depiction of the ships Sampson, Salvadore, and St George ye Sampson

Salvadore

ye St George

These Silver-ships brought treasure to our shore
Two hundred seventie thousand pounds and more;
Color'd by Flemish and by Spanish Claims;
The Fraud's discovered, Violet spoile's ye games
By seasonable Protest, when Great Ones did decree.
To the Nation's Damage, to have set them free
Reward is due: o let it not be said
The Work is don; But Workman never paid
Tho Violet



A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS In the Court OF Admiraltie, Against the
Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, their Silver and Lading.

AND An Account presented what Silver was taken out of the said Ships, and
coined in the Tower, (being above two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds,)
all which Silver the Commonwealth got by the chargeable Prosecution and
Discovery of Tho. Violet, who saved the Commonmon-wealth this Silver, Dec. 16.
1652. As in this Narrative is Attested under the Hands of many Honorable
Persons.

Together with several Humble Proposals, for the Profit and Honor of this
Commonwealth, in saving them many score of thousand pounds, 1. By making an
Act against transporting Gold and Silver, 2. Against the culling and melting
down the heavy current Coins of the Nation. By removing the Obstructious of
the Mint, and ways propounded to make the Mint constantly coin money. 4. For
the just and due Regulation of the Manufactures of gold and silver Lace to
prevent the daily cheats put upon the Wearers. 5. And for the making of a
public Copper Farthing, and a great Revenue propounded to be monthly paid out
of the same for the relief of the maimed Soldiers: And several other
Particulars humbly represented to the Parliament and Council of State.

By THO VIOLET of London, Goldsmith.

Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant, that is poor and
needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of the strangers that are in thy land
within thy Gates.

Ver. 15. At his day thou shall give him his Hire, neither shall the Sun go
down upon it, for he is poor, and sets his heart upon it, lest he cry
against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1659.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE John Lord Bradshawe, Lord Commissioner of the Great
Seal of England, Tho. Lord Fairfax, Maj. Genesis Lambert, Sir Arthur Hesilrigge,
Sir Henry Vane, Sir James Harington, Lieut. Genesis Ludlow, Lord Whitlock, Lieut.
Genesis Fleetwood, Josiah Barners Esquire. Coll. Morley, Tho. Scot Esquire. Col. Sydenham,
Henry Nevill Esquire Tho. Chaloner Esquire. All of them of the most honorable Council
of State.
May it please your Honors,
IT is a curious Art to make a Watch, and he must be a skilful Artist, that
exactly sets a broken Bone, God for the sins of this Nation, has several times
in this Age, took the Clock of this Commonwealth in pieces, and many of the
pins and wheels have bin and are misplaced. It now requires great skill, to
place and set every thing in its due order.

Your Honors have a great work to do, God has broken us in pieces, and
divided our Councels, and none can unite us, but he that has wounded us, he
only must cure us, and bless and sanctify all lawful means, or else our
disjoynted bones will never be truly knit, or exactly set.

For this end has God appointed a select number of honorable persons, of which
number your Honors are Members, whose heart God has fixed for this great
Work, to revive the stones out of the heap of rubbish, and to build the Walls
of our Jerusalem, though the Sanballats, Arabians and Ammonites be worth, and
conspire altogether to fight against Jerusalem, to hinder this Work.

Right Honorable, if you will finish this good Work you have begun, you must
do as Nehemiah did, keep good watch day and night, because of your enemies,
lest your adversaries serve you, as they served Nehemiah, for they say you
shall not know nor see till we come in the midst amongst them, and slay them,
and cause the work to cease, if this be not prevented, this Parliament will
have a fatal end.

Presidents in Courts of Justice is a great Guide to all just Judges,
especially when they have been made by the Grave and Learned, and are recorded
in the Sacred Bible, the chiefest Book that every good Statesman walks by; such
Statesmen that walks by Machiavels rules, the wicked Maxims of these
troublesome times, they do as Saul did when he left God, and went to the VVitch
of Endor, he pretended to go to speak with Samuel, and met with the devil, so
these times have produced many a Fast, the pretense has bin to seek God and
Peace, when the true end has bin to get to be the Head of a Party and Faction,
to make division, and to get the Peoples money: The People are now very well
acquainted with such canting, and as we know after a flash of lightning, there
comes a clap of thunder, so has it many times fallen out, after Fasts has
followed an erecting of an High Court of Justice, or one remarkable oppression
or other.

I humbly present you here in this Epistle, with a good President made by a
great Statesman Nehemiah, such a one as God has recorded was a Savior of his
Country, a Builder up of Jerusalem, in the like case, and in the like straits
as it is now, or suddenly without Gods infinite mercy will be with us, he took
this course. In the first place, he sought God, and prayed before the God of
Heaven, and did not make a mock-Fast; then he used the means, he fell to his
Work, and built up the walls of Jerusalem, and did not only build, but he
built wisely and politickly, and had there bin a Sanballat found amongst them,
the people would have stoned him.

On the lovver places behind the wall, and on the higher places, he set the
people after their families, with their svvords, their spears and their
bovves; and when he had set himself in a posture of defense, he made the
people to be his Guard, and delivered an Oration to the Rulers and People,
saying, Be not afraid of your enemies, remember the Lord which is great and
terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your
wives and your houses.

I shall humbly desire your Honors to observe, what was the effect of this
orderly and good posture. Nehemiah and his people did not their work
carelessely and by halfes, and spent their precious time in needless
questions, but did all things upon sound advice. For when great things are
quietly without Faction disputed, and the Result concluded; then to use
expedition and resolution is just policy.

But all hasty and unadvised attempts at long running brings the Commonwealth
into great danger, and the Actors generally into contempt and misery, many men
in their designs thinking to catch a great Fish, but after long angling bring
up a Frog; this daily experience has showed, and I can experimentally say it
to be true.

For those men that read Machiavel, and make it their Rule to walk by, in stead
of the Bible, because they are in great places, to practice Iniquity by a Law,
as Ahab did for Naboths Viniard, who did not only cheat him of his Land and
Inheritance, but robbed him of his Life, and to seem holy called a Fast, the
effect of that godly Fast was to set two men's sonns of Belial, to bear false
witness that Naboth had Bsasphemed God and the King, sending a warrant for the
Execution of innocent Naboth before ever they tried him, that he should be
stoned to death right or wrong, what a sad End the Authors of this murder and
robbery come to is well known, how many great and Noble Persons of the
eminentest for quality in this Nation, have bin Trappaned and perjured out of
their Life's, Lands and Estates, and some of the witnesses upon their Death beds
with horror of Conscience, and great Remorse have confessed the perjury that
they were suborned by others, to the great scandal of the Justice of the Nation
by such ways to get men's Estates.

This is most apparent God is coming to visit for these things, and when man
cannot bring the Delinquents to Justice, he causes the guilty Persons one to
punish another, till by the dividing and subdividing they are so weak, that as
the flood came upon the old world and destroyed mankind, so by these divisions
the strength of the Nation is disjoynted. Every man upon and against his
Neighbor, making a passage and way for the common Enemy to come and swallovv
the Innocent with the guilty, if God be not merciful.

Moses divided the Red Sea, and the Children of Israel passed over on dry Land,
God has by nature made a Sea betvveen us and our Neighbors, he has hedged us
in, and made a wall of separation between us and Popery, but our sins at this
day are plucking down this wall, the wild Bore of the Forest is come in
amongst us, the Devil and the Jesuits have played their parts in this Nation,
to the ruining of many Body and Soul, and to the admiration of Christendom, the
Jews Crucified Christ thinking to gratify Caesar, Caesar a few years after
paid them to purpose for Crucifying him.

May it please your Honors, The ten Commandments and Fonts for christning of
children at the beginning of these Troubles were plucked down; and now comes
Pulpits to be beaten in pieces, and frequent tumults in several Churches within
the city of London, as lately at Aldgate parish has bin done, which is a
corner of the city, where many poor live, and are fit for any Insurrection.

When I see children with a candle amongst powder or chips, I fear the burning
of the house, or a blow with powder; when we see the buds appear, the spring
is near: these are as certain signs of a mischief; as the plague-tokens are
to a man that has the Plague, the best symptoms are a purple fever; a
shaking, an earthquake, if not a dissolution. The pride and vanity of some
Lecturers and Ministers, who in the Nation having studied points of dissension
and division, instead of the Gospel of Christ preach themselves, (too much
plenty have made them wanton.)

No doubt but some of them do it with the advice of the Jesuits to make a
separation in Countries, Cities, Towns, Parishes and Families, till without
Gods infinite mercy, the Jesuits bring a destruction both on the Churches and
houses of the Nation, and on this Great City of London, and set every man to
cut one another throats. Would not the end of these things bring an unhappy
deformation, instead of a blessed Reformation, when we are exposed to the fury
of a foreign Enemy by the vileness of the Jesuits, and folly of our own
Divisions?

What a divelish State trick was put upon the late Protector Oliver, and his
Secretary Mr. Thurloe, by Sir Kenelm Digby, and several other Persons
Jesuitically inclined, in setting the Protector on that fatal business of
Hispaniola and Jamaica, without ever advising and consulting with many of the
English Protestant Planters, who had for many years lived in those parts, and
had they had the honor to have been consulted with, they could have told them
that those fiery Regions was not for the constitution of our bodies.

That Fox and subtle Statesman Sir Kenelme Digby, his very name should have
bin fatal to the Protestants cause, if the Lord Protector Oliver and Mr.
Thurloe would have bin pleased to remember the Gunpowder treason.

This fatal design of Jamaica cost the Protector and the Commonwealth above
two millions of pounds, beside the lives of above twenty thousand valiant
Englishmen, destroyed by the unhealthfulness of the Climate, and want of
necessary Provisions; and when these valiant men were almost famisht, (who had
they bin in any part of Christendom, the Spaniards durst not have looked them
in the face, had they bin twice their number,) yet these gallant Soldiers were
all like sheep led to the slaughter, and their blood spilt like water on the
ground, by the treachery of some of their Officers, who no doubt had private
instructions from some then in power to do what they did, which upon
examination was the cause they kept their heads upon their shoulders, and
escaped both with lives and estates.

May it please your Honors, I hope your Honors will pardon these sad and
necessary truths, proceeding from a loyal heart. I have formerly ventured my
life many times to get the Commonwealth two hundred seventie eight thousand
pounds in money, I now venture my self in these dangerous times to speak truth.
It is now as it was in the days of Noah; no man but Noah and his Family
believed a flood would come, till it did come and sweep them all away.

And if I be justly used, I may now in your streights bring you in presently as
great a sum in money again as I saved you formerly abov three hundred thousand
pounds, fevv of the Council of State when I undertook to discover the Spanish
Ambassadors fraudulent claim to this Silver, I say there was but few of that
Council did believe that I could ever get the State this Silver, or that I
would be so faithful to refuse ten thousand pounds which was offered me by the
Claimers of this Silver, which is certified in this Book by several honorable
Persons to be true, should I bend my brains as much to study the disturbance
of this Commonwealth, as I have ever done the peace and happiness of it, I
could Demonstrate to you, a pen and Inkhorne-man as I am can do more service or
disservice then many hundreds of Red-coats, I humbly pray my faithfulness be
not paid with Ingratitude.

As for my own life, I desire to have it no longer preserved then I can serve
and benefit my Country. I will wait on God, and exspect an happy issue upon
this my humble request, knowing that if the Reputation and Justice of the
State, and the Certificates of honorable persons be of any value in your
Honors sight, my great expense, pains and faithfulness, shall have its due and
promised Reward; considering that in these humble Proposals which I have
propounded to your Honors for my satisfaction, I take no money from the
public, but humbly offer to pay in monthly a great Revenue to the maimed
Soldiers, to regulate the abuses of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Thread
and Lace, to give a stop to the Transportation of Gold and Silver, to keep your
Mint constantly at work to coin money, great quantities yearly: all which
services are of very great consequence to the Commonwealth, the consideration
of the premises I humbly leave to your Honors, and remain

Your Honors dutiful and humble Servant, TH. VIOLET.

THE TABLE.
THO. Violets Petition to the late Protector Oliver, for getting the
Commonwealth two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds, and to be paid his
reward according to Promise. p. 51. The Lord Protectors Reference 61 The
Officers of the Mint, their Certificate concerning this business. 61 Several
persons Affidavits of Tho. Violets Services. 63 A Copy of Tho, Violets Letter
sent to the Lord Bradshaw. 67 Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Hills Letter to Mr. Thurloe.
68 Doctor Walkers Warrants to the Examiners, Mr. How, Mr. Arnold, Mr.
Dorislaws, Mr. Bud, concerning Tho. Violet. 69 Sir Tho. Viner, Sir John
Barkstead, John Limbery, Maurice Thomson Esquire. their desires to the Lord
Bradshaw touching Tho. Violet. 74 Doctor Walkers Certificate. 90 Lord Com.
Bradshaws Certificate, concerning Tho. Violets service in staying this Silver.
80 Alderman Francis Allen Esquire. his Certificate. 83 Sir George Fleetwoods
Certificate concerning this service, and the Council of States Promise and
engagement to Tho. Violet for his reward. 84 Sir James Harringtons Certificate
of many services done in staying this Silver, and in other Particulars. 92 Sir
Tho. Viner, Sir John Barkstead, Gabriel Beck, Capt. John Limbery, Edward Dendy,
Henry Middleton, Maurice Thomson, Isaac Dorislaws, Esquire. Certificate touching
Th. Violets great service in the Silver-business. 99 The Late Lord Protector
Richards Order to Gabriel Beck and Francis Bacon Esquires, touching Tho.
Violet. 112 Francis Bacon and Gabriel Becks Certificate to the late Lord
Protector Richard. 113. Tho. Violets Petition to the late Lord Protector, in
the name of Edward Johnson Esquire. for the making of a public farthing. 118 The
late Protectors Warrant to Master Solicitor General Ellis, to prepare a Grant
for these Farthings. 120 An Account given to Sir Thomas Viner, Mr. Alexander
Holt, etc. of this business of the Silver Ships. 122 The several abuses and
obstructions of the Mint, with ways propounded by Tho. Violet to set the Mint
on work. 11 The late King Charles's Letter to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London. 33 An Account of what has been taken from me by the
Parliament. 38 An Order of the Council of State, requiring Th. Violet to pay
forty pounds to the Committee of Salop for certain Bonds, with power to take
the benefit of them, and sue them as he might have done, before any
Sequestration. 47 John Corbet Esquire. his Receipt for the aforesaid forty pounds.
48
To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England, etc. AND TO
THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COUNCIL OF STATE.
I. THomas Violet of London Goldsmith, humbly presents this Narrative,
concerning his staying in the Court of Admiralty the Silver in the Ships
Sampson, Salvador and George, together with the Certificates and Reports of
many Honorable Persons, attesting your Petitioners great service done this
Nation, in his seasonable Applications to the Council of State 1652. and his
protesting in the Admiralty, against the discharge of this silver, and
discovering the frauds of the Spanish and Flemish Claimers, and in many other
particulars.

II. Further shows, that there was unloaded out of the aforesaid ships, 1653.
upon your Petitioners discovery, the sum of two hundred seventy eight
thousand pounds, which your Petitioners stayed by his Protest in the Admiralty,
the same hour the Judges would have discharged it. And this silver was all
coined in the Tower. And Colonel Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower, paid all
this treasure to the Army and Navy, for the defense and service of this Common
wealth, in 1653. and 1654. as will appear to your Honors, upon the sight of
his Accounts concerning this business.

III. These Particulars with many others, are certified to his late Highness
Oliver Lord Protector, under the hands of Col. Barkstead, Lieutenant of the
Tower, Alderman Viner, Capt. John Limbery, Doctor Walker, Sergeant Dendy,
Maurice Thomson, Treasurer of the East India Company, Sergeant Middleton,
Isaac Dorislawes, Gabriel Beck Esquires, By virtue of his late Highness
reference directed to them 13. July 1657.

IV. The true Copies of these original Petitions and Certificates, and several
other Transactions touching this silver, are here presented to your Honors
view, to the end your Petitioner may (after so long a delay of Justice) have
his dearly earned reward. Your Honors, upon perusal of all the Premises, will
see it clearly proved, your Petitioners great expense, eminent zeal,
faithfulness, and integrity, with the hazard of his life in this service of
the Commonwealth.

Your Honors Humble Servant, THO. VIOLET.
May 25. 1659.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORDS and others of the COUNCIL OF STATE.
VIZ. Thomas Lord Fairfax, Major Genesis Lambert, Col. John Desborough, Col. James
Bury, John Bradshaw Sergeant at Law, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Sir Horatio
Townsend, Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, Sir Henry Vane, Lieut, Genesis Ludlow, Lieut.
Genesis Fleetwood, Major Saloway, Col. Dixwell, Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Josiah Barners,
Col. Morley, Mr. Thomas Scot, Mr. Robert Wallop, Sir James Harrington, Col.
Walton, Col. John Jones, Col. Sydney, Col. Sydenham, Mr. Hen. Nevill, Mr.
Thomas Chaloner, Col. Downs, Lord Chief Justice St. John, Col. Thompson, Lord
Whitlock, Sir Robert Honywood, Sir Archibald Johnson.
May is please your Honors,
YOur Petitioner did about the eighth of December. 1652. deliver into the Council
of State a Written Paper, wherein was discovered, that at that present time a
Practice and Combination was set on foot by several Merchants and others, to
deceive the Commonwealth of a great quantity of silver, above three hundred
thousand pounds, which was then aboard the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and St.
George, then riding about Black-wall.

Upon Examination of this Business at the Council of State, the Council within
few days after, commanded and engaged your Petitioner in this service, and
your Petitioner did faithfully promise the Council his uttermost endeavors, to
discover this fraud, and at his own charge to prosecute this Business in the
Court of Admsraltie. The Judges of the Court of Admiraltie did appoint the 16.
day of December. 1652. to give sentence for clearing these ships and silver,
being to the value of about three hundred thousand pounds in silver, as appears
by the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint; Whereupon your Petitioner came
into the Court of Admiralty, the very day and hour the Judges were clearing
the said silver, and at his own peril made his Protest in the Admiraltie
against the Judges of that Court, and against all further Proceedings of
theirs, to discharge this Silver in the aforesaid ships, till your Petitioners
Witnesses were examined, and showed the Judges many Reasons, being for the
advantage and safety of the Commonwealth, for respiting for some days their
Judgment.

Thereupon the Court of Admiralty adjourned till the next day; and the Judges
being very angry with your Petitioner for making the aforesaid Protest, and for
what your Petitioner had said to the Judges in open Court, the Judges thereupon
command your Petitioner to attend the Council of State that very day in the
afternoon, being 16 of December 1652. the Petitioner to answer before them for
his mildemeanor (so the Judges were pleased to call it) that morning in the
Court of Admiralty.

Your Petitioner did accordingly attend the Council of State that day, 16 Dec.
in the afternoon, and upon full examination of the Business before them, the
Council stayed the silver, and blamed the Judges for their complaining of your
Petitioner, and your Petitioner had thanks from the Council for what he had
done in his timely and seasonable staying this silver, and commanded to use
what expedition he could in proving that great quantities of the silver then
aboard these ships appertained to the Merchants of Amsterdam. Thereupon your
Petitioner undertook to the Council of State to disprove the Spanish and
Flemish clamors, and the Spanish Ambassadors pretenses to all this silver in
the aforesaid ships. And this discovery your Petitioner undertook to make to
the Council of State at his own charge.

The Council of State upon the considerations aforesaid, and to encourage your
Petitioner to proceed, they did faithfully promise your Petitioner for this his
service and discovery, that your Petitioner should be paid the sum of eleven
thousand pounds out of the silver that should be taken out of these ships, and
converted to the use of the Commonwealth, this sum of eleven thousand
pounds, being the value of your Petitioners Estate, which the Parliament 1643.
upon misinformation against your Petitioner had sequestered.

And the Council of State declared unto your Petitioner, That if your
Petitioner should fail to make good his undertaking in disproving the Spanish
and Flemish Claims to all this silver, then aboard the ships Sampson, Salvador,
and George, that the undertaking would undo your Petitioner; for upon your
Petitioners failing to make good proof of what he had undertaken, the Council
of State would report your Petitioner to the Parliament to be an Incendiary,
therefore it highly concerned your Petitioner to be well assured of what he had
undertaken, and also to be justly dealt withal when he had done this service.

Upon the assurance of the Council of State upon the aforesaid terms, your
Petitioner engaged and undertook this great, difficult, and dangerous service,
wherein your Petitioner employed above ten several persons, for about two
years, and laid out of Purse, besides all his time and hazard, the sum of
above seven hundred sixty five pounds, which he pays interest for at this very
day, as is deposed by several Witnesses whom your Petitioners employed in this
service, and this is attested under the hands of several Honorable Persons, to
the late Lord Protector Oliver.

May it please your Honors, besides this service your Petitioner did for the
Commonwealth, he discovered to the Council of State, in Jan. 1651. That from
August. to December 20. 1652. the Admiralty had discharged fifty eight ships,
all laden with rich merchandise, I printed the several days of the month
they were cleared out of the Court of Admiralty, the names of the ships, and
the Master of the ships names, and the parties to whom these ships and
merchandise was delivered at London; and that many of these ships after their
discharge from hence, unloaded their merchandise at Amsterdam for the account
of the Dutch, to the value of many hundred thousand pounds.

Upon examination of this Business, the Council of State had certain
intelligence from beyond sea that this information was true, and these Letters
were remaining in Captain Bisheps hands who can testify the truth. Whereupon
your Petitioner humbly presented to the Council of State in writing several
ways for the preventing this abuse for the future, and the Judges in the
Admiraltie was removed, and other Judges put in their places, with particular
instructions for the prevention of the former frauds put on the Nation.

By which discovery made by your Petitioner, the Commonwealth got many score
prizes, which were condemned as Dutch prizes, when they could not bring
attestations from Hamborough under the Parliament Agents hands, viz Mr
Bradshaws, that they really and truly belonged to Hamborough. The value of the
Ships and goods by your Petitioners means discovered was amounting to several
score of thousand pounds, besides all the silver your Petitioner stayed, which
the Dutch had cozen. ed us of, had not your Petitioner acquainted the Council
in January 1652 with the former cheats put on the Nation, in printing a list of
58 Sail of ships, most of them Dutch prize, which the Commonwealth lost, for
want of keeping a good Watch on the Actions of their Judges and Officers in the
Admiralty in those times 1652. 1653. It was nothing for ordinary Proctors in
the Admiralty to get four of five thousand pounds a year, by cozening the
State in their prizes, till your Petitioner by his discovery to the Council of
State, spoiled their Trade for a great part of it. This discovery got your
Petitioner the envy of many hundred Merchants, and others in the Admiralty.

There was not a motion, nor any Proceedings in the Court of Admiralty, for
about three years, touching the Silver Ships Sampson, Salvador and George,
their silver and lading, but every day your Petitioner was required to give his
attendance therein, at the Court of Admiralty, and forced to employ at his own
charge many persons; and your Petitioner was required by Doctor Walker, at his
own charge to employ many persons to breviate and have inspection into all the
Records, Acts, Bills of lading, Pleas, Extracts, Allegations, and
Interrogatories, Witnesses, Depositions in the Silver business, as will appear
under the hands of several persons employed and paid by your Petitioner for
that service.

Your Petitioner did several times move the Council of State, in December,
January, February, March 1652. to unload the silver out of the ships, to avoid
the embezeling thereof, there being above an hundred thousand pounds stolen
out of these ships, while the silver was in the River; there are bills of
lading in the Admiralty, for silver that was never delivered into the Tower, to
the value of above a hundred thousand pounds in silver, which bills appertain
to these ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George.

Your Petitioner presented to the Council of State, in 1652. 1653. several
frauds and abuses put upon the Commonwealth, in the Sale of their Prizes,
Ships, and Merchandise, by the indirect means of some Officers they entrusted
to sell the same, sometimes the State has been cheated forty in the hundred,
to the value of many score of thousand pounds in this business.

Your Petitioner finding these papers that made this Discovery, which he
delivered to Col. Joanes, and Mr. Thurloe, (by some bribing means) in the
Custody of some of the parties complained of; and that nothing was done to
reform these abuses, but this business was stiffed. (And by your Petitioners
discovery of the abuses for the service of the State, he had contracted the
envy of many guilty persons) Thereupon to show to the world, what I had
delivered in private to the aforesaid persons was true, and that I would
justify what I had complained of privately, I printed the several frauds and
cheats put upon the Nation by some of the Commissioners for prize Goods, and
some of their Officers and Agents, and demonstrated several ways for the State
to find it out, which was offered to be proved to be true, by Mr. John Day,
and several others at that time, but the fate of the Commonwealth in those
days was to be cozened, that makes the debts of the public now at this time
so great, and the Publicans of the time so rich.

Your Petitioner by order of Parliament, as appears by your Records of the
House, for several years was commanded to follow and solicit the getting of
an Act to pass against transporting Gold and Silver. And your Petitioner made
several overtures both for punishing and discovery of the offenders that had
transported Gold and Silver, and melted down the silver coin of the Nation; by
whose fines many score of thousand pounds would have justly come to the State.

But the guilty persons were then so powerful in the Councills of the
Parliament, that though the Parliament made several Committees of the House and
Council of State, for the perfecting the Act and for discovery of the
offenders, and referred the matter thereof to the consideration of the
Commissioners of the Navy, Officers of the Mint, and Farmers of the Customs,
who all of them have certified the Parliament of the great mischief and damage
the Commonwealth suffered by several evil-disposed persons, who for private
lucre and gain daily transported the Gold and Silver of the Nation, to the
unspeakable damage of the Commonwealth. This Bill being twice read in the
House, and several times committed, yet by the power of some guilty Merchants,
this good Act was stopped, smothered and stifled, and never finished, though your
Petitioner attended many years at his great expense and charges to have this
good Act past, (And now at this day it is apparent to all people,) that you
cannot receive in the payment of a thousand pounds twenty shillings in Gold, no
Gold being stirring in the Nation, but in the hands of Gamesters, Rooks, and
Goldsmiths, they selling a twenty shillings piece in Gold for two shillings in
the pound, more then the price current by Proclamation, which is against the
Statute of the fifth and sixth of Edward the sixth. And to give your Honors an
information of the present stock of Silver moneys, now current in this Nation,
there is very little left but light and clipped money, the weighty silver money,
being culled, melted down, and transported, by diverse Goldsmiths and others,
for private lucre and gain, to the unspeakable damage of the Commonwealth,
especially at this time, now we have War with Spain. This your Petitioner has
often complained of to this Parliament, and has humbly offered them a remedy,
but as yet nothing has been done by them to prevent this mischief.

There was several Committees appointed to regulate the abuses concerning the
coin, and removing the obstructions of the Mint these times, having appointed
two Doctors of Physic to be the chief Officers of the Mint.

Your Petitioner was required to give his attendance on this Committee, and
commanded by them at his own charge to send for from beyond seas all the
principal Coyns in Christendom, and to procure the Laws, Orders and Statutes
made beyond seas, for the due regulating their Mints; and their Policies, how
they used to draw bullion into their Mints: these Laws your Petitioner
translated and printed, and presented them to the Committee of this business,
for removing the obstructions of the Mint.

And your Petitioner made Assayes of all these foreign Coins of Gold and
Silver, and writ down the just weight and standard of every several foreign
Coin, what proportion and value they held with the standard of our Mint, and
what every foreign piece of Gold and Silver, would make to Merchants to be
coined in our Mint of London, and caused all the several stamps of the Coins
of foreign Gold and Silver to be engraved, for the true information of all our
English Merchants, who generally are not so expert in this mystery as the Dutch
Merchants are. The true reason of this defect is this, viz. In England we have
only our own Coins of Gold and Silver goes current, which makes our Nation in
general never to study the intrinsecal value of foreign Coins of Gold or
Silver; whereas in Holland almost all foreign Coins of Gold or Silver goes
current by Proclamation, therefore of necessity all Merchants and others must
know the intrinsecal value of all foreign Coins, what proportion they hold
with their standard; and several Books which they call Placarts, are printed by
Authority of the States, with the several Figures of the Coins of foreign
Gold and Silver, being marked in the margin at what price the several Coins
shall go, not being washed and clipped, and full weight.

And the Dutch allowing these foreign Coins to go current, having public
banks of treasure, that makes them Masters of their Exchange of moneys, the
mysteries whereof very few of our English Merchants understand, for the reasons
aforesaid.

But had the Figures of all the foreign Coins bin printed, which was prepared
by your Petitioner, by order of the Honorable the Committee of the Mint, in
1652. your Petitioner humbly affirms to your Honors, that the printing thereof
would have been a great guide and advantage to our Merchants, and the Nation,
had Mr. Secretary Thurloe given your Petitioner back again these Prints and
Papers which was most modeled and acted by your Petitioner; but he buried them
in Oblivion, as he did many other good Proposals, which your Petitioner
presented to him, for the service of the Commonwealth.

Your Petitioner humbly offered, to the consideration of the Committee, for
removing the obstructions of the Mint, that if they would set the Mint a work,
they must take order to remove their chief Officers of the Mint; these
Gentlemen, the present master. Worker and Warden, were never brought up to know
the mysteries of the Mint, nor the private ways of correspondence with foreign
mints and merchants, and to make every wind bring grift to their mill, and to
know what ships and merchants bring us in gold and silver, and to learn the
mystery to enforce them to coin it; also to know what ships and merchants
transport gold and silver without license from the State, and to keep good
intelligence and watch upon their actions, that so the gold and silver
endeavored to be unlawfully transported may be seized and forfeited. For a man
to be his Crasts-master in this mystery, requires as many years study as to be
a Doctor of Physic, and is never to be learned by looking on an Vrinal.

Your Petitioner humbly says, The Parliament had made a better bargain to have
given these Doctors of Physic forty thousand pounds for a pension, than to
suffer that damage they have received by the not employing of the mint, daily
gold and silver being imported into this Nation, and before ever it be coined
transported out again without license, to the great damage and weakening of the
stock of this Common wealth.

There is silver and gold vast and great quantities brought daily from beyond
the seas, and landed in this Nation, without paying of Custom, and this very
silver and gold is stolen out of the Nation again before ever it be coined
without license or paying of Custom; so here is a Trade to the value of some
hundreds of thousands of pounds by the year, for the particular profit of some
covetous merchants, and the Commonwealth have no profit either by Excise,
Custom or Coynadge; and till skillful men in these Mysteries be employed in the
Mint, this mischief will not be stopped or removed either by Doctors or
Apothecaries.

Your Petitioner did formerly offer, and now does humby offer unto your
Honors, that he may be empowered and commissioned to be master-Worker and
melter of the Mint, to undertake now at this time to set your Mint to work,
notwithstandidg the present War with Spain, provided your Petitioner may be
empowered by your Honors order for the execution of what he shall humbly
propound for the honor of the State and service of the Commonwealth in this
business.

God send your Honors to order all these abuses by me here presented, may be
prevented for the future, and care taken where corrupt, ignorant and unskilful
persons are got into imploiment for the public they may be removed, and
trusty skillful Officers put in their imploiments. Your Petitioner humbly
says, This is a sure way to abate and lessen the great engagements of the
Commonwealth, when Drones are discharged and Bees employed: for if your Honors
take away the cause, the cure of the disease follows of course.

OLIVER the late Lord Protector the 20. of April 1653. dismisses the
Parliament, and the same day put a Guard of soldiers aboard the aforesaid
ships, Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, then riding about Black wall. And
shortly after unloads all the silver into the Mint, which your Petitioner
stayed for the use of the Commonwealth: your Petitioner can prove it by the
Account of the Mint, that the silver which was taken out of the said ships,
beside what was stolen and embezeled, amounted to the sum of two hundred
seventie eight thousand odd hundred pounds, and Mr. Lieut. of the Tower, Col.
Barkstead, paid out all this great Treasure.

In reducing the Dutch, paying the Army, and other services for the Public, as
will appear by the particulars of his Account; and your Petitioner never had
farthing, so that this great Treasure your Petitioner stayed, was every penny
laid out in defense of the Commonwealth, and subduing the Dutch. It was a great
mercy of God to this Nation, that your Petitioner prevented the Dutch from
getting this great Treasure, at that juncture of time, 1652. that silver would
have made work for us else, had the Dutch had it.

When your Petitioner see all this money disposed of by Col. Barkstead, and not
one penny thereof paid unto your Petitioner, according to the promise of the
Council of State; yet at the same time your Petitioner to be daily commanded
and enjoined by the late Lord Protector Oliver, and by his Council, and by the
Judges of the Admiraltie, and Doctor Walker 1653. 1654. daily required at his
own charge to attend and prosecute this business, and to pay about ten other
persons for about two years, who assisted your Petitioner in the prosecution
of this business, as appears by the Warrants of the Council of State, Court of
Admiraltie, Doctor Walker, all of them dated after the 20. of April 1653. which
Warrants and Orders your Petitioner has ready to produce to your Honors.

Your Petitioner finding this unmerciful and hard usage in this business, to
be daily forced to borrow great sums of money at interest, and to expend the
same in prosecuting this business in the Admiraltie to maintain the States
claim to this silver against the claimers, and your Petitioner never to receive
one penny from the States for his service, he was enforced to petition the late
Lord Protector OLIVER for his reward and satisfaction, according to the promise
of the Council of State, his Highness being one of the Members that had
faithfully promised your Petitioner the sum of eleven thousand pounds when
your Petitioner first undertook this service, before Col. Bingham and Mr Sadler.

In his Petition he sets forth the several services, chargeable and dangerous
imploiment, together with the Council of States engagements and promise, to pay
your Petitioner eleven thousand pounds for this his discovery and service, and
named several of the Council of State which knew this to be a truth, and that
your Petitioner wholly relied upon the Councels Promise as aforesaid (which was
the true cause) that engaged your Petitioner, to undertake this difficult,
chargeable, and dangerous task and emploiment.

And had not your Petitioner borrowed above seven hundred sixty five pounds,
and expended it all in this service, which he pays interest for at this very
day, besides your Petitioners daily attendance in the Admiralty, with about ten
persons whom he paid and employed in this business to assist your Petitioner;
had not your Petitioner done this, the Commonwealth had lost every penny of
this great treasure.

The late Lord Protector Oliver, upon your Petitioners addresses unto him, and
after his daily attendance for above two years, with Petitions at Whitehall and
Hampton Court, for his dearly earned reward, the reasons wherefore the
Protector delayed your Petitioner so long, before his reference touching this
business, was (he knew the Referrees would certify the debt, and that he knew
I could prove his particular Promise, for the paying of your Petitioner eleven
thousand pounds for this service which he made me at the Cock pit at Whitehall,
before Col. Bingham and Mr. Sadler, who were of the then Council of State, and
brought me to him, to give him a particular Account what your Petitioner had
done in this business, your Petitioner by his importunity and daily
attendance, following him every day, got his Highness Oliver at last, to
refer the aforesaid Petition to Col. Barkstead Lieut. of the Tower, Mr.
Alderman Vyner, Capt. John Limbery, Doctor Walker Advocate for his Highness,
Gabriel Beck, Sergeant Dendy, Maurice Thomson Treasurer of the East- India
Company, Sergeant Middleton, Isaac Dorislawes Esquires, or any three or more of
them, to take your Petitioners Petition into their consideration, to examine
all the premises, and thereupon to state and certify your Petitioners case,
(to his late Highness Oliver Lord Protector,) together with their opinions
upon the whole matter, touching your Petitioners reward and satisfaction for
this service, as appears by the original Petition and Reference.

All the aforenamed Referrees upon reading this Petition, and the transactions
thereupon, after many days meeting, held it very necessary for the clearing
of the truth, to acquaint the Lord Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington, Sir George
Fleetwood, and Francis Allen Esquires, with your Petitioners Petition, and his
Highness Reference thereupon, in regard your Petitioner had named all the
aforesaid Honorable perjons in his Petitions and Papers, amongst others, who
both knew your Petitioners services, touching the staying this silver, and were
privy to the Council of States Engagements and Intentions, to pay your
Petitioner eleven thousand pounds, when your Petitioner undertook to disprove
the Spanish and Flemish Claimers. And upon Consideration of the Councels
promise to your Petitioner, as aforesaid, was the cause that made your
Petitioner undertake this difficult, chargeable and dangerous service. And the
aforesaid referrees received Certificates from every one of the aforesaid
honorable persons, which Certificates set forth the great service done by your
Petitioner, viz. That your Petitioner was upon his first undertaking of this
Business looked on by the then Council of State as the Great Wheel that set all
on work, and set on foot this discovery in getting the State this great
Treasure, or else the State had lost it in the Admiraltie, and that these
Actings of your Petitioner, accompanied with great charge, hazard and trouble,
was the Cause (sine qua non) of the after-benefit received by the State upon
conversion of this silver. That the Council of States Engagements and
intentions to the Petitioner, at his first assuming the imploiment, was not
without good reason uncommitted to writing, for avoiding of misconstruction.

And the Council of State did not only promise the Petitioner the restoration
of his Estate for his particular service of staying the Silver, but did also
promise to confer upon the Petitioner an Honorable Memorial, and had not the
Petitioner had a real assurance from the Council of State in 1652. for the
paying of him the sum of eleven thousand pounds, the whole Business touching
this Silver had been lost and left undertaken, had not the Petitioner had such
an insurance and promise, and also relied on the same for a just Performance.

It is true, they certify that for some Reasons of State the Petitioners
(Thomas Violets) assurance and reward was not committed to writing, to avoid
clamor and lewd tongues, but this omission was not to frustrate the Petitioner
of his dearly earned Reward, the restoration of his Estate, or eleven thousand
pounds.

These are but the Heads of the aforesaid Certificates, the Originals certify
all matters touching this Business at large, under the hands of the Lord
Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, Francis Allen Esquires,
every person severally certifies all the aforesaid referrees their particular
knowledge of this Business.

Col. Barkstead, Sir Thomas Viner, and all the beforenamed Referrees, upon
consideration of these Certificates, and upon sight of the attestation of the
Officers of the Mint, and several other Witnesses, who depose, That Thomas
Violet was several times offered, and might have received from the Claimers of
Silver, (Merchants of Flanders then in London) the sum of ten thousand pounds
to have desisted the prosecution of this Business in the Court of Admiralty,
and to have betrayed the trust which the Council of State imposed on him, to
make a discovery of Spanish and Flemish fraudulent Claims; and also upon sight
of several orders of the Council of State, the Judges of the Admiralty, and
Doctor Walker, and several depositions taken in the Petitioners case, upon the
whole matter all the aforesaid Referrees certify his late Highness Oliver Lord
Protector; viz.

That upon Examination of Thomas Violets Petition, they find that the
Petitioner is a person who not only deserves the making good of the Council of
States Engagement and Promise unto him, for the true paying your Petitioner
Tho. Violet, the sum of eleven thousand pounds, but upon due consideration
had of the great Travel, Charge, and Hazard, which your Petitioner has
undergone in the Prosecution of this business, and your Petitioners great
faithfulness in refusing to be corrupted, or betray the interest of the
Commonwealth, as has been fully proved unto them, as also upon the
Attestation of Sir George Fleetwood and Sir James Harrington, concerning the
Promise of the Council of State to your Petitioner Tho. Violet, for the
restoration to him his estate, or eleven thousand pounds, all these Referrees
report to his late Highness Oliver Lord Protector, that they humbly conceive
upon the whole matter of Fact, that over and above the payment of eleven
thousand pounds: that there be some signal reward conferred on the Petitioner
for this his eminent service, that all other for the future may be encouraged
to serve the interest of the Commonwealth, with that singular faithfulness and
integrity, as the Petitioner has done, and they all certify that they find,
It proved that the Petitioner by his chargeable prosecution of this business in
the Court of Admiralty, has contracted debts, amounting unto the sum of
seven hundred sixty five pounds, which the Petitioner borrowed at interest, all
his own estate being under sequestration ever since 1643. besides several other
great sums of money your Petitioner borrowed at interest for his support ever
since his sequestration, upon consideration whereof they find the Petitioners
Engagements are very pressing upon him, and they all humbly offer, that for
the present, lest the Petitioner should be thrown into prison, for the very
moneys he has expended in getting the Commonwealth this great treasure of two
hundred seventy eight thousand pounds, the just account thereof they had seen
presented unto them by Col. Barkstead.

That his Highness Oliver Lord Protector, in consideration of all the
Premises, would be pleased presently to pay the Petitioner Tho. Violet, some
considerable sum of money to pay off his great engagements for the State, and
for his support for the future, according to his quality, and that the
remainder of the money to make up the sum of eleven thousand pounds be paid
unto him according to the Promise of the Council of State, the Petitioner Tho.
Violet, having served the Commonwealth in this great business, with a great
deal of resolution, faithfulness and activity. This Report is at large signed
and certified to his late Highness, Oliver Lord Protector, the first of May
1658. by Col. Barkstead Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Alderman Vyner, Gabriel
Beck, John Limbery, Edward Denly, Henry Middleton, Maurice Thomson, Treasurer
of the East India Company, Isaac Dorislaws, as appears by the original
Certificate.

Your Petitioner petitioned the late Lord Protector Oliver 29. July 1658. and
annexed the aforenamed Report of the Referrees, and petitioned to be paid the
sum of eleven thousand pound. The Lord Protector Oliver, upon reading the
aforesaid Petition, and the Report annexed, refers your Petitioner for
satisfaction, together with the Report of Col. Barkstead, Sir Tho Vyner, and
others, for your Petitioners satisfaction unto his privy Council, that they
take consideration of all the matters therein contained, so that the Petitioner
may have and receive satisfaction according to Justice and Equity for this
service 29. July 1658. but his death shortly following, nothing as yet has
been done for your Petitioners satisfaction.

Your Petitioner thereupon in October. 1658. petitioned the late Lord Protector
Richard for his satisfaction, and annexed the aforesaid Reports and Petitions
(upon his Highness perusal of the same) he was pleased to refer the same
unto the consideration of Francis Bacon late Master of his Requests, and
Gabriel Beck Esquires, Solicitor to the late Council of State; They after many
days meeting concerning this business, have certified accordingly, as Col.
Barkstead, and the former Referrees have done, viz. for the due paying your
Petitioner the sum of eleven thousand pounds, and that they hold the
Petitioner to be a person very fit and useful to be employed in removing the
obstructions of the Mint, and that the Petitioner be employed for regulating
the Manufacture of gold and silver Wyre and Lace, which Certificates are here
to be produced to your Honors, signed by Francis Bacon and Gabriel Beck
Esquires, 18 Jan. 1658.

Your Petitioner humbly prays your Honors to take into consideration the
great and eminent advantages your Petitioner did this Common wealth in staying
this silver, at that juncture of time in December. 1652. for had that silver come
into the hands of the Dutch, they would have laid it all out in powder and shot
agaiust this Commonwealth, as we employed it against them, as will appear by
Col. Barksteads Accounts, which moneys under God was a principal mean to reduce
the Dutch; what service this treasure did the Nation in that juncture of time,
Christendom knows, the Dutch then our enemies felt, and this Common wealth at
this day enjoys the happy fruit of it.

But had all advantages been home followed against the Dutch in the last War,
we had grubbed up their greatness by the roots, and flayed his Zealand Lions
skin, and broken their sheaf of Arrows to shivers, making them unable for ever
to trouble us, (but we only pared their nails, and parted with them upon too
gentle conditions, and made such a peace with them, that at this time they
carry all our Trade from our Merchants in a manner, and do us more damage by
being our feined friends, then they could do being our open enemies, the due
consideration thereof is humbly hinted here to your Honors. And if your
Honors require a more particular Account, I can demonstrate it to you in many
particulars.

May it please your Honors.
These Certificats, though they do declare the truth of your Petitioners
service really performed, by a great number of Witnesses, yet without further
consideration they pay not your Petitioners engagements, which were disbursed
by him for the accomplishment of this service; and those Gentlemen that have
lent their moneys reallie to your Petitioner, to enable him to do this service,
look for real payment in moneys, and not in words, your Petitioners engagement
at this day for this business of staying of the silver, being above fifteen
hundred pounds.

St. James says what profit is it, if a Brother be naked or destitute of daily
food, for one to say to him, be thou warmed, and be thou filled, if he supply
him not with food and raiment, so likewise a bare Certificate, without further
supply, will neither pay debts, nor cloth, nor feed a man, many words will not
fill a bagg, (it is Justice that establishes a Nation, and payment of money
quits debts, and not words)

What a shame would it be to those, that profess so much Justice, and
reformation, as this age does, to have it left to posterity and record, That
your Petitioner that has done this Commonwealth such an eminent service, in
getting them more money then any man in this Nation ever did before, should not
be justly rewarded, according to the promise and engagements of the Council of
State, which made your Petitioner undertake this chargable, difficult, and
dangerous service, your Petitioner might have had tenn thousand pounds from the
Claimers, to have held his peace and bin quiet, and to suffer the Judges of the
Admiraltie, to let this Silver pass, the truth of this is certified under the
hands of many persons of quality, had your Petitioner taken this course, to
have bin bribed off, it had bin most for his ease but less for his honesty.
The Commonwealths interest, and his own reputation, in making good his promise
and engagement to the Lord Bradshaw and Council of State he valued more then
his life; your Petitioner has done his duty, and will leave the issue to God.
it is Solomon that says a poor man delivered the City, yet no man remembered the
poor man, when he had done his work. I humbly hope that your Honors Justice
will prevent me, that I may not have occasion to say the same, that is true of
this Age, or leave so sad a memorandum of the ingratitude of these times. If
the Rules of our Savior were observed by men of power in this Nation at this
day, to do to all People, as they would be done unto, your Petitioner should
not have bin so long from time to time delayed with references, in so Just and
equitable Petition.

If your Petitioner has not this his dearly earned reward, it will remain to
posterity in print, to fright and terrify all persons, and make them wary how
they engage for the future, upon English States-mens promises, when they shall
see and read these Transactions and Certificates, If your Petitioner has not
satisfaction according to Justice, it would be a means to make other men to
take money when it is offered, and not to trust to English States men's
promises.

About the 20. of April 1659. your Petitioner did engage an Honorable person,
to present to the Lord Richard Cromwell the late Protector these very Petitions
and Certificates, which I now present unto your Honors in print, I am credibly
informed, upon his perusal of them, he was most honorably pleased to be very
sensible of your Petitioners sad sufferings, great expense, pains and
fidelity for the Commonwealth in this service.

And that seeing all this Treasure (which your Petitioner stopped in the Ships
Sampson, Salvador and George) was employed and spent in the defense of the
Commonwealth, his late Highness was pleased to declare, to an Honorable
person that informed me your Petitioner, his late Highness did think my
promised reward to be a just debt, and that the Commonwealth ought to pay it,
and had not the Government been changed, I am assured from several honorable
persons, his late Highness the Lord Richard Cromwell would have seen me
justly paid the sum of eleven thousand pounds, and given me an honorable
reward and Imploiment over and above.

Your Petitioner implores your Honors to consider of all his premises, and
that as your Petitioner did this Nation the greatest service, that ever was
done by any man of his condition, in saveing this Commonwealth two hundred
seventie eight thousand pounds, which was all employed in defense of this
Commonwealth.

Your Petitioners humble prayer is, after so long a delay of Justice, he may
have his dearly earned reward, the payment of the sum of eleven thousand
pounds, in such ways and in such manner, as your Petitioner may be enabled to
pay off the great engagements he has laid out in this service, and to support
himself according to his quality, and that others seeing your Justice, may for
the future be encouraged to serve the interest of the Nation, with that
integrity, activity, and faithfulness as your Petitioner has done, with the
hazard of his life, and all that he had dear in this world, your Petitioner
having engaged his Credit, and borrowed above fifteen hundred pounds which he
expended every penny in this service, and in his attendance to ge^t
satisfaction, and at this day owes the sum at interest, to save and get the
State this great Treasure, besides all his pains and hazard.

These several Services and Proposals done by your Petitioner, for the honor
and profit of the Common wealth, your Honors will see them certified under the
hands of the Lord Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, and
Francis Allen Esquire, and that your Petitioner was faithfully promised the
restoration of his estate, by diverse members of Parliament and Council of
State, for several chargeable services your Petitioner had done the Parliament
some years before, from the year 1648 to 1652. before your Petitioner undertook
to stay the silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, and this is
clearly demonstrated by the said Certificates.

But upon your Petitioners happy and successful staying of this silver, and
undertaking at his own charge to prosecute this discogery in the Admiralty,
upon the Promise of the Council of State 1652 to pay your Petitioner the sum
of eleven thousand pounds for this service, in lieu of his sequestered estate,
which for so many years your Petitioner had solicited both the Council of
State and Parliament to have it.

Sir James Harrington, and Sir George Fleetwood, fully and clearly certify,
that they think themselves bound in honor and conscience, to certify the
truth of their knowledge to his Highness Referrees, according to their Request
and Desire, concerning the Council of States promises and engagements to pay
your Petitioner the sum of eleven thousand pounds, that so your Petitioner
may have his dearly earned reward for this great service, and not labor for
the State in vain; And that if the rule of the Gospel were observed to do to
other men as they would be done unto, your Petitioner could not be many weeks
without receiving eleven thousand pounds, and over and above an honorable
reward and memorial from the State for this great service, and that the State
in Honor and Justice, was obliged to pay your Petitioner the above said sum,
and that no doubt but so faithful a service, so carefully and painfully
performed would have a happy issue, and the Petitioners reward from the State
would be suitable to the greatness of the service, upon perusal of Sir James
Harrington, and Sir George Fleetwoods Certificates, your Honors will see this
more fully set down and amplified; The Lord Bradshawes Certificate for the
substance is to the same effect, so is Francis Allens Esquire, who being a
Goldsmith knew experimentally the great abilities in your Petitioner, to
regulate and reform the abuses in the Mint, and the services and overtures of
your Petitioner. 1650. 1651. 1652. offered the Council of State both to set the
Mint on work, and to give a stop to the transporting of Treasure, he certifies
your Petitioner had taken great pains, and spent much money in this business,
(which had the humble advice and proposition of your Petitioner then bin taken
by the Parliament) you had filled the Nation at this day with Gold and Silver,
and constantly employed your Mint to the great honor and profit of the Nation,
for all the War with Spain.

Your Petitioner at this day humbly offers to set the Mint on work so he may be
employed, and not labor for the State in vain, for your Petitioner to take
the pains and be at the Charge, and other persons who have no skill in this
business, to run away with the profit: Your Petitioner has too often bin so
served by great men in power, and shall not do it again for any ones pleasure
whosoever.

Thus have I humbly presented my services done for the State, and the Councils
engagements and promise for your Petitioners satisfaction. It is a Rule set
down by God and all Nations, Christians, Turks, and Jews, that there are
degrees of rewards for virtue, and degrees of punishments for vice, the degrees
of Punishments and Rewards are in all well-regulated Kingdoms and Common
wealths put down, and the people know them that so they may not offend; and
there is no offense to be justly punished, either by Gods Law or Man's, before a
Law be made to give men the Rule, for the Apostle says, I had not known sin
but by the Law. And that punishment that is inflicted on a man, before a Law
made to prohibit or restrain a man from doing the same, let it be inflicted by
what Power soever, (must needs be a very great affliction and punishment sent
of God for a man's other sins) and cannot as to men be said to be regularly
done, especially where the offense is taken, and the punishment so heavy, as it
shall deprive a man of all his estate, and keep a man almost four years a
Prisoner, in which time your Petitioner spent eight hundred pounds for charges,
whereof nine hundred twenty eight days of that time, he was kept a close
Prisoner, without ever being brought to a legal Trial, according to the
Fundamental Laws of the Nation by a Jury, the birthright of every Englishman
rich or poor; but after a man's estate is squandred, disposed, and given away to
several Persons and Committees, for particular men's profit, and upon false and
untrue pretenses, to the value of above eleven thousand pounds, as your
Petitioner for many years has proved and presented to the Council of State
and Parliament, ever since the year 1648. being much about the time your
Petitioner was turned out of the Tower, without any legal Trial or Reason given
for his Commitment, or the taking away of his Estate contrary to Magna Charta,
and all the Laws of this Nation.

God having given your Petitioner his freedom, your Petitioner presently, to
show that he was oppressed, and the Parliament misinformed, and his estate
unduly taken away, given and disposed of upon false and untrue pretenses, for
particular men's profit, to several Committees and others, the Petitioner did
humbly address himself for relief, to many honorable Members of Parliament
and Council of State, and presented them with the true estate of his sufferings
in Print.

The Cause of your Petitioners sufferings was for bringing up a Letter from
Oxford 1643. from the late King, who had then a desire to emploie, and make
your Petitioner Master-worker of his Mint at Oxford; which place the King did
give me there, and the Petitioner had an Order from the House of Parliament,
and a Pass from the Lord General Essex, about the 28. of December. 1643. to go
to Oxford to the King, upon condition to put in security in a thousand pounds,
which security I did accordingly give, to make good my Exchange for one Mr.
Hesilrigge, and did accordingly bring up my Exchange to London, and left it
with Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, about the 3. of Jan. 1643.

And the late King Charles, upon my Exchange as aforesaid, commanded me to
bring up a Letter from him to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and
Common Counsel of the City of London. I do confess I honored and loved the
late King, for many benefits received from him, and it was my duty to obey him
as my King, though I had never received benefits from him; but had I known
there had been any Act or Order of Parliament to prohibit me or any other to
bring up the said Letter at that time, or that the Parliament would have taken
any offense against me for doing thereof, my principles at that time, and the
whole course of my Actions since, has clearlie demonstrated to your Honors
and the World, that I would have humbly declined that emploiment; for I have
ever been an Honourer of the Parliament and my Country, as this Narrative will
demonstrate to posterity.

The Tree is known by its fruit, and no man I humbly conceive in the Nation of
my condition, has yielded better fruit, or ever got the Common wealth two
hundred seventie eight thousand pounds in silver, but your Petitioner. At the
same instant of time Van Trump was in the Downs with the Dutch Fleet, upon the
clearing of these ships out of the Admiraltie, to have conveyed them to
Holland. This was a real Plot, not a feined one, as appears by the Commissions
this day in the Court of Admiraltie, under the Great Seal of Holland, to De
Weet and De Ruyter, their Vice-Admirals, to guard these ships from the English,
upon the Petitions of the Merchants of Amsterdam. I pray God England never
forgets this deliverance nor the Council of State the Performance of their
Promise to your Petitioner for this discovery, your Petitioner going in danger
of his life by the Claimers for several years for doing of this service.

Here follows the Copy of the late King Charles's Letter to the City of
London.

To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved, Our Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Our City of
London, and all other Our well-effected Subjects of that City.
Charles Rex,
Trusty amd Well beloved, we greet you well: When we remember the many Acts
of Grace and Favor We and Our Royal Predecessors have conferred upon that our
City of London, and the many examples of eminent Duty and Loyalty, for which
that City has been likewise famous; We are willing to believe (notwithstanding
the great defection we have found in that place) That all men are not so far
degenerate from their affection to Us, and to the peace of the Kingdom, as to
desire a continuance of the miseries they now feel: And therefore being
informed, That there is a desire in some principal persons of that City to
present a Petition to Us, which may tend to the procuring a good understanding
between Us and that Our City, whereby the peace of the whole Kingdom may be
procured; We have thought fit to let you know, That we are ready to receive
any such Petition, and the Persons who shall be appointed to present the same
to Us shall have a safe conduct: And you shall assure all our good Subjects of
that Our City (whose hearts are touched with any sense of Duty to Us, or of
Love to the Religion and Laws established; in the quiet and peaceable fruition
whereof, They and their Ancestors have enjoyed so great Happiness), That we
have neither passed any Act, nor made any Profession or Protestation for the
maintenance and defense of the true Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of
the Subject, which we will not most strictly and religiously observe; And for
the which, we will not be always ready to give them any security that can
be desired: And of those Our gracious Letters, We expect a speedy Answer from
you. And so We bid you farewell.

Given at our Court at Oxford in the nineteenth year of our Reign, December 26.
1643. By his Majesty's Command. GEORGE DIGBY.

[I do most humbly desire the Common Council of the City of London, to
certify your Honors, if ever (amongst all their Records, ever since the
foundation of their City) they find such a sad President as mine is; And
whether that any Messenger from any former King of England suffered the loss of
his Estate (to his damage at this day above twenty thousand pound, for bringing
them or any their Ancestors the like Letter for peace, as I did from the late
KING. And at that time (viz. in December 30. 1643.) there was sent and came
from Oxford the Writs weekly under the Great Seal of England without any
Countermand: My hard usage Afterages will hardly believe, had I not Printed it
to Posterity, that it may serve as a warning to prevent other Persons, from
being got in the like Snares for the future.] For this cause

I Suffered Imprisonment in the Tower almost four years, for bringing up the
aforesaid Letter from Oxford to the Lord Mayor and Common Council of the City
of London in December 1643. although I had an Order from the House of Commons
(as appears by their Journal Book) and a Pass from the Lord General Essex to go
to Oxford; for an exchange for Mr. Hesilrigge, Sir Arthur Hesilrige his
Brother, and I left my Exchange with Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, about the 2. of
January 1643. which were both procured for me by Mr. Theophilus Ryley
Scout-master General of the City of London, who was authorized to execute that
place by the Common Council of London; and I was authorized by the said Mr.
Ryley to do the same (Mr. Ryley being empowered by the Parliament and Common
Council of London to hold Intelligence in any the Kings Quarters, as by his
Orders he showed me:) Mr. Ryley was a man of a known and approved Integrity,
and in great esteem with the then Parliament and City of London at that time,
and would not have acted any thing but what was Just, and for the Parliaments
service, according to his Trust. (If he had thought it otherwise, if he might
have gotten a hundred thousand pounds, upon my conscience) and that made me to
act this Business, to bring up the Kings Letter upon his Entreaty (as he
confessed upon his Examination;) and I justified my doing thereof by his Order,
he being a public Minister, and empowered to do it, as he told me. And
also the Committee of both Nations was made acquainted with my going to Oxford,
for the bringing up the said Letter which I brought from the late King (by Sir
David Watkins Knight, I desired him to make the Parliament acquainted therewith,
before ever I went to Oxford, and to have their approbation;) which Sir David
Watkins (after he had spoken with them) told me, I had their approbation to go
to Oxford: And all this was done before any Law or Ordinance was made or
declared to forbid me or any other to do the same (that ever I heard of:) or
to this day can hear of, and I humbly say, That before a Law made, there is no
transgression, neither by Gods law nor Man's law. And I was not to question Mr.
Ryleys power, abilities and trust, considering he acted as a public Minister,
but to act according to his direction, so long as he was in the said Office of
Scout-master, I having his Warrant and approbation for doing what I did. I have
never read nor heard of so heavy a punishment as your Supplicant does suffer
under, before a Law made to give a man warning, to take heed how he Transgress.

And by the Statutes of 9. Hen. 3. cap 29. 5 Edw. 3. cap. 9. and 28. Edw. 3.
cap. 3. No person (of what estate or condition soever he be) shall be put
out of Land or Tenement, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, without
being brought to answer by due process of the Law; which I have Petitioned for,
by a legal trial many years, but could never obtain the same.

May it pleas your Honors, Had there been a Proclamation or Act of Parliament
at that time to have prohibited me, I should have then been afraid; besides,
Mr. Ryley should never have made me act against a declared Law, nor the King
neither.

Now, forasmuch as your humble Supplicant having ever since his Enlargement out
of the Tower, made it his daily practice to study to serve the Commonwealth,
and doing such remarkable Services (as aforesaid) for the Common-welath, I do
most humbly implore your Honors most gracious Order for the restoring me to
my aforesaid estate with damages, or the paying your Supplicant the sum of
eleven thousand pounds, according to the promise of the Council of State. 1652.

May it please your Honors, If I would have betrayed my Trust to the
Commonwealth, about this Silver that was in the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and
George, I could have had every penny of eleven thousand pounds paid me by the
Claimers of the Silver in those Ships; either in money here, or Bills of
Exchange beyond Seas: that money would have made me live plentifully in any
part of Christendom. I do most humbly implore your Honors, that I may have
such Justice by your Honors goodness and benignity, as I may have cause never
to repent of my being faithful to your Honors and the Commonwealths Interest
in this particular, concerning the Silver Ships, their Silver and Lading.

I most humbly here present an Account of what has been taken from me Tho.
Violet; for which I most humbly desire satisfaction, with my damages, or the
sum of eleven thousand pounds, as was faithfully promised unto me by the most
Honorable Council of State, in December and January 1652. for staying the
silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, and disproving the Spanish
Ambassadors Claim to this silver, which was above three hundred thousand
pounds, my damages at this day by the taking my Estate 1643. is above twenty
thousand pounds 25. May 1659. viz.

When I was first sent unto the Tower the 6th. of January 1643. my mother had
of mine good Bonds and Bills in her hands taken away from her at several times,
to the value of one thousand three hundred and odd pounds; Besides many of my
Papers and accounts of great concernment to the Common-welath; and as yet I
cannot come to the knowledge who has them: But this I am sure of, If there had
been any thing in them that could have made against me, there had then use
been made of them.

2. My mother had at another time a Privy Seal taken from her, wherein the late
King acknowledged he owed me (for my expenses in discovering the Transporters
of Gold and Silver) nineteen hundred threescore and eight pounds, which money I
laid every penny out of my own purse to do the late King and Commonwealth that
service: in prosecuting the Transporters of Gold and Silver, in the Star
chamber I caused them to be fined twenty four thousand one hundred pounds,
besides several Merchants and others, who had their pardons from the late King,
for transporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the heaviest Silver Coins
of England, viz. Alderman Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs, Mr. Peter Fountain and
several other Merchants, the terror of which sentence and punishment, for some
years did give a stop to transporting of Gold and Silver, to the great service
and advantage of the Commonwealth, and if the Parliament please to pass the
Act against Transporting Gold and Silver which has twice this Parliament been
read in the House, and several times Committed, and empower your Petitioner to
see to the due execution thereof, your Petitioner will give a stop to the
Transportation of Gold and Silver, and discover the Offenders, if a Commission
be granted to make enquiry of the same, according to former Presidents in
Richard the Seconds time, by Act of Parliament.

This Parliament was so careful to have these Offenses prosecuted, that they
excepted them out of the general Pardon, being the desire of the Committee of
the Mint, as appears by this following Order.

White Hall Janu. 24. 1651. Master Attorney General.
AT a Committee of the Council of State for the Mint, this enclosed exception
was presented to the Committee to have it inserted in the general Pardon. The
Committee do hold it fit, for the benefit of the Commonwealth, to have this
exception inserted in that Pardon, and do recommend it to you accordingly.

viz.

EXcept all offenses done or committed by any person or persons whatsoever, in
transporting out of England any Gold or Silver, in coin or in bullion without
License, and all other offenses in the unlawful buying, selling, exchanging or
melting down of any the current gold or silver coins of England, or of any
gold or silver bullion, against whom, or for which, any Information is now
depending in the Court of Exchequer at Westminster.

Ordered that Master Thomas Violet attend M. Attorney General with this Order
of the Committee, and also the Committee of Parliament for drawing the general
Pardon to have these offenses excepted.

James Harrington. Herbert Morley.


Your Petitioner did deliver this Order, to Mr. Attorney General, and this
exception is put into the general Pardon of this Parliament, as may be seen
upon perusal.

3. The Committee of Essex put me out of Possession of the Manors of Battles
and Patan-Hall in Essex, as appears by their Warrants. Of which Lands I had an
Extent of One thousand pounds, for the payment of five hundred: and one Mr.
Elconhead received my rents ever since 1643, and never paid the Committee of
Essex any thing, for your Petitioners Extent of five hundred pounds, and the
same Elconhead injoyes your Petitioners Lands in Essex to this very day, by
color of the Sequestration of the Committee of Essex, to your Petitioners
great damage.

4. The Committee of Shropshire seized, in my sisters hands, in London, three
Bonds due to me, in two thousand pounds for the payment to me Thomas Violet
One thousand pounds, by the Lady Anne Waad, Edmond Lenthal, Phillip Cage and
Charles Mordent Esq's. 1643. which Bonds were carried to Shrewsbury.

5. I had the Leas and Extent of ten several Houses at the Posterne in Little
Moor-fields; and the Tennants owed me, when I was committed to the Tower, in
arrears for rent above one hundred pounds: And for these sixteen years, I
received no Rent of them. But one Mr. Elconhead has received the Rents of them
ever since, by color of a Sequestration of the Committee of Middlesex.

6. I had the Office of sealing and surveying of all gold and silver Thread and
Wire: which prevented the making of all slight and adulterate gold and silver
Thread, and Wire, granted to me under the Great Seal, for three Lives, from
the Late King; which Office cost me Fifteen hundred pounds (to the Lord
Treasurer Juxon, L. Cottingon, Sir. John Cook: Secretary of State, and Sir John
Banks the late Kings Attorney. The necessity of keeping up that Office, to
prevent the daily Cozenages and frauds of diverse Silkmen, Wyerdrawers and
Refiners in their making Course, slight and deceitful Gold and Silver Wire and
Thread: Your Petitioner formerly presented unto your Honors, and can prove it
that forty thousand pounds a year in silver is wasted, besides the Wearers
daily Cozened for want of a due Regulation of gold and silver Thread, and Lace.

And upon the Discovery of these notorious Cheats, 1635. (the late King and his
Council appointed me Surveyor and Sealer of the said Manufacture) I caused all
the abuses to be laid aside: I indicted some offenders, imprisoned some,
caused others to stand in the Pillory, and made many of them that wrought
adulterate course silver run away out of London: By which means I angered many
Cheating Wyerdrawers, Silkmen and Refiners: and the late Kings Council and
Commissioners settled such Rules and Orders, during the Regulation of the
Manufacture, as it was all made of good silver, and the Coin and Bullion of
this Nation preserved; and your Supplicant was bound, to the late King, to
warrant all the Manufactures either of gold or Silver, Wire or Thread which he
sealed, or surveyed in the Office, to be good silver, and to make it good to
any party grieved in the Nation; as appears by my Patent under the Great Seal
of England. For which Assurance, Surveying and Sealing, I was allowed to demand
and take an half penny for every ounce Troy, in Wire, Spangles, Oes, etc. I
surveyed; and 4 pence for every pound weight Venice, for all the Gold and
Silver Thread I sealed with the Seal of my Office, being the Rose and Crown.
And all that time the gold and silver Lace, was as good Silver and as duly
assaied as the Plate or Money of the Nation, and now it is made under no Rule
nor Government, but the Wearers many of them cheated by course and deceitful
Lace, Wire, silver Thread, as I can demonstrate.

7. I had a Grant from the late King, under his Signet, to be Master-worker of
the Mint in the Tower of London for my life, with the Fee of five hundred
pounds a year, for executing that place; which Grant was taken from my Mother,
out of her Custody, when I was sent to the Tower.

8. I had one quarter part of the Lady Villers Farm at the Custom-house, for
the Importation of all gold and Silver Thread, Hatbands, Lace, and Copper,
throughout England and Wales; which cost me, a little before I was sequestered,
above seven hundred pounds. And if the making gold and silver thread was put
down in England, the Custom of gold and silver thread imported would make a
far greater Revenew then now it does by the Excise; and the Manufacture, if it
be made here, ought to be kept to a strict Regulation. Mr. Edwards and Mr.
Tbornbury I employed to Collect this duty at the Custom-hous.

9. I spent in my Imprisonment in the Tower for almost four years about eight
hundred pounds, reckoning my Fees and Expenses, and could never get Justice,
though I petitioned to the Parliament as aforesaid, for many years to come to a
legal Trial, knowing my self to be innocent both by God's Law and the Laws
of the Land; and by the testimony of a good conscience, which has ever
supported me in and through all these great troubles. All this Estate was and
is Sequestered, to this day; (but my three aforesaid bonds, which I now have in
my Custody,) besides my damage for my four years Imprisonment.

10. Since I came out of the Tower, by order of the Council of State 1652. your
Petitioner laid out (in the Prosecution of the Silver Ships, Sampson, Salvador,
and George) above the sum of seven hundred sixty five pounds, I borrowed
every penny of this money, paying Interest for it at this day. And by my
Protest against the Discharge of these silver Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and
George, and my Discoveries thereupon, by many good and legal Witnesses,
Passengers and others in these Ships: I caused all the Silver to become the
Commonwealths: All which services I did (upon the faithful promise of the
Council of State) in December. 1652 to restore me to all my Estate, or the full
value of eleven thousand pounds.

John Corbet Esquire, one of the Members of this present Parliament at this
day, and one of the Committee of Shropshire, meeting with your Petitioner in
March 1655. was nobly pleased to take notice of your Petitioners good
endeavors to serve the Commonwealth; and seeing that your Petitioner had put
out in Print, a List of his particular damages, and the particular Bonds,
Houses, Lands, Offices, set down, which had been taken from your Petitioner his
Mother and Sister, who had then a great part of his estate in their Custody, at
the time of his imprisonment in the Tower, and were plundered of it during that
time of my Imprisonment there, by the title and name of Sequestration.

This Noble Gentleman Mr. Corbet, being very sensible of my sufferings, and how
your Petitioners estate had bin squandred away, was pleased to tell your
Petitioner he could do him a courtesy, in procuring to your Petitioner three
Bonds taken from your Petitioner in two thousand pounds, for the payment of
your Petitioner one thousand pounds 1644, which Bonds Mr. Corbet told me were
at Shrewsbury in Shropshire, morgaged by that Committee for forty pounds,
which the Committee had laid out for public use.

Your Petitioner was glad to hear where these Bonds were, and to know who had
them, though they day in Lavender for forty pounds, your Petitioner for many
years making diligent enquiry after them, and had never got true information
where they were, had not Mr. John Corbet told him, and it was a thousand to one
that these Bonds, being eleven years out of your Petitioners Custody, that
your Petitioner ever heard of them; or got them again into his hands.

This Worthy Gentleman Mr. John Corbet advised me to make my Application by
Petition to his late Highness Oliver Lord Protector, and to his Council, for
to have these Bonds restored, and that if his late Highness and his Council
would give him order to do it, he wished me so well, be would procure your
Petitioner these three Bonds safe and uncancelled, Provided your Petitioner
would pay the Committee of Shropshire for them the sum of forty pounds,
which your Petitioner willingly offered to do, whereupon your Petitioner
petitioned the late Lord Protector Oliver and his Council for the aforesaid
three Bonds. And the Council of State ordered John Corbet Esquire, should
attend them, to give them true information of this business, which accordingly
he did, and thereupon this Order following of the Council of State was made,
and your Petitioner paid his money to Mr. Corbet accordingly.

Friday, March 21. 1655 At the Counsel at White Hall.
UPon reading a Report from the Committee (to whom the Petition of Thomas
Violet was referred) praying that certain Bonds seized upon by the Committee of
Salop may be delivered unto him. Upon consideration of the said Report, and for
that the said Bonds are engaged for forty pounds, which the said Committee
employed for public use, Ordered by his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Counsel, That upon the said Thomas Violets paying unto the said Committee the
said sum of forty pounds, for which the said Bonds are engaged, That the said
Committee be required to deliver up the said Bonds unto the said Thomas
Violet, and that he be at liberty to sue the same and to take the benefit
thereof as formerly he might have done; and that it be referred to John
Corbet Esquire. to see the said Bonds delivered up accordingly upon payment of the
said forty pounds.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Counsel.
Mr. John Corbet I attended with this order; March 28. 1655. He was pleased to
tell me he was to go down into Shropshire, and would speak with the Committee
who were to receive the forty pounds, and then I should know where to pay my
money, for he told me he had never received Public moneys, and he was
very unwilling to receive any now. But upon his return, upon my earnest
entreaty and to save me from further trouble, he told me he would receive
and keep this forty pounds in deposito, for the use of the Committee till he
had order from them for the disposing of it. That transaction follows, viz.

MEmorandum, That the 24th of May 1656. In obedience to the Order of his
Highness the Lord Protector and his Counsel of the 21. of March 1655. I John
Corbet Esquire. have delivered unto Thomas Violet of London God-Smith, three Bonds:
the first bearing date the 6th of June 1638. of eight hundred pounds, for the
payment of four hundred pounds within one year after the death of the Lady Anne
Waad; in which Bond, the said Lady Anne Waad, Charles Mordent, Philip Cage, and
Edmund Lenthal Esquires stand bound to the said Thomas Violet: and one other
Bond of the 6th of June 1638. in six hundred pounds, for the payment of three
hundred pounds, within two years after the death of the said Lady Anne Waad; in
which the Persons aforesaid stand bound to the said Thomas Violet: and one
other Bond (of the same date) of six hundred pounds, for the payment of three
hundred pounds, within three years after the death of the said Lady Anne Waad;
in which Bond, the Persons aforesaid stand bound to the said Thomas Violet; The
sum of forty pounds being paid by the said Thomas Violet, according to the
said Order.

JOHN CORBET. Witnesses then present. Edward Watkins. William Davis. Edmund
Cogan. John English Scr.


The Lady Anne Waad of Battles Hall in Essex died about May 1643. And the Bonds
are due to me Thomas Violet, at this day as abovesaid.
Your Petitioner may justly say his Estate was squandred away, when a thousand
pound of good Bonds of your Petitioners lay in lavender for eleven years for
forty pounds, and your Petitioner had never known where they had bin, had not
Mr. Corbet told him, your Petitioners humble Prayer to your Honors is, that
seeing your Petitioner has paid Mr. Corbet the forty pounds according to the
aforesaid Order, and has these Bonds safe and uncancelled now in his Custody,
and in consideration of your Petitioner services, in staying this Silver, That
your Honors would be pleased in part of your Petitioners satisfaction of
eleven thousand pounds by your Honors Order, to Empower your Petitioner by
Authority of Parliament, to show and Implead these Bonds, notwithstanding any
Order of Parliament to sequester the said Bonds, and to Empower your Petitioner
to take out Judgment and Execution thereupon, notwithstanding any Order or
Ordinance to the Committee of Shropshire, or any other Committee Touching or
Concerning these Bonds.

And my most humble Petition is to John Corbet Esquire, one of the Honorable
members of this Parliament, that as he received my money for the use of the
Committee of Shropshire, and gave me the first notice and discovery in whose
Custody these Bonds were, so he would now be pleased out of his love to
Justice, to certify his knowledge of the truth of this Business; that so I may
have Releif in this business according to Justice and equity.

Hereafter follows your Petitioners Petition to Oliver Lord Protector, and
his Reference thereupon to Col. Barkstead, Alderman Viner, Capt. John Limbery,
Doctor Walker, etc.

TO HIS HIGHNESS OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the COMMONWEALTH of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, And the Dominions thereunto belonging.
The Humble Petition of Thomas Violet.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner did about the 8th of December. 1652. deliver unto the
Council of State a written Paper wherein was discovered that at that present
time a practice and Combination, was set on foot by the then Spanish Ambassador
Don Allonso de Cardenas, with several other Merchants both Strangers and
Natives, to deceive the State of a great quantity of Silver near four hundred
thousand pounds, which was aboard the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, then
riding at Eriffe.

Which Persons before-named, had contrived by forged Bills of Lading, false
Claims and Claimers, with other fraudulent pretenses to get cleared the Court
of Admiralty the aforesaid Silver and Ships, and for the effecting thereof
there was no Cost spared nor Stone left unturned, as appeared by intercepted
Letters of Mr James Steniere, a principal Actor to have this Silver cleared,
which Letters caused the said Mr. Steinere to be Committed to the Sergeant at
Arms attending the Parliament, and by Mr. Pompey Callendrens Letter there was
fifty in the hundred offered in Amsterdam, to ensure the said Silver and Ships
out of our hands.

Many of the Council of State did upon the intercepting these Letters
concerning the Silver Ships, believe that the Spanish Ambassador had, for a
piece of money to be paid him, claimed this Silver as the King of Spaines
Treasure and his Subjects, colourably, but they knew not which way to discover
it, and to prove the fraud, that so the State might have the Silver as Prize,
(there lay the mystery) that then the Council could not fathom, and that made
the Lord Bradshawe and several of the Council of State to engage your
Supplicant in this service, they telling your Petitioner that if this fraud
was to be found out, they were assured your Petitioner could do it, if your
Petitioner would be true to the State, whereupon your Petitioner did faithfully
promise the Council of State his uttermost endeavors to discover this fraud,
and within three days after your Petitioner hearing the Parliament had made an
Order upon the request of the Spanish Ambassador, for the Judges of the
Admiralty to proceed to a speedy sentence concerning these Ships and Silver,
thereupon about 8th of December 1652. your Petitioner made the Lord Bradshaw and
Council acquainted, that he had certain Intelligence and would prove it upon
the peril of his Life by many credible Witnesses, that a great part of this
Silver appertained to several Merchants of the united Provinces, and that
these Ships having unfree Goods in them, were by the Civil Law forfeited to
the State, and upon the aforesaid Paper which your Petitioner delivered into
the Council of State, the Council of State sent for Doctor Walker your Highness
Advocate, who told the Council of State that if what was alleged in that
Paper could be made good, the Ships should be stayed let the Judges say what
they pleased.

May it please your Highness. The Judges of the Admiraltie appointed 16th
December. 1652. to give sentence for the Clearing or Condemning these Ships,
Sampson, Salvador, and George, and they ordered the Commissioners for Dutch
prize Goods to be then in the Court, but the Commissioners Mr. Hill and Mr.
W^lson declared unto your Supplicant the day before they were to attend in the
Admiralty, that they were Merchants, and a great part of their Goods and
Estates in Spain, and therefore they durst not for fear of having an Imbargo
on their Estates in Spain be seen in the Court of Admiralty to stopp these
Silver Ships, but they earnestly prayed and advised your Petitioner, that if
he knew any way to entitle the State to the Silver in those Ships, he should
do the Commonwealth very great and acceptable service, and save the State all
the Silver, which otherwise would be discharged that morning; for then there
was no other person appeared to stay these ships and silver, but your
Supplicant, either at the Council of State, or with Doctor Walker your
Highness Advocate, And this Doctor Walker knows to be a truth.

In pursuance of entituling the State to this silver in the aforesaid ships,
your Supplicant received a Command from the Counsel of State 13. December. 1652.
That if your Supplicant would undertake at his own peril to disprove the
Spanish Ambassadors Claim, and to prove that great quantities of the silver in
the aforesaid ships, appertained to Merchants of the united Provinces, and
Amsterdam, by good and legal Witnesses, That then notwithstanding the Order of
Parliament, your Petitioner should make his Protest in the Court of Admiraltie,
against the discharge of the said silver, till his Witnesses were examined. The
Council of State declaring, that if the Court of Admiralty committed your
Petitioner for making his Protest then the Council would presently hear, and
take cognizance of the same business. The Council of State further declared,
that if your Supplicant should fail to make good what he had undertaken, he
would be utterly undone, for that they would certify your Petitioner to be an
Incendiary, in presuming to contradict the Spanish Ambassador, and Duke
Leopoldus Agents, in affirming the silver belonged for a great part thereof to
Merchants of Amsterdam, when the Ambassador on his honor affirmed, it was all
for his Catholick-Majestie, and his Subjects Accounts, and none other. But if
your Petitioner was so assured, as he would venture his life, liberty, and
estate, to disprove the Spanish Ambassador, and Duke Leopoldus Agents claim,
and prove great quantities thereof to appertain to the Dutch of the united
Provinces then our enemies, by good and legal proof, and did perform this his
undertaking, your Petitioner should not only be restored to all his estate the
Parliament had taken from him, being about eleven thousand pounds, for which
sum your Petitioner had for several years before Petitioned the Parliament
and Council of State) but also your Petitioner should have both that Estate and
a good reward over and above for his good service, and this Promise your
Supplicant had from the Council of State and the Committee for foreign
affairs, and that they would see your Supplicant justly and truly satisfied,
and upon this Honorable assurance your Petitioner engaged and undertook this
great service, and when your Supplicant Petitioned the Council of State, for an
Order of the Council or Parliament in writing for the States just performance,
when he had proved that great quantities of this Silver aboard the three
aforesaid Ships appertained to the Dutch the Committee of foreign affairs,
and the Lord Bradshaw was much offended that your Supplicant should scruple the
Justice of the State, as not to be fully rewarded according to the greatness
of the service, Protesting it could not enter into the heart of any honest man
to scruple or suspect the Council of State so ungrateful, as not to perform
there promise justly with your Petitioner, and had that Council of State
continued in power, your Supplicant is assured in his Conscience that he had
reeeived every penny of the sum promised, being eleven thousand pounds out of
the moneys as it was Coined.

The reasons that the Council of State did not give your Petitioner a written
Order for the restoration of your Petitioners Estate, or the value being eleven
thousand pounds, was that if it was done either by the Order of Parliament or
Council of State, then the Spanish Ambassador and other Nations would know,
that the Council of State had stayed that Silver contrary to an Order of
Parliament, and had promised a reward to your Petitioner to make this discovery
before the service done, which the Lord Bradshaw told your Supplicant at the
Council Board the Council would not (to get all the Silver in the Ships) be
known to make an agreement, to find out Witnesses to have the business done,
but that your Supplicant might rest assured on just and Honorable dealings,
and the restoration of his Estate or eleven thousand pounds, If your Petitioner
did by good and legal Witnesses disprove the Spaniards Claim to this Silver in
the aforesaid Ships.

Your Supplicant having proceeded so far as to make his Protest in the Court
of Admiraltie, against the discharge of these Ships and Silver, he was
necessitated to proceed to make his discovery, or else the undertaking it had
undone him for ever, and your Petitioner acquainted the Council that to proceed
in this discovery would be very Chargeable, and your Supplicant being under
sequestration, unsupportable, but no allowance of money could be obtained till
your Petitioner had entitled the State to the Silver; and this being done on
your Supplicants part, the Council said your Petitioner might rest assured of
just and Honorable performance, for the payment of your Petitioners eleven
thousand pounds or his Estate.

Your Petitioner being at or about that time, several times offered by some
Merchants of Flanders, Claimers of great quantities of the Silver, That if your
Petitioner would desist and not prosecute this business in the Court of
Admiraltie, he should have paid him down the sum of ten thousand pounds,
either in money here, or in Bills of Exchange, upon the discharge of the Ships
and Silver, but your Petitioner refused the offers of the Merchants, and made
the Lord Bradshawe and the Council acquainted therewith, and valued more the
safety and Honor of the Nation, and his own reputation in this undertaking,
then the Spanish Merchants money, relying wholly on the promise of the Council
of State for his just reward and satisfaction.

Your Supplicants Expense and Charges in the prosecuting this business, in one
year and a halfs time amounted to above five hundred pouuds, besides what
sums of money your Supplicant has since expended, he having employed
constantly ten several persons, some of them lived in Spain and Holland, and
several months your Petitioner employed several Merchants and others in the
Registry of the Admiralty, to inspect into all proceedings, Claims, Exhibites,
pleadings, Bills of Lading, and comparing many thousand sheets of paper and
writing, and translating many Bills of Lading and other transactions, all which
your Petitioner did by the Command of the Council of State, and upon Warrants
and Orders of your Highness Advocate Doctor Walker; Your Supplicant also
employed several persons about Erisfe, Limehouse, Blackwall, Wapping, and St.
Katherines, to find out where the Seamen and Passengers of these Ships lay,
paying all charges of their meetings, boate-hire, writing and transcribing all
the proceedings, and printing them for the Parliament, to vindicate the Justice
of the Nation in staying this Silver and Ships, for it is proved out of the
mouths of several Passengers that came from Spain that very Voyage. That
vast and great quantities of this Silver appertained to the Dutch, and was
delivered in Spain aboard these Ships for the accounts of Merchants of
Amsterdam, and by the Original Letters under the States general Seal to
their vice Admiralls de Wit and de Rutter, remaining now in your Highness
Court of Admiralty, commanding them to Convoy and guard these Ships from the
Parliaments Forces, and these Commissions or Letters were procured upon the
Petition of the Merchants of Amsterdam, and by several advices remaining in
the Court of Admiralty, these Ships and Silver were bound for Holland, It is
proved that when these three Ships first set Sale to go their Voyage, they went
from Holland, and the Ports and Harbors of the united Provinces, also that
several Merchants in London for their own proper accounts, had Silver Laden
aboard these Ships this Voyage in Spain, which clearly disproves the Spanish
Ambassadors Claim to all the Silver in these Ships, to be only for his Master
and his Subjects accounts, for Merchants Natives of London are not the King of
Spaines Subjects, It is also proved that several parcells of Silver aboard
these Ships, were entered, and Bills made in feined names and colourably, to
avoid the taking and condemnation of the Silver and of these Ships, if they
were taken by the English.

It is also proved, that although the Bills of Lading were for Oastend, yet the
Silver was consigned to Amsterdam. It is likewise proved by several
Passengers, that when these Ships had bin ten days at Sea, and hearing of the
Wars between the English and the Dutch, the Masters Books were altered, and
all the Hollanders and Zelanders names were put out, and other names put in
their stead, and after three times perusal and examination of the names, the
Books were written out saire (which were the Books produced in the Court of
Admiraltie) And the original blotted Books, which were the true Books, were
not to be found, but when these Ships came into the Downs, the Purser of the
Ship Sampson, took them and tied them to an Iron Bar, and then threw them
into the Sea.

These particulers with many others, are the volontary confessions of several
Passengers in these Ships, being actors and parties in Spain, and privy to all
these actions both in Spain and on Shipboard, and the Confession of Dutchmen
and Easterlings.

Your Petitioner has humbly presented these proofs and Witnesses to show the
greatness of your Supplicants service, and the Justice of the Nation in staying
and confiscating this Silver, so that it now clearly appears, the Claim of
the Spanish Ambassador to this Silver, was but a fraudulent practice in him to
have cozened the State, and cheated them of all this great Treasure.

This business your supplicant effected with the assistanee of tenn other
persons, in a year and halfes constant attendance, sitting up many days and
nights together when your Petitioner first undertook this service, being daily
threatened to be murdered by the Claimers, and expending above five hundred
pounds in this service.

All which particulers of your Petitioners prosecuting this business, and the
charges he was at for doing the same, is attested upon the Oaths of four
credible Witnesses, who were employed in this service, and were privy to your
Petitioners expense.

Which five hundred pounds your Petitioner borrowed, and has ever since
continued at interest, and is now above seven hundred pounds; Several
Gentlemen lending the same to your Petitioner out of their good will to the
Nation in general, and that your Petitioner might be restored to his Estate
again, and had not your Petitioner borrowed this money to enable him to do
this service, your Highness and the Parliament had lost every penny of this
Silver, being about three hundred thousand pounds.

Never any man as yet, brovght and saved your Highness, and the Parliament so
much money at one time in any age, as your Supplicant has heard of; or read of.

Your Petitioner trusts and hopes in God, and your Highness, that so great
service to your Highness and the Nation, shall not go unrequited.

What service this Treasure did your Highness, and the Nation at that
conjuncture of time in 1653. Christendom knows, the Dutch (then our Enemies
felt) and this Nation (under your Highness government) do enjoy and have the
happy fruit of at this day.

Your most humble Petitioner prays your Highness to take all the Premises
into your Princely consideration. And that your Petitioner may have his estate,
or the value thereof restored to him, in recompense of his services aforesaid.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. THO. VIOLET.

Whitehall, July 13. 1657.
His Highness is pleased to referr this Petition to Sr. John Barkestead
Knight, Lievtennant of the Tower of London, Sr. Thomas Viner Knight, Captain
John Limbery, Doctor Walker, Gabriell Beck, Sergeant Dendy, Maurice Thompson,
Sergeant Middleton, and Jsaac Dorislaus Esquires, or any three or more of them,
to take the Petition within written into their consideration, examine the
premises, and to State and Certify the case to his Highnesses* together with
their opinions upon the whole matter.

Fol: 231. Fra: Bacon

Here follows an Attestation of my Protesting in the Court of Admiraltie
against the Judges, clearing and discharging the said Silver and Ships, and
against the Spanish Ambassadors Claims, just that Morning as they were
discharging of the Ships and Silver, being the sixteenth day of December. 1652.
as appears by the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint under their hands,
viz.

WE, whose names are here underwritten, hereby certify all whom it may
concern, that we were present in the Court of Admiralty that day the Judges of
the Court were reported to proceed to a sentence for the clearing or condemning
of the ships Salvador, George, and Sampson,) it being about the seventeenth of
December. 1652. And there we saw Mr. Thomas Violet, the same day in the Court
present a Paper unto the Judges, which he declared contained several Reasons
and Arguments to the Judges; for respiting their Judgment concerning the
discharging of those ships, and several other Prizes, till he had examined
several Witnesses on the behalf of the State, to disprove the Spanish Claims
concerning these Ships, at which time the Silver was aboard these Ships: After
some time spent in arguing the business by Mr. Violet in behalf of the State,
the Judges seeming to proceed to a sentence concerning the said Prise Ships,
Mr. Thomas Violet made his Protest in the said Court of Admiraltie aganist the
discharge of all or any of these Prises, declaring he did it upon his own
account, till his Witnesses were examined in the behalf of the State: And that
the Judges, if they should proceed to the contrary, should answer it to the
Parliament and Council of State at their peril. Thereupon the Court desisted
from proceeding in the said Business; and the Judges thereof required Mr.
Violet to attend the Council of State that afternoon, about his carriage that
day in the Court of Admiraltie, touching these ships.

Dated at the Mint in the Tower of London, December 23. 1654. Signed George
Brett. Thomas Burch, James Hoore.


Here follow the Affidavits and Certificates of the truth of Tbomas Violets
Service, made by honest men of clear reputation, (Merchants and others) that he
employed, and were privy to the whole Proceedings in the Admiralty and other
parts of this Nation: and by what ways and means he made these Discoveries,
to entitle the State to this Silver, and disprove the Spanish Ambassadors, and
the Spaniards Claims. The Affidavits follow; viz.

JOhn Glover of London Merchant, aged about forty years, makes Oath, That Mr.
Thomas Violet, having since December 1652. received several Orders and Warrants
from his Highnesses Council, and Doctor Walker (Advocate for the
Commonwealth,) to assist in the behalf of the Commonwealth, against the
Silver ships Sampson, Salvador. and George, and all their Silver and lading: In
pursuance of which service the said Mr. Violet has constantly entreated his
(this Deponents) assistance, (amongst several other persons which he the said
Mr. Violet employed) for making discovery of the several frauds and practices
of the Masters of those ships, and of several other Merchants, Claimers of the
Silver and lading in the aforesaid ships, to deceive the State by their several
Claims; And also of the several Bills of lading, and in several other
particulars: in pursuance of this service for the Commonwealth, for several
months this Deponent, with one Mr. Simon Baldwine a Merchant, who lived a long
time at Cades and St. Lucars in Spain, and with Mr. Violet this Deponent and
they two did veiw and examine all the Bills of lading, and the several pleas
and Exhibits, Extracts, and all other writings and papers which were brought
in, and remain in the Registrie of the Admiraltie concerning these ships,
silver and lading; the Register declaring that they had seen all the
Transactions that was then upon record in that business, which were many
thousand sheets; and that the said Mr. Violet had several Warrants from Doctor
Walker to the Register and Examiners of the Admiralty, to require them, that
the said Mr. Violet, and all such as he should nominate under his hand to the
said Register and Examiner, should be empowered to make several Searches, which
he this Deponent and the rest did almost every day for about three months: And
this Deponent further makes Oath, That after he and the rest had taken such
Observations and Directions, as Mr. Thomas Violet had given order concerning
the marks of several Bills of Lading, and several other particulars, both Mr.
Simon Baldwine and this Deponent delivered the Papers up to Mr. Violet, he
having employed and contented us for our pains. This Business concerning the
ships and silver, this Deponent came to be engaged in at the request and
entreaty of the said Mr. Violet, he having heard how necessary and
advantageous he (this Deponent) should be, in making this discovery of the
truth of this business; For that this Deponent for many years was an Inhabitant
and merchants in Rotterdam, and had Commerce and Trade with most Towns in
Holland, where Trading was stirring. And this Deponent know's many of the marks
of the Bills of Lading of these Silver Ships, though they pretend to belong to
Spaniards, Hamburgers and Flaunders, yet they are the same marks as diverse
Merchants of Holland give to their goods and Merchandise; And that since the
War with Holland, diverse Ships and their lading have been condemned in the
Admiraltie, and made prize of, which had Silver and merchandise aboard them at
the time of the condemning, with the same marks which are in these Ships
(Sampson Salvador and George); And this Deponent further deposes, That he
knows the said Mr. Violet employed (besides Mr. Simon Baldwin,) several other
people for the making these discoveries ever since December. 1652. And this
Deponent has been employed by the said Mr. Violet in this business for almost
a year and a half in the finding out and searching this business; and the said
Mr. Violet has to his (this Deponents) knowledge, expended very great sums of
money in prosecution thereof, to the value of above five hundred pounds,
besides all his pains, attendance and hazard; this Deponent having heard him
several times threatened and in danger of his life by several Merchants and
others, Claimers of the Silver in these Ships: they having declared in this
Deponents presence, That by the said Violets protesting in the Court of
Admiraltie against the discharge of these Ships and Silver in December. 1652. the
day the Judges appointed for discharging the Ships and Silver, (and by his
further prosecution against those Ships and Silver since) he has been and is
the only cause of hindering them of their Silver and Ships; And that they had
had their Silver long since, had not Thomas Violet undertaken the prosecution
of this Business. And this, this Deponent has heard affirmed several times by
merchants and others, claimers, both at the Exchange and elsewhere. And this
Deponent makes Oath, That this Affidavit is for the affirming and justifying
of Mr. Violets pains, hazard and service in prosecution of this Business of
the Silver ships and Lading.

John Glover.
Sworn the 27th November 1654.

before me ROBERT KELLEWAY, Master of the Chancery in Ordinary.



Thomas Ley. John Gerrel.

Both sworn the 25. of November. 1654.

before me JOHN PAGE.



Simon Baldwin.
Sworn the 17. of February 1653.

before me JOHN PAGE.



A Coppie of my Letter sent to the Lord Bradshaw. 25th of March 1653.
May it please your Honor,
I Have left with Colonel Harbert Morley this day my Petition to the Council of
State against Otho George: I humbly desire your honor to take notice, if the
Council of State do not take some present order in it, to consider what
encouragement my self or any man that serves the Commonwealth in the discovery
of the Ships, silver and Merchandise now brought in as Dutch prize shall have
when they shall be assaulted in the streets with Stilettoes and Poniards from
Cap: Otho George, for being isntrumental to do the State service: I have been
advised by several friends for this eight days, not to come to the Exchange or
Admiraltie, least I should be murdered for undertaking this business, Mr.
Joachim Pesler Chirurg^on upon the Ship Sampson, now riding at Eriff, of which
Ship Otho George is Captain, and Jacob Elaes Otho George his Cabin Boy, has
discovered the Silver in the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, that a great
part thereof belongs to the Dutch For when they had been ten days at Sea, the
Purser was ordered by the Captain to go into the Fore-Castle, and take his Book
and blot out all the names of the Hollanders and Zealanders, and, in their
place, to insert abundance of other names: for which discovery Captain Otho
George did stab the Surgeon of the Ship. My humble prayer to your Honor is,
That the examinations taken about this business before the Lord Mayor of
London, in the presence of Mr. Will. Reymes, John Carleton, Jonathan Symonds,
These Examinations will imforme you at large.

Your Honors humble servant THO. VIOLET.

To Our most worthy friend John Thurloe Esquire, at White Hall, these present.
The Commissioners for Prize Goods Letter to Mr. Thurloe.
Mr. Thurloe,
WE have a certain discovery that a great quantity of Gold and Silver has
been stolen out of the Dutch prize ships that call themselves Hamburgers, we
desire, for the service of the State, to have a Warrant to bring all the
Bullion in the Dutch prise-ships on shore; We have here enclosed sent you Mr.
Thomas Violets Letters to us, and his proofs taken in the Office; every hours
delay of not taking the Silver a shore is great loss to the State; We find
Mr. Violet the bearer hereof, very active and knowing to make these
discoveries, and he has done several good, and great services for the State
already in this business, We desire you to present the same to the Council of
State, We are Sir,

Dated Dutch prize-Office, December. 18. 1652. Your very Friends and Servants,
Samuel Wilson, Richard Hill.

A Warrant of Doctor Walkers, to the Examiners Mr. How, and Mr. Arnold in the
Court of Admiralty, December 1. 1653.
MAster How and Mr Arnold, in the business of the three ships, Sampson,
Salvador, and George, and the Silver and Lading in those ships, Mr Violet was
ordered to contribute and yield his assistance, to bring in Evidence on the
behalf of the Commonwealth. I did heretofore sign a Warrant, that all the
Proceedings might be showed him: He now desires, that the names of all the
Witnesses already produced on the behalf of the State, as also the Allegations
and Matter upon which they were produced: as likewise, the names of all
Witnesses produced on the behalf of the Claimers; and every one of them
particularly, and the Allegations and Interrogatories upon which they have been
produced, might be shown to him. I pray your Honors to consider, whether I
could employ men in this Discovery for two years, and not to pay them for
their pains, and yet I have not had one penny for this service.

Doctor Walker knew that I employed many people every day in these Discoveries,
several of these being often with me, both at the Admiralty, and at his
chamber; and he knew, I employed none in this business but credible persons,
as appears here under his hand.

And could Doctor Walker have made this Discovery, or known the tricks of these
Merchants, Masters of ships, and Pursers, by forged bills, and many other
subtilties of Trade, which is not in his Law Books, but is common amongst the
Dutch Merchants in these times. Dr Walker would have saved me the labor and
charge for employing people to make this Discovery, or from making my Protest
in the Admiralty, and would have had the credit and thanks from the State for
this Service and Discovery to himself. But this I dare say, though he be a
great Lawyer, yet for the making of this Discovery, he was then 16. December.
1652. utterlie ignorant of the way to do it, this being a subtilty amongst a
few Merchants, and not to be read in the Civil Law Books, and had I not had all
my Intelligence from their own creatures, and plowed with their Heiser, I could
not have done this service, or made this Discovery.

And upon examination of this business at the Council of State, Doctor Walker
confessed that it was not his study nor his place to seek up and down to
procure Witnesses, or to find out ways to entitle the State to this Silver;
and except I could bring legal Witness, the State must lose this Treasure:
this he declared several times before the Council of State.

But if the Passengers did confess this Silver to be laden, a great part of
it for the account of Merchants of Ansterdam, as I had undertaken they would
do, then he would improve that Testimony to the uttermost for the States
advantage, which indeed Doctor Walker did.

And I proved these frauds by the testimony of about ten of the Passengers,
being all Dutchmen, Hamburgers and Lubeccars, and other Hans-towns men; and I
had above fourscore witnesses the Passengers and Merchants more to examine in
this business, many of them were after packed away by the Claimers, being
Dutch mariners, and had money given them that they should keep out of the way
and not be examined, and several Witnesses waited many days to be examined in
the Admiralty and could not.

Spanish Gold and Silver was plentifully bestowed on some in the Admiralty, and
they loved it well. The Claimers had their Instruments almost every night that
stole silver out of these ships, to the value of many score thousand pounds,
which I discovered to the Council of State, as appeared by several papers which
I presented to them.

I employed several men who spoke the Dutch Language at my own charge, and gave
them money to go on shipboard, and to drink freely with the Dutch mariners,
and in their cups to fish out the secrets of this business, and when I had
once got the end of the string, I would by other engines and instruments
closely follow and never give it over till I knew the whole bottom of the
Flemmish and Spanish cheats which they intended to put upon the Nation.

These men that I employed on shipboard for to make this Discovery for me
never appeared to me in the Admiralty, lest the Spanish and Dutch Merchants
and mariners should have discovered them to have been my spies. And to deal
clearly with your Honors, they were none of them Book-men, Civilians, nor
Lawyers, but such persons as be- skellom'd me soundly in their cups with the
Dutch mariners; and though I paid for the Brandey-wine, strong beer, Mum, and
Spruce beer, pickle Herrings and Holland cheese, yet I never exspected from
them good word or penny of money for all this charge and pains.

If I were to do the like service again for the State, I would never look in
any Books of the Civil Law, but consult with such persons as know how to humor
a Dutch Skipper or mariner, and fish out his secrets. Thus have I clearly told
you the ways and instruments I used to do the Commonwealth this great
service. I now humbly exspect according to the Council of States promise the
sum of eleven thousand pounds for this service. And had I not undertaken it
the Commonwealth had lost this Silver, which was to the value of two hundred
seventy eight thousand pounds.


This that he desires being just, I desire that you would not put him off, but
let it be done forthwith unto himself, and all such others as he under his hand
shall nominate; for he employes others under him in searching into this
business. He will nominate none but such as may be trusted in it. And I desire
you in your several places to give him, and all that he shall employ, all ready
dispatch and encouragement, that the business of the Commonwealth may find
no obstacle. Where there is publication, you may likewise show him the
Depositions and (I pray) let nothing that is just be denied him.

3. September. 1653. Walter Walker.

3 September, 1653.
MAster Dorislaus and M. Bud are now again desired to deliver unto Mr. Violet a
Copy of the Specifications given in by the Masters and Commanders of the ships
Sampson, Salvador, and George: as likewise, Copies of all the Pleadings
Articulate Exhibited and admitted on the part of the Claimers of the Silver in
any of these ships: And they are to go with him to the Register, and Examiners
Offices; and to procure him a view of all the Bills of Lading, Extracts and
Exhibites, either brought into the Office, or exhibited by any Claymers: And
whatever Papers are, or shall be exhibited by any Claymers: And whatever
Papers are, or shall be exhibited by any Claimers in the three Ships. I do, as
Advocate for the Commonwealth, desire Mr. Dorislaus to yield all his
endeavors and assistance, and also the Register, Examiner, and Deputy-Register
in the Admiraltie from time to time to give Mr, Violet free admittance and view
of all Acts, Bills of Lading, and Pleas Exhibited, and Extracts and Papers
remaining in the Registry, or which shall come in: And to it readily and
effectually; the same tending to the service of the Commonwealth; and being in
order for preparing the Evidence fit to be produced for the Commonwealth. I am
in this Letter, by order of the Council of State to Doctor Walker, entreated to
make this Discovery, but now I have done the States-work with the hazard of my
life, and vast expense, I cannot by Petitions, Certificates, or Prayers, and
many years attendance, get to be paid my most dearly earned reward which the
Council promised me, being eleven thousand pounds; had I thought of this usage,
I could have bin paid by the Claimers.

If this discovery had bin so easily made, and had bin every bodies work to
have found out the Spaniards Frauds, I should not have had these earnest
Entreaties from Dr. Walker, according to the Orders of the Council of State, of
the 1. of September. 1653. The Commissioners for Prize-Goods, have certified to
Mr Secretary Thurloe, how active and knowing they found me to make these
Discoveries; and had I not been so, the Nation had lost every penny of this
great Treasure, amounting to above two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds.


And I do, according to the Order of the Council of State of the First of
September, 1653, earnestly desire and Entreat Mr. Violet, and also the
Commissioners for Prize goods, and their Sollicitors and Agents; as also, the
Proctor and Silicitors for the State, and every one of them, with all
convenient speed, severally to set down in Writing all the Informations that
they respectively know of, or can find: And all the Evidences and Proofs that
may be discerned or produced on the part of the Commonwealth; That so a full
Plea and Articulate Allegation may be prepared, and the Proofs brought in for
the Commonwealth: And no Default be done, suffered, or Committed

3. September. 1653. Walter Walker.

Here follows the Referrees Letter, with their desires to my Lord Bradshaw.

WHereas by an Order of Reference from his Highness the Lord Protector, dated
the 13th. of July 1657. the Petition of Mr. Thomas Violet, (concerning his
staying the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, and therein the Dutch silver)
is referred to the consideration of Sir Thomas Vyner, and Sir John Barkstead
Knights, Captain John Limbrey, Doctor Walker, Gabriel Beck, Maurice Thomson,
Edward Dendy, Henry Middleton, and Isaac Dorislaus Esquires, or any three or
more of them, who according to the said Order of Reference, are to examine,
state and certify the premises, contained in the said Petition to his
Highness, together with their opinion upon the whole matter. And whereas upon
reading the said Petition, of the said Mr. Thomas Violet, there are many
particulars of service alleged by the Petitioner, which he affirms the Lord
Bradshaw to have knowledge of; It is therefore desired, in order to a speedy
and effectual proceeding upon the said Petition, That Gabriel Beck Esquire, Mr.
Sergeant Dendy, or either of them, will take the pains to wait upon the Lord
Bradshaw, and in the names of the abovesaid Referrees, to Present the Petition
and Reference relating to the said Thomas Violet, with the desire of the said
Referrees, That his Lordship upon perusal of the same, will be pleased to
certify his knowledge of the premises, dated the one and twentieth day of
August 1657.

Tho. Vyner. Jo. Barkstead. Jo. Limbrey. Maurice Thomson.


This same Letter, which these aforesaid Referrees writ to the Lord Bradshaw,
the Referrees out of their love to Justice, and to know the Truth; were pleased
to write to Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, and Francis Allen
Esquire, and sent them Copies of your Petitioners Petition and Reference,
subscribed by the aforesaid Referrees, that so these Honorable Gentlemen, upon
the perusal of your Petitioners Petition, and the Reference, thereupon would
also be pleased to certify their knowledge of the Premises to the aforesaid
Referrees, which they all of them were honorably pleased to certify
accordingly.

For which Justice of theirs I am bound to pray for every one of them, the like
great Obligations your Petitioner owes to the following Referrees, let the
issue of this Business be what God please, I have learned to submit unto his
Providence, I am as clay in the Potters hands.

And though I was very unwilling to print these Certificates and the Referrees
report to their late Highnesses Oliver and Richard, knowing these Honorable
Gentlemen love to do the oppressed right for conscience sake, without blowing a
Trumpet not looking for thanks from men, that so God may reward them openly.

Yet the present posture of my business is such, that to demonstrate the many
services your Petitioner has done this Commonwealth, your Honors shall see
it certified under the hands of twenty four Honorable and Credible persons,
the Originalls I have ready to produce, I humbly crave pardon of these
Honorable Gentlemen for doing thereof without acquainting them therewith, it
is both by the Laws of God and this Nation, that out of the mouth of two
VVitnesses every thing, shall be established, both for men's Estates and Life's
by the Laws of this Land a Jury of twelve persons either quit or condemn all
persons of what degree soever.

For your Honors Information, your Honors upon the perusal of these
Certificates would see a concatenation of faithful and difficult service,
which your Petitioner at his great expense, charge, trouble, and loss of time,
from the very hour your Petitioner was discharged out of the Tower; viz. 1647
to the year 1651. the year before your Petitioner undertook this great service
of staying the Silver in the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George.

In consideration of which service done as aforesaid, many of the Council of
State and members of this Parliament, did promise your Petitioner the
restoration of his Estate, and they watched but for an opportunity to acquaint
the Parliament therewith, that so his Estate may be restored unto him again,
all these services and promises made by the Council in the year 1651. before
ever this Silver was brought into the River, or the State had seized on it.

May it please your Honors, in December. 1652. before your Petitioner would
undertake to make his discovery of the Spanish and Flemish fraudulent Claims,
to cozen the State of this Treasure, and to be at the charge of prosecuting the
same in the Admiralty, your Petitioner was necessitated to come to a certain
agreement about his estate with the Council of State, and how he should be paid
for this service, or else it had been a thing impossible for your Petitioner to
have undertaken this task, or to have gone through with it, in respect the
Council of State would not advance any money to your Petitioner, but would
rather have let this silver go in the Admiraltie, as it had gone, had not your
Petitioner in the very minute of time stayed it, as is attested under the hands
of the Officers of the Mint, whereupon your Petioner was forced to borrow great
sums of money, to enable him to employ instruments to find out the bottom of
this fraud.

Several Gentlemen lent your Petitioner seven hundred sixty five pounds at
interest, every penny spent in this service; the reason that both made your
Petitioner undertake this difficult business, and made these Gentlemen lend
your Petitioner this money, was upon the credit and faith of the Council of
States promise to your Petitioner, that if this silver was forfeited to the
State, your Petitioner should faithfully be paid out of the same the sum of
eleven thousand pounds, in lieu of his estate, and this you will see clearly
proved, and my friends knew me so well, that I would not to fail of your
Petitioners undertaking, and for that your Petitioner was and is ready to prove
to the Council of State, his damage is far greater by his Sequestration and
Imprisonment then eleven thousand pounds, the Council of State did faithfully
promise 1652. that over and above the paying of your Petitioner the sum of
eleven thousand pounds, for this service of getting and staying this silver,
your Petitioner should have an Honorable Reward and Memorial left to posterity
for the same, and it was upon this score of getting my estate again off
Sequestration, or eleven thousand pounds satisfaction, that I ever acted in
this business of the silver, or in any other public business from the year
1647. to 1651. or since 1652. to this time, for had I not been assured
faithfully of my estate from the Council of State, and relied on just
performance; or had I had the least thought of such usage, and putting off from
day to day with References and Reports now my work is done; when my business,
and what I deserve is as well known (as the beggar knows his dish, or a man
knows his right hand from his left.) I do humbly declare reallie to all the
world, (I would have remembered that saying, a man may be over just) or else I
would have taken more consideration then I have done of my own preservation,
when I was offered ten thousand pounds by the Claimers for to have connived and
let the State be cozened of the silver in the Admiraltie, as they were at the
time of many Dutch prize ships and goods. It could not enter into your
Petitioners heart to exspect such delays by references and old Court tricks;
had I thought of such dealings, I had known a way to pay my self. Had your
Petitioner spent his spirits, time and estate to have studied disturbance and
malignancie, as much as he has studied the honor, peace, profit and welfare
of this Commonwealth, the silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador and George had
never been coined in the Tower, being two hundred seventie eight thousand
pounds, but by the treachery of some Merchants and others in the Admiraltie,
had been cleared out of the Nation and sent to the Dutch. Had your Petitioner
December 16. 1652. at nine of the clock in the morning in the Court of
Admiraltie been possessed with the dumb spirit of malignancie, your Judges of
the Admiraltie that very day and hour had cleared the aforesaid silver, the
Admiral Van-Trump then lying on the Downs to have wasted the silver to
Holland; which had not your Petitioner prevented by seasonable applications to
the Council of State, might have proved of sad consequence, and have cost many
thousand English men's lives, and God knows what other damages to this Nation,
such an oversight in the Court of Admiraltie might have brought upon this
Nation.

Here follows the Lord Bradshawes CERTIFICATE upon the Desire and Request to
him, of Sir Thomas Viner, Sir John Barkestead, John Limbery, Maurice Thompson
Esquires, Authorized by his late Highness Oliver, to be Commissioners to
Examine this Business.

The Lord Bradshawes CERTIFICATE.
I Have perused the Petition and considered of the desires mentioned in the
annexed Paper, and in compliance therewith so far as my memory serves me,
which has bin assisted by the view of several Orders, Certificates,
Depositions and memorialls formerly made in the Petitioners Case, and now
showed unto me, I signify and declare as follows.

That although I may not take me to make a narrative of Mr. Violets Case, much
less to give a punctual account, after so many years, of what passed at the
Council, relating to that engagement of theirs asserted in the Petition (which
to be in the manner therein set down) I can neither knowingly affirm nor deny,
yet the Petitioners addresses in the time of the War with the Dutche,
concerning the stay of the Ships which had the Silver in them being very
remarkable, I can for the substance testify, and do well call to mind the
Petitioners tenders and intimations to the Council, and undertaking the service
touching the Silver specified in his Petition, and that upon good deliberation
taken of the matter (the probability of his allegations being also much
strengthened by the concurrant circumstances of some Letters about that time
intercepted) he had thereupon very good encouragement given him by the Council,
that (performing h^s discovery) his pains, cost and care, should be thoroughly
considered, and he honorably rewarded, or was told or promised to that effect.

Whereupon he was Authorized and appointed by the Council to sollivite and
assist in that whole business as by their Orders appears, and whilst that
Council satt, was taken notice of as the maine Agent in the whole conduct
thereof, as the proceedings of those times will show, what the beneficial
consequence of that employment, and what fruit thereof has been to the State
may be better manifested, by others who have been at the Heline of Affairs
since the 20th of April 1653. the day of the dismission of the Parliament and
old Council.

But if I may offer my sense of the man and his actings, which I apprehend to
be in part expected, my opinion was and is, that his seasonable interposition
and protest in the Admiralty, applications to the Council, and discovery of the
Dutch and Spanish frauds touching the Silver Contested for, these actions
accompanied also with great Charge, hazard, and trouble on his part, as he
offers to Demonstrate, and affirms to be well known, adjoining thereto for
the legal part, the constant assistance of the learned Advocate for the Common
wealth, were the maine occasion (if not the causa sine qua non) of the after
benefit received by the State upon conversion of that Silver, the Petitioner
being looked upon as the great Wheel that set all on work, as I believe it
would be testified for him by others, who had the honor to serve the
Commonwealth in Council, when this business was first began, and afterward
until the close of the same if they were consulted herein.

His losses Anno 1643. and his disburstments about the Silver, for which he
prays satisfaction and indemnity, I must leave to his own Evidencinge, and it
seems he is ready for it.

The Councils Engagements and Intentions to him-wards, at his first assuming
the employment, were not without good reason uncommitted to writing for
avoiding of all misconstruction, they proposing on the one hand a fair and
just proceeding, and on the other all due encouragement to that person whose
disquisition and effectual prosecution for making good the claim they knew
must needs be very expensive, and liable to many difficulties and hazards from
the multitude of the contrary interessed parties, and their many and powerful
abettors: So as any one in reason may conclude, that without such assurance of
the part of the Council, and relying upon it on the Petitioners part, the whole
business had miscarried, as left, un-undertaken, and undone.

The Petitioners sore task and merit of the State in this particular: I shall
not further meddle with; or take upon me to divine or determine what the issue
will, or should be as to his just recompense and compensation.

His zeal, resolution, activity, and ability to promote the public interest
in diverse respects, being known to me heretofore in good measure, as I formerly
held my self obliged to cherish, and so much as in me was to improve for the
States advantage: So upon the occasion now offered, wherein the honor and
justice of the State, and their profit also, as I conceive, is mainly involved;
I am very free to render him according to my best observation of him and his
actings, this due and deserved Testimony. September. 5. 1657.

John Bradshaw.

This is a true Copy of the Lord Bradshaws Certificate on the behalf of Mr.
Thomas Violet examined by me, Thomas Hewet, John Rimmer.

Francis Allen Esquire; Report, and certificate upon the desire and request to him
of Sir Tho. Viner, Sir John Barkstead, John Limbrey, and Maurice Thomson
Esquires.
Gentlemen,
I Have received an intimation from you as referrees by virtue of an order from
his Highness the Lord Protector referring to a Petition of Mr. Thomas Violet
concerning his staying the Ships Samson, Salvador and George: And the silver
therein contained, That I would testify my knowledge in writing concerning the
same, or what else is contained in the aforesaid Petition, in a ready
compliance with what is so intimated, I do in the first place say, That I had
not the particular knowledge of those affairs, as they respect Master Violets
actings in them, which other Honorable Persons had, and therefore cannot
testify so particularly concerning those transactions as others may see just
cause to do, on Mr. Violets behalf only, Thus much in general I can and do
freely testify, from my own observation and knowledge, that Mr. Violet did
engage in that concernment of the staying the ships Samson Salvador and George;
and in discovering the frauds endeavored to be put upon the State touching
the silver in them, contained with a great deal of industry, courage and
unweariednesse; and indeed I conceive to his very great charge and expense,
besides his frequent attending the Committee for the mint in several affairs,
referring thereunto, which could not but be expensive to him also; all which is
submitted to your further consideration.

27 October. 1657. Francis Allen.

This is a true copy of this certificate, witness Tho. Hewet, John Rimmer.

Sir George Fleetwoods Report and Certificate upon the desire and request to
him of Sir Thomas Viner, Sir John Barkestead, John Limbrey, Maurice Thomson,
Esquires.
Gentlemen,
MR. Thomas Violet showing me his Petition to his Highness, and his Highness,
and his desires mentioned in the annexed Papers, and requesting me to certify
my knowledge of his services for the Commonwealth, I find my self bound, as I
am a lover of Justice and Truth, that would to the uttermost of my abilities
have vice punished, and virtue rewarded, in pursuance whereof I do signify,

That I have known Mr. Violet for many years, he having daily recourse to my
Vnele Watkins, during the time he had the office of head Searcher of the Port
of London; They advising together to get an Act pass against transporting gold
and silver, and the Bill being brought by Mr. Violet into the Parliament, there
was several references to the Committee of the Navy, Officers of the Mint, and
Commissioners of the Customs to certify their opinions: and they all centured
and agreed in this, that the Parliament, (if they would have the Mint set on
Work, and the gold of the Nation preserved) the Act against transporting gold
and silver then depending in the House should be passed, this was Anno 1647. as
appears by the original Orders.

These actings of Mr. Violet for the Public, together with several proposals
of Mr. Violets for the advancement of the Trade of the Nation, and Mr. Violets
constant attendance for many years both at the Council of State and Parliament,
and Council of Trade, to procure the restoration of his Estate: Caused many of
the Members of the House and Council of Trade, and my self amongst the rest to
take especial notice of the Man, and such of the Council and Parliament as were
pleased to make use of him found in Mr. Violet a deep and profound insight into
Mint-Busines, and Merchants affairs.

And this good opinion of Mr. Violet procured him this benefit in 1651. that
many of the Council of State, and Parliament, waited an opportunity for to move
in the House for Mr. Violets indemnity, and for the full restoratiln of his
estate being about eleven thousand pounds.

And this was promised to Mr. Violet 1651. a year before his undertaking this
great service of staying the Silver mentioned in Mr. Violets Petition, and I am
confident * if Mr. Violet will take the pains to wait upon some of the Members
of Parliament and Council of State, he will have many honorable testimonies of
this that I say besides my self.

And this was the true ground, and original of Mr. Violets being taking notice
of by the State of his abilities to make discoveries of the fraudulent Claims
of the Spanish Ambassador to the Silver in the Ships, mentioned in Mr. Violets
Petition, all which Silver Mr. Violet by his seasonable discovery to the State,
and by his protesting in the Court of Admiralty in December. 1652. was the only
cause of getting the State this great Treasure mentioned in the aforesaid
Petition of Mr. Violet, being three hundred thousand pounds, and the
Parliament, and Council of State in 1652. imposed upon Mr. Violet the whole
care of the management of this business in the Court of Admiralty as to the
discovering part of the Spanish Ambassadors fraudulent claims, as appears
unto me by the view of several Orders and Warrants.

It is most apparent in the whole proceeding in this difficult service, Mr.
Violet had always in his eye the restoration of his estate, or the value of
eleven thousand pounds, and the particular of Mr. Violets demands to the
Parliament in 1651. was about eleven thousand pounds, and had he not had a real
assurance from the Council of State in December. 1652. for the restoration of his
Estate, or the value, this great Business had been lost and left un undertaken
by Mr. Violet, had he not had both such a promise, (and also he relied on the
same) for just performance, for Mr. Violet in this his high undertaking
ventured all his Estate, Life, Liberty, and expended in this service above five
hundred pounds, as I find by the depositions of four persons employed in this
service.

I remember well the appearing of the Spanish Ambassador in the Parliament
1652. in December, demanding the Ships, Samson Salvador, and George, with their
silver and lading.

It is very remarkable, the courage of Mr. Violet, in giving the Ambassador of
Spain so high a charge in 1652, 1653. concerning his undue practices to
defraud the Nation of this silver: And yet the Ambassador never to vindicate
his reputation, nor to desire reparation, he being here above a year after:
This shows apparently there was a design set on foot by the Spanish Ambassador
to defraud the Nation in this business of the silver Prises, for when I see
the Spanish Ambassador make no Addresses to the Parliament for reparation, I
was assured Mr. Violet would make him let go his hold and claim of this silver
mentioned in his Papers, which he delivered into the House.

Upon perusal of Mr. Violets Papers I observed, that though the Parliament was
dismissed 1653. the 20. of April, yet Mr. Violets sore task continued on him
still, he being by that present Council looked upon as the great wheel that set
all on working, as to the discovering part, and this appears under the hand of
Doctor Walker in several Letters writing to Mr. Doreslaws, Mr. Bud the States
Proctor, Mr. Arnold, Mr. How, to require them all in their several places to
let Mr. Violet, and all such as he employs under him have the full view and
inspection of all proceedings in the Register of the Admiralty, and to require
Mr. Violets attendance, he paying several persons, and expending in this
business above five hundred pounds, as I find it sworn by several persons.

It is true for some reasons of State Mr. Violets assurance and reward was
uncommitted to writing to avoid claimers, and misconstruction of lewd tongues,
and to carry an even hand both in respect of the claimers, and the Spanish
Ambassador: But this omission was not to frustrate Mr. Violet of his dearly
earned reward, the restoration of his Estate; many of the then Council of
State, if they be attended by Mr. Violet, will say this could never enter into
their thoughts.

To set a man so sore a task; and strictly to impose on him his daily
attendance, and to enable him to undergo this great and heavy weight to be
assisted by ten several persons, four of them swear Mr. Violet expended,
besides all his pains, hazard, and labor, five hundred pounds in this service.

And I am persuaded had not Mr. Violet undertaken this business in that very
nick of time he did 13. of December. 1652. and constantly and vigilantly
followed, and agitated in this business, both at the Council of State, and
Admiralty; this great quantity of silver had been lost, and the State deluded
with pretended claims, and how seasonable a service this was at that
conjuncture of time, and the happy fruit and effect so great a treasure brought
to the Nation, is visibly to all men.

My opinion is that for the Honor (and I may say profit of this Nation, to
encourage all men for the future to be faithful to the Commonwealth, and to
expose their Persons, and expend both their spirits and purses for the Honor
and safety of the public, as Mr. Violet has done in this great undertaking,
and brought it to a happy issue.

That as the sum of money was the greatest that ever (I think) at one time was
saved to this Nation by any one man's discovery, so his reward should be
suitable, not only to have the full restoration of his Estate, which was
faithfully, to my knowledge, promised to him, both by many of the Council of
State and Parliament before ever Mr. Violets undertaking this service mentioned
in his Petition. But this service being finished, Crowns all his former
undertakings, and in my opinion he not only deserves the full restoration of
his Estate, but to have an honorable memorial left to posterity of his
seasonable and faithful discoveries and services concerning the aforesaid
silver, That so all others may be encouraged to trust to the faithful promises
of the Council of State, when they shall see the States promises faithfully
performed in such a conjuncture of time, as when the Government was changed.

And I think I am bound in my conscience, that taking notice of such high
proposals as were propounded either in Parliament or Council of State, during
the time I had the honor to serve the Public (amongst which I have and do
hold this service mentioned in Mr. Violets Petition to be one of the first rank
that was ever presented in Parliament or Council of State, when the work is
finished,) I hold my self obliged, both in honor and conscience to give the
undertaker, such as Mr. Violet, that has in this business labored all along
to the perfecting of the work, The State having gotten by this discovery and
undertaking, about three hundred thousands pounds (as M. Violet affirms to me
so much money coined) he having finished his sore task, I think I am bound in
justice to help him what I can, that so after so great pains and hazard Mr.
Violet might not work in vain.

And upon this account I make this certificate, whereof one part is upon my own
knowledge and experience I have had of Mr. Violet, the other Part I refer to
the Orders of Parliament, Council of State, Doctor Walkers warrants, and the
Certificates of the Officers of the Mint.

And I wish for the due encouragement of all active Persons that shall
hereafter venture upon great and high undertakings for the profit, honor, and
safety of this State and Commonwealth, that Mr. Violets reward and
compensation for this great service may always be had in remembrance, for no
doubt so great and faithful a service discovered so seasonably, will have a
happy issue, and the reward from the State will be suitable to the greatness of
the Service.

September. 22. 1657. G. Fleetwood.
This is a true Copy of Sir George Fleetwoods certificate on the behalf of Mr.
Thomas Violet,

examined by me Thomas Hewet, John Rimmer.



Doctor WALKERS CERTIFICATE.
I Can truly, and do certify, That when the Cases of and touching the Silver
in the three ships, the Sampson, Salvadore and St. George, were depending in
the Court of Admiralty, touching the same being Prize. And before the Argument
touching the casting the Onus probandi thereupon in that Court were made; Mr.
Thomas Violet did repair to the said Court of Admiraltie, and to my self, being
Advocate to the then Parliament, and did produce from the then Council of
State, one order bearing date the 13. of December. 1652. And also some other
Orders of the then Council of State, whereby he the said Mr. Violet was ordered
to repair to the said Court of Admiralty, and also to my self as Advocate for
the then Parliament; And to look after and take care of those said businesses,
touching the said Silver in the said three Ships or to such effect, and
accordingly he the said Mr. Violet was therein very careful, and industrious,
and did by himself and others employed by him, and at his own charge take
great pains in following the said business, and in searching after, and
examination of the said Ships, Papers, and Books, and writings, and other
matters that were exhibited into the Registers of the Admiraltie, and in making
his observations thereupon, and collecting thereout what might make for the
State, and looking after such other evidences as he could find out, (wherein
he was noe way remiss or negligent) and the said Mr. Violet did openly own
the same business in Court, and moved therein on behalf of the Parliament, and
that earnestly and with zeal, and made or declared some Protest therein in the
said Court of Admiraltie. And did not only particularly apply himself to me,
but did also in my hearing privately press it to some of the then Judges of the
Admiralty. And I did find that the said Mr. Violet, by his much public owning
and appearing therein in the behalf of the Parliament and then Council of
State, did contract much envy and ran great hazards of his person, and it
cannot be but that he did lay out and expend much money to such as he employed
therein.

10. March 1657. Wall. Walker.

I shall humbly desire your Honors to observe that Doctor Walker if he had
pleased, could have certified in this his Certificate, the day of the month I
made my Protest against the Judges of the Court of Admiraltie, being the 16.
December. 1652. against their discharging this Silver, and the great Contest I
had with them about it before I could get the Judges to Respite their Judgment,
and that to his knowledge the Judges of the Admiraltie complained of me to the
Council of State that very day in the afternoon for doing this service, and
that had it not bin for your Petitioner, the State had bin cozened of all this
Silver. But because I printed the list of the Dutch prizes, and discovered the
abuses and cheates put on the Nation by some Officers in the Admiralty, (no
doubt but this business stuck in his stomach, and to gratify some guilty
persons that had cozened the State) and that made him to certify my business
by halfs, and but part of his knowledge.

But it matters not as long as your Petitioner has his services fully
certified concerning this Silver business, under the hands of Sir James
Harrington, Sir George Flettwood, and the Officers of the Mint.

This memorial I put down to let Doctor Walker know, that though he could
forget me and certify his knowledge by halfes, It may 'one' day I Will in my lot
not to forget him, but to certify my knowledge of him fully, when I find a
convenient time.

If Doctor Walker could have made this discovery without me, he would never
have entreated me to do it, as appears by his Orders and Letters to Mr.
Dorislaws, Mr. Bud, Mr. How, and Mr. Arnold, Officers in the Court of
Admiraltie. vid. fol. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73.

Sir. James Harringtons Report and Certificate upon the desire and request to
him of Sir Thomas Viner, Sir John Barkstead, John Limbery, Maurice Thomson
Esquires.
I Have read Mr Thomas Violets Petition, and his desires mentioned in the
annexed Paper, as also the desires of the Referrees, and in compliance of his
sad request, so far as my memory serves me, which has been refreshed by the
veiw of several Orders of Parliament, Council of State, Certificates,
Depositions, and memorialls formerly transacted in the Petitioners business,
both concerning the Silver mentioned in the Petition, and several other of Mr.
Violets faithful services done by him for this Commonwealth.

I do signify and declare, that from the year 1649. to the year 1653. being
the time I had acquaintance with Mr. Violet, I observed that he had a deep
profound judgment and insight into the secrets of our Mint in England, and
knew the mystery and secrets of other Mints in foreign parts, and the several
Arts, mysteries, and ways foreign Nations used to induce and draw Bullion
both gold and silver to their several Mints and Countries, and the Laws and
ordinances foreign Nations made for hindering the exportation in every
respective Country.

And that both my self and others, my Associates of the Council of State, in
business of high and great concernments as to the Civil part, especially
concerning the Mint and Trade made use of him in many particular services for
the Public.

And indeed for my self I must give him this just and due Commendations, that
for all the time I knew him at the Council of State, he was very diligent to
advance the public service, as will appear by the Acts of the Council in
those times, if recourse be thereunto had.

Which actings of his, and his diligent attendance at the Council of State, was
in prosecution for many years to obtain his estate which was taken from him by
the Parliament, as he constantly affirmed both to my self and others, my
associates of the Council of State, when we employed him in many great
businesses for the Common wealth, and this dilligent and vigilant carriage of
his, presented him both to the Parliament and Council of State, as a man whose
abilities, activity, resolution and fideliry, was very necessary and
serviceable for the benefit of the State, and great use was made of him in
those times by the State, as appears by the Silver business, mentioned in his
Petition.

And that to those that knew him both in Parliament and Council of State, his
trust and faithfulness was held in very good estemee, and his services were
eminently taken notice of both by my self and diverse others, both in the
Parliament and Council of State, for several years before Mr. Violet engaged
in this great undertaking of staying the Dutch Silver in December 1652.
mentioned in his Petition.

And truly I must attest that both my self and several others of the
Parliament and Council, looked upon Mr. Violet in this great undertaking of
staying the Silver mentioned in his Petition, in the Ships Sampson, Salvador,
and George, That Mr. Violet was the great wheel of the work that got the
State this great Treasure, for he both discovered to the Council of State, the
fraud of the Spanish Ambassador, and the frauds of the Dutch and Spanish
Claimers to the Silver, which seasonable discovery of his at the Council stayed
it, together with his Protest in the Court of Admiraltie, being by him
faithfully, and actively performed, the true Attestation whereof was examined
at the Council of State, and now showed me under the hands of the Officers of
the Mint.

By all which proceedings it appears to me that Mr. Violets engagements in
this service, was not only the isntrumental occasion of getting the State this
great Treasure mentioned in his Petition, but the only cause, and without him
and his Protesting in the Court of Admiraltie at that very instant nicke of
time 16. December. 1652. this great Treasure being about three hundred thousand
pounds (as Mr. Violet affirms to me there was so much money taken out of the
Sampson, Salvador, and George) had bin all let go out of the Nation, and bin
discharged by the Court of Admiraltie, and of what prejudicial and dangerous
consequence, such an oversight in the Court of Admiraltie might have produced
to this Commonwealth at that conjuncture of time, when Van Trumpe the Dutch
General was in the Downs, is obvious to all men to conjecture, as also the
contrary, the great advantage and benefit that has accrued to this Nation by
Mr. Violets happy and succesfull Protesting in the Admiraltie against the
discharge of this Silver, and opposing the Spanish Ambassador, and all their
numerous interessed parties and Claimers, and their powerful abettors joined
with it, the hard and voluntary task he imposed upon himself (as I find it
sworn by several Witnesses) and that besides all his pains and hazards, he
expended in this service above five hundred pounds.

And I find by Doctor Walkers Warrants directed to Mr. Dorislaus, Mr. Bud, Mr.
Arnold, and Mr. How, the States Officers, and ministers in the Court of
Admiraltie, and by Orders of the Council of State, that since the 20th of
April 1653. Mr. Violet was required and enjoined not only to contribute his
own endeavors, but also at his own charge to employ many others in making
this discovery, which I find to be attested under Doctor Walkers hand, and by
the Depositions of several Persons employed by Mr. Violet, for that although
the Parliament and Council of State were dismissed the 20th day of April 1653
yet Mr. Violets fore task, expensive, and dangerous employment was imposed and
continued on him till the State had gotten the Silver, and this appears by
Warrants from his Highness Council, and Doctor Walker of a later date ready to
be produced, which I have seen.

These actings of his, accompanied with great charge, hazard, and trouble,
shows to all the world Mr. Violets faithful service, constant fidelity, and
love to his Country.

Upon due consideration of all the premises, I am very willing to testify my
knowledge of Mr. Violet, according to that true worth and great abilities I
know in the man, with his readiness to serve his Country, and I do it the
rather because he had several times my faithful promise (when I was a
Councellor of State) that I would testify his several services done to the
Parliament, by which I conceive he merited the indemnity and restoration of
his estate before this great undertaking, mentioned in his Petition about the
Silver in December. 1652 but doing this service successfully in staying this
Silver, I think my self therefore now much more bound in honor and
conscience, after so long a trial of this man's patience, constancy, and
fidelity, and his love to his Country, to give you my true observation of the
man, both in his acting this and other great business, and this I attest upon
my knowledge and experience of the man, and not upon hearsay.

And if the rule of the Gospel be observed, viv. that all men do to others as
they would be done to themselves, Mr. Violet cannot be many weeks without a
full restoration of his Estate or the value, and if Mr. Violet has had such
measure as he has presented to the world in print, surely I must say he has
had hard measure, but I wish him not only his Estate, but also an honorable
memorial to be left to Posterity of his great service, according to former
engagements to him by some of the then Council of State, for this particular
service of the Silver mentioned in his Petition, this just due and deserved
Testimony, I do give him this first of October 1657.

James Harrington.

This is a true Copy, Examined by us Thomas Hewet, John Rimmer, John Symes.

WHen I brought these aforesaid Certificates to the Commissioners, to whom the
Examination of my services touching this Silver, was referred by the late Lord
Protector Oliver, I offered to bring them the Testimonialls of several others
of the Council of State, to affirm and attest to the same effect as these
honorable Gentlemen had don.

But the Referrees were pleased to say they had seen enough, and to forbid me
the troubling any others for conformation of what I had alleged in my
Petition, they declaring that these Certificates aforesaid had given them full
and ample satisfaction, and that they were sorry I should be so dealt with,
and that they did see my sad sufferings, and would fully and effectually
certify the true State of my business to his Highness Oliver what I had
merrited from the State, they not doubting but I should have not only the sum
of eleven thousand pounds paid me for this discovery and great service but
also should receive an honorable reward over and above for the same.

To Encourage others for the future to rely and trust to the Promises of the
Council of State, and to be faithful in the trust that was imposed on them by
the State.

The Referrees telling your Petitioner, that in Justice, Prudence, Honor, and
Policy, the States must pay me, and that they could not expect but the end of
my labors would come to a happy issue, and thereupon the aforesaid Referrees
were pleased to give me this honorable Certificate following, concerning the
true State of my services, and the Council of States engagements to pay me the
sum of eleven thousand pounds, and an honorable reward over and above. viz.

May it please your Highness.
WHereas by your Highness order of the 13th of July last, your Highness was
pleased to referr unto us or any three of us Mr. Thomas Violets Petition
hereunto annexed, whereby we are directed to examine the premises suggested
therein, and to state and certify the Case to your Highness, together with
our opinions upon the whole matter.

In obedience whereunto we having perused the said Petition, and finding many
particular services which the Petitioner thereby affirms were done by him and
well known to the Lord Bradshawe, and many others of the late Council of
State, and he having named to us Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetewood,
and Francis Allen Esquires, who (amongst other of the Council) knew the
Petitioners great service done concerning the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and
George, their Silver and Lading mentioned in his said Petition, and the Council
of States intentions and engagements to him, when he undertook to disprove
the Spanish Ambassador, and Spanish and Flemish Claimers thereunto in the
years 1652. and 1653.

For the clearing of the truth of the Petitioners allegations suggested in his
said Petition, we held it necessary to acquaint the Lord Bradshawe, and the
said Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, and Francis Allen Esquires,
with your Highness said Referrence, and sent them Copies thereof with the said
Petition, and with our desires that they would certify their particular
knowledges therein, that so we might the better return to your Highness the
true state of the Petitioners Case.

And we have accordingly received Certificates from all the aforesaid Persons,
which we have hereunto annexed, together with the said Petition and Referrence
for your Highness gracious peruseall, all which Testimonialls and Certificates
set forth the great services done by the Petitioner, by his seasonably
discovery of the Spanish Ambassadors, and Claimers fraudulent endeavors to
deceive the Commonwealth in December. 1652.

We have likewise perused several Orders of Parliament and Council of State,
that set forth the intended frauds and Practices of Don Alonso de Cardenas, in
coming in his own Person to the Parliament and to the Council of State with
several other Merchants, and their Claiming the Dutch Silver then aboard the
said Ships. And we find Mr. James Stenere committed by the Parliament for
tampering in this business; We find it attested under the hands of Mr. George
Brett, James Hoare, and Thomas Birch, all Offieers of your Highness Mint (they
being then in the Court of Admiraltie the 16th of December. 1652.) that the
Petitioner by his active, faithful, and seasonable Protest in the said Court
(at that very instant nicke of time, and the very hour the Ships and Silver
were in judgment before the Judges there, and upon discharge) the Petitioner
by his Protest stayed the Silver mentioned in the Petition, being to the value
of above two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds in Silver, taken out of the
aforesaid Ships and Coined in your Highness Mint, as the Petitioner has
proved to us upon the sight of some accomptes.

And we find by several Orders of the Council of State, and Orders from
Doctor Walker the Commonwealth's Advocate, and by several Depositions and
Certificates that the whole weight of that business was imposed on the
Petitioner by the Council of State in 1652. and 1653. as to the discovering
part, and the Petitioner was required to prosecute this service after the
dissolving of the long Parliament, by the Council of State then being.

The Heads of the Lord Bradshaws Certificate. We also find it attested by the
Lord Bradshawe, that the seasonable interposition of the Petitioner, and his
Protesting in the Admiralty, applications to the Council, and discovery of the
frauds, both of the Spanish, and Dutch, touching the said Silver, those
actions of the Petitioner accompanied also with great charge, hazard, and
trouble, were the maine occasion if not the causa, sine qua non, of the after
benefit received by the State upon conversion of that Silver, the Petitioner
being looked upon by the then Council of State as the great wheel that set all
on work, when this business first began and after til the close of the same;
The Councels engagements and intentions to him wards at his first assuming the
employment, were not without good reason uncommitted to writing for avoiding
all misconstruction, they proposing on the one hand a fair and just
proceeding, and on the other all due encouragement to that Person whose
disquisition and effectual prosecution for making good the claim, they knew
must needs be very expensive, and liable to many difficulties, and hazards,
from the multitude of the contrary interessed parties, and the many and
powerful abettors, so as any one in reason may conclude, that without such
assurance on the part of the Council, and relying upon it on the Petitioners
part, the whole business had miscarried, as left unundertaken and undone.

The Petitioners sore task and merit of the State, he says he will not
further meddle with; The Petitioners zeal, resolution, and ability, to promote
the public interest in diverse respects being known to him in good measure,
as he formerly held himself obliged to cherish and (so much as in him was) to
improve for the States advantage, so upon this occasion offered wherein the
honor and justice of the State and their profit (as he conceived) is mainely
inv olved; He says he is very free to render the Petitioner according to his
best observations of him and his actings, this due and deserved Testimony.
Dated the 5th of September, 1657.

The Heads of Sir James Harringtons Certificate. Sir James Harrington also
certifies us, that the Petitioner was the great wheel of the work which got
the State this great Treasure, for he both discovered to the Council of State,
the frauds of the Spanish Ambassador, and the Dutch and Spanish Claimers to
the Silver, which seasonable discovery stayed it at the Council, together with
his Protest in the Court of Admiralty, being by him faithfully, and actively
performed, the true attestation thereof was examined at the Council of State,
and the Petitioner employed several persons at his own charge in the
prosecution of this business, being required by the Council of State to do it,
by all which proceedings he says it appea^s that the Petitioners engagements
in that service, was not only the isntrumental occasion of getting the State
that great Treasure mentioned in the Petition, but the only cause and without
him, and his Protesting in the Court of Admiraltie, at that very instant nicke
of time the 16th of December. 1652. this great Treasure (being about three
hundred thousand pounds) had bin all let go, and further says, that the
Councll of State did not only promise the Petitioner, the restoration of his
Estate, for this particular service of the Silver, but also an honorable
memorial, and that both himself, and others of his associates of the Council
of State, in business of great and high concernment (as to the Civil part)
especially as to the Mint and Trade, made use of him in many particulers for
the Public, and that he did observe that all the time he knew the Petitioner,
which was from 1649 to 1653. the Petitioner was very dilligent to advance the
Public Interest. These actings of the Petitioner accompanied with great
charge, hazard, and trouble, shows forch to all the world the Petitioners
faithful services, constant fidelity, and love to his Country, this Testimony
concerning the Petitioner, bears date under Sir James Harringtons hand the
first day of October 1657.

The Heads of Francis Allen Esquire. his Certificate Mr. Francis Allen certifies,
that the Petitioner did engage in that concernment of staying the Ships
Sampson, Salvador, and George, the Silver and Lading, and in discovering the
frauds endeavored to be put upon the State, touching the Silver in them
contained with a great deal of Industry, courage, and unweariedness, and
indeed he conceives to his very great charge and expense, besides his freequent
attending the Committee for the Mint in several affairs referring thereunto,
which could not but be expensive to him also. This Certificate bears date the
27th of October 1657.

The Heads of Sir George Fleetwood his Certificate. Sir George Fleetwood
likewise certifies, that the Petitioner by his seasonable discovery to the
State of the Spanish Ambassador, and Claimers frauds as to the Silver
mentioned, and his Protesting in the Court of Admiralty in December 1652. was
the only cause of geting this great Treasure mentioned in the aforesaid
Petition, and that the Council of State in 1652 and 1653. imposed upon the
Petitioner the whole care of the management of this business in the Court of
Admiraltie as to the discovering part, and that the Petitioner was several
times employed by the Council of State, and members of Parliament, and such of
the Council for the State or Parliament, as were pleased to make use of him,
found in the Petitioner a deep and profound insight into the mysteries of the
Mint business, and Merchant affairs.

And the said Sir George Fleetwood further says, that it is most apparent in
the whole proceedings of this business, that the Petitioner had always in his
eye the restoration of his Estate, or the value of eleven thousand pounds,
which was the sum of Mr. Violets demand to the Parliament in 1651. which was
promised the Petitioner by several members of the Council and Parliament for
service done before this great undertaking, and had not the Petitioner had a
real assurance from the Council of State in December. 1652. for the restoring to
him his Estate, or eleven thousand pounds for this service of the Silver, the
whole business had bin lost, and left un-undertaken by the Petitioner, had he
not had such a promise, and also relied on the same for just performance, and
he says it is true that for some Reasons of State, Mr. Violets assurance and
reward was uncommitted to writing, to avoid claymor, and misconstructions of
lewd Tongues, but this omission was not to frustrate the Petitioner of his
dearly earned reward, the restoration of his Estate, as many of the late
Council of State (if attended on by the Petitioner) would say this could never
enter into their thoughts. This attestation under the hand of Sir George
Fleetwood bears date 22th September 1657.

These Certificates with the former Attestations are briefly reported. The
Originals specifying the Petitioners particular s^rvices, in this and other his
undertakings, more at large are hereunto annexed.

And whereas the Petitioner alleges in his Petition, that had he desisted the
prosecution of the said business in your Highness Court of Admiralty, and
betrayed the Trust the Council ^f Sta^e ^eposed in him, he was several times
offered, and might have received in the years 1652. and 1653. from several
Merchants of Flanders then in London, the sum of ten thousand pounds. Upon
examination of this Allegation, we find that the Merchants Claimers did
several times offer the Petitioner ten thousand pounds, to have deserted this
business of prosecuting against the Spanish Ambassador and Claimers concerning
this Silver. And this was confessed by the Merchants Solicitor to be true, as
appears by two several persons Affidavits, viz. Mr. Thomas Hewet, and Mr.
William Savill, taken before William Glascock Esquire. one of the Masters in
Chancery.

And whereas the Petitioner alleges, That in the prosecution of this great
business, for the space of about two years he was at the sole charge himself
thereof, and paid ten several persons whom at that time he employed in this
service, as he has proved by Affidavit of four Witnesses, viz John Glover and
Simon Baldwin Merchants, Thomas Ley and John Gerrell Citizens of London, Sworn
before John Page and Robert Kelloway Esquires, Masters in Chancery, in 1654.
That the Petitioner to their knowledge expended above five hundred pounds in
this service in 1652. and 1653.

We find the Petitioners debts and engagements contracted in the prosecution
of this business of the Silver Ships to be very great, amounting unto the
sum of seven hundred sixty five pounds, and upwards, which the Petitioner
owes at interest at this day. And he has presented us a particular List of
the several men's names, of whom the Petitioner borrowed the said money to do
this service, the truth of which appears unto us by the Affidavit of the said
Mr. Violet, sworn before Doctor Harrington, one of the Masters of your
Highness Court of Chancery, besides several other great sums of money, which
the Petitioner affirms to us to have taken up at interest, for his necessary
support and maintenanee ever since the Sequestration of his estate in 1643.

May it please your Highness, upon this business of the Petitioner we have
had many meetings. And being by your Highness Reference required not only to
slate the Petitioners Case, but to certify our opinions upon the whole matter;
We do accordingly in all faithfulness and humility certify to your Highness,
That upon due consideration had of the great travel, charge and hazard, which
the Petitioner has undergone in the prosecuting of this business, as has
been proved unto us as aforesaid. As also upon the Attestation of Sir George
Fleetwood, and Sir James Harrington, concerning the Promise of the Council of
State to Mr. Violet, for the restoration of his estate, or eleven thousand
pounds.

Upon the whole matter, we do in all humble manner certify your Highness,
that we find the Petitioner is a person, who not only deserves the making good
the Council of States Promise to him as abovesaid. But also by your Highness
goodness, bounty and favor, that there be some signal Reward conferred upon
him for this his eminent service, according to the Promise of the said Council,
as by the Certificates of Sir George Fleetwood, and Sir James Harrington, has
been attested unto us, That so all others for the future, may be encouraged to
serve the interest of your Highness and the Commonwealth with all
faithfulness, as it appears to us the Petitioner has done.

We have also considered of the Petitioners debts and expenses contracted in
this service, and for his support since 1643. and believe the Petitioners
engagements at this present are very great and pressing upon him. Wherefore
being ordered by your Highness to certify our opinions upon the whole matter,
We humbly offer unto your Highness, That for the present, (left the Petitioner
should be thrown into prison, and thereby utterly ruined for the very moneys he
has expended in this service,) That some considerable sum of money in part
may speedily by your Highness be assigned unto him, for the paying of his debts
contracted in this great service for the public. And also that care be taken
for his subsistence, according to his quality. And that the remainder of the
money promised him by the late Council of State as aforesaid, may be paid unto
him, as soon as your Highness, and the great affairs of the Commonwealth can
permit, he having eminently and signally showed his zeal, resolution and
forwardness, with the hazard of his life in this service for his Country.

All which we Humbly submit to your Highness Wisdom and Justice.

1. May 1658. John Barkstead Tho. Viner, Gabriel Beck John Limbery, Edward
Dendy Henry Middleton, Maurice Thomson Isaac Dorislaus.


Examined by us, Jo. Symes, Jo. Rimmer.

WHen your Petitioner after much pains, patience, and attendance, had gotten
all these aforesaid honorable Gentlemen's Certificates, and Testimonialls
aforesaid in May 1658. I cast about how I should bring my business to have it
come to a good issue, that after so much delay I might have Justice.

Thereupon your Petitioner, Petitioned Oliver Lord Protector, setting forth my
former services, and backing the same with so many bulwarks, and Certificates,
that in justice nor honor, I thought he could not delay me longer of my dearly
earned reward, for I knew he could not deny a tittle in my Petition, but what I
alleged I had fully proved, and that your Petitioner might be dealing with him
for something to get some employment till he paid me the sum of eleven
thousand pounds.

I did offer in part of my satisfaction of eleven thousand pounds, to except of
the employment of Regulating the manufacture of gold and silver thread, with
the fees I formerly had received, and I humbly offered to accept of this office
at the value of two thousand pounds, this office being a part of my own Estate,
for which I paid formerly 1500l.

And had I not bin disturbed in the due execution, by some damorous cheating
Silkmen, and Wire drawers and Refiners who make it their common trade to cozen
the wearers of gold and silver lace, and have melted down within this twenty
years of the Plate and heavy silver Coins of the Nation to the value of a
million of money, to the wispeakable loss of the Commonwealth, by wasting of
the blood and sinews of this Nations money, which ought to be kept in peoples
purses to maintain Trade and Commerce, and not to be put upon Women's
Petticoats to be burst and wasted away.

For to induce his Highness Oliver to grant me the said employment, I annexed
to my Petition and Papers a Report of the Committee of Parliament for Trade,
Dated June 16. 1657. the original Report I have ready to produce to your
Honors, which Report certifies that they have had it fully proved before them
upon many days Examination, the great abuses daily practiced in the culling
and melting down the current silver coins of this Nation; for the expensive
making Gold and Silver Lace, Wyre and Thread. They certify under their hands
the daily abuses and cheats is put on the Wearers by the deceitful making Gold
and Silver Thread and Lace, and also by several fraudulent practices in the
making Gold and Silver Thread, that there is w^sted of the stock of Silver in
this Nation, about thirty thousand pounds a year. And that at this day there is
no Rule nor Order for regulating the Work-masters, nor the Workers, but every
one is 'est to cozentle Commonwealth, and they have certified it by what
several ways they do it; as will appear upon your Honors Perusal of the
Certificate of the Committee for Trade.

And the Committee for Trade finding this to be a great abuse and cheat put on
the Nation, have upon many days consideration presented to that Parliament a
Report of a Model and Way for the due Regulation of all these abuses, and
recommend in their Certificate your Petitioner for the execution of that
service, to be appointed the sworn Officer, and to take the fees for doing that
service as formerly your Petitioner did, and that your Petitioner for the
future put in security in the Exchequer, to warrant all these Manufactures of
Gold and Silver Lace, Wyre and Thread to be good silver, that is drawn,
assayed, marked or sealed at the Office.

And to warrant the same to be sterling silver according to the Standard at the
least, or to pay all damage to the Party or Parties grieved, and that all Gold
and Silver Thread shall be duly spun, with a due proportion of Silver to Silk,
to the end that the Silver may not be brushed and rubbed, of Lace, Buttons, and
other sorts of works in Gold and Silver Thread, as it daily is, to the
quantity, as has bin proved to the Committee for Trade, of thirty thousand
pounds a year.

Whereupon his Highness refers this Petition July 13. 1658. and all the
aforesaid Reports, together with a Report of the Council of Trade, for the
regulating the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Thread, to the considerations of
the Privy Council, to take all the premises into their consideration, and to
see your Petitioner paid for these services in staying the Silver, and for his
former losses according to Equity and Justice.

And that if the Council conceived it fit, I should have the emploiment to see
to the due regulating the manufacture of Gold and Silver Wyre and Lace, and to
prevent the melting down heavy English money, as I desired, but the Protector
soon after died before I could get the Council of State to meet, and so I
renewed my Petition to the late Lord Protector Richard, who signed this Order
to Gabriel Beck, and Francis Bacon Esquires, viz.

RICHARD P.
WHereas we are informed that Thomas Violet of London Goldsmith, has formerly
done our most dear Father of famous memory and this Nation several great
services, and that the said Thomas Violet has made his addresses unto you, and
in many particulars has acquainted you with his humble desires and good
affections to our service, and showed you several transactions which ought to
be taken into our considerations, being (as we are informed) both for our
service, and the profit, safety, and honor of this Nation. We therefore
require you to give us an account of all such particulars concerning the
Public, as the said Thomas Violet has already acquainted you with, and if
you conceive it fit for our service, you are by these presents authorized to
send for the said Thomas Violet, and to examine him upon any other questions or
matters, which you shall conceive is fit for our service, and in what way the
said Thomas Violet may be serviceable unto us and the Public, and the result
of your debates to present unto us in writing, with what expedition you can.

Dated 28. October 1658.
To our trusty and Welbeloved, Francis Bacon, and Gabriell Beck, Esquires.
May it please your Highness.
IN obedience to your Highness Order of Referrence dated 28. October last
hereunto annexed, we have several times met, and find that Thomas Violet
Petitioned your Highness royal Father for his promised reward, which Petition
his late Highness 13 July 1657. referred to the Lord Barkstead, Sir Thomas
Viner, and several other Persons, and their Report thereupon is hereunto
annexed, which Report we have perused, and also several Certificates of the
Lord Bradshawe, Lord George Fleetewood of the Vache, Sir James Hanington, and
Francis Allen Esquires, and several other Certificates of the Officers of the
Mint, as also the Orders of the late Council of State, Depositions, and Orders
of the Court of Admiraltie, whereby it appears to us that the said Thomas
Violet by his seasonable interposition, and Protest in the Admiraltie 17.
December 1652. his application to the then Council of State, and his discovery
of the Spanish and Dutch frauds, touching the Silver in the Ships Sampson,
Salvador, and George, being near three hundred thousand pounds, this his
discovery and prosecution in the Admiraltie, in all probabillity saved the
State this great Treasure, or else the State had been cozened thereof, as
appears to us at large by all the aforesaid Certificates ready to be produced
to your Highness.

We find it proved and certified, that Thomas Violet expended seven hundred
sixty five pounds in the prosecution of this service, besides all his time and
hazard, which moneys appears to us he took up at interest, for which he
stands indebted to several persons, and he has proved to us he is every day
in danger to be taken in execution, for the very moneys he expendded in this
service, to get the State this great Treasure.

And we find it attested unto your Highness royal Father, by the
Certificates of all the aforesaid Referrees, that the State did promise unto
Thomas Violet, upon his undertaking at his own charge to do this service, to
pay him the sum of eleven thousand pounds, and some other rewards for this
service, in stopping the aforesaid Silver.

And it is further certified to your Highness royal Father by all the
aforesaid Referrees, that they find it proved that Thomas Violet was offered
ten thousand pounds in the behalf of the Claimers, to have desisted his
prosecution in the behalf of the State, touching this Silver.

And we find that the Lord Barkstead, Sir Thomas Viner and all the other
Referrees humbly propounded to your Highness royal father as very fit and
just, that a considerable sum of money be presently paid unto Thomas Violet,
for to discharge his debts, and for his support, lest otherwise he should be
thrown into Prison and utterly ruined for the very money he has expended in
this service, and that care be taken for the future for Thomas Violets
subsistence according to his quality, and that the remainder of the money to
make it up the sum of eleven thousand pounds, promised to him by the State
for this service, may be paid unto Thomas Violet as soon as the great
occasions of the State can permit. This Certificate is hereunto annexed and
signed by all the aforesaid Referrees 1. May 1658. to your Highness royal
Father.

And we humbly offer it as our opinions, that it is both just, and fit for the
honor of the State, that the moneys Thomas Violet has expended in this
service, and a due consideration for his support for the future be speedily
paid unto him, to preserve him from a present ruin, and the remainder of the
aforesaid sum to be paid him as soon as the great occasions of the
Commonwealth will permit

And the Referrees do bold Thomas Violet to be a person very fit and useful
for employment either in your Highness Mint, or in the Office for the due
Regulation of gold and silver wire, and Lace, etc. and in several other
emploiments, as appears by several Certificates. And Violet himself has made
several Proposals unto us in writing for his satisfaction, which we have
hereunto annexed for your Highness gracious perusal, In some of these
Proposals we do humbly apprehend Thomas Violet may be useful for your
Highness and the public service. All which we humbly submit to your
Highness consideration.

18. Jan. 1658. Francis Bacon. Gabriel Beck.


Examined by us Jo. Symes, Jo Rimmer.

ABout the middle of April 1659. the late Lord Protector Richard, receiving
these Certificates and this following Petition, blamed some persons whom he had
interessed to give him a true Account of my sufferings, and of my abilities and
willingness to serve the Commonwealth, that they had not done it before, but
to show that his late Highness put a great value of my services and
sufferings, and of my abilities to serve the Nation, (as some Honorable
Gentlemen told me he did) he was pleased upon the Reading this following
Petition; to give me and some other Gentlemen which I had nominated in trust
for my use, this ensuing Warrant for the making of a public farthing for the
use of England, Scotland, and Ireland, referring the Approbation and
Confirmation thereof to the Parliament, to provide such Orders and Rules as
they thought best for the good of the People

I used the name of Edward Johnson Esquire. and some other Names for my use, and
here follows my Petition and Reference from his late Highness. And if the
Parliament please to employ me in this service, and to grant me for thirty one
years the entire and whole management of this Office, for making a common
farthing. I will thankfully accept of the emploiment, and humbly and thankfully
allow it as five thousand pounds paid unto your Petitioner from the
Commonwealth, in part of his due debt of eleven thousand pounds for staying
the aforesaid silver. And your Petitioner will be tied to pay the maimed
soldiers, during the time of this Grant, twelve-pence upon every twenty two
shillings in farthings, which shall be uttered by me or my Assigns, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, which will be a constant revenue, and I will
pay it in monthly to the Treasurers for the maimed soldiers.

And if the State please to have farthings made of a smaller proportion, I will
allow the soldiers five shillings for every twenty two shillings, and yet
these Copper farthings shall be above as heavy again do the ordinary farthings
that now pass among us.

To his Highness RICHARD LORD PROTECTOR of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And
the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging.
The Humble Petition of Edward Johnson Junior, Esquire. etc.
SHOWS,
THat there are many frauds and deceits daily practiced by diverse petty
Retayling Tradesmen, Chapmen and others, in making and uttering farthing
tokens of their own stamping, almost every petty Retayling Tradesman putting
forth a several farthing token not valueable without any License, some of
Pewter, Tinn, Lead, Brass, and some of Copper, according to every man's fancy
that makes their own farthing tokens.

Great numbers of these Retayling Tradesmen break, others remove themselves
from one place to another, and many of them die insolvant, and their farthing
tokens thus unduly uttered beiug not valueable, one of them not being worth in
value the sixth part of a farthing, and some of their farthing tokens not worth
the twentieth part of a farthing, the people of this Nation (especially the
poorer sort) are daily cheated and cozened by these indirect practices.

To prevent these abuses for the future, your Petitioners humbly pray your
Highness that a common valueable farthing may be made of fine Rose Copper of a
valueable weight (that is to say) of the weight of about half a quarter of an
ounce Haver du poys to a farthing, and twenty two Shillings by tail, to weigh
eight pounds Haver du poys, with the remedy of six pence under or over to pass
current within your Highness Dominions of England, Scotland, and Ireland, for
all such persons as will make use of them for their necessity of change, and to
prohibit all other farthing tokens now made, or to be made or uttered within
your, Highness Dominions aforesaid

That to have a valueable common farthing to be made, to pass current within
your Highness said Dominions, is so needful a thing in the Commonwealth, and
of such necessity for change, that the making of the same will relieve and
accommodate many thousands of petty Tradesmen and poor people, as will plainly
appear unto your Highness, in our most humble Reasons and motives hereunto
annexed, to which we do most humbly Referr.

Your Petitioners most humbly pray your Highness, in respect of the great
charge, and trouble they shall undergo in performing this service for the good
of the Common wealth, to grant unto them and their Assigns and Deputies, the
sole making and uttering of the aforesaid Common farthing for one and thirty
years, and to prohibit all other farthings, and the making and counterfeiting
of this farthing by any other, upon pain and loss of Estate and imprisonment
during your Highness pleasure, and in consideration thereof, your Petitioners
will serve your Highness Dominions with valueable farthings of the goodness
and weight aforesaid, and also pay unto your Highness Exchequer to your
Highness use, twelve pence for every two and twenty shillings in farthings,
which shall be vented and uttered by your Petitioners, their Deputy, or
Deputies in England, Scotland, and Ireland, which will be certain revenew to
your Highness of many hundred pounds a year, and a great accommodation and
benefit to the poor of all your Highness Dominions.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray etc
RICHARD P.
WE have perused the Petition of Edward Johnson Junior Esquire, etc. together
with the reasons hereunto annexed, and our will and pleasure is, that our
Solicitor General prepare a book fit for our signature, for the erecting of
an Office for the sole making, venting, and uttering of a Common farthing, to
go current in England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, according to the weight,
proportions, and propositions, in their Petition, contained with such Rules to
be observed by the Petitioners, or their Assigns, for the stamps, figures, and
Arms of the said farthings, as we and our Successors shall appoint, and for
the granting the same to the said Edw. Johnson Junior Esquire; etc. and their
Assigns and Deputies for one and thirty years. Reserving to us and our
Successors twelve pence for every two and twenty Shillings of the said
farthings, so vented and uttered. And our Solicitor General is to attend and
acquaint the Parliament with this Petition, together with the reasons thereunto
annexed, and with this our Warrant. Who are desired to Ordain and appoint
such Rules, Prohibitions, and Penalties, for the effectual and better
management of this service, the preventing of all former abuses, and
restrayning of the Counterfeiting, and importation of any the said farthings
from the parts beyond the Seas, as they shall think fit and necessary for the
carrying on of this Service for the good of the Commonwealth. Given at
Whitehall the 19th day of April 1659.

To our Trusty Well beloved Sir William Ellis Barronett our Solicitor
General.
To my much honored and worthy Friends Sr Thomas Viner, Knight., Mr Alexander
Holt, Mr John Sanders, Mr James Hoar, Mr Will. Baldwine, Mr Will. Du-Gard, Mr
Sarjeant Dendy, Mr Gabriel Beck, Mr Bovey, Mr Ed. Watkins, Mr John Heatly, Mr
Lucas Lucie, Mr Thom. Packington, Mr Francis Bishop, Mr John Burredge, Mr
Delabar, Mr Nowel, Mr Emery, Mr Hord.
Worthy Gentlemen, and my good Friends:
TO you of all others I am most obliged to give a particular account of this
business, touching my staying this silver, mentioned in this Book, because, I
could not have done this great service of staying the Ships, Sampson,
Salvador, and George, and prosecuting that business in the Admiraltie, but that
I had the money to do it from you, and I owe it you at this day about 1500 l. I
have formerly showed unto most of you the Orders of Parliament touching this
business, and what endeavors were acted by Mr James Steneer, and several
other Merchants, to cozen the State of all this great treasure: All the printed
Transactions most of you have seen formerly, But the orders that mentions
seven several Letters of Mr. James Steneres, and several other Merchants
Letters which were read in Parliament. Mr. James Steneer writes to his
Correspondents beyond Seas concerning the geting them this Silver out of the
Admiraltie, (we, meaning himself and the rest of his confederates, have made
a great many friends among the great ones to speak for us in the business when
it comes before them, (a wise man may guess who those great ones were, and what
great ones made a trade by cozining the Commonwealth in their Prizes) the
Claimers of the silver at that time having stolen several scores of thousand
pounds out of these Ships, so that they weree full of money and they could
bribe any Person in power that would be corrupted, in another of Mr Steneres
Letter that was read in the Parliament House, Mr. Stenere writes to his
Correspondents beyond Seas, that he must have a care what he did write to them
touching this Silver business, left his Letters should be opened, when he was
brought to the Parliament Bar the first of December 1652. he rather chose to
act the part of a fool, and a liar, rather then to serve the Commonwealth to
discover this design, for which tampering of his the Parliament committed him
from the Bar to the Sergeant at Arms the first of December 1652. as appears
by the journals of the Parliament, at that time Van Trumpe the Dutch Admiral
was in the Downs, and no doubt but his mouth watered after this Silver, there
is a Commission under the great Seal of Holland, and the original orders of
the States General. Upon the petition of the Merchants of Amsterdam, to guard
these ships and silver from the Parliaments forces, which will remain to
posterity to show the justice of this Nation in staying this silver for Dutch
silver, the truth of this being also confessed in the Admiraltie by many of the
mariners and passengers which came that Voyage from Spain, and that the
Pursers books and many of the Bills of Lading were forged and altered at sea
after that they had heard certainly by some ships that the Dutch were at wars
with England.

The Parliaments Agent at Cades gave advice here to Mr Wilson his kinsman, the
day that these ships set sail from Cades, and though they gave out there that
they were to go for Dunkirk, yet their designed Port was Amsterdam, they being
laden for the greatest part upon the account of the Dutch, and the same was
confessed in the Admiraltie by many of the Passengers and others.

December. 14. 1652. The Spanish Ambassador Don Alonso de Cardenas, Ambassador
extraordinary for the King of Spain, came in person to the Parliament, and made
an Oration in the House, claiming all this silver in these three ships to
belong to his Master and for his Masters subjects account; which Speech he
also at the same time presented to the Parliament in writing both in Spanish
and English, together with two bundles of papers touching this silver, which
he referred to the consideration of the House: And for several days he made
his appearance at the Council of State, and put in the like claims for this
silver, he engaging his Honor that no part of it did belong to the Dutch, as
will appear by the proceedings and the records of the Council of State, and Mr
Stenier was bayled, and his business never called on to this day.

While these businesses were transacted at the Parliament, Council of State,
and Admiraltie, I made the Lord Bradshaw and many of the Council of State
acquainted with the whole practice and fraud that was intended to be put on
them by the aforesaid parties, and that if they had not a special care, the
Judges in the Admiraltie would discharge this silver, and the Dutch had rather
it should be in the bottom of the sea than we should have it. Upon this
Information the Council of State commanded me to attend carefully the motions
of the Court of Admiraltie and the Merchants touching this Silver, and from
time to time to give the Council an account what was done in the business.

Whereupon, December 15. 1652. I made the Council acquainted, That the Judges
of the Admiraltie had appointed to bring these ships, Sampson, Salvador and
George, their silver and lading to a judgment the next day, being December. 16.
in the Admiraltie; And that I did believe the Judges would clear the ships,
the Lord Bradshaw and some others of the Council asked me what reason I had to
say so or to suspect so: Whereupon I told them, the Commissioners of Dutch
prize Goods had given me a warrant to go aboard these Dutch prize ships when I
pleased, and to imploie whom I thought good to get acquaintance with the seamen
aboard these ships. And I had certain intelligence, that Otho George, Captain
of the Sampson, had commanded all his men to be in readiness and had taken in
fresh victualling and biskets, and that in a few days they should be at
Dunkirk, declaring that Van Tromp would do them no hurt though he were on the
Downs.

Upon this discovery, many of the Council of State did apprehend the great
damage and danger the Nation was in if this great treasure should fall into
the hands; of the Dutch, and after much debate I was commanded by the Council
to attend in the Court of Admiraltie, December. 16. all the while the Court sat,
and if the Judges did go about to clear the silver, then I should make my
Protest against their proceedings, till my Witnesses were examined that should
discover the fraud: And the Council likewise charged me, That if the Judges
asked me by what authority I made my Protest, I should deny I had any order
from the Council of State but I should do it upon my own peril and account, if
I were certain I could disprove the Spanish Ambassador, and if I did prove that
there was silver aboard these ships belonging to the Dutch, out of the first
hundred thousand pounds that was coined of this silver, I should be paid eleven
thousand pounds, being in lieu of my estate that I had for many years
petitioned for, whereupon I told the Council the estate the Parliament took
from me, endamaged me above sixteen thousand pounds, many of the Council
replying (Perform you what you have undertaken, which we believe you are never
able to do) and you shall have an honorable reward for this service, over and
above eleven thousand pounds which you claim for your estate. I have done this
service, and two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds the State has had, and
employed it for the desence of the Commonwealth, in paying the Army and Navy,
as will appear by the Accounts of Coll. Barkstead; yet to this day the Council
of State has not performed their faithful Promise to me, to pay me eleven
thousand pounds, and to give me an honorable reward over and above for this
service.

It is very remarkable, that there was a design laid amongst some of Mr
Steniers great ones to cozen the State of this Treasure; and would I have been
Knave, I might have been one of his great ones, and have taken ten thousand
pounds to let the silver go, as in this Book is cortifiedby many honorable
persons might have had.

And that to some in the Admiralty, my appearing in that Court to stay this
silver was most distasteful and unexspected, and spoiled some peoples markets
both in the Admiraltie and other places too; for some of the Judges in the
Admiralty, (Exton and Stevens) December. 16. 1652. were so far from giving me
thanks for my discovery, and for making my Protest in the behalf of the State
to save this silver (which had not their interest and profit layen another way
they ought to have done) but they contrariwise openly in the Court before many
hundreds of merchants have reviled me and would of discharged this silver.

And had I not received a command from the Council of State the day before to
act in that manner, to be sure to keep the Judges from discharging the silver,
let the Judges say what they pleased, the Judges would that morning have
discharged the silver, and consulted together to commit me; they disputed the
business so loud, that I and many others heard it: And the Judges bid Wyeen
the then Register of the Admiralty call on the ships Sampson, Salvador and
George, not minding what I said: this can be proved by many merchants, and is
fully certified by the Officers of the Mint.

Whereupon I told Mr Wyeen the Register, that if he and the Judges did
discharge the silver in these ships, and did not forbear their sentence till my
Witnesses were examined, I would make it the dearest days work they ever did
in their lives or to that effect. And I undertook before the Judges in the
Admiralty upon the peril of my life to disprove the Sanish Ambassador and
Flemmish Claims to this silver. Whereupon Monsieur Motett (the Spanish
Ambassadors Secretary) hearing me say so to the Judges, was in a very great
rage, and so were all the rest of the Claimers.

Whereupon I told the Judges, that if they would clear the silver,
notwithstanding my Protest, before my witnesses were examined, it was most
apparent the Commonwealth was betrayed, and bribes given and taken by some
great ones to cozen the Commonwealth of this silver, but it should not be in
their power to do it, for I would prevent them.

And that if the Judges did proceed to discharge this silver, and that this
silver come into the hands of the Dutch, the Judges lives and estates could not
make the Commonwealth satisfaction; for that Van Tromp the Dutch General was
then on the Downer, and an hasty Judgment, before the truth of this plot was
discovered, would put this silver into the Dutch men's power, which might be of
sad consequence to this Nation, and may cost many thousand English men their
lives. VVhereupon all the Spanish and Flemmish Claimers were in a great rage,
heat and discontent.

Two of the Judges (Exton and Stevens) told me I had undone my self for ever,
in making my Protest against the discharge of the silver, and by my other
actions and words that day in the Admiralty; and so the Judges commanded me to
attend the Council of State that afternoon: And so the Court broke up, the
Spaniards and Flemmings cursing me bitterly, and I exspected every minute to
be murdered by them.

The Judges of the Admiralty prophesied truer then Lilly hitherto; for they
told me the staying of this silver would undo me: for if the Council of State
do not pay me the eleven thousand pounds they promised me, I have by my
faithfulness, honesty and integrity to my Country in the protesting against
the discharge of this silver in the Admiralty, and by my constant, chargeable
and dangerous prosecution thereof, in getting the State two hundred seventy
eight thousand pound, in refusing the Claimers money, when they offered me ten
thousand pounds to be silent and let the State be cozened of the silver: Would
I have been a knave I might have been reckoned among Mr Stenieers great ones,
but my faithfulness to my Country in this particular service (if the State be
not just to me in their promise) will undo me for ever.

Gentlemen, I have formerly delivered a particular of some of your names, and
the sums of money I borrowed of you to to enable me to do this great service,
all my own Estate being under a sequestration, unto the Commissioners that
were appointed to examine this business.

Most of you knew when you lent me this moneys, I was to lay it out in this
business in the Admiraltie, and tenn honorable Gentlemen have Certified, I
borrowed of you and spent in this service seven hundred sixty five pounds,
besides several great sums of money I paid some of you for Interest of this
money ever since the year 1652. and great sums of money I have borrowed to do
the Council of State other services, as you may find in this book, Fol. 107.
108.

I owe unto you all this 25th of May 1659. the sum of fifteen hundred forty
and odd pounds, current money of England, which sums I have laid out and a
great deal more, in doing of this Common wealths service. Gentlemen, I have
printed this Letter to acquaint the Council of State, that some of you have
commenced Suits, and I look every day for your Executions to be served on me,
for the very money I laid out to save the lives of thousands of this Nation.

I shall humbly leave it to the consideration of the Parliament, Council of
State, and all true Englishmen that are Lovers of their Country, and respect
the credit of the Nation, when they shall read what I have done in this
service, so clearly proved.

First, what the State and Commonwealth has got, and the conjuncture of time
when Van Tiumpe the Dutch General with the Dutch Fleets was in the Downs, and
at that very time I was offered by the Claimers of this Silver, great Merchants
of Flanders who was then in London to get this Silver out of the States hands,
I have proved that these very Claimers several times offered me the sum of
ten thousand pounds, to have suffered the State to be cozened of this Silver in
the Admiraltie, and had I not esteemed and valued, the peace and prosperity of
this Nation above my life, I would have taken this money without any further
trouble, and gone and lived in another Country, where I could have bin employed
in some Common wealths and States, and have bin honorably and thankfully
rewarded.

I shall humbly desire the Parliament and Council of State to consider how many
such malignants there is in the three Nations England, Scotland, and Ireland,
if the Parliament could but find a covee of ten such malignants in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and the Dominions of Wales, to bring them in two hundred
seventy eight thousand pounds every one of them as I have done, such a sum of
money would pay the debts of the Public, if they can find none of the breed
but my self, I humbly desire then to preserve me for a Phoenix, and to pay me
eleven thousand pounds which I have so clearly proved they owe me, and give me
a Commission to go a Kite-catching for the Commonwealth, I shall humbly
present them with a great number of pretended godly Buzzards, who since the
year 1640. have cozened the Commonwealth of many hundred thousand pounds, I
shall humbly show them the ways how they have done this, and find out the
men who from the bottom of baseness and beggerie, have by unjust ways
accumulated to themselves vast estates, in these distracted and trouble some
times, to the ruin of many thousands of families, whose cries for their
oppressions have ascended up unto Heaven, and no doubt but is the principal
cause of these sad distractions and divisions that are now amongst us.

If one Achan could trouble all Israel for stealing a golden wedge, and a
Babylonish Garment, what disturbance will a thousand Achans do, who have
cozened the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland; for my part I
humbly say clearly, that I never stayed this Silver in 1652. for any of the
then Council of States particular profit, I never minded either Oliver or
Rowland, I did it for the service of the Commonwealth, and Honor of the
Nation, as I was a true Englishman, without respecting private persons; and let
who will have the Government, or Supreme Power, I shall humbly demand it, as it
is my right and due, my dearly earned reward of eleven thousand pounds for
this service.

S. Paul says, he sought with beasts at Ephesus; I am sure of it, in this
business, in staying this Silver, I was fain to encounter with beasts in the
Admiraltie, at the Exchange, a shipboard, to make my self all things to all
men, to spend my spirits, my money, make use of my Credit, engage several of
you Gentlemen to borrow great sums of money for me, to get the State this
great Treasure: and when I exspect my reward, to be delayed with Referrees,
and Reports, and Certificates, and to trouble all these honorable Gentlemen to
spend their time for several days in taking the Proofs and Collections, and as
yet not to receive one dramm of justice, or one penny of Reward; to be used as
children are that look into a Fortune-book, to be directed from one spirit to
another: how honorable this usage will be for the Commonwealth, to have this
recorded to posterity, I leave it to you, and all just men to judge.

So contrary to all humane exspectation has Gods dealings been with me in
this business, that where my greatest fear was, I had no need to fear, and
where my greatest confidence was, there I am miserably disappointed.

For I feared the Spaniards and the Claimers would kill me for staying this
Silver, but that was a needless fear, for God has kept me, I put my trust in
man and thought assuredly, that it could never enter into the hearts of
Gentlemen, and an English Council of State, but thankfully and honorably to
pay me what they had promised faithfully, and I so dearly earned, which was for
getting them two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds.

The State to pay me in liew of my Estate taken from me, to my damage twenty
thousand pounds, for which the Council of State agreed to pay me as aforesaid
the sum of eleven thousand pounds, besides an honorable reward.

Had I served my God with that integrity, and broke so many nights sleep to
study to please him, as I did to please the Council of State and man, God would
not have left, nor disappointed me as man does. Had the Council of State an
intention never to have paid me when I undertook their work, they had done
both you and me a Courtesy to have chopped of my head, and eased me out of a
troublesome world.

Then I had not cozened you of your money, which I must be forced to do if the
Council do not pay me, most of you know I could not pay you, till the State
paid me, and this some of you will attest, when required to be true, besides
it grieves me to the Soul more for some of you, who out of good will to the
Nation, borrowed great sums of money for me, and at this day are sued for the
same and must pay it, that I should be made an instrument to Trappan you or any
honest man for your good will to your Country, to cozen you of your money.

It is true my body is at your service to imprison in a Goal, but it is money
that you expect, and not my flesh or bones.

How shameful a thing would it be, that it should be left to posterity, that
Thomas Violet that saved this Nation two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds,
all employed in the defense of the Nation, at such a time the Commonwealth was
in Jeopardie, and in great streights for money, discovering this Plot the same
day the Judges in the Admiraltie would have discharged the Silver, and then it
had bin presently conveyed to our enemies the Dutch.

For which service and undertaking the Council of State faithfully promised him
the sum of eleven thousand pounds, and an honorable reward, Thomas Violet
having got the Commonwealth all this Silver as aforesaid, but no performance,
no promise, nor word kept.

That Thomas Violet might have had ten thousand pounds from the Claimers to
have deserted this Trust, and to have connived and let this Silver go, but he
would not be false to the Commonwealth.

But constantly for two years being assisted by ten other persons that followed
this business in the Admiraltie, a Shipboard, and at the Exchange, and in
several other places, and with much Trouble, Charge, and Expense, to get the
State the aforesaid great Treasure, borrowing fifteen hundred pounds of
several of his dear and loveing friends to do this service, who upon the
Councils of State not performing with me, in paying me my dearly earned reward,
were all cozened of their money, for I cannot pay you before the State pay me,
and if this should fall out to be true, would not all good men say, both you
and I have had hard measure for our good will and fidelity for getting the
State this great Treasure, and make other men for the future to take money when
it is offered them.

And not to play an after-game as I now do, to Petition for my due
satisfaction.

I pray God for the honor of this Nation, and of this Posterity, that the
Council of State take order for my satisfaction, and indeed I am persuaded in
my Conscience, when the Council sees these Transactions attested by a multitude
of honorable Witnesses, and my services so great, that never any man of my
quality had the like Contest with mighty men, and brought it to so happy
success as I have don, that I shall be truly paid eleven thousand pounds, and
the Damages will be considered for the forbearance of my dearly earned reward
so long from 1653 to 1659.

Gentlemen, I have presented to you the hardest usage that you or I can expect,
and if I be not justly and honorably dealt with, let fortune do her worst, I
will trust and wait on Gods Providance, and tide out these troublesome times,
ever keeping this rule where I receive Protection there will I pay obedience,
let it be to Oliver, or Rowland, and no longer then I can have Protection will
I owe obedience, but I will study the happiness and Honor of my Country so
long as I live and breath, and let what will come this has and shall be my
rule to walk by.

I now think it convenient to give you an account, by what ways I humbly
propound to be paid by the Parliament and Council of State this sum of eleven
thousand pounds, and to take no money from them, but to bring them in greater
sums of money, and also advantage the Nation many scores of thousand pounds,
and fill the Nation with great Treasure of gold and silver, the Soldiers
delight, and the Merchants darling, being that which is the measure of all
things.

Upon the peruseall of this narative, you will see a Watch taken in pieces, and
to your eye you see the wheels and springs that makes the motions and the
parties employed.

A Painter may show you the Colors before he works, but the craft is in
mixing and grinding them, and handling the pencel that makes the Picture.

There is not one man of a hundred thousand that could, or can go through with
this business, but the undertaking of it would brake his neck. It was God that
enabled me, and kept up my spirits, and so he does at this day, or else it had
bin impossible but I should have sunk under the weight of so much oppression.

The showing you a Watch, and painting, inables you not to make either, without
long study, Tools and materials.

Here you see both the Theorick, and the practick part, that I have and can
serve my Country.

And me thinks that rule in common Justice should be allowed to me, that
having made my proofe-piece as it is amongst most Lawyers or Tradesmen as a
reading shows a man well verst in the Law, an excellent Picture once finished
makes a man an approved Painter, and several prizes skilfully played approves
a man master of defense.

I humbly present unto the Parliament and Nation, my getting the Common wealth
this two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds to be my proof-piece, to show to
posterity, that the Garden of England has too few such malignant Violets, that
would voluntarily venture life, credit, and what is above life, have morgaged
all my well-being for the future for fifteen hundred pounds to save this
Nation, and refused ten thousand pounds when I was offered to be bribed.

Let any just man consider of what I have done, and no man can deny me this
reward of eleven thousand pounds, that has honesty, honor, or Conscience.

When they remember Christ's rule, do as thou would be done unto, (I must put
the number of such ungrateful persons, if the sad fate of State have left any
of the breed in the Council of State not into the number of English States men,
but they are of the breed of Machiavel,) and I hope not to find one of them in
our English Council of State, that profess Christianity and would offer worse
measure to their fellow Contrymen, and Protestants, then Turks would use to
Christians.

God deliver all good honest minded men from such Machiavel-villains, but I
hope better things that St. James his rule shall be remembered, show me thy
faith by thy works, that I that have worked in the Vinyard of this
Commonwealth all my time, so succesfully for the profit and honor of the
Nation from the year 1648. to 1659. now I have gotten the State this Treasure
as I have fully proved it (both the money the State promised being eleven
thousand pounds, and an honorable reward.) the honor and Justice of the
Nation being so highly concerned to see me Justly satisfied.

To conclude, have you but patience till the next Term, and such of you as have
commenced your suits go no further, put not your self and me to expense and
trouble, till I get the Council of States Answer to this book, I here promise
you all, such of you that will have my person, next Term willingly to submitt
to your Executions, and if the Council of State will suffer me to be buried in
a prison alive, for the money I expended to get the State two hundred seventy
eight thousand pounds, and at that time ventured my life in the business, such
oppressions will stink in the nostrills of all good and just men, but I hope
better things, and trust the Council of State will be more careful of the
credit, and faith of the Nation.

Your Bondman for the States service, and would sain subscribe my self my own
Freeman to do yon service. THOMAS VIOLET.

THE POSTCRIPT. The Ways I humbly propound to the State to pay me this debt,
are these, in which Emploiment the Common wealth will get twenty times more
advantage then I, as appears, Viz.
1. I Have at this time three Bonds in my Custody, which were out of my
possession twelve years in the Committee of Shropshires hands at Shrewsbury,
which bonds are in two thousand pounds for the payment of me one thousand
pounds, and taken from my Sister Anno. 1643. who kept them for me, these bonds
were due in 1644. I paid John Corbet Esquire a member of this present
Parliament forty pound, to have these Bonds delivered to me by the Committee of
Salop, which money I paid by command of the Council of State, as appears in
this book Fol. 27. 28. 29.

I only humbly desire and pray for an Order, or Ordinance of Parliament to
confirm the said Order of the Council of State, and that I be empowered by
Order of Parliament to sue and to implead the said Bonds, as formerly I might
have done, notwithstanding any Order, or Ordinance of Parliament to the
Committee of Shropshire, or any other Committee touching or concerning these
Bonds, in regard I have paid the Committee of Salop forty pounds for them as
aforesaid.

And I shall thankfully allow and accept of these three Bonds for two thousand
pounds in part of payment of the sum of eleven thousand pounds the Council of
State promised me. Gentlemen, for your Comfort these Bonds are good Bonds, and
the men Solvant that owe me the money, and the money is doubled at six in the
hundred at this day, and I have men of fifteen hundred a year tied for the
payment of me of these Bonds at long running, though now they keep out of the
way, they shall pay me.

2. Whereas I had an Office for Regulating gold and silver thread, as appears
in this Book, Fol. 110. 111. 112. and had I not bin disturbed in the due
Execution of the said Office by several Clamorous cheating Silkemen,
Wyerdrawers, and Refiners, who I have proved to the Parliament make it a common
Trade to cozen the wearers of gold and silver Lace, as I can attest it under
the hands of Mr. Alexander Jackson sworn assay Master of Goldsmiths Hall, and
other persons in a hundred parcells.

The Refiners and Wire drawers of gold and silver within this twenty years,
have culled and melted down the heaviest coins of Shillings, Sixpences, half
Crowns, and Plate of this Nation, to above the value of a million of Silver,
to the great weakening of the Stock of current Silver money, the great decay of
Trade, and unspeakable loss to the Commonwealth.

I have, and can produce to the Parliament a Certificate of the Committee of
Trade dated the 16th of January 1657. upon many days examination of all these
abuses, I have it certified to the Parliament the several daily cheats of
Wier-drawers put on the Nation, and the Committee for Trade recommended me
Thomas Violet to the Parliament to be restored to my Office with such fees as I
received formerly, and certify the great mischeifes which is daily practiced
for want of this Office.

And that I should be ordered to put in security in the Exchequer in such
sums as the Parliament please to appoint me, to warrant all gold and silver
Wire that shall be assayd at the Office to be fine Silver, and not under
sterling, and all gold and silver Thread to be justly and duly made, with a due
proportion of Silk, and Thomas Violet to pay the damages to any person greiv'd
or wronged, that buy gold or silver Thread, or Lace surveyd as aforesaid.

And to prohibit all Refiners, and other persons the melting down the current
Silver coins, or Plate of the Nation, for any of these manufactures upon
severe penalties, the Committee recommend me to the Parliament, I should have
the power as formerly to make searches, and deface all adulterate gold and
silver Thread and Wire, and the Committee Certifies this Regulation of the
restoring me to my Office, would increase the stock of Silver in the Nation
above thirty thousand pounds a year, the original Order I have ready to
produce.

And if the Parliament by their Order empower me to Execute that Office again,
and confirm me in it for two life's, which cost me fifteen hundred pounds
before I could get the grant under the great Seal from the late King, (which
money I paid to the Lord Treasurer Juckson, Lord Cottington, Secretary Cook, Mr
Attorney General Banks,) if I have this Office again, I will increase the
stock of Treasure every year above seventy thousand pounds a year, whereas now
as this manufacture is made, without a Rule, it wastes the stock of Treasure
thirty thousand pounds a year, and this I will maintain, prove, and
demonstrate it to your Honors to be true, this manufacture being under no Rule
and Government as it is at this day, is one of the back doors that has brought
such a scarsity and want of current Silver money on the Nation, and had it ever
come to Examination in Parliament as now I desire it may, I will prove it is
more profitable to the Nation to keep money in peoples purses, then vainly to
brush and lose thirty thousand pounds a year of men and women's clothes, as is
Certified by a Committee of Parliament it now does.

I will demonstrate this Nation had better have given at this day one hundred
thousand pounds to me to have kept up this Office to a due Regulation, then
have put down my Office, by the doing thereof they have had a million of money
less in the stock of the Nation then they should have had, had my Office
continued, if the Parliament please to empower me to Regulate this manufacture,
and to receive the fees I took formerly, I humbly will accept of it for two
thousand pounds so I may have it for two lises, in part of payment of the
eleven thousand pounds which the State owes me.

3. I have for many years attended the Committee of the Mint about Regulating
their Mint, as is well known to many members of the Council of State what
charge and time I spent in this service, I complained of this business eleven
years ago, and for your further satisfaction I recommend you to Fol. 11. 12.
13. 14. in this book, there you will see the true Reasons set down how it comes
about that no silver and gold is coined in the Tower.

And that the Parliament, I will Justify, had been better to have given the
two Doctors Gourdon, and St. John, forty thousand pounds for a Pention, then
have employed them in their Mint, that it is not in the power or skill of
Doctors or Apothecaries ever to set the Mint at work as I have demonstrated:
that had I not stayed two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds which was
coined by my prosecution, this sum was as much money as has bin coined in some
seven years in the Tower, since the Master-worker and Warden had that
imploiment, I have humbly offered if the Parliament please to command me and
pay me for my pains, that I will make the Mint corstantly go, and cause every
year some hundred of thousands of pounds to be coined, to the honor of the
Nation, and increase of the stock of the Nation.

Provided I may have the place of Master-worker and Melter, with the usual
fees formerly allowed to them settled under the great Seal, and that I may be
empowered by Orders and Warrants from the Council of State from time to time
for to see the due execution of my place, for the inabling me to do this
service. This business to effect is very troublesome and chargable.

And will be of mighty concernment to the State, for their service, as you will
see in this book, by filling the Nation with Treasure and money, the blood and
sinews of Commcrce and War, what makes so general a complaint of want of
Trade, but want of money, and people have not moneys to pay the ordinary and
necessary charges, and if the State do not look to settle this business
suddenly, this mischief for this many years I have foretold to the Parliament
in Print, and I knew would suddenly come upon us.

It is a certain Maxim, Not any private person, or a Commonwealth can ever be
capable of effecting any great business that is not rich in moneys, or cannot
command great sums of money, either of his own, or upon his Credit.

I pray read and consider what I have said concerning this business in this
book, Fol 11. 12. 13 14. if the State employ me here in the Mint, I will remove
all these obstructions, and set the Mint a working, and this employment if I
have it for my life, I will humbly accept of it at the value of two thousand
pounds, in part of payment of my satisfaction of eleven thousand pounds, and by
my industry and care will increase the States Stock every year some hundred of
thousand of pounds of Silver, which now comes in, and is stolen out.

I would never undertake to do this diffiult business, were I not assured
there is none in the Nation can do it but my self, and till the State employ
me, this work will never be done effectually.

Three of you Gentlemen are great mints men and Gold smiths, and know the
difficulty of this undertaking, and I dare affirm before you, none of you
will trouble your selves to find out the bottom of these difficult ways that
must be used to do this service, not for ten times the profit I shall receive
by this Emploiment.

Therefore I humbly desire to have an act to enjoy the place of Master-worker
and Melter for my life, provided I do this service within three months after
my grant, this mischief is come to a gangrene, and the Council of State must
make sharp and strict Orders in this business, or else this mischief cannot be
remedied, a great deal of care must be used to put these Laws in Execution,
else there will be a perpetual consumption of the Stock of the Nation in the
Silver coins, as it is come already on the Gold coins, you shall not receive
in a thousand pounds one twenty-shillings-peece in Gold, and in few years there
will be the like defect in the Silver, not so much as will maintain Commerce,
and Trade, pay Rents and Taxes, nor to go to Market.

The first Sluce-gate that must be stopped, is the forbidding the melting of
gold and Silver current coins of the Nation, for gold and silver thread it is
true there is a Law against it, but who looks after the Execution, Execution is
that that gives life to the Law.

The like course must be taken against the Transporting gold and silver out of
the Nation, it is true old Laws forbid it, but who makes it their business to
discover the offenders

Had the Act passed in the House which I prosecuted against Transporting Gold
and Silver, and I empowered and employed as I humbly propounded ten years ago,
this Nation had had at this day millions of Silver which is now Transported, to
the great damage of the Nation.

This Act has bin twice read in the House, ten times Committed, Referred to
the Committee of the Navies, Officers of the Mint, Officers of the Customs,
all their Reports and Certificates certify that if the Parliament will not
pass this Act, and appoint able skillful persons to make it their business to
hinder the Transporting Gold and Silver, the stock of Gold and Silver in the
Nation would be all Transported, and this Nation exposed to very great
inconveniences by not preventing it, who can or could say more then these
Certificates say.

If the Parliament please to pass this Act, I will spend my time and pains,
and in that service, take these Transporters in the nick of their action, and
confiscate the moneys, had I Warrants and did set my springes I would catch
these Woodcocks, my experience would be of great advantage, for an old Dear
stealer is the best keeper of the Park, and it is not unknown to some of you
that almost thirty years ago I was questioned about Transporting Gold and
Silver, I discovered a nest of Transporters of Gold, and the King engaged me to
do that service, I caused them to be fined twenty four thousand one hundred
pounds, in the year 1635. in the Starr Chamber, as appears by the Records, and
made Alderman Gibbs, and Sir John Wollaston, glad to Petition and pay well to
the late King for their Pardons, for abuses done in their Trades, and this was
the true ground of Gibbes, and Wollastones revenge against me.

When in the year 1643. they maliciously and Knavishly engaged honorable
Gentlemen to present me to the Parliament for a malignant, and to send me to
the Tower, and sequester my Estate, to my damage at this day twenty thousand
pounds, only to work their malicious ends upon me, when at that time they had
Trappaned me, to catch me as a man catches a Partridg with their Lowbel, Mr.
Theophilus Rily who decoyed me into this snare to undertake to bring up from
Oxford the Letter from the Late King Charles, mentioned in this Book, Fol. 33.

And then to aggravat it against me with that Violence to some honorable
members of Parliament, that it had like to cost me my life, and I suffered
almost four years imprisonment in the Tower, and had my estate sequestered to my
damage of twenty thousand pounds as appears in this Book, Fol. 38.

I Petitioned the late Protector Richard for to give me and some others I
nominated in trust for my use, the grant of making a common farthing, as
appears in this book Fol. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122. the late Protector
accordingly gives me etc. the grant of the same for 31. years in part of my
reward for this service of staying the Silver, and orders the Solicitor
General to attend the Parliament for their Approbation, who are desired to
ordain and appoint such Rules, Prohibitions, and Penalties, for the effectual,
and better management of this service, the preventing of all former abuses, and
restraining the importation and Counterfeiting of any the said farthings from
the parts beyond Sea, as they shall think fit and necessary for the carrying on
of this business for the good of the Common wealth, and he reserves to the
Commonwealth twelve pence out of every twenty two shillings.

I shall humbly desire the Parliament, to give me the grant for the sole making
of a Public farthing for 31. years of the value and weight aforesaid, and I
shall humbly and thankfully accept of this employment as the value of five
thousand pounds toward my debt of eleven thousand pounds, and if the
Parliament please to have a farthing made lighter, yet as heavy again as the
common farthings, I shall make a common farthing to go current in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and I will pay unto the maimed Solders five shillings
upon every two and twenty shillings that is uttered in the Office, and account,
truly upon Oath, this will be a great revenew to the maimedSolders, and I will
be bound to account monthly to the Treasurers of the maimed Solders, which will
be about three hundred pounds a month for some years.

By these ways I shall both pay my self my eleven thousand pounds, and be
serviceable to the Commonwealth above an hundred thousand pounds, in doing
these services in the Mint, and for Regulating gold and silver Lace, and Wire,
and stopping the Transporting of gold and silver, no man in the Nation has had
the experience to do it but my self, and where I get one penny, the Common
wealth in point of bonour and profit will get twenty, the issue of all I humbly
leave to God, and submitt my self to his good Providence.

And remain Gentlemen your Bondman till the State free me THOMAS VIOLET.
25. May 1659.
FINIS.

