Polidore Virgil, by Birth an Italian, the greatest Antiquary in his Time: He
was Archdeacon of Wells, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

THE WORKS OF THE Famous Antiquary, Polidore Virgil. Compendiously English't by
John Langley, late Master of Paul's School, London. CONTAINING The Original of
all Arts, Sciences, Mysteries, Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil. A Work Useful For all Divines, Historians, Lawyers,
and all Artificers.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1663.

Polidore Virgil.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Original of the Heathen gods.
WHen the spirits of the air (whom the Scripture calls, Ephesians. 6.
Rulers of this world) began to give answers of Prophecy, out of Images, made
to resemble mortal men, and by their wicked subtlety, did pretend themselves
sometimes to be of the number of good spirits, sometimes gods celestial, and
sometimes the souls of valiant Lords: they brought men into such error and
perplexity, that in short space they did altogether alienate men's hearts from
the religion and reverence of the true God. And for as much as their spiritual
nature is subtle, they usurped the name of good Angels. For according to the
opinion of antiquity, not only to every man, but also to every singular place
and family, were allotted two Angels; Whereof the one went about to endamage
them: the other with all its endeavor, studied to profit them. These invaded
particularly every house, conveyed themselves into men's bodies, and closely in
their entrails, imbezelled their health, procured diseases, illuded their
hearts with fantastical visions and dreams: and by such mischief enforced men
to repair to them for help, Oracles doubtful.
and inquire their Oracles and answers; which of purpose had doubtful
understandings, lest their ignorance should be perceived. By these deceitful
means they were so deified, that sundry people after diverse sorts chose them
gods, and with great reverence worshipped them. For such men as a Nation had
attained any special Commodity by, to the furtherance or garnishing of their
living, What men were deified.
or builders of Cities, or Ladies excellent in Chastity, or men puissant in
Arms, were honored for gods; Isis. Neptunus.
as the Egyptians had Isis; the Assyrians, Neptune; the Latins, Faunus: the
Romans, Quirine; Faunus. Pallas. Apollo. Jupiter. Belus.
Athens, Pallas: the Delphians, Apollo; the Grecians, Jupiter; the Assyrians,
Belus, and many Countries had diverse other gods; and some (which is a shame to
speak) worshipped brute beasts, and took them for gods; by reason whereof, the
Grecians had the opinion, That the gods had their beginning of men. And thus
when men withdrew their fantasies from Images, to the spirits invisible, they
were persuaded that there were many gods, and of no smaller number then mortal
men.

Of this variety of opinions, Opinions of the Philosophers.
the Philosophers (which laid aside all private and public affairs,
employing all their study in searching out the truth) took occasion to dispute
of the nature of gods diversely. Thales.
Thales Milesius, which first searched such matters, said, That God was an
Understanding, that made and fashioned all things of the water, as matter
prejacent. Pythagoras called him, A Lively Mind, that pierced and passed
through all things, of whom all living creatures received their life. Cleanthes.
And Cleanthes defined God to be The Air. Anaxagoras.
Anaxagoras esteemed him to be an Infinite Mind, which did move it self.
Chrisippus.
Chrisippus thought he was a natural power, endued with godly reason. Some were
of the opinion, that there were no gods. Diagoras.
Diagoras and Theodorus affirmed plain, Theodorus.
That there was no God at all. Protagoras.
Protagoras reported, That he knew no certainty of the Gods; wherefore the
Athenians banished him out of their Empire. Epicurus.
Epicurus granted there was a God; but one that was neither liberal,
bountiful, nor had any regard of things: that is to say, God is no God; but a
cruel and unkind Monster. Anaximan*
Anaximander supposed the gods to be born, and not to dye, till after many
ages. The Egyptians, because of the Ancestry of their lineage, feign the gods to
have begun among them, and that they were but two, and everlasting: the Sun,
whom they called Osiris; and the Moon, that was named Isis. Notwithstanding
Lactantius writes, Saturnus father of the gods.
That Saturnus was the first Father of the gods, which begat Jupiter, Juno,
Neptune, Pluto, and Glauca, by his Wife Ops. And for the benefits that they
showed to their Subjects, they were deified.

But in such variety of opinions, it is a thing difficult to determine the
first offspring of their gods, both because they be but vain, and also sprung
out of mortal humanity. And again, to speak of God, To speak of the nature of
God is dangerous.
as he is in his supernatural essence, is a thing dangerous, because we can
neither behold the resplendent brightness of his Majesty with our corporal
eyes, nor with any quickness of wit, comprehend his infinite might, as the
Poet Symonides did declare very well: Simonides.
For when he was required of King Hiero, to show him what thing, and of what
sort God was, he desired to have one day respite; when he asked him the next
day, he prayed to have two days: and as often as the King required of him an
answer, he increased the number of the days of deliberation: the King
marvailing that he doubled so many times the days, inquired why he did so? For
the more (said he) that I consider the thing, and muse on it, the more obscure
and intricate it seems to me. Which thing if the Philosophers (which like to
blind warriors, wandering in darkness) had done, they would not have devised
so many lies to offend or displease their Creator. For it is better to be
ignorant in the truth, then to teach error. Therefore to conclude (as Macrobius
writes) There is but one God, One God.
subject to no mutability, who is One Eternal Being, of all natural things:
the cause principal who says by his Prophet Esaias, I am God, before me there
was no other, neither shall be after me, without beginning, only everlasting,
of whom Virgil writes thus.

Heaven and Earth, and the Water large,
The bright circle of the heavenly sphere:
The Spirit all fostereth: and has full charge.
Passing through all, to guide to every where.
And Plato says, There is but one God, and affirms that this world was
created by him; and was called God, because he gives freely to men, all things
good and profitable, What God is.
and is the principal fountain of all goodness in this world.

CHAP. II. The Principles of natural things.
ALthough it had been convenient to have begun this present Treatise with
declaring the principles of natural creatures; and so consequently to have
expounded the original of the gods, forasmuch as they have their beginning of
the same things: yet the reverence that I have to the true God, which was
before all other creatures, moves me to begin at him, as the cause principal
of the rest. Therefore as concerning the causes of things, I will show first
the minds of the Philosophers that he most probable, until I come to the truth
it self. Thales, one of the seven wise men of Greece, has an opinion, that
water was the material cause of all things. Contrariwise, Heraclitus, an
Ephesian, and Hippasus, suppose all to be procreated of fire. Water is cause
material. Fire.
Empedocles says, the four Elements were the causes of things, as Lucretius
writes.

Of Water, Earth, Air, and fiery glede: Four Elements.
All things natural duly proceed.

Anaximenes thinks all things to have their beginning of the Air. Air.
Metrodorus assirmeth the universal World to be eternal, without beginning or
end. Epicurus one of Democritus disciples, puts two causes, Atomos.
Atoms, or Motes, and vacuity or emptiness, of these he says, the four
Elements come. These are the opinions of the Philosophers, that were men
without the knowledge of God: The World was made of naught.
but (as Moses and Josephus record) the Scripture concludes that in the
beginning, God made all things of nothing; as Saint John says, all things were
made by him. And therefore (as Lactantius writes) let no man be curious in
searching, of what material God made these great and wonderful works, for he
formed them all of nothing, by the power of his mighty word. For as David the
Prophet sings, he spoke the word and they were made, he gave Commandment,
and they were created. Plato.
Of the same opinion is Plato, in his book called Timeus.

CHAP. III. The procreation of Man, the diversity of Languages, and division of
Nations.
THe most famous writers of natural Histories (as Diodorus records) The
opinions of the birth of man.
spoke of two sundry manners of birth, and first stock of mankind. For they
which contend that the World was ungenerate, and without any danger of
corruption, say also that man has been in a certain perpetuity, without
beginning. Of this opinion, were Pithagoras, Architas, Xenocrates, and
Aristotle, with other Peripateticks, affirming that all things in the eternal
world, which have been, or shall hereafter come to pass, be by Generation
endless, and without beginning, and have only a circuit and course of
Generations, wherein both the birth, and natural resolution of things may be
perceived. The second opinion.
Other that suppose this world had both an Original cause of being, and shall
also end by putrefaction, hold opinion that man had a time of his Generation.
The Egyptians opinion of man.
For this cause the Egyptians report, that men were first born among them, as
well by reason of the fruitful rankness of the soil, and seasonableness of
the Air, and because of the River Nilus, which for the lusty fatness of the
slime, does procreate diverse kinds of beasts, and has in it self naturally a
certain nutritive power. Mice engendered of the mud.
For in the Country of Thebais Mice be engendered of the mud: wherefore men in
those parts stand in admiration when they behold the fore-parts of them to the
breast, wallow and move sensibly in the mire, and the hinder partts not yet
fashioned, and without shape. The story of Psammaticus.
Nevertheless, Psammaticus their King, desiring to know in what Country, men
were first begotten, devised this means. He caused two young Infants new born,
to be delivered to his herdmen, to be brought up among his cattle, and
commanded that no man should speak any word to them, because he would know what
word they would speak first. Then two years after when the herdmen opened the
door where they were nourished, they stretched out their hands, and cried
Becos, which in the Phrygians language, signifies bread. Thus it was known
that the Phrygians were the eldest lineage, and first born. The Ethiopians do
conjecture themselves to be the first, because no man would come out of any
other place into that Region, The Aethiopians opinion of man.
and they of that be by a general con^ent, Aborigines.
called homebred, and (as Diodorus says) it is probable that those under the
Meridional Equator, should be the ancientest of all. For seeing the heat of
the Sun dries up the moisture of the earth, and has also of it self, a power
to give and preserve the life of things, it is like that the place which is
situate nearest to the Sun, should bring forth the first living creatures.
Anaximander.
For that cause Anaximander taught, that men first sprung of water and Earth,
warmed with lively heat. Empedocles in a manner confirms the same, where he
writes that every particular member was severally made, and proportioned of
the Earth (as a mother) and so to have been compacted, and conglutinated by
heat and moisture into the perfect figure and shape of a man.

Democritus thinks men were first made of Water and Mudde, Democritus,
tempered together. Zeno.
Zeno judges the cause of Mankind to have proceeded of the New World. And men
to be only begotten by the aid and comfort of the divine fire, that is, the
providence of God. As for the Poets, Poets.
some feign, how man was made out of soft clay by Prometheus. Some say, that
they sprung of the hard stones that Deucalion and Pirrha cast: And thus much is
of the vain opinions of the Gentiles. God made man.
But to speak the truth, (as Scripture teaches) the beginning of man was in
Jewry. For God, when he had finished the World, Adam the first man.
did create the first man, Adam, of the Earth of the field of Damascus, as some
think. Thus Adam, made by God, marrying his Wife Eve, was author, and beginner
of the whole Posterity and Lineage. But for as much as God formed but one man,
and endued him with one kind of speech only, to utter and declare the things
that he contained in his mind: men perchance will marvail, what the cause
should be, that there be at this day so many diverse languages, Diversity of
speeches.
that according to the variety of Countries, there be sundry speeches. And
therefore I thought it convenient to show the occasion of the same. When Nimrod
the son of Cham, that was son to Noe, after the universal flood, went about to
withoraw men (which feared the danger of drowning) from the worship of God,
Religiou.
supposing all their hope to consist in their own might and power, persuaded
them to build a Tower of such altitude, that the water should not be able to
overflow it. Babylon.
Whilst they were thus earnestly occupied about their enterprise, God divided
their speeches in such sort, that not one of them could understand another, by
reason of the discord and disagreeing of their languages. And thus began the
diversity of tongues that we use now. The same was the occasion that the
posterities of Noe were dispersed and scattered abroad. Division of Nations.
For when one could not understand another's language, it came to pass, that
every man departed into sundry Provinces add Countries, and there named places,
whereof they had the government; and also Cities, which they builded, after
their own names, as Eusebius testifies. The sons of Noe were Sem, Sons of
Noah.
Cham, and Japhet. The issue of Sem was Elam, whereof the Elamites came. Assure,
of whom the Assyrians were named. Authors of the names of Countries.
Arphaxad was the first founder of the Arabians, and Lud of the Lidians: the
children of Cham were Chus, that named the Ethiopians; and Mesre the beginner
of the Egyptians. Chanaan, of whom the Canaanites had their name: the lineage of
Chus was Seba, whereof the Sebees came; and Evila, of whom came the Evelites.
And semblably we must believe, that of them came all other Nations and people
of the world, which be now in so great number, that they cannot easily be
numbered.

CHAP. IV. The beginning of Marriage, and sundry rites of the same.
GOD, after that he had fully accomplished, and perfectly created the world,
and when all the creatures therein were in their kind consummate, (as Moses
teaches) he made man last of all, to be Lord and Sovereign of the whole body
of the world, as one of whom all his work should be subject, because he was
fashioned after his own likeness. Instruction of wedlock.
And lest so worthy a creature should by death perish, or the world might want
his governor and ruler, it pleased him to make woman out of the body of man,
and so with the bond of Matrimony, combined them together, that they should not
live after the manner of brute beasts: therefore has God joined Adam and Eve
in Marriage in Paradise, Marriage began in Paradise.
before they knew sin, that by the congression and company of these two sexes,
and kinds, their issue might be enlarged, and so replenish the whole World. In
this sort was Matrimony instituted, albeit antiquity feigneth Cecrops King of
the Athenians to have ordained Matrimony, Cecrops.
for which cause, he was reported to have had two faces. But all Countries did
not enter like bond of Matrimony, The manners of diverse Nations in Marriages.
neither kept it after one fashion. For the Numidians, Egyptians, Indians,
Hebrews, Persians, Parthians, Thracians, and almost all the Barbarians, every
one according to his substance married Wives, some ten, some more. The
Scythian, the Stoics, and Athenians, used their children and wives in common,
and copulated with them abroad openly like beasts. Massagites.
The Messagites married every one a wife, but they used them commonly. Among
the Arabians it is the manner, Arabians.
that all Kinsmen should have but one wife, and he that came to meddle with
her, should set his staff at the door; for their custom was to bear a staff,
albeit she lay every night by the eldest, by this means they were all brethren.
An Adulterer was there condemned to death, Punishment for Adultery.
which was perceived by this, if he were of another family or kindred. Where
chanced on a time a strange thing, worthy to be had in memory, there was a
certain Kings daughter of excellent beauty; which had fifteen brethren, that
loved her all entirely well, and used one after another, to resort to, and keep
company with her: she began by such daily dalliance, to be weary of their
wanton company, and devised this feat, she prepared staves like her brothers
staves, and by and by as one was gone, she set a staff at the door like to his,
and by that deceit, the other, when they came to the door, supposing one to be
within, pressed no further, and it fortuned on a day when they were all
together in the Court, one of them departed from the other, and repaired to her
house, and when he espied a staff at the gate, thinking it to be some
Adulterer, for he was assured that he left his brethren in the Court, he ran to
his father and accused his sister of Adultery; but when the matter was known,
it was perceived that he had falsely slandered her. Buying of Wives.
The Assyrians and the Babylonians bought their wives in open Market at a
common price, which custom among the Saracens and Arabians yet still
remains. When the Nazamones were first married, Nazamones
they used to suffer their wives to lie the first night with all her guests, in
the worship of Venus; and from thenceforth they kept themselves chaste, and
pure of living. A certain people of the Carthaginians, which border on Egypt,
were wont to offer such maidens as should be married, to the King of that
Region, to deflour whom it pleased him. The use sof Scotland.
In Scotland also the usage was that the Lord of the soil should lie with the
bride before her husband: but for so much as it was unfitting to be frequented
among Christians, their King Malcolme, the third of that name, Malcolme King of
the Scots.
about the year of our Lord, M.XCIX. did abolish that beastly abomination, and
ordained that every maid should give the Lord for the redemption of her
maidenhead, a Crown of Gold. Single livers
Some people lived single, as certain Nations called Cristae and Esseni among
the Hebrews, which did abhor the calamities and troubles in marriage. Wedlock
was observed sincerely and reverently of the Romans till Divorcement began;
Divorcement.
which although it be an occasion that Women should more earnestly keep their
chastity, yet our Religion does scarcely permit it. One Spurius Servilius,
Spurius Servilius.
the year after the City was founded 522. ( Marcus Pomponius, and Caius
Pap^rius being Consuls) first sued a Divorce from his Wife, because she was
barren: for which fact, although he affirmed openly before the Censors that he
did it only because he would have issue, yet he was evil spoken of among the
common sort. This decree of divorcing was taken out of the Laws of Moses, Moses
ordained Divorcements.
which made the first constitution of that statute; yet was there this
difference. For by Moses it was only lawful for the Husband to forsake his
Wife; but the Romans decree gave them both like liberty. The Rites of Marriage
were diverse in Rome; Rites of Marriages.
the manner was, that two children should lead the Bride, and another bear a
Torch before her of white-thorn, in worship of Ceres: that like as she with
fruits of the earth does nourish men; so the new bride like an houswife, should
bring up her children. Which manner is used in England, saving that instead of
the Torch, there is born here a cup of Silver or Gold before them. A Garland
also of Corn-eares was set on her head; or else she bare it in her hand, or if
that were not, when she came home, wheat was scatered abroad over her head in
betokening of plenty and fruitfullnesse.

Also before she came to bed to her Husband, Fire and water were given her,
Fire and Water given in token of chastity. Maids of Rome and Greece.
which have power to purify and cleanse, signifying thereby that she should be
chaste and honest of her body. There were besides these, diverse Rites which I
omit. The maids of Greece and Rome (as it may appear by Homer and Catullus)
were usually accustomed to gird their Privity with a lace, or swathel, till the
day of their Marriage. The Bride anointed the posts of the doors with swines
grease, because she thought by that means to drive away all misfortune, whereof
she had her name in Latin. Neither might she step over the threshold, Vxor ab
ungendo.
but must be born over, to declare that she loses her Virginity unwillingly,
with many other superstitious ceremonies, which be too long to rehearse.

CHAP. V. The Institution of Religion and who Worshipped gods first with
sacrifice.
IT is no doubt but men which at the first without any Governor, led a
barbarous and rude manner of life, Occasion of Idolatry.
did highly advance their first Kings honor and praises; and by the persuasion
of the Devil, either for their wonderful courage and virtue, or to flatter the
condition of their dignity, or for some special benefit that they received by
them, magnified them as gods. Whereby it came to pass, that Kings, being
well-beloved of their people, le^t a fervent memorial of themselves among their
subjects and posterity; by reason whereof men made Images of them, Images of
Kings.
to take a comfortable pleasure of the beholding of them: Afterward because to
encourage men to virtue and chevalry, they reverenced them as gods, for every
valiant courage would with more alacrity enterprise dangerous adventures for
the commonweal, when they perceived the noble acts of worthy and puissant men,
to be recompensed with honor and laud of the immortal Gods. Thus Temples began
first to be builded, and service of the gods to be performed, by the ordinance
of Melissus, Melissus.
in the time of Jupiter, or not long before. Yet that the true and certain
original may be absolutely known, let us appoint the custom of idolatry, to
have begun in the time of Belus King of the Assyrians, Belus.
which reigned in the 3180 year of the world whom the Babylonians first
worshipped for a God, and set up an Image of him: and therefore they that think
Idolatry has endured from the begiuning of the World, are deceived. H^rodotus
says, that the Egyptians first builded Altars, Temples, Images, and offered
sacrifice to the gods, and after taught them to strangers: Some suppose that
Mercury showed with what ceremonies gods should be honored. Some say, it was
devised by King Numa Pompilius.

Diodorus thinks that the Aethiopians did institute the Rites of sacrificing
Aethiopians.
to the gods, which thing Homer in his Ilias witnesses, where he tells how
Jupiter and the other gods went into Aethiopia to the oblations that were
customably made there, and also repaired thither to be cherished with the
fragrant odours, that perfumed the sacrifices. And the Aethiopians received
this reward of their holiness; that they should never be conquered, but ever
live in liberty. without any bondage. Lactantius affirms, that Melissus King
of Creet did first sacrifice, and ordained other solemn rites in the ceremonies
of their gods. Janus.
In Italy, Janus and his son Faunus appointed sacrifices to Saturn; and after
them, King Numa set up a new Religion.

Cadmus out of Venice, Cadmus.
and Orpheus out of Thrace, Orpheus.
brought first into Greece the mysteries, solemnities, dedicating of Images,
Cecrops.
and Hymns of their gods.

Albeit, Herodotus says that Cecrops King of Athens transported all such
constitutions and ordinances out of Egypt into Greece, and first invocated
Jupiter, founded Images, set up Altars, and offered sacrifices, that were never
seen before in Greece. But to God Almighty, whom we Christians honor and
serve, Cain.
Cain and Abel first offered; Abel.
and Enos first called upon the name of the Lord. Enos.


CHAP VI. Who found the Letters, and the number of them.
LEtters, wherein is contained the treasure of knowledge, Letters.
and by whom things notable be preserved in fresh remembrance, after the
opinion of Diodorus, were found by Mercury in Egypt, yet some say one Menon an
Egyptian devised them: Diodorus Menon.
but instead of the letters they of Egypt used to signify and declare the
intents and conceits of their minds by the figures of beasts, The Egyptianss
letters.
Fishes, Fowls, and Trees. Pliny says, he thought that the Assyrians
excogitated the letters which Cadmus brought out of Phoenice into Greece, Pliny.
which were but 16 in number. Cadmus found fourteen letters. Palamedes added
four letters.
A b c d e g i l m n o p r s t v. to these Palamedes added in the battle of
Troy other four, viz. (...). Simonides found as many, viz. (...). Whose power
is contained in our letters. Aristotle says there were 18, of the old, viz.
(...). and that Epicarmus put to the other two, Epicarmus.
(...) and (...)S. Hermolaus is supposed to have added sy. Herodotus writes,
how that the Phenicians that came with Cadmus to inhabit Thebes, Cadmus.
brought letters into Greece, which were never seen in use there before-time.
Some think the Aethiopians invented them, and then taught them to the
Egyptians, that were one of their Provinces. But Eumolphus tells unfainedly
that the beginning of letters did proceed of Moses, Eumolphus.
which reigning long before Cadmus days, Moses.
taught the Jews the letters, and thence the Phoenicians received them, and the
Greeks learned of them. Which thing is conformable to the saying of Pliny
before rehearsed: for Jury is a part of Syria, and the Jews be Syrians.
Nevertheless I find by Josephus that writing was before Noe's flood, The Sons
of Seth found the letters.
for the sons of Seth wrote in two Pillars, one of brick and another of stone,
the Science of Astronomy; whereof that of stone, in the time of Josephus
remained in Siria. Philo ascribes the invention of them to Abraham, which was
elder then Moses, albeit I had rather assign to Seths children, the beginning
of writing. As for the Hebrew letters which be now, Hebrew letters.
according to Saint Jeromes opinion, were but newly invented, and devised by
Esdras: for before that time the Hebrews and Samarites used all one Characters.

The old greek letters were the same that the Romans use now, Greek letters
as Pliny conjectureth by a certain brass Table that came from Delphos, which
was dedicated and hanged up in a Library in the Temple of Minerva at Rome in
his time. Evander brought letters into Italy.
They were brought into Italy by Evander, and the Arcadians which came into
Italy, to inhabit there, as Ovid tells in his book Defastis.

The Hetrurians had also a form of letters by themselves, wherein the youth of
Rome was instructed, as well as in the Greek letters, Demeratus taught the
Hetrurians letters.
which one Demeratus a Corinthian taught the Hetrurians. And like as the
Grecians had enlarged the number of their lette^s, so the Italians following
their example, put to theirs, f k q x y z h. which h is no letter, The letter
F. was taken of the Ae^lians.
but a sign of aspiration: f they received of the Aeolians, which both among
the old Romans and Aeolians had the same sound and pronuntiation that p. with
an aspiration has, which we use in writing Greek words. And afterward Claudius
Casar, as Quintilian writes, appointed that it should be taken in the place of
v. consonant, as fulgus for vulgus, fixit for vixit; And even so our English
men use to speak in Essex, for they say Fineger for Vinegar, Feal for Veal, and
contrariwise, a Vox for a Fox, vour for four: And in process of time it was
used for ph. in Latin words. k. was borrowed of the Greeks, but no good
Author uses it in writing Latin. q. was added because it has a grosser
sound then c. The letter x. we had also out of Greece, although (as Quintilian
judges) we might well forbear it, forasmuch that they used for it either c s
or g s. Likewise y and z, were sent from the Grecians, and be used of us only
to write Greek words.

CHAP. VII. The Invention of Grammar.
NExt the Letters, the invention of grammar ordinarily succeeds, both because
it is the foundation and ground whereon all other Sciences rest: and also
forasmuch as it takes the name of letters; For Gramma in Greek signifies a
Letter in English. Grammar is an Art that does consist in speaking and writing
without fault, so that every word have his due letters, and (as Quintilian
supposes, Two parts of Gramm
is divided into two parts: the way to speak congruously, and declaring of
Poets. As Tully writes, there is required in Gramarians, the declaration of
Poets, the knowledge of Histories, exposition of words, and a certain utterance
of pronunciation. It had the beginning of marking and observing what was most
fit or unfitting in communication, which thing men counterfeiting in their
speech, made this Art, even as Rhetoric was perceived. For it is the duty both
of Grammarians, and Orators to have a regard and respect, how to speak.
Hermippus says that Epicurus first taught the Art of Grammar, Epicurus taught
Grammar first. Crates taught Grammar in Rome.
and Plato espied and perceived first the commodity and profit of it. In Rome,
it was nothing esteemed till one Crates Malotes was sent by King Attalus to the
Senate to teach it between the second and third battles of Punicks, a little
before the death of Ennius the Poet. It is of all other Sciences the most
special, for it shows a means to attain all the rest of the liberal
Sciences. Neither can a man come or attain to any excellency in any Art,
unless he have first his principles of Grammar, perfectly known, and thoroughly
perceived.

Therefore in old time Grammarians were called judges and allowers of all other
writers, and for that cause they were called Critici.

In this excelled Didymus, and Antonius Enipho, Antonius-Enipho a Schoolmaster.
whose School Marcus Cicero resorted unto diverse times after his affairs of the
Law were ended: Nigidius Figulus, Marcus Varro, Marcus Valerius Probus, and the
arrogant Palemo^, with many other of the Greeks, Aristarchus, Aristotle, and
Theodoces were chief.

CHAP. VIII. Of Poetry, and Meter, and sundry kinds of the same.
POetry is a goodly Art: Poetry.
as well because no other discipline can be perceived, except a man study it
vehemently, for it comprehends all other sciences: as for that, where other
faculties be devised by the pregnance, of man's wit, this art only is given of
nature by a divine inspiration, without which Democritus affirms there could
never be excellent Poets: for it proceeds not of Art or Precepts, but of a
natural inspiration, and spiritual power. Poets be called holy, of Ennius.
And therefore Ennius called Poets holy, because they be by a special
prerogative commended and praised to us of God. The beginning of this art is
very ancient, and, as Eusebius says, it flourished first among the Hebrews,
that were long before the Greeks. Hebrews were Authors of Poetry. Moses.
For Moses the great Captain of the Jews, what time he led them out of Egypt
into the land of promise, passing the red Sea, which by the power of God gave
place to them, inspired by the holy Ghost, made a song of Hexameter Verses, to
render thanks to God for that benefit.

And David the holy Prophet of God, David.
after he was dispatched of all his affairs in war, and escaped the assaults
and dangers of treason, living in great peace, devised many pleasant tunable
Hymns, for the praise of God in sundry kinds of Meter. For as Saint Jerome
says, the Psalter of David goes in as good number and measures, The Psalter
of David.
as either the Greek Planudes, or the Latin Horatius: sometime in Alcaeus
number, sometime in the Meter of Sappho, sometime with half measures. What is
goodlier then the song of Moses in Deuteronomy, and of Isaiah? more ancient
then Solomon? more perfect then Job? Solomon. Job. Orpheus. Linus.
We may worthily ascribe the invention of it to the Hebrews: but indeed Orpheus
and Linus, and after them, Homer and Hesiodus did first polish and adorn the
Art with all kind of Furniture. The Romans received it not till of latter time;
for Livius Andronicus (as Tully writes) in the 513 year after the City was
builded, Livius Andronicus.
( Caius Claudius Cento, and Marcus Tuditanus being Consuls) set forth the
first interlude or fable, a year before Ennius was born. Before those days, it
was had in such despite, that if one had professed himself to be a Poet, he was
supposed to be as bad as a murderer, The beginner of Meter was the true God,
The World was made by Meter.
which proportioned the world; with all the contents of the same, with a
certain order as it were a Meter: for there is none (as Pythagoras taught) that
doubts, but that there is in things Heavenly and Earthly, a kind of harmony;
and unless it were governed with a formal concord and described-number, how
could it long continue? All other instruments, that we occupy, be all fashioned
by a manner of measure. And Diodorus assigns the invention of Meter, which
the Poets by a spiritual influence used in their works, to Jupiter, as to
Almighty God.

Of Meters there be diverse kinds that have their name, Diverse kinds of Meter.
Heroical verse.
either of the thing that is described therein, (as heroical Meter is so called
of the Wars of noble men that be contained in it) wherein also Apollo gave his
Oracles, therefore Pliny says we have that Meter of Pythius Oracle; or of the
inventour as Aesclepiadical; or of the quantity of Jambus, Archilocus found
Jambus.
because it stands of a short and a long, which Archilocus found first, of
the number of feet, as Hoxamoter and Pentameter, which is also called
Elegiacal, the shepherds song, Daphnis the son of Mercury found: Daphnis found
the Shepherds Carolls.
and other devised other songs, which I let pass, for my purpose is only to
speak of the Inventers of the Meter, and not to persecute the particulars.

CHAP. IX. The beginning of the Tragedies, Comedies, Satyrs, and new Comedies.
TRagedies and Comedies, Tragedies.
had their beginning of the oblations, (as Diodorus writes) which in old time
men devoutly offered for their fruits to Bacchus. For as the Altars were
kindled with fire, and the Goat laid on it, the Quire in honor of Bacchus,
sung this Meter called a Tragedy. It was named so, either because a Goat which
in Greek is called Tragos, (...).
was the reward appointed for him that was Author of the Song, or because a
Goat, which is noisome to the Vines, whereof Bacchus was first inventour, was
Sacrificed to Liber: Or of the grounds or dregs, which in Greek is called Tryx,
(...). Visards were found by Eschylus.
with the which stage players used to paint their face, before that Eschylus
devised Visards. The beginner of them, alter the mind of Horace, was Thespis,
albeit, Quintilianus says, Eschylus set forth first open Tragedies before any
other, Sophocles and Euripides did furnish them more gallantly. Famous
Tragedies.
In Rome Livius Andronicus made the first Tragedy, wherein Accius, Paccuvius,
Ouidius, and Seneca excelled. The Comedies began what time (the Athenians being
not yet assembled into the City) the youth of that country, used to sing solemn
verses at feasts, abroad in the Villages and High ways, for to get money: they
were so named of the Greek word Comos, for a Banqueting, (...).
or Come a street, and Ode a song. Yet it is uncertain among the Grecians who
found it first. In this kind of writing, Aristophanes, Eupolis, and Cratinus
bare the price: of the Romans, Livius Andronicus found it first. A Tragedy.
In a Tragedy noble personages, as Lords, Dukes, Kings and Emperors be brought
in, with an high style. A Comedy.
In a Comedy, amorous dalliance, matters of love, and deflouring of maidens be
contained. Heaviness is appropried unto a Tragedy, and therefore, Archilaus.
when King Archelaus desired Euripides, to write a Tragedy of him, he denied
it, wishing that never such thing should chance to him, as should be worthy of
of Tragedy; for it has ever a miserable end, and a Comedy has a joyful end.
A Satyr.
A Satyr is a Poesy, rebuking vices sharply, not regarding any persons. Two
sorts of Satyrs.
There be two kinds of Satyrs; the one, which was both among the Greeks and
Romans of ancient time used, for the diversity of Meters much like a Comedy,
saving that it is more wanton. Demetrius of Tharsus and one Menippus a bondsman,
whom Marcus Varro did counterfeit, were writes in this kind. The second manner
of Satyrs is very railing, only ordained to rebuke vice, and devised of the
Romans, upon this occasion. When the Poets, Liberty of the old Satyr.
that wrote the old Comedies, used to handle for their arguments not only
feigned matters, but also things done indeed, which although at the first, it
was tolerable, yet afterward it fortuned by reason that they inveighed so
liberally, and largely at their pleasure, against every man that there was a
law made, that no man should from thenceforth, reprehend any man by name. Then
the Romans in the place of those Comedies, substituted such Satyrs, as they
had newly imagined. New Comedy.
Then also began the new Comedy, which concerns generally all men of mean
estate: and has less bitterness and railing, but more pleasantness and
pastime for the auditors. Of this Menander and Philemon were Authors, Menander.
which assuaged all the crabbednesse of the old writings. Of them Cicilius,
Nevius; Plautus, and Terentius, learned to compile Comedies, although (as
Quintilian says) they never attained to the least proportion of their Patrons,
because the Latin Tongue is not so fit to receive the ornaments of Eloquence,
as the Greek Tongue is. The Satyrs had the name of Barbarian gods that were
rude, Satyrs whereof they were named.
lascivious, and wanton of behavior. In this form of writing Lucilius,
Horacius, Persius, Juvenal, obtained great fame and praise.

CHAP. X. The Devisers of Histories, Prose and Rhetoric.
HIstories, Histories.
of all other Writings, be most commendable, because it informs all sorts of
people, with notable examples of living, and does excite Noblemen to ensue
such activity in enterprises, as they read to have been done by their
Ancestors; and also discourageth and dehorteth wicked persons from attempting
of any heinous deeds or crime, knowing, that such acts shall be registered in
perpetual memory, to the praise or reproach of the doers, according to the
desert of their endeavors. Pliny writes, That Cadmus Milesius first wrote
Histories among the Grecians, Cadmus wrote the story of Cyrus.
which contained the actions of Cyrus King of Persia. Albeit, Josephus
supposes it to be made probable, that Histories were begun by the old Writers
of the Hebrews; as in the time of Moses, which wrote the lives of many of the
eldest Hebrews, Moses did write the first Stories.
and the creation of the World: or else to the Priests of Egypt and Babylon.
For the Egyptians and Babylonians, have been of longest continuane very
diligent; in setting forth things in writing; insomuch, Priests of Egypt wrote
stories.
that their Priests were appointed for that purpose, of putting in writing such
things as were worthy to be had in memory. As concerning the first writers of
Prose, I cannot hold with Pliny, which says, Pheresides.
Pheresides, a Syrian, wrote first Prose, in the time of King Cyrus. For it is
no doubt, but he that wrote Histories, wrote also Prose first; and Pheresides
was long after Moses, which was 688 years before Joatham King of the Jews. In
whose time the Olympiads began; and this Pheresides (as Eusebius writes) was
but in the first Olympiad. Greek stories.
Of the Grecians, Xenophon, Thucydides, Herodotus, Theopompus, flourished most
in writing Histories. Of the Romans; Latin stories.
Titus Livius, and Caius Crispius Salustius, with diverse other, were had in
high estimation. Before that time they used Annals or Chronicles, which
contained only the actions and facts of every day severally. The first office
of an Historiographer, is to write no lie. The second, that he shall conceal no
truth for favor, displeasure or fear. The perfection of an History, rests in
matter and words. The order of the matter requires observance of times,
descriptions of places, the manners and lives of men, their behaviors,
purposes, occasions, deeds, sayings, casualties, atchievings, and finishing of
things. The renour of the words asks a brief perspicuity and sincere truth,
with moderate and peaceable ornaments.

We may be sure, Rhetoric.
that by and by after men were formed, they received of God the use of speech,
wherein when they perceived some words to be profitable, and some hurtful in
uttering of them: they appointed and compiled an art of speech, or
communication, called Rhetoric. Which (as Diodorus says) was invented by
Mercury: Mercury* Empedocles.
but Aristotle affirms, that Empedocles was first author of the Oratorial
Art. In Rome, this seat of eloquence was never forbidden, but in process (as
it was perceived to be profitable and honest) was had in such estimation; and
so many, partly for their defense, partly for glory and ambition, employed
their studies in it with such endeavor, that very many of the Commonalty were
promoted into the degree of Senators, and achieved much worship by it; Corax
and Thiseas gave rules of Rhetoric.
Corax, and Thisias, being Sicilians, gave first precepts in writing of this
Science. And their Countryman Leontinus Gorgias succeeded them. Demosthenes was
principal among the Grecians: among the Romans, Cicero.
Tullius Cicero had no fellow. Now as touching the effect and property of it,
Parts of Rhetoric.
there be in it (as Cicero writes) five parts; first, to invent matter to
speak; then, formally to order his devices; next, to polish it, and furnish it
with elegant terms, and choice words, and to have it in perfect memory: and
last of all, to utter it with a comely gesture, in such sort, that it delight:
for the convenient treat ableness thereof, does teach, and plainly declare the
thing, and move affections of pity and favor, in the hearts of Judges; or if
the cause permit, or time require, to excite a cheerful laughing, and abundant
grave severity. In terms of this faculty, we have this difference; we call him
that defends matters, and pleads causes, an Orator. A Rhetoritian, is he
that teaches or professes to be a Schoolmaster in that Art. A Declamator, is
he that is occupied in feigned causes, either for his own exercise, or to
instruct others thereby.

CHAP. XI. Who Invented Music; and what efficacy it is of, in humane affairs.
Music, by the testimony of ancient Poets, Orpheus.
is very ancient; for Orpheus and Linus, both born of the lineage of the gods,
were very excellent Musicians. And because the one by the sweetness of his
Harmony, delighted and mollified the gross hearts, and rude minds of men, it
was feigned, that he made the wild beasts, as Lions and Tygres, to follow him:
and the praisings of god's valiant powers, and deeds of Arms of Lords, were
used to be sung with Lutes at the royal Feasts; as Iompas in Virgil, and
Demodocus in Homer bear witness.

The Finders of Music, Finders of Music, after diverse Authors. Zephus.
Amphion.
as Pliny supposes, was Amphion the son of Jupiter by Antiope. The Grecians
ascribe the finding of it to Diodorus. Eusebius says, That Zephus and Amphion,
which were in Cadmus's days, invented Music. Solinus contendeth, that the
study of this Art came out of Crete, and was perceived by the ringing and
shrill sound of Brass, and so brought and traduced into numbers and measures.
Polybius affirms, That it came from the Arcadians, Arcadians
which have an exceeding mind to that Science. And Diodorus writes, Mercury
found the Concords.
That Mercury found Concords of singing. Albeit, it is like that these only
were the first setters out of it in Greece of late time: for Josephus tells,
Tubulcain.
That Tubulcain an Hebrew, the son of Lamech, which was many Ages before them,
used much to sing to the Psaltery and Lute: notwithstanding, who was first
procurer of it, and when it was found, it is yet uncertain. For it seems to
have been given of nature to mankind at the beginning, Nature gave Music to
men.
for a special remedy, to mitigate the cruel pains, wherein man is plunged;
for a child newborn, cease its crying at the singing and lulling of his
Nurse. In all kind of labors, Laborers pass away the time with Songs.
singing is comfortable, the Gally-man, the Plowman, the Carter, the Carrier,
ease the tediousness of their labor and journey, with carollings, and
whistling: yea, the brute beasts be delighted with songs and noises, as Mules
with bells, Horses with trumpets and shalmes, are of a fiercer stomach to their
appointed Ministry. And of whom (think ye) learned the Birds their diversity
of tunes? Who taught the Nightingale such sundry notes? Doubtless even nature
was of this agreeable Harmony, the only Schoolmistresse. Music makes men
effeminate.
But the Egyptians did forbid their young folks learning of Music, because it
seduceth and makes effeminate the hardy, courage of men. And Ephorus says, It
was ordained to delude and deceive men. Nevertheless, Socrates.
Socrates wa^ not ashamed in his old age, to learn to play on the Harp.
Themistocles
And Themistocles, because he refused the Harp at a Banquet, was reckoned
unlearned. Salii Martis.
The Priests of Mars in Rome, talled Salii, sung verses about the City: And
especially the great Prophet David, David.
which sung the Mysteries of God in Meter, frequented singing.

CHAP. XII. Who Invented Musical Instruments, and brought them into Italy.
IT is said, Mercury.
that Mercury found the Harp first. Harp.
For as he walked by the River Nilus after an ebb, he found a Tortoise all
withered, and nothing remaining but the sinews; which as he fortuned to strike
on them, made a certain sound: and after the pattern of that, he fashioned an
Harp, and according to the three times of the year, Summer, Winter, The strings
in the Harp.
and Spring, he put to it three strings, a treble, a base, and a mean. This
Instrument he gave to Apollo, and Apollo delivered it to Orpheus: some think
Amphion found it. Amphion.
I find, that the Harp had seven strings, to resemble the seven daughters of
Atlas, Gods of favor.
whereof Maia, Mercury his Mother, was one. And then after that, were two other
put to, to represent the nine Muses.

Some re^er the original of the Harp and Pipe to Apollo, for his Image in
Delos (as they say) has in the right hand a bow, and in the left hand the
goddesses of favor. Whereof one has a Harp, Shalms.
another a Shalm, the third a Pipe. Shalms were at the beginning made of Cranes
legs, and after of great reeds, Dardamus Trezenius.
Dardamus Trezemius used first to play and sing with them. Pan an heathenish
God, found the Pipe of small Reed first, Pipe.
to solace his love. Eusebius says, Cybele found it, and some suppose it was
Apollo. Timarias played on the Harp or Lute first, without Ditty, and Amphion
sung first to the Lute, but the Harp was found before by Tubal, Singing to the
lute.
and fashioned like the Greek letter (...).

Hermophilus first distributed the pulse, and beating of the Veins, to certain
measures of Music. And the Prophet David found diverse instruments, as Regals
Regalls.
and Nebles. Nebles.
The Troglodites found the Dulcimers. Dulcimers.
Pises Terrenes found the brazen Brazen
Trumpet, Trumpet.
which the Terrenes footmen used in their wars: some think it was Tirreus, or
Dirceus an Athenian. For when the Lacedaemonians made war against the
Messenians, and the wars were long endured, they had answer of Apollo, that if
they would win the field, they should have a Captain of Athens.

And the Athenians in despite, sent to them one Dyrceus, a lame and one eyed
fellow, Dyrceus Captain of the Lacedaemonians.
and all out of shame, yet they received him, and used his counsel, and he
taught them to play on Trumpets, which were so fearful to the Athenians, by
reason of the strangeness of the noise, that they fled forthwith, and so they
obtained Victory. Moses found the Trumpet Arcadians brought Instruments into
Italy. Lacedaemonians manner of war.
Moses the valiant Captain of the Hebrews found the Trumpet, and made it of
Silver. The Arcadians did first bring all Musical Instruments into Italy,
where before that time, they used only Mountainous Pipes. Thucidides writes,
that the Lacedaemonians used first in war Shalms. Clarions, and Rebecks, to the
intent that when they were ready to the wars, by such playing, they might
better keep array. The Romans footmen joined, Drumslades, Drumslades in war.
with Trumpets. Pipers.
Haliattes King of the Lidians had in the battle, Fiddlers.
against the Milesians Pipers and Fiddlers, playing together, the Grecians, as
they went to war, had Lutes going before them, to govern their pace, all other
Countries (as we do now) used trumpets in battle.

CHAP. XIII. The beginning of Philosophy.
THe Science of Philosophy, which Tully calls the Study of Wisdom, Searcher
out of Virtue, Expulser of Vice, (according to diverse opinions) was brought out
of Barbary into Greece. For it is said, Magitians.
That in Persia the Magitians (for so they called their wise men) were
excellent in knowledge; in Assyria, Chaldees.
the Chaldees; in India, the Gymnosophists, having their name, Gymnosophists.
because they went naked, had their part of wisdom; of which faction one Budas
was chief. In France, the Druides: Druides.
in Phenice, Ochus: Ochus.
in Thrace, Xamolxis, Xamolxis.
and Orpheus: Orpheus.
in Libya, Atlas. Atlas.


The Egyptians say, That Vulcanus the son of Nilus found the first principles
of Philosophy. Laertius writes, That Philosophy began in Greece, where Museus
and Linus were first learned men: but Eusebius says, That Philosophy, Hebrews
were Authors of Philosophy.
like as all other Sciences, sprung among the Hebrews, and of them the Greek
Philosophers, which were a thousand years after Moses, learned all their
knowledge. The name of Philosophy was not used among them, till the time of
Pythagoras, Pythagoras calls himself, a Philosopher.
for he called himself a Philosopher; and the study of wisdom, Philosophy:
whereas formerly it was named Wisdom, and they that professed it, had the
title of Wisemen. There be three parts of it; Three parts of Philosophy.
one called natural, another moral, and the faculty of disputing, called
Logic: Natural, treats of the World, and contents thereof, which Archelaus
brought out of Ionia unto Athens. Moral, informs the life and manners of men;
this part Socrates traduced from heavenly things, to the use of life, and to
discern good and bad. Logic inventeth reasons on both parts, and was found by
Zeno Eliates: Five parts.
others divide it into five parts, natural, supernatural, moral, mathematical,
and Logic. Dialogues were made first by Plato, or at the least furnished with
more eloquence; for Aristotle says, that they were devised by Alexamenus
Scire^s.

CHAP. XIV. Astrology, the course of the Stars, Sphere, nature of the Winds.
THe Earth is most subject to the influence and operation of the Planets, and
by the temperate seasonablenesse of the Constellations, it brings forth
abundance of fruits: The power of the Stars.
and as Julius Firmicus supposes, the Stars have also a power in the birth of
men, to make them of one fashion or other, this or that complexion, of good or
bad disposition, according as the Aspects, Conjunctions or Oppositions do
procure. Observing of days.
And the Egyptians have devised and appointed to every night and day its
peculiar god, and what destiny, or death shall chance to him that is born on
any such day. Chaldees.
And the Chaldees said, that to atchieve any good or hurtful thing, the Planets
help much.

By this occasion, men, through diligent observing of the celestial bodies,
invented Astrology, Astrology.
wherein the whole moveable course of the Heaven, the rising, going down, and
order of the Planets be comprehended, which the Egyptians boast themselves to
have found; Egyptians.
though some say Mercury Mercury.
was author of it; and Diodorus affirms it to be Actinus the son of Phoebus.
Nevertheless, Josephus plainly declares, that Abraham instructed them,
Abraham.
and the Chaldees in that Art, and thence it came into Greece; Grecians learned
in Egypt.
for all the learned men of Greece, as Pherecides, Pythagoras, Thales,
acknowledge, that they were disciples to the Egyptians and Chaldees. Atlas.
But Pliny writes, that Atlas was the first founder of it, and therefore the
Poets feign, that he bears Heaven on his back. Servius thinks it was
Prometheus that found it. Nevertheless, all these (as I suppose) were the
beginners of this faculty, every man in his own Country only, where he
dwelled: for even from the beginning of the World, Seth his posterity.
the sons of Seth devised first the Science of the Stars, and for as much as
they feared lest their Art should perish, before it came to the knowledge of
men, (for they had heard their grandfather Adam say, that all things should be
destroyed by the universal flood) they made two Pillars, Two Pillars preserved
Astrology from the Flood.
one of stone, the other of Brick, to the intent, that if the Brick wasted with
water or storms, yet the stone should preserve the letters whole and perfect,
and iu these Pillars they graved all that concerned the observance of the
Stars. And therefore it is probable, that the Egyptians and Chaldeans learned
Astrology of the Hebrews, and so consequently, it spread abroad in other
Nations; and thus began Astronomy, conceived to seduce men's wits. Among the
Romans, Sulpitius Gallus; in Greece, Thales Milesius perceived the cause of the
Eclipse of the Sun and Moon. Endimeon marked first the course of the Moon and
her changing, as Pliny writes. Pythagoras (as some say) observed the course of
Venus, called, the Day Star; but (as Laertius supposes) it was Permenides. The
Sphere was divised by Archimedes a Syracusian; Archimedes
but Diogenes takes it to have been Museus; and Pliny a^cribeth it to
Anaximander. The winds were first observed by Aeolus, Aeolus.
as it is reported, upon this reason; The Inhabitants of the Islands about
Sicily, Prognosticate by the smoke of the said Isles three days before, what
wind they shall have; and for that cause they say that Aeolus has dominion
over the winds. The winds, as some divide them, Four Winds.
be four, according to the four principal Regions of the air; they that be more
curious, make eight. Andronicus.
And especially one Andronicus Cerestes which builded in Athens a Turret, and
set on every side of it, Images of Winds.
the Images of Winds, graven against the Region whence the winds came, and set
them on Pillars of Marble, and in the middle he set a brazen Image of Triton,
which he had made, so that it would turn with the wind, and stand with his face
toward the wind that blew, and point with a rod to the Image of the same Wind;
which manner is now used in all Countries; for they set up Weather-cocks or
Fans, Weather-cocks.
to show out of what Quarter the Wind blows. Fans.


CHAP. XV. Who Invented Geometry, Arithmetic, with other things.
NIlus, Nilus overfloweth Egypt.
the most famous River of the World, from the time that the Sun is in Tropico
Cancri, until it come to the Equinoctial line in Libra again, does overflow
all the Downs and plain Countries of Egypt: Prognostication of plenty and
scarceness.
by the altitude and deepnesse of this flood, the Egyptians foresee the plenty
and scarsity of fruits to com. For if it increase but unto the depth of twelve
or thirteen Cubits, it portendeth lack of sufficiency: if it pass fourteen,
and so to sixteen, it imports great plenty. In the time of Claudius Caesar,
it waxed eighteen Cubits, which was the greatest tide. The least was in the
time of the battle at Pharsalia; whereby it signified, how it abhorred the
murder of the valiant Pompey.

When Nilus, with such inundations had partly diminished, partly transposed,
the Meers and Landmarks, whereby their portions of land were disordered, they
were compelled often to measure their bounds afresh: for that cause the
Egyptians vaunt, Egyptians found out Geometry.
that Geometry was invented by them to measure Lands. As Arithmetic by the
Phoenicians, the better to perform their Merchandise. The Jews found out
Geometry.
But Josephus seems to attribute both to the Jews, saying, That God prolonged
the time of their lives, because they were employed in studies to search out
Astrology and Geometry; and the Egyptians were ignorant in Geometry and
Arithmetic, Abraham taught the Egyptians Contents of Geometry.
until the time that Abraham taught them. Geometry contained the description
of lengths, breadths, shapes, and quantities. In this Strabo in Greece
excelled, in the time of Tiberius; and Ptolomy, under Trajanus and Antoninus:
In Italy, Plinius and Foninus.

Measures and Weights were found by Sidonius, Measures and Weights.
(as Eutropius says) the same time that Procas reigned in Albany; Ahaz in
Judah; and Jeeroboam in Jerusalem. Some write, that Mercury devised them in
Greece; Pliny ascribes it to Phidon of Argos; Gellius, to Palamedes. Strabo,
to one Phidon of Elis in Arcadie. Di^genes says, that Pythagoras taught the
Greeks weights and measures; but Josephus affirms, that Cain found them first
of all.

Numbers, Numbers.
some say, were invented by Pythagoras; some, by Mercury: Livius supposes,
that Pallas found them. Manner of reckoning years.
The manner of counting years in Greece, was by Olympiads, which contained the
space of five years, as the Romans did Lustra, which contained the same number
of years: and sometimes by nails. Counting by Nails.
For every year the Consul or chief Judge called Praetor, in the Ides of
September, fastened a nail in the wall of Jupiters Temple, next joining to the
Temple of Pallas, to signify the space of years. Letters to count with.
And we use to write our numbers with these seven letters. C I D L M U X. or
with these Figures. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. Figures of Arithmatick.
which, because they be in quotidian use, it needs not to declare.

CHAP XVI. Physic, and the parts thereof.
Physic, which with remedies provided by God, Inventors of Physic.
does much comfort and cure men in their maladies and diseases, that break
forth in their bodies, is thought worthily to have been invented of the Gods.
For it is supposed that Mercury found it among the Egyptians, some say it was
Apys their god; Apollo god of Medicines.
or Arabus son to Apollo: some refer it to Apollo himself, because the moderate
heat of the Sun is banisher of all sickness. Clement does attribute the
finding of it to the Egyptians in general, and the amplifying and enlarging of
it to Aesculapius, which, beside other things, Drawing out of Teeth.
found the plucking out of Teeth, Notwithstanding, whosoever found the notable
knowledge of Medicines, it is no doubt but it was perceived, by what things
were wholesome, and what unwholesome. And as they observed how the sick folks
used their diet, Observing of diet was the beginning of Physic.
and marked how some for greediness did eat much, and some forbear their meat
because of faintness of their stomach. Whereby they learned that abstinence
was a helper and furtherer of health: and by such observance other Precepts of
Physic were gathered.

It has three parts, Three parts of Physic.
one of Dieting, another of Medicines, the third of Surgery, for by one of
these three ways, are diseases relieved. But forasmuch as it often changes,
it was very obscure till Hippocrates did renew it: Hippocrat^s reduced it to an
Art.
and whereas they had a custom, that the Patient, being restored to health,
should write in the Temple of the God that helped him, both his name, and the
manner of healing, that the example might help the like disease: our of all
such precedences, he gather^d Precepts of Physic, and brought it first to a
formal Art.

In Rome, Archagathus, of Peloponuesus, was the first Physician, Archagathus
the first Physician in Rome.
in the five hundred thirty fifth year of the City, ( Lucius Emilius, and
Marcus Livius being Consulls) and was made Freeman of the City, which was first
made a Surgeon; after, for the sharpness of his cutting and searing, he was
named a Butcher and Murderer: and afterward, when the number began to
increase, they were expulsed out of Rome, Marcus Cato banished Physicians out
of Rome. The manner of the Egyptians in their diseases.
and banished by Marcus Cato, as Pliny tells in his thirty sixth Book.

In Egypt and Babylon, they used no Physicians, but brought the sick persons
into the streets and common places, that the men, which passed by, might tell
them what manner, diet or means, they themselves had used in the like disease
to escape it: Neither was it lawful for any man to pass by, till he had
communed with the Patient. In the latter days, Every disease had a sundry
Physician.
the Egyptians distributed the Art of Medicines, in such sort, that every
Disease had a diverse Physician to minister in it, as one for the eyes, one for
the head, others for the entrails; and likewise, other for other sicknesses,
and so it came to pass, Famous Physicians.
that all places were full of Physicians. In this Art Cassius, Calpitanus,
Aruntius, Rubrius, Antonius, Musa, Galenus, Avicenna, excelled.

CHAP. XVII. The Inventours of herbs medicinable, what remedies men learned of
beasts.
NAture doubtless, Herbs were created for man.
the Mother and Governesse of all things, did create herbs, as may appear by
many examples, partly for the delectation, and partly for the Health and
preservation of men's bodies. For Xanthus an Historiographer (as Pliny
records) tells how a Dragon revived his young Faun that was slain, by the
virtue of an herb called Balin: Herb called Balin.
and the Hechewall, Hechewall.
if a wedge be driven into the hole of her nest (for she makes her nest in the
hole of a Tree, that she works with her beak) compels it to fall out, with
an herb that she knows: and some of the Indians live only by herbs.
Appianus writes, Parthians.
that the Parthians, which Anthony put to flight, constrained by extreme
famine, chanced to eat a certain herb, whose nature was to make them that eat
it, to forget all other things, and only dig up stones, as if they would do
some great matter; and after such extreme travail died. Of such Medicines made
with Herbs, Chiron, son to Saturnus, Chiron was Author of Medicines and Salves.
and Phillara was the finder, and devised also salves for wounds, Sores, Biles,
although some think it was Apollo, and some refer it to his son Aesculapius,
whom Chiron brought up to the Samothracians. But I suppose they attributed the
Invention of it to Chiron, because he found the Herb Century, Centaury was
found by Chiron.
wherewith he healed the wound that he had by Hercules shafts, falling on his
foot, as he was handling of his weapons: Notwithstanding, Celsus says that the
Art of Physic is very ancient, but he makes no mention of the Author of it,
only he says, Aesclepiades abolished Physic.
Aesclepiadss; which was an excellent Physician, did abolish the use of it, for
as much as it annoyed the stomach, and engendered evil humors. Mercury found
the use of Moly: Moly.
Achilles, Yarow: Esculapius, Panace.
Panace; and sundry men found sundry herbs, Medicines of Honey, Sol, the son
of Oceanus, invented: and beasts taught men certain herbs, necessary for
Medicines. As the Heart stricken with an Arrow, drives it out with Dittany;
Dittany.
and if he be stinged with a Spider he heals himself with eating Pills, or a
certain herb named Cancer. Cancer.
Selandine, Selandine.
which is a sovereign herb for the sight, was perceived by the Swallows, which
healed the eyes of their young ones with it. The Snail or Torteise, ready to
fight with the Serpent, armeth himself with Savery, Savery.
or Marjoram. Marjoram.
The Boar in his sickness, cures himself with the Ivy. Ivy.
Of the water Horse in Nylus, Letting of blood.
men learned to let blood: For when he is weak and distempered, he seeks by
the River side the sharpest Reed-stalks, and strikes a Vein in his Leg against
it, with great violence, and so eases his body by such means; and when he has
done, he covers the wound with the mud.

The Ibis, a bird much like the Stork of the same Country, taught Physicians to
Minister Glisters: For when she is full, she purges her self, with her crooked
beak, at the Fundament. The Wesil in chasing the Serpent, preserves her self
with Rue, Rue.
and the Stork with Organy. Organy.
In Greece, Orpheus, Museus, Dioscorides; In Rome, Marcus Cato, Pompeius
Leuius, wrote of the nature of Herbs. Pliny thinks that this Art was first
received among the Romans.

CHAP. XVIII. The beginning of Magic, driving out of Spirits, Charms,
Prophesying in sundry manners.
Magic had its beginning of Physic, and was the invention of Zoroastres King
of the Bactrians, Zoroastres found Magic.
which reigned eight hundred years after the siege of Troy, the same time that
Abraham and Ninus reigned, about three thousand one hundred fourscore and five
years, after the Creation of the World. Lactantius and Eusebius think it was
set forth among other devilish sciences, by the evil Spirits; and Pliny
calls it of all Arts the most deceitful. It is compacted of Physic,
Superstition, and the Mathematical Arts. Thessaly used Magic.
The Thessalonians especially were accused, with the frequent use of this
practice, the writer of this art was Hosthanes. Hosthanes wrote books of Magic.
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plate with diverse others, s^iled into far
Countries to learn it: wherein Democritus was most famous, three hundred years
after the City was builded, in which time, Hippocrates published the Art of
Physic.

The manner to drive out spirits out of men that were possessed with them,
Driving out of spirits.
and Charms to heal corporal maladies, King Solomon taught, Charms.
as Josephus witnesses: and he saw it done by Eleazar in his time, Eleazar
drives out spirits.
before Vespasianus then Emperor. The manner to heal them was thus: He put to
the nose of the possessed man a Ring, wherein was enclosed a root that Solomon
had showed, wherewith he drove out the spirit, and the man fell down: then he
conjured with such Orisons and Exorcisms, as were appointed by Solomon to
banish the spirit out of the Demoniak.

The Sages or Wisemen of Persia which in their language be named Magi, being
wholly addict to the honoring of their fall gods, came to such extreme folly,
that they professed openly, that they could not only by the observation of the
Stars know things to come, but also by other pretensed arts, and mumbling of
some words, they could do and bring to pass any thing that they would.

By them were invented these 6 kinds of Magic; Necromancy, which is by raising
up of dead men; as in Lucane, one raised from death, told the adventures of the
battle of Pharsalus.

Piromancy, that tells things by the fire and lightning; as Tenaquilla, the
wife of Tarquinius Priscus, prophesied, that Servius Tullius should be King of
Rome, because she saw the fire environ his head. The finding of this, Pliny
refers to Amphiaraus.

Hieromancy, that is, a kind of prophesying by the air, as by flying, feeding,
singing of birds, and strange tempests of wind and hail.

Hidromancie, was prophesying by water: as Varro writes, that a Child did see
in the water the Image of Mercury, which in 150 verses told all the chance of
War against Mithridates King of Pontus.

Geomancy, was a divination, by opening of the earth.

Chiromancy, is a conjecturing by beholding the lines, or wrincles of the
hands, called commonly Palmistry.

Which vain illusions, and false persuasions, it becomes all true Christians
to eschew and abhor.

CHAP. XIX. Two kinds of Divination, Soothsaying, casting Lotts, and
interpreting of Dreams.
CIcero makes two kinds of divinations, Two kinds of Prophesying.
one natural, and another artificial. Natural is that, which proceeds of a
certain commotion of the mind, Natural.
that chances sometimes to men when they be in dreams, or sleeping: sometimes
when they prophecy in manner of fury, and ravishing of mind; as Sybilla and
diverse other religious persons did. Of this kind were Oracles of Apollo and
Jupiter-Hammon. Albeit they were often false, because they came of a devilish
policy, and man's subtlety: but such as come of the Holy Ghost, and not of a
blasphemous madness, be true.

The artificial consists in those things which come of conjectures,
Artificial.
old considerations, and observances of the entrails of beasts, flying of
birds, casting of lots.

The regarding of the bowels of beasts began among the Hetruscians: Beholding
the bowels of beasts.
For as it fortuned a man that plowed, to raise up a deeper surrow then he was
wont to do; one Tages suddenly arose out of the earth, that taught them all the
feats of Soothsaying; but Pliny says, one Delphus found it.

The divinations by looking on the feeding of birds, Feeding, flying, and
chattering of birds.
Theresius a Theban, devised. Caras first marked the chattering of them; and
Pythagoras observed their flying.

Orpheus added the divination by other beasts. What store we ought to set by
such divinations, Massolanus lets the Augury.
Massolanus a Jew teaches us: When he was in the wars, a certain Prophet
commanded every man to stand, till he had taken a conjecture of the bird that
flew by: but Massolanus took privily a bow and shaft, and killed the bird;
wherewith the Wisard, and diverse others were displeased: Then he said to them,
Why dote ye so? can the bird, which knows not of her own death, tell us the
casual adventures of our Journey? For if she had had any foreknowledge, she
would not have come hither to have been killed of me.

Casting of Lots, Numerius Suffusius devised first at Pr^nest.

The expounding of dreams, Dreams-reading.
Pliny ascribes to Amphiction; but Trogus assigns it to Joseph son to Jacob.
Clement says, the Telmessians found it. But all these were invented to seduce
men with superstitious error, and for the commodity of them that use it.

Here ends the First Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Original of Laws; and who made the first Laws.
LAW is a constant and perpetual good thing, Law.
without which, no house, no City, no Country, no estates of men, no natural
Creature, nor the World it self, can consist firm and stable. For it obeys
GOD; and all other things, air, water, land, and men, be in obedience to it.
Chrysippus calls it a knowledge of all Divine and humane matrets, commanding
equity, and expulsing wickedness and wrong.

There be of Laws three kinds: one natural, The Laws Natural.
that is not only appropried to man, but also it concerns all other lively
things either in the Earth, Sea, or Air. As we perceive in all kinds of living
creatures, naturally a certain familiarity of male and female, procreation of
issue, and a proclivity to nourish the same; the which proceeds of a natural
law engraffed in the hearts of every of them: Nature her self, that is, God,
was Author of this.

The second is named the Law that all men use generally through all the World;
as to show a man the way, to communicate to men the commodity of the Elements,
Water and Air; to this kind appertains the Law of Arms; and it is called in
Latin, Jus gentium.

Civil Law, Civil Law.
is the private Law of every Country or City, as of the Romans, Lacedaemonians,
and Athenians. This consists in decrees of Princes, Statutes, and
Proclamations.

The chief and principal laws were promulgate by God, confirmed after the most
pure and perfect manner that natural equity could devise or conceive, and be
instable constance, and subject to no transmutation. After the example of
these, man has invented Laws to desend and preserve good men, and to punish
and keep evil persons in office and good order.

Such Laws Ceres made first, Lawmakers.
as Diodorus supposes: Ceres.
but others think it was Rhadamantus; and afterward others in diverse Countries
devised and ordained Laws: as in Athens, Drac^ and Solon: in Egypt, Mercury: in
Crete, Minos: in Lacedemonia, Lycurgus: in Tire, Tharandus: in Argos,
Phoroneus: in Rome, Romulus: in Italy, Pythagoras; or, after the mind of
Dionysius, the Arcadians, that were under Evander as their Sovereign Lord and
chief Captain. Notwithstanding, the very true Author of Laws, God was the
true Author of Laws.
was God, which first planted in us the Law of Nature; and when it was
corrupted by Adam, and his posterity, he gave the written Law by Moses to
reduce us again to our first state and true instinct of Nature; Moses
promulgated the first laws in writing.
which was before all other, as Eusebius declares.

CHAP. II. Who ordained the first governance of a Cominalty, Tyranny, with
other Constitutions.
THe administration of a Commonweal is after three sorts, The manner of ruling
the Commonwealth.
as Plato divides it; Monarchy, where one rules. Aristocracy, when the best
men govern. Monarchy.
Democracy, or popular state, Aristocracy.
where the common people have a stroke in ruling the publike-weal. Democracy.
Principality or a Kingdom was first begun by the Egyptians which could not
long subsist without a King or Ruler: Kingdom began in Egypt.
there reigned first, as Herodotus says, Menes; and their manner was to choose
him among the Priests of their Religion: and if it fortuned, that any stranger
obtained the Realm by Conquest, he was compelled to be consecrated Priest, and
so was the election legitimate, when he was King and Priest. The Diadem, that
was the token of the Honour-royall, had its beginning by Liber Bacchus.

The Athenians first ordained the state of a Commonwealth, Democracie began in
Athen^.
that was governed by the whole Commons, as Pliny thinks; albeit they had
also Kings, whereof Decrops Diphyes, which reigned in Moses's time, First Kings
how they behaved themselves.
was the first, For, as Justine writes, Every City and Nation had at the
beginning a King for their chief Governor; which attained to that dignity by
no ambition or favor, but by a singular Wit, and sober modestness, and reigned
with such loyalty, that seemed only in title a King; in deed, a Subject.

Ninius King of the Assyians, Ninius did enlarge his Empire.
contrary to the old ^ite and custom, of an ambitious desire that he had to
bear rule, first arrogantly usurped the Emof all Asia, except India. As
concerning the Institution of the Commonwealth, where the Commons do all
things, notwithstanding the mind of Pliny, I suppose it began among the
Hebrews, Hebrews ordained Democracy.
which were ruled by a popular State many years before that Athens was built.

The form of Policy, Aristocracy.
which is governed by the best, (as the Romans Commonwealth was) I cannot well
understand when it had its original, unless I should assign it to the Thebans,
which in the time of Ninius ruled the Egyptians, whose rule, because the
valiant and noble bare the authority, was called a power or potency, which was
the 3185th year of the World. Theseus first Tyrant.
Pliny writes, That after Theseus, Phalaris was the first Tyrant; whereby it
appears, that he thinks Theseus was author of tyranny: Nemroth.
but Nemroth of the lineage of Noah, not long after the flood, used tyranny.

Bondage (as Pliny supposes) began in Lacedemonia: Bondage.
yet I find that it began among the Hebrews, and had its original proceeding of
Chanaan the son of Cham, who, because he had laughed his father Noah to scorn,
as he lay dissolutely when he was drunk, was punished in his son Chanaan with
penally of bondage and thraldom, a thing to them very strange; and to his
posterity, grievous.

The order of manumission in old time was in this manner: The Lord or Master
took took the bondmen by the head, or some other part of his body, saying, I
will this fellow be free, and put him forth of his hands. Areopagites judged in
the night.
The Council of the Areopagites, (which were called so of the Court of Mars)
were instituted by Selon to judge of life and death, their custom was to use
such Sovereignty, and integrity in Judgment, that they heard all causes and
matters in the night, and not in the day: to the intent they should have no
occasion to regard the parties, but only have their eye and respect earnestly
to the thing that was brought before them. Voices which be used and occupied in
Consultations, Giving of voices.
Judgments, and Elections were first ordained by Palamedes.

CHAP. III. The three manner of Regiments in Rome, the beginning of
Ornaments-Royall, with other matters pertaining to a Commonwealth.
ROme, which was the most renowned City of all the World, both for the Valor
of Arms, and Civil Policy whereby it was governed, had three forms of
Regiment. In the beginning it had Kings; Kings of Rome.
for Romulus, which was builder thereof, reigned there; and after him, six
other, under whom, the Principality lasted 244 years after the City was
builded. Then Tarquinius being banished for the notable crime and rape of
Lucretia, committed by his son, it was ordered by two Consuls, Consuls in Rome.
Junius Brutus, and L. Tarquinius Collatinus. They had the name and title of
Consuls, of the consultation and provision which they made for the
Commonwealth. They ruled the Empire, conducted Armies; and by these Officers,
because they were annual, the years were counted. Within 12 years after the
expulsing of the Kings, when 40 Cities of the Latins, Octavius Manilius, son
in law to Tarquinius, being their captain, made insurrection, and conspired
against the Romans, Dictator first in Rome.
T. Largius was created Dictator or great Master; which office was highest in
authority: and, as Dionysius thinks, it was taken of the Greeks, among whom,
Ely^netae had the same power that Dictators had in Rome. Livius refers the
original of them to the Albanes: And the Carthaginians had also their
Dictators. The space of the Dictator's Office.
This Magistrate was never used saving in great dangers of the Commonwealth,
and it continued but six months: during that Office all other Magistrates were
abrogated, except the Tribunate or Provostship of the Commons. The Consul's
duty was, to name and proclaim him, and that no time but in the night: The time
of denouncing the Dictator.
albeit what time the Veientes had won the Romans Camp, A. Cornelius Cosus,
Marshal of the Army, need so constraining, denounced Mamercus Aemelius for
Dictator, contrary to that statute, About 300 years after the building of Rome,
the public State was transferred from the Consulship, Decrees.
unto the Rule of Ten, called Decem-viri, which endured but three years; for by
reason of the outrageous lust of Appius Claudius, against the Maid Virginea,
they were deposed, and Consuls were substituted to supply their room. Then, the
310th year of the City, in the place of Consuls, were chosen Marshals or
Provosts of Armies, Tribunimilitum.
whom they named Tribunes, Aulus Sempronius, Attacinus, L. Attilius Longus, and
T. Colicius Sieulus. Democracie began in Rome.
The authority of the Commons became daily more seditious, and confederacies
increased. In such sort, that C. Cunuleius brought to pass, that the
Comminalty married with the Nobility, and the Tribunes by their earnest
instance and suit, caused that the high Offices were permitted to them of the
common sort. At the 355th year of the building of the City, P. Licinius, a man
of the Commons.
P. Licinius Calvus was made Tribune of the Army. The 389th year, L. Sextus
Lateranus attained the Consulship: the 399 year, C. Martins Lateranus was
created Dictator.

From this manner of Governance, L. Sylla.
it was by Sylla and Marius brought to one Ruler or Prince again. C. Marius.
Thus has Rome had all kinds of administration of the Commonwealth. Royal
Ornaments.
The Emperial ornaments of the Kings of Rome, as fardels of rods, the ax, the
garland of gold, the Chair of Ivory, the Kyrtil or Cope, Chatio^,
trapped-Horses, Rings, Coat-Armours, Robes, Mantles of Estate, Embroidered
Gowns, with garments of Baudkyn or Motley, with all other Royal Apparel,
began among the Tuscanes, which Tarquinius Prisons subdued, and used these
first by the permission and license of the Senate. The 12 Lictours or
Sergeants, Romulus first appointed after the manner of the 12 Nations of the
Hetrurians, whom he conquered, which gave to every of their kinds, when he was
crowned, a Lictour or Sergeant: whose duty was to wait on the Magistrates, and
bear the Rods, and Axe of Execution. The rods (as Pliny writes) were of birch.
The institution of Taxes or numbering the people, Servius Tullius King, began in
Rome first, but Moses long before that time numbered the Israelites, and
therefore the first Tax, Subsidy, or Tribute, was ordained by Moses among the
Hebrews, and the counting of the number of the people.

Prisons, Fetters, Stocks, Gyves, Staves, with like instruments to punish
malefactors, Ancus Martius (as Livy says) did first appoint them to keep men
in fear and good order.

CHAP. IV. Who ordered the Year, the diversity of it, Months, Noxes, Ides,
Kalends, and Prime.
HErodotus writes that the Egyptians first found out the year by the course of
the Planets, and divided it into twelve Months. Diodorus assigns it to the
Thebanes, which stands with the opinion of Herodotus, because the Thebanes be
a nation of Egypt, and Egypt was sometimes named Thebe. Servius says that
Eudoxus found it first, and after him Hipparchus. Laertius ascribes it to
Thales a Milesian, which (as he testifies) first perceived the seasons and
times of the year, and parted it into 365 days, but that was only among the
Grecians. Josephus witnesses that the year was devised by the Hebrews in
Egypt, before Noah's flood. Diverse devisions in the year.
There be diverse fashions of dividing the year; The Archadians finished their
year in three Months, the Carians and Acarnans in six Months: there was a
year that consisted in 30. days, which was counted by the change of the Moon,
there was also the great year that ended, The great year.
when all the Planets returned into one point or Line, and after the mind of
Cicero, it contained 12954. years of the Sun. Josephus in his Antiquity says
it contained but six hundred years. The other Grecians numbered the full year
with 353 days. Romulus ordered the year.
Romulus first divided the year into ten Months, whereof March, that he named
of his father, was first. April the second had that name of Venus, because she
was born of the froth of the Sea, which is called Aphros: May of the Ancient
men: June of the young men: the other he named in their order, and number, as
Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November, December. Albeit afterward,
Quintilis was called Julius in honor of Julius Caesar, and Sextilis was
changed into Augustus, for the memorial of the Emperor Augustus Caesar.
Notwithstanding, forasmuch as this year which Romulus ordered, did neither
agree to the course of the Sun, nor changes of the adding Moon; Numa applied it
to the course of the Moon by adding 56. Numa added to the year.
days, whereof he made two Months, the one he named January of Janus, the
first king of the Latins, the other February of their god Februus. Afterward,
Numa, supposing God to be delighted with odd numbers, gave to January, April,
June, August, September November, December, twenty nine days. To March, May,
Quintilis, and Sextilis, that is July and October, thirty one days, and to
February twenty eight days. Last of all, Julius Caesar made the year perfect.
Julius Caesar put to the whole year, ten days and, six hours, whereof he
added to these Months, January, August, and December, every of them two days:
and to April, June, September, and November, he gave to each of them one day.
In this manner Julius Caesar accomplished the year perfectly, according to the
course of the Sun: and the six hours every four years amounts to one day,
which causes Leap-Year (as we call it) in Latin it is named Bissextus,
Leap-year. Bissextus.
because every fourth year we count twice the sixth Calends of March.

The Months have their name because they measure the course of the Moon. Thus
the year has twelve Months, whereof April, June, September, and November
have thirty days, Days of every Month.
all the rest has one and thirty days, saving February, which has but twenty
eight, In the year be 52 weeks and a day. There be 365 days and six hours. The
Calends, Nones, Ides, have their appellations of the manner of the reckonning
of the Romans. The first days were named Kalends, from (...), to call: for at
every change of the Moon, the chief Ruler of the Sacrifices (called Rex
sacrificulus) assembled all them of the Country of Rome, in the Capitol, and
showed them their Festival days, and what it was lawful to do that Month.
The Nones had that name; because they were the ninth day from the Ides, which
Ides be the middayes of every Month, and had their appellation of the
Hetrusians Term iduare, that signifies to devide in the middle. This fashion
of counting the Months, endured to the 450 year of the City, and was kept
secret among the Bishops of their Religion till the time that C. Flavius, P.
Sulpitius Avarrio, and P. Sempronicus Sophilongus, then being Consulls, against
the mind of the Senators, disclosed all their solemn feats, published them in a
Table that every one might have perseverance of them. The Prime, whereby we
find the Conjunction of the Moon, and all moveable Feasts, as Lent, Easter,
Whitsonday, and such like, was invented by the great Clark Saint Bernard, or of
Julius Caesar, as appears in the tenth book De divinis officiis.

CHAP. V. Who ordained the hours, dyals, and Clocks, deviding the day and night.
HOurs, which being in number 24, accomplish the space of a day and night, were
so named of the Sun, which in the Egyptians language is called Horus. They at
the first were appointed but 12. For H^rmes Trismegistus, perceiving a certain
beast consecrated to their god Serapis, Mercurius Trismegistus appointed 12
hours.
to make water or piss twelve times in the day, at equal distance, supposed
that the day ought to be divided into twelve hours.

This number did continue long, but afterward the day was divided into 24
hours. Anaximenes a Milesian found in Lacedemonia the first Dial, that declared
the hours by the shadow of the Gnomon. It was long before they were used in
Rome, for (as Pliny writes) in the 12 Tables, there was only rehearsed the
rising and going down of the Sun: and a few years after, Noon or Midday was
added, which the Beadle or common Crier did denounce. This was only on clear
days, when they might perceive the course and altitude of the Sun. The first
Dial was set up on a Pillar openly, which stood behind the common Pulpit, or
bar called rostra, at the cost of M. Valerius Messala, M. Valerius Messala
ordained a Dial in Rome. Water Dial.
then Consul in the first Punick battle. The water-Dial was used first in Rome
by P. Scipio Nasica, the 900th year of the City, to divide the hours of the day
and night. Albeit it was invented by Cresibins of Alexandria. Clocks.
Afterward Clocks made of Metal were invented by subtle wits, Sand-Diall.
and sand-Dials were made, whose Authors be yet unknown. In some places the
Clocks strike 24 hour^ by order; Striking of the Clocks.
in other some, as in the Well parts of the World, it smites twice in the day.
In such order that the 12th hour is at noon, and at midnight. The days which
be reckoned diversely in several nations, Sundry Divisions.
began in Egypt, where the year and Months were also devised, they take all
the space from midnight to midnight for one day, and the Roman^ used the same
manner. For the Sunrising is the beginning of all affairs, and functions, the
night is a time of Counselling: they had also assigned to every hour a sundry
Ministry, as Martial in his Epigram declares.

The day was divided in sundry wise.
That every hour had a several office,
The two first served for salutation,
The third for Lawyers alteration.
Two next were spent in labor diversely,
The sixth men might themselves rest quietly.
The seventh, of Works was a resolution,
The Eighth was for wrestlers; and in Conclusion.
The ninth was limited for Men's repast,
And so for the other, of time was made no waste.
The Babylonians called the space between the Sun risings, a day: the Athenians
named all that was between the goings down, a day. The Vmbrians count their day
from noon to noon: but commonly from morning till night is called a day. Parts
of the Night.
The night was divided into four watches, whereof every one (as Hierome
witnesses) contained three hours.

CHAP. VI. Who set forth Books first, or made a Library, Printing, Paper,
Parchment, or Art of Memory.
BOoks which contain (the Monuments of ingenuous wits, and a Register of all
Valiant prowess, as Lae^tius thinks, were first published (...) Greece.
Pisistratus made the first Books.
Gellius says, it was Pisistrat^^ that made the first book, and exhibit^ it to
be read openly. Yet Josephus de^clareth that the Hebrews and Priests (...)
Egypt and Chaldee set forth Books first.

The Athenians multiplied the number of Books, Atheus made many books.
which Xerxes carrye^ from thence into Persia, and Seleuo^ king of Macedony
caused them (man^ years after) to be conveyed to Athen^ again. Ptolomeus
Libraries.
After that, Ptolomeus King o^ Egypt gathered together 700000 books which were
all burnt at the battle o^ Alexandria. Nevertheless, Strab^ records that
Aristotle did institute the first Library, Aristotle had the first Library.
and left it to Theophrastus his Disciple, and taught the Kings of Egypt how
they should order their Library: Theophrastus left it to Melus, and of him
Seepsis received it. There was also a very ancient Library at Pergamus.

In Rome, Asinius Pollio.
Asinius Pollio had the first Library, which was the occasion that good wits
employed great study in learning, to the ample furtherance and commodity of
that Commonwealth. There be at this day many in Italy, but the most famous, F.
Feltrius.
is the Library which Frederick Feltrius Duke of Vrbine did cause to be
edified. Truly the commodity of Libraries is very profitable and necessary;
but in comparison of the Art of Printing, it is nothing; both because one man
may Print more in one day, then many men in many years could write: And also it
preserves both Greek and Latin Authors from the danger of corruption. It was
found in Germany at Mogunce by one J. Cuthembergus a Knight; John Cuthenbergus
found Printing.
he found moreover the Ink by his devise that Printers use, sixteen years after
Printing was found, which was the year of our Lord, 1458, one Conradus an
Almain brought it into Rome, and Nicholas Johnson a Frenchman, did greatly
polish and garnish it: And now it is dispersed through most parts of the World.

Before the use of Paper, men used to write in leaves of Date-Trees, and
sometimes on the bark of Trees. Men wrote in Plates of Lead.
Afterward they wrote the public writings in plates or sheets of Lead, and
their private matters in Tables and wax, for tables (as Homer testifies) were
before the siege of Troy. Paper was devised by King Alexander, as Varro
affirms; it was made of a kind of fenny Rushes, that grew in the marish
grounds of Egypt. But Pliny says, it was used in the time of King Numa^ that
reigned 300 years before Alexander, and his books, which were found in a chest
of stone in a field, by L. Pitilius a Scribe, were written in Paper. In
process of time, paper, that we use now, was invented; it is made of, linen
cloth, beaten together in Mills for that use.

Parchment, as Varro witnesses, was found in Pergamus: albeit, Jewish
Historians (as Josephus shows) used Parchment: they wrote also in Goats ins
and sheepskins in old time, as Herodotus declares.

There be diverse manner of Papers, as Paper-royall, Paper-demy, blotting paper,
merchants paper.

The usage of writing by characters, is very ancient, and was found by
Tyrotullius Freman, (as Eusebius supposes), and Julius Caesar used it much in
secret and privy Counsels.

The Art of Men of great Memory.
Memory was found by Simonides in Thessaly: For when he was invited to a
banquet at a Nobleman's house, called Scopa, it chanced that he was sent for to
speak with two young men at the gate, and straightway the Banqueting House
fell, and destroyed all the guests. Then he, because he remembered in what order
and place every one sat, delivered every man his friend to be buried. By that
fact, both he perceived the order of the Art of Memory, and what commodity came
to the remembrance of man by such an Art. Cyrus, King of Persia, excelled in
Memory, which could call every man in his Army by name. Cyneas the Ambassador
of Pyrrhus the day after he came to Rome, saluted every order of Nobles by
their proper names. Mithridates could speak 22 Languages. Julius Caesar could
write, read, endite, and hear a tale, all at once. Adrianus the Emperor could
do the same.

CHAP. VII. The beginning of War, with other things concerning the same.
CHivalry, Mars author of Chivalry.
wherein is declared the manly courage of noble Captains, was devised (as Tully
says) by Pallas: the manner of War (as Diodorus thinks) was invented by
Mars. But Josephus tells, Tubulcain.
that Tubulcain, which was before the flood, did first practice feats of Arms:
whereby it appears, that the use of Wars is of great antiquity; but it is
uncertain who was the first Warrior. Before the finding out of Weapons, men
used to fight with their fists, seet, and biting. And thus began battle, as
Lucretius writes: Hands and feet, tooth nail,
Were first Weapons in battle.


Afterward they began to fight with Staves and Clubs. And therefore they assign
to Hercules a staff and a Lions skin. For men in the beginning used staves to
revenge their injuries and quarrels, and covered their bodies with skins of
wild beasts instead of Armor. Palamedes ordered and set men first in array,
Palamedes appointed Watches and Warding.
appointed Watches and Warding to be kept, Watchwords.
and Watch-words in the battle of Troy. At the same time Sinon found out
Beacons and Fires. Pliny says, that the Phenicians invented first the Policies
of War. Diodorus affirms, that Mars forged first weapons, and armed Soldiers
with them, and therefore the finding out of them, is attributed to him: but the
instruments of War were found by diverse men at sundry times.

Helmets, Swords, and Spears, the Lacedaemonians found: yet Herodotus supposes
the Targets and Salettes to be the invention of the Egyptians, and so to have
come into Greece.

The Habergeon was devised by Midias Mossenius, shields by Pretus and Acrisius,
as they fought together.

Leg harness and crests of Salettes were invented by the Carians, Javelins and
Datts with thongs or strings by Btolas son to Mars; Bills by the Thracians;
Justing Spears and More-Spikes, by Tyrrhenus: they were used first in the siege
of Capua, that Fulgius Flaccus laid to it. Penthesilia imagined Poleaxes, and
Pykes, hunting staves: bow, Shafts, and Sythes, Jupiter's son invented:
although Diodorus ascribes the invention of them to Apollo. Artabanus, whom
Eusebius recites, says, that the invention of Armor, began by Moses; which
being very young, achieved the first hardy enterprise against the Ethiopians.
Of all Engines of war, the Cretians found first the Cross-bows; the Syrians,
Quarelles or Bolts: and the Phoenicians found Brakes and Slings. Howbeit,
Vegetius holds opinion, that Baleares, a people which dwell in the Spanish
Seas, ordained Slings. Cranes, or Vernes, to wind up great weights, were the
device of Ctesiphon. The Ram, called in Latin, Aries, wherewith walls be
overthrown, was made by Epeus at Troy. Artemo Clazemonius instituted the Sough
or Tertise, called in Latin, Testudo, to undermine Walls. But of all other
that ever were devised to the destruction of man, the Guns be most devilish,
which was invented by a certain Almain, whose name is not known: After this
sort; It chanced, that he had in a Mortar, Powder of Brimstone that he had
beaten for a medicine, and covered it with a stone, and as he stroke fire, it
fortuned a spark to fall into the powder: suddenly there arose a great flame
out of the Mortar, and lifted up the stone wherewith it was covered, a great
height: And after he had perceived that, he made a Pipe of Iron, and tempered
the powder, and so finished this deadly Engine, and taught the Venetians the
use of it; when they warred at Claudius Dyke against the Genuates, which was in
the year of our Lord, 1380. What year Guns were found.
For this Invention he received this benefit, that his name was never known,
left he might for this abominable devise, have been cursed and evil spoken of,
whilst the world stands.

Bellerophon (according to the judgment of Pliny) taught first to manage and
ride Horles: Riding of Horses.
which rode the swift Pegasus into a Mountain of Lybia, called Chimera, as
Diodorus supposes it was Neptune, that not only taught to ride horses, but
also (as Lucane supposes) brought to light the first horse. Bridles, bits,
horse-harness, or trappers, the Peletronians, a Nation of Thessaly, found; and
as some think, the way to break and tame horses, was learned of them; which
also taught shooing of horses. Also the Numidians rode their horses without
saddles. Carts with two horses, and Wagons, the Phrygians first used.
Chariots, Erichthonius devised first in Greece. Fighting on horseback, the
Centaures found in Thessaly. Notwithstanding, all the Commodities of such
beasts, as Horses, Mules, Asses, and all other bearing and drawing beasts were
at the beginning. For it is manifest, that the Egyptians and Hebrews, Assyrians
and Arabians used them: but the glorious Grecians usurp all to their own glory
and ambitious praise and commendation.

CHAP. VIII. The Institution of Olympiads, with other shows and games.
THere were four principal Plays or Shows in Greece; Plays or Shows.
whereof the most principal was Olympiads: which were kept every fifth year in
the Mount Olympus, and ordained by Hercules, one of the five brethren, named
Idaei Dactyli, in honor and remembrance of Jupiter. Corilus.
In this game, Corilus an Arcadian wan first the prise (as Eusebius says).
Pliny affirms, that Hercules, son of Alcumena, obtained the victory there
first. Exercises used in the Olympiads.
There was wrestling, running with horses, and on foot, turnying, leaping,
coursing with Chariots; contention of Poets, Rhetoricians, Musicians, and
disputations of Philosophers. The manner was then to proclaim wars, or enter
leagues of peace: the reward of the victorious, The reward of the Victors.
was a garland of Olive, which Tree grew there beside. By this they counted
their years, as the Romans did by Lustra and their Councels.

The second Show was Pythii, which were in honor of Apollo, and made by Apollo
himself, in memorial of his activity, in vanquishing the great Dragon Python,
that was sent by Juno, to persecute his Mother Latona.

The third Game was Isthmii, devised by Theseus, in the worship of his father
Neptunus, as Hercules had done by Jupiter: they had the name Isthmii, of the
narrow place in Greece, that Corinth stood in, where the Plays were
celebrated, beside an old Temple of Neptune, environed with a dark Wood of
Peche-trees. They that wan the mastery, had a garland of Pine Tree.

The fourth game was Nemei, named of the Forest Nemea. Nemei.
These Feasts the Argivans kept in reverence of Hercules, that slew their
mighty Lion whose skin he ware for his Armor. Pyrrhusdance.
Pyrrhus dance was that wherein the Lacedaemonians practiced their youth, from 5
years of age, as a preparative to greater affairs of war. It was first
instituted in Cree^ by one Pyrrhus, that was one of the Cibeles Priests. They
danced it in armor, and with weapons on horseback, as Solinus testifies.

Naked games were first invented by Lycaon; Funeral plays by Arastus;
wrestling by Mercury; Dice, Tables, Tennis, and Cards, were sound of the
Lydians, a people of Asia, and begun not for any Lucre or pleasure, but for a
Commonwealth. For when their Country had great scarsenesse and want of Corn,
insomuch that it was not able to suffice the people, they mitigated and swaged
their hunger and scarcity, by taking their meat moderately one day, and by
applying such sports and pastimes the next day, to drive away the tediousness
of their famine and hunger. The Chesse were invented the year of the world
3635. by a certain Wise man called Xerxes, Xerxes.
to declare to a Tyratt, that Majesty or Authority without strength,
assistance, and help of his subjects, was casual, feeble, and subject to many
calamities of fortune; his intent was to break the fierce cruelty of his heart,
by fear of such dangers as might come to pass in the life of man. There is a
game also that is played with the postern bone, in the hinder foot of a sheep,
Ox, ^oat, Fallow or red Dear, which in Latin is called Talus. Talus.
It has four chances, the ace-point (that is named Canis, or Canicula) was one
of the sides, he that cast it, laid down a penny, or so much as the games were
agreed on, the other side was called Venus, that signifies 7. he that cast the
chance, wan six, and all that was laid down, for the casting of Canis. The two
other sides were called Chius and Senio: He that did throw Chius wan. 3. And he
that cast Senio, gained 4. This game (as I take it) is used of children in
Norfolk, Chancebone.
and they call it the chancebone; they play with three or four of those bones
together: It is either the same, or very like to it.

There was a game at the Dice called Vultursu, and Hercules Basilicns, that
Plautus makes mention of: but the inventours of those games be yet unknown,
albeit, it seems to be a device of the Romans; and likewise the Author of the
game, Odd and Even.
named odd or even, and holding up of hands or fingers is uncertain.

There be some that refer the finding of the Cards and Chesse to the noble
Palamedes:

CHAP. IX. Certain plays of the Romans.
LUpercal was a Cave at the foot of the mount Palatine, hallowed to Pan a
Mystical god of the Arcadians, where the custom was to sacrifice (...) dog,
because he should keep the Wol^ from their folds.

The oblation was made in February, after this rite and fashion. The young men
all naked, The Rites of these feasts.
ran and coursed about wantonly and lasciviously, in honor of Pan, with whips
and scourges, in their hands: and the Women offered themselves, to be beaten
with their scourges, supposing that it helped to the fruit fulness of
Children: This pastime was instituted by Evander, that came out of Arcadia,
Marcus Antonius, in this play being naked, let the Diadem on Julius Caesar's
head.

There was also another Show called Circensis, which were celebrated in aplace
walled about, named Circus, where was used fighting, and Coursing of Horses,
and running with Charets.

The Circus that we name Listes or Tiltes, were of great length, and had bars
where the race should begin, and at the other end was the Wager set, that they
ran for: there was used in the same place tournying: These were long used among
the Romans, and had the title of great plays or games.

The third kind of Plays were Saturnalia, which continued five days in
December, and were kept very costly and sumptuously with great sport and
gladness, and continual feasts, and usually presented one another with gifts,

It was also the manner in those Festival days, that servants should have
equal power in things, and like authority, and sit at the Table with their
Masters, because in Saturns time, all things were used in common. Janu^
ordained them in honor of Saturn^^^, (as Macrobius declares) and some say
they began in Athens.

There was also another game of Sword-players unarmed: Sword-Players.
the occasion of their beginning, was because the Romans when they went to war,
should see Fighting, VVounds, and Swords, to the intent they should be the
less afraid of their enemies armed, or be discouraged, when they saw the
bloody VVounds in the Field, therefore the Chief Captain or Lieutenant of the
Host, should exhibit to the people, a Game of Fencing of Sword-players.

CHAP. X. Who found Truce, Leagues, sundry kinds of making Triumphs and
Ovations.
TRuce (that is called a Covenant of Peace for a season) was instituted by
Lycaon; Truce.
it was taken sometimes for years, Truce for Years.
as the Romans took truce with the Veientes for forty years; Hours.
with the Cerites for an hundred: sometimes Truce was made for hours, as Caius
Pontius, a Samnite, required of the Dictator of Rome, truce for six hours.
Leagues of peace, Theseus did ordain in Greece; but Diodorus assigns it to
Mercury. Nevertheless, they were in frequent use long before that time in
Assyria and Egypt, and namely among the Hebrews. For Jacob made a league with
Laban. And Moses offered conditions of peace to the Princes of the Countries,
by whom he passed: and after him, Joshua confirmed a bond of peace with the
Gibeonites. Therefore it is a great difficulty to know the inventor of it. There
were diverse fashions of making Leagues, as the Romans manner was thus; The
Herald of Arms at commandment of the King, took a hogg appointed for that
purpose, and smote him, saying; So let Jupiter smite him, that disannulleth
this holy league. But Polybius writes, that the Herald took a stone in his
hand, and said; If I p^rform and stand to the Covenant of this league, without
guile or fraud, the gods give me all things prosperous. If I either do o^ think
the contrary, I pray God that I alone be destroyed and cast away, as I cast
this stone from me; and forthwith he threw down the stone. When the Arabians
made a league of peace, there stood one between the two parties, that did cut
it with a sharp stone, the hollow of the hand of the confederates, and with the
blood that issued out, he anointed seven stones that stand between them, with
rags taken out of their garments, and invocateth Dionysius and Urania their
gods: then the Sollicirer gives surety for the stranger or Citizen that was of
his part. The like order was used in Amities made among friends.

The Scythians made Leagues after this manner: They filled a bowl of Wine, and
mingled it with the blood of him that should enter the bond of peace, and then
they wet their Arrows, Axes, Halberds and Darts in the bowl: that done, they
with many words vowed and cursed themselves, and so drunk the Wine, both they,
and all the Nobles present. The same use was among traitors in their
Conspiracies at Rome.

The Barceans consented on their leagues thus: Barceans League.
they made their day of Confederacy, over a cave very privy, and so long as the
earth continued, so the pact endured. Dionysius, which was replenished with the
spo^ls of many Countries, Triumph.
led the first Triumph; and afterward, it was received of sundry Nations, as
the Captains of Carthage, when they sped well, triumphed. In Rome, Romulus,
after he had conquered Acron King of Cenineus crowned with Laurel and carried
in a Chariot with four horses, entered into the City triumphantly. And dedicated
his prey and spoils to Jupiter, as Di^nysius writes. Albeit, Eutropius says,
that Tarquinius Priscus first triumphed of the conquest of the Sabines.
Camillus led the first solemn triumph with white horses, Camillus.
a gilded Chariot, and a Garland of gold, with all the Captains following the
Chariot, with chains and Fetters about their necks. And the Senate going before
into the Capitol of Jupiter's Temple, where they offered a white Bull, and then
returned. It was lawful for none to triumph, but such as were Dictator, Consul,
or Praetor. Albeit, Cneius Pompeius, being but of the Order of Knights,
triumphed, as Cicero tells.

Ovation is a less Royalty then Triumphs, and was the worship of such, as had
ended any battle, or achieved any Feat without bloodshedding; or when the
battle lacked any of the due circumstances of appointing. They that came into
the City with that pomp, were crowued with a garland of Myrtill; And went on
foot into the Capitol, all the Senate following him, and there offered a sheep.
The first that had any Ovation, Posthumous Tubertus.
was Posthumous Tubertus. The Lacedaemonians when they vanquished their enemies
by craft, policy, or dec^it, offered a Bull: when they did valiantly subdue
them by force of Arms, they sacrificed a Cock, according to their manner of
triumph: Read Appianus Livius, or Julius Capitolinus.

CHAP. XI. Garlands or Crowns, the diversity of them, and of Ointments.
PLiny testifies, Baccbus.
that Bacchus did first invent and wear a garland made of Ivy on his head: and
after it was taken in a custom, that when they sacrificed to any of the gods,
they were to be crowned with a garland, and the oblation likewi^e.
Notwithstanding, I find that the use of Garlands or Crowns, is of more
antiquity then Bacchus. For Moses; Moses.
that was many years before him, made many Crowns and Garlands of gold. At the
first, the manner was, in all Plays and Sacrifices, to make Garlands of boughs
of Trees. And after they were garnished with variety of flowers among the
Sicionians, by Pausias, Pausias.
and Glicera his leman. Not long after, Winter Garlands, that be called
Egyptian, which are made of wood or Ivory, did with many colors, began to be
had in use. And in process, they made Crowns of brazen plates gilt or covered
with silver, called for their thinness, garlands. Lastly, Crassus the Rich did
first set forth, in his Games and Shows, Crowns with silver and golden leaves.
And consequently there were invented many manner of Crowns. As the triumphant
Crown, that the Emperor or grand Captain ware in his triumph; this was first
made of Olive, and afterward of gold. The murall or wall crown, that was given
to him that scaled first the Walls. The Camp-Crown, that was the reward of him
that entered first in Arms, into the Camp of his enemies. Naval or Sea-Crown,
which was set on his head, that first boarded his enemies ship. And all these
were of gold. The Obsidionall Crown, that was worn of him that delivered a City
besieged, and was made of Grass. There was also a Civil Crown, which was a
Sovereignty that a Citizen gave to him, that had valiantly preserved him from
his enemies; this was made of Oaken branches. And this manner of Crown the
Athenians did first devise, Pericles.
and gave it to Pericles. There were moreover Crowns of Pearls, Trench Crowns
and Garlands, composed of the ears of Corn, which as Pliny witnesses, was
first in use among the Romans. But Garlands made of Cynamon, woven and imbossed
with gold, Vespasianus did first consecrate in the Capitol, in the Temple of
Peace.

In some space of years, the excess of Crowns was such, that the Grecians in
their Banquets, crowned both their heads and Cups also, Cups were crowned.
whereof the Ionians were authors. By this sort of Crowns, Cleopatra empoisoned
Antonie, as Pliny writes. And Artaxerxes used Crowns of Garlands in his
Feasts: to this Virgill alluded in his Aeneides, They set forth their golden
goblettes,
And crowned them with fresh chaplettes.


Ointments (as Josephus writes) (though Pliny says the contrary) were used
long before the battle of Troy; for Jacob sent to his son Joseph in Egypt
oyntm^nts: and Moses, that was three hundred and fifty year before the siege of
Troy, makes mention of Ointments, concerning the sanctification of the
Tabernacle, and Priests of the Old Testament. Albeit, it is not known, who was
the first deviser of them. Pliny and Solinus report, that Alexander, when he
wan the Camp of Darius, found among other Jewels and spoils a casket of
ointments, that much pleased him. But Herodotus does declare, that it was in
frequent use before Darius's time. Aethiopus devised Ointments.
For Cambyses, son to Cyrus, sent Ambassadors to Aethiopus King of the
Macrobians, with great presents, whereof a box of Ointments was a parcel. When
the King had learned the manner of the confection of it, he contemned and
neglected it, as a thing of no value. It is not certain when they came into
Rome: but I find in Pliny, that the 565th year of the City, Antiochus being
vanquished, and Asia subdued and conquered, Ointments might not be sold.
P. Licinius Crassus, and Julius Caesar, then Censors, commanded that no
foreign nor strange Confection of ointments should be sold in the City.

CHAP. XII. Who found out Metals, Smiths, Coals, Fire, Candles, and Bellows.
OF all Metal wherein worldly substance consists, Gold, that all men sorely
Covet to have, is the most precious. For the desire hereof, they have dug in
the deep bottomless Abyss of the Earth, and at the length (as Phalerius
said) they will dig Pluto out of hell for it. And Diogenes when he was asked
why Gold looked so pale, answered very well, saying: Because it has many that
lie in wait for it. Cadmus, as Pliny affirms, Cadmus found Gold.
found it in the Mount Pangeus in Thrace, or as some think, it was Thoas, and
Eaclis that invented it in Panchaia. Silver, Erichthonius of Athens or Ceacus
found out. They report that Gold was found in Pageus, because there is great
plenty in that hill, as Herodotus does write. The five brethren named Idei
Dactyli, found Iron in Creet. Midacritus brought lead out of the Islands
against Spain, called Cassitrides, as Strabo declares. Brass was found by
Cinirs, in the Isle of Cyprus, and Solinus says it was found in Creet. Ciniras
also devised the Tongs, File, and Lever. Notwithstanding Clement says, that
Selementes and Damnameneus, two Jews, found Iron first in Cyprus, and the
Pannonians Brass. Aristotle holds opinion, that Lydus a Scythian first
taught to melt and work Brass, Melting Brass.
Theophrastus thinks it was Delas, a Phrygian. Strabo writes that a certain
people named Thelchines, wrought Iron and Brass first, and they made a Sword
named Harp, which they gave to Saturn.

The Smiths Forge some think the Caelybians found, Smiths ^orge.
and some suppose it were the Cyclopes, which first used the Smiths craft.

Diodorus holds an opinion, that Idei Dactyli and Vulcanus were Authors of
Iron, Idei Dactili.
Brass, Silver, Gold, and all metals that are wrought with the fire.

Sothering of Iron, Sothering of Iron.
Glaucus found; and Cadmus, melting of Gold. But I take it that all these
before named found the use of such things in their own Countries. For the use
of all such metal was perceived in the beginning of the World by Tubulcain,
which was son to Lamech and occupied Smith-craft. Clement refers the
tempering of Iron to Delas.

Fire is supposed to be the invention of Vulcanus: Victruvius says that the
Trees tossed and shaken with Winds, by beating together of their boughs excited
fire. But it had been more convenient to have ascribed it to the gift of God,
which gave it to man to be a remedy against the danger of cold.

Pirodes first stroke fire out of Flint; Pirodes stroke fire out of Flint.
Prometheus taught first to keep it in Matches.

Pliny tells how the Spies in Armies and Camps, or else the Shepherds
devised to smite fire by rubbing of two pieces of Wood together. Laurel and Ivy
be best for that use. Bellows were found by Anacharsis as Strabo witnesses;
Candles the Egyptians invented.

CHAP. XII. Who ordained Coins, Looking Glasses, Rings, with precious stones.
Coin, of what metal soever it was made, (as it appears by Josephus) is very
ancient; For Cain, Adam's son was very greedy, in gathering together of money:
Herodotus writes that the Lydians first coined Silver and Gold to buy and sell
with. For before the siege of Troy, as Homer witnesses, men used to change one
commodity for another. Yet in the time of Abraham, there was Money current, for
he bought the Cave to bury his Wife Sarah, of the Hittite, Ephron, for 400
Shekels of Silver, which was before the siege of Troy many years.

In Rome the first coin of Gold was made in the 547th year of the City, Gold in
Rome.
and it was named a Duckat, and after, it began to be used in many places at
sundry times. Phedon began Silver coin in the Isle Egina. It was minted in
Rome, in the 484th year after the City was builded: the print of it was a
Chariot with two horses, and some with four. Janus coyns of Brass.
Janus did cause Brass to be coined, with a face on the one side, and a ship
on the other side, to the intent to gratify Saturnus (which arrived there in a
ship) by setting forth his memory to their posterity and successors. Servius
Tullius first coined Brass with an Image of a sheep and an Ox.
Looking-Glasses.
Looking Glasses of Silver were devised by Praxiteles in the time of Pompeius
Magnus: There were also invented looking Glasses of Steel, Lead,
Chrystal-Glasse, and mingled stuff, wherein we behold our visages. Though it
is uncertain who did first find them, yet Pliny says that one Sidon invented
them of Glass. Sidon.
Rings with a piece of stone wrought in them, be reported of Pliny to have been
made of Jupiter, to keep in memory the punishment of Prometheus, Prometheus.
for that he deluded the gods of the Element of fire and did traduce it to man's
use, but that is a fable not to be credited. The use of Rings and precious
stones is of great antiquity, for I read in Genesis that Judah gave his
daughter in Law Thamar a Ring, and broches, as pledges of his promise. And
Moses, who was 300 years before the battle of Troy, speaks of Rings and
precious stones for making of the Ark and vestures of Aaron, as Oriches and
Smaragdus, or Emrode. In Rome at the first they used Rings of Iron every man
saving the Tribunes. It was long before the Senators had any Rings of Gold,
Rings served to Seal Letters.
and as Macrobius writes, they used them, not so much for trimming and decking
of themselves, as to seal letters with them; insomuch that it was not permitted
to any man to have more then one, and that was allowed to none but Freemen.
Aman might have but one Ring
Afterward they began to grave Seals in precious stones. And least they should
be broken with stresse, Rings were worn on the left hand.
they ware them on the finger of the left hand, that is next the little finger,
because the left hand is not put to so much labor as the right hand, or else
(as Macrobius says) because there goes a Vein from that finger to the Heart.
Rings also were used and worn of the Knights in Rome, that by them they might
be distinguished and known from the common sort of people.

CHAP. XIV. The Original of Glass, Amber, Vermilion, Mirrhe, and Crystal.
IN Phoenice, which is a part of Syria. at the foot of the Mount Carmel, there
is a Pool called Candebea, whereof the River Belus springerh, in the which,
Glass, as Pliny writes, is engendered. For it is reported that on a time when
a Merchants Ship, that was fraighted with Salt-peeter (for so some expound
nitrum) arrived there; and as they prepared their meat on the sands and
Seabanks: It fortuned that because they had no store of stones to bear up their
Vessels, wherein they sod their meat, they took great pieces of Nitre out of
their Ship to set their Victuals on, which after they chanced to be on fire,
and mingled with the sand, there ran bright flakes of this precious Liquor. By
this River is Menon's Tomb, and as Josephus writes, the nature of that water
is to turn and transform other metals into glass. Amber, as Diodorus
witnesses, was found in the Isle Basilia, which lies against Scythia, above
Galatia in the great Ocean, where it was first cast up, and was never seen not
found in any other place before. Vermilion or Red Lead was found in Ephesus, by
Gallius an Athenian. Vermilion.
And it was i^ Rome counted and taken for holy, insomuch that on their
Feastival days, they painted the face of Jupiters Imag^ with it, and the
bodies of them that triumphed; and Camillus triumphed so, as Pliny witnesses.
Myrrh, which is a^ humor congealed and constipated together with heat, Myrrh.
comes out of the East parts, and namely out of Carmania^ Pompeius in his
triumph of the Pirates and Robbers on the Sea, brought it first into Rome.
Crystal.
Crystal is a stone that is congealed of pure water, not with cold, but by a
power of divine heat, whereby it retains its hardness, and never relenteth
or melts, and receives diverse colors, and this is the opinion of Diodorus.
But Pliny supposes that it comes of the Ice, extremely Frozen. Nevertheless
it is uncertain who found it.

CHAP. XV. The beginning of Imagery; and of Alexander's Image.
COncerning the use of making Images, from whence it came, Authors differ and
vary. For Macrobius cites one Epicardus, that says, it began of a
superstition of Hercules, Hercules.
who, according to the number of his Companions, whom he lost in his Voyage
into far Countries, when he came home into Italy, made Images of them, and cast
them down at the Bridge Sublicius, Wood-bridg.
into Tyber, to the intent they should be carried into their natural Countries,
thinking that to be a just Funeral. Nevertheless, he takes it, that they came
rather of the custom of the Arcadians, The Arcadians manner.
which, as Diodorus writes, in their wandering abroad, repaired into Italy, and
builded a Chapel to Pluto, and an Altar to Saturnus; where they pacified Pluto
with the heads of men and burned the bodies to Saturn. An Oracle.
For so they expounded their Oracle, Et capita inferno, et patri transmittite
lumen.
Give heads to Pluto the God infernal,
And Saturn his father the fire lustral.


The sacrifices that were offered to Saturn, were named Saturnalia. After,
Hercules as he passed through Italy, when he had conquered and subdued Gerion,
advertised them to change that unlucky sacrifice into fortunate oblations, and
taught them to make Images of heads of men to Pluto: And to light Tapers of Wax
in honor of Saturn. Lactantius says, Prometheus made Images.
Prometheus made first Images of soft Clay, and taught the way to make statues:
Some say, as Diodorus writes, that the Aethiopians found the first use of
Images, and of them the Egyptians learned.

Notwithstanding I find that Images were long before that time: For Rachel,
when her Husband fled out of Mesopotamia, from Laban his Father in Law, did
steal away her fathers gods, And some think that men took occasion from God to
make Images, who willing to show to the gross wits of men, some representation
of himself, took on him the shape of man; so Abraham and Jacob ^aw^ him. And
the Scripture seems in sundry places to attribute to him hands, feet, eyes,
and ears, which be parts and members of men. And by this means men received the
manner of making Images of God, because to keep him in fresh memory. And this
is the true Original of Imagery. Spurius Cassius made in Rome the Image of
Ceros in brass. Ceres Image of Brass.
Afterward statues of men were made, to excite and encourage valiant hearts to
high enterprises. And for that cause the Athenians set up the Images of
Hermodius and Aristogiton, that slew and expulsed the Tyrants. Leontinus
Gorgias, made himself an Image of pure Gold, not hollow, first; and set it in
Delphos the 78th Olympiad. Pharnaces caused one to be made of Silver like
himself, M. Attilius made the first Image of Gold in Rome.
which Pompey in his Triumph removed. In Italy, M. Attilius Glabrio, made the
first statue of Gold on horseback in remembrance of his Father: There were also
Images made of Brass, Ivory, Wood, and Marble.

The manner of the Romans was to set up their Images covered, but the Grecians
used to form them naked, and the Romans also had a Rite to burn incense, and
light Tapers before them. In this Art many were very expert, as Pliny
rehearses. Phidias.
But Phidias of Athens passed them all. In Rome, the kindred and family of the
Macrians were acoustomed to wear on them the Image of Alexander the great,
Graven: as, men in Gold or Silver, Women in Kalls and Rings: because it was
reported that he should archieve well in all affairs, which did bear on him
Alexanders Image, either in Gold or Silver.

And therefore Augustus Caesar used long the Image of him, Augustus Seal.
in sealing his letters.

CHAP. XVI. Painting, and Potters craft, or Working in Earth.
GYges a Lydian, as Pliny thinks, did first invent and devise portraiture in
Egypt. In Greece, Pyrrhus, the Cousin of Dadolus, according to Aristotle's
mind. But Theophrastus says, that Polygnotus an Athenian found it: Polygnotus.
yet Pliny agrees neither with Theophrastus, nor yet with himself: for in his
35th book, he says, that Polygnotus a Thalian, did first paint women in single
apparel, and trimmed their heads with Kalls of sundry Colors, and set forth
Pictures to show more decent, in opening their mouths, and made their Teeth to
be seen, and the Visages more favorable to behold; but who found it, it is
uncertain. For the Egyptians say they had that art 600 years before it came to
Greece: And they of Greece affirm it was begun by the Sicionians, and some of
the Corinthians. Albeit, all confess it began of the drawing of a man with
lines. In process of time it waxed more sumptuous with colors. The beginning
of painting.
Drawing pictures with lines or shadows Philocles an Egyptian, or Cleanthes a
Corinthian, devised. Thelephanes a Sicionian, and Ardices of Corinthus found
this Art first, without Colors, and Cleophantes of the same Country invented
Colors: Cleophantus invented colors.
Apollodorus obtained much praise with the Pensil. In this excelled Timagoras,
Pithius Polygnotus, Aglaophon, with others that Pliny recites in the 12th
Book. And Raphael Sanctus, an Vrbinate, is very excellent in expressing of
lively Images of men in this faculty. The potters occupation that works all
things in Clay and Earth, Potters craft
Chotebus. (...) Athenian found; as Pliny in his seventh book tells.
Dibutades Worker of Clay.
In his 35th book he asscribeth the Original of it to Dibutades at Corinth:
which by the help of his Daughter invented this craft. For after she understood
that a young man her lover should depart into a strange Nation for the tender
love that she bare to him, she drew his Image on a Wall after the pattern of
his shadow by Candlelight, which her father filled and fashioned with Clay,
and made it into a figure and resemblance of his body, and dried it with the
Fire, and set it in the common Hot-house where the maids and Women kept Baths:
And there it remained till Mummius destroyed Corinth. Mummius destroyed Corinth.
Some say it was found by Rhenus, and Theodorus in the Isle of Samos. Demeratus.
And Demeratus father to Tarquinius Priscus King of the Romans, brought it into
Italy, and after him Euchiras, and Eugranias amplified the Science more
copiously. Lisistratus a Sicionion invented making of moulds, and the way to
work Images in them. The Potters Wheel or frame, Potters frame.
(as Ephorus says) Anarcharsis a Philosopher of the Country of Scythia, found:
Some say it was Talus, Dadalus sisters Son.

The special Workmen in this Art were Demophilus, and Gorgosus.

The end of the Abridgment of the Second Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Invention of Husbandry, with other things concerning the same.
HUsbandry or tilling the ground, Husbandry.
Diodorus says, was excogitated by Dionysius among the Egyptians; Dionysius.
In Greece and Asia, by Triptolemus Triptolemus,
(as Justine writes); in Italy, by Saturnus: but Virgil witnesses, that Ceres
first devised it. Nevertheless Josephus declares that it was found by Cain,
Adams eldest son. In the beginning, men lived by Acorns, Men lived by Acorns.
and other fruits of the Earth till Ceres (as Pliny tells) taught them of
Athens, Italy, and Sicily to sow Corn, which before grew among other herbs.
Diodorus refers the invention of it to Isis. Albeit, Justine affirms that
Triptolemus found it in the time of Erichthous* King of Athens: but Diodorus
says he learned it of Ceres, and had Commandment to teach it abroad. In Italy,
Saturn instituted sowing, as Macobhius re^^isieth, Pi^umnus taught men first to
muck and compass their land, and his brother Pilumnus taught men to bake and
grind, Baking and grinding.
Pliny says, that Augeas a King in Greece taught men to dung their lands in
the time of Homer, Dunging land.
and Hergules afterward published it in Italy. Yoking Oxen.
Diodorus witnesses that Dionysius the second, yoked Oxen to the Plough first,
where as before it was labored by hand. Briges an Athenian, or as some report
Triptolemus; and some say, one Osiris found the plough: Trogus says that it
was Habis King of Spain that taught first to plow and sow. Instruments of
Husbandry, Plough.
as Virgil supposes, Ceres found out, Instruments of Husbandry.
but we must take it, that these men before rehearsed, did teach it in sundry
places: for it is manifest, that before their time the Hebrews and Egyptians
had knowledge of this Science. As Jacob, when there was a great dearth of Corn
in Canaan, sent his sons into Egypt to buy grain. And therefore without doubt,
the Hebrews did first find out the way of tilling the earth, grinding, with
other rusticall instruments. Sakres of hair were found in France, as Pliny
tells; and Boulters of Linen, in Spain. In Egypt they were made of Fenne
rushes, and Bull-rushes.

CHAP. II. Wine, Oil, Honey, Cheese, and strange Trees brought into Italy.
DIodorus says, Wine.
that Dionysius did first perceive the nature of the Vine, and taught men of
Greece to plant it, and to press wine out of the Grape, as Saturnus did in
Italy. Some say it was Icarius, father of Penelope, that found it in Athens.
And was afterward slain by the Husbandmen, when they were drunk. Atheneus in
one place writes, Oresteus.
that Oresteus, son to Deucalion, first found the Vine about the Mount Aetna in
Sicily. In another place he says, that it was found at the City Plinthina in
Egypt. Aruntes a Tirrhene, banished out of his Country by Lucinon, whom he
brought up of a child, carried first Wine into France. Seculus the son of
Ventus, invented the first food of men, of the Trees; and Eumolphus an
Athenian, taught the manner of ordering of them. But before all these, Noah
planter of the Vineyard.
Noah was the first that either tilled the Land, or planted the Vineyard. And
when he had drunk of the fruit of the grape, he was drunk.

Wine-Taverns were set up first by the Lydians, a people of Asia, which also
found diverse games. Staphylus (as Pliny says) allayed wine first. Drink that
is made of Barley, which we call Ale, and was the common drink of the
Egyptians, was devised by Bacchus: and he taught it to such Nations, as had no
grapes growing. And for that cause, England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and
Germany, and all that border on the West and North Seas, use this drink.
Albeit, the Germans put Hops in it, and call it Beer. In Greece, as Diodorus
affirms, Pallas showed the Olive, and the way to make Oil. Olive-Oyl.
And Arist^^^ gathered the cruddes of milk, and made Cheese first. Making
Cheese.
And the Oyl-Mill as Pliny witnesses, notwithstanding the Olive was before
Noah's flood: and Moses spoke of Oil, that was used in sacrifices, whereby it
may be perceived, that the Jews invented Oil. Justine says, Gargorus,
Gargorius.
King of Curetes, found the fashion of gathering Honey, Gathering honey.
he dwelt in the Forest of Carchesia in Spain. There grew no Olive in Italy,
Spain nor Africa, in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, the 174th year of the City.

And afterward, the 440th year of the City, there were some, howbeit, they were
near the Sea. But indeed honey was gathered first by the Hebrews shepherds. The
Cherry-trees, L. Lucullus brought out of Pontus, the year of the City 680.
Zizipha and Tuberes, two kinds of Apple Trees, S. Papinius conveyed out of
Syria and Africa, into Italy, in the time of Augustus Casar. The Plane-tree,
the Laurel-tree, the Fig Tree, and Apple Trees, with other, which is not
needful to rehearse, were brought in by diverse men, whose names are not spoken
of by any Authors.

CHAP. III. Who named Beasts, instituted Sacrifices, Hunting, Salt, Poultries.
BEasts, Adam named Beasts.
after they were all created in their kind, were named by Adam, with the same
names, that they be now called. Hiperbius.
Hiperbius, son to Mars, killed them first; but I rather refer that to Abel,
Adam's son; Abel.
for he did first offer to God the first begotten of his flock; and from him it
spread abroad among the Hebrews, and also other Countries. Of all other, Swine
were the first that were sacrificed of the Gentiles, in the Sacrifices of
Ceres, Goddess of Corn: as Varro witnesses, in Leagues of peace, and in
Marriages. At length, they came to such outrageous cruelty, that they
sacrificed men. Eating of Flesh.
Flesh was not used to be eaten, until the time of Noah; and then God
permitted it: but many Countries long after that, forbear and kept great
abstinence from flesh: a^ in the golden World under Saturn, men only lived by
fruits of the earth. The Priests of Egypt refrained from flesh, Priests of
Egypt.
Eggs, and milk, because, as they thought, Eggs were but tender and soft flesh,
and milk was blood, saving that the color was turned. And the Essenes in Jury,
and Jupiters Priests in Creet, never eat flesh. Banquets.
Banqueting dishes and delicates were made in Ionia, and then that evil
custom was taken up by other Countries: albeit, there were laws made in
Lacedemonia by Lycurgus, and in Rome by Fannius, for the abolishing of such
excessive feasting. I would some good man would now prescribe a Law, to be
precisely observed of all men. For I think there was never such riot in
feasting as there is in these times. Hunting and fishing, the Phoenicians
found. Salt and Thuse thereof was perceived by Misor and Salech. In Rome, Q.
Hortensius, did first set forth a Pecock, at the Augurs feast. Poulteries of
all kind of fouls, were instituted by Marcus Laelius Strabo, a Knight of
Brundusium. And Alexander Emperor, had also such Poultries. Warrens and Parks
were made first by Fulvius Hirpinus. And now they be every where used, but most
commonly in England, to the great damage of good pastures, that might feed
other Cattle. Beasts that be Badges.
The Wolf, the Minotaur, the Horse, the Boar were cognizance of the Romans
Armies: And Caius Marius in his second Consulship, appointed the Eagle for a
badge of his Army and Legion, with many other now adays, which be in Coats of
Arms of Noble Men.

CHAP. IV. Who found Flax, and Wool, with such instruments and Arts as belong
to the same, and Silk.
Linen or Flax, as Pliny says, was sound by the beautiful Lady Arachne of
Lydia, and she taught also the way of knitting Nets to take Beasts, Fish, and
Fouls. Minerva instructed the people of Athens first, in spinning and weaving
Wool: but in one place, Pliny seems to ascribe the feat of Weaving to the
Egyptians.

The Walkers or Fullers craft, was invented by Nicias, a Megarian: the Lydians
in Sardis died Wool first.

Spindles for Wool, were first invented by Closter; son to Arachne. Hangings of
Arras, which be used in Halls or Chambers, Attalus King of Asia devised: and
Pallas taught the use of clothing or apparel, as Diodorus writes: and
Eusebius says, one Vs^ a Sicilian born, made first clothing and Apparel for
men, of beasts skins: but indeed Adam, whom God did first create, made the
first Leather Coats for himself, Adam made the first coat of Leather.
and his Wife Eve, our old Mother, leaving thereby a pattern to all his
posterity, of that craft.

The Shoo-makers Art, Shoomakers craft.
one Boethoius found. Attalus taught men first to Weave Gold in Clothes. And
the Phrygians invented broidring. Embroidring.
The Greeks devised the Mantle, and the Hetrurians found the Robes of estate.
And mingling of diverse colors in Apparel, was the invention of the
Babylonians. Silk, which in all Countries is occasion of much dissolute
behavior in Apparel, was found of the Cerites, growing on their Trees, and
with wetting they comb it off, and make it fit for their uses.

Spinning and weaving of Silk, Spinning and Weaving Silk.
that comes of Worms, Pamphila the daughter of Platis, devised it in the Isle
Coos. Purple color was found, as Pollux witnesses, upon this occasion; As
Hercules, being in love with a beautiful Lady, named Tiro, walked on the
Sea-Cliffs, his Greyhound chanced to find a shellfish, called a Purple;
Hercules. Tiro.
and when he had eaten it, the orient color of the blood remained on his
snowt: which fresh color, the Lady espying, threatened Hercules, that he should
never be admitted to her presence, unless he brought her a cloth dyed with
that precious color. Then Hercules, willing to accomplish his Ladies will,
sought the purple Fish, and carried the blood to his Sovereign Lady. And thus
began the Purple-colour among the Tyrians.

CHAP. V. Buildings made of Clay, Brick, Stone, with other like matters.
MEn at the first lived like wildbeasts, in caves, and also fed on fr^its and
roots of the earth: but after they perceived the commodity of fire, and felt
thereby a great comfort, against the vehemence of cold: some began to edily
Co^tages of boughs of Trees, and some dug Caves in the Mountains, Houses.
and by often experiencing of such means, they attained to a greater perfection
in building. And afterward (as wits of men be inventive) they learned to
fashion building with walls, Making Walls of Houses.
that they set up with long props. And did wind them about with small rods, and
so daubed them: and to keep out the storms, they covered them with reeds,
boughs, or Fen-sedges. Thus in process of time, they came to the Art of
building, Pallas invented Building.
which as Diodorus says, is ascribed to Pallas: but I rather think, that
either Cain, or else Jobal, son of Lamech, found out this art.

Houses of clay, Doxius, son of Gellus, did first invent and set up, taking
example at the Swallow's nest. Brick-buildings were invented by Eurialus and
Hyporh^us, two brethren of Athens, as Pliny judges: albeit Diodorus refers
it to Vesta, daughter of Saturnus. Epimendes of Crete first used to hallow his
house and fields, Blessing of ^ouses.
with expiatio^s. Tyle and Slate to cover houses, were the invention of
Siniras, son of Agriopa; in the Isle of Cypres.

Stone-delves or quarells were found by Cadmus in Thebes, or (as Theophrast
writes) in Phoenice. Yet I think the Invention of such Arts may more justly be
ascribed to Cain, or the posterity of Seth: which did make two Pillars, one of
Brick, and another of Stone, and wrote in them all the Art of Astronomy; at
which time, I suppose, Pillars and Brick were first made, whereby it appears,
that the feat of building has been from the beginning of the World.
Nevertheless, I deny not, but these aforementioned, did begin edifying in sundry
Countries.

Marble was used in building at Rome, of rich men, to show their sumptuous
magnificence. As M. Scaurus, being Aedilis, caused 360 Pillars of Marble to be
carried to the making of a Stage, whereon an interlude should be played: but L.
Crassus was the first that had Pillars of Marble. M. Lepidus made the Gates of
his house with Marble of Numidia. He was Consul, the year of the City 676.
Mamurra, a Knight, that was Master of Julius Caesar's Works in France, pinned
first the Walls of his house with broken Marble. In gra^ing Marble, Dipoenus
Scilus, born in Crete, flourished first; Gravors in Marble.
before King Cyrus reigned in Persia.

CHAP. VI. Who made the first City, Tents, Temples, and Pitts.
WHen men were somewhat reclaimed from their brutish behavior, Occasion of
making Cities.
by reason that they were refreshed from their extreme cold, by fire, and such
houses as they had devised; they gathered them substance and goods, to the
sustentation of their households and families. But after they perceived that
mighty and strong men did invade and dispoyl them of such stuff as they had,
they knit themselves together in a company, and dwelled in one circuit, which
they walled about, and named it a City. Notwithstanding there is much diversity
of opinions among Writers, which was first. For Pliny says, Cecropia.
Cecrops builded the first City, and called it by his own name, Cecropia, which
was afterward called Athens. Strabo writes, that Phoroneus first builded
Argos: Argos. Diospolis.
the Egyptians say, that Diospolis in their Country was long before: which is
credible to be so, because they be a very ancient Nation. Trason first made
Walls. Towers, (as Aristotle says) the Cyclopians edifyed: but Theophrastus
thinks the Phoenicians builded them.

And Virgil refers that feat to Pallas. But to say the truth, Cain (as
Josephus declares) made the first City, and named it Enochia, after his son
Enoch. And the young men that came of Noah his lineage, by the advice of
Nimroth, builded the first Tower, of an exceeding height, which was called
afterward Babylon.

Tents, Jobal son of Lamech invented: notwithstanding that the Phoenicians
affirm, that the Nephews of Seculus found them.

Temples, as Diogenes supposes, were found by Epimenides in Crete. But
Victruvius affirms, that one Pithius a Carpenter, made the first Temple in
Priene, in the honor of Pallas. Herodotus says, that the Egyptians instituted
Temples first. In Rome, Romulus builded the first Temple, to the worship of
Jupiter Feretrius. To Almighty God, Solomon, King of the Hebrews, builded the
first Temple (3102 years after the Creation of Adam) in Jerusalem. Pits or
Wells Danaus dug first, as Pliny teaches, after he came out of Egypt into
Argos, a Country of Greece. Nevertheless, to tell the very original of them,
Isaac dug Pits.
Isaac his shepherds dug the first Pitts, as appears in Genesis. And Moses
caused Pitts to be dug in the Wilderness, when he did conduct the
Israelites out of Egypt, which was 393 years, before that Danaus came into
Argos; neither was it Danaus, but his daughters, that dug the Pit at Argos.

CHAP. VII. The Labyrinths, Turrets, sundry fashions of Burials.
LAbyrinths, which we may call Mazes, were certain intricate and winding works,
with many entries and doors, in such sort, that if a man were once entered, he
could not issue out, without he had either a perfect guide, of else a clew of
thread to be his conduct. There were four of them most notable, Four Labyrinths.
as it is reported: the first was in Egypt, and was called of some the Palace
of King Motherudes, of some the Sepulcher of Mexes: but there be other that
say, it was builded in honor of the Sun, by King Petesucus, or Tithoes:
albeit, Herodotus says* It was the common Tomb of the Kings of Egypt; this
stood a little from the Pool of Mirios. The second was made in Creet, by
Daedalus, at the Commandment of King Minos, wherein Theseus of Athens slew the
Minotaure. The third was wrought in the Isle Lemnos by Smilus, Rhodus, and
Theodorus, Carpenters of the same Country. The fourth, Porsenna, King of the
Hetrurians, caused to be made and set up in Italy for his Sepulcher, it was all
of Freestone, and vaulted. The high Steeples or Turrets, that the Egyptians
call Pyramides, were between Memphis and Delta two Cities of Egypt, of such
height, that it was marvel how the stone and mortar should be carried so high.
One of them that was greatest, was the work of 3040 men, in 20 years at the
cost of King Chemis, whom Herodotus names Cheopis. Chabreus brother to the
same King, made the second Turret, not equal in height. The third King
Micerenus caused to be wrought, 20 foot shorter then his fathers was, The
occasion that they were made, as Pliny tells, was, lest the people should be
idle: and Josephus says, the Egyptians enforced the Hebrews to build those
Pyramides, because they should be in subjection to them, and that they might be
made slaves and drudges: or else, lest the Kings should leave so much Treasure
to their Successors, that it might move them to Sedition or Treason. Mausoleum.
Mausoleum that was the Tomb of Mausolus King of Caria, his wife Artemesia
builded most sumptuously, Artemesia.
and for that faithful love that she bare to him, she remained a Widow all her
life time.

The manner of burial in diverse countries, is of sundry fashions: as the
Massegetes and Derbians, judge them that dye in sickness very wretches; and
therefore when their Parents and kinsfolk wax aged, they strangle them and eat
them, supposing that it is better that They should eat them, than the Worms.
The Albanes, the dwelled by the Mount Caucasus take it to be a mortal crime if
they regard, or once name them that be dead. The Thracians kept solemnly the
Funerals of the dead Corpse of men, with great joy and solace: because they be
discharged by death from humane miseries, and rest in eternal felicity; and
contrariwise at the birth of their Children they made great sorrow and
lamentation, because of the calamities that they must sustain in this miserable
life. The Women in India, take it for a great honesty and Triumph, if they be
buried with their Husband: for it is granted to her that loved him best. There
be other diverse manners of burying among the Pagans, and Heathen people, which
forasmuch as they exceed the bounds of humanity, and have in them no hope of
Resurrection, which I shall at this present omit, and over-passe them. The
Romans, because the dead corpse, The Romans burned their dead bodies. Sylla.
that died in battle, were after their burial dug out of the ground,
instituted the manner of burning the carcases of men departed, which Rite was
executed on Sylla, chief of all the house and kindred of the Cornelians, which
feared lest he should be served as he had used Marius. They had also in Rome, a
manner of deifying, or hallowing their Emperors dead bodies, after this sort.
When the Emperor was dead, and his body reverently buried, with great
exequies, they formed an Image of the Emperor, pale,, as though he were sick,
and laid it at the Gate of the Palace, in a bed of Ivory: and the Physicians
resorted thither to the bed six days continually; the Lords of the Senate, and
Noble Ladies and Matrons standing on every side of the bed. The seventh day,
the young Lords and Nobility, bare him on their shoulders in the bed, first
into the old place of judgments called Forum Vetus, and then into the field
named Campus Martiu^, where they chose their Magistrates and high Officers,
where they laid him intent builded for the purpose, like a Tower, and filled
it with dry wood, and sweet Ointments, and after they had finished the Rites
and Ceremonies of their Law, he that should succeed in the Empire, put a
Firebrand to the Tent, and then others did the like. And after all was burned,
they let fly an Eagle out of the top of the Turret, which, as they supposed,
carried the Soul of the Emperor to heaven, and from thenceforth they honored
him as a god. Commendations to the worship of the dead bodies at Funerals,
Valorius Publicola, first made in the praise of Brutus, and that was long
before the Greeks had any, notwithstanding Gellius writes that Solon ordained
that law in Athens in the time of Tarquinius Priso^s. Women had Commendations
in Rome.
The Romans used to praise the Women at their burialls, because on a time they
were contented to give their Golden Jewels to make a boul to send to Dolphos,
to the god Apollo.

CHAP. VIII. Who made Spires called Obelisci, the marks of the broaches, the
Egyptians Letters, first Sanctuary.
OBelisci, which may be called long broches or Spires, were great and huge
stones in Egypt, made by Masons, from the bottom smaller and smaller, of a
large length, and were consecrated to the Sun, because they be long, much like
to the beams of the Sun. The first of them was instituted by Mitres, which
reigned in Heliopolis, being commanded by a Vision to make it, and so was it
recorded and written in the same. King Bochis set up four that were every of
them 48 Cubits long: Rameses.
Rameses (in whose time Troy was destroyed) reared up one, forty Cubits of
length, and another of 819 foot, and every side was four Cubits broad.

Ptolomeus Philadelphus made one at Alexandria of four Cubits. Ptolomeus.


And Phoron set two in the Temple of the Sun, of an hundred Cubits length a
piece, and four Cubits broad, on this occasion: It fortuned that this King, for
a great crime that he had committed, was stricken blind, and continued so ten
years, and after by Revelation at the City Bucis, it was told him that he
should receive his sight, if he washed his eyes with the water of a woman, that
was never defiled with any strange man, but was always content with her Husband.
First he tried his own wife, and afterward many other, till at the last he
received his sight, and married her by whose Urine he was healed, and recovered
his sight, and all the other, with his first wife, he caused to be burnt at
once. Then for a remembrance he made his oblation with the two foresaid Spires
in the Temple of the Sun. Augustus Caesar brought two of these Broches into
Rome, and set one in the great Tilt-yard or Listes, if I may call Circus in
those terms; the other he set in the field called Campus Martius: In these
broaches for the most part were written Images of beasts, The manner of Writing
in Egypt.
whereby their posterity and successors, might perceive the renown of such
Princes, and the manner of their ^ows and oblations.

For the Egyptians used the Images of beasts in the stead of letters, and as
Cornelius writes, they declared their minds by the figures and shapes of
beasts: as by the Be they signified a King ruling his Commons with great
moderation and gentleness; by the Gos-Hauk, they meant speedy performance of
their affairs.

Sanctuary (as Stacius writes) was made first by Hercules Nephews in Athens,
and was called the Temple of Mercy. From thence it was not lawful to take any
man violently, that repaired thither for aid and comfort: notwithstanding Moses
which was long before Hercules, did institute three franchised Towns, whither
it was permitted for them to go, that had done any Murder unawares; o^ by
chance-m^dly.

Next after him, Romulus:
Romulus ordained a Sanctuary in Rome, to increase his Citizens, and to have
more number to build the City. There was a Sanctuary in the Isle Calvaria,
dedicated to Neptune; and another in Egypt, at Canopus, consecrated to
Hercules; and another to Osiris; and in Syria; one hallowed to Apollo. And
there be many at this day in Christendom, and namely in England: but now the
liberty and number of them is diminished, because they were occasion of great
crimes and enormities.

CHAP. IX. Of Theaters, Amphitheatres, and Baths.
Theaters, were certain places, as Scaffolds with Pentises, wherein the people
of Athens stood to behold the enterludes that were showed: and they were made
like half a Circle, with benches one above another, that they might without any
impediment see the Plays; Dionysius did first institute them in Athens: in the
midst of the Scaffold or Theater stood the ^^age, wherein Comedies,
Tragedies, with other shows, were exhibited to the common sort. Of them the
Romans took example, to make such Scaffolds: Covering of Scaffolds.
which Quintus Carulus caused to be covered with linen clothes, and hanged it
with silk; whereas before they had no vault to bear off the Sun or Rain. But
Marcus Scaurus being Aedil, that is, having the oversight of all public and
private buildings, made the first in Rome, that endured for the space of thirty
days, it was made up with Pillars of Marble. Caius Curio, at his father's
burial, builded two Theaters of Timber after such a fashion, that they might
in time of enterludes stand one contrary to another, in such wise, that neither
Play should disturb other: and when it liked him, he turned them together, and
made an Amphitheatre, which was a round Scaffold full of benches of diverse
heighths; wherein he set forth a game of Sword players. Pompeius Magnus made
the first standing Theater of freestone, after the pattern that he saw at
Mitylene, when he had subdued Mithridates King of Po^tus. Cains Julius Caesar
builded the first Amphitheatre in the Field consecrated to Mars. In this were
set forth Shows of wild beasts, and Sword-players; for the manner was, that
such as were condemned to death, or taken prisoners in war, should be cast
there to the wild beasts to be devoured and slain. It was strewed with sand,
lest the blood of those that were slain, should defile them that fought, or
discourage their hearts: and therefore, there were certain appointed to toss
and strew the sand. The place called Circus, that we may call Lists o^
Tyle-yards, were walled about with stone of a great length, wherein was used
Coursing and Justing, and Tourneying on horseback and on foot by Champions and
Challengers: they were first made in the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, and that
was called the greatest. After that, two other were made, one by Flaminius, and
the other by Nero.

The first Coursing, First Justing in Rome.
justing, and running, with other exercises in the Lists, were, when Spurius
Posthumous Albinus, and Quintus Martius Philippus, were Consuls, the year of
the City 567.

Hot Baths were used first privately of all men, Private Baths.
according to their degree and ability, because of the preservation of health
as they pretended: Common-B^ths.
but in process they builded common Baths and Hot-houses to sweat in; and the
Nobles did bathe and wash with the Commons; and finally, men and women were
permitted most lasciviously to bathe together. Most notable baths were they
that Agrippa, Notable Baths.
and Nero, and Titus Vespasian, with other Emperors, made, as Julius
Capitolinus writes: they were both great, and also gorgeously dressed like
Cities and bigg Towns, with all places of opportunity, to maintain excessive
riot in all sorts of men.

CHAP. X. Who found the Carpenters Craft, and Instruments of the same; Vessels
of diverse measures,
DAedalus, after the mind of Pliny, first invented the Art of Carpentry, with
these Instruments following, the Saw, Chip-Ax, and Plomline, whereby the
evennesse of the Squares be tried, whether they batter or hang over, the Augore
or Wimble, and Glue, to join boards together. The Squire, the Lyn^, the Shave,
the Pricker of Punch, were devised by Theodore a Sa^i^ Notwithstanding
standing, Ovid writes, that Talus, Daedalus's sisters son, invented the
Compass, and fashioned the Saw after the pattern of the backbone of a Fish:
How the Saw was found.
or as Diodorus says, by the example of the jawbone of a Serpent; he found
also the Shave: and for such benefits as he did show and bestow to the use and
profit of men, he was highly commended: But Daedalus envying that a boy, being
but his Apprentise, Daedalus slew his Nephew for envy.
should excel his Master, cast him down out of a Tower (as Ovid witnesses)
and slew him. Pythagoras a Samian, devised another manner of rule or Squire,
then this that we use commonly, fit for all manner of buildings, as Victruvius
declares in the ninth books. Penthesilaea Queen of Amazons is reported to have
found the Axe. Albeit, I think the invention of this Art is more worthy to be
referred either to the Hebrews, which occupied such Arts before Dedalus time
and specially in making of the Tabernacle which was curiously wrought; The
Tyrians were cunning Carpenters.
or else to the Tyrians, that were in that faculty far above the Hebrews. For
which cause Solomon wrote to the King of Tire for workmen to build the Temple.
Speusippus invented making of hollow Vessels, as Barrels or Hogsheads. Vessels
of Osiar or Wicker, as Baskets, or Hampers, with such like, Ceres did first
devise, as Servius writeeth.

CHAP. XI. Who ruled first on the Sea, found Ships, Merchandise.
STrabo writes that Minos King of Creet had the first rule of the Sea: Who was
ruler on the Sea first. Neptune.
but Diodorus says that Neptunus had the Empire of it before him, for he
invented the feat of Rowing in boats, and made a Navy, and was made Admiral of
it by his father Saturnus. And Pliny reports that King Erichthras devised
Boats first, and rowed in them in the Red Sea: Erichthras devised Boats.
some say they were ordained by the Trojans in the Narrow Seas called
Hellespontus; some think they were invented in the English Sea, and covered
with Leather and Hides of beasts. Danaus was the first that used any ship when
he sailed out of Egypt into Greece, as Pliny records, although some suppose
it to be the Samothracians, and some Atlas that found it. But, to speak the
truth, Noah was the first that made the Ship wherein he preserved from danger
of the Water, Noah made the first ship.
all the living creatures that were saved to multiply the World, and that was
the pattern that all other made their ships after. Jason first made a Galley,
which Sesostrias King of Egypt used after him, and Eytheus made the Barge with
two order of Oars on a side, Amocles of Corinth, that with three course of Oars
on a side: the Carthaginians, that with four; and Nesichthon of Salamis, that
with five Oars on a side, which the Romans made in the first Punick battle*
Zinagoras a Syracusan devised that with six rows of Oars. Hippius a Tyrian
conceived the making of the Lighter, or Merchants ship. The Cirenians invented
the Hoy or Gallion. Phoenicians the Keel or Demi Bark. The Rhodians the
Brigantine. Cyprians the Bark. Germans the boats of one piece. Illyrians the
Cock-boat or Lighters. Rudders were found by the Copians, and the broad Oars
the Plateans devised. Sails Icar^^ found, albeit, Diodorus says it was Aeolus.
Daedalus found the Mast, and the cross piece whereunto the Sail is fastened.
Ferry Boats the Athenians or the Salaminians found: close C^lleys were found by
the Thasians. The Tyrrhenes devised the Anchors, and Eupalamus made it with two
points or Teeth; but some refer it to Anacharsis, who also invented the Graples
or Tackle of a ship. The stem of the ship Piseus imagined. Tiphis found the
stern after the example of the Kite, which in her flying turns all her body
with the turning of her tail.

Minos made the first battle on the Sea. Merchandise was first instituted to
furnish men with necessaries, by way of exchange: but after, when Money was
coined, it was occupied more for men's private wealth, then for any common
profit, Philosophers were Merchants. Carthaginians first Merchants. Dionysius
taught the Trade of Merchandise. The Hebrews did buy and sell.
and for that cause, Cicero calls it a vile and servile craft. Albeit,
Plutarch witnesses that Thales, Solon, Hippocrates, and Plato frequented this
Art. The Carthaginians found it, as Pliny. writes in the 7th book, but
Diodorus says it was Mercury that found it. And Pliny in his tenth Book, says
that Liber otherwise called Dionysius, invented the Trade of Merchandise, and
therefore it is to be thought that the Carthaginians learned the Trade of
Merchandise of Dionysius. But the Hebrews, (as Josephus witnesses) used buying
and selling in the time of Noah: and Joseph was sold to Merchants, Hebrews did
buy and sell.
and carried into Egypt. The Lydians were first Mercers, and carriers abroad of
stuff, as Factors, Pedlers, and Brokers do with us.

CHAP. XII. Who Instituted Stews, Dying of Hair, Barbers, with other things.
VEnus, Venus, a common woman.
which was begotten of the froth of the Sea, (as Poets feign) was a common
Harlot, and brothel of her body, and had many Children by sundry men; as by
Mars, she had Harmonia; by Mercury* Hermaphroditus; by Jupiter, Cupido: by
Anchises, Aeneas. And because she alone would not seem to be a whore, she
ordained in Cyprus, that women should prostitute themselves for money to all
that came. And Justine tells, that the manner of the Maids of Cyprus, was to
get their marriage do^er, by such filthy baudry. And to help further the
matter, one Melampus brought out of Egypt into Greece, the rites of Bacchus's
sacrifices, wherein men use to company dissolutely with women in the night, in
such wise, that it is a shame for Christian men to speak of: much like our
Shows or Dances, called Masks, in England, and Bone-fires, as they be used in
some parts of the Realm. But Spu. Posthumous, Albinus, Spu. Posthumous
abrogated Bacchus's Feasts.
and Q. Martius, abolished those Feasts; I would all Masks and Bone-fires were
likewise banished from among us Christians. Yet common Women were long before
Venus's time. For it appears in Genesis, that Judah, son to Jacob, meddled with
Thamar his daughter in law, because he supposed she had been a whore by reason
of her apparel. But to let that pass, Common women were of long time.
yet it is pity to see among Christian men, Stews and baudry maintained, as
though it were for a commonweal: and honorable Matrimony so neglected and
polluted without any fear of God. This is a doctrine of the Devil, if there be
any. In Moses laws, an advoutrer was stoned to death; and in Greece, in Rome,
and in Arabia, and diverse other Countries, he was punished by death; yet among
Christians it reigns unpunished: God will strike once for all, therefore let
the Ministers of the Law provide a godly remedy. I would wish, that women would
follow the Pagan Lucretia, or Hebrew Susanna; and men, Joseph.

Medea found the dying and coloring of hair; and our women of England have not
forgotten it, with other enormities, wherein some of the Physicians be greatly
too blame, that teach such things to that frail creature. They be ashamed of
Gods Creation and handywork in themselves, or else they would not amend it.

Barbers, to shave and round, were instituted by the Abantes, because their
enemies in war should have no occasion to pluck them by the hair. P. Ticinius
Mena brought them into Rome the 354th year after the building of the City:
before, they were unshaven. Africa^^s was wont to be shaven every day. There be
many other things, whose Authors for Antiquity cannot be known; and some,
because of the negligence of men, that will not write such things. No man can
tell who began Clocks, Bells, the Ship-man's Compass, Gowns, Stirrops, Caps or
Bonnets, ^o that is but newly invented: because in old time, men we^^
ba^e-headed. Water-Mills, Organs, and Claricymbals, Tallow-Candles, reclaiming
of Hawks, Rings, with many others, which for the antienty, or oversight of
men, be in extreme oblivion.

Atheneus in his fourth book, says, That Ctesibius, a Barber of Alexandria,
found out the Organs, and brings the testimony of Aristotle.

The End of the Third Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Fourth BOOK.
CHAP. I. The beginning and increase of Christian Religion.
THe Christian Religion wherein only reste^ the whole hope of o^ salvation,
Our Religion began of the Hebrews.
began of the Hebrews, who were so named of Heber, and lived very devoutly,
before there wa^ any law written; only by a natural inclination, excited to
perform justice and truth.

The first that called on the name of God, Enos called first on God.
was Enos, then Enoch, and Noe. after them Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who
because he had seen God, was named Israel, and of him the Hebrews were surnamed
Israelites. Of the issue and Lineage of his twelve Sons, there came twelve
Tribes or Generations of Jews, every Tribe bearing the name of one of them: Job
also was a perfect godly man, and Joseph was a mirror of chastity. To these
men the Will, Promises and Revelations of God were showed first.
Notwithstanding they did not long persevere in that perfect innocence of
living, but partly for their corruptible nature, prone to vice, and partly by
reason of the acquaintance that they had with the Egyptians, a kind of people
very superstitious, and much given to Idolatry, they fell from their purity
into such extreme blindness of heart, ignorance of God* and idolatry, that
they differed in nothing from the Gentiles and Heathen. But God as he is
merciful and long suffering, 205 years after that Israel came into Egypt,
Moses delivered the Israelites from bondage.
and 430 years after Abraham's going thither, delivered them out of the
thraldom and bondage that they were in, by the valiant Captain Moses; and
brought them through the red Sea, and Wilderness, into the land of promise,
the fruitful land of Canaan; ye^ they unkindly forgot all those benefit^ and
returned to their old wretchedness and sinful abominations. Last of all, God
considering that neither law of nature, Gods mercy is showed.
nor Law written, nor his great benefits, nor preaching of his sundry Prophets,
(whom they most cruelly murdered) could turn them from their stif-necked and
stubborn obstinacy: To show all kindness possible, God is made Man.
sent his only begotten Son, equal to him in essential power, to be incarnate
of a pure maid, that at the last, they might by this example and Preaching,
have an obedien^ heart toward their Creator, which was born (the year of the
World 4997, What year Christ was incarnate.
and and the 41 year of the reign of Augustus Caesar) of the Virgin Mary, to be
our Savior, and intercessour for us before the Judgment Seat of the Father, as
his name Jesus does portend unto us.

He, by his example, teaching, and miracles, Christ was persecuted to death.
showed the path of salvation* but they enviously did persecute him to the vile
death of the Cross; nevertheless, by his divine power he arose the third day,
in the 18^h year of Tiberius the Emperor his reign, The year of Christ's Death
and Resurrection.
and after 40 days he ascended to the right hand of God, leaving power and
Authority with his Apostles, to establish the Commonwealth and Religion of
Christians; and the 10th day after his Ascension, The Holy Ghost is sent.
he sent the Holy Ghost into their hearts, to strengthen and teach them all
truth. This was 33 years and 3 months after his Incarnation. Thus our Religion
had its original, and the Apostles by their preaching, amplified and enlarged
it very much. For Peter first preaching to the Jews in Jerusalem of the cruel
murder that they had committed against Christ Jesus, converted and baptized in
one day 3000 men and Women. Peter Converted three thousand.
And by the miracle of healing the lame man at the beautiful gate of the
Temple, he stayed and confirmed them strongly in the Faith, albeit he suffered
persecution greatly for the same: And Stephen for his faithful testimony,
Stephen is martyred.
was stoned to death. Philip converted and baptized the Samaritanes, and a
certain Eunuch of Candaces. Queen of Ethiopia; Men were first called Christians
in Antioch.
the Eunuch turned the Queen with her family, and a great part of that Country
to the faith of Christ. After in Antioch, the faithful named themselves
Christians.

Thomas preached to the Parthian^, Matthew in Ethiopia, Bartholomew ins India,
Andrew in Scythia, John in Asia, Peter in Galatia, Peter, Bishop of Antioch.
Pontus, Cappado^ia* Peter was born in Bethsaida, a City of Galilee, and
brother to Andrew. He was Bishop of Antioch seven years; and converted many
people of Asia: and after went to Rome, in the time of Claudius, and there
preached the Gospel with great increase. At the same time Mary the Virgin, Mary
the Virgin dyed.
and Mother of (...) Savior Jesus Christ, did change her life, which was the
year of our salvation 47* Not long after, Paul is converted.
Paul being converted from his fantastical Traditions, to a Preacher of
Christ's Gospel, was brought to Rome, where he preached boldly the Gospel,
notwithstanding the great persecutions that he suffered for it, Paul was
beheaded.
and afterward suffered death by the way of beheading, at the commandment of
Nero, Peter was crucified.
the same day that Peter was crucified on a Cross. Thus daily the Congregation
of Christians increased more and more, as the Acts of the Apostles, and other
Histories do declare it fully. Albeit there was great trouble and persecution
in every place, yet God by his power, contrary to their expectation* turned
their cruelty to the furtherance of his Word, confirmation of the faithful,
and confusion of them that used tyranny.

CHAP. II. The Institution of Circumcision and Baptism.
GOD, which had made promise to Abraham, that he should be father of many
Nations, and that all the world should be blessed in his seed, (that is Christ)
willing to stay his faith in the same promise, appointed the Covenant of
Circumcision between him and Abraham, Circumcision.
saying, Every male shall be circumcised, and the flesh of his foreskin shall
be cut round about, for a sign of the League and Confederacy that I make with
thee. Upon this Commandment, Abraham is circumcised.
Abraham then being 99 years of age, did cut his foreskin; and his son
Ismael's, being then 12 years old, whom he begat of Hagar his bond-maid; and
all his servants: For this cause (as S. Cyprian says) that he might have the
first fruits of the blood, which should afterward shed his holy blood for the
redemption of many; Why the blood was shed.
yea of all that believe in him. The fashion of it was, to cut the foreskin of
a man's yard with a knife of stone, as God commanded Joshua, that he should
make knives of stone, to circumcise all the Israelites the second time; The
second Circumcision.
and Moses did circumcise his children with a sharp stone, Chrysostom calls
Circumcision the first and most ancient Commandment; for there is no Nation,
that gave any precepts or rules to live by, before Abraham or Moses; and
therefore it is to be supposed, Other Countries do circumcise.
that other Countries took example at the Hebrews, to circumcise their
Children, as the Phoenicians, and Arabians, the Saracens, the Ethiopians, the
Egyptians, and the Colchians.

This Circumcision of the flesh, was a figure to us of the circumcision of the
heart, What Circumcision signifies.
and casting away of all superfluous lusts, carnal desires, and imports a
moderation and mortifying of the affects and concupisce^ces of the old Adam; I
mean the sinful body: he that had not this sign, was banished out of the number
of the people of God, and had no part in the promises made to Abraham.

Baptism, wherein is left to us a signification both of the mortification of
the flesh, and dying to the World, that we may walk in a new life, and also of
the washing away of our sins by Christ's blood, and is the token that we be of
the body of the Congregation of the faithful, John Baptist author of Baptism.
was instituted by Saint John, son of Zachasry, the 15th year of the Emperor
Tiberius his reign, in the Wilderness, beside the famous River of Jordan, where
he baptized much people. This baptism and washing, was in the water, to
ssignifie the washing away of our sins that should be by Christ, which baptized
in the Holy Ghost and fire. There were signs of Baptism in the old Law, as the
Cloud, the Red Sea, the River of Jordan. The first that was christened of the
Heathen, was Cornelius of Caesaria, and the Eunuch of Queen Candaces.

Christening of Infants was instituted among us, as Circumcision of children
was of the Jews celebrated the eighth day. Iginius Bishop of Rome ordained
first that children, which should be Christened, should have a godfather, and a
godmother, for to be witness of the Sacrament that it was received. And Victor
Bishop there, When Laymen may Christen.
did institute, the one might be christened either by a layman or woman in time
of necessity, because Infants were often in dange^* There be three manner of
Baptisms, (as Cyprian divides it.) Three Baptisms.
One in water, whereof John was author; another in the Holy Ghost and fire,
whereof Christ was Institutor: the third, in blood, wherein the children that
Herod slew, were christened. The old custom of baptizing.
It was also the manner in old time, that they which were grown in age should
be baptized in white apparel, and that was wont to be at Easter or
Whit-sunday; only necessity constrained otherwise. In the mean time, till
those days came, they were taught the mysteries of the Religion of Christ,
which they should profess. Of that custom I suppose the 7th Sunday after
Easter, is called, the White-Sunday.

CHAP. III. Of the Priesthood of the Hebrews, and degrees of the same.
LIke as in the Christian Commonwealth there be two sorts of men, one called
the Laytie, to whom appertains the ministration of the public weal, and all
temporal affairs: the other is the Clergy, to whom belongs the cure and
charge of ministering the Word of God, Sacraments, and other decent ceremonies:
so in the old Law of the Hebrews, there were two jurisdictions, one of them was
Captains and Governors of the Commons: the other was the Priesthood, that did
offer up the sacrifices, and other oblations. Of this degree of Priests. Aaron
first Priest.
Aaron and his sons were the first, ordained and consecrated by Moses at the
Commandment of God.

The manner and fashion of hallowing of them and their Vestures, is declared at
large in the book of Exodus. As for Noah, which made the first Altar, Noah made
the first Altar.
Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did make their offering rather of a
natural devotion, then any Priestly authority.

After that, the Levites, whom we use to call Deacons, were created by Moses to
minister and serve Aaron in all the Sacrifices, to bear the Ark and Tabernacle,
the holy Vessels, and pitch the Camp, and were discharged of all te^^rene
affairs.

Next them were chosen the Ministers, which did make ready the sacrifice, as
Calves, Oxen, Sheep, with such other things, at the commandment of the
Levites, these we may call Subdeacons. Certain other were elected to light the
Tapers and Lamps, named Accolites.

The Sextons or Porters were appointed to keep out all profane and unclean
people. And Readers to preach and read the Law and Prophets on their Sabbath
days.

There were moreover Chaunters and Singers to sing the P^alms in the Temple,
whom David and Asaph did institute.

Conjurers were ordained by Solomon to drive evil spirits our of men.

All these Offices went by Succession, Succession in Priesthood.
neither was one promoted from one to another. Thus was the Levitical
Priesthood appointed, which was but a sign and shadow of things to come, that
is Christ, in whom rests the perfection and complete fulfilling of the Law.

CHAP. IV. Of our Priesthood, how it is double; What laying on of hands means.
CHRIST JESUS our Savior, Christ Author of our Priesthood.
vhich was King and Priest after the order of Melehisedech, in the New
Testament has instituted among us a Priesthood to offer and do the functions
of the new Law: and it is of two kinds or sorts.

The one is a spiritual Priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices. Spiritual
Priesthood.
In this kind Christ offered and gave up himself a consummate oblation for the
sins of the whole world; as Peter says, Christ died once for our sins, he
being righteous, for us unrighteous, that he might give us up to God; mortified
as touching the flesh but living in the spirit.

Of this Priesthood be all Christian men, All Christian men are Priests.
which after the example of Christ must offer our prayers, thanksgiving, and
our bodies mottified: we be all of the degree of this Kingly Priesthood as
Peter, and also John in the Apocalypse do bear witness.

The second Priesthood is a Ministry that Christ did ordain following the
order of the Law, Second Priesthood is a Ministry.
that we might have our teachers to instruct us in the Gospel, as the Jews had
their Schoolmasters in the Law.

He did elect twelve Bishops, whom he called by a new name Apostles, because
they were appointed to be Ambassadors into all parts of the World, with the
mighty word of his power to carry the glad Tidings of his Gospel.

He assigned also 70 Disciples, to whom he gave the charge and office of
Preaching and teaching, which in stead of Aarons Sons, should be among us,
inferior Priests, and Seniours of Congregations: and these began the order of
our Priests, as our Bishops had their original of the Apostles.

As the Apostles and 70 Disciples; which were Ministers and disposers of the
Mysteries of God, The manner of consecrating in the Apostles time.
had no other manner of consecrating, but only the vocation and election of
Christ into the Office, and so was Matthias chosen in the Acts, into the room
of Judas: So were the seven Deacons chosen to Minister to the poor people of
the Congregation. And Titus did choose in every Town and City of Creet, Laying
on of hands.
Priests by the laying on of hands, which was a manner of admission without any
further Ceremonies, whereby Authority was given them over the Congregation, and
boldness to execute earnestly his office with the assistance of the Holy Ghost.

And therefore in the beginning of the Church, The fashion of the Primitive
Church.
when a Bishop was consecrated, there was used no other Rites or Ceremonies,
but only the people to whom the Election of the Bishop belonged, should pray:
and after the Seniours or Priests by laying on their hands, admitted him to
that degree. Of these Peter was called chief, and first, because both of his
ancient^y, and also forasmuch as he was the first Elected.

A Bishops room is not so much an honor, A Bishops office.
as it is an heavy burden, not so much a laud, as a load. For his duty is not
only to wear a Mitre and Crosier, but also to watch over the flock of the Lord
vigilantly, to teach with the Word diligently, with example honestly, and in
all things to go before them uprightly, and lead them in the way of Truth, that
they may follow the pattern of his godly living, and there as it were in a
Mirror, behold how they ought to reform and conform their lives. And this
office of the Bishopric and Deacons was instituted by the Scripture only: for
Priests in the Primative Church and Bishops were all one. Scripture bears
these


But the Bishops of Rome following the shadows of the old abrogate law of the
Hebrews, Rome made more Orders
have ordained a swarm of diverse other orders, as Potters or Sextons, Readers,
Exorcists, Accolites, Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, as a
certain degree one above another, whereby they should ascend to the highest
dignity. Caius Bishop of Rome did begin the Orders first: Iginius did devise
first Orders.
yet some say, Iginius did ordain those degrees long before Caius his time. And
I grant well that Iginius might be the first deviser of them, and afterward
Caius accomplished the work, and brought it to a final consummation.

The office of a Priest (as Christ ordained it) was to teach, The Office of a
Priest.
Baptize, and Minister the Sacrament of the Altar, and thanksgiving, bind and
loofe, and judge of Doctrines.

Therefore let them take heed that admit such to be Priests, as cannot perform
the duty of that ministry. For many suppose if they can mumble up a pair of
Matins, and say Mass, they be perfect Priests.

CHAP. V. The manner of shaving Priests Crowns, who may not be Priest, what age
he must be of.
THe common and general badge of all Priests is the shaven Crown. The shaven
Crown is the Priests badge.
whereby the Clergy is dissevered from the Laity, and be put in remembrance by
it, how they ought altogether to relinquish and despise all carnal pleasure,
and worldly treasure, and ensue after heavenly things, which be eternal, This
as Beda writes, Occasion of shaving of Crowns.
grew into a custom, and was decreed by a constitution, to the intent that the
thing which was before opprobrious, might grow to honor and comeliness. For
Peter when he preached at Antioch, Peter was mocked for his baldness.
was scorned and mocked because of his bald head, or shaven Crown, and it was a
contumelious thing, both among the Romans and Lombards to be shaven. I think
the original cause of it did proceed of the Ceremonies of the Nazarens, Shaven
Crowns came of the Nazarens.
which when they had lived long time (as Josephus tells) very devoutly, they
shaved their heads, and sacrificed the hair in the fire to God, whereby they
signified that they did dedicate themselves wholly to live in Godly perfection.
Samuel was a Nazaren, and Sampson also. I suppose that this Rite of the
Nazarens came out of Egypt, Priests of Egypt were shaven. What the Crown
signifies.
where the Priests were customably, shaven, in token of sorrow and heaviness,
for the death of their God Apis. And they were also shaven daily, because they
should be without filth, in their quotidian Sacrifice

The signification of the Priests crouns, is to declare, that they ought to
reject terrene and Earthly substance, reserving to themselves only a competent
sufficiency. Anacletus first forbad Priests to have beards, or long hair.

Siricus decreed, that all those men that were twice married, or wedded a
Widow, should be no Priests.

Anastasius commanded, Lame men may not be Priests.
that none that was lame or maimed, should be admitted to be a Priest.

Bonifacius instituted, That no man could be a Priest, The age of Priests.
before he were 30 years old; for that was the age of Priests in the old Law.
But the Council of Laterane thought it sufficient, if he were 25 years old,
after the example of the Levites, which at that age ministered in the Tabernacle.

Anacletus also appointed, Stalling a Bishop.
that every Bishop should be installed and consecrated of other ancient Bishops.

CHAP. VI. Who devised Parishes, and Diocesses, the Order of Cardinals,
Notaries, and Chamberlains.
AFter that the Priesthood was ordained, both lest the cure should be
overgreat, and also that every man might know what his charge was, and ho far
his Office extended; Dionysius, the year of our Lord 267, divided, both in Rome
and other places Churches, Churchyards, and Parishes, to Curates; and
Diocesses to Bishops, and commanded every man should be contented* with his
prescript bounds. But before that, Cures in Rome.
Euaristus appointed titles of Cures to the Priests in Rome, whose duty was to
christen all that were converted from Paganism to Christian Religion, and
resorted thithen (...) received ^he faith, and to bury the dead. And afterward
Marcellus decreed, that there should be (...) in number.

These, because they were the chief Priests in Rome, Cardinals.
and had the prerogative before the rest, were named Cardinals* and of them
without doubt, the order of Cardinals sprung first, which for as much as they
were in daily presence with the Bishop of Rome, that then had the primary o^ of
Christ endome, were had in great reputation and reverence. And Innocentius the
fourth of that name* (which was about the year of our Lord, Innocentius.
1^54.) willing to augment and advance their dignity, commanded by (...) that
from thenceforth they should ri^^ when they came to the Bishop's Palace, and
wear a red hat, Cardinal Hatts.
whereby was mean* that they ought to be in ^^^endinesse, to adventure
themselves for the love of Religion, and spend their blood in Christ's Cause:
and Paulus, Bishop, ordained, that they should have Scarlet Robes or Kirtells.
This order stands of three sorts, for some be Bishops, and be in number s^x.
Order of Cardinals.
The Cardinals of Hostia, Sabine, Portua, Tusculane, Prenestine, and Albane.
The other were either Priests; or Deacons, albeit in no certain or special
number. But there is another Order in Rome of Notaries, which were appointed by
Julius the first of that name, to write the Acts of all godl^ Martyrs and
Confessors, and register them for a perpetual example, of constant and virtuous
living. Albeit, I think it rather to be the invention and device of Clement,
which ordained seven Notaries, to inroll the notable deeds of Martyrs. And
Antherius after, did more firmly ratify it. Also Leo the first, a godly and
well disposed man, seeing the people repair thither from all parts of the world
for pardon, appointed certain Officers of the Priests, whom he named
Chamberlains, to keep the Tombs and Sepulchers of the Apostles and Martyrs,
that they perceiving the holy reverence about the Apostles graves, might be
more enflamed with devotion. But all such Offices be now perverted, and turned
from that godly purpose, to a vain worldly ostentation and pomp, and be ready
Merchandise in Rome; the promotions be so grear.

CHAP. VII. The Prerogatives of the Bishop of Rome* and his Election.
ONe special Prerogative and Privilege of the Bishop of Rome, The Bishop of
Rome may change his name.
i^, that he may change his name, if it seem to him not very pleasant to his
ears. As to speak merrily if he be a malefacto^^, he may call his name
Bonifacius: if he be a coward, he may be called Leo: for a Carter, Vrbanus: and
for a cruel man, Clemens: if nocent, Innocentius: if ungodly, Sergius invented
the changing of his name.
Pius. This was the ordinance of Sergius; and they say, they do it after the
example of Christ, which changed Simon Barjona his name into Peter: and of this
it came to pass, that every Bishop when he was elected, chose the name of one
of his predecessors.

The Bishop of Rome is also born on men's shoulders; which custom came of the
election of Stephanus the second, whom the people for his great virtue and
godliness, with much joy of the election, bare on their shoulders. The manner
of the pomp of bearing was admitted, but the imitating and following of his
virtue and sincere living, was omitted. Albeit, it might spring of a gentile
custom that was among the Romans, that every rich man or high Potentate,
should be born of his servants in a bed.

The authority to choose the Bishop of Rome, Election of the Bishop of Rome.
belonged first to the Emperor of Constantinople, and the Deputy of Italy,
till the time of the Emperor Constantine, which licenced the Cardinals and the
people of Rome, to elect him. This was about the year of Christ 685. A few
years after, Gregory the third; with other his Successors, The Empire is
removed into France by Bishops of Rome.
when they were vexed by the Lombards, seeing they could not have ready help of
the Emperor of Constantinople, required aid of Charles Martelle, Pippin, and
Charles the Great, King of France. For which benefits, Leo the third made and
denounced Charlemain, Emperor, and gave him authority to ratify and confirm
the election of the Bishop of Rome: but Nicholas the second, rerestrained the
election only to the Cardinals; which custom remains at this day.

The great possessions that the Bishop^ of Rome have, contrary to the example
of Christ, (whose Vicars they name themselves) and Peter's poverty, their
predecessor, Charles gave the Lands to the Sea of Rome.
were given them by (...) and L^wi^, Emperors. And yet notwithstanding all
that large benigni^y and kindness showed to him and his Ancestors, John the
12th made Oth^, King of Germany, Otho, a German, is made Emperor.
Emperor; and afterward Gregory the third, a Ger^^^ born, for to gratify the
Empero^^ his Countryman, Decreed, that the (...) shops of Mogunce, Treverance,
and C^^len, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, (...) County Palatine, Princes
Electors Decree by the Bishop of Rome.
Duke of Saxony, and King of Bohemia, should have full power to choose the
Emperor, about the year of our Lord, 1002.

Thus the Bishops of Rome have been inhanced in worldly power, that they think
themselves equal with Princes, Kings, and Emperors. But, as it was falsely
Usurped, so shall it by the Word of God, be rooted out and extirpateds, as an
unprofitable Tree.

CHAP. VIII. The dividing of Priests into sundry degrees; A manner of Swearing,
and Excommunication.
GRegory, surnamed the Great, where before time, Priests and chief Priests
(...) only used in the Congregation, first divided them into Patriarchs and
Archbishops. Patriarchs at the first were of Rome, Antioch, Alexandria,
Jerusalem, and Constantinople; Archbishops had their title to be called
Metropolitans, because their See was in the Mother-City of the Province. The
Pall is decreed to the Patriarchs.
(...) the first ordained, that all Patriarchs and Archbishops should wear a
Pall, which which does signify Meekness and Justice, wherewith they should
especially be garnished. Then also the inferior Orders began to be divided, as
that the Archdeacon should be above a Deacon, and Archpriest above the
Priest, and over them the Deans; and then were ordained Canons* that sing in
Cathedral Churches. (...) permitted, Changing of Bishoprics.
that a Bishop might change his Bishopric for another, upon an honest cause,
if he were thought sufficient to discharge a greater, for his learning and
godliness* Caius first made a Statute, that a Priest might not be Convented
before a Temporal Judge: A Priest might not be convented.
but lest any man should be circumvented by fraud or guile, Eu^^chianus
instituted, That the accusati^^ should be put in writing before the Judge.
Likewise Cornelius decreed, (...) a man should not take or require (...) oath
of a Priest; but only in matter^ concerning Religion and Faith.

The manner of Swearing, was in ol^ time of this sort: He that should swe^^*
took a Stone in his hand, and said; If I deceive you that I know, Jupiter
banish me out of all good men's company, preserving the rest of the City, as I
cast away this stone from me. And (as Pliny (...) write) it was not lawful for
any man to bear an Office five days, unless he were sworn. In like manner our
Bishops, Kings, Priests, or other Offices-swear, before they be admitted to the
Office.

Justinianne, Emperor, appointed first that men should swear by the Gospel*
and now adays, all that swear, lay their hand on the book and kiss it,
saying, So help me God, and the holy Gospel: because as the Gospel of our
Religion and Faith, may for no cause be violated; so an Oath in no case may be
broken.

The fashion of excommunicating men that be obstinate and disobedient to the
Officers, Excommunication.
or common tran^gressors, came (as some think) out of the Rites of the Jews,
which banished out of their Synagogue, all those that ran in obstinacy against
their Traditions.

And some suppose it sprung of the Religious folk in France, named Druides,
which (as Caesar records) if either a private man or officer, were ^ot
conformably ordered after their Ceremonies, excluded him out of their company.

CHAP. IX. Consecrating Nuns, taking off our Ca^kissing the Pope^ feet, and
washing of feet.
THe custom to consecrate Virgins, making a vow of chastity, was (...) by Pius
the first, which instituted (...) that none should be made, before (...) were
25 years old; The age of Nuns at their profession.
and that they might be consecrated at no time, but in the Epiphany or
Twelf-day, Easter, Eav^^, and on the Feasts of the Apostles, (...) it were when
any professed, were (...) point to dye. And Sotherus caused (...) a Decree was
made that no such Professed, should touch Cope, Nuns might touch no coap nor
Incense.
or put Ince^se into the Censors the year of our Lord God 175. It seems to
have begun (...) the Apostles, which is proved by Paul's words, where he says,
let no Widow be chosen, before she be threescore years of age, with diverse like
sayings.

Lynus Bishop of Rome, commanded that no woman should enter into the
Congregation or Temple, Women may not be bare head in the Church.
with her head bare, which appears to have been taken of the Hebrews: for the
Bishop i^ the old Law might not uncover his head, and in Arabia and Carthage,
it (...) taken for an unhonest and unreverent thing, if a Woman should uncover
her head, Taking off of Caps.
and go bare. The taking off of our caps to our Superiors, signifies that we
should disclose, and show them all such things, as we have in our custody.

The Rite diabolick, of Kissing the Bishop of Romes feet, Kissing the Bishop of
Romes feet.
took its original of the manner of the Romans, which in their Paganism, used
to kiss the feet of the people and other nobles, in token of obedience: as
Seneca tells how Caius Caesar stretched out his left foot, that Pompeius a
Carthaginian might kiss it.

Pompenius Laetus writes, that the Emperors used to give their hands to be
kissed of the Nobles, and then to take them up, to kiss their mouths, and the
Commons kissed their knees: but Cuius Caligula, and Dioclesianus, made them to
stoop to their feet. This Pagan example, our Christian Bishop and Gods Vicar,
full uncomely, and ungodly, does counterfeit. All other Bishops used to deliver
their right hand, to be kissed of such as came to salute them: For the Right
hand, as Pliny says in the 11th book, has in it self a certain Religion, and
therefore, we make all Covenants and Promises with it. The manner of saluting
with kisses, is very ancient, Saluting With Kisses.
for it was the manner of the Hebrews to kiss strangers at their first
meeting, as Jacob kissed Rachel, before he broke unto her, that he was of
kindred; and Laban, after he knew him to be his sisters son, embraced him with
his Arms, and kissed him. And the Romans custom was to kiss their kinsfolk,
but afterward it was extended to further familiarity, and is now frequented
very lasciviously. Albeit, in Rome it was an Ordinance, that Women should kiss
their kinsfolk, because that if Sshe had drunk any Wine, contrary to the Law
made against the Women, for drinking of Wine, by such means she might be espied.

Washing of feet, on Maundays-Thursday, that the Priests use among themselves,
Washing of feet on Maundy Thursday.
and Nobles to inferior persons, is a counterfeit of the institute of Christ,
who to show them a pattern of humility and meekness, washed the Apostles feet.
The Kings and Queens of England that day, wash the feet of so many poor men and
women, as they be years old, and give to every of them, so many pence, with a
Gown, and an ordinary Alms of meat, and kiss their feet, and afterward give
their gowns on their backs to them that they see most need of all the number.
It is a godly institute, I would there were more such Ceremonies to help the
poor. For they be now neglected, and not regarded, but lie dead often in the
streets, for lack of sustenance.

CHAP. X. The Institution of Priests called Flamines, with other Religions of
the Romans.
NUma Pompilius, the second King of Rome, willing to reclaim that fierce Nation
from war and Chivalry, to the regard of Justice, and keeping of Peace, ordained
to the High God Jupiter, a Sacred person called Flamen Dialis, Flamen. Dialis.
that is, Jupiters Priest.

And to advance the order, he set him in a Chariot of Ivory, and a costly Robe:
but so soon as his Wife was deceased, he was discharged, and gave over his
Office.

He never road out, nor might not lie one night out of the City, lest any
sacrifices should be neglected by such absence.

Swearing was clean forbidden him, because an Oath is a manner of punishment to
any freeborn man, and namely to a Priest, which has charge of all divine
observances: For his word should have the weight of an Oath.

I could wish that our Bishops would mark and follow both those properties of
these Heathen Religions, for then the state of our Religion should be better
case then it is, and others would not enforce so lightly, a Priest to the
necessity of an oath, which should have no other terms, but yea and nay, to
confirm or deny their saying.

Beside this Flamin, that was called Dialis because he was consecrated to
Jupiter, there were by the same Numa ordained two other, one to Mars, another
to Quirine; albeit Plutarch says it was Romulus that instituted Priests to
Jupiter and Mars.

Virgins Vestall, were of his bringing in also, and founded in honor of Vesta,
daughter to Saturnus. The first that ever was chosen into that Religion, was
called A^^ata, and of her all were named likewise. A maid might not be under
six years of age, nor above ten, if she were created of this Religion. These
continued in their profession thirty years, where of the first ten they spent
in learning the Rites, the other ten they ministered, and the last of their
years, they taught other Novices, and when her term of years was expired, she
might marry, or tarry in that Religion still. They were found at the charges of
the common chest: and if any of them committed any carnal act with any man, she
was born in the sight of all the people out of the City, and at the gate named
Collina, was buried quick. They rode in a Wagon, and other Magistrates rode to
them, and if they came by in time of execution, the condemned was quite
delivered. This Religion began at Alba by the institution of Ascanius, Pontifex
maximus.
and was renewed in Rome by King Numa. A high Bishop was instituted also by him,
to have the chief stroke in all ceremonies of Sacrificing, and he prescribed
the days and places of Sacrifices, and in what form they should be done. He
ordained also to Gradivus Mars, twelve Priests named Salii* because they danced
in a solemn manner, and went about the City with songs. They ware an
embroidered coat, with a Brazen Breastplate, and a round Tergate. It seems
that Numa took this Rite from the Hebrews; for David went before the Ark of the
Lord dancing.

Heralds of Arms which were called Feciales Sacardotes, were ordained by him,
to provide that no battle were unjustly taken in hand: they also made leagues,
established Peace, or if it were not duly made, they might break it, and offer
oblation for the offense of the Captain, and the hole Army. Pater Patraetus was
an Officer that made all leagues or Bonds, and was created by the Heralds, as
Marcus Valerius first Herald, ordained Spurius Fusius first in the office of
Pater Patratus. After the expulsing of Kings, an office called Rex Sacrificulus
was appointed, which should do all such customable observances, as the Kings
should do; Albeit, it was under the High Priest or Bishop, the first tha^ did
bear that office, was Marcus Papirius.

Epulones had the Office of appointing feasts, and solemn Bankets to Jupiter
and the other gods, these were also called Sodales Titii, which were ordained
by Romulus after he joined fellowship with Titus Tatius.

The End of the Fourth Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Fifth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the decking of Churches on Holy Days* offering of Images of Wax,
and Tables of Miracles; solemnizing first Masses of Priests.
THere be many superstitious Customs crept in among Christian Congregations,
which cam^ of an Ethnic opinion^ and because they could not altogether be
abolished and extirpated, yet they were transposed to a better use, and removed
from Idolatry, to the ^^^^shing of Churches and Temples of (...) faithful
people. As trimming of (...) Temples with hangings, flowrs, ^^^ghes and
garlands, was taken of the Heathen people, which decked their Idols and houses
with such array. Offering Images of Wax or Tapers.
In like manner it is to be thought, of the the of hanging up Images of Wax,
and Tapers before Saints, or as often as any member is diseased, to offer the
same in (...), as legs, arms, feet, Paps, Oxen, Horse, or sheep, which were
hanged up in the Church, before that Saint, by whom (as they believed) they had
obtained health, of the said member or ^east: for this came of an old
Heathenish fashion of sacrifices, that the Pagans offered to Saturnus and
Pluto, in an Isle of Italy, named Cotillia, whereof I spoke before. I think the
bearing of Candles, that we use on the Feast of the Purification of our Lady,
called Candlemas-day, came of this Gentile rite also, that in burning them, we
might worship the Saints, as they honored their false god Saturn. It seems
that Lamps and hanging lights began of the Candles, that Moses set up to burn
in the Tabernacles. The fastening up of Tables, wherein the Miracles are
written, for ^ Monument and testimony to the posterity, came of a custom, as
Strabo writes, that is used in Greece, where the manner is, that whosoever was
relieved of any sickness or malady, should hang up a Table, containing the
recovery of his health, in the Temple of that God* that had preserved him, and
especially there were many set up in Aesculaplu^^ Temple at Epidaurus. The use
of feasting on holy days, and at the first Mass of Priests, was borrowed also
of the Gentiles, which honored the day of consecrating their Religious as
solemnly, at the day of their Nativity, with devour and religious breakfasts
and feasts, calling it, the Native day of their sacred personages: whereof
Apul^ius makes mention. And it is a good usage, because the day of the birth
brings but only life, the day of consecrating a Priest brings,
or else ought to procure, a good and godly life. Albeit (...) Maundy-Thursday,
Drinking on Maundy-Thursday.
has been the manner from the beginning of the Church, to have a general
drinking, as appears by S. Paul's writing to the Corinthians, and Tertullian
to his Wife.

CHAP. XI. The manner of casting money to the people, New Years gifts, Dancing,
Maying, Christmas Lords.
IT smells also of Gentility that the Bishop of Rome, Emperors, and Kings at
their Coronation, are wont to scatter money among the Commons, Casting of money
abroad.
and make Royal feasting, which is a pretense or sign of the beneficence or
liberality, that is to come afterward. For the old Romans used the same order
and institution, in their Triumphs, Games, and Funerals, as Suetonius records.

Presenting of New Years gifts had its original thence likewise; for Suetonius
Tranquillus reports, that the Knights of Rome gave yearly on the Kalends of
January, a present to Augustus Caesar, although he were absent. Which custom
remains in England; for the Subjects send to their Superiors, and the Noble
personages give to the Kings some great gifts; and to gratify their kindness,
he does liberally reward them with some thing again.

But I commend more the manner of the Italians: The laudable manner of the
Italians.
for there the richest and most noble, give to the poor inferiors; it is a
signification of good and prosperous fortune of all the whole year following.

The use of Dancing (as Livy says) came from the Hetruscans to Rom^, which we
exercise much on Holidayes, as they did; not without slander of our Religion,
and hurt and damage of chastity.

As for Masks, they be so devilish, that no honesty can be pretended to color
them: Zacharias Bishop of Rome, made a decree against it, but that avails
nothing.

At the Kalends of May, the Youth, as well men as women, are wont to go a
Maying in the fields, and bring home boughs and flowers to garnish their houses
and gates, and in some places the Churches: which fashion is derived of the
Romans that use the same to honor their Goddess Flora, with such Ceremonies,
whom they named Goddess of fruits.

The Christmas Lords rhat be commonly made, at the Nativity of the Lord, to
whom all the household and family, with the Master himself, must be obedient,
began of the equality, that the servants had with their Masters in Saturnus
Feasts that were called Saturnalia: wherein the Servants have like Authority
with their Masters, during the time of the said feasts.

And this furnishing of our bellies with delicates that we use on Fastingham
Tuesday, what time some eat till they be enforced to forbear all again, sprung
of Baccbus feasts, that were celebrated in Rome, with great joy and delicious
fare.

And our Midsummer bone-fires, may seem to have come of the Sacrifices of
Cer^s, Goddess of Corn, that men did solemnise with fires, trusting thereby to
have more plenty and abundance of Corn.

Disguising and Mumming that is used in Christmas time in the North parts, came
out of the Feast of Pallas, that were done with Vizors, and painted Visages,
named Quinquatria of the Romans.

CHAP. III. The manner of anointing Priests, Kings, them that be Christened,
confirmed, of sore sick.
WHen Moses had builded the Tabernacle, he was commanded to make a confection
of holy Ointment, wherewith both the Work; Kings and Priests were anointed.
the Vessels, Priests, and also Kings, which be called to that office or
dignity, ought to be anointed: so that it came to pass, that the anointing was
the very token and difference, whereby Kings were known among the Hebrews,
Purple Robe is the difference of the Emperor.
as the Emperors in Rome were known by their Purple Roabs. Aaron and his Sons,
were the first anointed Priests, and Samuel anointed Saul first King over
Israel, Aaron and Saul first anointed.
and so consequently it grew into a custom, that Priests and Kings were
anointed. By which thing is signified, that they be specially favored of God,
and like as Oil lies aloft on the water, or other Liquor, so the office of a
Priest, and dignity of a Prince, surmounteth all other degrees of Ministers,
both in the active and also contemplative life.

Silvester Bishop of Rome ordained first, Anointing of children Christened.
that all that were Christened, Churches, and Chalices, should be anointed with
Oil. Our oil that is now used, is made of Oil Olive, and natural Balm, Fabianus
commanded that it should be renewed every Monday and Thursday.

Clement the first ordained, that all Children and other that were Christened,
should be anointed again with Crisme, and he instituted also the Sacrament of
Confirmation, supposing that no man were a perfect Christian, if that Rite and
Ceremony were by negligence omitted. For this cause that the Holy Ghost might
more plentifully be given to them by the hands of the Bishop.

This thing began of the example of the Apostles, which sent Peter and John
into Samaria, to lay their hands on them, that they might receive the Holy
Ghost. The manner of confirming.
It is only ministered by a Bishop in this wise: first he asks the name of
the child, and then makes the sign of the Cross in the forehead, with the
Chrisme, saying: I sign thee with the token of the Cross, and confirm thee
with the Crisme of Salvation, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; that thou may be reple^ished with the Holy Spirit, and have everlasting
life; So (...) And then he smites the cheek of (...) Child softly: but if he
be of a great age, he gives a sharp stroke, that he may remember that mystery,
saying, Peace (...) with thee.

Felix the fourth did institute, Extreme Unction.
That such as were in extremes should be anointed, following the example of the
Apostles, which, as Mark wi^nesseth, cured many diseases by anointing them and
S. James speaks of a like thing in his Epistle.

CHAP. IV. The beginning of Marriage of Priests, when it was forbidden; with
other Laws touching Marriage.
MOses the Minister of God among the Israelites, which were desirous to augment
and amplify their issue, ordained, that all men indifferen^ly, as well Priests
as Lay People should take wives, lest the debarring them from matrimony, might
be occasion of greater enormity, and inconvenience among them. When a Priest
might not marry.
Albeit, because of the dignity of the ordet of Priesthood, he made restraint,
that they should marry none that was taken prisoner, bondwoman, or divorced
from their former husband; and the Bishops might not be married but to Maids.
Bishops married Maids.
As concerning our Priesthood, Sylvester the first, after the Text of S. Paul,
commanded that a Priest should marry but one wife, A Priest might but once
marry.
and after to live sole alone: as Paul had a wife, as may appear in his
Epistles to the Philipians and Corinthians. And Clement Bishop of Alexandria,
and Ignatius, which was in Paul's time, witness the same.

Peter and Philip had wifes and daughters, whom they bestowed honestly in
marriage to husbands. And S. Peter seeing his Wife led to death, for the
profession of Christ, with great joy of her constancy, said; Wife, remember the
Lord. This order the Greeks, and all the East parts of Christendom do use,
which would not consent to the Council of Niece, wherein it was propounded,
That the Priests should forsake their Wives: Paphnutius withstood the Council
of Nice.
and namely, Paphnutius, the holy and chaste Bishop, that came out of the
borders of Egypt, withstood that Decree very earnestly. Stiricius the first
forbade the Priests of the West parties, and Deacons to marry, the year of our
Lord 337. He instituted also, That he that either wedded a Widow, or took a
second wife, could not be made Priest, Pelagius the second enforced the
Subdeacons to forsake their wifes. And Gregorius, because he thought it
violent to divorce them, ordained, That from his time, none should be
Subdeacon, unless he vowed Chastity before. Notwithstanding, Gregory
established the single life of Priests.
the Laws before made took no effect among the Priests of the West parts,
until the time of Gregory the seventh, which was the year of our Lord, 1074.

And here Polidore protests, That the single life of Priests does more harm
to the Religion, shame to the Order, and grief to honest men, then their
constrained chastity profieth: If they were restored to the liberty and choice,
it were no prejudice to the Christian Commonwealth, and honesty for the Order.
Decrees of kindred inhibited.
In the beginning men married their sisters and kinswomen; but Moses restrained
them of the Hebrews, from the first and second degrees: and Fabianus forbade
the third and fourth; which Custom stands now in effect. Theodorus did
inhibit first, That a man might not marry that Maid, to whom his father was a
Godfather. It was confirmed first by Gregory, and after by Alexander the
third, That no man should marry his brother's wife, lest it should be thought
to be a counterfeit of the Hebrews. Lanuch was the first that ever had two
wives whose example many others ensued afterward.

The custom of purifying of women, Purification of women after Childbearing.
was taken of the Hebrews, but there is no day or time appointed for it.
Nevertheless, for an honest order, they use commonly not to be purified before
the month day, and then with a few honest Matrons, she comes accompanied to
the Church, and offers a wax Taper, and the Chrisome.

CHAP. V. Of the Temples, Churchyards; when the Cross was first had in
reverence.
IN the Old Testament, Moses set up a Tabernacle, curiously edified to God,
wherein Supplication and Intercession was made to him for the (...) of the
people. And in that he made the Ark of Covenant, in the which he put the two
Tables of stone, containing the Law of the Ten Commandments, Aaron's rod, and
the pot of Manna. Solomon made the first Temple.
After him, Solomon, King of the Hebrews, made at Jerusalem ^ Temple of costly
array, and sumptuously wrought. I cannot (to say truth) perfectly tell, where
the first Church of Christians was builded, but by all conjecture, it seems
that it was made of the Apostles, either in Ethiopia, where Matthew preached;
or in Lower India, where Bartholomew taught; or in Scythia, where Andrew showed
the Word of God. Where they doubtless, either cause new Churches to be
edified, or else transposed the Idol's Temples, to serve the Christians use,
abolishing Superstition, and planting the true Religion of Christ. Albeit, it
were not against reason, to suppose there was a Temple or house of prayer,
appointed by James at Jerusalem. First Church in Rome:
In Rome the first that I read of, was consecrated by Pius Bishop of Rome, in
the street called Patricius, at Novatus Baths, in honor of the Virgin
Prudentia, at the request and suit of Praredis her sister. And after Calistus
made a Temple to the Virgin Mary, in a place beyond Tiberis, and instituted a
Churchyard in Apius's street, and called it after his own name. But Abraham
was the first that made any place of burial in Hebron, Abraham ordained the
first place of Burial.
where he bought of Ephron an Hittite, the double Cave for 300 shekels of
silver, with the the ground about it; and there, was Sarah his wife, and he
himself buried.

Noah builded the first Altar, and offered upon it a burned Sacrifice to the
Lord. And Bonifacius the third, caused that they were covered with linen
clothes. Constantine forbade putting to death on the Cross.
Constantinus when he had won the battle against Maxentius, by reason of a
vision that he saw of the cross the day of the battle, ordained, that from
thenceforth, no man should suffer death on the cross. And so in process of
time, it was had in much reverence and worship. And Theodosius made a law, That
there should no Image of the cross be graven in stone, marble, or in earth,
lest men should tread on it. Hellen, Constantine's Mother, Hellen found the
Cross of Christ.
a very virtuous woman, repaired to Jerusalem, to seek the Cross of our Lord,
where with great labor and diligence, she fouud it, and with it the other two,
whereon the Thieves were hanged: but it was ease to perceive Christ's Cross by
the Title, which then did remain, albeit sore wasted and corrupted with
Antiquity.

CHAP. VI. Of the ancient rite or sacrificing; Feast-dayes, dedicating Temples;
the mystery of Fire, Holy Water.
CAin and Abel, Cain and Abel sacrificed first.
the two sons of our first Father Adam offered in sacrifice to God the first
fruits of their goods. Abel his oblation was a Lamb; Cain his gift was Corn.
Afterward, when the Priesthood was ordained, Aaron and his sons offered diverse
things with sundry Ceremonies, which he showed at large in the book of
Leviticus.

The Gentiles almost all sacrificed to the Idols men or women after sundry
rites, Men were sacrificed by the Gentiles. Punishments that they suffered for
omitting the oblations.
as appears in the Histories of Gentile-Authors. And if it fortuned, that
they omitted any such abominable idolatry, they had great punishment,
destruction of their fruit, corruption of their water, infection of the Air,
death of Cattle, great droughts, women had evil deliverance, with many such
plagues, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus witnesses, which the spirits of the air
procured to delude and seduce men, and confirm them in their error.

The holy days among the Jews were diverse, as the Sabbath Day, the Feast of
the new Moon, the Passover, the Feast of unleavened bread, Pentecost, the
Feast of Tabernacles, the Dedication day: which be all showed largely in the
Old Testament.

The use of dedicating Churches, Dedicating of Churches.
is of great antiquity: for Moses did sanctify the Tabernacle; and Solomon
consecrated the Temple that he builded at Jerusalem. And Esdras after, when
they returned from the Captivity of Babylon, hallowed the Temple new again. Of
them we receive our Rite of hallowing of Churches, albeit we have more
ceremonies then they had.

Fire was kept continually on the Altar by the Priests; for without it and
salt, could no sacrifice be duly made, or ordinarily offered; and we in our
Masses have ever a Taper of Wax burning. And the Emperors of Rome had Fire
born before them, and the Vestals had ever perpetual Fire in the Temple where
they served Vesta.

The spirits of the air, that gave doubtful answers to them that enquired any
question of them, Oracles ceased at Christ's coming.
were at the coming of Christ all destroyed. For when he was carried into
Egypt, which is a Country full of superstition and Idolatry, all the Idols of
that Region were overthrown, and fell to the ground at his coming thither. And
in the time of Adrian the Emperor, both the wicked sacrifices were abolished,
and also the Oracles of Apollo at Delphos, Jupiter-Hammon in Egypt, with like
vanities were subverted by the power of God through his Son Jesus Christ.

Holy Water was ordained by Alexander the first, to be consecrated to drive
away Spirits, and was commanded, that it should be kept as well in Churches, as
in private houses for the same use: whereof are grown among the common people
many superstitious errors, contrary to the Word of God.

CHAP. VII. Who ordained Praying. Why we look Eastward, Ministering the
Sacrament of the Altar.
FOrasmuch as we are created of God, after his own Image, for the intent to
honor and serve him, and so finally to enjoy the eternal inheritance of
Heaven, which we must attain to by Prayer, acknowledging our own infirmities,
and referring us to the mercy of our most loving Father. It shall therefore be
convenient to declare the institution of Prayer.

Prayer therefore was from the beginning, Prayer was at the beginning.
as Abel prayed, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, with other Patriarks, prayed to
God in all their doubtful affairs, and gave thanks for the good atchieving of
them. Moses and Aaron, with other, as Anna the wife of Helcanah showed us an
example of Prayer. Christ prescribed a Prayer.
But Christ is the first that did show us any special form of Prayer, as
appears in the Gospel of Matthew. Afterward when men began to count their
Prayers, as though God were in our debt for often begging of him, there were
devised by one Petrus Heremita a Frenchman of the City of Amiens, Bedes, to say
Lady Psalters on, the year of our Lord 1090. The same Petrus was occasion that
Pope Urbane stirred the Christians to make a Voyage into Asia, at which time
Jerusalem was recovered.

The manner of turning our faces into the East, when we pray, is taken of the
old Heathens, which as Apuleius remembers, used to look Eastward, and salute
the Sun: we take it in a custom to put us in remembrance that Christ is the
Son of Righteousness, that discloseth all secrets. But that was not lawful
for the Hebrews, as may seem to us by the setting of the Tabernacle, and they
must ever look toward the Temple as the story of Daniel declares. Moses when
he had received the ten Commandments, assembling the people together, showed
them the will of God, and that was the first Sermon or Preaching: and the
Prophets had without doubt open collations: And afterward John Baptist in the
Wilderness of Jury Preached, and so did Christ himself, and gave Authority to
the Apostles and Disciples by special Commandment to do the same.

The blessed Sacrament of the Altar was instituted by our Savior Jesus Christ,
The institution of the Sacrament.
a little before his Passion in Jerusalem at his Supper, when he had ended the
Paschal lamb, in this wise: He took bread, and after he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take and eat, This is my body
that shall be given for you; So taking the Cup, he gave thanks likewise, and
delivered it to them, Saying, Drink ye all of this Cup, for this is my blood of
the New Testament, which is shed for the remission of sins. Thus under the form
of bread and Wine, he gave to them particularly his body and blood sanctified
in and by the Word. And gave commandment that like Sacrifice should be made in
remembrance of him.

Alexander the Bishop of Rome did ordain that this oblation should be made of
sweet bread, Alexander decreed that the Sacrament should be consecrated of
sweet bread.
where before it was Leavened bread. And he commanded that water should be mixed
with Wine in the Cup.

CHAP. VIII. Who Sacrificed first after Christ's Tradition, and increased the
parts of the Mass.
EVerything at the first in the Ministry of the Lords Supper, The old Rite of
consecrating.
was plain, sincere, and without any mixture of Ceremonies, containing more
virtue then Solemnity. For it is manifest that Peter, which either first of
all, or else with the rest of the Apostles, did consecrate often times after
the Rite that he had received of Christ, and by and by, after the Consecration
joined to the Lords Prayer or Pater Noster: And I suppose it was not much
differing from the Mass that is used in the Church on Good Friday. Coelestinus
ordained the prayers that the Priest says when he revesteth himself to Mass,
or at putting on his clothes that begins Judica me Deus, etc. Albeit it
seems by the words of Chrysostom in the 11th Homily on Matthew that it was
taken of the Churches of Greece and Asia, which used to sing Psalms while the
people assembled together. Damasus instituted the confession at the beginning
of Mass, and some refer it to Pontianus. Kyrie eleeson was frequented in
Greece first, and Gregorius caused it to be said nine times in the Latin
Church. Gloria in excelsis is ascribed of some to Telesphorus, of some to
Hilarious, of some to Symmachus; and the Council of Toletane thinks that the
Doctors of the Church made it. Collect Gelasius and Gregory gathered. And the
Grail was appointed by them also. Alleluya was translated from Jerusalem to the
Latin Church in the time of Damasus. The Tract, Durandus says was devised by
Telesphorus, and Sequences were invented first by one Nothgerus an Abbot. The
Epistles and Gospel were (as Hierom writes) used in the East Churches of very
ancient time, S. Hierome did devide the Epistles and Gospels
wherefore I suppose we had the manner to read the Epistle and Gospel of those
Churches; Yet some say Telesphorus ordained them, and some suppose that Jerome
at the request of Damasus did devide them, as we read them now at this day.
Anastasius commanded that we should stand at the Gospel in token that men
should be in a readiness to defend the doctrine of the Gospel. The first part
of the Creed Marcus ordained to be read, after it was made by the Council of
Nicene; and the second part, Et Spiritum sanctum, that the Counsel of
Constantinople composed Damasus caused to be read in the Church. Eutichianus
instituted the Offertory to be sung whilst the people offered such things as
went to the relief and comfort of the poor: The Offertory remains, but the
poor are forgotten; as though they had no part in Christ, and were vile abjects
of the World.

Gelasius made the Prefaces, howbeit in the beginning they used but one
Preface. And Secius added the Sanctus out of the Prophet Esaias. Washing of the
hands.
Washing of hands began either of the old Testament, where they did nothing
with unwashed hands, or else of the Gentiles, which before their Sacrifices
used to wash their hands; as Hesiodus witnesses.

Burning of Incense, that was occupied in the old Testament by Aaron and of the
Panims in their superstitious Rites, Leo the third ordained to be had in the
Latin Church. The Privity of the Mass called the Canon was made by diverse
persons, as Gelasius made Te igitur. S^titius added Communicantes, and
Alexander the first, that was long before them, made Qui pridie, and that was
the beginning of the Canon before that time. For Alexander was 340 years and
more before Gelasius. Hanc igitur, Leo joined; and Gregory annexed three
petitions in the same, Dies que nostros, and so forth. Innocencius the first
instituted, that Priests in the upper part of the Church, called the Chancel or
Quire, should kiss one another, and that Pax should be born to the people.
Blessing with hands and Chalices, Blessing with Chalices.
came out of the Hebrews Ceremonies: For Aaron after he had sacrificed, blessed
the people. And Christ at his Ascension blessed his Disciples. Sergius ordain^d
the Agnus dei, seven hundred years after Christ, to be sung of the Clergy at
the time of the Communion. The often turning of the Priest to the Altar, when
he says Dominus Vobiscum or Orates fraires, came of the Hebrews rites; where,
in sacrifice time, the Priest turns him to cast the blood of the Sacrifice on
the people, and the Heathens used the same fashion in their superstitions, and
therefore doubtless we had those Ceremonies of them.

CHAP. IX. Why we say, Ite missa est, Whereof the word Mass and ceremony came;
The first manner of taking the Sacrament.
WHen Mass is ended, the Deacon turning to the people, says, Ite, missa est;
which words are borrowed of the rites of the Pagans; and signifies, that then
the company may be dismissed. It was used in the sacrifices of Isis. that when
the observances were duly and fully performed and accomplished, then a Minister
of the Religion should give warning or a watchword, what time they might
lawfully depart: And of this sprung our custom of Singing, Ite, missa est, for
a certain signification, that the full service was finished.

Mass, is an Hebrew word, (as R^^cline says) and signifies an oblation or
sacrifice, with all circumstances concerning the same.

The Romans called all such service, as appertained to their gods, in one
general name, Ceremonies, Ceremonies.
because a certain people named Cerites, received the relics and other
observances of the Romans Religions devoutly, and preserved them; for when the
Frenchmen by the valiantness of their Captain, Brennus (that was a Britain of
this Land) had won the City, for that benefit all the rites of their gods
universally were named Ceremonies.

Alexander inhibited Priests, that they should not sacrifice but once in a day;
and Telesphorus permitted them to say three Masses on Christmas day: First, at
midnight, what time Christ was born: the second, in the morning, when
shepherds visited him: The third, at further of the day, where afore-time it
was not lawful to celebrate before the third hour of the day.

Felix the first decreed, Mass must be said in places consecrated.
That no Mass might be said but in places consecrated, saving in the time of
necessity, and that none but Priests admitted should intermeddle with the
mysteries of consecration, because that authority was only given to the
Apostles at the beginning, by whom Priests be meant and understood.

Anacletus ordained. That no Mass should be done, but in the presence of two
at the least, lest the Priest should say in vain to the walls, Dominus
Vobiscum, when none were present; and therefore they do evil, Corner-Masses be
forbidden.
that consecrate in corners alone. Albeit, Gratianus refers that to Soterus,
which perchance did renew that constitution.

The Sacrament was used of our predecessors in the Primitive Church every day,
Daily Communion.
as Luke witnesses in the Acts of the Apostles; and Anacletus caused it to be
renewed by a Decree, upon pain of Excommunication. And Victor denounced,
Uncharitable persons were interdicted from service.
That those should be interdicted from all services, that (when they should
receive the Sacrament) would no^ be reconciled to their Neighbors of all
grudges, hatreds, and displeasures.

Zepherinus, an hundred years after Anacletus, commanded, That all that
professed Christ, or bare the name of Christians, being of the age of 12 or 14
years, should at the least once in the year, at E^ster, receive the blessed
Sacrament. Fabianus decreed, that they should receive it three times in the
year.

Innocentius the third decreed, Keeping the Sacrament meant in Churches.
That the Sacrament should be kept in the Churches, to the intent to be in a
readiness at all times, lest they that were sick, should want the spiritual
comfort in that troublesome time of death; and Honorius the third confirmed the
same.

The End of the Fifth Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Sixth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Auricular Confession.
ALbeit Man, We be reconciled by Christ.
redeemed with the precious blood of Jesus Christ is fully reconciled to GOD,
and all the heaviness of his displeasure be appeased: yet the poisoned nature
of man is such, the occasions of sin be so many and so great, that in this
slippery way of worldly life, we must needs (our infirmity enforcing us
thereto) fall into the snares of the Devil and sin. Repentance, a remedy of sin.
But God, as he is all mercy, willing the death of no sinner, but that he
convert and live, has left us the comfortable salve of repentance, as a
present remedy against all such incursions of our enemy, of fragility of body,
whereby we may with a good hope call to our Heavenly Father for the
forgiveness of our offenses and trespasses. For (as the Prophet Ezekiel
records) What hour soever the sinner does lament, and is repentant for his
sins, God (for his Son Jesus sake) will no longer bear them in remembrance.
Therefore whosoever with concupiscence vanquished, Desperation is forbidden.
or by lust inforc^d, by error deceived, or by force constrained, does fall to
any kind of injustice, let him not despair in his own conscience, or mistrust
the bottomless mercy of God; but with good courage repair to this medicine,
repentance and contrition of heart: Consequently it should be the Penitent's
office and duty, after such heaviness taken, as it were by a vomit, to spue out
of his conscience all such unwholesome things as might remain still, engender
desperation, or imbezell his hope in the promises of God. For this cause,
Confession, named Auricular, that is made to the Priest, was at the beginning
instituted; that men might therein open their hearts to their Curates, and
receive at their hands the oil of the Gospel of Christ, to supple their raw and
young sores. It was the institution of Innocentius the third, Innocentius did
ordain Confession to the Priest.
that so many as were by age subject, or in danger to commit sin, should at the
least once in the year be confessed to their Curates, to whom it concerns to
know the behavior of his Parishioners, for as much as he must render a
straight account of his cure. And therefore it is evil in mine opinion, to
have these common Penitentiaries, which be the occasion, that Curates give not
their counsel where need is, and men thereby be more bold to sin, seeing they
shall not be rebuked by such common Confessors, but for their money have ready
absolution, with small exhortation, to amend their sinfulness. This Confession
is proved in the Text of S. James, where he says, Confess your sins one to
another, and one pray for another. And also in the 20 Chapter of John, where
Christ says, Receive the Holy Ghost: Whose sins soever you remit, they are
forgiven them; and whose sins soever you retain, they are retained.

CHAP. II. Mattins, singing of Psalms by course; Legends of Saints.
MAttins with Prime and Hours, were appointed first by Hierome, for one
Eusebius of Cremona, and diverse others, that lived with him, to sing in the
Churches. And the Fathers and old Governors of Congregations, received them
following the Verse of David in the 119 Psalm. Seven times in the day have I
given and sung praise to thee. Cyprian writes that the prime and other hours
took their original of Daniel. Which after the custom of his Country, thrice
in the day, Morning, Noon, and Evening, on his knees used to pray. It was also
the Rite of the Heathen, to have morning Prayers, Apuleius de a simo an reo
libro. 11.
for Apuleius says, that they sung salutations of the new light, and showed
that it was prime of the day: where he means by salutation, the morning songs
that we call Mattins, and there declares how the hours of the day were sorted,
and divided for Sacrifices and Prayers. Pelagius the second was the first that
commanded Priests to say them daily, Pelagius charged Priests to say Mattins
daily.
that like as the just man falls seven times o^ the day, so by instant and
continual prayer, he might as often rise and amend.

Vrbanus the second, ordained the Lady Mattins to be said daily, and confirmed
them in the Council, which he had at Mount Clare in France.

The division o^ David's Psalter into seven parts called Nocturns, according to
the seven days in the week, was the Work of Hierome, at the request of Damasus
Bishop of Rome, which also gave Commandment that it should be read al^o in the
Churches, and added Gloria Patri to the end of every Psalm.

Damasus also instituted that the Psalms should be sung and said by course,
Singing of Psalms by course.
Though some say Ignatius did devise that before his time, which thing was
learned of David or Asaph: for in the old Synagogue, they used to sing their
Psalms after that sort, but our singing (...) far from their manner. For our
singers cry out so loud, that we hear nothing sa^e a noise, and those that be
present, cannot be edified with the word. It were great furtherance to
Religion, If those singers were either banished out of the Temples, or else
their singing were more moderated, Our common singers rebuked.
that the words might be understood, to the edifying of the Laity, which is
sore blinded with singing and sound of Instruments, that be not fit to edify,
but to delight the Ears. This modest singing was used by the holy Athanasius
Bishop of Alexandria, through all his Province and Diocese, as Austin
witnesses. Damasus commanded that the common Creed should be said every hour.
Vitalianus invented the decent tunes, wherein the Hymns be sung and joined the
Organs to them. Legends of Saints, were made the year of our Lord 800 by Paulus
Diaconus and Isuardus a Monk, at the desire of Charles the Great. And for as
much as the Persecutions were so great, that in the time of Dioclesian the
Emperor, there died 17000 Christians, within 30 days space, they could not
particularly write all their lives, but made certain general Legends of
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, which we now call the Common; and the Fathers
commanded those to be read in the Church on ^uch sSaints days. Afterward many
thinking that they should be heard; rather for their much babbling sake, Uses in
the service.
devised sundry manners of praying, and diverse uses: as Bennet's Monks had one
use; Bernard's another, and Dominicks brethren had one order by themselves, and
every Provincial Bishop, made a several Use in his Diocese; and all were
confirmed by the Bishops of Rome.

CHAP. III. The beginning of ^asting, Alms, Advent, Lent, Embring days.
FAsting and Alms-deeds be (as St. Augustine says) the two wings of prayer,
wherewith it is made stronger, and lighter to fly into the presence of God, and
be more accep^able in his sight. Fasting has been used from the beginning of
the World, when the Fruit of the Tree of knowing good and evil, was forbidden
to our first Parents in Paradise, because by such abstinence they might obtain
and enjoy everlasting felicity.

Alms, in like manner, sprung of the infirmity and neediness of the nature of
men: for as they felt hunger, cold, nakedness, and such other calamiries, as be
in our mortal life, they were constrained to desire aid and succor of other
men, as of alms. Albeit Moses was the first that ever prescribed any law of
giving alms, as appears in the book of Deuteronomy. Charitable alms must be
so freely given, that we exempt none from the use and part-taking of it; and,
as the Scripture says, without respect of persons.

As for Fasting, Flesh was not eaten before Noah.
of that original proceeded further, for the use of Flesh and Wine, from Adam,
till the time of Noah was unknown. And Moses forbear meat forty days; and
Elias did likewise: Our Savior Christ fasted the same space. Example of
Fasting.
And God pardoned the Ninivites of their crimes, because they fasted with
repentance.

The Jews also in their law, so often as they either asked any benefit of God, or
would pacify his wrath, or render thanks for his benefits, or kept any solemn
Feasts, used commonly to fast. And certainly he keeps not the true fast,
which forbeareth flesh, or foregoeth his Supper, but he that diminishes his
affections, abateth his anger, asswageth his Pride, moderateth his desires,
mortifieth his lusts, suffers patiently all adversities; that man is the true
faster. Albeit the other is a coadjutor to that thing, and helps much that
purpose.

Therefore, to the intent we might reclaim such corruptions, of our old Adam.

The Apostles did ordain the Fast of Lent, as Hierome in an Epistle to Mercella
does plainly declare.

Wherefore they that refer it to Telesphorus, Telesphorus did appoint it before
Easter.
be deceived, for he did not institute it first, but appointed that it should
be kept before Easter. And added another Week to it, which we call
Quinquagesima.

This week he commanded Priests to fast more then the Laity, because that they,
which ought to be Holier then the rest, should in this ordinary Fast, show more
abstinence then other.

The Apostles also instituted that there should be a solemn Fast for three
Weeks before the Nativity of our Lord, named Christmas: which constitution was
a while kept universally, but afterward it was resigned to the Monks and
Religious persons.

Calistus, or as some think, Vrbanus, did begin the Embring days quarterly,
for the preservation and amplification of fruits, ordained for the sustenance
of men and beasts. Albeit, I rather take it to be an imitation of the old Roman
feasts, which thrice in the year had sacrifices for the prosperous success of
their Corn. One Vinalia, for their Wines. The other Robigalia, for all their
grain, lest it should be mildewed. The third Floralia, for all their fruits.

These vain superstitions the old Bishops of Rome turned to a Godly use,
Superstition turned into Religion.
and transported their Feasting into Fasting, that they might the rather, at
the contemplation of our Prayers and Fasting, God might prosper the increase of
all fruits to the sustentation of his Creatures.

CHAP. IV. Watches were turned into Fasts; Fasting on Fridayes and Wednesdayes;
naming the days of the Week in sundry wise.
IT was the manner, from the beginning of our Christian Faith, that forasmuch
as our Savior was born in in the night, Priests did rise in the night season,
and sung the hours Canonical, otherwise named the Mattins: and the Lay people
was accustomed on those Saints Eves, that were any solemn Feasts, to watch at
the Tombs of Martyrs, Praying, and singing holy Psalms. Which thing the
Testimony of Pliny does approve, where he writes in an Epistle to Trajane, how
much number of people was slain, in whom he could never espy any fault, saving
that before day, at certain times and Feasts; they arose and sung the
commendation of Christ whom they called God. But as time is the corrup^er of
all worldly things, So devotion began to abate, and instead of Hymns, they sung
dissolute ballads, and prayer was turned into wanton dalliance. The youth went
about light amorous company, the eldest persons practiced baudry, women were
not ashamed to give themselves to be corrupted, in all kind of whoredom. Upon
this occasion the old fathers fearing lest it should grow to a further
inconvenience, turned the Vigils into Fasting days.

Notwithstanding, the Priests used their ordinary times of Service, as they
were wont to do, and such Feasts were called by the name of Vigills, and
observed with no less reverence then the Fast of Lent. This remedy was
provided after St. Hieromes time, which dyed the year of our Lord 422, when
Bonifacius the second was Bishop of the Sea of Rome.

The like custom was also observed among the Egyptians, Egyptians Rite in
Watches.
which on the Evens of their high feasts fasted, and after they had slept,
Night Sacrifices are abolished.
they offered a Cow. all such night Sacrifices, and observances for like
causes, were by a perpetual Law in Greece abrogated, Diagundas.
by Diagundas a Thebane. The Fast of Wednesday and Friday, was commanded by the
Fathers because on the one day Christ was Crucified, and on the Wednesday,
Judas purposed in his mind to bewray him, as Apollonius the Eloquent Orator
supposed. Silvester the first, Bishop of Rome, abhorring the memorial of the
vain Gentile gods, decreed that the days of the Week, which had before the
names and Titles of the Sun, Days were turned into Feries.
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, should be called the first,
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and Seventh Ferie: as the Jews counted
their days from the Sabbath day. He did also call the first Ferie, Dominicus
Dies, that we name Sunday, and called Saturday Sabbatum of the old holy day,
and rest of the Hebrews: all these things were done at the Suit of Constantine
then Emperor. Albeit, the Apostles before that time, had consecrated the
Sunday to the Lord, because that day he rose from death, and the Jews Sabbath
was turned into it, as may appear by the decree of Pius, that ordained the
Easter to be kept on the Sunday: Easter is appointed on the Sunday.
and therefore I think Silvester did but only renew the same Act of the
Sunday. It was the invention of the Egyptians, that the days were first named
after the 7 Planets, as Diodorus records. Saint Gregory was the Author, that
neither flesh, nor any thing that has affinity with it, White meats is
forbidded on Fasting days.
as Cheese, Milk, Butter, Eggs, should be eaten on such days as were fasted.
We have also a manner and usage of hallowing the Table and meat, before we be
set, that began of the imitation of Christ, which used the same fashion over
the five loaves in the Wilderness, and at Emaus also, he did likewise
consecrate the Table, in the presence of his Disciples: so was the form of
saying Grace after Supper, taken likewise of the custom that Christ commonly
kept at his Suppers.

The manner to read a part of the Bible at dinner time, has been of long
continuance, and did proceed of the Godly doctrine, that Christ instructed his
Disciples in, at all times, but namely at his last Supper, wherein he treated
of the perfection of all the Mysteries of our Religion. And thus our fathers,
to keep in memory such an wholesome institution, did bring in this manner of
reading the Scripture at meat or mealtime.

CHAP. V. The original of holy days, Paschal Candles, Birth-dayes.
LIke as the Jews had in their Law, (which was but only a shadow of things to
come) holy days appointed for the execution of the mysteries of their
Religion, whom they in one general term, named Sabbath-dayes, Sabbath-dayes of
the Jews.
of the rest and vacation that they had from bodily labors: semblably our
fathers have ordained Feastival days, Holy Days.
in the N^w Testament, wherein Christian men (all profane businesses, and evil
matters laid apart) might whol'y apply themselves to godly and spiritual
meditations. As the perusing and reading of Scriptures, Works due for the holy
days.
hearing of devout Sermons, rendering honor to God by sacrificing, praying, and
well doing, be works fit and convenient for the holy day, and also reverencing
the memorial of Saints on such days as be assigned to that purpose, is on the
holy day laudable. For Oblation is only due to God; as Paul and Barnabas did
openly testify at Listra. For when he had commanded, by the power of the Word
of God, that the man, which was lame from his Mothers womb, should arise and
walk; the people for wonder and marvail of the Miracle, would have done
sacrifice to them; but they renting their clothes, departed out of the press,
and with sharp words rebuked their enterprise, as a thing unmeet to be done to
any mortal man, or worldly creature.

First of all, Easter is instituted by the Apostles
the Feast of Easter was instituted by the Apostles, and prescribed by Pius the
First, to be solemnized on the Sunday. Afterward Victor that was Bishop of
Rome, (about the 196th year of our Lord) decreed, That it should be kept,
Eastet is to be kept in March:
and celebrated on the Sunday, from the fourteenth day of the first month,
that was March; until the 22 of the same, lest our order and account, should
agree with the Jews, which kept it somewhat sooner then that appointment
speaks of: albeit many foreign Bishops at the first, refused that
Constitution, because they thought it not amiss to keep that Feast after the
president of Saint John the Apostle, S. John kept the Jews Easter.
who renewed the Rite of the Jews, in the Feast of Easter.

The custom of hallowing Paschall Candles on Easter Eve, was commanded by
Zozinus, to be frequented in every Church.

The manner of keeping holy the birthday of every man, was much used in Rome;
albeit the Persians had that usage before them. For there it is the fashion,
that every man after his ability, should with observance of dainty feasts,
worship the day of their birth; and of them the Romans received that
superstition.

CHAP. VI. Of the Institution of Holy Days, and Canonizing.
AS you have heard that Saint John the Apostle did celebrate the Feast of
Easter, Easter.
even so the other Apostles (as it is said) were authors not only of the same
Easter-Feast; but also ordained, That those days wherein our Savior had done
any mystery, concerning our salvation or information, should be kept holy: and
to the intent they might be more reverenced of their posterity, they themselves
kept them, during their lives, very devoutly: as the Sundays, Advent, Feasts
instituted by the Apostles.
the Nativity, Circumcision, and Epiphany of our Lord, the Purification of our
Lady called Candlemas, Lent, Palm Sunday, Maunday-Thursday, when Christ, after
Supper, washed his Disciples Feet; Good Friday, Easter, the Ascension, and
Whitsunday, the Feast of Pentecost was before used of the Hebrews: For fifty
days after that the Lamb was sacrificed in Egypt, the Law written by the hands
of God, was given by Moses in the Mount Oreb, in the wilderness of Sinai. And
50 days after the death of Christ, who like a Lamb was offered of the Jews for
our Paschal, the Apostles received the law of the Spirit. The Feast of
transfiguration came also of the Jews: for like as Moses his face was
transposed into a perfect brightness, after he had communed with God in the
Mount; so now after the shadow and vail were taken away by Christ his coming,
it pleased God to show to his disciples his transfiguration, as a declaration
of the shadow past, and a figure or signification of the Immortality to come.
In consideration whereof, the holy fathers perceiving the use of such
holy days, confirmed and ratified them by a Decree made in the Council had at
Lions in France; and furthermore commanded, that such days, as either the holy
Saints departed this life, or else wrought any miracle, or did any notable deed
to the increase of our Re^igion, should be kept holy, because Christians might
have more opportunity to hear the Word of God, and more devoutly serve him in
an uniform order.

Then were instituted the Feasts of Saint Stephen, Feasts instituted at the
Council of Lions.
Innocents, Sylvester, John, Baptist, the Apostles days. Conversion of Paul,
our Lady-dayes. Laurence, Michael, Martine, and generally of Al Saints, which
was the constitution of Bonifacius the fourth. For he caused that the Temple
which Marcus Agrippae did edify in honor of all the Romans Idols, as the name
Pantheon does pretend, was by the license of Phocas, then Emperor, turned into
the Church of All-hallows, and consecrated the 12th day of May; and Gregory the
fourth afterward willed it to be kept the first day of November.

The Feasts of the Invention and Exaltation of the Cross, and Corpus Christi
day, were dedicated by Urban the fourth, and pronounced for holy days.
Sylvester at the suit and instance of the Emperor Constantine, assigned the
day of ad vincula Sancti Petri, called commonly Lammas, in memorial of Peter's
pains, persecution, and punishment that he suffered for Religion. Felix the
first, to magnify the glorious commendation of Martyrs, made a Statute, that a
yearly oblation should be had in memorial of them: and Gregory would, that
Mass should be said over their bodies; which thing, Vigilantius thought worthy
to be rejected and refused; albeit the report goes, that Anacletus was, of
this constitution, the first Author. The same Felix instituted first, That the
day whereon any Temple was dedicated, should be hallowed of that Village or
Town; Reconciliation of Churches.
and made also a law, That such Churches as men doubted of, whether they were
consecrated or no, should be hallowed again. And Felix the fourth did ordain,
That Bishops only should dedicate them, and that the same dedicated day should
be kept holy yearly afterward.

The fashion to deify men that had done any benefits to the Commonwealth, is
one of the most ancient usages, that I read of. For antiquity even from the
beginning was accustomed to make gods of their Kings; which either by abundance
of benefits, or notable qualities, and prowess, had won the hearts of their
Commons. And specially the Romans did that with great pomp and many
observances, as I did declare before in the third book out of Herodian. Of them
our Bishops learned, as by a pattern, their rite of canonizing Saints: and the
yearly sacrifices, that Gregory and Felix appointed, concerned nothing else but
to declare, that those Martyrs were Saints, and of the household of God. The
Pope must hallow Saints.
Last of all, Alexander the third ordained, That no such divine solemnity
should be given to any man openly, without he were canonized, and admitted to
be a Saint by the Bishop of Rome his Bull, because no man should choose himself
any private Saint, or commit any peculiar Idolatry.

CHAP. VII. Institution of years, days, or Obites, and the manner of mourning.
FUneral exequies that be done over dead bodies, were the institution of
Pelagius, Albeit, Isidorus ascribes the original of it to the Apostles, and he
himself did augment the Rites, that we use in this time. Ambrose supposes that
it proceeded of the custom of the Hebrews, which lamented Jacob forty days,
and Moses the space of thirty days, for that time is sufficient for the wise
to weep in. It was also the usage of ancient Romans to mourn. For Numa
Pompilius assigned Oblations to the infernal gods for the dead, and did
inhibite that a child under the age of three years should be bewailed, and that
the elder sort should be mourned no more Months then he had lived years. But
commonly the longest time of a Widows mourning was but ten Months, Ten Months
was the common time of Wedding.
and if any were married within the space again, it was counted a great
reproach: wherefore Numa ordained that such as had mourned up before the day
limited, should offer a Cow that was great with Calf for an expiation.
Expiation of hasty Marriages.
Nevertheless if that rite were used now a days, and namely in England, we
should have small store of Veals, there be so many that marry within the time
prescribed. Plutarch writes that the Women in their mourning laid a part all
Purple, Gold, and sumptuous apparel, and were clothed both they and their
Kinsfolk in white apparel, like as then the dead body was wrapped in white
cloths.

The white color was thought fittest for the dead, because it is clear, pure
and sincere, and least defiled, and when the time of their weeping was expired,
they put on their other vestures. Of this Ceremony, (as I take it,) the French
Queens took occasion, French Queens in their Widdow-hood wear white clothing.
after the death of their Husbands the Kings to wear only white clothing, and
if there be any such Widow, she is commonly called the white Queen. The Jews
ended their mourning after thirty days, and Englishmen keep the same Rite.
Their mourning garments for the most part be altogether of black color, and
they use to wear them a whole year continually unless it be because of a
general Triumph or rejoicing, or new Magistrate choosing, or else when they be
toward Marriage. Mourning is superstition and Hypoorisy.
But the custom of mourning is no other thing then mere superstition,
specially if women or men have a louring look, and a laughing heart. For all
such lamentation helps nothing the dead Corpse or Soul of the deceased, and
disquieteth sore the living.

The manner of washing dead bodies and specially of Noble men, and anointing
them, was received of our Ancestry which used to wash the bodies of the dead,
and it was the office of them that were nearest of his Kindred, to do it.

Soul-Masse day, that is the second day of November, was begun by Odilo that
was Provost or Provincial of the Monks of Cluniacenses order, upon the
occasion that he heard about Aetna the burning Mountain of Sicily oftentimes
great weeping, lamentation, and crying: which he supposed to be the yelling of
evil spirits, that bewailed because the Souls of dead men were taken from them
by the petitions, and sacrifices of well disposed Christians, therefore he
persuaded his covent in the time of John Bishop of Rome, to make a general
obite of all Souls the day next after the Feast of all Saints. About the year
of on^ Lord 1002, our fathers received it as a godly institution full of
pitiful charity: and thus by process of this Monks supposition, sprung much
vain superstition.

CHAP. VIII. Of the seventh day, thirtieth day, old manner of burial, hallowing
Chalices, Priests, Garments, with other things.
HOratius the Poet, and Servius, write, that the Romans used c^stomably the
ninth day after the burial, to renew the sacrifices and solemn rites of the
funeral, which they named in Latin, Novem-diales: of this, we in our Religion
have gathered the fashion of keeping the seventh day with Exsequies, and other
ordinary oblations. And in England the custom is to keep the 30th day or
moneth-end with like Obites, as were done on the burial days. Or else it might
seem, that this keeping of the seventh day, Marriage vows renew^d.
was brought up after the same sort among us; as in marriages they used in old
time to renew their vo^s the 7th day. For like as that day was the solemn
beginning of increasing the issue of mankind; so the same day of burial is or
should be the complete finishing and end of every thing. Burial is an end of
all things.
The Massilians in France passed and spent the days of their burials, with
private oblations, and feasting of their kinsfolk, without any manner of
lamentation or sorrow, which thing the Englishmen at this day use commonly to
do. In burials the old rite was, that the dead corpse was born before, and the
people followed after, as one should say, We shall dye, and follow after him,
as their last words to the Coarse did pretend. For they used to say, when it
was buried, on this wise, Farewell, we come after thee: and of the following of
the multitude, they were called Exsequies. Albeit they used at Kings, and
Noblemens Funerals, to go before with Tapers; which custom we keep still.

Chalices, Chalices of Wood.
wherein the blood of Christ is consecrated, were at the first of wood, and
that was the institution of the Apostles, which would prevent all occasion of
avarice in Priests: but Zepherinus afterward commanded, that they should
consecrate in a vessel of glass. Chalices of Glass.
Notwithstanding in process, that custom was broken. And Gratianus decreed,
that they should say Mass, and consecrate with Chalices of silver or gold; or
else if those might not be gotten, in Chalices of Tin; albeit some refer this
to Urban the First. Sextus the First commanded, that corporaces should be of
Linen cloth only, and that of the finest, and purest: and he forbade, that
any Layman should handle the hallowed vessels, and namely women were
inhibited. The hallowing of Priests vestures, and altar clothes, with other
ornaments of the Church, and the diversity of vestures of sundry orders was
taken out of the Hebrews Priesthood, and used in our Church first by Stephen
Bishop of Rome, first of that name. For at the beginning, Priests in their
Massing used rather inward virtues of soul, then outward apparel of the body,
which is ^ather a glorious show, then any godly edifying. Sabinianus decreed
first, that the people should be assembled together to hear service at certain
hours of the day, by ringing of bells: And John the 22 ordained, That bells
should be tolled every day three times in the evening, Ringing to Service.
Tolling the Ave-Bell.
and that then every man should say three times the Ave-Maria.

The use of Bells came first of the Hebrews, where the high Priest or Bishop
had in the skirts of his uppermost vestures little bells to ring, when he was
in the holy place within the vail. And even the Vail, Hangings, Candlesticks,
with other Vessels that we use in the Church, came also of their Ceremonies.
The banners that be hanged abroad in Easter time, are used to declare the
triumph of Christ over death, the devil, and hell, and were taken of the
Heathen, which in their Victories did bear banners to declare and signify the
conquest of their enemies.

CHAP. IX. Of Vows, going barefoot, Letanies, praying for them that sneese,
crossing the mouth when men yawn.
WHen we be brought into any extreme calamity, or dangerous adventure, that can
by no man's power or provision be relieved, the urgent necessity constraining
us, we fall to prayers, and vows-making, as when we promise to set up Candles,
Images of wax, or silver, with other like, supposing thereby to obtain remedy
of our grief. This custom was borrowed of the Hebrews, Vows came of the
Hebrews.
which used to make such vows to God, and diverse other Countries of the
Gentiles used that rite to their false gods. In like manner, going barefoot
was taken up of the Jews fashion: which in their sickness and other misfortunes
were wont to pray continually 30 days, forbear wine, shave their hair, and
after go barefoot to the Temple, and make oblation. This manner of Vow was so
earnestly used in the time of the Emperor Nero (when Florus was President of
Jewry) that Bernice, sister to King Agrippa, went her self barefoot to the
Temple of Jerusalem, to obtain some gentleness for her Countrymen at Florus
his hands; but all in vain, for his avarice was so unsatiable, that no
lowliness could pacify it. Even so we in any of our afflictions, sickness, or
other heaviness make vows to God and his S^ints, and perform them, going to
the place barefoot in like manner as the Jews did. Supplications were ordained
in a great Earthquake by Mamercus, Bishop of Vienna, in the time of Leo the
First. These be called of the Greek word, Letanies; and are commonly named
Processions, because the people proceed forth along in array, two and two
together, and go from place to place praying loud. They be called the less
Letanies. And Agapetus, as it is reported, first apoointed them to be sung
every Sunday in or about the Church; although it seems by Tertullian's words,
that they have been used from the beginning of the Church; and therefore it may
be supposed, that Mamereus did only renew the custom. Afterward Gregory
ordained the great Letanies, called septiformis Letania the same time that much
people in Rome perished through a great Plague of swelling of the privy
members, which came of a corrup^ air, that was poyso^ed with Adders and Snakes,
that were cast out of Tyber at a mavelous high Tide.

There was another Plague, whereby many as they sneesed dyed su^denly; whereof
it grew a custom, that they that were present when any man sneesed, should
say, God help you.

A like deadly Plague was sometime in yawning; wherefore men used to fence
themselves with the sign of the Cross: both which customs we retain still at
this day. In all other extern affairs that we go about, we use to sign our
selves with the token of the Cross. And this has been the usage from the
beginning of the Church.

CHAP. X. Of Images, Tithes; and who permitted the Clergy to have possessions.
AT the first there was no Imagery nor Pictures in the Churches, but all
occasions of Idolatry were withdrawn according to the commandment of the old
Law. Notwithstanding, it crept in among Christians by little and little, and
men made Images of Christ on the Cross, after the example of Moses which set
up brazen Serpent, and Abagarus Duke of Edissenians, Abagarus.
a Nation beyond the River Euphrates, sent a Painter to draw the Image of our
Savior Jesus: but for as much as he could not behold the brightness of his
face, Christ laid a napkin on his face, wherein he by his divine power printed
the resemblance of his visage, and sent it by the Painter to the Duke. A little
napkin was given by him (as it is said) to a woman, that had the bloody flux,
whose name, new Writers say, was Veronica; and Luke the Evangelist had the
Image of Mary the Virgin in a Table painted. And in the Sixth Council held at
Constantinople by the commandment of Constantine, and Justinian the second his
son, it was decreed, That Images should be received into the Churches, and
worshipped with great reverence, as a thing whereby the Laity might be
instructed, as instead of Scripture, and that Incense might be burned, and
Tapers lighted before them. This was about the year of our Lord 630; or as some
take it, about the 703 year or our Lord, when Agatus was Bishop of Rome.
Afterward Constantine, Bishop there, confirmed that Decree, and caused Images
in the Church of Saint Peter, and pronounced Philip the Emperor an Heretic,
Philip, Emperor, is proclaimed an Heretic.
because he had shaven and scraped away the Imagery that was in S. Sophie's
Temple. Not long after, they were ratified and established in the Council of
Nice, where were assembled by the procurement of Eirene, Mother of Constantine
the 6th, 350 Bishops.

The great Prophet of God, Moses, and his Successor Joshua, divided the Land
of Canaan among the Israelites, assigning no part thereof to the Tribe of Levi,
because they were the Lord's portion, saving that he gave them habitations in
every Tribe, and a little pasture for their Neat, Sheep, and other Cattle.
Therefore, because they ministered in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and executed
such ceremonies, as appertained to their Religion, he appointed for them the
first fruits and tenths to live on. And after this sort began the paying of
Tithes, by the Institution of Moses.

And Origin on the book of Numbers affirms, that this commandment is to be
observed of us after the letter, without any allegory or mystical
interpretation. And it appears by Christ's words, that he allows the
literal sense of the old Law, where he says in the Gospel, Luke 11. Christ
allows Tithes.
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye that tithe Mint and Rue, and all
manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the Law of God, these ought to
have been done, and not to leave the other undone: where you may perceive how
that as he commands one, so he would not have the other omitted, that be
signified there literally. Eutychianus (because in the Old Testament, the
first fruits were offered to the Lord) ordained, that Corn should be
consecrated on the Altar: as Oil and Incense was burned in the Hebrews
Synagogue, and that Decree remains still in effect in some places. But the
Priests virtue is so old, and men's devotion waxes so cold, that instead of the
first fruits, now adays the people use to bring, on the Sundays, a few loaves
of bread; in some places two or three, as they be disposed, and those the
Priest consecrateth and parts by pieces among the people; that whereas in
time past, they used to receive the Sacrament on those days, now they eat this
bread hallowed in memorial of it. And this they do after the pattern of Christ,
which was ever wont to hallow bread, before he either eat it, or gave it to his
Disciples.

Other Nations also used to offer their first fruits and Tithes, First Fruits
were offered of diverse Countries.
as the Romans offered to Hercules, and Bacchus to Jupiter; Mars gave to
Jupiter the tenth of his prey of Lydia. Urbanus, a man of godly living, and
singular learning, about the year of our Lord 222 decreed. That it was lawful
for Priests to receive such Rents or Lands, Possessions are permitted to the
Clergy.
as were given them; albeit there was nothing private to any man, but common to
all. And thus by little and little, the spiritual possessions were enlarged,
and Bishops of Rome were greatly enriched. Lucina an holy Maid of Rome, made
Marcellus Bishop there, her Heir and Executor; and afterward Constantine did
largely endow the same Bishop.

The End of the Sixth Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Seventh BOOK.
CHAP. I. The beginning of the solitary life of Religious Persons.
THe matter has been long in controversy, who first began to inhabit
VVildernesses, for some (as Saint Jerome witnesses) that have ransacked the
uttermost, say that Helias and John Baptist, were Authors of the life solitary:
but as the one was more then a Prophet, so the other was above the state and
condition of Monks. Some assign the original of it to Anthony, Beginning of
Religion.
others refer it to one Paul a Thebane surnamed Heremite. But (for as much as
every man may speak his fancy in a thing doubtful) I think the institution of
this Monastical life to have proceeded of the Essees, a Religious brotherhood
among the Hebrews, that lived after a greater perfection, then Monks did in
their Superstitious and Fantastical Traditions, as appears by the Eighth book
of Eusebius. De preparatione Evangelica.

Of their proceedings Anthony, and Paul the Thebane, Paul the Hermit.
took example of ordering the Rules and Precepts of their Religious Scholars.
Albeit, it is right to ascribe the original of it to Anthony, which although he
were not the first, yet he did much encourage the endeavors of all other, to
lead that life, and Authorized the Discipline of Monks in Egypt, and afterward
Basilius in Greece, and Hilarion in Syria, did much augment and amplify that
purpose. For this Hilarion a man of great virtue, by calling on the name of
Jesus, healed at the City or Gaza, the sons of a Noble Woman: whereupon the
brute of him was so noised, that many out of Syria and Egypt, repaired unto
him, and he founded Abbeys in Palestine, and instructed them with rules of
living. As for Anthony he lived in the Wilderness of Thebais in Egypt, and
builded there an Abbey, where he himself, with Sarmatas, Amatas, and Macarius,
his Disciples, lived in so earnest contemplation and Prayer, that they lived
only with bread and water, his holiness was such that Helena, mother of
Constantine did commend her self and her son, to his Prayers. He died in the
Wilderness when he was an hundred years old, the year of our Salvation 341,
his Disciples Amatas and Macarius increased much the Religion after his death,
and Sarmatus was slain by the Saracens. The institution of this state of living
came, I grant, Religion has grown to superstition.
of a good zeal to godliness, but the Devil, perverter of all good things, did
so impoyson the hearts of men, that they had more trust in their works, then
Faith in Christ's blood, and then every man began new rules of works to be their
own Saviors, which was abominable in the sight of God.

CHAP. II. The division of Monastical life into s^^dry Sects and factions.
IN the year 166, after the death of Anthony, Bennet an Italian, born at Nursi
in Vmbria, when he had lived long in solitariness, resorted to a City of
Italy, named Sabblaque, a City of the Latins, forty miles from Rome. And
because he was greatly delighted with a solitary life, and also the people
pressed to see and hear his preachings, he departed thence to Cassine. And in
the time of John the first, Bennet builded an Abbey at Cassinum.
in the year of our Lord 524, he builded there an Abbey, and assembled the
Monks, that were dispersed alone in diverse places, into one covent, and ordered
them with instructions of manners and rules of living, confirmed with three
vows, that is, chastity, wilful poverty, and obedience, because they should
all together mortify their own will and lusts.

These three forenamed Vows, Three Vows Basilius ordained.
Basilius, Bishop of Caesaria did first institute and publish, in the year of
our Lord, 383. And also assign the year of probation or Trial, that Religious
persons had before they were professed.

The Order of Cluniacenses, were ordained by one Odon an Abbot at Masticense, a
Village of Burgundy. And William Duke of Aquitane gave them an House, the year
of our Lord 916. in the time of Sergius the third. Not long after, the Religion
of Camaldimenses was begun by Romoaldus of Ravenna, in the Mount Apenninus, the
year of our Lord 850. They kept perpetual silence, every Wednesday, and Friday
they Fast, they eat bread and water, they go barefoot, and lie on the ground.
In a part of the same Mountain called Vallis Umbrosa, or the shadowed Valley,
in the year of Christ's incarnation 1040. under Gregory the sixth, John Gualbert
began a new sect of Monks, and named them of the place where the Abbey stood,
the Shadowed-Valley Order.

The Monks of Olivet sprung up as a fruit of disorder, the same year that the
variance was among the three Bishops, and were instituted by Barnardus
Ptolomous, the year of Christ 1407. under Gregory the 12th. The Faction of
Grandimoniensers, began by Steven of Avern, in Aquitane or Guyen, the year of
our Lord 1076, under Alexander the second, and had their Title of the Mountain
where their Abbey stood. A little after the same time, Robert Abbot of Molisme,
in Cistersium a Forest in Burgundy, did institute the order of Cistercians;
albeit, some ascribe this to one Ordingus a Monk, that persuaded Robert to the
same, about the year of our Lord 1098. under Urbane the second; Of this
Religion was that great Clerk St. Bernard.

Almost an hundred years after this in the year of our Lord 1166. The order of
Humiliates was devised by certain persons, exiled by Fredericus Barbarussa,
which when they were restored to their Country, apparelled themselves in
white, and lived by a kind of Vow, in Prayers, Penury, and working wool, and
were admitted by Innocentius the third, and other his successors.

Celestines were founded by Celestinus the fifth of that name, Bishop of Rome,
in the year of our Lord, 1198. In England Saint Gilbert at Tirington, and
Sempringham, began an order called after him Gilbertines, in the time of
Engenius the fourth, the year of Christ's Incarnation 1148.

The Justinians were invented by Lewis Barbus, a Re^igious man of Venice, in
the Abbey of Saint Justine at Padua, the year of our Salvation 1412, in the
days of John the 24th. There were also Orders of Nuns devised after the same
Rules of Superstition, as the other be.

CHAP. III. Of the Hieronymians, Canons, Charterhouse-Monks, White-Fryers,
Crouch-Friers, with others.
HIeronymians had their beginning of Saint Hierome; which leaving his Native
Country, went into Jewry, and there not far from Bethlehem, builded him an
house, where he lived very devoutely, the latter end of his life, in the time
of Innocentius the seventh, the year of our Lord, 1405. After his example,
other counterfeited a resemblance of perfection, naming themselves
Hieronymians, wearing their clothes of white, and a cope plaited above over
their Coat, girt with a lether girdle.

There were also certain Hermites called Hieronymians, of the Foundation of one
Charles Granel of Florence, which made himself an Hermit of the same Religion,
in the Mountains of Fessulus. Others there be, that say one Redo, Earl of Mount
Granel, did institute them in Fessulus, in the time of Gregory the twelfth. Yet
there be some that say, that the original of this brotherhood, was instituted
of Hierome in a Desert, Eusebius of Cremonen^es
and that Eusebius of Cremona, with other devout and holy men, which kept
conversation with him, did enlarge and augment the family of that profession.

As concerning the Channons Reguler, there be two opinions: for some say that
Augustine by and by, after he was created Bishop, brought his Channons in this
rule and form of living, wherein they have been so long trained and nusled up:
other some brag, and make their vaunt, that it was devised of the Apostles, and
of this opinion was Thomas Aquinas. But Augustine was doubtless, either the
inventour of the Sect, or renewer of it, and therefore may be justly taken for
an Author of that Faction, and so was he likewise of Augustine. Hermites.

The Channons clothing was a white Coat, and a linen rochet under a black
cope, with a Scapular to cover their head and shoulders: The Hermites have a
contrary vesture, a black coat with a scapular, and another coat of white, and
a Lether Girdle. Of these there were diverse other orders. As the order of St.
Savior of the Scopettines, The Order of Cannons or Hermites.
which were ordained by Steven and James, two men of Scenes, in the time of
Urbane the fifth, the year of Christ, 1370. And Gregory the 11th, by his
consent, confirmed them in their Hypocrisy.

The Frisonaries is another Order, which began among the Hetrurians, in the
County of Luces, that be otherwise called Lateranenses, by the device of James
Brixian, in the time of John the 24th, the year of Christ 1412, and they were
amplified and increased by Eugenius the 4th.

The third Order is titled the brethren of St Gregory de Alga. This was
ordained at Venice by Laurence Justinian, in the time of Innocentius the
seventh, in the year of our Lord, 1407. with diverse other Orders; which
forasmuch as they rose suddenly, I will omit.

Bruno of Collen, that sometime read the Philosophy Lecture at Paris, did
institute the Charterhouse Monks, in the Diocese of Gracionopolis, at a place
named Carthusia, in the year of our Lord one thousand and eighty, under Gregory
the seventh. Their life was outwardly full of painted holiness, in forbearing
Flesh, Fasting, bread and water every Friday, full of solitariness, much
silence, ever pinned in, and women were banished out of the house, with other
semblable Ceremonies.

The Carmelites or white Friars, were as some say, begun in Mount Carmelus,
after the example of Elias the Prophet, which lived there long solitary, that
they were first assembled together by Almericus Bishop of Antioch, the year of
our Lord, one thousand one hundred and seventy, in the time of Alexander the
third, and they were also called our Lady Friars, of a Chapel of our Lady,
that was in the Hill Carmelus. Nevertheless about four hundred years after, in
the time of Innocentius the third, they were reformed by Albertus Bishop of
Jerusalem, Carmelites clothing is changed.
according to the rule of Basilius and the color of their coat was turned into
white by Honorius the third, where before it was Russet.

The other of Premonstratenses was instituted in the Diocese of Laudune, by
Northbergus a Priest: and the Precepts of that covent, were gathered out of St
Augustines rules, and admitted for good by Calixtus the second, in the year of
our Lord 1120.

The Crouch, or Cross Friars began about the year of our Lord, 1215. by the
device of Syracus Bishop of Jerusalem, which showed Helen mother of
Constantine, where the Cross lay hid, and in memorial of the Cross, he caused
this brotherhood and College of Friars to bear the Cross; and yet they never
knew what the Cross weighed in their bodies or in their hearts, and forasmuch
as they were sore wasted, Innocentius the third renewed the Religion.

CHAP. IV. Black and Grey-Fryers, the Trinity-order^ Brigidians, Jesuits, new
Hermites, and Bonhomes.
ABout the time of Innocentius the third, arose two famous founders, of two
superstitious Sects, I mean Dominick the Spaniard, and Francis the Italian, of
the Country of Vmbria, Dominick, at the first was a Canon; but because he could
not suffer to have a superior, and was also weary of the Cloister, he
invented, a new fraternity, named Dominicans, Blackfriars, or
Fryers-Preachers, because they had the charge to preach the Gospel, without
mixture of any Pharisaical leven. The new guise of their Vesture, made innocent
Innocentius to wonder.

But Honorius the third by his Bull honorably admitted them, Dominick is
Canonized.
the year of our Lord 1220; and Gregory the 9th put the matter all out of
doubt, canonized Dominick, and by his Bull under Lead, allowed him for a Saint.

Frances, that was first of the Friars Augustines, thinking that sect not to be
sufficiently furnished with Hypocrisy, began a new trade of living, in the
Mount Appenninus, in a place named commonly Laverna: doubtless a ground worthy
for such a foundation, as was beside the Word of God; it was set up in the time
of Honorius aforesaid. They were named Minoribes, of the humility, and
lowliness of heart, that they should have; but that was smally regarded, and
farthest from their study. Two years after the year of our Lord God, 1229,
Francis was sanctified by Gregory, Francis is made a Saint.
and made a Saint. Francisoans afterward fell at contention for the rules of
their profession. They that failed somewhat of the unperfect perfection of
them, retained the name of Minorites still; the other entitled themselves
Observants, more worthy to be called Obstinate.

The latter fellows were brought in^o England by King Edward the 4th, and were
greatly inhanced by the famous Prince, King Henry the 7th.

At the same time was Clara the Virgin, Countrey-woman to Saint Francis, which
was a great Foundress of Nuns, of the same Rule that Francis gave his Covent:
of them sprung the bastard Penitencers in the days of John the 22, and the
year of our Lord 1315.

The Order of the Trinity under Innocentius, was begun by John Matta, and Felix
Anachorita in France in the County of Meldine. Then also was founded, or else
not long after, in the time of Martin the fourth, the Religion of Virgins or
Servants, by one Philip of Florencia, a Physician; and Benedict the 11th,
confirmed it, in the year of our Lord, 385.

The Order of Brigidians, was instituted by Brigidia a Widow, that was Princess
of Sueta under Urban the 5th, in the year of our Lord 1370, it was as well of
men as women, albeit they dwelt severally by themselves.

The Family of Jesuits, was the Invention of Johannes Columbinus, in the City
of Senes, in the time of the same Urban, the year of our Lord 1368; they were
no Priests, nor consecrated persons, but were men of the lay sort, given and
addicted to prayer, and had the name of Jesuits, because that name of Jesus,
should be often in their mouth; they be much like to our Beads-men in England.

The Sect of new Hermites began in Urbin, a City in Italy, in the Country of
Umbria, where Polidore Virgil was born; and was the device of one Petrus an
Hetrurian, and they had in the same City a goodly Hospital or Guild Hall.

The Bonhomes were instituted in England by Edmund son of Richard Earl of
Cornwall, which was brother to Henry the third, and was elected King of the
Romans, and heir apparent to the Empire, by the principal Electors about the
year of our Lord 1257. The special head place of that Religion was Astrige,
where the noble King Henry the eighth has now a goodly Palace. This Edmund
brought the blood of our Savior, as it was said, into the Realm.

CHAP. V. The original of sacred Knights, and white sect.
Whilst the City of Jerusalem, Grave-keepers, or Sepulchre-Knights.
before our Christian men had conquered it, in the year of our Lord, 1099, was
in subjection to the Saracens, the Latin Christians, that lived there
tributaries, purchased a license to build near unto the Holy Sepulcher dwelling
houses, and among other they made an Hospital of our Lady to receive the
strange Pilgrims, and appointed a Provost to entertain them.

This was in Silvester the first his time, the year of our Lord three hundred
twenty and four; and renewed, the year of Christ one thousand three hundred
ninety and seven, in the time of Celestine the third, Bishop of Rome.

After the pattern of this house, was devised a like house of Virgins in
memorial of Mary Magdalen, to receive the Women that resorted thither. It began
in the 2d Vrbanes days, the year of our Lord 1099. Notwithstanding because the
multitude of Latin Pilgrims waxed very great, they builded three Hospitals of
Saint John Baptist, as some say; Albeit, some think it was of John
Eleemosinarius, that was the Patriarch of Alexandria, in the reign of the
Emperor Phocas. This Sect one Gerardus adorned with a white Cross in a black
vesture: grand Captain of these Knights was Ramundus, when Clement the fifth
had the Sea of Rome, about the year of our Lord 1310, yet some affirm that the
beginning of them was in the 3d Alexanders days, the year of Christ one
thousand one hundred seventy and nine: Knights of the Rhodes.
and they be called of the order of Saint John, or Knights of the Rhodes,
because they won the Rhodes from the Turks, which afterward they lost again in
January, in the year of our Salvation, one thousand five hundred twenty three,
albeit, they did long defend it manfully.

The Temples order was begun in Gelasius the second his days, Templer-Knights.
in the year of Christ's Incarnation, one thousand one hundred twenty and eight,
by Hugo Paganus, and Gaufridus de sancto Alexandro: they were named Templers,
because they kept in a part of the buildings near to the Temple, they kept
Bernardus rule in their living. But Clement the fifth deposed them, partly for
that they renounced the Faith, and conspired with the Turks, and partly for
other notable crimes.

The order of Teutonicks, or Dutch Lords, Dutch-Lords.
began in Jerusalem by a Dutch man whose name is not known; Their office was to
fight against the enemies of Christ's Cross, it began in the days of Clement
the third, the year of Christ's incarnation 1190. Petrus Ferdinandus a Spaniard
began the order of Saint James Knights, Knights of St James.
that lived after St Austins rule, under Alexander the third, and in the year
of our Lord, one thousand one hundred and sixty, in the same Bishops days.

Sanctius a King, ordained the Faction of Calatranean Knights, which professed
the rule of the Cistercienses.

Of the same profession be they of the Order of Jesus Christ's Knights, which
were instituted by John the 22th Bishop of that name, in Portugal to resist
the Saracens.

Alexandrians brotherhood of Knights in the Realm of Castile, that began in
Gregory the ninths time, about the year of our Salvation 1240, but who was
Author of them is uncertain. James King of Arragon did found two sects of
Knights, Knights of St Mary de Mercede.
one named of S. Mary, de Mercede: the office of those was to ransom such as
were taken Prisoners in wars by the Turks: the other Sect is called Montastan
Knights, Mountesians.
and they wear a Red Cross. Both these Orders Gregory the 11th did allow, in
the year of our Lord, 1000.

The Order of Minimes or least-brethren, were founded by one Franciscus Poula a
Sicilian. after the example of Frauncis his Minorites.

The Apostolic brethren began in the year of our Lord 1260. Apostolic
brethren.
by the institution of Gerardus Sagarelus, in the Town named Perma in Lombardy
in the time of Alexander the fourth.

The white sect sprung up in the Alps, and descended into Italy, having a
Priest for their Captain. But Bonifacius perceiving they should do no good to
his honorable estate if they continued, caused their Captain to be beheaded at
Viterbium, as attainted of some Heresy, the year of our Lord 1400. They were a
great number, and did no other thing but lament the state of Mankind, and
bewail the sins of the people. There was of this fashion both men and Women,
and were called the white sect, because they ware white clothing.

CHAP. VI. The Ninivites, Assyrians, Antonians, and Ceremonies.
NO less superstition is in the fraternity of the Ninivites, although they
avaunt themselves to have received the^^ manner of living from the Apostles: for
the end of their doings is to work their own Salvation by deeds satisfactory to
God, where in deed they derogate the effect and power of Christ's blood. Rites
of Ninevites.
The Rites be specified with outward holiness: as often assembling to prayer
hyring of Chauntry priests, supporting poverty, and be clothed in sackcloath,
and scourge one another with whips.

Of this painted penance they call themselves Ninevites, as though they
appeased Gods wrath in the same wise, as they of Nineveh did, where in deed
they had hearty contrition for their offenses: these have but pretensed
holiness and penitence. They began under Clement the third, the year of our
Lord, one thousand, 285.

The manner of their whipping came of the Roman sacrifices, and Lupercalia,
whereof I spoke before; for they used the same custom of a superstitious
opinion: or, if a man would be curious in bolting out of the original of their
beating, it may appear to have proceeded of an observance of the Egyptians, An
usage of the Egyptians.
For the usage was there, that whilst they offered a Cow with many Ceremonies
to their great Idol, as Herodotus witnesses, during the burning thereof, they
should beat one another miserably with wands or rods.

The title of their fraternity came of the Romans, which had diverse
fellowships, as Sodales Titii, and Fratres Arvales that sacrificed to Ceres,
goddess of Corn. Another sort there is, not only idle, but also theevish, and
they be called Assyrians, the same that we name commonly Egyptians. These, as
all men have heard, and many have by experience proved, be so light fingered,
that they will find two things, before they lose one.

The men by such pilfery, Craf^s of the Eygptians.
theft, and plain stealing, and Women by Palmestry, blessings, with like other
sorcery, and witchcraft, furnished with lies, seduce and deceive a great number
of simple people in every Country and Region.

And because they should have more liberty to speed their purposes, The
Egyptians excuse.
they say, It is their vow, and penance is given them to go in continual
pilgrimage.

The occasion that these vagabonds stray thus abroad, came of an old Idol that
they worshipped in their Paganism, named the Goddess of Syria, Goddess of Syria.
wherewith they used to gad from place to place to beg money, wine, milk,
cheese, corn, and other stuff, Libro 8. deasmo aureo.
as Apuleius writes.

The same people now they be christened, play their parts in like manner with
sundry subtilties: and what they get by lying, picking, stealing, bribing, they
make money of; and so return home, laughing to scorn all those simple persons
that they have thus deceived.

Seeing all other superstitions be abolished and rooted up, it is pity that
this should take still effect, and be unpunished. The Antonians were a
counterf^i^ of Anthony's perfection; but they differ as much from his holiness,
as white from black; they have a T. on their breast, that means Toll,
teaching them to take what they can get, be it Cow, Ox, Calf, or Pigg; for they
offer Swine to him, as they did sacrifice sheep to Bell in Babylon; they were
instituted in the year of Christ 324.

The Ceretanes began in Ceretum, a City of Vmbria, Ceretanes play in Summer,
and beg in Winter.
and they ever used to go a begging at the latter end of Harvest, when the
Barns were stuffed with corn; and so like drones devour that which other have
gotten with the sweat of their brows.

Of these valiant beggars, there be in every place a great many: but I cannot
tell what time they were instituted; and how soon they be put down, it skilleth
not.

CHAP. VII. The original of Mahomet's Sect.
OF all these superstitious Sects before rehearsed, there is not one so
diabolical, as the Sect of Mahometans, as well for the filthiness of all
unlawful lusts, as other outrageous naughtiness, that they occupied daily, to
the great endamaging of Christendom, and increase of their own infidelity.

Of this unreverent religion, Mahomet a Nobleman, born in Arabia, or as some
report, in Persia, was author: his father was an Heathen Idolater, and his
Mother an Ismaelite: wherefore she had more perceivance of the Hebrews law.
This wicked plant, brought up and fostered under his Parents, and instructed
like a mungrell in either of their laws, became expert, and of a ready wit:
And after the death of his father and mother, he was in household with one
Abdemonaples, an Ismaelite, which put him in trust with his merchandise, and
other affairs; and after his decease, he married his Mistress, a Widow. There
he fell in acquaintance with the Monk Sergius, an heretic of Nestorius's sect,
that fled from Byzance into Arabia: and by his counsel and advice, this
Mahomet, about the year of our Lord five hundred and twenty; and the twelfth
year of the reign of the Emperor Heraclius; began in Arabia to found a new
sect, and by seditious Sermons seduced much and many Countries. He conquered by
help of the Arabians diverse Lands, and subdued them as Tributaries, and
compelled them to live after the tradition of his laws, that he gathered out of
the New and Old Testaments, and diverse heresies of Nicolaites, Manichees, and
Sabellians. He dyed the 40th year of his age, and his body was carried by the
Saracens into a City of Persia, called Mecha, and laid in a Coffin of Iron.

Caliphas succeeded Mahomet; but he was deposed for his superstition, and
another of the same name was substituted in his room.

Homar was the third that reigned; and he, after the conquest of the Persians,
wan Jerusalem, and all Syria, the year of our Lord 680, in the time of Agathon
Bishop of Rome, and Constantine the 4th, Emperor. This Sect waxes daily
bigger and bigger, partly through the discord of Christian Princes; and partly
by reason of our sinful living, that daily grows to greater enormities, that
deserve the heavy hand of God over us.

The End of the Seventh Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Eighth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Relics, Stations, the year of Jubilee, Pardons.
NOt long after the Martyrdom of Peter and Paul, both many, and that of diverse
sorts, as well men as women, by the example of their constancy, were encouraged
to suffer sundry kinds of torments in several parts of the World, for the
maintaining of Christian Religion. But namely in Rome, Many Bishops of Rome
suffered Martyrdom.
much murder of innocent blood was committed of Tyrants by many manner of
punishments, and a great number dyed in Christ's cause: among others, certain
Bishops, to the number of thirty and two, were slain by extreme persecution,
unless it were seven of them, which by death were prevented before they
attained the Crown of Martyrs. Therefore considering that much Martyrs blood
was spent, and that specially in Rome, and many from other places were conveyed
thither; Cletus and Anacletus, Bishops there, did seriously go about to
reverence them. For the one appointed a place where Martyrs should severally
have their Sepulchers apart from the lay people; and the other by decree,
denounced him accursed as sacrilegious, that by word or deed hindered men's
devotsion from visiting the Tombs of the Apostles.

Upon this occasion, Calist^s the First, builded, beyond Tyber, a Church, in
honor of our Lady: and Constantine, Emperor, edified to Peter, Paul, and
Laurence, Temples. This matter was by Gregory the Saint set forward, to the
increase of superstitious devotion: For he appointed the Letanies of Saints,
with Orapro nobis, to be sung with Masses in certain solemn days in the chief
Temples of the City, promising them that repaired thither at such solemn
Feasts, clean remission of sins by his pardon. And he named the pompous
sacrifices, Stations, because they were celebrated on certain days limited and
prescribed by Statute. Bonifacius the eighth, in the year of our Lord 1300,
appointed the year of Jubilee, or grace, to be kept every hundred year with
clean remission a poena et culpa, to all them that visited the Temples of the
Apostles Peter and Paul. And this was taken up of the example of the Hebrews,
albeit they did keep it every 50. years; or else, as some think, he assigned
the years according to the old Feasts of Apollo and Diana, which the Romans
Heathen solemnized every hundred year; and of that they were called Ludi
seculares. About fifty years after, Clement the sixth decreed, That it should
be celebrated every fifty years, as the Hebrews rite was, because no man was
able to attain the old Jubilee of an hundred years. Last of all, Sextus the
fourth restrained the year of grace to the 25th year, and he himself kept it at
that day, which was in the year of Gods grace showed by his Son Jesus Christ to
the World, a thousand four hundred threescore and fifteen. About the same time,
Pardons were much used, but who was the first author of them, I have not read
in any Writer, saving that Saint Gregory (as I said before) proclaimed Pardons
as a reward for them, Pardons were profitable to the purse.
that came to his Stations. This seed sown by Gregory, grew to a ripe Harvest
in the time of Bonifacius the 9th, who reaped much money for that chaff. After
this, Alexander the sixth, that was in the year of our Lord 1500, Jubilee sent
into all Countries.
assigned the Jubilee and Stations to be had in sundry Provinces and Countries,
to the intent, that less throng of people, and more thrift of money might come
to Rome, and so the people should only lose their money, and save their
labor. But Moses was the first author of the Jubilee, as appears by Josephus
in the Old Testament.

CHAP. II. The Bishop of Romes Titles, Colleges of Scribes, Sealing Bulls with
Lead, Annates.
FOrasmuch as nothing is so decent for a Priest as gentleness, Titles of the
Bishop of Rome.
nothing so fit as lowliness, nothing more comely then humbleness, according
to the saying of our Savior, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart,
nor nothing more against their order then pride and arrogance, Gregory the S.
Bishop of Rome, named himself Servus servorum Dei, which thing he did not only
usurp in Title, but also express in deed. This name and preface was received
and used of his Successors, but his hearty meekness was refused, as a thing
that diminished their Pontifical estate. Cletus added to Salutem et Apostolicam
benedictionem, as a Salutation condign and appertaining to virtue and
godliness, and a resemblant to Christ's greeting, Christ's greeting. The Hebrews
saluting.
which was Peace be with you; or of the Hebrews, that used to say in their
meetings, Peace be with thee: And this all our Bishops have reserved to
themselves as a peculiar saluting.

As concerning the Scribes that used to write the letters Apostolical, where
before time they were wont to write for nothing, or else asked very little;
John the 22th, desirous to increase and enlarge his substance, founded a
College of Scribes that should write and endite letters of their own device,
and do other offices, but they must be chosen out of his own Clerks, and must
pay and be dismissed of money, before they could be admitted to the room. He
did also pay, (to those which had benefices of his gift and presentation) all
such things, as belong to the Apostolical penitencers. Bennet the 12th devised
first, Bulls sealed with Lead.
and determined the price of Writs, and Bulls. The custom of sealing the
Bishop of Romes Bulls with lead, was taken up by Steven the third, and Hadrian
the first, to the intent they should endure longer, where before time the usage
was, to Seal in wax with a Rirg. And this was the year of our Lord 772, at
which time Hadrian was Bishop: before those days I find no mention of sealing
with Lead as before Carolus Magnus, Carolus Magnus sealed first with Gold.
none of the Roman Emperors sealed letters with Gold; Pius the second did
create Breviators, and set them in an Order, which Paul deposed; but Sextus
afterward renewed them, and also instituted a new College of Solicitors, and
Proctors, by whose Counsel and advice, all Bulls and grants were made and
ratified. He also ordained 9 notaries of the Treasure Apostolical, and assigned
to every of them certain fees and profits, that he might have speedy utterance
of the rooms. Innocentius that succeeded next Sextus, devised the College of
Secretaries, and Alexander the sixth increased the number of writers of his
Briefs, to the number of eighty and above.

The summoners and catch-poles, that were hangers unto those Breviatours, were
by Nicolas the third put out of office, lest all the poor sheep should be
^lay'd to the quick. But all this filled not so much the Popes Coffers in 7
years, as his Annates did in one. Annates he called the yearly revenues or half
part of the fruits, of a Benefice or spiritual promotion, that he received of
the new incumbents. These began first at his own Benefices, A general decree of
Annates.
whereof he was patron. And Clement the fifth generally decreed it* in the year
of our Lord, 1305, Bonifacius the ninth, and John the 22th renewed the Decree
for fear of forgetting, because it helps much the purse.

CHAP. III. Of the Sect of Simoniakes, Heretics, and Schisms.
PHilip the Deacon, when he had by his preaching, converted them of Samaria to
Christ's Religion, among many other, he turned one Simon a Magician and
inchanter, and Baptized him. In short space after, Peter and Joh^ were sent
thither, to confirm them in the Faith, by giving them the Holy Ghost, through
laying on of hands, this Simon perceiving the feat of Peter, that he could by
laying on of hands, give the Holy Ghost, Simon proffered money for to have power
to give the Holy Ghost.
proffered to give a large sum of money to have that power taught him, whereas
he should rather have obtained it by Faith and godliness. Peter moved at those
words, with anger said, Thy money shall turn to thy destruction, because thou
supposest the gift of God to be bought with money; neither shall thou have any
portion or d^al of this charge, for thy heart is not upright before God. Thus
rejected of his suit, he became a great enemy to Peter, and in Rome seduced by
his Magic much people, Simon was made a god.
insomuch that he was taken and proclaimed by Neroes Charter a god, with this
title, Simon deus sanctus.

But Peter with the sword of Gods word, after long conflict of words, and
contention of miracles, between the Capitol or Councel-chamber, and the Mount
Aventine caused that, as he was by his Magical exorcisms lifted up, Simon ^did
fly in the Air.
and flying in the Air, he had such a fall that he brake his Leg, and it cost
him his life in Aretia, Simon brake his Leg.
where he lay at Surgery for the healing of his leg.

Of him, all that buy and sell the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and say the World
was not of the creation of God, but proceeded of a power above, were named
Simoniakes: and some call them that buy or sell Benefices, and spiritual
promotions, which thing (although it be often used) is plainly forbidden by the
Scriptures. Next Simon succeeded his Disciple Menander, a Samaritane born,
which called himself a Savior sent from heaven, to preserve and save men; and
promised them that received his Baptism, should live immortally: he did more
harm, and perverced more than his Master Simon had done.

In the same year the heresy of the Nicolaitans began, which taught that Wives
should be used in common; as the Anabaptists do now at this time.

Then also Corinthus enterprised, to mix the new Law with the old, affirming,
Circumcision ought to be observed and kept; and that after the Resurrection,
men should live a thousand years in carnal lusts and pleasures. In those days
Ebion his heresy brake out, which said, That Christ was not before his Mother.
John did write his Gospel: against Hebion.
Against this fellow, John wrote his Gospel, last of all the Evangelists. About
that time were other diverse heretics; as Basilides, that affirmed, there were
two beginnings, principal causes of things contrary: and his Scholar Marcion a
Stoician, that denied Christ to be the Son of God: and Valentian, that said,
Christ took no flesh of the Virgins body, but passed through her, as it were,
through a Pipe or Conduit. Then also Montanus named himself, the Comforter, or
Holy Ghost. Apelles was then also, which said, Christ was but a fantasy in
the sight of men: and Sabellius, that said, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, were but one Person: and Paulus Samosatenus, which denied the two
Natures to be in Christ, and that he began but of his Mother, and that she had
after him more children by Joseph. And thus began Heretics first to spring up.
As for Schisms, which sprung of such heresies and erroni^us opinions,
Novatianus a Priest of Rome was the first author, in the year of our Lord 255,
in the time of Cornelius Bishop of Rome: He named his disciples Mundi, that is,
pure and clean; and he affirmed, that offenders ought not to be admitted, but
rejected, although they were penitent for their sins: Which opinion, the
Anabaptists now maintain. He was condemned by Cornelius Bishop of Rome, as an
heretic, with all his adherents. About 80 years after, in the reign of
Constantine the Great, Arrius a Priest of Alexandria, was the beginner of a
Sect and Schism, that denied the Son to be of the substance of God the Father;
but this was convict in the Council of Nicene, albeit not extinct.

The third Schism was, when Damasus was Bishop of Rome, wherein they contended,
not only with voices and words, but also with violence and weapons, by reason
of the ambition of the Bishops there assembled. Schisms of later times.
Other Schisms have sprung in our time, to the great disquietness and confusion
of Christian Religion, and destruction of Commonwealths, which I pray God may
be redressed and stayed, to the honor of Him, to the confirmation of the
faithful, to the subversion of hypocrisy, to the advancement of Gods Word, to
the mitigating of the trouble of public weals, to the establishment of
perpetual unity of heart, and continual peace, all dissension and war
extinguished.

CHAP. IV. When the first General Council was kept, and which were allowed by
the Fathers.
THe custom of assembling Councils, to take deliberation of things doubtful,
or matters serious, is of great ancientry, as well among the Hebrews, as other
Nations: And by such a manner of Council, Matthias elected by a Council.
was Matthias surrogated and substi^uted in the stead of Judas, into the number
of the Apostles. And by a Couucil holden at Jerusalem the Apostles discharged
the Gentiles of Moses's law.

Cornelius was the first, as plainly appears, that called together any
Council; and that was in Rome, of 600 Bishops, and as many Priests, wi^h a
great multitude of Deacons. In this Council, the heresy of the Novatians was
convicted. And at the same time sat also a Council at Carthage, where Saint
Cyprian was Bishop. Eusebius wri^eth also, That once in the days of Dionysius,
and likewise in the time of Felix, the Fathers summoned another Council at
Antioch, to condemn Paul Samosatene, which denied the two Natures of Christ, as
is aforesaid.

Five other Councils were celebrated in the reign of Constantine the Emperor,
and all were in Greece; One at Nicea, Council of Nicea.
a City of Bithine, where were gathered 318 Bishops to confute Arrius and his
Sect. This was the year of Christ 324, the same time that Sylvester the First
was Bishop of Rome.

The second was at Constantinople, Council at Constantinople.
when Damasus was Bishop of Rome, wherein Macedonius and Eudoxas were
condemned, because they did deny the Holy Ghost to be God.

The third was at Ephesus, Council at Ephesus.
Celestine the First then occupying the Sea of Rome. There, was Nestor's
heresy abolished, that said, Mary the Virgin was Mother of Christ a man, but
not as he was of God; and that the Person of the Godhead and his Manhood were
two sundry Persons.

The fourth was at Chalcedonie, Council at Chalcedon.
under Leo the First, where Eutyches an heretic was condemned: These four
Saint Gregory thought worthy to be admitted and allowed to the establishing of
our Religion.

The fifth was solemnly kept at Bizance, Council at Bizance.
at the Commandment of Vigilius Bishop of Rome: and in this was Theodorus
reasoned with, which affirmed, that Mary did bear only a man, and not God and
man; for that cause the Council there then decreed, That Christ's Mother should
be called Theotocos, or Deipara, that is, Bearer of God: and the Acts of this
Council were received by Gregory.

The sixth Council, Constantine the fourth, at the request and suit of Agathon,
called also at Bizance, where 200 Bishops condemned Macarius of Antioch. This
Council was accepted by Hadrian the First. That no Council might be legitimate,
or lawfully assembled without the Bishop of Rome's consent and assenr, was the
constitution and decree of Marcellus the First; and afterward, Julius Damasus,
and Gregory, ratified the same.

Martin the Fifth made a Law, That every tenth year the Bishop of Rome, and all
Christian Princes should meet together, to consult of matters concerning our
Religion and Christian Faith. It was decreed at the Council of Nicene, That
every Bishop should twice yearly have a Synod or Senes general within his
Diocese, to correct and reform such things as were out of order. But now the
matter is so handled, that Senes, be only Courts to gather their Senage and
Proxy; with a Procession, and a Sermon that the half understand not: other
correction I hear of none.

CHAP. V. Of the first persecutors of Christians; and first Martyrs.
CHRIST, Christ was a witness of the truth.
which came into this World, and was Incarnate, to bear witness unto the
truth, had for his true testimony, great envy of the Jews; insomuch, that they
persecuted him to the vile death of the Cross, for his earnest record and
report of the truth: and they did no less pursue the Apostles and Messengers
of the truth. For when they, following the example of their Master, did openly
declare the Word of truth, and namely Peter did sorely rebuke the wickedness
of the Jews, in putting to death Christ the author of life, advertising them
to repent and amend: the Jews were so furious, that first they murdered
Stephen, as the Acts of the Apostles testify, because he was a vehement
witness of the truth. Stephen disputed with all the Learned men of J^wry.
This Stephen did two years continually, after Christ's death, dispute with all
the Learned men of Alexandria, Cyrene, Cilicia, and Asia, and by heavenly
wisdom, confounded their worldly reasons, and humane learning. Wherefore they
were so sore vexed with hate and malice against him, that they violently thrust
him out of the City, and then cruelly stoned him to death. Stephen is stoned to
death.
Thus Stephen was the first open maintainer and defender of our Christian
Religion. Afterward, as Luke tells, Stephen first open defender of our faith.
so bitter and sharp persecurion did burst out against the Christians that were
in Jerusalem, that they were enforced to stray abroad, and were scattered
throughout all Jewry and Samariae, saving that the Apostles remained and so
journed still at Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, this persecution was the occasion
of great furtherance of the Gospel, by reason they ceased not, but preached
still the word every where, with great increase, and augmenting of the
faithful number.

Among the Heathen Nations, Nero first persecutor of of all the Heathen Princes.
Nero was the first Prince that persecuted our Religion universally; and put
Peter and Paul to death, and consequently many other innocents were slain
cruelly. For when of a devilish mind that he had, he could not spare even his
Country; but either for displeasure of the ruinous houses, which grieved him to
behold, or else desirous to see a resemblance of the burning of Troy, Half Rome
was burned by Nero.
he set on fire the most part of the City of Rome, with so huge a flame, that
it burned six days, and six nights continually, to the impoverishing of many
thousands of rich Citizens. Then to mitigate the shameful and abominable deed,
and to stint the bruit and slanderous report, that went on him for that
flagitious fact, there were forged false witnesses, to say, the Christian men
did this act; and so, many simple innocents smarted for that Tyrant's pleasure:
and to obdurate himself in mischief, he proclaimed an open Persecution against
all that professed the Name of Christ. Not long after, Domitian renewed another
affliction of the Christians: Persecution done by the Emperor.
and Trajanus raised the fourth. Marcus Antonius, and Lucius Aurelius Commodus
stirred up the fifth Persecution. Aelius Pertinax moved the sixth. Maximinus
procured the seventh. Decius, the eighth. Valerianus the ninth. Aurelianus
caused the tenth. Dioclesian made the greatest Persecution.
And Dioclesianus began the eleventh, which was sorest, sharpest, and of longer
continuance then any of all the rest: in such sort, that Scripture-books were
burned, and Churches plucked down, Christian Magistrates that did bear any
office; were deposed, Soldiers were enforced to deny their faith; or else
forego their goods, and forbear their life's, by a general Proclamation. Neither
were the three cruel Tyrants. Maxentius, Licinius, and Maximianus behind with
their parts, but were as busy as the best, to procure trouble to the Christian
people.

Constantinus born in England, Constantinus first defended the Christian Faith.
then called Britain, was the first Christian Emperor, that advanced and
defended the causes of our Religion, and preserved Christian men in peace and
quietness.

In all these Persecutions, many did suffer Martyrdom, as diverse Histories
record; Stephen was the first Martyr.
but Stephen was the first Martyr of the New Testament. For John Baptist died
before the consummation of the old Law. After this example many other ensued,
and sustained like crosses for the truth sake; which all now reign with God. To
whom alone be all glory, honor, and praise, world without end, So be it.

The End of the Eighth Book.
Polidore Virgil.
The Ninth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Buttons, and other Garments of the Ancients.
THe Invention of a Button is a thing worthy of consideration, wherewith the
Ancients did fasten their Coats together, or sometimes their Girdles. In its
lowest part it had the biggest circumference, and so went smaller toward the
top like a Pyramide; it was made and joined to the raiment with a Golden or
Brazen thread, that it might without out difficulty be moved backwards and
foreward.

The most noble and rich men had their Buttons made of Gold. The several
materials of Buttons.
The men sort of people used Silver. The poorest Brass or Iron. Soldiers did
wear Silver Buttons. But Aurolianus at first allowed them to be made of Gold
for this Soldiers (as Vopiscus testifies). Emperors had the summity or top of
their Buttons made of Jewels, and sometimes the whole Button it self. The
Emperor Leo commanded that soldiers should use such Buttons as were only
precious for Gold, and rare workmanship, but not such as were enriched with
jewels, because those did belong to the use and ornament of the Emperor only.
Commanders among other rewards, were wont to give a Golden Button to those
Soldiers that had fought with a generous and stout courage, as Livy often
mentions.

The Ancients used to wear a short Coat under their Gowns, Short Coats.
such as Deacons, and Sub Deacons use, and all did gi^d them except the
Senators, who did wear a purple Coat called Latus-Clavur? For they fastened the
sides of it together, with Godlen Buttons, which were called in Latin, Latos
Clavos, and therefore they did not gird their Coats. This kind of Garment was
the token of Senators.

When it was cold, Cloaks.
they did wear a Cloak under their Gowns which was fringed, and Knights most
commonly used it, as Isidore declares.

In Rainy weather, (as Martial says) they did put on a Cloak made of Leather
or skins, which they did wear above their Coat. They went without Hose to cover
their legs, and for that cause when the dust remained on them, they washed them
every day (as Quintilian asserts). Pompey having a swelling upon his shin,
covered it with a binding of linen, and a Bracelet, so that a certain man said
in sport, that he ware that on his leg, which Kings did bear on their heads.
Footmen did wear hose or legharnesse, which the Latins called Calige, whence
the Soldiers were called Caligati. Likewise they had short-Cloaks or Cassocks,
which fastened under their Chin, and when they were ready to fight, they cast it
upon both their shoulders; and, that they might be nimbler to resist their
enemies, they girded it about them, (as Plutarch does recite)

Noblemen and horsemen, did put on Boots made of Hides, that came up to their
knees; and from thence upwards, they were armed with Iron.

There is a great doubt risen, whether the Ancients used a covering for their
heads or no: seeing that it is neither manifest in ancient coins nor statues.
Certainly they used not a Hat, which represented the one half of an Egg shell,
when it was cut in the midst, for that was given to such that were manumitted
from their servitude. Moreover, Suetonius relates, that Julius Caesar having
found that the deformity of baldness was obnoxious, because of the jeers of
detractors, he accustomed to turn back the hair which grew behind his Crown to
cover the baldness of his head: but when he could not hide it sufficiently by
this means, he usurped the custom of wearing a Crown of Laurel continually;
which care had been superfluous, if any covering for the head had been in use.

But this may be said that the invention of Hats was used to defend the people
against the Sun. And on the contrary Plutarch writes that Sylla did rise to no
man, nor uncover his head, but when Pompey came. Varro affirms, that according
to the institutions of the Ancients, every one was to uncover his head to any
Magistrate passing by, and that more for health then honor: which Controversy
I will not determine, but leave this field to others, wherein they may exercise
themselves.

It plainly appears, that in the year one thousand one hundred and seventy,
there was a certain sort of Hats, that was black, and ascended smaller toward
the top, like a Pyramide. And Nicetas, in the life of Alexius Comnenus,
writes, that when the Emperor Andronicus Comnenns was created, a certain Hat
which he had, being taken off, in the place thereof there was a Purple or red
Mitte put upon his head.

CHAP. III. Of the Bezoar Stone.
THe Bezoar Stone was unknown in former ages. Bezoar.
Some suppose it to be the tears of a Heart, which, having devoured a Serpent,
and casting it self into the water to expel the poison, is wont to weep
exceedingly: and then the tears being hardened, and fallen upon the Land, are
said to be Bezoar. But that is false. Yet it is true, that those tears have
that virtue, though it be not the right Bezoar, which is bred in Mauritanta,
and has wonderful effects against any poison.

If you take twelve grains of it in wine, Its power.
it utterly expels all sorts of poison presently. It has the same effects, if
you lay it upon the bite of a Serpent: and it defends a man's person, so that
no poison can hurt him. It is good against the Plague, and pestilen ial
Fevers, and its use is wonderful in many diseases and infirmities. The
Arabians had the knowledge of it first, as Rhasis says, who writ of i^, and
lived in the reign of AL-Mansor, the great King of Mauritania. The Latins and
Graecians never knew this precious stone.

CHAP. III. Of Alchymy.
Alchymia, Alchymy.
signifies Infusion or Steeping; For Chymia, in Greek, denotes Infusio in
Latin; and Al, is an Arabian Article, signifying Hic.

There is a great controversy when Alchymy was invented. For neither Pliny
(though he was otherwise a most diligent author) nor any Greek or Latin Writer
make any mention of it. But I believe that it is very ancient; for Suidas
writes, that the Art of Alchymy endured till the time of the Argonauts, when
Jason went to take away the golden Fleece; which was nothing else then a
certain book, that taught to turn other Metals into gold: For those that
invented that story, concealing its name, called it, the Golden Fleece.

The Egyptians professed that Art very much, in the reign of the Emperor
Dioclesian: who, hating them, because they made an insurrection, burned their
writings concerning their distilling of Gold and Silver, lest being made rich
by this Art, and having gotten plenty of money, they should rebel again. The
Emperor Dioclesian was created in the year 287; so that this Art was rather
renewed, than new.

Many things were ingeniously invented in this our Age, which were totally in
former times unknown.

Among which Latten, Latten. ^
which is called Lato, may be recorded; which is made bright with some certain
powder which is mixed with it, and makes the shining of the Metal, which is
not real; Because if a Spoon of the same Latten be dipped in the same powder,
the pure brass, as it was at first, will return to the sight; for the dust
being consumed, it loses the counterfeit brightness.

The Artists of Alchymy have invented a means to make a Saphyr white, A Saphyre
made white.
so that it may seem to be Adamant: And so it is wont to be fastened in Rings,
that no man, though never so skillfull, can discern it to be a Saphyr. I saw a
trial of it amongst the Lapidaries of Venice; for a dispute being risen, and a
wager laid, Whether the stone which was put in the Ring, were a Saphir or an
Adamant; the answer was, it was an Adamant; and such as were skillfull in this
Art, said that that Saphir could not be distinguished from an Adamant.

Alchymists also produce a certain kind of Tin, Tin like Silver.
which you would think were true Silver, which being struck with a Hammer,
remains firm and constant the same, but not in a Vessel, which is called
Lacopella, or Cupella: and they have many other notable inventions.

Likewise they have found out strong waters, Aqua-fort is
wherewith they separate Brass from Silver and Gold, which could not be done
in ancient times, (as Vlpianus the Lawyer affirms in lib. 5.. 3. ff. De rei
vindicat. Where he says, that if Brass were mixed with Gold, it could not be
deducted. Those strong waters do wonderfully trouble the sight, when they
separate Gold from Silver. For the Silver may be seen to ascend through the
middle, as if it were some certain Column; and it is changed into green, red,
and other colors, and at last it is scattered in the water, so that the Silver
can be seen no more, but all is full of water, the Gold remaining in the Bottom.

The Cupella was lately found; that admirable vessel is made of a bone of an
Ox. Cupella.
In this, Gold and Silver is put to be polished and purged of all spots and
blemishes, wherein nothing but even the very pure refined Gold remains. The
Gold or Silver being involved in a thin leaf of Lead, is cast into that little
Vessel, which is put on the fire, and then the Cupella or little Vessel
consumes all the other metal which is in it, but leaves the true Gold or
Silver, which lies in the bottom without any mixture, untouched.

But there is a doubt whether Alchymy be lawful or no? Whether Alchymy be
lawful or not?
And truly the interpreters, as well of the Civil, as spiritual or Canon Law,
affirm with one consent; that though at the first sight it may seem to be
concluded negatively, forasmuch as it belongs to God alone to change one
substance into another, because no man though of never so great fame, can
perform that; And therefore the Devil when he tempted Christ, as if he were in
doubt, whether he were the Son of God, or no; said, If thou art the Son of God,
cause that these stones may be made bread, that is, Do something which only
belongs to God to do. Yet they concluded at last, that Alchymy was lawful. And
upon this Argument^, viz. because all metals proceed out of Sulphur and
Quicksilver, which the Alchymists call Mercury, which if they receive Air,
Water, and Heat sufficient, are turned into Gold, but if they want a fit
temper, that they cannot be brought to that perfection, then they make Silver,
Tin, Lead, or Brass, according to the influence and disposition of the
Elements. Therefore humane Art does not turn one substance into another, but
heat and temperament; Sulphur and Quicksilver having the force and power to
turn into Gold, and if it cannot be done by reason of some defect, then the
Alchymists do supply that heat and temperament by their Art, which will bring
the Sulphur into the substance of Gold, as well as if it had been natural. John
Andrea, a noted interpreter of the Pontifical Law; writes, that Arnoldus de
villa nova, turned Brass into little Rods of Gold, in the Roman Court, many
Cardinals being present; and presently departing, he left it to any sort of
trial. The Art may be true, but I believe that there are very few, yea, scarce
one that is expert in it. For those that profess it, are either Fools, or much
inclined to poverty. Therefore it is an ancient Proverb, I never saw a rich
Alchymist.

CHAP. IV. Of Distillation.
DIstillation was invented after that the Roman Empire was established. It is
credible, that it was found at the same time, in the exercise of Alchymy. Some
say, that a certain Physician, having a dish upon the Table full of herbs,
being suddenly called to visit a sick person, covered that dish with another,
and then went away: but being returned, he found the uppermost dish moistened:
and hence considering that he might easily extract juices, he bent his wit so
far, that thence he made the beginning of Distillation. Others having imitated
him, by practicing that Art, have made it perfect. That Art is profitable,
because out of it came Aquavitae, Oil of Cinnamon, and innumerable other
Liquors, which are of very great effect. By this means it happens that all
those waters out of Succocory, Capers, and other herbs, which are wont to be
administered to sick persons, are now distilled: whereas formerly they were
only boiled, and the Decoction given to the Patients.

FINIS.
A Table, containing most of the special Matters or Sentences in this Book.
A.
AAron and Saul first anointed, 196 Abell. 23 Aborigines. 11 Abraham. 49 He
taught the contents of Geometry to the Egyptians. 53 He is circumcised, 161
ordained the first place of burial. 203 Adam the first man, 12. he named
beasts, 127. He made the first Coat of Lether, 130 Advent, 226 Advoutry. 153
Aeolus observed the winds. 50 Aeromancy. 62 Aethiopus despised ointments, 106
Air. 8 Alchymy, 305 Alhallow-day. 336 Alms. 224 Amber. 113 Amphion. 43
Amphitheaters. 143 Anacletus forbade Priests to have beards, 172 Anaxagoras. 3
Anaximander, 4, 11 Anchors. 151 Andronicus, 51 Annates. 286 Anointing is the
token of Kings. 196 Anointing of Children, 197 Antioch. 159 Antonius Enipho, a
Schoolmaster. 28 Apollo. 3 Apollo, god of Medicines. 54 Apostles, 168
Apparel. 130 Apparrelin mourning, 139 April. 78 Apuleius de asino aureo, 221
Arabians. 15 Arcadians, 41 Archagathus the first Physician in Rome, 56
Archbishops, 179 Archdeacons, ibid. Archelaus, 34 Archilocus found Iambus, 31
Archimedes devised the Sphere. 50 Ariopagites judged in the night, 71 Arras
Cloth. 130 Aristocracy. 170 Aristotle had the first Library, 84 Arithmetic.
54 Ark, 202 Art of Memory, 87 Asclepiades abolished Physic. 58 Assinius Pollo
had the first Library in Rome, 85 Astrology, 49 Athanasius, 223 Athens made
many books. 84 Atlas. 49 Atoms or Motes. 8 Authors of the names of Countries.
13 Augustus's Seal. 118 Auricular Confession, 112 Axe. 148
B.
BAbylon, 13, 137 Bacchus. 103 Baking. 123 Balm, an herb. 57 Banners. 245
Banquetes. 128 Baptism. 163 Barbers. 154 Barchian league, 101 Barges. 150
Barques. ibid. Baskets, 149 Baths, 146 Battle on the Sea, 151 Beads. 208 Beasts
that be badges, 129 Beadel denounced noon, 81 Beholding the bowels of beasts,
63 Bells, 245 Bellows. 109 Belus, 3, 21 Bennet's use. 224 Bezoars stone. 304
Bible, 231 Buying of wives. 17 Birds. 64 Birth-dayes. 234 Bissextus. 79
Bishops, 160 Bishops of Rome may change their names, 176 Bishops of Rome be
carried on men's shoulders, ibid. Bishops married Maids, 195 Blood-letting, 59
Boats, 150 Bolts. 90 Bone-fires, 153, 199 Bondage. 71 Books, 84 Bow and shafts,
90 Bracks and Slings, 90 Brazen Trump. 44 Brass, 107 Brick-work, 132
Bridle-bits. 91 Brigantine. 150 Broches. 141 Building. 132 Bulls of Lead. 284
Burial is the end of all things. 243 Burying, 138 Burying of an Empeperour, 140
Burning dead bodies, 139 Buttons. 299
C.
CAdmus, 22, 23, 24 Cadmus wrote the first story of Cyrus. 36 Cadmus found
gold, 107 Cain. 23, 122 Cain and Abel sacrificed first. 204 Calends. 79
Camillus, 101 Cancer, 59 Candles. 109 Candlemas-day. 191 Canis. 95 Canonizing
of Sainss, 238 Caps. 183 Cardinals. 174 Carpenter's Art. 147 Carthagenians were
first Merchants. 151 Casting Lots, 64 Casting money abroad, 193 Cecrops, 15, 22
Centauri was found by Chiron, 58 Ceres. 68 Ceres's Image. 117 Ceremonies, why
they were so named, 214 Chaldees. 46, 48 Chalices of Wood, 243 Chalices of
silver and gold, 244 Chamberlains. 175 Chariots. 92 Charms. 61 Chances. 95
Chanters. 166 Chattering of birds, 64 Cherry-Trees. 126 Cheese making. ibid.
Chesse. 95 Chip-Axe. 147 Chiromancy. 62 Chiron, author of Salves. 58 Chius. 95
Chrysippus. 4 Chrism. 197 Christ, author of our Priesthood. 167 Crystal. 114
Christmas Lords. 195 Christening of Infants, 163 Churches and Churchyards, 202
Cicero. 39 Circenses. 97 Circumeision, 161 Civil Crown. 104 Civil Law. 67
Cleanthes. 3 Cleophantus invented colors. 119 Clergy. 165 Clocks. 82
Cock-boat, 150 Coining. 111 Comedies. 34 Commendations to dead bodies, 141
Commonwealth, 70 Common-women. 153 Communion. 216 Compass. 148 Confession.
219 Confirmation. 197 Conjurers. 166 Constantine forbade putting to death on
the Cross. 203 Constantine born in England, first Christian Emperor, 297
Consuls of Rome, 73 Corax gave rules of Rhetoric. 39 Corn-sowing, 123 Corona
triumphalis, 104 Corporaces, 244 Corpus-Christi day, 137 Covering of Scaffolds,
143 Councils, 292 Counting by nails, 54 Cranes or Vernes, 90 Cratus taught the
Grammar in Rome, 28 Cries, 99 Crosse-bowes, 90 Crosse-dayes. 236 Cross
forbidden to be made. 203 Crowns of Brazen plate, 103 Crowns of diverse sorts,
104 Cups were crowned, 104
D.
Days of every month, 79 Days turned into Feries, 230 Days named of the
Planets. 231 Daphnis found the Shepherd's Carolls, 32 Dardanus Trezenius, 44
Darts. 89 David sung in Meter, 30, 42 Decking of Churches, 191 Declamator. 39
Decrees, 74 Dead bodies, 139, 241 Daedalus slew his Nephew, 148
Dedication-dayes, 237 Dedicating of Churches, 205 Degrees of kindred inhibited
to marry, 200 Deifying of the Emperor, 140 Delaying of Wines, 125 Demaratus
taught the He^rurians Letters, 25 Demaratus, 120 Democrasie began in Rome, 74
Democrasie, 69 Democritus. 11 Demosthenes. 39 Denouncing the Dictator. 71
Detany, 59 Division of Nations, 13 Divorcement; 18 Diagoras, 4 Dialls. 81
Dialogues, 47 Debutades. 120 Dice. 94 Dictators first in Rome, 73 Dictator's
Ossice. ibid. Dying of Wool. 129 Dying of hair, 152 Diocesses, 174 Dioclesian.
297 Diodorus. 23 Dionysius, 40, 122 Diriges or Exequies, 239 Disguising, 195
Diverse Divisions of the year. 77 Diverse divisions of the day. 82 Diverse kinds
of meter, 31 Diverse manner of Paper. 86 Diversity of speeches, 12 Divisions of
the night, 83 Dreams. 65 Drinking on Maundy-Thursday, 192 Druides. 46
Drumslades in War, 45 Dulcimers. 44 Dunging Land, 123
E.
EAster, 234 Easter appointed to be kept on the Sunday. 230 Easter instituted
by the Apostles, 233 Easter to be kept in March. ibid. Eating of flesh, 127
Eclipse of the Sun and Moon. 50 Eggs. 128 Egyptians. 49 Egyptians are
superstitious. 157 Egyptian Letters, 23 Egyptians found Geometry, 52 Egyptians
found the year. 76 Election of the Bishop of Rome. 177 Electors of the
Emperor, ibid. Eleazer drives out Spirits, 61 Embring-dayes, 226
Embroidering. 130 Ennius called the Poets holy. 29 Empedocles. 38 Endymion
perceived the course of the Moon. 50 Enos. 23 Epicarmus. 24 Epicurus. 4
Epicurus taught the Grammar first. 28 Epulones. 89 Ethiopians. 21 Ethiopians
opinion of man. 10 Evander brought Letters into Italy. 25 Even and odd, 96
Eumolphus. 24 Excommunication. 181 Exercises. 93 Extreme Unction. 198
F.
FAmous Physicians. 57 Fanes. 51 Fasting. 224 Faunus. 3 Feasts instituted by
the Apostles. 235 Feasts instituted at the Council of Lions, 236 February. 78
Faeciales Sacerdotes, 188 Feeding of Birds. 64 Ferry-Boats. 151 Fetters. 76 F.
was taken of the Aeolians. 25 F. for V. consonant, ibid. Fiddlers and Pipers, 45
Fighting on horseback, 92 Figures of Arithmetic, 54 Fire. 7, 109 Fire and
Water given in token of chastity, 19 First Mass of Priests, 192 First Church
of the Christians. 202 First Church in Rome. ibid. Fishing, 128 Flesh was not
eaten before Noah. 225 Flying of Birds, 64 Five parts of Philosophy, 47
Foreheads, 154 Frederick Feltrius's Library. 85 Fullers craft, 129 Funerals,
138 Funeral Plays. 94
G.
GAley, 150 Games. 92 Garlands, 103 Gates of Marble. 133 Geomancy. 62
Gymnosophists, 46 Glasses to look in. 111 Glass. 113 Glue. 147 God's Nature. 5
God made man. 12 God, what he is. 6 God was the author of Laws. 68 God is made
man, 158 God's mercy. ibid. Goddesses of favor. 43 Godfather and God-mother.
163 God-brother and God-sister, 201 Gold. 107, 110 Good Angels. 2 Goshauke. 143
Grace at meat. 231 Grammar, two parts, 27 Gravers in Marble, 134 Grecians
learned in Egypt. 49 Gregory established the single life of Priests, 200 Greek
Letters. 25 Greek stories. 37 Grinding. 123 Guns, and when they were first
made, 90
H.
HAbergeon. 89 Hallowing of the Priests Vestures. 244 Hangings. 130 Harness. 89
Harp. 108 Harp, who found it, 43 Hebrew letters. 25 Hebrews were authors of
Poetry. 29 Hebrews were authors of Philosophy. 47 Hebrews after Josephus found
Geometry. 52 Hebrews ordained Democrasie, 70 Hechwall. 57 Hellen found the
Cross, 203 Helmets. 89 Herb called Balin. 57 Herbs were created for man. ibid.
Hercules. 96 Heretics. 289 Heroical Verse. 31 Hiperbius. 127 Hippocrates. 55
Histories. 36 Hoye. 150 Holy bread. 251 Holy Days. 205 Holy Water. 206 Honey.
126 Horses. 91 Hostanes wrote books of Magic. 60 Hours. 81 Houses. 132
Hunting. 128 Hunting-staves. 90 Husbandry. 122
I.
JAcob made a league, 99 January, 78 Janus, 22 Janus coyns of brass, 111
Javelins. 89 Icarius. 124 Idaei dactyli. 108 Ides. 80 Idolatry. 20 Jehosuah. 99
Iginius made first orders. 170 John Baptist. 209 John Guthenbergus found
Printing. 85 Images. 115, 249 Images of Kings. 20 Images of Wax. 191
Institution of wedlock, 14 Instruments of husbandry. 123 Instruments of
Physic, 57 Job. 30, 156 Joseph. ibid. Iron. 107 Isaac dug pits. 136 Isis.
21 Jubilee. 281 Julius Caesar made the year perfect. 78 Jupiter. 3 Justes in
Rome. 146 Justing-Spears. 89
K.
KEele. 150 Keeping the Sacrament in Churches, 217 Kingdoms began in Egypt. 69
Kings, how they behaved themselves, 70 Kings of Rome. 72 Kings and Queens of
England. 184 Kings and Priests were anointed. 196 Kindred inhibited to marry.
200 Kissing the Bishop of Rome's feet. 183 Knights wear Rings for difference.
112 Knights of the Rhodes, 269 Knights of St. James, 270 Knights of Jesus
Christ, ibid. Knitting nets. 129
L.
LAbyrinths. 136 Laborers pass the time with Songs, 24 Lacedaemonians manner of
War. 45 Lacedaemonians offerings. 102 Laity. 164 Lamech had 2 Wives, 201 Lame
men may not be Priests. 173 Lammas-day. 237 Lamps. 191 Latin stories. 37 Law.
66 Law for drinking of wine. 184 Lawmakers. 68 Laws of mourning, 239 Laws
natural. 66 Lead. 107 Leagues. 99 Leap-year. 79 Legends. 223 Leg-harness. 89
Lent. 225 Leontinus Gorgias's Image. 117 Letanies. 247 Letters. 23 Letters to
account withal. 54 Letting of blood. 59 Lever. 108 Levites. 66 Liberty of the
old Satyrs. 34 Libraries. 84 Licinius Calvus. 75 Lycurgus. 68 Lydians. 110
Lighter. 150 Line. 147 Linen. 129 Linus. 30 Livius Andronicus, ibid.
Looking-glasses. 111 Lots. 64 Lucretia. 154 Lupercalia. 96
M.
MAgitians. 46 Magi. 61 Magic. 60 Mahomet's Sect. 276 Maids of Cypres, 152
Maids of Rome and Greece, 19 Maying. 193 Marjoram. 59 Malcolm, King of Scots.
17 Manner of diverse Nations in Marriages, 15 Manner of reckoning years. 53
Mantil. 130 Manumission, 71 Marble, 133 March, 77 Marcus Cato banished
Physicians out of Rome. 56 Marcus Valerius ordained a Dial in Rome. 82 Mary
the Virgin dyed, 160 Marriage began in Paradise. 15 Marriage of diverse Nations.
ibid. Marriage of Priests, 198 Marius. 75 Mars, author of Chivalry. 88 Martyrs.
294 Masks. 153, 194 Messagetes. 15 Mass, the parts thereof. 214 Masts. 151
Matches. 109 Mattins, Prime and Hours. 221 Measures and Weights, 53 Meats
forbidden on Fasting-dayes. 231 Melissus. 21 Melting brass. 108 Memory of
Martyrs, 237 Menander. 35 Men deified. 2, 237 Men lived by Acorns, 123 Men of
great memory, 87 Men were first called Christians in Antioch. 159 Men were
sacrificed by the Gentiles. 204 Men wrote in plates, 86 Menon. 23 Mercury. 38,
48, 68 Mercury found the Concordes, 41 Mercury found the Harp. 43 Mercurius
Trismegistus appointed 12 hours in the day. 81 Metals. 107 Meter, diverse kinds
thereof. 31 Mice engender of the mudd. 10 Milk. 128 Minister. 166 Minos. 68
Minos had the first rule on the Sea. 149 Myrrh. 114 Moly. 58 Monarchy. 69
Months. 79 Money. 110 Monks, 257 Morispikes. 89 Moses. 24, 29, 103 Moses did
promulgate the first Laws. 68 Moses did write the first story. 36 Moses found
the trump, 45 Moses ordained divorcements. 18 Motleys. 130 Moulds. 121
Mourning. 239 Mourning is superstitious Hypocrisy, 241 Mummius destroyed
Corinth. 120 Murall crown. 104 Music. 40 Music makes a man effeminate. 42
N.
NAbles. 44 Naked games. 94 Nasamones. 17 Nature gave Music to men. 40 Nature
of Oil. 196 Navall Crown. 104 Necromancie. 62 Nemi. 94 Neptunus. 2 Neptunus had
the Empire of the Sea. 149 Nero first persecutor, 296 Netts. 129 New Years
gifts. 193 Night sacrifices are abolished, 229 Nilus does overflow Egypt. 51
Ni^us did enlarge his Empire. 70 Noah made the first Altar. 165 Noah planter of
the Vine. 125 Noon. 82 Nonas. 80 Notaries. 175 Numa added to the year. 78
Numbers. 53 Nuns. 182 259
O.
OBelisci. 141 Observing of days. 48 Observing of diet, was beginning of
Physic. 54 Obsidional Crown. 104 Occasion of Idolatry, 20 Ochus. 46 Odd and
even. 96 Offering. 191 Office sold in Rome, 176 Oil. 196 Ointments. 105
Olympiades. 93 Olive-Oyl, 126 One God. 6 Opinion of Philosophers, 3 Opinion of
the birth of of man. 9 Oracle. 115 Oracles doubtful. 2 Oracles ceased at
Christ's coming. 206 Orator. 39 Order of Cardinals, 175 Order of Manumission,
71 Oresteus. 124 Organie. 59 Orpheus. 22, 30, 40, 46. Original of Heathen Gods.
1 Otho, a German, made Emperor, 178
P.
PAinting, 118 Palamedes array, 89 Pallas. 3 Pamphilia. 130 Panase. 58 Pancias.
103 Paper. 86 Parchment, ibid. Pardons. 282 Parishes. 173 Parts of Rhetoric,
39 Parts of the night, 83 Part^ians. 57 Paschal Candles. 234 Patriarchs. 179
Paul is converted, 160 Peacock. 128 Pelagius caused Subdeacons to forsake their
Wives. 200 Penitencers. 266 Pensil. 119 Pentecost. 235 Persecutors. 297 Peter
and Philip had Wives. 199 Peter crucified. 160 Peter converted three thousand.
159 Phedon. 110 Pherecides. 37 Phidias. 118 Philip, Emperor, proclaimed an
heretic, 249 Philosophy, 46 Philosophy in three parts, 47 Pyrrhus dance. 94
Physicians famous, 57 Physic. 54 Phonoreus. 68 Pillars. 133 Pirodes struck
fire out of flint, 109 Piromancy. 62 Pisistratus made the first book. 84
Pythagoras called himself a Philosopher, 47 Pythagoras observed the Day Star.
50 Pits, who dug them, 136 Plays or Shows. 92 Plato, 8 Pliny. 23 Plough.
123 Plucking out of Teeth, 55 Poets. 112 Poets be called holy, of Aeneas. 29
Poetry. ibid. Pole-axes. 89 Polignotus. 118 Punishment for Adultery. 16, 153
Punishment for omitting Oblations. 204 Pontifex Maximus, 187 Possessions
permitted to the Clergy. 252 Posthumous. 102 Potters craft, 120 Potters frame.
121 Prayer. 207 Preaching. 208 Price of Writs, 284 Priest's age. 173 Priests.
168 Priests first Mass. 192 Priests of Egypt. 128 Priests of Egypt wrote
stories. 37 Priesthood. 165 Primitive Church, 169 Prime. 80 Prince Electours.
178 Printing. 85 Prisons. 76 Prognostications. 52 Prometheus. 111 Prophesying,
63 Prose. 37 Protagoras. 4 Psalter of David. 30 Psammeticus, 10 Ptolemeus's
Libraries, 84 Pultries. 128 Purification of women, 201 Purple color. 131
Purple robe. 196
Q.
QThe Letter. 26 Quarrels. 90
R.
RAmmers. 90 Readers. 166 Reading the Bible at meat. 231 Riding of horses, 91
Reckonings. 53 Reconciliation of Churches. 237 Regals. 44 Religion. 13, 156
Relics. 279 Repentance, a remedy for sin, 218 Rhetoric, 38 Right hand, 183
Ringing to Service. 245 Rites of burying, 138 Rites of Marriage. 18 Royal
Ornaments, 75 Romans burned their dead bodies. 139 Romans League, 99 Rome made
orders. 170 Romulus. 72 Romulus ordered the year. 77 Rowing in Boats. 150, 151
Rudders. ibid. Rue. 59 Ruling the Commonwealth. 69
S.
SAbbath-dayes of the Jews. 232 Sacrament of the Altar, 217 Sacrifices. 227
Sails. 150 Solomon. 136 Solomon made the first Temple. 202 Salt. 128 Saluting
with kisses, 184 Sanctuaries, 142, 201 Sand Dial. 82 Satyrs, 34 Saturnalia
games. 97 Saturnus, Father of the gods. 4 Savery. 59 Saw. 148 Scaffolds. 143
Scarlet robes. 175 Schisms. 290 Scythians League. 100 Scribes. 284 Selandine.
59 Senio. 95 Servius Tullius. 111 Secretaries. 285 Seth's posterity. 49
Sextons, 166 Shafts. 90 Shalmes. 44 Shaven Crowns. 171 Ships. 150 Shoo-makers
craft, 130 Silk. ibid. Sylla. 75 Silver. 107 Silver coined in Egina, 110
Silvester commanded, That a Priest should have but one Wife, 199 Simony. 287
Simonides. 5 Singing Psalms by course, 222 Singing to the Lute, 44
Single-livers. 17 Sithes. 90 Slings. ibid. Smith's Forge. 108 Socrates, 42
Solicitors, 285 Sol. 81 Soul-masse day, 241 Somners. 285 Sons of Noah, 13 Sons
of Seth found the Letters. 24 Sodering of Iron, 108 Spears. 89 Speaking of the
Nature of God is dangerous, 5 Spindles. 129 Spinning, 130 Spirits. 60 Spurius
Carilius. 18 Squire. 147 Stations. 281 Stalling a Bishop, 17^ Staves. 8^
Steeples, 137, 13^ Stephen is martyred 15^ Stars, of what power they be. 48
Stews. 152, 29^ Stocks, 7^ Story of a King's daughter. 1^ Striking of the
Clock, 82 Subsidies and taxes. 76 Succession of Priesthood, 166 Superstition
turned into Religion. 227 Supplications. 247 Susanna. 154 Swearing. 181 Swine
commended in sacrifices. 127 Swords. 89 Sword-players. 98
T.
TAbles. 94 Talus. 95 Tapers. 191 Targets. 89 Taxes or subsidy that they pay,
which have benefices, 285 Telesphorus did appoint Lent to be kept before
Easter, 226 Tennis. 94 Tents, 135 Texts proving Confession. 220 Thales. 3, 77
Theaters, 142 Themistocles, 42 Theodosius commanded, That no Cross should be
graven on the ground, 203 Theseus, first Tyrant. 71 Thessaly used Magic, 60
Thracians fashion of burying, 139 Three strings in the Harp, 43 Three Masses on
Christmas Day. 215 Tile and Slate. 132 Tyrians were cunning Capentersr, 148
Tisias gave rules of Rhetoric. 39 Tithes, 25^ Titles of Bishops of Rome, 283
Tongues, 108 Towers, 135 Tragedies, 32 Tragos. ibid. Transfigurations. 235
Tribunes. 74 Triumphs. 101 Trix. 33 True Fast. 225 Truce for years. 99
Tubal-Cain. 40, 88, 108 Turning our faces Eastward, 208
V.
VEnus. 95 Venus, a common woman, 152 Vermilion, 114 Vigils, 229 Vizzards were
found by Echilles, 33 Voices. 72 Vows. 246 Use of Scotland. 17 Use in the
Service. 224 Vulcanus. 108 Vultursii. 96 Uxor ab ungendo, 19
W.
Wagons. 92 Walls of houses, 135 Washing of feet on Maundy-Thursday, 184
Washing dead bodies, 241 Watch-words. 89 Watches, wards. ibid. Water is cause
material, 7 Water-Dial. 82 Weights and Measures, 53 Weaving, 129 Weather-cocks.
51 Whit-Sunday. 164 Wimble. 147 Winds, 50 Wine, 124 Wine-Taverns, 125
Winter-garlands, 103 Wool, 129 Women had commendations in Rome, 141 Women may
not base their heads in the Church, 182 Women of India. 139 Works due on the
Holidays. 232 World made of naught, 8 World was made by Meter, 31 Wrestling.
94 Writing in Egypt, 143 Writing Tables. 192
X.
X The letter. 25 Xamolxis. 46 Xerxes. 95
Y.
YAwning, 248 Year, who found it. 77 Yoking Oxen. 123
Z.
ZEphus, 40 Zeno, 11 Zoroastes found Magic. 60
FINIS.

