THE Provoked Wife, A COMEDY.

Books Printed for and lately Published by Richard VVellington, at the Lute in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
FAmiliar Letters, Written by John Late Earl of Rochester in two Volumes; each
Volume may be had singly. Ovid's Travestie: or a Burlesque on Ovid's Epistles,
by Captain Alexander Radcliff. The whole Works of that Excellent Physician Dr.
Tho. Sydenham, Englished. Poems on several occasions, with a Satyr on the
Playhouse, by Mr. Robert Gould. The Histories and Novels of the late Ingenious
Mrs. Behn, Collected into one Volume. A Discourse of the Nature and Faculties
of Man, in several Essays; with Reflections upon the occurrences of Humane
Life, by Tim. Nourse, Gent. The Family Phys^cian, or a Collection of Choice,
and Approved Remedies for the Cure of all Diseases incident to Humane Bodies;
useful in Families, and Serviceable to Country People. To which is added the
true English Wine Cellar, being the Right Method of making English Wines or
Metheglin; with a Collection of the Choicest Cosmetick Remedies for Preserving
the Beauty and Complexion of Ladies, never before Published. By George
Heartman, Servant to Sir Kenelm Digby, till he Died. A General History of the
Diseases of Infants and Children, by John Peachey of the College of Physicians.
Plautus's Comedies Englished by Mr. Eachard. The Art of Knowing ones self, or a
Diligent search into the Springs of Morality, written in French, by James
Abbadie, D. D. faithfully Englished.
Next week will be Published an End to the Controversy between the Church of
England and Dissenters, in which all their Pleas for Separation from the Church
of England are proved to be Insufficient, from the Writings of the most Eminent
among the Dissenters themselves. And their Separation Condemned by the Reformed
Churches,

THE Provoked Wife: A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the New Theater, IN Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

By the Author of a New Comedy called the Relapse, or Virtue in Danger.

LONDON, Printed by I. O. for R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Church
Yard, and Sam. Briscoe in Covent Garden 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Plays lately published: Anatomist, or Sham-Doctor: Rule a Wise and have a
Wife: Rover, or the Banished Cavalier: The Younger Brother, or Amorous Jil^^
Spanish Wives, a Farce: Unnatural Brother, a Tragedy: Triumphs of Virtue* a
Trage-Comedy. All Printed for Richard Wel^ington, at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard: Where you may be furnished with most Plays.

Next Week will be published the Plot and no Plot, A new Comedy, Written by Mr.
Denn^^.

PROLOGUE To the Provoked Wife, spoke by Mistress Bracegirdle.
SInce it is the Intent and Business of the Stag^,
To Copy out the Follies of the Age;
To hold to every Man a Faithful Glass,
And show him of what Species he is an Ass.
I hope the next that teaches in the School,
Will show our Author he is a scribbling Fool.
And that the Satyr may be sure to Bite,
Kind Heaven! Inspire some venomed Priest to Write,
And grant some Ugly Lady may Indite.
For I would have him lashed, by Heavens! I would,
Till his presumption swam away in Blood.
Three Plays at once proclaims a Face of Brass,
No matter what they are! That Is not the Case,
To Write three Plays, even that is to be an Ass.
But what I least forgive, he knows it too,
For to his Cost he lately has known you.
Experience shows, to many a Writers smart
You hold a Court where mercy never had part;
So much of the old Serpent's Sting you have,
You Love to Damn, as Heaven Delights to Save.
In Foreign Parts, let a bold Voluntiere,
For public Good upon the Stage appear,
He meets ten thousand Smiles to Dissipate his Fear.
All tickle on, the adventuring young Beginner,
And only scourge the incorragible Sinner;
They touch indeed his Faults, but with a hand
So gentle, that his Merit still may stand:
Kindly they Buoy the Follies of his Pen,
That he may shun 'em when he Writes again.
But it is not so, in this good natured Town,
All Is one, an Ox, a P^et, or a Crown,
Old England's play was always knocking Down.
EPILOGUE, By another Hand.
Spoken by Lady Brute and Bellinda. Lady B. NO Epilogue!

Bell. I Swear I know of none.

Lady. Lord! How shall we excuse it to the Town?

Bell. Why, we must even say something of our own.

Lady Our own! Ay, that must needs be precious stuff.

Bell. I Will lay my life they will like it well enough.
Come Faith begin --

Lady Excuse me, after you.

Bell. Nay, pardon me for that, I know my Cue.

Lady O for the World, I would not have Precedence.

Bell. O Lord!

Lady I Swear --

Bell. O Fie!

Lady I Am all Obedience.
First then, know all, before our Doom is fixed,
The Third day is for us --

Bell. Nay, and the Sixth.

Lady We speak not from the Poet now, nor is it
His Cause -- (I want a Rhyme)

Bell. That we solicit.

Lady Then sure you cannot have the hearts to be severe
And Damn us --

Bell. Damn us! Let 'em if they Dare.

Lady Why, if they should, what punishment Remains?

Bell. Eternal Exile from behind our Scenes.

Lady But if they are kind, that sentence we'll recall,
We can be grateful --

Bell. And have wherewithal.

Lady But at grand Treaties, hope not to be Trusted,
Before Preliminaries are adjusted.

Bell. You know the Time, and we appoint this place;
Where, if you please, we'll meet and sign the Peace.

Drammatis Personae.
Constant. Mr. Verbrugen. Heartfree. Mr. Hudson. Sir John Brute. Mr. Betterton.
Treble, A Singing Master. Mr. Bowman. Rasor, Vallet de Chamber to Sir I. B. Mr.
Bowen. Justice of the Peace. Mr. Bright. Lord Rake Companion to Sir, I. B.
Coll. Bully Companion to Sir, I. B. Constable and Watch.
Lady Brute. Mrs. Barry. Bellinda her Neice. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Lady Fancyfull.
Mrs. Bowman. Mademoiselle. Mrs. Willis. Cor. and Pipe, Servants to Lady Fancy.
THE Provoked Wife.
ACT the First.
Scene Sir John Brute's House. Enter Sir John, solus. WHAT cloying meat is
Love, -- when Matrimony's the Sauce to it. Two years Marriage has debaucht my
five Senses. Every thing I see, every thing I hear, every thing I feel, every
thing I smell, and every thing I taste -- methinks has Wife in it.

No Boy was ever so weary of his Tutor; no Girl of her Bib; no Nun of doing
Penance nor Old Maid of being Chaste, as I am of being Married.

Sure there is a secret Curse entailed upon the very Name of Wife. My Lady is a
young Lady, a fine Lady, a Witty Lady, a Virtuous Lady -- and yet I hate her.
There is but one thing on Earth I loath beyond her: That Is fighting. Would my
Courage come up but to a fourth part of my Ill Nature, I Would stand buff to her
Relations, and thrust her out of Doors.

But Marriage has sunk me down to such an Ebb of Resolution, I dare not draw my
Sword, tho even to get rid of my Wife. But here she comes.


Enter Lady Brute. Lady. Do you Dine at home to day, Sir John?


Sir Ioh. Why, do you expect I should tell you, what I don't know my self?


Lady. I thought there was no harm in asking you.


Sir Ioh. If thinking wrong were an excuse for Impertinence, Women might be
justified in most things they say or do.


Lady. I Am sorry I have said any thing to displease you.


Sir Ioh. Sorrow for things past, is of as little Importance to me, as my
dining at home or a broad ought to be to you.


Lady B. My Enquiry was only that I might have provided what you liked.


Sir Ioh. Six to four you had been in the wrong there again, for what I liked
yesterday I don't like to day, and what I like to day, it is odds I may not like
to morrow.


Lady B. But if I had asked you what you liked?


Sir Ioh. Why then there would have been more asking about it, than the thing
was worth.


Lady B. I wish I did but know how I might please you.


Sir Ioh. Ay, but that sort of knowledge is not a Wife's Talent.


Lady B. What ever my Talent is, I Am sure my Will has ever been to make you
easy.


Sir Ioh. If Women were to have their Wills, the World would be finely governed.


Lady B. What reason have I given you to use me as you do of late? It once was
otherwise: You married me for Love.


Sir Ioh. And you me for Money: So you have your Reward, and I have mine.


Lady B. What is it that disturbs you?


Sir Ioh. A Parson.


Lady B. Why, what has he done to you?


Sir Ioh. He has married me. Exit Sir John.

Enter Lady Brute, sola. The Devil's in the Fellow I think -- I was told before
I married him, that thus 'twou^d be; But I thought I had Charms enough to
govern him; and that where there was an Estate, a Woman must needs be happy; so
my Vanity has deceived me, and my Ambition has made me uneasy. But some
comfort still; if one would be reveng^d of him, these are good times; a Woman
may have a Gallant, and a separate maintenance too -- The surly Puppy -- yet
he is a Fool for it: For hitherto he has been no Monster: But who knows how far
he may provoke me. I never loved him, yet I have been ever true to him; and
that, in spite of all the attacks of Art and Nature upon a poor weak Woman's
heart, in favor of a Tempting Lover.

Methinks so Noble a Defense as I have made, should be rewarded with a better
usage -- Or who can tell -- Perhaps a good part of what I suffer from my
Husband may be a Judgment upon me for my cruelty to my Lover. -- Lord with what
pleasure could I indulge that thought, were there but a possibility of finding
Arguments to make it good. And how do I know but there may -- Let me see --
What opposes? -- My Matrimonial Vow? -- Why, what did I Vow: I think I promised
to be true to my Husband.

Well; and he promised to be kind to me.

But he has not kept his Word --

Why then I Am absolved from mine -- ay, that seems clear to me. The Arguments
good between the King and the People, why not between the Husband and the Wife?
O, but that Condition was not expressed. -- No matter, 'twas understood.

Well, by all I see, If I argue the matter a little longer with my self, I
shall not find so many Bug-bears in the way, as I thought I should. Lord what fine
notions of Virtue do we Women take up upon the Credit of old foolish
Philosophers. Virtue's it is own reward, Virtue's this, Virtue's that; --
Virtue's an Ass, and a Gallant's worth forty on it.


Enter Bellinda. Lady. Good morrow, Dear Cousin.


Bell. Good morrow, Madam; you look pleased this morning.


Lady. I am so.


Bell. With what, pray?


Lady. With my Husband.


Bell. Drown Husbands; for yours is a provoking Fellow: As he went out just
now, I prayed him to tell me what time of day 'twas: And he asked me if I took
him for the Church Clock, that was Obliged to tell all the Parish.


Lady B. He has been saying some good obliging things to me too. In short,
Bellinda, he has used me so barbarously of late, that I could almost resolve to
play the downright Wife, -- and Cuckold him.


Bell. That would be downright indeed.


Lady B. Why, after all, there is more to be said for it than you would Imagine,
Child. I know according to the strict Statute Law of Religion, I should do
wrong: But if there were a Court of Chancery in Heaven, I Am sure I should cast
him.


Bell. If there were a House of Lords you might.


Lady B. In either I should infallibly carry my Cause.
Why, he is the first Agressor. Not I.

Bell. Ay, but you know, we must return Good for Evil.


Lady B. That may be a mistake in the Translation --

Prithee be of my opinion, Bellinda; for I Am positive I Am in the right; and if
you will keep up the Prerogative of a Woman, yo^^ll likewise be positive you are
in the right, when ever you do any thing you have a mind to. But I shall play
the fool, and jest on till I make you begin to think I Am in Earnest


Bell. I sha'n't take the liberty, Madam, to think of any thing that you desire
to keep a Secret from me.


Lady B. Alas, my Dear, I have no Secrets. My heart could never yet con^ine my
Tongue.


Bell. Your eyes you mean; for I am sure I have seen them gadding, when your
Tongue has been locked up safe enough.


Lady B. My eyes gadding? Prithee after who, Child?


Bell. Why, after one that thinks you hate him, as much as I know you love him.


Lady B. Constant you mean.


Bell. I do so.


Lady B. Lord, what should put such a thing into your head?


Bell. That which puts things into most peoples Heads; Observation.


Lady B. Why, what have you observed, in the name of Wonder?


Bell. I have observed you blush when you meet him; force your self away from
him; and then be out of humor with every thing about you: In a word; never was
poor Creature so spurred on by desire, and so rein'd in with fear!


Lady B. How strong is Fancy!


Bell. How weak is Woman


Lady B. Prithee, Neice, have a better opinion of your Aunt's Inclinations.


Bell. Dear Aunt, have a better opinion of your Neice's Understanding.


Lady B. You Will make me Angry.


Bell. You Will make me Laugh.


Lady B. Then you are resolved to persist?


Bell. Positively.


Lady Bell. And all I can say --


Bell. Will signify nothing,


Lady B. Though I should swear 'twere false --


Bell. I should think it true.


Lady B. Then let us both forgive [kissing her] for we have both offended. I in
making a Secret, you in discovering it.


Bell. Good nature may do much: But you have more reason to forgive one, than I
have to pardon the other.


Lady B. It Is true, Bellinda, you have given me so many proofs or your
Friendship, that my reserve has been indeed a Crime: But that you may more
easily forgive me, Remember, Child, that when our Nature prompts us to a thing,
our Honor and Religion have forbid us. We would (were it possible) conceal even
from the Soul it self, the knowledge of the Bodies weakness.


Bell. Well, I hope, to make your Friend amends, you will hide nothing from her
for the future, though the Body should still grow weaker and weaker.


Lady B. No, from this moment I have no more reserve; and for a proof of my
Repentance, I own, Bellinda, I Am in danger. Merit and Wit assault me from
without: Nature and Love soli^ite me within; my Husbands barbarous usage piques
me to revenge; and Satan catching at the fair occasion, throws in my way that
vengeance, which of all Vengeance pleases Women best.


Bell. It Is well Constant don't know the weakness of the Fortifications; for
of my Conscience he would soon come on to the Assault.


Lady B. Ay, and I Am afraid carry the Town too. But whatever you may have
observed, I have dissembled so well as to keep him Ignorant. So you see I Am no
Coquet, Bellinda: And if you will follow my advice you will never be one neither.
It Is true, Coquettry is one of the main ingredients in the natural Composition
of a Woman, and I as well as others, could be well enough pleased to see a
Crowd of young Fellows, Ogling and Glancing and Watching all occasions to do
forty foolish officious things: nay should some of 'em push on, even to Hanging
or Drowning: Why -- Faith -- if I should let pure Woman alone, I should even be
but too well pleased with it.


Bell. I Will swear 'twou^d tickle me strangely.


Lady B. But after all, it is a Vicious practice in us, to give the least
encouragement but where we design to come to a Conclusion. For it is an
unreasonable thing, to engage a Man in a Disease which we before-han^ resolve
we never will apply a Cure to.


Bell. It Is true; but then a Woman must abandon one of the supreme Blessings of
her Life. For I am fully convinced, no Man has half that pleasure in possessing
a Mistress, as a Woman has in jilting a Gallant.


Lady B. The Happiest Woman then on Earth must be our Neighbor.


Bell. O the Impertinent Composition; she has Vanity and Affectation enough to
make her a Ridiculous Original, in spite of all that Art and Nature ever
furnished to any of her Sex before her.


Lady B. She concludes all Men her Captives; and whatever Course they take, it
serves to confirm her in that opinion.


Bell. If they shun her, she thinks it is modesty, and takes it for a proo^ of
their Passion.


Lady B. And if they are rude to her, it is Conduct, and done to prevent Town
talk.


Bell. When her Folly makes 'em laugh, she thinks they are pleased with her Wit.


Lady B. And when her impertinence makes 'em Dull, Concludes they are jealous
of her favors.


Bell. All their Actions and their Words, she takes for granted, aim at her.


Lady B. And pities all other Women, because she thinks they envy her.


Bell. Pray, out of pity to our selves, let us find a better Subject, for I am
weary of this. Do you think your Husband inclined to Jealousy?


Lady B. O, no; he does not love me well enough for that.

Lord how wrong Men's Maxims are. They are seldom jealous of their Wives,
unless they are very fond of 'em; whereas they ought to consider the Woman's
inclinations, for there depends their Fate.

Well, Men may talk; but they are not so Wise as we -- that is certain.


Bell. At least in our Affairs.


Lady B. Nay, I believe we should out do 'em in the business of the State too:
For me thinks they Do and Undo, and make but mad work on it


Bell. Why then don't we get into the Intrigues of Government as well as they?


Lady B. Because we have Intrigues of our own, that make us more sport, Child.
And so let us in and consider of 'em. Exeunt.


SCENE. A Dressing Room. Enter Lady Fancyfull, Mademoiselle and Cornet. Lady
Fan. How do I look this morning?


Cor. Your Ladyship looks very ill, truly.


Lady Fan. Lard how ill-natured thou art, Cornet, to tell me so, tho the thing
should be true. Don't you know that I have humility enough to be but too easily
out of Conceit with my self. Hold the Glass; I dare swear that will have more
manners than you have* Mademoiselle, let me have your opinion too.


Madam. My opinion pe, Matam, dat your Ladyship never look so well in your Life.


Lady Fan. Well, the French are the prettiest obliging People, they say the
most acceptable, well manner'd things -- and never flatter.


Madam. Your Ladyship say great Justice inteed.


Lady Fan. Nay every thing's Just in my House but Cornet. The very
Looking-Glass gives her the Dementi. But I Am almost afraid it flatters me, it
makes me look so very engaging. Looking affectedly in the Glass.


Madam. Inteed, Matam, your Face pe hansomer den all de Looking-Glass in tee
World, croyiez moy.


Lady Fan. But is it possible my Eyes can be so languishing -- and so very full
of fire?


Madam. Matam, if de Glass was burning Glass, I believe your Eyes set de fire
in de House.


Lady Fan. You may take that Nightgown, Mademoiselle; get out of the Room
Cornet; I cannot endure you. This Wench methinks does look so unsufferably ugly.
Exit Cor.


Madam. Every ting look ugly Matam, dat stand by your Latiship.


Lady Fan. No really, Mademoiselle, methinks you look mighty pretty.


Madam. Ah Matam; de Moon have ^o Eclat, ven de Sun appear.


Lady Fan. O pretty Expression. Have you ever been in Love, Mademoiselle?


Madam. Ouy, Matam. sighing.


Lady Fan. And were you, beloved again?


Madam. No Matam. sighing


Lady Fan. O ye Gods, What an Unfortunate Creature should I be in such a Case.
But nature has made me Nice for my own defense; I Am Nice, strangely Nice,
Mademoiselle; I believe were the merit of whole mankind bestowed upon one
single Person, I should still think the Fellow wanted something, to make it
worth my while to take notice of him: And yet I could Love; nay fondly Love,
were it possible to have a thing made on purpose for me: For I Am not cruel,
Mademoiselle, I Am only Nice.


Madam. Ah Matam, I wish I was fine Gentelman for your sake. I do all de ting
in de World to get leetel way into your heart. I make Song, I make Verse, I
give you de Serenade, I give great many Present to Mademoiselle, I no eat, I no
sleep, I be lean, I be mad, I hang my self, I drown my self? Ah ma Chere Dame,
Que je vous Aimerois. Embracing her.


Lady Fan. Well the French have strange obliging ways with 'em; you may take
those two pair of Gloves Madamois^lle.


Madam. Me humbly tanke my sweet Lady.


Enter Cornet. Cor. Madam here is a Letter for your Ladyship by the Pennypost.


Lady Fan. Some new Conquest I Will warrant you. For without Vanity I looked
extremely clear last night, when I went to the Park.

O agreeable. Here Is a new Song made of me. And ready set too. O thou Welcome
thing. ( Kissing it) Call Pipe hither, she shall Sing it instantly.

Enter Pipe. Here, Sing me this new Song, Pipe.


SONG.
I.
FLy, fly, you happy Shepherds, fly,
Avoid Philira's Charms;
The rigor of her heart denies
The Heaven that is in her Arms.
Never hope to gaze and then retire,
Nor yielding, to be blessed:
Nature who formed her Eyes of Fire,
Of Ice Composed her Breast.
II.
Yet, lovely Maid, this once believe
A slave, whose Zeal you move:
The Gods Alas, your youth deceive;
Their Heaven consists in Love.
In spite of all the thanks you owe,
You may Reproach 'em this,
That where they did their Form bestow
They have denied their Bliss.
Lady Fan. Well, there may be faults, Mademoiselle, but the Design is so very
obliging, 'twou'd be a matchless Ingratitude in me to discover 'em.


Madam. Ma foy Matam, I tink de Gentelman's Song tell you de trute. If you
never Love, you never be Happy -- Ah -- que IN aim l' amor moy.


Enter Servant with another Letter. Serve. Madam here is another Letter for your
Ladyship.


Lady Fan. It Is thus I am importuned every morning, Mademoiselle. Pray how do
the French Ladies when they are thus Accablees?


Madam. Matam, dey never Complain. Au Contraire. When one Frense Laty have got
hundred Lover -- Den she do all she can -- to get hundred more.


Lady Fan. Well, strike me dead, I think they have Le gout bon. For it is an
unutterable pleasure to be adored by all the Men, and envied by all the Women
-- Yet I Will swear I Am concerned at the Torture I give 'em. Lard, why was I
formed to make the whole Creation uneasy? But let me read my Letter. Reads. If
you have a mind to hear of your faults, instead of being praised for your
Virtues, take the pains to walk in the Green walk in St. James's with your
Woman an hour hence. You Will there meet one, who hates you for some things, as
he could love you for Others, and therefore is willing to endeavor your
Reformation -- If you come to the Place I mention, you will know who I am; if you
don't, you never shall, so take your Choice.


This is strangely Familiar, Mademoiselle; now have I a provoking Fancy to know
who this Impudent fellow is.


Madam. Den take your Scarf and your Mask, and go to de Rendezvous De Frense
Laty do iustement ^omme sa.


Lady Fan. Rendezvous! What, Rendezvous with a man; Mademoiselle.


Madam Eh, pourquoy non?


Lady Fan. What? and a man perhaps I never saw in my Life


Madam. Tant m^eux: c'est done quelque chose de n^uveau.


Lady Fan. Why, how do I know what designs he may have. He may intend to Ravish
me for ought I know.


Madam. Ravish? -- Bagatelle. I would fain see one Impudent Rogue Ravish
Mademoiselle; Ouy, je le voadrois.


Lady Fan. O but my Reputation, Mademoiselle, my Reputation, a^ ma Chere
Reputation.


Madam. Matam; -- Quand on l' a une fois perdue -- On n'en est plus embarassee.


Lady Fan. Fe Mademoiselle, Fe: Reputation is a Jewel.


Madam. Qui coute bien chere Matam.


Lady Fan. Why sure you would not Sacrifice your Honor to your Pleasure?


Madam Je suis Philosophe.


Lady Fan. Bless me how you talk. Why what if Honor be a burden, Mademoiselle,
must it not be born?


Madam. Chaque un a sa fason -- quand quelque chose m' incommode moy je m' en
defais, Vite.


Lady Fan. Get you gone you little naughty French woman you, I vow and swear I
must turn you out of doors if you talk thus.


Madam. Turn me out of doors? -- turn your self out of doors and go see what de
Gentelman have to say to you Tennez. Voila [giving her her things hastily]
vostre Esharpe, Voila vostre Quoife, Voila vostre Masque, Voila tout.

Hey, Mercure, Coquin; Call one Chair for Matam, and one oder ( Calling
within.) for me, Va t'en Vite. Turning to her Lady and helping her on hastily
with her things. Alons, Matam; depechez vous done. Mon Dieu quelles scrupules.


Lady Fan. Well, for once, Mademoiselle, I Will follow your Advice, out of the
intemperate desire I have to know who this ill bred Fellow is. But I have too
much Delicatesse, to make a Practice on it.


Madam. Belle chose Vraiment que la Delicatesse, lors qu' il s'agit dese
devertir. -- a za -- Vous Voila equipee parto^ns. -- He bien? -- q' avez vous
donc?


Lady Fan. IN ay peur.


Madam. IN n'en ay point moy.


Lady Fan. I dare not go.


Madam. Demeurez donc.


Lady Fan. Je suis Poltrone.


Madam. Tant pis pour Vous


Lady Fan. Curiosity's a wicked Devil.


Madam. C'est une Charmante Saint.


Lady Fan. It ruined our first Parents.


Madam. Elle a bien diverti leurs Enfants.


Lady Fan. L' honneur est contre.


Madam. Le plaisir est pour.


Lady Fan. Must I then go?


Madam. Must you go? -- must you eat, must you drink, must you sleep, must you
live? De nature bid you do one, de nature bid you do toder. Vous me ferez
enrager.


Lady Fan. But when reason corrects nature, Mademoiselle.


Madam. Elle est donc bien Insolente C'est sa soeur aisnee.


Lady Fan. Do you then prefer your nature to your reason, Mademoiselle.


Madam. Ouy da.


Lady Fan. Pourquoy?


Madam. Because my nature make me merry, my reason make me mad.


Lady Fan. Ah la Mechante Fransoise.


Madam. Ah la Belle Angloise, forcing her Lady off.


The End of the first Act.
ACT the Second.
SCENE, St. James's Park. Enter Lady Fanciful and Mademoiselle. Lady Fanc.
WEll, I vow, Mademoiselle I Am strangely impatient to know who this confident
Fellow is. Enter Heartfree. Look, there is Heartfree. But sure it cannot be him,
he is a professed Woman-hater. Yet who knows what my wicked Eyes may have done?


Madam. Il nous approach, Madam.


Lady Fanc. Yes, it is he: Now will he be most intolerably Cavalier, though he
should be in love with me.


Heartf. Madam, I Am your humble Servant: I perceive you have more Humility and
Goodnature than I thought you had.


Lady Fanc. What you attribute to Humility and Goodnature, Sir, may perhaps be
only due to Curiosity. I had a mind to know who 'twas had ill manners enough to
write that Letter.


Throwing him his Letter. Heartf. Well, and now, I hope, you are satisfied.


Lady Fanc. I am so, Sir; good b'w^y to ye.


Heartf. Nay, hold there; though you have done your Business, I have not done mine:
By your Ladiship's leave, we must have one moments prattle together. Have you a
mind to be the prettiest Woman about Town, or not? How she stares upon me!
What! this passes for an impertinent Question with you now, because you think
you are so already.


Lady Fanc. Pray Sir, let me ask you a Question in my turn: By what right do
you pretend to examine me?


Heartf. By the same right that the Strong govern the Weak, because I have you
in my power; for you cannot get so quickly to your Coach, but I shall have time
enough to make you hear every thing I have to say to you.


Lady Fanc. These are strange Liberties you take, Mr. Heartfree.


Heartf. They are so, Madam, but there is no help for it; for know, that I have
a Design upon you.


Lady Fanc. Upon me, Sir!


Heartfr. Yes; and one that will turn to your Glory and my Comfort, if you will
but be a little wiser than you use to be.


Lady Fanc. Very well, Sir.


Heartfr. Let me see, -- Your Vanity, Madam, I take to be about some eight
degrees higher than any Woman's in the Town, let t^other be who she will; and my
Indifference is naturally about the same pitch. Now, could you find the way to
turn this Indifference into Fire and Flames, methinks your Vanity ought to be
satisfied; and this, perhaps, you might bring about upon pretty reasonable
terms.


Lady Fanc. And pray at what rate would this Indifference be bought off, if one
should have so depraved an Appetite to desire it?


Heartfr. Why, Madam, to drive a Quaker's Bargain, and make but one word with
you, if I do part with it, -- you must lay me down -- your Affectation.


Lady Fanc. My Affectation, Sir!


Heartfr. Why, I ask you nothing but what you may very well spare.


Lady Fanc. You grow rude, Sir. Come, Mademoiselle, it is high time to be gone.


Madam. Alons, alons, alons.


Heartfr. (stopping 'em) Nay, you may as well stand still for hear me, you
shall, walk which way you please.


Lady Fanc. What mean you, sir?


Heartfr. I mean to tell you, that you are the most ungrateful Woman upon Earth.


Lady Fanc. Ungrateful! To who?


Heartfr. To Nature.


Lady Fanc. Why, what has Nature done for me?


Heartfr. What you have undone by Art. It made you handsome; it gave you Beauty
to a Miracle, a Shape without a fault, Wit enough to make 'em relish, and so
turned you loose to your own Discretion; which has made such Work with you,
that you are become the Pity of our Sex, and the Jest of your own. There is not
a Feature in your Face, but you have found the way to teach it some affected
Convulsion; your Feet, your Hands, your very Fingers ends, are directed never
to move without some ridiculous Air or other; and your Language is a suitable
Trumpet, to draw Peoples Eyes upon the Raree-show.


Madam. ( aside) Est ce qu'on fais l'amour en Angleterre comme sa?


Lady Fanc. ( aside) Now could I cry for madness, but that I know he would laugh at
me for it.


Heartfr. Now do you hate me for telling you the Truth; but that is because you
don't believe it is so: for were you once convinced of that, you would reform for
your own sake. But it is as hard to persuade a Woman to quit any thing that
makes her ridiculous, as it is to prevail with a Poet to see a Fault in his own
Play.


Lady Fanc. Every Circumstance of nice Breeding must needs appear ridiculous to
one who has so natural an Antipathy to good Manners.


Heartfr. But suppose I could find the means to convince you, That the whole
World is of my Opinion, and that those who flatter and commend you, do it to no
other intent, but to make you persevere in your Folly, that they may continue
in their Mirth.


Lady Fanc. Sir, though you and all that World you talk of, should be so
impertinently officious, as to think to persuade me, I don't know how to behave
my self, I should still have Charity enough for my own Understanding, to
believe my self in the right, and all you in the wrong.


Madam. Le voila mort. Exeunt Lady Fanc. and Mademoiselle.


Heartfr. ( gazing after her) There her single Clapper has published the sense
of the whole Sex.

Well, this once I have endeavored to wash the Blackamoor white; but
henceforward I Will sooner undertake to teach Sincerity to a Courtier, Generosity
to an Usurer, Honesty to a Lawyer, nay, Humility to a Divine, than Discretion
to a Woman I see has once set her Heart upon playing the Fool.

Enter Constant. 'Morrow, Constant.


Constable. Good morrow, Jack; What are you doing here this morning?


Heartfr. Doing! guess if thou can.

Why, I have been endeavoring to persuade my Lady Fanciful, that she is the
foolishest Woman about Town.


Constable. A pretty Endeavor truly.


Heartfr. I have told her in as plain English as I could speak, both what the
Town says of her, and what I think of her. In short, I have used her as an
Absolute King would do Magna Charta.


Constable. And how does she take it?


Heartfr. As Children do Pills; bite 'em, but cannot swallow 'em.


Constable. But, prithee, what has put it in your Head, of all Mankind, to turn
Reformer?


Heartfr. Why, one thing was, the Morning hung upon my Hands, I did not know
what to do with my self. And another was, That as little as I care for Women, I
could not see with patience one that Heaven had taken such wondrous pains
about, be so very industrious, to make her self the Jack Pudding of the
Creation.


Constable. Well, now could I almost wish to see my cruel Mistress make the
self-same use of what Heaven has done for her, that so I might be cured of a
Disease that makes me so very uneasy; for Love, Love is the Devil, Heartfree.


Heartfr. And why do you let the Devil govern you?


Constable. Because I have more Flesh and Blood than Grace and Self-denial. My
dear, dear Mistress, 'd ^death! that so gent^el a Woman should be a Saint, when
Religion's out of fashion!


Heartfr. Nay, she is much in the wrong truly; but who knows ^ow far Time and
Good Example may prevail?


Constable. O! they have played their Parts in vain already: It Is now two Years
since that damned fellow her Husband invited me to his Wedding; and there was
the first time I saw that charming Woman, whom I have loved ever since, more
than ever a Martyr did his Soul; but she is cold, my Friend, still cold as the
Northern Star.


Heartfr. So are all Women by Nature, which makes 'em so willing to be warm^d.


Constable. O, don't profane the ^ex; prithee think 'em all Angels for her sake,
for she is virtuous, even to a fault.


Heartfr. A Lover's Head is a good accountable thing truly; he adores his
Mistress for being virtuous, and yet is very angry with her, because she will not
be lewd.


Constable. Well, the only Relief I expect in my Misery, is to see thee some day or
other as deeply engaged as my self, which will force me to be merry in the
midst of all my Misfortunes.


Heartfr. That day will never come, be assured, Ned: Not but that I can pass a
Night with a Woman, and for the time, perhaps, make my self as good sport as
you can do. Nay, I can court a Woman too, call her Nymph, Angel, Goddess, what
you please; but here is the Difference 'twixt you and I: I persuade a Woman
she is an Angel; she persuades you she is one.

Prithee let me tell you how I avoid falling in love; that which serves me for
Prevention, may chance to serve you for a Cure.


Constable. Well, use the Ladies moderately then, and I Will hear you.


Heartfr. That using 'em moderately undoes us all; but I Will use 'em justly, and
that you ought to be satisfied with.

I always consider a Woman, not as the Tailor, the Shoo-maker, the Tire-woman,
the Sempstress, (and which is more than all that) the Poet makes her; but I
consider her as pure Nature has contrived her, and that more strictly than I
should have done our old Grandmother Eve, had I seen her naked in the Garden;
for I consider her turned inside out. Her Heart well examined, I find there
Pride, Vanity, Covetousness, Indiscretion, but above all things, Malice; Plots
eternally aforging, to destroy one another Reputations, and as honestly to
charge the Levity of Men's Tongues with the Scandal; hourly Debates how to make
poor Gentlemen in love with 'em, with no other intent, but to use 'em like Dogs
when they have done; a constant Desire of doing more mischief, and an
everlasting War, wag^d against Truth and Goodnature.


Constable. Very well, Sir, an admirable Composition truly.


Heartfr. Then for her Outside, I consider it merely as an Outside; She has a
thin Tiffany covering over just such Stuff as you and I are made on.

As for her Motion, her Mien, her Airs, and all those Tricks, I know they
affect you mightily. If you should see your Mistress at a Coronation, dragging
her Peacock's Train, with all her state and insolence about her, 'twould strike
you with all the awful thoughts that Heaven it self could pretend to from you;
whereas I turn the whole matter into a Jest, and suppose her strutting in the
self-same stately manner, with nothing on but her Stays, and her under scanty
(...) Petticoat.


Constable. Hold thy profane Tongue, for I Will hear no more.


Heartfr. What you will love on then?


Constable. Yes, to Eternity.


Heartfr. Yet you have no Hopes at all.


Constable. None.


Heartfr. Nay, the Resolution may be discreet enough; perhaps you have found
out some new Philosophy, That Love's like Virtue, its own Reward: so you and
your Mistress will be as well content at a distance, as others that have less
Learning are in coming together.


Constable. No; but if she should prove kind at last, my dear Heartfree. Embracing
him.


Heartfr. Nay, prithee don't take me for your Mistress, for Lovers are very
troublesome.


Constable. Well, who knows what Time may do?


Heartfr. And just now he was sure Time could do nothing.


Constable. Yet not one kind Glance in Two Years, is somewhat strange.


Heartfr. Not strange at all; she don't like you, that is all the business.


Constable. Prithee don't distract me.


Heartfr. Nay, you are a good handsome young Fellow, she might use you better:
Come, will you go see her? perhaps she may have changed her mind; there is some
Hopes as long as she is a Woman.


Constable. O, it is in vain to visit her: sometimes to get a sight of her, I visit
that Beast her Husband, but she certainly finds some Preten^e to quit the Room
as soon as I enter.


Heartfr. It Is much she don't tell him you have made Love to her too, for
that is another good-natured thing usual amongst Women, in which they have
several Ends.

Sometimes it is to recommend their Virtue, that they may be lewd with the
greater security.

Sometimes it is to make their Husbands fight in hopes they may be kill^d, when
their Affairs require it should be so. But most commonl^ it is to engage two men
in a Quarrel, that they may have the Credit of being fought for; and if the
Lover's killed in the business, they cry, Poor Fellow! he had ill Luck. -- And
so they go to Cards.


Constable. Thy Injuries to Women are not to be fo^rgiven. Lo^k to it if ever thou
do fall into their hands --


Heartfr. They cannot use me worse than they do you, that speak well of 'em.

Co^^o! here comes the Knight.


Enter Sir John Brute. Heartfr. Your humble Servant, Sir John.


Sir J. Servant, Sir.


Heartfr. How does all your Family?


Sir J. Pox of my Family.


Constable. How does your Lady? I have not seen her abroad a good while.


Sir J. Do! I don't know how she does, not I; she was well enough yesterday: I
have not been at home to night.


Constable. What! were you out of Town!


Sir J. Out of Town! no, I was drinking.


Constable. You are a true Englishman; Don't know your own Happiness? if I were
married to such a Woman, I would not be from her a Night for all the Wine in
France.


Sir J. Not from her! -- Oons, -- what a time should a man have of that!


Heartfr. Why, there is no Division, I hope?


Sir J. No; but there is a Conjunction, and that is worse; a Pox of the Parson.
-- Why the plague don't you two marry? I fancy I look like the Devil to you.


Heartfr. Why, you don't think you have Horns, do you?


Sir J. No; I believe my Wife's Religion will keep her honest.


Heartfr And what will make her keep her Religion?


Sir J. Persecution; and therefore she shall have it.


Heartfr. Have a care Knight, Women are tender things.


Sir J. And yet, methinks, it is a hard matter to break their Hearts.


Constable. Fie, fie; you have one of the best Wives in the World, and yet you seem
the most uneasy Husband.


Sir J. Best Wives! -- the Woman's well enough, she has no Vice that I know of,
but she is a Wife, and -- damn a Wife; if I were married to a Hogshead of
Claret, Matrimony would make me hate it.


Heartfr. Why did you marry then? you were old enough to know your own mind.


Sir J. Why did I marry! I married because I had a mind to lie with her, and
she would not let me.


Heartfr. Why did not you ravish her?


Sir J. Yes, and so have hedged my self into forty Quarrels with her Relations,
besides buying my Pardon: But more than a^ that, you must know, I was afraid of
being damned in those days, for I kept sneaking cowardly Company, Fellows that
went to Church, said Grace to their Meat, and had not the least Tincture of
Quality about 'em.


Heartfr. But I think you are got into a better Gang now.


Sir J. Zoons, Sir, my Lord Rake and I are Hand and Glove, I believe we may get
our Bones broke together to night; Have you a mind to share a Frolic?


Constable. Not I truly, my Talent lies to softer Exercises.


Sir J. What? a Doune-bed and a Strumpet?
A Pox of Venery, I say.
Will you come and drink with me this Afternoon?

Constable. I cannot drink to day, but we'll come and sit an hour with you if you
will.


Sir J. Phugh, Pox, sit an hour!
Why cannot you drink?

Constable. Because I Am to see my Mistress.

Sir J. Who Is that?

Constable. Why, do you use to tell?

Sir J. Yes.

Constable. So will not I.

Sir J. Why?

Constable. Because it is a Secret.

Sir J. Would my Wife knew it, 'twould be no Secret long.

Constable. Why, do you think she cannot keep a Secret?

Sir J. No more than she can keep Lent.

Heartfr. Prithee tell it her to try, Constant.

Sir J. No, prithee don't, that I may not be plagued with it.

Constable. I Will hold you a Guinea you don't make her tell it you:

Sir J. I Will hold you a Guinea I do.

Constable. Which way?

Sir Ioh. Why I Will beg her not to tell it me.

Heartfr. Nay, if any thing does it, that will.

Con. But do you think, Sir? --

Sir Ioh. Oons, Sir, I think a Woman and a Secret, are the two impertinentest
Themes in the Universe. Therefore pray let us hear no more, of my Wife nor your
Mistress. Damn 'em both with all my Heart, and every thing else that Daggles a
Petticoat, except four Generous Whores, with Betty Sands at the head of 'em,
who were drunk with my Lord Rake and I, ten times in a Fortnight. Exit Sir John.


Con. Here Is a dainty fellow for you. And the veriest Coward too. But his usage
of his Wife makes me ready to stab the Villain.


Heartfr. Lovers are short sighted: All their Senses run into that of feeling.
This proceeding of his is the only thing on Earth can make your Fortune. If any
thing can prevail with her to accept of a Gallant it is his ill usage of her;
for Women will do more for revenge than they will do fo^r the Gospel.

Prithee take heart, I have great hopes for you, and since I cannot bring you
quite off of her, I Will endeavor to bring you quite on; for a whining ^over, is
the damn'd'st Companion upon Earth.


Cor. My Dear Friend, flatter me a little more with these hopes: for whilst
they prevail I have Heaven within me, and could melt with joy.


Heart. Pray no melting yet: let things go farther first. This afternoon
perhaps we shall make some advance. In the mean while, let us go Dine at
Locket's, and let hope get you a Stomach. Exeunt*


SCENE* Lady Fancyful's House. Enter Lady Fancyfull and Mademoiselle. Lady F.
Did you ever see any thing so Importune, Mademoiselle?


Madam. Inteed Matam, to say de trute, he want leetel good breeding.


Lady F. Good breeding? He wants to be cain'd, Mademoiselle: an Insolent Fellow.

And yet let me expose my Weakness, it is the only Man on earth I could resolve
to dispense my Favors on, were he but a fine Gentleman. Well; did Men but know
how deep an Impression a fine Gentleman makes in a Lady's heart, they wou^d
reduce all their studies to that of good breeding alone.


Enter Cornet. Cor. Madam here is Mr. Treble. He has brought home the Verses
your Ladyship made, and gave him to set.


Lady F. O let him come in by all means.
Now, Mademoiselle, am I going to be unspeakably happy.
Enter Treble. So Mr. Treble, you have set my little Dialogue?

Treb. Yes, Madam, and I hope your Ladyship will be pleased with it.


Lady F. O, no doubt on it; for really Mr. Treble, you set all things to a
Wonder: But your Music is in particular Heavenly, when you have my words to
cloth in it.


Treb. Your words themselves, Madam, have so much Music in 'em they inspire me.


Lady F. Nay, now you make me blush, Mr. Treble; but pray let us hear what you
have done.


Treb. You shall, Madam.


A Song to be Sung between a Man and a Woman.
M. AH Lovely Nymph, the wor^^'s on Fire:
Viel, Veil those cruel Eyes.

W. The World may then in Flames expire,
And boast that so it Dies.

M. But when all Mortals are destroyed,
Who then shall Sing your Praise?

W. Those who are fit to be employed:
The Gods shall Altars raise.

Treb. How does your Ladship like it, Madam?


Lady F. Rapture, Rapture, Mr. Treble, I Am all Rapture. O Wit and Art, what
power you have when joined. I must needs tell you the Birth of this Little
Dialogue, Mr. Treble. It Is Father was a Dream, and it is Mother was the Moon. I
dreamt, that by an unanimous Vote, I was chosen Queen of that Pale World. And
that the first time I appeared upon my Throne, -- all my Subjects fell in Love
with me. Just then I waked: and seeing Pen, Ink and Paper lie idle upon the
Table, I slid into my Morning Gown, and writ this in promptu.


Treb. So I guess the Dialogue, Madam, is supposed to be between your Majesty
and your first Minister of State.


Lady F. Just: he as Minister advises me to trouble my head about the welfare
of my Subjects; which I as Sovereign, find a very impertinent proposal. But is
the Town so Dull, Mr. Treble, it affords us never another New Song?


Treb. Madam, I have one in my Pocket, came out but yesterday, if your Ladyship
pleases to let Mrs. Pipe Sing it.


Lady F. By all means. Here Pipe. Make what Music you can of this Song, here.


SONG.
NOT an Angel dwells above
Half so fair as her I Love:
Heaven knows how she will receive me:
If she smiles, I Am blessed indeed
If she frowns, I Am quickly freed;
Heaven knows, she never can grieve me.
II.
None can Love her more than I,
Yet she never shall make me die.
If my flame can never warm her;
Lasting Beauty, I Will adore,
I shall never Love her more,
Cruel^y will so deform her.
Lady F. Very well: This is Heartfree's Poetry without question.


Treb. Will Not your Ladyship please to sing your self this morning?


Lady F. O Lord, Mr. Treble, my cold is still so Barbarous, to refuse me that
pleasure; He he hem.


Treb. I Am very sorry for it, Madam: Methinks all Mankind should turn
Physicians for the Cure on it.


Lady F. Why truly to give mankind their due; There Is few that know me, but
have offered their Remedy.


Treb. They have reason, Madam, for I know no body Sings so near a Cherubin as
your Ladyship.


Lady F. What I do I owe chiefly to your skill and care, Mr. Treble. People do
^^t^er me indeed, that I have a voice and a je ne scai quoy in the Conduct of
it, that will make Music of any thing. And truly I begin to believe so, since
what happened the other night: would you think it, Mr. Treble; walking pretty
late in the Park, (for I often walk late in the Park, Mr. Treble;) A whim took
me to sing Chivy-Chase, and would you believe it? Next morning I had three
Copies of Verses, and six B^llet-doux at my Levee upon it.


Treb. And without all dispute you deserved as many more, Madam, are there any
further Commands for your Ladyship^s humble Servant?


Lady F. Nothing more at this time, Mr. Treble. But I shall expect you here
every morning for this Month, to sing my little matter there to me. I Will reward
you for your pains.


Treb. O Lord, Madam --


Lady F. Good morrow, sweet Mr. Treble.


Treb. Your Ladyships most obedient Servant. Exit Treb.


Enter Servant. Serve. Will your Ladyship please to dine yet? Exit. Serve.


Lady F. Yes: let 'em serve.

Sure this Heartfree has bewitched me, Mademoiselle.

You cannot imagine how odly he mixed himself in my thoughts during my Rapture
even now. I vow it is a thousand pities he is not more polish^d. Don't you think
so?


Madam. Matam. I tink it so great pity, dat if I was in your Ladyship place, I
take him home in my House, I lock him up in my Closet, and I never let him go
till I teach him every ting dat fine Laty expect from fine Gentelman.


Lady F. Why truly I believe, I should soon subdue his Brutality; for without
doubt, he has a strange penchant to grow fond of me, in spite of his Aversion
to the Sex, else he would never have taken so much pains about me. Lord how
proud would some poor Creatures be of such a Conquest? But I alas, I don't know
how to receive as a favor, what I take to be so infinitely my due But what
shall I do to new mould him, Mademoiselle? for till then he is my utter aversion.


Madam. Matam, you must laugh at him in all de place dat you meet him, and turn
into de ridicule all he say and all he do.


Lady F. Why truly Satyr has been ever of wondrous use, to reform ill manners.
Besides it is my particular Talent to ridicule folks. I can be severe; strangely
severe, when I will, Mademoiselle. -- Give me the Pen and Ink: -- I find my
self whimsicall -- I Will write to him.

-- or I ll let it alone, and be severe upon him that way. Sitting down to
write. Rising up again.

-- Yet active severity is better than passive. Sitting down.

-- It Is as good let alone too, for every lash I give him, perhaps he will take
for a favor. Rising

-- Yet it is a thousand pities so much Siting.

-- Satyr should be lost. Siting.

-- But if it should have a wrong effect upon him 'twould distract me. Rising.

-- Well I must write though after all. Siting.

-- Or I Will let it alone which is the same thing. Rising.


Madam. La Voila determinee. Exeunt.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT the Third.
SCENE Opens. Sir John, Lady Brute and Bellinda rising from the Table. Sir I.
HEre; take away the things: I expect Company. But first bring me a Pipe; I Will
smoke. to a Servant.


Lady B. Lord, Sir John, I wonder you will not leave that nasty Custom.


Sir I. Prithee don't be Impertinent.


Bell. to Lady. I wonder who those are he expects this afternoon.


Lady B. I Would give the World to know: Perhaps it is Constant; he comes here
sometimes; If it does prove him, I Am resolved I Will share the visit.


Bell. We'll send for our Work and sit here.


Lady B He Will choke us with his Tobacco.


Bell. Nothing will choke us, when we are doing what we have a mind to. Lovewell


Enter Lovewell. Love. Madam.


Lady B. Here; bring my Cousin's work and mine hither


Exit Love. and Reenters with their Work. Sir I. Whu; Pox, cannot you work
somewhere else?


(...) We shall be careful not to disturb you, Sir.


Bell. Your Pipe would make you too thoughtfull, Uncle, if you were left alone;
Our prittle prattle will Cure your Spleen.


Sir I. Will it so, Mrs. Pert? Now I believe it will so increase it sitting and
smoking. I shall take my own House for a Paper-Mill.


Lady B. to Bell. aside Don't let us mind him; let him say what he will.


Sir I. A Woman^s Tongue a cure for the Spleen -- Oons -- aside. If a Man had
got the Headache, they would be for applying the same Remedy.


Lady B. You have done a great deal Bellinda since yesterday.


Bell. Yes, I have worked very hard; how do you like it?


Lady B. OF it is the prettiest Fringe in the World. Well Cousin you have the
happiest fancy. Prithee advice me about altering my Crimson Petticoat.


Sir I. A Pox of your Petticoat; here is such a prating a man cannot digest his
own thoughts for you.


Lady B. Don't answer him. Aside

Well, what do you advise me?


Bell. Why really I would not alter it at all.
Methinks it is very pretty as it is.

Lady B. Ay that^s true: But you know one grows weary of the prettiest things
in the world, when one has had 'em long.


Sir I. Yes, I have taught her that.


Bell. Shall we provoke him a little?


Lady B. With all my heart.
Bellinda, don't you long to be Married?

Bell. Why there are some things in it I could like well enough.


Lady B. What do you think you should dislike?


Bell. My Husband a hundred to one else.


Lady B. O ye wicked wretch: Sure you don't speak as you think.


Bell. Yes I do: Especially if he smoked Tobacco. He looks earn^stly at 'em.


Lady B. Why that many times takes off worse smells.


Bell. Then he must smell very ill indeed.


Lady B. So some Men will, to keep their Wives from coming near 'em.


Bell. Then those Wives should Cuckold 'em at a Distance.


He rises in a fury, throws his Pipe at 'em and drives 'em out. As they run
off, Constant and Heartfree enter. Lady B. runs against Constant. Sir I. Oons
get you gone up stairs you confederating Strumpets you, or I Will Cuckold you
with a Vengeance.


Lady B. O Lord he will beat us, he will beat us. Dear, Dear Mr. Constant save us.
Exeunt.


Sir I. I Will Cuckold you with a Pox.


Constable. Heavens, Sir John, what is the matter?


Sir I. Sure if Woman had been ready created, the Devil, instead of being
kicked down into Hell, had been Married.


Heart. Why what new plague have you found now?


Sir I. Why these two Gentlewomen did but hear me say, I expected you here this
afternoon; upon which, they presently resolved to take up the Roon, of purpose
to plague me and my Friends.


Constable. Was that all? why we should have been glad of their Company.


Sir I. Then I should have been weary of yours. For I cannot relish both
together. They found fault with my smoking Tobacco too; and said Men stunk.
But I have a good mind -- to say something.


Constable. No, nothing against the Ladies pray.


Sir I. Split the Ladies. Come, will you sit down? Give us some Wine, Fellow:

You will not smoke?


Constable. No nor drink neither at this time, I must ask your pardon.


Sir I. What, this Mistress of yours runs in your head; I Will warrant it is some
such squeamish Minx as my Wife, that is grown so dainty of late, she finds fault
even with a Dirty shirt.


Heart. That a woman may do, and not be very dainty neither.


Sir I. Pox of the women, let us drink. Come, you shall take one Glass, though I
send for a Box of Lozenges to sweeten your mouth after it.


Constable. Nay if one Glass will satisfy you I Will drink it without putting you to
that expense.


Sir I. Why that is honest. Fill some Wine, Sirrah: So, Here Is to you Gentlemen
-- A VVife's the Devil. To your being both married They drink


Heart. O your most humble Servant, Sir.


Sir I. Well? how do you like my Wine?


Constable. It Is very good indeed.


Heart. It Is Admirable.


Sir I. Then give us the other Glass.


Constable. No, pray excuse us now. We Will come another time, and then we will not
spare it.


Sir I. This one Glass and no more. Come: It shall be your Mistresses health:
And that is a great Compliment from me, I assure you.


Constable. And it is a very obliging one to me: So give us the Glasses.


Sir I. So: Let her live. Sir John Coughs in the Glass.


Heart. And be kind.


Constable. What Is the matter? does't go the wrong way?


Sir I. If I had love enough to be jealous, I should take this for an ill Omen.
For I never drank my Wives health in my life, but I puk'd in the Glass.


Constable. O she is too Virtuous to make a Reasonable man jealous.


Sir I. Pox of her Virtue. If I could but catch her Adulterating I might be
devorc'd from her by Law.


Heart. And so pay her a yearly Pension, to be a distinguished Cuckold.

Enter Servant. Sir, There Is my Lord Rake, Colonel Bully, and some other
Gentlemen at the Blew-Posts, desire your Company.


Sir I. Cods so, we are to Consult about playing the Devil to night.


Heart. Well we will not hinder business.


Sir I. Methinks I don't know how to leave you though. But for once I must make
bold - Or look you: may be the Conference may not last long; so if you will wait
here half an hour, or an hour; if I don't come then, -- why then -- I will not
come at all.


Heart. to Constable. A good modest proposition truly: Aside.


Constable. But let us accept on it however. Who knows what may happen.


Heart. Well Sir, to show you how fond we are of your Company we'll expect
your return as long as we can.


Sir I. Nay, may be I may not stay at all: But business you know must be done.
So your Servant -- Or hark you: If you have a mind to take a frisk with us, I
have an interest with my Lord, I can easily introduce you.


Constable. We are much beholding to you, but for my part I Am engaged another way.


Sir I. What? To your Mistress I Will warrant. Prithee leave your nasty Punk to
entertain her self with her own Lewd thoughts, and make one with us to Night.


Constable. Sir, it is business that is to employ me.


Heart. And me; and business must be done you know.


Sir I. Ay; VVomens business, though the world were consumed for it.


Exit. Sir I. Constable. Farewell Beast: And now my Dear Friend, would my Mistress
be but as Complaisant as some men's Wives, who think it a piece of good breeding
to receive the visits of their Husbands Friends in his absence.


Heart. Why for your sake I could forgive her, though she should be so
Complaisant to receive something else in his absence. But what way shall we
invent to see her.


Constable. O never hope it: Invention will prove as Vain as VVishes.


Enter Lady Brute and Bellinda. Heart. What do you think now, Friend?


Constable. I think I shall swoon.


Heart. I Will speak first then, whilst you fetch breath.


Lady B. We think our selves obliged Gentlemen, to come and return you thanks
for your Knight Errantry. We were just upon being devoured by the Fiery Dragon.


Bell. Did not his fumes almost knock you down, Gentlemen?


Heart. Truly Ladies, we did undergo some hardships, and should have done more,
if some greater Hero's than our selves hard by had not diverted him.


Constable. Though I Am glad of the Service, you are pleased to say we have done you;
yet I Am sorry we could do it no other way, than by making our selves privy, to
what you would perhaps have kept a secret.


Lady B. For Sir John's part, I suppose be designed it no s^cret since he made
so much noise. And for my self, truly I am not much concerned, since it is
fallen only into this* Gentleman^s hands and yours; who I have many reasons to
believe, will neither interpret nor report any thing to my disadvantage.


Constable. Your good opinion, Madam, was what I feared, I never could have merited.


Lady B. Your fears were vain then, Sir, for I am just to every body.


Heart. Prithee, Constant, what is it you do to get the Ladies good Opinions;
for I Am a Novice at it?


Bell. Sir, will you give me leave to instruct you?


Heartfr. Yes, that I will with all my Soul, Madam.


^ell. Why then you must never be slovenly, never be out of humor, fare well
and cry Roast-meat; smoke Tobacco, nor drink but when you are a-dry.


Heartfr. That Is hard.


Constable. Nay, if you take his Bottle from him, you break his Heart, Madam.


Bell. Why, is it possible the Gentleman can love Drinking?


Heartfr. Only by way of Antidote.


Bell. Against what, p^ay?


Heartfr. Against Love, Madam?


Lady Br. Are you afraid of being in Love, Sir?


Heartfr. I should, if there were any danger of it.


Lady Br. Pray why so?


Heartfr. Because I always had an aversion to being used like a Dog.


Bell. Why truly, men in love are seldom used better.


Lady Br. But was you never in love, Sir?


Heartfr. No, I thank Heaven, Madam.


Bell. Pray where got you your Learning then?


Heartfr. From other Peoples Expense.


Bell. That Is being a Spunger, Sir, which is scarce honest; if you would buy some
Experience with your own Money, as 'twould be fairlyer got, so 'twould stick
longer by you.


Enter Footman Footm. Madam, here is my Lady Fancyful, to wait upon your
Ladyship.


Lady Br. Shield me, kind Heaven, what an inundation of Impertinence is here
coming upon us!


Enter Lady Fancyful, who runs first to Lady Brute, then to Bellinda, kissing
'em. Lady Fanc. My dear Lady Brute, and sweet Bellinda! methinks it is an Age
since I saw you.


Lady Br. Yet it is but three days; sure you have passed your time very ill, it
seems so long to you.


Lady Fanc. Why really, to confess the Truth to you, I am so everlastingly
^atigu'd with the Addresses of Unfortunate Gentlemen, that were it not for the
extravagancy of the Example, I should even tear out these wicked Eyes with my
own Fingers, to make both my self and Mankind easy. What think you on it, Mr.
Heartfree, for I take you to be my faithful Adviser?


Heartfr. Why truly, Madam, -- I think -- every Project that is for the Good of
Mankind, ought to be encouraged.


Lady Fanc. Then I have your Consent, Sir.


Heartfr. To do whatever you please, Madam.


Lady Fanc. You had a much-more limited Complaisance this Morning, Sir. Would
you believe it, Ladies? The Gentleman has been so exceeding generous, to tell
me of above fifty Faults, in less time than it was well possible for me to
commit two of 'em.


Constable. Why truly, Madam, my Friend there is apt to be something familiar with
the Ladies.


Lady Fanc. He is indeed, Sir; but he is wondrous charitable with it; he has had
the Goodness to design a Reformation, even down to my Fingers ends.

'Twas thus, I think, Sir, you would have Opening her Fingers in an awkward
manner. had 'em stand. -- My Eyes too he did not like: How was it you would have
directed 'em? Thus, I think. Staring at him. Then there was something amiss in
my Gate too, I don't know well how 'twas; but as I take it, he would have had
me walk like him. Pray, Sir, do me the Favor to take a turn or two about the
Room, that the Company may see you. -- He Is sullen, Ladies, and wont: But, to
make short, and give you as true an Idea as I can of the matter, I think 'twas
much about this Figure in general, he would have molded me to: But I was an
obstinate She walks aukwardly about, ^a^^ng and looking ungainly, ^^en changes
on a sadden to the extremity of her usual Affectation. Woman, and could not
resolve to make my self Mistress of his Heart, by growing as awkward as his
Fancy.


Heartfr. Just thus Women do, when Here Constant and Lady Brute talk together
apart. they think we are in love with 'em, or when they are so with us.


Lady Fanc. 'Twould however be less Vanity for me to conclude the former, than
you the latter, Sir.


Heartfr. Madam, all I shall presume to conclude, is, That if I were in Love,
you^d find the means to make me soon weary on ^t.


Lady Fanc. Not by over-fondness, upon my word, Sir. But pray let^s stop here,
for you are so much governed by Instinct, I know you will grow brutish at last.


Bell. ( aside) Now am I sure she is fond of him: I Will try to make her jealous.

Well, for my part, I should be glad to find somebody would be so free with
me, that I might know my Faults, and mend 'em.


Lady Fanc. Then pray let me recommend this Gentleman to you: I have known him
some time, and will be Surety for him, That upon a very limited Encouragement
on your side, you shall find an extended Impudence on his.


Heart. I thank you Madam, for your recommendation; But hating idleness, I Am
unwilling to enter into a place where I believe there would be nothing to do. I
was fond of serving your Ladyship, because I knew you would find me constant
employment.


Lady Fanc. I told you he would be rude, Bellinda.


Bell. O, a little Bluntness is a sign of honesty, which makes me always ready
to pardon it. So, Sir, if you have no other exceptions to my service, but the
fear of being idle in it, You may venture to list your self: I shall find you
work I warrant you.


Heartfr. Upon those terms I engage, Madam, and this (with your leave) I take
for earnest. Offering to kiss her hand.


Bell. Hold there, Sir, I Am none of your earnest givers. But if I Am well
served, I give good wages and pay punctually. Heart. and Bell. seem to continue
talking familiarly.


Lady Fanc. ( Aside) I don't like this jesting between 'em -- methinks the Fool
begins to look as if he were in earnest -- but then he must be a Fool indeed.

-- ^^rd what a difference there is between me and her. Looking at Bell.
scornfully. How I should despise such a thing if I were a man. -- What a Nose
she has -- What a Chin -- What a Neck -- Then her Eyes -- And the worst Kissing
Lips in the Universe -- No no, he can never like her that is positive -- Yet I
cannot suffer 'em together any longer.

Mr. Heartfree, do you know that you and I must have no Quarrel for all this. I
cannot forbear being a little severe now and then: But Women you know may be
allowed any thing.


Heartfr. Up to a certain age, Madam.


Lady Fanc. Which I am not yet past I hope.


Heartfr. ( Aside) Nor never will, I dare swear.


Lady Fan. to Lady B. Come Madam; Will your Ladyship be witness to our
Reconciliation?


Lady B. You agree then at last.


Heartfr. ( slightingly) We forgive.


Lady Fanc. ( Aside) That was a cold ill-natured reply.


Lady B. Then there is no Challenges sent between you?


Heartfr. Not from me I promise. ( Aside to Constant) But that is more than I Will
do for her, for I know she can as well be damned as forbear writing to me.


Constable. That I believe. But I think we had best be going lest she should
suspect something, and be maliciou.


Heartfr. With all my my heart.


Constable. Ladies we are your humble Servants. I see Sir John is quite engaged,
'twould be in vain to expect him. Come Heartfree Exit.


Heartfr. Ladies your Servant. (to Bellinda) I hope Madam you will not forget our
Bargain; I Am to say what I please to you

Exit Heartfree.
Bell. Liberty of Speech entire, Sir.


Lady Fanc. ( Aside) Very pretty truly -- But how the Block head went out:
Languishing at her; and not a look toward me. Well; Churchmen may talk, but
Miracles are not ceased. For it is more than natural, such a Rude fellow as he,
and such a little impertinent as she, should be capac^ble of ma^ing a Woman of
my sphere uneasy.

But I can bear her sight no longer -- methinks she^s grown ten times uglier
than Cornet.

I must go home, and study revenge.

( To Lady B.) Madam your humble Servant, I must take my leave.


Lady B. What going already Madam?


Lady Fanc. I must beg you will excuse me this once. For really I have eighteen
visits to return this afternoon so you see I Am importun^d by the Women as well
as the Men.


Bell. ( Aside.) And she is quits with 'em both.

( Lady Fanc. going.) Nay you sha'n't go one step out of the room.


Lady B. Indeed I Will wait upon you down.


Lady Fanc. No, sweet Lady Brute; you know I swoon at Ceremony.


Lady B. Pray give me leave.


Lady Fanc. You know I will not.


Lady B. Indeed I must.


Lady Fanc. Indeed you sha'n't.


Lady B. Indeed I will.


Lady Fanc. Indeed you sha'n't.


Lady B. Indeed I will.


Lady Fanc. Indeed you sha'n't. Indeed Indeed Indeed you sha'n't.

Exit Lady Fanc. running. They follow. Re-enter Lady Brute, sol^. This
impertinent Woman, has put me out of humor for a Fortnight. -- What an
agreeable moment has her foolish v^sit interrupted -- Lord how like a Torrent
Love flows into the Heart when once the sluice of desire is opened! Good Gods
what a pleasure there is in doing what we should not do!

Re-enter Constant. Ha! here again?


Constable. Though the renewing my visit may seem a little irregular, I hope I shall
obtain your pardon for it, Madam, when you know I only left the Room, lest the
Lady who was here should have been as malicious in her Remarks, as she is
foolish in her Conduct.


Lady B. He who has discretion enough to be tender of a Woman's Reputation,
carries a Virtue about him may atone for a great many faults.


Constable. If it has a Title to atone for any, it is pretentions must needs be
strongest, where the Crime is Love. I therefore hope I shall be forgiven the
attempt I have made upon your Heart, since my Enterrprize has been a secret to
all the World but your self.


Lady B. Secrecy indeed in sins of this kind, is an Argument of weight to
lessen the Punishment; but nothing's a Plea, for a Pardon entire, without a
sincere Repentance.


Constable. If Sincerity in Repentance, consist in sorrow for offending: No
Cloister ever enclosed, so true a Penitent as I should be. But I hope it cannot
be reckoned an offense to Love, where it is a duty to adore.


Lady B. It Is an offense, a great one, where it would rob a Woman of all she
ought to be adored for; her Virtue.


Constable. Virtue? -- Virtue alas is no more like the thing that is called so, than
it is like Vice it self. Virtue consists in Goodness, Honor, Gratitude,
Sincerity and Pity; and not in Peevish, snarling streightlac'd Chastity. True
Virtue whereso'e'er it moves, still carries an intrinsique worth about it, and
is in every place, and in each Sex of equal value. So is not Continence you
see: That Phantome of Honor, which men in every Age have so contemned, they
have thrown it amongst the Women to scrable for.


Lady B. If it be a thing of so very little Value; Why do you so earnestly
recommend it to your Wives and Daughters?


Constable. We recommend it to our Wives, Madam, because we would keep 'em to our
selves. And to our Daughters, because we would dispose of 'em to others.


Lady B. It Is then of some Importance it seems, since you ^an't dispose of 'em
without it.


Constable. That importance, Madam, lies in the humor of the Country, not in the
nature of the thing.


Lady B. How do you prove that, Sir?


Constable. From the Wisdom of a neighboring Nation in a Contrary Practice. In
Monarchies things go by Whimsie, but Commonwealth's weigh all things in the
Scale of Reason.


Lady B. I hope we are not so very light a People to bring up fashions without
some Ground.


Constable. Pray what does your Ladyship think of a powdered Coat (...) Dee^
M^^rning*


Lady B. I think, Sir, your Sophistry has all the effect that you can
reasonably expect it should have: it puzzles, but don't convince


Constable. I Am sorry for it.


Lady B. I Am sorry to hear you say so.


Constable. Pray why?


Lady B. Because if you expected more from it, you have a worse opinion of my
understanding than I desire you should have.


Constable. aside. I comprehend her: She would have me set a value upon her
Chastity, that I may think my self the more obliged to her, when she makes me a
present of it.

To her. I beg you will believe I did but rally, Madam, I know you judge too
well of Right and Wrong, to be deceived by Arguments like those. I hope you will
have so favorable an opinion of my Understanding too, to believe the thing
called Virtue has worth enough with me, to pass for an eternal Obligation
where're it is sacrificed.


Lady B. It is I think so great a one, as nothing can repay.


Constable. Yes; the making the man you love your everlasting Debtor.


Lady B. When Debtors once have borrowed all we have to lend, they are very apt
to grow very shy of their Creditors Company.


Constable. That, Madam, is only when they are forced to borrow of Usurers, and not
of a Generous Friend. Let us choose our Creditors, and we are seldom so
ungrateful to shun 'em.


Lady B. What think you of Sir John, Sir? I was his free choice.


Constable. I think he is married, Madam.


Lady B. Does Marriage then exclude men from your Rule of Constancy.


Constable. It does. Constancy's a Brave, free, haughty, generous Agent, that
cannot buckle to the Chains of Wedlock. There Is a poor sordid slavery in
Marriage, that turns the slowing Tide of Honor, and sinks us to the lowest ebb
of Infamy. It Is a corrupted Soil; I Will Nature, Avarice, Sloth, Cowardice and
Dirt, are all its product.


Lady B. Have you no exceptions to th^s General Rule* as well as to to'ther?


Constable. Yes: I would (after all) ^e an exception to it my self if you were
free, in Power and Will to make me so.


Lady B. Compliments are well placed, where it is impossible to lay hold on 'em.


Constable. I would to Heaven 'twere possible for you to lay hold on mine, that you
might see it is no Compliment at all. But since you are already disposed on
beyond Redemption, to one who ^os not know the value of the Jewel you have put
into his hands: I hope you would not think him greatly wronged, though it should
sometimes be looked on by a Friend, who knows how to esteem it as he ought.


Lady B. If looking on^t alone would serve his turn, the wrong perhaps might
not be very great.


Constable. Why, what if he should wear it now and then a day, so he gave good
Security to bring it home again at night?


Lady B. Small Security I fancy might serve for that. One might venture to
take his word.


Constable. Then where is the injury to the Owner?


Lady B. It Is an injury to him, if he think it one. For if Happiness be seated
in the Mind, Unhappiness must be so t^o.


Constable. Here I close with you, Madam, and draw my conclusive Argument from your
own Position: If the injury lie in the fancy, there needs nothing but Secrecy
to prevent the Wrong.


Lady B. g^ing, A surer way to prevent it, is to hear no more Arguments in it is
behalf.


Constable. following her. But, Madam --


Lady B. But, Sir, it is my turn to be discreet now, and not suffer too long a
Visit.


Constable. catching her Hand. By Heaven you shall not stir, till you give me hopes
that I shall see you again, at some more convenient Time and Place.


Lady B. I give you just Hopes enough -- ( breaking from him) To get loose from
you: And that is all I can afford you at this time.

Exit running. Constant Solus. Now by all that is Great and Good, she is a
charming Woman. In what Ecstasy of Joy she has left me. For she gave me Hope;
Did she not say she gave me Hope? Hope? Ay; what Hope? -- enough to make me let
her go -- Why that is enough in Conscience. Or no matter how 'twas spoke; Hope
was the word: It came from her, and it was said to me.

Enter Heartfree. Ha, Heartfree: Thou have done me Noble Service in prattling to
the young Gentlewoman without there; come to my Arms, Thou Venerable Bawd, and
let me squeeze thee ( Embracing him eagerly) as a new pair of stays do^s a Fat
Country Girl, when she is carried to Court to stand for a Maid of Honor.


Heart. Why what the Devil's all this Rapture for?


Constable. Rapture? There Is ground for Rapture, man, there is hopes, (...), hopes,
my Friend.


Heart. Hope's? of what?


Constable. Why hopes that my Lady and I together, (for it is more than one bodies
work) should make Sir John a Cuckold.


Heart. Prithee what did she say to thee?


Constable. Say? what did she not say? she said that -- says she -- she said --
Zoons I don't know what she said: But she looked as if she said every thing I Would
have her, and so if thou wilt go to the Tavern, I Will treat thee with any thing
that Gold can buy; I Will give all my Silver amongst the Drawers, make a Bonfire
before the Door, say the Plenipo's, have signed the Peace, and the Bank of
England^s grown honest. Exeunt.


SCENE opens. Lord Rake, Sir John, etc. at a Table drinking. All. Huzza.


Lord R. Come Boys. Charge again. -- So -- Confusion to all order. Here Is
Liberty of Conscience.


All. Huzza.


Lord R. I Will Sing you a Song I made this morning to this purpose.


Sir I. It Is wicked I hope.


Col. B. Don't my Lord tell you he made it?


Sir I. Well then let us have it.


Lord R. Sings.
I.
WHat a Pother of Late
Have they kept in the State
About setting our Consciences free
A Bottle has more
Dispensation in Store,
Than the King and the State can decree.
II.
When my Head's full of Wine,
I over flow with Design
And know no penal Laws that can curb me.
What ever I devise,
Seems good in my Eyes,
And Religion never dares to disturb me
III.
No saucy remorse
Intrudes in my Course,
Nor Impertinent notions of Evil*
So there is Claret in store,
In Peace I Have my Whore,
And in Peace I jog on to the Devil.
All Sing. So there is Claret, etc.
Lord R. (Rep.) And in Peace I jog on to the Devil.
Lord R. Well, how do you like it, Gentlemen?


All. O, Admirable.


Sir I. I would not give a fig for a Song, that is not full of Sin and
Impudence.


Lord R. Then my Muse is to your taste.

But drink away; The Night steals upon us, we shall want time to be Lewd in.
Hey Page, sally out, Sirrah, and see what is doing in the Camp, we'll beat up
their Quarters presently.


Page. I Will bring your Lordship an Exact account. Ex. Pag^.


Lord R. Now let the spirit of Clary go round.
Fill me a Brimmer. Here Is to our forlorn-hope.
Courage Knight; Victory attends you.

Sir I. And Lawrells shall Crown me. Drink away and be damned


Lord R. Again Boys; to'ther Glass, and damn Morality.


Sir I. ( drunk) Ay -- damn Morality -- and damn the Watch. And let the
Constable be married.


All. Huzza.


Re-enter Page. Lady R. How are the Streets inhabited, Sirrah?


Page. My Lord it is Sunday night, they are full of Drunken Citizens.


Lord R. Along then Boys, we shall have a feast.


Col. B. Along Noble Knight.


Sir I. Ay -- along Bully; and he that says Sir John Brute, is ^ot as Drunk and
as Religious, as the Drunkenest Citizen of 'em all -- is a liar, and the Son of
a Whore.


Col. Bull. Why that was bravely spoke, and like a freeborn Englishman.


Sir I. What Is that to you, Sir, whether I am an English man or a French man?


Col. B. Zoons, you are not angry, Sir?


Sir I. Zoons I am angry, Sir, -- for if I am a Freeborn English man, what
have you to do, even to talk of my Privileges.


Lord R. Why prithee Knight don't quarrel here, leave private Animosities to be
decided by day light, let the night be employed against the public Enemy.


Sir I. My Lord I respect you, because you are a man of Quality: But I Will make
that fellow know I am within a hairs breadth as absolute by my Priveleges, as
the King of France is by his prerogative. He by his prerogative takes money
where it is not his due; I, by my Privelege refuse paying it, where I owe it.
Liberty and Property and Old England, Huzza. Exit Sir I. reeling, all following
him.


All. Huzza.


SCENE. A Bedchamber. Enter Lady Brute and Bellinda. Lady B. Sure it is late,
Bellinda? I begin to be sleepy.


Bell. Yes it is near twelve. Will you go to Bed?


Lady B. To bed my Dear? And by that ^^me I Am fallen into a sweet sleep, (or
perhaps a sweet Dream which is better and better) Sir John will come home,
roaring drunk, and be overjoyed he finds me in a Condition to be disturbed.


Bell. (...) in need ^^t ^ear him, he is in for all night (...) The Servant's in
he is gone to drink with my Lord Rake?


Lady B. Nay it is not very likely indeed, such suitable ^ompany should part
presently. What Hogs Men turn, Bellinda, when they grow (...) or Women.


Bell. And what Owls they are whilst they are fond of 'em.


Lady B. But that we may forgive well enough, because they are so upon our
Accounts.


(...). We ought to do s^ indeed: But it is a hard matter.

For when a man is really in love he looks so u^sufferably silly that tho a
Woman liked him well enough before, she has then (...)o, to endure the sight of
him. And this I take to be the reason, why Lovers are so generally ill used.


Lady B. Well ^own now, I Am well enough pleased to see a man look like an Ass
for me.


Bell. Ay, I Am pleased he should look like an Ass too -- That is I Am pleased
with my self for making him look so.


Lady B. Nay tr^^y* I think it (...) find some other way to express his
Passion, 'twould be more to his advantage.


Bell. Yes; For then a Woman might like his Passion and him too.


Lady B. Yet, Bellinda, after all, A Woman's life* would be but a dull
business, if 'twere not for Men; And Men that can look like Asses to^. We
should never blame Fate, for the shortness of our days; our time would hang
wretchedly upon our hands.


Bell. Why truly they do help us off with a good share on it. For were there no
Men in the World, OF my Conscience I should be no longer a dressing than I Am a
saying my prayers; Nay tho it were Sunday: For you know that one may go to
Church without Stays on.


Lady B. But don't you think Emulation might do something; for every Woman you
see desires to be finer than her Neighbor.


Bell. That Is only that the men may like her better than her Neighbor. No^ if
there were no men, adieu fine Petticoats, we should be weary of wearing 'em.


Lady B. And adieu Plays, we should be weary of seeing 'em.


Bell. Adieu Hide-Park, the Dust would Choke us.


Lady B. Adieu St. James's, Walking would Tire us.


Bell. Adieu London, the smoke wou^d stifle us.


Lady B. And adieu going to Church, for Religion would never prevail with us.


Both. Ha ha ha ha ha


Bell. Our Confession is so very hearty, sure we merit Abs^lution.


Lady B. Not unless we go through with it, and confess all. So prithee, for the
Ease of our Consciences, let us hide nothing.


Bell. Agreed.


Lady B. Why then I confess, That I love to sit in the Forefront of a Box. For
if one sits behind, there is two Acts gone perhaps, before one's found out. And
when I am there, if I perceive the Men whispering and looking upon me, you must
know I cannot for my Life forbear thinking they talk to my Advantage. And that
sets a Thousand little tickling Vanities on Foot. --


Bell. Just my Case for all the World; but go on.


Lady B. I watch with Impatience for the next Jest in the Play, that I may
laugh and show my white Teeth. If the Poet has been dull, and the Jest be long
a coming, I pretend to whisper one to my Friend, and from thence fall into a
little short Discourse, in which I take Occasion to show my Face in all
Humors, Brisk, Pleased, Serious, Melancholy, Languishing; -- Not that what we
say to one another causes any of these Alterations. But --


Bell. Don't trouble your self to explain: For if I Am not mistaken, you and I
have had some of these necessary Dialogues before now, with the same Intention.


Lady B. Why I Will swear Bellinda, some People do give strange agreeable Airs to
their Faces in speaking.

Tell me true! -- Did you never practice in the Glass?


Bell. Why, did you?


Lady B. Yes Faith, many a time.


Bell. And I too, I own it. Both how to speak my self, and how to look when
others speak; But my Glass and I could never yet agree what Face I should make,
when they come blurt out, with a nasty thing in a Play: For all the Men
presently look upon the Women, that is certain; so laugh we must not, though our
Stays burst for it, Because that is telling Truth, and owning we understand the
Jest. And to look serious is so dull, when the whole House is a laughing.


Lady B. Besides, that looking serious, does really betray our Knowledge in the
Matter, as much as laughing with the Company would do. For if we did not
understand the thing, we should naturally do like other People.


Bell. For my part I always take that Occasion to blow my Nose.


Lady B. You must blow your Nose half off then at some Plays.


Bell. Why don't some Reformer or other, beat the Poet for it?


Lady B. Because he is not so sure of our private Approbation as of our public
Thanks. Well, sure there is not upon Earth, so impertinent a thing, as Women's
Modesty.


Bell. Yes; Men's Fantasque, that obliges us to it.

If we quit our Modesty, they say we lose our Charms, and yet they know that
very Modesty is Affectation, and rail at our Hypocrisy.


Lady B. Thus one would think, 'twere a hard Matter to please 'em, Neice. Yet
our kind Mother Nature has given us something, that makes amends for all. Let
our Weakness be what it will, Mankind will still be weaker, and whilst there is
a World, it is Woman that will govern it.

But prithee one word of poor Constant before we go to Bed; if it be but to
furnish Matter for Dreams; I dare swear he is talking of me now, or thinking of
me at least, though it be in the middle of his Prayers.


Bell. So he ought I think; for you were pleased to make him a good round
Advance to day, Madam.


Lady B. Why, I have even plagued him enough to satisfy any reasonable Woman:
He has besieged me these two Years to no Purpose.


Bell. And if he besieged you two Years more, he would be well enough paid, so he
had the plundering of you at last.


Lady B. That may be; but I Am afraid the Town will not be able to hold out much
longer; for to confess the Truth to you, Bellinda, the Garrison begins to grow
mutinous.


Bell. Then the sooner you capitulate, the better.


Lady B. Yet methinks I would fain stay a little longer, to see you fixed too,
that we might start together, and see who could love longest. What think you if
Heartfree should have a Month's Mind to you?


Bell. Why Faith I could almost be in Love with him, for despising that foolish
affected Lady Fancyfull, but I Am afraid he is too cold ever to warm himself by
my Fire.


Lady B. Then he deserves to be froze to Death. Would I were a Man for your
sake, my dear Rogue. Kissing her.


Bell. You Would wish your self a Woman again for your own, or the Men are mistaken.

But if I could make a Conquest of this Son of Bacchus, and rival his Bottle:
What should I do with him, he has no Fortune; I cannot marry him; and sure you
would not have me commit Fornication.


Lady B. Why, if you did, Child, 'twou'd be but a good friendly part; if 'twere
only to keep me in Countenance whilst I commit -- You know what.


Bell. Well, if I cannot resolve to serve you that way, I may perhaps some other,
as much to your Satisfaction. But pray how shall we contrive to see these
Blades again quickly?


Lady B. We must even have Recourse to the old way; make 'em an Appointment
'twixt jest and earnest, 'twill look like a Frolic, and that you know's a very
good thing to save a Woman's Blushes.


Bell. You advise well; but where shall it be?


Lady B. In Spring-Garden. But they shall not know their Women, till their Women
pull off their Masks; for a Surprise is the most agreeable thing in the
World: And I find my self in a very good Humor, ready to do 'em any good turn
I can think on.


Bell. Then pray write 'em the necessary Billet, without farther Delay.


Lady B. Let Us go into your Chamber then, and whilst you say your Prayers, I Will
do it, Child.


Exeunt. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE Covent Garden. Enter Lord Rake, Sir John, etc. with Swords drawn. Lord
R. IS the Dog dead?


Bully. No, damn him, I heard him wheeze.


Lord R. How the Witch his Wife howled!


Bully. Ay, she will alarm the Watch presently.


Lord R. Appear, Knight, then; come, you have a good Cause to fight for,
there is a Man murdered.


Sir. John. Is there? Then let his Ghost be satisfied: For I Will sacrifice a
Constable to it presently; and burn his Body upon his wooden Chair.


Enter a Tailor, with a Bundle under his Arm. Bully. How now? What have we got
here? A Thief?


Tailor. No an't please you; I Am no Thief.


Lord R. That we'll see presently: Here, let the General examine him.


Sir John. Ay, Ay; Let me examine him; and I Will lay a Hundred Pound I find him
guilty, in spite of his Teeth -- for he looks -- like a -- sneaking Rascal.

Come Sirrah, without Equivocation, or mental Reservation, tell me of what
Opinion you are, and what Calling; for by them -- I shall guess at your Morals.


Tailor. An't please you, I Am a Dissenting Journeyman Tailor.


Sir John. Then Sir, you love Lying by your Religion, and Theft by your
Trade. And so, that your Punishment may be suitable to your Crimes, -- I Will
have you first gagged, -- and then hanged.


Tailor. Pray good worthy Gentlemen, don't abuse me; indeed I Am an honest Man,
and a good Workman, though I say it, that should not say it.


Sir John. No Words, Sirrah, but attend your Fate.


Lord R. Let me see what is in that Bundle.


Tailor. An't please you, it is the Doctor of the Parish's Gown.


Lord R. The Doctor's Gown! -- Hark you, Knight, you will not stick at abusing
the Clergy, will you?


Sir John. No, I Am drunk, and I Will abuse any thing -- but my Wife* and her I
name -- with Reverence.


Lord R. Then you shall wear this Gown, whilst you charge the Watch. That though
the Blows fall upon you, the Scandal may light upon the Church.


Sir John. A generous Design -- by all the Gods -- give it me. Takes the Gown
and puts it on.


Tailor. O dear Gentlemen, I shall be quite undone, if you take the Gown.


Sir John. Retire, Sirrah; and since you carry off your Skin -- go home, and be
happy.


Tailor. [pausing] I think I had even as good follow the Gentleman's friendly
Advice. For if I dispute any longer, who knows but the whim may take him to
Case me. These Courtiers are fuller of Tricks than they are of Money; they will
sooner cut a Man's Throat, than pay his Bill.


Exit Tailor. Sir John. So, how do you like my Shapes now?


Lord R. This Will do to a Miracle; he looks like a Bishop going to the Holy
War. But to your Arms, Gentlemen, the Enemy appears.


Enter Constable and Watch. Watchman. Stand! Who goes there? Come before the
Constable.


Sir John. The Constable's a Rascal -- and you are the Son of a Whore.


Watchman. A good civil Answer for a Parson, truly.


Constable. Methinks Sir, a Man of your Coat, might set a better Example.


Sir John. Sirrah, I Will make you know -- there are Men of my Coat can set as
bad Examples -- as you can do, you Dog you.


Sir John strikes the Constable. They knock him down, disarm him and seize him.
Lord R. etc. run away. Constable. So, we have secured the Parson however.


Sir Ioh. Blood and Blood -- and Blood.


Watchman. Lord have Mercy upon us: How the wicked Wretch Raves of Blood. I Will
warrant he has been murdering some body to, Night.


Sir John. Sirrah, There Is nothing got by Murder but a Halter: My Talent lies
toward Drunkenness and Simony.


Watchman. Why that now was spoke like a Man of Parts, Neighbors: It Is pity he
should be so Disguised.


Sir John. You Lie, -- I am not Disguised; for I am Drunk baref^c'd.


Watchman. Look you there again, -- This is a mad Parson, Mr. Constable; I Will
lay a Pot of Ale upon's Head, he is a good Preacher.


Constable. Come Sir, out of Respect to your Calling, I shall not put you into the
Round-house; but we must Secure you in our Drawing Room till Morning, that you
may do no Mischief. So, Come along.


Sir John. You may put me where you will, Sirrah, now you have overcome me; --
But if I cannot do Mischief, I Will think of Mischief -- in spite of your Teeth,
you Dog you.


Exeunt: SCENE a Bedchamber. Enter Heartfree, solus. What the Plague Ail's me?
-- Love? No, I thank you for that; my heart's Rock still. --

Yet it is Bellinda that disturbs me; that is positive.

-- Well, what of all that? Must I love her for being troublesome? at that
rate, I might love all the Women I meet, I gad.

But hold? -- though I don't love her for disturbing me, yet she may disturb me,
because I love her -- Ay, that may be, faith.

I have dreamed of her, that is certain --

Well, so I have of my Mother; therefore what is that to the purpose?

Ay, but Bellinda runs in my Mind waking --

And so does many a damned thing, that I don't care a Farthing for --

Methinks though, I would fain be talking to her, and yet I have no Business. --

Well, am I the first Man, that has had a Mind to do an Impertinent thing?


Enter Constant. Constable. How now, Heartfree? What makes you up and Dressed so
soon? I thought none but Lovers quarreled with their Beds; I expected to have
found you snoaring, as I used to do.


Heart. Why, faith Friend, it is the Care I have of your Affairs, that makes me
so thoughtful; I have been studying all Night, how to bring your Matter about
with Bellinda.


Constable. With Bellinda?


Heart. With my Lady, I mean: And faith I have mighty hopes on it. Sure you must
be very well satisfied with her Behavior to you Yesterday?


Constable. So well; that nothing but a Lover's Fears, can make me doubt of
Success. But what can this sudden Change proceed from?


Heart. Why, you saw her Husband beat her, did you not?


Constable. That Is true: A Husband is scarce to be born upon any terms, much less
when he fights with his Wife. Methinks she should even have Cuckolded him upon
the very spot, to show that after the Battle, she was Master of the Field.


Heart. A Council of War of Women, would infallibly have advised her to it. But,
I confess, so agreeable a Woman as Bellinda, deserves a better usage.


Constable. Bellinda again?


Heart. My Lady, I mean: What a-pox makes me blunder so to day? [aside] A
Plague of this treacherous Tongue.


Constable. Prithee look upon me seriously, Heartfree -- Now answer me directly! Is
it my Lady, or Bellinda, employs your careful Thoughts thus?


Heart. My Lady, or Bellinda?


Constable. In Love, by this Light in Love.


Heart. In Love?


Constable. Nay, never deny it: for thou wilt do it so awkerdly, 'twill but make the
Jest sit heavier about thee. My Dear Friend, I give thee much Joy*


Heart. Why prithee, you will not persuade me to it, will you?


Constable. That she is Mistress of your Tongue, that is plain, and I know you are so
honest a Fellow, your Tongue and Heart always go together.

But how? but how the Devil? Pha, ha, ha, ha --


Heart. Hey day: Why sure you don't believe it in earnest?


Constable. Yes, I do; because I see you deny it in jest.


Heart. Nay, but look you Ned, -- a -- deny in jest -- a -- gadzooks, you know
I say -- a -- when a Man denies a thing in jest -- a --


Constable. Pha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Heart. Nay, then we shall have it: What, because a Man stumbles at a word: Did
you never make a Blunder?


Constable. Yes, for I am in Love, I own it.


Heart. Then; so am I. --
Now laugh till thy Soul's glutted with Mirth, [Embracing him.]
But, dear Constant, don't tell the Town on it.

Constable. Nay, then 'twere almost pity to laugh at thee, after so honest a
Confession.

But tell us a little, Jack. By what new-invented Arms, has this mighty Stroke
been given?


Heart. Even by that unaccountable Weapon, called, Ie ne scai quoy; For every
thing that can come within the Virge of Beauty, I have seen it with
Indifference.


Constable. So in few words then; the, Ie ne scai quoy, has been too hard for the
Quilted Petticoat.


Heart. I gad, I think the Ie ne scai quoy, is in the Quilted Petticoat; at
least, it is certain, I never think on it without -- a -- a Ie ne scai quoy in
every Part about me.


Constable. Well, but have all your Remedies lost their Virtue, have you turned her
Inside out yet?


Heart. I dare not so much as think on it.


Constable. But don't the two Years Fatigue, I have had, discourage you?


Heart. Yes: I dread what I foresee; yet cannot quit the Enterprise. Like some
Soldiers; whose Courage dwells more in their Honor, than their Nature; On they
go, though the Body trembles, at what the Soul makes it Undertake.


Constable. Nay, if you expect your Mistress will use you, as your Profanations
against her Sex deserve, you tremble Justly.

But how do you intend to proceed, Friend?


Heart. Thou know I Am but a Novice; be friendly and advise me.


Constable. Why look you then; I Would have you -- Serenade and a -- write a Song -- Go
to Church; Look like a Fool -- Be very Officious: Ogle, Write and Lead out; And
who knows, but in a Year or two's time, you may be -- called a troublesome
Puppy, and sent about your Business.


Heart. That Is hard.


Constable. Yet thus it often falls out with Lovers, Sir.


Heart. Pox on me for making one of the Number.


Constable. Have a Care: Say no Saucy things: 'twill but augment your Crime, and if
your Mistress hears on it, increase your Punishment.


Heart. Prithee say something then to encourage me, you know I helped you in
your Distress.


Constable. Why then to encourage you to Perseverance, that you may be thoroughly
ill used for your Offenses, I Will put you in Mind, That even the coyest Ladies
of 'em all, are made up of Desires, as well as we; and though they do hold out a
long time, they will Capitulate at last. For that thundering Engenier, Nature,
does make such havoc in the Town, they must Surrender at long Run, or Perish
in their own Flames.

Enter a Footman. Sir, There Is a Porter without with a Letter; he desires to
give it into your own Hands.


Constable. Call him in.


Enter Porter. Constable. What Io; Is it thee?


Porter. An't please you Sir, I was Ordered to Deliver this into your own
Hands, by two well-shap'd Ladies, at the New-Exchange. I was at your Honor's
Lodgings, and your Servants sent me hither.


Constable. It Is well, Are you to carry any Answer?


Porter. No, my noble Master. They gave me my Orders, and whip, they were gone,
like a Maidenhead at Fifteen.


Constable. Very well; there. Gives him Money.


Porter. God bless your Honor.


Exit Porter. Constable. Now let us see, what honest trusty Io has brought us.

Reads. If you and your Play-fellow, can spare time from your Business and
Devotions, don't fail to be at Spring-Garden about Eight in the Evening. You Will
find nothing there but Women, so you need bring no other Arms than what you
usually carry about you.




So, Play-fellow: Here Is something to stay your Stomach, till your Mistresses
Dish is ready for you.


Heart. Some of our old Battered Acquaintance. I wont go, not I.


Constable. Nay, that you cannot avoid: There Is honor in the Case, it is a
Challenge, and I want a Second.


Heart. I doubt I shall be but a very useless one to you; for I Am so
disheartened by this Wound Bellinda has given me; I don't think I shall have
Courage enough to draw my Sword.


Constable. O, if that be all, come along; I Will warrant you find Sword enough for
such Enemies as we have to deal withal.


Exeunt. Enter Constable, etc. with Sir John. Constable. Come along, Sir, I
thought to have let you slip this Morning, because you were a Minister; but you
are as Drunk and as Abusive as ever. We'll see what the Justice of the Peace
will say to you.


Sir John. And you shall see what I Will say to the Justice of the Peace, Sirrah.


They Knock at the Door. Enter Servant. Constab. Pray Acquaint his Worship, we
have got an unruly Parson here: We are unwilling to expose him, but don't know
what to do with him.


Servant. I Will Acquaint my Master.


Exit Servant, Sir John. You -- Constable -- What damned Justice is this?


Constab. One that will take Care of you, I warrant you.


Enter Justice. Justice. Well, Mr. Constable; What Is the Disorder here?


Constab. An't Please your Worship --


Sir John. Let me speak and be damned: I Am a Divine, and can unfold Mysteries
better than you can do.


Justice. Sadness, Sadness, a Minister so Over-taken. Pray Sir, Give the
Constable leave to speak, and I Will hear you very patiently; I assure you Sir, I
will.


Sir John. Sir, -- You are a very Civil Magistrate. Your most humble Servant.


Constab. An't Please your Worship then; he has attempted to beat the Watch to
Night, and Swore --


Sir John. You Lie.


Justice. Hold, pray Sir, a little.


Sir John. Sir, your very humble Servant.


Constab. Indeed Sir, he came at us without any Provocation, called us Whores
and Rogues, and laid us on with a great Quarter-Staff. He was in my Lord Rake's
Company. They have been playing the Devil to Night.


Justice. Hem -- Hem -- Pray Sir -- May you be Chaplain to my Lord?


Sir John. Sir -- I presume -- I may if I will.


Justice. My meaning Sir, is -- Are you so?


Sir John. Sir, -- You mean very well.


Justice. He hem -- hem -- Under favor, Sir, Pray Answer me directly.


Sir John. Under favor, Sir -- Do you use to Answer directly when you are
Drunk?


Justice. Good lack, good lack: Here Is nothing to be got from him. Pray Sir,
may I crave your Name?


Sir John. Sir, -- My Name's -- He Hycops. Hyccop, Sir.


Justice. Hyccop? Doctor Hyccop. I have known a great many Country Parsons of
that Name, especially down in the Fenns. Pray where do you live, Sir?


Sir John. Here -- and there, Sir.


Justice. Why, what a strange Man is this? Where do you Preach, Sir? Have you
any Cure?


Sir John. Sir -- I have -- a very good Cure -- for a Clap, at your Service.


Justice. Lord have mercy upon us.


Sir John. [Aside.] This Fellow does Ask so many Impertinent Questions, I
believe I gad, it is the Justice's Wife, in the Justice's Clothes.


Justice. Mr. Constable, I Vow and Protest, I don't know what to do with him.


Constab. Truly, he has been but a troublesome Guest to us all Night.


Justice. I think, I had even best let him go about his Business, for I Am
unwilling to expose him.


Constab. Even what your Worship thinks fit.


Sir John. Sir, -- not to interrupt Mr. Constable, I have a small Favor to ask.


Justice. Sir, I open both my Ears to you.


Sir John. Sir, your very humble Servant. I have a little Urgent Business calls
upon me; And therefore I desire the Favor of you, to bring Matters to a
Conclusion.


Justice. Sir, If I were sure that Business, were not to Commit more Disorders;
I would release you.


Sir John. None, -- By my Priesthood.


Just. Then, Mr. Constable, you may Discharge him.


Sir John. Sir, your very humble Servant. If you please to Accept of a Bottle
--


Just. I thank you kindly, Sir; but I never drink in a Morning. Good-buy to ye,
Sir, good-buy to ye.


Sir John. Good-buy to ye, good Sir. Exit Justice.

So -- now, Mr. Constable, Shall you and I go pick up a Whore together.


Constab. No, thank you, Sir; My Wife's enough to satisfy any reasonable Man.


Sir John. [Aside.] He, he, he, he, he, -- the Fool is Married then. Well, you
will not go?


Constab. Not I, truly.


Sir John. Then I Will go by my self; and you and your Wife may be Damned.

Exit Sir John. Constable gazing after him. Why God-a-marcy Parson.


Exeunt. SCENE Spring-Garden. Constant and Heartfree Cross the Stage. As they
go off, Enter Lady Fancyfull and Mademoiselle, Masked and Dogging 'em. Constable.
So: I think we are about the time appointed; Let us walk up this w^y.


Exeunt. Lady Fancy. Good: Thus far I have Dogged 'em without being discovered.
It Is infallibly some Intrigue that brings them to Spring-Garden. How my poor
Heart is torn and wrackt with Fear and Jealousy. Yet let it be any thing, but
that Flirt Bellinda, and I Will try to hear it. But if it prove her, All that is
Woman in me shall be employed to destroy her. Exeunt after Constant and
Heartfree.


Re-enter Constant and Heartfree. Lady Fancyfull and Mademoiselle still
following at a Distance. Constable. I see no Females yet, that have any thing to
say to us. I Am afraid we are banter'd.


Heart. I wish we were; for I Am in no Humor to make either them or my self
merry.


Constable. Nay, I Am sure you will make them merry enough; if I tell 'em why you are
dull. But prithee why so heavy and sad, before you begin to be ill used?


Heart. For the same Reason, perhaps, that you are so brisk and well pleased;
because both Pains and Pleasures are generally more considerable in Prospect,
than when they come to pass.


Enter Lady B. and Bellinda, masked, and poorly dressed. Constable. How now, who
are these? Not our Game I hope.


Heart. If they are, we are even well enough served, to come hunting here, when
we had so much better Game in Chase elsewhere.


Lady Fancy. to Mademoiselle. So, those are their Ladies without doubt. But I Am
afraid that Doily Stuff is not worn for want of better Clothes. They are the
very Shape and Size of Bellinda and her Aunt.


Madamois. So day be inteed, Matam.


Lady Fancy. We'll slip into this close Arbor, where we may hear all they say.


Exeunt Lady Fancy. and Mademoiselle. Lady B. What, are you afraid of us,
Gentlemen?


Heart. Why truly I think we may, if Appearance don't lie.


Bell. Do you always find Women what they appear to be, Sir?


Heart. No Forsooth; but I seldom find 'em better than they appear to be.


Bell. Then the Outside's best, you think?


Heart. It Is the honestest.


Constable. Have a care, Heartfree; you are relapsing again.


Lady B. Why, does the Gentleman use to rail at Women?


Constable. He has done formerly.


Bell. I suppose he had very good Cause for it:
They did not use you so well, as you thought you deserved, Sir.

Lady B. They made themselves merry at your Expense, Sir.


Bell. Laughed when you Sighed


Lady B. Slept while you were waking.


Bell. Had your Porter beat.


Lady B And threw your Billet doux in the Fire.


Heart. Hey day, I shall do more than rail presently.


Bell. Why you will not beat us, will you?


Heart. I don't know but I may.


Constable. What the Devil's coming here? Sir John in a Gown? -- And drunk In Faith.


Enter Sir John. Sir John. What a Pox -- here is Constant, Heartfree, -- and two
Whores I gad: -- O you covetous Rogues; what, have you never a spare Punk for
you Friend? -- But I Will share with you.


He seizes both the Women. Heart. Why, what the Plague have you been doing,
Knight.


Sir John. Why, I have been beating the Watch, and scandalizing the Clergy.


Heart. A very good Account, truly.


Sir John. And what do you think I Will do next?


Constable. Nay, that no Man can guess.


Sir John. Why, if you will let me sup with you, I Will treat both your Strumpets.


Lady B. [aside.] O Lord, we are undone.


Heart. No, we cannot sup together, because we have some Affairs elsewhere. But
if you will accept of these two Ladies, we'll be so complaisant to you, to resign
our Right in 'em.


Bell. [aside.] Lord, what shall we do?


Sir John. Let me see, their Clothes are such damned Clothes, they will not pawn
for the Reckoning.


Heart. Sir John, your Servant. Rapture attend you.


Constable. Adieu Ladies, make much of the Gentleman.


Lady B. Why sure, you will not leave us in the Hands of a drunken Fellow to abuse
us.


Sir John. Who do you call a drunken Fellow, you Slut you? I Am a Man of
Quality; the King has made me a Knight.


Heart. runs off. Heart. Ay, ay, you are in good Hands, Adieu, adieu.


Lady B. The Devil's Hands: Let me go, or I Will -- For Heaven's sake protect us.


She breaks from him, runs to Constant, twitching off her Mask and clapping it
on again. Sir John. I Will Devil you, you Jade you. I Will demolish your ugly Face.


Constable. Hold a little, Knight, she swoons.


Sir John. I Will swoon her.


Constable. Hey, Heartfree.


Re-enter Heartfree. Bellinda runs to him and shows her Face. Heart. O Heavens!
My dear Creature, stand there a little.


Constable. Pull him off, Jack.


Heart. Hold, mighty Man; look you, Sir, we did but jest with you. These are
Ladies of our Acquaintance, that we had a mind to frighten a little, but now
you must leave us.


Sir John. Oons, I will not leave you, not I.


Heart. Nay, but you must though; and therefore make no words on it.


Sir John. Then you are a couple of damned uncivil Fellows. And I hope your
Punks will give you sauce to your Mutton.


Exit Sir John. Lady B. Oh, I shall never come to my self again, I Am so
frightened.


Constable. 'Twas a narrow escape, indeed.


Bell. Women must have Frolicks, you see, whatever they cost 'em.


Heart. This might have proved a dear one though.


Lady B. You are the more obliged to us, for the Risque we run upon your
Accounts.


Constable. And I hope you will acknowledge something due to our Knight Errantry,
Ladies. This is the second time we have delivered you.


Lady B. It Is true; and since we see Fate has designed you for our Guardians,
'twill make us the more willing to trust our selves in your Hands. But you must
not have the worse Opinion of us for our Innocent Frolic.


Heart. Ladies, you may command our Opinions in every thing that is to your
Advantage.


Bell. Then, Sir, I command you to be of Opinion, That Women are sometimes
better than they appear to be.


Lady Brute and Constant talk apart. Heart. Madam, you have made a Convert of
me in every thing. I Am grown a Fool: I could be fond of a Woman.


Bell. I thank you, Sir, in the Name of the whole Sex.


Heart. Which Sex nothing but your self, could ever have atoned for.


Bell. Now has my Vanity a devilish Itch, to know in what my Merit consists.


Heart. In your Humility, Madam, that keeps you ignorant it consists at all.


Bell. One other Compliment with that serious Face, and I hate you for ever
after.


Heart. Some Women love to be abused: Is that it you would be at?


Bell. No, not that neither: But I Would have Men talk plainly what is fit for Women
to hear; without putting 'em either to a real, or an affected Blush.


Heart. Why then, in as plain Terms as I can find to express my self: I could
love you even to -- Matrimony it self a-most I-gad.


Bell. Just as Sir John did her Ladyship there.

What think you? Don't you believe one Month's time might bring you down to the
same Indifference, only clad in a little better Manners, perhaps. Well, you Men
are unaccountable things, mad till you have your Mistresses; and then stark mad
till you are rid of 'em again. Tell me, honestly, is not your Patience put to a
much severer Trial after Possession, than before?


Heart. With a great many, I must confess, it is, to our eternal Scandal; but I
-- dear Creature, do but try me.


Bell. That Is the surest way indeed, to know, but not the safest.

To Lady B. Madam, are not you for taking a turn in the Great Walk: It Is almost
dark, no body will know us.


Lady B. Really I find my self something idle, Bellinda, besides, I dote upon
this little odd private Corner. But don't let my lazy Fancy confine you.


Constable. [aside.] So, she would be left alone with me, that is well.


Bell Well, we'll take one turn, and come to you again.

To Heart. Come, Sir, shall we go pry into the secrets of the Garden. Who knows
what Discoveries we may make.


Heart. Madam, I Am at your Service.


Constable. to Heart. [aside.] Don't make too much haste back; for, do you hear -- I
may be busy.


Heart. Enough.


Exit Bellinda and Heartfree. Lady B. Sure you think me scandalously free, Mr.
Constant. I Am afraid I shall lose your good Opinion of me.


Constable. My good Opinion, Madam, is like your Cruelty, never to be removed.


Lady B But if I should remove my Cruelty, then there is an end of your good
Opinion.


Constable. There is not so strict an Alliance between 'em neither. It Is certain I
should love you then better (if that be possible) than I do now; and where I
love, I always esteem.


Lady B. Indeed, I doubt you much:
Why suppose you had a Wife, and she should entertain a Gallant.

Constable. If I gave her just Cause, how could I justly condemn her?


Lady B. Ah; but you would differ widely about just Causes.


Constable. But blows can bear no Dispute.


Lady B. Nor Ill Manners much, truly.


Constable. Then no Woman upon Earth, has so just a Cause as you have.


Lady B. O, but a faithful Wife, is a beautiful Character.


Constable. To a deserving Husband, I confess it is.


Lady B. But can his Faults Release my Duty?


Constable. In Equity without doubt. And where Laws dispense with Equity; Equity
should dispense with Laws.


Lady B. Pray let us leave this Dispute; for you Men have as much Witchcraft in
your Arguments, as Women have in their Eyes.


Constable. But whilst you Attack me with your Charms, it is but reasonable I
Assault you with mine.


Lady B. The Case is not the same. What Mischief we do, we cannot help, and
therefore are to be forgiven.


Constable. Beauty soon obtains Pardon, for the Pain that it gives, when it applies
the Balm of Compassion to the Wound; But a fine Face, and a hard Heart, is
almost as bad as an ugly Face and a soft one: both very troublesome to many a
Poor Gentleman.


Lady B. Yes, and to many a Poor Gentlewoman too, I can assure you. But pray
which of 'em is it, that most afflicts you?


Constable. Your Glass and Conscience will inform you, Madam. But for Heaven's sake
(for now I must be serious) if Pity or if Gratitude can move you, Taking her
hand. If Constancy and Truth have Power to tempt you; If Love, if Adoration can
affect you, give me at least some hopes, that time may do, what you perhaps
mean never to perform; 'Twill ease my Sufferings, though not quench my Flame.


Lady B. Your Sufferings eased, your Flame would soon abate; And that I would
preserve, not quench it, Sir.


Constable. Would you preserve it, nourish it with favors; for that is the Food, it
naturally requires.


Lady B. Yet on that Natural Food, 'twou'd Surfeit soon, should I resolve to
grant all that you would ask.


Constable. And in refusing all, you starve it. Forgive me therefore, since my
Hunger rages, if I at last grow Wild, and in my frenzy force at least, This
from you. Kissing her hand. Or if you would have my Flame, soar higher still, then
grant me this, and this, and this, and Thousands more; [Kissing first her hand,
then her neck. Aside.] for now is the time, She melts into Compassion.


Lady B. [Aside.] Poor Coward Virtue, how it shuns the Battle. O heavens! let
me go.


Constable. Ay, go, ay: Where shall we go, my Charming Angel, -- into this private
Arbor. -- Nay, let us lose no time -- Moments are precious.


Lady B. And Lovers wild. Pray let us stop here; at least for this time.


Constable. It Is impossible: He that has Power over you, can have none over
himself. As he is forcing her into the Arbor, Lady Fancyful and Mademoiselle
bolt out upon them, and Run over the Stage.


Lady B. Ah; I Am lost.


Lady Fancy. Fe, fe, fe, fe, fe.


Madamois. Fe, fe, fe, fe, fe.


Constable. Death and Furies, who are these?


Lady B. Oh heavens, I Am out of my Wits; if they knew me, I Am Ruined.


Constable. Don't be frightened; Ten thousand to One they are Strangers to you.


Lady B. Whatever they are, I will not stay here a moment longer.


Constable. Whither will you go?


Lady B. Home, as if the Devil were in me. Lord where is this Bellinda now?

Enter Bellinda and Heartfree. O! it is well you are come: I Am so frightened my
Hair stands an end.

Let Us be gone for Heaven's sake.


Bell. Lord, What Is the Matter?


Lady B. The Devil's the Matter, we are discovered. Here Is a Couple of Women
have done the most impertinent thing. Away, Away, Away, Away, Away.


Exit running. Re-enter Lady Fancyful and Mademoiselle. Lady Fancy. Well
Mademoiselle, it is a Prodigious thing, how Women can suffer filthy Fellows, to
grow so familiar with 'em.


Madamois. Ah Matam, il n'y a rien desi Naturel.


Lady Fancy. Fe, fe, fe. But oh my Heart; O Jealousy, O Torture, I Am upon the
rack. What shall I do, my Lover's lost, I never shall see him. Mine.

Pausing -- But I may be revenged; and that is the same thing. Ah sweet Revenge.
Thou welcome thought, thou healing Balsam, to my wounded Soul. Be but
propitious on this one Occasion, I Will place my Heaven in thee, for all my Life
to come.

To Woman how indulgent Nature's kind.
No Blast of Fortune long disturbs her Mind.
Compliance to her Fate supports her still,
If Love will not make her Happy -- Mischief will.

Exeunt. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE Lady Fancyfull's House. Enter Lady Fancyfull and Mademoiselle. Lady
Fancy. WEll, Mademoiselle; Did you Dog the filthy things?


Madamois. O que Ouy Matam.


Lady Fancy. And where are they?


Madamois. Au Logis.


Lady Fancy. What? Men and All?


Madamois. Tous ensemble.


Lady Fancy. O Confidence! What, carry their Fellows to their own House?


Madamois. C'est que le Mari n'y est pas.


Lady Fancy. No, so I believe, truly. But he shall be there, and quickly too,
if I can find him out.

Well, it is a Prodigious thing, to see when Men and Women get together, how
they fortify one another in their Impudence. But if that Drunken Fool, her
Husband, be to be found in ever a Tavern in Town, I Will send him amongst 'em.
I Will spoil their Sport.


Madamois. En Verite Matam, ce seroit damage.


Lady Fancy. It Is in Vain to Oppose it, Mademoiselle; therefore never go about
it. For I am the steadiest Creature in the World -- when I have determined to
do Mischief. So, Come along.


Exeunt. SCENE Sir John Brute's House. Enter Constant, Heartfree, Lady Brute,
Bellinda, and Lovewell. Lady B. But are you sure you don't Mistake, Lovewell?


Love. Madam, I saw 'em all go into the Tavern together, and my Master was so
drunk he could scarce stand.


Lady B. Then, Gentlemen, I believe we may Venture to let you Stay and Play at
Cards with us an Hour or two; for they will scarce part till Morning.


Bell. I think it is pity they should ever part.


Constable. The Company that is here, Madam.


Lady B. Then, Sir, the Company that is here, must remember to part it self, in
time.


Constable. Madam, we don't intend to forfeit your future Favors, by an indiscreet
Usage of this. The moment you give us the Signal, we sha'n't fail to make our
Retreat.


Lady B. Upon those Conditions then, Let us sit down to Cards. Enter Lovewell.
O Lord, Madam, here is my Master just staggering in upon you; He has been
Quarrelsom yonder, and they have kicked him out of the Company.


Lady B. Into the Closet, Gentlemen, for Heaven's ^ake; I Will wheedle him to
Bed, if possible.


Constable. and Heart. run into the Closet. Enter Sir John, all Dirt and Bloody.
Lady B. Ah -- ah -- he is all over Blood.


Sir John. What the Plague, does the Woman -- Squall for? Did you never see a
Man in Pickle before?


Lady B. Lord, where have you been?


Sir John. I have been at -- Cuffs.


Lady B. I fear that is not all. I hope you are not wounded.


Sir John. Sound as a Roche, Wife.


Lady B. I Am mighty glad to hear it.


Sir I. You know -- I think you Lie.


Lady B. I know you do me wrong to think so, then. For Heaven's my Witness, I
had rather see my own Blood trickle down, than yours.


Sir John. Then will I be Crucified.


Lady B. It Is a hard Fate, I should not be believed.


Sir John. It Is a damned Atheistical Age, Wife.


Lady B. I am sure I have given you a Thousand tender Proofs, how great my Care
is of you.

Nay, spite of all your Cruel Thoughts, I Will still persist, and at this moment,
if I can, persuade you to lie down, and Sleep a little.


Sir John. Why, -- do you think I am drunk -- you Slut, you?


Lady B. Heaven forbid, I should: But I Am afraid you are Feverish. Pray let me
feel your Pulse.


Sir John. Stand off and be damned.


Lady B. Why, I see your Distemper in your very Eyes. You are all on fire. Pray
go to Bed; Let me entreat you.


Sir John. -- Come kiss me, then.


Lady B. [Kissing him.] There: Now go [Aside.] He stinks like Poison.


Sir John. I see it go's damnably against your Stomach --
And therefore -- Kiss me again.

Lady B. Nay, now you fool me.


Sir John. Do It, I say.


Lady B. [Aside.] Ah Lord have mercy upon me.
Well; There; Now will you go?

Sir John. Now Wife, you shall see my Gratitude. You give me two Kisses, I Will
give you -- two Hundred. Kisses and tumbles her.


Lady B. O Lord: Pray, Sir John, be quiet.
Heavens, what a Pickle am I in.

Bell [Aside.] If I were in her Pickle, I Would call my Gallant out of the ^oset,
and he should Cudgel him soundly.


Sir John. So; Now, you being as dirty and as nasty as my self, We may go Pig
together. But first, I must have a Cup of your Cold Tea, Wife. Going to the
Closet.


Lady B. O, I Am ruined.

(...) there, my Dear.

(...) I Will warrant you, I Will find some, my Dear.

(...) Open the Door, the Lock's spoiled. I have been (...) the Key this half
hour to no purpose. I Will send for (...) Morrow.


Sir John. There Is never a Smith in Europe can Open a Door with more Expedition
than I can do. -- As for Example, -- Pou. He bursts Open the Door with his foot.

-- How now? --

What the Devil have we got here? --

Constant -- Heartfree -- And two Whores again, I gad. -- -- This is the worst
Cold Tea -- that ever I met with in my Life. --


Enter Constant and Heartfree. Lady B. [aside.] O Lord, what will become of us?


Sir John. Gentlemen -- I am your very humble Servant -- I give you many Thanks
-- I see you take Care of my Family -- I shall do all I can to return the
Obligation.


Constable. Sir, how odly soever this Business may appear to you, you would have no
Cause to be uneasy, if you knew the Truth of all things; your Lady is the most
virtuous Woman in the World, and nothing has past, but an Innocent Frolic.


Heart. Nothing else, upon my Honor, Sir.


Sir John. You are both very Civil Gentlemen -- And my Wife, there, is a very
Civil Gentlewoman; therefore I don't doubt but many Civil things have past
between you. Your very humble Servant.


L. B. [ Aside to Constable.] Pray be gone; He Is so drunk he cannot hurt us to
Night, and to Morrow Morning you shall hear from us.


Constable. I Will Obey you, Madam.

Sir, when you are Cool, you will understand Reason better. So then I shall take
the Pains to Inform you.

If not -- I wear a Sword, Sir, and so good-b'uy to you.

Come along, Heartfree.


Sir John. -- Wear a Sword, Sir: -- And what of all that, Sir? -- He comes to
my House; Eats my Meat; Lies with my Wife; Dishonours my Family; Gets a Bastard
to Inherit my Estate. -- And when I ask a Civil Account of all this -- Sir,
says, he, I wear a Sword. -- Wear a Sword, Sir? Yes Sir, says he; I wear a
Sword -- It may be a good Answer at Cross-Purposes; But it is a Damned One to a
Man in my Whimsical Circumstance -- Sir, says he, I wear a Sword.

To Lady B. And what do you wear now? ha? tell me.

Sitting down in a great Chair.

What? you are Modest and cant? --

Why then I Will tell you, you Slut you.

You wear -- an Impudent Lewd Face. --

A Damned Designing Heart -- And a Tail -- and a Tail full of -- He falls fast
asleep, snoaring.


Lady B. So; Thanks to Kind Heaven, he is fast for some Hours.


Bell. It Is well he is so, that we may have time to lay our Story handsomely;
for we must Lie like the Devil to bring our selves off.


Lady B. What shall we say, Bellinda?


Bell. [Musing.] -- I Will tell you: It must all light upon Heartfree and I.
We'll say he has Courted me some time, but for Reasons unknown to us, has ever
been very earnest the thing might be kept from Sir John. That therefore hearing
him upon the Stairs, he run into the Closet, though against our Will, and
Constant with him, to prevent Jealousy. And to give this a good Impudent face
of Truth (that I may deliver you from the Trouble you are in:) I Will even (if he
pleases) Marry him.


Lady B. I Am beholding to you, Cousin; but that would be carrying the Jest a
little too far for your Own sake: You know he is a younger Brother, and has
Nothing.


Bell. It Is true; But I like him, and have Fortune enough to keep above
Extremity: I cannot say, I would live with him in a Cell upon Love and Bread and
Butter. But I had rather have the Man I love, and a Middle State of Life, Than
that Gentleman in the Chair there, and twice your Ladiship's Splendor.


Lady B. In truth, Niece, you are in the Right on it: for I am very Uneasy with
my Ambition. But perhaps, had I married as you will do, I might have been as Ill
used.


Bell. Some Risque, I do confess, there always is; But if a Man has the least
spark, either of Honor or good Nature, he can never use a Woman Ill, that
loves him and makes his Fortune both. Yet I must own to you, some little
Struggling I still have, with this teazing Ambition of ours. For Pride, you
know, is as Natural to a Woman, as it is to a Saint. I cannot help being fond of
this Rogue; and yet it go's to my Heart to think I must never Whisk to
Hide-Park, with above a Pair of Horses; Have no Coronet upon my Coach, nor a
Page to carry up my Train. But above all -- that business of Place -- Well;
Taking Place, is a Noble Prerogative.


Lady B. Especially after a Quarrel.


Bell. Or of a Rival. But pray say no more on it, for fear I change my Mind. For
of my Conscience, were it not for your Affair in the balance, I should go near
to pick up some Odious Man of Quality yet, and only take poor Heartfree for a
Gallant.


Lady B. Then him you must have, however things go?


Bell. Yes.


Lady B. Why we may pretend what we will; but it is a hard matter to Live
without the Man we Love.


Bell. Especially when we are Married to the Man we hate. Pray tell me? Do the
Men of the Town ever believe us Virtuous, when they see us do so?


Lady B. O, no: Nor indeed hardly, let us do what we will. They most of 'em
think, there is no such thing as Virtue considered in the strictest notions of
it: And therefore when you hear 'em say, Such a one is a Woman of Reputation,
They only mean she is a Woman of Discretion. For they consider, we have no more
Religion than they have, nor so much Morality; and between you and I, Bellinda,
I Am afraid the want of Inclination seldom protects any of us.


Bell. But what think you of the fear of being found out.


Lady B. I think that never kept any Woman virtuous long. We are not such
Cowards neither. No: Let us once pass Fifteen, and we have too good an Opinion
of our own Cunning, to believe the World can penetrate, into what we would keep
a Secret. And so in short, We cannot reasonably blame the Men for judging of us
by themselves.


Bell. But sure we are not so Wicked as they are, after all.


Lady B. We are as Wicked, Child, but our Vice lies another way: Men have more
Courage than we, so they commit more Bold, Impudent Sins. They Quarrel, Fight,
Swear, Drink, Blaspheme, and the like. Whereas we, being Cowards, only
Backbite, tell Lies, Cheat at Cards and so forth. But it is late. Let Us end our
Discourse for to Night, and out of an excess of Charity, take a small Care, of
that nasty drunken thing there -- Do but look at him, Bellinda.


Bell. Ah -- it is a Savoury Dish.


Lady B. As savoury as it is, I Am cloyed with it. Prithee Call the Butler to take
away.


Bell. Call the Butler? -- Call the Scavenger.

To a Servant within. Who Is there? Call Rasor! Let him take away his Master,
Scower him clean with a little Soap and Sand, and so put him to Bed.


Lady B. Come Bellinda, I Will even lie with you to Night; and in the Morning
we'll send for our Gentlemen to set this Matter even:


Bell. Withal my Heart.


Lady B. Good Night, my Dear. Making a low Curtsy.


Both. Ha, ha, ha.

Exeunt. Enter Rasor. My Lady there is a Wag -- My Master there is a Cuckold.
Marriage is a slippery thing -- Women have depraved Appetites: -- My Lady's a
Wag, I have heard all: I have seen all: I understand all, and I Will tell all;
for my little French-woman loves News dearly. This Story'll gain her Heart or
nothing will.

To his Master. Come, Sir, Your Head's too full of Fumes at present, to make
Room for your Jealousy; but I reckon we shall have Rare work with you, when
your Pate's empty. Come; to your Kennel, you Cuckoldly drunken Sot you. Carries
him out upon his Back.


SCENE Lady Fancyfull's House. Enter Lady Fancyfull and Mademoiselle. Lady
Fancy. But, why did not you tell me before, Mademoiselle, that Rasor and you
were fond?


Madamois. De Modesty hinder me, Matam.


Lady Fancy. Why truly Modesty does often hinder us from doing things we have
an Extravagant Mind to. But does he love you well enough yet, to do any thing
you bid him? Do you think to Oblige you he wo^'d speak Scandal?


Madamois. Matam, to Oblige your Ladyship, he shall speak Blasphemy.


Lady Fancy. Why then, Mademoiselle, I Will tell you what you shall do. You shall
engage him to tell his Master, all that past at Spring-Garden. I have a Mind he
should know what a Wife and a Neice he has got.


Madamois. Il le fera, Matam.


Enter a Footman, who speaks to Mademoiselle apart. Foot. Mademoiselle;
Yonder Is Mr. Rasor desires to speak with you.


Madamois. Tell him, I come presently. Exit Footman. Rasor be dare, Matam.


Lady Fancy. That Is Fortunate: Well, I Will leave you together. And if you find
him stubborn, Mademoiselle, -- hark you -- don't refuse him a few little
reasonable Liberties, to put him into humor.


Madamois. Laisez moy fair. Exit Lady Fancyfull.


Rasor peeps in; and seeing Lady Fancyfull gone, runs to Mademoiselle, takes
her about the Neck and kisses her. Madamois. How now, Confidence.


Ras. How now, Modesty.


Madamois. Who make you so familiar, Sirrah?


Ras. My Impudence, Hussy.


Madamois. Stand off, Rogue-face.


Ras. Ah -- Mademoiselle -- great News at our House.


Madamois. Wy wat be de matter?


Ras. The Matter? -- why, Uptails All Is the Matter.


Madamois. Tu te mocque de moy.


Ras. Now do you long to know the particulars:
The time when: The place where: The manner how;
But I will not tell you a Word more.

Madamois. Nay, den dou Kill me, Rasor.


Ras. Come, Kiss me, then. Clapping his hands behind him.


Madamois. Nay, pridee tell me.


Ras. Good b'wy to ye. Going.


Mademois. Hold, hold: I will Kiss dee. Kissing him.


Ras. So: that is Civil: Why now, my pretty Pall; My Goldfinch; My little
Waterwagtail -- you must know that -- Come, Kiss me again.


Madamois. I will not Kiss dee no more.


Ras. Good b'wy to ye.


Madamois. Doucement: Dare: es tu content? Kissing him.


Ras. So: Now I Will tell thee all. Why the News is, That Cuckoldom in Folio, is
newly Printed; and Matrimony in Quarto, is just going into the Press. Will you
Buy any Books, Mademoiselle?


Madamois. Tu Parle comme un Librair, de Devil no Understand dee.


Ras. Why then, that I may make my self intelligible to a Waiting Woman, I Will
speak like a Vallet de Chamber. My Lady has Cuckolded my Master.


Madamois. Bon.


Ras. Which we take very ill from her hands, I can tell her that. We cannot yet
prove Matter of Fact upon her.


Madamois. N'importe.


Ras. But we can prove, that Matter of Fact had like to have been upon her.


Madamois. Ouy da.


Ras. For we have such bloody Circumstances.


Madamois. Sans Doubt.


Ras. That any Man of Parts, may draw tickling Conclusions from 'em.


Madamois. Fort bien.


Ras. We have found a couple of tight well built Gentlemen, stuffed into her
Ladyships Closet.


Madamois. Le Diable


Ras. And I, in my particular Person, have discovered a most Damnable Plot, how
to persuade my poor Master, that all this Hide and Seek, this Will in the Wisp,
has no other meaning than a Christian Marriage for sweet Mrs. Bellinda.


Madamois. Une Marriage? -- Ah les Droless.


Ras. Don't you interrupt me, Hussy; it is Agreed, I say. And my Innocent Lady,
to Riggle her self out at the Backdoor of the Business, turns Marriage-Bawd to
her Neice, and resolves to deliver up her fair Body, to be tumbled and mumbled,
by that young Liquorish Whipster, Heartfree. Now are you satisfied?


Madamois. No.


Ras. Right Woman; Always gaping for more.


Madamois. Dis be all den, dat dou know?


Ras. All? Ay, and a great deal too, I think.


Madamois. Dou be fool, dou know noting.
Ecoute mon pa^vre Rasor.
Dou see des two Eyes? -- Des two Eyes have see de Devil.

Ras. The Woman's Mad.


Madamois. In Spring-Garden, dat Rogue Constant, meet die Lady.


Ras. Bon.


Madamois. -- I Will tell dee no more.


Ras. Nay, prithee, my Swan.


Madamois. Come, Kiss me den* Clapping her hands behind her, as he had done
before.


Ras. I will not Kiss you, not I.


Madamois. Adieu.


Ras. Hold: -- Now proceed. Gives her a hearty Kiss.


Madamois. A ca -- I hide my self in one Cunning place, where I hear all, and
see all. First die drunken Master come mal a propos; But de Sot no know his own
dear Wife, so he leave her to her Sport --

Den de game begin.

De Lover say soft ting. As she speaks, Rasor still acts the Man, and she the
Woman.

De Lady look upon de Ground

He take her by de Hand.

She turn her Head, one oder way.

Den he squeez very hard.

Den she pull -- very softly.

Den he take her in his Arm.

Den she give him, Leetel pat.

Den he Kiss her Tettons.

Den she say -- Pish, nay see.

Den he tremble,

Den she -- Sigh.

Den he pull her into de Arbor,

Den she pinch him


Ras. Ay, but not so hard, you Baggage you.


Mademois. Den he grow Bold.

She grow Weak.

He tro her down

Il tomb dessu,

Le Diable assist, Rasor struggles with her, as if he would throw her down.

Il emport tout:

Stand off, Sirrah.


Ras. You have set me a fire, you Jade you.


Madamois. Den go to de River and quench die self.


Ras. What an unnatural Harlot it is.


Madamois. Rasor. Looking languishingly on him.


Ras. Mademoiselle.


Madamois. Dou no love me.


Ras. Not love thee! -- More than a Frenchman does Soupe.


Madamois. Den dou will refuse noting dat I bid dee?


Ras. Don't bid me be damned then:


Madamois. No, only tell die Master, all I have tell dee of die Laty.


Ras. Why you little malicious Strumpet, you; should you like to be served so?


Madamois. Dou dispute den? -- Adieu.


Ras. Hold -- But why will thou make me be such a Rogue, my Dear?


Madamois. Voila un Vrai Anglois: il est Amoureux, et cependant il veut
raisoner. Vat 'en au Diable.


Ras. Hold once more: In hopes thou wilt give me up thy Body, I resign thee up my
Soul.


Madamois. Bon: eccute done: -- if dou fail me -- I never see dee more -- She
takes him about the Neck, and gives him a smacking Kiss.

if dou obey me --

Ie m'abandonne a toy.

Exit Mademoiselle. Ras. licking his Lips. Not be a Rogue? -- Amor Vineit
omnia. Exit Rasor.


Enter Lady Fancyfull and Mademoiselle. Lady Fancy. Marry, say ye? Will the two
things marry?


Madamois. On le va fair, Matam.


Lady Fancy. Look you, Madamo selle, in short, I cannot bear it -- -- No; I find
I cannot -- If once I see 'em a-bed together, I shall have ten thousand Thoughts
in my Head will make me run distracted. Therefore run and call Rasor back
immediately, for something must be done to stop this Impertinent Wedding. If I
can but deferr it four and twenty Hours, I Will make such work about Town, with
that little pert Sluts Reputation. He shall as soon marry a Witch.


Madamois. [aside.] La Voila bien intentionee. Exeunt.


SCENE Constant's Lodgings. Enter Constant and Heartfree. Constable. But what do
think will come of this Business?


Heart. It Is easier to think what will not come on it.


Constable. What Is that?


Heart. A Challenge. I know the Knight too well for that. His dear Body will
always prevail upon his noble Soul to be quiet.


Constable. But though he dare not challenge me, perhaps he may venture to challenge
his Wife.


Heart. Not if you whisper him in the Ear, you will not have him do it, and there is
no other way left that I see. For as drunk as he was, he will remember you and I
were where we should not be; and I don't think him quite Blockhead enough yet,
to be persuaded we were got into his Wife's Closet, only to peep in her
Prayer Book.


Enter Servant, with a Letter. Servant. Sir, Here Is a Letter, a Porter brought
it.


Constable. O ho, here is Instructions for us.

Reads. The Accident that has happened has touched our Invention to the quick.
We would fain come off, without your help; but find that is impossible. In a
word, the whole Business must be thrown upon a Matrimonial Intrigue, between
your Friend and mine. But if the Parties are not fond enough, to go quite
through with the Matter; it is sufficient for our turn, they own the Design.
We'll find Pretenses enough, to break the Match. Adieu.




-- Well, Woman for Invention: How long would my Blockhead have been a
producing this.

-- Hey, Heartfree; what, musing Man? Prithee be cheerful. What say thou,
Friend, to this Matrimonial Remedy?


Heart. Why I say, it is worse than the Disease.


Constable. Here Is a Fellow for you: There Is Beauty and Money on her Side, and Love
up to the Ears on his; and yet --


Heart. And yet, I think, I may reasonably be allowed to boggle at marrying the
Neice, in the very Moment that you are a debauching the Aunt.


Constable. Why truly, there may be something in that. But have not you a good
Opinion enough of your own Parts, to believe you could keep a Wife to your self?


Heart. I should have, if I had a good Opinion enough of hers, to believe she
could do as much by me. For to do 'em Right, after all, the Wife seldom
rambles, till the Husband shows her the way.


Constable. It Is true; a Man of real Worth, scarce ever is a Cuckold, but by his
own Fault* Women are not naturally lewd, there must be something to urge 'em to
it. They Will cuckold a Churl, out of Revenge; A Fool, because they despise him;
a Beast because they loath him. But when they make bold with a Man they once
had a well grounded Value for, it is because they first see themselves neglected
by him.


Heart. Nay, were I well assured, that I should never grow Sir John. I never
should fear Bellinda^d play my Lady. But our Weakness, thou know, my Friend,
consists in that very Change, we so impudently throw upon (indeed) a steadier
and more generous Sex.


Constable. Why Faith we are a little Impudent in that Matter that is the Truth
on it. But this is wonderful, to see you grown so warm an Advocate for those
(but the other Day) you took so much pains to abuse.


Heart. All Revolutions run into Extremes, the Bigot makes the boldest Atheist;
and the coyest Saint, the most extravagant Strumpet. But Prithee advise me in
this good and Evil; this Life and Death, this Blessing and Cursing, that is set
before me. Shall I marry -- or die a Maid?


Constable. Why Faith, Heartfree, Matrimony is like an Army going to engage. Love's
the forlorn Hope, which is soon cut off; the Marriage-Knot is the main Body,
which may stand Buff a long long time; and Repentance is the Rear-Guard, which
rarely gives ground, as long as the main Battle has a Being.


Heart. Conclusion then; you advise me to whore on, as you do.


Constable. That Is not concluded yet. For though Marriage be a Lottery in which there
are a wondrous many Blanks; yet there is one inestimable Lot, in which the only
Heaven on Earth is written. Would your kind Fate but guide your Hand to that,
though I were wrapped in all that Luxury it self could cloth me with, I still
should envy you.


Heart. And justly too: For to be capable of loving one, doubtless is better
than to possess a Thousand. But how far that Capacity's in me, alas I know not.


Constable. But you would know?


Heart. I would so.


Constable. Matrimony will inform you.

Come, one Flight of Resolution carries you to the Land of Experience; where,
in a very moderate time, you will know the Capacity of your Soul, and your Body
both, or I Am mistaken. Exeunt.


SCENE Sir John Brute's House. Enter Lady Brute and Bellinda. Bell. Well, Madam,
what Answer have you from 'em?


Lady B. That they will be here this Moment. I fancy 'twill end in a Wedding.
I Am sure he is a Fool if it don't. Ten Thousand Pound, and such a Lass as you
are, is no contemptible Offer to a younger Brother. But are not you under
strange Agitations? Prithee how does your Pulse beat?


Bell. High and low, I have much ado to be Valiant, feel very strange to go to
Bed to a Man?


Lady B. Um -- it does feel a little odd at first, but it will soon grow easy
to you.


Enter Constant and Heartfree. Lady B. Good Morrow Gentlemen: How have you
slept after your Adventure?


Heart. Some careful Thoughts, Ladies, on your Accounts have kept us waking.


Bell. And some careful Thoughts on your own, I believe, have hindered you from
sleeping. Pray how does this Matrimonial Project relish with you.


Heart. Why Faith even as storming Towns does with Soldiers, where the Hopes of
delicious Plunder banishes the Fear of being knocked on the Head.


Bell. Is it then possible after all, That you dare think of downright lawful
Wedlock?


Heart. Madam, you have made me so Foolhardy, I dare do any thing.


Bell. Then Sir, I challenge you; and Matrimony's the Spot where I expect you.


Heart. It Is enough; I Will not fail.

[Aside.] So, Now I am in for Hobs's Voyage; a great Leap in the Dark.


Lady B. Well, Gentlemen, this Matter being concluded then, have you got your
Lessons ready? For Sir John is grown such an Atheist of late, he will believe
nothing upon easy Terms.


Constable. We'll find ways to extend his Faith, Madam. But pray how do you find
him this Morning?


Lady B. Most lamentably morose, chewing the Cud after last Night's Discovery;
of which however he had but a confused Notion even now. But I Am afraid his
Vallet de Chamber has told him all, for they are very busy together at this
Moment. When I told him of Bellinda's Marriage, I had no other Answer but a
Grunt: From which, you may draw what Conclusions you think fit.

But to your Notes, Gentlemen, He Is here.


Enter Sir John and Rasor. Constable. Good Morrow, Sir.


Heart. Good Morrow, Sir John. I Am very sorry my Indiscretion should cause so
much Disorder in your Family.


Constable. Disorders generally come from Indiscretions, Sir, it is no strange thing
at all.


Lady B. I hope, my Dear, you are satisfied there was no wrong intended you.


Sir John. None, my Dove.


Bell. If not, I hope my Consent to marry Mr. Heartfree will convince you. For
as little as I know of Amors, Sir, I can assure you, one Intrigue is enough to
bring four People together, without further mischief.


Sir John. And I know too, that Intrigues tends to Procreation of more kinds
than one. One Intrigue will beget another as soon as beget a Son or a Daughter.


Constable. I am very sorry, Sir, to see you still seem unsatisfied with a Lady,
whose more than common Virtue, I am sure, were she my Wife, should meet a
better Usage.


Sir John. Sir, If her Conduct has put a trick upon her Virtue, her Virtue's
the Bubble, but her Husband's the Loser.


Constable. Sir, You have received a sufficient Answer already, to justify both
her Conduct and mine. You Will pardon me for meddling in your Family Affairs; but
I perceive I am the Man you are jealous of, and therefore it concerns me.


Sir John. Would it did not concern me, and then I should not care who it
concerned.


Constable. Well, Sir, if Truth and Reason will not content you; I know but one way
more, which, if you think fit, you may take.


Sir John. Lord, Sir, you are very hasty: If I had been found at Prayers in
your Wife's Closet, I should have allowed you twice as much time to come to
your self in.


Constable. Nay, Sir, if Time be all you want. We have no Quarrel.


Heart. I told you how the Sword would work Sir John muzes. upon him.


Constable. Let him muze; however, I Will lay Fifty Pound our Foreman brings us in,
Not Guilty.


Sir John. [Aside.] It Is well -- it is very well -- In spite of that young
Jade's Matrimonial Intrigue, I am a downright stinking Cuckold -- Here they are
-- Boo -- Putting his Hand to his Forehead. Methinks I could Butt with a Bull.

What the plague did I marry her for? I knew she did not like me; if she had,
she would have lain with me; for I would have done so, because I liked her: But
that is past, and I have her. And now, what shall I do with her -- If I put my
Horns in my Pocket, she will grow Insolent. -- If I don't; that Goat there, that
Stallion, is ready to whip me through the Guts. -- The Debate then is reduced
to this; Shall I die a Hero? or live a Rascal? -- Why, Wiser Men than I, have
long since concluded, that a living Dog is better than a dead Lion. --

[ To Constable. and Heart.] Gentlemen, now my Wine and my Passion are governable,
I must own, I have never observed any thing in my Wife's Course of Life, to
back me in my Jealousy of her: but Jealousie's a mark of Love; so she need not
trouble her head about it, as long as I ^ake no more words on it.


Lady Fancyf. enters Disguised, and Addresses to Bellinda apart. Constable. I am
glad to see your Reason rule at last. Give me your Hand: I hope you will look
upon me as you are wont.


Sir John. Your humble Servant. [Aside,] A wheedling Son of a Whore.


Heart. And that I may be sure you are Friends with me too, pray give me your
Consent to wed your Niece.


Sir John. Sir, you have it with all my Heart: Damn me if you have not. [Aside.]
It Is time to get rid of her; A young Pert Pimp; She Will make an incomparable
Bawd in a little time.


Enter a Servant, who gives Heartfree a Letter. Bell. Heartfree your Husband,
say you? it is impossible.


Lady Fancy. Would to kind Heaven it were: but it is too true; and in the World
there lives not such a Wretch. I Am young; and either I have been flattered by
my Friends, as well as Glass, or Nature has been kind and generous to me. I had
a Fortune too, was greater far than he could ever hope for. But with my Heart,
I am robbed of all the rest. I Am Slighted and I Am Beggared both at once. I have
scarce a bare Subsistence from the Villain, yet dare complain to none; for he
has sworn, if ever it is known I am his Wife, he will murder me. Weeping.


Bell. The Traitor.


Lady Fancy. I accidentally was told he Courted you; Charity soon prevailed
upon me to prevent your Misery: And as you see, I Am still so generous even to
him, as not to suffer he should do a thing, for which the Law might take away
his Life. Weeping.


Bell. Poor Creature; how I pity her! They continue talking aside.


Heart. [Aside,] Death and Damnation! -- Let me read it again. [Reads.] Though
I have a particular Reason, not to let you know who I am till I see you; yet
you will easily believe it is a faithful Friend that gives you this Advice. -- I
have lain with Bellinda. ( Good.) -- I have a Child by her, (Better and
Better.) which is now at Nurse; ( Heaven be praised.) and I think the
Foundation laid for another: (Ha! -- Old Trupenny!) -- No Rack could have
tortured this Story from me; but Friendship has done it. I heard of your design
to Marry her, and could not see you Abused. Make use of my Advice, but keep my
Secret till I ask you for it again. Adieu.





Exit Lady Fancyfull. Constable. to B. Come, Madam; Shall we send for the Parson? I
doubt here is no business for the Lawyer: Younger Brothers have nothing to
settle but their Hearts, and that I believe my Friend here has already done,
very faithfully.


Bell. [scornfully.] Are you sure, Sir, there are no old Mortgages upon it.


Heart. [coldly.] If you think there are, Madam, it may not be amiss to deferr
the Marriage till you are sure they are paid off.


Bell. [Aside.] How the Galled Horse Kicks!

[ To Heart.] We'll deferr it as long as you please, Sir.


Heart. The more Time we take to consider on it, Madam, the less apt we shall be
to commit Oversights; Therefore, if you please, we'll put it off, for just Nine
Months.


Bell. Guilty Consciences make Men Cowards: I don't wonder you want Time to
Resolve.


Heart. And they make Women Desperate: I don't wonder you were so quickly
Determined.


Bell. What does the Fellow mean?


Heart. What does the Lady mean?


Sir John. Zoons, what do you both mean?


Heart. and Bell. walk chasing about. Ras. [Aside.] Here is so much Sport going
to be spoiled, it makes me ready to weep again. A Pox of this Impertinent Lady
Fancyfull, and her Plots, and her French-woman too. She Is a Whimsical,
Ill-natured Bitch, and when I have got my Bones broke in her Service, it is Ten
to One but my Recompense is a Clap; I hear 'em tittering without still. I Cod
I Will even go lug 'em both in by the Ears, and Discover the Plot, to secure my
Pardon. Exit. Ras.


Constable. Prithee explain, Heartfree.


Heart. A fair Deliverance; thank my Stars and my Friend.


Bell. It Is well it went no farther. A Base Fellow.


Lady B. What can be the meaning of all this?


Bell. What Is his meaning, I don't know. But mine is; That if I had Married him
-- I had had no Husband.


Heart. And what is her meaning, I don't know. But mine is; That if I had
Married her -- I had had Wife enough.


Sir John. Your People of Wit, have got such Cramp ways of expressing
themselves, they seldom comprehend one another. Pox take you both, will you
speak that you may be Understood.


Enter Rasor in Sackcloth, pulling in Lady Fancyf. and Madamois. Ras. If they
will not, here comes an Interpreter.


Lady B. Heavens, what have we here?


Ras. A Villain, -- but a Repenting Villain. Stuff which Saints in all Ages
have been made of.


All. Rasor.


Lady B. What means this sudden Metamorphose?


Ras. Nothing: without my Pardon.


Lady B. What Pardon do you want?


Ras. Imprimis, Your Ladyships; For a Damnable Lie made upon your Spotless
Virtue, and set to the Tune of Spring-Garden.

[ To Sir Iohn] Next, At my Generous Master's Feet I bend, for Interrupting his
more Noble Thoughts with Phantomes of Disgraceful Cuckoldom.

[To Constable.] Thirdly, I to this Gentleman apply, for making him the Hero of my
Romance.

[ To Heartf.] Fourthly, Your Pardon, Noble Sir, I ask, for Clandestinely
Marrying you, without either bidding of Banns; Bishop's License, Friends
Consent -- or your own Knowledge.

[ To Bell.] And lastly, to my good young Ladies Clemency I come, for pretending
the Corn was sowed in the Ground, before ever the Plough had been in the Field.


Sir John. [aside.] So that after all, it is a Moot Point, whether I am a
Cuckold or not.


Bell. Well Sir, upon Condition you confess all, I Will Pardon you my self, and
try to obtain as much from the rest of the Company. But I must know then, who
it is has put you upon all this Mischief?


Ras. Satan, and his Equipage. Woman tempted me, Lust weakened me; -- And so
the Devil overcame me: As fell Adam, so fell I.


Bell. Then pray, Mr. Adam, will you make us acquainted with your Eve.


Ras. to Madam. Unmask, for the honor of France.


All. Mademoiselle?


Madamois. Me ask ten tousand Pardon of all de good Company.


Sir John. Why this Mystery thickens instead of clearing up.

[ To Ras.] You Son of a Whore you, put us out of our pain.


Ras. One moment brings Sunshine.

Showing Madamois. It Is true; This is the Woman, that tempted me. But this is
the Serpent, that tempted the Woman; And if my Prayers might be heard, her
Punishment for so doing, should be like the Serpent's of Old.

Pulls off Lady F's Mask. She should lie upon her Face, all the days of her
Life.


All. Lady Fancyfull.


Bell. Impertinent.


Lady B. Ridiculous.


All. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Bell. I hope your Ladyship will give me leave to wish you Joy, since you have
owned your Marriage your self.

Mr. Heartfree: I vow 'twas strangely wicked in you, to think of another Wife,
when you had one already so Charming as her Ladyship.


All. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Lady F. aside Confusion seize 'em as it seizes me.


Madamois. Que le Diable e toute ce Maraut de Rasor.


Bell. Your Ladyship seems disordered: A Breeding Qualm, perhaps. Mr. Heartfree:
Your Bottle of Hungry Water to your Lady. Why Madam, he stands as Unconcerned,
as if he were your Husband in earnest


Lady Fancy. Your Mirth's as nauseous as your self Bellinda.

You think you triumph over a Rival now.

Helas ma pauvre fill^. Where ever I Am Rival, there is no cause for Mirth. No,
my poor Wretch; it is from another Principle I have acted. I knew that thing
there would make so perverse a Husband, and you so impertinent a Wife; that
left your mutual Plagues should make you both run Mad, I charitably would have
broke the Match. He, he, he, he, he. Exit laughing affectedly. Mademoiselle
following her.


Madamois. He, he, he, he, he.


All. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir John. [aside.] Why now this Woman will be married to somebody too.


Bell. Poor Creature, what a Passion she is in: But I forgive her.


Heart. Since you have so much goodness for her, I hope you will Pardon my
Offense too, Madam.


Bell. There will be no great difficulty in that, since I am guilty of an equal
Fault.


Heart. Then Pardons being past on all Sides, Pray let us to Church to conclude
the Day's Work.


Constable. But before you go, let me treat you pray with a Song, a new married
Lady made within this Week; it may be of use to you both.


SONG.
1.
WHen yiedling first to Damon's flame
I sunk into his Arms,
He swore he would ever be the same,
Then rif^'d all my Charms.
But fond of what h'ad long desired,
Too greedy of his Prey,
My Shepherds flame, alas, expired
Before the Virge of Day.
2.
My Innocence in Lovers Wars,
Reproached his quick defeat.
Confused, Ashamed, and Bathed in Tears,
I mourned his Cold Retreat.
At length, Ah Shepherdess, cried he,
Would you my Fire renew,
Alas you must retreat like me,
I Am lost if you pursue.
Heart. So Madam; Now had the Parson but done his Business --


Bell. You Would be half weary of your Bargain.


Heart. No sure, I might dispense with one Night's Lodging.


Bell. I Am ready to try, Sir.


Heart. Then Let Us to Church:
And if it be our Chance, to disagree, --

Bell. Take heed: -- The surly Husband's Fate you see.


FINIS.
Books lately Printed for, and Sold by Richard Wellington, at the Lute in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
VAde Mecum, or a Necessary Companion; Containing, Sir Samuel Morland's
Perpetual Almanac. Readily showing, 1. The Day of the Month, Moveable Feasts,
and Terms, for any Years past, present, or to come. 2. A Table of the Years of
each King's Reign since the Conquest. 3. Directions for what should be done
Monthly, in Orchard, Kitchen, and Flower-Gardens. 4. The Reduction of Weights,
Measures and Coins, with a Table of the Assize of Bread. 5. A Table wherein any
Number of Farthings, Halfpence, Pence or Shillings, are ready Cast up, of
great Use to all Traders. 6. The Interest and Rebate of Money; the Forbearance,
Discompt, and Purchase of Annuities. 7. The Rate of Post-Letters, both Inland
and Out-land, 8. An Account of the Peny-Post. 9. The Principal Roads in
England; showing the Distance from one Town to another, in Measured and
Computed Miles, and the Distance of each from London; also the Market Towns on
each Road, with the Days of the Week the Markets are kept on, with the Hundred
and County each Town stands in. 10. The Names of the Counties, Cities, and
Borough-Towns in England and (...), with the Number of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses to Serve in Parliaments. The Usual and Authorized Rates of Coachmen,
Carmen, and Watermen. A Discourse of the Nature and Faculties of Man, in
several Essays, with Reflections on the Occurrences of Humane Life; By Tim.
Nourse, Gent. The true Preserver and Restorer of Health; being a Choice
Collection of Select and Experienced Remedies, for all Distempers incident to
Men, Women and Children; together with Excellent Directions for Cookery: Also,
for Preserving, and Conserving and Making all sorts of Cherry-Wine, Syder,
Metheglin, etc. The Works of that Excellent Practical Physician, Dr. Tho.
Sydcaham; Faithfully Englished by John Peachy, of the College of Physicians. A
General Treatise of the Diseases of Infants and Children, Collected from the
most Eminent Authors; By John Peachey, of the College of Physicians. Familiar
Letters, Written by John late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable Henry
Savile, and other Persons of Quality, with Love Letters, by Mr. O^way, and
several Letters Written by Mrs. Phillips and Mr. Thomas Brown. The Gauger's
Practice, or the Practical Way how to Gauge and Inch Brew^^s Tun^, with the
Gauging of Casks, according to the true Rule^ of Art, with a Table of Cylenders
in Ale Gallons, and Centesimal Parts, from 8 to 60 inches in Diameter, and 31
Inches in Depth. By George Ward, Philomath. Printed for Richard Wellington, at
the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Plays lately Printed and Sold by Richard Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
SPanish Wives. Younger Brother, or Amorous Jilt. Old Batchellor. Unnatural
Brother. Agnes de Castro. Rover. Relapse, or Virtue in Danger. Rule a Wife and
have a Wife. Country Wife. Rehearsal. Anatomist, or Sham Doctor. Cyrus the
Great, or the Tragedy of Love. Don Quixot, Three Parts complete. Roman
Bride's-Revenge. Marriage-Hater Matched. Country Wake. Neglected Virtue.
Pyrrhus King of Epirus. Very Good Wife. Woman's Wit. She Gallants. Sullen
Lovers. Humourist. Mackbeth. Timon of Athens. Oedipus. Ibrahim the 13 th.
Emperor of the Turks. Heir of Morocco. Canterbury Guests. Lost Lover, or
Jealous Bridegroom. Pausanias. Loves a Jest. Brutus of Alba. Plain-Dealer.
Othello. Sir Courtly Nice. Earl of Essex. All for Love. Squire of Alsatia.
Devil of a Wife. Lancashire Witches. Cleomenes. Don Sebastian. Abdelazor, or
the Moor's Revenge Pastor Fido. Country Wit. Love for Money. Conquest of
Granada. Cheats. Titus Andronicus. City Politics. Debauchee, or Credulous
Cuckold. Venice Preserved. Rival Queens. Villain. Theodosius. Sir Antony Love,
or the Rambling Lady. Princess of Cleves. Antony and Cleopatra. Disappointment.
Fond Husband. Mithridates. Caesar Borgia. Woman Captain. Rival Ladies. Wives
Excuse. Sir Solomon, or the Cautious Coxcomb.
Where you may be Furnished with all Sorts of PLAYS.


