THE VINDICATION OF JUDGE JENKINS Prisoner in the TOVVER, the 29. of April,
1647.
I Was convened upon Saturday the 10. of this month of April before a
Committee of the House of Commons, wherein Master Corbet had the Chair; and I
was there to be examined upon some Questions then to be propounded to me; to
which Questions I refused to give any other answer then that which was set
down in a paper I then delivered to the said M. Corbet, which follows in
these words:

Gentlemen,
I stand committed by the House of Commons for high Treason, for not
acknowledging, nor obeying the power of the two Houses, by adhering to the King
in this War. I deny this to be Treason for the supreme and only power, by the
Laws of this Land is in the King. If I should submit to any examination
derived from your Power, which by the Negative Oath stands in opposition to the
Kings Power, I should confess the Power to be in you, and so condemn my self
for a Traitor, which I neither ought nor will do.

I am sworn to obey the King, and the Laws of this Land: you have not power to
examine me by those Laws, by the Kings Writ, Pattent, or Commission; if you can
produce either thereof, I will answer the questions you shall propound;
otherwise I cannot answer thereto, without the breach of my Oath, and the
violation of the Laws, which I will not do to save my life.

You your selves, all of you this Parliament, have sworn that the King is our
only and supreme Governor: your Protestation, your Vow and Covenant, your
solemn League and Covenant, your Declarations, all of them publish to the
Kingdom, that your scope is the maintenance of the Laws; those Laws are and
must be derived to us, and enlivened by the only supreme Governor, the
Fountain of justice, and the life of the Law, the King. The Parliaments are
called by his writs; the Judges sit by his Pattents, so of all other Officers;
the Cities and Towns corporate, govern by the Kings Charters; and therefore
since by the Law I cannot be examined by you, without a power derived by His
Majesty, I neither can, nor will, nor ought you to examine me upon any
questions. But if as private Gentlemen, you shall be pleased to ask me any
questions, I shall really and truly answer every such question, as you shall
demand.

April 10. 1647. David Ienkins.

This paper has been misrepresented to the good people of this City by a
Printed one, styling it my Recantation, which I own not; and besides is in it
self repugnant (just like these times) the Body falls out with the Head. To
vindicate my self from that Recantation, and to publish to the world the
realitie of the Paper then delivered to Mr. Corbet, and the matter therein
contained, I have published this ensuing discourse.

No person who has committed Treason, Murder, or Felony, has any assurance at
all for so much as one hour of life, Lands or Goods, without the Kings
gracious pardon, 27 Hen. 8. Cap, 24.

The King is not vertually in the two Houses at Westminster, whereby they may
give any assurance at all to any person, in any thing, for any such offense.

1. The House of Commons has declared to the Kingdom in their Declaration of
the 28 of November last to the Scots Papers, page 8. That the King at this time
is not in a condition to govern. No person or thing can derive a virtue to
other men, or things, which it self has not: and therefore it is impossible
that they should have a virtue from the King to govern, which they declare he
has not himself to give.

2. The Law of the Land is, 5. Elizab. Cap. 1.
That no person in any Parliament has a voice in the House of Commons, but
that he stands a person to all intents and purposes as if he had never been
elected or returned, if before he sit in the House, he take not his Oath upon
the holy Evangelists, that the Kings Majesty is the only and supreme
Governor over all persons in all Causes. All the Members of the said House
have taken it, and at all times as they are returned do take it; otherwise
they have no color to intermeddle with the public Affairs. How does this
Solemn and Legal Oath agree with their said Declaration, That the King is in
no condition to govern? By the one it is sworn, He is the only supreme
Governor; by the other, that he is not in a condition to govern.

3. The Oath is not, that the King was, or ought to be, or had been, before he
was seduced by ill Council, our only and supreme Governor in all Causes,
over all persons; but in the present tense, that he is our only and supreme
Governor, at this present, in all Causes and over all persons. So they the
same persons swear one thing, and declare to the Kingdom the contrary of the
same thing, at the same time, in that which concerns the weal of all this
Nation.

4. The Ministers in the Pulpits do not say, what they swear in the House of
Commons. Who ever heard sithence this unnatural War, any of their Presbyters
attribute that to his Majesty which they swear? The reason is, their Oath is
taken at Westminster amongst themselves: that which their Ministers pray and
preach, goes amongst the people. To tell the people that the King is now their
only and supreme Governor in all Causes, is contrary to that the Houses do
now practice, and to all they act and maintain. They, the two Houses forsooth,
are the only and supreme Governors in default of the King, for that he has
left his great Council, and will not come to them, and yet the King desires to
come, but they will not suffer him, but keep him prisoner at Holmby: so well
do their Actions and Oaths agree.

5. They swear now King Charles is their only and supreme Governor; but with
a resolution at the time of the Oath taking, and before and after, that he
shall not be only or supreme Governor, or only and supreme, but not any
Governor at all: For there is no point of Government, but for some years past
they have taken to themselves, and used his name only, to abuse and deceive
the people.

6. That this vertuall power is a mere fiction, their Propositions sent to
Oxford, to Newcastle, to be signed by the King, do prove it so. What needs
this ado, if they have the vertuall Power with them at Westminster.

7. To affirm that the Kings power (which is the virtue they talk of) is
separable from his person, is high Treason by the Law of the Land; which is so
declared by that learned man of the Law, Sir Edward Cook; so much magnified by
this present Parliament, who in the 7 part of his Reports in Calvin's case, fol.
11. says thus. In the reign of Edward the second, the Spencers, the Father
and Son, to cover the Treason hatched in their hearts, invented this damnable
and damned opinion, that homage and Oath of Ligeance was more by reason of the
Kings Crown, (that is, of his politic capacity) then by reason of the person
of the King upon which opinion they inferred 3. execrable and detestable
consequences. 1. If the King do not demean himself by reason in the right of
his Crown, his lieges are bound by Oath to remove the King. 2. seeing that the
King could not be reformed by suit of Law, that ought to be done per aspertee
that is by force. 3. That his lieges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in
default of him: All which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the reign
of Edw. 2. called exilium Hugonis le Spencer; and the other in Anno 1. Edw. 3.
cap. 2.

And that the natural body and politic makes one indivisible body, and that
these two bodies incorporate in one person make one body, and nor diverse, is
resolved as the Law of England. 4. Eliz. Ploydon Com. fol. 213. by Sir Cobert
Catlin, Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir James Dier, Lord chief Justice of
the Common Please, the Lord Sanders, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and by
the rest of the Judges, viz. Justice Rastall, Justice Brown, Justice Corbet,
Justice Weston, Baron Frevyll, Conne and Pewdrell, Sergeant Gerrard Atturny
General; Carell Atturry of the Dutch: Plowdon the learnedest man of that age,
in the knowledge of the Law, and Customs of the Realm.

8. The Law in all ages without any controversy is and has been: That no Act
of Parliament binds the Subjects of this Land without the assent of the King,
either for Person, 9. Hen. 3. Magna Charta. So in every age till this day, and
in every Kings time, as appears by the Acts in Print 1 part of the Instit
Sect. 234. in fine where many of the Law-Bookes are cited. 7 Hen. 7. 14. 12. of
Hen. 7. 20.
Lands, Goods, or Fame. No man can show any syllable, letter, or line to the
contrary in the books of the Law, or printed Acts of Parliament, in any age in
this Land. If the vertuall Power be in the Houses, there needs no assent of
the Kings. The styles of the Acts printed from 9. Hen. 3. to 1. Hen. 7. were
either, The King ordaines at his Parliament, etc. or the King ordains by the
advice of his Prelates and Barons, and at the humble Petition of the Commons,
etc. In Hen. 7. his time the Style altered, and has sithence continued thus,
It is ordained by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled. So that always the Assent of
the King gives the life to all, as the soul to the body; and therefore our
Law-Bookes call the King, the Fountain of Justice, and the life of the Law.

9. Mercy as well as Justice belongs by the law of the Land only to the King. 2
Hen. 4. Cap. 22. 4 pars instit. 42. Mr. Prin in his Treatise of the great Seal
Fol. 17. 27. Hen. 8. ^ Chap. 24.
This is confessed by Mr. Prynn, and it is so without any question: The King
can only pardon, and never more cause to have sufficient pardons then in such
troublesome times as these, and God send us pardons and peace. None can give
any pardon, but the King by the Law of the Land: the whole and sole power of
pardoning Treasons and Felonies belongs to the King, are the words of the Law,
and it is a delusion to take it from any other and utterly invalid. 27. H. 8.
Cap. 24.

10. Queen Elizabeth summoned her first Parliament, to be held the 23 of Jan.
in the first year of her Majesty's Reign. The Lords and Commons assembled by
force of the same writ, the 23 day the Queen fell sick and could not appear
in her person in Parliament that day, and therefore prorogued it until the 25.
of the same Month of January. Resolved by all the Judges of England, 3 of Eliz.
Dier. 203.
that the Parliament began not the day of the return of the writ, viz. the 23
of January, when the Lords and Commons appeared, but the 25 of the said month
when the King came in person: which shows evidently that this virtuall
presence is a mere deluding fiction that has no ground in Law, reason, or
sense. They have the King now a prisoner at Holmby, with guards upon him, and
yet they govern by the vertuall Power of their Prisoner. These are some few of
the causes and reasons which moved me to deliver that paper to M. Corbet, which
I am ready to justify with my life, and should hold it a great honor to die
for the honorable and holy Laws of the Land: That which will save this Land
from destruction, is an Act of Oblivion, and His Majesty's gracious general
pardon, the Soldiers their Arriers, and every man his own, and Truth and
Peace established in the Land, and a favorable regard had to the satisfaction
of tender Consciences.

April 29. 1647. David Ienkins.


