PROPOSALS HUMBLY PRESENTED To his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of England,
etc. and to the High Court of Parliament, now assembled;

For the calling to a true and just Account all Committee Men, Sequestrators,
Treasurers, Excize and Custom-Commissioners, Collectors of Monthly
Assessments, and all other Persons that have been entrusted with the Public
Revenue; or have in their Custody any thing of value appertaining to the
Commonwealth.

WITH Several Reasons for the Doing thereof, and the Ways how it may be
exactly done, and several Presidents by Acts of Parlalament for the due and
strict execution of the same; for the Honor of God, and Ease of the good People
of this Nation in general in their Taxes.

ALSO, For the Regulating of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Thread and
Wire; and for the passing an Act against Transporting Gold and Silver, and
against Melting down the Current Silver Moneys of the Nation.

LIKEWISE, A Narrative of the Proceedings in the Court of Admiraltie against
the Silver-Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George.

By THO. VIOLET of London Goldsmith.

Prove. 11. 10. When it goes well with the Righteous, the City rejoiceth; And
when the Wicked perish, there is shouting.

Josh. 7. 19, 20, 21. Luke 16. 1, 2. LONDON, Printed Anno Domini M. DC. LVI.



To His Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF England, Scotland and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it pleas Your Highness!
AMongst the Roman Emperors, the name Pater Patriae was held their highest
title of Honor; and the surest support of all good Princes, has been the
Peoples hearts: For where the Tongue-string, and not the Heart-string make's
the music, the harmony may, and does many times, end in discord.

Queen ELIZABETH (that glorious Queen, and England's Deborah) used to say, Give
me my People's hearts, and we shall not need to ask their purses: and this
Maxim never deceived her. With what easshee got aids from the Nation in
Parliament, the Records of her Reign show: The chief point that made the People
so free to grant in those days, was, they knew by forty four years.
experience, she was sparing and frugal her self, and God blessed her with a
wise and prudent Counsel: And in point of managing her Revenue, That she never
forgave her Accomptants or Receivers of her public Revenues, where it was
possible to be levied. The State had had millions of money now in bank, had
they followed her Rules to take a strickt account of all their Receivers. The
moneys belonging to her Crown. (as I humbly said) was never forgiven: Insomuch
as some of her greatest Servants and Favorites dying in her debt, she would not
discharge their Heirs or Executors, but held their Lands under extent, till
she was paid the uttermost farthing; saying, She would not forgive any
Officer that was an accomptant; for the public moneys was not hers to give.
And the Earl of Leicester, Secretary Walsingham, and Lord Chancellor Hatton
(for all their being great Pillars in the Commonwealth, and greatly in her
favor) having gotten to be in her debt, their several Lands were held under
extent, after their deaths, till every penny was paid her: Though some of their
Heirs petitioned, yet they were forced to pay the uttermost farthing, receiving
this answer from the Queen, That if the People should know that she prodigally
gave away the public Treasure, they might justly deny her when she had
occasion in Parliament, or otherways. An excellent Rule, at this time, and at
all times, for all sovereign Princes to follow*

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; About the Spanish Invasion in 88, Queen Elizabeth
borrowed of the Merchant Adventurers about One hundred thousand pound, and kept
that money by her for above one year, and paid it exactly at the day, with
interest, after 10 per cent. though she made not any use of one penny of it,
but put it in bank with the rest of her Treasure. This she did out of her
forecast and providence, that so if the Spaniards had landed, she would not
then be to seek for Treasure, for to pay her Soldiers and supply her
occasions. Her wise, rich and provident Grandfather Henry the 7th, she reading
his Life and Reign, could teach her that Rule, never to let her Exchequer be
empty; he leaving (as is recorded) in Richmond House, Seventeen hundred
thousand pound in gold; which is now by computation, according to the present
value, near five millions. By these courses that glorious Queen got such
reputation, for good husbanding and prudent managing her Revenues; and
principally, by her just repayment, and by her sparing the public Treasure,
that in many of her Parlaments, the subsidies and fifteons granted, ^^re
entreated and pressed on her, as a be^evolence and free will offering of the
People to her; with many expressions of thanks from the Parliament for her good
and gracious Government: And sometimes their voluntary bounty has been such,
that the Parliament has granted more than she would accept; and the Queen
has, with thanks, her self in Parliament, returned Subsidies again. Her Fame
extending beyond Solomon's, even to the farthest and greatest Monarchs in the
world. The Grand Seigniour sending his Imperial salutes, and desiring her Peace
and Amity with Commerce and Trade. And the Emperor of Russia, admiring her
great Valor, in offering to affront and assault and begin a War with the King
of Spain, at her desire, did grant to the English Merchants, for the respects
he bore to their glorious Queen Elizabeth, many great Privileges and
Immunities in his Empire for Him and his Successors for ever; which were
inviolably observed by his Successors, till about the year 1650. She usually
said, She desired that her Subject's Purses should be her Exchequer. For, as
long as they were rich, she could not be poor: These Princely and Popular
Expressions took so with all her Subjects, (rich and poor) that she never
stirred out of the Court, but she had the Acclamations, Prayers and Praises of
Thousands of her People, both in City and Country: And she would show the like
tenderness and affection to her People. And this Blessing God bestowed then on
this Nation, that Prince and People were of one Mind, one Heart, and one
Faith, (except some few Catholics). Her watchful eye was ever over them; and
that strengthened, by God's blessing, her hands, that in her time she did such
great things: in her greatest Difficulties, her Affairs were carried smoothly
on by the prudence of her Counsel. If Grievances were by the Commons in
Parliament presented unto her, it was in such a decent form, (she always
keeping the dignity of her State Imperial) that the People's Grievances
appeared unto her like the tears of the Turtle and the mourning of Doves. Some
of the Representations of their Grievances in Parliament, I have seen and read
to this effect, That if there was any thing expressed otherwise then they
should have represented, That her Majesty would cast the vail of her Grace
upon it, and give a favorable and benign Answer and Interpretation of their
humble Petition. And surely, (next to God's gracious protection) her Safety
was built, as Solomon's Throne was, she was supported by XII. Lions, a grave
and prudent Counsel; the number of her inward Privy Counselors not much
exceeding that number: By her prosperous Conduct and Management of her Affairs,
all Christendom esteemed England to have a glorious Prince, a wise Counsel of
State, and the People happy in general.

I have read, that my Lord Chancellor Bacon, in a Speech of his in Parliament,
had this saying, Sure I am (says that golden mouthed Orator) that the Treasure
that comes from the Commons to her Majesty, is but as a vapor which arises
from the Earth, and gathers into a Cloud, and stays not there long, but
upon the same Earth falls down again; And if some few drops fall upon France
and the United Provinces, it is as a sweet odor of Honor and Reputation to the
English Nation throughout the World. Elegantly expressing the relief that the
English afforded both to France and the Low Countries against their then common
Enemy the Spaniard.

In her glorious Reign, the Counsels that were then in Parliament, tended ever
to the individual prosperity, and the safety and preservation both of the
Queen and People: And like Christ's coat, without seam, all their Counsels were
of one piece, the equal prosperity of both. And after 44 years reign, this
glorious Queen dyed, rich in Jewels, rich in Money and Plate, the Lands of the
Crown; and, above all, rich in the Love and Estimation of her Loyal People,
after she had contended with the King of Spain, by invading him in Spain, in
Portugal, in the Indies, firing and burning his Ships and Carrakes in our
narrow Seas; and made her Commanders so terrible on the Spanish coasts, that
the children when they cried, their parents would fright them with garda el
Draco; which is, Be quiet, have a care, here is Drake. I pray God, and hope to
see the same fear fall on them by the Virtue and Valor of Your HIGHNESS's
Admiral Blake, not only to fright their Children, but their Natives, when they
are men, making them to cry garda el Blaco, as well as their Fathers said garda
el Draco. This great Quarrel at the first was undertaken by the Queen, for the
relief of the miserable poor distressed Dutch Protestants, the States of the
United Provinces in the Low Countries, (they had no other title in her Reign).
I hope they will for ever acknowledge the Courtesies of English men's blood and
money, that has made them now the High and Mighty Lords the States, and a free
State; I wish it be not now in their Greatness blotted out of their
remembrance.

Queen Elizabeth's Wars in Ireland were very expensive; and also her
Relieving of France both with Men and Money. And at the foot of the account,
for all these great undertakings, to leav her Successor her Kingdoms in great
wealth, peace, honor, and safety, and her People happy, make's up the m^^acle.

Toward the setting of this glorious STAR, some sons of Belial laid the
foundation of the Hellish Powder Plot; and at latter end of her glorious Reign,
the Anabaptists and Sectaries begin (like Snakes) to engender; but her
Successor King James, by his prudence, shook them off, as St Paul did the
Viper, by several ways and means: First, as the Physician, let us some blood out
of the body to preserv the whole: Secondly, as Seafaring men in a storm,
cast's some goods over board to save the Cargasaon: Thirdly, as a good
Husbandman, that will afford some feet of ground for hedging and and ditching to
fortify and secure the rest: Fourthly, as a good Gardener, that would have his
garden plants grow, pluck's up the weeds by the roots: So King James used all
these Remedies to the Sectaries, some of their mouths he stopped with
preferment; some he committed to the rigor of the Law, which cost them their
lives; others to Prison. And after the Dispute at Hampton Court, he put down
his peremptory resolution by Proclamation, (which I humbly call his hedge, to
keep out the little Foxes that spoil the Vineyard of the Church) Requiring a
conformity to the same by all Persons upon strickt penalties; which proved a
good temporary Remedy.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS to read but one touch more of the splendour and
glory of this great Queen Elizabeth; she was not without her Eclipses with
troubles and fears many ways (to show the uncertainty of worldly glory) even
from her nearest Kinswoman Mary Queen of Scots; who, while she was Queen of
France, by her Husband's persuasion, took upon her the style and title of Queen
of England; from which sprung all her troubles in Scotland, when she returned
a widow out of France (and this was done by Queen Elizabeth and her Counsel's
instigation): These troubles, by her Scotch Rebels, drove the Scotch Queen into
England, whither she fled for refuge; but it proved otherwise: for, upon that
score, she was caught in the net of death; and so much the sooner, by reason
of her impatience not brooking the delays of her Deliverance; which thrust her
headlong into so many Treasons, that Queen Elizabeth could not let her live,
and be in safety her self; for Queen Elizabeth was often times heard to say,
Either strike, or be stricken: and so she struck first, and cut off her head;
and by that means removed her Capital Enemy, (It is a certain truth, It is a
dangerous thing for a supreme Magistrate to have the patience to stay to be
first stricken) but to put an end to those plots which were daily plotting and
hatching against her Crown and Dignity; for the Queen of Scots had real plots
for both, having found in her Study the Keys of above fifty several Characters
for several people she held Intelligence with, both Forain and English
Traitors. Queen Elizabeth's grave and wise Counsel would not let her play an
after game. They had the Queen of Scots tried by a Jury of English Noblemen,
many of them being Catholics, and her own friends and nearest relations; and
had they not found her guilty, many of their heads had gone off: for which very
reason, many that the Scotch Queen took to be her friends, were her greatest
enemies. But doing that business so effectually, the Queen wincked at many
Noblemen; for many of her Jury that had been hatching and acting with her,
Queen Elizabeth buried their faults in oblivion. But Abington and Babington
escaped not so well, being both hanged, drawn and quartered, and their Estates
annexed to the Crown. There were others (as Somervill, Parry, Savage, and many
more) that sought this glorious Queen's death, but she was still protected by
the Watchman which slumbereth not; and dyed gloriously, and in peace.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; when King James came to the Crown, a Powder Plot
was laid for him, his Vine and Olive-branches being to be about him, attended
by his Nobles and third Estate in Parliament, who were all designed in the
twinkling of an eye to have been brought to ashes, and dispersed by the four
Winds: the hellishness of that Treason is beyond the expression of words.

That many Treasons have been plotted in other Countries, and on other Princes
as well as ours; to Catholics as well as to Protestants, and have taken
effect: They were but plotted with us, but by God's providence prevented;
beyond Sea really acted, witness the two great Kings of France, (Henry the
Third and Henry the Fourth) one stabbed before Paris, in the face of his Army;
and the other King, by a rascally Votary, a fellow conjured into the spirit of
a Quaker (by such a base hand died Henry the great King of France in the
streets of Paris) and the Prince of Orange murdered in Holland, being a
Protestant Prince, by the same kind of villainous hands. These perils are
common in all ages, to good Princes and bad Princes, Protestants and
Catholics. And seeing these daily practices are and have been by God's
permission suffered to be done, what manner of men ought all Princes and
supreme Magistrates to be, considering (more than other men) they may have
their glory extinguished in a moment, and that by base and unworthy hands.

Some men (in all ages) being possessed and instigated by the power of the
Devil, who possesses them, and put's into their minds, that a private man may
by a dagger or pistol judge and execute a Prince, if they conceiv him a Tyrant:
And these delusions many times prevail with these incarnate Devils, whereby
they act Tragedies, and shake whole Nations; and thus do supreme Magistrates
too frequently become (by these ill-principl'd Miscreants) upon the matter, but
mere Tennants at will of their Lives and Dignities.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; there is a Pestilent Plague that reigns amongst
us, which (I humbly say) ought by the pruning-knife of the Law to be lopped
off from the vvholsom Tree of this flourishing Commonwealth; and that is the
Treasonable Libeller, which of late has increased openly every week,
producing daily monstrous births of Villainy against the State. Great SIR! I
humbly say, That these things ought not to be despised, but rather looked into;
for every Libel is a knock at a careful Magistrate's door; to awaken and cause
him to stand upon his Guard; especially in such Times as these, when many men's
brains are apt (being like Touchvvood) to take fire with the least spark of
Sedition. And therefore, even as the Plague and sundry other filthy diseases
are obnoxious and troublesome to both the mind and body; so are all scurrilous
Verses and libellous Pamphlets, with their divellish Authors, in a higher
degree more infectious and hurtful to both Church and Commonwealth. (Now all
diligence should be used to bring the Offenders to Justice, and by that means
to terrify others.) I have seen some questioned, but I did never see exemplary
Justice done upon the Offenders, for these many years bypast: Some Juries in
this Nation will not believ the ill Consequence of this fire, till (without
God's great mercy) all will be in a flame; for one Villain may bring a Plague
into a City, as well as an Army; and one Conspirator, or one Libeller, one
Naples Massanello, against a Prince or State, may be like a Thunderbolt that
strike's upon the sudden, and can hardly be discerned, there is no defense nor
preparation against them; one Felton in a moment extinguished the Greatness of
a Duke of Buckingham.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; amongst just Princes (in the deadliest war)
assassinators and poisoners of Princes have ever been accounted execrable; and
the Actors and Plotters to be taken off from the face of the earth. And for
all these new Doctrines abroad within this Nation, all true Subjects, without
distinction or degree, (I most humbly conceiv) owe faith and service to the
supreme Magistrate, which give's them protection: And it is Treason for any
Subject in this Nation, of what degree soever (I humbly conceiv) to be privy
to any forain Invasion, Rebellion, or Sedition, or any private Practices, to
alienate and estrange men's hearts against the State, and so prepare them to
burst out into Tumults and Commotions in these dangerous Times.

Most humbly I shall conclude, That as Your HIGHNESS (by Divine Providence)
has gotten the Supremacy of Power, and to be Protector of these Nations (so
it is balanced with the supremacy of Cares); You must watch, when others
sleep; for Your ascent to Greatness has brought on You a great proportion of
cares and troubles. And those men, whomsoever they be; that look to gather
their fruits, and live under the shadow of Your Protection, and would be
partakers of the beneficial Advantages, which daily must descend from Your
HIGHNESS, being the Supreme Magistrate; if they will not, in requital of Your
Protection, be true and faithful to Your HIGHNESS and the Commonwealth, Such
men (I humbly say) let them pretend what Religion they pleas, (without God's
infinite mercy) may bring, both upon themselves and the Nation in general, great
mischiefs, to the destruction both of themselves and many other particular
persons.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; Queen Elizabeth and her prudent Counsel would
never stay to be first stricken, either by a Forain Prince, or home Rebel;
when she saw there was just occasion, she would always be beforehand with
them: by which her Vigilance, she kept her Self and People in safety, being
much feared by her Enemies, and honored and admired both at home and abroad by
all her Friends.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I most humbly desire Your gracious perusal of
these my humble following Proposals, for calling the Accomptants of this Nation
in general to account; and of Your Princely Benignity, to vouchsafe to pardon
what You in Your great Wisdom shall see in this Book amiss; if it be my
error, it is an error of the right hand, and flow's from a Loial heart, out of
my humble zeal and affection of your Highness Safety, Honor, Peace and Wealth,
and for the good and ease of the Nation in general of some of their Taxes, by
calling some unjust Stewards, Committee Men, and Treasurers to account,
according to the Laws of the Nation;) and that your Highness and the Parliament
would be pleased to make such Orders, Ordinances and Rules for the due and just
making of Gold and Silver Thread, VVyer, Purle, Spangles, etc. that the former
Deceipts and Frauds, (daily practiced and put upon the Nation) may be
prevented; And that an Act may be made against all persons that have or shall
hereafter cull and melt down the current Coins of the Nation, for the making
of any of the aforesaid Manufactures, or for any use whatsoever: And that an
Act against Transporters of Gold and Silver out of this Nation may be
forthwith passed, to prevent these great mischiefs to the Commonwealth, which
daily arise through the Covetousness of particular persons, to the great
damage, weakening and impoverishing of the Nation in general. The long
Parliament has particularly excepted all these offenses concerning the Coin and
Bullion out of the general Pardon, in Anno 1651. and all the Offenders are at
this day liable to be severely punished. There is the draught of an Act of
Parliament against all these Offenses and Offenders, twice read in the House and
amended, and appointed by the House to be reported by Mr Augustine Garland in
the month of April 1^53. Which Act, if once finished (as it is now drawn) does
appoint Commissioners to examine and find out both the Offenses and Offenders,
according to former Presidents in Parliament.

And upon the effectual prosecution (I humbly say) the Offenders may find the
old Proverb true, that Sweet meat must have sour sauce: Their exemplary
punishment will terrify others for the future from practicing such mischiefs
against the Commonwealth.

I have humbly presented to your Highness a further Narrative of my prosecution
against the Silver ships Sampson, Salvador and George in the Court of
Admiraltie. The several witnesses (being many of them Passengers in these
ships) confess the Silver and Lading was consigned for Amsterdam; And many
other remarkable Proceedings, for to vindicate the Honor and just Proceedings
of the then Counsel of State and Parliament, who stayed those Ships and Silver,
as Hollanders Silver and merchandise, ships and goods, only upon your
Supplicants information and prosecution against them. The Hamburgers, Spaniards
and Lubeckers had their ships and goods restored by the Judges of the Court of
Admiraltie.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I had more trouble to entitle the State to this
Silver in these ships, and to disprove the Spanish Ambassadors Claim to this
Silver, then I shall have to find out the frauds of the Accomptants of this
Nation: And if I be empowered to be your Highness's Remembrancer, and to have
an inspection into the Accounts of this Nation, (by the assistance of God, if
your Highness and the Parliament will strictly and effectually proceed in this
Business) it will bring your Highness in millions of money, for the ease of the
good People of the Nation in general.

God defend, the Commons of this Nation should pay their Taxes and Assessments
to particular persons, who shall not give a just account to the Commonwealth,
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Nation. All good people (I most
humbly say) ought to part with some part of their Fleece for the Safety of the
Nation, when it is legally assessed, and justly and truly accounted for; but
not to pay their moneys to private Treasurers and Committee Men: that by these
Imploiments, many of them have gotten vast possessions from the bottom of
beggerie and baseness, by fraud, dissimulation and Cozenage.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; These men have not moderately shorn the Sheep of
these Nations, but they have rent and torn their pelts and skins from them, and
they ought (I most humbly say) to pay for the mending of them; and to serve
some of these men as Dudley and Emson were served in King Henry the Eighth's
time, would be a pleasing sight, and acceptable to the good People of the
Nation.

My most humble Suit to your Highness is, That none of the Accomptants of the
Nation may escape in the crowd, from giving up a just, true and perfect
account; and that Commissioners and Auditors, of approved integrity and trust
to your Highness, may be empowered to view and inspect into all Orders and
Warrants that have or shall be produced by any Treasurer or Accomptant, for
all sums of money they pretend for their discharge; and where any VVarrant
has been pretendedly or really paid, and not legally empowered for the payment
of any sum of money; all such Warrants may be suspended, for the view and
inspection of your Highness's Commissioners of the Revenue, or such other
honorable persons your Highness shall appoint for that service: And every
Treasurer and Accomptant of this Nation, his Body, Goods and Lands, his Heirs
and Executors, to be liable till they have duly accounted, according to the
Laws of the Nation, or obtained your Highness gracious Pardon and Discharge.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; Thus far I proceeded in this my most humble
Epistle, at the first day this Parliament fate, being Sept. 17. and your
Supplicant being resolved to wait some time, to see how God would dispose of
the Counsels of your Highness Supreme Court, I did for some days acquiess in
this Business.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; It is a reverent Tradition and Privilege granted
to the Members of the high Court of Parliament, that many things may be spoken
by the Members of the high Court of Parliament within the House, which are not
communicable abroad, and punishable for themselves to speak out of that Place.
There are some things which God does many times put into a man's heart, (which
is no Member of Parliament, but an humble loial Subject) which are for the good
and benefit of the Nation, which one man knows; and peradventure another man
that is far wiser and more learned than he, does not know.

May it pleas Your Highness; In a ship, an ordinary Boy thereof is as much bound
to discover a Leak or a Conspiracy in the said ship, as the Boson or Pilat,
and has as good interest to do it, because his life is endangered in the
concealing of it; and a poor man's life may be as precious to himself as a rich
man's: the same thing ought every man to do, that is a faithful Subject on
Land, in any Nation where he has protection, and much more his Country, for
preventing all Conspiracies to his power; and if he make a Discovery of what
the Supreme Magistrate knows before, he may therein show want of Judgment, but
not want of duty or affection to the Supreme Magistrate or Government where
he lives.

I humbly say, That man sins against God and his Conscience, if it be for
the honor of God, the good of the Nation, and the safety of the Supreme
Magistrate, if he do not discover it: (and all men formerly were bound by
their Oaths of Aliegiance and Supremacy to be true to the King.)

For he that hides and conceals that which God would have revealed, puts Gods
light under a Bushel; most especially, if it be incumbent upon a man's spirits,
and such notions dictated unto him by the spirit of God, which he never had
before for the doing it; and upon resisting that spirit, may never have
hereafter.

This being my present condition, upon my knees I beseech your Highness to be
graciously pleased to grant your favorable perusal of this Epistle and Book,
being far larger then at first I intended, proceeding from a most humble,
dutiful and loial heart, for your Highness Security, Peace, Honor and Safety.

Had Caesar perused what was writ to him before he went into the Capitol, he
had not died as he did. The Duke of Guyse in France, and many others (in all
ages) that have slighted information and intelligence, have had the same sad
fate.

Great SIR, I most humbly say, your Highness having (by Gods gracious and
favorable assistance) taken on You the Government of being PROTECTOR of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, You ought
and are bound (both before God and to these Nations) to the uttermost of your
power to give Protection and equal Justice to all the good people of these
Nations, that are willing to live under your Protection, and to defend them
with all your might and strength, and to use the power God has put into your
hands for those ends, to keep your People in peace and safety against all
factious spirits.

In pursuance thereof, You are (as much as in you lies) to keep from power or
public Imploiment all such as You and your Counsel shall know to be public
or secret undermining Enemies of the peace and welfare of this Commonwealth,
by what pretenses, titles or callings soever, whether Civil, Military or
Ecclesiastical. You and your great Counsel (upon my bended knees I say) are to
have a special care of some men, who, under the pretense of the Privileges and
Rights of the people in Parliament, would (upon that popular score) vent their
own discontents, and put all again into a confusion: with what spirits some old
Members came to serve the Nation in this Parliament, was visibly seen to all men
that wished the peace of this Nation, in some Counties upon their election, and
in their ordinary conversation and deportment: The scope and drift of some men's
designs was to make division and faction between the Parliament and your
Highness, between the City and your Highness, and put all things into a
confusion this present day, to make way for the public Enemies of your
Highness and this Nation. This was by some particular persons (no doubt)
intended (and all men that study and love the peace of their Country might
see it) under such cunning undermining questions, as was by some discontented
spirits set on foot the last Parliament, craftily to undermine the very Body and
Being of the Government, and sliely to strike at both your Highness and your
Posterities Life, Fame and Fortunes, and to pluck up by the roots your Highness
Counsel and the established Government, which your Highness (by the Advice of
your Counsel had settled); witness, the many Libells of all sorts and tempers,
to stir up commotions in several Parts and Parties, the Ingredients being
prepared for all Interests to incense and infuse a hatred and detestation of
the present Government; and (without Gods mercy) the intentions of some would
have before this time burst out into tumults and insurrections: my hopes and
prayers are, that God, by your Highness prosperous government, has prepared
better things for this Nation.

That some factious Cocks, which crew so loud in the Country, now they are
kept out of the Pit, may return home to their Houses, Country Capons, and
sleep quietly in their roosts; it will be a happiness both to themselves, their
Country, their Wives and Children, their Friends, Tennants, Servants and
Neighbors (if they do so); and their not doing of it, may bring disturbance on
the Nation, and a certain ruin upon themselves, their Wives and Children. It is
an old trick, Divide and Rule: and many that have had the power, will leave no
stone unturned to get again into play; so they laugh, they care not if the
whole Nation cries.

There are many good People who have been misled, upon the notion of Liberty
and Freedom; And if your HIGHNESS and your Supreme Counsel (the Parliament) do
not give a stop by your power and vigilancie, even at this juncture of time
(without Gods mercy) things may run into great Disorders.

Therefore your HIGHNESS and the Parliament (I most humbly upon my knees say)
must build the walls of our Jerusalem (England, Scotland and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging) as Nehemiah did that of the Jews. Your Highness
and the Parliament have many Samballats that envies your Building and scorns
your Reformation; there are many of the Children of Separation and Division in
these Lands.

When a wise man would keep his House from falling, (that is rent and shaken
with great tempests,) he props it up with timber, cramps it with Iron bolts and
bars; and, it may be, upon the propping of it to set it upright, cracks the
seiling and fret-work of the best and stateliest room in his House; surely if
either the Wife or the Children or the Servants should come and complain to the
Owner what damage this beautiful room has received, the Master of the House
and his Workmen have at hand a ready Answer, which is, Should he not have
propped and crampt the House with Iron bolts and bars, the whole fabric would
have fallen, and the House have been made a heap of rubbish, both he and they
would have had no place to keep them from the weather.

By this my propping and cramping up my House (says the wise Master and his
Workmen) I have secured and got my Esse, I have kept my being; when my House
is new tiled and tyte, to keep out the weather, you shall have your desire, I
will give you all content, I will cause Plaisterers to repair and garnish that
seiling which you are so much offended with the cracking of; I will new gild
it, and make it more beautiful then ever it was, provided you will put to your
hands to sweep down the Cob-webbs, and carry away the rubbish, and so cleanse
and clear my House; do this, I promise you I will do the other.

No doubt, but a wise and dutiful family will do it cheerfully with thanks,
for their Esse and being has been preserved through the Master of the
families Providence.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I humbly say, The good people of these Nations
under your protection, ought (at this juncture of time) earnestly to pray to
God, that the foundations of their Happiness may be so laid, this Parliament
(as to secure firmly their being) that they may have an Esse, and then comes
the Been, that it may be as firmly settled upon as sure a foundation as a Rock,
against whom no divisions or force can or shall prevail.

For the effectual Security of these Nations, that this Parliament would be
pleased to erect a high Court of Justice, to sweep down the cob-webbs, remove
the rubbish, clear the house, and by Justice restrain and (if incorrigible) cut
off unruly and violent spirits. Wise men cut their coats according to their
cloth, and will be sure to keep themselves warm, before they buy Lace to trimm
them. Upon my knees I humbly desire your Highness, to put the Nation in a
posture of defense, against homebred Traitors and forain Force, and then be
pleased to garnish the People with rich and stately Privileges.

Security ought to be provided for before Ornament.

The Divisions at home are far more destructive and dangerous, than any forain
Force or Invasion can be to this Nation. God be thanked, the Sea is a hook in
our Enemies nostrils; they may be numerous, but they are at a distance. I hope
this Nation in one respect may have a Property that Ireland has, that no
Spider or venomous living Creature but dies as soon as it is put on Irish
ground: So, I pray God, none of Englands Enemies (either homebred Traitors or
forain Nations) that shall invade us, but upon their first Landing, may by Gods
Assistance find English ground to be their graves, by the virtue and valor of
your Highness Armies.

I have heard of a famous Vaulter, that having once showed a rare trick, was
pressed by some to do it again; and striving to do it the second time, brake
his neck.

God divided the red Sea, and made a passage for the Children of Israel to
bring them out of Egypt toward Canaan, this I find and read; but I never
found nor read, that God would have divided the red sea, and given them a safe
Passage, if they would have left Moses and Aaron, and returned into the red Sea
again for Egypt.

We have a Proverb, The pot goes often to the water, but at last it comes
broken home. Gods providence has gone along with us, while he bids us go and
fight his battle, we have seen the success. No man can promise a Blessing,
when we fall out amongst our selves for shadows, and neglect our common
Safeties. Many men have laid their designs to bring a mischief about, so deep,
that when they spring their mines, the powder that makes the train shall be
freedom and privilege of Parliament, Gods Cause, and what not, to make a
disturbance. The truth is, if some men would speak their minds truly, there
are a sort of people do but cajole the common people, and blow them into
discontents to get into places of power, as Absalom did, with I would I were a
Judge in Israel, what Justice would I do? so says some male-contented Members
that were of the long Parliament, If we can but revive Lazarus, get the long
Parlaments power to sit everlastingly; Well, what then? we will restore the
People to their Liberty; Even as much as you did it when you had the power;
for they had so entangled themselves and the Nation, that rich and poor, young
and old, were glad they were dissolved; and many of them are ashamed of their
own doings, yet some of the old Members would fain be at the old Work.

They would (had they your Highness power) destroy and pluck up by the roots
You, that had vvrung the power out of their hands, also your Posterity, your
Counsel, Army, and all your relations. I humbly say, I believe these would be
the Actions of some of the Members of the long Parliament, had they the power
again; and this is the study of some discontented Members.

To stir up and foment the several humors and tempers of some factious people,
to gather together and involve us in blood again, what means the daily
seditious printed Libells else? if your Highness, the Parliament, and Army look
not vigilantly about to suppress these malcontents, (before they get a head)
by exemplarie Justice. I humbly say, the mischief is not so inconsiderable,
that it should be despised.

And if it should so fall out, that this mischief should burst out, (as God of
his infinite mercy defend) by the neglect either of your Highness, the
Parliament or Army; no doubt but God, having put us of these Nations into your
hands for just protection, for such as submit to you for conscience sake; the
same God will require a just account of your Highness, Parliament and Army,
how you have discharged this great trust; and wheresoever the failing of the
Trust is, God will expect a strict account, and punish it: for men's lives
ought not to be spilt as water on the ground, nor their goods plundered, to
satisfy factious and private spirits: The supreme Magistrate is to see the
peace of the Nation not to be disturbed upon particular factions, though they
be multitudes. The Magistrate set over us is not to bear the sword in vain:
Justice is sometimes more seasonable for the Nation (upon incorrigible
Offenders) then Mercy, that others may take example.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; A master of Ship in a storm at sea, may fling
goods overboard, for saving the Passengers, Ship, and Loading; and the Owners
must bear the loss, with thanks for his care; which if he should do in a calm,
(fling the goods overboard) he would deserve blame and to pay for the
merchandise: That may lawfully be done in dangerous times, which cannot be
justified in quiet times.

There are some Privileges in a quiet time, which may and ought to be stood
upon, which at this time are destructive to the very being and safety of the
Nation; For if every man should be admitted to give Physic that the Neighbors
present and commend out of love to a sick man, the patient may quickly be
purged out of the world: Dangerous times must have skillful, valiant, and
vigilant managers of their Affairs, and not discontented persons.

We see in Fevers, Calentures, and Lunacies, wise Physicians sometimes binds
the hands, and give their Patients thin and spare diet; which, by the care and
attendance of the Physician and Friends, the Sick are again recovered: Surely
when they are in health, these mad men ought to thank their Physician and
Friends, as being (under God) the Instruments that gave them Life and Being:
When these mad men are well recovered, they need not to be restrained within
doors, they need not to be debarred of a free and plentiful diet, but to
enjoy all they have freely, and to dispose of it as they please themselves. If
these Rules were not observed, when men are in a Lunacie or Sick, it would
destroy Society, and be destructive to mankind. A mad man with a knife may
cut his own throat; with a sword, kill and wound all he meets. A Sick man may
eat or drink so much as may kill him, fling off the clothes, or otherwise
disorder himself.

Now, may it pleas your Highness; If these be ordinary bonds and relations of
Christianity, Neighbor-hood and Friendship between party and party, and is
used amongst the most barbarous Nations, as the means to preserve a being;
how much more is it your Highness Duty and Place, and God expects it from
your hands (being assisted with the supreme Court of Parliament) to be a good
and merciful Physician to the distempered and sick men of the Nation, some old
Members of the long Parliament? A disease of the mind, and an inveterate heart
are not curable, but by Gods blessing: such evil spirits are not cast out but
by Prayer and Fasting. How mercifully have you dealt with some of them that
were chosen to sit in Parliament, in not suffering them to runn upon that (which
certainly had some of them been admitted to sit in Parliament) they would have
runn themselves upon a Rock to their own Confusion?

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; I do not say, all those Gentlemen that were not at
first admitted, God defend; for many, no doubt, are honorable and worthy
Personages, and will give your HIGHNESS, the Parliament and Counsel just
satisfaction. The like (I most humbly say) for those honorable and worthy
Gentlemen, that are gone down into their Countries; no doubt, many upon their
private occasions to settle their Business, and return to do the Parliament and
Nation Service.

May it pleas your HIGHNESS; there is a saying, He is more merciful that
prevents a man from falling, then he that takes him up after he is fallen,
and could have staid his falling; it shows an abundance of bowels of mercy,
that your Highness would not let some men run their desperate course, that
they, when they were entangled in the net of their own inventions, might have
enriched your Coffers by their Confiscations, and ruined their families.

God has put it into your heart, to save them as a brand out of the fire; for
had they been let alone, they had some of them burnt their wings. If they read
the History of former Kings Craft (as King James used to call it); they
constantly made Risings and Tumults an advantage unto them by Confiscations and
Forfeitures, to augment the Revenues of the Crown. And, no doubt, (many a man
for the very covetousness to get his Estate) some Kings have hatched and
revived old Treasons themselves, to get and ensnare sometimes Innocents, and
sometimes heedless Traitors. Histories, both divine and profane have such
examples.

God send some men never to forget your Highness goodness; for when they had
runn their course (as some Gentlemen in the North and West have done) some
would have com to untimely deaths, others to banishment, and all to ruin and
infamy (to the break-heart of their Wives, Children, and relations); and some
others, with sorrow, tears, and unfeigned repentance, to have begged for their
lives, and (peradventure) not obtained it, being cut off in their prime and
strength, before half their days are runn out.

Their Wives, Children, and Relations of some Families in this Nation, are
bound to bless God for ever, that put it into your Highness heart to prevent
some men in this Nation, that they should not forfeit their lives nor estates:
a great mercy (with reverence be it spoken) in imitation of the great God of
Heaven, that has said, I will not the death of a sinner; and with long
suffering and patience bears with sinful man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, and lighter then the dust in the balance. What are the private
malcontents of this Nation in your Highness hands, so long as you make God
your Shield and Buckler? Under Gods safeguard and tuition, mighty Kings and
Commonwealths have not been able to resist the force of your Armies and Navies;
(witness, Holland, Denmark, Portugal, etc.) that God that has delivered you
from the Bear and the Lion, will deliver you from these uncircumcised
Philistines, if you put your trust in him.

The Blessing of him that spoke out of the burning Bush, bless your Highness
and your High Court of Parliament, and direct all your Counsels, that this
Parliament may prove a Blessing to this Nation; And that your Highness and the
Parliament may be (as Moses and Aaron to the Children of Israel) the Deliverers
of these Nations out of the Land of Egypt; And that God would send the spirit
of Courage, Love and Concord upon all your Persons, and bless the Counsels and
Acts of this Session of Parliament; That your Highness may be a Nursing-father,
and with compassion ease the Griefs and Oppressions of your People, (many of
your good and loial Subjects at this day suffering much wrong and oppression,
amongst whom your humble Supplicant is not the least, being oppressed contrary
to Gods Law and the Laws of the Nation.

Your Supplicants daily prayer is, That God of his mercy will blast and
scatter all inventions and plots that are or shall be hatching against your
Highness and the high Court of Parliament, either of forain Foes or native
Rebels; And that God would turn the Counsels of some of the malicious
Achitophels of this Nation that are sequestered and laid aside, and some others
that have maliciously deserted their Trusts, into Foolishness; And if they do
maliciously, wilfully and foolishly persist still to seek the disturbance of
these Nations, over which God by his divine Providence has made your Highness
Governor and PROTECTOR; that then your sword of Justice may fall on some of
them, to terrify others, or (which is worse) that some of them may (if they do
not repent of this malicious sin to God and your Highness for what they had
maliciously designed) they may serve themselves as Achitophel did, 2 Samuel 17.
23. And when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he sadled his
ass, and arose and gat him home to his own house to his City, and put his
household in order; and HANGED himself, and was buried in the Sepulcher of his
Fathers.

Let this be the end of your Highness's malicious and implacable Enemies;
others that err through misinformation or difference in Judgment, I pray God
to show them a sight of their sins, and give your Highness a merciful heart,
so freely to pardon them, as your Self would expect Gods pardon; that so,
through the great mercy and protection of our God, these three Nations (after
so many Earthquakes, Overturnings, and most famous and memorable Revolutions)
may be firmly grounded and settled on the foundations of Liberty and Freedom,
Truth, Mercy, and Peace; to the astonishment and amazement, horror and
confusion of homebred Traitors and forain Nations, your Highnesses and our
Nations Enemies.

When they shall see their hopes disappointed, many of them promised to
themselves, viz, Uproars, Tumults and Commotions, Fire and Blood; every man
ready to sheathe his sword in his Neighbors bowels, the rocks to rend, and the
Stars of our Firmament to fall, our Sun to be darkened, and Moon to be turned
to blood, through the divisions and private discontents amongst us in Parliament.

But BEHOLD! by the good guidance of God, this glorious Parliament running its
course as the Sun in his strength, to the joy and comfort of our Friends, both
at home and abroad, and confusion of our Foes in all parts; that see this
Parliament sit in Glory and Peace, in Love, Union, Order, and Concord, in that
form as was wont to be in Glorious Queen ELIZABETH's days, every Member
making it his study to get good Laws, Liberties and Privileges for the
Counties, Cities and Buroughs they served for; and for these Nations of
England, Scotland and Ireland in general, for the individual Safety,
Prosperity, VVelfare and Honor of Protector and People, all their Interest to
go hand in hand together. And your Highness acting Queen Elizabeth's part,
studying always to enlarge your Self, to give these Nations all just and due
Satisfaction and large Immunities.

Your Highness and the Parliament building up this Commonwealth, as Nehemiah
did the walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 4. every Builder to have his sword girded by
his side, and so they builded; there are several other remarkable passages in
that Chapter fit for these present times.

By the blessing of God, these glorious Beginnings of this Parliament will have
as an auspicious and happy end and finishing, to the great contentment of your
Highness and all the good people of your several large Dominions, to the terror
of your Enemies, and the frustrating of many Spanish designs, that were and
are hatching here, under specious pretenses of several men's Interests and
Discontents.

These men's Eggs were buried (no doubt) in India Gold; but, by the good
guidance of God, the Spaniards Eggs will prove addle; He is so subtle (by the
Counsel of his Jesuits, casting themselves into all shapes) for he does most
of his work by the Jesuits, who sow and foment new Doctrines amongst us, that
have bewitched and cracked the heads of many men in these Nations, which do the
Spaniards and Papists work, and know it not.

When your Highness Navies sailed to the West Indies, You caused them to be
sheathed with Planks, Pitch and Hair, that the worms which breed in those Seas
might do no hurt or prejudice to the hull or bulk of their Ships.

Great SIR! England, Scotland and Ireland may well be compared to three Roial
Ships, and the Dominion of Wales to a most Princely Frigot, Your Highness by
the grace of God being Protector, General and Admiral.

Your Highness has now a War with Him that styles himself the Emperor of the
Indies. This Prince is Master of a Metal that is as dangerous to all Princes
in Christendom, their Persons, Countries, Lands and Territories, as the Worms
in the Indian Seas are to the Merchants ships. No Iron bars can be made so
strong, but this Metal (like Aqua fortis) will eat thorough. It is called Gold
and Silver; it is so subtle, that it will incorporate (like Quicksilver)
almost with all metalls: Men of all Professions, all Ages, rich and poor, young
and old, none but are taken and corrupted with it, as he is a Natural man.

But God has appointed a Remedy against this Poison to some persons through
his mercy, the precious balsom of his restraining Grace; but this he grants
but to a few, whose spirits are elevated above Gold and Silver, this world or
worldly things.

God has appointed another Balsom for these Nations against the Poison of
Spanish Gold and Silver; and that is, to bless these Nations with your Highness
victorious PERSON, being assisted with your supreme Counsel the Parliament.

Upon my knees I most humbly say, As you sheathe your Ships you send to India
for fear of the Worm; so your Highness must sheathe the Cinque Ports and
Creeks of your HIGHNEss Dominions, you must fortify and garrison the Seaports
of this Nation, and the People be always ready (both in hand and heart, all
as one man) to fight for our Religion, Country, our Lives, Wives and Children,
Lands and Estates; and without this be done, we shall not have a Being,
Estates or Propriety: this is the one thing necessary and chiefly to be looked
after, to fortify and secure the Nation against homebred Traitors and forain
Forces.

And, if any should presume to assault us, we may be aforehand, and by our
Navies destroy their Ships and Vessels in their own Seas, let their Land be
died with their Spanish blood, let their barren Country be fatned with their
own Carcasses; and as they give in their Moneys the Sheaf of Arrows, as a
remembrance of the great Victories they obtained by the Valor of the English;
so now, for their Ingratitude, the Spaniards may cry as they did in Queen
Elizabeth's time, to Philip the Second King of Spain and his Counsel, SIR, Let
us have Peace with England, and War with all the World. And if they did so
when this Nation had but one Drake, and a small Fleet (in comparison of what
your Highness has, we having now many score of Drakes, which if they be
empowered with your HIGHNESS Commission, and Gods Blessing thereupon) they
shall never be able to bring home their Treasures from the West Indies; and
though our Fleet wait long, no doubt the Vigilancie of your Admirals will make
the Spaniards pay for their attendance.

About sixteen years ago, God (out of his secret Judgment) struck the Crown of
Spain with a dead Palsy on one side, by the revolting of the Portugals, their
right heir and true King assumed the Crown, viz. the Duke of Bragantza; so that
now your Highness fights but with one half of the King of Spain, as he was
formerly; the other half the Portugal will assist You in all his Dominions
(both in Christendom, Africa, East and West Indies) to destroy the Spaniards.

So that as God has raised your Highness to this Greatness admirably, to have
the Soveraignity and Dominion of these Nations* so by this rent and division of
Portugal from Spain, God has facilitated and made the way easy for your
Highness to cut down and pluck up by the roots this barren Tree the Spaniards.
And those Nations in the West Indies, which at this day live under the Spanish
Tyranny, and are now fed with the chaff and bran of Popish Superstition, may
be (by the blessing of God) fed with the pure manchet of the Gospel, and at
once be delivered from bodily and spiritual slavery.

My daily prayer to God is, to keep us unanimous in this Nation of England, as
we and our Predecessors were in famous Queen Elizabeth's days; that it may be
the study of every good Protestant in this Nation with heart, hand and purse,
to destroy the Spaniards greatness.

The King of Spains Power is now not half so much as it was before Portugal
revolted from him, and his Power is now far more in show then substance; his
Territories and Dominions are at such a distance one from another, they stand
like the hairs of King James's beard, scatteringly, as if one was afraid of
another: the charges of Garrisons, and to keep his Dominions under his
Obedience, does cost him (in some Countries) far more to keep the bare Title,
then the Revenues of the Countries amount unto, witness our next Neighbor
Flanders; and the like is for many other of his Dominions, that yearly cost him
many hundred thousand pound^* he holds a Wolf by the ears; and if the King of
Spain could be well rid of them, both He, and his Counsel (no doubt) wishes
both Flanders and Holland drowned in the Seas; they have been the Spunges that
have sucked up all his Treasure yearly.

There was wont of old to be a saying, No Fishing like the Fishing in the sea;
No service like a Kings: so, I humbly say, No War like a War with Spain, No
service like a Protectors service.

If we can but light on the King of Spains Indian Fleets, and stop that
Course, your Highness and these Nations (by Gods assistance) will turn the
scales of all the Affairs of Christendom, and make your Highness appear the
true Defender of the Faith in these Imperial Dominions, and the Sword and
Buckler of all the Protestant Churches in Christendom.

It is a Rule amongst Gaimsters, Winn at first, lose at last; and great
Undertakings are not to be effected but with great Difficulties. If it please
God to put it into your Highnesses and this Parlaments hearts, vigorously and
vigilantly to pursue the War in the West Indies, all the Protestants in
Christendom will be bound to bless God, and pray for your Highness and this
glorious Parliament; and, by the Blessing of God, You and your Armies and Navies
will cut the King of Spain in the jugular vein; as the Dutch man says, Kill
him as dead as a herring: which must be done by the unanimous Power of these
three Nations.

This Course will make great Brittany and Ireland, and their several and
respective Ports, Havens and Harbors thereof, to act and do Cadis and St Lucars
work; our British and Irish seaport Towns (by the prosperous conduct of your
Highness Admirals and Generals) to be the Bancks, Magazins and Scales for
Return of Indian Treasure, Jewels, and precious Merchandise. The Drumm and
Trumpet encourages Horse and Man to Battle. The word India, and to be master
of the Treasure (as Gold, Silver, and other good things) of that new World, no
doubt is and will be more inducing to many noble spirited Gentlemen, Merchants
and Mariners of this Nation, then Drumm and Trumpet to Soldiers. But when the
Land-souldierie shall be likewise interessed in the Purchase and Honor of this
noble Undertaking; and the prayers and purses of the good people of this Nation
in general, and an Act of this Parliament for settling a way for the vigorous
prosecution and maintenance of this just War, for the Good and Peace of
Christendom, to go along in this glorious Action. Then surely it will be a
voice of thunder and terror to the Spaniards; they have seen their best days,
and the Massacres and Cruelties they have committed in the Indies, confessed by
their own Contrymen; now calls them to a strict account for the sins of
their Forefathers.

All good people of these Nations may justly say, your Highness is sent by God
as a Blessing of God to Christendom, and as a second Joshua to our Israel, to
fight the Lords Battles; And by your most valiant Generals, Admirals, Land and
Sea-souldierie, to put the People of these Nations into possession of the
West Indies.

There is a sort of wilful People in these Nations, that repine and murmur,
and will not see your Highness make these Nations happy. I humbly say, Your
Enemies shall see this glorious Work done by your Highness, which shall cause
some men to burst with anger. God has appointed the Valor of this Nation to
be a terror and scourge to the Spaniards.

By this means the Spanish Greatness will go out like the snuff of a Candle,
and all Christendom, that has been disturbed and put into Garbles, confusions,
and Tumults, by their Ambition and Pride, to the slaughtering and murdering of
millions of men, wasting whole Kingdoms and Nations, their wounds and scarrs
lie bleeding at this day in several places.

May it pleas Your HIGHNESS; The West Indies is the King of Spain 's sting; as
Sampson 's strength lay in his Hair, so does the strength of the King of Spain
lie in his Indies: Clip but off his Trade of Returns from the Indies, Your
Highness will find him as weak as water, and so poor, that he shall not be
able to pay for a Poore-John or a Pilcher; You will hit him in the Ball and
White of the Eye: If you take the Indies from him by the valor of Your People,
the English may make his Castilianians grind Sugar Canes in the Barbados, and
use them as Sampson was used in the Prison-hous, and keep the Spaniards so
poor, that the Hair of their heads shall never grow again to disturb
Christendom.

God still; for ever keep the spirit of Union in these Nations in general, that
every man in his Calling may have a heart and hand to build up our Breaches:
that both Your Highness and your People may as one man seek the Individual
Prosperity the one of the other, even as it is the study and care of every goo^
Husband and good Wife to please and content one another: And this is no more
then (I most humbly say) Prudence requires at this time; for the Adversaries of
our Peace are vigilant, and leave no stone unturned to break in upon us, and to
make a division either in hearts or hands, at this conjuncture of time, may
hazard and disturb the whole Nation.

Now the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which never slumbereth nor sleeps,
direct your Highness and this glorious Parlaments Counsels and Actions for his
Honor and the Safety and Peace of all these Nations, over whom your HIGHNESS
(by the Grace of God) is PROTECTOR; That as Your Highness is great and glorious
in this World, you may be also great and glorious in the World to come. So
prays,

Your HIGHNESS 's most loyal, dutiful and obedient Subject, THOMAS VIOLET.
LONDON, Sept. 24. 1656.
To His Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF England, Scotland and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it pleas Your Highness!
HAving formerly (in November 1655, and April 1650 last) most humbly presented
Your Highness in writing with some humble PROPOSALS, for Your Service, in
relation to the calling to a true and just account all persons that have,
directly or indirectly, in their Custodies, the public Moneys, Lands, Plate,
Jewels, Merchandise, or any other thing or things of value; and also the
Statute made at Westminster in the tenth year of the Reign of Richard the
Second: which excellent Law was made to bring to a strict account all such as
had defrauded the King and State. The then Parliament, in making that good Act,
was so careful to have all persons brought to account, that had received the
public Treasure, and all such as had defrauded the King and Realm, that they
made it a praemunire and loss of a man's Estate, besides imprisonment, for any
(of what degree soever) that persuaded or gave counsel unto the King to have
the said good Law defeated. And they found the strict and due execution of that
Law to be the only Balsom to cure the great distempers and debts of the
Commonwealth, and ease the good people in general of great outrages,
oppressions, and insupportable charges. These are the very words of that
Statute.

Upon the delivery of this Writing, Your most humble Subject received Your
Highness's gracious pleasure by Mr Kelleway, that Your Highness did approve of
those his humble and loial endeavors for Your Service; and that they should
be taken into consideration.

May it pleas Your Highness; Your humble Subject finding that on the 26 of May,
1656. a Commission was issued our, under the Great Seal of England, to certain
persons, for to make enquiry and discovery concerning all persons that have in
their hands or possessions, Moneys, Goods, Plate, Merchandise, or any thing of
value appertaining to the Commonwealth, etc. Whereupon Your loial Subject did
present unto Your Highness's said Commissioners at Worcester-hous (about the
last day of May) the names of several persons who had been entrusted and
employed as Accomptants and Treasurers to receiv and finger the public Moneys,
Lands and Merchandise. Very many of these persons have made the Commonwealth's
Money, Lands, Goods and Merchandise which they were entrusted with, so like
their own, that to this day it stick's in these men's hands, and is in their
private possession, to the great damage of the Nation. And many of them (upon
examination) will be found to have at this time vast sums of money in their
hands and possessions amongst them all, to the value of many hundred thousand
pounds, Likewise your loial Subject has most humbly presented your Highness
how strict Queen Elizabeth was to have all her Receivers called to a just
account, never sparing her great Officers and Favorites, by which means she
lived and died rich, never finding want in her Exchequer, nor her Chests
without Treasure.

Your faithful Subject finde's now (upon his Inquiry) many of these Gentlemen
that were Treasurers and Accomptants, to wonder and make it strange, that ever
they should live to see the day that any persons should call them in question
upon their accounts (and that a just and true account should be ever expected
by the State) from all persons that have received and possessed themselves of
the public Moneys, Lands, and Merchandise, etc.

May it pleas your Highness, your humble Suppliant saie's, That that opinion of
these Gentlemen (for to have a perpetual Indemnity, and to escape scot-free,
as he most humbly conceiv's, is not grounded upon any just or true reason);
for there be hundreds of Orders, Ordinances and Acts to enable them and
thousands of people now living to be Collectors of Subsidies, Committee Men,
Treasurers, Excise-men, Commissioners of the Customs, Trustees for the sale of
the King, Queen and Prince's Lands, Bishop's, Deans and Chapters, and other
Delinquents Lands, Receivers, Sequestrators, and Collectors of the monthly
Taxes, Collectors for Charitable Uses; and all and every one of these persons,
by the fundamental Laws of this Nation, their bodies, lands and estates, from
the time and hour they became Debtors to the Commonwealth, their Persons,
Heirs, Executors and Administrator^, their and every one of their Goods,
Tenements, into whose hands they are sold, converted, or do com. And all other
Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, which any other person then had, or now
have in trust for their use, or which at any time ever hereafter shall have
power to dispose of, are all liable to the due and true accompting, paying and
answering your Highness and your Successors the moneys, lands and goods, etc.
they have received; and this is by many Statutes known to be the law of
England. And many of them (before they were admitted to act as Trustees,
Sequestrators, Committee men or Treasurers) took an Oath not to act contrary to
the several Rules, Limitations and Instructions given them by several Acts and
Orders of Parliament and Council of Sat, as appears by the Journal books and
printed Acts and Ordinances of Parliament and Council of State; likewise many of
the abovesaid persons, upon strict examination, will be found wilfully
perjured, which makes the Offenders liable to fine and ransom for the breach of
their Oaths.

The Laws now in force (to be duly and truly executed for to have an exact
account) will bring your Highness and the Commonwealth in milions of money:
there is not any one of the aforesaid persons can show any Order, Ordinance,
Act of the Council of State or Act of Parliament, (that when they were made
Committee Men or Treasurers) to give them, or any one of them, a privilege or
indemnity to cozen and defraud the State, or to license any one of them to
pocket up the Wealth and public Treasure of the Nation, which they have
fraudulently converted to their own use. And when they can show no such
privilege, (nor so much as a pardon) they need not make it strange, as many of
them do at this day, That they should be forced to give the Commonwealth a
just, strict, and true Account, or else their Bodies and Estates, as also their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns to be liable, till they shall
have justly and truly accounted.

Your Highness's humble subject delivered in W^iting to your Commissioners at
Worcester-Hous certain Queries for his better direction to proceed in this
service, and most humbly desired their judgments thereupon, that so he might
know whether his discoveries were within the cognizance of their Commission.
All which he humbly presented unto them, as being very material both for
your Highness and the Commonwealths service and he told the Commissioners;
that he intended to make their judgment thereupon to him, to be his Rule
either to proceed or desist in these discoveries, to avoid unnecessary expense
and trouble to himself and others.

May it pleas your Highness; in June last your Supplicant left with your
Highness servant Mr Kelleway the true copy of the Writing he did deliver to
the Commissioners at Worcester-Hous, and most humbly besought him to present
the same unto your Highness. And his most humble petition to your Highness was,
That you would be graciously pleased, upon your Highness's perusal, to
signify your pleasure thereupon to your humble and loyal subject, concerning
the premises; that so he might know how to proceed but Mr Kelleway having no
covenient opportunity to get your Highness to peruse the same (by reason of
your Highness other great and weighty affairs) thereupon your Supplicant
received back the said writing again from Mr Kelleway and has now printed the
same.

The true reason wherefore your humble Subject has forborne to attend the
Commissioners at Worcester-hous, to receiv their order and direction concerning
the premises, is, because your most humble and loyal subject intends to put in
the same Writing into the Parliament, and there will humbly wait for your
Highness's and the Parlaments gracious Commands, and directions therein, And
the results of that most high and honorable Court upon the premises what your
Highness and your high Court of Parliament in your great and profound wisdoms
shall judge fit to be don for the glory of God and good and eas of the nation
concerning all the premises.

May it pleas your Highness; your loyal Subject has in some things enlarged
himself more then in his writing he left with your Highness: he hopes, it is
for the honor of God, the benefit of your Highness, and the eas of the good
people of this nation in general. His daily prayers to God is, That the
public Treasure that is in private men's hands may, by a gracious Act of this
ensuing Parliament, be ordered, converted and turned into the right Channel,
to save the public Taxes; which will be as a sweet smelling Perfume in the
nostrels of the good people of this nation, when they shall see those
Caterpillars (that have not only eaten the leaves, but barked the trees of this
Commonwealth, using all opressions and fraud to grow rich) be made to restore
it. No doubt the work is pleasing and acceptable to God and all good men; and
then many men (who have made their religion a cloak to cozen the Commonwealth)
may be made to restore their unjust detained Treasure and Lands. Many men
(under the shadow of sanctity) having made gain to be great godliness,
(instead of godliness) to be great gain.

May it pleas your Highness; your most humble and loyal Subject, at your
Highness's feet, imploreth to be relieved; having been imprisoned almost four
years in the Tower of London; viz* 1643. to 1647. and two years and nine
months of that time kept close prisoner; his estate in lands, houses, offices,
goods and moneys being taken from him, to his damage of eleven thousand pounds
(there being then, at his bringing up the late Kings letter from Oxford in
December 1643. no known law or public Ordinance to prohibit him to bring up
the said letter to the Lord Mayor and City of London); and he had a Pass from
the house of Commons to go to Oxford, as appears by the Journals in the
Parlament-hous; and he had at the same time a Warrant from the Lord General
Essex to go to Oxford, procured by Mr Theophilus Ryley, then Scoutmaster of of
the City of London. May it pleas your Highness (by Gods Law) Romans 4. 15. Where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression; and by the known Laws of this
nation, such and such Actions are declared Crimes, and laws and rules set for
the degree of punishing. And he most humbly conceaveth, it is not in any just
Judges power to exceed the punishment for any offense, more then is prescribed
and set down by the Law.

And it is expressly provided for in Magna Charta, that no Freeman shall be
taken, imprisoned, or distressed of his freehold or liberties, or any other
ways destroyed, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the
Land; That no man should be deferred or denied Justice, or Right.

Whereas your Supplicant, after he was out of the Tower, petitioned for six
years constantly at the Parliament doors the members, and at the Counsel of
State, to have a legal Trial by the Parliament, or else by the common Law; And to
that end delivered several Petitions to several members of Parliament, yet your
Supplicant could never have Justice. Some of the members of the then Parliament,
after his many years constant attendance, and great expense, to com to a trial,
told him, Had he been guilty, he should never needed to have petitioned the
Parliament for a Trial; the Parliament would have granted him a Trial without
petitioning for it.

May it pleas your Highness; This is your most humble Subjects sad condition,
groaning under, and having so heavy a sentence as the loss of almost all his
estate, to his damage above eleven thousand pounds, almost four years
Imprisonment in the Tower, when there was no law made at his acting this
Business, nor at the time of his Commitment, for either punishing of him, or
any other, for acting the same thing (which was, bringing up the late Kings
letter to the City in December 1643) but Ordinances and Orders made after he
had brought up the King's Letter, for the Confiscation of his Estate, and
Imprisonment of his Person, and a great part of his Estate given to private and
particular men. Now with Tears and Sighs he appeal's to Your Highness, for
restoring him to his Estate and just Reparation, being oppressed and undon for
a Pretended Crime, when there was no Law; no, not so much as the Breach of the
Good Behavior made against it in December 1643, either to Prohibit him or any
other to do the same.

He has printed this Business, with the several Houses, Offices, Bonds and
Money taken from him; To which he does most humbly refer himself, And Your
Suplicant was daily faithfully promised by some worthy Members of the Long
Parliament and Counsel of State, (who pitied Your Supplicant's sad Condition,
seeing his willingness to serve the Commonwealth) to have Justice and
Reparation: and that held up his Spirits, and kept him always to be willing,
to the uttermost of his power and strength-beyond the abilities of his Estate,
to engage both his time and estate, for many years, to do the then Parliament
many and great services, as appears by Your Loyal Subject sprinted Narrative,
1653. The several Particulars were to his Charges and Expense of many Hundred
Pounds, as by many Witnesses he can and has proved.

Besides, One most Remarkable Service to the Nation in General Your Supplicant
did, by the Command of the then Counsel of State, which shall, and ought to
stop the mouths of every one, and all his Adversaries, that have, or shall
maliciously traduce him as a Malignant, for a man disaffected to the State, or
to the true happiness of the Nation in General.

Your humble Subject did this service when Van Trump was in the Downs. It was
no small hazard, his venturing to deliver in a Paper to the Counsel of Srate;
in December 1653. which Writing was by the Counsel of State referred to the
Committee for Foreign Affairs: Wherein Your Supplicant discovered the
fraudulent Practices of the Spanish Ambassador, and Duke Leopoldus and his
Agents, to defraud the Parliament of a Vast Sum of Treasure, above three
hundred Thousand Pounds; which was brough^ up into the River as a Prize, in
three Ships, viz. The Sampson, Salvador, and George.

And this he did, at the same time, when the Lord Ambassador of Spain, with
many other Agents of Duke Leopoldus, and Licensiados of the King of Spain 's,
living at Antwerp, did all of them affirm both to the Judges in the Admiralty,
the Counsel of State, and to the Parliament in November and December 1652, that
all the Lading, both Silver and Merchandise in the said Ships, did appertain to
the King of Spain and his Subjects, and none other.

(May it pleas Your Highness, I was far more troubled to find out the frauds
of the Spania^ds Claims to the Silver in these Ships, and to bring it forth to
be proved by good and Lawful Witnesses, as I have here out of the Admiraltie,
to Entitle the State to the Silver in these Ships, Then I shall be troubled to
find out the Frauds and Deceipts of all the Accomptants in General of this
Nation, if once I be but empowered by your Highness to have an Inspection on
the Accounts, and such Rules followed and executed, as by the Laws and Statutes
of this Nation, has been formerly put in practice: and the whole Charge of
this Discovery will not stand the State in 12d the pound, to bring the Moneys
into the Exchequer: And it may be so managed, not Six pence Charge upon the
Pound.)

The Spaniards in the Court of Admiralty, by their Counsel, pleaded, that they
ought not to have the Onus probandum cast on them; being their Ships and
Lading, and came from a free Port, viz. Cadis in Spain; and were consigned to
Free Ports, Dunkerk and Ostend, that came over from beyond Seas purposely upon
this Business: And they affirmed solemnly to the Court of Admiraltie, that
there was no goods, silver, or Merchandise aboard all or any of the three Ships
that appertained to the Dutch of the United Provinces, or French.

Whereupon, there was an Order of Parliament, about the beginning of December
1652, to the Judges of the Admiraltie to proceed to Judgment, according to the
Course of the Court, concerning the Ships Sampson, Salvador and George, and the
Exspectation of many hundred me^ was every day after to see the Ships
discharged: and a day appointed for sentence.

Thereupon, some of the late Counsel of State finding, that in some of your most
humble Subject's Writings, he had discovered many secret ways how Merchants
transport Gold and Silver, both out of this English Nation, and Foreign Parts:
and some of them conceiving, that if Your Supplicant were empowered, and
commanded to find out the Spaniard 's Frauds; He could do it.

Whereupon, the Counsel of State sent for Your Supplicant, and asked him, if he
could and would serve the Parliament faithfully, concerning these silver Ships:
And if he could, by good and legal Witnesses, disprove the Spanish
Embassador's Claim to this Silver, in the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George,
the Committee for Foreign Affairs (in the behalf of the Counsel of State and
Parliament) promised Your Supplicant he should be restored to all his Estate,
or the value which had been taken from him, or the Sum of Eleven Thousand
Pounds in Lieu thereof: and should have of the Parliament a good Reward over and
above.

After, within two days time Your Supplicant waited on the Lord Bradshaw, and
Committee for Foreign Affairs, and told them, he would undertake to disprove
the Spanish Embassador's Claim to all this Silver, by Legal and undeniable
Proof: And would prove, by clear Testimony, That there was several great
quantities of Silver in these Ships that did not appertain to the King of
Spain, or his Subjects; but to the Dutch of the United Provinces. Thereupon the
Counsel of State by their Order of December the 13, 1652, Ordered Your Subject
to assist, and be in the nature of a Remembrancer, and to repair to Doctor
Walker from time to time, who is the Commonwealth 's Advocate for the
prosecuting of these Ships (Sampson, Salvador, and George,) which accordingly
he did.

Thereupon, the day the ships were to be discharged the Court of Admiralty,
your humble and faithful Subject made his protest in the Court of Admiraltie
against the Judges and their Proceedings, as appears by the Certificate of the
Officers of the Mint herewith presented: And your Supplicant likewise declared
in the Court of Admiraltie, that the Judges (but at their perils) should not
proceed to clear or discharge all or any of the aforementioned ships, (as the
Sampson, Salvador, or George) till your Supplicant's witnesses were examined in
the behalf of the Commonwealth. This was December. 17. 1643.

Whereupon the Court of Admiraltie required your Supplicant to appear before
the Counsel of State, that afternoon at three of the clock, to answer before
the Counsel of State to their Charge for your Supplicants Action and Protest in
the Court of Admiralty; your Supplicants Protest being made against and
contrary to an Order of Parliament, as Judge Exton affirmed in the Court of
Admiralty.

There was many hundred of Merchants in the Admiralty, the Spanish Ambassadors
Secretary, Duke Leopoldus his Agents, and several Spaniards, when your
Supplicant made his Protest against the discharge of these silver ships, silver
and merchandise: And that very day in the afternoon, at the Counsel of State,
before the Judges of the Admiralty, upon reading of some papers, your Supplicant
humbly presented against the discharge of the ships (the Sampson, Salvador, and
George) and all their silver and lading. Upon a full debate before the Counsel
of State, these three ships and silver were all (by Order of the Counsel)
stayed; and your Supplicant had thanks given him by the Counsel for his
faithful service; and presently commanded with all diligence to make his
proof, whereby to disprove the Spanish Ambassadors Claims.

In the further prosecution of this Business, your Supplicant received several
Orders of the Counsel of State and of your Highness's Counsel, which ordered
him from time to time to make his Addresses, and advise with Doctor Walker
(your Highness's Advocate) in this Business.

Doctor Walker knows, that for 16 months together, your Supplicant employed
many people in this Business, against the ships (Sampson, Salvador, and George)
their silver and lading. Your Subject employed several persons in the
translation of Spanish and Dutch Papers, which are in the Registrie of the
Admiraltie; other persons your Supplicant daily employed amongst the Passengers
and Seamen that belonged to these ships, to find out and know what silver
appertained and belonged to Holland, and all other matters that might tend to
the discovery of this Business, constantly (as I said) employing about ten men
in this Service, as appears by their several Affidavits, for near sixteen
months together. All these men's expenses at their meetings, Boat-hire, and
payment of them for their time, your most humble Supplicant out of his own purs
has discharged. And this he did, to enable himself to do this service, and to
find out the bottom of the Spanish Ambassadors fraud, in claiming this silver.
Your Supplicant (at the earnest entreaty of Doctor Walker, as appears by his
Warrants to the Examiner and Register of the Admiralty) did cause to be
breviated and read, and took notes of many thousand sheets of paper: some papers
he caused to be translated out of Dutch and Spanish into English, concerning
the silver ships. For almost three months together, this was your Supplicants
and several men's works; viz. one Mr Glover, that had lived a long time in
Holland, and Mr Bald-wyne, that had lived in Spain, as also your Supplicant.
and others which were daily employed about this Business, as the Registers and
Examiners of the Admiralty can testify: and all this was done by your
Supplicant at his own charges, never receiving a penny as yet, either from the
Parliament, Counsel of State, or your Highness, for all his disbursments: and
this your Supplicant did, at the command of the Counsel of State, and at the
entreaty of Doctor Walker.

And had your Supplicant failed to make good his allegations, and not to have
proved what he undertook to do, he had been totally a second time undone.
Your Supplicant must confess, that the old Counsel of State in December 1652.
many of them told him, If he should fail of disprooving the Spanish
Ambassadors Claim, and could not prove what he had alleged to the Counsel of
State, that in these ships there was silver appertained to the Dutch of the
United Provinces, That then his protesting against the discharge of this
silver, would totally undo your Supplicant, and be his utter ruin.

Your Highness, and your most honorable Counsel, will see it clearly proved,
the great expense, pains and hazard which your humble Subject has been at
till this very day, your Petitioner paying interest for above five hundred
pounds; which money, every penny, he expended in this service (as appears by
the Oaths of several persons which your Supplicant employed, and they were
privy to the laying out of the said sums of money only in this service.
(These original Papers remain in Mr Jessops and Mr Scobels custody.) And your
humble Supplicant trusts in God and your Highness, that he shall have his
Estate restored, or the full value, for doing this great service, according to
the then promise of the then Counsel of State, whereof your Highness was then a
Member.

May it pleas your Highness; Had the long Parliament and Counsel of State coined
the money which your Supplicant stayed, or altered the property thereof, he is
really assured by many honorable Gentlemen of the long Parliament and the then
Counsel of State, that he should have had full satisfaction with thanks for
this great service: But they could not pay the Reward, before they received the
Benefit. I humbly say, The old Counsel of State set me (your loyal Subject) to
beat the bush for them, but your Highness caught the Bird; and since your
Supplicant has acted by several Orders of your Highness's Counsel, being
promised by them a just and good Reward, I do most humbly implore your Highness
for the same.

Your Petitioner has printed these Examinations, Witnesses, Transactions and
Passages, and humbly tenders them at your Highness's and the Parlaments feet;
that so your Highness and the Parliament may see the service your Supplicant
has done. Had he not taken this course, it had been impossible for him to have
clearly stated it to your Highness and the Parliament, and also to the whole
Nation and world in general, what charges and pains he has been at to do this
service. This will clearly show to the world the just cause the then Parliament
and Counsel of State had in 1652 for the staying these ships (Sampson,
Salvador, and George) and their silver, from undeniable Testimonies. Upon the
sight whereof, the mouths of many clamoring merchants will be stopped, when
they see upon what grounds this silver was stayed, and the clear witnesses and
proofs for to justify the truth, to disproov the Spanish Ambassadors and
Spaniards Claims to all this silver in these ships.

May it pleas your Highness; it is out of the mouths of many of the Passengers
in these ships that (this Voyage) came from Spain aboard these very ships, all
able and credible witnesses; they have confessed,

1. That great quantities of this silver and merchandise was delivered a ship
board in Spain for the account of the Hollanders and Merchants of Amsterdam,
and other parts of the United Provinces.

2. By several Advises from beyond Seas from Holland and Spain (by the
Parlaments Agent at St Lucars in Spain Mr Wilson, and Mr Pompeys Calendrens
Letters from Holland, and Mr Steniers Letter, intercepted here in England) that
these ships were bound for Holland, and a great part of the silver for
merchants of Holland and Zealand: Also the Counsel of State had advice from
Holland, that some of the same Fleet that set sail from Spain at the same time
with these three silver ships, being taken by the Parlaments men of War at
sea, were discharged from them, pretending themselves to be bound for
Hamborough, and so got discharged; and immediately, when they had got from our
Fleet, sailed directly into Amsterdam. The ships that so fraudulently cleared
themselves and got into Amsterdam, after they were in the possession of the
Parlaments ships, were worth near upon a million of money: had those ships been
brought to London, that Business had broak the Hollanders hearts.

3. It is proved, that when these ships set sail to go their voyage, they all
set sail from Holland Ports.

4. It is proved by several merchants of London (that have put in their claims
to several parcels of silver in these three ships) That several parcels of
silver then aboard these ships, was laden and put aboard these ships for the
proper account of merchants of London. Which clearly showed the Spanish
Ambassadors Claims to all this silver (as his Masters silver, and only for his
Catholic Majesty, and his Subjects account) to be a notortous State trick,
and forged to get the Treasure out of the States hands, that was in these
ships. And if the Spanish Ambassador could have done it, he was to have had
many thousand pounds of the owners for doing of this State Business; but (by
Gods assistance) your humble Supplicant prevented him, to his great expense and
danger of his life for doing this service.

5. It is confessed and proved, That several parcels of silver aboard these
ships, were entered in Bills of Lading by feigned names, and colorably to avoid
the taking of the silver and moneys, likewise to avoid the adjudication and
condemnation of the same, if these silver ships and their lading were seized
on; and that the Bills of Lading now produced in Court of Admiralty, were
forged at sea, when they heard we had wars with Holland, and all the Dutch
names of the Bills altered. This is proved.

6. There is in the Admiralty the States Generals Commission to De Wit and De
Rutter (their Vice-Admirals) to guard these ships from the English: And this
was done upon the petition of the merchants of Amsterdam to the States General.
These Letters and original Commissions under the great Seal of Holland I have
printed; and the Originals can be produced when there is occasion. Without
doubt the merchants of Amsterdam would not have petitioned the States Generals
for a Convey for these ships, had not the Lading and silver belonged to them.

7. Your Highness will see (upon the whole matter and prosecution of this
Business) your most humble Supplicant has left no stone unturned, nor spared
any cost hazard or pains to do the Parliament (and since your Highness) this
service.) And your humble Supplicant is fully assured, That it is a far easier
work for him to discover the frauds of the Accomptants and Committee men of
this Nation, if he had a Commission to be your Highness's Remembrancer, to
see this Business effectually prosecuted, than to have made this Discovery of
these silver ships.

8. He has clearly proved several unfree goods and parcels of silver aboard
these ships, appertaining to the Dutch, (then our Enemies) which has made all
the silver and merchandise liable to a seizure and confiscation.

9. May it pleas your Highness; In France, one parcel of goods found a
shipboard, and consigned to an enemy, confiscates all the ship and goods. In
Spain and in Holland, one barrel of Butter or a case of Pistolls consigned but
as a present to a friend, shall confiscate both ship and goods. And your humble
Subject hopes, the same Law that is civil for them beyond the Seas to judge and
put upon our Merchants and their Ships and Merchandise there, shall not be
held in England to be an uncivil Law, and a breach of Jus Gentium, when it is
but the same measure of Justice which has been in this Business administered to
Forrainers here, which Forrainers administer to our Merchants beyond the Seas?
And this is a known truth in many Merchants cases, that had not so much Justice
in Spain, as we have given to Forrainers here, even in these their silver
Ships.

Here follow the several Witnesses, Examinations and Proofs against the Silver
Ships, (Sampson, Salvador, and George) according to the Original Records.
MR JOACHIM PEESLER, Surgeon upon the great Sampson, (Otto George Master,
above 36 years of age) testifies; viz.
1. THat as they were at Cales, they took in all their Lading of Silver, the
most of which was brought in by night; amongst the rest, 40 bars of Silver
laden by the order of a Portugees at St Lucars, and consigned to his Brother
(a Jew dwelling in Amsterdam).

2. When they had been ten days at sea, the Purser was ordered by the Captain
to go into the Fore-castle, and take his Book and blot out all the names of the
Hollanders and Zealanders, and, in their place, to insert abundance of other
names: After which, they looked it over, and found fault with some names that
remained unaltered, saying, They were too well known; so he put other strange
names in their rooms. Then they examined it again the third time, and found
some names that they thought were too well known in England; so he dashed out
their names, and put in others in their rooms; and then caused them, after the
third time of Examination, to be written out fair. And he says, That the
Pursers Book that is now to be seen, is that which is written out fair, since
the three alterings of the Original Book, by blotting out several Hollanders
names; the original blotted Book being not to be found.

3. There were 4 bars of Silver (as they lay at Eriff) brought out of the
Hold; and by reason they were too big to be carried away, they were put into a
barrel of salt by the Steers-man and another: three of which bars are yet
aboard, for want of an opportunity to convey them a shore; but the fourth is
carried a shore.

4. When the Silver was taken in at Cales, they agreed to sign several Bills of
Lading for Ostend, though they were consigned to Amsterdam (as is well known to
the abovesaid Joachim Peesler); for he heard Laders themselves say at Cales,
That though the Bills of Lading were signed for Ostend, yet the Silver was to
be sent to Amsterdam.

5. He says, That at Cales he would have been freed from the ship Sampson;
for that the Master would not tell him to what place he was bound: whereupon
the Master told him, That if he would go for Amsterdam, he might continue his
service aboard; for that the ship should first go for Amsterdam: but afterward
hearing of the Wars between England and Holland, the Master told him they were
bound for Ostend.

6. He says, That out of the Elias, and two other ships, (of which were
Masters, Claes Peterson, and Daniel Ferrine, all belonging to Holland) several
parcels of silver were brought aboard the Sampson in Cales road, and remained
aboard the Sampson, when she was taken by the English; the said Joachim being
aboard the Elias, when the silver was thence sent aboard the Sampson.

7. He says, That the Steers-man, Peter Naut brought on shore from the ship
Sampson a parcel of silver, about the bigness of a large Sugar loaf, which they
well knew did belong to one Daniel Ferrine, a Master of a ship in Amsterdam.

I. D. Joachim Peesler.
Dated March 21. 1652. We underwritten do witness, That the above Articles
were affirmed to be true by the said Joachim Peesler, who subscribed the same
in our presence.

Will. Reymes, I. Carleton, Jonathan Symonds.



THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



Joachim Peesler, sometime Surgeon upon the Ship Sampson, now riding at
Eriff, whereof is Captain Otto George.
Makes oath, that the said Otto George, meeting him in the street, called him
Villain, and gave him many other opprobrious words, and came toward him, and
laid hold upon a weapon the said Otto had about him, and part drew the same;
whereupon, one that was in Company with the said Otto George, held his arm, and
would not suffer him further to approach the said Joachim; whereupon the said
Otto replied, that he should catch him on the other side: And the said Joachim
does verily beleev, if the man had not held the said Otto George, that he had
then and there wounded him.

Jonathan Symonds makes oath, That he has declared the whole substance of
what is above written in Dutch to the said Joachim Peesler, who affirms the
same to be the whole truth; and he says, that he has declared to him, the
said Joachim, the substance of the oath he is to take.

I. D.
THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



This quarrel did arise upon the Confession of Joachim Peesler (Surgeon of
the ship Sampson) when Otto George, the Captain of the Ship Sampson, had heard
that he had discovered the truth for the State, concerning the altering of the
Dutch Bills of lading in this Ship; and Otto George and the Spaniards malice was
so great to Joachim Peesler for making this discovery, that (I have heard it
credibly reported) they poisoned him shortly after, and then reported he died
of the French Pox.

1. Jacob Elaes testefieth, that so soon as they came into the Without all
doubt, these Papers that were flung into the Sea, were the true and original
Bills of Lading made in Spain.
Downs, and the Master gone to London, that the Steersman, Peter Naut, took up
a bundle of writings, and tied them first to an Iron Bar, and then threw them
into the sea. And the said Jacob knows this to be true for; he delivered
the Iron to the Steersman, and saw him tie it fast, and throw it into the Sea.

2. Since the said Ship was brought into the River of Thames, there has
several considerable quantities of silver been carried out of the Ship,
particularly as they lay at Eriff, several silver bowls and dishes, 16 silver
trenchers, two silver saltsellars, 6 great silver dishes, about 7 or 8 bags of
pieces of Eight, which were carried out by night, and packed in canvass that so
they might, make no nois; And that Otto George and the Steersman knew of the
unlading of them; for the most part was carried to Otto George's lodgings.

3. There is brought on shore four small bags of pieces of Eight, being the
proper goods of Claus Peterson, Skipper and Burger of Amsterdam.

4. That when they were at Cales, upon their first loading of goods, the
Captain told them, They should first go for Amsterdam; but afterward hearing
of the Wars between England and Holland, the Master told him, They were bound
for Ostend.

5 The Steersman Peter Naut, hearing what I had declared in flinging the
writings overboard, asked me, Whether or no I had given in such testimony: to
which I answered, I had; and would justify it: whereupon the said Steersman,
Peter Naut, struck me on the face, that I bled; and so the said Steersman went
out of the room, without further denying the truth thereof.

6. Peter Naut, the Steersman, brought on shore from the Sampson a parcel of
silver about the bigness of a Sugar Loaf, which he knew belonged to Daniel
Ferrine, a Master of a Ship in Amsterdam.

I. D. Jacob Eliares.
Dated March 21. 1652. We underwritten do witness, That the above Articles
were affirmed to be true by the said Jacob Eliares, who subscribed the same in
our presence.

I. Carleton, Will. Reymes, Jonathan Symonds.



THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



[There was many score of thousand pounds stolen out of these Ships, while the
silver lay in the River, by Dutch and others; and had it not been unladen but
by the State left on shipboard, before this time it would all have been (in
all likelihood) stolen away.]

The Testimony of Richard Scot, taken this 15 of December 1652.
WHo says, That in September last there lay a ship, called the Prophet Elias,
belonging to Horn in Amsterdam, and (to his best knowledge) bound for Holland;
the Skipper of the same ship died at Cales; and being dead, the Deponent says,
That the Owners of this ship, being part owners of the Sampson, did sell the
said ship to some Spanish merchants at Cales: at which time, here was taken out
of the ship the Elias (by the men and boat of the Sampson) a parcel of money,
containing fifteen or sixteen bags, and four or five bags of Cocheneel, and
brought it on board the Sampson; where (so far as this Deponent knows) it is
still remaining.

Richard Scot.
Witness,

James Reynolds, Jonathan Symmonds,
I. D.


THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



BArnard Claeson, of Groeningen in Westfreyzland, says, That he is 20 years
old, and that he has been aboard the Sampson nine months and ninteen days,
and that he came first aboard at Talloon, (she being taken by Frenchmen) and
from thence to Genoa, where she took in most part of her Lading; and from
thence went to Lighorn, where they took in a small parcel of Goods more; And
that their end in going to Lighorn was, to look for two Holland men of War
there, to conduct them to Cales, where they lay three or four months for the
silver Fleet; And that at Cales he knows there were taken in Dutch goods, (by
the Skippers acknowledgment) but after the ^umor of the War between England
and Holland, the Skipper said, That he had sent a shore all the Dutch goods;
but, to this Deponents best knowledge, there went not above three or four
parcels on shore: And says, that he supposes these Goods were pretended to
be sent on shore, upon the account of our Differences; And he further says,
That when they were in Cales, before they were Laden, they said they should go
for Holland; but after they had taken in the silver; then they gave out, that
they were bound for Ostend; And he further says, That most part of this
silver was taken in by night in small parcels; And says, That the Goods they
took in at Genoa were delivered at Cales; And says, That there was a very
great quantity of Goods aboard the said ships, when they were reported to go
for Holland; And that he knows not that the said Goods were laid on shore
again.

December 20. 1652. Bernard Clason, Thomas Angel,
The substance abovesaid is verbatim acknowledged by Tho. Angel, In presence of
us,

James Reynolds, Jonathan Symmonds.


THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



April 18. 1653. The Testimony of Barnard Clason, about the age of 22 years,
Says, He was taken aboard the Sampson, (Otto George Master) at Tolloon in
France, and sailed with him from thence to Genoa, and to Allicant, so to
Malaga, then to Cales, where at first he gave it out he went for Amsterdam;
and not only the Captain, but the Steersman said the same.

He further says, That he heard a Merchants man say to the Steersman, he
had two Barks of Ox or Cow hides, that were to go for Amsterdam; and asked the
Steersman if their ship was bound for Amsterdaam; to which the Steersman
answered, Yes, they were bound for Amsterdam; but after hearing of the Wars
between England and Holland, then they gave it out they were bound for Ostend.

I. D. Barnard Clason.
THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



The Certification or Information of John Perrin, one of the Ships company of
the Vice Admiral of the Ships now under arrest, which pretend to be of
Hamborough, called the Salvador, as follows:
IMprimis, The said John Perrin (being about 32 years of age) does certify,
That he being an English man, born at Tongue, near Sittingbourn in the County
of Kent, That he being about his occasions at Cades in Spain, (where the
aforesaid ship Laded) he was entertained by ^he master of the said Salvador,
for wages, (as they pretended) ^o go for Ostend: and coming homewards, (as the
Ships company was at prayer) one Thomas Thomason, an Italian Passenger in the
said ship, demanded of a Spanish merchant, Whither the said ship was bound? to
which the said merchant replied, That they intended for the Downs, ^here to
take in a Pilot; And said, that they would from ^hence go to Ostend; And that
the most part of the goods were to go for Amsterdam: Also, that at the same
time, when the said Salvador came from Cades, there were seven ships more came
from thence with her; And that ^he masters mate of the great Sampson told him
the said John Perrin, that three of the said ships were going to St Mallows,
and four of them to Ostend; whereof five of the said seven ships are here in
the River of Thames.

This John Perrin lives at Feversham in Kent, when he is in England.

per me John Perrin.
This Paper was delivered to me December 14. 1652. by Mr Richard Pitts of the
Tower; In the presence of

I. D. John Reynolds.


THO. VIOLET:

A true Copy.



The Declaration of Philip Brown concerning the Ship Sampson, said to be of
Lubeck Nov. 2^. 165^.
Says, that he was shipped in the said Ship at Talloon; about the beginning of
the summer; from whence the Ship sailed to Genoa, and from thence to Lighorn,
where they expected to be conveyed by two Hollanders (who were gone the night
before they got thither) which should have conducted them to Cales; where, when
they arrive^, they lay seven weeks: and this deponent says, that in that time
he took in by night for 16. or 17. nights together several parcels of silver;
and he says further that (being one night walking upon the deck with the
Masters mate) the said Brown asked him whether or no the said ship with her
lading would not be Prize to this State, in case it should be taken by any of
the Parlaments Fleet: He answered, that he thought the Plate would prove
Prize, by reason that most part of the Money was returned for goods out of the
West Indies, which were sent thither by the Hollanders: And this Deponent says
further, that he (understanding the difference between this Nation and the
Hollanders, (being very desirous to come for his own Country) desired the
Master to clear him, which he denied, And told him, that unless he would go
with him to the Port whether he was bound, he would pay him no wages; but he
would not confess whether he was bound: But the reason why this Deponent left
the said ship was, because he heard, by all Circumstances, that they were
bound for Holland.

Philip Brown.
Witness

James Reynolds. J. D:


THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



Wednesday the 30th. day of March 1653.
JOhn Marshall a Waiter on board the Sampson, Otto George Master, declares,
that on Monday last the said George came aboard the Sampson, and shortly after
fell into discourse with this Affimant, and one William Sharp, another Waiter
aboard, and told them, that he was questioned concerning a good quantety of
silver that was said to be taken away out of the said ship; And then said, for
my part I never had away but 400 pieces of Eight, which was my own money, and
my plate for my own table. It Is true (said he) there were three bars and an
half bar of silver, under my Cabin, which lay there after the English had
seized the said Ship, and by my direction, the Steersman took them from thence,
to dispose of them in some secret place, And took an Hogshead, and filled it
with Salt, and hid the three bars and an half amongst the Salt; and afterward
the Cook, having occasion to use some salt, went to fetch some out of that
Hogshead, and there he found the silver aforesaid: And now (said the said Otto
George) the half bar is missing, but for the three Bars they shall be forth
coming. And then added (which he had also said diverse other times) that if
the Ships and Lading should be made Prize, he would be answerable, or else
he would be hanged, or they should have his life for it. And this, or to this
effect, the said Mr George, at the time and place aforesaid, spoke and declared
freely, and of his own accord, to the parties aforesaid in the English Tongue.

John Marshall. William Sharp. I. D.
THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



An Information given to the Commissioners for Dutch Prises, December 27. 1652.
YEsterday, being the 26th of December 1652. I Humphery Faircliffe a Waiter for
the Custom house, on board the Great Sampson, now riding at Eriffe, had some
discourse with the Cooks mate, who told me, he intended to com up to the
Captain of the said Ship, as this day, who (said he) is in London, to ask him
for some money; and that if he would not give him money as he had given other
folk, viz. the Steersman, the Scrivan, the Gunner, the Cooper, and Jacob the
Cabine Boy, and many others; that then he would go up to the States, and
discover so much as would make the goods and Ship Prize* altogether: and would
declare no more then what he had heard with his ears and seen with his eyes.

He said, he heard the Boatswain speak to the Steersman between Deck, and
said if an English Ship did meet with them, and knew that the Silver was
Holland goods, they would take it for Prize. And the Steersman did make answer,
so they would, and the Ship too. And another standing by said, the Ship was too
great to go into Ostend: To whom he answered, that they intended to lie
without till the Boyers came from Holland to fetch away the Silver: and then
the Ship being lighter they could go into Ostend.

He said also, that he saw them where they had bestowed all the Silver, and
that it lay a bast the Maste, but the Ship swimming too much by the Stern,
they brought a great deal of the silver and laid it on both sides before the
Maste.

And he further told me, that all the Silver is Hollands goods and more of
the other goods, as Hides. And when he had so said, Peter the Boy came in and
interrupted us, otherwise I had known more of his mind at that time.

He also told me, that for a month together, whilst they were at Cales, they
knew no other but they were to go for Holland; but afterward, when the News
came that the English and the Dutch were fallen out, that then he said, they
took the goods out of the Holland ship they were in, and gave it out, they were
to carry the goods to Ostend.

All this was spoken and done on the day and year before named.

And on Tuesday the 28 of December, 1652. I met again with the Cook's Mate
aforesaid, and he told me, that he had received ten pieces of Eight of his
Captain, and now he would go aboard again.

And one Erasmus, who belongs also to the same ship, says, that he had got
money of the said Captain, and he would not go abord any more.

Humphery Faircliffe.
Humphrey Fairc^^ffe made oath of the truth of that which is contained in this
Paper, the 28th day of December, 1652. before me

Tho. Exton.


THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



The Information of Stephen P^^ckle Merchant.
THis Informant says, that about the 30th of November last, stilo novo; being
then in Holland, and traveling in the Skute from Delph to the Hague,, (there
being in the Boat diverse Dutchmen of quality, dwelling in Delph,) he heard
them discourse about the taking of Ships by the English; especially the taking
of the last Plate ships, now under the Notion of Hamburgers. In which Discourse
one of them (being one of the Lords of Delph, and a Member of the East India
Company there,) did confidently affirm to the rest of the Gentlemen, that the
silver on board the Hamburgers, now in custody of the English, did belong to
several Dutchmen of Amsterdam and Harlem: And further said, that although it
might be pretended, that the silver did belong to Hamburgh, yet at last it
would fall upon their own heads, his reason being this, That the English were
subtle enough to find out the ground of the business.

Febr. 14. 1652. London. Steephen Puckle.
Witnessed by

William Randall, Clerk to the Commissioners. Edward Birch. J. D.



THO. VIOLET.

A true Copy.



The States Generals Letter: The Original, under the great Seal of Holland, is
in the Court of Admiraltie.
THe States General of the United Provinces: Faithful and welbeloved; That
which we have resolved to day, concerning the protecting and defending of
these Ships bound from Spain toward the United Netherlands, which are
exspected, you will see out of the enclosed Extract of our Resolutions;
according to the Contents thereof, you are to govern your selves, wherewith
concluding, we recommend you to God's protection.

E. Hooleck
In the Hague. 15 Sept. 1652. By order and appointment of the said Lords States
General in the absence of the Griffer.

J. Sprouson.



To our faithful Friend Wit Cornelis De Wit Vice Admiral of Holland and
West Friesland.
Dominica, 15th Sept. 1652.
Upon what has been presented by the Lords Deputies of the Province of
Holland, in the Assembly after deliberation had, It is resolved, that in
pursuance of their high and mighty Resolution of the 31 of August last past, do
declare by these, that the Vice Admiral de Wit, and the Vice-Commander de
Ruyter shall be written unto, That the ships coming from Spain toward these
United Netherlands, and exspected home, shall not only be protected against
the English, but against all others whomsoever, who would offer to damnifie
them.

E. Hooleck.

An Extract out of the REGISTER of the secret Resolutions of the High and
Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands.
Die Sabbati, August 31. 1652.
THere being produced the second time in the Assembly, the Report of the Lord
Verbolt for the Sea affairs, in pursuance of their Resolution of the 26th
Current, They have perused and examined the Letter of the College of Admiralty
at Amsterdam, written from thence the 24 of the same month; together with a
Petition, signed by a good number of Merchants of the same Town, in the behalf
of themselves and others likewise interessed in the Spanish Trade, concerning
the security and bringing in salvo the Ships and Silver which is expected out
of Spain; That the Commander of the Fleet of this State sailing, do convoy
as well the Ostend Ships as the Hamburgers ships laded with Silver, in case they
should refuse to it. Whereupon, after deliberation held, it was resolved, That
there shall be a Letter sent to the rere-Admiral, De Rutter, that in case they
in the said Channel should meet any Ostend ships, or Hamburgers, coming (as
aforesaid) laden from Spain, they shall convoy these ships at this conjuncture
of time; viz. the said Ostend ships to the coast of Flanders, and the others
into this Country; Although it be not according to their former Instructions,
whether they would or not, or would not consent to it.

H. Bevering.
This agrees with the said Register in the absence of the Graffer,

J. Sprouson.



These Original Warrants and Orders of the States General, and Petition of the
Merchants of Amsterdam, were taken in a Dutch ship that was going with them to
Cornelius de Wit, Vice Admiral of Holland and Westfriezland, and brought to
Dover to MR Vincent Delabarre and MR Thomas Delavale, merchants there, before
they came to the Vice Admiral of Holland; who, finding them to be of great
Concernment and service to the State, acquainted Your Supplicant therewith; and
they sent them up to the Lord Bradshaw and Counsel of State, to be made use of
for the service of the Commonwealth; to their great Commendations for their
Fidelity to this Nation in this particular.

An Extract translated out of a High Dutch Letter from the Hague, bearing date
the 15th of Novem. 1652.
THere was a Report the other day at Amsterdam, the Hague, and here, That the
English had taken our Spanish Fleet; which made many look very dolefully, That
at Amsterdam 30 per cent. was offered for Ensurance, but 50 per cent. was
demanded. But this is found to be an Apocrypha, especially if we may beleev
the report which is come from Antwerpt; for the Letters which came thence, of
the 14th instant, do mention, That nine of the said ships were got to Dunkerk
and Ostend, which had the most part of the money in them; We do long (with
fear) for the confirmation.

I. D. P. Colandrin.

So that although the Port be Dunkerk or Ostend where these ships pretended to
unlade, yet the Adventurers and Owners are of Amsterdam. And this you shall see
clearly confirmed out of several Papers of the States General, upon the
Petition of the merchants of Amsterdam, in the behalf of themselves and others,
^nteressed in the Spanish Trade. There were above thirty other witnesses, all
passengers in these ships, which I brought daily to the Admiraltie to Mr Budd,
the States Proctor, to be legally examined in the Court of Admiraltie; who
could and would have discovered the whole bottom of the Spaniards frauds in the
claiming of this Silver: But through the neglect of Mr Budd, and the craft and
vigilance of the Claimers, and the Spanish Ambassadors Secretary, the witnesses
that I would have examined for the State, (being most of them Passengers in
these ships, this voyage from Spain) they had moneys given them, and were
packed away out of the Nation, before they were examined in the Admiraltie for
the State: Of which abuse and injury to the State, I heavily complained to the
then Counsel of State; but the Counsel was dissolved two days after they had
made an Order for the strict examination of this Business, which was about the
20th of April 1653. Mr Budd, the States Procter, was too great with the Spanish
Ambassadors Secretary. And that was the reason why my witnesses were not all
examined in the Admiralty, but let pass beyond the Seas without examination.

In the Registry I find, amongst many other proofs, this following.

IN a Letter to Mr Samuel Wilson from Mr James Wilson, Agent for the Parliament
at Cades, dated October 19th new style, 1652. This day goes away several ships
bound (as they give out) for Ostend; and Bills of Lading made thither, but the
Port is for Amsterdam: There goes amongst them 7 or 800 Potaccoes of Tobacco,
as near as we can guess.

[This was written out of Spain by the Parlaments Agent Mr James Wilson, who is
now in London (as I am informed); and, no doubt, can give a reason of his
writing the same to Mr Samuel Wilson, the Commissioner for Prize Goods.]

In the Registry of the Admiraltie. BErnard Clason, John Perrin, and Thomas
Angel, Passengers in the Salvador, Sampson and George, confess, That there were
eight Ships in one Fleet, when they came from Cades: And though they were to go
to Ostend, most part of the goods were to go to Amsterdam.

The like does several other Witnesses confess; And that these three ships set
sail from Cades 19th of October 1652. And when these ships were a lading, they
were bound for Amsterdam: And when they heard of the War between Us and
Holland, then they gave out they were for Ostend.



SEveral humble Proposals I made to Doctor Walker; and from him to the
Committee of the Counsel of State appointed to take an Account of your
Supplicant touching this Business, for sending of Commissioners into Spain, to
examine the Laders in Spain, concerning the the Claims of this Silver: which is
the common way they do it, not by way of Mandamus, but by Entreaty, according
to the Course of the Civil Law beeween all Countries who have Amity one with
another, This is daily done: Which had they sent Commissioners, There is not
one of the Spanish Merchants that are nominated in the Bills of Lading in the
Court of Admiralty, that durst have owned the Transporting of Silver out of
Spain, for it is loss of Life and Estate in Spain, to Transport Silver (if you
confess it, or be taken doing it) And whether we had Peace or War with
Spain, the Silver had been all the States: For what silver belonged to Holland,
the Dutch they could not Claim, by the last Articles of Peace, And what the
Spaniard Claimed here, by Merchants, would have all been denied in Spain; for
no man there would confess the Transporting Treasure: And if the Bills of
Lading and the Laders were denied to be true in Spain, the State had done
their work.

I have stated this business at large, to show the great Expense, trouble,
hazard and pains, the hard and difficult ways I found out; I made use of
Seamen that were Passengers, Merchants, English, Strangers, all sors of
people, and all interests, to effect this service, I took pains night and day.

And I most humbly say, if I be empowered by your Highness to have a full
Inspection into the Frauds of the Accomptants and Treasurers of this Nation
with power to act as Remembrancer, And to have the same power (as Doctor Walker
gave me in the Admlraltie) to inspect into all manner of proceedings of
Committee men and Accomptants and Frauds of the Nation, as aforesaid, I will
most humbly undertake (upon the peril of my life) to bring your Highness in
many hundred Thousand Pounds: Provided I may have just reward and encouragement
for what I have done already.

Upon my humble Petition to your Highness and the Counsel for my satisfaction
for the staying the Silver Ships, The Counsel of State made this order.

Wednesday, 16 January, 1652.
ORdered, the humble petition of Thomas Violet, with the These Papers annexed
to my Petition are the Original Affidavits of my Expenses and Charges in this
Business, and Warrants from Doctor Walker and the Counsel to require me to do
this Service: and they remain now in Mr Jessop's custody.
Papers annexed be referred to General Montague and Colonel Sidenham, to be
by them considered of, And the fact, with their opinion reported to the Counsel.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.

Tuesday, 22 January, 1655.
ORdered that Mr Srickland be added to the Committee to whom the Petition of
Thomas Violet is referred.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Counsel.

Upon these Orders of the most Honorable Counsel I writ this Letter ensuing.

A Copy of my Letter to the Lord Bradshawe.
May it please your Honor,
SInce the Order for the taking up the Accounts of this Nation, I have found in
Mr John Corbet's Custody (he being one of the Committee for Salop,) three of
my Bonds of 2000 pounds, for the Payment of one Thousand Pounds to me Thomas
Violet; and the State never received Penny for them. Whereupon, I have
Petitioned his Highness and the Counsel of State for these three Bonds (as part
of my satisfaction) and Mr Corbet has been sent to by Mr Scobell, and was with
the Committee Yesterday, and confessed that he had the Bonds, and that the
State never received Penny of them. This, Mr Corbet told my Lord Strickland and
Colonel Jones, and that he would deliver them unto me if he had the Counsels
Order. I have likewise Petitioned the Counsel, that, for the present, I might
have five hundred pounds, in part of my satisfaction; which money I laid out in
the Prosecution of the silver Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George. And this I
have proved upon the Oaths of Five men: And Dr Walker and the Commissioners for
Prize goods have sent these Affidavits up to the Counsel for my satisfaction.
And these Certificates and Affidavits remain sealed together in Mr Jessop's
custody. And I had the Counsel of States faithful promise (but chiefly and
above all, I relied upon Your Honor for the Restoration of my Estate or the
Value) the Parliament having taken from me to the value of above Eleven
Thousand Pounds in Houses, Lands, Bonds, Moneys and Offices; when by Gods law
nor the law of this Nation, at the time when they took away my Estate, I had
not forfeited one penny. If it had not been for my protesting against the
Discharge of the Silver, and my prosecution of that business, the Silver had
all been let slip out of the Nation. I most humbly beeseech your Honor to
acquaint Mr Scobell of my several services; and defire him, that he be
careful to draw up my order for my bonds, that I may be enabled to sue and
prosecute them, as freely, as if they had never been under Sequestration. And
that I may have, for the present, my moneys I have expended in this service
against the Silver Ships. It is a lamentable Case, my Usage, for me to bring
the State nere four Hundred Thousand Pounds, And to be put to Petition for the
moneys I laid out of my purs. At the Counsel of States, and at Doctor Walkers
Entreaty, I employed people to do this service, as I can make it appear under
his hand. My condition (I humbly conceiv) is not to be matched, I having done
so good Service, and been so ill requited. (It will make all men afraid to
trust to English States men's promises.) If I would have betrayed my trust, and
my Country, (I take God to witness) I was several times offered ten thousand
Pounds of some of the Claimers of this Silver: Which had I done it, I need not
either to have stayed in this Country, or to have petitioned for my Bonds or
Charges.

Your Honors most humble and Obbiged Servant THO. VIOLET.


The Lord Bradshaw's Report on the side of this Letter, written with his own
hand: viz.
I Must needs affirm, That it appeared to the late Council of State, that Mr
Violet did very good service to the Parliament and Commonwealth, touching the
Ships mentioned in this Letter, and deserved good acknowledgment and
satisfaction for it, as being very instrumental in discovering the Dues to the
State, and finding out frauds in this and other particulars: for which, in
those times, he was thought worthy of Consideration.

February 7. 1655. John Bradshaw.

For this his Justice in certifying the Truth, I give his Honor most humble
thanks.

I Presented this Letter and Certificate to some of the Honorable Council; who,
when they had read it, replied, They wondered my Lord Bradshaw and the Council
of State did not give me satisfaction when I did this service; saying, They
could have done it: and (if they would) they might have kept their promise;
they then had power enough to do it.

TO which I humbly answer; My agreement with the Lord Bradshaw and the Council
of State was, That I should be paid eleven thousand pounds for this service,
out of the first moneies the State coined of the silver in these ships, after I
should by good and legal witness disprove the Spanish Ambassadors Claim; Or I
should be restored to my estate in Offices, Lands, Bonds, Money, and Houses
the Parliament had taken from me, with all my damage. Now (may it pleas your
Highness) neither the Lord Bradshaw nor the Council, all the time after their
agreement with me, could pay me; neither did I desire it, before it was due;
for I was to be paid my moneys out of the same moneys which were then aboard
the Ships: For although by my discovery and protest, the Council of State
stayed the silver; which was the 17th of December 1652. Yet all the time after
of the Parliament and Council of States sitting, which was to the 20th of April
1653. the suit against these silver ships and their silver and lading went on
in the Admiraltie; and my witnesses some of them examined in the Admiraltie,
though many other witnesses I would have examined more then I did get to be
examined, but could not have them. And there was no publication till after the
20th of April 1653. and then the power of the Old Council of State was taken
from them, and the silver (though stayed all that time, from December 1652. to
April 1653.) remained a ship board, though both the Commissiones for Prize
Goods, and my self often times, made the Council of State acquainted with the
daily Imbezilments of the Silver in these ships.

May it pleas your Highness, Upon the dissolving of that Parliament and Council
of State, I received new Orders and directions from your Highness's most
honorable Counsel, commanding me to proceed and present to them all frauds and
abuses concerning this silver. And when I presented to your Highness's Counsel
my humble desires, and told them what agreement I had made with the Old Counsel
of State, which was, That I should receiv twelv pence upon every twenty
shillings which was paid to the State out of these silver ships for my
discovery, till the sum of eleven thousand pounds was paid me.

After I had attended your Highness's Counsel several days for my Answer, the
right honorable Colonel Sidenham and Colonel Jones (for Answer to my humble
Petition for the said Allowance) told me, the Councils pleasure was, and they
required me in the Councils name to proceed, and that I should have from the
Council all my charges, and an honorable Reward for my pains and hazard,
expense and time, both for those I employed and for myself, if I did disproov
the Spanish Ambassadors Claim to the silver aboard the Sampson, Salvador and
George; and other particular Agreement your Highness's Council would not make
with your Supplicant; for Colonel Sidenham and Colonel Jones told me, It was
below the Council to make any other Agreement: and of the just performance of
this, I might rest assured on.

May it pleas your Highness; Till I had this promise from your Highness's
Council, I would proceed no further, but refrained my Attendance on Doctor
Walker (he sending for me earnestly to proceed, both by Mr Doreslaus and
others) I told them, when the Counsel of State had given me their answer, how
I should be restored to my estate, and receiv satisfaction for my disbursments
I had and should lay out in this service, I would then proceed in this Business.

And upon the right honorable Colonel Jones and Colonel Sidenham's promise to
me as aforesaid, and upon Doctor Walker's earnest entreaty of me (as appears
under his hand) I proceeded in this service. And this was done since your
Highness took the Government, by order and command of your Council of State,
and at the entreaty of your Advocate Doctor Walker. And upon these honorable
Promises (besides my former Agreement with the Old Council of State) I relied
and proceeded; whereupon, Doctor Walker gave me several Warrants to the
Register, to the Examiner, and to Mr Budd your Highness's Proctor, and Mr
Doreslaus. The Copies whereof follow; viz.

3 September, 1653.
MAster Doreslaus and Mr Bud are now again desired to deliver unto Mr Violet a
Copy of the Specifications given in by the Masters and Commanders of the ships
Sampson, Salvador, and George: as likewise, Copies of all the Pleadings
Articulate Exhibited and admitted on the part of the Claymers of the Silver in
any of these ships: And they are to go with him to the Register, and Examiners
Offices; and to procure him a view of all the Bills of Lading, Extracts and
Exhibites, either brought into the Office, or exhibited by any Claymers: And
whatever Papers are, or shall be exhibited by any Claimers in the three Ships.
I do, as Advocate for the Commonwealth, desire Mr Doreslaus to yield all his
endeavors and assistance, as also the Register, Examiner, and Deputy-Register
in the Admiraltie from time to time to give Mr Violet free admittance and view
of all Acts, Bills of Lading, and Pleas Exhibited, and Extracts and Papers
remaining in the Registry, or which shall come in: And to do it readily and
effectually; the same tending to the Service of the Commonwealth; and being in
order for preparing the Evidence fit to be produced for the Commonwealth. And
I do, according to the Order of the Counsel of State of the First of September,
1653, earnestly desire and Entreat Mr Violet, and also the Commissioners If
this Discovery had been so easily made, and had been every bodies work to have
found out the Spaniards Frauds, I should not have had these earnest Entreaties
from Dr Walker, according to the Orders of the Council of State of the 1 of
Sept. 1653. The Commissioners for Prise goods have certified to Mr Secretary
Thurloe, how active and knowing they found me to make these Discoveries; and
had I not been so, your Highness had lost every penny of this great Treasure,
amounting to above Three Hundred Thousand Pounds.
for Prize goods, and their Sollicitors and Agents; as also, the Proctor and
Sillicitors for the State, and every one of them, with all convenient speed,
severally to set down in Writing all the Informations that they respectively
know of, or can find: And all the Evidences and Proofs that may be discerned
or produced on the part of the Commonwealth; That so a full Plea and Articulate
Allegation may be prepared, and the Proofs brought in for the Commonwealth:
And no Default be done, suffered, or committed.

3 Sept. 1653. Walter Walker.

And another Warrant of Doctor Walkers to the Examiners Mr How, and Mr Arnold,
viz. 1 December, 1653.
MAster How and Mr Arnold, in the business of the three ships, Sampson,
Salvador, and George, and the Silver and Lading in those ships, Mr Violet was
ordered to contribute and yield his Assistance, to bring in Evidence on the
behalf of the Commonwealth. I did heretofore sign a Warrant, that all the
Proceedings might be showed him: He now desires, that the names of all the
Witnesses already produced on the behalf of the State, as also the Allegations
and matter upon which they were produced: as likewise, the names of all
Witnesses produced on the behalf of the Claymers; and every one of them
particularly, and the Allegations and Interrogatories upon which they have been
produced, might be shown to him. This that he desires being just, I desire
that you Dr Walker knew (to his own knowledge) that I employed many people
every day in these Discoveries, several of them being often with me, both at
the Admiraltie, and at his chamber; and he knew, I employed none in this
business but credible persons, as appears here under his hand.
would not put him off, but let it be done forthwith, unto himself, and all
such others as he under his hand shall nominate; for he imployes others under
him in searching into this business. He will nominate none but such as may be
trusted in it. And I desire you in your several places to give him and all that
he shall employ, all ready dispatch and encouragement, that the Business of
the Commonwealth may find no obstacle. Where there is publication, you may
likewise show him the Depositions, and (I pray) let nothing that is just be
denied him.

December 1. 1653. Walter Walker.

[Mr Simon Baldwine, Mr John Glover, Mr Thomas Lee, Mr John Gerrel, Mr Bruise,
Mr Smith, Mr William Bourne, Mr Scot, and several others, Thomas Violet
employed daily in the Admiralty about this Business, as Dr Walker and the
Registers and Examiners daily see, and as appears by the above said Doctor
Walkers Warrant.]

WHen I first was required by the Counsel of State to engage in this service,
to assist and be in the nature of a Remembrancer for this Business, my Warrant
(of December 13. 1652) from the Counsel of State commanded me from time to
time to acquaint Doctor Walker (Advocate for the Commonwealth) with what I had
to offer, or did desire to be done in this Business of the Silver ships for
the service of the Commonwealth. And truly my Duty and Truth binds me to
give Doctor Walker humble thanks; for I ever had his uttermost Assistance,
Advice and Encouragement to further me in this service; for he knew I needed
it, having undertaken a knotty work, and had great and mighty Opposites
therein, (even such as had great Influence in the State and then Parliament)
which would have had the silver then discharged; and for my staying it, they do
owe me a shrewd turn to this day.

Doctor Walker made it his Business to keep the Silver here, till my Witnesses
were examined. Let the Judges of the Admiraltie say what they pleas, This was a
great help and encouragement unto me in my Discoveries, and made my work so
much the easier when I found his vigilance and integrity to improve by all
lawful ways and means the Commonwealths interest to this Silver, that they
should not be cousoned of this great Treasure. The like ready assistance to
their power (in their several places) I must truly acknowledge I received ever
from the Registers and Examiners, when I showed them Doctor Walkers Warrants.
For others in the Admiralty that did not do their duties, and hindered me as
much as they could (though they were the Commonwealths officers; and, by their
places and duty, ought to have don that they neglected to do: God forgive them,
I do; considering though they endeavored to neglect their duties, I was so
vigilant (God assisting me) that they were disappointed of their purposes. And
the Commonwealth and your Highness, by my protest and careful prosecution, got
every penny of the silver in these ships Sampson, Salvador and George, which
else your Highness and the Commonwealth had lost. For my doing whereof great,
men in the State were and are angry with me, and many merchants and others in
the Admiraltie and else where grinned their teeth at me; yet for all their
malice (through the good protection and guidance of God) they could never bite
me with their teeth though with their tongues they have back bitten me very
liberally upon all occasions by themselves and their emissaries. I humbly say,
it is an unworthy way to say that behind a man's back which they will not say
to his face. And I humbly hope now your Highness sees the true proceedings and
my expense, hazard, envy and pains so clearly and particularly proved by
many witnesses, you will in your Justice pay me what was promised me, viz.
the full Restoration of my Estate, with damages; or the sum of eleven
thousand pounds. For it would be strange to all men, to have it left to
posterity, that Thomas Violet (out of his zeal for his Country) upon the
faithful promise of the Counsel of State of England, borrowed five hundred
pounds at Interest, and laid it out every penny to save and get the State Three
hundred thousand pounds in Silver; which the State had lost, had not Thomas
Violet prosecuted the Business, and discovered the fraudulent Claims to all
this Silver; which Practices were set on foot by the then Spanish Ambassador,
to deceiv the State. The particulars at large I formerly Printed, when I stayed
the Silver 1652.

Here follows an Attestation of my Protesting in the Court of Admiraltie
against the Judges, clearing or discharging the said Silver and Ships, and
against the Spanish Ambassadors Claims, just that Morning as they were
discharging of the Ships and Silver, being the seventeenth day of December
1652. as appears by the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint under their
hands, viz.

Dated at the Mint in the Tower of London, December 23. 1654.
We, whose names are here underwritten, hereby Certify all whom it may
concern, that we were present in the Court of Admiraltie that day the Judges
of the Court were reported to proceed to a sentence for the Clearing or
condemning of the Ships (Salvador, George and Sampson;) it being about the
seventeenth day of Dec. 1652 And there we saw Mr Thomas Violet the same day in
that Court present a paper unto the Judges, which he declared, contained
several reasons and Arguments to the Judges: for respiting their Judgment
concerning the discharging of those Ships, and several other Prizes, till he
had examined several witnesses on the behalf of the State, to disproov the
Spanish Claims concerning these Ships, at which time the silver was aboard
these Ships: After some time spent in arguing the business by Mr Violet in
behalf of the State, the Judges seeming to proceed to a sentence concerning the
said Prize Ships, Mr Thomas Violet made his Protest in the said Court of
Admiraltie against the discharge of all or any of these Prizes, declaring he
did it upon his own Account, till his Witnesses were examined in the behalf of
the State: And that the Judges, if they should proceed to the contrary, should
answer it to the then Parliament and Counsel of State at their peril. Thereupon
the Court desisted from proceeding in the said Business; and the Judges thereof
required Mr Violet to attend the Counsel of State that afternoon about his
carriage that day in the Court of Admiralty, touching these ships.

George Brett, Thomas Burch, James Hoore.


Here follow the Affidavits and Certificates to the Truth of Thomas Violetts
Service, made by honest men of clear reputation, (Merchants and others) that
he employed and were privy to the whole proceedings in the Admiralty and other
parts of this Nation: and by what ways and means he made these Discoveries,
to entitle the State to this Silver, and disprove the Spanish Ambassadors and
the Spaniards Claims. The Affidavits follow; viz.

JOhn Glover of London Merchant, aged about forty years, makes Oath, That Mr
Thomas Violet having since December 1652. received several Orders and Warrants
from his Highness's Council, and Doctor Walker (Advocate for the Commonwealth)
to assist in the behalf of the Commonwealth against the silver Ships Sampson,
Salvador and George and all their Silver and lading: In pursuance of which
service, the said Mr Violet has constantly entreated his (this Deponents)
assistance, (amongst several other persons which he the said Mr Violet
employed) for making discovery of the several frauds and practices of the
Masters of those Ships, and of several other merchants, Claimers of the Silver
and lading in the aforesaid Ships, to deceiv the State by their several Claims;
And also of the several Bills of lading, and in several other particulars: in
pursuance of this service for the Commonwealth, for several months this
Deponent, with one Mr Simon Baldwine a merchant, who lived a long time at Cades
and St Lucars in Spain, and with Mr Violet this Deponent and they two did view
and examine all the Bills of lading, and the several pleas and Exhibits,
Extracts, and all other writings and papers which were brought in and remain in
the Registrie of the Admiraltie concerning these ships, silver and lading; the
Register declaring that they had seen all the Transactions that was then upon
record in that business, which were many thousand sheets; and that the said Mr
Violet had several Warrants from Doctor Walker to the Register and Examiners of
the Admiraltie, to require them, that the said Mr Violet, and all such as he
should nominate under his hand to the said Register and Examiner, should be
empowered to make several searches, which he this Deponent and the rest did
almost every day for about three months: And this Deponent further makes
Oath, That after he and the rest had taken such observations and directions,
as Mr Thomas Violet had given order concerning the marks of the several Bills
of Lading, and several other particulars; both Mr Simon Baldwyne and this
Deponent delivered the Papers up to Mr Violet, he having employed and promised
to content us for our pains. This Business concerning the ships and silver,
this Deponent came to be engaged in at the request and entreaty of the said Mr
Violet, he having heard how necessary and advantageous he (this Deponent)
should be, in making this discovery of the truth of this Business; For that
this Deponent for many years was an Inhabitant and merchant in Rotterdam, and
had Commerce and Trade with most Towns in Holland, where Trading was stiriing.
And this Deponent know's many of the marks of the Bills of Lading of these
Silver Ships, though they pretend to belong to Spaniards, Hamburgers and
Flaunders, yet they are the same marks as diverse Merchants of Holland give on
their goods and Merchandise; And that since the War with Holland, diverse Ships
and their lading have been condemned in the Admiraltie, and made prize of,
which had Silver and merchandise aboard them at the time of the condemning,
with the same marks which are in these Ships (Sampson Salvador and George);
And this Deponent further deposes, That he knows the said Mr Violet
employed (besides Mr Simon Baldwine) several other people for the making these
discoveries ever since December 1652. And this Deponent has been employed by
the said Mr Violet in this business for almost a year and an half in the
finding out and searching this business; and the said Mr Violet has to his
(this Deponents) knowledge, expended very great sums of money in prosecution
thereof, to the value of above five hundred pounds, besides all his pains,
attendance and hazard; this Deponent having heard him several times threatened
and in danger of his life by several Merchants and others, Claimers of the
Silver in these ships: they having declared in this Deponents presence, That by
the said Violets protesting in the Court of Admiraltie against the discharge of
these Ships and Silver in December 1652. the day the Judges appointed for
discharging the Ships and Silver, (And by his further prosecution against those
Ships and Silver since) he has been and is the only cause of hindering them
of their Silver and Ships; And that they had had their Silver long since, had
not Thomas Violet undertaken the prosecution of this Business. And this, this
Deponent has heard affirmed several times by merchants and others, claimers,
both at the Exchange and elsewhere. And this Deponent makes Oath, That th^s
Affidavit is for the affirming and justifying of Mr Violets pains, hazard and
service in prosecution of this Business of the Silver ships and Lading.

John Glover.
Sworn the 27th November. 1654.

before me ROBERT KELLEWAY, Master of the Chancery in Ordinary.



THomas Ley and John Gerrel make Oath, that in December 1652. Mr Thomas Violet
was Commanded by the Council of State to assist (in the behalf of the State)
against the Ships Sampson, Salvador and George; And several times since, the
said Mr Violet has received warrants from his Highness Council, and Doctor
Walker (Advocate for the Commonwealth) for the prosecution of that service:
this the Deponents know because Mr Violet has shown them several times the
warrants upon several occasions, he having employed them (these Deponents) for
about sixteen months in the assisting him to prosecute this business
concerning the Silver Ships. Besides, to their these Deponents knowledge, he
did imploie eight other persons at his charge for making these Discoveries, for
above sixteen months together, he the said Thomas Violet paying all charges
of meetings, Boat-hire, and for writing and subscribing all the Transactions
for the Counsel of State and Doctor Walker, for Printing the several
Proceedings for the Parliament and Counsel: And they, these Deponents, are
assured and know Mr Thomas Violet could not (though he has been very thrifty
in this Business, to have as much done for as little money as he could) expend
in this Service for the State in his prosecution of these silver Ships, he
has expended above five hundred pounds, besides all his hazard, pains and
time, having to their knowledge sat up many nights and days together to do
this Service; And having contracted the envy of many merchants for staying
this Silver: And this Affidavit these Deponents make for satisfaction of all
whom it may concern.

Thomas Ley. John Gerrel.

Both sworn the 25 of November 1654.

JOHN PAGE.



SImon Baldwine of London merchant, aged near 43 years, makes Oath, that Mr
Thomas Violet in December 1652. was ordered and required by the Council of
State to assist in the Admiraltie, in the behalf of the Commonwealth, against
the Silver Ships Sampson, Salvador and George, and their Silver; And several
times since has received several orders and warrants from his Highness*s
Council and Doctor Walker (Advocate for the Commonwealth) against the said
Ships and all their Silver and Lading. For the more effectual prosecution of
this service, the said Thomas Violet knowing this Deponent had lived for some
time at St Lucars and Cades, and by that means knew the way of their Account,
and shipping Goods and Silver, when the Silver Fleet returned from the West
Indies: Thereupon the said Thomas Violet, and this Deponent, and one Mr John
Glover, and several others, did view and examine the Bills of Lading, and their
several marks, Pleas and Exhibits, Extracts and other Papers which were brought
into the Admiralty, concerning these three silver Ships their Silver and
Lading. Which Search Mr Violet was desired to make by Order of Doctor Walker,
in pursuance of an Order of his Highness*s Counsel, as appears by several
Warrants to the Register and the Examiner of the Admiraltie: And this Deponent
makes Oath, That Mr John Glover and this Deponent, having taken such
Observations and directions as Mr Violet conceived was for the most advantage
of the Commonwealth, concerning the several marks of several Bills of Lading,
(both for their silver and merchandise) and several other particular
Observations; and that Mr Violet (to this Deponents knowledge) employed at his
own expense many other people to find out this Business; he having engaged to
see me Simon Baldwine and Mr Glover satisfied for our pains. This Deponent
delivered Mr Thomas Violet the Papers. And this deponent further says, That
he was employed by Mr Violet for one year together, this deponent living in
the house with him for that time purposely for the Transactions of this
Business: And this deponent verily believes, that Mr Violet (in the
prosecution of this service against the Ships Sampson, Salvador and George)
has expended many hundred pounds, and that it cannot be less then five
hundred pounds, besides all his pains, attendance and hazard; this deponent
knowing Mr Violet to sit up many nights and days for this Business; this
deponent having given his constant attendance therein for about one year, to
find out the frauds of the Spaniards Claims unto and in the aforesaid Ships:
Which frauds, after much search, Mr Violet discovered by many passengers and
mariners, and by other ways and means, as does appear by many confessions
under the hands of several people, and the several other papers in Mr Violets
custody.

Simon Baldwine.
Sworn the 17 of February 1653.

JOHN PAGE.



THomas Violet makes Oath, That since the thirteenth of December 1652. in his
(this deponents) prosecution and assisting against the Ships Sampson, Salvador
and George, their Silver and Lading; he having employed several persons
amongst the Seamen and Passengers belonging to these Ships to get acquainted
with them, and of several other persons, for the searching out of all Records
both in the Tower and in the Admiraltie; And for the transcribing and printing
the several Transaction's of this Business for the State; this deponent having
for sixteen months together constantly employed eight several person, and
sometimes above half a score, for the effectual prosecution of this service,
many of them being constantly with him (this deponent) when he addressed
himself to Doctor Walker about this business: In which service this Deponent
has expended above the sum of five hundred pounds, besides all his time and
hazard of his person. Upon this consideration, viz. the Counsel of State,
having in December 1^52. faithfully promised this Deponent, That if he did
disprove the Spanish Ambassadors and his Agents Claims to the Silver in these
Ships, and to prove by good and legal Witnesses that great and considerable
quantities of the silver aboard those Ships appertained to the Dutch, That then
this deponent should be restored to his estate or the value of it: upon the
Credit of which promise, he (this deponent) borrowed five hundred pounds to
do this service (the deponents estate being taken away from him by the long
Parliament to his, this deponents, damage of above eleven thousand pound as he
(this deponent) presented to the Commit for Foraine Affairs December 1652.
And the Committee faithfully promised him (this deponent) a restoration of all
his estate in kind, or the full value thereof, for this service, if he did
disprove the Spanish Ambassador and his Agents Claims to the Silver in the said
Ships.

THO. VIOLET.
Sworn Nov. 25. 1654.

John Page.



A Copy of the Commissioners of the Dutch Prise Office Letter to Mr Thurloe
then Clerk of the Council of State.
Mr Thurloe!
We have a certain discovery, that a great quantity of Gold and Silver has
been stolen out of the Dutch Prize Ships, that calls themselves Hamburgers;
we desire, for the service of the State, to have a warrant to bring all the
Bullion in the Dutch Prize Ships on shore. We have here (enclosed) Mr Thomas
Violets Letter to us, and proofs taken in the Office; Every hours delay of not
taking the Silver a shore, is a great loss to the State: We find Mr Violet,
(the bearer hereof) very active and knowing to make these discoveries, And he
has don several good and great services for the State already in this
business; which we desire you to present the same to the Counsel of State,
with the tender of our services, we are Sr

Your very friends and servants
Sam. Wilson. Rich. Hill.

Dated Dutch Prize Office, December the 18th 1652. This is a true Copy,
examined by me

THOM. BRUCE, Scr.



Upon what is here sworn and attested by able legal Witnesses, I do most
humbly appeal to Your Highness, Whether I did not deal with the Counsel of
State and the Committee for Foreign affairs, and Your Highness's Counsel as
public Ministers in the name and behalf, of the Commonwealth: And that, (if I
had not relied on their honorable Promiss, and since, on Your Highnes's
Counsel; whether I would have run these hazards, been at this Charge, hiered
half a score several persons, and to have spent five hundred pounds, and paid
Interest for it till this day, if I had not had the assurance from the State,
of just and honorable dealing) the Lord Bradshawe, nor any one of the old
Counsel of State were privately interessed in this business, with agreeing with
me for the restoring of my Estate, or the sum of Eleven Thousand Pounds, if
I did disprove the Spanish Ambassadors and the Spaniards Claims, they were not,
nor none of their relations were to have one penny or farthing benefit by this
agreement.

They did only look upon the greatness of my service and the hazard, charge
and difficulty I should undergo: And some of the Counsel of State told me, If
I did prove what I undertook, I deserved forty thousand Pounds, for I saved the
State all the Three hundred thousand pounds: But if I should fail in what I
had undertaken, I deserved to lose my life: And that, if I would be so rash,
to make a Protest against the discharge of the Silver, and, when I had done,
could not prove it, I must suffer highly for it, for it was at that time to
bring more fists about their ears then the State could well defend themselves
from. Many of the Counsel of State, and some of the Commissioners for Prize
goods and Officers of the Mint told me, I had undone my self if I did not
prove, there was great quantity of silver in these Ships, Sampson, Salvador
and George, belonged to the Dutch in the United Provinces.

Many great Personages told me, The Spanish Ambassador would demand Justice on
me for presuming to contradict what so great a Princes Ambassador affirmed to
the Counsel of State, and to the Parliament, if I failed of my proofs against
him.

Also, the Merchants, many scores of them would have their actions against me,
for their Damages, for my detaining their ships and silver upon a fall
pretense, (they having enterred a Protest for their Damage in December 1652,
for detaining this silver.)

And, above all, some of the Council of State told me themselves, if I could
not prove what I had alleged to be true, I should be taken for an Incendiary
(and so they would report me to the Parliament?) So that, in seeking to get
mine Estate, I ran a great hazard totally to ^do my self.

May it please Your Highness: In brief, I might with the same security have as
well flung my self off of Paul's Steeple, as to have missed to maintain my
charge, and not have disproved the Spanish Ambassadors Claim.

Therefore when I had made my Protest in the Admiralty I was forced to be at
the Charge to make out my Evidence and Proofs, and then fully to follow this
business, or be undone.

The prosecution of this business has been to my insupportable Charge: to this
day I pay Interest for five hundred Pounds I borrowed, and laid out in this
business, to bring the State in above Three hundred thousand Pounds, as appears
formerly, upon the Oaths of several credible Witnesses. And although I was
promised the sum of Eleven Thousand pounds. Of all that sum I have received
as yet (though I attended daily the State) but three Bonds (which were my own
Bonds) in two thousand Pounds for the payment of one thousand Pounds unto me
Thomas Violet: These Bonds being seized, and taken out of my sisters cust^dy in
Holbourn Anno 1644, by the Committee of Shropshire,

And these Bonds I could not have out of the Committee of Salops Custody, till
I paid them forty Pounds, as appears by the Order of the Counsel following. So
that, there is nothing that comes into a Committees hands of my Estate that I
could yet ever get of Scot-free.

But I must ever humbly acknowledge John Corbet Esquire his great Justice and favor
to me, in helping me to my Bonds, even on those terms I had them: For which I
give him humble thanks. And if the said Committee of Salop will restore me
back the said forty Pounds (I have deposited in Mr Corbets hands for their use)
now they see my faithful Affection and Duty to my Country in these several
particulars; I shall like-wise-give them thanks for their Justice, in doing me
right. Their County will be little the Richer for taking this Forty Pounds of
me.

The Order of the Counsel of State thereupon follow, viz.

Friday, March 21. 1655. At the Counsel at White Hall.
UPon reading a Report from the Committee (to whom the Petition of Thomas
Violet was referred) praying that certain Bonds seized upon by the Committee of
Salop may be delivered unto him. Upon consideration of the said Report, and
for that the said Bonds are engaged for forty pounds, which the said Committee
employed for public use, Ordered by his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Counsel, That upon the said Thomas Violets paying unto the said Committee the
said sum of forty pounds, for which the said Bonds are engaged, That the said
Committee be required to deliver up the said Bonds unto the said Thomas
Violet, and that he be at liberty to sue the same, and to take the benefit
thereof as formerly he might have done; and that it be referred to John
Corbet Esquire, to see the said Bonds delivered up accordingly upon payment of
the said forty pounds.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Counsel.

Mr John Corbet I attended with this order; March 28. 1655. He was pleased to
tell me he was to go down into Shropshire, and would speak with the Committee
who were to receive the forty pounds, and then I should know where to pay my
money, for he told me he had never received Public moneys, and he was
very unwilling to receiv any now, But upon his return, upon my earnest
entreaty and to save me from further trouble, he told me he would receiv
and keep this forty pounds in deposito, for the use of the Committee till he
had order from them for the disposing of it. That transaction follows, viz.

MEmorandum, That the 24th of May 1656. In obedience to the Order of his
Highness the Lord Protector and his Counsel of the 21. of March 1655. I John
Corbet Esquire have delivered unto Thomas Violet, of London Goldsmiths, three
Bonds: the first bearing date the 6th of June 1638. of eight hundred pounds,
for the payment of four hundred pounds within one year after the death of the
Lady Anne Waad; in whc^h Bond, the said Lady Anne Waad, Charles Mordent, Philip
Cage, and Edmund Lenthal Esquires, stand bound to the said Thomas Violet: and
one other Bond of the 6th of June 1638. in six hundred pounds, for the payment
of three hundred pounds, within two years after the death of the said Lady Anne
Waad; in which the Persons aforesaid stand bound to the said Thomas Violet: and
one other Bond (of the same date) of six hundred pounds, for the payment of
three hundred pounds, within three years after the death of the said Lady Anne
Waad; in which Bond, the Persons aforesaid also stand bound to the said Thomas
Violet; The sum of forty pounds being paid by the said Thomas Violet,
according to the said Order.

JOHN CORBET.
Witnesses then present

Edward Watkins. William Davis. Edmund Cogan. John English Scr.




The Lady Ann Waad of Battles Hall in Essex died about May 1643. And the Bonds
are due to me Th. Violet, as abovesaid.

May it please your Highness,

OUt of your princely regard to Justice, to reliev your humble Supplicant; and
to give that order and direction, that either your Supplicant may be restored
to his Estate again, with his Damages, or the sum of Eleven Thousand pounds
paid him, according to the faithful promise of the Counsel of State; Or any
other way Your Highness in your great Clemency and love to Justice shall think
most convenient for the just Reward of your Loyal Subject, to give him
Satisfaction. (Your Supplicant having formerly at large Printed the Grounds and
Reasons for his Stay of this Silver; and the several humble proposalls he
from time to time presented to your Highnes*s Counsel and Doctor Walker for
your service.) And your Highness having disposed of all this great treasure by
the hands of Sr J. Baxter, your Highness 's Lieutennant of the Tower; who has
been honorably pleased solemnly several times upon your Supplicants humble
suit, to promise me, if ever he had a fit opportunity to acquaint your
Highness of the great charges, pains and attendance I had been at in this
business: and that he would faithfully and effectually do it; and present how
seasonably both for the Nation and your Highness I stayed that silver in the
Ships Sampson, Salvador and George, when Van Trumpe was in the Downs, ready to
conduct the silver home. And this appears upon the attestation of several
Gentlemen, your Highness's Officers of the Mints hands, whom Mr Lieutennant of
the Tower knows to be able, honest Gentlemen; And they were in the Court of
Admiraltie when I stayed this silver by my Protest. I humbly refer my self to
their Certificate in this Book, Fol. 48, and to Mr Lieutennant of the Tower's
report to your Highness thereupon.

I petitioned your Highness in February 1653. to take an Account of these
silver ships, and what I had proved in the Admiraltie: And desired, that your
Highness Counsel would advise with Doctor Walker about sending Commissioners
into Spain, to Examine the Claimers in Spain: and for to Advise how this
weighty business might be managed for the most advantage of the State: and to
vindicate the Justice of this Nation in staying this silver in the Ships
Sampson, Salvador and George. This was the substance of my humble Petition.

The 3d of February 1653. Your Highness referred this Petition to the
consideration of the Counsel to expedite the business, by Mr J. Sadler.

Wednesday 22. February 1653. At the Counsel at White Hall.
THe humble Petition of Thomas Violet to his Highness the Lord Protector, and
by his Highness referred to the Counsel, was this day read. Ordered, that it
be referred to a Committee of the Counsel, viz. to Major Genesis Lambert, Lord
Viscount Lisle, and Col. Sydenham, or any two of them, to take consideration
thereof, and to inform themselves of the Fact, and the Claims made, and to
state the same: And in order thereunto, to send for Doctor Walker, as also for
the Petitioner, and such persons and papers as they shall judge meet; and to
report the same, with their opinions to the Counsel.

Will. Jessopp, Clerk of the Counsel.

THe 25 of February 1653. Doctor Walker and your Supplicant attended the right
honorable Major General Lambert and Colonel Sydenham; to whom your Supplicant
delivered a duplicate of many, Papers he had formerly delivered to Doctor
Walker, touching this Business; wherein, at large, was set down what was proved
for the State against the Silver Ships; (some part of which Papers I have here
printed, with my then humble desires to the honorable Committee, to have
Commissions out of the Admiralty to go into Spain, (as is usual by the course of
the civil Law) by which means the silver that is pretended by their bills of
Lading to be laden by Spaniards at Cales and St Lucars aboard these Ships;
not one penny will be claimed of it in Spain by the Spaniards; for, the
transporting Silver out of Spain without the Kings license, is loss of life and
estate: And had the Claimers had the Kings license to transport the Silver,
that license would have been pleaded in the Admiralty: and this is a certain
truth, No man in Spain will make a confession to hang himself; if they did,
they would be accounted mad merchants; so that all this Silver would have
proved prize to your Highness, bad we not had a War with Spain: for the truth
is, these Spanish Claims were forged on board the Ships when they were at Sea;
as appears by the voluntary confession of Mr Joachim Peesler, Surgeon of the
Ship Sampson, who says, The Pursers book was altered at Sea, and all the Dutch
names put out of the Pursers book, and other names put in, and the true book
was not in the Admiralty; and the Spaniards wanted for no help in London to
perfect their fraudusent Claims as I have set forth: And Jacob Eleares, the
Cabbin-boy of the Sampson says, The Steersman at the Downs took an Iron-barr
and tied a bundle of Writings fast to it, and then flung it into the sea. You
will see this at large by both their own Confessions in this book, fol. 17, 20.

I also most humbly presented the insupportable charge and expense, the
continual hazard of my life, and the envy I had by my staying this Silver.

The right honorable Committee were well pleased with the account Doctor Walker
and my self gave them touching this Business; And Major General Lambert
commanded me to make my Petition, and to set down my humble desires, and he
would see that I should receive satisfaction and encouragement for this
service. And accordingly I made my humble Petition, and delivered it to his
Honor; but as yet (by reason of the multitude of great Businesses) it is daily
respited: Doctor Walker at the same time made his Report of the great expense
and envy I had undergone in doing this Service; and humbly referred me to the
honorable Committee for satisfaction. This was about March 1653

This (that before I have humbly declared) shows to all the world the just
grounds and reasons the then Parliament and Counsel of State had for staying the
ships Sampson, Salvador, and George upon your humble and faithful Subjects
discovery, and his Protest in the Court of Admiraltie, and his great expense
and pains: All which he willingly and cheerfully undertook, to show his true
affection to his dear Country, to the then Parliament and Counsel of State, and
afterward to your Highness; by several Orders and Warrants from your
Highness's Counsel, and your Highness's Advocate, requiring and desiring your
Supplicant to do this: And no man of his Condition can show fuller or clearer
demonstration of his duty and love to his Nation and the present Supreme
Governors; Nor no man in England (of your Supplicants condition) ever brought
to the Commonwealth so much money at one time, as your Supplicant has done.

May it pleas your Highness; the Scripture says, The tree is known by his
fruit: Had I not loved my Country, I would not have ventured my life and
estate (as I have done) in this service, and sat up nights and days to do
this service, and employed half a score persons at my own charge in this
Business.

I most humbly here (upon my knees) present your HIGHNESS an Account of what
has been taken from me Thomas Violet; for which I most humbly desire
satisfaction in kind, with my damages, or the sum of eleven thousand pounds,
as was faithfully promised unto me by the most honorable Counsel of State in
December and January 1652. for staying the Silver in the ships Sampson,
Salvador and George, and disproving the Spanish Ambassadors Claim to this
Silver, which was above three hundred thousand pounds.

1. WHen I was first sent unto the Tower the 6th of January 1643, my mother had
of mine good Bonds and Bills in her hands taken away from her at several times,
to the value of one thousand three hundred and odd pounds; Besides many of my
Papers and Accounts of great concernment to the Commonwealth; and as yet I
cannot come to the knowledge who has them: But this I am sure of, If there had
been any thing in them that could have made against me, there had then use
been made of them.

2. My mother had at another time a Privy Seal taken from her, wherein the late
King acknowledged he owed me (for my expenses in discovering the Transporters
of Gold and Silver) ninteen hundred threescore and eight pounds: which money I
laid every penny out of my own purse to do the late King and Commonwealth that
service: and I caused the transporters of gold and silver to be fined in the
Star Chamber at Twenty four Thousand pounds, besides several Merchants, and
gold and silver Refiners, viz. Alderman Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs, Mr Peter
Fountain and others: Upon their Petition to the late King, (and paying well for
it) had their Pardon under the Great Seal of England, for several abuses
practiced by them in their Trades, and complained of at Whitehall to the late
King by Sr Henry Mildemay Master of the Jewel-hous, and by some of the Wardens
and Company of Goldsmiths, as will appear by the Order of the Counsel-table, 25
Jan. 1634.

3. The Committee of Essex put me out of Possession of the Manors of Battles
and Patan-Hall in Essex, as appears by their Warrants. Of which Lands I had an
Extent to the just value of One thousand pounds: and one Mr Elconhead received
my rents ever since 1643, Mr Philip Cage being in possession for my Use.

4. The Committee of Shropshire seized, in my sisters hands, in London, three
Bonds due to me, in two thousand pounds for the payment to me Thomas Violet
one thousand pounds, by the Lady Anne Waad, Edmond Lenthal, Phillip Cage and
Charles Mordent Esqrs, as appears by the Bonds restored unto me back from John
Corbet Esqr, 24th of May 1656, by virtue of your Highness and your Counsels
Order of 21 of March 1655. And I have put these Bonds in suit, according to the
power given unto me by your Highness, and your most honorable Counsel: For
which Justice I most humbly am bound to give to Colonel Syddenham, my Lord
Strickland, and Col. Jones most humble thanks; humbly trusting in God, that
they will be honorably pleased to move your Highness, and the Council to take
that order, the rest of my Estate under Sequestration shall be justly
restored: Or, that I shall have the sum to be made up Eleven thousand pounds
paid me, according to the faithful promise of the Council of State 1652, for
staying, and intituling the State to the aforesaid Three hundred thousand
pounds in silver, which the Commonwealth, (only by my means,) had every penny
of it.

5. I had the Leas of ten several Houses, at the Posterne in Little
Moor-fields; and the Tennants owed me, when I was committed to the Tower, in
arrears for rent above one hundred pounds: And for these Thirteen years, I
received no Rent of them. But one Mr Elconhead has received the Rents of them
ever since.

6. I had the Office of sealing and surveying of all gold and silver Thread and
Wire: which prevented the making of all slight and adulterate gold and silver
Thread, and Wire, granted to me under the Great Seal, for three Lives, from
the late King; which Office cost me Fifteen hundred Pounds (to the Lord
Treasurer Juxon, L. Cottington, Sr John Cook Secretary of State, and Sr. John
Banks the late Kings Attorney. The necessity of keeping up that Office, to
prevent the daily Cosennages and frauds of diverse Silkmen, Wyerdrawers and
Refiners in their making Course, slight and deceitful Gold and Silver Wire and
Toread: I shall at the later end of this book show at large; having about three
hundred Assayes of adulterate and course gold and silver Wire, Thread, Spangles,
Oes, etc all made and sold contrary to the Laws and Statutes. These Assayes
are in my custody, under the Hand and Attestation of Mr Alexander Jackson
Assay-master of Goldsmiths Hall; and the several Silkmens names and shops, and
days of the Month in which they sold this course, adulterate gold and silver
Thread and Lace, Spangles, Wire, etc. to the great deceit of the Nation in
general.

And, upon the Discovery of these notorious Cheats, the late King and his
Counsel appointed me Surveyor and Sealer of the said Manufacture.) I caused
all the abuses to be laid aside: I Indicted some offenders, imprisoned some,
caused others to stand in the Pillory, and made many of them that wrought
adulterate course silver run away out of London: By which means I angered many
cheating Wyerdrawers, Silkmen and Refiners: and the late Kings Council and
Commissioners settled such Rules and Orders, during that Regulation, the
Manufacture was all made of good silver, and the Coin and Bullion of this
Nation preserved; and your Supplicant was bound, to the late King, to warrant
all the Manufactures either of gold or silver, Wire or Thread which he sealed,
or surveyed in the Office, to be good silver, and to make it good to any party
grieved in the Nation; as appears by my Patent under the Great Seal of England.
For which Assurance, Surveying and Sealing, I was allowed to demand and take an
half penny for every once Troy, in Wire, Spangles, Oes, ctc. I suveyed; and 4
pence for every pound weight Vennice, for all the Gold and Silver I sealed with
the Seal of my Office, being the Rose and Crown.

7. I had a Grant from the late King, under his Signet, to be Master-worker of
the Mint in the Tower of London for my life, with the Fee of five hundred pound
a year, for executing that place; which Grant was taken from my Mother, out of
her Custody, when I was sent to the Tower.

8. I had one quarter part of the Lady Willers Farm at the Custom-hous, for the
Importation of all gold and silver Thread, Hatbands, Lace, and Copper thread
throughout England and Wales; which costmee, a little before I was sequestered,
above seven hundred pounds. And if the making gold and silver thread was put
down in England, the Custom of gold and silver thread imported would make a far
greater Revenew then now it does by the Excise; and the manifacture, if it be
made here, ought to be kept to a strict Regulation.

9. I spent in my Imprisonment in the Tower for almost four years above seven
hundred pounds; and could never get to be heard, though I petitioned to the
Parliament, as aforesaid, many years, to come to a Trial, knowing my self to
be innocent both by God's Law and the Laws of the Land; and above all, by the
testimony of a good Conscience, which has ever supported me in and through all
these troubles. All this Estate was and is Sequestered, (but my three aforesaid
bonds) to this day; besides my Damage for my four years Imprisonment.

10. Since I came out of the Tower, by order of the Counsel of State 1652. and
since I laid out (in the Prosecution of the silver Ships, Sampson Salvador, and
George) above the sum of five hundred pounds, as appears by the Oaths of
several persons which I employed in this Discovery, (as you may see in this
book, Fol. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55.) I borrowed every penny of this money,
paying Interest for it at this day.) And by my Protest against the Discharge of
these silver Ships, Sampson, Salvador and George, and my Discoveries thereupon,
by many good and legal Witnesses, Passengers and others in these Ships: I
caused all the Silver to become the States: All which services I did (upon the
faitfull promise of the Counsel of State (in December 1652) to restore me to
all my Estate, or the full value of Eleven thousand pounds) being Required to
do this Service by several Warrants from the Counsel of State, and at the
Entreaty of Doctor Walker, as appears in this Book, And no other man in England
besides my self did ever (at one time) save the State three Hundred thousand
Pounds: which (if it had not been for me) the State had been coze^ed of every
penny of it, as appears by this and my former Narrative.

Here follows the Copy of the late Kings Letter to the City of LONDON.

To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved, Our Lord May or and Aldermen of Our City of
London, and all other Our well-affected Subjects of that City. Charles Rex.

Trusty and Well beloved, we greet you well: When we remember the many Acts
of Grace and Favor We and Our Royal Predecessors have conferred upon that our
City of London, and the many examples of eminent Duty and Loyalty, for which
that City has been likewise famous; We are willing to beleev (notwithstanding
the great defection we have found in that place) That all men are not so far
degenerate from their affection to Us, and to the peace of the Kingdom, as to
desire a continuance of the miseries they now feel: And therefore being
informed, That there is a desire in some principal persons of that City to
present a Petition to Us, which may tend to the procuring a good understanding
between Us and that Our City, whereby the peace of the whole Kingdom may be
procured; We have thought fit to let you know, That we are ready to receiv
any such Petition, and the Persons who shall be appointed to present the same
to Us shall have a safe conduct: And you shall assure all our good Subjects of
that Our City (whose hearts are touched with any sense of Duty to Us, or of
Love to the Religion and Laws established; in the quiet and peaceable fruition
whereof, They and their Ancestors have enjoyed so great Happiness), That we
have neither passed any Act, nor made any profession or Protestation for the
maintenance and defense of the true Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of
the Subject, which we will not most strictly and religiously observe; And for
the which, (...) will not be always ready to give them any security that can
be desired: And of these Our gracious Letters, We expect a speedy Answer from
you. And so We bid you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Oxford in the nineteenth year of Our Reign, December 26.
1643. By his Majesty's Command.

GEORGE DIGBY.




[I do most humbly desire the Common Council of the City of London, to
certify your Highness, if ever (amongst all their Records, since the
foundation of their City) they find such a sad President as mine is; And
whether that any Messenger from any former King of England suffered the loss of
his Estate (to his damage above eleven thousand pounds) for bringing them or
any their Ancestors the like Letter as I did from the late KING. And at that
time (viz. in December 1643.) there was sent and came from Oxford the Writs
weekly under the Great Seal of England without any Countermand: My hard usage
After-ages will hardly beleev, had I not Printed it to Posterity.]

I Sufferd Imprisonment in the Tower almost four years, for bringing up the
aforesaid Letter from Oxford to the Lord Mayor and Common Council of the City
of London in December 1643 although I had an Order from the House of Commons (as
appears by their Journal Book) and a Pass from the Lord General Essex to go to
Oxford; which were both procured for me by Mr Theophilus Ryley, Scout-master
General of the City of London, who was authorized to execute that place by the
then Parliament and Common Council of London; and I was authorized by the said
Mr Ryley to do the same (Mr Ryley being empowered by the then Parliament and
Common Council of London to hold Intelligence in any the Kings Quarters, as by
his Orders he showed me:) Mr Ryley was a man of a known and approved
Integrity, and in great esteem with the then Parliament and City of London at
that time, and would not have acted any thing but what was just and for the
Parlaments service, according to his Trust. (If he had thought it otherwise,
and he might have gotten a hundred thousand pounds, upon my Conscience) and
that made me to act this Business, to bring up the Kings Letter upon his
Entreaty (as he confessed upon his Examination;) and I justified my doing
thereof by his Order, he being a public minister, and empowered to do it, as
he told me. And also the Committee of both Nations was made acquainted with
my going to Oxford, for the bringing up the said Letter which I brought from
the late King (by Sir David Watkins Knight, I desired him to make them
acquainted therewith, before ever I went to Oxford, and to have their
approbation;) which Sir David Watkins (after he had spoken with them) told
me, I had their approbation to go to Oxford: And all this was done before any
Law or Ordinance was made or declared to forbid me or any other to do the same
(that ever I heard of:) And I humbly say, That before a law made, there is no
transgression, neither by Gods law nor Man's law. And I was not to question Mr
Ryleys power, abilities and trust, considering he acted as a public minister,
but to act according to his direction, so long as he was in the said Office of
Scout-master, I having his Warrant and approbation for doing what I did. I have
never read nor heard of so heavy a punishment as your Supplicant does suffer
under, before a Law made to give a man warning.

And by the Statutes of 9. Hen. 3. cap. 29. 5. Edw. 3. cap. 9. and 28. Edw. 3.
cap. 3. No person (of what estate o^ condition soever he be) shall be put
out of Land or Tenement, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor dis-inherited, without
being brought to answer by due process of the Law; which I have petitioned for,
by a legal trial many years, but could never obtain the same.

May it pleas your Highness, Had there been a Proclamation or Act of Parliament
at that time to have probibited me, I should have then been afraid; besides,
Mr Ryley should never have made me act against a declared Law.

Now, forasmuch as your Supplicant having ever since his Inlargment out of the
Tower, made it his daily practice to study to serve the Commonwealth, and doing
such remarkable Services (as aforesaid) for the Commonwealth, I do most humbly
implore your Highness*s most gracious Order for the refloring me to my
aforesaid estate with damages, or the paying your Supplicant the sum of eleven
thousand pounds.

May it pleas your Highness, If I would have betrayed my Trust to the
Commonwealth, about this Silver that was in the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and
George, I could have had every penny of eleven thousand pounds paid me by the
Claimers of the Silver in those Ships; either in money here, or Bills of
Exchange beyond Seas: that money would have made me live plentifully in any
part of Christendom. I do most humbly implore your Highness, that I may have
such Justice by your Highness goodness and benignity, as I may have cause never
to repent of my being faithful to your Highness and the Commonwealths Interest
in this particular, concerning the Silver Ships, their Silver and Lading.

May it please your Highness,

THe exact looking back into the Accounts of this Nation, which, upon my bended
knees, I here humbly have desired a strict inspection into, by approbation and
authority of Parliament, and strict Laws to be made, without favor or
affection (the prosecution of this great business to be left to uninteressed
men to do Justice.) When this is done, it will bring the State in many
millions of money; and leav a stock of Lands for the Public: Which if it be
effectually, justly and strictly done, will make all after ages call this
Parliament the BLESSED PARLIAMENT, the true nursing fathers and builders up of
the breaches and ruins of this Nation. It is incredible, the great sums of
money that belongs unto the State, which particular persons have fraudulently
concealed, and upon a strict search will be discovered.

Great Sir,

THere has been some of Your Higness's Commissioners for Customs, (out of a
pretended zeal to do Your Highness and the Commonwealth service) offered
themselves to execute those places, without any fee upon th^^^ first
undertaking; and (upon that specious pretense) turn^^ almost all the old
Officers of the Commonwealth for collecting of Customs and Custom business
out of their places, to the total ruin of many scores of Families through out
the Nation (only to make way for their one friends and relations to come into
beneficial places (which could not be duly executed but by persons of skill
and trust) to make up many of their broken kindreds and friends decayed
fortunes.

This mischief was practiced upon the old Officers of the Customs; And by the
ignorance and insolency of many of these new Commissioners and Officers the
Revenues of the Customs have been much abated, and the Commonwealth Damnified.
But upon examination of some of these pretended godly Commissioners, viz.
Colonel Harvey, and Mr Alderman Avery the Father, (now a prisoner in the Fl^et)
and his son Dudley Avery (now a prisoner in Lambeth-hous) detected and proved,
before your Highness's Counsel, to have cozened the State of several thousand
pounds: The Father being entrusted as Treasurer, by the Commissioners of the
Customs. Many of their dark actions have been brought to light; some of them
(for their bad practices and insolences to Merchants) being generally cursed
and hated in the City of London, and in all the Sea Ports' of this Nation.

May it pleas your Highness, it caused a general joy amongst all good Merchants
and honest men in London, when these men were questioned. And when they were
made to restore great sums which thy had fraudulently deceived the State of:
It pleased all good men.

The same just course to be strictly now taken with all the Treasurers,
Sequestrators and Committee men of the Nation, will make all honest men thank
God, and bless your Highness and the Parliament, for the ease the good people in
general shall receiv in their taxes by stripping these ^ublicans and Sinners:
Amongst the many swarms of ^^em your Highness will hardly find one relenting,
repenting Zaccheus. And for those Treasurers that have laid out the
Commonwealths moneys in Lands, their Lands will and is by the Law of this
Nation liable till they have perfected their Accounts, and come out of the
Commonwealths debt: And the like for any Accomptant that is dead, their Heirs
and Executors by the Law are liable to pay the same, if an Estate can be found
in their hands.

May it pleas your Highness, the business of calling the Treasurers of the
Nation to a strict Account (as he humbly conceives) can and will offend none
but the guilty; and they will storm to see these humble Proposals, or that any
should presume to be so much a true Englishman and lover of his Country, as
to petition for an account of these Treasurers actions, either to your Highness
or the Parliament; For th^se that have been just in their Trust, this humble
Petition will make no impression on them:

It will only concern, vex and griev the Guilty, and such as have cozened your
Highness and the Commonwealth; All such as cannot endure this Examination,
trial and rubbing, if they winch, they are galled horses and faulty.

But for such as are just persons in their Trust, in their public Accounts and
Payments, that have none of the Commonwealths Blood and Sinews (Money)
converted to their private ends; nor have made themselves and their families
rich by fraud in these troublesome Times and common Calamities; there are many
such just men (no doubt) in all these Offices; for these Gentlemen (no doubt)
it will pleas them: This search and inquisition (the strickter it is) will
pleas good men most, for it will purge the dross from the gold; it will clear
honest men's credits; it will separate the sheep from the goats; it will
vindicate them and their posterity, that when so many of their Callings and
Mysteries (when Inquisition was made) were found guilty of fraud and cheating
the State and Commonwealth, they discharged their Trust with a good conscience
faithfully and truly.

And I hope all this number of Committe-men will be on my side, for to have a
strict Inspection into their Accounts, according, to former Presidents of
Parliament, and by the Laws of the Land has been formerly done.

May it pleas your Highness; An Act to be revived, and to appoint the Sages
and Pillars of the Land to see Justice and execution impartially done,
employing able and discreet persons by your Highness's Commissions in every
Parish and County of this Nation, to enquire (upon oath) into all Frauds and
misdemeanors; and what Persons and Estates and their value, have been
sequestered, (what Goods and Chattels, Woods felled, money and all other things
of value) since the year 1642. and into whose hands and possession the Profits
came; and into the monthly Assesments and the value of every Book of Rates,
and what Commissioners signed the Books; the Account of the County
particularly set down, who were Treasureres, an^ to give them a full charge to
inspect into all the Officers of Excize and Customs, Commissioners for Prize
Goods, all Treasurers and other Officers both in London and all other Cities,
Buroughs, Towns and Ports in the Country, that have fingered the public
money, This stricktly and impartially to be done (upon the oaths of able and
discreet persons) in every Parish in England, will lay the axe to the root of
the Tree, and grubb up by the roots unjust Committee Men and Treasurers, and
all such as have defrauded your Highness and the Commonwealth: And this will
bring your Highness in millions of money and ease the public Taxes.

May it pleas your Highness; From such as are true honest Englishmen and love
their Country I look for no opposition in setting this Business on foot for
calling the Accomptants and Treasurers of the Nation to Account; but it is the
guilty party that will be sure to sting me (and they are both potent and
numerous) with the venom of their tongues, which is as bad as the poison of
Asps; for this Business does touch them to the quick, and they and their
Creatures will leav no stone unturned to do me a mischief.

Therefore upon my knees I most humbly beg your Highness 's and the Parlaments
gracious and favorable Countenance and Protection of these my true and loyal
Endeavors for the Service of your Highness and this Parliament; Which gracious
Protection and Favor shall forever oblige your most humble and loial Subject
to pray daily for all Gods choicest Blessings on your HIGHNESS's Person, and on
your Princely Illustrious and Glorious FAMILY; That all Plots and wicked
Designs against your HIGHNESS may be blasted and com to naught; That your
HIGHNESS may be victorious against all your Enemies both by Sea and Land; That
your HIGHNESS may Protect these Nations in Honor and Glory many years: And at
the end of your Government and prosperous. Rule here on Earth, your HIGHNESS
may be taken into the Protection of him that made the Heavens, and there to
Reign with his Son for ever in eternal Glory; So prays

Your HIGHNESS 's most humble Loyal and obedient Subject, THO. VIOLET.
September 1656.
To His Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF England, Scotland and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it pleas Your Highness!
WHen I heard (in November 1655.) your most Honorable Counsel was upon settling
a way for the taking up of the Accounts in general of this Nation; and they had
recommended it to your Highness for your Highness's confirmation (thereupon
diverse Auditor^ ^^d worthy Gentlemen were nominated to inspect and take the
Accounts of some particular persons, viz. of the Commissioners of the Customs,
and others) I humbly thought it my duty, living under your Highness's
Protection, not to neglect any opportunity wherein I might show my self
serviceable unto your Highness and the Commonwealth: And having formerly (in
August 1653.) humbly presented my humble Proposals to the Parliament, for
calling the Accomptants of the Nation in general unto a just and due Account
(but as the sequel proved, it was not Gods time for the then doing of it):
Also I did again renew this my humble Petition to your Highness on November 8
1655. (In which my most humble request, I was and am far from charging all
Treasurers, Committee men, Sequestrators, Excize-men, Commissioners of the
Customs, etc. to be all falls and unjust Stewards; I humbly say, I was and am
far from that: for, I beleev, there is some good Corn amongst this great heap of
chaff and tares.) My humble suit to your Highness was and is, That this heap of
Chaff and Corn (the Treasurers and Sequestrators) may be winnowed and sifted;
the Chaff and Tares from the good Corn, and that a strict Inspection be made
into all their Accounts, both for Pajements and Receipts (according to the
strict Rules of former times, and according to many Presidents and Acts of
Parliament in several Ages) by knowing just and unbyassed men, such as will make
it their whole Business to inspect into the Frauds, and present your Highness
with the Truth (without respect of persons) and how they find each man's
Actions; That so your Highness (in imitation of the great Judge of Heaven and
Earth, whose Deputy you are here over us) may render to every one according to
his works. To such Gentlemen that shall be approved just and faithful in
their Accounts of this Nation, your Highness would be graciously pleased to
set a mark of Respect and Trust upon them, for that they have been found Just
in their Generation, and not tempted (as Acan was) with the Babylonish Garment,
^^ ^ilver, nor the Wedg of Gold. And for the faulty Treasurers and
Sequestrators, and all such as shall be proved to have cozened the
Commonwealth, in deteining or defrauding the Commonwealth of their Moneys,
Goods, Lands, Merchandise, etc. or by imbezling any thing of value from your
Highness and the Commonwealth, They may be served as the Unjust Steward was
in the 16th of Lukes Gospel and ver. 2. Give an Account of thy Stewardship, for
thou may be no longer Steward: And to have a mark put on them, never to
bear any Office of Trust in the Commonwealth more; And that according to the
Statute of 6. Hen. 4. cap. 3. Commissions may issue forth, directed to discreet
and able persons, to inquire and certify the Profits the said Accomptants have
received within each County of this Nation; and what shall be found to be by
them concealed and not accounted for, the said Accomptants may be attainted of
the said Frauds and Deceipts by a Jurie of Inquiry, and be made to pay the
penalty, being treble the damage.

This excellent Law (for the strict and just taking up all the Accounts of
Sequestrators, Treasurers, Collectors of monthly Taxes, Committee Men,
Excize-men, Commissioners of Customs, etc.) to be put in execution, will bring
your Highness and the Commonwealth in millions of money, and ease the good
People in general of the Nation of their Taxes, if they pay but the Principal
and Interest for what will be found, upon a strict and just Inquiry, in your
Treasurers and Accomptants hands.

A Copy of the Papers I delivered unto Your HIGHNES'S Nov. 8. 1655. (viz.)
Proposals, humbly conceived for your HIGHNESS's Service.
May it pleas your HIGHNESS; My most humble Petition for Your Service is,
THat there be speedy order taken, that the Commissioners for your Highness's
Prize-goods, and all others that have had private Letters of mart or Letters of
Reprizal, Commissioners for Excise and Customs, Treasurers of Goldsmiths Hall,
Drury, Worcester, and Gurney houses, may have no discharge from your Highness,
till they have and shall deliver in their Accounts, and till that some especial
Commissioners be appointed and fully empowered by your Highness to examine,
hear and determine the said Accounts; And the Commissioners or any three of
them empowered to examine upon oath all such person and persons, as they shall
have information, that can and will discover the several practices and frauds
that all or any the above said persons have acted concerning your Highness and
the public money of this Nation, Prize ships, and Prize Merchandise; And that
the Commissioners may be empowered to send for witnesses and all accounts,
books, papers, which may any ways conduce to prove the said frauds and
misdemeanors, according to a pattern of an Act of Parliament in the 10th year of
Richard the second and 6. Henry 4. Chap. 3. And that your Highness would be
pleased to keep a careful eye on this business, and to command of your
Commissioners for this great business, an exact and true account (without all
favor) or affection of all the several frauds and misdemeanors against your
Highness and the Common wealth, which they shall find proved unto them, and
all the several names of the offenders, and their particular frauds and
offenses, which shall or may be proved to your Highness Commissioners
concerning all the premises.

May it pleas your Highness, for the Commissioners of the Customs, I humbly
say, if they knew of Colonel Harvies deceitful and fraudulent practices, and
did not discover them, then they are parties in the same Condemnation with him.
And if the Commissioners say they did not know it, nor could apprehend the
same; then, I must humbly say, they are ignorant, and not fit for their trust
and places. For they ought all of them to have an equal inspection every week,
what sums of money came in for your Highness account, and what is issued out.
And I must humbly say, they receiv their pention for that end, and not to stand
as Ciphers in their Office. If your Highness give a Command for a strict and
Exact prosecution of this business; It will bring you in a fe^^ months many
hundred thousand pounds.

May it pleas your Highness, I have formerly presented, these humble proposals
to the Parlamen^, but there was nothing don for the discovery of these
offenses. The reason why they did not proceed, will on examination be clearly
discovered. I shall enlarge these humble proposals for your Highness service,
if I receiv your further direction and commands to proceed therein, humbly
submitting them and my self at your Highness feet.

Your HIGHNESS's most humble Loyal and obedient Subject, THO. VIOLET.

[Amongst the names of many Worthy Persons, I most humbly presented unto your
Highness that (to my particular knowledge, if they were empowered) could make
great Discoveries unto your Highness of the Frauds of the Accomptants of the
Nation, concerning the public Treasure. Your Highness took especial and
particular notice of one, namely, Gabriel Beck Esquire, and your Highness
commanded me to find him out, and that you would signify your pleasure to
him what you would have done in this Business; which I did accordingly]

March 23. 1655.
MAy it pleas your Highness, I am credibly informed that one Maj. Will. Jervis,
for the good of the Commonwealth, and for your Highness service, has
presented several frauds and misdemeanors, practiced by several Commissioners
at Drury-hous and other places, upon the sale of Delinquents estates, Deans and
Chapters Lands, the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenues, forging of Debenters,
and several other practices, to the great loss and prejudice of your Highness
and this nation. And that by your Highness appointment, there are several
persons of quality and integrity, appointed for the hearing and final
determination of all matters concernning the aforesaid frauds, presented by
Major William Jervis.

I most humbly desire for your Highness service, that the Commmissioners
appointed by your Highness, may have under their care and charge the humble
Proposals I have formerly presented to your Highness on the 8th of November
1655. and that your Highness would be graciously pleased to appoint me
Thomas Violet, the Remembrancer to your Highness's Commissioners, for the
discovery and prosecution of the offenders, with such allowance for my pains,
as your Highness shall think fit: And that your Highness would be pleased to
read an Act of Parliament made in the tenth year of King Richard the Second; of
which I most humbly present you with a true Copy, for the discovering of all
abuses, and frauds of this Nature (as I most humbly have petitioned to have
redressed) for your Highness's profit and honor, and good of the Nation.

If your Highness be pleased to read the Act, it is made for the redress and
punishment of all the deceipts and frauds of these present times. The wisdom
of that Parliament found this a Cordial, to enrich the King, and ease the
people in general of great outrages and oppressions, and insupportable charges
(the very words of the Statute); and the Parliament was so careful to have all
persons brought to punishment, that had defrauded the King and Realm, that they
made it a praemunire and loss of any man's Estate and imprisonment (of what
degree soever) that persuaded or gave Counsel unto the King to have the said
Law defeated; and for the second offense, to move the King to do contrary to
this Act, he shall lose his life and member, as appears by the said Act. etc.

Here follows at large the Statute of Richard the Second.

This is the STATUTE Made at Westminster in the tenth year of K. Richard the
Second. Viz.
KNOW ye, that (at the Reverence of GOD, and for to nourish peace, unity, and
good accord, in all parties, within the Realm of England; and especially, for
the common profit and eas of our people, and good governance of the same of our
Realm of England, which we soveraignly desire) Of the assent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament holden at Westmi^ster the first day of October
last past, we have don to be made a Statute, as well to the amendment of the
said Governance as for the common profit of the said Realm, in the form
following:

WHEREAS our sovereign Lord the King perceives by the grievous complaints of
the Lords and Commons, of this Realm, in the present Parliament assembled, that
the profits, rents and revenues of this Realm, by singular and insufficient
counsel, and evil governance, as well of some his late great officers, as of
diverse other persons, being about his person, be so much withdrawn, wasted,
eloyned, given, granted, aliened, destroyed, and evil dispended, that he is
so much impoverished, and void of Treasure and goods and the substance of the
Crown so much diminished and destroyed, that his estate, and the estate of his
house, may not honorably be sustained, as pertains, nor the wars, which daily
abounds, and inviron his Realm, maintained, nor governed, without grate and
outrageous oppressions, and insupportable charges of his said people, And also
that the good laws Statutes and Customs of his said Realm, (which he is
bounden to hold and observe) be not, nor have not been, duly holden nor
executed, nor full justice nor right don to his said people, whereby many
disherisons, and diverse great mischeifes, and damages be happened, as well to the
King, as to his said people, and to all his Realm; whereof he to the honor of
God, and for the weal of him and his Realm, And for the quietness and Releif
of him and of his people, who have been in diverse manners greatly charged,
before this time, willing, with the grace of God; against such mischeifes, to
provide a good and due remedy. HAS, of his free will, and at the request of
the Lords and Commons aforesaid, ordained, made, and assigned, his great
Officers, that is to say, The Chancellor, Treasurer, and keeper of his Privy
Seal, such as he holds good sufficient and lawful, for the honor, and
profit of him and his Realm, And moreover, of his authority royal, certain
knowledge, and good agree, and freewill, And by the advice; and assent, of the
Prelates, Lords and Commons aforesaid, in the full Parliament, in aid of good
governance of his Realm, And good and due execution of his said Laws, And in
releif of the Estate of him and his people in time to com, upon the full trust
that he has of good advisement, wit and discretion, of the Honorable Fathers
in GOD, William Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Alexander Arch Bishop of York,
his dear Uncles ^dmond duke of York, and Thomas duke of Gloucester, the honorble
Fathers in GOD, William Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bushop of Exeter, and
Nicolas Abbott of waltham, and his wellbeloved and Faithful Richard Earl of
Arundell, John Lord of Cobham, Sir Richard le Scrope and John Devoreux, has
ordained, and assigned, and deputed them, by his Letters, Patents, under his
great Seal, to be of his great and continual Counsel, from S. Edmonds Eve the
Martyr, by a whole year, next following, after the date of the said Letters
Patens, to survey and examine, with the said great officers, That is to say,
the Chancellor, and Treasurer, and keeper of his privy Seal, as well the Estate
and governance of his house, and of all his Courts, and places, as of all his
Realm, as of all his officers, and Ministers, of whatsoever Estate, Degree, or
condition he be, as well within the said House, as without, and to enquire, and
take Information, by all the ways which to them best shall seem of all the
rents, revennues, and profits, that to him appertaneth, and be due, as well
within the Realm, as without, in any manner way or condition. And of all manner
of Gifts, and Grants, alienations and confirmations, made by him, of Lands
Tenements, Rents, and ymmunities, profits; Revenues, wards, marriges, Escheats,
forfeitures, franchises, liberties, voydances of Archbushops Bushiprickes,
Abbeys, Priores, Fermes, of Howses, and Possessions, of Aliens, And of all
other possessions soms, of money, goods and Chattels, and of all other things,
and to what persons, and for what cause, and how, and in what manner, And namely
of those persons which have taken without desert, And also all manner of
Revenues, and profits, as well of his said Realm, as of Lands, Seigniories,
Cities, Towns, Castles, Fortresses, and also of all manner his other posesons,
as well on this side the Sea, as beyond, and of the profits, and emoluments, of
his money, bullions, and of the taking of Prisoners, Towns; and Places, Ships,
Carackes, good, and Ransoms, of war, by land and by sea, And of benifices and
other possessions of Cardinals; Rebels; and all other aliens, and also of
carrying of money out of the Realm, by the Collectors of the Pope, Procurators,
of the Cardinals, Lumberds, and other persons, as well aliens as Denizens, And
of the Emoluments, and profits, coming, and rising, out of the Customs
Subsides, of Wools, Leather, And woolfels and of small Custstomes and other
Subssedies of Cloethes, Wynes, and all other Merchandise, And of disines,
quinzins, And all other subsides and charges, granted by the Clergy, and the
Commons, and also of the receipt, profits and payments of the hamper of his
Chancery, And of all other his receipts from the time of his Coronatiion, tell
And of fees, Wages, and rewards of officers, and Ministers, more, and less,
Also of immunities, and other Rewards, And also gifts and grants made to any
person by him, and by his Father, and his grand father, in fee, or for term of
life, or in any other manner And if gre or payment be to them thereof made,
and by whom, and how And in what manner. And also how much they have released
or given, to officers or others to have their payments to what persons how, and
in what manner, And of Lands Tenements, Rents, Revenues, and forfeitures,
barganed and sold, to the prejudice and damage, of him, and of his Crown, and
by whom, and to whom, how, and in what manner, And of the Sale or bargain of
Tallies and Patens of singular profits, as well in the time of his said
Grandfather, as in his own time, and how, and by what persons, And also of all
his jewels and goods which were his said Grandfathers, at the time of his
death, and what, and of what price or value, and where they be become, and how,
and in what manner, And of all Cheviences any wise made to his use, by any
manner of persons, And of all loss and damage he has had, and fustained, by
the same, And by what persons, how and in what manner; and of charters of
pardons general and espcciall, and also of the somes and payments and manner of
expense, as well of his said house, as for the salvation and defense of his
Realms, Lands and seignioryes, Towns, Castles, and fortresses, and other
Places, on this side the Sea, and beyond, don and received, by any persons,
as well Soldiers as others, and by any manner of way, and how and in what
manner, and how much they have given to have their payments; and of the
concealments of rights, and profits, and by whom, how, and in what manner, and
of maintainers, and takers of quarrels, embracers of enquests, and of officers,
and ministers, made by brockage, and of their broggers, and of them that have
taken the said brocage, and how and in what manner; and also of all the defaults
and offenses that be don as well in his said house, as other places, and courts,
aforesaid, as in all other places, within his realm of England, by any manner
of persons, whereby the profit of him and of his crown has been impaired, and
diminished or the common law disturbed, delayed or other damage to him happened,
giveing and comitting by the same of his royal authority and by the advice
and assent aforsaid, to the said counselors, or any six of them, and to the
great officers, full power and authority general and especial, to enter his
said house, and all the offices of the same, and all his other Courts and
places, as often as them pleas, and to cause to com before them, where and when
them pleases. The Rols records. and other minuments and evidences, such as
them likes, and all the defaults, waste and excesses found in his said house,
and also all the defaults, and misprisions found in the other courts, places,
officers and ministers, aforesaid and in all the other Articles, and points,
above named and every one of them, And also all other defaults misprisions,
excesses, falcities, deceipts, extorsions, oppressions, damages greviances, don
in prejudice damage and distress, of him and of his crown, and the Estate of
his realm, in general or special, above not specified nor expressed, to amend
correct, repair, redress, reform, and put in due and good estate and
establishment.

And also to hear and receiv, all manner of complaints, and quarrels, of all
his leiges which will sue and complain them as well for our sovereign Lord the
King, as for themselves before the said Counselors and officers of all manner of
duresses, oppressions, injuries, wrongs and misprisions, which may not be well
amended nor determined, by the course, of the common law of the land, before
used: and thereof to make good and due remedy, and recovery as well for our said
sovereign Lord the King, as for his said Liege people and all the things,
aforesaid and every of them, fully to discuss and finally to determine, and
thereof to make full execution, according as to them best shall seem, for the
honor and profit of our said sovereign Lord the King and of his estate, and
reintegration of the rights and profits of his said crown, and better
governance of the peace and laws of his Land; and relief of his said people.
Willing also that if diversity and variance of opinion rise or happen between
the said counselors, and officers, that the Indgement or opinion, of the
greater party have force and hold place, as in the said letters patents is
fully contained.

Whereupon our said sovereign Lord the King, willing that the corrections and
redresses of the defaults, and misprisions aforesaid may be for the profit of
him, and his said Realm, in the form aforesaid, put in due execution, without
being broken or disturbed, by any of the assent of the Lords and Commons, of his
said Realm, in this present parliament has ordained and established: that every
one of his said Leiges, greater or less, of whatsoever estate, or Condition
that he be shall be atendant and obedient; in how much that touches the
Articles aforesaid, and every dependancie thereon, to the said counselors and
officers, in the form aforesaid. And that every person, that shall be judged
before them: and convicte of any the defaults, or misprissions aforesaid, shall
take and receiv without debate, making such correction as shall be judged to
them by the said counselors and officers, in the form aforesaid: And that no
person of what estate or condition, that he be grater or less shall give to
the King, privily or apertly, counsel, exhortation or motion, whereby the King
should repeal their power withing the time aforesaid, in any point nor do any
thing contrary of his said grant, or, of any the said articles. And if any
person of what estate, or condition, that he be, do against the Ordinance and
Establishment aforesaid, or procure or do any thing in any manner whereby the
said Counselors be disturbed, in any point: upon the exercise of the said
power, Or which exciteth or procures our said sovereign Lord the King to do or
command, any manner of thing whereby the power of the said Counselors and
Officers, or the execution of their said Judgments and awards to be made in
the same, be in any point aforesaid defeated, and that duly proved by good and
true witnesses, which be notoriously holden, of good fame and condition, not
suspected convenably, examined before the King, and the counselors and
officers aforesaid, any of the Justices of the one Bench or other: taken to
them or other discreet and Learned in the Law, such as pleas the said
Counselors and officers: shall have such penance, that is to say, at the
first time he shall be so convicted, he shall forfeit all his goods and
chattles to the king, and nevertheless, he shall be imprisoned at the king's;
will: and if any person be duly attainted in the form aforesaid of council,
excitation or motion given to the King, or of doing the contrary of his said
grant as aforesaid, albeit the king, do nothing by such council, excitation or
motion, yet he shall have such penance as before; And if it happen (which god
defend,) that he so bear him afterward, that he be another time attainted (as
before) of any the said defaults, or misprisions, then the same person so
convicted or attainted, shall have at the second time the penance of life and
of member, saveing always the dignity pontiffical and privileges of holy
Church and Clerical in all the things aforesaid.

And that this Satute hold force and effect, during the said Commission only,
and therefore we Command thee that thou do the said Statute openly to be
cried and published in Cities Buroughs, Towns and fairs, markets, and other
notable places, within the Baily-wick, within franchises, and with out
according, to the tenor and form of the same,

Dated etc.
The Statute of 6 Hen. 4. Chap. 3. Made against the frauds of escheators,
alnagers customers, and other acountants that defraude the King, ordains,
comissions to be directed to the most lawful and discreet persons in every
County to enquire into all frauds of accountants, who have deceitfully
concealed the Kings dues: and in case they shall be attainted, they shall
forfeit treble damages, and their bodies to prison etc.

May it please your Highness,

PEradventure some (upon the sight of this Act) may alledg, this Statute was
made in the Reign of a weak and unfortunate Prince, to restrain the disorders
of his House, and to bring to Justice evil Counselors; and will say, God be
thanked, we have a wise and victorious Protector, and a provident and frugal
Counsel, and provident Officers and Ministers under them: I grant this a truth,
and I thank God for it. But this I humbly say, Amongst the exactest model that
ever was upon earth (which was Christ and his Disciples) there was a Judas
amongst the twelv. May it pleas your Highness, (upon examination of some of the
Transactions of the long Parliament, concerning money matters, some particular
members with some of their Committees, and many of their Agents, and many great
persons employed in the Commonwealth, at this very day) there will appear to
your Highness above one Judas in twelv, taking in all that were members of
Parliament, with their Committees and Agents, some of them being in great places
of Trust at this day; Many of them being provident Thieves, getting from the
bottom of baseness and beggerie, by fraud, dissimulation and cozenage, in every
County, City and Corner of the Nation, vast and great possessions, both in
money, lands and goods. Many of these men being near of kin and condition to
the Unjust Steward in the Gospel, who (when his Lord called him to account,
because he could not dig nor delve) joins with his Lords Debtors to cozen his
Lord and Master; and this is the true stare of this Business. Upon the peril of
my life, this your Highness will find to be the true condition (upon
examination) of many members in the long Parliament, many Committee Men, many
Farmors of the Customs, many Commissioners for Delinquents Lands, many
Purchasers of Lands, many Excize-men, many Commissioners for Prize-Goods, and
many other persons of all callings and conditions that have had imploiment for
the public, and have fingred the public Treasure ever since the year 1640. of
every condition great numbers, who (amongst them) have stolen and cozened the
Commonwealth of above twenty millions of money.

May it pleas your Highness, I have ever esteemed that man a bad Bailiff or
Steward, that desires to keep a confederacy and correspondencie with his Lords
Tennants and Debtors, that so they may keep their Landlord and Master in
ignorance, never to know the value of his estate, nor when nor how to make his
improvement; but when casualties fall, to pocket up the profits themselves, and
defraud their Lord, and keep him always poor, that so they may be always
held useful and necessary by their Lords and Masters, when indeed they are but
juggling Knaves, and are the bain and dishonor of their Lord and Master both in
his Estate and Reputation: I most humbly say, that if there be any against the
discovery of these Abuses, your Highness will (upon examination find them
parties or near of affinity to them that have cozened your Highness and the
Commonwealth. I humbly upon my knees beg your Highness's pardon for these my
plain and loial expressions, which proceed from the heart of one that daily
prays to God for your Highness's peace, safety and prosperity.

Your Highness 's most dutiful and loyal Subject, THO. VIOLET.

May it pleas your Highness,
I Requested Mr Kelleway to deliver into your Highess's own hand this Business
in a written parchment, and a written sheet of paper annexed thereunto; it
containing a Business (in this conjuncture of time) very necessary for your
Highness's perusal and observation (as your Supplicant humbly conceives)
praying your Highness to signify your pleasure to your Supplicant thereupon,
by your Servant Mr Kelleway. And your obedient Supplicant and Subject (as in
duty bound) shall daily pray, etc.

April 1. 1656. Your Highness 's most dutiful and obedient Subject, THO.
VIOLET.

May it pleas your Highness,
AN Act of Parliament now so effectually made, and so effectually prosecuted (as
this Act in Richard the Seconds time was) would bring your Highness in many
hundred thousands of pounds, if the care of the mannagement of this great
Business be left to men of unbyassed Interests, that will see to the strict
examination and punish of the offenders great and small; it will eas the people
in general of many of their taxes. A few Laws well executed is better then a
multitude of Laws, and the execution neglected. And this Act in King Richard
the Seconds time, appoints the Pillars of the Land to see to the due execution
and punishing the offenders. And the wisdom of that Parliament would not
appoint Commissioners of a meaner degree, least through fear or for reward
Justice might be blinded and overawed (as many times it is) when ordinary
persons have the execution thereof: Great Trust in mean men's hands is subject
to miscarriage.

May it pleas your Highness,
I Have delivered in to your Highness Commissioners for discoveries at
Worcester house in writing the 30th of May 1656, these Discoveries annexed,
amounting to about the sum of four hundred thousand pounds, which your
Highness and the Commonwealth have been defrauded of, I have humbly desired
their direction to me thereupon: and that I might have a Copy of their
Commission; that so I might be informed, whether these my Discoveries (on the
Terms and Conditions I have presented them) be comprised therein: and whether
any encouragement is to the Discoverer for so doing. My most humble Suit to
your Highness is, that I may be empowered to inspect all and every such
papers, books, warrants, accounts and orders as may conduce to make my
discoveries. And further, to examine upon Oath all such persons who can and
will prove the aforesaid Frauds. The whole premises (as I have humbly stated it
to the Committee) I present to your Highness, and most humbly beg your Highness
to vouchsafe your Highness gracious perusal, it being (as your humble Subject
conceives) very much for your service; and to be pleased to signify your
gracious pleasure therein. And, as in duty bound, your Supplicant shall daily
pray, etc.

30. May 1656. Your Highness most humble and faithful Subject THO. VIOLET.

Here follows the Copy of the Writing I delivered in to your Highness's
Commissioners.

To the honorable the Committee for Discoveries, sitting at Worcester House.
May it pleas your Honors,
I Am certainly informed by those that are learned in the Laws; That all
Sequestrators, Treasurers, Receivers, and all such who have the States Tenths
upon Reprisals in their hands, Committee men and all other persons whatsoever,
in whose hands any Moneys, Jewels, Plate, Goods or Merchandise or other things
of value whatsoever, belonging to the late King, the Parliament, his Highness the
Lord Protector or the Public; The said persons, their heirs, executors and
administrators, and their, and every one of their lands, goods, tenements, etc.
into whose hands soever they be converted and do come, and all other lands,
tenements, goods and chattels which any other then had in Trust, or for their
Use, or which at any time or ever after they had power to dispose of: Are all
liable for the payment and answering of the said public Debts and Accounts of
the said Treasurers, Receivers, Sequestrators, and such as have the States
Tents in their hands concerning all Reprisals of Ships. And their heirs,
executors, administrators, Tertennants and all others into whose hands the said
goods, lands, moneys, Jewels, Merchandise, etc. do by whatsoever means come:
Are all accountable for, and must pay and satisfy the same to his Higness.

May it pleas your honors, This being granted a Truth, the old Maxim of my
Lord Cook's will now at this day prove true, That whosoever eats the Kings
goos, the feathers at one time or other will stick in his throat: And that all
persons whomsoever, whether Committee Men, Sequestrators, Treasurers, or any
other persons whomsoever, his and their Estates, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators are always chargeable with Debts due to his Highness and the
Commonwealth, without his Highness's gracious pardon. And that this is Law,
there are many Judgments and Presidents in the Exchequer; which, if there be
occasion to satisfy your Honors, I will cause some learned Gentleman in the Law
to produce to you Presidents and Statutes. And I also desire your patience to
read my Ensuing Queries thereupon, Viz.

May it pleas your Honors,
I Humbly present these Queries to you, and desire to receiv your Judgments
thereupon; that so I may know whether my Discoveries are within Cognizance of
your Commission, when they are Discoveries of this nature as these in my
Queries I set down: All which I humbly present unto you, as being very material
both for his Highness's service and for myself. As for my part, I intend to
make your Judgments thereupon to be my Rule (either to proceed or desist in
these following Discoveries) to avoid unnecessary expense and trouble both to
my self and others.

My humble Queries are these following.

1. WHen Comissioners are or have My Copy is not perfectly exact^^. (...) in
so^e one or two small particulars it may ^^^fer from the Original which I put
up to the Commissioners at Worcester house.
been appointed either by Ordinance of Parliament, or Order of the Council of
State, or under the Great Seal of England, for to take the Care and Charge of
the Sale of all Prize Ships, and Merchandise, brought in by any of the men of
War, of the late Parliament or of his Highness's and the States Shipping; and
all and every one of the said Commissioners having allowance of Poundage, or
yearly Fees from the State for that Service, for their care and pains in the
sale of all or any Merchandise, Gold Silver, Jewels, Plate, Ships and all other
goods whatsoever brought in for the Use of the Public: Which Commissioners
have been appointed by Parliament, Counsel of State, or his Highness: And by
virtue of that Power, Commissioners have acted, being all of them obliged and
tied to make a true and just Account upon oath unto his Highness of all sums
of money they receiv, and the just and true value of all Merchandise and Goods
they have been entrusted with the Sale, without any fraud or mental
reservations, saving only their just Fees and Sallerie appointed to each of
the Commissioners by the Parliament or his Highness. And these Commissioners
having failed in their Trust, whether (according to the Statute, 6 Hen. 4. Cap
3.) this be within the Cognizance of your Commission to punish the Offenders,
and to cause them all to make a just and true Account, upon oath, and to pay
the Commonwealth what they have defrauded the State for what remains in their
hands.

2. Whether these Commissioners (when they had their Commissions) have
Covenanted jointly or severally with the State to give a just and true Account
to his Highness and the Parliament. And whether they be guilty all of them
(that were put into one Commission) if I prove the offense of some of them: Or
whether only such of the Commissioners as are proved guilty, and the other
Commissioners (though their power was all of one date, and they acted together)
shall not be accomptable, but every man for himself severally to answer for
his own particular actions and no further.

3. That if I shall prove some of the Commissioners for the States Prize Goods,
HAVE sorted out Wines, Sugars, Oils, Wools, Fruit, silks, Linen, Cloth of Gold
and Silver, Jewels, Pearl, Civer, Bezer Stones, and any sorts of Commodities in
any Cellars, Ships, Warehouses, or other Places within this Nation, either by
themselves, servants, Coopers, Brokers, Porters or any other skillful persots
in Merchandise; and when this sorting, picking, garbling, is one, to reserve a
quantity more or less of this sorted, picked, and garbled Merchandise, for the
Commissioners themselves, either one or more of them, viz. If the Commissioners
or Sub-commissioners for the State make a sale of thirty thousand Pounds of
goods and merchandise, more or less, there having been before Ten thousand
Pondes of this merchandise sorted and garbled out for the Commissioners.

As in one Instance, Suppose 300 Tons of French Wines are the whole Parcel
of Wines the State has by their Commissioners to Sell, and 200 Tunns of this
Wine is exposed to Sale by the States Commissioners, and sold by the Candle (as
the usual way is, publicly to every man, (And one hundred Tunns of this
French Wines, being picked out of the choicest and principal of the whole
Parcel, is reserved for a Commissioner or Commissioners for the sale of Prize
goods, and these Commissioners shall pretend this small Parcel of 100 Tunns of
Wines is not worth the trouble to make a new Sale by the Candle: And thereupon
these Commissioners or Sub-commissioners (being entrusted to sell these Wines
by the State, having a Fee or Sallary for the same) do, contrary to their
Trust, either by themselves in their own name or names, or get friends, and use
the names of others to buy the said 100 Tunns of Wines, but so that still the
Commissioners have the profit of the said Wines so sold, when in truth this 100
Tunns of Wines, picked and sorted out of 300 Tunns, was realy worth, in the
Market, as much as the 200 Tunns sold publicly by the Candle for 15l, 16l,
20l the Tunn, and sometimes more: And some of the Commiseioners for Prize goods
have bought for their own uses the Hundred Tons of the choicest and picked
Wines at the rate of 15l, 16l, 20l the Tun, and sometimes more, which Wines
have been by the said Commissioners sold to the Vintners and others at 30l,
35l, and 40l a Tunn, ready money, when the State has had but 15l. and ^0l.
allowed and put down on their Account. This demonstration serves for all their
Wines, Sugars, Tobaccoes, Silks, Linnens, Salt, Civet, Bezerstones, Pearls,
Jewels, Wools, Oils, Fruit and Spice, and all other Commodities brought in any
the States Prizes. These merchandises sorted, garbled and picked from the gross
bulk, may be better in the true value then the gross quantity of merchandise
sold usually by the Candle, sometimes 20l. 30l. 40l. in the hundred; and
sometimes (where goods are perishable) half in half, there is so much
difference in the sorting. And whether these Commissioners (being entrusted to
sell the States Goods at the best rate) could underhand buy these Goods
themselves, after they have been picked and sorted, or go partners with any that
did buy, and that much under the true value, as will be found upon examination
by my discovery.

4. Whether these things being duly proved, the Commissioners for Prize-goods
and every one of them, are not liable to make a true account to his Highness,
and to stand charged with all the surplusage of Moneys they have made of all or
any the Prize-goods belonging to the State and his Highness, which they have
not as yet duly and truly accounted for, and to be ordered to deliver in
upon their several oaths a just and true account of all the Merchandise,
Jewels, Diamonds, Pearls, Civet, Beazar-stones, etc. that have come into their
custody, and what Prize Ships or Goods they sold and had a share in themselves,
and of the true value of all merchandise that has come to their hands, and
whether I may not cause to be viewed all Books and Papers which I know can
evidence the same, and thereupon produce any person or persons to be examined,
to find out the bottom of the fraud; and whether any person or persons
nominated to be examined as witnesses touching the premises, shall be
compelled to declare their knowledge (except the party or parties themselves;)
and whether your Commission does empower you the Commissioners to give me a
full fifth part of all such sums of money as shall be paid into the
Exchequer, upon any discovery of all or any the aforesaid misdemeanors? I
humbly pray your Honors, to take notice that the Commissioners for Prize goods
always have had a great fee and allowance settled on every one of them for
their pains and trouble; and therefore I conceiv they are obliged to deliver in
an exact and just account upon oath in writing of all the several ships and
merchandise to his Highness.

5. For the Commissioners of Excize, Treasurers of Goldsmiths-hall,
Commissioners of Drury and Gurney-houses, Collecto^s for the Plymouth Duties
for redeeming of poor Slaves at Tunis and Argier, etc. that have had several
Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, Orders from the Counsel of State, Orders
from his Highness, for the payment of great sums of money, as this Case is
stated; (viz.) John Do has an Ordinance from his Highness, or formerly from
the Parliament or Counsel of State, for six thousand pounds charged upon the
Excise (or any other Treasury) to be presently paid or in course; (These
Commissioners have also a great Fee and Sallary for their pains, and more then
that they cannot lawfully expect nor contract with John Do to make an
abatement of the said Debt of 6000l. but (as I humbly conceiv) by making such a
bargain for their private profit, by installing a public Debt, and to put the
profit up to their particular use, they are liable to a Fine to his Highness,
as I have proved unto you in a president done by Act of Parliament in Richard
the Seconds time (as appears by the Records;) Commissions were granted to find
out that very offense, besides to be liable and make good all such sums of
money, and damages for forbearance, as shall be proved they have craftily and
fraudulently concealed and kept the same money from his Highness.) As for
example; the aforesaid Six thousand pounds warrant of John Does, the Treasures
(or some one of them) taking advantage of John Does necessity, treat with him,
and compound for his said Order or Ordinance which is for six thousand pounds,
for three thousand pounds, more or less (as John Do and the States Treasurer
can agree); and John Do makes his bargain for more or less, as he is
straightened in his occasions, and as his payments grow upon him: Upon John Does
receiving the money, he agrees for, (it may be 3000l. 4000l. or 5000l. for
his Order of 6000l.) He, upon receipt of the sum contracted for, makes a
general and full acquittance and discharge for the whole sum of 6000l.
aforesaid. My humble Quere to you is, Whether this is not a fraudulent Act of
any Treasurer, Commissioner of the Excize, Custom-hous, and Drury-hous, or any
other public Treasurer of the Nation, and every such Treasurer punishable, if
he deliver in unto the State the full sum of 6000l. when in truth he has
paid poor J. Do but 3000l. or the sum John Does necessity compelled him to
take? And I humbly desire to know of you, Whether you have power by your
Commission to send for John Do or any other person that can discover unto you
the truth, How much justly of this 6000l was paid to John Do; and to examine
him of the grounds and reasons that made him (the said John Do) give a receipt
for more money then he received, and the time when the Treasurer or Treasurers
made him his payments, and how much truly and really remains in the
Treasurers hands, which the said Treasurer has fraudulently concealed and
detained in his hands from his Highness and the Commonwealth; and who and what
party or parties were the Agents and Broakers (and where they dwell) to drive
the bargain between John Do and the aforesaid Treasurers: whether the said
Treasurers have broken their Trust in compounding the States debt, and putting
the whole sum on their account, when they paid but part, they being the States
servants, and receiving Fees and Sallary (for their just and faithful
performance of their duty in their place of Treasurer or Treasurers) from the
Parliament and his Highness? And I know in a Trial in Chancery, between the Lord
of Holland and one of his Stewards, who put in several sums of money to the
full value in his account to several persons, when he had compounded his Lords
debts, and the Steward was allowed no more then he really paid to his Lords
Creditors: if this be the Law for a Private man, I hope it will be Law for
his Highness and the Commonwealth.

6. There are two Reasons which make me humbly conceive, that the Preasure or
Committee-man, Sequestrator, or whosoever he be, ought to pay to his Highness
the sum and interest which he has concealed, and is liable to a further
punishment, without his Highness's pardon: 1. First, because every Receiver is
his Highness's Servant, and receivs a Sallary for his attendance and pains; and
therefore upon that account ought to give a just account upon oath to the
Exchequer, both of all the sums of money he receivs (as a Committee-man,
Commissioner or Treasurer, justly and truly without fraud) both for principal
and interest: if he has compelled the States Debtor to pay interest, he
ought to account for all that interest to the State; the like just account he
ought to put into the Exchequer, for his just and real payments; and if it be
proved he delivered in fall, feigned, forged or Averyen Accounts, or put in
more money on his account then he has really paid to every person that is
nominated on his account: I humbly conceiv it, all former Ages have held it a
high Crime and punishable; and I hope your Honors will do so now. 2. Secondly,
As the Receiver or Treasurer will be sure not to charge himself with more
money then he truly receivs for the use of the State; so (I humbly say) his
Highness's Commissioners for the Treasury, nor the Barons of the Exchequer,
ought not to discharge him for any greater sum then the aforesaid Treasurer
has truly and really paid. And this I humbly desire your judgments in (for a
greater or lesser sum); and if I shall prove one or more Treasurers guilty of
the aforesaid offenses, whether you by your Commission are empowered to give
me a full fifth part for my discovery of all such sums of money I shall cause
to be paid in to the Exchequer touching the premises?

7. Whereas several Delinquents and purchases of Lands, having made their
Compositions and bought Lands, and having given security to the Parliament or
to his Highness, and have failed at the several days of their paiments; and so
continued, some for years, and some for months: And the aforesaid persons
(upon the finishing their said payments) have accounted and paid interest to
his Highness's Treasurers for all that time they forbear to pay their moneys
with interest money, over and above their Bonds they have paid in to the
Commissioners and Treasurers appointed to receiv their payments. My humble
Quere is, Whether all such interest money (received by any Commissioner, as
aforesaid) ought not all to be accounted for by every Treasurer upon oath: and
whether a fifth part of the said discovery shall be paid to the Discoverer?

8. Whether the Treasurers for Charitable uses (as Redemption for Slaves,
Plymouth Duties for redee^^ng of Captives from Argier, Tunis and Tipolis, etc.
Collections for the Relief of Ireland, Tanton, and all other Charitable Uses of
that nature) be within the cognizance of your Commission; and that a fifth
part shall be allowed to any person that can and will make discovery in whose
hands any sum of money is collected, as aforesaid, and not truly accounted
for, to his Highness?

9. Whereas several Lands have been illegally and unduely sold; (viz some
before a survey or This is a particular Charge against the Commissioner, as
Drury-hous, for several great abuses and frauds practiced by them to the great
damage of your Highness, and contrary to their Trust and Oaths.
particular returned) contrary to the Commissioners instructions; And also by
their Commission, no Lands ought to be sold till a certain set number of
Commissioners were met together; which number made them a Committee: and under
that Committee the said persons could not legally act as Commissioners, nor had
a lesser number then was appointed them by their Commission power to sell Lands
or Gods appertaining to the Commonwealth, and the Commissioners to take a
Corporal Oath before they could act as Commissioners, not to act contrary to
their Directions and Rules set them: notwithstanding the aforesaid Rules and
Instructions appointed unto the Commissioners and Trustees by the Parliament and
his Highness, and contrary to their Oaths, several great quantities of Lands
have been sold by some few of the Commissioners privately, (before the said
Commissioners number was full, or the Trustees fully empowered to sell any
Lands appertaining to the State,) for many days, meeting, and contracting for
Lands and Houses, when there were not so many Commissioners met together, as to
enable them legally to be a Committee, according to their Commission, and
Instructions thereupon. My bumble Querie is, to know, Whether these Sales are
good in law, being sold contrary to their Instructions, and by a lesser number
of Commissioners then were appointed to sell the Lands: So that many thousand
pounds yearly of Delinquents Estates have been sold in reversion, which ought
to have been sold in possession. And great and vast sums of money have been
reprised by some Commissioners, and the Contracters, contrary to their Trust,
have received several sums of money indirectly, of several persons, for their
actings, as aforesaid; and have sold Lands at under-values, viz. When one man
has bid 25 years value and could not have it, but has gone without it;
another (that has been a friend) has bought the same Land for 13 years value,
to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth; I humbly crave your Opinions,
Whether all the aforesaid frauds, or any of the said misdemeanors are within
Cognizance of your Commission; And the Discoverers to have a Fifth part for all
Sums of money that shall be caused to be brought in to the Exchequer upon
these Discoveries proposed in this Article.

10. Whether it be within the Cognizance of your Commission, to take an
account of all sums of money that have been collected in the City of London
and Lines of Communication, for furnishing the City with Coals; and where
that Stock remains? for though some men received back their moneys, without
their Interest, after they had been deluded many years, Yet there is many
thousand pounds (at this very day) in the Treasurers hands. And whether all
the Treasurers living since 1644, within every County, City, and Borrough, and
have been appointed to receive great sums of money, and other Provisions for
the relief of Ireland, building of Churches, mending Highwaies, redeeming of
slaves, and other Charitable uses, be within the Cognizance of your
Commission, and the Discoverers to have a fifth part.

11 Whereas great sums of money remain in men's hands that have stolen Custom
and Excise, and also in several Committees hands within, this Nation, upon the
Account of the public I late of the Nation; and several Taxes viz. of 60000l,
90000l, 120000l a Month, and all other Parlament-Taxes, whereas greater sums
of money have been (by virtue and color of the said Ordinance) collected upon
the several Inhabitants of the City of London and Lines of Communication, and
in other parts and Counties of this Nation, which moneys have been levied by
the Pettie-collectors, and paid in to the great Collectors and Treasurers, and
great quantities of these moneys remain in several persons hands, unaccompted
for to the great Damage of his Highness and the Public. I humbly desire to
know, whether this Discovery be within the Cognizance of your Commission: And
the Discoverers to have a Fifth part of all sums of money that shall be paid
into the receipt of his Highness's Exchequer. And how I shall be secured of my
Fifth part upon all or any the aforesaid Discoveries in the aforesaid Articles,
Which I humbly propound unto your grave Judgment; and crave your Orders and
Directions thereupon, it tending to, and being highly for his Highness 's
service, to have all the aforesaid Frauds strictly examined, and found out.

I shall, and do attend this business; and when I shall receive your Commands
or Directions how I shall steer my self in the Prosecution of this business:
And know from you, whether all these Discoveries are within the Verge of your
Commission: That then the Discoverers of all or any the offenses aforesaid
shall have one full Fifth part for his Discovery, of all sums of money due
unto his Highness, and unlawfully detained, as aforesaid I shall (upon yours
Honors answer unto me) put in several Claims to all these several Branches
aforesaid.

May it pleas your Honors,
Several persons have withheld from his Highness and the Commonwealth (in
Lands, Tenements, Debts, Duties, Money, Mertchandize, Assessments, Goods and
Chattels) the several Sums hereunder named: which several sums of money they
have in their hands, or have converted them to their own Uses. I have thought
it convenient to conceal their name, and not print them; but to print the Sums
by the Numbers, and leav a space for the names.

Numbers. Pounds. I. 01500 II. 01000 III. 02000 IV. 04000 V. 10000 VI. 16000
VII. 20000 VIII. 06000 IX. 02000 X. 20000 XI. 10000 XII. 06000 XIII. 15000 XIV.
10000 XV. 20000 XVI. 02000 XVII. 04000 XVII. 04000 XIX. 06000 XX. 04000 XXI.
15000 XXII. 05000 XXIII. 20000 XXIV. 06000 XXV. 20000 XXIV. 04000 XXVII. 15000
XXVIII. 12000 XXIX. 12000 XXX. 16000 XXXI. 04000 XXXII. 02000 XXXIII. 02000
XXXIV. 06000 XXXV. 0^000 XXXVI. 02^00 XXXVII. 08000 XXXVIII. 06000 XXXIX. 02000
XL. 03000

These are the Sums of money which several Gentlemen in this Nation,
Accomptants, Treasurers, and others have in their han^s and possessions, or
have converted the same to their own private Uses. And all the aforesaid
persons ought to be accomptable for the Lands, Tenements, Debts, Collections,
Assessments, Merchandise, Goods and Chattels, to the full value they have
received. And at this day the aforesaid persons have in their hands the
particular Sums aforesaid; which they still with hold from his Highness, most
of them contrary to their Trust, being the Parlaments and his Highness's
servants, and receiving their Sallaries, and Wages of the Parliament and his
Highness, for their Attendance in the Excise Office, Custome-hous, Drury-hous,
Goldsmiths-hall, Treasurers for the monthly Taxes, and Treasurers for several
other Assessments, moneys collected for several charitable uses, for Redemption
of Slaves from Argier, Tunis, Tripolis, etc. Commissioners for sale of all
Prize goods etc. who all have had great Fees and Sallaries, and therefore ought
by the Law to make a true and just Account upon Oath. And every of them have
got the Public moneys, and by that means have unduely enriched themselves
with great and vast Possessions in Lands and Treasure: And they withhold to
this day the just Rights and Dues which appertain to his Highness and the
Commonwealth. And (in regard there is a Fifth part to the first Discoverer,
that shall make it appear, by sufficient proof, that any have Moneys, Lands,
Houses, Goods and Merchandise, or any other thing of Value in their hands
appertaining to the State,) Thereupon I put in my Claim, and Charge all the
aforesaid persons, to have in Several Commissioners at Drury-hous have by
undue Practices, contrary to their Trust, damnified and defrauded his Highness
of above Sixty thousand Pounds. The several Commissioners names, the particular
Sums, and the particular Charges I humbly crave leav to have liberty hereafter
to insert, referring my self to my 9th Query I herewith presented to the
Commissioners at Worcester-hous.
their Custodies the aforesaid moneys, Lands, houses, goods, and Merchandise,
to the values aforesaid; and desire of your Honors, that I may be admitted to
make my Proofs against such of the said persons as I do, and shall desire to
charge; and that I may have a view and inspection into all such Books and
papers which are conducing to the making of every particular Charge; and to
examine witnesses, upon Oath, thereupon: And that all persons which stand in
Contempt may by your warrant be Attached.

My humble desire is, That these Discoveries be Registered, and the day when I
delivered the same: and this Charge, with my several Queries annexed. I desire
also, they may be kept at Worcester-hous, as a Record, to manifest the true
grounds and reasons, why I deliver in this Charge.

26. May. 1656. Your humble Servant THO. VIOLET.

May it pleas your Highness,
THe High Court of Parliament being shortly after summoned by Your Highness, I
did thereupon forbear, for a time, to proceed further in this Business, with
the Commissioners at Worcester-hous; being resolved (by the assistance of God)
humbly to present these humble Propositions (with some additions) unto your
Highness, and that Supreme Court, the Parliament; desiring of God, so to direct
me in this Business; that, what I most humbly propound may be for the glory
of God, and good of the Nation; and that my Labors in this Business may be
accepted of by your Highness, and the Parliament, as proceeding from an humble,
loyal, and true English Heart.

May it pleas your Highness,

I Do most humbly offer to your Highness and the Parliament these further most
humble Proposals for your Highness and the Commonwealth's service; which I
most humbly present on my knees at your Highness's and the Parlaments feet; and
do likewise humbly pray, that these my most humble Proposals may be confirmed
by an Act of this Parliament, with such alterations and additions as shall be
conceived by your Highness and the Parliament most for the honor of God and the
benefit of the good people of this Nation, by easing them in their Taxes, and
calling to account the Commonwealths Debtors.

1. According to the Statute of Rutland, made May 24. in the tenth year of the
Reign of King Edw. 1. Anno Dom. 1282. touching the Recovery of the Kings Debts;
And the Statute of 6. Hen. 4. cap. 3. made against the frauds and deceipts of
diverse Sheriffs, Escheators, Aulnagers, Customers, Comptrollers and others, in
these words following; viz. Item, Whereas diverse Sheriffs, Escheators,
Aulnagers, Customers, Comptrollers, and other the Kings Officers, accomptable,
in many parts of the Realm, do fraud and deceive our said Lord the King yearly
in their unlawful and untrue accounts, concealing and reteining to their own
use the greater part of that which rightfully ought to appertain to the King,
to his great damage and loss. Out said Lord the King (by the Advice and Assent
aforesaid) has ordained, That presently after every final account given and
made by the Officers and Customers aforesaid, before the Barons of the
Exchequer of our Lord the King: The tenor of the Account of every the said
Officers from time to time shall be sent into the Counties where the same
Accomptants be Officers, together with Co^missions directed to the most
lawful and discreet persons, to enquire and certify the profits which the
said Accomptants have received within the said Counties, in the name and to the
use of our said Lord the King by them in the manner aforesaid upon their said
Accounts, or deceitfully concealed and received to their proper use and profit.
And in case that the said Accomptants be attained of their said fiauds and
deceipts, they shall incurr to our Lord the King the penalty of the Treble of
the same whereof they shall be so convict, and their Bodies to Prison, until
they have made fine and ransom to our said Lord the King, according to the
discretion of his Judges.

These excellent Laws to be put in execution, for the strict and just taking
up all the Accounts of Sequestrators, Treasurers, Collectors, Committee Men,
Excize men, and Collectors of Customs, Surveyers, who have returned falls
surveys, and then bought the Lands according to the value of their fraudulent
surveys, or received Bribes for making these fraudulent surveys for some
particular persons profit; these (I humbly say) being strictly examined, will
bring your Highness in many hundred thousand pounds.

Here follows many Laws of excellent use for the furthering of this business
of calling the Accomptants of the Nation to a just account.
THe Statute of 33. Hen. 8. cap. 39. Provides, that all Bonds and Specialties
made to the King, shall be in the nature of a Statute of the staple; and also
all Process, Judgments, Executions, etc.

That the King, his Heirs and Successors shall not be debarred or delaied his
just debts and duties against any as heir or hei^s to any person endebted to
him, albeit the word heir be not comprised in the Cognizance, Obligation or
Specialty.

That the King in all his Suits for Debts shall recover his Costs and Damages.

That the Kings Suits shall be preferred, and his Debt first paid and
satisfied. Magna Charta cap. 18.

That Lands entailed shall be liable to the payment of the Kings Debts, And
the King may recover his Debt against the Executor of his Creditor.

How the Kings Debt shall be levied, when his Debtors Lands shall come to
several men's hands and possessions.

The Statute of 7. Edw. 6. cap* 1. Provides several Penalties and Forfeitures
to be inflicted upon all Officers and Accomptants that shall conceal any Duty,
and not pay the same in due time; And that Officers and Accomptants shall (upon
notice) delcare what money they have received and not accounted for, and upon
commandment make payment of the same within ten days next, after notice, upon
pain or forfeiture of loss of their Offices.

The Statute of 34. Hen. 8. cap. 2. sets down the Forfeitures of High
Collectors and general Receivers of Fifteens and Subsidies, and all other Loans
and Taxes, that do not pay the money by them received to the Kings use to such
person and at such time as he shall be appointed; And that the King shall at
his pleasure charge the said Collector or Receiver, and their Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators, A Proclamation from his Highness, to require all
Accompatants to delive^ in a perfect account upon their oaths of their Receipts
and Payments within a certain time, or else to suffer the penalty of the Law;
and select persons to be nominated to inspect these Accounts, and by what
Orders all moneys were paid.
with four shillings the pound for every month the said moneys shall be laid
out by them for profit, but detained and not paid within three months next
after the receipt.

The Statutes of 13. Eliz. cap. 4. and 27. Eliz. cap. 3 Provides, that
Treasurers, Receivers, and Accomptants Lands shall be liable for the payment
of their Debts to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors; And that the Queen, her
Heirs and Successors may sell and dispose of their lands, etc. and against whom
the same sale shall be good; and how the Queen, her Heirs and Successors may
use the lands of the Treasurers, Receivers and Accomptants indebted, which he
or they has or have purchased in the names of other persons, etc.

The Statute of 1^. Eliz cap. 7. Provides, that the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap.
4. shall extend to under-Collectors, Receivers and Accomptants of Tenths and
Subsidies of the Clergy, to make their lands, goods, etc. liable for
satisfying of such moneys as they have collected and received, and not paid and
accounted.

And that every such under-Collector and Receiver shall account in the
Exchequer for his Receipt, as other Collectors and Receivers do.

The Statutes of 52 Hen. 3. cap 23. and 13 Edw. 1. cap. 11. Provides, that all
Accomptants that do withraw themselves, and have no Lands, etc. whereby they may
be distrained, Then their bodies to be attached and imprisoned, and caused to
make their Accounts.

And the punishment of the Sheriff or Jailer that lets an Accomptant
Committed escape.

May it pleas your Highness;
AT the beginning of our late troubles, some men (having designed unto
themselves to make themselves great in the midst of the common Calamities, and
to fish in troubled waters) disturbed the most excellent course of the
Exchequer; and (to compass their fraudulent designs which they had craftily
laid) erected Private Treasuries, as Goldsmiths hall, Gourney house, Worcester
house, Haberdashershall, Weavers hall, Drury house, Custom house, Excise Office,
Treasuries for the Public Plate of the Nation at Guild hall, and infinite
other places throughout this Nation were erected, and petty Exchequers, where
the public money was kept; and the public Accounts by that means
interwooven one with another; and almost all of them managed by persons equally
guilty, and excessively covetous, as well City Commissioners and Treasures, as
Country Commissioners and Treasurers. So that ordinary Clarks and slight
fellows being crept into employment, to finger the public moneys, some, by
buying of the Goldsmiths light and clipped moneys, and then putting the said
light and clipped moneys amongst the public Treasure. (It was observed by all
that paid moneis in to the Treasurers, that the Tellers would not receiv a
clipped shilling, and when they paid it away for the State, their Payments were
full of clipped money, which clipped money they bought of Goldsmiths, to the
value of many score of thousand pounds, and this was twenty times culled over
and over, and now they are fain to take it in the Country, or to receiv none:
The clipped money was like a horse in a mill, it went round; the Treasurers
would receive none, but bought it of the Goldsmith, the Goldsmiths would melt
no clipped money they bought, but sell it to the Treasurers and Cashiers; this
was paid to the Army, they paid it for their Quarters, the Farmer pays it to
his Landlord, the Landlord brings it up to London and sells it to the Goldsmith
at 15l, 20l, 25l in the hundred loss, thinking it is melted, and he shall
never more be tronbled with it: but the Goldsmith sells it, as aforesaid; and
at my Gentleman's next quarter payment his money is paid him again: so that the
Nation (by this trick) has been mightily cheated by public Cashiers: and they
have many of them gotten great Estates, some Five thousand, some Ten thousand,
some Fifteen thousand, some Twenty thousand, some Thirty thousand, some Forty
thousand Pounds apiece: And if these petty Varlets, which were but servants
and underlings, have gotten such vaste and great Estates by their crafty and
fraudulent actions, being but young sucklings, in comparison of many of the
great Treasurers their masters; what have these great Treasurers then gotten,
whose ravening paunches have devoured the wealth and substance of the Nation.

May it please your Highness, I could name them by scores, but that I forbear
at present, till Justice do personally single them out; for in every County,
City, Corporation, and almost in every Parish in England and Wales, there is
very few Parishes in the Nation without some of these Unjust Stewards,
Committee Men, Sequestrators, and Treasurers. I most humbly beseech Almighty
God, to put it into Your Highness 's and the Parlaments hearts, to say
particularly to every unjust Treasurer, Committee-man, Sequestrator,
Excise-man, Commissioner of the Customs, Commissioner and Trustee for the Sale
of Delinquents Estates, Treasurer for the public Plate, and every other
person that shall be proved to have the public moneys in his hands, as was
said to the unjust Steward in the Gospel, How is it that I hear this of thee?
Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.

Your Highness and the Parliament may see, by the former recited Laws and
Statutes, what care all former ages had to see the Kings Debts and Rents duly
paid and accounted for; and that no fraud should be put upon them, their Heirs
or Successors.

To prevent all frauds, most excellent Ways and Rules were settled in the Court
of Exchequer, in all Kings Reigns, by the great care of many Ages: And the
Sages of the Law know, there was not a more exact method in the world, then the
Court of Exchequer was, for the just accompting and paying the Kings Dues.

I have heard my Lord Cottington say in the Exchequer Chamber, That no Prince
in Christendom had the like exact way, as the King of England had, by the
course of the Exchequer, if the Rules set down by the Court be by the
Underofficers duly executed: so that whatsoever sum comes in there, (be it
a million of money) must be duly paid and accounted for, or else he could
find it upon the foot of the account, if ever it came in charge into the Pipe.

And if the course of the Exchequer had not been disturbed, and the payments of
the public money thrust out of the old Channel, it had been impossible to have
had so many Treasurers cozen the Commonwealth so grossly and shamefully as they
have done.

And in order and pursuance of calling all Accomptants to a just, true and
strickt Account, your Supplicant most humbly presents these ensuing Proposals
to your Highness and the Parlaments view and consideration; and humbly prays,
that the same may be put in strickt execution, with such alterations and
additions as your Highness and the Parliament shall conceive fittest for the
good of the Nation in general, to ease the people of their Taxes. For, God
defend that the generality of the people should contribute their moneys, and
pay it to Treasurers that shall make themselves great (and their private
posterities after them) out of what they have cozened and defrauded the
Commonwealth of. Therefore I humbly petition your Highness and the Parliament,

1. THat an Act of Parliament may be made, and a Proclamation thereupon go
forth, commanding and requiring all Committee Men, Sequestrators, Trustees for
sale of Delinquents Estates, Commissioners of Excize, Commissioners of the
Customs, Treasurers of the public Plate, and all other Treasurers, Receivers,
Collectors, and all other Accomptants and persons whatsoever that have been
employed to collect and receiv, and have collected and received any the public
moneys, goods, chattels, plate, etc, or other things of value throughout
England and Wales, ever since the beginning of the year 1642. shall within
three months next after the date of the said Act and Proclamation make up and
deliver (according to the Laws and Statutes of this Nation made for Accomptants
and Accounts) into the Exchequer (or other place your Highness shall appoint)
their several just and true Accounts of what Moneys, Goods, Chattels, Plate,
etc. or other thing of value they or any for them have received; And how and by
what warrant they have paid and delivered out the same: The same Account to be
delivered in upon the particular oath of every such person Accomptant, that the
same is a just and true Account; And upon every particular account so made, to
pay in the money remaining in his hands upon his said Account (if any there
be) into the Exchequer, or other person and place your Highness shall appoint
to receiv the same: And upon failer of bringing in their several and particular
Accounts, according to the said Act and Proclamation, that then all such
moneys, goods, chattels, and other things of value, which shall be found and
proved (upon Inquisition) they have received for the Commonwealth, whereof
they have not accounted for, shall be levied and taken upon their estates, and
their persons imprisoned, until they have justly and truly accounted; And if
any person or Accomptant aforesaid shall be dead, then the Heir and Executor
or Administrator of such person so dying, or being dead, shall duly account
for the party so dying or being dead, according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Nation.

2. That an Act of Parliament may be made, and sent throughout England and
Wales, to require and empower four of the next Justices of the Peace, or such
other Commissioners your Highness shall appoint, to call a Jury in every Parish
of substantial Freeholders, or other discreet honest men (either of the same
Parish or Parishes next adjacent) and to call to their assistance all other
discreet persons that can and will give them true information concerning any of
the premises in charge: And the said Jury so impannelled, to make true
Inquisition of all such neighbors and persons aforesaid, of these particular
things following; viz.

3 That the Jurie be empowered to enquire and present all persons, men and
women, and their degree and quality that have been sequestered, in each
respective parish, within every County of this Nation, and the days of the
month and year when this was done: Also, they are to enquire and present what
stock of Cattle, Money, Plate, household stuff, etc. or other things of value,
they had taken from them, and to set down the particular values thereof; Also
to set down the values of the Houses, Lands and Tenements, Woods, etc.
sequestered, and into whose hands the same came; And to set down the parcels and
values distinctly, and the several time and times when this was done, and by
whose order, warrants and directions, and who received the moneys.

4. They are to enquire and present in every Parish what Committee Men and
Sequestrators and Treasurers are in every Parish; their distinct names and
qualities; who of them are dead, and who be their Heirs and Executors or
Administrators; And if any Sequestrator, Treasurer or Committee-man be removed
out of their ancient abiding places since 1642. to set down (to the best of
their knowledge or information they can get) where every such Sequestrator,
Committeeman and Treasurer does live; in what County and place within this
Nation, or elsewhere.

5. They are to enquire in what Places of the County the Committee for
Sequestrations did usually sit; and to certify the same: And, that diligent
search be made for all Books of Orders of every particular Committee.

That in every Parish twelv able and discreet persons, upon oath, shall make
strict inquisition who received all Rents and Profits of all Lands and Houses
of Delinquents in the said Parish, and how long every Delinquents lands were
under Sequestration, before they were compounded for or sold; and to present
all persons that shall be proved to have the public money in their hands, and
what quantity: And this all Juries in every Parish shall swear to do (without
favor or affection) and that some considerable penalty may be inflicted on
such Juries or the Parties offending amongst them, that shall wilfully perjure
themselves in wilful making false Returns, and in wilful concealing any frauds
to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, through their connivance or willfulness,
when the Evidence for the State has by good and legal witnesses sworn the fact
positively and clearly; and yet the Jury will not make their Returns according
to their Evidence, to set a penalty upon all Offenders of this nature.

6. That the Prime Justices of the Peace of every County in England (or such
other Commissioners your Highness shall appoint) may be authorized by your
Highness and the Parliament to meet at the head City or Town of every County;
and there they, or any six of them, shall take all the particular presentiments
of the several parishes, and send forth their Warrants to all Committee Men,
their Clerks, Sequestrators, Surveyers, and others, to bring in all the Acts,
Orders, Ordinances, Writings, etc. which empowered them to act as a Committee
for the County, and empowered them to raise money and sequester Delinquents
Estates (personal and real); and all the Orders, Warrants, and Proceedings they
made as Committee men: And to command all Clerks and other persons whatsoever,
to bring in the said Papers, Books and Records, which has been made at any
meeting of the Committee, without any imbezelment or alteration; And the said
Commissioners, or any six of them, to be empowered to give any Committee-man
or their Clerks an Oath, to answer to all such Questions concerning any Moneys,
Lands, Goods, Chattels, or other things of value, etc. as has come into their
custody, and to examine them by what Order they paid the same, and how much
money etc. remains in every Committee-mans hands, and to return every man's
Answer. And if any person refuse to deliver the Books and Writings of the
Committee, or has imbezled or defaced the same, every such person to be
committed to prison without bail or mainprise, till his Highness and his
Counsels further pleasure be known.

7. The said Justices of peace and Commissioners aforesaid, or any six or more
of them are to retourn their Certificates of all the frauds, abuses, failers of
Trust, etc. And what persons they find upon the particular Presentmens of
every Parish that have the Commonwealths money, lands, goods, chattels, etc. in
their hands, where the Justices find it positively to be proved, to certify
it so; where they find it by circumstances, to certify the same to the best
of their skill and knowledge, as they will answer their neglect to his Highness
and his Counsel.

8. The said Justices and Commissioners in every County to put up all these
Papers, Records, Writings etc. which shall be Returned unto them from every
Parish severally, and safely, without any imbezelment, in Trunks or Boxes
sealed with their seals, with their Certificate how they in their Judgments
find the whole Business, upon the Presentment of each Parish: And a Duplicate
of that Presentment to be sent along with the Papers, Records, and Accounts in
general. The same to be sent up to some public Place that shall be set down
and nominated by your Highness, and there to be safely kept, without
imbezelment, by faithful and trusty sworn persons, to be nominated and
appointed for that Service; And also several persons of skill and ability
(upon oath) to view and audite and inspect into all the said Books and Papers,
Accounts and Writings concerning the premises; And to give your Highness and
your Counsel an account (upon their oaths) concerning the premises, and how
they find each several man's Account, without fear, favor or affection, (as
they will answer it upon peril of their Estates and pain of Imprisonment.

9. Where Counties are large, the Justices and Commissioners aforesaid to
divide themselves into several divisions, and to take the several Presentiments
of Parishes; Provided, that (at the least) six Commissioners and Justices be
at the taking up of the Returns of the Certificates of the Parishes, and every
Parish to keep in their Vestry of their Parish Church safely a perfect Record
of the Duplicate attested under the hands often of the ablest Freeholders, or
others, with the Minister and Churchwardens hands, also the day and year they
made their Return, and the Justices names, and place where and to whom they
delivered it: And this to be done, upon a strict penalty.

10. That whereas there has been several monthly taxes and voluntary
contributions for many years, viz. ever since the year 1642. taxed and gathered
upon the Counties, Cities, and Borroughs within England and Wales: That
diligent Enquiry be made by the Justices of the peace, and Comissioners of
each County, of those that have Assessed the said Monthly Taxes within the
Cities, Borroughs, and Parishes of each respective County. And that all the
sums of money received by Order of Parliament or his Highness, and the
Transactions thereupon for each respective Parish and County be particularly
set down the just Sums, what was Rated at every one of the Quarter Sessions,
or other meetings, when they made their Bills and Books of Rates and
Assessments, and the several Sums they laid upon every Hundred or Parish
within every respective County. That they present in writing the gross Accounts
of every Book of Rates and Assessments since the year 1642; and what
Commissioners signed those Books of Rates, and who were made Petty Collectors
for each Parish and Hundred for every respective year, and the several Sums
rated. This to be don for every particular Tax which was Rated: and who was
made the Chief Collectors and Treasurers of each County. And to set down to
what Treasurers at London the Country Treasurers of each County paid their
Taxes which they levied of each respective County; or, if they paid the money
in the Country by Order of the Committee, to produce their Original Orders and
Warrants; and those Warrants and Orders to be transmitted up to such persons
as your Highness shall appoint, to be examined of the legalitie of these
Orders: And all these Original Assessments made ever since 1642 to be
transmitted up to London, to such place or places, person or persons, as your
Highness shall appoint.

11. To make strict enquiry what Voluntary Contributions, Sum or Sums of
money, Jewels, Plate, etc. have been in each respective County, City, Town,
Corporate Seaports, and elsewhere contributed and given toward the maintenance
of the late war in defense of the Parliament here in England, or for the relief
of the Protestants in Ireland, and for the Redemption of Slaves at Argier,
Tunis, Tripolis, and other places, and the Custom Books to be examined at
every Port: And who have been by Act of Parliament or Order of any Committee
empowered to receive any the abovesaid Premises.

12. A convenient reward to be allowed out of the aforesaid Discoveries made
for loss of time, charges, and pains taken and undergon by any of the persons
that shall be so employed by the aforesaid Justices of peace, in each County.

13. To appoint sworn Officers and Auditors to Calculate and cast up what has
been levied since 1642. according to the Returns out of each County in the
Nation: And what has been duly and really paid, upon true and lawful
Warrants. And a select Committee appointed to view and approve of these
warrants: And, upon approbation, the Officers to allow it upon every Receivers
account. And if that the Warrants be not approved of by the Commissioners of
his Highness's Treasury, or others, to be appointed for that service, by his
Highness and Counsel; Then the full Charge of every County shall be put at the
foot of each man's Account that has been a Receiver: And every Receivor's
Estate and Person to lie liable, till he has perfected his Accoumpt justly
and truly in the Exchequer, according to the good known Laws of the Land.

14. And if this course be strictly looked after and taken; Whosoever has any
of the Commonwealths money in his hands, it will be found out. For, if any
Treasurer or Collector has a Charge given him by the Country, City, Town,
Corporation, or hundred, for the moneys he has received, Every Receiver and
Treasurer must discharge themselves by known legal Acquittances and Warrants
from such as were legally empowered to give them; and from the day any
Accomptant of the Commonwealths money, till the time he shall have a just and
legal Discharge upon a just and true Account, not a feined, forged, or Averian
Account; I most humbly say, Every Receivers and Accountants Body, Lands and
Estate whatsoever, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, are all, and
every one of them Liable, till they have justly Accounted, and gotten their
Legal Quietus est. And this is the known Law of the Nation, and constantly has
in all ages been practiced in the good old way of the Court of Exchequer at
Westminster. The Whole Premises, upon my knees, I humble tender at Your
Highness and the Parlaments feet, and implore your gracious and benign
Acceptance of your Supplicant's loyal endeavor, for Your Highness and the
Commonwealths Service.

To His Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF England, Scotland and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging. The humble Petition of THOMAS VIOLET of
London Goldsmith,
Humbly shows,
THat great quantities of Plate, Bullion, and the heavy current Silver Coins
of this Nation, (as Shillings, Sixpences and Half-Crowns, and Five shilling
pieces) have been formerly, and are at this day melted down, for the making of
Gilt and Silver Thread and Wire Spangles, Oas, Purl, etc. to the great waste of
the Stock of this Nation.

By which evil Practices many mischiefs and damages have been and are daily put
on the Commonwealth, which ought strictly to be prevented, most especially in
this conjuncture of time when we have Wars with Spain.

That your Highness would be graciously pleased for the future, not to suffer
either Refiner, Goldsmith, or Wyer-drawer to melt the Coin or Plate of the
Nation, to make Gold or Silver Wire or Thread, but that all Silver employed or
spent in this manufacture be bought or contracted for beyond Seas, upon the
produce and returns of Commodities; And that none of the Coin or Plate of the
Nation be spent or wrought in this manufacture upon the severest penalties can
be inflicted on the Offenders.

That the late King and his Counsel in Anno 1635. taking into their
consideration the great loss he sustained in his Customs, by suffering this
manufacture to be in England, did cause a Duty to be imposed on Gold and
Silver Wire, which was made into Silver Thread, Spangles, Purls and Oas; the
sum of Six pence the ounce Troy, (which is not two pence upon the ounce
Venice) upon Gold and Silver thread, commonly so called; but it is truly gold
and silver Silk, for the Silver is all spun on Silk. May it pleas your
Highness, the Book of Rates in the Custom-house lays eight groats upon one
pound Venice, which, upon account, is above six pence the ounce Troy in Wire
(as upon Examination before the Counsel of Trade your Petitioner shall make it
clearly appear).

That if your Highness do continue the making of gold and silver wire and
thread here, That your Highness will be pleased to recommend it to the
Committee for Trade, to take especial ca^e to prevent the frauds and damages
now daily done and practiced in this manufacture; And to make such Orders and
Rules for the Trade, that there may be a through Reformation of false, slight,
and deceitful stuff, upon very strict penalties: And for the due execution of
the same, the Committee of Trade to consider and settle such Officers, and
their Fees for their pains, as they shall deem fiting, to prevent the bypast
Abuses; And to report the same Regulation to your Highness and your Counsel
for Confirmation.

That if your Highness continue this manufacture here, That then as great an
Excize be laid on it here, as is laid on the Custom and Impost of Gold and
Silver thread, imported from Millan, Venice, or other Forain parts: For the
making of silver thread here, hinders the importation of so much Silver as
would be brought in on that manufacture, which Silver will increase the stock
of the Nation. And this manufacture being made here (as it is now made) without
order or Rule both for fineness and weight of Silver, and without consideration
had what your Highness and the Commonwealth loses in the Customs, by
suffering it to be made here, and the waste of the Coin, Plate and Bullion of
the Nation, (without a due regulation of this manufacture) it is far better for
the Commonwealth to have the making totally put down.

May it pleas your Highness, Much may be alleged and pleaded for the making
this manufacture here, so it may be justly made; as that it keeps and
maintains a lively hood for many thousand persons and families in and about the
City of London, which would perish, if this manufacture were put down. A just
and strict regulation will be better for the Workmen and the Tradesmen (such
as are honest, and would not adulterate their Lace, Ribbons, Spangles, etc. in
this manufacture) And be greatly advantageous to the wearers, The Coin and
Bullion of this Nation will be preserved, and your Highness Revenue much
increased, If the draught for the just and due regulation of the manufacture of
Gold and Silver wire and thread (which your Petitioner herewith most humbly
presents to you Highness) be put in due execution, with such alterations and
additions as the Commit for Trade in their great wisedoms shall think fit for
your Highness and the Commonwealths Service.

Your Petitioner humbly prays, That the premises may by your Highness be
recommended to the Committee for Trade, and they Ordered,

1. To consider, Whether it be fit (at this conjuncture of time) to continue
the making of this manufacture here in England.

2. If they conceive the manufacture still may be made here for the relief and
employment of the Poor, That then the Committee of Trade be Ordered by your
Highness to set down such Rules and Ways, as they in their Judgments shall
think fit, to prevent all former Frauds and Abuses put upon the Coin of this
Nation: And that as much Excize may be laid on the Silver Wire and Thread, as
is paid to your Highness and the Commonwealth in the Custom-house, if the
Silver Thread were imported from beyond Seas into this Nation, Which will
increas your Highness Revenue some thousands of pounds yearly. And that your
Petitioner may be Ordered by your Highness to attend the Committee for Trade
with his draught for the regulation of this Manufacture: And (as in duty bound)
your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

THO. VIOLET.

Whitehall, May 8. 1655.
HIs Highness refers this to the Consideration of the Committee and Counsel
for Trade, to enquire into the particulars and certify their opinion.

Nath. Bacon.

May it pleas your Highness;

THe late King Charles and his Privy Counsel would never suffer, that the
silver courrant Coins or Plate of the Nation should be wast^d in this
Manufacture, for the making of gold or silver Thread: What the Refiners and
Wyerdrawers did spend of the Plate and Coin, in these Manufactures, it was and
is against the Laws of the Land: And by the very Monopoly that the King
granted to Alderman Wollaston and Aldermam Gibbs, An. 1636. for to be his only
Agents for refining one Hundred thousand pounds a year of Foreign Silver, for
making this Manufacture; yet, in that Project of Gibbs and Wollaston they
Covenant with the King, not to Refine or cause to be melted down any the
Courrant Coin or Plate of the Nation; and that they should melt none but
Foreign Bullion which shall be Imported for the making this aforesaid
Manufacture; And many of the Privy Counsel then were for the total putting down
of the making and wearing this Manufacture here in England, as causing an
excessive Expense to all Sorts and Conditions of people, as being a Vanity
that the Nation might well be without: But then it was considered by the King
and his Counsel, the multitude of Women spinsters and other people that had
their subsistence out of it; and, in that regard, the Manufacture was continued
(but under strict Rules for the due Regulation, and that all the Workers should
conform to the same, and they did promise an humble conformity:) and I Thomas
Violet was appointed, under the Great Seal of England, to take the care and
Charge of Sealing and Surveying all these Manufactures, to prevent the former
cheating and Cosennage both of Wyerdrawers, Silkmen, and Refiners. The several
frauds I clearly proved, under the hand of Mr Jackson, the sworn Assay-master
of Goldsmiths hall; and I cut and defaced all slight. course, and deceitful
gold or silver Thread, Spangles, wire etc. which Office I did justly and
faithfully execute for almost Five years, and prevented all former Abuses, and
caused the workmen to work their silver for these Manufactures as exactly and
justly as the Plate or Money of the Nation is made, during the time I regulated
the Manufacture by my sealing of it. This I have proved, under the hand of many
hundred Spinsters who petitioned for the Restoring me to my Office again.

Your Petitioners most humble prayer to your Highness is, that the Honorable
Committee for Trade, now having this Business under their examination, and
(having the particulars in this Petitition in consideration) may be by your
Highness ordered to make their Report, and to take care for the preservation of
the Bullion and Coins of the Nation: And that all Silver made for this
Manufacture be melted at a Public place, and Viewed, and Registered; that so
none of the Coins or Plate of the Nation be melted down for any of these
Manufactures: And to appoint such Officers as they shall conceiv may be fit
for the regulating of all Abuses in the Manufacture, and for the best advantage
of your Highness.

The honorable Committee for Trade have given the wyerdrawers and Refiners
several days for the propounding of ways for regulating of the said Trade,
and to prevent the abuses bypast, and to preserve the Coin and treasure of the
Nation. But (instead of that) the Wyerdrawers have presented the Draught of a
Corporation to the Committee of Trade; which, if it should be granted unto
them in that way they have presented the same, They would melt, and cause the
Goldsmiths to melt for their use (in a few years) all the heavy Gold and
Silver, Coin and Plate of this Nation. And indeed they are come to that
confidence, that they think to cozen all people that wear Gold and Silver; And
to get a Charter for the doing thereof, that so they may work Iniquity by a
Law.

May it pleas your Highness,
THere was a Complaint made to the late King Charles and the Lords of his Privy
Counsel, January 25. 1634. And an Information given by some of the Wardens of
the Company of Goldsmiths, touching the detriment and damage which arises by
the undue Practices of some Refiners and Gold-wyerdrawers of London, by melting
the current Coins and Bullion of the Nation: And several Depositions against
the Refiners of London were presented to the King and his Counsel at
White Hall, of very high and heinous Crimes by some of the Wardens and Company
of Goldsmiths; and no doubt but the Company of the Goldsmiths have the Copies
of these Papers in their Hall. There-upon, Mr Attorney General Banks received
a Command from the said King and Lords to prosecute the Statute of 4. Hen. 7th
against such Refiners and Gold-wyer-drawers as he should find to be
Offenders, and to see the Penalties might be recovered. And upon further
examination of these most heinous Offenses, an Information was put into the
Starr-Chamber by the Kings Attorney General Banks against Alderman Wollaston
and Alderman Gibbs, for melting and procuring several Goldsmiths to cull and
melt the current Silver Coins of the Nation; And for the unlawful buying and
refining of the said heavy current English Moneys, and for unlawful buying and
refining Gold and Silver, and for several other Abuses practiced by them,
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Nation (as appears at large by the
Kings Attorneys Information in the Starr-Chamber against them.)

Some of the Wyer-drawers of London, seeing the Wind blow at that Corner, to
prevent the danger approaching on them, petition the said late King in the
behalf of themselves and diverse other Wyer-drawers of the City of London, the
second of April 1635. In which Petition they set forth, that there are many
Abuses daily practiced and done in the said Trade of Gold and
Silver-wyer-drawing, and the manufuctures thereof; and that their Trade was
under no Government; That they desired his Majesty's most gracious care in
suppressing the promiscuous use, by ordering them into a Government. Therefore
they pray, That such as have served for the Trade, or such as they should deem
fit to use the same; and one or two Refiners, that may refine Gold and Silver
to be used in the Trade, may be made a Corporation with a non obstante of the
Statute of 4. Hen. 7. or any other Statute or Proclamation.

And that they may be Incorporated, and have two Wardens and twelve
Assistants, and to have a fitting Officer for their Company and raising money
for necessary Charges; And that no Gold or Silver thread may be put to sale,
unless it be sealed with This Restraint ought now to be carefully looked
after; and to make the melting down of Shillings, Sixpences, half Crowns, and
five Shilling pieces, Felony; And strictly to forbid (upon severe Penalties)
all Goldsmiths not to presume to be Cashiers and Receivers of Merchants
moneys, by which means they have formerly and do at this day cull and melt down
the heavy English money. The Gold^miths have (by buying and selling English
Gold above the current price) bought and sold all the Gold out of the Nation,
to the unspeakable damage thereof. And now there is no other Remedy to get
Gold back in the Nation, but by raising of it, as some would have it: shortly
we shall have no Silver Coin left in the Nation, and then we must raise that
to get back our Silver again: And by this means all settled Revenues and
Landlords will lose so much in their estates as you raise Gold and Silver.
the Seal of the Company. And upon these Conditions they offered to pay his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for ever One thousand pounds yearly, and
(over and above) two pence the ounce for all Forain Bullion that shall be used
in their Trade: And humbly petition, That his Majesty would be pleased to
publish his Proclamation, to forbid any to practice any the said Trades or
Manufactures, or Drawing or Spinning of Gold or Silver Thread or Wire, other
than such as should be Incorporated.

Upon this Petition his Majesty granted this following Reference; viz.

2 April, 1635.
HIs Majesty refers this Petition to Mr Attourny General, To take the same
into consideration, together with the Earl of Holland's Petition, and certify
his opinion.

R. Freeman.

This Petition I have ready to be produced.

Sr John Banks Attournie general certifies back to the late King, to this
effect, viz. That he did not discern any inconvenience, that the Gold
Wyerdrawers (who offer his Majesty, upon their voluntary Petition, One
thousand pounds a year, and two pence for every ounce of Bullion which should
be used by them) should be incorporated, for their better government,
according to their Petition, so that they be tied to some certain Conditions,
(amongst which) they were not to work any of the current heavy Money of this
Nation, nor any of the Plate of the Nation for any Manufacture of Gold or
Silver Thread or Wire: they were not to use any Silver in their trade, but
Foreign Bullion, and no more than yearlie should be imported by their means;
and the Manufacture made according to the Standard or better.

Hereupon the Refiners Alderman Wolaston and Alderman Gibbs etc. seeing
themsellves exposed to the Law (by the information of some of the Wardens and
Company of the Goldsmiths informing against them, and Mr Attournie General
Banks, by Order of the King and Lords prosecuting them in the Starr Chamber,
for high Crimes and Misdemeanors,) the Refiners viz. Alderman Wolaston and
Alderman Gibbs etc. Petition the late King in An. 1635. for his grace and
mercy; and making their humble Application to the then Attournie general
Banks, and Sr J. Cook Secretary of State, and to Sr William Beecher, and
several others, whom they paid and gratified with great sums of money to get
their pardons, I being privy thereunto, and desired and requested by them to
use all my endeavors to keep Sr John Wolaston off from being indighted upon
high Crimes and Offenses, which Alderman Wolaston was charged with by Sr Henry
Mildemay and some of the Wardens of the Company of Goldsmiths, which I did by
Secretary Cooks power: and I did assist them to get their Pardons, and spent
my money, and used all my endeavors and interest freely; And at the earnest
entreatie of Alderman Gibbs, who with many tears besought me to do it for Gods
sake.

I having a little before made my peace, and paid to the King two thousand
Pounds for my pardon for Transporting Gold and Silver, and by that means being
intimately acquainted with Sr John Cook then Principal Secretary of State, and
Mr Attorney General Banks and Sr William Beecher Clark of the Counsel: I
could, and did get, for Alderman Wolaston and Alderman Gibbs, great favor of
them. I managed their business so amongst them, that the edg of Justice was
blunted, and Sr Henry Mildemay's Commission revoked, and all his endeavors to
undo Alderman Wolaston and Alderman Gibbs I disappointed by the power of the
aforesaid persons. And I am confident they paid them well for it, for in those
times there was nothing done by Court^ers, for Citizens, without money; and I
am sure, I, in my particular found it so. But I never would accept or take of
Alderman Wolaston or Alderman Gibbs (for my expenses and pains) one farthing,
though they often times then offered me their pretended great acknowledgments:
And this I do say is true, as I shall answer before God, I did it freely upon
the account of Friendship I bare unto Alderman Gibbs. And how well and justly
Alderman Gibbs and Alderman Wolaston requited me for getting them their
Pardons of the King, in 1636. the Common Counsel of London and many honorable
members of Parliament know, and heard at a common Hall, in January 1643. when
Alderman Wolaston (being Lord Major) and Alderman Gibbs were the chief
Informers against me in Guild Hall, and incensed many honorable members of
Parliament and the body of the City of London against me, as a malignant and
vicious person; And this Alderman Gibbs did (by along winded Speech) openly at
Guild Hall. And (some few days before) they abused and villified me before a
Committee of Parliament, at Goldsmiths Hall, and procured me to be sent to the
Tower through their unjust Information. But God in his good time will find
their iniquity out; for since, it has been proved what Alderman Wolaston has
been to the Government, and that makes him incapable to bear Office in the
Commonwealth: How God will dispose of Alderman Gibbs this Parliament, that, time
will present.

And, what Service I have don to this Nation, I most humbly leav it to the
considerations of all true English men. I saved the Nation (at one time) three
hundreed Thousand Pounds, in the year 1652. A sum of money, more then all the
Goldsmiths and Refiners are worth, put them all together. And in doing that
service (I most humbly say) I clearly showed my Duty and Affection to this
Nation; and showed, I was no Malignant. When Alderman Wolaston and Alderman
Gibbs do so much for this Nation, I shall take them to be better men then now
I do.

After many days Attendance of Alderman Wolaston, and Alderman Gibbs at the
Counsel-table, and at the Attourny General Sr John Banke's Chamber, Upon
condition that Alderman Wolaston and Alderman Gibbs Their Pardons under the
Great Seal of Enland will show the offenses they were guilty of, for men need
not take a Pardon, if they be not guilty and faulty. I refer my self to the
paticulars in their Pardons, what offenses they were pardoned of.
might have their Pardons under the Great Seal of England, for what offenses
and abuses (in their Trades) they had done contrary to the Laws of this Nation:
and Mr Attournie General (by order of the King and Counsel) to stop his
Proceedings against them and the rest of the Refiners, both in the Exchequer
and Starr-Chamber: The Refiners, Alderman Wolastone and Alder. Gibbs thereupon
offer to pay his Majesty six pence the ounce for all Wire that should be
disgrossed and spent in that Munufacture: And they drew in six other Refiners
to be their fellow Partners and Monopolists; and to pay the Rent of a fair
house, above one hundred and twenty Pounds a year; to pay Clarks wages, and
other incident charges.

And this Office they did execute several months (in the year 1635.) before
the King would give Alderman Wolaston and Alderman Gibbs their pardons for
their offenses. And much ado then they had to get their Pardons: for when
their pardons were at the Signet Office, Sr Henry Mildemay got the King to stop
their pardons. And this Sr John Cook the Secretary of State told me, That Sr
Henry Mildemay had presented to the late king, how grossly both Alderman Gibbs
and Alderman Wolaston had abused the Commonwealth, contrary to the Law, and how
they had surprised the King in getting their Pardons, and that they deserved to
be made exemplar. I am sure (according to the usual way of the Court)
Alderman Wolaston and Alderman Gibbs could not remove such obstructions but
with great sums, though the particular sums I never knew. And I was desired
by Mr Secretry Cook, at Oatlands on Sunday after Diner, to go presently to
London to Alderman Gibbs and Alderman Wolaston (which accordingly I did) to let
them know from him, their Pardons were stopped by the King, and that they
should attend him about it; which accordingly Alderman Gibbs and Alderman
Wolaston the next morning did. I was well acquainted (for I had paid for it)
what the meaning of such a message was, to be sent by me to Alderman Gibbs and
Alderman Wolaston: And I did believ that they had not come up to a full price,
nor paid so much as was expected; and I knew that was the main stop of their
Pardons.

Upon this Offer of the Refiners, to pay the King six pence the ounce, (being
as much again as the Gold-wyer-drawers had offered by their Petition) the
Gold-wyer-drawers were laid aside with their Petition, and Propositions by the
late King and his Counsel as inconsiderable persons.

And the Refiners (Alderman Gibbs and Alderman Wollaston, by their craft)
getting to be great with the Attorney General Banks, Secretary Cook, Sir
William Beecher, and other Courtiers, got to be the only men to carry on this
Project, for being the Kings Agents to furnish One hundred thousand pounds a
year for this manufacture. And the late King (to gratify the Refiners who had
bid him so roundly) granted Alderman Wollaston and Alderman Gibbs their pardons
under the great Seal of England (the rest of the Refiners being then but young
men, were esteemed as rascal Deer, they had not wool on their Backs, nor had
committed sins enough for to have their pardons under the great Seal of
England; and so got dismissed by Order of the Lords of the Counsel in the Court
of Starr-Chamber.

And the King appoints the Refiners (viz. Alderman Wollaston, Alderman Gibbs,
Henry Patrickson, Daniel Stalworthy, William Haward, Richard Gibbs, Thomas
Nowel and Walter Hill) under the great Seal of England, to be called by the
name of his Majesty's Agents, for the refining of One hundred thousand pounds
Gold and Silver a year for this Business; And they had not a bare title only
of that name, for the late King allowed them to share with him, and to tax the
People in their prizes, to sell their gilt silver Wire two pence upon every
ounce, and the silver Wire one penny upon every ounce more then diverse
Goldsmiths of London offered to sell the Wyer-drawers. And this was offered
several times by Captain Williams (the late Kings Goldsmith) a man of a great
and vast Estate, Mr Footer, Mr Symonds, and diverse other able rich men; And
good security offered to the late Kings Commissioners, and at the Counsel
Table at Whitehall, for the performing of Covenants: But this would not be
granted by the late King or his Counsel.

And this gave the great Offense in Parliament, 16^0. it being found by the
Parliament upon Examination, that so great and numerous a company as the Company
of Goldsmiths and Gold-wyer-drawers are, should be debarred so great a branch
in their Trade as this is; For it will be justified, and credibly demonstrated
to your Highness and the Parliament, that these aforesaid eight Refiners
(whereof Alderman Gibbs and Alderman Wollaston had one half of the Trade and
stock, as appears by the Monopoly) got more for their own particular profit,
by monopolizing to themselves the sale of all Gold and Silver Wire for this
Manufacture, being one hundred thousand pounds a year, then all the Goldsmiths
in London, which are many hundred families, did get at that time by selling all
the new Plate in London; (And, I am confident, all knowing Goldsmiths will
calculate it so;) which was and is the principal part of the Goldsmiths Trade.

The Duty reserved to the King in lieu of his Customs, was nothing so odious to
the Wyer-drawers (in comparison) as the Refiners Monopoly was. The Wyer-drawers
constantly affirmed to the King and his Counsel, and to the Kings
Commissioners, that the Refiners Monopoly was contrary to Law; and upon a
dispute at the Counsel Table, the King called the Refiners (Alderman Gibbs and
Alderman Wollaston) his Sheep, and the Wyerdrawers he called his Goats; (but in
the conclusion both these Refining Aldermen proved the Kings Majesty's Sheep
biters:) And the late King pressed the Wyer-drawers at his Counsel Table to
conform themselves to the Regulation; but some of the Wyer-drawers told the said
King, They would submit to the Law, but not to the Refiners Monopoly; and that
it was against the Law, that Freemen of the City of London should be
restrained a Free Market, to enrich private men, and to make them Aldermen.
Besides, the Gold-wyer-drawers were compelled upon great penalties (as appears
by their Bonds) to buy no Silver wire for their manufacture, but of the said
Alderman Wallaston, Alderman Gibbs, and the other six Pat^ntees joined with
them; and oftentimes the Refiners (Gibbs and Wollaston) pressed the
Commissioners to cause searches; and complaining they were at great charges
paying Clerks wages and Housrent; and therefore desired searches and seisures
of such Wyer-drawers silver which did not buy of them: And they forced all
persons to pay them two pence the ounce for all gilt wire, and a penny the
ounce for all silver wire more then they ought or needed to have done, had the
Wyer-drawers been permitted to have had a free market. And the Goldwyerdrawers
paid this for diverse years together, as is well known to many hundred persons
in London.

Hereupon, the Wyer-drawers petitioned against this Monopoly of Alderman Gibbs
and Alderman Wollaston to the Parliament in 1640. and therein set forth that
this Monopoly was contrary to the Common Law, and against the Statute of 21.
Jac. concerning Monopolies; and contrary to the Liberties of the City of
London; And that this monopoly was for the excessive profit of the Refiners,
for that they could buy their silver at a months time 3 pence an ounce
cheaper; then they were forced to pay the Refiners ready money: And this was
affirmed in Parliament by Thomas Joles, Robert Patrickson, Laurence Whalley,
Nathanae^l Seabourn, and several other Gold-wyer-drawers.

Upon Examination of this Business by the Parliament, the Patentees (Alderman
Wollaston Alderman Gibbs, etc) were commanded to bring into the House their
Monopoly, and then the Wyer-drawers got quite free from it by Parliament.

The Refiners (Alderman Wollaston and Alderman Gibbs) to avoid the punishment
which might justly have been imposed on them by the Parliament, according to the
Statute of 21. Jac. cap. 3. concerning Monopolies. When they saw they could
hold their Monopoly no longer, and that the Parliament was called, they petition
to have their Pattent of Agencie dissolved, as if it had been put on them by
force and against their wills, alleging, That they were sued in the
Starr-Chamber; and that (to avoid a sentence there, being terrified by the
example of the Soap-boilers and the Vintners) they accepted of being his
Majesty's Agents.

When the truth was, they accepted of being the Kings Agents for the sole
refining and vending of One hundred thousand pounds silver a year for this
Manufacture, out of a covetous desire to enrich themselves, and unjustly did
exclude all Goldsmiths and Wyer-drawers that had served their time to the
Trade; and by their undertaking this Monopoly, they got their Pardons under the
great Seal of England for many great, as may appear upon view of their Pardons.

That they were sued in the Starr-Chamber, it is very true: For such Crimes,
that had the Cause proceeded, and witnesses then been examined, and the Court
given Judgment against them, they had been both undone.

To my knowledge, this was their chief Plea in Parliament; and so they flung dirt
in the Kings face (for his mercy toward them) by their Petition which they
presented to the House.

Though before the Parliament, they would neither let Goldsmiths nor the
Wyer-drawers to have a free market; but stiffly insisted on it, ever when it
came to a dispute, That the Refining and preparing Gold and Silver wire, did
absolutely belong to the Refiners; and so excluded the Goldsmiths of London:
And by their Monopoly excluded all other persons from the Trade, but only
eight persons (the Kings Agents and Pattentees. These Agents laid out of their
own purses Two hundred eighty and two pounds three shillings for repairing the
Office; which they gave me a Bill of under their own hands; and desired me to
move Sec^etarie Cook to get the King to allow it them. I did so; but the King
returned them answer, That if it had cost them ten times as much, he would not
allow one penny; for he had Ordered Alderman Wollaston and Alderman Gibbs to
have their Pardon, and that in that he had given them Ten thousand pounds. I
have the Original Bill by me.

Several times this Monopoly of the Refiners was opposed, and argued
oftentimes at the Counsel Table, and before the King; Commissioners in Little
Britain, and at Mr Attornie General Banks Chamber (both before Alderman
Wollaston and Ald. Gibbs got their Monopoly, and after they had their Pattent)
some of the Wire drawers and some of the Goldsmiths and Silkmen (chiefly Sir
George Binion a Silkman, for the Silkmen; and the Wardens of the Company of
Goldsmiths, for the Goldsmiths; and all the chief Wyer-drawers, in behalf of
themselves and their Fellow Wyer-drawers) opposing Sir John Wollaston and
Alderman Gibbs Monopoly, and desiring to have a free market to buy their
Silver. But the Refiners still made such potent friends, (no doubt their Gold
flew plentifully amongst the Courtiers, or else they could not have carried it)
that neither VVyer-drawers nor Goldsmiths could buy of them or sell either
silver or wire for any the manufactures aforesaid; but all must be bought of
Alderman Wollaston and Alderman Gibbs, and others the Kings Agents and
Pattentees, till 1640. that that the same was overthrown in Parliament.

May it pleas your Highness;
DUring the Prosecution and Contest of this business between the Goldsmiths,
Gold Wyerdrawers, Refiners, and Silkmen, about the frauds and abuses committed
in their Trades, (each man putting it of from one to another.) The King and
Lords of the Counsel cast about, How to be truly informed of all these
abuses, and to search into the bottom of all this Knavery and Cheating: Several
ways were propounded. At last, the Lords of the Counsel Ordered a private
Search and Inspection into all Silkmens and Gold Wyerdrawers shopps: And
afterward, the King and Lords empowered me Thomas Violet, under the Great
Seal, to make these Searches frequently, to prevent srauds in Wy^rdrawers and
silkmens shops, and in any other places where I conceived slight and bad Silver
and Gold Thread and Wire was, and to seize the same, and if I found it bad to
deface it, and to certify their names to the Kings Counsel or the Attorney
General.

And the Lords of the Counsel, at that time, Ordered Sr Henry Mldemay to send
several persons to buy small parcels of Gold and Silver Wire and Thread,
Spangles Purls, Oas etc. in almost all the Silkmens and Wyerdrawers shops in
and about London. That so they might be truly informed, upon an Assay by the
sworn Assay-master at Golsmiths Hall Mr Alexander Jackson, what manner of gold
and silver Wire and Thread, Spangles, Oes, and Purl; (and the Standard of the
Silver) was made and vented for good silver. I do verily believ, There was
never a fuller or clearer Discovery of Frauds and Cheatings in the world, then
was discovered at that time:

For Mr Jackson the Assay-master of Goldsmiths Hall has Reported every
particular Assay by it self, and Master Humfrey Worthington, Mr Thomas Johnson,
and Mr Leonard Welsted have set down the days of the month and the year, the
Silkmen and Wyerdrawers shopps, and their names, where they bought this course
adulterate Silver Thread and Spangles, and that they bought it and paid for
good silver, I have both the original Certificates ready to be produced.

The Title of the several Assayes is, TRialls made by me Alexander Jackson
(sworn Assay-master of the Right Worshipful the Company of Goldsmiths, for his
Majesty's service) of certain Quills of gold and silver Thread, Spangles,
Plait, and Wire for and by the apointment of the Right Worshipful Sr Henry
Mildemay Knight, as follows, being first burnt and melted, and assayed,
brought by Sr Henry Mildmay the 9th of July, 1635. to Goldsmiths Hall. The
Kings Standard for Starling silver is Eleven ounces Two penny weight Fine upon
the pound. The Assayes follow, viz.

The particular Original Reports I have ready to produce to the Counsel of
Trade, wherein they will see the great Cheats put upon the Nation by some
Refiners, Wyerdrawers, and Silkmen.

At the bottom of the original paper, this follows, viz. These are the
several Assayes of the silver Spangles, plaited Wire, and silver Thread, made
and Reported by me Alexander Jackson; They being all under Starling and
against the Laws of the Kingdom. Some part of these Assayes I made by the
appointment of Sr Henry Mildemay Knight, in the year 1635; and some part of
which falsified and defective silver Thread, flatted Wire, and Spangles were
brought to me by Mr Tho Violet, in the year 1638.

By me ALEXANDER JACKSON the sworn Assay-master to the worshipful Company of
Goldsmiths, London.



By Order of the Lords of the Counsel I Tho. Violet paid Mr Jackson Five pounds
for this Service.

And this silver Thread, Wire, Spangles, etc. was one hundred and odd several
parcels made, contrary to the oath of every Goldsmith, Wyerdrawer, and
Refiner, when they are made free at Goldsmiths Hall. I humbly leav it to be
considered on, whether this manufacture ought not strictly to be looked after
and duly regulated, when neither Oaths nor bonds will keep them to work good
^^lver.

For executing of my Office justly and strictly, to hold the Refiners and
Wyerdrawers to a Rule, to make all their wire and thread of good silver, and
punishing the Offenders, many of them I brought to Justice. And I showed the
King how he was cozened in the Mint of Three thousand Pounds a year (which
caused Alderman Wollaston secretly to hate me mortally) And he caused me to
be clapped up (by his incensing some members of Parliament against me) in the
Tower, in Januarie 1643. when he was Lord Major of London. And the Parliament
kept me close prisoner there Nine hundred twenty eight days; and Fourteen
Months more, in which I had liberty to go at large in the Tower; upon the
pretense I was a Malignant, when the truth was, Alderman Wollaston vented but
his private malice against me.

Upon this occasion viz. Alderman Wollaston having put up to the Parliament in
the year 1640, a Petition, slighting the Kings mercy and goodness toward him,
in giving him his Pardon; when I saw Alderman Wollaston's carriage in that
Petition he presented to the Parliament, I then told the King, in the year
1640. that Alderman Wollaston joining with some of the Officers of his Mint had
made a fraudulent agreement to melt all the silver in the Mint, which was to
make moneys; and he to have from the King the allowance of 16 grains upon the
pound Troy, which is 2 pence the pound weight Troy, for all the silver he
melted in the Mint. This agreement was made without either the King's or the
Lords of the Counsels knowledge or approbation, nor was there any allowance or
power under the Great Seal of England for him to receive these fees, or the
Officers of the Mint to grant them to him.

By which fraudulent bargain, the King was defrauded of near upon three
thousand pounds a year, from the year 1630. to the year 1640. And Alderman
Wollaston put up all this money in his own particular purse, the King nor Lords
never knowing any thing of this blind bargain.

Alderman Wollastons place in the Tower being so inconsiderable in the eye of
the State, and in the reputation of the world (the melter of the mint being but
the Master workers servant) that Alderman Wollaston never had a Patent for it
under the Great Seal, whereas the Master worker of the Mint has a Pattent; the
Warden, the Assaie-master, the master of the Irons, the Engraver, the
Comptroller, the Teller, and several other Officers of the Mint, have all of
them their several Pattents under the Great Seal of England for their several
places.

Now Alderman Wollaston's place was worth every year to him more money then all
the aforesaid Officers of the Mint, twice told; for every year he cleared near
three thousand pounds a year, as I proved to the late King, and I can prove it
to your Highness, the Parliament, and your Counsel, whenever you pleas: and
all the Officers Fees in the Mint did not amount to one thousand pounds a year.
A strange fraudulent trick, that a servant (for in the Mint Alderman Wollaston
was but the master workers of the mints servant) should get six times more then
his master, and three times more then all the Officers in the mint: It was the
profits of this Place raised him principally to be an Alderman.

But this is no great wonder, when the masters of the mint (for many years) are
and have been ignorant of the mysteries and perquisites of their places, to the
great damage of the Nation in many particulars. In former times it was not so;
Goldsmiths and Artists were masters of the mint, that knew the course of
Exchanges, and held Correspondence with Foreign Bankers and merchants: no Age
can show (before this) a Doctor of Physic master worker of the mint; and had
not I stopped at one time three hundred thousand pounds of silver, the Irons in
the mint would have been rustie. I caused more money to come to the mint at one
time (1653) then has been coined this seven year besides that money.

Upon this my Information to the King, he presently sent for Mr Andrew Palmer,
the Assay-master of the mint, and Mr Henry Cogan, the Comptroller of the mint,
and examined the business about Alderman Wollastons Place in the Tower, and
commanded me to be by, and to declare before them what I had told his
Majesty concerning Alderman Wollastons Place of melter in the mint. And when
they heard what I said, they confessed it to be a truth, that Alderman
Wollaston had in ten years (being esteemed but as a servant by the condition
of his Place in the mint to the Head-Officers, the master Worker and Warden of
the mint) gotten more by his melting of the Silver in the mint, then all the
Officers of the mint (put them all together) had done.

Whereupon the King was wonderful angry with them, (they being his Officers
in the Mint,) that they would suffer such a thing, and not acquaint him or his
Counsel with it; And asked, If my Lord Treasurer, or Lord Cottington, or the
Lords of his Counsel allowed him to have such Fees and allowances, or knew that
Wollaston made such Gains in the Mint, by being Melter of the Gold and Silver.
They told his Majesty, No; they did believe none of them knew it, nor any
others but the Officers of the Mint; for that it was a mystery and few did
know it: Thereupon, the King swor^ his Officers of his Mint must either be
Knaves or Foo^s, to let such an one as Alderman Wollaston gull him of three
thousand pounds a year, and to give such a Place of Profit to any, without his
consent or the consent of his Privy Counsel, or any of his great Officers. And
then the King solemnly protested. He would have an account and satisfaction for
this Business; And that he would not allow Alderman VVollaston Thirty thousand
pounds for that he could have done for One thousand pounds. This was about ten
days before the King went from London, and had he ever came again in peace,
(in my conscience) this business had been called to a strickt account: and the
King thereupon gave me Thomas Violet the place of Master of the Mint, and to
have the fee of five hundred pounds a year, And that I should execute Alderman
Wollastons place, of melter without any fee upon account of the Masters fee and
no more: I was to melt the Gold and Silver upon oath, not to have any benefit
but only my fee of five hundred pound a year, as master worker of the Mint:
Alderman Wollaston came to hear of this business afterward, (in all
likelihood) by Mr. Palmer or Mr. Cogan, and this was the true cause of Sr John
Wollastons getting me to be sent to the Tower, when he was Lord Mayor of
London. One other chief reason of my sending to the Tower was; some Merchants of
London and others (that had transported vast quantities of Gold and Silver out
of the Nation, and had melted down many score thousand pounds of heavy current
English money, for gold and Silver wire and plate) finding that I was commanded
by Mr Pym and Mr Hamden, and other honorable members of Parliament to attend the
house, about passing an Act of Parliament in the house, to question all such as
had transported Gold or Silver, without license, (The order for my prosecution
of this business against the Transporters of gold is in the Journal book of the
Parliament, 18th of March 1640. As will thereby appear, and the several orders
and transactions thereupon) Therefore the transporters of Gold and Silver, and
the cullers and melters of the heavy silver coin of the Nation, fearing if I
was not clapped up in the Tower, or some other place, they should be questioned
for their transporting Gold and Silver: These men cried me up in the City,
and to the Parliament for a malignant, and incensed some worthy members of
Parliament against me, that did not know these men's true reasons, nor the
bottom of their malice; so I was sent to the Tower: But in the mean time, what
mischief the Commonwealth has gotten by not passing the Act against the
transporting of Gold, which I was ordered by the Parliament, to prosecute, as
appears by the Journals in Parliament, as I before said 18th of March 1640. The
not passing this Act has given an opportunity that all the Gold is sent out of
the Nation, And now many propound the only remedy is to raise Gold (Not
considering the great mischief and loss that attends raising Gold or Silver)
The like mischief will suddenly fall by suffering Goldsmiths to be the public
Cashiers, they by that means, cull and melt down the heavy moneys of the
Nation, And when all is culled and melted down and transported, (as I have
often times said) then there will be a proposition for the raising of Silver,
to the unspeakable damage of all Landed Gentlemen, and the Nation in general
will be impoverished so much as you raise Gold or Silver.

This mischief has com by suffering Goldsmiths to become exchangers of Gold and
Silver and fortaign Coyns, whereas that does only Properly by the Law of the
Nation belong to your Highness, And till an exchange be set up by your
Highness, (and the Goldsmiths upon great penalties restrained only to their
working of Plate and gold Rings and Jewels and selling them,) It is a thing
impossible to prevent the transporting of Gold and Silver, as I have formerly
showed; which the Counsel for Trade will find upon examination to be true To
which I humbly refer my self.

May it pleas Your Highness!
I Had at this day kept these Trades Refiners, Gold-wyer-drawers, Silkmen,
Weavers and Button-makers (for so much as concerns the Silver) in that good
order, by my Office of Surveyer and Sealer, that no course Silver should be
made or spent in these manufactures. And I humbly say, I doubt not but I shall
receive thanks from this Parliament and the Counsel of Trade for my care, in
discovering so many of these deceipts and frauds in these Trades: As I shall
particularly make appear before the Counsel of Trade upon examination of this
Business, it will save the Nation and the wearers of Gold and Silver many
thousand pounds a year. My true end of doing this is, that the Trade may be
regulated, and my place of Surveyer and Sealer restored, and I authorized (as I
was formerly) under the Great Seal of England to search, survey and seal all
these manufactures, and to see them justly made, and to have such a just Fee as
may support my expense, and in some reasonable proportion pay for my pains and
hazard I undergo by warranting the manufacture of Gold and Silver thread, etc.
to be all good to the Nation, and made according to the Standard. The wearers
will have this benefit, they shall be secured of good Commodities, that does
last as long again as the greater part of the manufacture does now; and when it
returns to the melting-pot, it will make them, in some sorts of lace, as much
again as it does now; and it will save many thousand pounds a year which is
brushed and rubbed away, if the silver thread be duly made with a due
proportion of Silk, according to the just Rules as I settled formerly in my
Office.

There are several unlawful Engines, called Wheels, that twist the Silver on
the Silk so slightly, that all those that wear Silver spun by these Wheels are
merely deceived. The women Spinners (being some thousands) have from time to
time complained of them, both at the Counsel Table and at the former Counsel of
Trade, and the Kings Commissioners by several Orders put down the Wheels. I
most humbly desire, the women Spinners, may be heard at the Counsel of Trade,
concerning that and other abuses in this manufacture. They will acquaint them,
that whereas good Gold and Silver thread should hold six ounces of silver and
three ounces of Silk ought to be the due proportion for the making Needle gold
and silver, and five ounces of silver to three ounces of Silk, of the
sleightest: now the manufacture is ordinarily made, for some sorts of silver
thread six ounces silk to three ounces silver, and so the wearers are cozened
half in half; besides, the silver lace is so slightly made (for many sorts
thereof, being both course and adulterate, and so thinly covered that it loses
the color) is bruised and rubbed off from the Silk, and little returns to the
melting-pot: These particulars will clearly be proved (before the Counsel of
Trade upon examination) by hundreds of witnesses when it comes to be examined;
And it is a great Abuse put on the Nation.

Here follow the principal Heads of the Refiners Monopoly.

May it pleas your Highness;
IN the month of May 1636. an Indenture was sealed between the late King on the
one part, and Alderman John Wollaston and Alderman William Gibbs, Henry
Patrickson, Daniel Stallworthy, William Howard, Richard Gibbs, Thomas Nowell,
and Walter Hill of London, Refiners and parters of Gold and Silver, on the
other part.

1 That the late King did by his Proclamacion, 18. Jan. 12. Car. declare his
will and pleasure, to be for the time to com, that none of the Coyns, or Plate
of this kingdom should be spent in the making of Gold, or Silver thread, wire,
purles, plate oas spangles etc. but of such Silver only as should be supplied
from farrain Parts, by such persons as his Majesty should thereunto appoint.

2 And that none of the current Gold and Silver Coyns of this Realm, should
hereafter be moulten down by any Refiner Goldsmith, or other person, And that
all gold and silver whatsoever, which hereafter should be employed, used, or
spent about this Manufacture, should be refined prepared and disgrossed, only
by such persons, as his Majesty should assign in that behalf, And should be
by them sold and delivered, (and by no other) to all and every persons which
should work the same.

3 And that his Majesty's Agents should take care upon the vending or sale of
any Gold or Silver, to any person or persons whatsoever, for the uses
aforesaid; that there be answered and paid to his Majesty's use, six pence an
ounce Troy in wire, of all Silver sold, as well toward the provision of Bullion
from beyond Seas, as for recompense of such loss his Majesty sustained in his
customs by the less importation of the premises.

4 His Majesty having had experience of the Abilities, and Skill of the said
John Wollaston, William Gibbs, Henry Patrickson, Here the Refiners in this
Monopoly are called his Majesty's Agents. They ma^e such a bargain with the
King, that Cap. Williams offered to furnish the silver 2000. l. a year cheaper
(and to put in security of 10000 l for performance) then the said Monopolists
did force the^ Wyer-drawers, to pay: for all other Persons, but the Kings
Agents, were prohibited to sell silver for this Manufacture, as appears by their
Indenture under the great Seal. This Monopoly is flat against the Letter of the
Law 21. Jac. chap. 3.
Daniel Stallworthie, William Haward, Richard Gibbs, Thomas Nowell, and Walter
Hill, (who, as his Majesty's Agents appointed by his majesty, has since the
aforesaid regulation, sold all the aforesaid Silver and Gold, for the
aforesaid manufactures) And in further pursuance and execution of his majesty's
intention has appointed constituted and made for him and his heirs and
successors, and did by the said Indenture appoint constitute and make the
aforesaid John Wollaston, William Gibbs, Henry Patrickson, Daniell
Stallworthie, William Howard, Richard Gibbs, Thomas Noell, and Walter Hill, and
the survyvors of them, The Agents, of his Majesty his heirs and successors,
for the furnishing, refining, dissgrossing and selling one Hundred Thousand
Pounds, worth of Silver and Gold yearly, and every year, or yearly so much more
thereof as shall or may be by them jointly vended, uttered, or sold, in the I
beseech you Note, Alderman Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs have 1^ shares of 3^ a
full half of the Trade of all the Rest of the Refiners, who all of them had
great houses, wives, and families to maintain: And they two, for their
particular, sold their silver for above a thousand pound a year dearer then it
was offered by several people to furnish the workers. And Alderman Gibbs and
Alderman Wollaston had both of them their pardons for abuses practiced by them
in their Trades: so that this Monopoly did their work every way. but, had the
Law been followed against them, for abuses don by them in their Trade, they had
been undone.
making the Premises: which shall be divided into thirty two parts and shares;
John Wollaston shall have the furnishing and selling of Eight parts of the
Thirty two parts, William Gibbs shall have the providing and selling of other
eight parts of the said Thirty two parts, Henry Patrickson of two parts and one
quarter part of the said thirty two parts, Daniel stallworthie shall have the
selling of three parts, and one quarter part of the Thirty two parts. William
Haward shall have the ^efining and selling of two parts, and one quarter part.
Richard Gibbs shall have the refining and selling of three parts of the said
Thirty two parts. Thomas Nowell shall have the providing, refining, and selling
of two parts and a quarter of the said Thirty two parts. And Walter Hill shall
have the providing and furnishing, refining and selling three parts of the said
Thirty two parts.

I most humbly desire your Highness to be pleased to observe, Mr William Haward
was formerly Mr Alderman Gibb's man, and one of the King Agents in this
Monopoly with Alderman Gibbs and Alderman Wollaston. Mr William Haward was
questioned by me, and proved to have counterfeited the current Gold and Silver
moneys of this Nation, and for making Gold and Silver Wire with a core of
Copper (which was one half Silver and one half Copper) which he made into Gold
and Silver Wire and Thread, and sold it for good Gold and Silver Wire and
Thread; and I caused him to be apprehended, and his tools seized on at Old
Windsor, twenty miles from London: And afterward I took him in Southwark, with
one Morse a Refiner (as cunning a Rogue for counterfeiting of money as ever was
of the Trade of Refiners); Mr Haward he had the common luck of the Refiners,
for he had his pardon for his offenses; viz. Coining of Money. An ordinary
Crime with some Refiners.

Mr William Morse (Mr William Hawards man, another Refiner also) I took him
with a Porters load of Coining Irons in St Thomas the Apostle in Southwark; he
was both Coining and making Silver (at one time) with a core of Copper, half
Silver and half Copper, to make Gold and Silver Thread. I have the Assaies
under Mr Jacksons hand, the sworn Assaymaster of Goldsmiths-hall: And this
Silver and Copper Wire was made into Thread, and was usually sold for good
Silver by Mr Morse, Mr Mantle, and Mr Rhodes: I took Mr Rhodes, Mr Clark and Mr
Mantle (Wyer-drawers) making of Spangles above one third part Copper, mixed
with the Silver, within the Rules of the Kings Bench (they thought they had
been safe there in a Prison, but my Officers I employed found them out).
Likewise I took one Mr Geares, and caused him to be Indicted at the Sessions
House in the Old Baily; (this was after I had found him working at the Old
Ford, in Shoreditch, White Chapel, Goodmans Fields, and in other blind
Places) and when I saw he would take no warning, I caused him to stand in the
Pillory, for selling silver with a core of Copper for good Silver; I employed
all the year four men in the four parts of the City and Suburbs to make these
searches and seisures, and they were paid one hundred pound a year, during all
the time I had the Office. This Geares made many thousand pounds of Gold and
Silver thread, half Copper and half Silver, and sold it all for good Silver in
London. I did also upon search seize upon several quantities of Silver Lace
mixed with Copper, in Alderman Garwayes Hands (which by several Wire drawers
and others was sold to Merchants that traded to Russia); and there it was found
out and detected by the Russians, and sent back to England to the Governor of
the Company (Alderman Garway) to have these Wyer-drawers in London found out
and punished, that had dishonored the Nation in making Gold and Silver lace
mixed with Copper, and selling it to Russia Merchants for good silver. This
Lace was one Mr Sand's lace (Sr George Sand's brother) who was deceived in it.
I made Twenty men runn away about this Business.

There have been within this few years several other Refiners and Goldsmiths
indicted at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey for counterfeiting gold and
silver; (the Coins of the Nation) who have so craftily managed their business,
that some of them have escaped hanging by miracle.

If I have my Office established again, I wish them to forbear coming thither
to the Old Bailey, any more for I know by what tricks they have deceived the
Jurie and the Court. These men and their fellows are angry with me* and would
by no means have me to have the looking after the regulating of the Trade of
gold and silver Wire and Thread. And indeed they have reason; for (had I my
Office again for Sealing and Surveying this Manufacture) I should spoil many a
man's cozening Trade, which he daily now practices, in deceiving the
Commonwealth by the deceitful making these Manufactures of silver Wire and
silver Thread etc. For I found out where Silkmen had sold to some of the
Nobility and some Honorable persons silver lace mixed with Copper for good
Silver. I caused the offenders to be prosecuted in the Starr Chamber for it;
and caused them to make it good to the parties wronged. In brief, for Five
years I caused all the Gold and Silver that was spent in this manufacture to
be duly and justly made: (The value yearly out of Silkmens shops in London,
when it was made into Lace and Ribbins, Spangles, Oes etc amounted to above Two
Hundred thousand pounds a year Starling, as I have calculated it by my
Accounts; for it all passed my Seal and Survey, either by me or my Deputies,
such as I was to answer to the Commonwealth for the true performance of their
Places, and gave Security in the Exchequer for their just performance.) I
caused all these manufactures to be made so justly and exactly as the Plate
and money of the Nation.

And though some that I caused to be punished for their cheating were and are
angry with me, and got others to back them with complaints; by their
petitioning to the Parliament in 1641. That I had caused some of them to be
imprisoned, disturbed them in their Trades, and spoiled and defaced their Wire,
Thread, and Spangles etc. and made searches and seisures in their shops and
houses. Truly I confess this part of their petition was true, when I found
their Silver was adulterated.

This I did whilst I had my Office. And afterward, for want of doing it, the
Nation was Cozened, and at this day is Cozened (as I can show in one hundred
and odd several parcels of course and adulterate Silver and gold Lace, Spangles,
Purl, Oes and Wire) All under the hand of Mr Alexander Jackson sworn
Assay-master of Goldsmiths Hall.

For the cheating Fellows of the City (let them be either Wyerdrawers,
Silkmen, or Refiners) I dare swear (whether they be rich or poor) I gave them
little reason to love me or wish me well; for I hindered them as much as I
could: And I never knew a Thief love a Judge heartily. But there are honest men
of these Trades, both Refiners and Gold-Wyerdrawers, and Workmen, which desire,
I may have my place restored to me; and that wish, the abuses of their Trades
and Manufactures may be redressed: For all honest workmen are undone for want
of a regulation, and power to be settled on some select persons to punish, the
offenders; And reduce their number, only to such as have served Apprentices to
the trades, and to make the workers to conform themselves to such orders as
your Highness and Parliament shall see best for the preventing the waste of the
Coin, and Plate of the Nation. I have humbly presented a Model for a Regulation
of the abuses to the counsel of Trade to which I humly refer.

May it please your Highness,
ALderman Gibbs and Alderman Wollaston, etc. were authorized in any part of the
Realm of England and Dominion of Wales, by their Monopoly to prepare and fine
One hundred thousand pounds in silver and gold yearly and every year; or so much
thereof as may yearly by them be jointly vended, uttered or sold, according to
the Rates and Provisions aforesaid. To have and to hold the said powers,
licenses and authorities, and all and singular the premises unto them the said
John Wollaston, William Gibbs, Henry Patrickson, Daniel Stallworthy, William
Haward, Richard Gibbs, Thomas Nowel, and Walter Hill, during the term of seven
years, from thence forth next ensuing fully to be completed and ended; And
that without any account to be made for the same to his Majesty his Heirs or
Successors.

5. And they Covenant they will sell no silver or gold for these Manufactures,
but to such persons that shall be admitted to work and be allowed to buy the
same. And also that they shall and will pay the aforesaid Duties to his
Majesty his Heirs and Successors, which was sixpence upon every ounce Troy of
Silver spent in this Manufacture.

6. They Covenant with the King, that they nor their servants shall not melt
down or be consenting to the melting down of any the current Coins of the
King his Heirs or Successors, or the Plate of the Nation, for any the
Manufactures aforesaid, except such only as shall arise and return off and
from any gold and silver Thread, Lace, Purles, Oas, Spangles or Wire, or shall
be imported from the parts beyond the Seas, and has not been manufactured in
this Nation.

And all and singular these Grants, Powers, Licenses and Authorities before
given and granted, they shall lawfully use and Alderman Gibbs and Alderman
Woll^ston bind their Monopoly to them as fast as they can; it must break
through all former Laws for their private and particular profit; it must
oppress Goldsmiths, Wyer-drawers, Silkmen, and all other Tradesmen whatsoever
it. Their Monopoly must go through thick and thin, though against the Law; no
Act, Statute or Ordinance, Proclamation, Provision or Restriction formerly made
whatsoever, shall or can stop or contradict them; this was the pace and furious
carreer of Alderman Gibbs and Alderman Wollaston while they were the Kings
Agents in the Kings time; but to save their skins (when the times altered) they
could presently change their notes, put on sheepskins and would appear as
Lambs; they would be full of godly expressions in Guild Hall, Goldsmiths-hall,
and many other places in the City, and be highly for the Covenant, and amongst
their Brethren storm at the oppression of the Times, and at Projectors and
Monopolizers (when there was none greater then themselves, as appears by this
Monopoly). They have said at a common Hall in Guild Hall (when I was sent to
the Tower) that I was the Monopolist and Pattentee for this Manufacture, when
truly I neither had heart or hand in it, nor any manner of wa^^s concerned in
the buying or selling the silver Wire for this Manufacture. If I would, I could
not; for the aforesaid Ind^^ture between the King, Gibbs and Wollaston sets
forth, that only eight Refiners were the Pattentees, and none others.
enjoy, notwithstanding the Statute made in the fourth year of Hen. 7th cap. 2.
and notwithstanding the Statute made in the 5th and 6th years of Edw. 6th cap.
19. entitled, The Penalty for Exchange of Gold and Silver. And
notwithstanding the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 15. or any other Act, Statute,
Law, Ordinance, Proclamation, Provision or restriction whatsoever to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And his Majesty for Him and his Heirs
and Successors did will, ordain and declare, that during the continuance of
this his Grant, his Majesty his Heirs and Successors will not give or grant
any liberty, license, or power, or authority to any person whatsoever, other
then unto such as have already served or shall hereafter serve as Apprentices
wholly and only to the Art of Refining and parting Gold and Silver by the space
of seven years (as the said John Wollaston, William Gibbs, and other the
parties before named have done) to be made, expended and employed in or about
the making gold or silver thread, or any the several Manufactures herein before
mentioned.

And the aforesaid persons every one for himself did covenant and promise to
and with his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, that from time to time, during
the term granted, to perform their best endeavors in and by all lawful ways
and means for the promoting and advancing of his Majesty's benefit and service
in the premises.

And his Majesty, for him, his Heirs and Successors, during the term thereby
granted, did Covenant to vouchsafe his and their assistance to the said Agents
and the Survivors of them, for the better performance and discharging of the
said Agencie, and all other the premises so by them undertaken, according to
the tenor and true meaning of the said Grant: In witness whereof, to the one
part of this Indenture remaining with the said Agents, Our Sovereign Lord the
King has caused the Great Seal of England to be put; And the other part
remaining with his said Majesty, the said John Wollaston, William Gibbs, Henry
Patrickson, Daniel Stallworthy, William Haward, Richard Gibbs, Thomas Nowell,
and Walter H^ll have set their hands and Seals the day and year first above
written, Anno Dom. 1636. Witness Our Self at Westminster the 7th day of May,
in the twelfth year of our Reign.

I have the Copy of this Monopoly of the Refiners verbatim at large, sworn and
attested; ready to be produced, if required.

May it pleas your Highness;
THese are the chief Heads of the Monopoly granted by the late King Charles
1636. to Sir John Wollaston Alderman, and Alderman William Gibbs, and others,
Refiners of the City of London.

This monopoly was complained of to the late King and his Counsel by some of
the Wardens and Company of the Goldsmiths in Anno 1636. and since oftentimes
to the late King and his Commissioners, both by several Goldsmiths and
Wyerdrawers (as being a great loss and abuse to the whole Company of
Goldsmiths) in Annis 1637, 1638, and 1639, and is against the Statute of 21.
Jac. cap. 3. and several other Acts of Parliament, and against the Common Law of
the Land, and the Charter of the City of London.

By this monopoly they engrossing into a few particular men's hands for their
private lucre and gain (under the specious pretense of the Kings service, which
was the ordinary mask used by Pattentees and Monopolists of that time) the
livelihood and subsistence of many hundred Goldsmiths and Wyerdrawers, which
by the Charter of the Company of Goldsmiths ought not to have been debarred,
and by the custom of the City of London were legally empowered to refine Silver
and Gold, as well as the said Refiners were.

And though this was oftentimes offered, it was always denied and opposed by
the Refiners, who had got this monopoly in their Iron clutches, and would not
let go their hold, till their monopoly was put down by the Parliament, upon the
Petition of the Gold-wyer-drawers, as aforesaid.

I have left with the honorable Committee for Trade, (in Aug. 1656.) several
humble Proposals for the just and due regulation of this Trade of Refining and
Gold and Silver-wyer-drawing. If they be put in execution, the Manufacture
will be again justly and truly made, the Coin and Bullion of the Nation
preserved, and your Highness Revenue augmented: But, as the Manufacture of Gold
and Silver Thread, etc. is now made, the wearers thereof are many of them
cozened, and the Coyns and Plate of the Nation melted (to the great damage of
the Nation) and every day new Cheats are invented, to deceive the Wearers by
Wheels or Engines. Therefore I most humbly pray for either a due Regulation of
Gold and Silver Thread and Wire, etc. or the making to be put down in England,
especially at this time now we have a War with Spain, strictly to look that
none of the Coyns of the Nation, or Plate, be melted down for any of these
Manufactures.

8. That within these three months (in June last) Mr Alexander Jackson (the
Assaie-master of Goldsmiths-hall) being desired to go to the Excize-Office, to
make an assay of some Silver that was made into Wire for this manufacture,
seized on an Ingott of course Silver about 30l. which was thirteen penny weight
worse then the Standard; And weekly (upon strict examination) it will be found
that great quantities of course silver has been made into these Manufactures.
This Silver (as I am informed) belongs to a Refiner, and it is both contrary to
the Law and a breach of his Oath to prepare any such Silver for any Manufacture.

I have many Assayes under Mr Jacksons hand (the Assay-master of
Goldsmiths-hall) where four ounces of Copper has been mixed and put into eight
ounces of Silver, and sold for good Silver (by some Silkmen and Wyer-drawers),
to the intolerable deceit of the Wearers of gold and silver Lace.

And whereas all persons should make gold and silver Thread to hold six ounces
Silver to three ounces of Silk, it has been ordinary, and at this day is made,
to six ounces of Silk but three ounces of Silver; the Silk many times heavy
died; the Wearers many of them are cozened, and their garments spoiled: And
many other Cheats and frauds I could particularize.

9. When I delivered an Account of these gross deceipts to the King and Lords,
and upon examination they finding these Abuses to be so frequent both amongst
Refiners, Silkmen and Wyer-drawers; The King and Lords of his Council having
often employed me in these Discoverics of the frauds of the Wyerdrawers, They
ordered me Thoms Violet Anno 1635. to be Surveyer and Sealer of all these
manufactures, for three lives, under the Great Seal of England; And to have and
receiv to my own use One Halfpenny the Ounce for Wire, and 4 Pence the pound
Venice for all gold and silver Thread I Sealed and Surveyed: And prohibited all
persons to put silver or gold Thread to Sale before it was warranted by the
Seal of my Office, being the Rose and Crown.

In consideration of this Fee aforesaid I Covenanted, and put in Security to
the late King in the Exchequer; That if any gold or silver Thread, Spangles,
Purls, Oes, or Wire should be Surveyed and Sealed, or passed out of my Office
either by me or my Deputy, which was course or adulterate silver, under
sterling, or not justly made; the Thread with a due proportion of silver, at
the least five ounces silver to three ounces silk: I was bound, and am bound to
this day, to answer and pay all Damages to any person grieved or wronged in the
Nation, concerning the Premises. And neither the Wyerdrawers nor Silkmen could
in Parliament produce one parcel of silver thread that I sealed in the Office,
or that was sealed by my Officers, to be course silver, or under the Standard.
And for five years I caused this Manufacture to be made so exactly as the
money and Plate of the Nation is now made; and the best gold and silver Thread
in the world.

Without my Fees which were allowed me under the great Seal of England I could
not be at the Charge of searching and Sealing; and without my Sealing and
Surveying I cannot warrant this Manufacture of gold and silver Thread and Wire
etc. to be good, and truly made, both for the fineness of the silver and a
due proportion of silver to a due proportion of silk: and without this
Regulation, every workman is left to do what he list, both for the fineness
of the silver, and the due proportion of silver to silk. And at this day (for
want of my Office) many frauds and deceipts are put on the Nation and all them
that wear this Manufacture, which I am bound to prevent, or make good the
Damage to the Nation, or to any that shall be deceived: Which cannot be
exspected from me unless I receiv my Fee to defray my Charge and hazard I run
in warranting all this Manufacture to be good, and justly made: And of the
justice and Equity of this I conceiv there can be no dispute.

May it pleas your Highness,
NOw, at this day the Manufacture of gold and silver Thread, Wire, Spangles,
Oes, etc. is under no Rule nor Regulation; either for the Fineness of the
silver, or the just and due making the silver thread with a due Proportion of
silver to a due proportion of true died silk; but it is left to every one to do
what he lists, and to Cozen the Commonwealth; and to cull and melt down the
Coins of the Nation: And if the Refiners can get but the Goldsmiths to melt
down the heavy Coins as shillings, sixpences and halfcrowns, which they do at
this day, and as they are wont to do ever when silver is above the price of the
Mint; or when we have Wars with Spain, then generally silver is dearer then
the Price of the Mint.

The Refiners think themselves clear, and the Law cannot touch them if they buy
heavy shillings and sixpences melted into Ingots: And by this way all the
heavy current silver moneys and Coin of this Nation is melted down. This
heavy, English silver money (for the greater part) is called and weighed by
Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet, who keep people purposely to cull and weigh the
heavy shillings and sixpences of this Nation, when silver is dear.

May it pleas your Highness, We shall not have money to buy and sell, nor to
hold Commerce, nor pay Rent or public Duties, if this mischief be not stopped.

When I was an Apprentice, I delivered with mine own hands, for one Mr Eman's
Account (who was my Master) to Alderm. Gibbs above thirty thousand Pounds of
heavy shillings sixpences and halfcrowns, which he bought of my Master Mr
Timothy Emans a Goldsmith in Lumbard Street; The said Mr Emans then being a
publiuqe Cashier for several Merchants, and receiving their money, and keeping
their Cashes: by which means he culled, and caused to be culled and melted
every year in heavy shillings and sixpences above Thirty thousand pounds a
year, from the year 1624 to the year 1630 into Bars or Ingots. And there was
many Goldsmiths in Lumbard street at that time, every of these years did melt
as much heavy English money, and some of them more then Mr Emans did. And
English silver was at that time so scarce, one could hardly get white money
Anno 1629 for gold but now almost all the silver, and almost all the gold is
gone, the silver melted down for gold and silver Lace: The gold almost all
Transported, that in a payment of ten thousand pounds one shall not receiv Ten
shillings in gold.

Alderman Gibbs would never have these shillings, sixpences, and halfcrowns
from Mr Eman in Kind, but the prope^^ie altered, and melted into Ingots;
though he knew and bargained for English money by the name of Swarg, to be
melted without fraud; being a common word amongst the Goldsmiths for heavy
English money. Whereupon my Master commanded me to put in every Ingot so much
Copper as the silver wasted, which was about a farthing the ounce: For Mr Eman
selling the heavy shillings halfcrowns and sixpenses to other Refiners and
Silversmiths in Kind without melting, would not bear the waste of melting Mr
Gibbs 's English money into Ingotts.

But Alderman Gibbs finding my Masters Silver a farthing in five shillings
courser then other Goldsmiths in Lumbard Sreet Silver was, who melted down Mr
Alderman Gibbs had a pair of Assay Balances in his closet, and when he
questioned me about this Business, he weighed above sorry several Assayes
of my Master Eman's silver with the Standard Piece, and all of them fell out
one penny weight short; and then he took about forty other Assayes of one Mr
Bradshaw's Silver (as he told me,) and Alderman Gibbs said to me, This is
heavy English money in Ingots, which I have and do daily buy of Mr Bradshaw, and
weigh your Masters Assayes against his. So I did, and found my Masters Silver
all one penny weight short of Mr Bradshaw's Silver. Thereuppon Alderman Gibbs
was very hot and angry with me, and told me, he was cozenned, for my Master
had put Copper into his Silver, and made him pay for good heavy English money
to be melted-without Copper; he pressing me very earnestly; I told him, I
had done it for several years by my Masters order, and he must seek his
remedy from my Master Eman; for I would show him my Masters Books every week
where I had put the Copper down upon the Account, for my Masters Profit, and
that I did believ, my Master had delivered him to the value of One Hundred and
Forty Pounds in Copper, in his Ingots, for which he had paid my Master Eman
for good silver.
their heavy English moneys. Mr Alderman Gibbs one day asked me seriously
about it; I told him, my Master had given me order to put in so much Copper as
would bear the waste of the silver; and that I did believ, I had put in and
mixed as much Copper into his Ingots, by my Masters order and for his Profit,
at several times, within Four years, for which Alderman Gibbs had paid for to
my Master after the price of good Silver, as came to above One Hundred and
Forty Pounds Starling.

Whereupon Alderman Gibbs a few days after questioned my Master Emans about
it, who did not deny it; and Alderman Gibbs threatened to Arrest him, and was
in a great rage about it, that he should be so overreached and deceived: But
my Master Mr Emans slighted the business, and in plain terms bid him do it if
he durst; so that Alderman Gibbs there (for all his craft) was Cozened of one
hundred and forty Pounds, Alderman Gibbs paying for good Silver when he
received Copper mixed in every Ingot.

The true reason wherefore Alderman Gibbs forbear to Arrest Mr Eman was, he
durst not have done it if he had cozened him of ten times as much; for if
Alderman Gibbs and Mr Eman had gone to Law about this matter, the whole
business of both their unlawful actions in this Cause would have been made
known to the world, and both Mr Eman and Mr Gibbs would have been undone. Mr
Eman could have given Mr Gibbs satisfaction for this wrong well enough, if he
had had a mind to have done it, for Mr Emans had then a better Estate then
Alderman Gibbs, and both of them (by this act) had forfeited their Estates to
the King, it being against the Laws of this Nation to melt the English current
Coins. This was done in the year 1629. And had I spoke but one word of this
business to Sr Henry Mildemay or Mr Attorney General, or unto the late King
Charles, (as I had oftentimes opportunity to have done it, being then employed
by the late King in several businesses by his particular Command; which, had I
done it before the said Alderman Gibbs had had his Pardon, Alderman Gibbs had
been for ever spoiled for being an Alderman; he might have had a Jack-line
about his neck, sooner then a Gold Chain, Alderman Gibbs and Mr Eman having by
this act forfeited all their Estates to the late King.

These abuses are commonly practiced both amongst the Refiners and Goldsmiths
at this day, without any scruple of Conscience, or honesty, or fear of the
Law; and (if not prevented) will undo and waste the stock of the Nation. If
Culling and melting down of the hevie current money be not prevented, the
Nation in General will not have money to pay Rents, go to market, or pay
Taxes: and this business to be neglected, without a strict Act of Parliament to
discover the Offenders, will bring intolerable mischiefs.

I have presented this Business many times to the long Parliament, who made many
Orders and References for passing an Act against melting of the Current Silver
Coins of the Nation, and against the Transporting of Gold and Silver. But it
was not finished.

The humble Proposals of many hundred Spinners to the Counsel of Trade, for
the Regulating of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Thread within this Nation,
formerly presented to the Counsel of Trade at White Hall 1650. which set forth
many of the Abuses in the present making Gold and Silver Thread, and they
humbly desire a Regulation.
1. THat all work in Gold and Silver Thread may be wrought by the
hand-Spinner, and the Wheels totally suppressed.

2. But if your Honors shall permit the Wheels to work superfine Gold and
Silver Thread, that your Honors would tie them to their Numbers, and that they
present unto your Honors the place of their abode, and that such Penalties be
put on them, as to your Honors shall seem agreeable to Justice, if they work
any other then superfine Thread.

3. That no Silver be spun (either by the hand or wheels) but shall contain at
least five ounces Silver on a pound Venice; and all Needle-gold and silver to
hold six ounces gold and silver to nine ounces Thread, and so all fine silver:
and by this Rule the Commonwealth shall not be cheated.

4. That the names of all men and women admitted to make gold and silver Thread
or Wire be kept in a Register, where they live, and all people that are
admitted, to put in security to the State, not to work any of these
Manufactures contrary to the Regulation agreed by your Honors.

5. That a sworn Surveyer, that is no Trader in the Manufactures, may have the
surveying and examining of all the Manufactures, and that he be required to
look carefully thereunto; and that all such Regulations desired in our Petition
may be taken into your Honors considerations, and the weight of Silver agreed
on, what shall be laid on the sleightest Thread on the pound Venice; which we
humbly desire (as aforesaid) five ounces Troy to one pound Venice, and six
ounces Troy to nine ounces Troy Needle Work; or a greater proportion of Silver
to Silk, if it shall upon examination by your Honors be found to be fitting.
The truth is, the hand-Spinners cannot make the silver Thread so slight as the
Wheels, and lay on so little Silver as they do; and that makes the Workmasters
stand so much for the Wheels; They serving their poor hand-Spinners, as we
have been informed formerly some Silkmen did the Silk-dyers, give them raw Silk,
and if they did not make one pound weight so many ounces more then it ought to
weigh, being justly dyed, the Silkmen would abate it out of their wages for
dying: So the poor Spinners, if they will not spin their Silver slight to some
of their Workmasters, and make Silk go farther then it ought to do if the
silver Thread be serviceable, they shall have no more work; and some of them
have their wages abated them, and their Workmasters tell them, They cannot make
stuff yield so much as the Wheels.

6. Whereas your Honors ask us, Which is the best cheap to the Commonwealth,
either the Wheel-work or the hand-Spinners work: to that we humbly answer;
That is best cheap to any man that wears it, that lasts most and longest upon a
garment, and not that which is brushed and the wind blows away; and that is
best cheap that yields most to the melting-pot, when it comes to be burned,
and that is our Hand-work; for the Wheel-work, the Silver is almost all blown
away.

7. The wheel-Spinners cannot make any Needle work, which is the chiefest and
richest work; and all Imbroiderie is made by the hand-Spinners work, and
Fringe-makers must work with hand-Spinners work, if they will work good: and
what work is made by the wheels, generally is slight cheating stuff.

8. The late King put down the wheels, and caused them to be broken in pieces,
that we poor Women might have a livelihood (being in and about this City many
thousands, that live on the Manufacture of gold and silver Thread): the
greatest of the number of these wheels have been set up since there was no
regulation in the Trade, and that every one might work what he list, since the
Office Mr Violet had (for seeing this Manufacture made good) was put down: By
which means the Manufacture is grown out of Esteem; and without your Honors
take some strict course, the Deceipts will daily increase.

9. And if there be not a sworn Officer to do Justice, some of the
Wyer-drawers will force some poor hand-Spinners to make slight silver Thread,
which their necessity will compel them to do, to keep them from famishing; and
the work so made is fitter to burn then for any other use.

10. Whereas the wheel men say, They were bound Apprentices to the Trade of
Spinning gold and silver Thread, we deny that any was bound to the Trade

11. If the Wyerdrawers would deal truly with your Honors, they could tell you,
it is their great gain they make by the cheating wheel-work, more then by our
labor which work good work, that makes them so stickle for their wheels. We do
humbly desire, that some of the prime Tailors and Silkmen and Goldsmiths may
be warned to attend your Honors: the Goldsmith will satisfy you what a
slight return the Silver wheel-work makes to the melting pot, being almost all
wasted, and blown away with the wind: The Tailor will tell you, they are
almost ashamed to sow it on; And the honest Silkman could wish all slight
wheel-work were put down, but that they must be forced to sell such as their
Neighbors do, or else lose their Custom. The Silver Thread is worse made now
and sleighter then ever it was; many sorts of Silver Thread having not half the
proportion of Silver it ought to have, and as it had, when Tho. Violet had the
Regulation.

THere was several persons desired the Counsel of Trade, that Thomas Violet
(who was formerly employed in the Regulation of this Manufacture, and knows
the way of discovering all the Frauds in this manufacture) may have the Place
of surveying and searching for all course and adulterate Silver in thread and
wire, and to seal all good Gold and Silver-thread. The said Thomas Violet from
time to time to search with the Wardens and Assistants of the Company of
Goldwyerdrawers, or by himself and his Officers, for all course Silver that is
wrought in this Manufacture to the deceit of the Nation. And that the said
Thomas Violet may have such allowance for the executing of the said Office, as
may enable him to defray the necessary charges for the strict search and due
regulation of this manufacture; for it cannot be well done without a great
deal of charges.

If your Honors trust the management of this Manufacture only to the
Wyerdrawers, without naming and appointing a sworn Surveyer and Sealer of this
Manufacture, one who is no Trader in these Commodities, (the Business to be
carried on singly by the Wyer-drawers) will never do your work to have a just
Reformation: For every Master-wyer-drawer will winck one at another, and they
will by that means (under color of Reformation) cozen the Nation by a Law, as
was done in the dying of Silk: when the Silkmen had the Regulation, all such
persons the Company envied, were found out and punished; in the mean time, the
Governers, Masters and Assistants they cheated and cozened the Nation more then
ever it was before, and no man durst say, Black was their Eye.

The like Abuses and greater will be practiced, if the management of the
manufacture of Gold and Silver wire be wholly left to the Refiners and
Wyerdrawers, without a third person which is no Trader, either Refiner or
Wyerdrawer, and therefore not interessed by benefit to be corrupted by making
the manufacture slight or deceiptfull: And this we can say, If there be any
Refiner or Wyerdrawer angry with Mr Violet, it is because he would not suffer
them to cozen the Commonwealth, but cut and defaced all slight Gold and
Silver thread. And he tied all the workmen to make good and just Gold and
Silver thread, such as was justly covered with a due proportion of Silver, to a
due proportion of Silk, that would last twice as long to the wearer as the
slight wheel-work.

For whereas Thomas Violet by himself and his Officers caused the
Gold-wyer-drawers to work all their Silver thread (from 1635 to 1640.) six
ounces Silver at the least to three ounces of Silk to all Needle work, and five
ounces Silver to three ounces of Silk for the sleightest silver Thread; and any
silver Thread that was under this size and proportion of Silver and Silk, the
said Thomas Violet was authorized to burn it or deface it, which many times
when he found it he did deface it. And this made some of the Wyer-drawers
angry with him, whereas it was their own faults to work slight silver and to
come within his danger; Thomas Violet did but his duty to deface their course
and slight silver Thread.

But this we can affirm, during the time Tho. Violet had the Office, he
caused all the Silver Thread to be made of good Silver; and there was never
(for the generality) so good Silver Thread made for the use of the Nation
before Mr Violet's Regulation, or since, as was during all the time he had the
Regulation by his Office. If Tho. Violet were empowered to make his Searches at
this day, (as he did formerly) he would (no doubt) find many Thousand
Pounds of course Silver Thread in London, and Silver Thread which is as bad as
course Silver.

we pray your Honors to mark what we say. whereas (by a just Regulation) six
ounces of silver and three ounces of true died silk is the true proportion for
the just making of silver thread: There is now (since all this Manufacture is
run into disorder, and made without a Rule) Gold and Silver spun upon heavy
died silk, and ordinarily Gold and Silver thread made, three ounces Silver to
six ounces Silk, and Four Ounces Silver to Five Ounces Silk.

And this Silver so unjustly wrought and spun, to the deceit of the Wearers,
is made and mixed in their Silver Laces, and other manufactures, and sold to
the Wearers by the ounce for good Silver thread, whereby the Wearers are
cozened half in half; and of this sort of Silver thread there is sold in
Silkmens shops many thousand pounds a year; and this Silver thread made upon
the Wheels so slight and thin the Silver is spun, that it will not abide on the
silk during the weaving and making the Lace, and the Tailors will declare to
you, while they are soing the Lace on the Garment the Silver will shed and fall
off the Silk, and when it comes to the weather, a Fogg or Rain, the wet gets
into the Silk, and then the Silk swells and breaks the silver (the Plate being
so thinly made that it flies off; and when it is dirtie, rub the Lace and you
wiil leav nothing but silk: This, all that wear it, can tell you. And in this
manner is many 1000 pounds a year Bruised, Cracked, and rubbed away: whereas,
if the Silver was all justly and truly made with a due plait, and a due
proportion of silver and Silk, the Lace would last as long again, the Silver
Lace would make as much again as it now does; and Twenty thousand pounds a year
in Silver would return to the melting Pot which by this slight making is
brushed off, and wasted, and comes to be blown in the dirt. the Goldsmiths can
tell you gold and silver Lace justly made, will make you three shillings the
ounce, and three shillings and sixpence the ounce to burn; your slight
Wheel-work will not make above one shilling or eighteen pence an ounce.

The Wyerdrawers and Refiners have good reason to cry Tho. Violet down to the
Parliament and Counsel of State; for they know he will hold their noses to the
grind stone (as he did formerly) and make them to make good work, if he be
restored to his Office which he formerly had. The Refiner he will have an eye
on, that he melt not, nor cause to be melted any of the current Coins or Plate
of the Nation, but only Foreign Bullion imported for this Manufacture; and
this was strictly looked to whilst Tho. Violet had his Office; and the
Refiners by their Indenture with the King Covenanted to do so, and not to melt
the current Coin or Plate of the Nation for any of these Manufactures.

The Wyerdrawers will do any thing rather then to be tied up to have their
Silver Thread sealed. They know, then they must work it all good silver, and a
due proportion of silver to a due proportion of true died silk It is not the
Fee that they are to pay is that that sticks with them, for that is a trifle in
comparison; it is, they shall be constraind to make all good Silver Thread
with a due proportion of silver: this is the Yoke they would fain fling off
themselves.

And if your Honors do not hold them to this, to Seal their silver on Scanes,
they will cheat the Nation as much as ever they did. The Wyerdrawers (in the
Twentieth year of King James had a Corporation, their Charter was to punish
offenders, suppress underhand Workers, and all irregular persons whatsoever:
And this Charter was granted with ample Power unto the Governors, Assistants,
and Commonaltie to make Warrants under the Common Seal of the Governor, unto
all such persons as they should think fit: and they did depute and authorize
one Henry Crompton, amongst many others, (the Thirtieth of July, 16. 3. (to
enter any House, Shop, Seller, Warehous, Ship or ships within England and Wales,
and to search and Assay all silver and gold Thread etc. that should be wrought
by any person or persons not being free of the said Company and allowed to work
as aforesaid: and to seize all base and counterfeit course Silver Thread, and
carry away the same, and to detain and keep it as forfeited to the use of the
King All these Powers they had granted them: but for want of appointing a Sworn
Officer to see the Governer Assistants and Commonalty do their duty; and to
punish Offenders impartially.

Upon the examination of the several miscarriages and frauds in the Execution
of that Power, the whole Proceedings was damned in Parliament, as a power that
was ill and Illegally managed, under specious pretenses of their Reformation of
Abuses, they got to be in a capacity to cozen the State cum Privilegio: And
there was an end of this Charter.

The Proceedings of all the miscariages of the Governors and Assistants of the
Refiners and Wyerdrawers was at large Painted out in Parliament, as tending
only to get a License for some particular men to Cozen the Commonwealth, and
all others to be punished.

My Lord Cook told the Refiners and Wyerdrawers, Where the Constable is the
theif, it is to little purpose to make a hue and cry: Therefore if ever you
would settle this Manufacture, put a sure Officer to see the Company of
Refiners and Wyerdrawers to do their Duty, and to wake good Gold and Silver
Wire and Thread justly and truly; as was formerly when Tho. Violet had his
Office. The Refiners and Wyerdrawers are angry with him only because he
executed his place strictly, and would not let them Cozen the Commonwealth as
they had formerly done.

This and much more was said at the old Counsel of Trade by some of the
Women-Spinners, Goldmiths, and other persons, upon several Meetings and
Disputes about the Regulation of this Manufacture: And the Counsel of Trade
had almost drawn the Model of a just Regulation for the preventing the Abuses:
But their Commission was Determined just as they were upon finishing the
Regulation: And the whole proceeding in this business was by them transmitted
to the Counsel of State.

Here follows a Certificate aganst the Wheels.
WE whose names are here underwriten, being Silkweavers, and other Traders in
Gold and Silver Thread do ce^tifie to this Honorable Council of Trade, and to
all people whom it may concern; The way of Spinning gold and silver thread by
the Women-spinners with the Cheer and Spindle, is far more serviceable and
better made by the Women spinners then by the Wheels for the benefit and
service of the Commonwealth: And the Wheels and Engines for spinning gold and
silver thread have greatly damnified the Women-spinners; whereby many hundred
Spinsters for want of work have and will daily fall into great misery and
Poverty, if there be not some good Order taken for the suppressing the Wheels.

This Certificate is Signed by the hands of above an Hundred Weavers, Silkmen,
Goldsmiths, Embroiderers, and Bonelace makers: And was humbly presented to the
Counsel of Trade in the Year 1650.

There are diverse of the workmen Wyerdrawers that have been with me since the
Workmasters presented the Draught of their desired Corporation, and told me,
that the Master-wyerdrawers have (in the Draught of their Corporation which
they delivered unto the Counsel of Trade in August last, 1656. omitted diverse
particular Rules which conduced very much to the well ordering of the Trade and
manufactures; and have inserted particular Rules only conducing to their own
private ends (being Master-wyerdrawers) and not for the general good either of
the workmen of the Trade, or of the Commonwealth.

The workmen desire that the workmasters of this manufacture may be
restrained, and for the future may not (as they do) force the workmen (for
their private gain) to make their work slightly and adulterate: That there may
be a sworn Surveyer and Assayer appointed; one that is neither Workmaster nor
workman, but an indifferent conscionable man between them both; that may Survey
and Assay all work made, and to be made; and may set Rules and Orders between
the workmasters and workmen, that so the work-masters may not cause the workmen
to make base, slight and adulterate work, for the workmasters private gain.

And that the Workmen may not be so beaten down in their Prices, that they
cannot make a livelihood; that the Surveyor may appoint the Assaymaster, who
may try and make Assayes of all work made into Silver and Gold thread, wire,
Purles, Spangles, etc. that so the manufacture may be made of fine silver, not
under Starling, but as much better as every Trader pleases.

That Tho. Violet (who was formerlie employed in the Regulation of this
Manufacture, and knows the way of discovering all these Frauds and Deceits in
the making and working of this manufacture) may be Surveyor and Searcher to
seiz on all course and adulterate silver, in wire and thread etc. and for all
slight work: And that your Honors set Rules and Orders for the punishing the
offenders; and that all gold and silver Wire etc. may be well and justly
made: And that Tho. Violet may have such a Fee allowed him for his service and
pains taken therein, as may support his Charges, and recompense him for his
service, care, and pains to be taken therein, and for his warranting to the
Nation that all the silver shall be justly made, and that strict penalties,
should be put and laid upon all work-masters, that give their work men course
adulterate Silver to work, to draw Gold or Silver wire, and that all
workmasters be forbidden to cause the workmen, to draw their silver to such
extraordinary sizes for slightness, that when it is twisted on the Silk it is
so thin, it cannot be made servisable to the wearers, but with the wind or
Rain, drops of the wearers Garments; I wished these men to put to their hands
to these last aforesaid proposals, which for the present they refused, telling
me, I knew these things to be true, as well as themselves; The reason why for
the present they would not set to their hands was, They would see first,
whether there was an Intention, of the Parliament, or Counsel for Trade, really
to reform these abuses, and to see good Silver lace, spangles etc. should be
wrought and made in the Nation, and to punish strictly the offenders; when they
were once assured of that, they would discover the whole bottom of the
workmasters knavery and oppression, and how many of them deceiv the
Commonwealth; But if they should be seen to discover these abuses, before they
were assured the Parliament would reform them, by their discovery, they should
be undon; for some of their workmasters would be stark mad with them; And
that some of them have been threatened by their work masters (the
master-wyer-drawers) never to be set on work by any of the
master-wyer-drawers, if ever they petition against, or discover any the frauds
of their workmasters, in these Manufactures.

The like tyranous threatening, many of the Master wire drawers, have used to
the women spinners to terrify them from speaking the truth: So that many of
these workmen to the master wyer-drawers, and also the women spyners of gold
and silver thread, are in a sad condition every way; They must work course
deceipfull gold and silver thread and wire, and must not, nor dare discover it,
upon pain of being undon, by some of their cruel Work masters Some of them with
tears in their eyes have told me, they were forced to work their Work Masters,
course and deceiptfull silver wire and thread, (contrary to their consent) to
get bread; And that their Masters have so pestred the trade formerly, with
taking a multitude of apprentices, for private and present gain, that now, not
one half of the Journiemen, can get work to put bread in their heads: That the
Journymen, stand in more aw (many of them) and fear, to displeas their
Workmasters, then their apprentices do; And this is the true reason, so much
bad slight silver thread is made.

If one man will not work at, such sizes, and such price (that the Silver shall
run such a length, that many of the Workmen even dravv their eyes out of their
heads;) So that when the Silver com's to be put on the Silk, it is in a
manner, as thin as a gilt on a bay leaf, the vvind vvil blovv the Silver away
of the silk: and then the vvheele-men and hand spinners, must agree with some
of these vvorkmasters, as the Silkmen did with the Dyers, they must make one
pound of raw Silk, weigh, two pound, when it com's from dying; so the
Master vvyer-dravvers will, and at this day do, force many of their Worke-men
to make Silver, three ounces Silver to cover six ounces of silk and four ounces
silver to cover five ounces of Silk, and this is sold for good silver thread
by the Master vvyer dravvers and Silkemen, so that the vvearers are Cozened
many times half in half, And this makes Knaves against a regulation, For they
can get more by selling ten pounds vvorth of this slight and deceitful Silver
Lace, then they can do by selling forty pounds vvorth of good silver Lace:
this is the true reason, wherefore they would have no Sealer, but would have
the Regulation of this business left amongst the Refiners and Wyer-dravvers
themselves.

This is the Substance of the Women spynners, and many of the Journymen
vvyer-dravvers desires, at this day, which they would give under their hands,
and prosecute it, by hundreds, if they were assured your Highness and the
Parliament would appoint a strict Regulation of these abuses in their Trade;
They will attend the Counsel of Trade and humbly present their desires
concerning all the premises.

My most humble Petition to your Highness and the Parliament is, For the speedy
passing the Act against Transporters of Gold and Silver, and against the
Cullers, and melters down of the heavy Coyns of this Nation, and such as buy
Gold or Silver above the price of the Mynt.

THis Act was in Mr Augustine Garlands, hands in 1652. (a member of the long
Parliament) and was recomended to the Parliament, by the Counsel of State, and
was drawn up by a Committee of the Counsel of State for the mint, in 1651. for
the appointing of Commissioners, who should make strickt inquiry after the
abuses of transporting Gold and Silver, And then there was an endeavor (by some
of the Transporters of Gold and Silver and of such as unlawfully bought, sold,
exchanged, or melted down, any of the current coyns of England, or of any Gold
or Silver bulloin) to have it passed by and with a general Pardon The
Committee for the mint taking Especial notice, of the great mischeifs, that
have happened to the Nation by the said abuses. when the general pardon was
drawing up they made this order to prevent the Offenders escaping their due
punishment. viz.

At Whitehall, Jan: 24. 1651. Mr Attorney General,
At a Committee of the Counsel of State for the Mint, this enclosed exception,
was presented to the Committee, to have it inserted in the General pardon, The
Committee do hold fit, for the benefit of the Commonwealth, to have this
exception inserted in the Pardon, and do recommend it to you accordingly. viz.

Except all offenses, don, and committed by any person, whatsoever, in
transporting out of England any gold or silver, in Coin, or Bullion, without
license; and all other offenses in the unlawful buying, selling, exchanging,
and melting down of any the current silver moneys or Bullion against whom or
for which any information is now depending in the Court of Exchequer at
Westminster.

Ordered that Mr Thomas Violet attend Master Attorney General with this order
of the Committee, and also the Committee of Parliament for drawing the General
pardon to have these offenses excepted.

James Harrington, Herbert Morley,

I did attend the Committee of Parliament and Master Attorney General with this
abovesaid order, and they did insert the exception in the General pardon, and
so none of these offenders are pardoned: the offenders are liable to the Law at
this day.

At the Committee at Whitehall August 16. 1649.
Ordered that a Committee be appointed to take into consideration, the
business of the Coin and the Par between us and other Nations, and how the coin
of this nation may be kept from being carried out, and likewise to consider of
some means Whereby the Mint may be set on work, and they are to speak with any
persons they think good about it.

December 20. 1649. THe Committees names Lord President Bradshaw, Sir James
Harrington, Sir Gilbert Pickering Sir William Constable, Mr Scot, Mr Bond,
Colonel Purefoy, Colonel Joanes, Mr Thomas Challoner, Sir Henry Mildemay,
Colonel Morley, Mr Allen, Mr Darley, Mr Cornelius Holland, Mr Nevil, or any
two of them, Sir James Harrington had the Chair for this Committee, he writes
to me this Letter, viz.

SIR!
Being informed of your abillity and readiness to make tender of such
proposals as may be for the service of the Commonwealth, I thought fit to
desire you that I may speak with you to morrow in the afternoon, being Tuesday
about two a Clock, at which time you shall find me at my lodgings in the
Stone Gallery in Whitehall.

12 Jan. 1649. Your loving friend, James Harrington.

For Mr Thomas Violet these.

And at the desire of Sir James Harrington and Mr Thomas Challoner, and others
of the Honorable Committee, for the Mint I did write to Holland for all the
principal Coins in Christendom, and did deliver many of them to the officers
of the Mint to make an assay of them, which several pieces of foreign gold and
silver were assayed in the Presence of the Committee of the Mint, they being
there at the Tower several days to make these Trials, where I attended them,
and I sent into Holland France and Flanders, for all their several Placares,
and did procure the Laws and Ordinances for regulating their respective mints,
with the several standards and weighits for their Coyns, gold or silver to be
translated, and thereupon the Commitee of the Mint caused the principal of
these foreign Coins to be engraven with their weight and finenes of every
piece, according to the standard of each mint, both gold and silver, what it
ought to weigh, with a just Calculation of the vallue what all the several
Species would make in the Tower of London, and the penny weight, and grains
that every such foreign Specie or Coin would make in the Tower of London, and
what proportion our gold and silver held with the mints of Flanders France and
Holland: and this was exactly calculated by the officers of the Mint and my
self, in the years 1651 and 1652, and all the proceedings thereupon. After many
months time, and the several Coins, graven in Copper Plates, were delivered
into the custody of Sir James Harrington, the chairman of that committee, to
report them unto the House, but the Parliament being dissolved 20 April, 1653.
the Act against the Transporters of Gold, and all the Proceedings concerning
the regulation of the mint was stopped for that time. There had been several
Agitations concerning this Act in the house many times in Parliament viz. 18.
March 1640. The business of the examination of the transporting Goldand Silver
referred to the Committee, that was appointed to consider of the state of the
Kings Army, and Thomas Violet appointed by that order of Parliament to prosecute
this business.

An order of Parliament 1 September. 1647. That the Committee of the navy
consider of some effectual course to prevent the Transportatim of Bullion, and to
report what they have don, to the house. The Committee of the Navy, 2. September
1647. direct their order to the Commissioners and officers of the Customs and
particularly to Mr Edward Watkins, then head Searcher, and they were all
desired to consider of some course to prevent the Transportation of Bullion out
of the nation. In October 1647. All the Commissioners with the chief officers
of the Custom-house set down several ways for the prevention of the
Transporting of Gold and Silver, which the Merchants by all secret means do
daily Transport. The Committee of the Navy by their order of the third of Dec.
1647. directed their order to the officers of the Mint, to certify their
opinions, what ways and courses were to be taken for preventing the
Transporting of Gold and Silver out of the nation. The officers of the Mint,
after great consultation and consideration, having taken good advice; (some of
them having had long experience viz. Mr. Palmer and Mr Cogan were the fitter to
give advice) first the officers of the Mint upon their certificate desire that
all the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and such as have melted down the
current Coin of the nation, may be brought to justice to Deterr others from
acting the like abuses for the future. Secondly, that according to the
president of the statute of 14 Richard 2. Cap. 12. A Commission be granted to
make inquiry through the nation after all such as had conveyed the moneys of
England out of the nation, and of all such as culd out and melted the heavy
current money, 4 Hen. 4. Cap. 10. the sixth of Edward 6. Cap. 19. Touching the
exchange of Gold and silver to be put in execution, that whosoever gives more
for Gold or Silver then it is or shall be declared, shall make fine at
pleasure of the State, To conclude they say in their Certificate, that the Mint
cannot be employed, nor the Transporting treasure stopped, if some course were
not speedily taken to discover these great abuses, and already all the Gold is
Transported out of the nation, and the Silver follows apace, and this is the
Certificate of all the chief officers of the Mint. 3. December. 1647.

About November 1647. The Citizens of London petitioned the Parliament against
the Transporters, of Gold and Silver, showing the great mischiefs that came to
the City thereby.

The 18 of August, 1649. The Counsel of State ordered, that a Committee should
be appointed, to take into their considerations, the business of the Coin, and
the Par between this and other Nations: and that there be care taken, that the
Coin of this Nation may be kept from carrying away out of the Nation; And to
consider of some means how the Mint may be set on work. In pursuance of this
last Order, the then Counsel of State did give order for the draught of an
Act, which was drawn by order of the Committee for the Mint, And I Thomas
Violet was required by the Counsel of State to attend this business, And upon
several meetings and debates, of several Honorable members of the then
Counsel of State; The draught of an act of Parliament against transporters of
Gold and Silver was finished, and left by order of Parliament in Mr. Augustine
Garlands custody; and the said Act was twice read in the House, and about the 12
of April 1653. following called for again, and appointed to be finished; as
apears by the Journals of the House: But other mighty business did intervene.

May it pleas Your Highness! It was easily to be discerned that some guilty
Merchants, who had been guilty of Transporting of Gold had hindered this Act
from passing; and I know all the Members in that Parliament were not free from
transporting gold and silver, and that made some of them say, as long as they
sat within the Parliament wall, that Act, against transporting gold, culling the
English coyns or buying of gold and silver, contrary to the law, should never
pass the house.

Former Ages have made transporting gold and silver Felony, as appears by
several Statutes; And all such as Cull and melt the current Coyns of the
Nation, to forfeit treble the value, of the moneys, they have melted or caused
to be melted: And by the Statute of 6 Ed. 6. cap. 19. whosoever gives more
for Gold or Silver, then it is or shall be declared by the Kings Procamation
to be current for within this his Highness Realm; that all the said coined
moneys gold or silver, so exchanged and every part and parcel thereof shall be
forfit, and the parties so offending, shall suffer Imprisonment, by the space
of one year, and make fine at the Kings Pleasure.

I have for these many years, pressed for an act of Parliament to be made
according to the Statute of 14. Rich. 2. cap 12. for Comissions, to go through
the Nation, to enquire of such as have conveyed the gold and silver, out of
England, to the prejudice and damage of the Nation. 9. Ed. 3. cap. 3. 17. Rich.
2. cap. 1. 2. H. 4. cap. 4. 4. H. 4. cap. 10. 9. H. 5. cap. 1. 2. H. 6. cap. 6.
4. H. 7. cap. 13. 1. H. 8. cap. 13. By all these aforesaid Laws and Statutes,
your Highness's predecessors endeavored stricktly to look to the preservation
of the Coyns of the Nation.

May it please your Highness,

THere was about twenty milions of gold and silver, coined in the Tower, from
the year 1622. to 1645 as will ^ppear by the Mynt books, upon a calculation
(which The Clerks can quickly find out to a penny) and all this gold is
already transported, the current silver coyns all culled and the heaviest
transported or melted to make gold and silver lace, and that moneys which
remains is clipped and light. And these mischiefs have been acted by particular
persons and will every day increas, without some speedy and timely remedy be
had, to find out the Offenders.

The current Silver coyns of the Nation have been greatly spent, in making the
manufacture of gold and silver wire, thread etc. formerly in the years, from
1624, to 1630. There being then a war with Spain, Starling silver was sold, by
the Goldsmiths for five shilling and three pence and five shilling and four
pence, the ounce, Now the money in the Tower is coined at five and a pence, So
that all but the clipped and very light money was melted down, to make plate
and gold and Silver wire and thread. And this was known to be the general
practice, of almost all the Goldsmiths and Refiners in London. I most humbly
say. There is never an honest Goldsmith in London, that will have the face to
deny this to be a truth, Silver was then so scarce that in payment of a
thousand pounds you should receiv nine hundred pounds in gold, and then in
1629. men were troubled to get silver money for gold, Silver was so scarce: The
East India company bought up in those years, Spanish money and dollers and gave
four shilling 10 pence a piece for them, which is five pence in a piece of
Eight more then they will make in the Mint.

Now your Highness has a war with Spain the fountain of Silver is diverted for
the present, so that silver rises, and so consequently the Goldsmith weighs
and culls all the Silver, that passes through his hands, And as the market
rises so does the Goldsmith lighten his plummet, or weight he culls the Money
of the Nation with, till at last they will cull and melt it all up.

Some Goldsmiths in Lumbert street, (contrary to the law) have bought and sold
Milions of Gold till now at last, they have bought and sold all the Gold out
of the Nation, and the current Silver coin of this Nation, is following after a
great pace, and will still follow except a strict Law be made to discover the
offenders, and bring them to severe justice to deterr others, there will be no
money left in the Nation. neither gold nor silver. The sad effects of such a
mischief is not suddenly apprehended, for no great action can be don without
money; And the long Parliament though they could not then agree, for the passing
of an act against the Transporters of Gold and Silver, yet they excepted all
such as transported Gold or Silver, or culled or melted the current coyns, or
bought or sold gold and silver, contrary to the Laws and statutes of the Nation
from the general Pardon. A Commission to enquire and find out the offenders,
directed to skillfull discreet persons, and authorized by act of Parliament,
according to former presidents will bring in good store of moneys toward the
payments of public debts.

May it pleas your Highness (for the Regulating of Gold and Silver thread) If
the Refiners and wire drawers be not tied to refine all the silver for their
manufactures, in one place, and not to melt any silver but what shall be
Imported from beyond the Seas, or shall proceed from burnt silver, Returns of
their Manufacture, and this to be duly and strictly enjoined them, and that
culling and melting of the current Silver money of the Nation, for these
manufactures Be, for the future, made Fellonie; and strickt Rules and
ordinances to provent all the frauds formerly practiced both by the Refiners
and wyer-drawers, (which offenses are by me most humbly presented to your
highness, and the Parliament for a redress and reformation) If there be not
such officers and Ministers appointed as aforesaid, This manufacture will never
be regulated nor the frauds prevented. I do also implore your Highness Grace
and Justice for the Restoring me to my place which I had, and to have such
sees as formerly I Received, and I to warrant the Manufacture to be justly
made to the nation, or pay the damage to any that are damnified by any gold or
silver thread, sealed in my Office. And that your Highness and the Parliament,
will be graciously pleased out of your Benignity favorabily to accept of these
your loyal subjects Endeavors to do your Highness and the common wealth most
humble and faithful service; which shall for ever oblige me daily to proceed,
and for ever to Remain your humblest Loyal Subject.

September 29, 1656. Thomas Violet.


