AN APPEAL TO CAESAR: WHEREIN GOLD And SILVER Is Proved to be the Kings
Majesty's ROYAL COMMODITY. WHICH By the Laws of the Kingdom, no Person of what
Degree soever, but the KINGS MAJESTY, and his Privy Council, can give License
to Transport either Gold or Silver to any Person, after it is Landed in any
part of the Kingdom of England. That this Great and Sacred Trust cannot be
changed into the Hands of any Person, Persons, or Corporations whatsoever,
without changing or diminishing the Sacred Power of his Majesty, it being
against his Crown and Dignity. Humbly Presented to his Most Sacred MAJESTY,
and his Most Honorable Privy Council, in opposition to some Merchants, who are
Endeavoring, upon feigned Pretenses, to dispossess his Majesty of this Royal
Trust, and to have it Confirmed by Act of Parliament, to Transport at the
Merchants pleasure, Foreign Bullion and Coin freely, after it is Imported
into the Kingdom, and make it a Free Merchandise for their private profit, to
the Damage of the whole Kingdom in general.

By THO. VIOLET of London, Goldsmith.

MATTHEW. 22. 21. Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, etc.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty: And to the LORDS of his MAJESTY'S most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCEL. The Humble Petition of THO. VIOLET of London,
Goldsmith.
Most Dread Sovereign!
I Your Majesty's most Humble, Loyal, and Dutiful Subject, humbly upon my Knees
present this ensuing Narrative to Your Sacred Majesty, and to Your most
honorable and prudent Council. I had not presumed to have meddled, with this
cause and Argument, but that* I see with what eagerness some Merchants of
London thought to steal one of the prime Flowers of your Majesty's Crown, (from
your Sacred Majesty, and Your most honorable Privy Council) before the Rising
of this blessed Parliament. True it is, Gold and Silver all over the World is a
current Merchandise, it answers all things, and commands all things under
the Sun.

But so, that in all Kingdoms, Gold and Silver is a Kingly Merchandise, and
only at the Kings Dispose and Will, and not at the dispose of the Merchants, to
be transported at their pleasure. May it please Your Majesty, by Twenty Acts of
Parliament, the Laws of this Kingdom of England in all Ages, has invested it
in the most Sacred Hands of the Kings of England, and their Privy Council, and
none other (whomsoever, either Lords, Bishops, or Commons).

The Reasons upon perusal of this Narrative, Your Majesty will find to have
been done, upon most wise, just, and great consideration, both for the Honor,
Strength, and Defense of the Kings Sacred Person, His Crown, and Dignity, and
Safety of the people.

The Money, Bullion, Gold and Silver of this Kingdom in all Ages, (till these
perilous headstrong Fanatic days) has been counted the chief Strength of
the Kingdom, the very Soul of the Militia, and the Sinews of War and Peace)
in Your Majesty's most Sacred Hands, and in Your Privy Councels, the Law of
this Kingdom has invested it, (and in none other of Your Majesty's Subjects of
what condition soever,) and there let it safely remain to the end of this World.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, upon his bended Knees, prays Your Majesty
to keep this Sacred Trust entire in Your Hand, and not to diminish the least
tittle, or branch of it.

O never suffer it to be at the will of the Merchant (least Your Majesty, which
God defend, giving some fawning spaniels this Authority, as they desire, out of
Your Sacred Hands) You give an oppertunity in a few years, that the breed of
them may turn Mastives, and so they may have a power to fly in the Face of Your
Sacred Majesty, as some of them did to Your Majesty's Royal Father of blessed
memory, which God defend; Fore-warned, Fore-arm'd: I humbly think I deserved
not to live, should I not say this.

The Gold and Silver of the Nation, either Foreign Coin, or Ingot, or the
current Coin of the Kingdom, is the soul of the Militia, and so all wise men
know it, that those that command the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom, either
Coin, or Bullion, to have it free at their disposal, to be Judges of the
convenience and inconveniency, or to hinder, or give leave to transport Gold
and Silver at their pleasure, is the great Wheell of the State, a most Royal
Prerogative inherent in Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, (and none
other whomsoever, but by Your Majesty's License, and cannot be parted with to
any Persons, but by Your Majesty's most especial Grant;) your Majesty, and
your Privy Council being by the Law the only proper Judges, to have liberty to
send to your Friends the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom.

Upon such just Reasons of State, as your Majesty, and Privy Council shall
judge fit for the due relief of your Friends, and Allies, to offend your Enemy,
and defend your Imperial Crown, and Dignity, and strengthen your Friends.

As Queen ELIZABETH several times assisted HENRY the Great King of France,
your Majesty's Royal Grandfather; and the States of Holland, with vast sums of
Gold and Silver.

The like Royal prerogative is in the Crown, upon Petition of the Merchants,
setting forth their just Reasons, and at your pleasure your Majesty to give
them leave to send Foreign Gold and Silver either to the Indies, or any part
of Christendom; but so as your Majesty, as all your Royal Predecessors, and
your Privy Council being in Commission by your Majesty for that service, are
the only proper Judges of this business, and have the Lock and Key to dispense
with the penal Statutes, to give leave to send so much Gold and Silver of
Foreign Bullion, or the Coin of the Kingdom, as your Majesty shall please in
your wisdom for to grant, and to what Prince, or Country, but not at the will
of any other Person whomsoever.

Your Petitioner humbly prays upon my Knees, for your Majesty's honor, for
your Majesty's safety, for the safety and greatness of all your Lords and
Gentry, for the safety of all your People, that your Majesty keep this Royal
Trust entire, and the same always in your Majesty, and your most honorable
Privy Councels hands, as the Appell of your Eye. Gold and Silver is a
Merchandise all over the World, true, but in Kingdoms it is a Kingly
Merchandise, and not to be transported without the Kings leave. What I hear
say, I upon my Knees submit to your Sacred Majesty's consideration,

November. 28. 1660. (and shall pray, etc.)
To the Right Honorable, the Lord High Chancellor of England, the Lord
Steward of his MAJESTY'S Housh old, the Lord High Treasurer of England, the
Lord Roberts, all of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council, These
humbly present.
May it please your Lordships,
I Humbly presume for to Acquaint your Lordships, that I understand some
Merchants of London, are endeavoring to obtain an Act of Parliament, to make
Gold and Silver a Merchandise, to transport freely at their will and pleasure,
as it is at this day at Amsterdam, and several other Commonwealths in
Christendom.

If this do not satisfy your Lordships, I have it at large to show this
mischief, but I hope I shall not need to say more to this business to stopit.
My Lords, I am none of the Council or Committee for Trade, and so it may be
presumption in me to intermeddle, to say any thing in this business; but my
Lords, a Stander by may see more in the Game then the Gamesters: I am no
Lawyer, yet I humbly say, I know this point concerning the giving liberty to
Merchants to transport money, and what the damage may be to his Majesty, to
his Lords of the Council, and to the Kingdom in general, as well as many others
that are in Commission for the Regulating of Trade.

My Lords, I have bin writing on this Argument above this month, and shall be
ready to present to his Majesty, and his Privy Council (within this week) a
Paper that shall unfold the many mischiefs and dangers the Merchants would
expose the King and the Kingdom into, had they this Power in their hands: the
Merchants should they obtain this their desire, and remove this Trust out of
his Majesty and his Privy Councels Hands, to be the only Judges, to give leave
to Merchants to transport Gold and Silver, would rob the King of one of his
greatest Prerogatives, and Flowers of the Crown, which by twenty Acts of
Parliament and Proclamations, is only invested in the Kings Majesty, and his
Privy Conncel; the granting the Merchants this Power, will bring an hundred
inconveniences and mischiefs to the King, Nobility, and Gentry, as I have at
large to show your Lordships and the Privy Council, and if I do not satisfy
his Majesty, your Lordships, and all his Privy Council, of this that I say to
be true, never let me have your Lordships good opinion, that I am either an
honest man, or one that loves the Kings Safety, Honor, and Greatness, and
the Honor of his Privy Council.

And therefore my most Humble Suit is to your Lordship, (my Lord Chancellor)
that if this business be called on at the Council of Trade, and your Lordship
be present there this day, as I hear you intend to be purposely about this
business, that your Lordship would be pleased, either to put off this
business for to have it argued before the Kings Majesty, or his Privy
Council at Whitehall sometime next week, in the mean time I shall be ready to
show to your Lordship and the Privy Council, that it concerns his Majesty next
to the Militia, to continue and keep this great Trust in his Majesty's Sacred
hands, and in the Power of his Privy Council, and no other person by the Law,
can or ought to have the Privilege, to give leave to transport Gold and Silver
at their pleasure, this being the soul of the Militia, they that have the money
and the Peoples purses, have virtually the Command in all Commonwealths of the
Government; let who will have the Title, the Bankers have the power; and this
privilege is no where granted, but in Commonwealths, God defend England from
the very name of a Commonwealth, for the Tragedies which were lately acted by
some Merchants in England.

When we had no King in this our Israel, they have robbed the Kingdom of all
the Gold, and so now would work iniquity by a Law; but by Gods Assistance, I
will diffect them, and lay the danger open to his Majesty, your Lordship, and
the Kings most Honorable Privy Council, and stand or fall by your righteous
Judgment, humbly praying for his Majesty's Safety, Honor and Service, that no
further proceeding in this great business be argued, but before his Majesty,
and his most prudent Privy Council, within less then a week I shall be ready
with my Reasons for what I say, to show your Lordship, that so all the Lovers
of the King might be satisfied of the Damage and Danger of removing this great
Trust, out of his Majesty's and his Privy Councels Hands. So I humbly rest

November. 27. 1660. Your Lordships Humble Servant THO. VIOLET.

For the Right Honorable the LORD CHANCELLOR.
May it please your Lordship to give Order, That no further proceedings in this
business be, but before, His Majesty and his Privy Council at White Hall; and
if His Majesty and Privy Council give judgment against what I say to be true,
I will lose my life, when they hear this business examiued.

WHereas the Merchants of London are endeavoring to get an Act of Parliament,
to have liberty to export Gold and Silver freely without the Kings Majesty's
and his most Honorable Privy Councils leave, I humbly propound, for His
Majesty's service and the safety, and honor of his Majesty, that these humble
Proposals might be considered of before any further proceedings on that
business be made. That his Majesty and his honorable Privy Council be pleased
to keep entire in their own hands the Licencing of all Gold and Silver after it
is imported into this Kingdom, to be exported or Coined, as they shall see just
cause, for the safety of the Nation, and safety and honor of his Majesty and
the Lords of his Council, and the safety and benefit of all his Majesty's
Subjects of what condition soever; and being settled in the Crown so many
hundred years by Acts of Parliament, as I shall prove it, this great and Sacred
trust be no way altered, especially at this Juncture of time, this Kingdom
being robbed of almost all its Gold and a great part of the Silver Coin, for
the private profit of particular persons, to the weakening of the Nation and the
destruction of Trade* this Royal trust being one of the prime flowers of the
Crown, and the very soul of the Militia, and it a right inherent only in the
King and his Privy Council, and there only deposited for many hundreds of
Years; whereby the King (only) by the Law can give leave and license to
transport Gold and Silver after it is imported into the Kingdom* and that if
you ever suffer this Roial trust to be managed by the Merchant, and suffer all
persons by Act of Parliament to be free to transport Gold or Silver, either in
Coin or Bullion, after it is imported and landed in England.

You take away one of the principal Prerogatives and flowers of the Crown,
destroying his Majesty's Mint in the Tower of London, and lay a sad foundation
to give some factious Merchants of this Kingdom a ground to make new
disturbances, and leave the Nation weak and naked of all Gold and Silver.

The granting the Merchants this power they desire, will bring a thousand
mischiefs both on the King and Kingdom, which God defend. In all ages, till
these Phanatick days, the Gold and Silver after it was landed in the Kingdom,
was held the Blood and Sinews of War and Peace, the Militia and strength of the
Kingdom.

I shall humbly present unto you these following Reasons for keeping this power
entire in your Majesty and Privy Council, and the King, Lords, and Commons
cannot be safe to suffer any other person, upon any pretense whatsoever of the
Crafty Merchant, to have the disposals at their will, and for their private
lucre to have the power by Act of Parliament, to transport Gold or Silver
either to the Indies, or other foreign Countries, or to any part of
Christendom.

Without your Majesty's license and order to take an exact account of what
quantity of Gold or Silver is transported, to what Country, the Ship, with the
Ships masters name, either to the Indies, or any foreign Princes Country in
Christendom, or to any State, or Commonwealth; that so upon reasons of State,
they may either inlarg his Licenses to the Merchant, or straighten them
according as the King and his Privy Council in their great wisdom shall think
fit.

Your Majesty and Privy Council ever having regard that the Kingdom have
always such plenty of Gold and Silver as may be for the honor of the King,
and safety of the people, and to maintain Trade and Comerce in the Kingdom, to
pay Rents, Customs, Excise, and Subsidies, to be a strength and an honor to
the Kingdom, and the King and his Privy Council to take the care to hinder Gold
and Silver to be transported to the Kings enemies.

And of all and every part of these Heads and Branches, and real Prerogatives;
in all Ages the King, and none but the King, and his Privy Council, by Acts of
Parliament, are the only proper Judges at their will, discretion and pleasure,
for the safety of the Kingdom, and no other person whatsoever.

Upon the several Reasons of the Merchants to his Majesty and his privy
Council, and upon their petition and request the King can dispense with the
penalty of the Law, and give the Merchant license to transport only such
quantities of Gold or Silver, either foreign Coin or Ingots, or the current
Coin of the Kingdom, either in Gold or Silver, as the King and his privy
Council shall think fit, for to carry on the Merchants trade in Christendom,
and out of Christendom, to strengthen his Majesty's friends, and offend his
foes; and this is an undoubted right of his Majesty's Crown, and cannot be
dispensed with, or deposited into the Merchants hands, or any other Subjects,
either Lords spiritual or temporal, but to the dishonor of his Majesty and all
the good people of the Kingdom, I do humbly prove it true for these Reasons
following.

If any person, of what degree soever, transport Gold or Silver without the
Kings license, the Laws and Statutes heretofore has made it Felony, both for
Bishops, Noblemen, or Commons, as I shall show by the St atutes hereafter
following, afterward a praemunire, and at this day forfeiture and imprisonment
during the Kings pleasure, viz. 9 Edward 3. 2 Henry 4, cap. 4, 2 Henry 6, cap.
6. 18. Edw. 4, 1 Henry 8. 5 and 6 of Edw. 6.

When the Kings Majesty has War with any Prince, by the Law the King may
prohibit the Merchant to export Corn, Arms, Ammunition to them, or any other
Commodities: the Law provides the prohibiting the exportations of Wool, Fullers
earth, and Timber, as being destructive to the Nation.

Gold and Silver by the Law is free for any man to import, at what place he
please to land it, without paying any Duty or Custom, the reason whereof is,
that the Merchant is obliged to Coin it, and upon the Coinage the King has his
duty paid, but once being landed, it cannot be transported but with leave from
his Majesty, or the forfeiture being taken, and the party claiming the Gold and
Silver so taken on shipboard, to be committed to prison without Bail, till the
King or his privy Council please to discharge him: This is the Law, this the
Custom, before these mad Phanatick days that we had no King in Israel.

And this in all Ages was the practice both in your Exchequer and the Star
chamber, for otherwise the Merchant, for his private profit would send all the
Gold and Silver out of the Nation, and make the Kings proclamation wait upon
the Merchants Exchange, as at this day it is with the Gold: The Merchants and
some Goldsmiths have raised Gold above the Kings proclamation: may it please
your Majesty, we want a Star chamber to punish them. I humbly leave it to
consideration, no Gold to be had under one shilling six pence in twenty
shillings, more then silver; I humbly pray an Act might pass this present
Parliament against this abuse of the Gold Coin, and several other abuses and
cheats put on the Nobility and Gentry by the adulterating and undue making Gold
and Silver Lace in London, whereby the wearers are daily cozened by course
flight adulterate Gold and Silver, and by putting a slight body of Silver on a
great thread of silk, to the damage of this Nation, above fifty thousand pound
a year, as I will prove it to your Majesty and your Privy Council; and this is
done for want of a Regulation of the Work-masters and Workmen in London that
make Gold and Silver Lace, without an Essay, or Finenesse, or proportion of
Silver to Silk.

I humbly desire your Lordships to consider what a loss the King will have in
his Customs, to suffer Gold and Silver to be exported at the pleasure of the
Merchant, and pay no Custom; here will be, for the profit of particular
Merchants, a Trade driven both inwards and outward, and the King have neither
Excise nor Custom; for all the World knows, Gold and silver pays no duty
inwards, it is free to be imported at the pleasure of the Merchant, when and
how, and where he please, for the reasons abovesaid:

And if you give the Merchant leave to transport the Gold and Silver freely he
imports, what is the King the better by this Trade of the Merchants, either
inwards or outward? let this be granted to the Merchants, to send out Silver
and Gold freely, for their private profit, and in a few years they will leave
neither Gold nor Silver in the Nation.

May it please your Majesty, It is profit that is some Merchants guide, not
honor, nor the safety of the Nation, and this is most apparent by some men's
actions and demands, touching this great business; The King will lose in point
of His Excise, and Customs, for if the Merchant invest his Silver and Gold in
Merchandies, the King has thereby His Excise and Customs: the King will lose
in point of His Mintage; if no money be coined, no profit by coynage: this has
made the Mint, a great part of their Workhouses fall down: It is for the Kings
honor to have His Kingdoms full of Gold and Silver, for His, and the Subjects
defense.

And if this Fanatic project should take, the King loses one of the principal
prerogatives of His Crown, and Dignity; for those that have the command of the
peoples purses, have the principal part of the Militia.

This is a Commonwealth trick, but tends to the undoing of a King, in all
Countries where the Merchants can set up a banck, and transport money freely,
as at Amsterdam; have not these men the command of the Militia, they are the
peoples Princes, and virtually the Banckers have the power, riches, and
strength of the Commonwealth, let who will have the Title, the Prince of
Orange, and the Duke of Venice, etc. but the Banker, and the hogan mogan
Merchants have the power.

The reason is clear, they have got the people by the money, and leave them
nothing but some Stivers, and base money to buy victuals; and indeed the people
have nothing but a paper credit; in a Kingdom the Merchants will never put up
a banck, least the King should seize on it all, they will not allow a King to
do that they practice.

And I humbly say, it is not for the safety of the King, nor Lords, to let the
Merchants have liberty to transport Silver or Gold at their pleasure, to
foreign Bancks, and Commonwealths, least the Merchants in a year or two put
the same trick on the King, and Kingdom, for all their current Silver, as at
this day they have done for all the Gold of the Nation. Let the greatness of
the Merchant be as a Handmaid to the Kings greatness, and ever subordinate to
the King.

Or else a confederation of twenty Merchants and Goldsmiths, shall make the
English shilling, in spite of the Kings Proclamation, and against His Crown,
and Dignity, and in despite of an Act of Parliament, to go for 13. d. every
English shilling; twenty shillings, for twenty one shillings eight pence; let
but the Merchants make Silver a Merchandise, as the Goldsmiths and Merchants
have already done Gold.

I beseech your Majesty to observe your Royal Father of blessed memory, never
did by His Proclamation, or at his Mint in the Tower, raise the Gold coined at
above twenty shillings a piece in payment. Does not the Statute 5. and 6. of
Edw. the sixth, make it forfeiture of the value, for any person whomsoever, to
utter, or put off Gold or Silver money at above the Kings Proclamation, and
imprisonment during the Kings pleasure? Do not above ten Proclamations say the
same? this is the known Law. Yet at this day, by the confederation of some
Merchants and Goldsmiths, in spite of this Law and Proclamations, for the
Merchants and Goldsmiths private profit, the current Gold is not by any person
to be had, a twenty shilling piece under 21. s. 4. d. 21. s. 6. d. 21. s. 8. d.

Your Majesty shall receive a hundred thousand pounds in Silver, and not have a
twenty shilling piece in Gold in a payment in the Exchequer. What is the reason
the Merchants and Goldsmiths have made it a Merchandise? they have against your
Majesty's Laws, to your weakening, and dishonor, and against your Majesty's
Imperial Crown, and Dignity, robbed You, and the Kingdom, of all the Gold;
broke your Royal Statutes and Proclamations, beggered your Majesty's Mint.

And these very men that have thus abused your Majesty, after all this
licentiousness, are so bold to desire to steal one of the prime Flowers out of
your Majesty's Crown.

Which is by having an Act of Parliament, that they might freely, and at their
will transport Gold and Silver, at their pleasure; they will (if they could get
this great power into their hands) leave neither Gold nor Silver in the Nation,
but light and clipped money, groats, ninepences, and thirteenpence-half-pennies;
let this be but taken notice of, how the Merchants have robbed your Royal
Father, your Majesty, and the whole Kingdom, of the current Gold of the Nation.

And then I humbly leave it to your Majesty's wisdom to consider what a project
this is, tending to the weakening of your Majesty, and Kingdom.

These men that have transported the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom already,
without your Majesty's leave, and against the Law, are grown monstrous rich
many of them by transporting all the Gold of the Nation, and most of the Silver.

And now their riches makes them so bold, thinking to bribe out all business,
as formerly they did in the Rump Parliament; they would work iniquity by a Law,
if your Sacred Majesty, or your privy Counselors should ever permit them, to
the ruin and damage of the whole Kingdom, to gratify the greedy avarice of
some Merchants, whose covetousness will never be satisfied; gain is their
godliness, and not godliness their gain.

May it please your Majesty, your Royal Grandfather, and Father, King JAMES
and King CHARLES of blessed memory, gave a stop to this mischief of
transporting Gold, by bringing some of the Merchants of London, that
transported Gold and Silver into foreign parts, into the Star Chamber in the
years 1619. Sir William Curtine, Sir Peter Vanlor, Mr. Delabar, Sir Moses
Trian, and some twenty more were fined in the Star Chamber at near two hundred
thousand pounds, and paid King JAMES into his Exchequer, for their composition,
about one hundred thousand pounds; this sentence gave a stop to the
transporters of Gold, and upon this sentence, shortly after the Mint flourished.

Your Majesty's Royal Father, in the year 1635 King CHARLES of blessed memory,
commanded me your Majesty's Humble and Loyal Subject, to discover all such as
transported Gold or Silver without His leave. I have the Kings Majesty's
Gracious Letter to me of thanks for my good and acceptable Service, under His
Majesty's Royal Hand and Signet, for discovering the transporters of Gold and
Silver, which Letter I have ready to produce to your Sacred Majesty. 1648. On
Francis Braudgen brought me your Mrajesties Royal Fathers command to put a
charge against the Transporters of Gold in the Exchequer. Notwithstanding his
Majesty's former command to forbid me to discover the Transporters of Gold
1643. because his Majesty heard that some Members of Parliam. in 1648. was
sending away their estates in Gold, he would have them discovered, and made
known to the people how they robbed them of their Treasure.
I caused the transporters of Gold at my own charge to be fined 24100 pounds, I
caused upon command of his late Majesty to be filed in the Exchequer in 1648,
as will appear on Record at this day, above a hundred several informations
against the Transporters of Gold and Silver, at my charge many hundred pounds,
I know the men and their instruments at this day as well as I know my right
hand from my left. I caused an exception, to have all the Transporters of Gold
excepted out of the general pardon granted by the Parliament in the year 1651,
as will appear in the Act, I put in an exception to have had it excepted in his
Majesty's general pardon 1660, but there was so many guilty persons that had
transported Gold and Silver out of the Kingdom, that I could not get it put
into the Bill to have these offenses excepted, whereby your Majesty lost one
hundred thousand pounds, had I got it excepted out of your Majesty's pardon,
there was above an hundred Merchants and Goldsmiths that I have proof against,
for transporting Gold and Silver, and robbing the Kingdom of Millions of money;
if your Majesty please, I will give your Privy Council a perfect list of their
Names who transported Gold and Silver, that should have paid your Majesty one
hundred thousand pounds, and thank God they escaped so too; I have all the
charge against them, and the informations in the Exchequer is now on Record,
and informations filed, to the just value of six hundred and fifty thousand
pounds.

This business I acted, by command of his late Majesty of blessed memory, and
did lay out of my Purse the sum of nineteen hundred and sixty pounds in
discovery of the transporters of Gold in one thousand six hundred thirty six,
and had not your Majesty pardoned the offenders, I would not for my share have
taken twenty thousand pounds of them.

I have it under your Majesty's Royal Fathers hand and signet from Oxford, that
he would pay me for my great good and acceptable service in discovering the
transporters of Gold.

This true account I humbly give your Majesty, to show there is no man in the
Kingdom can discover the transporters of Gold so well as my self; I know them
as well as the Beggar knows his Dish, and this is done by intelligence.

I was for seven years commanded by his late Majesty to give a stop to the
transporting of Gold and Silver, and I did effect it, as appears by your Royal
Fathers Letter, ready to be produced to your Majesty.

Here follows your Majesty's Royal Fathers Letter verbatim, viz.
Charles R.

Trusty and Wel-beloved, We Greet you well. Whereas We have formerly employed
you for the Discovery of all such as Transported Gold and Silver Coin beyond
the Seas, and all such likewise who contrary to the Laws, and for their own
private gain, have melted down great quantities of Silver; Wherein We
acknowledge you did Us good and acceptable service, for which (when God shall
enable Us) We do hereby promise to give you full satisfaction. And for that We
understand that you are pressed by Our Two Houses of Parliament to proceed in
the said Discovery, We do hereby strictly Command you that you intermeddle no
further therein, without Our special Direction, As you will answer the
contrary at your peril. And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant. Given at Our Court at Oxford, the nineteenth day of November 1643. in
the nineteenth year of Our Reign, etc.

By His Majesty's Command, GEORGE DIGBIE.
To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Thomas Violet Goldsmith in London.
If your Majesty will be pleased at this time to command me to Catch these
Moles that work under ground, the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and will
Graciously Empower me with a Commission, and Warrants to do the same, I will
undertake to set your Majesty's Mint on work again, and stop the Transporting
of Gold and Silver.

Vast sums of Money is Transported daily, both Gold and Silver, which, if not in
time prevented by your Majesty, and your Majesty's Honorable, and Prudent
Council, will weaken, and destroy your Majesty, and the Nobility, and the
Commonalty in general, to make a few Merchants. If it be your Majesty's, and
the Lords of your Councels pleasure, to empower me to do it, I will (by Gods
assistance) remove the obstructions of the Mint.

May it please your Majesty, I shall humbly desire, before any further
progress of this business be made, concerning the giving the Merchants leave
to transport Gold or Silver. That by your Majesty's especial Command, a select
Committee of Merchants may meet, with some of the Officers of your Majesty's
Mint, and my self, and that we may be ordered to make a true Calculation of all
Foreign Coins, both Gold and Silver, what every Coin will make, being its full
weight, in the Tower of London, and that we send for over from beyond the Seas
Placcarts, Edicts, and Proclamations, of Foreign Countries; And that a Jury of
Artests be commanded upon Oath, to make a true Report how they find Gold and
Silver over valued in other Countries, and report as near as they can the just
and true Standard in Foreign Mints, what proportion they hold to the Mint of
the Tower of London. When this is done, to consider of what ways and means
they use to keep their Mints on work, that such ways as may be advantageous
for setting your Majesty's Mint on work, may be observed to prevent former
abuses. That the ways and means how these Differences, Standards, may be
rectified beyond Seas, and all Standards reduced to a pair, and equality with
England, and this Mystery unsoulded truly to your Majesty after the essay by
fire and water.

And so when this business, which is very weighty, is truly, and rightly
stated by the Essay, Finenesse, and Weight, and is strictly, and exactly stated
to your Majesty, and your Privy Council, then may it please your Majesty, by,
and with the advice of your Privy Council, such ways may be concluded on, as
your Majesty in your great wisdom with advice of your Privy Council shall
judge best for your service.

They being truly informed both by your judicious Merchants, and the Warden,
Master, and Comptroller of the Mint, being assisted with a Jurie of Arrest to
make Essay upon Oath. By this way I humbly say, the whole truth of this
business will be found out.

The Law says that Gold, and Silver, and Corn, and a man's House is every man's
own, to have a propriety in it to make use of between party and party, but not
to destroy the propriety, but he is finable by the Law: a man cannot lawfully
burn his own House, burn his own Corn, Transport his own money, but it is
finable; and this was used in the Star Chamber by the Atturny Banks, and the
King's Council at Law, as an Argument against the Transporters of Gold, in the
Twelfth year of King CHARLES in the Star Chamber, when I prosecuted the
Transporters of Gold and Silver, by command of the late King CHARLES.

I had disbursed in causing the Transporters of Gold and Silver to be fined in
the Star Chamber 24200l. at my charge 1960l. and never as yet had penny for
that service. This very sentence kept the Gold and Silver in the Nation, till
the beginning of the late War 1643. For which Service your Royal Father gave me
thanks as aforesaid, but as yet never had penny of Money for doing that Service.

May it please your Majesty, whosoever goes about to take the prerogative out
of your Majesty's, and your Privy Councels hands, of hindering the Transporting
Gold and Silver without your Majesty's license; I humbly say it is a
Jesuitical, Fanatic design, under the specious pretense of Freedom of Trade,
to rob your Majesty, and your Privy Council, of the privilege of keeping in
the Treasure, and Wealth of this Kingdom, weakening your Majesty, and your
Privy Council, and your Royal Prerogative, leaving the Wealth, and Treasure of
this Kingdom, in Gold and Silver, to be guided by the covetous desire of some
Merchants, many of them care not two pence for the safety of the Commonwealth,
so they, and their private Families grow rich. I humbly say it is a
presumptuous motion of some hot headed Merchants, that would by crafty and sly
pretenses rob your Majesty of that which is next to the Militia of the
Kingdom, nay, it is the very soul of the Militia, Gold and Silver; get to be
Master of that, any man may get Shipping, Arms, Money, and any thing to make a
disturbance in the Kingdom.

We lately see upon what sly pretenses the Sword was wrung out of your
Majesty's Royal Fathers Hands; he that cast his eye upon any of the Flowers of
your Majesty's Imperial Crown, with intent to take them out either by fraud or
force, let them fall as Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and let their end be like
Achitophels, who seek to rob your Royal Majesty of this your just Prerogative.

And this I here humbly say, I will with my life maintain before your Majesty,
and your Privy Council, and the Parliament or Committee of Trade: And these
following Statutes, Laws and Proclamations are my Protection, and Warrant for
what I humbly say.

1. A Proclamation against giving for Gold, more then it is current. 21. July.
17. Jacob.

2. A Proclamation against melting, and culling heavy English Money. 18. May.
9. Jacob.

3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver at higher Prises
then the Mint. 14. May. 1. Jacob.

4. A Proclamation against Transporting of Gold. 23. May 1. Jacob.

5. A Proclamation against Profit for Gold and Silver; And melting. English
Money. And to prevent the abuses and wast, in making Gold and Silver Thread,
and Laces. 4. Feb. 3. Caroli.

6. A Proclamation against Transporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the
Current Silver Coins of the Nation, for Plate, or Gold, or Silver Thread. 15.
May. 3. Carolus.

May it please your Majesty, to observe with what care the wisdom of former
Parliaments entrusted the Kings of England, and their Privy Council, to keep
careful watch that the Gold and Silver once imported into this Nation, should
be converted into Coin, for the Strength and Honor of the Kingdom; that those
that did Transport Gold and Silver without the King's License, were Felons. And
in the Trial in the Star. Chamber, 12. Caroli Primi, which I followed by Order
of his late Majesty of blessed memory. The Atturney-General Banks, and the
King's Council, read many Presidents, wherein the Transporters of Gold and
Silver had judgment, and suffered execution of death, as Felons.

Your Majesty will find transporting Gold or Silver without the Kings license
to be Felony, and by several Acts of Parliament, 17 Edw. the 4. and the 4
Henry, cap. 13. And I humbly conceive the Kingdom is in as great scarcity of
Gold and Silver now as it was then, for almost all the Gold and Silver is
transported without the Kings license by the disturbance of the late War, and
now some Merchants are grown so presumptuous, that they would have an Act of
Parliament to make it to be at the will of the Merchants to transport what Gold
or Silver freely they please without license from the King, it were better for
the Kingdom that these that go about to take this prerogative from the King,
were blind, rather then the rest of the Kingdom should ever see that day these
Merchants should have their will, Stat. 9. Edw. the 3. against the transporting
of Gold or Silver without the Kings license, or the melting down the current
silver coin by Goldsmiths or others into plate Stat. 2. Hen. 4. cap. 4.

No person ought to presume to transport Gold or Silver either in coin or
bulion, upon pain of forfeiture of as much as they might, which I take to be
lives and estates.

2 Henry 6. cap. 6. Upon a grievous complaint made in Parliament, That great
sums of gold and silver was transported without the Kings license out of this
Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, That no gold, or silver should be
transported out of the Realm, and because it is supposed the gold and silver is
transported by Merchant aliens, it is ordered, That the Mercheant aliens shall
find security in the Chancery that they shall not transport the gold or silver
moneys out of the Kingdom upon pain of forfeiture of the sum or value, and if
any do contrary and that duly proved, his pledges shall pay the forfeiture,
though the Merchant stranger be gone beyond the Seas: If this Law had been put
in execution this last twenty years, the Kingdom had had millions of gold and
silver, which it is now robbed of, and the offenders are now grown so impudent
to hope to get an Act of Parliament to rob the kingdom of all the gold and
silver, as the greedy Merchant shall find and see his opportunity to send away
what gold and silver they please, without the Kings majesty or his privy
Councils license for the future.

18 Edw. the 4. No person to carry gold or silver, or jewels out of the kingdom
upon pain of Felony.

1 Henry the 8. cap. 13. An Act made that whosoever shall carry any gold or
silver out of the Realm without the Kings license, shall forfeit double the
value.

The 5th. and 6th. of Edward the 6th. cap. 16. An Act touching the exchange of
gold or silver, that whosoever gave more for gold or silver, then it is or
shall be declared by the Kings Proclamation, shall suffer imprisonment for the
space of a year, and make fine at the Kings pleasure, the one moity to his
Majesty, and the other moity to the Party, that shall seize the same, or will
sue for it by the Bill of information; were the Goldsmiths of London sued on
this Statute it would ruin most of them. Had not the Act of Oblivion pardoned
them, but that gives them no license or protection now at this day to act as
they do, to sell gold for 21 and 22 shillings for a Twenty shilling piece. Till
this be remedied and the rule for the price of gold set by your Majesty, the
Mint will never coin gold to any considerable quantity.

If this desire of the Merchants should go on, the Kingdom of England which in
all Kings raigns abounded with gold and silver, and famous for their pound
sterlings, the true guide and measure of our moneys will be put to use the
Rooking tricks of the Bankers of Amsterdam, and other Commonwealths.

Feed the people with a paper credit and the Merchants have all the peoples
money; I beseech your Majesty to consider of this monstrous design and
proposals of the Merchants, should by your Majesty be granted, which God
defend, in whose hands your Majesty disposes the Militia of the kingdom, even
truly your Majesty would surrender the Militia of the kingdom into the
Merchants power.

To send away all the treasure of the kingdom, by which means, they will so
fetter and impoverish the people of the kingdom, that when your Majesty's
loving Subjects would give you aid by consent of Parliament, they have no
moneys to do it but at the Merchants pleasure, who will be the only Judges of
the price they shall pay by exchanging, and the quantity in coin they will
please to let the people have.

Should the Parliament now grant your Majesty a payment of a hundred thousand
pounds in coined English gold, at twenty shillings the piece of gold, according
to the Laws and Statutes and your royal Fathers Proclamation, which forbids
all either Foreigners or Natives whomsoever, to pay, give, or utter the
current coins of gold or silver at above the Kings proclamation, upon pain of
forfeiture and imprisonment during the Kings pleasure. See the Statute law 5,
6, Edward 6. Yet for all your Majesty's laws and proclamations, your Majesty
nor the Parliament shall not receive a hundred thousand pounds in gold or a
hundred pound, but at the Merchants price, viz. 21 shill. 4 pence, 21 shill. 6
pence, 21 shill. 8 pence, 22 shill. for a twenty shillings piece of gold. This
is done in contempt of your Majesty and the law, because the Merchants have got
all the coined gold into their hands, and transported it to foreign parts, and
they will not let it come back again but at their pleasure and price make
silver a free merchandise, the merchants will guide the prize and send it all
away, to the destruction of your Majesty's Mint.

The Merchants of London, had they this power they desire, would by tricks,
either by Security or Exchange, get all the Gold and Silver into their hands.

And then I tremble to think what will follow, if the Merchants be Masters of
all the money: your Majesty's Fleet will lie at Chatham, at Portsmouth, etc.
and no moneys to be raised, but at the will of their Bankers; Your people in
Parliament shall grant your Majesty's Subsidies, and when it comes to be paid,
they have no money but what is in the Merchants Banks, or upon the Merchants
Security, they having gotten into their hands all the money.

All the world knows, the whole stock of the money of the Kingdom, is to be
disposed of by the credit of the City of London; the City of London gives the
Rule to the Kingdom, and the Merchant of London for credit upon money rules the
City, now if your Majesty should put this power into the Merchants hands, to
transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, it would be a ready way to see the
late Tragedies acted over again; and it is granted by all persons, that Gold
and Silver commands all things; if your Majesty should part with this Royal
Prerogative, I humbly desire your Majesty, upon my knees, to consider where
you will lodge this great Jewel, which is the quintessence of the Mllitia: I
humbly say many Merchants of London are recovered but lately out of the madness
of a dangerous Rebellion, and wise men use to watch such as have been once
frenzy afterward in all their actions, lest being let go at their own
pleasure they one time or another do either themselves or some others a
mischief; this I now humbly say, is to preserve your Majesty's Greatness,
Honor, and safety of your Majesty, and your most honorable Privy Council.

I study not to please some Merchants, but to serve your Majesty in truly
stating this business, I being formerly employed in this service by your Royal
Father he would have believed me in this point, and concerning the regulating
of Gold and Silver lace, and removing the obstructions of the Mint for seven
years, I had the only care of this business by his Majesty's order, to prevent
the transporting Gold or Silver.

If your Majesty suffer the Merchants to obtain this their desire, all the
paiments of the Kingdom will be unfixed, and your Majesty's Subjects will have
no money left but Groats, and some odd moneys, to buy Butter and Eggs; the
Tenants must pay their Rents after the Barbarious way in SCOTLAND, in Boules of
Corn, and Chaldrons of Victuals, Coals, Horses, Cowes, and Sheep. Your
Majesty's Privy Council, and your great Lords, and Gentry, must truck with
their Tenants instead of a thousand pound Sterling, to be paid them in current
Gold and Silver, according to 20. s. the pound Sterling for Gold, they must at
this day pay 21. s. 6. d. if they will have a twenty shillings piece; is not
this a wrong and dimunition to all the Lords in ENGLAND, seven pound ten
shillings in the hundred, in all the Rents they are out of by Lease.

But let Silver be made a free Merchandise, to Transport at their pleasure,
without your Majesty's leave, farewell all Landlords payments in money (then,
which God defend your Majesty should expose all the Nobility to be at the
will of the Merchants, for to receive either their Rent in Money or Ware.) All
payments in Silver will raise the price of your English shilling shall be set
against your Majesty's Crown, and Dignity by the Merchant, as at this day, all
the world know they have presumed without your Majesty's leave, and against
your Laws, to send away all your Majesty's current Gold of the Nation, and to
make it a Merchandise here in London, in contempt, despite, and affront of your
Majesty, the Parliament, and your Majesty's Laws and Statutes, and now are so
brazen Faced, that they look, and sue to have liberty to rob the King of this
great privilege* I humbly hope the Merchants bribeing days are past, they had
once a time in the long Parliament to make their Gold and Silver break thorough
all Bars, all Laws; a Corporation of London, with a joint Purse, was such a
Roman Ram, that it battered down all the Laws, and Statutes. I humbly hope
this business, and the mischiefs that would follow, if they should obtain,
their desire is so clearly stated, to be only in your Majesty, and your most
Honorable Privy Council, that you will never part with it to any Corporation
of Merchants, or others, but to keep it safe where the Law has disposed it, it
is a Jewel the Law has invested in the Crown, and cannot be valued, it is an
inestimable Pearl, and Riches.

That if the Merchants could by confederation pay down a Million of Money to
your Majesty presently, to have it in their hands; Your Majesty would be a
loser, Your Majesty would part with that which is Your Honor, Your Safety,
Your Lords, and all Your Peoples safety, the Soul of the Militia.

I pray God upon my Knees, your Majesty, and your Privy Council, would
consider what is here said, and set a mark on these men that attempt under sly
and fained pretenses, by subtlety and craft, to undermine your Majesty's
Throne, Crown, and Dignity; these men that desire this to be in their Power,
are like Water men, look one way, and Row another.

These men many of them have designed in their heart the moddle of a
Commonwealth, to be the fittest Government for this Kingdom; God has
delivered your Majesty from the Sword-man, the Club man, and has restored
your Majesty to the Glory, and Greatness of your Royal Father, and your
Predecessors, with the Hearts of all your good Subjects, and a large increase
of the Revenues of your Crown, to the joy of all your Majesty's good Subjects.

This Glory troubles some Mungrels of LONDON, that dare not bark, but are at
this day cunning fauning Spaniels, that would by fauning cozen your Majesty of
this Great, atd Royal Prerogative, which had they it, in seven years they may
lay such a Foundation, that the Child unborn may rue it.

I have read of a little Fish that sticking to a Ships side shall stop a great
Ship under sail. The Merchants of a Kingdom or Commonwealth that are Bankers
and have liberty to transport Gold and Silver at their pleasure, rule the
Commonwealth both for War or Peace, and have virtually the sovereign power,
being Masters of all the peoples money. These Bankers can hang a Pad-lock on
the Commonwealths Sword when they please: God defend your Majesty and your
Lords from suffering them to do so in your Kingdom of England, for all the
reasons before and after following.

The Merchants of London have transported all the Gold and most of the Silver
out of England, principally by the confederation and assistance of the
Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet, who are just in the nature of the Bankers at
Amsterdam, and the Goldsmiths is your Merchants Jaccall as the Jac-call is to
the Lion, they hunt for the Lions prey. The Goldsmiths lay up Gold and Silver
for the Merchants to transport, some Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet, keeping at
this day many great Merchants of London cashes, and some Noble men's cash by
this credit of several men's moneys, the Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet are in the
nature of Bankers, and have a great stock of Treasure by them always of Gold,
foreign coins, and Silver.

And as these and the Merchants please to truck and and chaffer, set the price
of the current Gold of your Kingdom at above the price current by Proclamation
of your Royal Father, and above the price of your Mint, to the destruction of
your Majesty's Mint, and against your Crown and Dignities; your Majesty's Mint
is tied to a certain rule both for the weight and fineness of the Standard of
your Majesty's Gold and Silver, and cannot by the Law exceed; now here is the
mischief.

The Goldsmiths they go between the Mint and the Merchants that transports Gold
and Silver, and out-bids the Mint, 1. d. and sometimes 2. d. and more the Ounce
in Silver, and five shillings the Ounce in Gold at this day, and so catch up
all the Gold and Silver to transport, being Factors, and Purveyors to the
Merchants that transports Gold and Silver.

And by this confederation between the Merchants, and Goldsmiths, contrary to
the Laws, and Proclamations of the Kingdom, they have cheated, and robbed the
Kingdom, and your Majesty's Mint in the Tower of London, and for these last
fifteen Years have destroyed, and made desolate the same.

Your Majesty's Mint in all times, by the Law, should have the pre-eminence,
and first served.

Your Majesty's Mint at this day is neglected, your Majesty's Laws despised,
and your Majesty, and the Kingdom of England, Lords, Gentry, Commons, cheated,
and robbed of all your Gold, and almost all your Silver, to the weakening, and
impoverishing of the Kingdom.

This wickedness is done only for the enriching of a few particular Persons,
Goldsmiths, and Merchants, to the destruction of the whole Kingdom, and if not
timely prevented, to the ruin, and destruction, and decay of Trade. This was
done when we had no KING in Israel, God forbid your Majesty now should suffer
it.

If your Majesty by your justice do not make some of these Offenders an
example, and timely prevent it, by the grave advice of your most Honorable
Lords of the Council for the time to come, to prevent these abuses by a Law, or
renewing the old Laws by your Majesty's Proclamation, making it loss of Estate
for any Goldsmiths to sell any Merchants Gold or Silver to transport, or to
convert Gold or Silver into any other use then Plate, and Gold, and Silver
Wire, the Offender for ever after to lose his Freedom.

And that no Merchant, or Goldsmith, shall give for Gold or Silver more then it
shall be declared for by Proclamation, upon pain of forfeiture. And that all
Goldsmiths that are Exchangers of Foreign Bullion, shall enter into security
with the Officers of your Majesty's Mint, to your Majesty's use, to Coin the
same, and to convert it to no other use. That no Merchant obtain a License from
your Majesty, to transport Gold or Silver, nor the East- India Company, other,
or more then they themselves cause upon their own proper account, to be truly
imported, according to their Charter; and that all Warrants for transporting
Gold or Silver be Registered, and the Goldsmiths to be tied to Coin all the Gold
and Silver they shall hereafter buy, such Goldsmiths that will not to be
debarred, the liberty to have power to exchange Foreign Gold and Silver, this
being a Prerogative of the Crown, and never granted the Company of the
Goldsmiths, as I can prove by the Law, that the Warden of your Majesty's Mint
is your Majesty's Exchanger, and he may License any whom he please to buy
Foreign Bullion, provided they put in security to Coin it in the Tower, and
convert it to no other use but to coin upon the pain of forfeiture of his Bonds
to your Majesty.

May it please Your Majesty, my most humble prayer to Your Majesty, and Privy
Council is, that at this juncture of time the late Lord Cottingtons Rules and
Observations may be made use of for bringing of Gold and Silver into the
Kingdom, that State-man about the year 1630. made a most advantageous Contract
with the King of Spain, for the bringing in Silver from Spain in English,
bottoms and Landing the Silver at Dover, one third part to be Coined in Your
Majestyes Royal Fathers Mint in the Tower of London, and the other two parts by
Your Majestyes Royal Father, and his Privy Councels License to be transported
at the will of the Importer, this Commission was granted under the Great Seal
of Your Majestyes Royal Father, by the advice of his Privy Council, and above
ten millions of Silver Coined upon that Contract, from the year 1630. to 1643.
This Silver has bin almost all transported away for the private profit of the
Merchant, and little current Silver Coin left in the Kingdom, but light and
eliped, and Counterset money in abundance. All the Gold sent away, to the
destruction of the Kingdom, for the private profit of the Merchants. If Your
Majesty please to inquire of Your Officers of the Mint they can certify this
is the truth. And what a dangerous Project this was of some men, to go about
to steal so Royal a Flower out of the Crown, such pilferers are Enemies to Your
Majesty's Crown and Dignity, and ought to be watched as men newly recovered
out of a Lunacy, kept from doing either themselves or others mischefe.

May it please Your Majesty, the King of Spain having peace with Holland, and
France, will not have occasion to Export so much Money for Flanders, as He had
when He had Wars with Them. Yet great Sums of Silver will daily be Exported
to Flanders from Spain, to pay the Spanish Garrisons in Flanders, and the
Trade from Spain to Antwerp, to pay the Bankers there, will daily cause great
quantities of Silver to be Exported from Spain.

I humbly desire, that upon Treaty with the Spanish Ambassador, the Lords of
the Council would take order to Carry the King of Spaines Silver, as the Lord
Cottington settled it; and that by the Law it should be made Felony, for any
Person that did not Coin one full third part of all Silver that by agreement
with the King of Spain should be coined, this License to be Canstantly allowed
to any Person upon the King of Spains Composition for Trade from Spain; And
for all other Persons whomsoever, that Import Silver or Gold, to have it by Act
of this Parliament, after the said Silver is Landed, that any Person that
Transports Gold or Silver, it should be Confiscation of Ship and Goods, and
Imprisonment during the Kings pleasure. Besides, the Forfeiture of all Gold and
Silver so put on Shipboard to Transport without Your Majesty's, or your Privy
Councels License; And that all Goldsmiths, or others whomsoever, that Culleth
and Melts down the Current heavy Silver Coyns, for any Manufacture, or to
Transport, it shall be Felony, and that without Mercy.

If These Laws by this Parliament be Revived, and I your Majesty's Loyal
Subject Empowered, and Commanded by your Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council, to See to the due Execution of them; By the Blessing of God, I will in
a few Years Replenish the Great want, and Scarcity of Gold and Silver, in the
Kingdom again; And Remove the present Obstructions of the Mint.

May it please your Majesty, It is the Execution of the Law quickens and gives
life to the Law, when knowing persons shall be entrusted to see to the
Execution.

There are Laws and Proclamations against transporting gold, but no
encouragement considerable for a man's time, all the Laws in the world will
never reform this abuse, if some Trusty persons be not appointed to look in a
particular manner, and make it their business, and a man cannot employ several
people to do this service but at great charge, vigilance and diligent
attendance to keep his watches, and intelligence in London, and the Ports; this
mischief daily increases, because no knowing person is empowered and commanded
to take care of this great business.

Queen Elizabeth would not admit the East India Company, at her first granting
them to be a Corporation, to transport the King of Spains silver coin into the
East Indies, though the Merchant pressed it very often; telling her Majesty
that her Silver Coin and Stamp was not known in the East Indies, they thinking
by that to get a License to send what Silver they pleased: This most prudent
Queen, and her wise Privy Council replied, to the Merchants of the East India
Company, that for the very reason the Merchant alleged, to transport the King
of Spains silver to the East Indies; It was her fixed reason and resolution
unalterable, she would not grant the East India Company leave to send the King
of Spains, or any foreign Princes coin into India, but such Silver as was
coined with her Effigies and Picture on the one side, and the Percullis on the
other side, of the just weight and fineness of the Spanish pieces of eight, and
pieces of four Royals, and no other Silver should by her Merchants be sent to
India.

And this was her Majesty's prudent reason for the doing thereof, that because
the Indians did not know her, nor see her greatness on her Silver, her Majesty
gave the East India Company leave to transport Gold or Silver, but so as she
would for the time to come give them a just occasion to reverence and honor
her, and bow at her Effigies, declaring she would all the world over, where she
gave her Merchants leave to Trade, be known to be as great a Prince as the King
of Spain: And that none should presume to send a greater quantity of Silver
then she in her wisdom should judge fit, to the East Indies, as will appear by
their Charter, both for the quantity, and with her Figure, Motto, and Percullis
upon the Silver: The Queens Majesty declaring she held it as a special and
chief Prerogative of her Crown and Dignity to put the Percullis upon all the
Silver the East India Company should send to the Indies: Nor would she admit
the Merchants of the East India Company to send more Silver then she and her
Privy Council did approve of; as appears in the Journal Books, the yearly
Licenses declaring she would have her Merchants in that point to be subordinate
to her will, not her will to be ruled at the Merchants pleasure.

And so during all her prosperous Reign to her death, this great and prudent
Queen ruled her Merchants, and not the Merchants her; this was according to the
Law of England, the Queen would ever be known to be a Queen.

This Narrative will appear to be true, by the Stamps, Weights, and Standard of
this Silver that was coined in the Tower ready to be produced to your Majesty,
and the most Honorable Privy Council, if your Majesty require the same; this
course continued all Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and it would be for the honor and
greatness of your Majesty, that all Silver transported to the Indies should be
coined of the weight of Pieces of Eight, with your Majesty's Royal Effigies,
and the Percullis in the Tower of London, that so all the world over, the
Nations might see your Royal stamp, and bow down, and do reverence; What an
honor had it been to your Majesty's Grandfather and Father to have had sixty
hundred thousand pounds transported in Silver to the Indies, with their stamp;
which would have been done had Q. Elizabeth's honorable Rule been observed: I
humbly desire it may be done hereafter, though your Majesty get nothing but
fame, no profit. I dare undertake the East India Company shall have their
silver coined in the Tower for 12 pence the pound weight, that is 60000 l.
coined for one thousand pounds.

The East India Company by money got this Royal Privilege laid down at the
beginning of King James his Reign, to the great impairment and loss of his
Imperial royal Crown and Dignity; and to the great loss of his Majesty in his
Mintage and Coynage and the losing and diminution of your Royal Grandfather and
Father of Blessed memory, in their Revenue at this day above an hundred
thousand pounds in the total sum in the duty of coining, there being since King
James his Reign by that Company above sixty hundred thousand pounds in Silver
and Gold sent to the East Indies, were their Books of Entries examined, and
their Books of Account to their several Factories in India; what they have sent
yearly to every particular factory, and some Auditors appointed to make the
inspection upon Oath.

I humbly say, there would be found many hundred thousand pounds transported
both of English Gold, and Silver, more then ever they had license from the King
to send to the great weakening, damage and decay of this Nation, they being a
Company that heretofore used to bribe out all their abuses by one course or
other.

Had not your Majesty by your Royal pardon pardoned them, they should before
this time have found the East India Company charged by me in the Exchequer with
many hundred thousand pounds of English Gold and Silver, and of half Crowns and
foreign Gold and Silver transported, against the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom, let them have got off as well as they could.

May it please your Majesty, That company pretends a debt your Royal Father
should owe them for Silks and Pepper delivered unto one Burlemack, a Merchant,
about the Year, 1630. upon your Royal Fathers account, had not your Majesty in
your great mercy pardoned this very Company of Merchants in your gracious and
free Pardon, 1660. I could have chalked out the way to have peppered the East
India Company, it had never been so peppered since it was a Company, they are
pardoned for what is past, but they have no Privilege for the time to come.

But if your Majesty command me to watch the East India Company that they for
the future send no more gold or silver then they have license for from your
Majesty; I shall faithfully do it, and give a stop to these mischiefs they have
formerly committed.

If your Majesty command, I shall not fear the riches or greatness of the East
India company, or Merchants of London, but I will tramel them and reduce them
to the due obedience of your Majesty's commands, and the Law of the Kingdom.

For the longer this business is not looked after, makes some Merchants think
to get leave to weaken the Kingdom in general, and incroach upon your Majesty's
sacred Prerogative to send what silver and gold they list away for the future,
without any Comptroller.

May it please your Majesty, a Court in the nature of the Star chamber, would
Frost-bite these Gentlemen, and make them pluck in their Horns, and submit to
your Majesty's Laws, which will be for the good of the Nation in general, that
these men may be curbed, and not left to rob the Kingdom of all its Gold and
Silver, as some Merchants have taken the boldness to do, when we had no King in
this our Israel for this last seventeen years.

Never School-boyes played such tricks in the absence of their Schoolmasters,
as some of the London-merchants have done: When the books of the Common council
of London, copied out together with the East India Companies books, be
thoroughly inspected, your Majesty and your honorable Privy Council will see
incredible passages, fit for Your majesty to know, such as is for Your
majesty's honor and safety for the future to prevent, viz.

I most humbly pray your Majesty and your honorable Privy Council, to
command true Copies of all the Acts of the Common Council of London, from one
thousand six hundred and thirty eight, to one thousand six hundred and sixty,
and the true copies of the East Indies Companies books of Envoys sent to their
Factors, of all the Gold and Silver they sent yearly, the ships name, and by
what Factor, and to what Factors in India and Persia, ever since one thousand
six hundred and twenty, to one thousand six hundred and sixty: Not that I have
the least thought that any of them should be punished for what is past, by
reason of your Majesty's gracious pardon, but that an Eye might be kept over
them to keep them from committing the same or the like offenses again against
your Majesty, your Crown, and Dignity.

I humbly say, I am so charitable to them, that I had rather see them always
upright in all their actions, then ever to hear that your Majesty should put
your Royal self to that trouble to pardon them again; when they have offended,
it is better, I humbly say, for the Merchants, that your Majesty take all
course to keep some Merchants from falling; then to take them up after they are
down, if they be watched that they shall have no opportunity to offend, it
saves the labor of punishing any of them.

Some Merchants I have heard say at the Council of Trade one thousand six
hundred and fifty, that it is an old Heresy to hinder the transporting of
gold and silver freely, and to retain it in the Kings hands he only to give a
license to transpor: Sure I am it is a Phanatick opinion for the Merchants to
labor to obtain it out of your Majesty's and your privy Councils hands.

Some Merchants are great magnifiers of Commonwealths, their Policies and
Governments, those that are for an Amsterdam model both in the Church and
Kingdom; but in our Kings sacred hands this great Trust in all Ages has
happily continued, and no Merchant never durst ask such a request to have it
at their own dispose; these Merchants covet more profit and gain then they do
the Kings Majesty's greatness, and that makes them so busy to get this Royal
flower out of the Crown.

May it please your Majesty, your standard of Gold and Silver is fixed to all
your Subjects of all your Nations* the pound sterling is a fixed payment, and
is the guide to all the Bankers in Christendom; for till they return their
Bills of Exchange for England, no Banker or Merchant can tell certainly the
true intrinsecal value they shall receive for a hundred pounds delivered in
their Banks, by Bills of Exchange to any place but only England, where these
paiments are fixed and paid according to the pound sterling, which is by
shillings, pence, and halfpence, without any fraud or bankmonie, from the
payment of one hundred pound, to the payment of one hundred thousand pounds, no
man can be wronged of a penie, but it will exactlie appear upon the casting up
of the account. Commonwealths and Bankers go upon Merchants subtilties, that is
not for the Honor and Dignity of your Majesty, to make your money go high,
when you are to pay your Armies and Fleets, and then presently to call it down
in Kingdoms; Kings are Sacred, and cannot act such dirty tricks, as
Commonwealths do.

Englands Tragedy from one thousand six hundred forty three, to one thousand
six hundred and sixty, may serve as a warning to all good subjects, how to
turn Kingdoms into Commonwealths, or to leave power of transporting Gold or
Silver at the will and pleasure of the merchant. Merchants are like fire and
water, Good Servants, but bad Masters; in their proper spheers good, but to get
a head destructive to mankind; witness the late horrible Tragedies fomented and
continued only by the pleasure and power of the Merchants and the wealth of
London: The burnt Child dreads the fire. I lost twenty thousand pounds by the
late Rebellion, which was hatched and kindled for the greatest part by those of
London.

They surfeited with Plenty, Riches, and Trade, the late Royal King Charles
the first, by his late Royal Fleets, laid the Foundation of the Merchants of
Londons greatness and reputation all over the World, no Prince nor Commonwealth
daring to injure the Merchants of London, but the King with the first wind had
his Royal Fleets in their Harbors to demand reparation to the Merchants
content, else their harbors debarred Trade* The late glorious King got the
envy of the Ship moneys; but never a penny of it in his Exchequer. The
Merchants of London got the profit, advantage, and security by Trading safely,
and the Seas scoured from Pirates: How unthankfully the Merchants required his
Majesty, was shown in this late Rebellion. I speak not this that any should be
punished, but that they might be prevented for the future to do the same things
again, as they did this last seventeen years.

In King James and King Charles their raigns, those good Kings was got into the
City of Londons debt, and to come out of it they did part with their Lands at
half the value. When Masters borrow Money of their Servants, it makes them
generally overvalue themselves and slight their Masters. I hope in a few years
his Majesty will be in that condition to lend the City of London money, upon
their Charter, the like to the East India Company and other Companies to have
their Lands bound. This was King Henry the sevenths way, he would always have
his Exchecquer full of money, finding it to be the greatest security to prevent
all mischief, to have the King richer then his people.

In the year one thousand six hundred forty seven, your Royal Father being
informed that many Members of Parliament, and factious Citizens was
transporting and packing away their estates in Gold beyond the Seas, which
these had in abundance cozened the Kingdom of, your Royal Father commanded me
by one Mr. Francis Brogdou, of London Gentleman, on whom his Majesty constantly
employed to go between him and his loyal Subjects, then Prisoners in the Tower:
This Mr. Francis Brogden brought me his Majesty's, your Royal Fathers pleasure,
that I should labor in the pretended Parliament House to obtain a commission
to discover the transporters of Gold and Silver, but so that if I obtained it,
I should use my diligence to discover the Parliament Men, and their factious
Merchants of London, to make them odious to the Kingdom that transported Gold
and Silver out of the Nation: I used my endeavor to make them public to the
World, for several years, to get this Commission to pass by the pretended Act
of Parliament, and it is well known to many of the then Parliament, Sir James
Harrington, Fleetwood, and several others; but was particularly opposed by both
the Ashes, Allen, Harvey, Sir Henry Vane, Strickland, and many others of the
Parliament, and by swarms of Sectaries of the City of London: which men had
transported the Gold and Silver out of the Nation; and therefore to be sure to
have them within compass of the Law, I caused a Gentleman to file in the
Exchequer a hundred informations against the transporters of Gold and silver,
and to let them remain on record, till your Majesty's Royal Father did come to
London (this was about one thousand six hundred and forty eight) at that time
being the hopes and prayers of all good men. But God had decreed it otherwise,
by taking your Royal Father out of this World, the World especially, this
unthankful Nation, not being worthy of him; so all things rested till your
Majesty's happy arrival in May 29. 1660.

Concerning the transporting of Gold and silver, though your Majesty has
pardoned the transporters of Gold till 29. May 1661. I humbly say, your Majesty
has declared that for the future you will have all men conformable to your
Laws, without respect of persons, if this rule be strictly observed, your
Majesty will never put this great business of transporting Gold and Silver to
be at the Merchants will and pleasure, least the same tumults and troubles be
played over again by some Phanatick Merchants, as they have done within twenty
years; your Majesty may as safely put a Sword into a Madmans hand, or a Knife
into a Child's, as trust the Merchants to transport Gold or Silver without your
Majesty's license, after it is once landed.

TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty: And to the most Honorable the LORDS of
his MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY COUNCEL. The Humble Petition of THO. VIOLET
of London, Goldsmith.
Most Dread Sovereign!
I Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subject for your Majesty's service
humbly pray, that the East- India and Persia Company, bring in their Charter,
whereby your Majesty and your Privy Council will inform your selves, by the
Charter your Royal Father and Grandfather passed with what privilege they
have granted them, and upon what conditions and restrictions.

2. That your Majesty and your Privy Council would be pleased to require an
account of the East- India and Persia-Companie, of all the sums of money,
Gold or Silver, either Foreign or English, which they have sent into India and
Persia, ever since July 1620. this is no new thing, for they did in 1620. give
an account, and made it by their Books appear, that from the Original and
first foundation of their Trade, in Anno 1601, to July 1620. they had shipped
away for India only, 548090l. sterling in Spanish moneys, and some Flemish
and Germane Dollars, which account was presented in Parliament at that time.

3. Your Petitioner desires your Majesty to take notice, that if the State in
Parliament were then so careful in times of peace, and the Trade of the Nation
flourishing, to call the East- India Company to an account for twenty years,
and to cause them to make their accounts plainly to appear by their Books for
twenty years; surely, I humbly conceive, your Majesty's and your Privy
Council will exspect for the service of the Kingdom, to have an exact account
of all the Treasure the East- India and Persia Company have exported; and to
have them to Produce a just account, what quantities of Gold or Silver they
have bought in Holland, and in other Foreign places, immediately upon their
proper account; and what quantity of English melted Silver in Bars, they have
bought of Gold* smiths in London; what quantities of Gold in Bars, they bought
of the Guinie and Barbary Companies, what quantities of English coined Gold
they have sent into the East- Indies, and to Persia; what quantities of
Cardques, Rix-Dollars, Rials of Spain, or any other Foreign Silver, they have
bought up in London, of Merchants, Goldsmiths, or others, which without the
East- India Company so buying, would have been brought into the Mint and
coined, to the great augmentation of the stock of this Nation. And that they be
required to give your Majesty, and your Privy Council, an Account of what
quantity of Spanish Pistollets, Dutch Riders, Hungarian Ducats, Gold Gilders,
Gold Albertus of Flanders, Italian Pistolets, Turkey Sultels, and all other
Foreign Gold and Silver, they have bought up in London, of Goldsmiths,
Merchants, Natives, and Strangers, which have not been members of their
Company, and transported to India and Persia, since 1620. All which, I am sure
they have perfect Accounts of. And that the aforesaid Company be required to
send your Majesty, and your Privy Council, in all the Warrants and Licenses
for their doing of the same, and for a true discovery of the premises.

4. That your Majesty, and your Privy Council, would require the Books of
Envoies, of the same Lading of every ship, of all the Gold and Silver, in
Bars, or Coin, that bath been sent to the East- Indies and Persia, since 1620.
for by them your Majesty and your Privy Council shall see what Gold and
Silver each ship carried, and the Ships, Factors, and Master's names, and to
what Factorie in Persia or India, and the several years, and so your Majesty
and your Privy Council will quickly see the just quantity to a penny what
they have transported, and in what sort of Coin, either English Gold or Silver,
or Foreign Gold or Silver, for these forty years; the giving your Majesty
and your Privy Council a true account thereof, will be of great concernment
to the Kingdom in many respects.

5. That your Majesty and your Privy Council would appoint a Committee to
view over the Journal Books: for out of them there will be gathered businesses
of great concernment to the Nation; and if some able Book-Keepers be appointed
with me, to take out what I shall observe in them, it will tend highly to the
service of your Majesty and give a stop to great mischefs that is daily
practiced on the Kingdom.

6. If your Majesty and your Privy Council please to inform your selves by
this way, your Majesty and your Privy Council will see clearlie many other
secrets, upon perusal of these Books, then I will speak of, and so your
Majesty and your Privy Council will be able to rectify and settle the Trade
in a flourishing condition, that it may be benificiall to the Kingdom, and all
the Adventurers, whereas heretofore, and now as it is managed, none gets by
it, but the Committees of the said Companies, and the Companies Factors and
their Officers. The Adventurers having been blinded ever since it was a
Company, and led by the nose by their servants, or else how could their
Factors and servants be so rich, and the Companie's stock so poor.

7. May it please your Majesty and your Privy Council, I humbly conceive,
upon the Examination of all the premises, When that the Books of the Company
are examined, it will be found that the East- India Company has sent away
the Kingdoms Coin, both in Gold and Silver, many hundred thousand pounds more
then ever they had warrant for to do; from your Majesty's Grandfather or
Father, though your Majesty and your Privy Council has forgiven it, yet It
ought to be prevented for the future this mischief; which your Petitioner most
humbly prays for your Majesty's and your Privy Counsels service, also That
your Majesty and your most honorable Privy Council command a true Transcript
under the hand of the Town Clerk of the City of London; to be transmitted to
your Majesty and your Privy Council, of all the Acts, and Orders of the
Common Council from the year 1638. to the 25. March 1660. It is true, your
Majesty by your gracious pardon has pardoned all offenses, but for the future
there will be great use made of their Orders, to know by what degrees, and
steps the late confusions got to a head, and poisoned that great body of your
City of London; I humbly say, your Majesty and your most honorable Privy
Council will make great use of the sight of them, to prevent any the like
disturbance again and to nip them in the bud (this will be for the general
good and quiet of the whole Kingdom) for as London pipes, so the greatest part
of the Kingdom dances, especially all Cities and corporations, keep the spring
head clear from being disturbed, the streams will run always clear, they have
your Majesty's most gracious pardon for what is past, but that gives them no
privilege to act the like things again, eitherby fraud, feined pretenses, or
by force.

The East- India Company formerlie having made it their common practice by
giving great sums of money for Bribes, to have liberty to oppress the good
people of the Nation, and to have License with Authority to deceive the
Kingdom; all which abuses, I pray God, by the wisdom of your Majesty, and
your most honorable Privy Council, may be carefully found out, and such
Order and Regulation made for the future for all Traders, as may be most for
the prosperity of this Kingdom in general, without any regard to particular
Interest, when it shall be found destructive to the Kingdom, and your dutiful
and loyal Subject shall pray for your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over
us.

November. 28. 1660. Signed, Tho. Violet.

I charged the East India Company before the Council of Trade, 1650. with
robbing the Nation of many hundred thousand pounds of Gold and Silver, more
then they had License to send; and several other Misdemeanors. Thereupon the
Council of Trade made these Orders.

Die Mercurii Sept. 11. 1650. At the Council for Trade at White Hall.
Ordered,

THat the East- India Company be desired to produce their Original Charter
before this Council.

Ordered,

THat the East- India Company be desired to bring into this Council, what
Licenses they formerly have had granted them for the Transporting of Bullion,
or Coin, since the year 1620.

Ordered,

THat the East- India Company be entreated likewise to produce the direct and
true. Accounts of all the several sums of Bullion and Coin, in any specie to
the full, that has been yearly transported by them, since the year 1620.

Ex. Ben. Worsly, Secret.

But these Orders were never obeyed, but some of the Rump Parliament was
bribed, and no Reformation, I only got the Envy for making this Discovery, I
humbly hope the East- India Companies time of bribing out all Business is
expired, now in your Majesty's blessed Reign; Truth shall prevail, especially
such as are for your Majesty's Honor, and Safety.

I shall humbly show your Majesty the damage the Kingdom suffered by sending
all the Silver to the East- Indies in Spanish money, before it was coined with
King James', and King Charle's Face, and the Percullisses, as it was coined in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and humbly recommend it to your Majesty, and
your Privy Council, to have all Silver so coined before it goes to the Indies.

It is for the Greatness, and Honor of the King, to have the Silver, his
Merchants Trade with, first coined with the Percullises, and His Effigies and
Motto, all over the World; For the Kings greatness is the Merchants security,
and protection, and to be made of the weight of pieces of Eight, and of the
same Standard, as it was in the Queens time; the King loses in point of Coinage
by not Coining, the Silver is sent to the East- Indies, as Queen Elizabeth did,
the East India Company had paid to the Kings Grandfather, and Father of
blessed memory, a hundred thousand pounds, which would have bin clear profit
since King James, in his Majesty's Exchequer, and all his Officers for Coining
paid, if Queen Elizabeth's Rule had been observed, to Coin all the Silver sent
beyond Seas. If the East- India Company Books be looked over, they have sent
above sixty hundred thousand pounds in Silver to the East- Indies, since the
first of King James in Spanish Silver, more money by far then is at this day
in England. I humbly recommend it for your Majesty's Honor and Profit that
your Majesty for the future may coin all Silver, or Gold, that so the Indian
Princes may see your Effigies, and bow at the sight thereof; As Queen Elizabeth
made the Merchants to do, or else they should not send her Silver. The true
safety and protection of the Merchant is, that they are Subjects of such a
great King, that can cause Justice and Right to be done to His Merchants, as
far as the Seas ebbs and flows round about the World, it is truly for the
Merchants security if they would consider rightly of all things, and love the
King's Honor, as well as their own Profit.

MAY it please your Sacred Majesty, I here humbly give your Majesty, and your
Privy Council an account concerning my staying the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and
St. George, 15. December. 1652. The day the Judges had resolved in the Admiraltie
to clear these Ships, their Silver and Lading, there being three hundred
thousand pounds in them. I saw about that time Don Asonso Decardenis the
Spanish Ambassador Extraordinary, come to the Rump Parliament, and owned their
power, as a free State and Parliament. I heard that many in Amsterdam was
playing the same prancks there with the Prince of Orange, as the Londoners had
played with Your Majesty's Royal Father, and your Majesty, I saw the Face of
all things look very sadly, both in France, Holland and Spain, the Royal
party being banished from home, put to great extremities abroad, and almost
insufferable wants: At which time I had advice from one of Dover that the three
hundred thousand pounds in Silver in the aforesaid Ships, part of it
appertained to Amsterdam Merchants, and other parts to Spaniards, and some to
Hamburgers; and I had the Copies of the Original Commission under the Great
Seal of Holland, to de Wit, and de Ruter, the Vice Admirals of Holland, to
require them to guard all Ships coming from Spain to Ostend, or Dunkirk, from
the English, the Dutch and Parliament being at War; and this was done upon
the Petition of the Merchants of Amsterdam, to the high and mighty Lords the
States, to guard the Ships from the English; which Commission, and Petition at
this day remains in the Admiraltie. I cast about how I might first divide the
pretended Council of State, in December. 1652. amongst themselves, about this
Silver, in the aforesaid Ships, and set them to stay it, which I knew would
engage the Rump Parliament in a foreign War, and so though the Kings Party
were oppressed at home, the Rump might wast their Soldiers, and have more
hands about their Ears then they were aware of, and in time be beaten out of
breath, and so the Royal Party might rise again. I divided the Council so as
there was ten for sending me to the Tower, and clearing the Silver, and twelve
for the staying the Silver, and giving me thanks. I made some of my secret
Friends acquainted with this design, they approved thereof; and so having
promised secretly one to another, for it concerned my life. I told them from
time to time how I laid my design, till at last I engaged Cromwell to take up
the Silver from aboard the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, and that
he would dissolve the Parliament; the same night that he dissolved the long
Parliament, he could not sleep for it about the 15. April 1652. Cromwell sent Mr
Sadler the Town Clerk of LONDON, and Coll* Bingham to me, to come presently to
him at the Cockpit, to give him the Coppies of all the Bills of these Ships
Lading, and the value of the Silver, which I did; and after he had them,
Cromwell could not sleep till he had the Silver in Bark steads custody in the
Tower. I found him to be forward in it, to get the Silver into his possesion in
the Tower, being 29. April 1653. Oliver Cromwell sent a guard of Soldiers to
seize on the Silver aboard these Ships, the Sampson, Salvador, and St. George,
the 20. day of April 1652. Bradshaw tore his Hair before me, and a Friend of
mine, Bradshaw telling him that Cromwell had undone them all by forcing the
Parliament, and that now he saw apparently he was an undone man.

Bradshaw storming at me Tho. Violet, saying, I was the fatallest man that ever
was to the Council and Parliament for staying this Silver, and that had I not
set the Council and Parliament to stay this Silver, till that every man's claim
was particularly proved, the Silver had been all Transported, and Cromwell
never durst have dissolved the Parliament, had he not got the Silver in these
Ships, being three hundred thousand pounds into his hands.

All which I did premeditately to set them, and the Council, Parliament, and
altogether by the Ears, to divide and weaken their Councels. And I made several
persons acquainted with my design, who are well known to your Majesty, both for
their Service and Fidelity, if I be required I will name them. Before ever I
undertook this Business, I had their advices, and approbation under secrecy,
for it had cost us all our lives had it bin known, I had given the Parliament
this vomit to undo them.

This I can prove to be the truth, and Sir James Harrington, Frances Allen, and
Tho. Scot used to say, it was Violet destroyed the Parliament, and not
Cromwell; for had I not stayed the Silver Cromwell durst not have forced the
Parliament. But whereas Doctor Walker, and some others have declared to some
Merchants, and others of London, I stayed the Spaniards Silver, and would not
consent to the discharge; I was so far from hindering the Spaniards of their
right, that I Petitioned Cromwell and his Council to discharge the Spaniards
Silver. But Doctor Walker opposed me in it, as appears by Doctor Walkers
Certificate to Cromwells Council.

Mr. Jessop Clerk of the Parliament delivered it to me upon condition I should
return it to him when I had done with it, I humbly pray your Majesty's most
Honorable Council to take the pains to peruse it, and they will see only
Doctor Walker staid all the Spaniards silver, I stayed the Dutch silver.

At last when Oliver Cromwell saw his Error, in taking on himself the government
in his single person, and in looking after the silver mines in Hispaniola, and
seizing upon the silver, as I had set him to do, he cursed me often times
bitterly; Mr. Beck of Westminster, being Oliver Cromwels Solicitor, and
Master Francis Bacon the Master of his Request: I used them to solicit my
business to Cromwell, for to get satisfaction for my estate unjustly taken away,
but they both told me, he would never do nothing for me, for he hated my name
and remembrance; and that whenever they moved him of my name concerning any
business, he would be in a rage; Mr. Beck, and Mr. Bacon several times have
asked me whether I could imagine the reason? I told them No, I wondered at it.

But indeed I know the reason, he did see I had set him on those things which
he was not able to master, and though I put on it the face of innocence I knew
from the first hour that Cromwell took the 278250 l. into his custody, that he
would destroy the Parliament, and divide and subdivide among themselves, till
all ended in confusion: I thought it my duty to give your Majesty, this true
Account and can prove it as aforesaid, and several other services, your
Petitioner has done for your Majesty, where in every on he ventured his life
for your Majesty's service, and never had farthing either of the Parliament or
Cromwell, but expended his own money for several years, to the value of fifteen
hundred pounds. And twenty thousand pounds taken from me by the Parliament as
aforesaid. There are many of the then Honorable Prisoners in the Tower can
tell your Majesty, how active I was always in your Majesty's Fathers service
in the Tower: I humbly refer my self to this following Certificate for the loss
of my Estate.

THese are to Certify, whom it may concern; That I William Du-Gard of London,
Clerk, have known Thomas Violet of London Goldsmith many years; and have been
privy to his Applications to the Parliament, for restoring him to his estate,
taken from him by the Parliament in 1643. for his bringing up a Letter of Peace
to the City of London, from Oxford, from his late Majesty CHARLES the I. of
blessed Memory; And I have seen Mr. Violets Original Petitions, Accounts, and
Demands of the Long Parliament, for satisfaction for his Estate, in Lands,
Houses, Offices, Bonds, Debts, Goods, to the value of above eleven thousand
pounds; so much has been confessed to me by several of the Committee of
Parliament, that Examined the said Tho. Violets sufferings, that they found it
fully proved Mr. Violets Losses to be above the sum of eleven thousand
pounds, besides his Imprisonment and forbearance. And I have heard several
Parliament men confess, that Mr. Violet was unjustly oppressed, contrary to
Gods Law and man's, for being sequestered for bringing up the Kings Letter for
Peace; and several Members of Parliament, upon my Solicitation promised him
from time to time satisfaction, but abused him by delays, making him for many
years lose both time, and expend much money in waiting on them to my knowledge;
but never received farthing from them.

I do further testify, upon the Perusal of Mr. Violets Papers, and the
Confession of several of his Neighbors, who knew him before the Year 1643.
that I do esteem his Losses to be far above eleven thousand pounds since 1643.
besides his Imprisonment, and loss of his Calling, to his damage at this time
above twenty thousand pounds. In witness whereof I have here to subscribed my
Hand.

WILL. DU-GARD.
The same is in Effect certified by several other Gentlemen, whose Names are
subscribed, viz.
ALEXANDER HOLT of London, Goldsmith. WILLIAM BOURNE of London, Brewer. PAUL
SMITH of London Gentlemen. ROBERT EMERY of London Gentlemen.

Witnesses.
Josiah Smith. Paul Edwards. John Wegewood. Henry Goldston. William Barnes
Knight ey Freeman.


A true Copy of Doctor Walkers report concerning the Silver Ships the 14th of
April 1654. To OLIVER CROMWELS Council.
May it please your Honors,
IN the business concerning the Ships and Silver goods in the three Ships in
the Samson, Salvador, and S. George upon attending your Lordships, with Mr.
Violet, several particular were proposed, and I was directed by your Honors
summarily, to state them, and to give my humble opinion upon every of them.

The particulars were,

1. Concerning the Silver in these three Ships, which was the bulk of the whole
matter upon which I argued, when I procured the Onus probandi to be cast on the
other side.

Mr. Violet divided it thus, that there was one Boschard a Hamburger, and one
Stephen de Balderos, and one Lewis Fardinandes Hagelo, and one Losa Berona; and
one Mexico Herera, and one Michaell Severino Lozenso de Eucle^; and one Thomas
Sauches, de Urise Anthonio de Puntho Spaniards, and one Dony Martin Native of
Galloway in Ireland, that laid particular claims every of them, to some parcels
of the Silver laden for their accounts all whom (as Mr. Violet Stated it) came
along in the said Ships and have attended their claims here ever since upon the
place, in making their proofs and sollicitings; for bringing it on to a hearing
for their particulars and are as Mr. Violet states it, by their long attendance
and spending in diet and otherwise reduced to such extremity as they for want
are ready to starve.

For these Mr. Violet, has proposed that his Highness and your Lordships would
direct that their claims would come on to a present hearing; that so what was
found to be justly and really theirs might be adjudged them: not only for
their present relief, but for the vindicating (as Mr. Violet terms it) the
justice of the Nation, and preventing any Imbargoes abroad for want of justice
here.

Now for this my Lords being as I conceive, rather the prudential part then the
legal, I must not take upon me to give any opinion in it, but submit it wholly
to your Lordships to consider the prudence of it, whether you will hold it fit
that these particulars shall come on before the rest of the claims; for the
other Silver in the said Ships and so to handle by pieces, or whether to have
all the Silver directed by trial and hearing altogether.

For the rest being the great bulks of the Silver, Mr. Violet proposed that
pleas should be put in, to be a ground for Commissioners to be procured to go
into Spain and Flanders to examine witnesses there; against the several
claimers, and their claims supposing that in respect the Laws of Spain prohibit
the carrying out of Silver under great penalties, the claymors would not dare
to own it in Spain, if Commissioners for his Highness, should be sent over
thither and that much discoveries would there be made, and witnesses be found
in Spain if active persons be employed and sent over thither.

Mr. Violet proposed that there would be this farther use made of it, by
procrastinating the businesses, and gaining of so long time as for Commissions
to go into Spain, and be executed there and returned.

As to the last of these it is evident, that it must of necessity gain time,
and delay the hearing.

But whether upon the main matter, it will produce any thing or countervaile
the charge, which must needs issue out of purse and cannot but be vast in
exceuting so many Commissions by the Magistrates of Spain, and employing such
as must necessarily, be sent over to look after it, I have often told Mr.
Violet, that I much doubt and must submit it to your Lordships, not daring of
my self to venture upon it; without a special warrant, for several reasons.

1. For that we yet know of never a particular witness by name to examine when
we came thither.

2. And for that it will be uncertain whether after so great acharg spent to
make inquiry there, any positive witnesses would be there or not.

3. If any there shall be found it will be uncertain whether upon the clay mors
cross interogatories they may not say more against us, then upon ours for us,
being there in a Country where the claymors will in all likelihood find more
means, friends and opportunities, then those that shall be sent over from hence
against them.

4. For that the claymors have already upon their own Commissions, owned their
claims in Spain, and examined witnesses by the Magistrates publicly there
upon; and therefore no doubt, but they may again publicly avow them at ours, if
any new Commissions go from hence for his Highness: as well as they did upon
their own claims when Commissions issued to Spain, for them which they have
procured to be there speeded and returned back again hither into Court.

And therefore what your Lordships proposed to me as first in expedient, that
is, to endeavor that publication for the claimors might so pass, that liberty
might be given to see their proofs, and yet if occasion were to plead and
examine witnesses notwithstanding, which Albeit, the rule be that contrary
matter may not be examined upon after publication and sight of the witnesses;
yet in those cases of the Silver in the said three Ships, I have since I waited
upon your Lordships, upon debates with the adverse Proctors and Councels
publicly in Court procured such a Salvo by their consents to be entered and
publication is so past that now the despositions and proofs for the claimors
may be perused, and yet liberty to plead and examine for his Highness (if there
be occasion) notwithstanding; but there being so many Commissions returned for
the claimors, and the depositions so extreme long, It will ask a good time to
puruse and consider them.

As to the rest of the goods in those Ships, not being Silver, many of them,
being much decayed and perished by so long lying, and some of them having been
heard already and for what remains, I see no reason at all to put off the
hearing of them any longer; for that the main charge suspicions and grounds
were against the Silver: and had not (as I humbly conceive) any such reflex
upon the Tobaccoes, Hides, and other goods; and besides such special provisions
may be made (as has also been already done in what has been heard) that they
may have no manner of consequence at all, as to any of the Silver.

And as to the Ships themselves, viz. The Sampson, Salvador, and St. George,
for as much as the public Agent for Hamborough has often pressed it, that
they might be permitted to come to hearing, and for that by this long lying,
one of the said Ships has been already sunk in the River; and that if the said
Ships should be continued much longer without repairing and employment, it is
publicly (and has been often) affirmed in Court, that they will decay, perish
and come to nothing. Truly Doctor Walker, if either you or O. Cromwell had known
upon what grounds or reasons I staid this silver, you (as O. Cromwels Fiscal or
Judge Advocate) would have paid me as you did the Kentish men for declaring for
the King. I was forewarned of trusting of you by several of the Kings friends,
who remembered how you served your Master Bishop Williams in the Star Chamber.
Indeed you told me Cromwell nor the Parliament would never give me any thing,
and seeing they would be advised by me and give me nothing, after they had
rokbed me of all my estate they could finger, I was resolved to give them that
advice to be revenged of them, that if they took it, it should destroy both the
Parliament and Cromwell. God it was that encouraged me and blinded them, that
they should ever trust a man's advice that they had ruined. They should have
remembered that advice, Trust not a pretended reconciled adversary; especially
keeping him from his estate, as they did me to this day to my damage Twenty
thousand pounds. Sir Henry Vane junior having a better nose than the rest, ever
said I was not to be trusted, telling Bradshaw I had several times made my
application to him, but he would have nothing to do with me: and when I stayed
the Silver, Vane moved to send me to the Tower; for (said he at the Council)
this Villain will set us against all the world at once, to bring in the King of
Scots; I wonder the Council claps him not up. Thereupon it was put to the
question: whereof 10 of them were for laying me in prison, and 12 for giving me
thanks; all those that were of the then Council of State knows this to be true,
That I made a fraction between Bradshaw and Vane. Cromwell and Bradshaw with the
rest of their party about the staying the Silver, but Vane, Strickland and
Nevil were for letting of it go. This Silver which I stayed was the only cause
of blowing up the Long Parliament, which I knew at that time an Army of 40000
men could not have done.
I do humbly conceive submitting it nevertheless to your Lordships that for the
avoiding of further perishing of the said Snips, and other lading (not being
Silver) and for avoiding claimour and scandal in delay of justice, The said
Ships, and remainder of the lading (except the Silver) may if your Lordships
please, be permitted to come to a hearing and judgment.

As for Mr. Violet himself, I can only say that by several Orders of the
former Council of State; he was directed to solicit and look after this
business of the Silver Ships, and that he has often attended and spoken in
Court, and many times repaired to me, and consulted about it; and that it has
appeared to me (and may also to your Lordships by perusing what he has
printed) he has spent much time about it, and I verily believe has drawn much
envy upon himself, and run some hazard and danger and spent his own moneys in
going up and down to make his enquiries. But I cannot determine what the
produce or effect thereof will be, or amount unto until some particular and
positive proofs be brought in to prove the Silver, or at least some part
thereof really and truly to belong to some Hollanders, specifying their names,
and the parcells, and discovering the fraud, in coloring it in other feigned
names.

For as I have humbly declared unto your Lordships, for as much as the Onus
probandi is by Law cast upon the claimors. The result is, that for so much as
the claimors shall not positively and certainly make special and particular
proofs of: there the judgment will be for confilcation in default of their
proof, in respect of the Onus Probandi so cast.

But for so much as the claimors shall make, and have made positive particular
and concludent proofs, of their real property. There I humbly conceive unless
more proofs be brought in, then yet are, or that Mr. Violet can bring in
certain and particular proofs, to encounter the other that in references and
arguments will be of no more force, then the casting of the Onus probandi alone
will do of it self, so that I dare not take upon me to give any opinion, But
must leave the consideration of Mr. Violet and his service to your Lordships.

All which I humbly Submit Walter Walker.
April 14. 1654.
By Command from King CHARLES the First, of blessed Memory, as appears by
Warrant under his Royal Hand and Seal, I caused these men following to be fined
in the Star Chamber, for transporting Gold and Silver, and culling and melting
down the heavy Coin of the Nation.

The 25th. of Ian. 12. Car. The 17th. of Febr. 12 Car. Charles Frank 4000 l.
Peter Hern 2000 l. Robert Ellis 4000 l. John Tere 2000 l. Isaac Romeer 3000 l.
Timothy Eman 2000 l. Jacob Delew 1000 l. Isaac Brames 1000 l. Roger Fletcher
1000 l. Henry Futter 500 l. Richard Cockram 1000 l. Henry Sweeting 500 l. John
Parrat 1000 l. John Perrin 100 l. The Total of the said Fines amount to the
sum of 23100 l.

This Sentence awed the Transporters of Gold, till these Troubles, they durst
not transport Gold or Silver, for fear I should meet with them.

Sir John Wollaston Knight, and William Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the City
of London, being informed against in this Information, by the then
Atturney-General, procured a Pardon from your Majesty's Royal Father, and so
were discharged. These two villains betrayed your Royal Father. 1643. As
aforesaid.

And Mr. Peter Fountain, who was informed against for Transporting of Gold by
me, procured his Pardon upon payment of 1100 l. to the Lord of St. Albanes,
then Master Jermyn. And all these I did bring to a Trial, at my own charge.

That besides the fourteen offenders sentenced in the Star Chamber, and
pardoned, as aforesaid, there are many other Merchants, Goldsmiths, and
others, that have transported Gold and Silver out of the Nation.

Die Mercurii 1 Sept. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That it be referred to the
Committee of the Navy to consider of, and take some effectual course to
prevent the Transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to
report what they have done herein, to the House.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl,

May it please your Majesty, to peruse your Royal Fathers letter, which I have
printed in this book, folio 14, wherein his late Majesty of glorious memory,
commands me that I should not discover the transpotters of Gold and Silver to
the Parliament, without his Majesty's especial license. His Majesty knew the
fines and composition of the offenders would bring the Parliament in great sums
of money, which they would then employ against him, being then upon the point
to call the Scotch then to invade the Kingdom of England, destroy his Majesty,
and the Royal party.

At the same time I had in the Parliament my Patent under examination in the
House of Commons, for an Office I have for two lives, under your Royal Fathers
great Seal of England, for the essaying and sealing all Gold and Silver Wire,
and Silver, and Gold Third, and to warrant the same to the Wearers, that it be
good Silver, and a due proportion of Silver to Silk. This Patent was commanded
by Sir Robert Harlow, being Chair man to a Committee, to be brought into the
House and referred to a Committee, who after several days hearing referred all
parties to the Law, concerning the regulation of Gold and Silver wier.

And I justified my Patent to be for the good of the Kingdom in general, and
that it saved fifty thousand pounds a year by my said office, and by my
regulation and tying the workmen to work good Silver, and a due proportion of
Silver to Silk; and this I humbly say at this day to be true, as I will prove
it at the Council for Trade.

There was a Committee appointed, and Pim, Hamden, Whittaker, Corbet, etc. to
article with me for to discover the transporters of Gold and Silver, and if I
would do that, and raise the Parliament moneys by the fines of the offenders,
then I was by their procurement that the committee of Parliament should report
the legalty and justice of my aforesaid Patent and Office; and it should have
been confirmed by Parliament, but first I was to raise the Parliament forty
thousand pounds by the fines of the transporters of Gold.

This agreement was made between the Committee of Parliament and me, in the
Court of Wards, about the 10th. of November 1643. and I prepared to make my
discovery accordingly. But then, may it please your Majesty, comes your
Majesty's Fathers Letter, of blessed memory, and commands me not to do this
service for the Parliament at my peril, as I have it to show under his
Majesty's hand and Seal. Thereupon presently I obeyed his Sacred Letter, and
chose Poverty and Loyalty before Riches, and to be a Rebel for my Loyalty I
have been most Barbarously used.

I told the Committee, that upon enquiry after the business, I found the French
and Dutch Merchants, and strangers, that had transported the Gold and silver
out of the Nation; were removed from Dover, and I could not for the present do
them that service I had promised them.

Whereupon Whittaker and Corbet took that but for a flam, and said, I was your
Majesty's Royal Fathers Spy, a Cavalier, and a Malignant, and moved the House
against me* and they sent me to the Kingsbench; and there I remained a
Prisoner, till I made an exchange for Mr. Heslerig, then Prisoner at Beaver
Castle 1643. in December.

In January after his late Majesty had exchanged me, presently he commands me
to bring up the Letter aforesaid, from his late Majesty to the Citizens of
London, which I did, and the barbarous abuses which I received from City and
Parliament, for bringing the same up, I have humbly declared.

My humble request unto your Majesty is, that you would be pleased to observe,
all my suffering is only for my loyalty to your Majesty's Royal Father, would I
have obeyed the Parliament, and discovered the Transporters of Gold at that
time, 1643. I had inioyed all my estate, and been settled in the Office which I
have for two Lives for the regulating Gold and Silver Thread and Wire.

And all this damage I suffered for obeying your Majesty's Royal Fathers
command, to my damage at this day above twenty thousand pounds: My most humble
Petition to your Majesty is, That seeing I was oppressed and traduced by the
tyranny of Sir Henry Vane junior, Sir Arthur Haselrig, and Mr. St. John, they
being the principal Actors that ruined me, that I may have by your Majesty's
goodness, bounty, and mercy, allotted out of Sir Arthur Haselrigs, and Sir
Henry Vanes estates such satisfaction and reparation as your Majesty in your
Royal wisdom shall think fit and just for my support, after so sad an
oppression for my loyalty to your Royal Father, the petition to the Parliament,
and my charge against Vane, St. John, Haslerig, was put into the Parliament
before your Majesty's gracious Letter from Breda, the Lords in Parliament
ordered me to respite my Petition to them, until your Majesty's happy arrival
into England, and ever since I watched my opportunity to show what I have done
and suffered for your Royal Father, and what I can and will do for Your
Majesty's Royal service, if you please to command me, I am at your service, as
far as my life and estate will go.

MAY it please your Majesty, in the year 1636. your Majesty's Royal Father gave
Alderman Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs his Gracious pardon, Sir Henry Mildmay,
and the Company of Goldsmiths, charged Alderman VVollaston for buying the Kings
stolen Plate, and Alderman Gibbs, for refining and melting of Silver contrary
to the Laws, as will appear in the Records of the Councel-Table, about March
1635. Had not his Royal Majesty of blessed memory pardoned the then Lord Major
Wollaston, the Law had hanged him before ever he had come to have been Lord
Major of London; and then he should have prevented this VVollaston from being
such a Traitor to his Majesty, the Proverb says, Save a Thief from the gallows
and he will hang thee: This VVollaston proved a bloody enemy to the King to his
dying day, and Gibbs as bad as he, but is yet living.

For as soon as ever I delivered his Majesty's Message unto my Lord Major, he
sent for his fellow Traitor Alderman Gibbs, and they presently concluded to
make Sir Henry Vane junior, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr Sollici or St. John, and
Francis Allen, acquainted with the Kings Letter, and ordered presently to
apprehend me, Sir Basil Brook, and Mr. Rily to seize upon our Estates and
sequester us: And so presently I was that night apprehended, and for four years
so used, that never any man that brought up a Letter from any King of England
to London, for a Peace, was so barbarously and cruelly used, that Evening the
aforesaid persons and some others examined me they carried me to Goldsmiths
Hall, they sent for Sir Basil Brock, and Mr. Rily, and St. John the Kings
Solicitor caused all our Pockets to be searched, and found their Letters in
Sir Basil Brocks and Rilies, but none in mine, and as Sir Basil Brook presented
him with the Kings Letter, which I brought up from Oxford; St. John asked Sir
Basil Brook for another Letter, which the Kings Majesty had sent up, the day
before I went to Oxford to press Rily and his party, to act their business as
soon as they could, with a Letter from my Lord George Digby, which the Officers
found about Sir Basil Brook. Touching this business when they had these
Letters, St. John's, Vane, Haselrig, Mr. Allen, Lord Major Wollaston, and
Alderman Gibbs, and several others, made themselves very merry with them. There
was Mr. Jackson the Essay-Master of Goldsmiths Hall, a very honest man, and one
that saved my life at that time, in discovering to me what was confessed by
Rily, that he had not discovered any thing, and that the aforesaid Committee
were resolved to face me down Rilie had confessed all, and so would have me to
discover, and I should have mercy.

They found in Mr. Rilies pockets Reads two Letters aforesaid, and threatened
him to have him racked, if he would not discover the bottom of the business,
and who they were in the City, that plotted to oppose the Scots coming in.

But there was an Oath of Secrecy amongst them all, and Rilie knew them all,
but I was not privy to the number that was but only to act with Sir Basil
Brook, Read, and at Oxford with his Majesty, the Queens Majesty, the Duchess
of Buckingham* and Lord Digby, and to bring the Kings Letter from Oxford.

Had Rily but confessed those Gentlemen in London that wete privy with him in
this business he had made many score of men in the City of London, lose their
Lives and Estates.

And had the Lord Major VVollaston concealed the business twenty four hours, it
had been out of his power to have stopped this design for peace: His late
Majesty of blessed memory told me at Oxford, That Rily had sent him down by one
that came purposely to Read from London, a List of above two hundred of the
principal men that had engaged in this business, every man upon an Oath of
secrecy: The late King commanded me to tell Mr. Rilie Scoutmaster-general of
the City, that he should follow his former Directions, which was to be careful
whom he imparted this business to, and to treat with them severally, and not
together, for all their security depended thereon, that it did concern all our
Lives and Estates to be circumspect: We had former Presidents to make us wary,
Tomkins and Challenor and others, and though he was careful of all his
Subjects, yet of those that were most forward to serve him, he was most tender
that they should venture themselves, telling me he did know more of this design
then I did, by Gods blessing it will take says his Majesty, I have laid it so
with Mr Rily, that I am assured of a happy success, go thy way, I will make
thee a man, and tell my Lord Major, and Mr. Rilie, I will make them famous for
ever. Rily was by all parties trusted to carry on this design, and had not the
sins of the Nation prevented us of such a mercy (for it was not Gods time) for
our deliverance, there was never in all these troubles a design for putting an
end to the War without bloodshed, so laid and contrived as Sir Basil Brook,
Col. Read, Mr. Rily, had laid every man his part severally; and so secretly,
that though the principal men in the City were engaged in the business to make
the City of London to declare for the King, and to oppose the Scots invading of
England, and the Cities Declaration which they intended to publish; I brought
it to his Majesty my self 1643. and received my Orders and Directions thereupon
my self from his Majesty, and the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Duchess
of Buckingham, and the Lord Georgs Digby his Majesty's Secretary and Coll.
Read, were only privy to this business; to my knowledge, at the Court, and no
other.

Two Letters of Col. Read's, sent to Mr. Theophilus Rily, Scout-master of the
City of London, from Oxford, to encourage the Common Counsel of the City of
London, to Petition his late Majesty for Peace; and to consider the sad Effects
that would follow, upon the Scots invading- England. Jan. 1643.
SIR!
I Wrote to you formerly, but never had any Answer, I assure you faithfully I
have not been wanting to do what you desired (as you may perceiv by the
effects) and if you have not your desire, blame your self, and give me leave to
tell you, that if you neglect the opportunity now offered to you, it may be you
shall never have the like again; for I have made those whom you have given just
occasion to be your worst friends, to be your best, and the only instruments to
procure what here is sent you, and be you confident she shall still be so,
provided you do your part; The Queens most Excellent Majesty, in my hearing, (I
being sent down to Oxford, by order of Rilie and some others, to bring up his
Majesty's Letter December. 1643.) did most earnestly intercede for the City of
London. The King thereupon replied, that he had there the best and worst
subjects of any King in Christendom; and hereupon the Queen replied, Violet it
shall be my care to see the Gentlemen that come from the City with a Petition
to the King shall be well accomodated, and have a most Gracious Answer to all
their just demands* God bless them, and God increase their number, and
thereupon the Queens Majesty wept, and the King drew his handkerchief out of
his pocket, and the tears stood in the Kings eyes, which made both Read and I
fall a weeping, and thereupon the Queen commanded Col. Read to lift up the
Hangings, to see no body stood behind the Hangings to hear what she said,
which Read did, and when the Queen see no body behind the Hangings; Ah Violet
said she the King and I am in a most sad condition, we have Traitors about us,
that watch all our Words and Actions, we speak nothing, nor do nothing, but it
is seat up to the Parliament, and they interpret it in the worst Sense: The
Queens Majesty at that time was very ill, and looked very carefully, and was
nothing but Skin and Bones. God be thanked for the blessed change that is here
at this day, the Kings Majesty her Son, in the Throne of his Royal Father, and
King of the hearts of his People; these two Papers was found in Rilies pockets,
and was printed by Order of Parliament, and Col. Read charged to be a Jesuit,
I am sure of it these Papers makes him a true Prophet, I saved Reads life in
getting him exchanged of the General Essex by a wrong name.
consider I beseech you, what a gap is opened by bringing in of the Scots, for
the destruction of this Kingdom, if there be not a Peace (which I pray God
Almighty to send speedily) you must expect Armies of Strangers from several
Places, who are now preparing, who certainly at their coming in will overrun
the whole Kingdom, and when it is past remedy, you will see your own Errors,
and therefore to prevent more misery then I am able to express to this
deplorable Kingdom, and the effusion of the blood of thousands of men, women,
and children, which must inevitably be this Summer; apply your selves in an
humble and submissive way to his Majesty, whom I know you will find ready
with Arms outstretched to receive you to favor and mercy, and grant you
favors, even beyond your expectation. Defer no time (for God's sake) and what
you will do, do it speedily; I say again, do it speedily, for reasons, I may
not write.

Oxford Dec. 10. 1560
Col. Read's Paper to Mr. Rilie, Scoutmaster of the City of LONDON.
SIR!
I Assure you that I have not been wanting to further your good desires, and if
it be not your own faults, I make no doubt but things will have an happy issue;
for I find those that are most concerned in it, forward enough. Reflect now
upon the misery of the times, and upon the groans and sufferings of those you
see not, which yet have been nothing to what they will be, if not speedily
prevented by a Peace; which to obtain I beseech you, let it not only be your
own care, but the care of all those you love, or have power with, otherwise be
confident of a general ruin, which certainly will be inevitable both to your
selves and posterity; and therefore take it into your serious consideration,
and let no causless jealousies hinder you to apply your selves in an humble and
submissive manner to his Majesty, who I am sure will yet look upon you with a
gracious eye; lose no time, for the longer you delay, it may prove the more
difficult, no doubt.

This last Letter I Tho. Violet delivered from Read at Oxford, to Mr. Rilie in
London December. 20. 1640.

This Coll. Read I got exchanged by a wrong name, for a private Soldier, at
the entreaty of Sir Basil Brook, who told me I should do a very good service
for his Majesty, and the Queens Majesty, to get Read to be discharged, but
that must be done by a wrong name, or else said Sir Basil Brook the Parliament
would never admit of his exchang; I did effect it, and sent this Coll. Read to
the King at Oxford, upon condition he would return to Mr. Rilie the
Scout-master of London, how he found his Majesty inclined to receive a
Petition from the City of London for peace, that they would declare themselves
for a peace, and Petition his Majesty for a cessation of Arms; and an
accommodation between the late King of Glorious memory. And I Tho. Violet was
sent down to Oxford December. 29 1643 to bring up his Majesty's Gracious Letter,
the Copy of the City of London* desire, being sent to his late Majesty,
wherein they desired upon the Copy I brought to Oxford, to have his Majesty
directed his Letter to the Militia of London, but his late Majesty would not
own the Militia, to treat with them as the Militia of the City, because his
Majesty told me at Oxford they were not empowered by his Commission, and he
would not own them: I told his late Majesty, and the Lord Digbie, it was
contrary to my instructions which I received from Mr. Rilie, to alter the
superscription of His Majesty's Letter, but seeing His Majesty would not but
direct his Letter, To our Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of our City of London, and
all other our well affected Subjects of that our City. I would venture my life
to bring up this Letter to London, and going according to my instructions I
received from his Majesty, to acquaint Wollaston then Lord Mayor of London,
and Alderman Gibbs, they caused me some few hours after I was gone from them,
to be apprehended upon a Charge of High Treason.

MAy it please your Majesty to peruse this ensuing Narrative, viz. in Sept.
1657. I being sick sent to Bradshaw to write to the pretended Protector
Cromwell, that if he would not pay me the eleven thousand pounds he promised
me, to pay me some considerable sum for my support. Bradshaw at that time wrote
to Cromwell very earnestly to pay me a considerable sum in part, using this as
his argument, and telling Mr Beck (Cromwels Solicitour) Mr Tho. Hewet, and Mr
Yates my Surgeon (who were all three by when Bradshaw wrote to the pretended
Protector about me) Bradshaw said, Remember my service to my Lord Protector,
and desire him in my name to pay Violet a considerable part of his money for
his support, according to his quality; my Lord Protector knows not Violet so
well as I do: If the man should go to Charles Stuart, he would do us more
mischief than a hundred thousand pounds would do us good: there are some Kings
would give an hundred thousand pounds for to have such an Engine for their
turn, and they knew him as well as I do. This message was sent to Cromwell from
Bradshaw by Mr Beck the Protectors Solicitour; Mr Hewet, Mr Yates, and these
Gentlemen are all in London to justify this to be true.

Mr Beck upon this message moved Mr Francis Bacon* the master of the Request,
to move Cromwell the Protector effectually about me, and he would also move him;
which they did, and they both told me when my name was but mentioned for my
money I petitioned for, Cromwell was so incensed against me, that he bestowed
all the bad words in the world, and said, that he took me to be a dangerous
person, and an Arrant Villain against him; and, in a word (says Mr Bacon and
Mr Beck) he takes thee to be an Arrant Knave. They often asked me if I could
imagine the reason that the Protector, and some of his Council, was so bitter
against me, that they never heard man have a worse character than Cromwell did
give me, and some of his Council that were intimate with him, as Thurloe, etc.
I replied, I received good for evil, the Protectors payment to me is not
current to revile me for venturing my life in his service, and laying out of my
purse 1500l. to get him 278250l. so much money Baxter paid him clear for the
silver I staid him in the ships Sampson, Salvador and St George, as will appear
by an Ordinance of Parliament for Baxters discharge for the payment of that
money. I knew Cromwels reason, but would not tell it to them. For I found (when
it was too late) he knew he had undone himself, by seizing on this Silver and
breaking up the Parliament; and that I was the fatal Instrument that advised
him to take the Silver into his own custody, either under the Ban quetting
house to lodge it, or in the Tower. He did believe I did it innocently and for
his good; for had he believed I had done (as truly I did) maliciously to
destroy him, he would have caused me to have been torn in pieces.

Mr Strickland asked one Capt. Swan, a Gentleman of Kent, an intimate friend of
mine, what he thought I was, and whether I was not a Cavaleer; Strickland
telling Captain Swan, Many of us of the Council of State take Violet to be a
sly and dangerous fellow, he is always presenting Propositions unto us which
may bear double interpretations; he pretends for the Councils profit, but I am
sure it is for their danger; he has staid Three hundred thousand pounds in
Silver, and has set us together by the ears amongst our selves, and with
Holland: Cromwell and Bradshaw makes use of him, promising him from day to day
to give him his Estate, but they but abuse him, they will never give him a
farthing. I heard Bradshaw say, I could wish Violet had his Estate or the
value, but there is no trusting him therein. If he should run to the King of
Scots, he would do us more mischief than a hundred thousand pounds. Keep him
poor, and that will keep him honest to us: for if he had his Estate, he would
be with the King of Scots.

The King of France has a standing Council for to Regulate his Mints, and to
hinder the Transporting of Gold or Silver. Were the like Orders settled in
England, it would be for your Majesty's service, and keep your Majesty's Mint
on work.

IN an Ordinance and Declaration of the King of France, printed at Paris, 30.
Oct 1640. Fol. 8, 9.
We expressly forbid, that all Materials of Gold or Silver, either coined or
uncoined, shall not be bought and sold at higher Rates, then is expressly set
down in this Declaration, which does declare the true value that must be paid
for the Mark of Silver.

We expressly forbid every one of what quality or condition soever, to
Transport out of our Kingdom any Gold or Silver, coined or uncoined, or any
other Goldsmiths work, upon penalty of forfeiture of the Materials and
Merchandise, and other things therein they shall be found to be packed up in,
besides the penalty of fifty pounds, and bodily punishment.

In an ORDINANCE and PLACCART, For the Regulating of the Mint; Published in
Brussels the last day of May, 1640.
ARTIC. XI. WE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents every one, of
what quality or condition soever, as well our Subjects as others, to transport
any Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, directly or indirectly, or
to cause the same to be transported, Minted or unminted, without having
obtained from us before hand express leave and consent to do the same, upon
penalty of forfeiture the Gold and Silver and Bullion, and to pay besides the
double worth, as also the Wagons that shall willingly have conveyed the same,
the offenders to be banished out of our land for five years, and the second
time for ever.

Ordinance and Placcart at Brussels the 18th. of March, 1643.
ARTIC. LVII. WE expressly forbid any person of what quality or condition soever
to buy or sell any Gold or Silver, either Bullion or current, at a higher price
then the Ordinance of our said Mint permits, upon penalty of the forfeiture
of all Gold and Silver the first time, the second four times as much and severe
correction.

Placcart and Ordinance for Flanders and Antwerp. 4 October. 1585.
ARTIC. XV. WE forbid and interdict expressly that no one of what quality, or
degree, or condition soever, shall transport or carry any Gold or Silver of our
Coins or Bullion, melted or in mass, nor any Gold or Silver to coin money, upon
forfeiture of the said Gold and Silver, besides two hundred Gold Rose Nobles,
for every Mark of Gold, and twenty Golden Rose-Nobles for every Mark of Silver,
and the second time to be bodily punished.

ARTIC. XIII. ANd we do expressly forbid all and every one henceforth to buy or
sell any wares of Gold or Silver money at above the price of the Mint; for
profit or gain, upon pain of the seller to forfeit the pieces sold, and the
buyer as much as the seller; besides, for the first time both buyer and seller
to forfeit threescore pounds, and the third time to be arbitrarily punished.

Placart and Ordinances concerning the general course and regulating of the
Mint and Moneys, as also concerning the Exchangers, Refiners, and Goldsmiths,
and others in the united Provinces, 1646.
ARTIC. XI. ANd as for the Gold and Silver money whose value is rated by this
Ordinance, we expressly forbid every one to present or pay, or receive the same
at higher rates then are here ordered, upon forfeiture of such money so
exchanged, besides arbitrary punishment.

ARTIC. XV. WE forbid every one to cull any Gold or Silver moneys, to sort the
weighty and good ones, from the light, for private and particular profit upon
pain of forfeiture, or to buy any Silver for Work at higher rate then the
Ordinance, upon pain of forfeiture double the value.

ARTIC. XVII. We expressly forbid from henceforth to transport or cause to be
transported out of our abovesaid Province toward any strange Mints, any Gold
or Silver, Moneys or Mass or Ingots, fit to coin money, upon pain of
Confiscation of the above said money and materials: And beside the penalty of
100 golden Angelots upon every mark of Gold, and 20 Angelots for every mark of
Silver, besides for the second time to suffer bodily punishment.

ARTIC. XXII. We forbid from henceforth every one to melt any Gold or other
Moneys of her Majesty of Englands stamp, valued by these Presents upon penalty
of life and goods, and the moneys that shall be light, shall be brought to the
Exchange according to the old Custom. If the Merchants please they may send to
Amsterdam, and have all these Proclamations, and there they will see whether
these Laws are not made according to the dates here abovesaid, in France,
Flanders, Holland: The whole business I humbly submit at your Majesty's and
your Priviy Councels feet, and humbly pray, I may ever live to see this Royal
Prerogative of giving leave to transport Gold and Silver to be only in the
Power of your Majesty, and your most Honorable Privy Council, that the
Merchants greatness may be as a Handmaid to your Sacred Majesty, and at your
command always.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Do desire the judicious Reader to pardon the mistakes of the Press, and to
mend them with his Pen, and the disorder of sorting my Notes, being straightened
in time, and fane to use two Presses for expedition, least the Merchants should
have surprised his Majesty, and gotten leave by Act of Parliament to Transport
Gold and Silver at their pleasure, to the damage of the Kings Majesty, and his
imperial Crown, and dignity. Grant me this just Request, to mend the Errors
with your Pen, and I shall be encouraged to present you with that which will be
advantageous to all the English Merchants, which is, I do intend to make an
exact pare, and calculation of all the Gold and Silver Coins in Christendom,
their just weights and fineness, and what they will make, being full weight in
his Majesty's Mint in the Tower of London, and all the Figures, and Coins,
Arms, and Mottoes severally Engraven, which will be a work of charge, and
pains, and will be a guide to all Merchants, to know all Foreign Coins of Gold
and Silver in Christendom, as well as our current Coin of the Kingdom of
England.

FINIS.

