PErlegi hunc Tractatum, in quo nihil reperio aut sanae Doctrinae aut bonis
moribus contrarium, quo minus Imprimatur.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis October. 13. 1662. Dan. Nicols. R. P. D. Arch. Cant.
Capel. Domesticus.

THE SAINTS Nearness to GOD: BEING A Discourse upon part of the CXL VIII.
Psalm. Written at the request of a Friend.

By Richard Vines Late Minister at St Laurence Jury in London.

Now published for the public good of the Church.

London, Printed by A. M. for Francis Tyron at the three Daggers in Fleet
street, 1662.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Virtuous Patroness of Piety THE Lady ELIZABETH
Countess Dowager of Exeter increase of all divine graces and temporal
blessings in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come.
Right Honorable,
AS the Queen of Sheba was by the fame of Solomon's wisdom encouraged to take
a long journey, to have the personal sight and real experience of those
excellencies in him, whereof she was before (upon credit only) so great an
admirer: so I being a stranger to your Person, but invited by the report of
your Honors Religious conversation and good affection toward pious and devout
persons, and all labors effectually endeavoring to bring Christians unto an
exact rule of holy living, do now presume to offer this Mite into the public
Treasury under your Noble Patronage, hoping the stamp of your acceptance and
countenance will make it current in the world, to whose censure it is exposed,
and for whose sake it now comes forth a Posthumus after the decease of the
Reverend Author, whose abilities and exemplary life were well known. And I was
the rather moved hereunto, upon consideration of my own unworthiness and
unprofitableness in the age I live in; and that I am never likely to advantage
it so much, as this small Treatise may, although there be more want of the
practice of Piety, than of the works of those that earnestly persuade to it.
And be sides I thought it incumbent upon me as a debt due to the memory of the
Author, and satisfaction of importunate friends, not to let this Tract written
upon a solemn invitation and request of an Acquaintance, to be buried in
oblivion; and that thereby God may be glorified, his Church and servants
furthered in their passage through the desert of this mortal life, toward the
celestial Canaan, and your Honor (whose affection and choice is with Mary in
the Gospel set upon the better part and spiritual things) may reap some
content and refreshment therein, is the earnest prayer and desire of

Your Honors most humble Servant and affectionate Orator William Drury.
October. 6. 1662.
THE SAINTS Nearness to GOD.
Psalm. 148. 14. A people near unto him.
THe Book of Psalms in the general, is a description of the estate and
condition of a godly man. In the beginning, we have him called a blessed man;
in the blessedness of holiness: and so going on in the ways of
righteousness, his estate in the end, is shut up in the happiness of blessing
and praise: For so the Book ends, as his life ends, in nothing but praise.
Wherein David as it were, begins to tune his heart to that Song of praise,
which he now sings for ever in Heaven. In many parts of the Book, walking in
holiness, (and so carrying happiness with him) we see him notwithstanding meet
with many storms, and tempests of evil: But as it were, escaped from all in the
end, he bursts forth in thanks. To put into every like godly man's mouth his
Lesson to conne, before the day of consort in Heaven, when nothing else shall
be sung, but praise, and honor, and thanks. The first part of this holy song
begins in the 145. Psalm. 1. where first stirring up his own heart to sing, and
so giving the pattern, as Gideon said to his Soldiers; Look on me and do
likewise, so in the end says he, My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord,
and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever. And from thence, every
Psalm begins and ends with praise. Yea the last is praise throughout; nothing
but praise, praise.

Among these hortatory Psalms to praise, is this our 148. And it is a general
exhortation to all sorts of creatures in their kinds, to praise the Lord,
whether they be things above, as Angels, the Verse. 2.
inhabitants of the first Heavens: or Stars and Verse. 3.
Lights of the next Heaven: or Clouds and Vapors, and Meteors, Verse. 7, 8.
which are in the lowest Heaven: or else lower Verse. 9.
things, as Mountains and Hills; living things, as Trees, and Beasts, and Foul:
Together lastly Verse. 11, 12.
with Men, of every condition and estate, for whom all the former were made.
And this exhortation is backed with a trebble Reason: 1. Taken from the
relation, between God and the several sorts of creatures. And, 2. That special
excellency that is in God himself. And, 3. From his goodness to his people.
The first Reason is laid down in the 5. and 6. Verse. 5.
Verses, and it stands upon these two parts; First, The creatures must praise
God, because he is their Maker; He commanded and they were created. Secondly,
Because he Verse. 6.
upholds them all being made, which is from his decree, that they shall not
pass, v. 6.

But in special men must give him praise. First, For his own excellency and
glory in the 13. verse. which glory Verse. 13.
and excellency is most transcendent, even above all the excellency of the
creature, above the earth and Heaven. Secondly, For his goodness to his
people, which is in the 14. verse, which is in exalting his people; He exalts
the horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints. And this people is set
out by their name who they were, The children of Israel; and by their interest
in him, They are a people near him.

He also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints; even of
the children of Israel, a people near him. And so we are come to the words.

The point of Observation we intend to handle out of these words is only this:

That Gods Saints, are a people very near him.

In the handling of this point, we will show

First, What nearness is, or wherein it consists. And

Secondly, In what respects Gods Saints are said to be near unto him.

Nearness first is Geometrical, and it is that little space or distance
between thing and thing, from thence by a trope or turning of the word, it is
used for any special relation between one thing and another.

1. There is a Political nearness; as first, the nearness of League or
Confederacy between Nation and Nation. So Solomon was near to Pharaoh by
Confederacy.

2. There is the nearness of Government, when Prince and People consent to
govern and be governed together, which is a farther nearness.

Secondly, There is an Oeconomical nearness, the nearness of a Servant and a
Master, which is still a further nearness.

Thirdly, There is an Ethical nearness, the nearness of friend to friend,
which is yet nearer.

Fourthly, There is a Logical nearness: 1. The nearness of house and
inhabitant. 2. The nearness of Relation or Kindred, of Son and Father, Wife
and Husband.

3. And of similitude or likeness, as of the picture to the person.

Fifthly, We have a Physical or Natural nearness, which is the highest degree
of all others As, 1. Of the branches to the tree. And, 2. Members to the head.

Having drawn forth these particulars out of their several places, we now will
show how Gods people are said to be near him.

1. Yet this is first to be premised, that there is a common nearness to A
common nearness of creatures and men.
God which is the nearness of the whole creature, namely, to him as he is
omnipresent, whereby all the frame of the world was near him, and in some sort
touches him, he being in, and through, and above, and about all things.

2. Again, there is a nearness to him in his Providence, which is that secret
touch of his hand, whereby he sustains and preserves all things. In these two
senses, not only his people, but all other men, and all things else, stones and
trees, and the like, are said to be near him. And in the latter sense, we have
it spoken of men out of the Church, Act. 17. 27, 28. where Paul tells the
Athenians, God was not far off them, because in him they live, more, etc. that
is, he is their preserver; yea in this sense the very Devils are near him.

3. There is another A nearness of men in the Church.
farther degree of nearness which belongs to men, and that to those which are
within the Park of the Church, a common nearness to Believers and Unbelievers.

The nearness of a common Nearness of common Covenant.
Covenant, and the signs of that Covenant; that nearness to him in his
Ordinances, whereby God is more near to them, than other men out of the Church.

But this I take not to be the nearness here chiefly intended, though this be a
prerogarive of the Church worthy much thanks and praise. The nearness here
chiefly The nearness here meant.
meant is a nearness belonging to Saints, as the words foregoing seem to
import, and so some of our best Expositors give it, to be a peculiar proximity,
which belongs to the people of God and no other, which strangers meddle not
with, nor know.

But to show wherein this nearness consists, which is in two things.

1. They are near him in faith. 2. In the work of faith.
First, They are near him in faith.

The name and nature of faith shows as much.

For faith is the relying upon God as mine in Christ.

First, It is a relying.

And to this purpose is it set out by trusting, and staying, and rolling the
soul on God. Hence a 1 Pet. 2. 7.
godly man is said to be built on Christ, and rooted in him, which phrases
intimate thus much unto us, that the Believer is as near unto God having faith
in him, as a man is to the thing on which he leans, as the stone to the ground
on which it is rolled, as the building to the foundation, and the tree to the
soil in which it stands and grows.

Again, It is the relying on God as mine] that is, the Believer is as near God
by faith, as the possessor and the thing possessed, as the Land and the Lord,
the house and the owner. Faith is of an appropriating nature, bringing God and
whatsoever is in him unto the Believer.

As mine in Christ, for it is by him all our nearness is.

So that this nearness is in faith. Faith is as the Jacobs Ladder, whereby his
people ascend up, and come near unto him.

And it has in it these eight rounds or degrees of nearness.

1. A nearness of Covenant. 2. Of People to their Prince. 3. Of Servant to his
Master. 4. Friend to Friend. 5. Of Child to Father. 6. Of Spouse to Husband. 7.
Of Branch to the Tree. 8. Of the Member to the Head.
1. The nearness of faith, is a nearness of Covenant or League.

Before men believe they are afar off, as enemies and haters of God; Romans 1. 30
Col. 1. 21.
so enemies in their minds by wicked works. To give a touch, They were enemies,
and enemies in their minds, that is to say, enemies in their minds, by wicked
works. All enmity is complete in Enmity is in two things.
these two, in the mind and in the work; they were both enemies in mind and
work, for the word may be so rendered. And again enemies in mind, by wicked
works, wicked works being the cause of this enmity of the mind. And therefore
Joh. 3. 20. men are said to hate the light, because their works are evil; this
by the way: so that men in sins are far off as enemies, not in League or
Covenant. God in Jesus Christ offers conditions of peace: men when once they
have faith, they then enter League, and therefore Isa. 56. 4, 6. it is a Isa.
56. 4, 6
laying hold on the Covenant, that is, that which strikes the stroke, and
reconciles God and man offended. Faith lays down the weapons, sins* that
fought against God, and lays hold on mercy, the Covenant and League God offers
to men, if they will be friends.

The whole Scripture shows this evidently, being indeed nothing else, but the
Writings of the Covenant of faith between God and man. The old and new
Testament are but the pair of Indentures or Covenants, the old being the first
Bill or Covenant, which being once expired, is renewed in the new Testament, as
a sign of this nearness.

2. The second step in this Ladder of faiths nearness, is the nearness of
people and Prince, Near nesse of people to King.
Isa. 33. 22. The Lord is our King, and he will save us; so, we are his people,
and throughout the Prophets, my people. Some choose pleasure, others profit,
others credit, but the Lord is their King. Others they acknowledge him not, nor
do any homage to him, and therefore they are called Rebels, Psalm. 68. 18.
because Psalm. 68. 18.
they have no faith: but faith in Gods people comes and takes the Oath of
Allegiance, and swears them Gods people, to say as David did, I have sworn, and
I will perform to keep thy righteous statutes.

3. Gods people are near unto him as a Servant Nearness. of Servant
to a Master.

This is a step yet higher and nearer: that they are such whose office it is
continually to wait and attend upon God. Faith puts upon them Gods Livery, that
they are men of his own Cloth. And this service is not an Apprentiship, to
serve their Master for a time, and then to go out Journeymen for themselves,
but like the Servant in Exodus 21. 5. that liking his Master well, was to have
his ear boared through with an Aule, and serve him for ever: so because they
like their Master well, because his service is perfect freedom; they take him
as it is Luke 1. 75. To serve him for ever.

Whereas contrary, other men are of another living, servants of Satan the
Prince of this world. Or at the best, their service is but slavery, which is a
service of compulsion.

They are no more his servants than all other things, stones, and trees, and
the like. Or as the Assyrian, Isai. 10. 7. They acknowledge him not. The
Assyrian there was Gods servant, for says the Text, I will send him against an
hypocritical Nation, etc. Howbeit, he thinks not so, but to cut off Nations.
God there sent him of his errand, to destroy, though he thought himself his own
Master, and that he wrought for himself. So men, though they seem to be
servants to God in doing his work, yet they in deed work for themselves as
their own Masters. But Gods people are near as the Servant to the Master.

And not only so;

4. But fourthly, This Nearness of friends.
ladder of nearness of faith, has another higher step; The nearness of
friend to friend. They are Gods friends, as A-Abraham, 2. Jam. 23. so Gods
acquaintance, his companions, and familiars, Acquaint thy self with Job 22. 21.
him, etc. Nay they are all the acquaintance, all the familiars he has in the
world.

Therefore men without faith are called strangers, that is, such as know Ephesians.
4. 18.
him not, such as are not acquainted with him. They may indeed know his
kindness, be acquainted with his mercy, as peace, and health, and riches; but
him they know not, so as to be entire and intimate with him, so as to call him
friend, and to be called so by him, when Gods people are his friends.

5. Faith has another step or farther degree of nearness, which is the
nearness of kindred, they are his children.

Unbelievers may be retainers to him, such as hold their Lands and Privileges
by him, such as now and then attend on him, once or twice a year, at Christmas
and Easter, or such like Festivities; but at the best they are but hired
servants, Luke 15. 17. that is, such as serve for hire, for life, and safety.
But they are nothing of a kindred to him, none of the children. Whereas Gods
people are near unto him, and so near as of kindred, and so near of kindred as
children.

As many as received Joh. 1. 12.
him, to them he gave power to be the Sons of God, even those that believe in
his name. So in Esaias 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, etc. Faith there steps forth, and breaking through the clouds
of Gods displeasure, challenges kindred of him calls him Father, and it is out
of question, Doubtless thou art our Father.

Other men cannot say so, if they do, it is a telling God a lie to his face.

They are at the best but Bastards and no true Sons. Only such as in outward
profession call God Father: but they are illegitimate, born of the Joh. 1. 13.
will of the flesh, and the will of man, and not of the will of God. Such whose
new birth is from the will of the flesh, or the will of man. Their show of
godliness and seeming holiness, is at the best but of the will of the flesh,
of themselves and for themselves, for their own good and safety, being stird
up, and acted, and ended by the flesh, and in the flesh: or of the will of man,
that is, it is a profession and seeming holiness, because men would have them
to be holy, for the will of such a friend, Father, or the like, to satisfy
men. As if the Evangelist should have said, All that go under the name of
Sons and call God Father, they are of three sorts, two are Bastards and no
Sons, such as are born of the will of the flesh, such as profess for the
satisfying of the flesh, the self-deceiving and closest Hypocrite, which is no
son though he think so: because he looks only to himself. The other is he that
is born of the will of man, that lives only to the will of man, the gross and
notorious Hypocrite. But the third is the true Son indeed, which is born of
the will of God, of his own will, and that obeys him for his will. But enough
of this, which I note more by the way than otherwise: this then is the fifth
ascent or gradation in the Ladder of Faiths nearness, That Gods people are his
children.

6. The sixth degree of higher nearness, is the nearness of Spouse to the
Husband: so in Cant. we have it My Spouse. All besides them, are such as go a
whoring from him, and are married to others, to pleasure and credit, and the
things of this world: and therefore, they having tied themselves formerly to
God, and broke the marriage knot, are called James 4. 4. Adulterers James 4.
and Adulteresses, because they defile the marriage Bed by the love of the
Creature: But Gods people are married to him Hos. 2. 19.
by faith.

7. Gods people are near him, as the branch to the tree, and it is also another
nearness of faith. Romans 6. 20.
Thou stand by faith, that is, that thou stand in the tree Jesus Christ:
*it is thy faith that makes thee a branch; that is the sap and juice which runs
from the tree, to make thee live near him as a branch: otherwise, thou were but
a wild Olive, or a dead branch of the tree. It Is your faith lets you into the
tree, and makes you a Scyon.

8. Lastly, The highest step of this Ladder of faiths nearness, is of the
Members to the head, so Ephesians. 4. 15.
Christ is called the head. That as all the members are united and joined to
the head, in sense and motion from it; so Christ is the head, we the members,
nearly united to him, in all power of knowing and doing.

This is the nearness of faith, which as a Ladder, consists of these eight
steps of nearness, and every one of them still higher, and so nearer God. The
nearness of Subject, is greater than that of League; Servant than Subject;
Friend than Servant; Child than Friend; Wife than Child; Branch out of the
same Tree, and in the same Tree, than the Wife. And lastly, The Member is more
essential, and so nearer than the Branch. So much for the first part of this
nearness, The nearness of Faith.

2. But secondly, As Part of nearness in the work of faith, which is holiness.
Gods people are near him by having faith in their hearts, by these many
proximities; so they are near him in the work of faith, which is, The nearness
of Holiness, which is the bringing of the whole man to God: So that if Gods
people touch him, not only in Relations, (as I formerly showed) but in the
whole man, and that which proceeds from it, if they touch him on all parts,
then are they a people near him. Other men as they come not near him in any
relations more than stones and trees, or little more, having no faith to spread
these relations over them: so having no faith, they have nothing of holiness,
nothing but sin, which turns them away from God, that they come not near him,
so much as to give him a look, so as to give him a word, if unawares they meet
him in his Ordinances. But Holiness, what it is.
Gods people are near him in holiness, which is the new casting of the whole
man in the mould of faith, to the mind of God. And this is the greatest
nearness of all other, for this more properly concerns God. Faiths nearness
is a nearness to God for our selves, to make us safe: but holiness is a
nearness to God for himself, first, and then for our selves. Faith sets us
under the covert of Gods love, to shelter of wrath: But holiness makes us like
unto God, to restore our first perfection we lost in Adam: and this is the
thing God intends in the working of faith, to restore us by holiness.

Now Gods people are near (in a double respect) in holiness.

1. In the holiness of Heart. 2. In the holiness of Life.
First, They are near him in the holiness of heart, which is a breaking down
the partition wall of sin, or taking away the distance made by sin, and a
partaking of the like nature with God himself.

1. Hence first they Nearness of similitude.
are said to be like God, near him by the nearness of similitude. The
holiness of the heart being the new Coining or Stamping of the Image of God
upon the heart; or the new drawing of the Image of God, in the colors of
holiness, upon the heart. That as we say, such a picture is very near, meaning
the man it represents: look on him and the picture together, and they are very
like; so look on that tablet of the heart, wherein the Pencil of faith, in the
Hand of God, has Drawn in the colors of holiness the Image of God, and they
are very near, very like.

On the contrary, a man on whose heart faith has not stamped this holiness, is
no liker God than darkness the Sun; there is not so much as the first draught
of his Image. And therefore you see no more of the Image of God in his heart,
than of the image of a man in a beast. But faith bringing holiness into the
heart, makes Gods people of his Image, face answering to face, by wiping out
the draught of Satan.

Therefore 1 John 3. 3. Whosoever has this hope in him, purifies himself as he
is pure: that is, faith draws a Copy of holiness in the heart, like to that
which is in God; faith boiles up to such a holiness as he has. When faith
comes, it sweeps the heart of the dirty corners of sin, which made God before
to be a far off; but when sin is swept, then comes in another nearness.

2. The nearness secondly of a Temple, and house: then the heart is
consecrated Gods Chapel, when the rubbish and dirt of sin is first purged away.

And therefore it is said, The Temple of God is holy, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
whose Temple ye are, that is, when once ye come to be holy, then ye are made
Temples of God.

So also Gods house, Ephesians. 3. 17.
the place of his continual nearness to them; that look as a man is near his
house, and nearer that than any thing else, so God and a holy heart are near,
and nearer than any other. Nay the holy heart is all the dwelling God has
below. He has Esaias. Romans 8. 9.
no other house than his people; no other rooms in his house, than their
several hearts; no other parlour or room of delight, than that heart which is
best adorned and hanged with grace, that is most holy. And this is not a house
which stands empty of the inhabitant; but it is a house whereof he says, as he
said of the Temple, Here will I dwell for ever, for I have a delight in it. But
farther, as they are near to God in the holiness of heart, so also

Secondly, In the holiness Near in holiness of life.
of life, whereby they live to him, Gal. 2. 19. and so they are said to live
with him, and to walk with him, that is, they are such, whose lives reach to
him, and end in him. And so they live with him, that is, they make him their
acquaintance indeed; as before we showed they had the title of friends. They be
not only called friends, but they live as friends, once friends and ever so,
such as are never parted or severed. Therefore this nearness of life is
expressed by walking with God; Enock walked with Genesis 5. 24.
God, that is, he was as near God in his life, as a man is to him with whom he
walks, he went even with him, walked not a far off from God, but close to him,
side by side, as we may so say.

Other men that have no faith, live a far off from God, as men of another
Country, as acquainted only with sin and the world, to whom and with whom
they life. But Gods people are a people near him, in their lives.

They are near him first in their thoughts, so near him therein, that their
thoughts are said to be upon him, Mal. 3. 16. Those that thought upon his name.
So David, nothing more ordinary than thoughts on God, so that he was his
Meditation, Psalm. 63.
which is the staying and continuance of the thought on the thing.

So again in their will and affections, their Love, Hope, Joy, Fear, is said to
be of him and in him. In desire they follow hard after him, Psalm. 63. 8. yea
getting once near him, they cleave to him, Deuteronomy. 4. 4. which cleaving is
chiefly by love and joy, so all their words and deeds are to him.

Lastly, They are near Nearness in their lives by serving him.
him in their services, for faith makes them not only Officers in his Court,
but to wait and attend upon him, to follow the Court, and attend in their
courses of service, in all the times of worship; yea, to be such as stand
continually before him, to be of his Presence Chamber, and at his elbow.

Whereas others either live from his Court, or are banished the Court, serving
Sin, the World, and Satan; or if they come to Court to tender their service;
they set their hearts another way, as false servants which do homage in heart
to other Lords than their own, when they are in the Court.

So these when they stand in Gods Courts, seeming to serve him, their hearts
attend in the Court of Satan, the Prince of this world. Therefore they are said
to honor him with their bodies, their hearts being far from him, Isai. 29.
13. far from him, in the word, far from him in prayer, or any other service
of his.

But Gods people are near unto him in all their service; they are near unto him
in the Word, as the Apostle; they 1 These. 2. 13.
receive it as the Word of God, not of men: as if he should say, there are two
sorts of hearers of the Word, some hear it only as the Word of man, man
teaching, man instructing, man exhorting or reproving, etc. but you receive it
as the Word of God. Faith makes them to hear God in his Word, other men neither
see, nor hear any thing of God in it.

But as it was with Saul and his company Act. 9. 7.
traveling to Damascus, so are godly men, and other men. As Saul and his
company were going to Damascus, it is said, a voice was heard from Heaven, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? and the men with him, they heard the voice, but
they saw no man, only Paul saw Jesus Christ, the others did not, So wicked men
hear the sound of the Word, but they see no man; they see not Jesus Christ and
God in his Word; for it is only the eye of faith that sees God in the
Prospective of his Word and Ordinances.

And therefore though men have these Prospectives of his Ordinances, yet they
see not God in them, because they want the eye of faith to unite them and God
together.

So again Gods people are near unto him in the Sacrament, which so often as it is
worthily received, is a new Bond out of the great Court of Heaven, to tie them
and God together more nearly; and it is faith that writes this Bond, and seals
it in the blood of Jesus Christ.

Whereas other men are no nearer God in the Sacrament, than they are at their
own table; nay it is a Sacrament of separation, that even unglues them from
their common nearness in common mercy* for as it is an ascent which by worthy
receiving makes men a step nearer to God, so by unworthy partaking they go
lower to evil, and farther from him.

Thirdly, They are near to God in prayer; for so prayer in Scripture is
commonly called a drawing nigh to God: and therefore they are said to be
Priests to God; that as Kings and great Rev. 2. 6.
ones have their Chaplains for them, so the people of God are his Chaplains,
yea Chaplains in Ordinary, such as wait continually on God; and that not only
for themselves, but for others also.

That look as Kings have their Masters of Requests, whereby the Petitions of
suitors are preferred unto them; so Gods people are his great Masters of
Requests, whereby Petitions of each other, yea and wicked men also are
preferred to him. So Abraham was Genesis 20. 7, 17.
the great Master of Requests for King Abimelech, Let Abraham pray for thee,
and thou shall live, etc.

So Job was the Master Job 42. 7, 8.
of Requests for his three friends. So Moses for the Israelites.

And this is faith still that makes this nearness.

Faith is that which perfumes their prayers with the blood of Christ, and so
they ascend up to God, and are accepted by him.

That as great persons choose still perfumed things, as apparel and Gloves,
etc. let the other alone, because the perfume makes them acceptable; so faith
makes their prayers acceptable to God, which else they would not be.

Lastly, And so we The last nearness to God, which is in his special
Attributes.
have done with these several branches of nearness.

Gods people are near him in his special Attributes.

They are near his presence, and in his favor. Others are like Absalom, which
might not see the Kings face.

Or at the best God frowns upon them.

They are near his eye.

Near his ear. Psalm. 34. 15


And so near his hand, that when danger is at hand, he is at hand, and puts
forth his hand to help, and faith takes him by the hand, and gets out.

So I might show how they are near the Trinity. Near the Trinity.


The Father, Son, and holy Spirit, which are (with all in them) most properly
theirs.

If then by faith in it self they are near unto God in that eight-fold
nearness.

Of
Covenant, Subject, Servant, Friend, Child, Spouse, Branch, Member.
And again in the work of faith, which is holiness

Of
Heart, as Like God. his Temple. House.

Life in Thoughts, Affections, Speeches, Actions. Service, Word, Sacraments
Prayer, etc.


If near him in his special Attributes;

And to all the Trinity;

Then they are a people very near him.

But to all this it may

Stand afar off? Psalm. 10. 1.


To hide himself, as David and many of Gods people complain*

It thus falls out sometimes, therefore God may there be said, to be a far off:
Because sin is a place where God is not, or ever was near to them in it, as
continuing in it, but only he is near them, as coming out of sin, so far as
they are sinful, so far is God remote from them; he comes no farther into
the heart than faith purifies it, into no rooms of the soul, but those that by
faith are swept from sin.

2. Again, though God seems to stand a far off, and to hide himself, that we
think him not near: yet as Jacob said, He Genesis 28. 27.
was nigh and he not aware of it; so God is near his people, when they think
not of it: even as the father is taken by the child for gone, when he is but
behind the hangings.

3. Thirdly, God is many times near, and actually helps when we think he is
not, and does not, because we look for him, in a way of our own prescribing,
wherein he will not come.

There is a double way wherein God comes to Double way of help.
his people.

First, An ordinary way, or the Kings highway, the great road of Providence
and Mercy, wherein he ordinarily is nigh them, as helping them in ordinary
means.

There is secondly a secret privy way or path, wherein he comes sometimes, and
is at us, before we are aware of it; and so we think him not come, because not
in the common road, wherein we expected him. Thus many times God is near in
giving some other mercy than we ask, as more fit for us. Thus sometimes he
gives not it may be wealth, but friends, or we it may be look to have a lust
healed by fasting and prayer, when they, nor any so common means do it not, but
he heals it by confession of it to a godly friend. Jam. 5. 16.


4. Though God stand a far off, yet he then is near, though not sensibly, yet
really and truly; the essence of the nearness remains still, though the sense
and influence be somewhat cut off: even as it is with the body of the Sun, when
it is covered with a Cloud, the body of the Sun is then as near, as when the
Cloud was not before it, though the heat and light, the influence were somewhat
cut off. A man is still as near the Sun in a cloudy day, as a clear day; so a
man is as near God, that once is truly near him, even when he hides himself
under a cloud of trial, as before. The relation for the substance holds as
firm, as a son is as much a son, when he is a thousand miles off from his
father, as when he is in the same room, in his fathers presence; so a son of
God, is as much a son, for the essence and truth of the relation, and as much a
spouse, when God is hidden from him under the distance of affliction, as when
he was joyous and at peace. The covenant is the same, the kindred the same, the
nearness the same. Even as the branches are as near the tree at one time as
another, though they perceive it not. The members are as near the head, in a
Palsy or Apoplexy, as at other times, though they feel it not, so fully or
plainly as at other times they may. And it is to be observed, that in such cases
as this of David; God is not quite departed; for says he, Why stand thou a
far off, which argues, God then was not out of sight, or out of call, though
not so near as before.

Now we come to Application.

First then, If Gods That God greatly exalts the horn of his people. Is not
this an exultation, when others are left out of all these forenamed relations,
that they should be taken in; to be in Covenant with him, yea servants, yea
friends, yea sons, yea his spouse? Come and see if there be any honor like
unto this honor wherewith he clothes his people, and which strangers meddle
not with.

If it be so, Then Ecclesiastes says of the King) so much as in thy thought:
much less proceed to open wrong, or persecution against them.

For first consider, he to whom they are so near, shall be sure to hear of it.
Did any man but think, the wrong he does to his fellow subject, the King should
be sure to hear it, would not he hold his hands and consider?

There is not the least wrong thou can do to any of these near ones; but God
shall be sure to hear of it.

They have friends enough in the Court of Heaven to tell him, yea those of his
Presence Chamber, the Angels, such as stand continually before him, such as are
sent Ambassadors, on purpose to see what wrong is done to them. Such as lie
Lieger, to hear and carry the least word spoken against his people; and they
will tell tales of you.

Besides they themselves are at the Kings ear, and in prayer will go and tell
him of you. That if Angels and Saints which are all the Court of Heaven, if
they or any of them know of it, God shall be sure to hear it.

But secondly, You do, shall come to their aid and their confusion. It is the
only way, to pull the world about a man's ears; to provoke the Lord-General of
the world, to Muster up his Batallions, and Hoasts of creatures against thee;
to cause Heaven and Earth, and the Commander of both, to turn enemies to thee,
and in their courses to fight against thee, as the Stars in their courses did
against Sisera. If then any man dare bid God, and his Armies of creatures
battle, let him give but the defiance to his people, and the word is no sooner
spoken, but they are all up in Arms, and come marching, like Jehu, furiously
against thee. Ten several Armies of creatures, we see leavied, and sent against
the Egyptians and Pharaoh, for the wrong done to the Israelites. And Army
being sent after Army, in the end, (fully to revenge the wrong,) God Mustred up
the Waters, causing them to lie in ambush against him; and when they were once
come into the Exodus 14. 26.
ambush, the Watchword was but given, and the liars in wait set upon them,
and overthrew them. So the Sun and Jos. 10.
the Moon by standing still, were made as spies to betray, and a shower of
stones like a Volley of shot to destroy the Canaanites. Wildfire out of 2
King. 1.
the Camp of Heaven, destroyed the Captains and their fifties that came to take
Elijah. The Numb. 16. 31, 32.
earth undermined Korah and his company, for their words against Moses.

Besides these, God has an Army of diseases, which sometimes is sent to
revenge his people. When God shall muster up the humors, of a man's own body
against him, making his enemies to be those of his own household, such enemies
as will not turn back; against whom, all the munition of Physic cannot defend;
such enemies as will not raise their seige, nor make any composition, but
assault, and in their assault, beat down the Ramparts and Fortifications of
nature, taking the strong Castle of the heart, and lay the Fort of the whole
man in the dust, even with the ground; so that if you can abide the brunt
against Heaven and Earth, and the several ranks of Soldiers, of creatures of
the Lord of Hoasts. If you have provision enough against a seige of judgments;
if Armor of Proof to bear off the Bullet of Destruction shot from the Engine
of Vengeance. If you dare stand against Gods great Ordance, his sore judgments
of Plague, Famine, or the like, (which mowes whole Cities and Nations down as
the Sith does Corn;) Then speak and wrong, and spare not. But alas you know,
all the Armor wherein ye can trust, is but Paper-Armour to defend you; that
all the things you can fly to, are but the creacures, which are Soldiers of
the Lords of Hosts, which therefore will not prove disloyal to their Lord, to
fly from their Colors, for your service and Pay, but be the very first, even
in the Forefront of the Battle against you.

But thirdly, Do them

First, You hold all you did not the Church uphold them; and were that once
finished, all things would fall again to their first confusion.

As it is in the erecting of a building, stones and timber, and other materials
are prepared, Workmen are hired, and the tools are moving, till the Edifice is
reard, and when once the building is finished, the stones and rubbish are cast
aside, the tools laid down, the Workmen paid and sent away, but they had their
hire from the building: So in the building of the Church, workmen are hired,
tools used, and the building being up, creatures and wicked men (used for the
Church) are paid with peace and wealth, and so cashired; but they had their pay
(the good things of this life) from the Church. You hold all you have on the
Church; these near ones are they, on whom you hold all; they are the great
Lords, on whom you hold your lives and goods. As Lot was the Lord, on whom the
Sodomites held both their City and safety. And therefore when he was gone, he
took safety with him, and destruction suddenly followed on them. They are your
great Charter, by which you hold all your privileges, and therefore make much
of them.

Do them all the good plentiful Crop, a liberal Table. Not a Seed, a Corn of
kindness, sown on these near ones, that shall not come up, in a plentiful
ear, of a hundred fold blessing. The people of God is the fatest soil to sow
kindness in, they yield the greatest increase, the fullest reward.

If they are so near unto

There are but two Double Motive.
causes that make men seek the acquaintance of those which are near great
persons. First, Because they are men of better rank and quality than others.
Secondly, Because they are able by their nearness to do for them.

These are first men of

Again, They are of the best quality, because such as bear all the great
Offices in the Court of Heaven.

Others may have the name of common Subjects, but they bear none of the Offices.

God dares not trust them; they would only bear Offices, to bear the credit and
gain.

But Gods people bear the Offices in his Court.

First, They are of his Privy Council, to know Psalm. 25. 14.
his mind.

Other men know his works, as his works of mercy, and his works of justice, but
his mind, his secret, they know not. Even as the works of a King, his Laws and
Proclamations, or the like, any Subject knows, but his mind, his secret, that
only his Council knows. So the works of God every man can take notice of, but
his mind, they only know which are near of his Council. They know his mind in
sin, to be out of measure sinful, his mind in grace, to be so free and
transcendent. They only know his mind.

They are again the Stewards of his Household; Stewards of the manifold 1 Pet.
4. 10.
grace of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

There are many wants, as there are many of his house, therefore many graces.
And because every one has not all grace, therefore are they Stewards mutually
each to other, that every one might have that which is lacking in his faith,
and humility, etc. And this they do as Stewards, dispencing out of the Kings
store, out of the store of grace, received from him; dispencing in instruction,
dispencing in reproof, and comfort, and the like, which is Christian communion,
which is the communicating of grace each to other.

And as they are Gods Stewards, so they are his Treasurers.

They keep all his riches. They are the treasurers of his Word and Ordinances,
wherein all his estate is laid up. They are the keepers of his Jewels,
precious faith, and the rest. They are the treasurers of mercy and judgment,
who can by the Key of prayer in the hand of faith, shut or open the door of
mercy, and take out what they will. Take out rain, or drought (as Elijah) take
out peace or war, life or death: all is in the keeping of his people who are
his Treasurers.

Secondly, As they are men of the best rank and quality, so they are able to do
for you. Have you any suit to be preferred to the King, what readier way than
to use such who are so near him? A friend in the Court may do more you know,
than all the friends you have beside. A friend in the Court of Heaven may get
you more, than all the world besides. We see it in Moses, who saved Numb. 14.
12, 13, etc.
the life of a whole Nation by his suit to God, when at once he would have
destroyed them. He may get you life, or health, or any thing.

The next Use shall be for Trial. That if Gods people be so exceeding near him;

Then let every one

First, Whether are you near him in a right Covenant or no? If so, then you
have joined your self to the Lord, in Jer. 50. 5.
a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

There are three things Three things.
here to be observed:

1. It is such a Covenant, wherein they join themselves to the Lord. 2. It Is
perpetual. 3. It Is not forgotten.
First, It is such a Covenant, wherein they join themselves to the Lord: that
is, such a one wherein they are halfes with God, where they strike with God, as
well as God with them. Many there are with whom God has passed his Covenant,
which are in the bounds and territories of the Covenant, which never yet joined
with God in the Covenant. Many are in the heat and benefit of the Covenant,
which have not laid hold on the Covenant, and truly tied themselves to God in
it. But they which are in the right Covenant, are such as have joined
themselves to God, as he is joined to them.

Secondly, It is a perpetual Covenant. It is not a truce which lasts for a
time, and then ends in open hostility; for such are the Covenants of many,
which like enemies brought to an exigent, make truce for a time, which ends in
war. So they being brought to an exigent in credit, come to the Sacrament, that
men might not speak ill of them, or on the bed of sickness, or such like, make
truce with God, but it ends in war, in sin again.

But the right Covenant is a perpetual Covenant, that is, not only such a one
as is of perpetual force and tie only, but also such a one as is intended to
perpetuity, and it is their earnest desire to keep it for ever. And it is such a
Covenant as being once made, they will repent it, though they loose by it.
Loose their lusts, and in them the world, which is wrapped up in lusts, as meat
in the stomach. Loose themselves also, that is, deny themselves; some go so far
as to make Covenants, and intend them to perpetuity; but when they are urged to
perform the conditions, and let all go for naked Christ, and a Kingdom only in
reversion; they fly off from their bargain as too hard. But the right Covenant
is a perpetual Covenant, such as they stand to through the attendance of
unavoidable crosses and enemies.

Thirdly, It is a Covenant which is not forgotten. Men often go so far, as to
make Covenants for ever, but they forget them.

As men's evidences covered over with dust, or thrown into a corner, are out of
sight, and so forgotten; so Covenants with God are covered over with sin, or
thrown into a corner, a corner of the world, pleasure, or profit, or credit,
and so are forgotten.

Have thou not made a Covenant with God, which is forgotten? that some lust or
other has made thee quite forget it, as if no such thing had been? if thy
Covenant be right, it is such a Covenant as is not forgotten.

The next sign of a Peter said to the lame man asking an alms, Such as I have
I give thee, though Silver and Gold have I none; grace nor glory, my goodness
extends not to thee, yet I give thee my self, my thoughts, affections, and all
I have: I present thee my prayers, and thanks and service. Do thou trade with
him in duty, as he traffiques with thee in mercy? Has he made thy heart, his
great staple of merchandise, to exchange continually duty for mercy? it is a
sign thou art in Covenant with him. On the contrary, do thou get what thou
can from him, without leave, without praying for them? take things by force,
health, wealth, and the like; not paying any thing, any service, not custom,
so much as the least deserved service, it is a sign of one out of Covenant; for
only an enemy out of league, will rob a Commonwealth, or take things by force.

Lastly, If thou art in league with God, then thou have common friends and foes
with him. Gods friends are thy friends, and his foes thy foes, Do not I hate
Psalm. 139. 21, 22.
them that hate thee, etc. yea thou hate sin, and Psalm. 97. 10.
the fuel and bellows of sin, the world, and Satan which feeds and blows up
sin. A man in Covenant hates sin. Men hate the sting, and love the Serpent,
hate sin as it is attended with Hell and death, but love the sin it self. Do
thou therefore hate sin? thy worldly mindedness, or pride, or uncleanness, or
whatsoever it be? so do thou hate sinners, as steept in sin, as enemies too
to thy inner man? So again, have thou common friends with God, to love where
God loves, and as far as he loves? to love the very sight and show of
holiness, the name of a godiy man? And do thou love every thing that may
confirm and continue the League, the Ordinances betwixt God and thee, though
never so contrary and cross to thy corrupt nature? it is then a sign, thou art
in Covenant with God.

The second sign is from the second degree of nearness, the nearness of
Subject. Whether art thou as a Subject of Gods or no? if thou art a true
Subject, then thou obeyest his Laws and Proclamations; then art thou confined
in thy ways, within the precincts of his Laws, so as to do thy endeavor to
keep them, even all of Psalm. 119. 33, 34.
them, with thy whole man, and that for ever. Then all his Laws stand in force
upon thy whole man, till they are called in, by a new Act of the Court of
Parliament of Heaven. Thou endeavourest also to keep the least Commandment, and
do not remain a wilful breaker of it, though it might get thee never so
much.

Again, Thou obeyest his Proclamations, every promulgation of his will, or any
Law, that by ill custom, is ready to be antiquated and abolisht. Every new
duty commanded by his high Commission, his Ministers, whose office it is, to
beat down new up-rising enormities, by dispeircing his Proclamations, and
fastening them upon the posts of men's hearts, upon their consciences being
faulty herein.

Whether again art servant is to his Master? If thou art a servant of his, then
thou art faithful unto him in all his house, Heb. 3. 2. It Is required Heb. 3.
2.
in a servant that he be found faithful as Moses was in all his house.

First, Whether art thou faithful? and faithful all his house?

First, Art thou faithful? do thou attend upon him, and upon no other?
There are many in service with God, that go for Christians, and wear his
Livery, when their hearts attend upon Satan and the world. Many are bodily
conversant about him in Prayer and the Word, whose hearts are left behind in
the world and lusts.

Again, They work not for him but themselves, and so steal from him that which
is his. He is an unfaithful servant, that steals from his Master that which is
his. Men steal thus from God, they steal from him his time; his time of
praying, his time of hearing, and reading, and meditating, and examining their
hearts, and lives, and his time of receiving the Sacrament, etc. and give it to
others, to profaneness, give it to pride, and worldly-mindednesse. They steal
from him also his Talents, wit, strength, beauty, health, riches, and give them
to lusts and sins.

Art thou

Secondly, Faithful in all his house, to do all that his service requires.
Faithful in regard of the Master, to do all that concerns his person, not one
duty alone but all, not only to tell him of things amiss in praying to him;
but also to hear him telling thee thy duty, and obeying, hearing his word, and
observing it. Not only attending at his Table, in coming to the Sacrament; but
also in loosing a meal, in fasting, when his service requires it, and so every
other day.

So faithful in regard of thy fellow servants, in helping and assisting them
in their work, in exhorting, and encouraging them in well-doing; in instructing
them also, and admonishing them when they err and do amiss.

Faithful in regard of all other things in the house; Art thou then faithful
to thy Master, and faithful in all his house, so as all his work is performed?
then art thou near him as a servant. Contrary, art thou sloathfull, idle,
wronging thy Master, in his goods and time, and wronging thy fellow servants?
then art thou no servant of his, but a servant of thy self.

4. Whether art thou one of the friends of God or no?

If thou art a friend of his, Then first thou love 1. Property of a friend.
him for himself; thou love him for his purity and holiness, and excellency;
because he is so, and not for that he has. Thou love not his, but him, for
that is friendship to love a man for himself.

Many there are that pretend friendship to him, and seem as if they loved him:
But it is, because he has much to give and they expect much. They love him, as
he is merciful and bountiful, as he is full and open-handed. As he opens out
of his Treasury of goodness, deals out peace and safety, gives forth wealth
and friends, compasses them about with kindness, fills up their Cup till it run
over. But they go no farther in kindness, than he does in bounty. They both
measure and limit their love, by his goodness; and therefore if he turn the
stream of mercy a little from them, their goodness and love dries up also. It
may be they can be content to Pray and hear the Word, and perform the other
offices of love, if they may get by it. Assemble Hos. 7. 14.
themselves for Corn and Wine, as the Prophet speaks. But this is to do duty to
mercy, to pray to peace and safety, to love, not him but his.

And so the most do with God, as men do with those that are greater than
themselves.

A great man because he is rich and powerful, and can do much for them, to him
they pretend a great deal of friendship, and show of love; but if he once dry
up in bounty, or stop in kindness, they are gone for new friends to reap new
kindness; whereas if they loved the man for himself, their love would last so
long as the person, not the purse or power only remaind. And who would take
such ones to be friends, that loved but so only?

And so do you think to go for friends, when you come for nothing else? Will
God take you to be friends to him, when your love is only spun forth by mercy?
when it is only linked to peace and riches, or the like? when your friendship
is only planted and rooted, and grows in the soil of his bounty, by the dew of
his favor, and is not built upon him?

You would not take such a man to be your friend, that is a friend to your
Chest or Table only. Yet God has a great many such Chest, such Table friends,
that are as great friends there as any; but if once the Purse is shut, the
Cloth drawn, their friendship is taken away also. Whether then, can you love
God stripped of all considerations of kindness, so that you will not break with
him, though he draw in his kindness, but keep him still though he had nothing
to give; no Heaven hereafter to make you happy, nor peace and wealth, and the
like, to stay you here? it is then a sign you are his friend. But if you love
him as he appears in mercy only, as he is covered over with kindness; it is a
sign you are no friend of his; he that is a friend, loves not so much his as
him.

Secondly, Another 2. Sign of friends.
sign of friendship is mutual trust, to each other.

Whether then will you trust him, and may he again trust you?

First, Whether will you trust him? that is, will you take him on his bare word
without any more? that is, to trust a man when thou relyest on him, for his
bare promise. And so that is to trust God for a mercy, not when you have hold
on him and the mercy too; one hand on him, another on the thing: But when you
lay hold on him, with both hands, that his promise is all the hold you have.

Many will trust him when they have security; trust him for a mercy,
deliverance, health or life: when they have a pledge, when they are in the way
of deliverance, or life; trust to the staff, when they have hold of one end of
it; whereas he that is a friend, will take his word as soon as his bond. Trust
him against trust, against hope, As Abraham, because he was a friend of God,
believed him (against hope) for a son, even then when in nature, and reason he
could see no issue.

To trust him with a pledge, is no more than an enemy will do; any man will
trust so, only a friend will trust for the bare relation of friendship.

Again, Whether may God trust thee? he that is a friend, God dares betrust with
any thing; betrust him with riches; betrust him with health or friends; betrust
him with greater things, even with Jesus Christ, which is all his stock of
mercy; and betrust with grace also, because he will give all, or the Revenues
of them to God again.

Other men, though he gives them health, or wealth, or the like; yet he trusts
them not with them, as looking for them again.

And therefore what he bestows on them, it is given as an exercise of his
bounty; and not any exercise of their trust and fidelity, which is therefore
some smaller matter that he gives, as these outward things which he looks not
for again. Even as we deal with men that have often deceived us, or are poor and
needy; if they come to borrow, we lend them not any thing we look to have
again, because we dare not trust them; but it may be, we give them something
out of our bounty, for their need.

So much for this third Sign. The next is,

Whether art thou

If thou art espoused to him, then

First, Thou likest him, and love him better than any other. As a loving
Wife, if you ask her how she likes her Husband; she will answer, I care not
what others do, how they like him; for my part, I like him better than any
other.

So the Spouse of Christ in the Canticles, Cant. 5. 9.
when she is asked how she likes Christ; what her beloved is better than other
beloveds: says she, He is the chiefest of ten Verse. 10.
thousand: that is, Let others say what they will, like or dislike, she likes
him better than any in the world besides: For He is white and ruddy, Verse. 10.
that is, he is perfectly beautiful for color. And so she describes him
throughout, summing up all in the 16. Verse, that He is altogether lovely,
Verse. 16.
that is, there is nothing to be seen in him, that is, any deformity, to hinder
liking or love: but he is most comely. Other men, as the Prophet Esaias says,
though in another case, See no form or comeliness in him; but he is unto them,
as a Blackmoore, that has nothing sightly. All his grace and holiness is unto
them but as so much blackness, though it be his perfect beauty. And therefore
let him come never so often a wooing to them, in his Word and Ordinances, he
cannot get a promise, for they like him not.

Whether then do thou like Jesus Christ, and like him above all others? if
thou art espoused to him thou do so. There are many that seem to like him,
and make love to him in praying, etc. can be content to do something to have
him; if they might have him with some ease; but they like him not better than
any other, than a lust of pleasure, or gain, or credit. We see this in the
Parable of those that were bidden to the Marriage Supper. Luke 14. 18.
God there offered his Son if they would have him. But they liked him not so
well as the world, else would they have taken him, when God made them the
motion of Marriage.

If thou then art Married to Jesus Christ, thou likest him and his love better
than all the world. Therefore Cant. Cant. 1. 2.
1. 2. It Is said, His love is better than Wine, that is, than all the
excellency of the creature; that there is not any other Grape that yields such
sweetness and comfort, as his love; no Grape of pleasure, or credit, or
profit, in all the Vyneard of the world that is like it, to her
Spouse-like-taste; but Jesus Christ is better than all, even as Wine exceeds
all other liquors whatsoever.

What then is it that fills up thy heart, that takes up the chiefest place and
room there? What is it sits highest and possesses the first room of thy liking,
the top of thy love? Is it the world or is it Jesus Christ? Is every pleasure
or profit a thing that takes thee up from Jesus Christ? that shuts him out of
doors, or makes him stand at the door, when they have easy entrance? Does
the world stay, and lodge, and walk in thy heart, when Christ can have no room
there? or if he get in, is he not admitted only into some common outward room,
when the world has the Parlour or chief room? Does he not stay a while only,
when the world is entreated and forced to stay? Is not the world as the chief
of the house, when Christ comes only as a servant, for thy own good and safety?
If the world gets thus all away from Jesus Christ, art not thou Married to it
and not to him? And therefore if thou pretendest never so much love to him, and
yet preferrest any thing before him, thou art much mistaken, if thou think
Christ thy Husband. But

Secondly, If thou art 2. Sign of a Spouse.
near unto Christ, as the Wife to the Husband, then thou take him for better
for worse, and thou keep him for better for worse: every Spouse does so if a
right Spouse.

1. Thou take Christ for better for worse, that is, not only for his Crown,
but also for his Cross; not only for health and wealth, and good report, but
for sickness, and poverty, and evil report; not only for what he has, but
for what he wants, to share with him alike in all conditions.

That which our Savior Christ required of his Disciples, to Take Matthew. 10. 38.
up his Cross; he requires also of every soul that espouses it self to him, to
take his Cross, is to take him with afflictions; and not only so, but with
persecutions and death too.

And herein he deals as a man coming a Suitor to a woman, tells her, this I am
worth, and such and such like benefits you shall enjoy by me; but withal, you
must take me with such an imperfection, want of a leg or limb, with such a
weakness and the like. So God deals with men, tells them of a Mark 10. 29, 30.
Kingdom, and the Prerogatives of his Crown, (if they espouse themselves to
him:) but withal, they must take him with afflictions, sickness, poverty,
losses and crosses; yea, with persecution and death, to take all into the
bargain, and so the match is made up, not otherwise.

Every one is willing to take Christ as a Savior, to take him with peace and
riches, and a Kingdom. But art thou willing to take him, if he should not
prove worth a Groate of worldly content? If thou should never see any thing
but a rough Sea of troubles, storm after storm, poverty after sickness,
disgrace after poverty, imprisonment and banishment after them; and so as to
fail all thy life time in this Sea, that all Gods waves should pass over thee?

Art thou willing to take him, (though as many tempests of wrath should fall
upon thee as did upon patient Job) and keep thee to him? It may be thou could
take him with some one affliction, but can not endure to hear of another? But
can thou take him, or have thou taken him with a willingness to loose that
which is most dear to thee? In thy wealth it may be thou likest such a match as
Jesus Christ, to have him with house and land, with a full stock, a gainful
trade: But what do thou, or would thou do, to think on Cattle stolen, or
dying, thy House spoiled, thy Seed buried and rotten in the ground, all cast
away; thy Trade decayed, and worth nothing? Could thou now keep thee to thy
Husband, when these things come by him, and not seek to raise thy self by
unlawful courses of deceiving and stealing?

Or if these were not so much, can thou take him with loss of friends, most
endeared to thee? loss of Parents, Children, yea, the Wife of thy bosom?
Could thou be willing to have Job's boyles, and to scrape thee with a
Potsheard? to loose all thy credit and good opinion, of near friends and
others, and so to be left without any staff of worldly comfort to rest on?

But this is not all, can thou take Christ with persecutions, to be mocked and
scorned for righteousness sake? willingly bearing the worst of reproaches,
(which the men of the world so warily avoid) and to bear the utmost, the malice
and wit of men can impose?

If thou art rightly espoused to Jesus Christ, thou take him for this and
more, to endure the utmost rigor of torture, that makes men by the only
thought of it to tremble. Thou will take Christ with this willingness to
endure any thing, and not make any exception. Even as a Wife which takes a man
for love, takes him to endure any thing with him.

And as thou take 2. Hold Christ.
him for better for worse, so thou hold him for better for worse.

A Wife that takes a man out of love to him, she is not only willing to endure
with him, but she does it indeed. She forsakes him not, because he proves poor
or sickly, (which are no causes of forsaking) or that men speak against him,
but she holds against all such storms.

Many go so far, as to take Christ for better for worse, till the evil comes;
but in the time of affliction, or persecution; because their match proves full
of crosses, and because men speak against the match; because they revile and
slander the ways of God; they break away, and divorce themselves from their
Husband Christ. Which is for a Wife, (because her Husband and she find crosses
in their match,) to forsake her Husband; whereas if the knot were tied in a
right choice and affection, it would work of (on such grounds) all thought of
forsaking: So if the knot be rightly tied between the soul and Jesus Christ, it
would hold against all the crosses and evils persecutions and deaths in the
world.

And therefore in the Cant. 8. 7.
8th of the Canticles and the 7th, it is said, Much water cannot quench love,
neither can the floods drown it, that is, All the evils in the world of
afflictions (for so commonly they are shaddowed out in the Scripture So Matthew.
7. 27. affliction by rain, persecution by floods, as temptations by winds.
by waters) and persecutions (which ordinarily are termed floods) cannot drown
or overwhelm this love, not wash it away, or bear it down. Afflictions cannot
do it (though they if any thing) be as waters to quench it, and which quench
the love of many false Spouses. But as the stone Asbestus being once fired, can
never be put out by any force, though it consume it self: so is it with this
Marriage-knot, this heating of the soul by the love of Christ, when once it is
hot by love, throw whole Buckets of afflictions, poverty, sickness, shame; let
fall whole showers of evils, continued afflictions; plunge it into a Sea of
sorrows, the longest and greatest pressures and trials: and this love will not
out, but burn in the midst of the waters. This fire of Heaven is like the other
fire of destruction that never goes out.

Nor yet can the floods drown it; floods are, both deep waters and violent
waters, for those two things are included in a flood (beside water,) namely,
depth, and violence of water. Some things cannot be drowned, because the water
is not deep enough. Other things, because the water is not strong enough, by
its force of running, to bear them down. But when these two, depth and force
meet in one water, that water of all others, is most likely to drown. So is it
with evils, some evils are not deep enough to swallow up those that lie under
them, and therefore they hazard not their love much: or if they be deep, yet
not violent enough, but creep on men insensibly, and so they keep some
strength against them, that they are not overcome by them, as sickness coming
more insensibly and slowly, because not deeply rooted, is oftentimes wrought
out by the natural strength, or at least, not so troublesome to nature.
Whereas those that are deep and strong to, overthrow the body, and lay it in
the Dust: so is it with some men, they can endure afflictions, and many, but if
deep and violent evils, as persecutions, (if not by the length; yet by the
soarnesse and violence) they make the love of men to moulder away to nothing.
Continual shame it may be, by ordinary men, fellows, does but shake it: but
the deep reproach and violent injuries of great one drownes all, by taking away
their footing, that hold they had of Christ, because it was not deeply rooted;
so that they which are not able to stand against the floods, but their love is
drowned quite and overwhelmed in them, that it rises no more, are no true, but
false Spouses of Christ: And therefore to shut these two up together, we may
see it in that of our Savior, of the stony ground, which when Matthew. 13. 21.
tribulations or persecutions come are offended. The meaning of the words is
this, That there are two sorts of men, which seem Spouses to Christ, and are
not.

Some that take him for better only, and not for worse, for when the worser,
tribulations or persecutions come, they fall away.

Others that have a little faster hold on him, but not in the right Spouse-like
affection; for when persecutions come, (though tribulations did not shake their
love) they fall away: for so the words are to be understood, that one of the
two, either tribulations or afflictions divide them from their supposed
Husbands, that they cannot stand against the floods. Whether then if thou can
stand against the Waters; yet can thou stand against the floods? Art thou so
deep and strong in love, as not to be covered and borne down by the depth and
violence of persecution, for they that are rightly espoused to Christ, will
hold him for better for worse, yea, in the worst that can come.

Lastly, The last sign of a right conjugall love is, to deny all affection to
any other that would unjustly have it. She that is a Wife, tied to her Husband
in a right choice and affection, so as to take him, not by constraint, but
purely from love, will let her love stir to no other, than to him which is
her Husband. So that soul which is rightly espoused to Jesus Luke 9. 23.
Christ, denies her self, of every Whorish affection to the world. For that is
to deny our selves, when natural corruption would feign move too, and asks
leave to go out, to the world, for the satisfying of that old self. But
Spouse-like affection says no; you shall not move to pleasure; you shall not
go to credit; you shall not run to profit again: no, I am espoused to Jesus
Christ, he it is that has my love, I dare not give it to any other besides.
Him have I given my heart, and I will keep it for him.

As a Spouse may have such motions, rising up to the beauty, and excellencies
of others, (which otherwise she could like well enough,) but because she has
given him her love, she rejects such motions, as not fit for her condition; so
the soul that is espoused to Christ, may have such unchaste motions rising up,
to the excellency of the creature (which she otherwise could like) but because
she has given Christ her heart, she cast out such motions as the Sea does dirt.

Do thou then give way to false affections rising in thy heart, to prevent
the love of Christ? thou have no Spouselike affection, and so art no true
Spouse. On the contrary, do thou beat down all false loves; such affections
as naturally boil up in thy heart, to the satisfying of the flesh, that old
self? Do thou give sin a peremtory denial, when it would carry thee away
from Christ to the creature? it is then a sign the knot is tied between thee
and Christ, and thou may take comfort in it.

Other signs from the other degrees of nearness might here be added, but these
are the main.

If this unworthy Tractate may beget profit or acceptance, it is that I wish.

The Lord Jesus Christ, who is our nearness, join our spirits nearer daily to
his Father, by his holy Spirit, in faith and holiness, and preserve us all to
his eternal Kingdom and glory. Fare. well.

FINIS.

