TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty, And to the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal;
with the COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

A true Discovery of the great Damage His late Majesty King Charles the First
received, by Sir Paul Pindar, and the rest of the Commissioners, in their
managing His late Majesty's Impost and Custom, from the year 1626. to 1639.
humbly presented to your Majesty by especial Command of your Royal Father of
Blessed Memory.

Here is likewise humbly offered to your MAJESTY, and the Parliament, a Model
for Collecting Your MAJESTY'S Customs for the Future, for the preventing
former abuses, which will advance Your MAJESTY'S Customs above One hundred
thousand pounds a Year more then was made 1660. if it be duly put in execution.

By Thomas Violet of London Goldsmith.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. The Humble Petition of Thomas Violet of
London, Goldsmith.
Humbly Shows,
THAT Your Petitioner, Anno. 1647. Your Majesty's Royal Father, writ His Royal
Letter from Hampt. Court to Sir Lewis Dives, to require him to acquaint your
Majesty, that your Royal Father desired your Majesty to keep a careful watch
on His Customs, and Farmers of His Customs, that so You might prevent the
former abuses put on Your Royal Father in the managing of His Customs,
apprehending, and finding he had bin wronged many hundred thousand pounds in
His Customs from 1626. to 1939. and was one principal cause of the mi^chiefs
that befell Him.
when he was a Prisoner in the Tower with Sir Lewis Dives, Knight, did make
him acquainted, That Your Royal Father of Blessed Memory, did send for Your
Petitioner to Hampton Court some few days, before He was removed to the Isle
of Wight, and it was to give Him an account of the management of His Customs,
from 1626. to 1639. which business Your Petitioner delivered in writing to His
said MAJESTY.

And upon Your MAJESTY'S happy Arrival, (as soon as Sir Lewis Dives came over
into England) Your Petitioner revived the said business to Sir Lewis, and
desired him to acquaint Your MAJESTY therewith, that so Your Petitioner might
know Your Royal Pleasure.

Sir Lewis Dives having imparted the same to Your MAJESTY, You commanded the
Form or Model, which Your Petitioner delivered to Your Royal Father, to be
brought in to Your MAJESTY, which accordingly is herewith humbly Presented.

Your Petitioners humble prayer is, That in regard of the great and weighty
affairs that now lie before Your MAJESTY, the Approaching Parliament, etc. Your
MAJESTY will vouchsafe to refer the Examination of the said Model unto the
Right Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England,
Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, and the Lord
Roberts of Truro, or any two of them, and they to certify Your MAJESTY their
Opinion concerning the said Model, with what expedition they can. And in the
mean time that present Order be taken, That no Person or Persons Farm the said
Customs; And that Sir Lewis Dives, and the Petitioner, do attend their
Lordships, with any other Additions thereunto, for Your MAJESTY'S service.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
At the Court at Whitehall the 14th of May. 1661.
HIS MAJESTY is pleased to refer this Petition to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England, the Lord High Treasurer of
England, and the Lord Roberts, or any two of them, who are to take the same
together with the said Model for regulateing the Customs into consideration;
and thereupon certify His MAJESTY their Lordships Opinion thereof, and what
is fit to be done therein, for the good of His MAJESTY'S Service.

Edward Nicholas.

AN INSTRUMENT FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF YOUR Majesty's Customs BY COMMISSIONERS,
FOR THE Future preventing those intolerable abuses, and unnecessary Expenses,
now put upon your Majesty in the Custom Houses; to your Majesty's Damage above
one hundred thousand pounds a year, since your Majesty's happy Arrival, 1660.
Humbly Shows,
THat if Your Majesty please to settle the Customs for the Kingdom of England
by Commissioners, those more or less at your Majesty's pleasure, and at the
Sallary of 1000 l. per an. each Commissioner, that then these Commissioners be
upon Oath to do your Majesty all saithful service, and for better dispatch to
sit twice daily, except in case of Sickness, Festivals, and the Sabbath, and to
the utmost of their skill to discover the best improvement can be made of your
Majesty's Customs; Amongst whom most especial care must be had for the placing
some of most approved integrity and diligence, by which means, much of the
dudue practices past may be unfolded: the most unnecessary number of your
Officers which now not only uselesly take wages, but also many of them defraud
by themselves, and by their consents your Majesty twenty times as much as their
sees, that these weeds be plucked up, and a certain way for the future so
plainly directed, as that monthly your Majesty may plainly see the constant
Incom of your Customs, and so ordered, that your Majesty shall yearly see the
balance of Trade, whether you import more foreign goods then you export
English; and how the stock of the Kingdom in money decreaseth.

2. In order to this Regulation, it is absolutely necessary that no person be
admitted into your Majesty's service in any employment in the Custom house, but
such as have estates, and also do give good security by sufficient bondmen, to
make good any error or fraud in accounts, or whatever other deceit or damage
in Customs they shall knowingly suffer to be committed.

3. That no man be admitted to compound for forfeited goods, or have any writ
of delivery out of the Exchequer under any pretext whatever, but that such
fines and further punishments be inflicted as shall be necessary to deter them
stealing, or for the future owning what shall be discovered to have been stolen,
it is so at Venice, in Spain, and elsewhere, and the sharper the law is, it is
the better for honest Merchants that make a conscience to steal Custom, there
are many Merchants that never stole Custom in their lives.

4. That the Receivers, Treasurers, Controlers, and their Clarks, even their
accounts twice a week at least, and that the Commissioners of the Customs do
balance their accounts with the Lord Treasurer every month, the first day of
every month to give up a new account, the balance of the account to be
delivered to his Majesty, signed by all the Commissioners; by which means your
Majesty will see every day and month in the year your Revenue, and also the
great mischief in not keeping the balance of Trade, will be as easily remedyed
in having distinct books and accounts unmingled, severally kept, of exportation
by themselves, and importation by themselves, when all Custom accounts be kept
after the Italian way, every charge given to have his counter discharge,
declaring the grounds and reasons of either; This may be thoroughly examined to
all particulars, and that future order be taken that the Customs and moneys
arising thereby, may be justly and truly answered into the exchequer once
monthly, and accounted for.

5. The great mischief and abuses amongst your Majesty's Servants, is not
committed by Commissioners above stairs, they cannot so easily cosen in false
entryes; the wrong is done by confederation 'twixt waiters, Searchees,
Tides-men, Porters, Wharfingers, and the Merchants below stairs; these can
suffer the Merchants to steal Custom by gross, Any Water Porter, Pa^
Wharfinger Carman, ^smith, or Persons, shall be pri^ the transpor^ Gold or Sil^
or packing the same sha^ pardoned so much as ^ confess, prov^ they be the ^
discoverers ^fore six ho^ seizure or in ^mation by ^ other person they shall h^
one full moy^ of all such G^ and Silver, Merchandiz^ they shall se^ on, and
brin^ into the Ki^ Warehouse a^ foresaid, ^ have their p^dons for a^m^ as they
discov^
or retail, either all or in part, or by entering their goods false, one
Merchandise for another, to avoid this there must be severe punishments for the
offenders, and as ample reward for discoverers, and these settled by Act of
Parliament, and Tables hung up with Rules for every man.

6. I humbly propose, that there be two Balletine Boxes, as there is at Venice
this day, made to rest, the one in the Custom-house, the other near the
Exchange, that they be under four Keys of men of best approved integrity, and
that public notice be given to all people for the making of discoveries, that
whosoever shall prove by good testimony your Majesty to be cheated by Merchants
servants, and Officers in the Custom-house, or others, shall have one moietie
of all such goods so forfeited for their pains, and also such further
emploiment as they shall be found capable of, that it be also ordered every man
to deliver in his information, sealed and subscribed with his name, the place
of his abode, the fact when, how, and where committed: That a Commission be
delivered to the Lord Treasurer, Lord Chancellor of the Exchequor, and the
Lords chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons of the Exchequer, to impanel a
Jury of thirty six Gentlemen of quality, not Tradesmen, or Merchants, to avoid
partiality, the first day of every Term, to be returned by the Sheriffs of
London, Middlesex, Kent, Essex and Surrey, all-dwelling distant not above five
miles from London, out of which to have twelve stand by lot, the twelve to
choose their Foreman, and that the said Jury be sworn to represent all such
matter, and only such as shall be found serious, and for His Majesty's service,
and on good information and full evidence given, to deliver up their true
verdict to the Lord Treasurer, and the Barrons of the Exchequer, signed with
their respective hands in a fair Parchment Roll upon Oath; that each respective
Jury-man so serving have ten shillings a day out of forfeitures arising by
discoveries due unto Your Majesty, so made as aforesaid.

7. And that every respective Officer hereafter relating to any service in the
Custom-house of the Ports of London, or else where, shall swear before two of
the Commissioners appointed for that service, That for the time to come, they
shall not see, or suffer any manner of goods, coming from parts beyond Seas, to
be laid on Land without Bill or Warrant of the accustomed Officers of the
Custom-house, without seizing the same goods so landed, according to the
Statute. The same Oath to be given for preventing the shipping of uncustomed
Commodities without lawful Cocket.

8. And for the better breaking away all confederacy as aforesaid, it is
expedient that it should be at the Commissioners pleasure, to make the under
Officers twice or thrice a year, as occasion of distrust is given, to cast lots
for the removing of their Stations, as chance shall guide them.

9. That care be had for putting in execution the Statute of Queen Elizabeth,
in which the Company of Wherry-men took order, that the Masters and Wardens of
the said Company were bound in the Exchequer, that neither they, nor any of the
Company of Watermen, their servants Boats or Wherreys, should carry in, or
fetch from any Ship coming in, or going out of the Kingdom, any goods or
merchandise, except such as were forfeit, which should be brought to Land by
the Officer pertaining to the Port of London, which Wares should be registered
in the Warehouse, in the Custom-house of the Port of London.

10. And that all Liter-men, Carmen, Crane-Keepers, Brewers and Wharfingers,
within four miles of London, be bound in the Exchequer never to lade or unlade
on land or on shipboard, any Wares, or Beer in the night, nor in the day time,
into any Ship or Vessel, but in the presence of the Searcher, or Officer there
present, with the Cocket thereof.

11. That an exact Register Book of all Bonds taken to Your Majesty be kept,
and all Bonds to remain in the Custody of the Commissioners for the time being,
that no bond be delivered but by the consent of three of the Commissioners, and
the reasons recorded for which the bond was canceled, and that Book be yearly
delivered into the Exchequor.

12. That all Bonds after they are duly proved, forfeited, the next Term be
delivered into the Barrons of the Exchequer; and a particular List of the Names
and value of them to my Lord Treasurer, and the Attorney General, that so the
penalties may be duly levied.

13. That the Statute be put in Execution, forbidding all Masters of any Ship
or Vessel, to break Bulk, or put ashore out of his Ship or Vessel any goods or
merchandise in any Creek or by-place, Fisher-Boat or other Vessel, Wagon,
Cart, or Coach, before he have made his entry of his said Ship and goods, the
said Master shall not only lose the goods so seized, but shall also forfeit
his Ship, with fine, and imprisonment of him that has consented thereto.

14. That it be hereafter declared, what places in London are or shall be
permitted lawful Keys and Wharfs to lade and unlade goods and merchandise, and
all other places prohibited about Graves-End, Barking, Greenhive, Wolledge,
Blackwall, Dedford, Limehouse, Wapping, St. Katherines, Southwark,
London Bridge, Lambeth, Bankside, etc. And also to appoint what Commodities
shall be lawful to lade or unlade at each Wharfe, or landing place, always
ordering that those goods of greatest bulk and least value, be taken up, or put
on shipboard at Wharfes furthest distant from the Custom-house of London.

15. Ever having especial care for the future, that all Silks, Satins,
Cambricks, Launs, and all foreign Laces, Thread, or Silk, rich drugs, Pearls,
Ambergreese, Bezar-stones, Sivet Musk, Diamonds, and all sorts of precious
Stones and Jewels, together with all sorts of rich Commodities, of small bulk,
be for ever hereafter unladen in the Warehouse of the Custom-house of London,
and no where else, there to be kept till sworn Prizers that shall be expressly
appointed for that purpose, and sworn impartially to value all such goods and
merchandise as aforesaid, do prize the same.

16. Also appointing a Seal (such as my Lord Treasurer shall think fit) for
such fine Commodities as will bear either Lead or Wax; Or else a Certificate to
be given to the parties claiming the goods, of the quantities of which the
Customs are satisfied.

17. That a Proclamation pass, That (these fine merchandises, and all others
that shall upon the view of the Book of Rates, by the Lord Treasurer be
appointed) after such a day shall not be exposed to sale, till they be sealed
as aforesaid; Or that they see a Certificate of the Commissioners of the
Custom-house, of the Customs of such goods as are duly satis^ied at the
Custom-house, under the penalty of three months imprisonment of the Person so
buying any of the Commodities as aforesaid, together with the forfeiture of the
equal value of such wares so bought as aforesaid, and that all Shop keepers and
others, buying any such fine goods as aforesaid, shall endorse on the
Certificate of the Commissioners of the Custom-house his name, shop, and place
of abode, and the quantity, and time when such goods were bought as aforesaid.

18. And that it may be lawful for any person, neither finding the Seal, or
good Certificate of the Merchant from whom he bought such Commodities; that
they were such parcels of such fine goods brought in such a Ship, the Customs
whereof were duly satisfied by himself (inserting his name and place of abode,
at such a time, as by his Certificate from the Commissioners of the
Custom-house may appear) I say it may be lawful for any person, not finding
Seal or Certificate, as aforesaid, to seize all such fine goods or wares, the
one half to his Majesty's use, the other to the Persons use that can discover
such uncustomed goods as aforesaid, and to deposit them in the public
Warehouse in the Custom-house, till due proofs are made touching all the
Premises.

19. That all Ships, Pinks, and other Vessels, when first they come into the
Port of London, bringing fine goods, be appointed a certain place to ride at in
the Thames, where some Posts or Chains may be sixth for that purpose distant
from the shore, and a Boat or more, and guard if occasion need, may watch and
swim round to search all persons going in, and coming forth with fine goods
uncustom'd out of the said Vessels.

20. That for the future to have all the Cocquets printed and filled up, would
ease much trouble both to the Cleark and Merchants, and be altogether as safe;
It is so at several foreign Ports.

21. It must be perpetual imprisonment, forfeiture of Estate, and corporal
punishment besides, to counterfeit the King's Seal for fine goods, or
Commissioners Certificates for customed goods.

22. Every Merchant stranger, that would enter any goods inward, being no
Denison, shall be bound to employ the return of his Commodities according to
the Statue, by Bonds taken, etc.

The Frame of the Model corrected by such alterations and aditions, as the
High Court of Parliament shall think fit, will save your Majesty a hundred
thousand pounds yearly, of which your Majesty has been defrauded by several
indirect practices of the Officers of the Customs, and Merchants of London,
their Servants, and their Adherents; 1660. All which I humbly submit to your
Majesty and the Parliament, to do therein as you shall think fit.

Thomas Violet.

I did about August last 1661. humbly present to the Right Honorable the Lord
Treasurer, and the Lord Ashley, several other Papers for the Regulating of Your
Majesty's Customs, and concerning a debt demanded of Your Majesty, by some of
the Commissioners of the Customs, being two hundred and fifty thousand pounds,
to advance one hundred and fifty thousand pounds, and so make the debt four
hundred thousand pound^, and have Your Majesty's Customs tied for the same, as
will appear by the Commissioners printed Paper, to which I humbly refer. I
humbly desired my Lord Treasurer, that the Farmers Accounts which were brought
into the Parliament 1642. may be stated and settled from 1626. to 1639. the
Committees Reports viewed and examined, concerning Your Majesty's Customs,
before so great a debt was allowed, I humbly presented the great damage to Your
Majesty, by engaging and incumbering Your Customs in so great a debt, to which
Vaper I humbly refer. I pray God that may be done herein, which is best for
Your Majesty's service, and the Good of the Kingdom in general, without by
respects to particular Persons.

In the month of May 1661. I humbly petitioned your Majesty, by your Royal
Fathers Command and Order to me at Hampton Court, to be pleased to take notice
how his Customs had bin managed from 1626. to 1639. which business your
Petitioner delivered in writing, and also that your Majesty's Customs in that
present Year 1660. was unduly managed by the indirect practices of some
persons, to your Majesty's damage one hundred thousand pounds a year, for want
of good Order and Rule, in the carriage of that great business of your Customs.
Your Majesty was graciously pleased to refer your Petitioner to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of England, the Earl of
Southampton Lord High Treasurer of England, and the Lord Privy Seal, who are to
take the same into consideration, and thereupon to certify your Majesty their
opinions thereof, and what is fit to be done therein, for the good of his
Majesty's service.

Since which time, their Lordships have met and appointed me to abb^eviate the
same, which I have done, and gave them every one a Breviate of what I humbly
desire, for the regulating of your Majesty's Customs for the future: since
which time the Parliament have settled the Customs on your Majesty, and I
humbly hope and pray for such an Act of Parliament, as shall redress all
former miscarriages, whereby your Majesty has been defrauded of your Customs.

Now this being well managed, is the chief Branch of your Majesty's Revenew,
and the Support of Trade and Navigation?

My Humble Request is, that the Officers and Commissioners for the future may
be confined to a moderate sallery, and all frauds and tricks of underofficers
may for the future be prevented, if the Customs be not narrowlier watched, and
the Moneys all converted to your Majesty's use, which formerly to the value of
near one million of money, was from 1626. to 1639. converted into private and
particular men's hands, to the ruin of his late Majesty in his great affairs,
as I can particularly prove yearly if it be required above fourscore thousand
pounds a year, converted into private purses, this destroyed the King, your
Royal Fathers Exchequer, and hindered all his Majesty's business yearly: These
very mischiefs if they be not timely prevented by Your Majesty and the
Parliament, may work the same dangerous effects again as they did formerly, and
may be repented when it is too late.

I have in this and many other particulars studied the publike-Interest at my
vast expense, and have had daily promises and references for my satisfaction,
but no performances, of which I am not a little sensible.

And I humbly hope whilst I make it my study to promote your Majesty's
service, and the good of the Kingdom; my long Imprisonment, and losses for Your
Majesty's Father, ^ur Majesty ^s now all ^mage of the any that was ^^de by the
^mp Parlia^nt, which ^l be near ^000 pound. I had had ^ Commissi^passed to be
^gister, I ^uld have all ^ several per^s buying ^t silver to ^e converted into
coin, ^ they to ^ve paid the ^nage, and ^ed your Ma^y this mo^ it is an
un^ferable ^arge for ^ur Majesty ^ pay the ^nage: there many score ^usand ^unds
a year ^ported into ^gland of ^d and silver, ^ich I would ^ce to be ^ined, had
I ^ Commissi^all but what ^ur Majesty ^ences. Also ^re will be any hundred
^uses acted in ^ Custom ^siness, which ^ll never be ^scovered, ^thout your
^titioner be ^ployed. I ^mbly rely on your Majest'es promise, it being for Your
profit to employ me in the Mint and ^stom business, during your Majesty's
pleasure.
and charges for attendance to procure my often promised satisfaction; there
may that just and merciful care be taken of me and my suffering, that I may not
conclude with the ruin of my own personal Estate and Interest.

I have suffered eight years Imprisonment, and lost to the value of twenty
thousand pounds for your Majesty's Royal Father, and I have been promised from
time to time since your Majesty's happy arrival into England, employments in
the Mint and Customs for my satisfaction.

I humbly rely on your Majesty, and some of your Honorable Counselors,
promises to me for my employment in your Majesty's Mint and Customs; your
Petitioner has the Certificate of all your Majesty's Officers of the Mint, for
my employment as Register, if it were passed your Majesty's Seal.

Upon my life, I will make your Majesty's mint to work again, and prevent the
transporting many score thousand pounds a year of Gold and Silver that is daily
transported without your Majesty's License; which I have not now power to do,
because I am not employed by your Majesty's Commission, if I do not do it, I
will lose my employment, I humbly desire my Commission but during your
Majesty's pleasure.

If your Majesty employ me in your Custom business, if I save not your
Majesty one hundred thousand pounds a year more then you made last year, 1660.
I will serve your Majesty in your Customs, and ask never a penny salary;
Provided I may have my Lord Treasurers Warrant to seize all Gold and Silver
exported without your Majesty's license, and to seize all Goods and Merchandise
exported and Imported before the Customs be paid; and that strict Rules and
Orders be observed for the future preventing of frauds by Order of Parliament
to force all. I will put in good Security to account justly to your Majesty
for one half of the seisures which I and my Deputies shall seize. Your Majesty
is at fifty thousand pounds a Year salarie for Officers to see the Custom
paid, and yet your Majesty is daily by their ignorance or breach of Trust
deceived above one hundred thousand pounds a year.

And thus I have humbly undertaken to the Right Honorable the Lord Treasurer
to serve Your Majesty without a Fee, and prevent in great part these abuses,
and make the Merchants weary of the trade of stealing Custom.

And yet my Warrant hangs in suspense, being referred and referred again; In
the mean time I am deferred, and your Majesty daily cozened in your Customs
one hundred thousand pounds a year and above: If I get one penny Fee from your
Majesty, your Majesty shall save it upon the peril of my life a hundred fold
as much.

I can prove your Royal Fathers commands to me at Hampton Court to make your
Majesty truly acquainted how his Majesty was cosened in his Customs from 1626.
to 1639. many hundred thousand pound, which his Royal Majesty found to be too
true, when it was too late, and commanded me upon my allegiance, I should
acquaint your Majesty with the particular ways how and by whom he was deceived
in the Customs, and that upon the penalty of my allegiance and life, as I would
answer to God and your Majesty, I should truly present these abuses to your
Majesty; this was two days before your Royal Father went to the Islo of
Wight, in the presence of Mr. Hugh Hen, and Mr. Brogden: Mr. Brogden is living,
and brought up to Sir Lewis Dives your Fathers Royal Letter, to command Sir
Lewis Dives to signify to your Majesty how highly your Royal Father did
apprehend he had been deceived in his Customs, from 1626. to 1639. and your
Majesty's Royal Father desired your Majesty to look carefully after your
Customs; I humbly refer my self to the Honorable Gentleman Sir Lewis Dives
report to your Majesty touching this business.

May it please your Majesty, I ventured my life to bring up your Majesty's
Royal Fathers Letter to the City of London from Oxford, 1643. to the Lord
Major, and Common Council of London, there being the same month one of your
Majesty's Fathers messengers murdered at London, for bringing from Oxford your
Majesty's Royal Fathers Preclamations.

I ventured my life when I was a Prisoner in the Tower, to make my escape to
your Majesty's Royal Father, and to return back a Prisoner to the Tower, upon
his especial command, to bring his Majesty these Papers concerning the Custom
business, as Sir Lewis Dives can witness.

And now may it please your Majesty, for obeying your Royal Fathers command to
me upon my Allegiance and Life, that without favor, mincing, or flattery, I
should tell your Majesty the truth, how your Royal Father was abused in his
Customs, as Sir Lewis Dives and Mr Brogden knows the blessed Kings command to
me that I should do it, it being his Majesty's last words he spoke to me; I
have in this also humbly obeyed; and put my self in great jeopardie, that so I
might discharge my faithful promise, and perform your Royal Fathers commands, I
know what a many powerful enemies I have raised by speaking and printing this
truth concerning the Customs if I have not your Majesty's protection. I humbly
hope the profit and safety coming to your Majesty by this Information,
together with Your Royal Fathers desire to you in this business shall protect
me, whose great and bitter afflictions had made him as wise as King Solomon.

When he told me before Mr. Brogden, and at the same time he wrote up to Sir
Lewis Dives to tell him he was afraid this information of the ill managing of
his Majesty's Customs did come too late for him; but it would be most
seasonable to Your Majesty, charging Sir Lewis Dives to present me to Your
Majesty to make this out to be a certain truth; and withal his Majesty
telling me I will write to Sir Lewis Dives to present your faithful services
and sufferings to the Prince, and serve him faithfully as you have done me, and
do not doubt but God will put it into his heart to remember and reward you for
my sake, to do that for you I would and should have done, but alas I cannot
help my self in this condition as I am, Sir Lew is Dives will be believed in
what he shall testify for you to the Prince; this testimony from Sir Lewis
Dives to Your Majesty, I humbly hope will make Your Majesty to protectime
from the malice and envy of some men.

When Sir Lewis Dives made Your Majesty acquainted in May last, 1660 with this
business; Your Majesty was graciously pleased to declare your Royal pleasure,
and to promise that if I did prove what I said, That Your Majesty's Royal
Father was deceived in his Customs from 1626 to 1639 as I set forth in my
Writing; And that Your Majesty was defrauded by several undue practices this
last Year 1660 in Your Customs above two thousand pounds a week, or an hundred
thousand pounds a year; and if I did show ways to prevent the same, and could
advance your Custom one hundred thousand pounds more then the Custom made
1660. Upon Your Majesty's Royal Word Your Majesty would see me paid to the
value of twenty thousand pounds, or employ me a Commissioner in the Customs
and Mint, with a Fee to that value, and charged Sir Lewis Dives I should do it
as soon as I could, and Your Majesty upon your Kingly Word would keep your
promise.

This Narrative will clearly prove to Your Majesty I have in every thing
performed my undertaking; First, I have proved Your Royal Father defrauded for
thirteen Years about eighty thousand pounds a year, and which way the Money
was spent. Secondly, I have proved your Majesty defrauded Anno 1660. in the
Customs one hundred thousand pounds a year, and set down the ways to prevent
it: And if your Majesty make me a Commissioner, and give me Power, upon my
Life I will make your Custom sixscore thousand pounds a year, more then they
made 1660. My Trust is next to God wholly in your Majesty; That you will
consider my fidelity, losses, suffering^; imprisonments, and to reward me
according to your Royal Fathers request to your Majesty touching me:

And if I be required by your Majesty, the Parliament, or your Majesty's
Privy Council: I shall print the substance of the particular Narrative which I
delivered to his Majesty, 1647. at Hampton Court, concerning the managing the
Customs from 1626. to 1639. and his Majesty's charge to me, and Sir Lewis
Dives, fully to acquaint you with the same, and the mischeifs that befell your
Majesty's Royal Father in his affairs by those miscarriages, or deliver it to
your Majesty's Privy Council in Writing if I be required to do it: For your
Majesty's service I shall wait on Mr. Secretary Nicholas to receive your
Majesty's commands, whether I shall print the aforesaid Narrative, or deliver
it to your Majesty's Privy Council in Writing, to the end these abuses in the
Custom House may be prevented for the future; as your Majesty please to
command me, that I will perform, and ever rest, Your Majesty's most dutiful and
obedient Subject as long as I live,

Jan. 25. 1661/2 THO. VIOLET.

FINIS.

