To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the
City of London. These;
Right Honorable, and right Worshipful,
THis his Majesty's most gracious Letter, I Thomas Violet of London Goldsmith,
brought from Oxford to London: and for doing his Majesty this service for the
benefit and weal public of this famous City, I have been committed prisoner
to the Tower of London for three years and half, and for nine hundred twenty
eight days of that time, was kept close prisoner in my Chamber, my Estate to a
great value sequestered (too gentle a word for so cruel usage to the Kings
messenger.) I do likewise send to you here enclosed, a book printed by Peter
Cole, in Corn hill near the Royal Exchange the 16. of January, 1643. Wherein
you may see the transaction of this Business concerning this his Majesty's
Letter, at large, printed by order of the two houses of Parliament, a book
worthy of your serious consideration, Now my humble request to you the Lord
Major; Aldermen and Common Counsel and all other well affected people of the
City of London is:

1. That you would seriously consider of this his Majesty's most gracious
letter unto you.

2. That you would examine all or any of the Records of the City of London, to
see if ever any Messenger from any of his Majesty's predecessors to this City
of London, with the Kings letter desiring peace, has been so hardly used as I
have been.

3. That you would improve your interest with both houses of Parliament, that I
may be discharged from my cruel imprisonment, may have the Sequestration taken
off from my estate, and receive full reparations for all my damages, and may
have leave to attend his Majesty.

And if the partciulars in his Majesty's letter which I send you here the Copy
off, shall yet be taken into your serious consideration, I humbly conceive it
may prove in some measure an happy expedient, to prevent those dangers,
mischiefs, and inconveniences, that seem to threaten disturbance both of the
City and Kingdom: which I am imboldned humbly to offer to your wisdom, out
of the zeal and affection my heart really bears to the happiness, peace,
and prosperity both of this famous City of London, and the whole Kingdom.

Your honors and the Cities most humble servant. Thomas Violet
From my Prison in the Tower, this 28. of June, 1647.
FINIS.

