A VINDICATION OF THE Apostolic and Primitive Manner OF BAPTIZING BY Immersion.

IN A Letter to Mr. George Keith: WITH Remarks upon a Second Friendly Epistle,
Written to him, from one who Styles himself Trepidantium Malleus.

LONDON, Printed for H. Walwyn, at the Three Legs in the Poultry, at the End
of the Old-Jury, 1700.

Mr. Keith,
YOU have very commendably disengaged your self from many Prejudices in
^wncation and Interest, to make an Impartial Enquiry into the True Principles
of Christian Religion; but you must expect the same Discouragements for so
doing, that every honest Enquirer before you, has met withal. Your Old Friends
will reproach you with Apostasy, and your New Ones, if you be not well aware,
will make you an Apostate from Truth. The several Zealots from all Quarters
fill your Ears with, Lo! here is Truth, and Sing Loud Hosannah's to their
several Systems; but I hope you are so good and so wise a Man, as to believe
'em at your leisure. Your having been imposed upon already, ought to make you
wary and cautious in giving your Assent for the future; and I am sure you
cannot justify it to your own Understanding, if you too hastily engage in any
Religious Communion amongst us. You have seen enough of Fair Pretense to Truth
and Goodness, so as not to be readily drawn in by a Specious Appearance.
Believe not every Spirit, is a Divine Oracle, and you had never greater reason
to regard it than now, when every Party aims at making you their Proselyte. You
do well to hear, and examine what they say, but your Prudence will Instruct you
to consider whom you take for your Guide. Give me leave as your Friend to put
you only in mind of the Men of whom you ought to beware.

First, I think you ought to beware of the Courtship and Discourses of the Men
of mighty Pretenses and Confidence, who talk over all their Scheme in Religion,
with the same Assurance as if they had Immediate Inspiration; nay, if you can
have Faith to believe 'em, they will not fail to let you know they are often
Inspired.

In the next place, you ought to beware of the Men of Excess in Devotion, or
the Devout Biggots, who by the Luster of their Specious Piety, may tempt you to
fall in Love with their mistaken Principles.

In the Third place, be sure to be upon your Guard when you happen to Converse
with some Persons truly Religious; who nevertheless will not allow you the use
of your Reason in several Points of Religion, but make it their Common place to
disclaim it, and decry the Persons who make the best use of it they can.

And in the Fourth place, I think it will be needless, since you are no
Stranger to Learning, to put you in mind of having no regard to a certain sort
of Men, who are Notorious Quacks in Religion.

In short these Men are such Bunglers in good Sense and Reason, that I dare say
you are aware of 'em already.

But in the last place, you cannot be too wary in your Conversation with a
Blustering noisy Pedant, who has more Wisdom and Learning in his own Opinion,
than all the Ancients and the Moderns; who is infallible in his Judgment, and
irrefutable in his Arguments: who makes wonderful Discoveries of other Men's
Errors, and more wonderful Confutations of 'em, but will not be obliged to
acknowledge his own: who marches up and down from Coffee-house to Coffee-house
to hand about his Notions, and to magnify his Conquests: Who looks as big as
the Great Mogul with a Scrap of Latin, and a little New Testament Greek; vainly
admires the in-considerable thing himself, and more vainly expects that others
should do so too: Who just knows so much of Books and Languages as to give you
their Titles, and call Things by their Names, and can despise every body, but
the despisable Man himself.

If your ill luck makes you acquainted with this Man, you will soon discover
him by his undiscreet Zeal and Ostentation: He Will tell you a fine Story of his
own Capacity, and bravely undertake to prove some New Hypothesis, by Arguments
known to no body, and convincing to no body but himself; and if you can bear
with his Impertinence, he will be Scribbling on in perperpetuum, to show you his
own Skill in Controversy, and your Mistakes: But then by those very Writings
of his you may know him; for at the very first taste you will find they contain
nothing else, But loose In-coherent Matter, dull Criticisms, foolish Stories,
idle Banter, stupid Drollery, and in short, the whole Family of the Insipids.

There Is a certain Author you know, whose Writings this Character very well
fuits; who will at last undoubtedly convince all that Read his Friendly
Epistles, his Apologies and Reprimands, and his Vindiciae Antibaxterianae, that
no Man that ever Printed on any Subject, can be so completly Dull, and so
remarkably Scurrilous as himself. I need not cite the Pages and the
Expressions, but I refer you to his whole Second Friendly Epistle to you for
one scandalous Instance.

The Author of this Friendly Epistle, Mr. Malleus (as he desires to be called)
excuses himself with an air of Indignation, page 4.
from proving that (...), signifies only to Plunge, for that he is sure is a
mistake; which after his Comical Fashion, he endeavors to prove from the
Original Words used in the Texts, Mark 7.4. and not as he has twice miscited it
4. and 7. Heb. 9.10. and not the 11. as he makes it.
cited in the Margin.

But notwithstanding his great Confidence in his Proof from these Passages, may
it not still be questioned, whether his Instances have any other Argument in
'em, unless it be to prove the flat contradiction to what he asserts? For the
words formed from the Verb (...) plainly referr to the hands in St. Mark and
St. Luke too; Luke 11.38.
and to make the Phrase complete, the Greek must run in St. Mark, (...), i. e.
unless they wash their hands, and in St. Luke, (...), i. e. that he had not
first washed his hands; by an ordinary grecism of an Accusative after a Verb
Passive, which every one of the Authors, Fr. Ep. p. 2.
miserable Grecians, very well knows, but himself. Now, that the Jews washed
their hands any other way than we, and all the World do, by Plunging 'em in the
Water, lies upon our Author's hands to prove; and there it will continue to
stick; I dare say, and without being put to a Plunge, he will never be able to
maintain it. Heb. 9. and 11.
But Mr. Malleus referrs you to another Text in the Hebrews; ay, so he does:
But he miscites the Number of the Verse, and like a miserable Grecian misreads
the Words of his Author, and like a miserable Logician, first supposes by a
good Inclination, that the sprinkling of Blood mentioned in the 14th. is one of
the Baptisms mentioned in the 10th. and then argues very pertly, but very
inconclusively, from it. And this is the fate of the First Arguments he
advances for a thing in which he is so confident, as to say, they are
irrefragable; and as clear as any Proposition in Euclid: Fr. Ep. p. 5.
a Book I have good reason to believe he never saw, since he so scurvily
disgraces it, by comparing his proofs, with the Theorems of that celebrated
Mathematician.

But Mr. Malleus is sick of this question, Ibid. p. 6.
(and I dare say his Reader is as sick of his Proofs) and therefore he proceeds
with great solemnity to advance Three New Paradoxes. He tells you Mr. Keith,
with great assurance that John the Baptist and St. Peter too, Declare they
Plunged not when they Baptized.

Not in express Terms sure --? No, no, but by good consequence. Pray let us see
it good Mr. Malleus. Why, St. Luke in his 3d Chap. and 16th Verse, introduces
John the Baptist, saying, I Baptize you with Water, and not in the Water, for
the Preposition is omitted. p. 4.
O miserable Grecian! don't you know what every Schoolboy knows, that an
Ellipsis of the Preposition does not alter the sense of the Phrase? Mat. 3.6.
Mat. 3.11. Mark 1.5, 8. Joh. 1.26, 31, 33, Joh. 3.23.
And don't you see it expressed in the Parrallel, and other places cited in the
Margin? But Mr. Malleus says, it is not English to say, I Plunge you with Water:
Agreed; but who translates it so besides himself? it is a bad Translation, and
it is his own. But what then shall determine the sense of the Word Baptize? Why
let Mr. Malleus for once consult his Greek Testament for the three Texts in the
Margin, Mat. 3.6, and 16. Joh. 3.23.
where John is said to Baptize in Jordan, and in Enon, because there was much
Water, or many Waters -- and Christ who was Baptized by John in Jordan, is said
expressly to have went up out of the Water, so that the manner of John's Baptism
is plainly specified in these passages. And if You Mr. Keith should ask your
Worthy Informer Mr. Malleus, in what manner did John the Baptist Baptize Christ
and others who came to him? Or how were they Baptized? Mr. Malleus must answer
if he will answer with the Text, That Christ and the Disciples of John were
Baptized in Jordan; unless he chooses to use his beloved Translation, and say
they were Baptized with Jordan.

But Mr. Malleus urges, p. 8.
That John so Baptized with Water, as Christ on the Day of Pentecost did with
the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; and he makes a great Pother with this Argument;
and lays about him as fiercely as Don Quixote did at the Windmill. Well, admit
it be so; then it must follow, that John the Baptist's Disciples were totally
immersed, and covered with the Water in Jordan, for the Apostles were totally
immerc'd or covered with the Miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost, the Fire appeared only in the form of Tongues; but all the Room was
filled with a mighty rushing Wind, Acts 2.
and all the Persons present therein, were as entirely Baptized with, or in
this mighty rushing Wind, as they had been, in in case all the Room had been
filled with Water; and thus John, as our Authors Words are, so Baptized with
Water, as Christ did with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; that is, by Immersion.

But the Text does neither say, nor imply, that Christ's Baptism with the Holy
Ghost must be like John's Baptism with Water; it is only said, I Baptize you
with Water, and he shall, etc. The Word Baptize in this Second Clause has left
its Native Sense, and if the Metaphorical and Borrowed Sense be somewhat
Catachrestical; it is no new thing, but an ordinary Scheme of Speech, used in
every Leaf of the Bible. This Word is used in another Allusive Sense, in Matthew.
20.22. and Mark. 10.38. and is thus Paraphraz'd by the Assemblies; shall you be
able to endure the over-flowings of Afflictions, which like deep Water-floods
must compass me about? Which Paraphraze by the way, in the Assemblies
Annotations is not only true, but a further Proof, that the Word (...), even
when used Metaphorically, has all its Allusive Sense from the very Notion of
Immersion.

But Mr. Malleus insists upon it, page 9.
That the Holy Ghost was poured out upon the Apostles, and that they were not
immersed, or plunged into or under that Divine Effusion; and as he expresses
it, the Water in John's Baptism was applied to the Person, and not the Person
to the Water: So then all the force of his Argument amounts to this, that
John's Baptism with Water was like the Baptism of the Holy Ghost; but that was
by the Effusion, or pouring of it out upon the Apostles, and therefore John's
Baptism must be by the Effusion or pouring out of Water on his Disciples.

Now to this, you may give Mr. Malleus this plain Answer, First, That there is
no necessity for an entire resemblance of a Real and Metaphorical Baptism in
all Circumstances as has been hinted before, and he will not be able to prove
his Major, that the one must in all respects be like the other: It Is sufficient
if there were any likeness, to justify such a Form of Speech, as Baptizing
with the Holy Ghost; whether the Parties were first put into the rushing Wind,
or the mighty rushing Wind was miraculously brought upon 'em on every side; in
either case the Parties were totally covered and surrounded with the Element.

But still Mr. Malleus will reply, That the pouring out the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, was Baptizing the Apostles with the Holy Ghost; and by consequence
that pouring Water upon the Party Baptized, is a proper manner of Baptism. Now,
suppose this should be granted Mr. Malleus, That the Real and Metaphorical
Baptism are in all respects Analogous, then it must follow according to his own
Judgment: That, as the Holy Ghost was poured out upon the Parties Baptized at
Pentecost, in so plentiful a manner, so as the Symbol of the Divine Presence,
viz. the mighty rushing Wind, entirely surrounded 'em, and touched 'em in all
parts, and on every side: So the Party's to be Baptized with Water, ought to
have it poured out upon 'em, with equal plenty, that the Element may touch
every part of the Body; and not only so, but it must be so poured upon the
Parties Baptized, as to touch all parts at the same time, as the rushing Wind
which filled the Room where the Apostles met, was at the same time present, and
Contiguous to every part of their Bodies. It cannot be denied, I say, if he
will have the manner of Baptism by Water, to be specified and determined by the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, but that the Water must be poured on the Party
Baptized with a kind of Inundation, so as the Water may stay and abide upon the
whole Body, in every part at the same time. And if this will necessarily
follow; What will become of his Mode of Baptism, by applying or sprinkling the
Water on certain Parts only? That certainly will not be Analogous to the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, which he contends it ought to be. So that for the
Strength of his Arguments, Mr. Malleus might well have forborne his insulting:
but the weakness of his Understanding would not give him leave to practice the
least piece of Discretion.

In the 11. Page he tells you, That it being admitted by many Paedobaptists
that St. John plunged his Disciples; this is accounted the strongest effort for
the Baptists. Pray Mr. Keith ask him, who told him so? Not one Baptist of
common sense can be of that Opinion; for the strongest Effort or Proof for
plunging, if there be any, must be found in the Words of the Institution, Vide
Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity. pt. 1. Chap. 10.
and the History of the Corresponding Practice of the Apostolic Age, and not
in the Concessions of some Learned Ingenuous Men; which Concessions at best,
are but Argumentum ad bominem, or a probable Topic; whereas an Argument from
the Institution and Primitive Practice. recited in the Gospels, or the Acts has
that certainty, and undoubted Evidence, which obliged those Learned Men to make
the very Concessions he mentions.

In Page 13. He puts a Question in very Bungling Burlesque. What were John's
and Peter's Arms and Legs made of? We may with good reason, and more modesty
then he uses, in treating those Venerable Apostolic Men; ask him, what were
the coarse and uncouth Materials of his Understanding? But why do you ask that
Mr. Malleus? Why because so many were Baptized: Friendly Epist. p. 13.
All Jerusalem, all Judea, all the Regions round about Jordan -- Three Thousand
by St. Peter in one Day, and they were Baptized in their Clothes, which is not
likely, or Naked, which is not Modest, for what Provision had they made to
change their Clothes? And this is the Substance of Mr. Malleus his Remarks in
that Page, abating the childish and silly Wittisms -- But pray Mr. Malleus, why
such adinn with the universal [All] do you design to make Mr. Keith believe;
that the whole City of Jerusalem and the whole Country of Judea, and all the
People living round about Jordan, were Baptized by St. John in Person? I dare
say you cannot impose such a sense upon the Text, nor Mr. Keith: and the Text
does not say what you make it say, Mat. 3.5.
in the place you referr to, There Is not All It Is observable that Cardinal
Bellarmine was in the same mistake as appears. Tom. 2. de Bapt. Lib. 1. Cap. 22.
Jerusalem to be found. But admit it had been said, all Jerusalem; as it is
said all Judea, and all the Neighborhood of Jordan; has Mr. Malleus ever seen
any Interpreter that afferts, we must by the universal [All,] understand every
Body that lived in those places? And has he forgotten the noted distinctiof an
Universal in genera singulorum, and in singula generum? which his Authors so
often abuse in their Comments, on that famous Text, God would have all men be
saved. They will immediately tell him, that [All] must signify in very many
passages, some of all Ranks and Orders, and not every individual Person, as it
is plain it does in the case before us; for St. Matthew uses a term of abatement
in the 7th Verse, saying, that John observed many of the Pharisees and Saducees
coming to his Baptism, it is neither said all of 'em, nor most of 'em; but many
or diverse of 'em; and they that came, Joh. 1.19. and 29.
were sent by such of the Jews who did not come to his Baptism; to enquire what
John was doing, and with what design: and many of the many that came, for ought
appears to the contrary, or can be proved by Mr. Malleus, or any of his Learned
London Divines, were never Baptized by John. So that at last his all Jerusalem
and all Judea, etc. must with the consent of the Context Mr. Malleus his
Learned Friends and Annotators, and with the Approbation to of his London
Divines, In his Title Page.
signify some Persons; or, if he will diverse Persons dwelling in Jerusalem,
and in all parts of Judea, and in the Neighborhood of Jordan came to St. John;
Mat. 3.6.
and were, as St. Matthew says expressly, Baptized by John in Jordan, Mark 1.5.
and St. Mark more expressly in the River Jordan, and that John who staid some
time in the Wilderness of Judea, should during his stay Baptize either in
Person or by his substitutes diverse of the Jews; is no such Instance of his
wonderful strength, nor so unlikely as Mr. Malleus endeavors to represent it.

But Mr. Malleus thinks it very improbable, Friendly Epist. p. 13.
That St. Peter should Baptize 3000 Converts in one day, especially confidering
(as his Learned Phrase is,) his antecedent and consequent work. This
observation is a fresh instance of Mr. Malleus's negligent and inconsiderate
humor; and demonstrates very evidently, that he cannot read hardly a single
Text with any tolerable attention to the sense of it.

For, in the 2d of the Acts at the 41st Verse, it is said; that about Three
Thousand Souls were added to the Church that day, i. e. on the day St. Peter
Preached? and it is said, That they who gladly received the Word, were Baptized,
and some of them might, nay all of 'em might be Baptized that day, but it is not
said, that all, or any of 'em were Baptized on that very day; nor is it said,
that one single Convert of the 3000 was Baptized by St. Peter in Person. With
how little Reason then, or rather with how great contrariety to Reason must Mr.
Malleus assert? that the 3000, were all Baptized, and not only so, but all
Baptized by St. Peter, and all in one day. Another Instance of Mr. Malleus his
great care to be in the wrong, for he crowds three untruths into one single
Proposition. However to gratify him, we will suppose it had been expressly said
in the terms of Mr. Malleus, that 3000 were Baptized by St. Peter in one day.
Does he not rememSt. John's distinction, between Christ Baptizing in Person,
and Christ Baptizing by his Disciples; Joh. 3.22. compared with 4.1, 2.
for St. John had expressly said, chapter 3. v. 22. and chapter 4. v. 1. that Our
Savior Baptized Disciples; and yet in the very next Verse he assures us that
Christ himself i. e. Christ in Person did not, but his Disciples Baptized 'em.
And if the Disciples were so ready to execute their Masters Orders in Baptizing
Converts, we may with good reason conclude, that had it been necessary to
Baptize St. Peter's numerous Conversion all in one day: St. Peter could not
have wanted the assistance of the whole Apostolic College, and many other
Christian Fathers, who were all then at Jerusalem.

Well then, upon the whole I think it may be admitted, That St. John's and St.
Peter's manner of Baptizing, their Converts is not attended with any
Difficulties, on account of the Number said, or supposed to be Baptized by 'em;
the only Objection that still remains unsatisfi'd, is to this purpose, Friendly
Epist. p. 12.
the Partys to be Baptized were altogether unprovided for this Solemnity,
having no change of Raiment, and no Cheering Liquors at hand for their use. I
pray Mr. Malleus, How do you know that? Because it is not mentioned: That Is a
Non-sequitur with a Witness; for either these conveniencys must have been
Necessary on such an Occcasion to the Parties who were to be Baptized or not:
If they were, undoubtedly they had 'em ready for use, though the brevity of the
Divine Historian in such Narrations as these, is a good reason why a wise Man
should not expect to find it in the History: But if such a Provision was
altogether needless in that Country, as every Body that is acquainted with the
Climate, and the Habits of those Eastern Countries must know; then I hope
'twill be granted to be altogether absurd for one to urge the improbality of
Baptizing by Immersion: because the Baptized were unprovided with some things,
for which they had no occasion, or at least were not necessary to 'em.

But Mr. Malleus thinks it very indecent, to Baptize without the Clothes, and
very unsafe to be Baptized in 'em, unless they are changed. As to that indecent
manner of Baptism, if he means of them who were Stripped quite Naked, he knows
not when, where, and by whom it was ever practiced or allowed; much less
asserted and vindicated, though it being so immodest a Practice, makes one wonder
Mr. Malleus of all Men should be an Enemy to it, who is so great lover of
Indeceneies and Rudenesses in his Style and Behavior.

And for the hazard, he supposes they must run, by being Baptized in their
Clothes: He is altogether mistaken if he thinks it be so; in those warmer
Climates, where Bathing in their light and loose Garments is very frequently
practiced: And in these Northern colder Regions our prudence directs us to use
such reasonable Precaution, in that Religious Solemnity, as may prevent any
inconveniences from Attending the Baptized, and him that Administers it. But
after all, If Mr. Malleus thinks these Little Difficultys, and Groundless
Objections are strong enough to disprove Express Matters of Fact, Matthew. 3.16.
Acts 8.39. Joh. 3.23. 2 Kin. 5.14. The 70. Read (...), which Pasor Transtates
thus, Immersit se Naeman Jordane septies.
Recorded in the Holy Scriptures; he may, if he be not wise enough to Quit it,
enjoy his beloved Opinion; yet let him consider, Chald. Paraph. intinxit se in
Jordene. French Translat. and se plongea au Jordain par sept fois -- Dutch
Translat. end dopte sich in de Jordane seven mael.
if this his Rule of confuting be admitted, as certain, it will be no difficult
task upon the same Grounds, to confute diverse Passages of Sacred History.

Mr. Malleus has but one thing more that has the Face of an Argument, which
after some confused Tittle Tattle, and Malicious Banter, he stumbles upon in
his 17th. Page, Friendly Epistle, p. 19.
and immediately falls into one of his fits of Indignation; and then we hear no
more of it, till the 19th. when he ushers it in with a great deal of Ceremony,
and tells you this (noble) Argument, as he would have it esteemed, was the
result of his free Thought; and though some ill natured People might be apt
unkindly to suspect he had stolen the Observation from a late Writer, yet he
assures you, and you may take his Word if you please, this Criticism is really
the Product of his Profound Meditations; and the Notion, he so much values
himself upon, is this: That (...) indeed signify's either to plunge or dip; but
for the Word (...) that has never such a Signification, but signify's other
ways of Washing, exclusive of dipping or plunging: And for this bold Assertion
he advances (but very cooly) Two considerable Reasons: One is, because (...) is
a Derivative, and the Other, that not One Passage of Scripture can be named,
where it signifies Dipping or Plunging. Now as these are Two very daring
Assertions, advanced with very great Confidence, by Mr. Malleus against all
Ancient and Modern Interpreters, Lexicographers and Critics; it gives the
Reader a fair and convincing Account of his unparalled Effrontery: And by
this we might have guessed that he dwells pretty near the English Versailles in
Moorfields; for what else but the Temper and Qualifications of the Fellows of
that College could have prevailed upon him, to advance a Proposition so grossly
and notoriously untrue? But to examine his Reasons, I must ask him, Did ever
any Grammarian Ancient or Modern tell him, that Derivatives for being
Derivatives lose some of the Sense of their Primitives? This had been a fine
Story indeed, had any of 'em been so silly as Mr. Malleus is, to believe it;
let him but examine, if he can, his Scapula or Constantine or Martinius, and
see if he does not meet with many, Ay, and a great many too, of the Derivatives
in (...), that are so far from lessening, that they intend the Signification of
their Primitives.

Yet to give him all the Advantage in a desperate Cause that he can desire, I
am content for the present it shall be admitted, to be the Property of Verbs in
(...) which are Derivatives, to abate somewhat of the Sense of their
Primitives. Nay, he shall have another Favor granted him, though he deserves
none, that the very Word (...) it self, in Dispute is not in some cases
excepted from this New Rule in Grammar lately Enacted by him, and his Anonimous
Author; and let him make the best of these Concessions: For, unless he can
prove that it does signify, and must signify any other thing than to wash,
dip, 2 Kings 5.14. Mat. 3, 6, and 16. Mark 1.5, and 8. John 3.23. Acts 8.38.
Romans 6.4. Colos. 2.12.
Plunge or Immerse the Body of the Baptized in Water, so as the whole Body for
a time remains under the Water, and entirely covered by it; as it is plain it
does and must signify in the Passages I refer him to in the Margin, I don't
see what service he will do himself by this New Fangled Spurious Rule in
Grammar. Every body knows that some words in all Languages have a pretty steady
lasting sense, and are Symbols for one, or a few precise Ideas.

And it is as well known, That there are other words which by a Promiscuous
usage are applied to a great variety of Senses. Now when a wise Man meets with
any word of the latter sort in any approved Author, he does not Peremtorily
engage and compel the Word to signify, as he would have it, and as it may have
often signified elsewhere, but takes it in the Sense of his Author, or else he
knows, he must be content not to understand him, which I suppose to be Mr.
Malleus his choice, and no body that I know will envy him for it.

The Sacred Writers ought to be treated with a peculiar Veneration; and if they
fairly present their Sense to you, in certain Terms which at sometimes are
ambiguous, but in the case before us, are clearly determined to a particular
Sense by the Circumstances of the Story; what perverseness must it be, to impose
a Sense that widely differs from what they deliver? This in good construction
when it is knowingly done, as it must be in some very plain cases, is a taking
upon us by our own Authority to establish a Scripture Canon of our own; for if
the sense of Scripture which in the best sense is Scripture, be interpreted
away, the Scriptures may be truly said to be lost, though all the Printed and
Manuscript Copies should continue in being.

But Mr. Mallens will have that to be the sense of this scripture term (...),
for which he contends viz. that it never signifies to dip or plunge. To this it
must be said, that it is very strange if it be really so, that all antiquity
should be utterly mistaken in the sense of a word, by which they always
apprehended they were particularly directed in the very mode of so solemn an
Institution. Dr. Cave's Prim. Christ. Pr. 1. Cap. 10.
What else occasioned the Universal Practice of Baptizing in Ponds, Rivers, and
in the Sea it self in the Three first Centuries? Tertull. de Baptismo ad
Quintillam. homo in aqua demissus; and nulla est distinctio, mari quis an
stagno, flumine an font, lacu an alveo diluatur. Nec quicquam refert inter eos
quo^ Joannes in Jordane, Petrus in Tibure tinxit.
which is mentioned by Tertullian and others, not as a late Innovation, but a
constant undisputed usage. So that one may safely challenge any one instance to
be produced for the different mode of Baptism during the Two first Centuries,
unless we may except the Baptism of Clinicks, or Persons confined to their
Beds, and at the point of Death, which however was looked upon as defective for
the Party so Baptized could not be admitted to Holy Orders. The Jews as their
Writers assure us, were wont to Baptize their Proselytes, for some time before
our Savior; and their mode of Baptism is agreed by all Learned Men to have
been by Mersatione non profusione ag^ solitum hunc ritum, indicant and vocis
proprietas, and loca ad eum ritum delecta. Joh. 3.33. Act. 8.38. and
allusiones, Romans 6.3, 4. Colos. 2.12.
Immersion. And if he does but consult the Synopsis Criticorum on the 6th verse
of the 3d Chap. of Matt. he will find himself confuted by that Learned
Gentleman that made that useful Collection, who will tell him Baptism used to
be celebrated by Immersion or putting the party Baptized into the Element, and
not by Profusion, or pouring the Element upon him. And further, that this
appeared by the proper sense of the Word, and the places constantly chosen for
that Solemnity, etc. But why do I refer him to this Gentleman? or what need
have I to send him to any particular Annotator? All the Protestant and all the
Popish, all the Ancient and Modern both Greek and Latin Interpreters are agreed
in this that (...) signifies to Immerge or Dip in 3 Mat. 1 Mar. 3 John,
Tertullian constantly Translates it by Tingo.
8th of the Acts, and 6 Romans and 2 Colos. whatever it may signify elsewhere:
And as all agree in that sense of the Word, so all the Ancient Eastern Churches
agreed in the mode of Immersion. And as was said before, very few, if any
Instances to the contrary can be produced by this miserable Grecian Mr.
Malleus, or any of his Learned London Divines. But had a Man leisure to collect
the Proofs from Antiquity for the Primitive usage of Baptism by Immersion, they
are for Number, and evidence so many and so considerable, that the very
Passages transcribed would soon grow into a pretty hansom Volume: And any Man
who had just dipped into the Writings of the Fathers, or but consulted the
Centuriators upon the Article of Baptism in the three or four First several
Ages of Christianity, could not be so stupid as to questoin the sense they gave
to the word (...) in the passages to which I have already referred Mr. Mallens.

There was indeed, at the time of the famous first Council at Nice, 46 and 49
Canone Apostol. Council. Tom. 1. edit. Paris.
and for a good while after, a debate between the Arians and Trinitarians about
Baptism, by a single and trine immersion; and one Eunomius was condemned for
baptising by a single Immersion in a Council held at Constantinople: and
further, this usage of baptising by a Trine Immersion was confirmed so lately
as by the second Council at Ravenna. But never was it yet decreed by any
Council General, Provincial, or Diocesan, that Baptism by Immersion (or
plunging, as he styles it) is no lawful Baptism, Friendly Ep. p. 6.
but a human and diabolical invention, a breach, a notorious breach, an
intolerable breach of the 6th and 7th Commandments. Had Mr. Malleus lived in
the 4th Century, he had been condemned as an Heretic without more ado, for so
bold, nay so wicked and antichristian an Error: For if a Person could not escape
their Anathema's for asserting that one single Plunge in the Water, or
Baptizing by one Immersion was sufficient, and that it need not be thrice
repeated, Mr. Malleus would have been Anathematized without hopes of
Absolution, who is so hardy as to disown and condemn Baptising by Immersion, as
unlawful.

How little did the Christians of the two first Ages, who for ought appears to
the contrary were generally if not all Baptized by Immersion or Dipping; how
little, I say, did they dream? that one who thinks himself a very Orthodox
Teacher, should arise and peremptorily Unchristian 'em all in one sentence, though
they were then the whole visible Church: and if this Author's opinion be true,
were never lawfully baptized, but were guilty of an intolerable breach of the
6th and 7th Commandment. Friendly Ep. p. 6.


Pope Gregory the 1. of that name, though a Pope, was so Orthodox in the point of
Baptising by Immersion, that he writes a very large Epistle to one Leander his
Contemporary, Bishop of Seville; wherein Immersion and Baptism by a Trine
Immersion is the subject and sense of every line: The Popes of those times had
it seems some Modesty, and some Christianity; but Mr. Malleus would tempt one
to think he had neither.

And Pope Leo the 1. was as Orthodox in this point as Gregory his Successor;
for in an Epistle of his he expounds the 4th verse of the 6th of the Romans in
a sense that plainly supposes baptizing by Immersion to be the allowed and
general Practice of the Church; Ep. Leonis primi in Tomo Tertio Edit. Paris.
Sepulturam triduanam imitatur trina demersio, and ab aquis elevatio,
resurgentis est ad instar de Sepulchro -- ibid.
for says he the trine Immersion represents our Savior's abiding three days in
the grave; and the rising of the party Baptized out of the water, resembles his
rising out of the grave. Now where had the sense of this comparison been, if
there had been no such thing in being as Baptizing by Immersion?

And to add but one Authority more of this sort, Catechis, ad Paroch, part 2.
de Baptismo. -- cum aliquis aqua mergitur, quod diu a primis temperibus in
Ecclesu^ Observalum.
the Council of Trent it self, As modern and heterodox as it is in most other
matters, has very modestly declared her opinion in this, in a Catechism made by
her order; viz. that, Baptising by Immersion or Dipping "was for a long time,
from the very beginning observed in the Christian Church.

But it may be Mr. Malleus has no regard to the sense and opinion of Popes and
Popish Councils, and I suppose for that Reason he will not much val^^ the
Opinion of an Eminent Writer in the ^ Church, who died in Rome, and thought it
necessary to Baptize not barely by immersion, but by ^^ine immersion; Epist
Gregorii Protosyncelli 30. ni fallor, Tomo Council. Edit. Paris. (...).
and appeals for his justification to the usage of former times.

However, I hope, Mr. Malleus has some esteem for the Judgment of Protestant
Divines, though the living have no Reason to value it, if he had not: And the
Sense of those Divines, is full on our side in the Matter in Debate, and point
blank against Mr. Malleus: For instance, The Divines who compiled the Cont.
Magdeb. Cent. 2. ministros in aquam Baptizandos immersisse -- probat verbum
(...), quod immersionem in Aquam significat, and quod Paulus immersiorem illam
allegorice exponit. 6 Romans 2 Colos. 5 Ephesians. 3 Tit. 10 Heb. and alibi.
Centuriae Magdeb. expressly say, That the Ministers Baptized by Immersion, in
the Second Century; that the Greek Word signified, to Plunge or Dip, and that
St. Paul in diverse Passages expressly alludes to the practice of Baptizing by
Immersion -- and a great deal more to the same purpose, in the 1st. 2d. and 3d.
Volumes. And the Learned and Judicious Calv. Inst. l. 4. C. 15. S. 19. Quanquam
and ipsum Baptizandi verbum mergere significat, and mergendi ritum veteri
Ecclesiae observatum fuisse constat.
Mr. Calvin, is as express in this Matter, as Words can make him, for he
frankly owns, that the Word Baptize signifies to Plunge or Dip -- And further
assures us, for a certain Truth, that Baptizing in that manner was the usage of
the Ancient Church.

And the Learned Casanbon, his Countryman, Casaub. Notae ad 3 Mat. commate 6t^.
-- Hic enim fuit baptizandi ritus ut in aquas immergerentur -- quod vel ipsa
vex (...), declarat satis. -- non esse abs quod se nonnulli disputarunt de toto
corpore immergendo -- ibid.
was of the very same Opinion, which he freely declares in his brief Notes upon
the Greek Testament, saying, That the manner of John 's Baptism, was by
Immersion, and that it was not without Reason, that some Persons argued for
plunging the whole Body under Water in Baptism, since the very Word has that
signification.

This was the Judgment of those two renowned Divines and Crities, the most
considerable perhaps that France ever bred. Let us see now of what opinions our
English Divines are in this point.

Bishop Daevenant in his Exposition on these words in the 2d. of the Colos.
[Buried with him in Baptism.] Observes, that the Persons Baptized in the
ancient Church were not Sprinkled only, but Plunged into the Water. Nay, Dr.
Holdsworth says more, In bis 22 Lecture.
that Baptism by Immersion is still in use in some Churches, and in others that
the Baptized are Plunged thrice, which is agreeable to the Ancient usage.

Dr. Sparrow, late Bishop of Norwich, p. 260. and p. 262 --
in his Rationale assures us, that Baptism in the first times was performed in
Fountains and Rivers, and the Apostles Baptized in such places. And perhaps
there is not one Divine of the Church of England to be named, so illiterate and
rash as Mr. Malleus; Vide Bp. Salisb. Expol. of the 28th Art.
but one and all of them, who have occasion to give their opinion in this
Subject, admit Baptizing by Immersion to have been the primitive practice. And
the Church of England itself directs her Ministers to observe it in some cases,
as appears by the Rubric in the Form of Baptizing Infants. So that every one
of her Divines when he declares his Assent and Consent to the truth and use of
her Liturgy, Rub. in the form of pub. Bapt. it they shall certity him [the
Priest] that the (...) may well end^re ^, he shall dip ^^ in the Water
discreetly.
at the same time professes thus much at least, that Baptism by Immersion is
practicable and valid in certain cases, and is by no means to be rejected as
unlawful, and as a notorious breach of the 6th and 7th Commandments. F. Ep. p.
19.

I will name but one Authority more, and have reserved that for the last,
because Mr. Malleus, it is probable, will rather be concluded by it, than by all
I have already referred him to: And the Person I mean, is the Learned Mr. Pool,
the Author of the S^^^psis Criticorum; who with the candor of a Gentleman and
sincerity of a Divine, freely declares himself in favor of the Antiquity of
Baptizing by Immersion or Dipping, P. 21. of this Discourse.
in the passage I referred Mr. Malleus to before, viz. in his Collection upon
the 3d Verse of the 6th Chapter of St. Matthew: But he confirms his Opinion by
citations from other Learned Men, and proceeds further to give his Reader the
sense of Maldonate, a considerable Annotator, Syn. Crit. in 3 Mat. Erat Ablutio
(...) qui in Ecclesiam Judae^rum admittebartur viz. totius corporis in (...),
et it a fuit admissus Jetbie.
and adds, that the Proselytes admitted into the Jewish Church, were baptized,
or as he words it, had their whole Bodies Immersed or Dipped. The Talmud, it
seems, under the Title de Repudio, declares, that the Jews were initiated or
entered into Covenant with God the same way; according to the sense of two very
Learned Men, Mr. Seldom and Dr. Lightfoot, in the places I refer my Reader to
in the Margin. Seldom de Syn. l. 1. c. 3. Horae Heb. in 3 Mat. 6.
But Mr. Pool does not barely acknowledge the Antiquity of Baptizing by Dipping
or Immersion, but thought fit to declare, ex abundanti, that the custom of
pouring water on the party baptized, or sprinkling with Water did but lately
prevail in the Christian Church. Pool in 1000 supra citato Serius ^liquanto in
valuisse mos perfundendisive aspergendi.


I think it may with good reason be supposed, if not fully proved, that whilst
Baptisteries, or places built and set apart for Baptism, were made so large as
to receive not only the whole Body immersed or dipped, but several Persons and
both Sexes in distinct apartments, at the same time, Durantus de ritibus Eccl.
l. 1. c. 19.
as it is certain they were; for Durandus mentions some, the Ruins whereof, were
shown in his time at Pisa, Florence, Bononia and Parma. I say, whilst these
Baptisteries were in use, Immersion, without doubt continued to be the ordinary
mode of Baptizing. Nay these Baptisteries were so capacious that some used to
bury their dead within their Walls, 14. Can. Council. Autisiodoren.
which was expressly forbid by a Council held in the Year 578.

It began indeed to be a Question about the middle of the third Century,
whether Baptism by Aspersion might not be lawful and sufficient, without a
strict observance of the former practice of Baptizing by Immersion: And St.
Cyprian, S. Cypr. Op. 76. Ep. ad Magnum
who flourished about that time, has this very point under debate: By which
enquiry it is as evident, as any thing can be; that Baptizing by aspersion or
sprinkling was then not an ordinary but an uncommon and rare practice; and the
Novelty of it, was the reason for which some did scruple to admit it; and not
only so, but made it a Question, Cent. Magd. in 3. Cent. de Bapt.
whether the parties who were so baptized, were truly and properly Christians.
How different then the Sentiments and practice of the best and purest Ages were
from the Opinion of Trepidantium Mallens, I think does in some measure appear
by this brief account I have given.

What was it then could tempt this daring Epistle-Writer to repeat the Insolent
Challenge of of his Anonimous Author? Viz. to produce one place in Scripture
where (...) signifies to Plunge. Of whatever Party the Gentleman be, who first
made the Challenge, he may upon Public Notice given who he is, have all his
own Dictionaries, Historians, and Commentators ready to answer his Challenge.
And since Mr. Mallens pertly appears for the Gentleman's Second, Friendly Ep.
p. 20.
but wisely resolves not to be concluded by his Authors, (for he cares not what
they say:) Having armed himself with so much Sufficiency and Obstinacy as to
reject the most convincing Arguments from all other Persons but St. John
himself, he may set his heart at rest, St. John will have nothing to do with
him, that Excellent Person was well enough understood by all his Followers; and
so was St. Peter too; and their Followers took care to Propagate the Doctrine
they taught 'em, and the usages they left 'em, but particularly the mode of
Baptizing by Immersion; insomuch that it continued, upon the matter, an
Invariable and Universal Practice for two or three Centuries succesively, as
those very Learned Men acknowledge, who for better Reasons, than Mr. Malleus
ever thought on, justify and practice a different Mode in Baptism.

I have now Sir considered the arguing part of Mr. Malleus his Epistle to you,
and am ready to blame my self for attempting to confute a Pamphlet, which in
every Page confutes it self, and has, I make no question been slighted by you
upon the first reading: It may be expected I should take some notice of his
Scandalous Reflections, defaming Stories, and pitiful Witticisms which he makes
sport with in every Page; but that is a Task sit for no body, but one of his own
Kidney and Complexion. He himself is the fittest Person to answer that part of
his Epistle; to write a Satyr or Panegyric upon his own Writings; and if he
does it, I am sure either of 'em will amount to the very same Lampoon.

You find scattered up and down in every Page the Flowers of his Rhetoric, and
his Complements, such, as for instance, Purblind Brethren -- Paper-headed Men
-- read their Scrible, and learn their Chatt. (a considerable Phrase borrowed
from Old Mother Clito) You Will find him in the 2d Page very Comically, and much
like a Pedant, Schooling his Masters the Reverend Assembly of Divines, with an
Objection which he says, is Ignorantly, Unlearnedly, and Foolishly urged; and
immediately he runs riot into his beloved Moods and Tenses. And in the very
next Page, he comes to his good nature again, and then the very same Persons,
are Unanswerable Vrgers, Great Worthies and Eagle-eyd-Men at Controversy, that
knock a Dispute in the head, while you say what is this.

In the 7th and 8th Pages You have his most Learned Observations, with which
his affected skill in the Greek has furnished him. And here you must take him,
(if you can be so kind,) for a considerable Critic, or else you will very much
disappoint him in his expectation.

In the 10th Page You are all of a sudden alarmed with his Discourse of the
Canon mounted up and beginning to roar, P. 10.
and I know not what: which would put one in expectation of some News from
Livonia. But he immediately disappoints you by telling you a Tale of a Tub and
himself. P. 11.
Once upon a time I lived in a Town, etc.

And in his 15th Page he falls foul, without any provocation given, Dr. R. Mr.
T.
upon Two Gentlemen, who value his Reproaches above his good Opinion, and would
have been very sensible of the Scandal of his Commendation; as, I make no
question, those Gentlemen are, whom he names in his 20th Page, and is mighty
desirous as if they had nothing else to do, to have the credit of being
Answered by one of 'em.

After this comes on an uninterrupted medly of Idle Stories; and by the Texture
it appears, every thing that came to hand, was made a part of his dull Epistle
to you Mr. Keith, that a Man has very strong presumptions to believe Mr.
Malleus to be that very Botcher which he mentions in the 25th Page, whom his
very kind Neighbor the Vintner had subdued with the Fruit of the Vine, and
made his Penn outrun his Wits.

Thus, Sir, for the respect I bear to Truth and your Person, both which I am
sure, are very much injured by this scurrilous bantering Epistle-Writer; I have
briefly exposed his Reasons and his Rhetoric; if it be pardondble, to give his
way of Writing and Arguing those venerable Names.

And upon the whole I think it is evident, that his Style, his Logic, and his
Confidence are all of a piece, and all without Precedent, exactly calculated
for the Meridian of Moorfields: And had he done himself Justice, he had dated
his Letter from one of the apartments in the College de gens insensez in his
Neighborhood; and then he had saved you the trouble of reading his Epistle,
and me the trouble of making these Remarks.

I am Sir.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 25. r. perpetuum, p. 6. l. 26. r. (...).

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Considerations of Drexelius upon Death, in Three Parts. First,
Considerations upon Sickness and Death, for such as are in Health. 2. Various
Thoughts upon Death, for all the Circumstances of Sick People. 3. The Divine
Art of Dying Well; or a Dying Person's Preparations for the other Life: Being
Directions, Meditations, and Prayers, suited to that last and greatest Occasion
of Life. Never before in English, now Translated by a Fellow of the Royal
Society. Sold by H. Walwyn at the Three Legs in the Poultry next the Old-Jury,
where you may also have Drexelius's Considerations on Eternity.

A Complete System of Grammar English and Latin; wherein that most excellent
Art is plainly, fully, and distinctly Taught, and practically managed through
every part; in a Method which renders it easy to all Capacities. Dedicated to
the Duke of Gloucester. Price 1 s. Sold by H. Walwyn.

A Brief Exposition of the Church-Catechism, with Proofs from Scriptures. By
the Right Reverend Dr. John Williams, Lord Bishop of Chichester. Edition 9.
Price 6 d.

The Whole Duty of Man, put into familiar Verse; for the greater Pleasure and
Benefit of the (Young) Reader. Price bound 6 d.


