TS PSTEOS LETOS: OR THE REASON OF FAITH: Briefly discussed in a SERMON,
Preached at Paul's before the Right Honorable, The Lord Mayor, etc. The third
of October, 1658.

And published by the Order of his Lordship, and Court of Aldermen.

By PETER VINKE B. D. Sometimes fellow of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge: and now
Minister of M. Corn-hil, London.

Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world?

1 Cor. 1.20. (...).

Clem. Alexandr. lib. 1. Strom. Quantum attinet ad hominis naturam, nihil est
in co melius quam men's and ratio; sed non secundum ipsam debet vivere, qui
beat vult vivere: alioquin secundum hominem vivit, cum secundum Deum vivendum
sit, ut possit ad beatitudinem pervenire, propter quam consequendam, non seipsa
debet esse contenta, sed Deo men's nostra subdenda est. Aug. lib. 1.
Retractation. LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in
Corn-hil, near the Royal Exchange. 1659.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr RICHARD CHIVERTON Knight.
Lord Mayor of the CITY of LONDON, And to the Honorable Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable!
THis ensuing Sermon which I never thought should have breathed much above an
hour, (unless in them that heard it;) is now at your command, to receive a
kind of new life; and to walk abroad in the view of all men. it only stays
in a line or two to crave your protection; which (being it comes forth only at
your Honors call) your goodness will not, and your justice cannot deny. -- As
for the subject of this discourse. I may truly say: it is not unworthy of you,
as men; but it is highly necessary for you, as Christians. Humanity requires you
to skill of the right use of reason: and Christianity expects you should not be
ignorant of the Prerogatives of Faith. Reason indeed makes you men; it is Faith
only that can make you good men: and better were it never to have been men,
than not to have been good.

I do not at all intend the least prejudice to Reason. I am not so Cynical as
to bark at that Moonlight (this would be but an ungrateful requital for this
Royal gift which our Creator has bestowed upon us) though I cannot equal it,
much less prefer it to Faith. As that houshoulder does not injure his inferior
guests, when he says unto them, stand ye here; and to the more honorable,
come up hither.

Of the two I confess, Reason as Leah, is indeed the elder, but tender- eyed:
and though seven years service is not too much for her; yet how many more would
be well spent for the obtaintng of her younger, but more amiable sister, Faith?
though Reason is the firstborn; yet Faith has the blessing: and concerning
these, that determination holds true too. The elder shall serve the younger.

But oh! What opposition does this meet withal in the minds of men? How hard is
it to persuade them to become fools; though it be only as a means to make them
wise? I know not which, if compared, does more exert the Almighty power of the
Spirit of grace; the bringing into subjection the high thoughts, or the strong
lusts that resisted it. I am sure it is full out as difficult to make the
blind to see, as it is to make the lame to walk.

We are then certainly as earnestly to labor to bring our minds, as our lives
unto the obedience of faith. It is no more lawful in the things of Religion to
think as we list; then it is in our daily conversation to practice what we
please, A defluxion from the head will soon corrupt the other parts: and
nothing is more dangerous, then to suffer this child of the bondwoman,
Reason; to laugh at Faith, the heir of the promise: if we mock God, or his
Word; he also will have us in derision.

The sum then of what I have in this truth's behalf to require of you; is but
what I hope, the justice of this Honorable Court acts daily; suum cuique
tribuere, to give to every one that which is his. When any case betwixt these
two parties; Faith and Reason; shall be pleaded before you, or rather in you:
give unto Reason, the things that are Reasons; and to Faith, the things that
are of Faith. Honor your God by believing things which you do not see, and he
will honor you, causing you to see hereafter those things which you do here
believe; which mercy especially I earnestly beg for you of the God of mercy,
acknowledging my self,

Right Honorable! The most Obliged to serve you in the Lord, PETER VINKE.
At Corn-hil, October 26. 1658.
THE REASON OF FAITH.
HEBREWS 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of
things not seen.


THe blessed Apostle (or whosoever was the Penman of this Epistle) having told
the believing Hebrews of the great need they had of patience, chap. 10. ver.
36. and foretold the Apostasy of many by reason of the want of it, in the
words foregoing my Text: In this Chapter he seasonably brings in a discourse
of faith, this grace being the best food to strengthen patience; and physic to
purge Apostasy.

The first thing then we shall consider to clear the Context, is the particle,
now or but; Gr. (...) which as some observe, Dr. Gouge in locum.
is the note of an assumption, or minor proposition in a Syllogism. The whole
Argument may be framed thus, If faith be the substance of things hoped for, and
the evidence of things not seen; the just that live by it, as in chap. 10. ver.
38. etc. may well be patient, and need not think of drawing back, ver. 39. but
faith is the substance, etc.

Hence it is that the Apostle throughout this Chapter enlarges only upon this
subject; and as in this first verse he lays down the doctrine of faith, so in
the following verses he speaks to the practice of it; Examples having this
advantage above Precepts, that they show their feasibility or practicablenesse;
a believer will not have a harder task enjoined him, than faith has enabled
many to undergo, witness the whole cloud of witnesses here specified: and
therefore he may with the more courage and confidence buckle himself unto it.
The words themselves are not a perfect definition of faith by genus and
differentia, faith being of an indefinite nature. And how can we look for the
perfection of that grace here, the nature of which we cannot sufficiently
comprehend?

They are then a twofold description of faith.

1. A forma interna. It Is a substance, it is an evidence.

2. Ab objectis externis. Of things hoped for, of things not seen.

Each part you see has twins, and those very like one another; we intend to
speak to them in their order, as they lay in the words.

The first word that holds forth the internal form or nature of faith, Faiths
first internal form. (...) which signifies
is (...), which (together with (...) in the latter part,) is purely
Philosophical, taken out of the field of Philosophy, and planted here in
Scripture, the garden of the Lord. It signifies according to its notation,
these two things.

1. Substance, which is so called, quia substat accidentibus, and ea sustinet,)
because it bears up accidents, 1. Substantia.
which could not be without it. As the color and dimensions of this book could
not be without the substance of it.

Thus faith is the substance that sustains and bears up all other graces; it is
the primum vivens, the heart in the new man. Does he live? it is by faith, Romans
1.17. If he stands; it is by faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. Can he walk too? it is by the
same faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. Without this, he is as another man. His patience,
unless upon the account of faith, because thou did it, is but stupidity, or
a Stoical apathy: His hope, unless it be through this grace, Psalm. 39.9. 2 Thessalonians 2.16. Gal. 2.2. Splendida peccata.
it is not the good hope, it is presumption: His mirth, unless he rejoices in
believing, is madness: Nay, without faith his best performances are but the
better sort of sins; only the hand of faith can lay them upon that Altar which
sanctifies the gift; To do a spiritually living action in order to the service
of a living God. (...), there must be a principal of life within.

Whatsoever we do, unless in order to express our obedience and thankfulness
to God through Christ, be it never so good for the matter of the action, it is
not well done in the manner of it; and God does not say if thou do good, but
if thou do well shall thou not be accepted? Genesis 4.7. We confess the
flowers of morality, (just and fair dealings,) may make men's names sweet
amongst their neighbors; when in the mean time unless they live and act by
faith, their persons and services may stink in the Nostrils of God. These may
wash thy face and hands, but it is faith only which can purify thy heart;
Acts 15.9.
thou art but a Cyclops, a Monster in Gods sight if thou have not the eye of
faith.

2. 2. Subsistentia
The word (...), signifies subsistence, and subsistere is in rerum natura
prodire; to subsist is to have an actual being. Thus faith gives a being to its
objects; it makes the things hoped for, to be as if they now actually were; as
by a prospective glass, things very far distant seem close by to the eye of the
body: so by faith, the promises (though many of them not to come till the end
of all things) appear at hand: Hence the Syriack Interpreter reads these words
thus, Est. autem fides certitudo de iis -- rebus quae sunt in spe, ac si jam
extiterunt actu. A believer is as willing to have Gods promise, as its
performance; and dares take his word as readily as present payment. What the
Schools say of the divine intellect, I may say of all that do partake of the
divine nature, to such, omnia coexistunt, all things are as if present with
them: if they look backward to the Creation of the world, their eye of faith
views it as clearly as if they had been amongst the Morning-stars that shouted
when the foundations of the earth were laid. Job 38.6, 7.
And if they look forward to the dissolution of all things, Rev. 20.11.
they see the heavens and earth already fleeing away.

Give me leave to raise this note a little higher; Some read the following
word, ((...)) actively, Aug. Epist. 117. ad Paul. Tra^^. 79. in Johan.
as Saint Austin amongst others: and then the sense would be, faith is the very
subsistence of them that hope; to add a word to what I hinted but now. Faith
is the differentia constitutiva of a Christian; as reason makes us men, so
faith makes us Christians. He that follows sensual objects, and is taken with
them, lives the life of a beast. He that lives according to the dictates of
reason, (deals fairly and squarely, (as you use to speak) he lives the life of
a man; Romans 16.26.
but he that lives in the obedience of faith, when he prays, prays in faith;
when he hears, mixes the Word with faith, etc. This is he that lives indeed the
life of a Christian: Nay, he lives the life of God, delighted with, and joying
in the same objects with God; to him only it is given intelligere ut Angelus,
and Velle ut Deus: to understand as Angels do, and to will as his God does.

The object of faith, 2. Its object. (...).
or the things of which faith is the substance, are called here things hoped
for, which because they are the same with the things not seen, as appears by
Romans 8.24. I shall speak of them together, not being able to takeany notice of
the less material differences which some make betwixt them. Come we rather to
the second description: in which we shall speak more to that, which is the
business of the Text.

The other word that the Apostle uses to express the nature of faith by, The
other internal form of faith. (...).
is (...); it signifies a demonstration or undeniable proof. Thus the
Philosopher frequently, and in this sense Scripture uses it, as John 16.8. it is
said of the Spirit, that when he is come, (...), i. e. he shall convince the
world. (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
He shall bring such arguments and evidances as shall take away all excuse.

Faith then is the evidence or demonstrative argument: that is; the souls
believing in him that speaks; commands, promises, threatens in the Word, is
instead of ten thousand arguments to prove the righteousness and truth of what
it finds there recorded.

Faith, as such, does not at all consider the probability or improbability of
the things themselves which are recorded in God's Words; but it looks singly at
the truth, and Authority of the Speaker. Credimus quia legimus.

The Arguments which are drawn for the confirmation of our Religion from
Miracles, the number of its Martyrs, it admirable success, and consent of all
its Mysteries, the correspondency it has with reason, are indeed powerful
considerations to make easy and familiar the actings of Faith, but Gods
faithfulness is the only motive of Faith. And in this consists the maine
difference between Faith and Science. Scire est excau fis cognoscere.
In Arts and Sciences we do not give our assent to any thing, till we have
found out its nature, and causes: but in matters of Faith we first assent and
believe God on his word; and then possibly we search after the reason of the
things we have believed: not for our own satisfaction (to whom Gods Authority
is foundation strong enough to build upon) but that we may be able and ready to
give an answer to them that ask us a reason of our hope, 1 Pet. 3.15.

And is not this evidence strong enough to a believer?

Dictum Jehovae, The Word of the Lord came, etc. Romans 1.2. Heb. 6.13. Romans
4.11. Cor. 1.22.
Surely then the Believers Thus' says the Lord, is a better argument than the
disputers (...), or Thus says the Philosopher.

Let then others give it for a Rule (as the Philosophers did of old) (...), to
receive nothing upon the credit of whomsoever. Or according to the late Mode,
To doubt of all things. The believers way is (...), to take Gods Word; and to
think himself well enough assured of any thing that God has asserted there,
though at present it be not seen.

That is the other property of the Object of Faith, The other expression of
faiths object. it is (...).
It is not seen. That is, it is not, it cannot be comprehended by sense or
reason.

Thus throughout the whole Sphere of faith's activity, its object does not
appear.

1. things past, it believes the Creation of the world, Heb. 11.3.
etc.

2. things present, Faith believes the Providence of God, Coloss. 3 1.
the sitting of Christ at the right hand of the Father, his Intercession, etc.

3. In things to come, It believes the Resurrection, Judgment, Psalm. 96.13.
etc. and yet none of these are seen.

Nay, how many things does the Christian believe, when the very contrary unto
them seem to appear? as that a Virgin should conceive, that God should become
man, etc. Unto which the unbelievers blasphemously reply, Tam Jupiter Taurus,
quam Deus homo.

I shall make some further instances; the rather because this is a main
foundation of that truth which will close up all.

1. Faith believes the doctrine of Justification, that they who are called, are
justified, Romans 8.30. and yet what abundance of guilt is the true believer
hanted withal? what bitter complaints and tears come daily from him?

2. Scripture tells us that the people of God are a holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
and do they see this? Is not the Canaanite still in the land? Oh what dirty
corners do the Sun discover in that room or heart where it shines? when the
Sun is up, what abundance of dust flies about when the house is sweeping?
what swarms of corruptions whilst the heart is a cleansing.

3. Gods Word says, that they are blessed that trust in him, Psalm. 2.12. But
certainly it is an hidden and invisible happiness? is it a happiness to be
imprisoned, mocked, stoned, etc. as the Worthies were, we read of in this
Chapter?

4. There is an abundance of all things promised to them that fear God, Psalm.
34.9. And did ever see this? I mean by sense or reason; it appears indeed
they have an abundance, but of all miseries, not otherwise: Paul had abundance
of Ship-wracks, Scourgings, Stonings, 2 Cor. 11.25. but nothing else, 2 Cor.
6.10.

5. Gods promise is, that he will be with us, Isa. 43.2. Certainly this does
not appear, unless to the eye of faith; who, but a very strong believer could
have seen God with his people in Gideon's time? Judges 6.13.

6. The children of God have an eternal life assured to them, Rev. 2.10. What
appears in order to this? they dye as well as others; and where is the promise?

7. Ay but there shall be a resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. This is as little seen as
the other; what preparation is there toward it after death? the body runs
through many changes; into corruption, worms meat, dust, etc. but still there
is nothing seen in the charnal houses and sepulchers that seems a fit
ingredient into the glorious body that is promised. 1 Cor. 15.43.
To forbear more particulars; If sense and reason were to give in their
verdicts on them, it would be at best but a non constat, there is not one of
them evident.

And Gods hand appears much in thus ordering the matter: Reasons why the object
of faith is thus not seen.
that reason its self should not attain to the things pertaining to God.

1. By these means God sets forth the vanity of the wisdom of the flesh, which
it is his design to confound and debase, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20.

2. God thus advances his own glory; all saving knowledge and heavenly wisdom
being necessarily his gift: Hoc fides credat, intelligentia non requirat ^e aut
non inventum pute^ incredibile, aut repertum non credat singular. Bern. de
cata. Domini. 1 Cor. 2.14. Prudentius.
when the noblest plant in natures garden (reason) cannot produce such fruit.

3. Thus God observes a just proportion between the object and faculty;
spiritual objects require a spiritual faculty: as the eye of the body cannot
see spiritual substances, no more can a carnal mind discern spiritual truths;
nil diurnum nox capit. To omit other reasons.

Having thus explained the words; that which I shall pitch upon, is the result
of them all, especially the latter clause; in this observation.

That faith only is the evidence of things not seen; Observe.
when the other faculties cannot discover them, but look upon them as doubtful,
if not false; faith accounts them evident and certain. For the understanding of
this, we must know that every thing is properly evident to that faculty to
which it does belong, as sensible things are obvious to sense; rational
conclusions are approved of by reason: and the things of God are in the sphaere
only of faith. Now these three, sense, Omne verum a quocunque venit, a Spiritu
sancto venit. Aug.
reason and faith, being all from God, (his works in man) cannot be contrary
one to another: neither does any one of them destroy the other: neither can any
thing be true in one, that is false in another, if rightly understood. As for
example: when sense says that much drink is good for one in a Fever or
Dropsy; reason does not contradict this; that to sense it is good; only upon a
better account it corrects its judgment: so when reason dictates that nothing
can be made out of nothing, and so would deny the Creation; that when the
privation is total, the habit cannot be introduced again, and from thence would
deny the Resurrection: Faith does not deny but that these axioms as to second
causes, and in the lower orb of reason are true; only it corrects their
malignity by showing a more excellent way; and bidding of us look a story
higher, unto God, unto whom all things are possible.

And as if you would act rationally, you must claudere quinque fenestras, not
follow your sensual appetites; so if you will act religiously, you will be
forced in many cases to say with Luther, tu stulta ratio, tace, thou foolish
reason, give way. Let our Apostle be heard in this case, who tells us
concerning the mysteries of Religion, 1 Cor. 2.9. that eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, (they are out of the reach of sense) neither have they entered into
the heart of man; (they exceed the capacity of reason) -- And therefore when a
soul is conquered, and taken in for God, the Articles of its Surrender are,
that it should now cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self Adversus scientiam Dei, quae est Christianorum fides. Bern. Ad Milites
Templi. Isa. 54.1^.
against the knowledge of God; and bring into captivity every thought ((...))
to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. So that henceforth this soul must
according to this agreement give up its self to be taught of God those things
which its nature is neither able nor willing otherwise to conceive of.

I know I am upon a ticklish point. This truth stands betwixt the Scylla of
Enthysiasts, who are ready to decry every thing because it is rational: and the
Charybdis of Socinians, who cavil at every thing that is above the level of
their reason: as if they needed to fear to be guilty of blind obedience, when
they have the Sun of Righteousness, God in his Word, to go before them. I
shall endeavor to do something toward the resolution of this great case in
several particulars. I will not call it my award betwixt these two parties,
faith and reason: yet I shall labor to give to each its due. The use of reason
and faith laid down, 1. Positively. 1. In Civil Affairs.


1. Positively.

1. It Is granted on all sides that reason has its use in Civil Affairs and
Worldly Matters; those that deny it to be a Jacob's ladder to climb up into
heaven by, acknowledge it to be an useful staff to walk upon earth withal. We
are not to pull out this eye because we cannot look steadfastly with it upon the
Sun. The Musician does not cut off the strings and throw them away because
the Instrument is out of tune.

Nay more, 2. In Religion Matters.
reason is useful in the things of God.

1. Reason is necessary for the conversion of Pagans and Infidels to the faith
of Christ; the very milk of the Word is too strong meat for such at first. It Is
in vain to allege Scripture to such as are not yet induced to believe the
authority of it. We must deal with such, as men that cure the bodily blind;
not bring them at first to gaze upon the Sun, but use them to lesser lights,
till at last they be able to look upon the greatest. Thus nature does not
expose us to the Sunbeams immediately out of pitchy darkness, till she has
inured us by a twilight to bear them.

2. Reason is the subject of divine knowledge in a believing soul, it is the
vessel which God fills with the oil of this grace. God in Regeneration does
not make another faculty, another eye, but purges it. As at the first time of
writing the Law, God afforded the Tables and writing too; Exodus 24.12. Exodus
34.1.
but at the renewing of it, Moses provided the Tables, though the writing still
was Gods; in our Creation, we have heart and holiness, both mind and
knowledge, Tables and writing from God; but in our renovation God takes the
faculties which we have already, and engraves his Image on them; God makes all
things indeed new in quality, not in substance. And this is the greater miracle
of the two, that the same man should by the same faculty apprehend the same
things so diversely from what he did in his unregeneracy; worldly things which
were so great in his eyes (as when the prospective glass is turned) seem now
very small and inconsiderable: and the things of God which did scarce appear
unto him, (as if he had now got Galileo's glass to look on the heavens withal)
he views them in their just dimensions.

3. Reason is the Instrument that God makes use of to direct and guide the
whole man by. It Is the Rudder in the ship, let it be bound for what place it
will; that as whatsoever we hear, we hear by the ear; and whatsoever we see, we
see by the eye: so whatsoever we understand, we understand by this faculty. By
the eye of our understanding (when enlightened) we know what is the hope of our
calling, etc. Ephesians. 1.18.

By reason we know what may be inferred from Scripture, and what not. Hence,
not to mention the Trinity, etc. we grant, and use two Sacraments, because
reason infers these from Scripture, and on the other side we reject a great
many that others would bring into the Church, because we cannot by reason prove
them to be commanded there.

4. I may add moreover, there is nothing which faith believes, but what is,
when thoroughly understood, agreeable to right reason. It may be above it,
(...). Plutarch. (...).
it cannot, as you have heard, be against it. True reason did never go about to
comprise the Bible in its own nut-shell; faith it self is but a kind of a new
life of reason. It Is the highest reason to believe what God says without
further enquiry. If ye have not made your selves more the children of
darkness, than ye yet were by nature; and if God has not in judgment blinded
you, and given you over to a reprobate mind, does not your very reason tell
you how vain it is to measure immensity by a finite compass; or span eternity
by your imperfect duration? To fathom the depth of the Wisdom of God by the
line and plummet of the wisdom of man; Romans 11.33. I have read of one of the
Ancients, (I think 'twas Austin) who being very thoughtful about the Nature and
Essence of God; he espies as he was meditating by the Sea shore, a young man
taking the water out of the Sea with a Ladle, and putting of it into a little
hole which he had made. The Father demands the reason of so frivolous an
employment. The young man tells him, that he was emptying the sea into that
hole; and that he might sooner make the vast Ocean to be contained in that
small place, than the other should comprehend the deep Mysteries he was
meditating of, in his shallow understanding.

Being we have freely granted thus much, Negatively.
I hope none will be offended if we dare not go further in its commendation;
but must, lest we should encroach on Faith, prescribe some bounds to Reason.

1. Reason may not be the Rule to try or measure revealed truths by; that you
should believe no more than what it affirms to. I am not to do any thing in
Religion, because I think it rational, it may be will worship, but to the Law
and to the Testimony. Isa. 8.20.
Neither are we to admit only so much of Scripture, as we fancy to be consonant
to reason; but we are to admit so much only of reason, as we are sure is not
contrary to Scripture; the lesser gives way to the greater. God made the
Scripture Light as the Sun to rule the Gospel-day: the Moonlight of reason
he makes to rule the night; amongst those that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death. And if at any time we go to Law with revealed truths before
this Heathen Judge, reason: we might win the case indeed; but lose truth, and
hazard our souls.

The grounds of this assertion, are,

1. The impotency of reason; this eye is bloodshot, it cannot see thoroughly
into natural causes: if you think it can, tell me from whence comes the heat of
the stomach, the strength of the nether jaw: stand upon the banks of our
Euripus, the Thames, and give a satisfactory reason of its ebbing and flowing:
Or answer me those questions propounded in the 36. 37, 38. Chapters of Job. And
if thy reason be either not faithful or able in its own things, who will commit
unto it the resolution of those things that are not its own?

2. But suppose it had not contracted any impotency, yet at best, reason is
fallible, and may be deceived. The eye is the most certain of all the senses,
and yet I have read of twenty ways whereby it may be deceived in its Object. I
am sure there are many more ways whereby this eye of the mind may be imposed
upon; reason at best is a creature: Whittaker, de authoritate Scripturae.
it has erred, it may err, and we should be always at incertainties, if we
had not an infallible Rule for our souls, something which may be believed for
its own sake, which only Gods Word may safely be.

Nay, never did Gods children err more dangerously then when they eyed natural
causes and reason too much. 'Twas the cause of Sarah's laughing, Genesis 18.12.
Luke 1.18. Gal. 1.16.
after I am waxed old, shall I have pleasure? and of Zechariah's doubting, I am
an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. And therefore Saint Paul says,
that when he was called to be an Apostle, to go and preach amongst the
Heathens, (in the midst of contempt and persecution) he conferred not with
flesh and blood; certainly if he had, they would have said to him too, Master,
spare thy self.

Though then we yield that reason is a light; yet we say also it is but
noctiluca cerebri, Aug. Prove. 20.27.
a glowworm light; for all its luster, we have still need of the Sun. I grant
it is the candle of the Lord: but I am sure withal that it has need of
snuffing; and if at any time it be a rule, it must be ( regula regulata, not
regulans) no further a Rule then it is its self ruled according to Scripture,
and the Word of God.

Consider, 2 Negatively.
That that very truth, promise, etc. which you do believe, does not benefit
your souls as to eternity, in that it is rational, but as it is believed: for
example, that God might commiserate Mankind, and find out ways for its
recovery, is rational; but as this is rational barely, it does not at all
conduce to our salvation, but as there has been a Declaration to this purpose
made by God in his Word. An assertion or principle how rational soever, is low,
faint and dead, as to the begetting or carrying on of a spiritual life, till
the Spirit it self does animate and enliven it; it is Gods speaking of these, or
the like truths, in Scripture, and to the heart, which makes them seed; apt for
the propagating a new life. The reason in them is but as a stick that bears up
a Vine or Plant more precious than its self, but gives it not life. The life of
faith is from its self, not from reason. The sum of what has been spoken
amounts to thus much: Reason is our Reuben, the top of our excellency,
Apollonius Tyaneus, Musonius, Vorstius, etc
(as men) but if it goes up to our fathers bed, it shall not excel; and
experience of all ages has taught us, that none have proved more desperate
enemies to the truth of Religion, than many otherwise excellently parted men.
Thus we have heard of some who having dug too deep, have met with such damps
as have extinguished the candle they were let down withal; thus learning, as a
flash of lightning, leaves men in the greater darkness. And surely there is
much of that commination, Isa. 7 9. fulfilled amongst us, which the Septuagint,
and many of the Ancients read thus, if ye will not believe, ye shall not
understand; Cypr. lib. 1. adversus Judaeot, Tertull. adver^us Marc. Psalm.
25.9.1 Cor. 1.26.
the things of God are to be believed that they may be understood. The modest
and humble believer, not the captious and proud Philosopher, has the promise
to understand them. As beasts, though of more exquisite sense then men, yet
cannot determine of humane affairs; so men, if barely, though excellently
rational, will be as much at a loss in heavenly matters.

God would not that a tool, any sharp instrument should be lifted up toward
the making of his Altar; Exodus 20.25. C^ussin ^^ saint Cour.
some think the truth and substance of that Law was, to show, how much God did
abhor to have the point of the acutest reason lifted up upon the Altar of
faith.

How much then certainly are they to blame who draw the Curtains, and shut out
in their very Sermons and spiritual discourses, the daylight of Scripture,
that they may enlighten them, as they think the better, by the candle of
reason? but I would not prevent my self in the application, which I am now come
unto.

This Scripture instructs, exhorts, comforts; Applic.
it is useful first for instruction; we may hence learn 1. The nature of faith;
and 2. the condition of the faithful.

The nature of faith, 1. Instruction which is twofold.
and concerning it these two things.

1. It Is not an opinion barely, 1. In the nature of faith.
it is an evidence.

But yet secondly, 1. It Is not a bare opinion.
it is not an absolute assurance: for it is of things not seen.

In the first place we hence learn, that true faith is not a bare opinion or
imagination; there are these two remarkable differences between them.

For first, the object of opinion is something looked upon as in its own nature
uncertain; the object of faith as in its self certain. The Scepticks, those
great Opinionists held, that there was nothing certain; but notwithstanding
whatsoever was said for any matter to day, as much might be said on the
contrary side to morrow. But believers build upon a word which is not Yea and
Nay, changeable and inconstant: 2 Cor. 1.18.
but it is in Christ Yea, that is, like himself who is the same yesterday, to
day and for evermore, Hebr. 13.8. Men indeed too ordinarily dress Religion, as
the Heathens did their gods, or as the Papists do their images, according to
the fashion of the time and place in which they live, and think that there is
little or nothing more in it. But be not deceived: God will not set his seal in
water; in a fluid transitory imagination, or opinion; but in wax; in that
understanding which (though ductile and flexible) is fit to retain those
impressions which his Spirit shall make in it.

Secondly, Faith differs from opinion, in that opinion is only matter of
speculation, faith is practical also. The seat of opinion is only the head,
but wiih the heart man believes, Romans 10.10. To know and assent unto the truths
in Scripture, will not alone make a man a believer, unless such a one as the
Devil is, James 2.19.
who believes and trembles; Interroge te utrum credis; dicis, credo: fac quod
dicis and fidcs est. Aug. It Is not a right faith until it does what it says.
Nay, faith is with all the heart; it takes in every faculty: for its object
has a double aspect upon the soul; first as true, and so it bespeaks assent in
the understanding; and then also as good, and thus it excites and draws forth
the will and affections; without this latter acting of a truth or promise upon
the soul, a man has no more benefit by it, then he has nourishment from his
food, when he only sees and believes the wholesomnesse of it, but eats it not.
Try then your faith by this; you would not take a false sixpence; and will ye
be put off with a false jewel, a false faith?

On the other side, 2. Faith is not always an assurance. 2 Pet. 1.10.
as faith is not an opinion barely, so it is not an assurance; for though it be
an evidence, it is of things not seen; now assurance is a kind of sight of
these things.

We will suppose assurance much to be endeavored after, when the Apostle
charges us to make our calling and election sure; and indeed there is no warmth
in a direct beam. Faith, which is the direct act, (the souls going unto, and
relying upon Christ,) will at length save; but the reflexe act of assurance
chiefly comforts. Our present business is to show that they are distinct.
Consider then that faith is so far from being an assurance, that it must
necessarily go before it, otherwise a man might be assured of what is not; and
as we are partakers of humane nature, before that we know we are; and bear the
image of the earthy before we know we do; so we bear the image of the heavenly;
and be partakers of the divine nature before we know of it. There is an infancy
or nonage in both natures as to us; and the spiritual life here is no more
exempted from its weakness, than the natural life is from the infirmities
which belong unto it.

I will but name some other particular differences.

1. Faith is constant, it is a seed immortal; assurance is not: the vision is
sometimes taken up, nay suddenly. Acts 10 16.
The influence of the Sun does always remain, but the light of the Sun does
not; it shine, and claps in again.

2. Faith which justifies, admits of no degrees; that is, wheresoever it is, it
is in its complete essence, or not at all. The soul cannot be partly married or
united unto Christ, and partly not: but on the contrary, assurance has its
degrees; where it is, it is usually but incomplete; we know thus too but in
part; sometimes we read our evidences by a candlelight as well as other-while
by a Sunnebeam.

3. The act of faith is grounded upon Gods Word. Assurance is chiefly grounded
upon experience; though indeed in both the soul is helped by the Spirit. Now I
have said this the rather for their sakes, who walk in darkness and see no
light: such Trees of the Lord may stand and grow, Isa. 50. ult.
when most shaken with the wind, and clouded from the Sun.

Remember then what ye have heard this day faith to be; viz. As the miraculous
cloud which we read of, ( Exodus 14.20.) which has its light side as it is an
evidence; but has its dark side also as it is of things not seen.

We come to tell you the condition of a believer, 2. Instruct. In the condition
of a believer.
which cannot but be desirable: Faith has made him a great one indeed, richer
than the richest; it is this man only that can say truly, as they did vainly,
Hos. 12.8. I have found me out substance; a carnal man has but shadows, lies
which he trusts unto. He may dream he eats, etc. but if ever God awaken him
either here, or hereafter, he shall find he is hungry, truly indigent, and
full of wants.

Oh man greatly beloved! this is he that has made the best discovery of what
before was but a terra incognita, an unknown Region; where true Gold and Jewels
of real price are to be found: and to this place he travels all the remainder
of his life. nay more, he has a kind of possession of it already; Phil. 3.20.
and is whilst he lives on earth, (...) a Citizen of heaven, and there he has
his conversation: enjoying by faith the happiness, and doing by love the
duties of that place. As to earth he is vel praesens absens, like Archimedes at
the taking of Syracuse, never minding what becomes of the world and worldly
matters. Faith brings him better Relations, Riches, Possessions, then their
fading ones are; and therefore as to heaven, he is vel Absens praesens, his
heart as another forerunner is entered in. He has sent his soul as a Prodromus
to prepare the way for his body. And in the mean while let the winds blow from
what corner they will, Matthew. 7.25.
impavidum ferient, they cannot cause him to make shipwreck of his substance.
Thus in the midst of a storm the nodes of the compass remain immovable, when
there is nothing else in the whole ship but is tossed too and fro. The other
things in the ship, as the other men of the world, are hurried whither the
present Tempest and season carries them. But believers, as the points in the
Compass, are fixed at all times; being governed not by the various winds, but
by the constant heavens.

Ah how much then has the meanest true servant of God to bless him for? flesh
and blood has not revealed these things, Mat. 16.17.
acquired this substance for them; but your Father which is in heaven. Faith is
a supernatural gift, not only in respect of nature corrupted, as all other
graces be; but in respect also of nature as 'twas at first created. Faith is
not as other graces, in our regeneration repaired, but as it were new built
from the ground. Man in innocence, (though he had a power to have obeyed God in
whatsoever he should have commanded; yet) he had not formally any such a grace
as faith; whose Object is that very Attribute which Adam then had no need of;
to wit, the mercy of God in Christ. And what a vast expense was God at to
create faith in thee? He made the whole World with a fiat, a words speaking:
but when the Apostle tells us of his making faith, Ephesians. 1.19. it is, says he,
by the exceeding greatness of his power; every word has its weight and
emphasis, by no less a power then that which raised up Christ from his grave,
when the sin of the world (a gravestone not easily to be removed) lay upon him
to keep him there.

Nay, what shall we render for Gods Word manifested in our days? Romans 10.8.
this is the word of faith. Let those who think themselves so sufficiently
enlightened without it, look upon Athens the eye of Greece, as Greece was (at
that time for knowledge) the eye of the whole world: And consider how miserably
blind and idolatrous it was till Paul their Phosphorus came amongst them. Is
the filme over the eye of our minds less then theirs was? Acts 17.29.
or our cataracts easilier coutch'd? has man's nature taken any higher degrees
in knowledge amongst us, than it did in that University? I fear me, that they
who decry the super-intendency of faith, were it not for those truths which it
alone has evidenced, (for all their goodly reason and parts) would now be a
worshipping an unknown God too.

But it is time I now hasten to those especial duties which this Text expects
from you: be exhorted then,

1. To labor for faith; Exhort. 1.
with all your gettings, get this way of spiritual knowledge: what would ye not
give for such a Philosophers stone, as some have fancied; which can turn all
things into gold? the Elixar of faith can do this. The harshest Providence
that believers go through; poverty, sickness, death; nay temptations,
desertions, infirmities, etc. only faith can make them all more precious than
gold which perishes: whereas others have riches, Eccles. 5.13. Romans 8.28.
etc. for their hurt. These very afflictions work together for the believer's
good: the thick cloud was as beneficial to the Israelites, as the fiery pillar.

Faith only can turn your shadows into substances: your appearances into
realities. It has a kind of Almightiness in it; and can speak to things that
are not, as if they were. If faith do but say, Let there be light, holiness,
etc. it shall be so, Mark 9.23.

Other things, as riches, honors, etc. they are not, though seen: for will ye
set your eyes upon things which are not, Prove. 23.5.
says God? whilst you say they are, they may cease to be; and so prove you a
liar to your face. but on the contrary: The objects of faith, as heaven, and
the happiness there, though not seen, Prove. 8^.8.
yet they are, substantial and abiding; and such as will never make a single
disappointment. And is not true gold in your Countinghouses, though not seen,
better than painted gold in a picture, though seen?

The Apostle tells us that we should take the shield of faith (...) above all
things; nay, in all things. (as Hierom reads it) Faith is like salt, which
every sacrifice must be salted with; without which, it is impossible to please
God, Hebr. 11.6. 'Twas by faith only that Abel offered a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain, Hebr. 11.4. This is the root as ye have heard, which
though ragged and unlovely in appearance, yet all the fruit of the Tree of
life, the whole systeme of graces are extracted from it. The dead child indeed
is reasons; the living child, where it is, is faiths.

Be content to make faith your evidence. Exhort. 2.
To think Gods revealed will the best reason that you can yield your assent
unto. Do not fear 'twill unman you? ye never come to be your selves, to act
truly rationally, till ye come to be believers. The Worldling that follows no
better than a glorious bubble, (with the neglect of better objects) is not
himself; and that Scholar that too eagerly pursues School Divinity with the
neglect of Scripture-divinity, is as little himself. Much learning has made
thee mad, Acts 26.2^.
is a truth: only mistaken by Festus in the application.

If we look for certainty, where can we find it if not with him that neither
deceives, nor can be deceived? Is not Gods sole affirmation equivalent to all
the several means whereby knowledge is acquit'd? Is an I saw it, a clearer
proof than God said it? or is the connection betwixt the causes and effects,
(which possibly too are but imagined such) more inseparable than betwixt Gods
Word and Truth? If God be neither ignorant, nor faithless in what he affirms,
thou art sure enough. And lest ye should be scandalized at believing, consider
but what confusion and disorder there would soon be in the world, if in humane
affairs themselves, we should only go by science, and believe nothing. -- si
quod noscitur credendum non est, quomodo servient parentibus liberi? Aug. De
utilitate credendi.
it is Saint Austins argument. How shall children know that these are their
parents, whom God has commanded them to honor? are not even mothers
themselves caused to believe their by-standing Friends, Midwives and Nurses
whereby they come to know those children which they ever after so tenderly
affect?

Nay, we are forced in worldly matters, to act by a civil faith, quite contrary
to that, which that that we see, would persuade us to. Thus the Husbandman
throws away his seed; sometimes too in unkindly weather; when to be sure he
has not a demonstrative knowledge that he shall reap any benefit by it. And
the Mariners hale their Ships out into the Roades, whilst the Winds are yet
contrary unto them. Well may we then in religious matters, think it not at all
unbecoming us to be acted by a divine faith: which whosoever shall take away,
(let him place what he will in its stead) he had as good take away the apple
from the eye, or the heart from the body.

But what if any should be further inquisitive after the reasons of those
things which are asserted in Scripture? A poor simple believer might answer
that of Paul in such a case, where is the Disputer of this world? 1 Cor. 1.20.
There is no need of the Disputers art, to defend or oppose, where God has once
declared his will; which, if all reasons else fail, Credo quia impossible.
Tert.
the faithful will believe, because it is impossible. and when the believer is
hardest put to it; he knows that he that moderates in the act, and sits in the
Chair of Truth, is most concerned to solve the objections; and says he, Lord,
Thou shall one day answer for me. Cyril. Hier. Catech. 6. Mat. 4.10.
(...) A bare it is written, was enough to confute and confound the subtilest
adversary. -- And this is the highest honor that such sorry creatures as we
are, can give to God; when for the defense of the least word, but once
pronounced by him; (notwithstanding all the contradiction that can be devised
against it) a Christian dares suffer, were it possible, ten thousand deaths. I
cannot dispute, cries the Martyr, but I can die.

I confess this is a hard, a very hard duty; we think nothing more easy, but
we find nothing more difficult than to believe. When God calls for our
estates, etc. none but a sordid spirit will deny them: but when the Lord
requires the subjection of all our imaginations, that our very reason, like
Simeon, should be taken and bound before him. The Lord pardon his servant in
this, cries the worldly ingenuous person. Puduit doctos homines, a Discipulis
Platonis fieri Discipulos Christi. Augustine. Fides est credere quod non vides;
cujus merces and veritas ^^t videre quod credidisti. Aug. Tract. 27. In Johan.
He had rather have Plato and Aristotle for his Masters, who pretend to prove
what they say; than Christ, who requires belief on his word. But remember what
Saint Austin says to encourage thee, if thou now wilt believe what yet thou
do not see, thou shall certainly see; what now thou do believe. On the
other side, to such an one who will not believe Gods Word, the promise; unless
he sees it: I will say to him in the Name of the Lord, as the Prophet did to
the Nobleman we read of, 2 Kings 7. 2. Thou shall see it indeed with thine
eyes, but shall not taste thereof. I might add.

Be exhorted to have a life answerable to this grace of faith; Exhort. ^
this denominating grace, whence all Gods children are called believers. My
meaning is; let your conversation be answerable to that description of faith
you have now heard of. Alapide in locum.
Disce hic quam cogitationes fidelis, and Christiani debeni esse sublimes; quam
non terrena, praesentia and caduca; sed coelestia, futura and aeterna;
cogitare, sperare, prosequi: de iis loqui, and anhelare debeat: Oh learn to
have high and heavenly thoughts. Thy portion, thy line, is not fallen here below;
not in these things that are enjoyed here, or seen here: but do not murmr or
repine it is but according to the exigency of thy condition that God deals thus
with thee, (...); Chrysostom. in loc. He^r. 11.1.
thou can not be a believer, and see or enjoy too. Methinks thy countenance
should be no more sad: Joy is comely for thee; which I am in the last place to
offer unto thee; and that in the saddest night of affliction that can befall
thee.

The evening in thy day is first too, but art not thou as one that watch for
the morning? Consolation.
and when it seems darkest, the daylight of eternal deliverance is at hand.
Faith shows thee that sunrising which will never set. The cloud of present
evils is not so thick, but faith can see through it the things hoped for. And
what though they be not outwardly apparent or visible? the Tradesman gains
most by his stock, when it is farthest out of sight. and when his cashe at home
is low, he may be very rich in commodities he has abroad. I have read of
Alexander, that when he went first into Asia, he gave away whole countries,
(which he had already in possession,) to his followers; and being asked what he
would reserve for himself; he answered, Hope; and how much more may it suffice
thee, when all other things are taken away? it cannot make thee ashamed as it
might, Romans 5.5.
and did him. Nay, can all that God is, and has, suffice to cheer and refresh
thee? (he is too covetous indeed that cannot be satisfied with God) Faith makes
him, and his to be yours. (as love on the other side makes you and yours to be
his) Gods Son is yours for your redemption; his Spirit yours, for your
sanctification; his words yours, for your instruction; his power yours, for
your protection; his glory is yours, for your coronation. I shall conclude all
with that notable saying of Bernard, which indeed does include several of the
uses forementioned. Faith, says he, tells us, there are unheard of, unthought
of blessings prepared: Dicit ^ides; parata sum magna and inexcogitabilia: dicis
spas; mibi illa servantur: curro ad ca, ait charitas. Bern. 1. Sermon. in Psalm.
90. Mat. 24.46.
Oh says hope; these are prepared for me, and kept for me; well says charity,
or holy love; I Will run to them, and endeavor after them: to which I will
only add my saying too, from the mouth of the Lord. Blessed is that servant,
whom the Lord when he comes, shall find so believing, and so doing.

FINIS.

