SERMONS Preached upon several PUBLIC AND EMINENT OCCASIONS.

By that Learned, Orthodox, and Powerful Divine, Mr. RICHARD VINES, late
Minister of the Gospel at Lawrence Jewry, LONDON.

Collected into one Volumne.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet, 1656.

The Titles, Occasions, and Texts of the Sermons contained in this Book.
1. CAleb's Integrity in following the Lord, fully preached to the House of
Commons on a Fast day, on Numb. 14. 24.

2. The Imposture of Seducing Teachers Discovered, in a Spittle Sermon before
the L. Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of the City of London, on Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.

3. Magnalia Dei ab aquilone, on a Thanksgiving day, before both Houses of
Parliament, on Isaiah 6. 8.

4. The Posture of David's spirit in a doubtful Condition, on a Fast day before
the House of Commons, on 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.

5. The Happiness of Israel, on a Thanksgiving day, Preached to both Houses of
Parliament, and the City of London, on Deuteronomy. 33. 29.

6. The Purifying unclean Hearts and Hands, on a Fast day before the House of
Commons, on James 4. 6.

7. The Hearse of the Renowned Robert Earl of Essex, Preached at his Funeral on
2 Samuel 3. 38.

8. The Authors, Nature and Danger of Heresies, on a Fast day before the House
of Commons, on 2 Pet. 2. 1.

9. 10. 11. Subjection to Magistrates both Supreme and Sub-ordinate, in three
Sermons at the Elections of the Lord Mayor of the City of London three years
successively, on 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16.

12. Corruption of the Mind described, in a Sermon preached at Paul's on 2 Cor.
2. 17.

To which is adjoined,
Enoch's Walk and Change, the Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mr Vines, by M.
Thomas Jacomb, on Genesis 5. 24.

There is also Printed for Abel Roper,
The Growth and Danger of Heresies, a Sermon Preached at a Fast before the
House of Commons, by Mr. Thomas Hodges on 2 Pet. 2. 2.

The Noble Order, a Fast Sermon before the House of Lords, by M. Daniel Evance,
on 1 Samuel 2. 30.

CALEBS INTEGRITY In following the LORD fully, IN A SERMON Preached at Saint
MARGARETS Westminster, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their late
solemn and public Fast, November. 30th. 1642.

By RICHARD VINES, Master of Arts of Magd. College in Cambridge, and Minister
of the Gospel at Weddington in the County of WAR.

Et facere, and pati fortia, Christianum est. LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Abel
Roper, at the sign of the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1646.

HONORATISSIMO, GRAVISSIMOQVE SENATUI PARL. DOM. COM. HANC SUAM QUALEMCUNQUE
CONCIONEM HABITAM APUD EUNDEM.

IN ECCLESIA SANCTAE MARGARETAE, APVD WESTMONASTERIUM, SOLENNI, MENSTRUORUM
JEJUNIORUM, DIE NOVEMBER. ULTIMO, ANNO 1642. EX OMNIBUS, QUI SACRIS OPERANTUR, IN
AGRO WARWICENSI, MINIMVS.

D. D. D.

RICHARDVS VINES.

CALEBS INTEGRITY In following the LORD fully. OR The Pattern of a godly Man,
going upon a dangerous service, or at a desperate point.
NUMBERS XIV. XXIV. But my servant Caleb because he had another Spirit with
him, (or in him) and has followed me fully, (Hebr. has fulfilled after me)
him will I bring into the Land whereinto he went, and his seed shall possess
it.
THe History whereof this Text is part; Verse 1. and 9. and 11. and 22.
is a Narrative of one of the murmurings of the Israelites, which famous ^^n of
(...) is expressed in some variety of style, being elsewhere called Temptation of
God, or (...) provocation, or imbittering of God, and sometime rebellion, which
is a sin incident to a people that under promise, or in expectation of good
from God, and yet withal, so encountered with temptations and obstructions of
their hopes, wave after wave, that they cannot (...) themselves by faith
reconcile the promise, or tenderness of God with his present providence and
dispensation toward them, his footsteps b^ing cloudy, and his hand heavy:
where upon their spirits are even by his probationary (...) imbittered against
him, as if he neither regarded his own truth, nor their sufferings. And God
again is imbittered against them for their unbelief in him, their jealousy of
him, their discontents, thought or vented against him; for God would not have
the people of his Covenant, because they are in straits, to question his
respect to them; no, though they be between Pharaoh and the Sea, at point of
perishing: But if his present hand make them cry, Alas, for the day Ier. 30. 7.
is great, It is even the time of Jacobs trouble, (and who will not shrink at
the first putting his feet into cold water) yet to over-believe sense, and add
with all, but he shall be saved out of it. This murmuring was the Tenth, the
greatest, and of the heaviest consequence.

The Tenth, so God himself numbers it, who, as he keeps a Book of every man's
particular sins (as the phrase of blotting out imports) and whereof every man's
conscience is a counter-part, so it appears hence that he keeps an exact
account of our National rebellions and provocations, Verse 22. They have
tempted me (...) these ten times.

The greatest, for besides that it is after nine, and the repetition of a sin
makes the latter ^o (...) the greater, ( Ezra 9. 14. Should we again break thy
commandments) I say, absque hoc, their other murmurings arose upon their want
of flesh, bread, water, or some dislikes of some particularly economy of God
over them: This strikes at the root, at the throat of all, for now being in
Paran, or at the Mountain of the Amorites, Chap. 12. 16. Deuteronomy. 1. 20.
in the very borders of the Land of their rest, ready to put in their sickle to
reap the promise made to Abraham so many hundred years before. They so
undervalue and dishonor Gods rest made over by deed of promise unto them long
agone, and now ready to be given by livery and seisin into their hand, that
they prefer a slavish life, nay, a grave in Egypt, before such an adventure,
Would God that we had dyed in Egypt, Verse 2. Or would God we had dyed in the
Wilderness, any grave would serve their indignation, rather then they would
put on for this inheritance; and happily they thought (as we sometimes do in
like case) that this Land being in promise, it should have dropped into their
mouths, even without their opening them, and not have been a Land of conquest
as well as promise; for so we fancy, that promises must fulfill themselves,
even though we be not in capacity of them, or contribute not to serve Gods
command or providence in the way of reaping them.

And what was the consequence? God was provoked, and in his wrath swore an oath
exclusive of this people, led them off the borders of the Land, a forty years
march in the Wilderness, until all the Mutineers (all above twenty years old
as their going forth of Egypt) fell therein. Upon which account, not a man of
that great people (except Caleb and Joshuah) of much above sixty years of age
came into Canaan.

Now if these things be our examples, (...)* 1 Cor. 10. 6.
then it is but laying the scene among our selves, and the result of it will be
this; That is after all our other National provocations of God, for which we
have long deserved, that the hand should write upon the wall, that God has
numbered our Kingdom and sinisht it. We should be brought to the borders of
that long prayed for rest from our yoakes and burdens in Church and State, and
then prove, as I may so say, run-awayes from Edge Hill, and stumble at the
threshold, despising the offer, cancelling our former prayers, scandalizing our
selves, saying, The time is not come, the time the Lords house Hag. 1. 2.
should be built, and so wish for Captains that we may return into Egypt, as
this people, Verse 4. Might we not fear such another oath of God against us,
and such another pilgrimage of our selves in the Wilderness of our own misery,
until our carcasses were all fallen as theirs.

The occasion of this mutiny was, Twelve Princes or heads of the Tribes, were
sent out to discover the Land, they went, returned, and reported, but these
Twelve were not all agreed of their verdict, they were ten to two; The ten
spoke their carnal fears, nothing but walled Towns, warlike people, sons of
Anak, the Land indeed is good, but like the garden of the Hesperides, Dragons
keep it; not a word or syllable of Gods Covenant, Promise, or Presence, to
counter-ballance or make rebatement. The people are drawn after them and
imbittered, they cry out that God has betrayed their Lives, Wives, Children to
manifest ruin, and to Egypt they will back again.

The two, Cateb and Joshua, controverted the ten, and Numb. 30. 30, 31.
protested. We are not able to say the ten, we are well able says Caleb; they
are stronger then we say the ten, Cum Cap. 30. 31, 32, 33. Cum Cap. 14. 8, 9.
they are bread for us say the two; we are Pismires and Grashoppors to them say
the ten; the Lord is with us, fear them not say the two; they are fenced in
with walls, and Giants say the ten; their shadow is departed from them say the
two; This was the contestation, but the No's carried it, and though Caleb and
his fellow plied the people with Gods presence, power and promise, and with the
experience they had had of him, yet they got no heat into them, but the heat of
insolency and rage, All the Congregation bad stone them with stones, Verse. 10
Spiritual arguments to a carnal heart, are but warm clothes to a dead man;
when men have once a prejudice against God, as if he would be false to them,
and think their faith in his promises will be but a snare to engage them into
ways destructive of themselves, then it is no oiling of a wheel so skotcht: for
it is a sure rule, he that has no faith to make use of God, would by no means
have need of him. When this people saw the great work which God had done upon
Egypt, then they believe; Exodus 4. 31.
the faith of a carnal heart is laid up in present sense or evidence of Gods
hand; but while the Anakims are alive, God is no body to them; a hard heart
will not bring up former experiments of God, to charge new dangers in the face,
for though says Moses, you have seen so much of God already, yet in this thing
ye did not believe the Deuteronomy. 1. 31, 32.
Lord your God. On the contrary, Caleb values God alone against all that can be
said, and makes the Giants but Pismires to his faith, by setting God by them,
of suchdown-right is God to a spirit of faith in that very thing wherein toan
unbeliever, he does not so much as stir, much less turn the beam.

So much for the survey of the Suburbs of the Text, whereby you already do
perceive, that here is something that is proper to the Meridian of our own case.

And now I am at the words, which are an exception of Caleb out of the number
of them, whom God by oath peremptorily excluded the Land of promise for their
Rebellion, and therein we have,

1 Gods testimony of him. 2 Gods promise to him. 1 Gods testimony of him. 1 He
has fulfilled after me. 2 He had another spirit with him.
2 Gods promise to him. Him will I bring, etc. and therein,
1 The assignement of Calebs plot, the Land he searched, or that part of it
into which he went.

2 The ground of that promise, because he had another spirit, and has, etc.

3 The entaile of the promise, or the inheritance upon his seed. His seed shall
possess it.

I begin with Gods testimony of this servant of his, He has fulfilled after
me, which after this time you may observe to be set as a mark of honor upon
this man: insomuch as when his name is named, this character sirnames him, He
that followed me fully; in like manner, as Deuteronomy. 1. 36. Ios. 14. and 6. and
alibi.
that brand sticks upon the name of Jeroboam, He that made Israel to sin.

I list not to vex the words. The Hebrew being (...), he has fulfilled after
me; answered with (...); in the new Testament, (...), 2 Cor. 10. 6. when your
obedience is fulfilled: but I will not stand to rub that ear, which will yield
me no more corn then the Translation has beaten out. He has followed me
fully; as if the Lord had said, he has stuck close to me, and improved the
business under his hand, howsoever succeslesly as to the people, yet
dangerously as to himself for my sake, and managed it to the best advantage of
my honor, by valuing me, my promise, presence, power, against all Objections
made by humane wisdom; or Objections laid by humane power.

Let us now see what the Text holds forth unto us, and that Honey is best,
which runs freely from the comb; we must not commit rape or extortion upon the
Word of God, a sin too frequent in our times, by such as are most zealous for
their party, for how many do (...), comparari verbum Dei, as the Apostle
speaks, dashing and mixing as Hucksters do their wares, adulterating the pure
word with their own crude fancies, and so uttering and venting it abroad into
the world, to the great scandal of Scripture it self, godliness, learning,
and ingenuity.

The Observations that offer themselves willingly are these.

1 That God makes great reckoning of, and gives special testimony unto such
his servants who fulfill after him. My servant Caleb has fulfilled after me.

2 To fulfill after the Lord, proceeds from another spirit than the unbelieving
Israelites are acted with all. He had another spirit with him.

3 Such shall not lose by the hand, who out of a right spirit do follow the
Lord fully. Because, he had, etc. him will I bring into the Land, etc.

For the first, it is not Calebs commendation only, but every man's duty also,
who bears this style, My Servant. You hear that Solomon who out of compliance
with his wives, took in also, as I may say, Concubines to Gods Temple, is
therefore charged, 1 King. 11. 6. Not to have fulfilled after the Lord; and
Iehu who out of compliance with that policy which proved fatal to that
Kingdom, not casting out that Ieroboamiticall Idolatry in being, is likewise
charged, 2 King. 10. 31. Not to have observed to walk in the Law of the Lord
with all his heart: both of them are taken as defective in this duty, he that
took in more, and he that cast out less then might answer the level of Gods
order of worship, and judge the same in other cases. For it is plain by our
Savior his frequent and instant importunity, that his people must deny, lose,
sell, forsake, hate all, not only all sin, but all dearest things of this
life, which are lawful, necessary, and (out of the case of impediment of our
following of Christ, and their competition with him) worthy to be sought or
enjoyed, which can import no less then this duty of fulfilling after the Lord.

Nor are these merely Evangelicall counsels to some perfect men, but obligatory
of all Christians, otherwise that weight could not be laid on, which is,
Whosoever does not this cannot be my Disciple, And indeed, as the Philosopher
says of privation, that it is one of the principles of natural generation; so
is self-denial and the whole sale of all for Christ, it is the first lesson,
howsoever it be last that is well learned, being the only removens prohibens,
that which removes all impediments of our fulfilling after Christ. And as the
times of Christ, opposite to the institution of the Gospel did require the
inculcation of this Point, so ours, opposite to the restitution of Gods worship
to it is native simplicity, do bespeak the same, being such, In quibus animum
firmare oportet constantibus exemplis, as he in Tacitus.

For the opening of this Point, we shall consider,

1 What groundwork is requisite to be laid in a man, that he may fulfill after
the Lord. 2 What it is to fulfill after him. 3 Why we should fulfill after him.
For the first of the three, I shall acquit it in four things, of which the
second will rise out of the first, the third out of the second, the fourth out
of the third.

1 The first and indeed the root of all the rest, is this, that there be in a
man a principle of saving faith, closing with Christ to secure the present and
final estate of the soul, or the groundwork of sound Regeneration and
conversion to God; there may be many workings or gifts of the Spirit of God in
and unto men, in whom there is not a spirit uniting to Christ, and there is a
dogmaticall faith of holding the truth in opinion and assent which is not
justifying of the person by reception of Christ; now there must be such a
spirit, and such a faith as may carry the soul out of it self for subsistence,
and above it self in operation and working, so that God may be (...), from whom
and unto whom the soul does act, and then it will follow, that he that has
cast his soul on Christ by faith, securing the mayn estate thereof, shall the
more easily cast away his life, estate, etc. in a particular cause for him. He
that through all the pangs and struglings of the new birth, discouragements at
the weight and height of his sin, oppositions of reasonings, delusions, and
flatteries of self-righteousnesse, violence of hell it self, has shot the mayn
gulf and has landed in Christ, shall with more facility lay aside his lesser,
his outward interests for him, for it is a terrible thing for the stoutest
heart alive to look such a danger in the face, as for ought he knows may at
one blow kill him and damn him, or in a moment, send him both to his grave and
Hell, it makes a man follow the Lord fully, when he obeyes the Commandment by
the same faith, whereby he receives the saving promise, and offers up Isaac by
the same faith, whereby he got him; that is, to obey and suffer by a
justifying faith, as they, Heb. 11. whose acts there expressed, were not most
of them justifying acts, yet done by a saving and justifying faith, for so it
is the same hand which shuts and closes upon the gift and opens it self to
work. And yet I must needs preoccupate an Objection, and grant that Abraham who
believed the main promise without staggering, showed some trepidation, when he
conceived himself in danger of his life, They will kill me, Genesis 12. 12.
says he; but that is but the encountering of sense with faith, which sense
fights sore against faith, when it is upon it is own dunghill, I mean in a
sensible danger, natures retraction of it self from a visible fear may cause
the pulse of a Christian which beats truly and strongly in the mayn point, the
state of the soul, to intermit and faulter at such a time; but the Needle will
return to the true point again upon self-recollection, That godliness has the
Promises that belong to this life and the life to come: as for such men whose
hearts are not ballast with grace; no marvel if they ride uncertainly and are
up and down in rough water, for though in fair and easy weather they may keep
tune and time, yet it will be no wonder if they ring their bells backward when
things begin to be on fire, Religio religat, Godliness binds fast.

2 The second is, That a man affect God himself, and account him his great
reward, and this is the immediate effect of saving grace and faith, to bring
the soul into the esteem and acceptance of God himself for our (...), or
chiefest good; it is true those Promises, I will call for the corn and increase
it, and will multiply the fruit of the Tree and of the Field, are blessings and
benefits of his Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 29. And blessed are the people that are in
such a case, Psalm. 144. 15. but the main Promise of the Covenant is, I will be
their God and they shall be my people; and then says the Psalmist, Ibid. Yea
blessed are the people whose God is the Lord: That which we call amor amicitiae
or conjugalis closes with the person, and not only with benefits. The first
Commandment shows that this is the most natural order; first; to have God for
our God, and then and thence to perform other duties. Servility when one is
awed from sin, or driven to duties by the whip, and mercenaries when one is
drawn by mere benefit or reward, are the bane of following the Lord fully: He
that parts with sin as a slave, parts with it and loves it, and will in the
calm gather up again that which he cast overboard in the storm; and he will
perform duties and hate them: He that follows God as a mercenary will no longer
uti Deo, then he can frui mundo: He will use him while he can serve himself of
him. Duties and sufferings are irksome things without that suave condimentum,
the love of God himself. I know the opinion of merit with God or men sweetens
sharp duties and sufferings to some palats, but that is but dulce venenum, a
sweet poison to all we do, it frustrates our very Fasts, Did ye Zach. 7. 3.
at all Fast unto me, even unto me? Was it not an argument of an excellent
spirit in Moses, when God offered him the benefit without himself or his
presence, Exodus 33. 2. I will send an Angel before thee, and I will drive out
the Canaanites, etc. but I will not go up in the midst of thee; and this was
the reason, I shall but consume thee if I do; what a fair offer was this, and
what a reason of Gods denial of his own presence was that, and yet Moses could
not be content with it; For if thy presence go Exodus 33. 15.
not with me, then carry us not up hence. Let us be here in the Wilderness
under thy Cloud, rather then possess a Canaan without thee.

3 The third is, To value Gods interests in any business under our hand, more
then our own, his Gospel, his cause, his glory; and this rises out of the
former; for he that loves God himself, above himself, will value Gods
interest above his own. It is the property of a sincere heart to observe, what
share God may have in any action or duty to which he is called, and to
distinguish and abstract it from his own. We have a famous instance in Moses,
who was offered a private fortune, even by God himself, I Will make of thee a
great Nation, Numb. 14. 12.
greater and mightier then they; no (says he) Lord, thou will be a loser by
it, and thou shall run the hazard of thy houour; and surely as God was
displeased with Balaam for going, though he bad him go, so the Lord would not
have taken it so kindly of Moses, if he had taken him upon the offer he made
in a time of his heat against his people; nothing makes a man eccentrick in his
motions so much as private respects; he that has an habituate by-end, has as
it were a nail in his foot, and though he may go well enough in soft ground,
yet he wilt halt when he comes in hard way: If ever in any great business God
did intwist his own interest with ours, it is now in our case, and if there be
any that could be content to sit down in the settlement of their liberty and
property, without further care of Religion, and to dwell in seiled houses,
while the house of God lies waste: let me put Hag. 1. 4.
them in mind of Reuben and Gad, who being seated in their plot, would yet
march on to see the rest of the Tribes settled, as well as themselves, before
they would sit down; and says Moses, if you will not do so, ye have Numb. 32.
18, etc.
sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out.

4 The fourth is, To be able to perish for God, and this rises out of the
former, for he only can lay himself out for God, that can lay up himself in
him: And it is a point of great ability, I know how to be abased, how to
hunger, I can do all things. Phil, 4. 12. Let no man say, Paul thou must hunger
and be abased, it is a matter of necessity, nay, but ye see he makes it a
point of ability in him, that he can be in a necessitous condition; a man shall
never be quiet nor at point, till he can lose himself to save himself, as
Christ speaks, and perish to live, for he shall be daunted at every alarm of
ill tidings, fearful of the shadow of the Cross, every danger in a duty awes
him; every frown of a great man dastards him, until he can perish in his
reputation, and be vile, more vile, yet more vile for God, or can come to that,
They would not Heb. 11. 35.
be delivered. It was the greatest heartbreaking to Paul when his friends in
affection to him, would have befought him out of his own danger, Acts 21. 13,
14. And this groundwork being well laid, you may easily see how possible and
probable it is, that such a man should follow the Lord fully, especially in the
matters of God and of Religion, wherein many excellent Romans to their Country
and true Patriots, prove very truants and heavy slugs.

I come to the second thing, viz. what it is to fulfill after the Lord, or who
may be said to do? And this I shall briefly run through.

1 More generally. 2 More particularly.
1 For the more general explication of this point, To fulfill after the Lord.
1 Excludes partiality in the Law of God and takes in integrity. Patiality is
either in the negative part of the Law, and that is when a man casts off some
sins, and has some other, one at least, in deliciis; or in the affirmative
part; when he plows here, and makes a bawke there, this cannot be following
fully, for that consists in integrity of aversion from sin, and of conversion
to God, quoad assensum and conatum. 2 It excludes sinisterity of ends, and
takes in sincerity; for the Scripture brands it for an emptiness of fruit,
when a man brings forth fruit to himself, Hos. 10. 1. Israel is an empty Vine,
he brings forth fruit to himself. 3 It excludes lukewarmnesse and takes in
zeal, not that preternaturall heat, miscalled zeal; for that is a disease
rather then a grace; zeal should eat us up, but not eat up our wisdom, nor
should pride eat up our zeal. 4 It excludes the mere form of godliness, and
takes in power; for form wants the chief dimension of holiness, which is depth
and substance; therefore those follow not fully, that run before the
commandment in outward form, but walk not after it in moral piety. 5 It
excludes withdrawing and takes in constancy, for (...), to follow fully, and go
on to the end, are much at one; he that walks fully after the Lord, walks
finally after him. But this fulfilling after the Lord, does not necessarily
require legal perfection, as to exclude all sin out of the person, or his
ways, for we hear of none besides the two Adams, in whom it might be said
(...), there is no sin; though it was said of one, and may be of other true
Israelites, (...), there is no guile, or predominant hypocrisy; Neither does
this fulfilling after the Lord, exclude inequality, and take in the same
measure as necessary in all, for the fullness of two vessels, does not infer the
equality of them; God has differently tallented men with grace, parts, means,
opportunities, and he does not require him that has but one tallent, to put
forth five.

2. For the more particular explication of the point, and first, who fulfils
after the Lord in duties of obedience, and that is when a man walks,

1, Universally in compliance of heart and endeavor to the whole rule, clipping
off industriously no part of that service which bears Gods superscription upon
it, though it may be to him harsh and unpleasant, yet the command of God shall
both awe and draw the heart unto it, for that word, I am the Lord thy God,
makes every Thou shall of his, and every Thou shall not, acceptable to a godly
man, and this is to walk (...), fully.

2 Freely, though no rod be holden over us, the Laws curse is the Impressed
shilling to force a servile spirit, but the love of God is the byas of a
voluntiere. Grace is that whereby God is free in giving to us, and grace is
that which makes our hearts free in obedience to him, and this freeness of
spirit will be most seen, when there are most rubs in the way; for then he that
moves by outward poyses will stick and be dull: as when a bowl runs up hill
every rub slugs it, but when it goes down hill a rub quickens it; a free
spirit is enkindled by that which quenches another man.

3 Satisfied in part with duty, and with the conscience of sincerity and
exercise of his graces therein, though success answer not; what a joyful man
was David when he and his people had offered so willingly the materials of a
Temple, though he might not build it, 1 Chronicles. 29. What pleasure took Paul in
infirmities and reproaches for Christ, when the strength of Christ was perfected
in his weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 10. And this is that satisfaction wherein a good
conscience finds some rest, when a man can pray, can believe, wait and speak
for God, though the success and event answer not his duties or desires, a good
heart is laden with the very burden of duty, and finds ease when it is
sincerely discharged, let the issue be as it will,

4 Independent upon, and unrespective unto the eye and account of men, and
that, 1 Though equals interessed as well as he do desert him, as the ten did
Caleb and Joshua. 2 Though the people misconstrue him, as these did them; he
that walks by men's countenance or eye, steers by a Planet, and not the
Pole Star.

2 To fulfill after the Lord when impediments lie in our way, and cross winds
carry us from the Port, is,

1 To reckon upon God with us, against all mountains of opposition, so Caleb,
The Lord is with us, fear them not. Thus the Prophet animated his man being in
fear, and Hezekiah his Subjects, There be more with us 2 Kings 6. 16.
then with him, yet had he none but God to reckon on, and the Assyrian had a
hundred fourscore and five thousand 2 Chronicles. 32. 7.
at least; such is this God of ours, who says, Shall I bring to the birth, and
not cause to bring forth, Isa. 66. 9. who promises Jacob the worm, that he
shall be his instrument to thrash mountains to dust, Isa. 41. 14, 15. and what
comparison between a worm and a mountain; what other reason is given of the
breaking in pieces of all confederacies and associations against the Church,
but only this, For Immanuel, Isa. 8. 10. and it might teach all the world, to
say when they set against God, fi^collidimus frangimur, as the earthen pot
against the iron rod breaks not the iron, but is it self broken.

2 To stand firm, by setting one foot upon the experiences we have had of God,
and the other upon his promises yet in expectation; for our experience of him,
we may argue from his opening of the red Sea, to his opening of Jordan. He
that opened the Sea to bring us into this wilderness, will surely open a River
to let us out. And for his promises to his people, they will eat their way over
all Alps of opposition, God will be the Midwife of them to deliver them of
their womb, as it is said, He has fulfilled with his hands, that which he
spoke 2 Chronicles. 6. 4.
with his mouth.

3 To fulfill after the Lord, being in encumbrances inward, outward, is,

1 When a man prefers not a quiet Egypt, before a troublesome and hazardous
adventure upon the Land promised; He will never repent of his choice of God,
nor of his engagements to his cause, though he suffer for it, and lose by it,
he will never say, would God I had dyed in Egypt, nor sound for a parley with
the world and sin, nor sound a retreat to his heart, to march away from the
cause or work of the Lord.

2 When we misconster not Gods intention and meaning toward us, nor put a
false gloss upon his hand that goes forth against us, like these
rotten-hearted Israelites, that cried God would betray them; it is hard when
his covenant, truth and love, cannot vindicate him from all possibility of
falsehood toward us, or forgetfulness of us. Keep up good thoughts of God,
that if he bring us not into Canaan at the fore-doore, yet after he has led us
about to humble our pride, he will bring us in at the postern, as he did this
people; and if he save not Jonah by the Mariners, he may save him by the Whale
that swallows him.

3 The third thing is, why his people should fulfill after the Lord; in which I
will be brief, for Eliah his reason is enough, If the Lord be God, follow him,
for all 1 Kings 18 21.
attractives are in him, all remuneratives, all restoratives, and he expects it
of his people, commends it in them, and rewards it to them: He expects it, I
know Abraham says God, that he will do so and so: He commends it, as here he
does Caleb, he followed me fully: He rewards it, as here he promises, and
afterward performed to Caleb, and generally they that follow the Lord home.

1 Shall see more of him. 2 Receive more from him.
1 They shall see and taste more of him, for then shall we know the Lord, if we
follow on to know him, Hosea 6. 3. we shall see him in oftener experiments, and
observe the curiosity of his contrivements and workmanship in his ways, and
that is one reason why he crumbles his mercies to his people, and why they
have his blessings by retail, that communion and trading between his people
and himself may be mayntained, and he more sweetly enjoyed: so the Cloud
empties not it self at a sudden burst, but distills and dissolves upon the earth
drop after drop.

2 They shall receive more from him; he measures liberally back to them that
mete liberally unto him: They that will have their fill of God, must hold on to
the loss of a duty or suffering, for usually he reserves the best and fullest
cup to the last; we know what Saul lost by not holding out one moment longer,
his men melted from him, the enemy was strong and near, and himself had stayed
almost to the end, yet for want of a minute, he lost by it, 1 Samuel 13. 13. Thou
have done foolishly, for now would the Lord have established thy kingdom for
ever; we know not what we lose by making haste, and not holding up our hands
as Moses did, to the going down of the Sun.

For the Use or Application of this Point,

Israelites, who, whether out of neutrality or malignity, fulfill not after the
Lord, being either purely privative in respect of this duty, or positively
disaffected, of these we have infinite, and of diverse principles, It Is strange,
that men should be no more sensible of the sin of lukewarmnesse, but that our
Savior gives a double reason of it. 1 That they are not stone cold, that is,
not so vicious or profane as others, for there are not so many degrees of cold
in the lukewarm as in the cold water; but they should consider that the
lukewarm are more offensive to Christ's stomach, and can less be borne by it. 2
That lukewarmness is attended with self-conceit and security, thou say I am
rich and have need of nothing, but Revel. 3 17.
this security arises out of self-ignorance, by which key whosoever is locked
up, they lie fast. I shall not so much discuss the sin, as the principles
whence such indifferency toward, or malignity against God and his ways does
flow. As,

1 Some are indisposed merely out of a stupid carelessness, lying asleep in the
side of our tossed Ship in this great storm, folded fast up in blindness and
security, as blanks in a Lottery, and they are but white paper, having nothing
written on them; such as these, like Samaritans are a kin to the Jews when the
Jews prosper, and disclaim kindred when they go down, being ready to contribute
their Eare-rings neither to golden Calf nor Tabernacle; or happily indifferently
to both, I mean Popery and purity are to them alike; And such is the case for
most part of such poor fouls among whom there has been no vision, their
Idol-shepheards having made their people Idols like themselves; not seeing, not
hearing, not having any spiritual sense; nor are they much the better who have
had some rare Sermons, most what about Orders and Ceremonies, and such
extrinsecalls, which have proved as a thrum left in the loomes, to which our
crafts-masters might more easily tie in their new piece, and if in no other,
yet in this respect, deserve castigation; because they have so taken up
Pulpits, Pens and Tongues, as to commit waste of precious time of affections
between brother and brother, and even of the substance of practick godliness,
which has suffered by such diversion; nor yet are they more awakend, whose
Preachers have been but Ethick Lecturers reading morality, whose Ministry has
not been first a fiery Serpent to sting the conscience (for Gods witnesses are
called tormentors of the inhabitants of the earth) and then a pole Revel. 11.
10.
to hold up the brazen Serpent to the wounded.

2 Some are indisposed to this duty of fulfilling after the Lord, out of
policy, and that is either policy of safety or of temperament.

1 Of safety, as a reed in the stream, which stands because it yields to the
tide and ebb, and bends the same way as the stream runs; the wisdom of these
men (as they call it) makes them stand as spectators upon the shore, while the
Ship is tossed at Sea, applauding themselves alone to have hit the right blot,
and censuring all others that endanger themselves for the Truth; If there be
deliverance they shall have part in the benefit without their care, cost or
trouble, and have share in the winnings though they have nothing at stake: but
put case a man is not agreed in hac hypothesi, that such or such a cause is
Gods, and therefore cannot lay out himself in it, or suffer for it. I answer,
when men are indisposed toward a duty they can easily plead in Bar, every
lesser scruple, or haesitancy of mind, which if they might forbid the action,
notwithstanding more preponderating arguments, Melancholy and Satan would have
us at such a pass, as we should do little or nothing; as it is a sinful thing
to ravish the judgment, to go without, or against the dictate of it; so it is
dangerous to enslave it to base fears, interests, lusts; the heart is not more
fraudulent than in seeking conviction, being like a Clyent instructing his
Council, and laying open all that favors him, concealing the strength of what
may be said against him, and when a rotten heart is pitched upon a verdict like
a partial and engaged Jury, it will hold to it, let the evidence be what it
will, resolving to elude the evidence and not see it. And if inconviction of
judgment, was but enough to free a man from the sin of not doing a duty, a man
might the better rest in it; but since it is not, let every man labor to avoid
that perplexity of sinning, if he perform, and of sinning, if he perform not,
and to that purpose, not only search the Word of God, but purge his heart from
the false by as; nor only praying, but praying for practick ends, He that will
do shall John 7. 17.
know: and let not the common sense and concurrent judgment of those that
truliest fear God be utterly flighted as inconsiderable, for though that be no
rule determining my act, yet it is a strong motive of my more diligent inquiry.
I conclude with that of our Savior, He that will save his life shall lose it.
It is a man's perdition to be safe, when he ought to perish for God.

2 Of temperament, I mean sinful, such as are they that cry, Divide the living
child, or can be content to make a mixture, like the transplanted Nations, 2
Kings 19. ult, Who feared the Lord and served their graven Images. If there be
any that can go so low as to give toleration to Popery (though now the Papists
put themselves in such a posture as they seem to threaten to give, rather then
take) let him consider that we have bin too liberal in connivence that way
already, and is it not therefore that war is in our gates; The setting up of
Reubens Altar had presently stirred up war against them, if the misprision had
not been cleared, that no Religion was therein intruded; and what say the
messengers of the Tribes, sent upon the Embassy, Rebel not against Judges 5.
8.
the Lord nor against us, Josh 22. 19. We shall smart for it if you do it. Let
their Popery and our Popishness go forth at once for ever: and so I would close
this point, but that having named the word Temperament, I would not be
mistaken, as if I meant to blow the fire which needs no bellows, flaming
already out at the house top, to which every good man should bring water and
not oil. For love peace, says the Scripture, yea, seek it when it is wanting
to you, yea and follow it when it is flying from you; but yet withal the same
Scripture couples peace and truth: peace and holiness in our loving, seeking
and following, for we shall have a dear bargain of it, if we sell truth to buy
it, and therefore we must not play booty with one another, to rise winners,
and God who has greatest interest to be the loser. We should be happy in such
Treaties, as might not prove a Trojan-horse unto us; and which might heal us to
the bottom, and not skin us over. And for him that delights in blood, let
satiate sanguine be his burden.

3 Some are indisposed to this duty out of fear, as

1 Fear to be engaged, standing with one foot within, and another without the
threshold, looking backward and forward, afraid of every new step, saying as
Caesar at Rubicon, yet we may go back, and of such men there can be no
certainty; for as it is said of those that followed Saul, they trembled after
him, 1 Samuel 13. 7. and the next news of them is that they were scattered from
him, verse 11. So is it here.

2 Fear of loss by the Reformation, and such is every Demetrius, whose Trade
goes down by it; and therefore no wonder if all the Craftsmen cry up their
Diana; there is but little more reason for ingrossers of dignities and livings
in the Church, then for Monopolists in the State, yet let not that Ox his
mouth be muzled that treads out the corn: If our Churches be made golden
Candlesticks, let not Candle-rushes be set up in them: If our Ministers be
Angels, they must have wings, and their feathers not so pluckt-off as to
prevent their flying; there is no color of fear of this from a Senate of such
Learning, Religion, and already declared resolution, for starve the Nurse, and
she must needs starve the Child; the Bird that is to keep the Nest and sit upon
the Eggs must have her meat brought in to her, and not fly abroad to purvey
for her self; nor makes this any thing against that freeness of preaching the
Gospel, which some in simplicity or worse do urge as inconsistent with liberal
mayntenance; for even the Volunteer follows not the War at his own charges I
say no more but this, that poor pittances and mere benevolences, are but too
like a prisoners mayntenance, whose small allowance, and almes-basket to boot,
keep him still hungry.

3 Fear or hatred of the purity of Ordinances and power of Religion, of which
thousands will say, as they of Christ, Mal. 3. 2. But who may abide the day of
his coming, and who shall stand when he appears, for he is like a Refiners
fire and Fullers soap. This root bears Gall and Wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. unto
such the burning and shining light of the Ministry is terrible; and the more,
when they shall not be able at pleasure to hamper it in the old snare of
Ceremonies, or bring upon it the old Extinguishers with that facility as wont;
it is a mark of a Philistine, if the Ark of God smite him with Emerods and
afflicts him, it serves not the Israelites so.

4 A scrupulous fear of sinning against authority, and in truth the
tenderness of the conscience in that point is to be approved; for God has so
hedged in Magistracy, whether the supreme or subordinate, that whoever 1 Pet.
2. 13. 14.
breaks through that hedge, shall feel the thorns in his sides, and therefore
conscience must acquit it self, of it is warrant and sincerity, that it seeks
nothing but the saving of the Ship and Master from the violence of the storm;
and in that case once speaking Ass said reason, who having saved her self, yea
and saved her Master from the Sword, against his own will, did thus plead
against his anger, What have I done unto thee, that thou have Number. 22. 28, 30
smitten me, was I ever wont to do so before time.

Ezekiel. 14 21.
judgments, ^^ Sword, and that Sword the sorest of all Swords, w^^^h kind may
yet doubtless be cast out by Prayer and Fasting: nor shall I now at this time
set in order before you our former National sins, for which God has been a
Moth unto us, and is now become a Lion; for from so small a thing as a Moth,
does he threaten to be a Lion unto Ephraim, Hos. 5. 12. etc. Let us rather
apply our selves to take notice of such marks of Gods displeasure as are now
upon us, since we came to the borders of our happiness, and observe the
reason why we are wafted from the shore so far into the main back again. When
was the venom spirits of men so discovered as now of later times, When I would
have healed Israel, the sin of Ephraim, was discovered, Hos. 7. 1. Healing
times are discovering times; and have we not cause to look for that in Joshua
24. 20. namely, that the Lord should turn to do us hurt, and consume us after
he has done us good; or for that in Numb. 14. 34. Yea shall know my breach of
promise; Our Ark is like Noah's floating upon the waters. We have many that are
weeping for Tammuz, thirsting for the return of their Adonis, we Ezekiel. 8. 14.
have bitter murmurings and eructations of Gall against God and his Truth, we
fear our remedies; we are full of divisions, sinful, paenall in Church and
State. We abound in jealousies, a just punishment of our provoking God to
jealousy of us by our former dalliances with superstition. We are discouraged
because of the way, and speak against God and Moses, Numb. 21. 4, 5. and
therefore has the Lord sent fiery Serpents amongst us, that bite us and even
devour us, Religion is torn into divisions and fragments, the swarm is up and
settles in so many places, as without great mercy, they will never be got into
one hive; such symptoms do we put forth now that God is healing us; and are
come to such a crisis as makes our hearts to bleed, what is there in Ireland?
what in England, but pila minantia pilis? quis talia fando? What Monster of
cruelty can endure to see his Mothers bowels so ripped up. Where are our public
spirits remote from mixture of private ends* What Soldier is willing to forget
his auream messem, or golden harvest, and rather be bankrupt by grace, then
make the State bankerupt by war? What Delinquent rather offers Jonah 1. 12.
up himself to Trial, and says, Take me up and cast me forth into the Sea,
so shall the Sea be calm unto you? Surely God will fetch our pride out of us
by strong hand, if we take not off the head of it, and cast it over the wall,
to prevent his indignation; and yet we have mavelous mercies too, if we had
eyes to see the. God has evidently shown that he is in our burning-bush, we
had otherwise been in ashes by this time, and so we are like the flint between
the hard hammer and the soft pillow, and have cause of the best kind of
humiliation, which is to love and weep, as that woman did: if we be not
battered into the mould, why are we not melted, that we may run into it? and
let these humiliations be continued in their vigor, that frequency beget no
formality; for the valley of Achor is given to us for a door of hope. Hosea 2.
15. Use 3.


Let it set an edge upon you to fulfill after the Lord.

1 When he goes before you, that is, (...).

2 When he flies from you, that is, (...).

1 When the Lord goes before you and invites you yet after him, by making the
track of his feet evident; we must not sit still, when his Cloud arises to
move forward, it is safe to march after it: and surely if God be to be seen. 1
In nicks of time, Tanquam a machina. 2 In working or creating good out of
evil, hope out despair, furtherances out of oppositions, etc. 3 In seasonably
discoveries of Clouds, while they were but like a man's hand. 4 In ministering or
suggesting timely antidotes or preventions. 5 In entangling the Spiders in
their own web, or bringing down enemies by their own hands, 6 In drawing
hopeful blessings on, upon their way above our first thoughts or aim, as he
drew on Luther, whetted by importunity of Adversaries; then is God gone out
before us, we may see his footsteps in all these ways, therefore follow him.

2 When he flies from you, yet then follow him fully: Does he hide his face,
delay to hear, lengthen our danger, are things in worse state with us since
Moses came? are Treaties abortive, Fasts imprevalent? etc. let us not turn back
and say, This evil is from the Lord, why should we wait upon him any longer?
There is reason that God should be sharp, we have inveterate stains to be
washed out, which will hardly be got out, until the cloth be almost rubbed to
pieces: Christ came with a shaking of the Heavens and Earth, and all the
Nations, Hag. 6. 7. after such concussions, The desire of all Nations shall
come; nor did Christ rise out of his grave without an Earthquake, cum
duplicantur lateres venit, Moses; for how could mercies be wonders, if straits
were not wondrous; though obstructions be obstinate, yet Christ will come in to
his people, even when the doors are shut: presently after Marahs bitter
waters, God brought Israel to Elim, where they had twelve Wels of water, and
threescore and ten Palm Trees, Exodus 15. 27. God hides himself to be sought,
delayeth to be importuned, flies from us to be followed.

I will add but a word or two of encouragement.

1 To all. 2 To you our Honorable Senators.
1 That which I shall say to all is this, that if we fulfill after the Lord,
we shall cut shorter our travails and troubles: so had this people done if
they had followed the Lord fully at this time, we lengthen our miseries by
shortning of our duties, and the Lord keeps aloof from us, because we lie
aloof from him: God is disabled from doing great works among us by our
distrust, He could do no great works among them, because of their unbelief,
says the Text: Or admit we be long holden off our happiness, as Caleb was kept
out of his promised inheritance forty years, yet shall Gods promises fill our
laps at last; the longer day God takes to make payment, the more he gives us at
the last. If he come not to heal Lazarus while he is alive, we shall lose
nothing by it, for he will come to raise him when he is dead; therefore let us
follow him fully, both by prayer, and all possible contributions to his work,
and cause, and Gospel; what if we have not an eare-ring left, so that the
Tabernaele have it: water we see puts it self to extremities, and contrary to
particular nature, rises upward ad prohibendum vacuum, to prevent a fraction in
the universe; who is likely to save his own Cabin when the Ship founders; but
it may be the work sticks, and it may be at thee; why is not thy shoulder at
the wheel, when the Cart is stalled; though Israel stick at first in Egypt,
yet they went out at length with the Egyptians leave, and not a dog (as the
Text says) moved his tongue against Exodus 11. 7.
them.

2 To you of Senatorian order, be you encouraged to follow the Lord fully, and
let not the Luminaries of the highest Orb beslowest of motion, you have need
of encouragements, that you may scatter the obloquies, the scandalls,
suspicions, jealousies had of you, and endure the contradiction of such as are
afraid to be healed: In the Universities they complain their Muses lie a
dying, O let it never be by or under your hand, but only teach them as of old
they were feigned, so now really to frequent and be Mistresses of purer
fountains: Some cry out that Religion will be changed, and thar there will be
an alteration thereof; If this Objection arise from this, that the Ceremonies
and usages hitherto offensive and burdensome, are likely to be abolisht, what
can be said more against them; for it is not time to cast them out, the rather,
because they are accounted such immoveables, that to remove them, is to commit
waste upon the very freehold it self. It Is time to break the brazen Serpent,
and to call it Nehushtan, a piece of brasle, when it is idolized; or if rather
the quarrel arise from that pure administration of Ordinances of worship which
is desired, is it not as void of reason; for shall perfective alterations be
accounted destructive, does the changing of the Tabernacle into a Temple,
wherein are ten Candlesticks for one and more setledness and beauty, imply any
change of Religion? Others find out as many Religions as we have Articles of
Doctrine, nine and thirty, and upbraid us with Sects and Schisms, etc. which
truly are our misery, and fill us with scandals, shame and sorrow; yet this I
may say, that if every several or new opinion, makes a new Religion, then we
have more then so many: If not, then doubtless we have fewer; but whatsoever
it be, it is but a fond thing to say there will be no building, because the
timber, stone, materials lie yet in confused heaps. I beseech you to set on
work hewers in the Mountains, and stone-squarers, to prepare 2 King. 5. ^5, 1^
timber and stones to build the Temple, that our Jerusalem may at length be a
City compact together, and at unity in it self. And as for all aspersions and
reflections upon you, follow the Lord fully; and as the ecclipsed Moon by
keeping her motion, wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendor, so
shall you, For every Isa. 54. 17.
tongue that shall rise in judgment against thee thou shall condemn; and this
is the heritage of the servants of the Lord.

For the confirming of you in following after the Lord, I might put you in
mind, what Gods people have done for God in pressing extremities. Namely,

1 Doing that which saving the pressing case, it might be questioned whether
they ought; an instance whereof we have in Phineas; Numb. 25. 13. who by an act
of zeal, turned away the near approaching wrath from Israel, and made an
atonement for them, by such a sacrifice as it is doubted by what warrant he
offered it up, I mean the execution of Delinquents, and yet is justified and
highly extolled by God for it. And so Esther, in a time of Esther 4. 16.
extremity, put her self to do that which was not according to the Law, to draw
forth her people out of destined destruction; nor do I know how she could have
answered it to God, if her particular observation of that humane Law, had
forbidden her the rescueand preservation of a whole Nation of Gods people, and
yet the Law she broke was capital, as she says, Verse 11. and therefore she
goes on with this resolution, If I perish I perish; whereby it appears she
could in this case have comfortably perished in the breach of that known Law.

2 Standing to it, so as it might be questioned whether it was needful, and it
is the case of Daniel, Chap. 6. 10. whose keeping his thrice a day devotions,
and opening his windows toward Jerusalem, not abating of the number of his
Prayers, nor performing them in a more concealed manner, to have avoided the
malice of his accusers for one Months time (for no longer was the Interdict to
last) may seem more then needs; yet he did not budge a jot, nor abate a
circumstance, because he saw his Religion was stricken at, and his sincerity
put to the trial, which he was resolved to mayntain with (as I may so speak) a
holy obstinacy, whatsoever came on it. I do not urge these examples, to
precipitate any man unto rashness, especially in cases not thus
circumstanciated, but to show how fully they went after the Lord, in that
wherein carnal wisdom might and would have found sundry specious elusions to
have evaded the duty.

I shall resume the exhortation in a few words, as touching your advancing and
settling Gods interest, and then he will settle yours; He took out of all the
Cities 2 Chronicles. 14. 5.
(says the Text) the high places and Images, and the kingdom was quiet before
him: If you will build God a house, he will make you an house; as it was said
to David, labor ye therefore to set up the Evangelicall worship and regiment
of Christ, so as there may not be one howbeit, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33
if possible, as there was in that of Asa, Howbeit the high places were not
taken away; which work we shall bring to best perfection, if we adhere to the
Word of God, and print after such an original as went before all editions of
error: not that I would tie any man to such examples, customs, constitutions
of the Word, as were merely occasional in their both rise and use, and
respective to times then being, for what would that differ from a superstitious
valuing of the brazen Serpent, after the use of it was out, because it once had
institution of God; but of this point no more now: My business is, to excite
you to follow the Cloud, and the Rock shall follow you; let Seedsmen be sent
forth into all our fields, that the people may be taken by the conscience, and
not only conformed by Law, for the strength and continuance of a Reformation,
lies not all in the Magistrate, but in this, that the people receive the truth
into them and among them, who otherwise will be but as Hens in a coop always
boaking to get out which was the reason that they were so up and down in Judah,
according as they had remiss or religious Princes; and by this means also
shall Popery be profligate, and Papists converted a little better, then merely
by oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, which breed such a generation as is
contrary to rule of Philosophy, which is Generatio unius est corruption
alterius, whereas these new Protestants are Papists still.

Finally, If there be some cross springs in the lock, some prophecy may lie
against our present hopes, for God has his arcana Imperii; or if necessity of
times, unripenesse of the people, shall retard the work, so as it shall be
said, so many years was this Temple in building, yet I say to you as the Lord
to David, 2 Chronicles. 6. 8. Thou did well that it was in thine heart: and let
but a right spirit (namely a spirit of adherence unto, and acquiessence in God)
carry you on to fulfill after him, and then, though Caleb through the peoples
rebellion, wander in the wilderness forty years, and be kept off his promised
reward; yet he shall come into possession thereof at last, and his seed shall
inherit it, and so I should come to that which remayns in the words, as namely,
That

To follow the Lord fully proceeds from another spirit, than the unbelieving
Israelites are acted with all: and this spirit of Caleb was clearly that which
the Apostle calls a spirit of Faith, in closing with, and cleaving unto God
alone. I cannot particularly handle this point, only be bold to cast in a word
or two toward the setting of the byas right way, else a man may run and never
obtain. If we would have the hand of the Dial to point and go right without,
the wheels and poyses must be right within, and we must not only look at the
work we have to do, but also to the principle within us, that it be a right
spirit, for there is no question but that a man of no filial disposition
toward God, may be Gods tool or instrument, or (if ye will) Gods servant, to
perform such or such a service right in Gods sight, I shall not need to show
how far a man may go, and what adventure he may make in a good cause upon
other reasons, principles and motives than proceed from a Gospel spirit; Cyrus
proclaims liberty to the Church, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22. yet was he a man that knew
not the Lord. I do^bt not but a Protestant upon a dogmaticall faith or belief
of his tenets and principles, might among Papists die upon them, and yet come
far short of salvation; how far would the name of Abraham or Moses have carried
a Jew, even a Jew in letter? Martyrdom is no merit.

Let every man therefore take heed to his spirit that he Mal. 2. 16.
deal not treacherously, for howsoever your good service perishes not to the
Church or Commonwealth, yet it perishes to you, if you be not carried with
hearts full to God. Many a man is a Carpenter to build Noah an Ark, wherein
himself is not saved. There are many rest in their mere opposition to, and hate
of Popery, as if that should seal up their salvation; and many again will
reason thus, The cause wherein I am is good, it will swim out its gods, and
that is their plea. Alas, this is not all, for be the Protestant truth never so
clear to thee, and be the cause thou art in never so good, yet thou may be
lost in it, as the Egyptians were lost while they went in the same path,
wherein the Israelites were saved; therefore pray and seek for such a spirit of
choosing and following the Lord thy God, as may ensoule thy actions or outward
works; and then beside the acceptance and testimony thy ways shall find with
God, thou shall be able to go through, and fulfill after the Lord, which a man
upon natural parts, and strength of moral principles or virtues, shall never
do, for youths shall faint and be weary, and young men shall utterly fall, Isa.
40. 30. that is, men their own ends, they rest and proceed no farther; such a
spirit therefore as Caleb had, do you restlesly seek of God the giver of it
to them that ask him, that being sincerely carried, (which in great and
glorious actions is the more hard) you may reap the Euge of a good conscience,
which is better then the Hic est of all the World: and not only so, but there
will be more hope of the work when it is carried on by such hearts; as God
said of David, he was a man after his own heart, and what follows, He shall
fulfill all my will, Acts 13. 22. And of Hezekiah it is said, that in every
work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in
the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it withal his 2 Chronicles. 31. 21
heart, and prospered; such hearts, such success we pray to them that are now
engaged in this great work, that so promises with the entayle of them upon
Posterity may follow such Calebs for ever.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii, 30. November. 1642.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that Mr.
Vines shall be desired from this House, to print the Sermon he preached before
this House at Saint Margarets Westminster, this Day at the public Fast; And it
is further Ordered, that he shall have the usual privileges as others
formerly have had, that none shall Print or reprint his Sermon, but those whom
he shall appoint.

Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to Print this Sermon.

Richard Vines.



THE IMPOSTVRES OF Seducing Teachers Discovered; In a SERMON before the Right
Honorable the LORD MAJOR and Court of ALDERMEN of the City of London, at their
Anniversary meeting on Tuesday in Easter week, April 23, 1644. at Christ-Church.

By RICHARD VINES, Minister of Gods Word at Weddington in the Country of
Warwick, and a Member of the Assembly of DIVINES.

The second Edition.

2 TIMOTHY 2. 17. And their word will eat as does a Gangrene.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun over against
Dunstans Church, 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAJOR AND COURT OF ALDERMEN, of the Famous
City of LONDON.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
AN Epistle Dedicatory usually bespeaks a Patron, and then the Reader is
epistled afterward. I entreat Readers only and Patrons no further then the
Truth may challenge them suo jure. Though I should have done my self but right
in sending this Sermon forth into public, yet your Commands were the stronger
tie upon me. It was received with ill resentment by some whose Character not I
but the Apostles gives in this Text: the aspect whereof is (I believe) no more
pleasing then the Sermon; Either they should not wear such faces as are afraid
of this glass, or wash first, and then they will not be angry. I should
rejoice to offend any man for his good; and be afraid to please him for his
hurt; I intended it for a stay to the mutant and unstable; a stop to that
Gangrene which I hope is not crept so near the Head as to have taken any of
you; who in other things have been so far from being Children tossed to and
fro, with winds, stormy winds, that from you posterity shall learn to be men.
The very holding up of the Text in open view may be a quo vadis? to one or
other. If not. Yet Thou have delivered thy soul, Ezekiel. 3. 19, 21. is some
comfort to him who humbly presents this Sermon to your hands and eyes, with
some enlargements here and there, which the time denied to your ears; and
whose honor it is to be

Your Servant for Christ, RICHARD VINES.

THE IMPOSTVRES OF Seducing Teachers Discovered;
EPHESIANS. IV. XIV, XV. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. But speaking the
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things which is the Head, even
Christ.
THE Gospel had no sooner ascended the Horizon of the Gentiles, and dispel'd
that universal shade wherein they had been benighted, but the Devil erected
his factories in those new discoveries to intercept the trade of truth,
therefore is our Apostle in many of his Epistles, so much in fortifying
believers against the impressions of seducing teachers, and the history of
Fatemur quidem novas quasdam and antea non auditas sectas, Anabaptistas
Libertinos, Mennonios, Zwenkfeldianos statim ad exortum Evangelii extitisse,
Juel Apol. Eccle. Anglicanae. Vide Sleidanum in commentariis.
Luthers time does witness also that it is the lot of reformations while they
are green and recent, to be infested with such sects and doctrines as happily
were never before heard of, and therefore it concerns all to be careful what
money they take when the markets are so full of adulterate coin, and to be
armed against the scandal thence arising, as if the truth was the mother of
such monsters which are none of hers, but are laid at her door to bring her
into discredit; we must expect no less, nay happily we have hereby an argument
that the truth is at the threshold, for it is not ordinary that tares grow any
where but in the wheat field. The Text too fitly serves our own Meridian,
being purposely chosen to give antidote against the infection of seducing
teachers.

Whether the word Henceforth do look back to the time past, and imply that the
Ephesians had been like children tossed to and fro, as is generally conceived
by the (...). Christost. Theophilact. Oecumenius. (...).
Greek expositors and others, I shall neither enquire nor insist upon it, but
shall take it as a resul: from what the Apostle had said in the beginning of
the chapter, where having in the 4, 5, 6, verses, named seven ones, one body
and one spirit, one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, wherein the Ephesians and all believers are
concenterated. He passes on and touches upon gifts and ministeries given to
the Church by Jesus Christ, sitting at the right hand of God; in which form of
expression he seems to allude to the As he does elsewhere, viz. Luke 2. 1c.
and to the Olympic exercises, 1 Cor. 9. 24. 25. etc. and alibi.
Romans in their tryumphs, wherein the Conqueror having the glorious Captains
at his chariot, scattered his munificence in congiaries and donatives to the
soldiery and people, for so our Savior ascended up on high, and led captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men: and what are those gifts which might become the
magnificence of a Conqueror so triumphant? Are they not ministeries? ver. 12.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, a royal donative given in the day of his triumph: but
the use and end whereunto these ministeries are subservient and isntrumental
adds value to them, as it is set forth, ver. 12. 13. 14. 15. For the
perfecting of the Saints, etc. That we henceforth be no more children.

In the next you have
A Character, and An Antidote.
The character is of 2. sorts of persons
The Seduced, The Seducer;
The Seduced are called children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine.

The Seducers are said to be sleighty, crafty, and to have their artifices,
methods, stratagems of deceiving, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

The Antidote or preservative is two fold;

1. The Ministry which Christ has given to his Church, He gave some Apostles,
etc. That henceforth we be no more children, etc. for the salt ( ye are says
Christ, the salt of the earth) serves to preserve the people from being
flye-blown with every corrupt doctrine unto putrefaction.

2. The holding fast of the substance and vitals of practick godliness, ver.
15. Following the truth in love, grow up in all things into him which is the
Head even Christ. The fortifying of the vitalls is a repercussive to all
infections from the stinking breath of a corrupt teacher.

I shall open each part of the Text as I come to it, And first the character or
description of the Seduced, or of them that are unstable; for there is no doubt
but the Apostle intends to descypher instability and fluctuancy by these words,
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine;
which is a sentence (as every eye may see) carried on in metaphors and
figurative expressions, only some critics might happily ask what decorum of
speech there is in children tossed to and fro and carried about with winds? For
had it not been more congruity to have said waves tossed to and fro, or clouds
carried about, then children? But we must not teach the Spirit of God to speak,
the sense is obvious and proper; for the better rendering whereof we may
consider;

1. By what name unstable people are called, children.

2. How their instability is expressed, Tossed to and fro and carried about.

3. What cause there is of it, Every wind of doctrine.

1. For the first, They are children (...) and (...) are synonymies, 1 Cor. 14.
20. wi^h Heb. 5. 13. and alibi.
, so called, not in respect of age, but of knowledge and understanding, 1 Cor.
14. 20. be not children (...) in understanding, but be men: Where (...) perfect
and ripe And so (...) and (...) in veteri Testamento. Isa. 3. 4. Prove. 19. 25.
Eccles. 10. 18. and alibi.
men of knowledge are opposed to children, that is, ungrounded and unskilful
ones, unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe, Heb. 5. 13.
Such babes the Apostle calls carnal, though they be in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2,
3. and opposes them to spiritual, that is, perfect or ripe of knowledge and
judgment; and you may see that such men, that are shallow and unballast with
knowledge, are easily carried into envying, strife, factions, one crying up
Paul, another Apollo, ver. 4. yea they become the certain prey of Sectaries and
Seducers, made prize of by them, as the (...), Col. z. 8.
word signifies, Col. 2. 8.

2. For the second, their instability is expressed in two (...)
metaphors, tossed to and fro, and carried about; the former is drawn from a
wave of the sea (for (...) is a wave) and so it denotes an uncertain man that
fluctuates in opinion, and is explained to the full, James 1. 6. a wavering man
is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. The latter from a
light cloud swimming in the air, carried about in a circle having no weight in
it, and may well be expounded by that of Jude ver. 12. clouds without water
carried about. Nor wave nor cloud have any consistence, but are always in
motion if any wind be stirring, you shall in vain look to find them anon where
you see them now.

3. For the third, the cause of this instability is every wind of doctrine,
there are winds of persecution that overthrow the house upon the sand, and
there are winds of doctrine that toss to and fro these children. Scripture
mentions chafe and stubble driven with wind, the reed shaken with the wind,
the wave, the cloud tossed and carried by the wind. It is because we have no
weight in our selves, nor solid principles, that the wind has power over us;
they are light things and moveable, that are at the command of every wind: when
the Apostle says wind of doctrine, he implies that there is no solidity; and
when he says every wind, he implies that there may be contrariety in those
doctrins to one another, and yet every one tosses some waves to and fro, and
carries some clouds about, nay the very same cloud that is now carried one way,
is anon carried another; and what a miserable pass is he at, whose Religion
consists in some empty opinion, and is but thereof tenant at courtesy to the
next wind that blows, being carried about with every Heinsius excrcit in
locum: doctrina indies mutabilis.
change or novelty of doctrine. There are others that are unstable, not for
want of principles and knowledge, but rather want of a good by as of sincerity
for God; being carried about too, but it is by their Interests and ends,
whereby they are off and on, up and down, as the sent lies, and as the game
which they hunt does lead them, with these I have not much to do at this time.

Having thus opened the words of the first part, I shall now sum them up
together into this point.

Children (that is, ungrounded people who have no sound bottom of knowledge)
are apt to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine.

1. Children, is a word denoting relation or imperfection; Relation, and so ye
are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 26. Imperfection,
so in that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I was a child I spoke as a
child, etc. There are many of this denomination in the Church, for as in a
School there are diverse forms, and commonly the most Scholars are in the
lower, so is it in the Church of God, there are abcedaries, babes that are to
be taught (...) their letters, Heb. 5. 13. the first elements of the oracles of
God, and to be fed with the spoon, or as the Apostle calls it, milk. He did not
think himself too high to feed with milk, 1 Cor. 3. 2. Therefore let no
Minister be he never so learned, scorn to be an Usher under Christ, to teach
his petties their a. b. c. If the people had not pleaded their rotten charters
of age and marriage against Catechism, and the Minister had not thought
himself too good to teach them their letters and first elements, we had not
seen so many children carried about with winds of doctrine: Pride (I fear) has
made both ashamed of the duty, the one to teach, the other to be taught, and I
would that both were now humble enough to acknowledge the fruit of that neglect.

Now children are so called, by reason of the imperfection of their knowledge,
either in respect of the measure of it, or of their ungroundednesse in it, and
is lying loose in them without rooting.

1. In respect of the measure of knowledge, which is low and mean, though
themselves be steadfast in it and unshaken: It is not a swimming but an
anchoring and centering knowledge, and stakes them down from fluctuancy and
tossing, and this is, by having the savor, virtue and sweetness of that they
know: He that has a little knowledge well tried by the touchstone of the word,
and tried in his own experience to be humbling, quickening and comforting, he
loves the truth, and love will establish him in it; upon that reason which
Peter gave to Christ, Joh. 6. 68. Whither should we go? ^hou have the words of
eternal life. The Apostles while under Christ's own ministry and wing were but
very raw in knowledge, (and thereby we learn that no doctrinall teaching or
ministry, though of Christ himself on earth, can make way into the heart of
man until the Spirit come,) yet so much they found in the words of Christ that
they knew not whether else to go, because eternal life was in them; and this
testimony our people cannot but give to our deserted Ministers, that the words
of eternal life is in them, and why then will they not reflect upon themselves
and say, whither shall we go? I would not tread out the least spark except it
be wildfire in the house-eaves which may set the whole Town afire. God has
his babes, to whom I would recommend for their comfort the comparing of Heb. 5.
13. with Heb. 6. 9. where the Apostle having called them babes that had need to
be taught the first principles, does yet say, we are persuaded of you things
that accompany salvation, and makes men^ion of their work and labor of love,
for there may be much godliness in lesser light: Fundamentals unto salvation
are not so many or burdensome, the least Star in the orb has as swift and
regular a motion though not so much light, as the greater; only let it be your
endeavor to know your own measure, and to increase in grace and in the
knowledge of Romans 12. 3. 2 Pet. 3. ult.
Jesus Christ which are practical things, and not to be question-sick, and
leave wholesome food to long 1 Timothy 64 (...).
after such things as do but add to the crudity of your stomachs, and fill you
up with wind.

2. In respect of their ungroundednesse in knowledge, which lies loose in them
and does not stake them down, or anchor them from being tossed, because they
have it by rote, and can neither give a reason of that they know, nor have
found the weight of it upon judgment and conscience, and so they are variable
and unstable like children; the Philosophers definition of a moist element is
proper to them: That Quod difficulter suis, facile alienis terminis continetur.
is (says he) it has no form or consistence of its own, but easily takes such
figure as the continent or vessel in which it is does give it, as water takes
the form of the dish or glass, etc. into which you put it, such are these;
they have no mould but what the next teacher casts them into, being blown like
glasses into this or that shape at the pleasure of his breath; to such as the^e
I commend this, to get the reason of that they know, as its said, a reason of
the hope that is in you, for Religion consists not in a rhapsody of loose
opinions, nor will a little knowledge gotten by rote preserve a man from being
taken captive by every nove^l doctrine. Its the Apostles phrase, 2. Tim. 3. 6.
They take prisoners silly women. Where you may note, that he says they prevail
with women; they (...) Omnes haereses ex gynecaeis Axiomat. Ecclesiastica, page
74.
get an Eudoxia, Iustina, Constantia, on their side, and so work upon Adam by
Eve.

2. These children are tossed to and fro, and carried about, and that denotes;

1. That they are unstable under the command of every wind, and a prey to every
net that is spread for them, traveling and wandering through all opinions when
they have left the true line; sometimes they are in Cancer, sometimes in
Capricorn, falling even into contraries, for one error is still a bridge to
another; so we know that the Arminian went forward to Popery, and many of ours
from Antinomianisme to Anabaptisme and Brownisme, and whether then? Why one
error ingendring with another begets a mule, or mixed offspring, and so Africa
it self shall not show more novelties, they will increase (says the Apostle 2 Timothy 2. 16.) to more ungodliness. Error is a precipice, a vortex or
whirlepool, which first turns men round and then sucks them in: be not carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. for its good that the
heart be ballast or ^stablisht with grace, where the opposition is evident
between being carried about and being established by grace.

2. That they are unprofitably carried; for to what port is the wave tossed? To
what station is the cloud carried? Is not the wave bandied back again by the
racket of the next wave, and the cloud by the next wind: Its good (says he)
that the heart be established, and to that end, that we converse in such
doctrines as do profit them that are exercised in them, Heb. 13. 9. (...).
still asking our selves this question, what improvement is there of my soul
heavenward by such or such doctrine? What healing of the gashes of conscience?
What further inlet or admission into communion with Christ? What cleansing from
al filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God,
2 Cor. 7. 1. If this be your aim, then steer this point, intend this scope,
and let go questions and vain janglings, contending toward the end of (...) 1 Timothy 1. 6.
the commandment, which mark (says the Apostle) may never shoot at, 1 Timothy 1.
6. in their ministry or doctrine, nor indeed do many hearers aim at any such
thing, I mean our Nomades (as I may call them) or walkers, who will not endure
to sit at the feet of a constant godly ministry (which yet is the best way of
proficiency in knowledge and godliness) but by reason of their feverish
thirst, as they distaste each one, so they desire to taste all waters; of which
sort is he that wanders away the Sabbath by peeping in at Church-dores, and
taking essay of a sentence or two, and then, if there be no scratch for his
itch, lambit and fugit, he is gone.

3. These children are tossed to and fro and carried about by doctrine, and
that implies, that they are hearers that are thus unsettled, and they are
teachers by whom they are unsettled.

1. They are hearers, and must not they be hearers? What else, condemned be the
atheism of the care of them who turn away their ear from God, who speaks by
the hand of his messengers; let us leave to the Papists ministorum muta
officia, populi caeca obsequia, the dumb offices of the Priests, and blind
obedience of the people, when Scribes and Phari^ees hold the chair, our Savior
says not, Mark. 4. 24. Luke 8. 18.
hear not, but take heed how you hear. Take heed what ye hear, beware of their
^eaven.

2. They are teachers that unsettle these hearers. They have troubled you with
words subverting your souls, Acts 15. 24. It much concerns the Church, yea and
the State into what hands doctrine is committed, by reason of the unsettlement
of the people which may be occasioned thereby, I should beseech them that are
in the office of teachers, that they would take heed to themselves and to the
doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 16. and that they would teach milk or meat, and not wind,
nor lead on people first into cirticismes, before they have laid in them the
plain Grammar rule of sound and wholesome words that they may be made
proselites to Jesus Christ, not to an opinion; yea, though you may bear the
name of a party as Paul might have done at Corinth, yet to cry them down who
would cry you up, and put over your Disciples to Christ as John did, telling
them that say I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, that they are carnal; 1 Cor. 3. 4.
and so you will wean them unto Christ whose they are; As for others that teach
indeed but yet are no teachers, (for whatsoever they do by gifts, yet
themselves are not the gifts of Christ unto men in the sense of the 11th verse
of this chapter) I should desire to know whether every one that has a gift to
be a servant must therefore be a steward, or that has gifts enabling him to
deliver a message, must therefore be an Ambassador; If in truth you be as Amos
said of himself, Herdesmen or gatherers of Sycomore fruit, then you must
produce Amos 7. 14, 15.
your extraordinary commission as he did, saying, And the Lord took me as I
followed the flock and said, go prophecy to my people Israel, or else you mu^t
be taken to be but Herdsmen still, and so it will be no wonder that strange
teachers should carry credulous people about with strange doctrines, as the
Apostle calls them, Heb. 13. 9.

4. The doctrine by which these children are tossed to and fro, and carried
about, is called wind, and that does not denote the pure Word of God, but some
illegitimate doctrine which the adulterers and ravishers of the truth do beget
upon it: what heresy ever came abroad without verbum Domini in the mouth of
it. The Arrian pleaded out of that text John 14. 28. The Father is greater then
I. The Anabap^^st from that, Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and disciple all
nations, and when he shall be thriven to his (...) or full stature he will
undermine Magistracy by that Romans 12. 19. Avenge not your selves. The
Antinomian has for his plea that 1 Timothy 1. 9. The law is not made for a
righteous man, arguing that he who has Evangelicall grace for his principle of
obedience should not have the law for a rule thereof; as if a new principle and
an old rule might not stand together: but because I intend not a particular
confutation of these or the like errors, therefore finally, you all know that
the devil has a scriptum est ready, Matthew. 3. 6. the Spider sucks poison out
of the Rose, not that I would imply that there is any such thing in the Word
i^self (for ex veris nil nisi verum) but that a corrupt stomach concocts
wholesome food in^o ^i^ease.

And why wind of doctrine?

1. Because there is no solidity in it, but being wind it breeds but wind in
the hearer and not good blood; and here I cannot but bewail our Pulpits of late
times, filled with hay and stubble in stead of gold and silver, as namely,
invectives against Bishops, and Cavaliers, news, and novel opinions, and in the
mean time the staple commodities of Heaven, as Christ, Faith, Love, etc. are
laid aside like breathed ware which no body calls for; I would not be thought to
be a patron of any such obnoxious persons against whom the Word of God shoots
an arrow; but this I plead for, that people who come to look for
soul-nourishing food may not be served with scum and froth.

2. Because of the changeableness, variety and novelty of it; for indeed such
teachers do fit their lettice to the lips of their auditory, and do easily take
them by their itching ears; nothing more pleasing to an Athenian ear then
novelty, which affects the hearers while it is fresh and green, but when they
shall come to chew this wind, they find nothing in it, and so they hunt about
again until they start a new notion. Christ is the only everlasting meat, who
though he be like a great standing dish, which by reason of Kickshawes and fine
Sallets is now adays not much fed upon by many; yet a truly humble soul is
never weary of Christ, neither can sit down to a meal, I mean, hear a Sermon
without him, and this sound appetite is a sign of an excellent temperament and
healthful constitution of spirit; he that has his mouth in taste for such
doctrine, and his stomach craving such solid food, has cause to bless God,
who it may be by inward shakings and temptations calls him to the settling of the
main free hold, and state of his soul, and so takes him off from running
himself out of breath after novelties and niceties, which will sooner fill his
head with dreams then his heart with strength or comfort.

3. Because of its prevalencie with and over unstayed men, one would wonder
that this which the Apostle calls wind of doctrine should so prevail and spread;
how suddenly is a whole country leavened with it? Whereas the saving knowledge
and reception of Christ, the power of godliness, and self-denial may be
preached an age, and not so many fish be taken as are taken at one draught by a
corrupt doctrine; I will not borrow that comparison which Eusebius made choice
of to express the quick spreading (...), Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. cap. 3.
of the Gospel at the first, saying, that it passed through the world like a
Sunbeam; but I shall take that of the Apostle 2 Timothy 2. 17. Their word eats
like a gangrene, which presently over-runs the parts and takes the brain, as
this wind of doctrine does, and the same Apostle (then whom no man did more
counter-work false teachers) says, Acts 20. 30. they shall speak perverse
things, to draw disciples after them, whereby it seems that the way to draw
disciples is to speak perverse things; hereunto. agreeing is that of our
Savior, Joh. 5. 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not: If
another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. Christ cannot find
entertainment but Bacchochebas is followed, and the reason is, because Truth
when it comes has nothing in us, but error has, There is no tinder to
catch a spark of truth, but there is oil for the wildfire of error. Heresies
are works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20. therefore men are soon removed, Gal. 1.
6. from truth to error.

And now to draw up this point into a sum, by way of Application:

1. Consider the doctrine you hear, and tell it over again from the hand of the
teacher, a man will tell money after his father. Beware lest a^y man make prize
of you, Col. 2. 8. some there are to whom the reputation and worth of the
teacher is the proof of his doctrine, receiving all that is stamped with his
ipse dixit. We should not call any man our father on earth, Matt. 23. 9. and
some also think it enough to say, This doctrine makes most against superstition
and popery, and yet we will not abide that in a Maldonat, who shall rather pitch
upon such a sense of Scripture, because it makes most against the Calvinists,
and there are who falling upon some novell opinion do honestate it with the
name of a new light, and conceive themselves the greatest illuminates, as
having two eyes and all the world besides but one, I deny it not, but that
every man in his Regeneration has a new light, which is a part of the new
creature; for the new creation begins in a fiat lux; Nor do I deny but that in
the Church there may be a clearer and further demonstration of, and insight
into many things in the Scriptures, which have lien in the bottom of the pit,
and may be brought nearer day then aforetime, for the nearer to the end the
more glory and light, as its said Dan. 12. 4. Shut up the words, and seal the
book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge
shall be increased. But this light though new to us, yet it is not new to the
word, to the Sun light is not new, though it be to the Moon, as the Apostle
calls strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. not such as are new to us, but such as are
foreign to the word: so we call that strange light, rather then new, which the
word of God ownes not, as the offspring thereof, and therefore I exhort you to
consider:

1. Whether this light come from the Word, or rather do not shine from a
glo-worm in your own fancies? Is not this vision of yours extra mittendo, by
beams going out of your own eyes to the object? do you not first conceive, and
then go forth to seek a father for your child? as the Sadduces that first deny
the Resurrection, and then think that they can make their heresy good, out of
a case in Moses Law, Matthew. 22. 24.

2. Whether it do nourish those graces in you in which the Kingdom of God
consists? Or whether does not this new light starve you? Does not this
sunshine put out your fire? For whether it be that the intention of the mind
upon the vain theory of opinions does divert the stream, and leaves (as I may
say) practick godliness dry; or whether God withdraw his influences from them
that lay themselves out in toys? or whatsoever the cause be, experience
shows that after this vertigo takes men in the head, many of them decay in
the vitals of Religion, and turn either Politicians to erect a party, or grow
very lean in practicke godliness, and draw loose in their geeres, if indeed
they become not loose in their lives and ways.

2. This point may give us just occasion to inquire into the reason why we are
so tossed to and fro and carried about, and crumbled into divisions, for who is
a stranger in Israel that he should not know these things. The heavens are
filled with fixed stars without number, but the Planets are no more then seven;
if the proportion was cast up amongst us, our (...), as Jude calls them ver. 13.
do hold a greater proportion to our fixed stars. Is not our Church called to
the bar to answer not so much for her purity or chastity in all
Administrations as for her very being and life? What children are these, that
will unmother her, before God her husband have divorced and unwifed her? That
will throw Babylon in her face, and then justify their secession and departure
by Flee out of Babylon: which will not serve their turn except they can find
also a Go out of Ephesus, out of Pergamus, out of Sardis, out of Laodicea, etc.

Our Sacraments are also called to the bar. The Lords Supper, under the
reason of a mixed Communion, by which (as I conceive) is not meant that
unbeleevers or unregenerate persons do partake rem sacramenti the kernel of
this ordinance; for in that respect they have no Communion with the faith full:
but that the Company of Communicants in the outward seal is mixed of regenerate
and unregenerate, Saints and hypocrites; unto which we say, that though the
door ought to be more narrow than to let in dogs and swine, yet the presence
and profession of intruders does not evacuate that Communion which the
faithful have with Christ, and among themselves: for the Master of the great
Feast (as He observed,) Matthew. 22. 12. does not say to them that has the
wedding garment; how came you in hither with such a man, but Friend, how ca^est
thou in hither not having a wedding garment?

Our Baptism is said to be a vanity, a nullity, as being dispensed to infants,
and that because we want example for it: but so we do, for women's receiving the
Lord's Supper: and if the reason and equity of the rule will carry it for woman
as well as men, then also we shall join issue in that point, and make it good
upon that ground, for children of believing parents as for the parents
themselves: for are not such infants foederati, confederates and in the
Covenant, See a learned Treatise called The Birth privilege.
though they cannot actually restipulate, yea surely, as well as those which
were circumcised.

The moral Law is questioned, whether it be obligatory to and directory of a
believer in Christ; for because he has another bridle of restraint of him from
sin, and another spur incentive of him unto obedience, therefore he has not
the same rule: which is but a confounding of the principle whereby, and of the
rule according to which a Christian is acted; these men are much mistaken in
that place whereupon they seem to ground their opinion, Romans 7. 6. That we
should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter. Where
they oppose these two as a rule and principle, taking away the rule, called
(say they) the oldnesse of the letter, by the principle which is the newness
of the Spirit; now there is nothing more clear, then that the Apostle, opposes
not the rule, to the principle of obedience; but duo principia, or rather duos
serviendi modos, two manners of serving, in the one of which they were
bondmen, in the other freemen.

Our Ministry is arraigned also, as the Papists, because the Ministers of many
Reformed Churches have not Imposition of the hands of a Bishop, deny their
ordination to be legitimate, so is ours denied, because we had; We are between
two milstones, what Ministers will they find in the Churches of Christ for many
hundred years if this be good against ordination? I cannot conceive but God
owned some of them, for his witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, Rev. 11. 3.

And finally to the nullity of these; the Church, the Sacraments, the Moral
Law, the Ministry, is added, the Mortality of the soul, which if reason cannot
confute, let a man consult conscience, if that cannot, Scripture will; had it
not been a strange mistake in our blessed Savior to have (but in a Parable)
supposed a rich man after his death in torment and Lazarus in Abraham's bosom;
if the soul be not immortal, or at least if it survive not; for that cannot
be applied to the resurrection, when the rich man will have no brethren on
earth to send unto, neither can there be any sense in that portion of
Scripture, but upon supposal of the soul outliving the body.

I had rather draw a curtain before this face of things then paint it out unto
you. How sad a hearing is it to hear I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of
Cephas? was not this that which (as Jerome observes) did at first set up
Bishops? our divisions are their factours, but that is not all; more sad it is
to hear, here is Christ, and there is Christ, for we are so impotent in our
opinions, that every man makes his own to be the very Shibboleth of the Church;
a thing unheard of before our times, that men of diverse Trades in this Famous
City, can be all of one Company, but being of diverse opinions they cannot be of
one Church, nor will be all of one School, except they be all of one form, which
breaks our communion into fragments; Now what may be the cause of this
transportation of people? are they children ungrounded in knowledge? That is
too much to be feared, or are they proud and wanton, and have taken surfeit of
the great things of the Law? Or are they ashamed to stand in the level of
sober practical Christians, but must be masters and set up the trade of some
new opinion for themselves, and build Babel to get a name, and to be some body
in the eyes of a party? I know not what to say, but the Lord stop the gangrene,
and turn all our eyes to the great things of the Law, that so this tithing of
mint and cummin may be left to a second place.

3. Be not children, and oh that this word might stop the fury of your
precipitate levity, as Caesar did the sedition of his Army by one word,
Quirites; you have had the vitals of Religion, a holy and pure doctrine, and
there is not another Gospel. For Ministers that have burned and shined
themselves out in holding forth essentials and saving truths, the whole world
since the Apostles time could not overmatch you; and for Christians (the seal
of their Ministry) begotten and bred up under their shadow, in respect of the
power of godliness there has not been another England on earth, since that
time; I do not ascribe this to the government and discipline (no more then I do
ascribe the multiplying of Israel to Pharaoh) but under God to the pains and
diligence of faithful pastors, whom I would not have any man now to
undervalue and debase as brats of Antichrist: they were Hereos and Worthies,
our regeneration and faith are their monuments, let no man dig up their ashes
and degrade them in esteem, nor belch out poison against the learning, livings,
callings of their godly successors in this Church: for wise men will interpret
that they do it upon no other reason then Herod burnt the Registries of the
families and genealogies of the Jews, in consciousnesse of his own obscurity;
And as for this Church, certainly she has had a womb to bear children, and
breasts to give them suck, which two things do make a fair proof for her
against all calumnies, though alas she had also a generation of vipers eating
through her bowels. Finally, This Kingdom owes as much to Religion as any in
the world, we have seen wonders of Gods love and miracles of deliverance, and
if God shall now bring his Ark to Jerusalem, and set it up in greater state
then before time, let us dance before it, but withal let us not despise the
house of Obed-Edo^-which God blessed for the Ark sake; we must not put down
the Temple because its made a den of thieves, but rather whip them out of it:
and for that we fast and pray, as also that those seven Ones in the fourth and
fifth verses may continue with us for ever, One body, and one spirit, one hope
of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all,
which should be as so many quoines to lock together all parts of the building
into one, as indeed they would if men were not so opinion-big as to make every
extravagant or at least extrinsicall opinion fundamental, and as an Atlas to a
new-Church building.

I come now to the second part of the Text, which is the character or
description of the impostors and seducers, that do unsettle men, whereof I
shall open the terms or words.

1. Sleight of men. The original word for slight, does properly signify
Dice-playing, and by a metaphor taken from players at Dice (which sort of men
you shall seldom read of in sober authors without some brand of infamy,) it
sets out the quality of false teachers, and in this all agree, but then in the
very point of application of this similitude there is a little difference.

1. As the cast of the Die is changeable and variable, (...).
alea nihil incertius, so are these teachers and such is their doctrine, and
therefore he calls it sleight of men, opposing this doctrine of theirs to that
of Gods pure word, which is always like it self and has no interests,
passions, crooked ends, as men have.

2. As dice-players can cogge the Die and make it answer what cast they please,
so these teachers have an act of mixing and adulterating the word, so as to
make it answer their own profit or advantage, but whether it be so or so, or
both ways, you see what these teachers make of their hearers, mere tablemen,
which the dice-player carries hither and thither, and moves from point to point
as he pleases.

3. Cunning craftiness, The same word that is used to express the subtilty of
the serpent tempting Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3. He beguiled Eve through his subtilty,
(...).
and it signifies the deep policy of men, 1 Cor. 3. 19. He takes the wise in
their own craftiness and so it imports that these teachers are veterators,
beaten fellows, men exercised and skillful to deceive.

4. They lie in wait to deceive, And the word in this Text is also used. Ephesians.
6. 11. that ye may be able (...)
(says he) to stand (...) against the stratagems of the Devil; fot it
signifies properly an ambushment or stratagem of war, whereby the enemy sets
upon a man ex insidiis, at unawares, denoting the specious and fair overtures
and pretenses of false teachers, spreading their net under the chafe, to catch
the silly bird, for it is plain that all their slight and craftiness is
(...), to this very end and purpose, that they may entrap and catch men within
the ambush of their impostures.

That which I collect from this part of the Text, is,

children, simple, easy, credulous people, the other is a shrewd gamester, a
man of subtilty and stratagems. I cannot therefore but upon this observation,
exhort you to take heed of playing with such, stake down nothing, especially
not your souls, come not within their ambush. I wonder that petties and
novices in knowledge will forsake the Congregations and open assemblies of Gods
people, to frequent private houses where these teachers lay their ambuscado;
would not all men condemn the folly of a young man of great estate, that should
deal with a crafty gamester? For these seducers whose design is to make
merchandise of their hearers, 2 Pet. 2. 3. do most of all aim at them who are
good prize, they care not much for a sheep that has not a good fleece. I
beseech you be wise, you may be caught, though you mean it not, God may give
you up captive to error for your vanity in forsaking his assemblies: Happily you
resolve that you will not be caught: no more did Dinah intend to be defiled
when she went forth to see the daughters of the Land, or Peter to deny Christ:
when he went to the high Priests hall; there is no man but will believe a lie
when God gives him up to delusion, one may be infected with the plague by
looking in at the window, our nature is apt to receive impressions of error.
Its observed of sheep, that they eat no grass more greedily then that which
rots them, wherefore if they shall say unto you behold he is in the desert, go
not forth, behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not, Matthew. 24. 26.
And what may some say, would you have us come up to an Idols Temple and
communicate in Idolatry? No, Come not ye to Gilgal, nor go up to Bethaven,
Hosea 4. 15. Woods and caves, and the I Will of Pathmos are to be preferred to
such assemblies; or should Christians abstain all private meetings, and confine
their Religion as many do to a Church and a Common Prayer Book? Far be it from
us: Antichrist and Popery will feel the wounds of such private Assemblies as
long as they draw any breath, the enemies of God and his Church know what
reason they have to hate conventicles (as they call them:) All that I have to
say is, that you stick fast unto and make use of your pastors and teachers,
which are the gifts of Jesus Christ unto his Church, ver. 11. and that you come
not into the secret of these who are described ver. 14. by their slight and
subtilty to deceive.

who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. they will not
resist the truth aper to mart, but cunningly undermine it, as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 8. that
is by sleight, and counterfeiting to do the same thing, so that one shall have
much ado to distinguish between the Serpents of Moses and them of the
Magicians, for they also did the like by their enchantments, Exodus 7. 11. It
seems these seducers are men of parts, the Apostle describes them in the same
words as the old Serpent is described by whose subtilty we exchanged Paradise
for thistles and briars; which first example should teach us for ever to take
heed of them, that are of his breed, who was more subtle then any beast of the
field; that which being sanctified or well employed, might be called wisdom,
being corrupted and abused is called craftiness, therefore (...), though
usually taken in the worser part, for Drusius in Job cap. 5. ver. 13.
subtilty and cunning, yet sometimes it signifies wisdom and lawful policy,
there is (...), a good and honest craftiness or policy, whereby a Minister
being a fisher of men, may catch such as by indiscretion will otherwise be
hardened, scandalized and lost both to himself and God: we are in great want of
this policy of discretion in the management of our Ministry, by breaking old
bottles with new wine, and by exposing Religion to contempt of them whom we
might have either convinced or at least disarmed of occasion against the truth;
but no farther upon this point: I must remember that I am upon the subtilty and
stratagems of impostours that lie in wait to seduce, some of which I shall
point out unto you, as I find them in the Scriptures, that so you may perform
that duty which is more then once enjoined upon you in this case, that is
beware.

The common design of all false teachers, is to make merchandise of people, 2
Pet. 2. 3. they negotiate their own ends, and have an eye to the stake when
they cast the die their credit, profit, lusts are the center to which they draw
every line, they have eyes full of adultery, and their heart is exercised in
covetousness, they follow the way of Balaam who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet, 2. 14, 15. and the Apostle beseeches the brethren to
mark such which cause divisions and offenses, because they that are such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, Romans 16. 18. but how does the
Apostle know this? For men's ends lie close; and how is it that he seems to
charge it upon all of them? Are they all covetous? Have all of them eyes full
of adultery? Do they all make their belly their God, etc.? Its true, that ends
lie close, a man may deny one and seek another, Simon Magus lays by his great
repute gotten by sorcery, to seek himself in getting power by laying on of
hands to give the holy Ghost, and this he carried so cunningly as to pass with
Philip undiscovered; pride may be trampled upon in pride, and books written
against vainglory only to get glory, bye ends may be preached against, even out
of bye ends; as all that bowl at the same mark do not take the same ground,
so men in seeking themselves, may drive several trades; one is for credit,
another for his palate, another for his purse, etc. but this in the general will
hold good, seducers are self seekers. For the service of this main design
these and such like are their arts or method.

by good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16. 18. the word he uses for simple, is (...), men that are otherwise not
evil, or as we vulgarly call them, harmless, innocent men, easy to be led
aside: It should seem the Corinthian teachers, with whom Paul had such
bickerings, had a faculty of pithanology or persuasive lenociny of words,
whereby they did suadendo docere, not so much convince by evidence of truth as
persuade with woing words; It concerns very much to hold fast the form of
wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. which the Apostle opposes to questions and
logomachies or strife of words and perverse disputings, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. as
also to profane and vain bablings, 2 Timothy 2. 16. Plerunque illa duo coharent
mutatio doctrinae and novi modi loquendi. Chem. loc. com.
and 1 Timothy 6. 20, that is (...), or as some read (...), empty words, and
novell expressions: you all know that by losing the genuine and proper meaning
of the word Church and Bishop, etc. we had almost forgot the Scripture use of
them, and brought the Church within the pale of the Clergy, and the Bishop into
a throne above the Ministers of the word; The Apostle Peter speaking of false
teachers, has an expression or two to this purpose, They speak great swelling
words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 18. that is, they speak great bubbles of words full
of wind, strong lines, or big fancies to bear down people by that torrent:
and again in the 2 Pet. 2. 3. through covetousness shall they with fained
words make (...)
merchandise of you. What are these fained words? do not they mean the same as
that 1 Timothy 4. 2. speaking lies in hypocrisy, or should it not rather be taken
for a set and composed form of words, such as Merchants use in commending their
wares so sale: showing the goodness and properties of the commodity they
desire to put off, and even belying it into credit, for to that the words seem
to allude: I shall not dwell upon this, but certainly it is not for nothing
that seducers are found to hide their hook under words and expressions, which
they do artificially fit and compose for the purpose: a good Title sells a
sorry Book: And all times will bear witness that it has been the property of
such men as have had any monster to bring to light, to use obscurity and
cloudinesse of expression, that what is unshapen and without form at the first,
may afterward be lickt into porportion: errors are bashful at first, and
coming out of the dark cannot look broad-waken upon the light, and therefore
they are by their parents or nurses always swathed up in clouts of ambiguity,
as the Oracles of old lapt up their Effata, or as he that wrote Edvardum regem
occidere nolite timere bonum est, where the comma helps him out at which door
he pleases: thus the sepia goes away in her own ink, and the door is left half
chare to make escape.

Pet. 2. 18. which is to allure as a bait does the fish. And what is that bait?
See ver. 19. they promise them liberty, there is not a more catching bait then
liberty: Is it likely that Jesus Christ or his Ministers that preach a yoke, a
daily cross, a forsaking all for him, should make such great draughts of fish,
as they that promise liberty? But what liberty, happily they may call it
Christian liberty, or liberty of conscience, so the serpent said, ye shall be
as gods, but what is it indeed: Is it not a liberty from the control or check
of superiors and their authority, for they despise dominion 2 Pet. 2. 10.
and speak evil of dignities, Jude 8. and therefore does the Apostle Paul so
much call for obedience and subjection to Magistrates, Masters, Ministers,
thereby anticipating or correcting the thoughts of Libertinisme, unto which the
name of Gospel liberty might be abused: Surely our Lord Christ has not brought
in a saturnalia or exemption of Christians from the Scepter of Government, or
the rod of Discipline. Nor is liberty of conscience (though sacred and
inviolable) a freedom to be or do what we will: for by that engine the sword
might be easily wiped out of the Magistrates, and the Keys out of the Churches
hand; and then we should find our selves returned to a Chaos without form and
void; I do not wonder that all sorts of sects and heresies (though they be of
contrary principles in particular) should meet and concur in this (...) or
liberty to live by their own laws, unaccountable to others, and independent;
Those that are commonly called Independents are far off from making the Church
to be such a Romulus his asylum, a Sanctuary for all comers; they allow that
Jerusalem shall reach forth her hand as far as Antioch; neither (I think) do
they plead the letting alone of the tares until the harvest, Matthew. 13. 30.
against the censures of the Church or the faces and securim of the Magistrate;
but I am sure of this, that he that says, Let both grow together until the
harvest; does not give way to any man to sow them. An enemy has done this: but
enough of this at this time. There are others that go about with liberty too,
and cry, a liberty from the obligation of the Moral Law as a rule; a liberty
from poenitential sorrows, fastings, humiliations to them that are regenerate;
a liberty from sinning, or if not so, yet from asking pardon for it, if they be
in Christ. These are great liberties indeed, but they are glorious liberties,
reserved unto another world, if any man promise you them here on earth, he
takes upon him to antedate the time of them. There are certain fruits and
effects of Christ's Redemption of us, which are payable only in the world to
come; There is yet another liberty which some will promise, and that is a
liberty of sensual lusts, and fleshly loosnesse. It was Balaams bait whereby he
invited the Israelites to the idolatry of Baal-peor, and the Apostle finds
these false teachers baiting their hook with the same, 2 Pet. 2. 18. They
allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness: and ver. 14.
Having eyes full of adulteries, or of an adulteress, as the original carries
it; and again, ver. 2. many shall follow their lascivious ways: for some
copies have (...). But you will say, Is there any such affinity between
seducing by doctrine and sensuality? How is it that the Apostle charges these
teachers with such filthy lusts? I shall answer but little to this question, as
God for idolatry, which is spiritual fornication, gives men and women up to
that which is corporal: for its said Romans 1. 25, 26. They changed the truth of
God into a lie: for this cause God gave them up to vile affections, so will God
shame and discredit the errors that are set up against his truth by the lusts
that keep company with them.

They undervalue and cast dirt in the face of all that stand in their light,
this is an old way of insinuating into people, the wolves persuade the sheep
that their Shepherds feed them, to fleece them, that so they may the easilyer
worry them: It is not much that we are called legal Preachers, timeservers,
persecutours, inquisitours, what not? The devil must first asperse God to Eve
before he prevail with her, and those popular preachers could not reign at
Corinth but by bringing Paul into dis-esteem, if they could; His letters, say
they, are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his
speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10. Its easy for men to ingratiate themselves
with their party by espying faults in every Ordinance and Administration never
so well constituted; we see beauty enough and find no want of light in the Sun,
though they that look upon it through their Galilean glasses discover spots in
it as big as all Asia or Africa, as themselves say.

They wrest the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 2. 16. making it to speak upon the rack that
which it never meant; partiality and affection to their own opinion is an ill
medium to look through: Pull the staff out of the water, and it will not be
crooked; how often do men (...) compel the Scriptures to go two mile, when of
themselves they will go but one, we should tremble to put words into the mouth
of those Oracles, which we do by mis-inferences, and mis-applications. 1. By
mis-inference drawing forth that which they will not yield, as the Sadduces
proved no Resurrection, because seven brethren had taken one woman to wife,
Matthew. 22. 28. unto whom our Savior answers, that though they cited a place of
Scripture, yet they erred not knowing the Scripture; for not he that repeats
the words, but takes up the true sense, is the man that knows the Scriptures.
We must not mangle and cut one joint from another, and expound one sentence
against the whole stream. I would men would tremble to take Gods hand which he
has set to his own Word, and set it to a lie of their own: it were odious to
serve a man so. 2. By mis-application of general rules to particulars. For it
has been observed that it is a great cause of many evils not to be (...).
Arrian. in epictet.
able to adapt common principles and general rules to particular cases or
actions; for how often is a general rule of Scripture brought for the warrant
of an unlawful action? As if the Apostle should have eaten with scandal, upon
the rule of All things are pure to the pure; so we know, how men first imagined
a decency and order in superstitious ceremonies, and then warranted them by
that, Let all things be done decently and in order; we fear not to say, that no
man can prove the calling of our Ministers, or the Baptism of our infants, or
the Moral Law to be null, etc. but by the torture of the Scriptures.

They recommend their doctrine upon some private pretended revelation and light
of their own, or by some effects thereof which they seem to have found in
themselves since they became therewith acquainted; as that they have found such
experiments of it in themselves as they never had before, they are more lively,
cheerful, comfortable, etc. As for their revelations or light, what is it they
mean by them? Do they mean that the veil is taken off the Scripture or rather
their eye, so that they have a cleerer spiritual discerning into, and savor
of, and affection to the Word? Or do they mean by revelation, some secret
sealings or assurances which are indeed private to their own souls, like the
white stone of absolution with their own names written thereon, These are
admirable first fruits of the Spirit and of glory; Happy are they to whom God
in this wilderness gives to taste these Clusters of Canaan-Grapes; And for the
effects of the word which they find in themselves, as attestations of the
truth, power, and goodness of the word. I find the Apostle appealing to the
sense of believers, to attest the doctrine of the Gospel, Gal. 3. 2. received
ye the Spirit by the preaching of the law, or by the hearing of faith? But now
what is all this to the revelation or effects of new and strange doctrines?
What impostures have not been obtruded upon pretense of private light and
revelation, the old Prophet may bring you into the lions mouth by telling you
of an angel that spoke to him, 1 Kin. 13. 18. and 24. God says that he proves
his people by a Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, to know whether they love the
Lord their God, with all their heart, and with all their soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. nor
Prophet, nor Apostle, nor Angel is to be heard if he preach (...) besides or
other then that ye have received, Gal. 1. 8.
and for that they say that they find themselves as it were in a new world
since they found this new way. I much question their probatum est, Is it not
some angel of darkness transformed into an Angel of light? Do they not walk in
the light of their fire, and the sparks that they have kindled, Isai. 50. 11.
It must needs be an easy way; when a man has cast off all trouble for sin and
all care of holy duties: but surely the way is too broad to be good. These
principles, I ought not to sorrow, for sin, least I disparage the sufficiency
of Christ's satisfaction: I can pay no obedience to the law, but I must thereby
either infringe my Christian liberty, or join merit with Christ; must needs
work a strange alteration, because the doctrine is strange.

I would speak a word from this point to Ministers, and to the people.

1. To the Ministers, you see these impostours have slight and subtilty to lie
in wait for the people; and whom does it concern but you to take heed to the
flock, you cannot by silence liberare fidem aut anlmam; Christ has given
Pastors and Teachers to his Church to this end, that the people should not be
children, tossed to and fro, etc. convincing of gainsayers, and stopping the
mouths of soul-subverting teachers does belong to your office, Titus 1. 9, 10,
11. if there were but one Heterodox teacher start up, and neglected by the
people, you would discharge at him, with as much freedom as at Papists: what if
there be more such teachers and followed by thousands, is it ever the more truth
for the number? Or is it a noli me tangere? Or are we slaves to popularity? And
dare not snatch the souls of our people out of the stream for fear of
displeasing them by saving of them? Or have we no hope to work a cure, and so
like Physicians, we let desperate patients eat and drink, and do what they will
without contradiction? Luther did not much consider how useful the Sectaries
of his time might have been against the Pope and his party, but confuted them
freely, knowing that they more blemished and hindered the Reformation by their
tenets, then were likely to help it with their hands: I would not blow the
Trumpet, or proclaim open war against lesser differences, severity and
acrimony in such cases breeds schism and heales it not: but pernicious
errors and destructive to souls: (which it is cruelty to spare and not pity)
must be faced and fought against, not with invectives and railing, that does
but anger the Gangrene, and is not the way to quench wildfire, but by solid
convictions and evidence of truth: for so you shall either gain a brother, or
not lose a friend. But you may ask, when should we go out against a doctrine as
pernicious: for even that point about the law which denominates an Antinomian,
and that about Baptism which denominates an Anabaptist, seem not to be fatal
to the soul? To this I answer, that we must look how a doctrine is attended or
consequenced: the first circle in the water is the least, those that are caused
by it are bigger and bigger, an opinion may be very ill as it is a bastard
mis-begotten by mis-inferences from the Word: but it is worse as it is a whore
and begets a new offspring of errors more pernicious, but I must remember to
whom I speak. Brethren, if the sheep be infected or worried, both God and men
will ask, Where were the Shepherds? Or what did they in the mean time?

2. To the people I say but this, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren mark them
which cause divissons and differences contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them: The avoiding of such teachers is your proper duty, as
you would avoid an ambuscado or stratagem of deceit: our present divisions are
scandalous to your selves, to your Ministers, to the truth: for by reason of
them, The way of truth is evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. they are the hopes of
the common enemy, and our own weaknings, and because I have named the enemy,
let no man think that the betraying of these differences among our selves does
give handle and occasion to them, to traduce us all as Anabaptists, Brownists,
Sectaries: we need not fear the calumnies of those to whom godliness it self,
as Christianity of old, was crime enough, we shall do our selves right in
their eyes by disclaiming them. The Apostles do boldly tax the divisions among
Christians notwithstanding any upbraiding of the Heathens. Let them say that we
are about (instead of purging the Temple as Christ did) to set up a Pantheon
(as the Romans did) or an Altar to the unknown god (as they of Athens did.)
This water will not stick upon us long, they will be of another mind when we
shall shake this viper off our hand: In the mean time I beseech you to consider
whether beside the slight and cunning craftiness of seducing teachers, there
be not some other stratagems on foot, acted from behind the door and at a
greater distance, some hand of Joab is in all this, the politician and the
Jesuit blow these coals, they would make us as Samaritans and Jews to one
another. Let us not gratify our enemies. I Will say but this, observe the brand
or character set upon the seduced, Unstable souls, 2 Pet. 2. 14. silly women
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3. 6. etc. and upon the
seducers, merchants of men's souls, 2 Pet. 2. 3. unruly, vaintalkers, deceivers,
aiming at filthy lucre, Titus 1. 10. 11. (...), lawless persons, 2 Pet. 3. 17.
men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. etc. but
admit there be a face and presence of holiness in the person, may we not then
more securely receive their doctrine? To this I answer, that both person and
doctrine may carry a fair stamp and superscription. We do not weigh gold to try
the superscription of it, but the weight. Gilded pills may convey poison.
Satan in Peter is not easily discovered. The better Pass that error brings with
it, the more dangerous it is.

So much upon the second part of the text. The third is the preservative or
antidote against all impressions of such teachers as come with slight and
subtilty, etc. and that is twofold. 1. The Ministry which Christ has given
to his Church, for this ver. relates to the 11. He gave some Apostles, and
some, etc. that henceforth, etc. and to them does the Apostle commit the charge
of the flock, to watch over them against wolves, Acts 20. 28, 29. 2. The
holding fast and pursuance of the substance and great things of Religion, ver.
15. but being sincere in love grow up in all things into him which is the head:
Its an excellent growth, to grow up into the head, that is, into communion with
and conformity to Jesus Christ, which trivial opinions nothing at all advance;
observe the antithesis or opposition he makes between being carried about, etc.
and following the truth in love, for contraria, contrariis, diseases are cured
by contraries; so the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. gives the same receipt
against unstedfastnesse, but grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; and to take off teachers from fables and genealogies, and
questions of no value; Paul commends to them the aiming at godly edifying which
is by faith, and to hold to that which is the end of the commandment, charity
out of a pure heart and of a good conscience and of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.
4, 5. If both Ministers and people would but drive this trade, it would take
off that wandering and hunting after novell opinions and doctrines, and would
keep us constant in the wholesome pastures, even now that the hedge of settled
government is wanting; If you have good feeding, why should not that keep you
from wandering, until the pale be set up, wait upon God in the use of his
saving ordinances; and pray for us, If Moses stay long in the mount, must the
people be setting up golden calves, and say we know not what is become of this
Moses; Aarons rod Exodus 7. 12.
shall swallow up all the rods of Iannes and Iambres in due time. The Apostle
puts us in hope of a vil ultra to such, 2 Timothy 3. 9. They shall proceed no
further, for their folly shall be manifest unto all.

FINIS.
Magnalia DEI ab Aquilone; Set forth, in a SERMON PREACHED BEFORE The Right
Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS, at Saint MARGARETS Westminster, upon
Thursday, July 18, 1644.

Being the day of public Thanksgiving for the great VICTORY obtained against
Prince RUPERT and the Earl of Newcastles Forces near YORK.

By RICHARD VINES, Minister of Gods Word at Weddington in the County of
Warwick, and a Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of both Houses.

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1646.

Die Veneris 19. Julii 1644.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Vines has hereby
thanks given him by this House for the great pains he has took in his Sermon
Preached before the Lords and Commons on Thursday the eighteenth of this
instant July, in Margarets Church Westminster, it being the day of Thanksgiving
for the great mercy of God in the happy success of the Forces of both Kingdoms
against the Enemies of King and Parliament near York; And that the said Mr.
Vines be entreated to Print and publish his said Sermon, which no man is to
presume to Print or reprint without his authority under his hand, as he will
answer the contrary to this House.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris 19. Julii 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Robert
Harley do give the thanks of this House to Mr. Vines for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he Preached at the entreaty of both Houses, at St.
Margarets Westminster, upon the day of public Thanksgiving for the great
Victory obtained against Prince Rupert and the Earl of Newcastles Forces, and
he is desired to published it in Print.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to Print my Sermon. Richard Vines.

To the Right HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
Right Honorable and Noble Senators,
BY this time it is clear day, even their eyes, whose unwillingnesse to
believe it made them blind, are now waken; to see that God did indeed put
matter of thanksgiving both into our hands and mouths: To disguise so solemn
a duty only to support reputation in the eyes of the world, is no less then
to put an Irony upon GOD. Thanksgiving is the reply we make to GODS answer of
our prayer, of whom if we walk worthy, he will surely make rejoinder of new
mercies. Though we cannot expect but that we may shift our garments and
sometimes wear sackcloth. The Lord set our hearts in tune, whether to Lachrymae
or Hallelujah; Beware of that rock which the Israelites fell foul upon in their
wilderness condition, where being at Gods more immediate finding, and having
all their entertainment from Heaven, they most of all did then imbitter GOD by
their murmurings against and temptations of him; The good Lord command the West
to blow as sweet a gale as the North has done, and so finish his own work,
that unto Henricus Rosas, Regna Jacobus, may be added, Ecclesias Carolus; So
prays,

Your unworthy servant for Christ Richard Vines.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS assembled
in Parliament, upon the 18th day of July, 1644.
It being the day of Thanksgiving for the great mercy of God in the happy
success of the Forces of both Kingdoms against the Enemies of King and
Parliament near York.

ISAIAH 63. 8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not
lie: So he was their Savior.

WHat the Historian says of that day, wherein Non suit mayor sub imperio
Romano dies, etc. Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6. de bello Punico secundo
Scipio and Hannibal disputed that long depending cause, between Rome and
Carthage in open field, The Roman Empire (until that time) had not seen a
greater day. The same may I justly say of the occasion of this our meeting: Nor
we nor our fathers in this Kingdom: considering the numbers on both sides, the
Interests that lay at stake, the fullness of the victory, the hopeful
consequence of it, have had more cause to sing, They compassed me about like
Bees, they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the Name of the Lord will
I destroy them; Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall* but the Lord
helped me: The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation. The
voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the Tabernacles of the righteous: The
right hand of the Lord does valiantly. The right hand of the Lord is exalted;
the right hand of the Lord does valiantly, Psalm. 118. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
for though God have clearly attested his presence with us, by many visible
tokens thereof ever since we came into this wilderness, so that we may truly
say, Take counsel together and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it
shall not stand; for Immanuel, Isa. 8. 10. yet he never yet did set a broader
seal to this Cause in testimony of his patrociny thereof than at this time and
place. The first Summer of our war he wrote himself our God in great letters
at Edge Hill; The second, in yet a greater character at Newbery; The third,
that he might be legible to such as hitherto would not see; he has wrote
himself Immanuel in a Text letter, even in that place where that which has
since proclaimed it self a cruel war, did then, in its infancy, disguize it
self under the name of Guard, a good Omen; Hannibal is routed near the walls
of his own Carthage: There can be to us no better sign than when God increases
upon us, and still makes us better measure of his mercies than aforetime. New
mercies from him are the matter of a new song to us, and of a new name to
himself, so let him swallow up the lesser characters of his goodness to us, in
still a greater letter; until the Egyptians see and say, Let us flee from the
face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians, Exodus 14.
25.

I shall not stand to rip a sunder the texture of the whole Chapter, the
beginning of it is taken up in a dialogue between the Church and Christ: Who is
this (says she) that comes from Edom with dyed garments from Bozrah? It is I
(says he) that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore (says
she) art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in
the wine fat? I have (says he) trodden down my enemies, and so have stained my
garments with their blood, as theirs with the blood of grapes that tread the
winepresse: And because a third question might have been asked, what partners
had thou in the work? he anticipates in the 5 Verse. I looked and there was
none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold; Therefore mine own
arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld me, and I will tread down
the people in my anger, etc. How little? how nothing? does the Church
contribute to her own deliverance or salvation? She has nothing to do, but
like Israel, to stand still Exodus 14. 13. with cap. 15. Ver. ^. etc. ^
and see the salvation of the Lord, and afterward to sing and follow the Lords
hand with acclamations; therefore she breaks forth, Verse 7. into these words,
I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord; the praises of the Lord
according to all that the Lord has bestowed on us, etc.

Now as a good Historian does not relate mere and naked matters of fact, but
the reasons and considerations moving so or so, with the effects and
resultances; so the Church survaying the loving kindnesses of the Lord; even
from the times of Egypt and of the wilderness (which was the great letter
wherein the Alphabet of his remarkable mercies to that Nation did begin)
suggests in the words of my text, the considerations upon which God proceeded
to be their Savior: For he said, surely they are my people, children that will
not lie: so he was their Savior.

The words have no great knot in them; that expression, Children that will not
lie, requires a little light, Mercer. in Genesis 21. 13.
mentiri Hebraice est and dicti and facti: The Hebrews call lying not only in
words, but deeds; verbal lying I shall not insist upon, for though the Papist
under-prop his Religion as the enemy does his cause with legends of these pious
frauds, yet lying is a trade that will break both the first Merchant thereof,
and the Broker, and the credulous buyer or receiver; they cannot keep open shop
long, lying Bonefires will not blaze long, lying Bells will be presently in the
changes; though truth may lose ground at the start, yet it ever wins at last.

The text speaks of lying in deed or fact, when a man does fallere fidem datam,
break his Covenant, deal perfidiously with God, for that is the proper notion
of lying in fact; to break through and violate engagements, to be unfaithful,
to deal falsely; so the word is used, Genesis 21. 23. Swear to me that thou will
not lie or deal falsely. Psalm. 44. 17. All this is come upon us, yet have we
not forgotten thee, neither have we lied, or dealt falsely in thy covenant,
Psalm. 89. 33. I will not suffer (says God) my faithfulness to lie or fail, my
covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips:
and so you shall find (though the word in the fountain be not (...) as it is in
the text,) Psalm. 18. 47. that feigned subjection or obedience to God or men is
called lying; The strangers (...) Is the word used, Psalm. 18. 47, etc.
shall lie unto me, or dissemble their submission; in which notion the word is
also used, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Thine enemies shall be found liers unto thee, that is,
they shall not dare but to be subject, though their hearts be rotten; and to
conclude, Hab. 3. 17. The labor of the Olive shall lie, that is, fail or
frustrate expectation; so that it cannot rest in doubt what should be meant by-
children that will not lie, that is, they are my people that will not shrink
(as one of our English translations does well Mr. Coverdales Translation.
turn the Latin, filii non negantes) they will keep touch with me, and will
answer their covenant-ingagements.

The words hold forth unto you three things;

He was their Savior.

He said they are my people, children that will not lie.

So he was their Savior.

For the right apprehension of the sense of the words, you are to take them as
a Prosopopeie, conceived in way Sanctius inlocum.
of imitation of men, that as a father in debate within himself what he should
do concerning a lewd and disobedient son, says, his courses are loose and
vicious, his disposition illiberall, his carriages toward me undutifull, but
he now falls at my feet, laments his exorbitances, obliges himself to return ad
bonam frugem, what shall I conclude? why notwithstanding all this, he is my
child, parents nil non sper ant de filiis, he will now keep promise, I will
be a father to him; So God is conceived of in this text, as being in
consultation with himself about Israel; and the word surely or notwithstanding,
implies that he could lay much rebellion, many relapses to their charge, and
yet on the other side considers, They bewail their evil ways, they renew their
covenants with me, they put upon themselves new engagements to be mine; I Will
trust them, surely they will not lie, nor shrink; how does the love of God to
his people preponderate all their miscarriages? how inclinable is he to
conceive hopes of them? for though he can allege enough against them to
justify his desertion of them, yet he buries in forgetfulness that which is
past upon hopes of better for time to come: and this expectation which he has
of them, gives a non obstante to all their former provocations and iniquities,
and casts the skales with him to be their Savior. They will not lie: So he was
their Savior.

The Observations that I shall take up at this time follow in their order:

God could have drawn up such a charge against his people to whom he was a
Savior, as might have justified him to all the world, if he had refused them.
I gather this from the first words he said; He said surely, or (as it elsewhere
is translated) notwithstanding: when one begins a speech with a
notwithstanding, he leaves it to your conception to imagine all that was in
his mind which never broke forth; and it carries it clear enough, that God
broke through all the considerations of their rebellion, apostasy,
unworthiness, when he said, Surely they are my people: and the like form of
speech carries the same implication, Matthew. 21. 37. Last of all, he sent unto
them his son, saying, They will reverence my son, as if he had said, They have
hitherto killed my servants one after another, but they will reverence my son:
Observe the connection of the former Verse with my text, I will mention the
loving kindnesses of the Lord, the praises of the Lord: for he said, yet they
are my people, that is, when he might have said so much against them as to
have deserted them, and given them up to destruction: then he said, yet they
are my people. It Is good for us to observe what God might lay in charge against
us, even then when he crowns us with his favor, or we proclaim his praises:
for nothing gives a better foil to mercy, nothing sets such an edge upon
thanksgivings, nothing sets the strings in sweeter tune for praises, than for
us to consider and compare our remoteness from expectation of any Salvation,
Make a man first humble, and you make him thankful, He that first can justify
God will the more easily and freely glorify him. We find not in the Pharisee
his God I thank thee, any self-condemning or God-justifying expressions: Our
Savior observes that that Leper who (of ten healed) came only back to give
glory to God, was a Samaritan. This stranger, says he, Luke 7. 16, 28. Let us
set our National sins before our eyes this day; when we come with our
peace offerings for public mercies, these sour herbs will quicken our palate
to the relish of this Passover, for it is a Passover indeed, God having made
the destroying Angel to pass over the houses of his people, and led the
stroke to find out them that would keep us still in Egypt, after God calls us
out; And to let pass all those provocations of God by this Nation for so many
years of rest. Let us look upon the face of our wildernes-sins (as I may call
them) and what were Isreal's wildernes-sins? murmuring against God, complaining
of his dealing with them, dislike of his Covenant, contempt of his Promises,
returning in heart into Egypt. And are not our carcasses as worthy to fall in
the Wilderness as theirs did? For it was not for their Egypt-sins, but for the
wildernesse-sins, when they werein passage to the promised Land, that God swear
in his wrath against them, that they should not enter Heb, 3. 10, 11.
into his rest. Have we not cause to tremble lest God should enter the caveat
of such an oath against us for the sins we are guilty of in this our passage.
What bitter complaints of, and murmurings at, Gods dealing with us? What
mutinies against our Leaders? what evil reports are brought up of the
Reformation intended? what lusting after the former fleshpots? what calling
for Captains to lead us back again into bondage? what dancing before the golden
calves of new opinions and ways of our own erection? and yet God is our Savior
with a non obstante to every of these miscarriages: Let us rejoice with
trembling, and be broken into thankgivings. In our receiving of such high grace
and favor, we must look to two things:

1 The relish of the mercy bestowed, which is quickened by sense of our
unworthiness.

2 The disgestion of it into thanksgivings, praises, and obedience.

In relishing of a mercy a man either looks upon it as a benefit, and so he
gives thanks to God as the benefactour; or as it is a fruit of prayer, and as
it is the workmanship of God in which he is seen in wisdom, power, presence,
goodness, and so he praises God as the workman: for that is the difference
between thanksgiving and praise, the one looks at the benefit, the other at the
workmanship of God in it. If one give you a Watch or curious piece, the
benefactor has the thanks, the workman has the praise. There are more
thanksgivers, than praysers of God, because though many taste the benefit, yet
few taste or see God in it.

And for the digestion of a mercy bestowed, it is much according to the relish
of it. He that relislies only his own interest or good in it, turns it
oftentimes into matter of self-glory, security, etc. but he that sees God in
it, The joy of the Lord is his strength, to make return of praise and service
to God again.

Gods people will not lie or fail God of his expectation that ehe has of
them. The Text puts these two as (...), one and the same, They are my people,
Children that will not lie. God says of himself that he cannot lie: of his
people that they will not. The reason is, because they follow and adhere to him
and his Cause upon true principles, and not self-interests and ends; a man may
advance very far and do valiantly upon private interest and ends. He may run
swiftly and smoothly, but he always falls toward and rests upon his byas. The
mixed multitude that go out with Israel will fall to lusting. We have seen the
end of such blazing and falling stars, who after they have deceived us a while
have been resolved into their elements of earth and self respects; but a man
that is carried by true Principles though the compass may through infirmity or
temptation sometimes admit variation or wavering, yet it recollects it self and
will point to the true pole, what waves or winds soever beat against the ship
wherein he is.

He was their Savior. But are there not Saviors besides him? Saviors shall
come up on Mount Sion to judge the Mount of Esau, Obad. Verse. ult. When they
cried unto thee, thou gave them saviors, who saved them out of the hand of
their enemies, Nehem. 9. 27. As the Scripture calls Magistrates Gods, so it
calls the vindices or Judges which he raised up to Israel, Saviors: but as
those are but dii minorum gentium, Gods by participation of some spark of his
image and authority: so are these but subsaviours, isntrumental actours so far
as they are acted by God; the glory of an instrument is none, but what redounds
to the workman that made it, or uses it. Cicero taxes Verres, for that he
found him at Syracuse written (...) a Savior. Hoc quantum est, says he, this
is so great a style as cannot be expressed in one Latin word. The word Savior
has no plural number in an univocall sense. Hos. 13. 4. Thou shall have no
God but me, for there is no Savior besides me.

I will not commonplace this point. This day is text enough to prove the truth
of it. Let us make particular use thereof. 1 To acknowledge God alone The
Savior. 2 To rejoice in him. 3 To render to him as to a Savior.

To acknowledge him, whose finger, do I say, or arm rather was made bare in
this business. Remove the thick wood of men, the so many thousands out of your
eye, that you may see God; I know we have (as he said) prodigia and miracula
humana, prodigies of men for valor; we have seen the chief Commander in
fight, to be (as was said of Caesar) medius inter imperatorem and militem,
between a Commander and a common soldier. But who teaches their hands to war
and fingers to fight? The more of God we see in them, the less of them let us
see in themselves. And because the word Savior will carry it both to
deliverance and victory.

1 Let us see God in the deliverance. What might we have lost by this battle?
Might not the Religion, Liberties, Happiness of two Kingdoms have been shaken?
would not the enemy have been heightened (if yet there be any degrees of ascent
left) unto such insolency and cruelty, that as was said of Tarquin, Vel ipsam
savitiam fatigasset, he would have tired out cruelty it self? Would it not
have been the greatest crime to have been godly? should not every Aristides
have tasted of their ostracisme, at the least, for no other reason than quia
nimium justus, He is too good? and if any have more cause to consider this,
than others, they are those that have more of Christ in them, than others; to
whom England and Scotland both might have been another Ireland. I cannot
express the consequence. God denied the premises or antecedent, who is our
Deus liberator, He has delivered, He does deliver, and we trust also that he
will deliver; He has delivered from plots, from stratagems of dilatory and
delusory peace. He does deliver from the sword of a furious enemy; and we pray
that He will deliver the King unto his loyal Parliament and people.

2 Let us acknowledge God in the Victory. How long did we lie against a strong
City, until God sent a great army to surrender it up into our hands. It was
relieved that it might be emptied; that York might be carried out into the
field, and taken there. Who so is wise and will observe those things, even they
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 43. Did not the
enemy flesht with that success follows us, and seek us out? for so God will
have it. At Edge Hill, Newbery and York, we shall be defendants: was not there
some inclination of the battle at the first against us, and some trepidation in
diverse of our men? Is this to be ascribed to the dubiousnesse and uncertainty
of war? for so Homer calls Mars, (...) an up and down, Iliad. ^.
or rather did not God take off some of Gideons soldiers? They are too many
(says he) for me to give the Midianites into their hands, Judge. 7. 2. We have
always hitherto found it in experience in all our battails that God removes men
from standing in his light, and obscures us the more to show himself: do we
need this art of God to take off our pride and self-confidence? or does God in
goodness to us delight to sweeten our victories, because gotten by his own
hand, and will not do us so much hurt, as to let us be our own saviors? some
use there is to be made of it, that God in no battle, as yet, would suffer men
to hide him from us: and blessed be his Name: for the sight of him in a
Victory, does us more good than the Victory it self; And yet further to wind
up the strings of your praises, see the spirits of the enemy which God has
given into your hands; and God has shown you their spirits in their colors.
There is a sword reached from a cloud with Fiat justitia; its well no higher
hand reached out that sword unto them. The Oracle with which he consulted that
devised that Motto, Fiat justitia, was too cunning for him; as it was for
Craesus when it said, magnam pervertet opum vim) that he should overthrow a
world of wealth, for it was indeed his own he lost, and so it pleased God the
tables should be turned and the Motto should become ours, and that it should be
sent up to you to whom it belongs, as a memorandum, Fiat justitia. The Crown
and Mitre under it, shows also that they hold the old principle, No Bishop, No
King, that is the lowest interpretation it can bear: It is to be feared that
the Mitre might in time have crept higher, for it is an aspiring thing, and the
Motto seems to join the Crown and the Mitre in equipage, Nolite tangere
Christos meos; As for the Crown let Mercy and Truth be the supporters of it for
ever, Prove. 20. 28. but for Mitres (if Histories lie not) we may say of them,
as it is said of some trees that grow not kindly in vicinity to each other; the
Crown has never flourished that has grown too near the Mitre: There is a
sword also in one hand threatens to unity a knot in an other; happily they mean
the Covenant of the Kingdoms: but that which is more strange is, that this
knot did ungird that sword: And finally that they may show their vile esteem of
you; they call some of you, in a picture, Dogs barking at a Lion, and in the
Motto they call you Catilines, for that is the English of quousque tandem
abutere patientia nostra, which might have been a proper device, if in the
Lions place at which we bark not, they had set the Fox or the Wolf and had
owned their own character; And is this the festivity of their wit or the rage
of their spirits? whatsoever it be, God has given them check; for though upon
confidence of success they did antedate their bells and bonefires, yet in a
few hours there was nothing of them left in the field, but bag and baggage,
Ammunition, Ordnance, Prisoners, dead carcasses; which had been more, if a
Noble Commander the honor of the field he treads upon, had not taken up that
sweet word which Caesar sometimes used, parce civibus, spare the deluded
countrymen.

To rejoice in the Lord the God of our salvation; The Romans allowed no
triumphs to Civil Wars, for they make the deepest wounds, alta sedent civilis
vulnera dextrae; And happily you will say, that Janus temple is not yet shut, the
sword is still waken, and we know not for how long a time the Commission that
God has given to it is yet in force; we want our David also to endite songs to
the chief Musicians, and it must be confessed, that there yet remayns that
which lames our joy and breaks a wing of it that it can but flutter and not fly
high: we know not how many heads of this Hydra will yet repullulate; when War
is once let loose, it is like the winds which Poets feign that one had in a
bag, the mouth whereof being opened, una eurusque notusque ruunt, they rusht
all forth and could never begotten into the bag again: but God is the God of
Hosts, and the battle is not yours but Gods, and if he give Moses and Israel
a song, let them sing though they have yet a great and terrible wilderness to
pass through, where if we can hardly tread beside Serpents that sting
mortally, etc. yet also we have a cloud that covers us, an Angel of Gods
presence that saves us, a rock that gives us water, and which is above all, a
Tabernacle of his worship: therefore let us rejoice even in this our
wilderness.

If there be yet any that think we disguise and lie our selves into sinful and
blasphemous thanksgivings, (for the Oxford bells still ring in some men's ears)
let them consider what a remarkable postscript God has added for confirmation
of this Victory in the surrendry of York; and if they be not so far out of
taste, as to account it a judgment and a misery, let them also rejoice with us;
for how does he differ that is hardened under ten mercies, from him that was
hardened under ten plagues.

Let us all think of rendering unto God: every man ask, Quid retribuam? the
hundred and sixteenth Psalm sets unto us a full Copy: Take heed of pride which
usually attends the receipt of benefits; and such pride brews a new cloud, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto
him, for his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon
Judah and Jerusalem. The Roman Commander upon some appearance of the gods for
his help in battle, built a Temple to them, and reddidit commilitonibus deis
stipendium. God must have a share out of this Victory; Every mercy puts us
further into debt to him, and puts upon us new obligations: The best rule to be
observed herein, is, to pay unto him no less in our thanksgivings, then we bad
him in our fastings and humiliations: we are apt to be liberal in vows, and
penurious in performance: and how then shal-we acquit our selves from being
lying children? He is my God (says Moses and Israel) and I will prepare him
an habitation, Exodus 15. 2. which engagement they did afterward make good in
laying out their bracelets, earrings, rings, tablets, all jewels of gold, etc.
for the making and service of the tabernacle, Exodus 35. 21, 22, etc.

aliquid of the text, arising from the connection of the parts of it by the
binding beam so, so he was their Savior.

God promises to himself that his people will not shrink from him or deal
falsely with him. So he is their Savior: for he speaks more humano, surely they
are children that will not lie, and so he is their Savior.

The sum of that which Gods expects in this saying, They will not lie, is.

They will not violate their covenant, or play fast and loose with me, they
will not hereafter say I was forced to it, the storm drove me uuto it as an
harbor: I entered it with a side-wind will and affection. There is no doubt
but the prosperous success of our Armies will make many Samaritans to be Jews,
and many will stand under the tree for shelter in a storm, who would willingly
afterward cut it down; if your heart be not right with God you will never be
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. The stone of witness which we set up
in this place will be our accuser for ever: If we prevaricate with God by eluding
the Covenant which we swore in the hearing thereof.

1 Chro. 15. 13.
God, which for the essentials thereof consists (as I may say) in indivisibili:
Thou shall not add (says he) nor diminish. It is observed that even when the
Moral Law Exodus 32.
was coming down to Israel they broke out into open impiety in the golden
Calf; and so in the beginning of the Priests administration, they transgressed
in offering strange fire; corruptions may grow up in time, but let Levit. 10. 1.
us not like Jeroboam, begin with a lie.

Israelites, that had all things according to the pattern, themselves being a
hard-hearted rebellious people. This particular practical godliness, I do
humbly commend to you the Nobility and Gentry, for our Reformation should begin
a majoritis (as he said,) bring the knowledge of God and his ways into your
souls, families, retinues, places of command; be godly as poor men; It is
terminus diminuens, an expression savouring of diminution, when men say, he is
religious for a Nobleman, he is godly after the rate of a great Gentleman*
Not that I upbraid you, for I hope God has as great a harvest in that kind of
corn in this land as in any other field, but I put you in mind of it this day.

they are children that will not lie; say then;

If promises of great things should single out some of you that are our corner
stones, promises that (as Mariana says) would even fell down the Cedars of
Lebanon, would you not fall but stand impregnable? The way that Lewis the
Eleventh took, was to single out the Proceres by gifs and indulgences, that he
might (as Commines says) the easilier do what he would with the lesser
shrubs, the commons, and by that means he sued out his livery; and as himself
expressed it, he delivered the French Kings from their Wardship: you have read
what God offered Moses, Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone that I may consume them, and
i will make of thee a great Nation, which condition Moses accepted not; he would
not be hired for a private interest to desert his place and duty.

If such a revolution of things should be, as that the enemy whom God has
slighted this day should knit his parts together again, and reinforce himself
and prosper, and come into the fauces of this Oity and take janiculum (as I may
say) would you not lie, nor fail your engagements? nor cry of Parliament and
Covenant? nor bless your neutrality and malignity, because by them you are
reconcilable?

If success shine upon you, and the Lord go yet before you, until he bring
you out of this wilderness, will you not endeavor to go less than you bad
him at first? and being landed on the shore, forget what you said in the
storm; like them of whom it is said, Psalm. 78 34. When he slew them, then they
sought him, and they returned and inquired early after God; and they remembered
that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer: Nevertheless they
did flatter him with their mouth, they lied unto him with their tongues.

If the way of God should upon discovery prove hard and incompliant with
somepolitike considerations, interests, ends, would you then hew and pare the
wood to the rule, or the rule to the wood, or make abatement on both sides? I
do but propound to you for self examination, for I have no doubt but that if
the gate as now it is too little to take in the whole truth, you will rather
break down a piece of the wall then leave out any part thereof; you know that
Jeroboams interweaving too much policy into his constitution proved fatal to
his Kingdom.

If when the Lions skin will not serve, the Foxes skin be taken, and there be
set on foot some fair overtures of sweet peace, to whose Temple we desire to go
through the Temple of Truth) which you might purchase upon rebate, will you be
like the plain Countryman reasoning with a Sophister, who cannot be taken in a
fallacy by him, because he holds the conclusion, let the Scholars premises be
what they will? Let your hearts be right with God, and he will ever be your
Savior. Which that they may be, I beseech you;

Religio vera and una, and salus populi suprema lex: Sincerity is the mother of
constancy, meum and tuum are the worst by as that can be in men of public
place; private ends must of necessity divide you among your selves, retard the
common work that is under your hand, dishonor you both before God and men: And
so for you that are Officers and Commanders in this War, carry you no private
aims to serve upon the public arms; It is no time to seek Vineyards and
Olive-yards, blow not the coals to keep War alive for a trade to get by; was
not he a famous Dictator of Rome that was fetched from the Plough, routed the
enemy, and returned to his Plough again? I fear many of ours are not of his
temper.

Saul be but his thousands and David his ten thousands, there grows a core
upon it: It makes many an impotent spirit sullen when he looks upon another
man's Trophie or Triumph. The Lord lay this evil spirit when it arises; do we
conquer for our selves or for the public? must no star shine besides our
selves? Let God have all the glory from you all, and then you will have nothing
to aemulate in one another; and it is worthy our acknowledgment unto God, who
lets not loose this evil spirit between the two Nations, but that they are
equally earnest to heap all the glory upon God; which is the only way to kill
aemulations and points of honor, which would sooner untie the knot than the
enemies sword.

Finally, Let all men fortify their hearts against the evils that follow good
success, that we be not made more loose in our Covenant than before, for we
have reason to account this day to be the fruit of our entering and holding fast
unto that: I say this day which shows you the two Nations formerly two, now
made one in a Covenant, in the field together, in a victory together, and in a
Pulpit together, paying unto God his praises, and so let them be for ever, one
Hosea 11. 12.
Judah yet ruling with God, and faithful with the Saints.

FINIS.
Die Martis, 22. October, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Mr
Ashurst, and Mr Gourdon, do from this House give thanks to Mr Vines, for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of the
Commons at St Margarets, Westminster; It being a Day especially set apart for a
Public Humiliation, and to desire him to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered,
that none shall presume to Print his Sermon without being authorized under the
hand writing of the said Mr Vines.

H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to Print this Sermon. Richard Vines.

THE POSTURE OF DAVID'S SPIRIT, When he was in a Doubtful Condition. OPENED In a
Sermon Preached before the Honorable HOUSE OF COMMONS, At Margarets
Westminster, upon October 22. 1644. Being a Day especially set apart for a
Public Humiliation.

By Richard Vines, Minister of the Gospel at Weddington in the County of
Warwick, and one of the Assembly of DIVINES.

Job 9. 22. He destroys the Perfect and the Wicked.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Ab^l Roper, at the Sign of the Sun over against
S. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1656.

To the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in Parliament at WESTMINSTER.
IF you please to read this Sermon, then bear in your mind that Aspect of Time
under which it was born. The Season will render the Theme more Savory. It was
when your United Armies were conceived to be near Engagement into a Dispute,
the Event whereof might have brought forth a Decretory Sentence upon the great
Matter in Question. The Army wherewith you were to Encounter as in it self, it
was not contemptible, so doubtless it did bear it self upon the Reputation of
that Check lately given to You in the West: God was to be sought unto as the
great and only Moderator, we could be in no better posture of spirit, than to
cast up all events with humble resignement of our All up unto God, so as to
cast, yea to cast away our selves upon him: If it were out of date, as to the
Public (as it is not) yet it may well serve to the Meridian of any godly man
in a doubtful or perplexed condition. The Lord continue to set marks of his
Favor both upon you, and the Cause of his Churches: So Prays

Your Servant in the Lord Christ, RICHARD VINES.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, upon their
Extraordinary day of Humiliation, October. 22. 1644.
2 Samuel 15. ver. 25, 26. And the King said unto Zadok the Priest, carry back
the Ark of God into the City. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord,
he will bring me again and show me both it, and his habitation. But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems
good unto him.
THe Religious King Jehosaphat hearing that Moab, Ammon, and Others were in
march against him; took the alarm, and first drew up his people into a posture
of Fasting and Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20. 1, 2, 3. and the answer from God was
present, for the Spirit of the Lord came upon a man in the midst of the
Congregation, v. 14. and he said, Hearken ye all Judah, and ye Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and thou King Jehosaphat. Thus says the Lord unto you, Be not
afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude, For the Battle is not
yours, but Gods. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle, set your selves
stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord v. 15, 16.

Had I such a message from God unto you at this time, or such as that which
Paul delivered to them in the Ship with him, when they seemed to be at the last
cast: There shall not a hair fall from the head of any of you, Acts. 27. 24. it
would be a good Breakfast unto you; but such is the case of God^ people
sometimes, that the Prophet being asked. Can these Bones live? answered, O Lord
God thou know, Ezech. 37. 3. and they in Joel 2. 14. were at their quis
novit.? Who knows if God will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind
him? As David in this Text was at his If, and If. If I shall find favor, etc.
But if he say I delight not in thee, etc.

The Text holds forth unto you the equal temperament, and the even poize or
posture of a gracious spirit in a doubtful condition: He whose heart is steered
by such a Compass, will ride even in all strait Seas whatsoever. I shall but
briefly touch the historical part, because it has not much influence into the
Text.

Absalom had stolen the hearts of Israel into an Insurrection against his
Father, the Conspiracy was both sudden and strong. David being in fear of
surprisal, resolves to flee from Jerusalem. There was a hand of God in this,
for he had told David beforehand, that for the matter of Vriah he would raise
up evil against him out of his own house, 2 Samuel 12. 11. Now it is come to pass,
The Priests and Levites would go with David, bearing the Ark of God: But
whatsoever superstitious conceit the people had in bringing the Ark of God from
Shiloh into the Camp against the Philistines; David had none, for he had
learned by that example, that even the Ark might fall into Philistines hands, 1 Samuel 4. 3. Therefore he said to Zadok, carry back the Ark of God into the City;
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and I
shall see it and his habitation (...), say the Septuagint: The Beauty or
Comeliness o^ it: But if he say thus, I delight not in thee, Here I am. Where
you find no discomposure or aestuations of spirit in David, no exclaiming
against the impiety of his Son, or against the unkindness and ingratitude of
Israel, no cursing of his stars, no bitter invectives against male-instruments,
for these things are but the sludge that is usually cast forth by the overflow
of distempered spirits.

But being of an equilibrious frame of spirit, lays himself down at the feet of
God, whether he please to lift him up, or tread upon him, and in happy
composure of himself comes to an anchor, even then when in regard of the event
of the storm, he is at his if and if.

There are six things in the text which I might work upon, as affording
seasonable matter for this time.

1. David resolves all into God, all events and issues, whether they be pro or
con, for good or evil. If I find favor, etc. but if he say thus, etc.

2. He makes Gods favor to him the ground of Gods restoring him, or bringing
him back again; If I find sav^ur in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back
again.

3. He casts up the events both ways, not being able to resolve the skales
either one way or other. If so then thus. If so then so.

4. Every way he is resolved to be at Gods dispose, if the worst come that can
come, yet says he Here I am.

5. He states his happiness to consist in the fruition of God, and of his
Ordinances. He will bring me again, and show me both his Ark and his habitation.

9. His affliction or utter overthrow he expresses by this phrase; Good in
Gods eyes. Let him do to me that which is good in his eyes.

among them. The suddenesse of the insurrection, ver. 14. Arise, let us flee,
for we shall not else escape.

Or 2. to bear himself up by such things as might seem to make for him,
Jerusalem adhered to him in their affections; the Priests, and Levites followed
him, all the country thereabout wept for him: ver. 23. some faithful men were
resolved to run the same hazard with him.

But whatsoever made either against him or for him as if the total sum on both
sides had been but Ciphers set over against one an other. He resolves himself
and all into God, if I find favor in his eyes etc. but if he say thus I
delight not in thee etc. and if we view David well, we shall observe, that he
was a man very happy in this frame of spirit. Does Michol scoff him for his
zeal? I will be more vile says he it is for God. Does Shimei curse him? its
God that has bidden him. Has he lost all at Ziglag? why yet he encouraged
himself in God. Does he fly before his son? he resignes himself up into the
hand of God and indites a Psalm, namely the third Psalm, wherein is the first
Selah in all the book of Psalms, he had it seems his elevations of spirit
even at this time, what an excellent spirit is there in a godly man, he will be
happy either in the fruition of God in peace: or in submission to God under
calamity: he is (...), has a square side to fall upon be he thrown where or
how the enemy can.

some loss to our selves, that he must distrain for his honor before we give
it to him. In our successes we are proud rather then, thankful, in our strokes
we are rather broken then humbled, oh that we would cast away these bladders
that help to drown us. The style of man is Alexander or Caesar has gotten such
a victory; But the style of Scripture is, The Lord dicomfiled Sisera before
Barak Judges 4. 15. 23. It was said the sword of the Lord and of Gideon. How
poor an army was it with which the sword of the Lord was coupled, yet the
victory was so examplary and signal, that it is made a pattern of an utter
overthrow, Isay 9. 4. as in the day of Midian and again, do to them as to the
Midianites Psa. 83. 9. and therefore as it is in Tragoedies when the scene is
come to such a paroxism, or such a knot as there seems to be no way out: then
Deus a machina, comes in and heales all. So when things are doubtful desperate,
inextricable, let God have your eyes, who can resolve every riddle and lead you
out of the Labyriuth.

And there is reason for it, why at such a time as this, when there is so much
at stake, you should resolve all your thoughts into God; because events and
issues are his, duty is yours but issues are out of your Sphaere. The Enemy may
heat his oven but he cannot make the fire to burn the three children. Balaam
may set up his Altars, and offer his sacrifices, but he cannot speak
enchantments when he has done all he can. It may be observed, that though the
devil begin the tragedy with I^b, and the Sabeans and Caldeans act in it, yet
the end is not called theirs, it is (...), James 5. 11. The end of the Lord,
Whatsoever the premises may be, God draws the conclusion, and that by another
manner of inference than is in our mood and figure, we have this hope, that if
God bring his people into the wilderness, he will also bring them out. He will
give them their vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of
hope, Hosea 2. 15. Let us not trouble our selves about that which is Gods work
and not ours, let us not only look at the storm that threatens us, but to the
steers man, that sits at the he^m to pilot us through all difficulties. Noah
need not beat his head about a monntain or place for the Ark to rest upon, God
will find an Ararat in the end.

He makes Gods favor to him, the ground of Gods restoring of him, or bringing
him back again; If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring
me back again. Free grace is the refuge or the plea of the most righteous man.
Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and walked with God, and
he found favor (says the Text, Genesis 6. 8.) in the eyes of the Lord, but some
may say, why does David appeal to favor? was he not innocent as to Absalom,
who rose up against him; and as to them that rose up with Absalom? was there
not sin in the adverse party? and godliness on his part? there is no question
of it; but yet David had former sins which were now remembered to him, and he
flies to mere grace and favor, and insists on that plea. It was favor and
mere grace that put Noah into an Ark, when all the world besides was drowned;
And what is it but Grace and Favor, that has shut you up into an Ark of
safety: Now when so many Families and Countries are brought under spoil and
misery, and (which is not the least part of mercy) has freed you from
temptations of betraying either your lives or your consciences, and from being
put to such disguisements of your selves, as Dawas, when he changed his
behavior before the Philistines, 1 Samuel 21. 13, When God comes down in
judgment against a people, there is ordinarily a reason to be found in
themselves. The Mariners knew that the storm fell upon them for some cause,
and therefore they went to the lot. And David when the famine did hang upon the
Land from year to year, inquired of the Lord for what it was, 2 Samuel 21. 1, And
for our own case, there is certainly a reason in our selves why the Sword is so
long in our bowels, which we should search out upon these days of inquiry; for
the smarting corrosive would drop off, if it did not find raw matter in the
sore, which makes it stick fast, and eat into the quick. But now for the matter
of our recovery, if ever God bring us again to show us his Ark, and his
Habitation, it must, it will be mere grace and favor, which grace is as
powerful as it is free: Powerful, I say, to break through all obstructions, lay
flat all Mountains of opposition, remove all impediments; and therefore it is
said; If I find favor, he will bring me again; let Absalom, let Achitophel,
let them all do what what they can: As some worthy Divines do assert grace to
work irresistibly in a man's conversion, so may I assert it as irresistible in
reducing and bringing back his Churches and people, from under the yoke of any
enemy; God that works graciously, works omnipotently and we know as little Why
as How. This is that which does most indear God to an unworthy sinner, and
which does most kindly melt the heart toward God again. Nothing does so at
once ravish the heart into admiration, and lay it low in selfconfusion.

The Inferences which I draw from this Point by way of Use to our selves, are
these;

1. Does David now at this time when he might easily in his affliction see his
former sins, the greatest that are recorded of him in the Scripture Fasten his
eye upon the free grace of favor of God, as to which his restoring was
possible? then why may not we, who are now under wrath for those many heinous
national sins of ours, fly to this free grace of God. and therein likewise
apprehend a possibility of our restoring, we are not shut out by our sins from
free grace; that which takes away our iniquities, is not taken away by them*
all the aggravations of our sin, do not prohibit our application to it, nor
bind the hands thereof.

2. In that David builds not upon the ground of either the enemy his
wickedness, or his own godliness and integrity, but derives his bringing back
again from mere favor: it may reach us to cast away all false flattering
arguments, which are the foundations of our proud hopes; one while we look on
the profaneness and wickedness of our enemies, and gather thence a kind of
self-presumption, as though God might not use such scorpions to correct his own
people withal; or not sell the Israelites into the hand of Moab, Ammon,
Philistines, people worse than themselves; otherwhiles we applaud our own
godliness and sincerity, and do bottom our expectations rather upon somewhat in
our selves, than the free grace and favor of God to us.

He could not resolve himself as touching the particular what God would do with
him. And are not we in a like predicament at this time? does not the Lord hold
us in suspense? and is not the ship filled with water again, after that it has
been pumped almost empty? is there yet any certain (...) of our estate? David
might have said something for himself. Himself was a godly man, an honest party
adhaered to him. The Priests and Levites were ready to follow him; and these
things were good abodements; yet he says, if and if, and so it may be with us;
and therefore we ought to cast up events both ways, not to create doubtings in
our selves, or distrust in God, but

1. To this end, That we may be fortified against the offense and scandal that
may be taken, if we should see Christ Jesus led to be arraigned, and crucified,
for what would become of us then, that have always expected a temporal and
flourishing estate from him? Might we not for want of forecast of such a thing,
come to warm our selves at the High Priests fire, and earn it full deerly, wi^h
a non putaram, or with the denial of our Lord.

2. To the end that we may know our own hearts, for he that feeds himself with
confidence that he shall never be moved, shall never know his spirit what metal
it is of the (...), or reasonings of his heart will never be known unto him,
for is it not plain enough, that many Samaritans that claim kindred of the
Jews, whiles they prosper, do disclaim their acquaintance when they see them
going down; are not many of us friends to the fortune of the cause, and not to
the cause it self. Durst Shimei open his mouth against David, until he saw him
flying? Put the case then both ways, and search your hearts, whether your
compass will not vary at such a time, but still point to the true pole, and
whether you can and will abide in the Ship, when it seems near to breaking all
to pieces.

And there is reason why we should cast up events both ways, not so much in
respect of the cause it self, as in respect of our resolutions and standing to
it, for the cause of God and of Religion will prosper, and will swim ont of all
waters; of that we have no doubt, though the vision be yet for an appointed
time. Though God drive with Abraham until the date of his body be out, yet the
promise shall beget Isaa^ out of a dead root; and if there shall not be left an
Isralite to rescue the Ark of God out of the Philistims hands, the Ark shall
rescue it self, and come home alone.

This is our confidence as concerning the cause of God in it self, and as
touching our selves, God has not left us hopeless for he has a great harvest
of his faithful people in this Land, and no Husbandman ever laid his field
fallow, while the corn was yet standing upon the ground, until he had inned
his crop, but yet there is reason why we should cast up both events.

The first reason, I shall gather up into three heads.



1. The sins we lie in and under, and first that mass of National sin, which
has been gathering into a heap for fourscore years together and upward, sins
of all kinds under the Gospel, and against the Gospel, Idolatry, oppression,
abuse of plenty and peace, as the Apostle says of the works of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 19. They are manifest which are these, and such like. So I say of the
sins of this Nation, their aggravations are great, themselves are great. If I
should go about to number them, I must add an etcaetera at the end, as the
Apostle does, and these are they which may justly put in a caveat, or a
notwithstanding in our way, as the sins of Manasses did to the Reformation made
by Josiah, 2. Kings. 23. 26 Notwithstanding the Lord turned not away from the
fierceness of his great wrath; But then secondly our wilderness-sins threaten
us much. For as it was not Isreal's Egypt sins which shut them out of Canaan,
and held them so long in the Wilderness, but their Wilderness-sins; so they are
our Wilderness sins, that presage ill to us, those I mean that are upon us,
since God came down to plead with us face to face, and to bring us upon the
way, and they are our want of sound Humiliation and brokeness of heart; for
though we be broken yet we are not humbled: we are broken in our families, in
our estates; The Kingdom is broken with our sins, and with the sword, but our
hearts are not broken for our sin. We are as weary of our fasts, as of our
wars: our solemn days are wantonized with curled, bare and spotted pride to
this day: our sackcloth is grown into a fashion and form, and by many laid
aside, the sword draws forth our blood, because sin draws not forth our
tears: surely God has an answer ready to that question; Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou
take no knowledge? I say 5. 8. 3. O that the Land would own its own sins! for
though we can all cry, It is sin, yet when we should come to particulars, Then
it is with us as with Joseph's brethren: Thou did it, and Thou did it. The
serpent said she: the people says Saul: the people says Aaron; We all
acknowledge that there is sin amongst us, some where in the general, no where in
particular: the people lay the blame on the Magistrate, the Magistrate on the
people, and so our sins are never found at home; let us survey our selves and
deal impartially. Are not self ends-served upon the public calamities, by
such as come to the common scarre fire, not to quench it, but to fish for what
they can get? Is there not a great neglect of personal reformation; even by
such as cry for reformation Ecclesiastical? Is the power of godliness sought by
them who call for purity of Ordinances? is not charity cold? I might call it
Justice toward those that have drained their own wells dry, and cannot now get
water to quench their thirst? are there not delays and obstructions of
Justice? are there not miscarriages in inferior officers and instruments that
are too sharp bitten, and prey for themselves under color of service to the
State? And may not the Lord renew that old saying: For three transgressions,
and for fo^r I will not turn away the punishment of your Land, Amos 1. ver. 3.
6. etc.

2 The unpreparedness that is in us to close with God, his way and truth, many
think it religion enough to cry King and Parliament, with them the power of
godliness lies under as great scorn and disrelish as ever, and though we have
engaged our selves by Covenant, yet is that Covenant made by many but as it
were a fast and loose knot, or a mere Shibboleth of distinction between party
and party, how many are willing to compound for such a Reformation as may serve
self-interests, or politic respects, making their own ends the standard of
Reformation, not the word or glory of God? What fear is there in many of the
strictness of it? What jealousy least it should clip the wings of civil
authority, and power? being startled at the name of jus divinum, as Herod was
when he heard of one that should be born King of the Jews, a vain fear. For he
that says by me Kings reign, does not by his Gospel pull them down date Deo
and date Caesari are no ways inconsistent.

The Symptoms that are upon us, are very ill abodements, as namely, the
divisions and sidings in matter of Religion, which is first turned into a kind
of Philosophy of opinions, and then divided into parties and sects, as the old
Philosophers were; After the great and general deluge of corruption of
Doctrine, and superstition in worship, we are fallen into the confusion of
Languages. And then again, what emulations in Officers that have great command?
as if they had an Alexander or a Caesar, or a Pompey in their breasts, making
too much ado about punctilios of honor? what dissentions in the country
between Committees and Commanders, the one accusing the other for plowing away
a furrow of his land, and the other recriminating the like, and whiles they
come up hither to contest the difference, the Plow stands? what should I speak
of driving of designs, and of the carriage of many in this cause, merely by
interests, and not by principles, which kind of men can never be firm, for
interests will make any man loose and uncertain; He has the byas in his
Pocket, which he can put off and put on, as the mark lies, nothing makes men
firm but principles, for such a man's byas is within the bowl, especially if his
principles carry him to God, as well as you, for otherwise he will not be
always yours. Now if all these things be laid together, they make good reason
why we should cast up both events.

The ways and dispensations of God toward us are so dark, as by them we are
not able to discern clearly of his particular mind or thoughts, as touching the
issue or event, when we are (as we think) at shore and ready to land, there
comes a gust, and waves us back into the deep again, The Ark is carrying to
Jerusalem, and there falls out a breach upon Vzzah and stops the work. The war
hangs long upon us, and who knows where or when the Tragoedy shall end. How
long have the German Churches, (where the first daybreak of reformation began)
been under a thick cloud, and many a time when they have seemed to see land,
they have been driven back again with cross winds. Thus do the ways of God,
like Arethuse, run under ground. He hides his paths and his ends, and he is in
the thick darkness; so that we see his goings: but are as much to seek for the
meaning of his dispensations, as the boy was that ran to fetch Jonathans
Arrows, whereby he made discovery to David.

This we know, that God has not pinned his Ordinances to the freehold of a
Land Nation, City: therefore he says, Jer. 7, 12 go and see what I did to
Shiloh where I set my name at the first, and what was that which he did to it?
Psalm. 78. 60, 61. He forsook the Tabernacles of Shiloh, the Tent that he had
pitched among them, and delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory
into the enemies hand, whence it may be affirmed that though God do not
altogether remove his name from the Isralites, yet he may change the place
thereof, from Shiloh to Jerusalem; and so though he do plant his Ordinances
somewhere in his Church; yet the Candlestick may be removed, and the Kindome of
Heaven taken away from this or that particular place or Nation.



It is not my purpose to weaken the faith of the people of God, but to confirm
their resolutions, nor to give the enemy any occasion to say; Now they stagger,
they mistrust their cause, the wilderness has shut them in, No, no, for
whatsoever may become of our carcasses in this wilderness, though they may fall
therein for our rebellions against, and temptations of God; yet for certain,
Israel shall come into the Land of rest, for howsoever it be that Gods ways
toward us be in the dark, yet his promises to the Church are in the clear
light. Our dry bones are not too dry to live again by his breath; Though he
carry Joseph into a prison, it is but to advance him; Though he thrust Jonas
into the Whales belly, it is but to save him. When the Ship is wrackt and
broken, and the foundations (as the Psalmist says) are destroyed, yet
edificab^o ecclesiam meam will stand good against the very gates of Hell. And
we may build upon it as a truth, that however his works of providence may seem
to us, not to answer his Word of promise; yet all his dispensations toward his
Churches, are in order to the fulfilling of his Promises, and the pangs of his
Church are unto life, and not unto death; I say the pangs or throws of his
Church, because I conceive, that these motions that are in Christendom, this
renting of States and Kingdoms, is in order to some revolutions in the
Churches; all these conspirations of stormy winds ingruent upon them are not
for nothing: Does the plowman plow all the day to sow? does he open and break
the clods of his ground, when he has made plain the ^ace thereof? does he not
cast in the principal wheat, etc. Isa. 28. 4 God will sow his Churches after
his tearing them up by the plow; and therefore whatsoever Statsemen and
Politicians may aim at, it is the Churches interest which the eye of God is
upon, though they neither know nor intend it. As the Scripture taking notice of
Augustus his Decree of taxing or enrolling the Empire or Provinces thereof,
seems to give us the reason and occasion of bringing Joseph and Mary to
Bethlehem (who were far off the place)* that Christ might be born according to
the Scriptures, which was a thing the Emperor never once dreamed of. God has
other ends and purposes in these shakings of Kingdoms and Provinces then
Politicians and Stasemen have, therefore let us not discredit God by unbelief,
for my Covenant is to me (says he) as the waters of Noah; that is, my purpose
to my people; to do them good is irreve^sible and absolute, Isa. 54. 10.

But then for our particulars. Though the waters of Noah return no more to
cover the earth, yet such a House, City, Country may be overflowed and
swallowed up with water; so may our Ark fall into Philistims hands; and
therefore gather your selves together, search your selves Oh Nation, even Ye
our worthy Senators, call your selves to account, and examine your selves
strictly, impartially, humbly, lest the Babylonish garment and wedge of Gold
(which causes Israel to fly before the men of Ai) be not in any of your Tents,
search out carnal policy, luke warmness toward God; Neutrality, private ends.
Its not impossible but that there may be an Absalom, a Shemei in your own
bowels, who if you were brought low, would drive you and the Ark of God too
into the Wilderness, to seek a place. Oh let the representative body of the
Kingdom keep themselves pure, that so if God should please to estimate, or
measure out unto the Nation, according to the representative body of it, there
may be mercy to it for your sakes. To this end, have an eye [I beseech you]
upon obstructours and designers, which cannot do so much hurt in the enemies
Army, as in your Counsels; Malignity thrust forth into the outward parts of the
body, is nothing so dangerous, as that which lies close and near to the heart
or vitals: Speed the hearing of Causes which come before you, that men may be
dismissed to their commands and employments abroad to prevent a vacuum. Pity and
relieve those that are broken and shipwrackt for the Kingdoms sake: have an
eye upon your under-Instruments and Officers, that they spend you not more
honor and reputation by their miscarriages, partialities, private gain: than
they bring you in supplies; he that flies a sharp Hawk, rides hard after her,
or else the Partridge will be half eaten before he come in; And fear not the
losing of any party by doing Gods will and work; for God himself should neither
give rain nor fair weather; if he should please all sorts of men, I shall less
stick on these things, because you were this day before put in mind of them;
only let me press one thing more, namely; That you would countenance honest and
godly men, with places of command and trust; With command, for they will be
firm and valiant, a man's valor lies in his conscience, and not in his spirit:
With trust, for such a man is like a door with two locks: He has an obligation
upon him, both to God and you. Finally, do all that may be to suppress open and
crying sins, for authority makes it self guilty of those, other men's sins,
which it endeavors not to cut down, we in the Ministry must cry them down and
you must cut them down, or else they become in guilt both ours and yours.

And let none of us say within our selves, we have strength for war, for
Eccles. 11. 9. The battle is not to the strong, We have received many marks and
tokens of favor from God, for Josh. 24. 19. He will consume you after he has
done you good. We are the Israel of God, to whom pertain the Promises, for
Josh. 7. 8. Israel flies before the Aians, We have the Ark of God in the Camp
with us, for 1 Samuel 4, 10, 11. The Philistims may take it, We fast before the
Lord and have a good, cause for Judge. 20. 21. Israel falls in two battles under
Benjamin. We are not so bad as the enemy that comes against us; For its no
trusting to the sins of an enemy. The worst briars or thorns may serve for a
rod in the land of God, to scourge his own people: We are Gods witnesses, for
Rev. 11. 7. The beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit shall mak^ war
against them, and shall overcome and kill them. In a word, the axe that cuts
down the tree, is hafted with the wood of the same tree, the enemies power over
us lies in our own sins; And so much for this Point.



I have not much to say upon this Point, This is the sum. Do your duty and
perish in it, Si fractus illabatur orbis, Conscience of sincerity, and
uprightness of heart in duty, will make a man sing Ecce ego, Here am I. Middle
region men, and lower Region, must be tossed and weather-beaten, they live and
have their treasure where winds and clouds, and waves come, but he is in the
Serene, and above all these whose hope the Lord is, you may be sooner killed
then hurt; and if God should deliver you up to the enemy, and bring in
difficult times, be sure that there is few of them that hate you now, but would
be ready to write upon the statue of each one of you that lives and dies
faithful, utinam viveres; or if such days should come that men shall be afraid
to name your names, or own your worth; yet as it was said of the Pictures of
those Patriots that durst not come forth and appear in after times, Eo magis
fulgebant quia non viseban ur, they shined the more, because they were not to
be seen. Be true to God, to his truth, it will save you: but if there be any of
you that come in and adhere to God and his Cause only for shelter and safety,
that is not thank-worthy with God, no man thanks another for being driven into
his house to stand dry in a shower.

That you may be able to say Here I am, when God shall please to declare that he
has no delight in you, these things are requisite;

1. To have a good conscience on your side, that will feast you within doors,
even when the hailstones rattle upon the tiles of the house; you know what
Luther said when he was convented before the Emperor at Worms, No winds shake
the earth but those within it. If you be in a good cause, that is not all, for
hypocrisy and base ends will more pull you down, than the goodness of the
cause will lift you up.

It Is a tirrible thing to be hemmed in by the wrath of God on one side, and the
galling of a guilty conscience on the other side. He that dare not face his own
conscience must needs fly from the presence and sight of God, he cannot say
H^re I am.

2. A submissive faith to trust God, and leave your selves in his hand,
accepting the punishment of your iniquity with silence and justification of
God, lying down as patiently under his knife, as Isaac under Abraham's.

3. Acquaintance with God, so as to lay up your lives with Christ in God,
having tasted his goodness to you in former experiences, such a man may be
killed all but the head, but that is above the reach of any enemy, and though he
be forsaken, yet he carries, my God, my God, with him, from the cross to his
grave.

David states his happiness to consist in the fruition of God and his
ordinances: He will bring me again, and show me his Ark, and the habitation of
it. He says not, he will bring me to my house again, to my Concubines which
are left behind; but he will show me his Habitation; The Ark and the Temple
were the things that he accounted worth the enjoying, and here you may observe
what a godly heart looks at, not revenues and trading, but Gods Ark and
habitation. The Roman H^storians observe how the first seven Kings did
contribute to the State of Rome. Romulus the first, gave it esse, then
Pompilius the next, brought in the sacra, Religion is indeed the very keel of
the ship. The main work we have to do is to settle it, and it is our greatest
wages, to see it established, it will pay us for all our layings out.

liberty to that, would be nothing else but to give him leave to be mad.

David expresses his sufferings, yea his utmost sufferings, by the phrase, Good
in Gods eyes, If he say thus, I delight not in thee, Here I am, let him do that
is good in his eyes: He might feel it evil, but if it be good in Gods eyes, he
yields to it; and so let our hearts be humbled and framed in expectation of
Gods hand to us at this time, that we may kiss the rod, and say with old Eli,
when he heard the fall of his house: It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good 1 Samuel 3. 18. We know not what Promises or Prophesies God has given
forth to his Church in his Word to be served and fulfilled by or upon our
ruins. If God please not to honor himself by our labors, let him honor
himself by our ashes.

FINIS.
Die Veneris, 14. Martii, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this House
does give thanks to Mr. Vines, for his great pains taken in the Sermon he
Preached on the 12th of this instant March, in Christs-Church, London, before
the Members of both Houses of Parliament, and giving thanks to Almighty God for
his blessing to the Parliament, for their late good success at Shrewsbury and
Waymouth. And that the said Mr Vines is hereby desired to Print and Publish his
said Sermon, which is not to be Printed or Reprinted, but by authority under
his hand.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliament.

Die Jovis, 13. Martii, 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr Solicitor, and Mr
Nicholas, do from this House return thanks to Mr Arrowsmith and Mr Vines, for
the great pains they took in the Sermons they Preached at the entreaty of both
Houses, at Christs-Church yesterday (being a day appointed for a public
Thanksgiving) and that they do entreat them to Print their Sermons; and it is
Ordered that none shall presume to Print their Sermons, but whom shall be
licensed under their handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to Print this Sermon, RICHARD VINES.

THE HAPPINESS OF ISRAEL.

As it was set forth In a SERMON Preached to both the Honorable Houses of
PARLIAMENT (the Lord Major, and Aldermen of the City of London being present)
at Christ Church, London, upon a Solemn Day of Thanksgiving, March, 12. 1644.

By RICHARD VINES, Minister of the Gospel at Weddington in the County of
Warwick.

Published by Order of both Houses.

The Second Edition.

EXODUS 15. 11. Who is like to thee O Lord among the Gods?

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Abel Roper, at the Sign of the Sun against
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1656.

To the Right Honorable, The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
SVch as look upon your successes with an evil eye, will not lock upon your
Th^nksgivings with a good one. They will be ready to say, Nescitis quid serus
vesper, praise a fair day at night. It Is no time to call for a plaudite, until
ye see the end of the last Act.

But the Psalmist tells us, that Praise is comely, and it is good, to pay as we
receive: our Hosanna's now, will nothing hinder our Hallelujabs then. Why
should we not offer up our first fruits, though we cannot as yet cry Harvest
home? and receive the earnests and pledges of further and fuller mercies with
Thanksgiving? This day among the rest is worthy to be marked with a
white-stone, being the memorial of our gaining of Shrewsbury, and regaining of
VVaymouth; The one we did not think of, the other we could hardly expect. In
our low estates and conditions, we have usually been happy in God; and in this
Mountain let the Hand of Isai. 25. 10.
the Lord rest, until all our Praises and solemn Thanksgivings, which do as yet
run in a lesser channel, may empty themselves into, and lose all their names in
one great Jubilee, so prays

Your most humble Servant for Christ, Richard Vines.

A SERMON Preached to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, at Christs-Church, London,
upon a Solemn day of Thanksgiving, March, 12. 1644.
DEUTERONOMY. 33. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people! saved
by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency:
and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon
their high places.
MOses in this Chapter, does prophetically retail out unto the several Tribes
their several Blessings; and in the close thereof, he sums up the body of that
people into one total, under the name of Israel; and their condition under the
name of Happiness. Thy Happiness, O Israel, etc.

In the words we have The happiness of Israel
1. Pronounced. 2. Described.
Pronounced in these words, Happy art thou O Israel: Who is like unto thee, O
people?

Described, and that two ways:

1. By the Author, Jehovah, who is resembled to weapons of war,
Defensive: The Shield of thy help. Offensive: The Sword of thy excellency.
2. By the parts of it, and they are two:
1. Salvation or deliverance: Saved by the Lord. 2. Victory or Conquest.
and that
1. Of their enemies. Thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee. 2. Of their
high places. Thou shall tread upon their high places.
Time will not permit me to take up observations out of every subdivision or
part of the Text, as it is cut out, but I shall cast the Happiness pronounced
into the point, and the Happiness described into the reasons of that point,
thus;

Such are the Happinesses of Israel, as do lift them up above all compare with
any other people. Thy Happinesses, O Israel: who is like to thee, O people!

That Israel is a people so happy, is proved:

1. They are saved by the Lord, the Shield of their help, and who is the Sword
of their excellency.

2. The enemies of Israel shall be found liars unto her, and she shall tread
upon their high places:

Such are the Happinesses of Israel, as do lift them up above all compare with
any other people: Happiness is as much in the singular, as in the plural number:
yet if there be a plurallity of happinesses, they do all belong to Israel above
all other people, every mouth (both the mouth of Balaam, and the mouth of
Moses) do pronounce Israel happy. All things do cooperate for good unto the
Israel of God; we say of Bonum a good thing, that it is ex causis integris, and
so of Happiness, we may say it is ex bonis integris; the mixture of any evil,
or defect of any proportionable good, maimes happiness, and makes that it
cannot be truly so called; and yet there is bonum ex malo; good arising out of
evil, which does much conduce to the happiness of Israel; were there no thorns
in the flesh, how should we be humbled? No Devil, how should we be winnowed? No
Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, Famine, Sword, how should we be more then
Conquerors? No Death, or Dissolution, how shouldwe come to be with Christ? The
world, life, death, things present, things to come, all are yours, and you are
Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 22. You will reply that many of these things that are said
to be ours, do work our good praeter-intentionally, and by mere accident, which
I grant to be true as touching these things themselves, but not as to God;
whose wisdom and power is both much set on work and seen in bringing good out
of evil. God is such an Artist in working the happiness of his people, that he
can make use of a crooked tool, to do that which can never be done by a
straight one; Pharaoh his double taks and burdens, serve to wean Israel from
and out of Egypt, so Pharaoh helps to make Moses succesful in the bringing off
of Israel? Joseph's brethren intend no preferment to him, or any fulfilling of
that Oracle which had said he should be high above his brethren, and yet they
contribute to it, and work toward it, The wisdom of all the enemies of Gods
people, and the subtilty of Satan are always befooled when they plot upon the
Church; that which they intend should be mortal, is medicinal; the Leech sucks
the blood, the Physician by the Leech, draws away the disease: God has a work
upon Mount Sion, and Jerusalem, Isai. 10. 12. He uses the Assyrian as his rod,
but the intention of the Instrument is nothing like unto the intention that God
has, ver. 7. And therefore it is that God is said to laugh at the enemies of
Israel, because he lets them build their works, and then blows down all their
Paper buildings by a blast, which they know not whence it comes; yea, God sets
them on work against themselves, and not only makes them set up their own
Gallows unawares to them, but hold the stirrup to Mordecai, whom above all men
they hate.

I shall not intricate my Discourse with any Philosophical disputes about
Happiness, wherein the Philosophers were so much divided in opinion, and into
parties, an evident demonstration of the blindness of men by nature, shooting
so wide from the mark in so concerning a point, but shall for the better
opening of the happiness of Israel, distinguish between the wilderness estate
of Israel; and their Canaan estate, and so of their happiness in their
wilderness condition, and in their Canaan condition; for so doubtless there is
a wilderness condition of the Gospel Churches, and a Canaan condition of them,
even in this world, wherein they shall be in more luster, settlement, beauty,
and glory, their mean Tabernacle shall arise into a more glorious Temple.

1. This Canaan condition of the Gospel Churches, is fully pointed forth in the
Promises and Prophesies of both Testaments, that Israel shall be happy, a
nonesuch, a quis sicut tu? who is like to thee? I make no question, only thus
much may be said, that as the Promises made before time to Israel, concerning
Canaan, could not be reconciled or adopted to the r Egypt, or Wilderness
condition so neither can the Promises made to the Gospel Churches as touching
their Canaan condition, be reconciled to the Wilderness in which they now seem
to be, and therefore if it should be asked: How does Gods Word and his Works
agree? How can his sweet voice be reconciled to his rough hand? We must answer,
That the Birth of the Promises, will answer their Conception, they will bring
forth in full shape and feature, the glory with which they are pregnant; but
that must not be expected, until they come to their full count: for there is a
fullness of time, wherein the Promises shall be delivered; until which the great
and good things we hope for, do lie in their womb, and we must be content, if
we say, as the Mother of Jesus, They have no wine: to hear, Woman, what have I
to do with thee, My hour is not yet come. John 2. 3, 4.


2. The wilderness estate of Israel, or the Churches of God, is that wherein
they are in pangs, and travail: being humbled and hammered by God, unto that
beauty and glory which shall be revealed in them; for it is to be observed that
God resembles the drawing forth of his Church, out of their declensions and
Apostasy, to the Idaea, or pattern of his bringing Israel out of Egypt into a
wilderness, Ezekiel. 20. 35, 36. Hos 2. 14. 15. And in this state of the Churches,
we cannot but expect, that there will be a mixed multitude among them that will
fall Numb. 11. 4. Numb. 14. 3, 4,
to lusting: there will be many returners in heart into Egypt, there will be
misreporters of that good land, murmurers, complainers, tempters of Christ.
There will be a powerful Amalek, that will oppose, and give battle, which must
be beaten down by Mos^s hands, and Joshua his sword. In a word, there will be
wilderness sins, which will keep us out of Canaan a long time; for you may
observe it, that it was not for Isreal's Egypt sins, but for their wilderness
sins, that their carcasses fell in the wilderness, and that the rest were so long
kept out of the promised land; and this observation is very useful to us as
this time, who hang so long in this condition, for our wilderness sins and
provocations.

How then can Israel be pronounced happy in her wilderness condition? for that
I bend my self the rather to speak of: that I might speak more nearly to our
own case. And that we may rejoice, not only in hope of the glory of God, but in
such present marks of his favor and presence, as may keep us erect; and in
Comfort, under such a condition. First then,

1. Israel, or the people of God are happy, because heirs of all the gracious
Promises which God has made. In Christ the promises are Yea to them and Amen,
that is made, and made good. They have God by his Name El Shaddi, to live upon;
though he be not as yet pleased to make himself known unto them, by his Name
Jehovah, and surely, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, were happy men, though God appeared
unto them only as a God Almighty, Exodus 6. 3. that is, he was a God engaged to
them by Covenant and promise, and a God of power to make good his engagements,
though he did not actually pay down, and give existence to his promises in
their times, and therefore it is said of them, that they having seen the
promises a far off, were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and so died, not
having received that which was promised, Heb. 11 13. It is a happiness to be
under promises, though the thing promised be posthumous to us. He is not poor,
that has good debts lying in so rich a hand as Gods: and we may find it true
in our experience, that all the while God keeps in his hand the principal, he
pays his people the full interest for forbearance, and maintains them in their
minority with some competencies out of the revenews which he has entailed upon
them when they come to full age. Jacobs prospering under Laban, while he was an
exile, and a servant, was far from that blessing to which he was heir, but yet
it was a remarkable hand of that God who was in bonds to him for a great sum.

2. Israel is happy in their wilderness, because they are come out of Egypt; It
is a kind of Promise Hos. 2. 14. I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, when we follow after our lovers, we may have, it may be, our bread,
and water, and wool, and flax, and oil, and drink; but when the thorn hedge is
made round about us, we are in a better condition, Hos. 2. 5, 6, 7. It Is an
argument that we are carnal, when the tasks and fleshpots of Egypt are valued
as a Happiness rather then wilderne^s dispensations; they that are in calamity,
do magnify the times of burning incense, to the Queen of Heaven; upon this
reason, Ier. 44 17. for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw
no evil. He would seem to speak a Paradox, that should say, It Is better as we
are, then as we were: Oh that there was not this error in our hearts; Oh that
we did know his ways: For I was grieved (says God) with that generation, and
said, They do always err in Heb. 3. 10.
their hearts, and they have not known my ways; that is, they consider not my
dispensations toward them for good, in bringing them out of Egypt, and in this
wilderness; our condition in Egypt being considered, might justly make our
wilderness a happiness to us, especially if we remember that God having brought
them once out, did not again bring them back into it. Israel returns back no
more, though many of the carnal mutineers desired it. The Churches may be
pursued and warred against by the enemy that ensl^ved them; the witnesses may
suffer under the tyranny and power of the beast, but they shall no more return
into captivity to her, sit down by her fleshpots, or to be under her tasks.

3. Israel is happy in the Wilderness, because they have therein the Covenant
renewed, the Tables thereof are given to them, the Tabernacle is set up, the
Ordinances are instituted and appointed, Religion is reformed, and the things
that concern the House of God, are made according to the Pattern: And all this
was done while Israel was in the Wilderness: This is Gods time to give, and the
Churches time to receive the holy Ordinances. In the wilderness I gave them my
Statutes, and showed them my Judgments, moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths,
Ezekiel. 20. 10, 11, 12. when God had Israel, as I may say, alone in the
wilderness, and under his hammer there, see how he deals with them: He settles
his own Ordinances, brings them into the bond of his Covenant, before he brings
them into their affluence of Milk and Honey: That it is the Happiness of Israel
to be thus furnished with Gods Ordinances, and brought into his Covenant, is
not necessary for me to prove, see Psalm. 147. ver. 19, 20. Romans 9. 4. But that
this is the time, when God does it, and promises to do it, you may see Ezekiel.
20. 35. 37. I will bring you into the wilderness, etc. and I will cause you to
pass under the rod that is, bring you into my possession, Levit. 27. 32.) And I
will bring you into the bond of the Covenant, and I will purge out from among
you the Rebels, and them that transgress against me, etc. ver. 38. When God
has his people in a wilderness, then he may do what he will with them; then he
will bring them into his Covenant, and then will he purge out the Rebels from
among them, as the Apostle observes he did, 1 Cor. 10. 5. And all these things
happened unto them for types, or examples unto us, ver. 11. Rebels shall be
purged out, and the people of God shall be brought into the bond of his
Covenant; and that when the Lord has brought them into a wilderness; Now then
Moses and all Israel consider Magistrates, Ministers, and all the people, this
is the time, this is the way wherein God is about to make you happy. It Is your
work and duty to receive and entertain the Ordinances from his mouth and hand,
to set up his Tabernacle, and build unto him an Habitation, and then will he
bring you into a condition flowing with Milk and Honey.

4. Israel in their wilderness condition are happy in the extraordinary
presence of God with them, to supply and support them, at such a time; never
were there more clear pledges and tokens of Gods presence with, of his power
and protection over Israel; then when they were in the Wilderness, there Manna
comes from Heaven, the Rock follows them, the Cloud is over them, the enemies
that fight against them, are strangely subdued; the Sun stands still whiles the
work is doing. When God brings his people into straits, he will work wonders
for them. Extraordinary cases have extraordinary applications made by God unto
them. Till they came to eat of the old corn of the land the Manna did not
cease, Josh. 5. 11. We cannot have great experiences until we come into
extremities; great deliverances presuppose great dangers; when Christ is in his
Agony and the Disciples sleep, there appears an Angel from Heaven,
strengthening him, Lu. 22. 43. 45. When the Mariners cast Jonah overboard, the
Lord prepared a great fish to swallow him, Jonah 1. 17. God does as it were put
himself to extremities, when he puts his people into them. Thou have considered
my trouble, thou have known my soul in adversity, Psalm. 31. 7. I shall say no
more upon this, but only that which we find, Hos 2. where the Lord having
spoken terrible things to his declined people, from the ninth verse to the end
of the thirteenth, does in the 14. verse, come to this resolution and
conclusion, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and what
then? I will speak comfortably to her; and I will give her vineyards from
thence, and the Valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she shall sing there as
in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the Land of
Egypt: There is (you see) in the wilderness God speaking comfortably, and
Israel singing joyfully.

5. Israel is happy not only in fruition of God, but in acting for God. It is a
question, whether a man's happiness do rather consist ^n fruition and enjoyment
of good things, or in doing and acting out of a right principle; the
Philosopher seems to define happiness rather by operation and working according
to virtue, then by fruition of good things, and it is out of question, there is
no greater happiness then in being Instruments and Agents for God: God makes
you as happy if he please to use your purse as if he fill it, if he please to
lay out your lives as if he save them. It Is hard to believe and relish this;
but there is reason for it, that a man's happiness should consist in that
wherein he is active, as well as in that wherein he is passive, that is, in his
returns unto God, as well as in his receipts from him.

So that upon the whole matter, It may seem that in what estate soever Israel
be, whether in a Canaan estate, or a wilderness estate, they are, and they may
truly be pronounced Happy: when they are like the bush, all on fire; God is in
the bush, and they are not consumed; and it may justly be to their great
comfort, that all his Dispensations toward them are in order to the fulfilling
of his Covenant, He keeps Covenant with them, or keeps them in his Covenant, by
all his Dispensations, whether he create good or evil. If Paul have a thorn in
his flesh, it is to take down his puffing up above measure If after successes
he give us a check, it is to take us off from the arm of flesh, lest we should
kiss our own hand.

So much for the happiness of Israel pronounced, now to the Happiness
described; and

1. Israel is a people saved by the Lord, the shield of their help, and who is
the sword of their excellency.

Saved, For Israel shall be saved with everlasting Salvation, and shall never
be confounded, world without end, Isai. 45. 17. They are under the wheel, yet
saved; plunged into the deep waters, yet saved; the winds and waves beat upon
the ship, but Christ is in the same bottom with them, and they are saved. The
Apostles makes a kind of Riddle of it, 2 Cor 4. 8. We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, but not in despair: Persecuted, but
not forsiken; cast down, but not destroyed.

Saved by the Lord, that is the sweet of all; the Salvation of Salvation it
self; Gods finger in any deliverance, is worth the whole body of the
deliverance it self; be it never so great; what have we to do in our own
Salvation? Stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, says Moses to
Israel, Exo. 14. 13. I will take the cup of salvation, says the Psalmist, Ps.
116. 12. but to work salvation, belongs to God alone, There is no Savior
besides me. Hos. 13. 4. and how will the Lord save his people? I will save them
by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen, Hos. 1. 7. when Iehoshaphat looks for
saving he says, We have no power against this great multitude, but our eyes
are upon thee. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. when Jacob looks for saving from the hand of
Esau, he says, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, Genesis 32. 10. The one denies all
self power, the other denies all self-merit, and so God is left to be the sole
worker of salvation, and the sole mover of himself to do it, and these two
taken together, do much indear God to us; that he saves by his own power; that
he is moved by his own grace; and it no less sweetens him that he is moved by
himself, than that he does it by his own Arm; how often does God defeat our
counsels, scatter our own strength, prevent all our prayers, outdo all our
expectations, that he may be more seen himself, when he has taken us from
standing in his own light, The people that are with thee (says he to Gideon)
are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hand, Judge. 7. 2. Too few
they cannot be, they may be too many.

The Lord is unto Israel,
The Shield of their help. The Sword of their excellency.
1. He saves Israel as the Shield of their help, or (...). Gr.
helpful Shield, He will interpose and take off all blows and strokes, which
might undo Israel. Magistrates that should protect Commonwealths, are called
Shields, Hos. 4. 18. so also some read the Text. Ps. 47. 9. The Shields of the
earth, that is, the Rulers and Governors; but these Shields may be stricken
through and through, being but paper Shields: This Shield of Israel is a
compassing Shield, that covers a man all over, on all sides, and leaves him not
open to the thrusts of the enemy: With favor thou will compass him as with a
shield, Ps. 5. 1^. so Ps. 3. 3. Thou art a Shield about me: God will cover you
all over with his favorable protection, as he did them in the wilderness with
a cloud; Faith is called a Shield, because it interposeth God and his Promises
or Word to all attempts of the enemy of our souls; as we use to call him Ensign
that carries the Colors; so Faith is called our Shield, because it bears or
carries our Shield (who is God) in our eye and heart, you have had much
experience of this Shield, having been often secured both from the plots of
Balaam, and sword of Balak, since you came into this wilderness.

2. He saves Israel as being the sword of their excellency. There is a skill
both in the use of the shield and sword; had we that holy art of putting our
gracious God (who is pleased to compare himself to the instruments of our help
against the enemy) to the best use we might, we should find this true, that he
would be a shield and sword. Indeed God is as good a Sword, as he is a Shield,
yea and he is the Arm as well as the Sword, he mannages his own counsels and
power, for our defense and safety: there may be a two fold reading of these
words.

1. The Sword of thy excellency, that is, whose Sword is thy excellency or
glory: it makes thee excel all other people. The excellency of Israel lies in
this, that God is theirs. God for a Shield, God for a Sword. It Is not their own
sword, but Gods, that makes Israel glorious, victorious, triumphant. (...). Gr.
I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me, but thou have
saved us from our enemies. Ps. 44. 6, 7. Do we ever read in any History of such
strange victories and defeats of the enemy, as the Church victories have been?
What story paralels the relation of those victories which God has gotten for
Israel? This sword has made them excellent.

2. He is the sword of thy excellency: that is, he fights for thy excellency:
for we often read this expression. The excellency of Iaacob or Israel, Ezekiel.
24. ^1. Amos 6. 8. and Chap. 8. 7. by which the sanctuary, the Ordinances, and
the Covenant, those excellent prerogatives of Israel, wherein they transcended
all other people, are meant. The Apostle calls them (...) the advantage or
preeminence of the Jew, they had the Oracles of God, to them pertained the
Adoption, the Glory, the Covenants, the giving of the Law, the Service and the
Promises, Romans 3. 1. and Romans 9. 4. this may be called the excellency of
Israel; and so God the sword of their excellency, because he will fight for and
maintain his own Covenant, Ordinances, Sanctuary, against all the world; he
values nothing in the world so much as his truth, and his people. Let the
Ordinances of God be erected, prepare unto him an Habitation, for these will be
your glory, and your bulwark also, because God will be the sword of them to
propugne and protect them. Upon all the glory there shall be a cloud or
covering, Isai. 4. 5. your enemies may be formidable by great names, Leviathan,
the Dragon of the Sea; but Gods sword wherewith he will punish them, is called
a sore, a great and strong sword, Isai. 27. 1.

I shall now proceed to the second part of the description of Isreal's
happiness, in these words.

2. Thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon
their high places. Which words may seem properly to refer unto the bringing in
and planting of Israel into Canaan; for then were their enemies found liars
unto them, and they did tread upon their high places; but yet this Promise is
extensive, to Israel now as then; so far, as that victory over all opposites
and oppositions shall stand on the Churches side. It is to be observed that
Moses describes the happiness of Israel in these words by that which was as yet
future: Thine enemies shall be found liars; Thou shall tread on their high
places: Much of our happiness lies in reversion. It Is said of those prodigies
of faith, Heb. 11 that some of them died in the faith, not having received the
Promises, ver 13. and that all of them having obtained a good testimony by
faith, received not the Promises, ver. 39. All of them happy notwithstanding;
There is a great inheritance in remainder, to be inherited by faith and
patience, Heb. 6. 12. Happy are they who are within the intail; The Church
shall reap her greatest Harvests, in the latter days. The scorching Sun that at
present beats upon the cornfieldsd does but ripen the fruits, which shall be
gathered in full sheaves in their season.

1. Isreal's enemies shall be found liars, that is, 1. Either they shall fall
into a consumption, and be attenuate and wast away, as it was said of the house
of Saul, it grew weaker and weaker; there is some such signification of the
word, Ps. 109. 24 Or 2. They shall promise to themselves great things, saying,
I will pursue, I will overtake them, and swallow them up, I will divide the
spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, as it is, Ex. 15. 9. but they
shall be found liars; for they shall bring forth a lie, as big with child as
they are with mischief, and so we have hitherto found true in our experience;
The enemy is but a liar, God has blown upon their counsels, and frustrated
them. Or 3. They shall be found liars unto thee, that is, shall be subject in
despite of their hearts, Ps. 18. 44. Strangers shall lie unto me, they shall
feign obedience and subjection, being so convinced of Gods hand with his
Israel, or feeling it so against themselves, that they shall curry favor, and
like Gibeonites fue to make their peace, and shroud themselves under the
protection of Israel: and this I conceive to be the most natural sense of this
expression. Thine enemies shall lie unto thee. And thence I shall observe, That
the prosperous success of Israel will make many hypocrites, who will feign
reconciliation, and submission, and therefore a watchful eye must be upon them,
because they are but liars; dissembling themselves, until there come an
opportunity and revolution of things, when they will turn Samaritans again;
It Is no resting upon their pulling in of their horns, but in the cutting of
them off; nor can there be any security to you, but only in leaving them no
power to hurt.

2. Israel shall tread upon the enemies high places; (...), upon their neck (so
the Greek translation) Enemies to the Church may have their high places, but
the Promise will bring them under her feet. It was literally fulfilled to
Israel in respect of Canaan; The Idol-gods worshipped usually in high places
cannot protect them; the strength, power, forces, magnificence of the enemy
must come down under Isreal's feet: this Promise will have effect, Thou shall
tread on their high places. Let not Israel be proud of the Promises, but with
humble confidence expect them. All enemies must come under Christ's feet, and if
under his feet, they cannot be over our head. If any shall laugh at this
Promise as unlikely (as Sarah once did at that Promise, which seemed
improbable) because the Church is few and weak; He may by the same reason laugh
at a worm, threshing the Mountains into chaff, and of the rams-horns blowing
down the walls of Jericho; no matter though the instrument be as contemptible
as the Jaw Bone of an Ass, so that it be in the hands of a Sampson: that God
who makes the Promise, has a hand strong enough to bring it to pass.

I shall now draw drown that which has been said, into Application, suitable to
the occasion.

Israel see God, and admire him, and cast upon him all the glory of their
Salvation and victories. This who is like to thee, is applyable both to God and
to Israel; Israel says of God, who is like unto the; O Lord among the Gods;
who is like to to thee? Ex. 15. 11. a fit Motto for your Ensigns, as it was for
the Maccabees; and God says of Israel, Who is like to thee, O people? God is a
quis sicut tu among the gods? Israel is a quis sicut tu among the people: such
mutual commendations do God and his people cast upon each other.

There are many rivulets which by their confluence make up such a stream, as
may turn the wheel of our praises this day; If we do search out the works of
the Lord, as it is said, Ps. 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein; and it may well be said, of them
that have pleasure therein; for otherwise, when the hand of God is lifted up,
men will not see; might we not be convinced of Gods finger here, if we would
survey all circumstances, and not Atheistically deny, or perversely wrangle
against the manifestations of God; but it is the great unhappiness of many
amongst us, that even with such spectacles they cannot read God in his works;
It is too late for the Egyptians to say, God fights for Israel, when they are
enclosed in the Sea, and cannot get back again, they might have acknowledged it
sooner, had they not been hardened; and who knows but that check which God has
lately given us in the North, may not freez up some again, that did begin to
thaw and yield; They that will be hard and stiff, shall not want occasion,
while we are in this wilderness. He that will stumble shall not want a stone in
his way. If Pharaoh can but see that the like is done by the enchantments of
his Magitians, as Moses did, then is he where he was: For our parts, it ought
not to take off our praises for the receipts we have had from God, though (as
they say of the Nightingal) we have a thorn at our breast whilst we sing; for
yet will we sing the Lords Praises, and gather up the crumbs of his mercies,
which he has let fall at Scarborough, Plymouth, Shrewesbury, Weymouth, (sic
positi quoniam suaves miscetis odores) these flowers make a good Nosegay,
though there be one Bryar in it.

Scarborough was given to us at the time of the Treaty, when Weymouth was taken
from us, which helped to make the end of the Wallet to hang the more even;
Shrewesbury and Weymouth were two great Ports of Armies to be powered forth upon
us. The one from the Welsh, the other from the outlandish parts, God has given
into our hands the Keys of both, and has shut up these two doors, and both of
them beyond our expectation.

Shrewesbury was that first Shop where the first great Army was formed against
us, a good omen there is in it, that that place should come into your hands,
and that without any considerable expense of your blood, and which is more,
that this should be upon the very day of breaking up the Treaty: wherein though
they were forward in their declaration, thereby to serve themselves by such an
advantage, yet God put out his Declaration before theirs, and declared himself
much for us, and better to the satisfaction of all murmurings and discontents
for the want of Peace, then any thing could have been said or declared by you;
For howsoever that the Treaty might have been a Tree of knowledge of good and
evil to us all, had we took and eaten of the fruit of it, yet because it was a
tree whose fruit was pleasant to the eye, and a Tree to be desired, how many
might have been tempted to have put all to the hazard by it, and for it? at
least have been much discontent at the uneffectualness thereof, had not God put
in such a caveat as this, against all our quarrellings.

And for Weymouth, who knows but it served to heighten the spirits and the
conditions of the other part, that they might break with us to their own
greater disadvantage, and then when that work was served and done, God returned
it back into our hands again, having taken it from us, or borrowed it of us for
a design of his, which when it was accomplished complisht, he gave it back
again. God had left a little spark alive in Melcombe. Melcombe Regis, not the
less the Kings for this their faithfulness: though (if I may speak without
offense) I hope less the Queens. It was very much, that a little Cock-boat
should rescue the Ship and Guns, and beat out the Pirates, though assisted with
field force; and recover themselves again, and when we thought that quarter
might have been well for them, then to Conquer and Triumph over the Enemy, was
a very remarkable hand of God with them, and the more that it is to our
admiration, the more to Gods honor: He that is solus in opere, let him not have
any that may be with him socius in gloria.. We will lay up this Sword in the
Tabernacle of the Lord, as a Monument, that little David, prevailed against
great Goliath; the Lord has looked upon us in our low estate; the season of
these mercies makes them the more valuable unto us.

jealousies and Interests. I wish they were silenced by self-denial, and that
the strength of public spirit, might drain those streams, and make their
channels dry. My Lords and Gentlemen, what a God do you lay out your selves
for, one that will be your Speaker in your Houses, and your Shield and Sword in
the Field; be true to him, and he will make your enemies liars unto you; set
him on high, and he will make you tread on their high places: you have a rent
and broken Ship to steer, and pilot through cross winds and waves. Be you one
among your selves, and then all divisions in Church or Armies will be less
formidable; Your union would be a precious Pearl, while we are hnmbled for our
manifold distractions. Let us rejoice in your unity. If Moses, Caleb and Joshua
hold together, and be all of one mind, the tumultuous Isralites will be the
better led on, through this wilderness. The last and ultimate end which you have
covenanted to intend and aim at, should give law to all private respects,
passions, interests, and rule to all the means that conduce toward it, let the
ardua regni, take place of meum and tuum, self-denial will make you all one.

You that are for the Sea and the Field, hearken, the Sea and the Field call
for you. It Is seed time now in the Country, let it be so with you; go forth
and sow for us the matter of future praises, or else we shall have a late
Harvest, and I beseech you, take faithful Ministers with you. If you have no
Preachers with you, you will have too many. The Country savors too much already
of the Field doctrine: and there is yet another thing which I have to say, I
know not whether to you or the State, or both, and that is this, That an
exchange be made of two hang-byes that have followed some of our Armies; I mean
Plunder and Free Quarter, and that exchange to be for two other that will do
you more credit; Good pay, and good discipline. We lose very much by the two
former, and should gain very much by the two latter; we should by this means
convince and conquer enemies, and take away our own reproach out of their
mouths, and we should both gain and keep firm our friends unto us: and
therefore we could not do our selves or the cause better service, then to
harken to this motion. Nor can there be a better time for you to go forth, then
when the successes which we mention this day do encourage you, our praises are
your vetiles or forlorn-hope, sent forth before hand; as they were Iehosaphats,
2 Chronicles. 20. 21. The Psalmist makes this conjunction, Ps. 149. 6. Let the high
praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand.

And for you, this renowned City: you are the Deborah, or Mother in this
Israel; of you that may be said, which is in the 12th. Chap of Zech. ver. 5.
The Governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem
shall be my strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God. You are the sinews and
strength of the Kingdom, and though you be much exhausted, and there is but a
handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse, yet (as hard as it
was) the Prophet put the widow to go and make him a little cake first, 1 King.
17. 13. it was a great trial, yet she lost nothing by it: you have now an
occasion, and an invitement, to stretch forth your abilities to the utmost,
this warm Sun that shines upon you, may open the oyster-shell that is closest
shut up; Thanksgivings as they enlarge the heart, so they open the hand: It Is
true, that we commonly say, a man will not adventure all in one bottom, that
is, when a man stays at land, and sends his goods to Sea; but if a man ship
himself into this cause, then why not all his goods, and worth? for if he
survive the storm, he has them; If not, he does not need them.

I have one motion to the honorable Houses, and one to this famous City: the
first is on behalf of the University of Cambridge, that some expedient way be
found for the easing their Taxes and burdens, that Learning may not be star^ed;
Let not the Kingdom want both her eyes; to what purpose is it, that the
University has a womb to bear, if she have no Breasts to give suck?

The second is on behalf of the poor, that workhouses may be erected, to drain
the streets which are so full of indigent and miserable people, whose misery is
their poverty, and idleness is their sin: It were a happy work to heal them of
both these; If every Thanksgiving be attended with some good work of
Reformation, our God will encourage us by further mercies, and we shall further
glorify him by the improvement of them.

Israel is pronounced and described, Happy; Then there is hope in the Churches
condition, though low and despicable; The Promises of God will eat their own
way through all oppositions and obstructions; There is an observation made of
three dead persons raised by Christ; one in the house, Matthew. 9. 25. one upon
the Beire, Luke 7. 14. one in his grave, John 11. 43. and yet all of them
brought to li^e again. This poor Church and Kingdom of ours is in a sad
condition. Ireland is upon the Beire. Germany as it were in the grave; and yet
there is hope of Resurrection to them all. Christ was first brought very low
before he was exalted, and his body shall imitate or follow the example of
their head; If God shall proceed still further to weaken us, yet when he has
made Jacob a worm, he will then make that worm a flail to thresh the Mountains
to chaff, Isai. 41. 14. 15. And so I conclude, Happy art thou, O Israel, etc.

FINIS.
THE PURIFYING OF UNCLEAN HEARTS and HANDS.

OPENED IN A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at their
solemn Fast, January 28. 1645. in Margarets Westminster.

By RICHARD VINES, one of the Assembly of Divines.

PSALM. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall
stand in his holy place?

He that has clean hands and a pure heart.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1646.

Die Mercurii, 28, January, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Mr. Long and Mr. Holland
do from this house give thanks to Mr. Vines for the great pains he took in
the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of this House at St. Margarets
Westminster, (it being the day of public humiliation) and to desire him to
Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that none shall Priut his Sermon, but who
shall be licensed under his handwriting.

Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to print this Sermon. Richard Vines.

To the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
SVch Auditors who will suffer the word of exhortation, Heb. 13. 22.
as they encourage the Minister to do his, so they shall be sure to know their
duty; which is not ordinarily the happiness of great personages. This Sermon
was preached upon one of the days of your solemn approach and drawing nigh to
God. It was no season to present you with fancies dressed in cobweb lawn, or
thin notions clothed with air. The Popish fasts did but change solid meat into
sweet meats. The subject of the Sermon is cleansing and purifying; which as it
was necessary by the law, before the unclean person might draw nigh to God, so
it is required of you; If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands
toward him; If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away: for then shall thou
lift up thy face without spot, Job. 11. 13, 14, 15. It is a liberty which
Ministers claim by virtue of their commission, to speak, exhort, and rebuke
with all authority, Tit. 2. 15. You that are the tutelar Patrons and assertours
of just liberties, do like your selves, in countenancing and encouraging this
also: so shall you have the ministry of the Word always ready to help you, to
beat your corruptions black and blew, which to do, is both the 1 Cor. 9. 27.
(...).
duty and beauty of your sackcloth-dayes. The Lord who has said, That the pure
in heart shall see God, Mat. 5. ^. And that he that has clean hands, shall be
stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. so draw nigh to you in the light of his
countenance, and strength of his arm, that you who have defended Religion from
being trampled upon, may preserve it from being torn in pieces, and see the
good of Jerusalem all the days of your lives. Lo prays,

Your servant in Christ Jesus; Richard Vines.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS, upon the day of the
Monethly-Fast, January 28. 1645.
JAMES 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Cleanse your
hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded.
MY work at this time (by agreement) is to bring up the rere of this text, See
M. Caryl his Sermon upon the former part of this text.
that it may appear to you in a full body; you received (in the fore-noon) the
invitation to that, which is not only the main duty, but also the chief good of
man. To draw nigh to God: And you have (I hope) tasted of the sweetness of
that promise which God does make, or the entertainment which he gives to such;
God will draw nigh to you; so the prodigal son arose and came to his father,
and his father ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. The Luke 15. 20.
lost son comes, the compassionate father runs. God answers his people in a way
of retaliation: if they draw nigh to him, he will draw nigh to them: and this
drawing nigh of God to us, is like the nearer approaches of the sun, which by
his heat and prolificall influences, gives life and beauty to those things that
before lay dead and buried, shrouded in the winding sheet of the winter snow.

That part of the text which comes under my hand ( Cleanse your hands, you
sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded) contains in it,

1. The prohibens, or impediment prohibiting this mutual drawing nigh of you
to God, of God to you; and that is, the pollution of your hands, the
uncleanness or corruption of your hearts; for it is not possible there should
be coalition or communion between God and wicked men; therefore its said, Psalm
18. 26. with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self froward; Plato saw this truth, Plato in Plae^o^.^.
(...) (says he) (...), the law of contrariety forbids purity and filthiness
to touch, that is, to have fellowship or communion, (...), touch not the
unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6. 17. God is so far from drawing nigh unto, that he
will hide his eyes from unclean hands. The reason why he delights not in our
fattest sacrifices, why our incense is an abomination to him, why he hates our
new Moons and appointed feasts, why he will not hear our multiplied prayers, is
the uncleanness of our hands, Isa. 1. from the 11. to the end of the 15th
verse; Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity, says the Prophet, Hab. 1. 13. that See the word (...) explicated in
M. Gattaker his learned Treatise, called. Go^s eye ^^ b^^ Israel.
is, thou can not countenance the violence and oppressions of thy people, the
grievance and vexation done unto them by wicked men, much less. draw nigh to
men of such unclean hands.

2. The removens prohibens, or the removal of that impediment, and that is
cleansing of hands, and purifying of your hearts, for says the Prophet, Isa.
1. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherles, plead for the widow: (And then it follows)
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord. Our dissimilitude and
unlikenes to God, is a bar to this mutual acquaintance and communion, for a
man unlike to God, cannot but dislike him. As white is no more contrary to
black, then black to white: so Gods holiness is no more contrary to our
wickedness, then our wickedness is to his holiness: and therefore there can be no
drawing nigh together, unles either God recede from his holiness, (which cannot
be) or we be cleansed and purified from our uncleanness, which is the only
way to make this communion close, sweet, and firm.

That the Text is proper and seasonable for this day of our Humiliation is
plain, not only by that which immediately follows in the 9. and 10. ver. Be
afflicted, and mourn, and weep: humble your selves in the sight of the Lord.
But by the Text it self, for what is the (...), the main business of a Fast, but
to search for the Lord with all our heart, to lament after him, to draw nigh
unto, and meet our God? and what is the (...), or main business of them that
fast, but to bring forth the wickedness that is in their hands, and the
predominant corruptions that are in their hearts, and as witnesses against
them, to cast upon them the stone of execution that they may die. A Fast is not
merely a sermon and a prayer, there is a propriety in that ordinance or duty.
The sermon should spread your sins before you, and your confessions and
prayer should spread them before the Lord. The sermon puts the ashes on your
heads, and dresses your souls in that sackcloth, which you are to wear as
mourning garments, in your prayer and humiliation. I wish our Fasts may not
lose their property, like physic, which by often taking, becomes at length a
diet, rather then a medicine.

There is in the words triplex (...), a threefold conjunction.

Sinners and double-minded cleanse and purify your Hands.

Sinners and double-minded cleanse and purify your Hearts.

I shall first break the shell, by explication of the terms.

The word [(...)] sinners, as it signifies in general any sinner, in
opposition to a righteous man, Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience, many
were made [(...)] sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
[(...)] righteous: so in special it also signifies a wicked man, one of
flagitious life, a sinner (...), therefore its often said [(...)] Publicans and
sinners, and Luke 7. 37. a woman in that City which was [(...)] a sinner, that
is an adulteress, or a harlot, as it is generally expounded; and if we survey
the beginning of this chapter, what brawlings, envyings, lusts, self-seeking,
did reign amongst this people, we shall see good reason to take the word
sinners, for such as did lie in more open and scandalous sins, men of unclean
hands.

The word (...), double minded, is once before used in this Epistle, chap. 1.
8. and signifies such as have double, (or as the Syriack expresses it) divided
(...) 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. Psalm. 12 ^.
hearts, it answers the Hebrew expression: a heart and a heart, which the
septuagint do interpret word for word, (...), and Symachus (whom Chrysostom
on, Psalm. 12. 2. calls (...)) renders it, (...), we shall best understand the
sense of the word, by comparing it with the opposite thereunto, and that is
(...), Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22. Simplicity, or singlenes of heart, it is a
grace recommended to servants, in singlenes of heart as unto Christ, not with
eye-service as unto men; And again its said, In singlenes of heart fearing God:
doing whatsoever you do from your heart, as to the Lord, and not to man; where
you have singlenes of heart described, to be the steerage of the heart, by the
fear of God in a right line, to intend and aim at him and his glory, in all you
do; for those crooked, serpentine, and subtle windings and turnings of heart,
which are called, (...)
Psalm. 145. 4, 5. crooked ways, that are like a winding way, or winding brook,
that runs in and out; or like a winding stayre case, where a man goes but
three or four steps, and then turns to another point, are set in opposition to
uprightnes of heart; such off and on, such in and out hearts cannot be upright,
they then are double minded.

1. Whose hearts are not single and entire with God, but divided between God
and self, being biassed with carnal and worldly lusts, policies or ends.

Like the heart of an Adulterer, or Adulteress, (so these double minded ones
are also called, ver. 4.) which is divided between husband or wife, and some
other strange love.

2. Whose hearts are not fixed upon one center, but uncertain, moveable, and
inconstant with God, cap. 1. ver. 8. A double minded man is unsettled in all his
ways, The word is (...), which signifies that he is at no setlednes within
himself, but off and on, by reason of lusts that mutiny within him, and carry
him away from choosing, and resting upon God alone: and this inconstancy rises
from the former, namely, the division of the heart, for it being divided in it
self by reasonings, self-interests, lusts, cannot be constant in attendance
upon God. It is but by accident that the weathercock points toward the sun,
namely, because the wind and sun are both in one corner. If the wind turn, it
turns away also.

2. Cleanse and purify, (...), these (...)
words are promiscuously, and indifferently used by the Septuagint, to
interpret the Hebrew words that signify to cleanse and purify; and there is in
these words an allusion to legal uncleanness, and the purifying of them; for
as in the law, before an unclean person might draw nigh to God, he must be
purified from his uncleanness, so those that will draw nigh to God or would
have God draw nigh to them, must cleanse their hands, and purify their hearts.
The Eo lavatum, ut sacrificem, number la^abo ut rem d^vinam facia^ Plant. in
au^ul. (...). ^lutarch in Mario.
Heathens had their ceremonious washings, and purifyings, as preparative to
their sacrifices and prayers, and this heart-purifying, and hand-cleanssing, is
that purgatory through which we must go, if we will draw nigh to God in worship
and communion; God will be served with clean creatures.

3. Hands and hearts. The heart is the womb, where lust is vvarmed and
conceived; the shop, where the forge, anvill, bellows, fire are for the
forming of lust, and making of it ready. The hands are put for the executive
and isntrumental powers, that bring it forth to light and act it, (...), Romans
6. 13. the weapons of unrighteousnes unto sin; In short, the outward and
inward man being filthy and unclean, must be purified from corruption of heart
and life. For he that has clean hands and a pure heart, Psalm, 24. 4. 5. shall
receive the blessing from the Lord; and righteousness from the God of his
salvation.

I shall now come to the matter of the Text which I will handle.

1. In the two parts of it distinctly. Cleanse your hands, purify your hearts.

2. As these two parts are in connection one with the other: cleanse your hands,
and purify your hearts.

3. As they stand both together, in reference to our drawing nigh to God, and
his drawing nigh to us. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you.
Cleanse your hands, etc.

You may easily see that here is very little speculative, or notionall matter,
but practical, and such as will fall most properly into use, and into matter
of application. We have now to deal with your hearts and hands, and not your
brain. Here will be no fine thin wafers which will melt upon your tongue, and
vanish in a little sweetness; and yet such novelties and running banquets are
all for the palate of these queasy times; o Religion! how art thou turned into
a kind of Philosophy of opinions, in danger to be a mere skeptic, or terra
incognita, an every thing, a nothing, a thing for a vvanton fancy to play
withal, a smooth tongue to talk of, made up of a brain and a mouth, without
heart and hands. How can it be otherwise when the tree of knowledge is so much
preferred before the tree of life?

From the first part, Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, I observe,

1 A corrupt and wicked life argues a man to be a stranger to God, and God to
him.

2 They that will draw nigh to God, must cleanse their hands.

draws a man into acquaintance with God, does proportionably kill sin. That
power which flows from God in acquaintance with a man, kills sin too: whether I
go out to the Sun, or the Sun come in to me, the darkness is expeld: sin has
not dominion over them that are under grace, Romans 6. 14. the knowledge of God
sets a man loose from his bondage to the enslaving lusts he before served, ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, John 8. 32. draw nigh
to God, and be unclean if you can. That faith which is uniting to Christ, is a
purifying faith; rebellion against the Commandments of God, is inconsistent
with communion with God; you may fast, and pray, and ask, that you may consume
upon your lusts, Verse. 4. like a Cut purse in a Church, who comes not thither
to seek God, but his prey.

I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord,
Psalm. 26. 6. Where you may observe, that thanksgivings and praises, which the
Psalmist calls sacrifices of shouting, or loud music, Psalm. 27. 6. and wherein
(...) Lorinus in Psalm. 26. 6.
they used (as one says) choros agere circum altar; are to be performed with
washen hands: so in your prayers, the Lord requires that you should lift up
pure hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and what a sweet reflection may you make upon your
deliverances which are wonderful, when you can say, I was upright with God,
and I kept my self from mine iniquity? Therefore has the Lord recompensed me
according to my righteousness, according to the cleannes of my hands in his
eyesight, Psalm. 18. 23, 24. If ye fall into straits, and be plunged into
depths of misery; If your face be foul with weeping, and on your eyelids be
the shadow of death; what a lifting up of the head will it be unto you, to be
able to say, Not for any injustice in my hands? Job 16. 17. If the Lord shall
deliver this Island from the oppression and injustice under which it has
groaned; what a crown and comfort will it be to you, that it is delivered by
the pureness of your hands? Job 22. 30. To conclude. If there be a frustration
of our counsels, and our endeavors bring forth nothing but wind; You shall find
the reason why God makes all void and ineffectuall, Isa. 59. 6. Their webs
shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their
works; Their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their
hands.

That nothing may be lost, let us pick up the particulars that are offered unto
us in this point.

1 That God invites (...) great sinners to draw nigh to him, and promises to
draw nigh to them, O ye sinners, no such strangers to God, but they may come
into favor, intimacy, and communion with him; Great sinners are oftentimes
made great Saints: God engraves his image in untoward wood, that the
churlishness of the matter may the more commend the workman; he calls them to
him, being yet overwhelmed with sin, and in their drawing nigh to him they are
cleansed; as Christ sent the Lepers to the Priest, but (...), as they were going
they were cleansed, Luke 17. 14.

2 He bids these sinners cleanse and purify, their hands and hearts? but how
can corruption cleanse it self? can unsavory salt season it self? No. God
purifieth the heart by faith, Acts 15. 9. and every man that has this hope,
purifieth himself, 1 John 3. 3. Christ is he that comes by water and blood, 1
John 5. 6. that is, by all manner of purifying, typified by legal
purifications. This is (says a learned man) one of the mysteries of this Law
(of purifying) that a clean person was himself made unclean, by touching the
holy water, Ainsworth in Numb. 19.
or sprinkling it upon the unclean: and this is the great mystery of the
Gospel, that he whose blood cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. and in whom
being a clean person is no sin, should yet be made sin for us, and for our
clensing. And as an unclean person is said to purify himself, Numb. 19. 12,
and 20. because that (though there was a peculiar water for that purpose, and
that also to be sprinkled on him by another) it was his duty to come unto that
purifying water, and make use of it: so are you to purify your hearts, and
cleanse your hands, by coming unto that blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12. 22, 24.
Faith will bring you to this purifying blood: one touch of CHRIST by faith,
draws virtue out of him, which will dry up your running issues. Humillation,
though it do not properly cleanse your hands, yet it plucks off the gloves, and
makes them bare for washing: and godly sorrow with its seven daughters as they
are expressed, 2 Cor. 7. 11. are clensing things. This is the way of your
clensing and purifying, this is your duty, and this through grace is your
ability; for the regerate being principled, does act; being purified, does
purify himself; and being kept by the power of God, does also keep himself, as
it is said, 1 John 5. 18.

3 Sinners are to cleanse their hands: but what are those sins? they are
generally those outward sins, or ways of wickedness wherein men use to walk,
and which do denominate a man (...) a sinner of deeper dye; but in special we
find some more eminently called sins of the hands, as oppression and violence,
Jonah 3. 8. blood, Isa. 1. 15. bribes, Isa. 33. 15. injustice, Job 16. 17. as
there are also eye-sins, ear-sins, tongue-sins, etc.

4 Why is clensing the hands set before purifying of the heart? for the rule
is, make the tree good, and his fruit good: in vain, do we go about to sweeten
the stream when the fountain still sends forth bitter water: To this I answer,
that though it be but a sollicitous trifling to vex every prius and posterius,
which we meet with in Scripture, and is but a curiosity to take pains to say
nothing, lest we might seem to leave any thing unsaid, yet there may some
account be given of this transposition: as 1 The Scripture sometimes puts that
first, which is visibly first, the sign before the cause, as when it is said,
Calling and Election. 2 Because conviction begins at some grosser sin, there
the conscience begins to take fire: and God who has the ordering of sin, makes
some great sin very serviceable and useful, to be, as it were, an entering
wedge to break the knotty heart all to pieces. 3 Because grace having once got
footing in the heart, presently enters the field against this kind of sins, as
having greater guilt, and by their bulk making the greatest interception of the
light of Gods countenance, and more inconsistent with a state of salvation,
then those rebelling and molesting corruptions which are within.

That they who draw nigh to God, must cleanse their hands. I shall offer only
this. That these sins of our hands, do keep us at distance from God, and God
at distance from us; your iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you, Isa. 59. 2. This is the worst effect
and fruit of sin; that it is privative of our union with, and fruition of God:
Depart from me, is as terrible a word as everlasting fire; It is (...). Jude
13. the blackness of darkness, the lustings of corruption which are in the
regenerate, are (as I may call them) transparent sins, they obstruct not our
communion with God; like the motes which are infinite, but hinder not the Suns
bright beams from us; but these hand-sins or wickedness of life, are opacous,
and put us into the shade, by their interposition between God and us, and
doubtless while we are in love with sin God is as unpleasing to us as we are
unpleasing to him, nor would we any more draw nigh to him then he to us. Give
me leave thus to convey the notion that I have upon this point, Commerce is
one thing, Communion is another: As a man will have commerce or trade with an
enemy, a stranger, any body, to trade with him for profit, and to gain some
commodity which he has in his hands; but Communion, which is in way of love,
friendship or acquaintance, he cares not for, nor would by any means admit of;
so a man, whose hands and life are full of sin, and his heart full of enmity to
God, may yet have some co^merce with God in duties or ordinances, to serve his
turn upon God, uti Deo ut fruatur mundo, and to make use of him for his own
ends; as it is said, Verse. 4. You ask, that you may consume upon your lusts;
but communion in way of league and friendship with God, and fruition of him in
way of special love and favor, he neither can have, nor will, except he
also give a bill of Divorce to his best beloved lusts.

I come now to make application of this Point to you, and the Use is in the
Text, Cleanse your hands, ye sinners. It Is unacceptable work to be set upon, for
a sinner to cleanse and purify, and to cleanse his hands too, which are full of
profitable sins, Turn ye enery one from your evil way, and from the violence
that is in your hands, Jonah 3. 8. It is a wonder that the Ship wherein we
are, so laden with sins of all ranks and subordinations of men, King, Princes,
Judges Lawyers, Gentry, Ministers, people (especially in such grown Seas as we
have been in) should live to this day; for you know we entered into this
wilderness, wherein we yet wander, with our former Egypt-sins upon our backs,
and we alas did not first make even before we went upon a new score; we fast,
we pray, we Covenant, and yet we are as double minded, as foul handed as
before; ungodliness, unrighteousness, self-seekings, hypocrisy,
religiousnesse for our ends abound amongst us, and contempt of the Ministry
more then ever, so that preaching of the word by the Ministers of this Kingdom,
which for soundness, spiritualnesse and success, has not been (I was going
to say) paralelled, (I may truly say) excelled in any part of the World, is by
very many now judged to have been a Monopoly, and fit among other Monopolies
to go down and to be made a common trade. Not many years ago, when it was
both danger and disgrace to hold forth the profession of the Name of Christ in
truth, what appetite had Christians to the sincere doctrine of Christ, and of
regeneration and mortification of sin? How did they in their private meetings,
lay siege to the throne of grace with united strength, and antidote themselves
against the infectious air of those times? whose eyes were thought too dear
for those faithful messengers of God at whose feet they sat? what contending
was there for the faith once delivered to the Saints? what burning love had
they each to other? what onenes of heart and mind? Now alas, some of those good
ears of corn are mildewd, and many run all up into straw, and do not ear so
well; Religion vapors it self out into notions and disputes of no value,
breaks into parties, and is broken in pieces by mutual animosities; Ammianus
Marcell. lib. 21 de Constantio. Grotius de veritate, lib. 1. in initio.
so it is observed, that that sincere and true godliness, which flourisht and
was warm in Christians under the persecuting Emperors, post Constantinum
caepit refrigescere, after Constantine, when it was both safe and honorable, it
began to cool, and to break out into ambition, pride, contention, etc. If you
will not own your sins, we that are Ministers must cry aloud, Isa. 58. 1. Cry
aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins: and observe, I pray you, to
whom the Prophet is commanded to cry aloud, namely, to such as sought the Lord
daily, and delighted to know his ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and
forsook not the Ordinance of their God; such as did ask of God the Ordinances
of justice, and took delight in approaching to God, that fasted and afflicted
their souls, Verse 2, 3. such as made religious duties the panders to their
lusts, and the covert of their injustice and oppression, hiding their filthy
sores under a velvet Plaster; Sin lies fast asleep and most secure in such
men, the form of religion is a Buff-coat to their sins; and therefore cry
aloud, and cry impartially against the sins of all sorts of men, so, as not to
lick the sores of great ones, and byte the sores of poor ones, for that is
rather to upbraid men with their poverty, then reprove them for their sins. You
know that Physicians, Chyrurgians (and so Ministers) are sometimes allowed to
be cruel; and the truth is, I fear we have lapt up the pills of reproof in so
much pap and sugar, that by allaying the bitterness we have frustrated the
operation. Oh that you were all of you too generous to be flatterd, and that
you would search out particularly your own personal and bosom sins, swearing,
drunkenness, whoredom, injustice, oppression: for whiles we speak generals,
no man thinks that the Cock crows to him, and so goes not forth to weep
bitterly; upon a general Indictment of a man to be a Felon or Thief, there can
be no proceeding to sentence, except the fact in particular be expressed; so
while you say only a general, We are sinners, and do not arraigne your selves
upon particulars, saying, This is my int^^ity, you can never judge and condemn
your selves as you ought. So much for the general.

as you are single persons, search your selves, consider your ways; Is there
any thing in your hands to be cleansed? You are to purge the corrupt leaven out
of your own houses, your selves, your families, your places of office and
trust are the proper sphere of your activity; you are for Ecclesiastical
reformation, and the sweeping out of corruptions out of the house of God: but
are you as intent upon personal reformation of your own ways? do your own
houses lie clean? have you real principles of godliness in your own hearts?
or are you carried merely by the Parliamentary genius or stream, by a rapt
motion? In one word are you not afraid of holiness? These are things sadly to be
considered. For ca^ you think that in good earnest one Blackmore should go
about to wash another? would you not say, Why does not he first make himself
white, that the other may thereby be persuaded he can make him so too? If any
of you should lie in known fins or lusts, can you comfortably,
conscientiously, and zealously contribute to the reformation of others? you may
indeed do that which is right in the sight of God, but where is your comfort,
if it be not done with a perfect heart? He must needs be afraid to hedge in
the Sacrament, and to make it inaccessible to the scandalous and profane, or
to settlea saithfull and searching Ministry in the place he lives in, that
knows he shall but thereby make a rod for himself. I beseech you therefore to
search your selves, that you may not be Carpenters to build an Ark for others,
and your selves be lost. It is a great honor to be a Member of this
Parliament, but it is as great a burden too, as ever Englishmen underwent: and
I shall crave leave to tell you further, that you may become the greatest
sinners in the world by it, for now the sins of the Kingdom may become yours;
the heresies, blasphemies, and crying wickednesses of oppression and injustice
may become yours; they are other men's sins by commission; they are your other
men's sins by your omission of that opportunity, and duty of your place to
provide for remedies preventive and removent of them, so far as they may come
within your knowledge, and the reach of your power. That which Scripture calls
partaking in other men's sins, adds more guilt to men of all sorts, especially
Ministers and Magistrates, then is generally thought of. Take heed of making
your selves partakers of those sins and abominations, which you hate the
thought of: and the Lord keep alive your zeal by this quickening consideration.

2 So much being spoken to any of you respectively, as single Members: Give me
leave to address my self in a word or two, to you the Honorable, and for
ever to be renowned Body. Is there any thing in your hands, the clensing away
whereof may cause you to draw nigher to God, or God to draw nearer to you? you
have had a miraculous hand with you this last year; and there is with you as a
token of Gods drawing nigh to you, such a chain of successes and victories;
consisting of so many links, without any flaw or breaking off between them, as
very few people have to show in the World again; I beseech you watch the door
against the entrance of that which usually attends either great parts, or great
benefits received, and that is pride: as we easilyer take cold when we are
warm: so its natural to man to be puffed up with success. I shall offer to you
this humbling consideration; when Israel was in the act of leading two hundred
thousand of Judah in triumph, having gotten a mighty victory over them; there
was a Prophet that pressed upon the Conquerours a seasonable argument, that took
very much with them, and wrought them into a more equal temper, and it was
this, 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. but are there not with you, even with you, sins against
the Lord your God? So say I to you: are there not sins with you, even with you?
reflect upon, and examine your selves. There are very many hard cases in the
Kingdom. I am not so out of my self as to lay them at your door, as you are a
body, because indeed I cannot, (and yet if I could, I durst do it) but I most
humbly give caution to you, who are the shields, the healers. There are many
forlorn and desolate persons, that follow you with cries for the price of
their husbands and fathers lives or limbs. It is not charity, but justice to
refresh their bowels: many have given down their milk freely, and yet after all
have their breasts bitten until they bleed, by unlawful plundering, spoil and
violence: many instruments employed, are very sharp bitten and prey for
themselves. The intention of the Physician and of the Leech is not the same. He
intends to draw out the blood in due proportion, as his patient can bear: She
has no other gage of her sucking, then till she be full as she can hold. It
were justice to squeeze these Spunges that have sucked themselves full, and to
leave them as dry as they were at first. Let difference be made of men's faults
in their punishments: there is no reason, that Peter who denied his Master of
infirmity, and Judas that betrayed him deliberately, should be both in one
praedicament. Let not justice be biased by partiality. A Judge ought to look
with no other eye, but the eye of the Law, which looks at things, and is blind
to persons. Let justice be speeded, that (...), Arist. Ethic. lib. 5. c. 7.
expenses and attendance eat not out the principal in question, Amos 5. 24.
Let judgment run down like water, and righteousness like a mighty stream; and
above all, shake your hands from bribes: whether bribes by presents, or by
kindred, friendship, favor, one puts out the eye as well as another, and there
may be quid pro quo bribes, when a man will lend his vote to one, to have it
paid him again, in a cause when he will call for it, and opinion-bribes, (as I
may call them) when a man will endeavor to carry another through, because he is
of his opinion and judgment in other things; Oh let justice dwell in your
Tents, and in your hands. And if in this ataxie, or confusion of things it be
impossible to prevent, or remedy many miscarriages, as I think it is,
(considering that many who run in to the common scathe-fire, do not intend the
quenching of it, but the seeking of an opportunity, in that confusion, to rob
them that are in misery, and to fish for themselves) then my prayer shall be
that of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, The good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary.

And so I pass on to the second paricular in the Text, Purify your hearts, ye
double minded; whence I take up these two points.

1 Double minded men have corrupt hearts. 2 This double mindedness hinders
both our drawing nigh to God, and his drawing nigh to us.
purify your hearts, ye double minded. Doublemindednes is a division of heart
between God and some other preponderating lust, or selfinterest; and so where
there should be no division, but singleness and integrity, there is division;
For all the heart, all the mind, all the soul, and all the strength, is that
which God calls for. There are some that have no heart, they have no thoughts
of God, no relish of him, no byasse toward him; it was an ill omen in
sacrifices, quando cor defecisset, when there wanted a heart; there can be no
expectation of any return of heartles Prayer, heartles performance of duties;
and this is the common posture of spirit of the ignorant, and secure
worldlings. There are some that have double hearts, they pretend to have a
zeal of God, and they profess the Name of Christ, and hang out the Christian
colors: but through hypocrisy and partiality to their own ends, and
self-respects they halt between God and Baal, or endeavor to comply with two
masters, or they part friendship and love between God and the World, as Verse
4. Ye adulerers and adultresses, know ye not that the friendship of the World
is enmity with God? There are some that have one heart, and this is that which
God promises to his Covenant people, and wherein he delights, when the heart
is totum homogeneum, whole and undivided from him, then is it a perfect heart,
and of a happy temper or constitution, being of chaste love, affection and
faithfulness to God, not vitiated or deflowred by carnal copulation with other
base lusts or ends; do but observe our Savior in that saying of his, Matthew. 6.
22, 23. how he opposes unto a single eye, an evil one; If, says he, Thine
eye be single, and then when you would have expected that double should have
bin opposed to single, he says, But if thy eye be evil, thereby signifying,
that if it be not fingle, it is naught and evil; and whereas one might think,
that a double eye has more light then a single: our Savior tells us the plain
contrary, that a single eye makes the body full of light, but a double eye fills
it full of darkness; Its true, there is in a double minded man, some eye to God,
that is, so as to use his name to serve self ends, or to color and cover his
sinister ayms and intentions. As a harlot whose heart goes after unchaste loves,
will yet have a husband too, (that is) to color and hide her lewdness; such
are these which are double-hearted: they have a Sabbath for God, and six days
for their lusts: they retain to God, and wear his cloth, and sometimes wait and
attend, but they are their own men for the most part, and work for themselves;
Religion unto them is but the stalking horse, under the sides whereof they
creep, to get a shoot at their own game; how often does God in Scripture find
fault with this kind of Professors? When ye fasted, says he, Zech. 7. 5. did
ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? and again, when they howled upon their
beds, they have not cried unto me with their heart, they assemble themselves
for Corn and Wine, and they rebel against me, Hos. 7. 14. An Israelite that is
without guile, that has but one heart, is a rare man, and worthy of an Ecce.
Behold, indeed an Israelite.

In the opening of this point, I shall follow the thread of that explication of
this word ( double minded) which I gave in the beginning.

1 This double mindednes is an uncertainty of the heart with God, not fixed
upon a Center, but off and on, as times, occasions, and interests do lead on,
or draw off, so far you will go with God, as your way and his do fall out
to hold: together: and until you must pull down Jeroboams Calves, as well as
Ahabs Baal; and then you part with him when it comes to such a pinch; so also
in adversity or affliction, we make nautarum vota, Mariners vows (as they do
in a storm) and when we are on shore, and landed out of danger, we eat the
Covenant we made before, Psalm. 78. 24. etc. When he slew them, then they
sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God, and they remembered
that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless, they
did but flatter and lie unto him, for their heart was not right with him, nor
were they steadfast in his Covenant. If the heart was right with God, it would
be certain and steadfast with him. Constancy is but the daughter of
Synceritie. Its a hateful thing to set sail to every wind, and to change
color so often, being no faster tied to God in the tempest, then we can be
loosened in the calm; Be what you were in the storm: in your affliction you
will abide to be spurred without kicking, and are very tame under reproofs: but
when you are lifted up and are at short, then to put you in mind of your Vows
and Covenants in the day of your trouble, is as an unpleasing a thing, as to
put a Mariner at shore in mind of his Vows or promises made at Sea. Its no
great danger to reprove men sharply when they are low, any coward may strike a
man that is down, but (believe it) when men are aloft and high, and may more
safelyer he dealt withal by stroaking, then by the spur, then it is somewhat
to come nigh the heels of truth, for it may happily strike out his teeth.

2. This double mindedness is a division of the heart from God. 1. It is
divided between the promises of God, and the difficulties opposite, when a man
lays his dead body, and the dead womb of Sara in the skales, against the
promise of having Isaac, this is sense fighting against faith. 2. Between
conscience and lust, conscience dictates, lust byasses, the inferior appetite
mutinies against the superior light, and leads it captive, video melior a
prob^que, deteriora sequor. 3. Between Religion and policy: and then Religion
commonly goes by the worse, Jeroboam and the King of Israel, to comply with
their politic respects, set up, and continued a selfe-devised worship, 4.
Between God and the world, or God and our own ends, as they here in the Text:
when we make God a mere servant to our selves, and move upon a private center
of our own: the heart is cunning and subtle in squinting toward its own ends:
visibly we will be for God: under hand we seek ourselves: so the planets in
their daily motion from East to West, move as the fixed stars, but they have
another motion of their own, which is creepingly by stealth, and more
unperceiveable then the other.

Purify your hearts, ye double minded, cast out those dividing lusts,
policies, ends, which draw you away from God; and pluck off those false byasses
of self-interest, and self-seeking, which cause you to wheel off from the true
mark or scope of all your desires and endeavors: you will be found faulty, if
your hearts be divided, Hos. 10. 2. simplicity of heart is of great account
with God; there is asinina simplicitas, and columbina, the simplicity of the
ass, and of the dove; the former is a defect in the understanding, the later
is the grace of an honest heart; and this sure is that which is of esteem with
God. In matters of judgment and justice between man and man, you are to have
two eyes, to look both ways but as they that take aim shut one of their
eyes, lest the sight should be distracted; so in your aims and ends, your eye
is to be single, in intending God, and not self: let Christ increase, though
you decrease.

The greatest matter above-board, and which all men's expectations and mouths
are full of, is the settling of Religion and of the Church. Religion is, (
rerum-publicarum quoddam quasi coagulum) Cunaeus lib. 1. cap. 15.
that which caements Commonwealths together, though now it be made the ball of
contention, and the great divider of us into parties; we divide it, and are
divided, being far more then double minded there about. Oh that God was first
set into possession of his right, and that his Tabernacle was pitched, before
any of the lots, for our own liberties or interests were drawn. This was the
oath that David swore in his afflictions, Psalm. 132. 2, 3. He swear unto the
LOrd, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob. Surely I will not come unto the
Tabernacle of mine house, nor go up into my bed. I will not give sleep to my
eyes, or slumber to my eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob; and this is the first Article in our
Vow and Covenant. What the real impediments are, does not fall within my way:
but the self-interests are to be searched out. Not yet, say some, and their
reason is the same, with that of the common sort of people, against Enclosures
in former times: If every man's own should be enclosed, they should lose their
freedom of Common, and that liberty they usurped all the field over, or (as
others hope) that after we have turned round a while, we may happily return to
the same posture we were in before, and having lost our way in the mist, may
come back again to the same place whence we set out at first. If any, (say
others) let it be a George on horsback that stands at door with a wooden
dagger, but keeps no body from going in, the thief passes under his nose into
the house, as well as the true-man. Not this, say some of those that are toward
the law, for then happily many contentions might be quenched at the bottom of the
chimney before they flame out at the top: and such may be the want of grist, as
it may tend much to the hinderance of their Mill. Nothing that's one, say the
Libertines; for we have gone loose so long, that now we cannot go strait laced.
Its irksome to wild birds to be coopt up in a cage under Discipline.

Those that have been such Proficients, in the school of liberty in a few
years, as to commence Teachers and Preachers of the Word, or have grown to be
such illuminates, as they pretend, will no more re joyce in, or accept of a
Government which may degrade them (...) resolve them into the first matter o^
elements of their composition, then Soldiers of fortune (as they are called)
can rejoice in a Peace concluded and settled. There might be (...) such like end
and (...), which carry (...) with men, and are the causes of our division,
which would in great (...) quenched, if the game was played on all (...) of
heart: let (...) self-respects which die close (...) that we may find the head
of that Nilus which thus overflows the banks. That double mindednes which keeps
us at distance from God, does also keep us at distance from one another, and
therefore that we may be (...), Phil. 2. 2. of one accord, I do for my own part
conceive it much ^^^^^cing, that whatsoever touching (...) of the Church,
shall, pass your hands ^^ may but (...) thereof go forth into the world,
(...)ded with the reasons and grounds of it: for doubtless, the reason which
induced you to set the stamp of authority upon it, will a ^^le much (...) it
pass currently with others. You know, the Gorgons head which strock all men
dumb in former times. The Church, the Church, is not likely to have the same
operation now, in this seeing and searching age: though men will willingly be
subjects to your authority, yet also, as they are men, they will be slaves to
reason. There is in your hands already (Renowned and Honorable) something
which was printed by your appointment, for your satisfaction, in one main
proposition, which if it might see the public light, might give light to many
who are yet in a cloud or mist.

So much for this point. There is yet a second, arising from these words:
Purify your, hearts, ye double minded. And that is,

For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord, James
1. 7. would any of you settle an acquaintance or friendship with a known
Vertumnus, that will be a parasite at one time, and a Judas at another: God it
choice of his friends, he owns not such as serve their lusts, and are in heart
divided from him. I have no time left me for this point as neither for the
consideration of both parts of this Text in connection together: clean hands,
and pure hearts: nor lastly, for the consideration of them both, with reference
to our drawing nigh to God, and his drawing nigh to us; wherein I might have
shown you how communion with God, and the power of godliness are linked
together; Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: cleanse your hands,
ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded.

FINIS.
THE HEARSE OF THE Renowned, THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX and
Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine,
sometime Captain Lord General of the Armies raised for the defense of King
and Parliament.

As it was represented in a Sermon, preached in the Abbey Church at
Westminster, at the Magnificent Solemnity of his Funeral, October. 22. 1646.

By RICHARD VINES.

Eccles. 12. 5. Man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streets.

Published by Order of the House of Peers.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Abel Roper at the Sign of the Sun
against Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
I Have performed what service I am able to the memory of the renowned Lord,
deceased, And to the Commands of that Right Honorable and Noble Triumvirate
which gave being to this Sermon. And to your Lordships by whose Order I have
adventured upon this Publication: All men (except such whose either morosity or
malignity does account, vetera in laud, praesentia in fastidio) must
acknowledge the worth, the valor, the faithfulness which lie under the Robes
you wear, and that it is not a mere borrowed Opinion which makes you
Honorable, but the reflection or rebounding back of that upon you, which went
first out from you: But this Sermon will teach you, that Titles of Honor are
written in dust, and that Princes and great men must fall, their very Monuments
are mortal, and will in time be found as Archemedes his Tomb (by Cicero) in
vepretis, over-growne with Thorns and Briars; and that light of memory which
shines after your Sunset, is but like the Moon which wanes also by degrees: No
glory that is woven in the finest Tapestry of this world but will lose color,
decay, and perish, but saving grace and the knowledge of Jesus Christ is (...)
a possession for eternity, your zealous agency for the Church and State will
carry you as far toward Immortality as any other Chariot in this world. Its as
much as nothing when one can say no more of a man then is said of some great
ones, that they reigned and died. The Genesis 36. 33.
Lord give you hearts actuated with zeal for God, together with a right
temperament of counsels, knowing that you are over a people who (as Tacitus
says) nec tota^ servitutem pati possunt nec totam libertatem, and if your fall
do come before you see, or reap the fruit of your labors: The Lord make you
such as may take comfort with you, and leave Honor behind you, so prays

Your Lordships most humble and unworthy servant, in and for Jesus Christ,
RICHARD VINES.

Die Veneris 23. October. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this House gives thanks to
Master Vines for the great pains by him taken yesterday in the Sermon he
preached at the solemnization of the Funeral of the Earl of Essex, deceased:
And he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the same, which is not to be
Printed by any but by Authority under his own hand.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
I appoint Abel Roper to print this Sermon. Richard Vines.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Solemnization of the Funeral of the Right Honorable
ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, etc.
Right Honorable, etc.
AS that Lot sent forth to attach a particular man, Josh. 7. 16. did move
gradatim, and by steps, taking first the Tribe, then the Family, then the
House, and at last the Man; atter which manner of progression, though at fewer
steps, Jonathan was also taken, 1 Samuel 14. 42. So do the trackes or vestigia
appearing to your eye, lead you at two or three removes to the most sad
occasion of this extraordinary and magnificent solemnity. The Escocheons which
are the Index of the Family do speak first, and tell the name of that
honorable Family which this Lot has taken. And this sable field of men,
charged with a stately Hearse, honored with so great a confluence of names and
titles of honor granted either by the Sword or Gown, whether Honorable,
Worshipful, or Reverend; and that in this place, where the Dij majorum gentium
have their Shrines, where the Lions of England have usually put off their
exuvias, and where Majesty and highness have laid up what of Mortality they
had, does proclaim him to be some Prince, or great name of that Family, whom
the Lot has taken.

But then the Military Equipage, the mourning Drum, the broken Lance, the
insignia and Instruments of War reversed, and in a mournful posture; The
Truncheon in a dead hand, do speak the very man. It is Jonathan that is
taken. And shall Jonathan dye that has wrought so great salvation in Israel?
It is (alas) too late to say, shall Jonathan dye, This Jonathan cannot be
rescued by the love of Israel; therefore I must sadly lay the Scene in one that
is already 1 Samuel 14. 45.
fallen: for do not ye know that there is a Prince and a great man fallen this
day in Israel?

2 SAMUEL 3. 38. Know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this
day in Israel?
THIS Text presents you with the Hearse of Abner; a Prince and a great man
fallen in Israel: This day presents you with a parallel Hearse of a Prince, and
a great man fallen in England; both of them magnificently attended with the
drooping statelines of public and universal lamentation.

That I may set up some lights about the Hearse of Abner, you may please to call
to mind:

1. His Office. 2. His Project. 3. His Fall. 4. His Funeral.
1. His Office was Captain of the Host, or stylo novo, Lord General of the
Forces of Israel; it was not so much because he touched King Saul in blood,
being Cousin-Germane, as in respect of this high command, that he is called, A
Prince, and a great man.

2. His Project which he had upon the Anvile now at his death, was the
reducement of all Israel unto the Scepter of David; herein his Project
concurred with Gods; but took rise in him, from an ill or suspicious ground.
Ishbosheth does but question him for familiar usage of a Concubine of Saul's
(which if true, was in those times accounted a kind of Crimen Majestatis) and
this heats his blood, for great Instruments will not be are a check) and
thereupon his Stomach brings him off to David. God uses the sins and great
Spirits, or animosities, of great men (though they be not carried by
Conscience) to bring to birth his own purposes and promises made to his David's.

3. His Fall; which was by the hand of pretended revenge, but real emulation;
the spirit of Caesar and Pompey was in Joab, before it was in them: He could
not abide a corrivall or equal. Let great Commanders look to this; Ambition
is a Planet that must have a whole Orb to it self, and is impatient of
Consort.

4. His Funeral; and that was solemn and honorable in Hebron; now the royal
City, and formerly the Sepulchrall of Abraham, Isaac, etc. At which, David was
chief mourner, for he followed the Bed or Hearse, verse 31. and he was the
Orator that made the speech of Lamentation; as he had before done for Saul and
Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 19.

Now for the Hersebefore you, let us see how far it paralells with this in
the Text.

1. The Prince or great man fallen this day in England was Captain Lord
General of the Host of England. There is agreement in the Office and Title;
the Text could not be proper to any fallen under our Meridian unto this day:
but unto this new star created by the Parliament, and arising in this
Horizon, about July 1642. and now eclipsed or fallen.

2. His project is written in a copy fairer then the original, and goes far
beyond that of Abner. The reducement of divided Israel into one hive is
somewhat alike in both. But here is no effeminate spark that raises the spirit
of this great man into a flame; no such cause of his engagement, but the
defense of those pupil twins, the two bleeding sisters ready to dye in each
the others bosom, the liberty and property of the Subjects of England.

3. His fall is clear of the disaster in Abners story; he falls not by the
hand of some unworthy and villainous desertor of him, made bold by his
vanquishment or flight, as Pompey did; nor by the just fury of an oppressed
Senate as Caesar did; nor by the arts and stratagems of a treacherous death as
Abner did; The hand of Joab is not in all this; but by an Euthanasy (which
Augustus wished for) a fair death. He dyed in peace.

4. His Funeral for the state of it certainly overmatches the pattern. Here
are the two Houses of Parliament, the map of all England in two globes, pouring
out their sorrows, and paying their kisses of Honorable farewell to his
tutelar sword.

The Princes of the Land that quarter with him in in honor and in blood, do
quarter with his hearse this day in black and mourning.

The flower of the renowned City of London (far surpassing the meanness of
Abners Hebron) do traile their tears after his Hearse, and are come to put
upon him their civicam coronam, their civicall crown of Honor, propter
servatos cives for their saved Citizens.

The reverend Judges and the Worthies of that gown, do present the mourning
tears of the laws that pay this tribute for their freedom from all
Antinomian prerogative.

The honorable soldiery, those great names which while they wore his Orange
in the field, could have daunted death it self, do now in change of color
weep over him (and what marble weeps not in such change of weather?) David
that could take a lion by the beard, yet weeps at the Hearse of Abner.

The gown also has its rank with the sword in this great Army of mourners.
The Assembly of Divines whose prayers he sometimes valued and requested, need
not be distreined for their contributions of tears and grief, they must wrap
up in a cloth, and lay up behind the Ephod this Goliah'-conquering sword in
memory of a very cordial and noble Patron.

Lastly, what should I say of those stars that come not into any
constellation. I mean persons of quality not within the ranks, yet within the
line of this Lamentation, together with that infinite multitude of all sorts,
from Cedars to the hysop, that do not only come to fill their eyes, but to
empty them? I must conclude, to say as the crier of the Ludi saeculares at
Rome, (which were but once in a hundred years.) Come and see that which ye
never saw before, Plin. l. 7. c. 28.
nor shall ever see again.

If yet it be replied that Abners Funeral has one point or two of State above
us, David a mourner, David an orator. I say but this; The tears of David were
at this time in great part Compurgators of that suspicion which he might lie
under; of having a finger in that wherein Joab had his hand, which kind of
tears we have not, nor could wish to have, though David's; only in the orator,
David, that made the speech we are exceeded; and I am glad that such a State
as this is inferior and deficient in nothing, but that wherein my poor
service lies.

By this unparallelling parallel, you may easily see that my discourse will be
divided between two noble Generals: and first let us come to the Text, wherein
David speaks something of the dead, and some thing to the living.

Of the dead. That a Prince and great man is fallen this day in Israel.

To the living. Know ye not. It concerns you to Vatablus in Annot.
know, or I would have you take notice both of it, and that I am weak this
day, though anointed King, and that the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me,
so that I cannot execute justice at present upon the bloody hand that has
given us this stroke.

Concerning that which is spoken of the dead, therein you shall find the
reason or spring of the tears of this lamentation. A Prince and a great man
fallen, and fallen, this day in Israel. This day in- Israel has the Emphasis
in it. In this nick of time wherein Israel was upon the point of reducement by
the agency and useful contributions of this great man, who seemed to be the
only Pilot that could have put the ship into quiet harbor, or at least a very
great steers-man in the work. This day is he fallen, and so Israel, if not
more alienated by his fall, yet remains in distraction and unsettlement: and
this day wherein I cannot give them just reparation, if they should demand it
of me; if any shall deny that there is any accent or emphasis in the word this
day in Israel, do but borrow the reflection of light from the story, and that
will clear it.

I shall not crumble that I have to say into literal and syllabicall minutes,
least I be of their number: qui Gallius. Doct.
verborum minutijs rerum frangunt pondera, but will draw up the matter into
this theme or head;

The fall of a Prince and a great man in the time of his agency and usefulness
for the settlement of the distractions of Israel, is just reason of a sad and
solemn lamentation.

This point I will open by parts, and those words. Know ye not, shall bring up
the uses of it, in the rear.

1. The subject of this lamentation is a Prince and a great man.

Prince to our English ears, sounds the first masculine branch or surcle
shooting from the stem of Majesty. But the Scripture which speaks no Treason,
gives this title to Captains in War, and generally to men (...) in headship or
power, whether Military Judge. 4. 2. 2 King. 9. 5.
or Senatorian; yea, though a man be but the foreman of his rank.

Great man is a note of some singular eminency above the ordinary trees of the
wood, and is a title given 1 Samuel 25. 2.
even to a Nabal that has 3000. sheep and 1000. goats, which is the meanest
rank of greatness.

But where a great man is added to a Prince, it may well import as much as
magnificent, a man of powerful interest, great valor, honorable
achievements, noble activity in his place. Magnus is an addition or hatchment
by which Alexander, Pompey, Carolus, etc. have been surnamed, for their great
services or exploits. So that a man by his orb or place he is set in, is
Princeps: but by his influence and beams of worth, raying from him upon the
sublunary Commons, he is Magnus. It is an excellent conjunction, a Prince and
great man. According to style of honor with us, a man may be noble by birth,
descent, or blood. And though I be none of the new Switzers, that could wish
Princes Cantoned into the common level; yet I may put you in mind that
Antiquity of Race is but a Moss of time growing upon the back of worth or
virtue: And if a man carry not the primigeniall virtue with him, which first
made his race noble, he is but a flower by change of soil degenerated into a
weed, as having nothing in him but the wax or matter, without the form and
stamp of Nobleness. And you know also that Nobility is often times the
creature of a Prince his fancy; which when there is no intrinsecall worth to be
the supporter of it, is (as Cap. de Nobilitate.
Charron says) but Nobility by parchment. It Is a brave consociation, when the
goodness and activity that makes you great, is as high as the place which
makes you Princes: for if that crazy fancy take a man which possessed some great
ones; they would be called Gods, and personate an ostentation of greatness
above men; it may bewray pride and madness; but can never so far deceive the
sense of underlings, but that they will say as the Cobbler did to Caligula, in
that state and humor, that he was (...) a great. I cannot teach you to be
princes, Fortuitum est; but I can tell you how to be great men: not great in
the glass which Parasiticall flattery holds before you, but indeed; and that
is thus: Fill the sphere of your activity, the Church and State, the Town or
Country, with the powerful and benign influences that flow from intrinsecall
worth: make the times the better for you: Constrain by your example your
inferiors to know God, and reform their Families. Let not Profanesse hide it
self under the wing of your patronage, nor lessen it self by the greatness of
your examples. Impartial and speedy Justice, with sweet refreshing Mercy, will
make you great men in the Commonwealth; Zeal and Syncerity for God and his
House, will make you great men in the Church. He that will be a great man, must
draw his lines to the center of public good: private ends never make a great
man.

2. The subject of this Lamentation is, one Prince, one great man. Ye are
called (as some interpret the word,) the Corners of the people; the Shields,
the Gods, the Saviors, the Shepherds of the people, the Ministers of God for
Good, Benefactors, etc. Now the fall of one great Tree makes a great gappe in
the hedge; the Eclipse of one of the greater ruling Luminaries benights the
world. Our Lives, Liberties, etc. are all bound up in you: we poor men steal
into our Graves, with no greater noise than can be made by a branch of
Rosemary, or a black Riband: No body takes notice of the Gloeworme, that goes
out in the hedge bottom: No Comet or Prodigy, or Earthquake tolls us the
knell of our departure; but one of you is carried forth by the tears all
ISRAEL, provided that you be what your Names import, public men, common
Sanctuaries of the oppressed, Cities of Refuge, Altars of protection; for
otherwise you may be such as that your death would be more worth then your
lives, and then, though you may be able to put men into black, you cannot put
them into mourning: Your death cannot be worth a tear, when your lives are not
worth a prayer.

3. The subject of this Lamentation is, a Prince and A great man fallen. Death
is a fall from every thing but grace: some do fall from a higher Scaffold;
great men fall diverse stories, from Honor, Riches, Offices; others from the
surface of a level ground, having nothing to fall from but naked life. Saints
dye, the gods do fall: I need not stand to prove it, there is not one of you
great men, but shall be the proof of this point shortly. The Law of Death runs
thus: All Honors, Titles, etc. to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding:
and there is no Prerogative to check this Law. I will not garnish this
Deaths-head with fine fragments of Poetry, and such stuff: nor would I at all
set it before you as a standing dish, were I not surrounded with so great a
Corona of Princes and great men: and happily some of you may be of Lewis the
Eleventh his mind, that charged all about him that they should not name the
terrible word Death; which yet you must hear of; for it is the way of all the
earth; the house of all the living; your long home, or house of perpetuity: of
which its said, Job. 3. 14. 1 King. 2. 2.
Kings, Counselors, Princes, small and great, are Job 30. 23 Lucian necy
there; and there (...) are (...): their bones and skeletons have no
Inscription or Titles of Honor remaining on them.

The way to this house of all the living, is (as one says) sanguinea, or
lactea; the bloody or the milkie; that is, the common natural, or usual way.

The former is trodden by great men: the Prince in my Text was sent home this
way; and so was the first man in the world that dyed. The Sword hangs in a hair
over the heads of great ones, who are often cut off by the hand of emulation
and animosity. That Adrian the fourth. Acts and Monum.
slaughterhouse of Rome (where it has been practiced by the Popes themselves,
who (as one of them said) do rather succeed Romulus, making his way by blood,
then Peter) has sent out cruel. Emissaries to cut off famous men by a
meritorious knife. How happily may you the Worthies of our Israel call to mind
the goodness of that great God, who has bound the hands of such assassinating
blood-suckers from executing their fury upon you, all this while, that you by
renowned industry and zeal, have given provocations to Rome and Hell.

The Common way is trodden by you great ones too: for ye Gods do die, and ye
Princes shall fall like other men. If you run your Genealogies high enough, you
will find your selves but as other men, in the fretum or narrowsea of Mankind
that divided the two Ocean worlds, the Arc of Noah: and thence if ye hold your
way upward, you will be found the sons of Adamah, common dust: And you that are
the highest dust, raised up a puff of wind of Honor above other men, are
laid, like the small dust, with one drop of rain. There is a great Arbiter of
all things, that can thunder the proud Emperor under his bed, and write the
great King at three or four words into trembling: That can send Adrian the
4th. Acts and Monu^.
a Fly to fetch the Triple Crown before his Tribunal, and make a hair, or the
kernel of a Raisin, as mortal as Goliath his spear: That can unspeake the whole
world into nothing, and blow down a great bubble with an easy breath: That by
drawing one nail, can throw down the stateliest building, and undresse your
souls by unpinning one pin. If he take the Bridle off the head of that fire
that is in you, it presently burns you up, By a Fever. If he loose the water, it
drownes you, by a Dropsy. If he lay his hand upon your mouth, he takes away
the airy difference between sleep and death. He says to Moses, Go up and die:
and it follows after, Moses my servant is dead. Every man has a day 1 Samuel 28.
10.
which is called His day: and death never makes return. Non est inventus in
baliva nostra.

4. The subject of this Lamentation is a Prince and a great man fallen in the
time of his agency and usefulness for the settlement of the destractions of
Israel. It was a time that the promise of God to David was at the birth, and
the Midwifery of Abner was offered. Let Abner otherwise be what he will for a
man. God may use an Egyptian midwife to bring forth the child of an Israelite.
But this great man falls in the very nicke of time, before the good issue of
his designs. Let me point out this Observation to you:

Its not unusual, that great builders catch a fall when they are upon the
scaffold about their work.

Oh how it amazeth the faith of Gods people, when the star that led them out of
their own Country, goes out of sight before it have brought them to their
journeys end. That youngling world of Reformation in Luthers time, had a sore
temptation, when it must see the fall (as I may say) of the Electour of Saxony
and others that were pillars of hope. Moses must live no longer then to bring
Israel into the plains of Moab: himself is allowed but a prospect of that he
hoped to have enjoyed, and to have brought Israel into We are not without
presidents: our eyes have seen some of our greater lights eclipsed, pleno orb,
when they have been at their Full. The great God that hides his Counsels, knows
his Works from the beginning to the end, and he takes off such Instruments that
he may show that he does not need, is not tied to any tool: for he made the
great world without any. When he says Faciamus, he speaks to himself alone;
not to himself and man. Thus he makes way for some other Providence to come
upon the Stage, and brings about his Work by a more crooked Instrument, which
we imagined should be done by a strait one. So Israel is speedily reduced to
David, though Abner fall. Or he humbles his people just before his promises
take effect; and first strikes them dumb before he open their mouths in a
Benedicite; that the lowliness of his handmaidens may break forth into a
Magnificat: or the time is not yet come that Israel is to be brought out of
Egypt: and therefore though Moses begin to rescue the Israelite, and slay the
Egyptian, yet he must flee for it, and be hidden for Forty years. Or else he
pulls the stool of our confidence from under us, because we sit down upon it:
or else pulls up the ^luce of some judgments which have been hindr'd by some
Lot or great man, or whatsoever it be. We see that God writes the Names of our
best and greatest men in the shell, and takes them away by a kind of
Ostracisme. All the help, hope, and comfort is, that God has all instruments
eminently in himself, and can raise up a Joshua in steed of Moses. Wherefore
if his Disciples cannot cast out the evil Spirit, let us come to himself, and
make our selves as sure of his Word by faith, as he is sure of his word by
promise; for though Joseph die in Egypt, yet he lays his bones at stake, that
God will surely visit his Israel, Genesis vlt. ver. 25.

5. All this that has been said, a Prince, a great man fallen at such a time,
is just reason of sad and solemn lamentation; and therefore David and Israel
is in this mourning posture: such a man whose influence had a large
circumference or sphaere while he lived, is followed by an honor and sorrow of
the same compass when he dies: You Princes and great men, death will tell what
the world thought of you; while you live (it may be) Sycophants and flatterers
lay their eggs in your ears, and hatch monstrous opinions in you of your
greatness. Such Books usually build in the highest Trees and on the other
side, envy and detraction may breath upon the glass of your reputation, that
it shall not (while you live) report so clear an Image of you, but death will
make thorow-lights in you; that you shall be seen on both sides; sorrows will
not, cannot be tongue-tyed; you will then begin to reap your due. Then the
world breaks out into these expressions; He was a brave man, He was a great
Courtier, that could not be curbed with a white staff, to be of counsel to
subvert the freedoms of his Country; He was a Captain that could draw a line,
but not to the ignoble center of his private ends; He was a Justice that would
scatter the drunkards from their Ale-bench, and did not understand the language
of a bottle or a basket; He was a Nehemiah, whose kindnesses were great which
he showed to the house of God, and the Offices thereof; He was a Minister that
could not only thunder in his Doctrine, but lighten in his Life; He was a
Papinian (a great Lawyer) but he would not defend Imperial and arbitrary
exorbitances, though he dyed for it; He was a man that appeared and stood for
the truth, and for God in the worst times, when the Summer birds were hidden in
their hollow Trees; He was a man firm and fixed, and studied not the neutral
art of putting off the cap to one, and making a leg to another. And is not this
a brave Echo, are not such men worthy of the Honorable tears of Israel? or
else Israel has reason to mourn for the senselessness and stupidity of their
own hearts. And for the State and honor of mourning, it is an ancient
solemnity credited by time, and great examples, yea, and almost the common
sense of mankind. For both Egyptians and Israelites concur in weeping for
Jacob, whose Exequies were performed in great Equipage when he was cared out of
Egypt; and not to instance in more examples, its said of Hezehiah, that all
Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, did him honor 2 Chronicles. 32, 33.
at his death, and laid him up in the highest Cell of the Sepulchers of David's
sons, such is the convictive Majesty of goodness, that this idolatroushearted
people follow their great Reformer to his grave with honor. De purgat. lib. 1.
c. 3.


In vain does Bellarmine go about to prove out of these solemnities, that
they are done ad juvandas animas. We find no Law of sacrifices for the dead,
these expressions are but civil indexes of honorable sorrows, a debt owing
to Worthies while they lived, and the remainder paid at their death: Like the
after-beames of the Sun, which follow him to his bed; and we were unworthy
heirs of their famous acts, if out of their own goods we could not allow them
answerable interrment; and if any Cynicke in his morosity shall say, that it
matters not, humine an in sublimi putrescat, Let him enjoy a Philosophical
rotting in what ditch he please; we know, there is the burial of an Ass; the
graves of the common people, which is something above that 2 Chronicles. 21. 20.
and higher yet, there is a burial in the City of David, but not in the
Sepulchers of the Kings, and amongst the Sepulchers of the Kings, There are
lower and higher Cells. Honor will follow after worth and merit even into its
grave. We do not lay up the carcass of every Cole-ship with that respect as
that of Drakes was; though confessedly the one must rot, as well as the other.

So much for the opening of the point; Now I come to the words, Do you not
know, by their hand to serve in the uses of this point.

1. Know ye not, You Princes and great men that ye must fall. 2. Know ye not,
You lower Shrubs, that these Cedars must fall.
For you that are Princes and great men, I may say of you as X^rxes weeping,
said of his vast Army, within these few lusters of years, there shall not be
one of you standing, but all fallen, and let me set this deathshead before you:
For I have no other dish, nor am I likely ever to entertain such a Table-full
of so great guests while I live again; let it therefore,

First, Humble you, and give me leave to follow the chariot of your greatness,
with (...), remember that you must fall. Greatness has need of some
correctives. You are such Pictures, that if one stand of the one side of you,
You are Gods; but if he look upon you on the other side, You are men, and must
dye like men: this takes you one step lower; nay, we may go lower yet; For man
being in honor without understanding, is like the beasts that perish. We are
all proud; pride is the shirt of the soul, which it puts off last when it
shifts: And every rising ground of authority or power, makes us rise in
thoughts. The very bramble, if it get a snatch of authority, will be talking of
his shadow. Oh that you had the meeknes of that Moses, whose face did shine,
but he knew not that (I speak this by allusion) the skin of his face did
shine. I would that but every tenth thought of your rising, was accompanied
with one thought of your falling: And yet you have more reason to have death in
your eyes then other men, because the Venice Glasses, and China metal of your
fine and tender bodies, will not abide so great a stroke as other earthen pots
of courser metal; I will not offer to you those complements with death,
whereof we read good store, in use among great men; as the boy that cried,
Memento te mortalem; or that, of presenting several sorts of Marble to the
Emperor upon his Coronation day, that he might then choose which he would have
for his Tomb, etc. But let me press the sense of your falling condition to
humble you. I do not mean by humility a moral familiarity or courtesy
toward those of lower rank, which yet is a graceful condescency of
Greatness: But I mean, a stooping to the reproves of the Word of God,
brought unto you by the Ministers thereof, who are but earthen vessels like
your selves: Submit your cheek to reproofs, for your own sins, and of your
Families. Let not your iniquities take sanctuary in your greatness; Frown not
your Chaplains into a mealmouth'd baseness, so that they dare no more make a
dark or oblique reflection upon your darling sins, then take a Bear by the
tooth. If you will bleed out your ill blood, you must pull off your Velvet
sleeve, and let the arm be bare to the point of the knife: Keep no State
against God, though he speak thunder and lightning by the mouth of dust like
your selves. A man never makes worse use of his greatness, then by it to cast
a muzzle over the mouth of sound and searching reproves. And it is a just
judgment of God upon such men, that they should have Prophets, that will say to
Ahab, Go up and prosper.

Secondly, Quicken you to activity in your places while you live, that you may
serve your generation according to the will of God before you dye, and see
corruption; otherwise, you are but blind lights in golden Candlesticks: You are
in great debt, both to the Church and Commonwealth, they have trusted you with
all they have, and your bond is good; but yet be not offended, if they call
hard upon you to pay your debts, for you are mortal men, and we know not what
Heirs or Executors you may leave behind you. The Creditor is oftentimes broken
in the Debtors death; Get death into your minds, and it will put life into your
actions; what you found made of poor Brick, leave in stately Marble, and be
not like many, who while they are rising, appear very active and stirring men;
but when they are up do freeze into a benumbed slownesse, like Bells that
strike thick when they are rising, and afterward when they are at full pitch,
are set; put your selves on with this spur, I must shortly dye: How should I
live fruitfully? The night will come, how should I labor while it is day? I
wish well to things that are good: but ( Been cogitare est been somniare) a
good thinker is but a good dreamer; nothing more sads and duls the heart when
one comes to dye, than his neglect of such opportunities which Gods providence,
or his own place have put into his hand of receiving and doing good. Nor is
there a sharper corrosive, than the reflection upon those days and times that
have passed over him, Male, aliud, nihil, agentem. The highest hills are the
barrennest ground, and I would that saying did not so truly square to great
Ones (that is) that the goodliest Trees, as Cedars, etc. do either bear none,
or the worst Fruit. Great parts and abilities without exercise and putting
forth are but secret and unknown Mines of Silver and Gold, which lie hid in an
unfruitful and unprofitable soil. And therefore, you the great and Noble
Worthies, in whose hands are the Public Faith, the Public Mercy, the Public
Justice, and the Public Peace; be good, and (let your goodness make you) quick
dispensers of what you have in Stewardship, because the time is short, and the
word read rationem may be given suddenly, look upon us as mortal men, who
shall not live long to receive, and upon your selves, who shall not live long
to give the fruits of your hands. And because the Occasion invites me, let me
propound an object to your charitable justice, that is, the relief of those
great sufferers who have bin great doers, I mean the first adventurers with
this great Commander, when he first cut through the Alps. As for the great and
doubtful matters that are under your hand, I would not be thought so rash, as
to wish you to precipitate: A Pilot among shelves and rocks may be too quick; A
Cunctator sometime saved the Commonwealth; only thus I may pray, that when the
Haven lies fair before you, and is without bar, you may fortiter occupare,
set in stiffly, lest new waves, raised by cross winds, carry you back into the
Main again.

3. Arm you against your fall, that the day thereof may be to you (as the
Passion-day of the Martyrs was called) the birthday of Eternity. Nequaquam
morte mortemini, was the inlet of our sin and misery, and keeps the door open
to sin still; The Epicure has his Armor against death: a senseless
consideration of it, as of a nothing, or a not being. The great Spirit has his
Armor too; A contempt of death out of principles of Valor and Honor; but
neither of these Armours can keep the arrow from the quick; There is a
terrible clause in the Statute of dying, And after that the judgment. Nor yet
will I go about to arm you with this meditation, that we shall have a shorter
journey from death to life again, than we had from not being, unto life, or
that which is cited by Gerard out of Luther, that all the time that has run,
or shall run out from the beginning, to the end, shall seem to Adam when he
rises again, but tanquam somnus unius horae, as the sleep of the body for one
hour; But if you will break the fall, which else will break you, then you
Gods must become Saints (for all Gods are not Saints) the death of Saints is
more precious then the death of Gods; Grace is special bail against death,
there is no gall and vinegar in it to be drunk by them, for whom Christ has
already drunk it: Death (says the Apostle) is yours, because contributory and
subservient to your happiness; That life which is hid with Christ in God, is out
of the reach of death, our Savior proves Abraham to be living, because God had
long after his death, said, I am the God of Abraham. Those that are confederate
with God in Covenant, must always live, that the Covenant may not be dissolved
by the death of the one party. There is a way then to break the teeth of death,
and to be immortal: Have God for your God; labor to have something in you
that is immortal besides your very souls; lay up for your selves a treasure
beyond the sea of death, that when this membrana dignitatis (as Seneca calls it)
a thin skin of honor breaks, you may not be quite bankrupts; enrich your souls
with the power of godliness, which is profitable to all things. The place of
Princes, the magnificence and great works of great men; The faith and godliness
of poor men do make a rare composition. Do not in stead of disarming death,
arm it rather against you, by putting a sword into the hand of it. The more
service that you may do by the advantage of ground you stand upon, the heavyer
will your accounts be, if your greatness be made a Stage and Theater for to act
the parts of luxury, lasciviousnes, oppression upon. What difference is there
between such gods, and those in Homer, of whose drunkenness and adulteries
there is frequent mention; let me speak one word to you, young Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, Learn you the way of godliness, that may free you from the
looseness and vanity incident to greatness; for when you have given florem
Diabolo, the flower of your time to lusts of youth; your fall may come before
you can so much as give faecem Deo, the dregs thereof to God.

I conclude this point with that which one observes upon Gods seeing all the
works that he had made, that they were very good, for then immediately (says
he) followed the Sabbath, or rest of God, which (though our salvation be not of
works) may signify thus much to you, that when you shall come to a retrospect
upon your ways and works, and find them so empty of, and contrary unto God,
there can be no expectation of a Sabbath or rest unto your souls; and
therefore, wash ye, make ye clean, etc. Isa. 1. 16, 17.

The second, Know ye not, is spoken to you, the lower shrubs. You are to know
that your great men may fall in the very time of their usefulness and service
for your good. In their loss, bewail your sins: for though you feel not the
stroke while the wound is fresh and green, yet afterward you will find the
want of such as are worthy instruments, when we expect they should do great
things; God by taking them away, interrupts the cast. Put not therefore your
trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation; for his
breath goes forth, and in that very day his thoughts perish, Ps. 146. 3, 4.
even his projects and intentions for your good, dye in the womb, and are
abortive. If we lean hard upon the reed, it breaks the sooner, and we are
laid flat on the ground. God will not let his people enjoy that long, which
they prize too much, some worm shall smite that gourd, and it shall wither;
and though many great men are not likely to be blasted by the confidence of the
people, yet our sad experience teaches us, that we smell too much to our
sweetest flowers, and so wither them.

I Shall now come to the parallel Hearse of that Prince and great man fallen
this day in England, of whom, though modesty it self may without blushing
speak in a magnificent style, yet have my thoughts waved me too and fro, it not
being easy to be moderatour of the Arguments that are for speech; or silence.
Not because the matter will surpass the work-manship, and the copiousnesse of
the subject shame, the penury of my expression; but because on the one hand it
is argued, that Funeral Encomiastickes of the dead, are very often confections
of poison to the living; for many, whose lives speak nothing for them, will
draw the example into consequence, and be thereby led into hope, that they may
press a hackny Funeral Sermon to carry them to Heaven when they dye;
especially, if such for whom no file could be rough enough while they lived, be
smooth-filed when they are dead: on the other hand it may be said, That though
common graves have no inscription, yet Marble Tombs are nor without some
Epitaph. Heroical examples should not go with a common pass, but with a
Trompet. David afforded this Honorary to Saul and Abner, and (which is to be
observed) he drew not any line in their pictures with a black coal, which yet
he might have done, for both of them had too much shadow if he would have used
it; but he dealt with them as the Painter did with Antigonus, who had but one
eye, he drew his Picture, imagine lusca halfe-faced, and so buried the
deformity out of the beholders sight.

Neither is this all, which makes me stand in a slippery place, but the various
senses and censures too, which are very likely to be found in this great
multitude: Some that hated the sound of his Drums and Trumpets, will not
patiently endure the Echo resounding to their disaffected ears. And some
again are indifferently content to hear some good words of his Epitaph,
because it begins with Hic jacet, here he lies; as Caracalla said to them that
desired, that some honors might be spent upon his Brother Geta, now dead out
of his way: Sit divus (says he) modo non sit vivus, honor him as you will, so
as he does not live. The most voices will doubtless vote, that it is needless
to set up a Candle to the Sun, for his story is yet alive in all men's
memories, and the stage whereon he acted it, is yet warm. The truth is, I had
rather leave him to the history, which I hope the honorable Houses have
bespoken, and to that Homer that shall be the praco of this Achilles. But
because his name would sometime have passed me clear through all Guards, and
probably has not as yet lost that virtue; and that this State and presence
speaks him with more eloquence, then I, so that I can but run the hazard of
being an imperfect interpreter by word, of that honor, which your selves do
speak by signs. And since death has put him beyond pride, all beyond envy,
and my self beyond flattery, what if we make a short Index of his Story, and
audit his d^bentur in the mean time, not drawing him in full proportion, but as
Ezekiel pourtrayed the City of Jerusalem upon a Tile, which will indeed be more
suitable to the posture we are in; for deep sorrows make no long orations,
Leves loquuntur curae, ingentes stupent.

Since then it must be so, jacta est alea; I shall impose upon my self this
law, not to build his Monument of common stones, nor trouble my self and you,
to gather such flowers to cast upon his grave, as grow in common fields, nor
descend or stoop to any thing which is beneath Heroical.

His Nobility and his Nobleness, though they might each of them adorn his
Monument, yet the third, which is his Excellency, is the transcendent.

For his Nobility; He was sprung of an exceeding fair, an ancient Stem, which
does branch forth into the great and Noble Families of the Princes and great
men of England, and he was the third of this Title which was inoculate into
that Stem, by Q. Elizabeth of famous memory, But Titles of Honor must dye as
well as men; and because this renowned stream carries it is name no further, I
shall omit all matter of Heraldry, as not becoming me at this time and place.

His Nobleness was of a high and honorable elevation; He was a man of fixed
principles, and of a masculine resolution, of an inviting familiarity in a
stately presence; too generous to be cruel, too great a Patriot to be Courted;
his compass without trepidation or variation, had constantly stood right to
that Pole; the good of his Country, which he kept in his eye, both when he wore
the Gown, and Sword: He was fide Romana and Anti-Romana, of Roman
faithfulness, and of Anti-Roman faith: A Senator that honored his Robes. The
tears of England, of his servants, of his tenants, do speak him in a better
language then the most eloquent Marble is able: Though tenants tears be no
commendation to a living landlord, yet are they credit to the dead.

The Character of his Excellency, may be that which David sometime gave to
Abner, the great man in my Text; Art not thou a valiant man, and who is like
thee in all Israel? When the time was come that Ianus Temple must be opened
here in England, by the Porter that only has the key of it, Necessity, and
those orphane sisters (before spoken of) Liberty and Property were to choose
their Guardian, Champion and Vindex; you the Honorable Trustees, looked out
for a Dictator, in whose hands you might deposite, the very being, safety,
freedom, lives, Senatus populique Romani, of the Parliament and people of
England, and happily pitched your eye and choice upon this man, who was stirpe
and ingenio bellicosus, One that had honor to give credit to the Cause he
undertook, reputation to vindicate his undertaking from contempt of enemies,
Interest, whose Drum could press an Army; dexterity to manage the Sword,
Counsel to direct it, Valor to use it, and faithfulness to discharge it. And
he was the man you then resolved to live and dye with. It was the greatest
honor in the world, to be credited with the infinite depositum of the life and
being of the Parliament of England. And at this time, when you had assigned
this Theater to act his part upon, it was the highest honor to him, that he
would undertake to Pilot a Ship so laden with so great a fraught, through the
tempestuous and angry Seas which then began to swell and be intractable, when
this poor Kingdom, knew not for the most part, how to wear Buffe and Steel,
until taught by him; in whom that ancient Chivalry and Valor of England
(which had left it is Monuments in France and other parts of the world, but of
later times almost emasculate and grown obsolet) was concentered, and by
transmigration had laid it self up in him: He was the man that was to break
the ice, and set his first footing in the Red Sea; a Hercules, but not in
bivio; a man resolved, when others hung in suspense; fixed, when some stars of
greatest magnitude were moved with trepidation, or erratick. That filled the
breach, when many lay post principa, and behind the hedge. No Proclamation of
Treason could cry him down, nor threatening Standard daunt him: That in that
misty morning, when men knew not each the other, whether friend or foe, by his
arising dispel'd the fogge, and by his very name, commanded thousands into your
service. Such as were for Reformation, and groaned under pressures in Religion,
he took by the hand, and they him: Such as were Patriots, and would stand up
for common Liberties, he took by the hand, and they him, and so became the
bond or knot of both, as the Axletree of the world upon which both the Poles
do move: And this must be his honor alone for ever; for though Joshua also
do admirably when he comes to it, yet it is Moses that first leads forth
Israel by their Armies.

Thus he entered, and for his deportment upon the Stage, and the experience he
gave of himself, who knows not it? Such was his personal valor, as if
nothing but steel had gone to his composition. The instances are famous; In
that great battle at Edgehill, where this Kingdom had her first Crisis upon
a Sabbath day, (our wars have now fulfilled above half a week of years) when
he had lost a wing yet he flew about, Et nullo discrimine, notam, dux an miles
erat; He showed his Army there what a man they had adventured with, in their
first Voyage; No, I prae sequar, Captain, but one whose Valor gave the word
sequimini me, with whose steel (its no disparagement to say, that) his for
ever famous Chieftaines sharpened their edge, and so that hill was made a
standing Trophee, your enemies (Right Honorable) from that day begun to take
you for a Parliament.

I must leave to the large Map of his Story, those many memorables and
victories, which bear his name; for even great places do not always find any
room in a little Map, and shall instance him but in one other particular, that
famous expedition to Gloucester, when we were at a very low water, and this
Eagle had then also moulted his feathers, and having imped themwith renowned
Londoners, did fight the greatest part of that long march thither, where the
then Governor whom I may (borrowing Cicero his word) call hujus Regni Stator,
the Stator of the Kingdom of England, (because he took the enemy his horse by
the bridle in his full career, and stopped him, and being resolved to sell that
City to them by the candle) was rescued before the candle dropped, by this noble
Champion, who retreating from that Tropic, fought his way back again through
hunger and hardship and because this Retreat should not be like an empty field
without some charge, He scattered that great Army near Newbery, and to you this
renowned City, reddidit Legiones, restored your valiant Legions, and restored
England to it self; An unparalleled Expedition.

His Faithfulness was like Touch or Marble without any streaming flaw, no
Honors, Offices, or whatsoever bears the name of greatness could bribe it.
The two Indies would have bin as dirt: He knew the Pole he must sail by, and
steered not by a mercenary Compass. He had espoused the Senate and Liberties
of England, and was resolved, aut liberare fidem, aut solvere animam.

His ends, so far as one may learn the mark by the Archers eye, were not
private interests, respects, or parties, to be served upon the ashes of public
ruins. Talk of gold to soldiers of fortune, He was Themistocles. A right line
drawn from the Center you set him, would have cut the center of his aims and
ends. Had you fallen upon such a Merchant as would have been eccentricke to you,
and have cauponated the war to raise his private interest, or have put in the
great fraught he was trusted with, and consigned the Cargazone, to some Royal
Port, oh, what a Ferall Table of Proscriptions, (like that of Syllae's) might
have bin set up amongst us; and your lives have bin bargained for, and sold as
that Triumvirate did the lives of the Senators of Rome.

His Counsel and wisdom was such as argued him to be a man that knew
conduct, He had a fine finger to find out, and skillful to untie or cut the
knot, In foresight of danger his eyes were open; but when he came to execute
his Councels, his eyes were shut against all impressions of fear and terror.

His love and respect to the Soldiery, such as became a brave Christian. He
would not Turkishly fill ditches, or stop Canon with them. His hand of relief
was not shut or short to rescued prisoners. He affourded honorable respect to
naked and wounded valor. His countenance paid and armed his soldiers, when
sometimes they wanted both: and no wonder if his School bred such a gallant
Infantry which had such a Master, and such an Usher.

In sum. This Camillus was a second Romulus. His Monument needs no
inscription, for his Epitaph is written in the hearts of men. Nothing but
ESSEX, the Great, the Valiant, the Faithful, the Parliaments Essex; the Essex
of England, and the Tutelar thereof: who added to his Noble Coronet all the
Military Crowns, saving that which is called Navall, or the Sea-Crowne, which
is due to another most Noble Worthy, more faithful than the Element he was
then the Master of.

For his death, the Forlorn hope it sent out before it, was but slightly, the
Physicians thought him bailable, but death lay in ambuscado in a full body, and
suddenly surprised him with a dying sleep, and now we are erecting of his
Monument, one of the seven wonders of the World was a Tomb. And if the Noble
and Famous men who fought under his Banner, shall please to be set in for his
supporters, it will be such a Squadron-Monument as will have no Brother in
England, until the time do come (and I wish it may be long first) that the
most renowned and excellent Champion that now governes the sword of England,
must now lay his bones by him, and then there will be the Alpha and Omega of
such a Story as shall render God fearful in praises, doing wonders by the
first hand of him that led us through the untrodden paths of the wilderness,
and by the second hand of him that has made Victory (which Homer calls (...),
a Jack on both sides) to change its name; who if he shall have but one stone
out of each City or strong Hold taken by his Arms, to make his Tomb, it will
be such a Monument that every stone of it will speak a History, and some a
Miracle: Or if that cannot be, it will be enough that he lay his head upon an
immortal Turff taken out of Naseby field: God thought Moses, or rather made
him the fittest man to begin, and lead Israel forth, and he honored Joshua with
the completing of the work, neither does Joshua eclipse the worth of Moses,
nor he the worth of Joshua; and so craving pardon of my boldness with your
patience, I have endeavored to speak wthout reflections upon any, nor did I
mean to tread on the foot or toe of any man, thereby to raise my speech the
higher, as knowing that this Prince and great man needed not to pull down the
stones of any other man's Monument to build his, who had enough in his own
Quarry, as being (nex^ ^he Honorable Parliament) that first man from whom we
pass to our posterity the conveyancies of our liberty and safety. Et nati
natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis. I have no more but this; He lived a good
General, He dyed a General good; and therefore a lamentation to all Israel,
and so I leave him in his Bed of Honor, and draw the Curtains, and put out the
lights.

Only a word at parting, and first my Lords to you, we may know how great the
Tree that is fallen, was, by the vacuity or void place it leaves behind it. We
look upon you as them that will endeavor to prevent the vacuum by acting from
that noble principle which moves to the universal and common good; the loss
we have sustained is great, though he never had wore Buff but only Parliament
Robes, and they say that when a limb or part of a man is cut off, anima
retrahitur, the soul is retracted. I wish the Philosophy may be verefied in
the retraction of his reality and faithfulness unto you; that so he may
remain among you in quintessence and virtue, being as it were divided among
you, as they say of Romulus, that he was discerpt by the Senate, when he dyed,
and every Senator got a piece of him. Let nothing that was exemplary in him be
put in his grave, that neither we nor our posterity may have cause to write
upon his Statue, as they did upon that of Brutus, utinam viveres.

As for his Military worth; If any shall apply themselves to copy it out, or
some young Noble Spark shall please to go to School to his Monument, their
lesson is, Disce Miles militare, Galbaest. Here they shall be taught how to
excel, side and armis, How to have mettell in their Coat, as well as Color;
How to carry themselves so, as they may legere exercitum, non emere, win an
Army and not press, silence mutinies, or persuade the soldiery with one lord
Quirites, and in a word how to be an Essex, not a Caesar, who converted his
Arms against the Senate, and therefore has a blot in his Copy to this day.

I must conclude with you the most Honorable Senate of England; It would be
too much presumption in me to thank you for this Honor of your presence and
sorrows; Its a great thing to be made immortal by an immortal Parliament:
All the Honor which belongs to your servants and instruments, redounds to you;
what they get or receive is but handed by them to you the owners; should we
write down but fifty to them, when there is a hundred due, the loss would be
yours. It was a stately deportment to entertain the news of this great
Champion and Senator his death, as the old Romans used to entertain sad
tidings, mutatis vestibus, and to honor your sorrow with an adjournment: This
is the way to breed more Essex's: Its Honor that breeds a soldier; Take
honor out of his eye, and you cut off the spurs from his heels. My wishes
are, first, that you may never have occasion to create any more then you have
done by the name of Excellency: secondly, that if you must, there may be such
men, with whom in safety you may lay up your lives, and thirdly, that you may
have the happiness to pitch upon them.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE Authors, Nature, and Danger OF HAERESIE.

Laid open in a Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons at
Margarets Westminster, upon Wednesday the Tenth of March 1646. being set apart
as a solemn day of Public Humiliation to seek Gods assistance for the
suppressing and preventing of the growth and spreading of Errors, Heresies,
and Blasphemies.

By RICHARD VINES.

(...) Hesych.

There must also be Haeresies. 1 Cor. 11. 19.

Vt fides habendo tentationem, haberet probationem. Tertull. de praescript.

Printed by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Abel Roper, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Sun over against Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
THe Compass of the subject entreated upon in this Sermon was too large to be
surveied in a short time. The nature of Haeresy lies under much obscurity and
inevidence. The Infidel who comes not in at all, And the Apostate who goes out
at all are visible enough to the eye, but the Haereticke who like a cunning
Bankerupt breaks with some stock in his hand, and holds' some planks of truth
when the ship is broken, is more hardly to be known. I have not spoken much
about the punishment of an Haereticke, but rather chose to show you who he is
then what to do with him. There are good rules for the Church her proceeding
against such men, which may also serve very fitly to the meridian of your
jurisdiction, as namely, in peccatis evidentiam, in paenis aedificationem; and
again, nec cito in apertis, nec unquam in ambiguis, with many other, which lay
on the other side of the hedge from my way which was toward the investigation
of the nature of Haeresie, wherein I hope that what I have offered shall be
interpreted with candor, for it was not my meaning to speak thunder and
lightning, but to speak to the enlightening of the minds of the auditory, and
not to the burning of Haereticks bodies; if any man please to compare my
language with that style wherein the holy scripture speaks of false teachers
and their corrupting men's minds, I doubt not but that I shall be found not
guilty of railing, whereof I have already been indicted in print, but I must
make amends for a long Sermon with a short Epistle; and therefore in a word, Be
quick (Noble Gentlemen) in settling the interest of Christ in this Kingdom. God
has paid you well aforehand, if that do not set an edge upon you, yet be
confident that he has somewhat behind remaining yet in his hand, which he
will not part with until he see your work for him in some forwardness, and
the longer the yarne hangs in the loome, the more it is ravelled, you have
been told that you have nothing to do in the reformation of the Church, give
not the world occasion to suspect that you think so too, but go on with God,
and prosper, and the Lord make your way plain before your face,

So prays Your most humble servant in Christ Jesus RICHARD VINES.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS at Margarets
Westminster, on the tenth of March 1646. being a day of public Humiliation
for the growth of Errors, Heresies, etc.
2. PETER 2. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.
BY a Declaration set forth above Thirty His Majesty's declaration in the cause
of C^nradus Vorstius Printed in English. Anno 1612.
years ago, King James (of Famous memory) was pleased to let the world know not
only how ill he resented, and how much he detested the Vorstian and Arminian
Doctrines, then newly borne, and in their swadling-cloathes: but also how
solicitously he interposed with the States General of the United Provinces
against their admittance of Vi^^i^s into the place of Divinity professor at
Leiden, or into their country; And that he might decline the envy of being in
aliena republica curiosus, he bears himself upon that common rule paries eum
pr^^^^ius ^rdet, when a neighbors house is on fire it concerns all in the
neighborhood to look about them, this vigilance condem^ our (I know not what
to call it, I wish no worse might be said then) insensiblenesse and security.
For what were those sparks at that time smoking in a remote corner in
comparison of that fire which now flames forth at every corner of our house,
blown up by that (...) or liberty of all religions, which may be justly called
the golden Calfe of these times, Where unto many are not unwilling to
contribute their strength and policy, and whose birthday they would not fear
to call festum Jehovae an acceptable day unto the Lord. Are not the errors
which are rife amongst us, either by infecting persons of place and quality
grown into that boldness? or by carrying away Barnabas also crept into that
credit? or by spreading far and wide risen to that strength? that they do
face, if not seem able to put into danger of rowting, our common faith, public
worship, authorized ministry, long and much expected and promised reformation.
This to the common enemy is the Cape of good hope, the sound part are afraid
least the truth should come to beg for poor quarter, and be led Captive
following the Chariot of triumphant liberty, some think that episcopacy in his
pontificalibus may by this means be retrived, and recalled from exile to which
it was sentenced by the Covenant, many that are as distant in their opinions as
the two poles, yet moveing upon one axletree, or tied together by the tails of
Common interest, Doubt not but by laying their stocks together, they shall be
able to bid fair for a Toleration. And that we might not be left alone to
wonder at our selves, our sympathizing brethren abroad do wonder also, That we
should be made the common sewreto receive the garbage of other Churches, and
that their stinking snuffes should be allowed candlesticks here in England.

In this sad posture of things, All men's eyes have been upon the Parliament,
and every one says Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there?
why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? And the
truth is neither your diversion by sudden and difficult emergents, nor wisdom
in not disobliging any party, has been able to satisfy the godly jealousies
of many, until they espied this day break of hope given to them by your
declaration, in which you take notice of a doublebond or obligation that lies
upon you.

1. The first is the bond of your solemn Covenant: It will do very much good
abroad when men shall see that you feel the obligation of that Covenant which
some do widen into such a latitude of sense and consequently into such a
looseness, that they may be easily said to keep that which hardly any man can
break; This additionall fast is an additionall bond also. For it cannot be
(without further peril to you) both a fast and a loose too.

2. The second is the bond of Gods mercies, miracles rather, in bringing you
clear out of the fiery furnace and therefore less you cannot do than
Nebuchadnezzar, who being convinced, and astonished by the miraculous
deliverance of the three servants of the Lord, made a decree that none should
speak any (...) In paraphr. Josephi. (...) inepti quid.
error against the God of Shadrach Meshach and Abednego, because there is no
other God that can deliver after this sort. Dan. 3. 29. I crave leave for this
prefaceing, It is only to bid this day welcome, because as it is the first that
ever was in England upon this sad occasion, so it is a new and strong
engagement and demonstration of your zeal and resolution to endeavor, to
draine these fens which have so over spread the face of Gods Church.

The Apostle in the latter end of the foregoing chapter recommends to
Christians the holy Scriptures as the fixed pole and un-varying compass by
which they should steer their course, It seems he knew nothing of any such
high form of Christians in the School of Christ which should (as I may say)
be got above the Scriptures or have learned beyond them. For he commends them
who had obtained like precious faith with himself and others of highest rank.
2 Pet. 1. 1. for giving heed to the word of prophecy verse. 19. and as appears
by that expression ver. 20. (...), knowing this first, He would have it said
down as a principle, and set as a strong fort against the battery of all false
teachers That no prophecy of Scripture is of any private sense or (...) is the
unfolding or clearing of things dark and doubtful, Mar. 4. 34 (...) Act^ 19.
39. (...).
interpretation. because it came not by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were carried by the holy Ghost. The settling of this principle,
and the fastening of Christians, or as it were nailing them unto the Scriptures;
the words of the holy Prophets and Apostles, is the scope at which the Apostle
collimes in this Epistle, as himself declares, Chap. 3. verse. 1, 2. and 17.
And that it might appear to them how necessary and seasonable it was to stir
them up to adhere to the sure word of God, and the true and genuine sense
thereof, He foretells the coming in of False teachers and Scoffers, False
teachers that would overthrow the truth of doctrine, which is according to
godliness, by bringing in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, chap. 2. ver. 1. Scoffers that would undermine and elude the truth of
Gods promises. There shall come in the last days Scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming, Chap. 3. verse. 3,
4. And because the Scriptures themselves were not likely to escape the (...)
Hesych.
rack, the Apostle gives a double character of such as would crooken it, or
make it look (...), Sylburg.
a squint, and they are the unlearned and unstable, and so concludes with
caution to all Christians, that they should beware, lest they being carried
away together, by the seducement of wicked men, or ((...)) lawless Libertines
of opinion and practice, fall from their own steadfastness, Chap. 3. verse. 16,
17.

In this Chapter the Apostle foretells the coming of false teachers into the
Gospel Churches, and describes their doctrines, their destruction, their
manners.

The doctrines which they teach are damnable heresies, they deny the Lord that
bought them.

Their destruction is exemplified and paralleld in three terrible examples, the
casting down of the Angels that fell, the destruction of the old world, the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha. It may make the ears of all haeresie-Masters
and their followers to tingle when they hear that the three great and famous
monuments of Gods sore wrath executed by his own immediate hand are brought in
as examples of his vengeance against that wickedness which above all other
pretends exemption and liberty from the stroke of men.

Their manners (in the description of which the greatest part of this Chapter
is taken up) are drawn out in so foul colors, that every man may make the
observation, That monstrous doctrines are accompanied with monstrious lusts.

In this verse you have the seedes-men, and they are false teachers; the seed
they sow, namely damnable heresies. The crop they shall reap, and that is swift
destruction.

In the first part which shows us the seeds-men, there are two points to be
taken up.

1. That there shall be false teachers in the Gospel Churches, as there were
false Prophets in the Church of old.

2. That these false teachers are they that bring in damnable heresies.

one and ask, are you a false teacher? and there will not be found any; the
confident false prophet puts it upon the true Prophet that He is the false.
Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee? 1 Kings 22.
24. which is the false prophet we shall see anon, in the mean time thus far
we are agreed, that there were such then, and that there shall be such amongst
Christians under the Gospel, though they that are guilty are wiser than to
make such a description of a false teacher, or of haeresy which may hit
themselves: but rather will use their slight to turn the Scripture, as one
does a right hand glove to fit the other hand.

False Prophets and false teachers are paralleld, both in their being in the
Church, and in their character or description.

1. In their Being in the Church, for

1. As God then sent Prophets to teach his people, Jer. 7. 25. Since the day
that your Fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day, I have
sent you all my servants the Prophets, and there were then false prophets also
says my Text. So God has set in his Church under the Gospel Teachers, 1 Cor.
12. 28. and there shall be also false teachers; then they wore a rough garment
to deceive, and now Zech. 13. 4. Matthew. 7. 15.
they come in sheeps clothing. The Apostle in this Text determines not the
false Prophets then to a particular place or time, but says they were among
the people; nor does he determine false teachers now to any one place or time,
but speaks indefinitely, they shall be amongst you. There is no age of the
Church free of them: only the last days are most likely to have most of these
dregs; and whereas its said of all true Prophets, that they were sent, and of
Pastors and Teachers, that God has set them in, and Christ has given them to
his Church; there is no more said of these in the Text than (...). They were,
and they shall be: they may easily find a Prophecy for their being in the
Church, but will hardly find a Scripture-warrant or calling.

2. As the Church of old, notwithstanding those living oracles of truth, the
holy men of God who spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and the lively
oracles of holy Scripture committed to it, had false Prophets also, who spoke
their own dreams: so the Gospel Churches even in the Apostles times, 1 John
4. 1. and notwithstanding the fullness and perspicuity of Evangelicall doctrine
given by inspiration of God, shall have false teachers in them; Who shall come
up in Samuels mantle, and putting the Scriptures to the rack, shall (...) (as
one says of Philo) force things into allegories and conceited extractions, and
make them like Anaxagoras his (...) drawing every thing out of any thing. For
an haereticall wit is a strange Chemist. The truth is, the resisters of the
truth, and the seducers in the old Testament are but acted over again in the
Gospel Churches. Here also are the resistings of Jannes and Jambres, by men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. Here are the
contradictions of Core, Jude. verse. 11. Here is the doctrine of Balaam, Rev. 2.
14. and here are the false teachers answering to the false Prophets, but yet it
is argued by some that the Analogy between the Old and New Testament, does not
hold in regard of the punishment of false Prophets and blasphemers, nor ought
to be drawn into consequence now. I would they would rather study to avoid the
same sins, then to evade the like punishments: for the greater liberty of
Conscience under the Gospel, cannot extenuate the sin of blasphemy, because
this liberty is accompanied with greater light.

2. In their Character or description. The Greek which has great felicity of
composition of words calls him in one word a false prophet, whom the Hebrew
calls a Prophet, and leaves him by spurious characters or properties to be
detected false or illegitimate.

A false prophet or a false teacher may be so denominated in a two fold respect.

1. As he teaches or vents lies and false-hood, which is the most usual and
common acceptance of the word. Ier. 14. 14. Esaias 9. 15. Ezec. 13. 2. etc.


2. As he teaches without a commission or calling.

1. In the first notion he is a false prophet that teaches lies, or delivers
forth the visions and deceit of his own heart, which he covers over with Thus
says the Lord Ezech. 13. 6. Ier. 28. 2. and so fathers his false dreams upon
God, and his chiefest aim and care is not to sting the people, but to feed his
deluded followers with pleasing things, and rather to tickle than to prick
them, Saying to Ahab, go up and prosper, 1 King. 22. 12. or God has broken the
yoke of Babylon, Jer. 28. 2. which was the advantage that Ahabs false prophets
had of Micajah, and Hananiah had of Jeremy, and this observation the Scripture
makes upon them, Thy prophets have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away
thy captivity. Lam. 2. 14. and they think to cause my people to forget my
name. Ier. 22. 27. Whence it is that they are applauded and that all men speak
well of them Luke 6 26. They are wiser then to mar their own markets by
sharp reproves, as a cutpurse is afraid to touch the quick with his knife
lest he loose his prey.

The character of false teachers is answerable, they are (...) Drus. praet. in
2 Pet. 2. 1.
Lying masters speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them. Acts. 20.
30. and speaking lies in hypocrisy, which they palliate over with It is
written, or the name of the spirit, and are therefore called spirits of error
1. Tim. 4. 1. as we are forbidden to believe every spirit. 1. John. 4. 1. that
is every doctrine though pretended to be from the spirit, for men are cunning
to lay down their bastards at an honest door, and to pin them upon the back
of scripture; being like to the false prophets in this mis-fathering of their
doctrines, as also in that other thing, which is the bayteing of their hooks
with sweet and pleasing baytes. (...) they allure as with a bait through the
lusts of the flesh and wantonness. 2. Pet. 2. 18. And they promise liberty
ver. 19. which are taking things, that it is no wonder there are many that
follow their pernicious ways. ver. 2.

2. In the second notion he is a false prophet who Jer. 14. 14. Ezech. 13. 6.
runs indeed but is not sent, I have not sent these prophets yet they ran Ier.
23. 22. They can say I have dreamed, I have dreamed, ver. 25. but they have no
mission, and such a one is to be counted a false prophet. Molin. Vates cap. 4.
Sive vera praedicet sive falsa whether he preach true or false; The character
of a false teacher is answerable hereunto, he is one that is (...), self
called, or fills his own hand, so that the question is not what he teaches but
by what warrant, as Cyprian Cyprian in Epistola ad Antonianum.
said once to one that was inquisitive what doctrine Novatian did teach, we
need not (says he) be careful or curious to know quid ille doceat cum foris
deat, the like may be justly said of false teachers. Its no asking what they
teach since they have no calling (...).
to teach, There are found in the new Testament, (I had almost said in England)
False Christ's, false Apostles, false Prophets, false teachers, all these ranks
are counterfeited, as he is called a false Christ, a false Apostle, who
pretends to be Christ or an Apostle and is not, so is he a false teacher who
pretends to be a teacher and is not sent. Nor is it any wonder that when once
men do begin to look for a new Christ, or new Apostles, or new Prophets, they
should in the next place fall to making of them, that so their seeking may not
seem frustrate, but because some are of opinion that preaching of the word is
not so much an act of office as of gifts, and that gifts and talents do carry
with them letters patents of commission to trade with them, I must crave leave
to bestow a few words upon it, because it has been generally received in the
Church that both matter and form, mission and vision, gifts and calling must
concur to the constitution of him who exercises a public ministry. For even
our Lord Jesus Christ in whom all fulness dwells: glorified not himself to
be made a high Priest, but was called of God as was Aaron. Heb. 5. 4. 5. and
the rule is there given, that no man takes (...) an honor or office to
himself, whatsoever be his parts or abilities, and the apostle says not how
should they (...), publicly preach the word, without gifts, and abilities?
but, except they be sent Romans 10. 15. It must not be denied, that every member
in the body has (...), his proper office, Romans 12. 4. 5. whereby it may
contribute to the good and edification of the whole. The word of God that
dwells in any, ought to diffuse it self for the benefit of others, in their
families, relations, and conversations. The talent which God has given to
every one is to be put forth to use, the Samaritan woman may call out her
neighbors to Christ, and the shepeards may spread abroad what they have heard
of him, though they be but shepherds and neither priests nor Levites, but
every starr in his own orb or Sphaere, Bellarm. de ecclesia militante.
diversa est ratio membri and instrumenti publici there is a difference
between a private member of the Church, and a public instrument. For all the
freemen of this City or corporation are not Aldermen, and the edification of
the body by ministry, and by membership are plainly distinguished, Ephesians. 4. ver
11. and 16. If every Phaeton that thinks himself able may drive the chariot
of the sun no wonder if the world be set on fire, I should not doubt to say,
that as in some cases Omnis homo miles against a sudden assaulter or invader,
every man is a soldier, so, as the case may be, omnis Christianus Evangelista
every Christian is an Evangelist, as Edesius and Frumentius published the
Gospel to the Indies, and the woman to the Iberians, as the Ecclesiastical
story Socrates lib. 1. chap. 15. 16. Theod r. lib. 1 chap. 23.
reports, And it is said Acts. 8. 4. those that were dispersed by the
persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, went every where preaching the
word, They disseminated the knowledge of Christ, to the ignorant Jews and
Hellenists. Acts. 11. 20. the circumstance defends the action, if it could be
proved that these dispersed Christians were private men and that they preached
the word in Jerusalem which Mornay du plessis of the Church, chapter 11.
was a constituted Church, before they were scattered thence, it would be some
thing to the purpose, The noble Mornay puts another case, that if the
sentinells be in a dead sleep any common soldier or man, may give the alarm
to the City, as when the dogs do not bark the geese do save the capitol, and
yet it remains good, that there is an office, in the hands whereof Christ has
lodged the stewardship of the mysteries of God, the word and sacraments, for
teaching and baptizing are both put into the same hand; It is not a man's able
parts which make him the steward of any of your houses, but your committing the
keys into his hand. Nor abilities, but commission, which makes an Ambassador,
what if a Gibeonite or any other man was able, and had the skill to dress a
sacrifice, and perform all the outward work thereabout as well as any Priest,
Must he therefore take upon him to usurp the Priests Office? I think none
will say it, No constituted Church either under the Law or Gospel can be denied
to have had Officer's appointed for the work of the Ministry and dispensation
of the holy things of God; As concerning the Church under the Law who can doubt
of it? And for the Churches under the Gospel that they should be constituted
and founded by Christ and the Apostles who were sent, (for its said John 20.
21.) As my Father has sent me, so send I you) and then that all sending should
determine and cease, as if Christ had given Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
but no Pastors, and Teachers, can enter into no man's head, till sense and
reason be first gone out of it; what else should be the meaning of those
words, (...)
Elders, Rulers, Bishops, Pastors, Governors, which are contradistinguisht to
the Community of the Church. As the Elders and whole Church Acts 15. Rulers and
Saints, Heb. 13. verse 24. Angels and Churches, Revel. 1. 20. and the one sort
are said to Rule and govern. The other enjoined to submit and obey them, Heb.
13. 17. for so doubtless Christ has formed this house of his, as other houses
are; This City as other cities, this body or commonwealth as other societies.
That is, to consist of such as govern and such as are Governed: for otherwise
it would be more like a Cyclops den then an ordered family, If any shall say
that (...) and (...) do signify nothing but one that carries the lantern of
doctrine, or goes before others by good example, let him say also that a Master
or a father of a family does (...), 1. Tim. 3. 4. 5. give but a good example,
to his house, as a very servant may do, or that Joseph was set (...). Acts. 7.
10. a good example to Egypt, and no more, The word (...), to preach is in the
new testament most usually and for the most part appropriated to preaching by
office and authority, and when the Apostle says 1. Tim. 2. 12. I permit not a
woman to teach (...) nor to exercise authority (as the word f Docere est actus
potestatis. Calvin in locum.
signifies) it is plainly signified that to teach in the Church is an act of
authority; those then to whom the Apostle commended the oversight of the Church
at his farewell. Acts. 20. 28. to whom Peter wrote and charged them with the
flock 1. Pet. 5. 1. whom the golden Candlesticks had for their Angels, and
upon whom that comfortable promise is entaild, I will be with you always unto
the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. are men in office, not indeed called unto
Lordship and dominion, but to a ministry and stewardship which is to be
regulated by that most excellent rule and to that only end For your
edification and not for your destruction 2. Cor. 10. 8.

But this office is undermined and pulled down by piece-meale, stone by stone,
as if a man should say this stone is not essential to the house, nor this nor
that, and so pull all down at last. This is a stratagem of the Socinian art;
It is said that imposition of hands in ordination is but a ceremony, or
formality, and in it self a cyphar; and being so why may it not be laid aside
as well as that ceremony of laying the Bible on the head, which is spoken of in
the Council. Carthagin 4. c. 2.
counsel of Carthage? concerning imposition of hands in the general this I
say that it is not a thing to be slighted as an outward rite incongruous to the
spiritualnesse of the Gospel for it is one of those which the Apostle calls the
doctrine of the beginning of Christ and the foundation, Heb. 6. 1. 2. and for
the particular place it has in ordination, let it first be settled and agreed
that the ministry being an office or calling has some way of entrance into it
appointed by him that has appointed the office, and that there is a separation
of men thereunto, or manner of their constitution and ordination, that is, a
potestative mission as some express it: and then the modus is to be inquired
into as touching which, it is argued that ordination by imposition of hands as
contradistinguisht from the election of the people is not essential to the
manner of entrance. Essential is a great word. Baptism and the Lords supper
are not essential to the being of a Christian or to salvation; so as the
privation of them should damn the soul, and yet are of excellent use and
clear institution. It may suffice, that there is so much in the word for
ordination as that the way of the word in that case is neither to be laid aside
nor receded from, nor maimed. The engine planted for battery and overthrow of
ordination is the election of the people that is the idipsum wherein the
separation of a man to the ministry does consist, and yet we read of a
separation unto God for the work of the ministry by fasting, prayer, and
imposition of hands, without any election of people, Act. 13. 1. 2. I am of
Lib. de repeccl. 2. cap. 2. parag. 12.
Spalato his mind that this was not a separation to an office which Paul and
Barnabas before had not, but that it was a separation unto God ((...)) for the
work of the Ministry, is clear enough, and what was that work, but the
preaching of the word and ordaining of elders. Acts. 14. 23. 24. 25. 26. If any
man can show throughout the New Testament that any did impose hands for
separation of men to the office or work of the ministry but only such as were
in office themselves, Apostles, Evangelists, Eldership, and these Teachers and
Prophets at Antioch, or that the election of the people is the id ipsum of
separation, let it be done, or let us have less dictating and less begging,
for by the way let me tell you, we live in the beggarliest age that ever was,
I mean for begging of the question.

And if the mere election of the people be sufficient, what need was there
that the Apostle should leave Titus in Crete, for this cause, that he might
ordain Elders in every City, Titus 1. 5. For if it be said that (...), that
thou might ordain, be no more then that thou might look on while the
people did it, Then why may not Pharaoh (of whom it is said (...), he
constituted Joseph Governor over Egypt) be said to look on only, while the
people did it. And what need was there that Paul and Barnabas should be
separated and sent forth to ordain Elders in every Church, Acts 14. 23. If the
Churches election had been the id ipsum of ordination; And why are the
characters and qualifications of Elders and Bishops given and described to
Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. Not so much to the people, by which they
should proceed in their elections, as to them who were appointed to ordain
them, that they might not lay on hands suddenly, 1 Timothy 5. 22. In which place
laying on of hands (as (...) with the Hebrews) is put for ordination, and so is
not election by the people any where found to be. As for Cases and instances of
a people cast up in some remote Island or the like: may not they choose a
Minister? and he perform the office without ordination? such cases may be
formed to overthrow any common rule or law of Ministry or Magistracy either.
It Is said that an Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis.
exception strengthens a rule, and overthrows it not, for then there could be
no rule of any thing, because every rule has some exception; set the
Heteroclites by themselves, and let the rule stand. If David eat the
Shewbread, or the Levites perform that office which belongs to the Priests (2 Chronicles. 29. 34. with Levit. 1. 6.) in case of necessity; there is no more can be
said but necessitas quod cogit, defendit, that which necessity commands, it
defends.

That the holy Ghost was given by the imposition of the Apostles hands; (I say
the Apostles) Act. 8. 18. is true: but no argument against laying on of hands
by the Eldership in ordination, for there were diverse reasons and occasions of
laying on of hands besides in ordination: and other hands were laid on in
ordination, than could give the holy Ghost. The Levites had imposition of hands
( Fagius in Chald. paraph. in locum.
tanquam in sacrificium, Numb. 8. 10, 11. as upon a sacrifice) dedicating them
to God and his service. And so in the New Testament, it was used for separation
of men to the work or office of the Ministry: but there is no miracle
wrought, nor is the holy Ghost given, nor any inward grace. The word (...)
grace seems somewhere to be put for office, as Romans 1. 5. See Romans 1. 5 and 15.
15, 16. Gal. 2. 9. Grotius, Beza, Dieu. (...).
Grace and Apostleship, that is, the grace of Apostleship, and in this sense
(as Beza says) if that (...) or grace be taken, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Then may it be
said to be given with imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. As for
election by the people, which is by some cried up as the All in All in this
point, though I have nothing to say against the lawfullnesse of it, where it is
duly conditioned: yet if any shall plead the necessity of it as essential to
the calling of a Minister, I should not stick to say, that there is clearer
evidence in Scripture for ordination of Ministers by imposition of hands, then
for election by the people. That word, (...), Acts 14. 23. out of which it is
expiscate, after a man has made the best of it, will leave him to beg the
question, for there appears in it no act of the Church at all: but whatsoever
it signifies, it refers wholly to Paul and Barnabas, who did (...) ordain
Elders for the Disciples, and therefore without endangering not only the sense,
but the grammar of the Scripture, can no more refer to the people, then
Diatrib p. 6. and page 10.
he that affirms that it may, can prove Luke to be an Apostle (as he styles
him.) I deny not that Cheirotonia in the (...) Zonar. in Can. 1.
original and first rise of the word signifies a giving vote or suffrage by
stretching forth the hand, or an election manifested by that sign, but the use
of words, not the Etymology must rule their interpretation; and it is past all
question that the Greek Heathen Authors do use this word (...) generally, to
(...) Hesych.
constitute, appoint, ordain, as is observed by Hesychius, as they do also So
also in Scripture, Acts 1. 26.
(...) to reckon or give sentence, though there be no use of counters or little
stones: and (...) to be chosen to a place, or to obtain a possession, though
there be no use of any Lot therein, accordingly to which a man may be said
pedibus ire in sententiam, though he have no feet to go upon: but because we
would not rest in generals, let us examine what was the act of Paul and Barnabas
in this place: for it is plain that they put forth some particular act, g
Ephesians. 1. 11.
when 'its said they ordained for them or unto them Elders, did they ordain by
imposition of hands? as the word (...) signifies in the Greek Fathers and
counsels who may be thought to understand the language) It is not unlikely
that those very men that had been sent forth upon this expedition by imposition
of hands, fasting and prayer should i^ the like manner ordain Elders, for so
the very tex^ in hand couples together, ordaining of Elders in every Church and
praying with fastings; or did they elect Elders for them? as Grotius in locum.
Grotius seems to interpret it, but those that contend for that sense of the
word, to signify election, will not easily digest the interpretation, and the
truth is, They that argue the peoples election of Ministers, from the election
of the seven, Acts. 6. which the Apostles permitted to the people there, cannot
easily grant that Paul and Barnabas did assume it to themselves here, because
it gives away the question, namely election by the people; or did Paul and
Barnabas join with the Disciples in election? If it had been said (...) it had
been something to the purpose, but it is not said they chose with them, but
they ordained for them Elders in every Church, And for that which Grotius
says, Credibile est etc. I'ts to be thought that the consent of the people
went along also, the reason that he gives, namely because in a lesser matter
their consent was sometime taken in, quite overthrowes that which is contended
for ex vi verbi out of the word (...), used in the text, and we know that where
the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren concurred in an act they are all named Acts.
15. 23. which as here it is not said so it cannot hence be proved; or in the
last place, if it be said that the word translated, ordain, signifies an
ordination upon a previous or antecedent election of the people, then 'its
clear that election does not thrust out ordination nor the act of the people
justle out the act of Paul and Barnabas, and so that engine works not by this
Text, which is so much clearer for ordination than election, as the act of Paul
and Barnabas is more express then that couchant act of the people, which is
pretended to lie hid in the same word: which if it be taken in one simple
sense, signifying either generally to constitute or ordain, and so relate to
the act of Paul and Barnabas, (without thrusting into the notion of the word
either imposition of hands (which may be made good elsewhere in Scripture to
have been used in ordination, or election by the people, which cannot be made
good elsewhere) or signifying election by suffrage, and so relate both to Paul
and Barnabas and the people, as if they all concurred in election or vote, and
that was all they did: both these significations the word will bear, though
not the Text: but if it carry twins in the belly of it, and import two diverse
acts different in kind, and so relate to some act of Paul and Barnabas,
differing from the act or suffrage of the people, then must that signification
be proved by good examples, lest it be found never to have been so used
before Luke used it so: but I hold my hand from further prosecution of this
Scripture, and offer to you one observation more, tending to clear the point
in hand, and that is out of Acts 6. where it is clear that there was an
election of the seven, and as clear, that the constitution or ordination of
them was reserved unto the Apostles, verse. 6. Look ye out seven men whom we
may appoint or constitute over this business; the people elected, the Apostles
ordained, verse. 3. and 5. But the election is not called the constitution or
ordination, for that the Apostles are said to do: and how did they do it?
verse. 6. when they had prayed they laid their hands on them, ordination by
imposition of hands was the constitutive act. The peoples (...) ver. 6. and the
Apostle (...) ver. 3. are not all one: that poor criticisme would never have
been borne, if the Diatrib. p. 10.
Author of it had but set the words together (...) the people set or presented
the elected before the Apostles, they did not ordain them before the Apostles,
but presented them to be constituted and ordained by them over that business
unto which they were chosen, verse. 3. There is not a more usual word in the
Arist. politic. passim. Acts 7. 10. 27. 35. Mat. 24. 47. and 25. 41. Lu. 12.
14. Acts 6. 3. Titus 1. 5. usually w^^^ ^he preposition (...), signifying the
place or the subject matter of their office and government.
greek tongue, to signify the making of a Governor, or settling one into an
office or praefecture then this word (...) which is also used for the
constitution of Elders and Church Officers in the new Testament, which we call
ordination.

If you please to consult the practice of antiquity in the point of election of
Bishops ab ordine and plebe (as they use to say) by the Church officers and
community, you shall find 1. That election was never set so high as to give
check to ordination, nor accounted that wherein the mission or sending did
consist: but as a preparative to ordination by way of good testimony of the
person to be ordained. 2. When you have searched all records (as Spalato derep.
eccles. lib. 3. cap. 3.
they are laid together by a very learned hand) the result and sum will be
this, that election had the force only of a nomination, presentation,
postulation, or consent, so as a Minister could not be obtruded invitae
ecclesiae upon a Church whether it would or no, if they were able to put in a
just exception against him, for which end the person to be ordained was first
to be proclaimed, or (as I may say) asked in (...), Council. Chalced. can. 6.
the Church, for the very reason of Cyprians Cyprian Ep. 68. Edit. Pam.
speech, that the people principally have power to choose the worthy, or refuse
the unworthy, is rendered in the same Epistle, that they do fully know the life
and conversation of every man. And therefore it is Diatrib. cap. 11.
injudiciously spoken that ordination necessarily follows election: for an
irrational or mere arbitrary dissent, when no just exception could be put in
bar against a man, could no more hinder a man's ordination, then such a
peevishness now adays can hinder the marriage of one whose name is published
in the congregation. Ab ordinatoribus plebs docenda non sequenda, says
Caelestinus.

The cloze of this point might well have been an Apology for speaking so much
of it in this place, had not the Text led me to say something, and the
necessity of the times, together with the present occasion constrained me to
this prolixity. For the office of the Ministry, and the power thereunto
belonging, are very much undervalued, and laid very low by many: who differing
among themselves in principles, do as in a common interest, join together to
cry down and degrade them, In order to a twofold liberty. The one is the
liberty of prophesying or preaching, as any man is able to set up the trade: in
opposition to which they conceive the Ministers do stand for their own livings
and power sake. The other is the liberty of their lusts and ways of looseness,
and these are such upon whom the fear of the Ministry is fallen, whose Spirit
cannot bear too free reproof, nor their courses a too close observation. And
hence it is that some of them having learning, do set their wits on work to
rout this office and the power thereof, by bafling the evidences of the word,
and endeavoring to dispute the Scripture out of doors, which though God has
not pleased to deliver Systematically in a way of absolute precept or
demonstrative clearness in every particular, yet ought to be regarded in the
hints and consequences and implications which afford foot-hold to a good
conscience, and not to be out-wrangled for our ends and lusts sake, as being
the beck of that great God who is able to becken us all into nothing, others
that calculate by the Ephemerides of policy, do discover or imagine future
inconveniences, which may arise from the indiscretion, passion, weakness of
the Ministers, and if they will but go on to play that Cannon a little
further, they shall find it will batter and overthrow all Magistracy, or any
government that is managed by men; others whose tongues are sharper then their
arguments fall foul upon the ministry, and pour treble contempt upon it, in
lieu of double honor, never was ministry more blessed and witnessed unto from
heaven, by the success and fruitfullnesse of it in bringing in and bringing
up, a people unto God, (though some of their chickens are caught and carried
away by kites or have forsaken them, as duckes forsake the hen that hatched
them) never more contemned That which the Collat. Carthag. 3.
Donatist objected sometime to Austin is now rife again tu quis es? Filius es
Ceciliani, an non? who ordained you, you are the brat of Cecilian, are you not?
(whom they pretended to be a traditor or to have given up the holy Scripture to
the fire) so they say to the Ministers, whose sons are you? is not your
pedigree by lineall descent from Antichrist? is not he the top of your kin? he
that has but half an eye may see the reason why the Wolves would have the
Sheep to quitt their dogs. The ministry if encouraged and supported to do
their duty, will be (next under the Parliament, who, we hope, will do theirs)
the greatest bulwark or bank against the inundation of error, haeresy, and
blasphemy, whose increase is the occasion of this humiliation; It is the lot of
the Ministers of the reformed Churches to be grund between two Mil-stones, in
the first reformation, the popish Champions fell pell-mell upon the calling of
the Non missi non vocati non consecrati. Bristow m^tiu.
Ministers of the reformed Churches pretending it to be null ( ac proinde nulla
ecclesia, and consequently (says Non ab episcopis ordinati ac proinde nulla
ecclesia Greg de Valentia. Tom. 4. disput. 9. qu^st 3. punct 2. in sine.
Gregory de Valentia) (the Churches no Churches) because they were not ordained
by Bishops. The same conclusion is now undertaken; That the present Ministers
in this Church are not lawful Ministers, upon a medium quite contrary, that
is, because they were ordained by Bishops, nor are those who are ordained by
Presbyters, in much better account with the objectours, for they are in the
same line of pedigree, being but once more removed from the stock,
great-grandchildren, to the Pope; The cauills of the Papists have been long
ago laid to sleep by the answers of Mornay of the Church. chap. 11. Sadrel de
legitim, ^ocat. Minister. reform(...) Minist. Anglica^^
learned men, who have distinguished between the corruptions in the persons
ordaining or in the fieri of ordination, and the substance and validity of
ordination in facto esse, and the very same answers which were made for the
first reformers and the Ministers ordained by them, are of as full force for
the Ministers now in being with us, and the Ministers ordained by them, nor can
our Ministry fall by this argument now used against us, without the fall of
all ministry in the Churches of Christ in all times and places where Bishops
had a hand in ordination, and if the Scripture do settle the power of
ordination in a Presbytery or in the Elders of the Church, it can never be made
good, that a Bishops hand (who is also a presbyter) being joined with others,
can anull the ordination, as neither is Baptism a nullity because administered
by a Bishop and happily with some corrupt ceremony used in the administration
thereof.

I proceed to the second point which I will touch but briefly and reserve the
use of both and of that which follows until the close of all.

Tertull de praescript.
Stuprant veritatem adulterio haeretico. They defloure the truth by haereticall
adultery not only those that teach without commission, but such as have a
calling to teach do by doctrines of error bring in damnable haeresies, as its
said Acts. 20. 30. Also of your own selves, shall men arise speaking perverse
things to draw Disciples after them-They called Paul (because he was a zealous
teacher of the Gospel) a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, Acts. 24. 5.
(...) signifies one that is the first man of the rank, it is a military word,
and I wish that our military men had not transfused error into the several
parts of our body. If it be said that many of those who are charged with
teaching of errors or haeresy are holy men, I answer that a holy man cannot
easily be a haeretick, nor are all the errous of holy men to be called haeresy
though they may be Hay and Stubble upon the foundation, but it has been
observed of old that some haeresiarchs or heads of haeresy have been well
reputed for strictness and unblameablenesse of life: we learn out of Austine,
that Pelagij nomen non sine laud aliqua posui quia vita ejus a multis
praedicabatur. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 33.
Pelagius had a very good testimony, and Scripture tells us they come in Sheeps
clothing and speak lies in hypocrisy. Lies would not take, if they were not
commended by the holiness of the person, and gilded over as a rotten nutmegge
with gold, There is a (...) or transformation of Satan into an Angel of light,
of false Apostles into the Apostles of Christ, of Satan's Ministers into the
Ministers of righteousness 2 Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15. and therefore we must not
measure or judge of Ex personis fidem? an ex fide personas? Tertull de praescip.
faith by the person but of the person by the faith. Truth may be as a Jewel
in a dunghill, and error carried (as Hanniball carried his poison) in a
Gold-ring, That horse of superstition and idolatry, upon the back of which the
Devil has in former times made war against the Church is slain under him,
and now he is mounted upon a fresh horse of another color, called liberty of
opinion, falsely called liberty of conscience, Lets not be ignorant of his
devices.

I pass on to the second part of the text. The seed which these false teachers
do sow, and the text says They shall privily bring in damnable haeresies even
denying the Lord that bought them, in which words we take up these three
things.

1. That haeresies are damnable. 2. That damnable haeresies are brought in
privily. 3. That those which bring them in do evendeny the Lord that bought
them.
I shall first open these in few words, and then come to the investigation or
searching out what haeresie is, which is here by the Apostle called damnable.

1. First you see that haeresies are said to be damnable or destructive.
Haeresies of destruction as its said, Psa. 5. 6. (...) a man of bloods, that is
a bloody man: but why should haeresies be emphatically called haeresies of
destruction? for is not all sin of damnable guilt? and is not death the wages
of sin as sin? Its true; And yet as Judas that was an Apostle, and an eminent
Disciple of Christ, and betrayed and sold him for money, is called, John 17.
12. (...) the son of destruction, and as the Antichrist is also called, 2 These.
2. 3. the man of sin, the son of destruction, because under Christ's name
and colors he fights against him, and serves his own lusts upon the profession
of his name, and so shall fall under more eminent and remarkable destruction.
So Haeretickes who professing Christianity, and the name of Christ, do deny
him, or adulterate his truth for their own ends and lusts, shall come under
more heavy and sore damnation, which is aggravated by that expression, Swift
destruction, which shall fall upon their heads violently and unexpectedly: for
their judgment lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not, verse. 3. And
that it may appear that God had an eye of wrath and vengeance upon this kind
of men long ago. Its said by our Apostle here, verse. 3. their judgment now of
a long time lingreth not: and by Jude, verse. 4. that they were of old ordained
to this condemnation or judgment, which new and unusual expressions or
aggravations of the destruction of this kind of men, do give sufficient
reason why haeresies are called haeresies of destruction: whether the word
damnable be restrictive to some haeresies, as implying that there are some that
are not damnable; or whether it be descriptive, as describing what haeresies
are Gerard in locum.
( in suo genere) in general, must be answered and resolved by the definition
or description of haeeresie, what it is: and if we either look at that
description of it, which is implied in this Text, to be a denying of the Lord
the Redeemer, or which is given of it in any place, in the Apostolical
Epistles; we shall find, that in the Scripture acceptance and description of
haeresie, All haeresie is damnable, not that every Haeretick is certainly and
peremptorily damned: for then I see no more reason for admonishing an
haeretick, then for praying for one that has sinned a sin unto death; even
Judas called the son of perdition, had he had (as some of the Ancients say)
Peter's repentance, might have found forgiveness as he did: but there is this
mark set upon haeresie, that we may all hear and fear and do no such thing.

2. Damnable haeresies are brought in privily, words of this decomposition as
(...) do signify insinuation, these tares are sown while men sleep, in a
clancular or subtle way whereof men are not aware, as its said, Gal. 2. 4.
False brethren (...) Gal. 2. 4.
at unawares, privily crept in, and Jude 4. (...) Jude 4.
Certain men are crept in privily, meaning Haeresy-masters or false teachers.
Haeresie is modest at first, and insinuates as the Serpent into Eve by subtle
fetches and quaeres, yea, has God said? Genesis 3. 1. or by sweet promises and
inducements, ye shall not surely dye, ye shall be as Gods, your eyes shall be
opened, verse. 4. 5. So its said, verse. 3. they shall make merchandise of you.
(...) with fine forms of speech, words composed for the nonce. The Apostle
observes that there is a subtilty, or as you might say a mystery in this Trade
of corrupting men's minds from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Ephesians. 4. 14. And sometimes they work by the wife (as the Serpent did) to give
her husband the apple: they draw men as Juglers do a piece of money with a fine
invisible hair, and never bring forth the portenta of their opinions, until
their sigmenta have made the way: they mix their dross among good silver, and
lap up error in the pap of truth, that some parts of the monster may have
their true shape.

3. These that bring in these damnable haeresies do even deny the Lord that
bought them, and here I might take in hand two sorts of opinions. The first is
that of the Socinians, who deny that Christ by a proper satisfaction made to
the justice of God, did buy or purchase us. To these the finger of the Text
seems directly to point: for they not only deny the Lord Christ's theanthropie:
but his redemption by way of purchase. The other is that of some that hence
infer an universal redemption, because that these that bring upon themselves
swift destruction are said to be bought by Lutherani, alisque.
Christ: of both which points I cannot say a little without speaking much, and
therefore shall hold me to my subject in hand; we may partly perceive by this
expression what damnable haeresies are: for its said that they who bring them
in, do even deny the Lord that bought them; If they deny Christ the Sovereign
Lord See Jude, v. 4.
((...)) by everting his person or natures. If they deny his redemption and so
evert his office (whether his Lordship or his redemption be denied) the
haeresie is damnable, and the word denying seems to me to imply, that the
proper naure of haeresie is to be Spalato, ostensio errorum Suares^^ cap. 1.
euersive and overthrowting: It consists not properly in additions to the word,
saving so far as those additions are overthrowing the pillars and foundations
of truth; that is, Christ the Lord that bought us, or the like to it: for if
hay and stubble be built on this foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 12. because they do not
overthrow it, or shake and shiver it, therefore though they be errors yet they
are not haeresie. Non omnis error est haeresis (says Ad quod vult deum in
praefat. August.
Austin) every Error is not haeresie: and therefore Weems. Treatise of the 4
de generate sons. page 180.
some distinguish of doctrines or errors thus: some are praeter, some are
circa, some are contra fundamentum, that is (as Austine says) some touch not,
some shake, and some raze the foundation. The weight and valor of doctrines
must be reck oned by their proximity or nearenesse to the fundamentals: for it
is in the Confanguinity of doctrine (as Tertullian calls it) as it is in
kindred, the neerenesse of kindred is to be measured by neernesse to the stock.

This denial of the Lord that bought them, may be either expressly conceptis
verbis and so with a little more height of expression may amount to blasphemy,
but happily these in the text who used composed words were not so black
mouthed, or this denial may be interpretative and by consequence: and the
consequence is either from their doctrines or a consequence of fact also, from
their course or conversation.

The consequence from their doctrines (if it overthrow the faith) must not be
drawn out into a long chain and far fetched, least by that means every error
be made haeresy, but the consequence must be near and close, so that you may
be able to say this or that doctrine or opinion at the next remove or at a very
near distance denies the only sovereign God and our Lord Jesus Christ. Jude
4. the battery may strike off a tile or make a hole in the wall, but except it
be near, will not overthrow the foundation, for as from every branch of a
great tree one may go or move to the root, yet the cutting off of any twigge
or branch is not a cutting down or rooting up the tree, so though all branches
of truth have continuity with the fundamentalls or principles, yet the denial
of every truth is not a razing or overthrow of them, I instance in the great
principle, Christ Jesus is the Lord that has bought us, not because there are
not other which being denied, faith is overthrown, but because it is the
instance in my text, and in Jude. 4. and also because principles lie so close
together, and are so concenterate that an error which routs one, routes
another by immediate consequence. I will give one instance or two, Suppose the
resurrection future be denied, this overthrowes the faith, 2 Timothy 2. 18. and
see how the consequence immediately shatters all principles, 1 Cor. 15. 13. If
there be no resurrection of the dead, Then is Christ not risen, Then is our
preaching vain, Then is faith vain, Then believers are yet in their sins.
Then the dead in Christ are perished, verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Or suppose the
Law be brought into equipage with Christ for justification, mark the
consequence. If so (says the Apostle) then Christ shall profit you nothing,
Gal. 5. 2. Christ is become of none effect unto you, verse 4. Ye are fallen
from grace, and I make no doubt to say that those of the Galatians, who for
their carnal ends, Chap. 6. 12, 13. did break the continuity and communion of
the Church, by giving themselves up to this opinion, were haereticks, not while
it was an opinion in debate or controversy: but when it grew into a ripe
Impostume in such as adhaered to it: and do but observe in both the instances
given, by how immediate consequence the denial of the resurrection, or the
contemperament of the Law with Christ, do overthrow the fundamental of
Fundamentalls, Christ Jesus, in respect of his redemption or office.

For that which I call consequence of fact, from the course or conversation of
Haeretickes: I observe that both the Apostle in this Chapter, and Jude in his
Epistle, who follows the same thread in his description of them, do characterise
them by the lusts and fleshy courses wherein they live. Jude speaks of false
teachers, as is evident by that he exhorts Christians to contend for the faith:
because certain men were crept in privily or unawares, verse. 3. 4 He
exemplifies the destruction of these by the same. examples of the Angels that
fell, and of Sodom and Gomorrha. He draws out their picture in the like foul
colors: and in the fourth verse calls them ungodly men, turning the grace of
God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. And though lusts of the flesh, as adultery and the like, cannot be
called haeresie; Tarre^rem. (...) de Eccl. lib. 4. part 2. cap. 1. Morton in 1
Cor. 11. 18.
yet if a man professing Christ shall choose such an opinion or doctrine as does
patronize and maintain those lusts, and so walks in a course of sin under
the protection of such an opinion or tenet, as is contrary both to faith and
holiness, that comes up to the Scripture-description of haeresie: for so these
false teachers that bring in damnable haeresies* are said to allure through
lusts of the flesh and much wantonness, ver. 18. and to promise liberty, as
likewise those that are entangled in their errors do turn from the holy
Commandment, and turn to their former vomit and wallowing in the mire, verse.
20. 21, 22. and so the shipwreck of faith and the putting away of good
conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. go both together; and therefore the Nicolaitans,
whose doctrine was hateful to Christ, Rev. 2. 15. and whose lusts and
filthiness maintained by their pernicious doctrine Iren. lib. 1. cap. 20.
were monstrous, can be accounted no other then damnable Haereticks (and we
may judge Clem. Alex. lib. 7. Strom.
the like of others of the same stamp) being the very persons (as is Epiphan.
haeres. 26.
conceived by good Authors) whom both Peter and Jude describe as turning the
grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Beza in Revel. 2. 15.
Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4. Quiros in Judam.


So much for the opening of the three points, which you may if you please bind
up together into one, That false teachers shall privily bring in damnable
haeresies, even denying the Lord that bought them.

Now we come to search out what Haeresie is.

The word haeresie is of Greek original, and is often translated Sect, not
Justnian in 2 ^et. 2.
a secando from cutting, but a sectando from following, as being a way which
men choose to follow as its said. The way which they call haeresie, Acts 24. 14
A way of worship or doctrine, for so he says, so do I worship the God of my
Fathers, believing, etc. It appears to be an act of the will electively
pitching upon such a way. For the word it self signifies election, coming not
from Martinius lexicon.
(...) to expugne or lay waste, (though that be proper enough) but from (...)
to choose or adhere unto: and therefore the Septuagint Levit. 22. 18. 21.
translate (...) free will offering by (...) election or free-willednesse. The
Rabbis call an Haeretick Drusius de 3. sectis Judae, lib. 1. cap. 2. Grotius
in Tit. 3. 10. Nic. Fuller Miscellan.
(...) which in Genesis 1. 12. Levit. 11. 22.
Scripture signifies a kind or species, and so they denote a man to be an
Haereticke, who leaving the common road or way of faith and Doctrine, sets up
and follows a particular way of his own, Elias in Tishbite.
(...) one that is (...) or (...) without law, that will not be bound up by
the rule, but runs out into his own way, and Nic. Fuller miscel. sacra. lib.
2. cap. 3.
some derive it from (...) which is translated (...) Nehem. 9. 17. Exodus 22.
16. signifying to refuse or deny, as if you would say a renegado or denyer of
the truth.

This word (...) while it kept it self among Philosophers, Physicians, and
other Professors of knowledge and learning past, for an honest word, but when
it came into the Churches quarters, and was taken up by Christians, it became
branded, stigmatized and odious. Its used about six times in the Acts 5. 17.
26. 5. 15. 5. 28. 22 24. 14. 24. 5.
Acts of the Apostles, and whether it may not in some of those places at least,
be taken in good part or indifferently, shall not be my dispute at this time.
But when you find it in the Epistles Apostolical, and in the Gospel
Churches, it has not a jot of good savor in it, but carries a mark of
iniquity and infamy upon it: In those Epistles it is used about 1 Cor. 11. 18.
Gal. 5. 20. Titus 3. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
four times expressly, and because I would not make a definition which you
might say is mine own, and so slight it, I will lay before you the Scriptures
that speak of it, that you may in their light see what it is.

The first place is that 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. I hear that there be Schisms
among you, and I partly believe it. For there must be also haeresies among
you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.

The Greek Interpreters take Schism and Haeresie in this place, for both one
in a manner, and understand not by the word Haeresie any matter (...) Chr^s.
and Oecumen in l^cum.
dogmaticall or of Doctrine: but others Beza in loc.
argue from the word (...) also. (There must also be haeresies) that they are
distinct, and that though haeresie include schism, yet schism does not
include haeresie: and to me it seems that they are near a kin, because the
Apostle rises from one to the other, saying, there are schisms, there must
also be haeresies: but they are not collaterally a kin; for by the ascent,
haeresie seems to be the greater: For there must be also haeresies, into which
those that are (...) do not Neque enim eos probatos intelligi jubet qui in
haeresin fidem demutant Tertull. de praescript.
easily fall, but are made the more conspicuous or manifest for soundness and
integrity.

That we may find the true nature of haeresie, let me in few words declare what
schism is.

The word schism imports a rent or division of things that were or should be
in continuity and undevidednesse, and as its taken in the matter of Religion,
it signifies a rupture in the communion, or from the communion of the Church
upon unnecessary and unwarrantable causes and grounds. A causeless breaking,
or breaking off from the communion of the Church in matter of worship or
Religion. Society and communion are of great importance: the evil of schism
is answerable to the good of society and communion; we are to judge of schism
by the cause of it: for if it be upon a cause which the Word warrants not, it
is a sin of high nature; Some distribute it into two sorts or parts, Cameron
de Schismat.
negative and positive. Negative is the very rupture and breaking off: positive
is the coalition of the parts rent off into new bodies, or associations under
other Pastors and Teachers. The formality of schism consists in the secession
or negative part, though the coalition into new bodies, which was called the
setting up, altar contra altar may make it more obstinate and pernicious; Now
I say the cause must rule us in judging of it. For as it is not the party which
separates that makes the Divorce, but the Adulterous party which gives the
cause. And as ( Mornay says) it is not the man who commences or begins the
suite which makes the trouble, but he that detains the right: So they are the
schismatics who give the just cause of separation from them, what a hurry was
made in the Church by the paschal controversy; wherein ( Tract of schis. page 5.
as one says) both parties might be schismatics, dividing themselves asunder
upon so trivial a matter, who were the Schismatics when the second Council of
Nice set up Images into such honor, and thereby put the Churches into
combustion? Doubtless the Council was the Schismaticke? who were the
Schismatics when the reformed Churches after all means used, were either
driven out, or broke off from the communion of the Church of Rome?
questionless the Mornay of the Church. cap. 10.
Pope and his followers, not the Protestants, who departed from them, as the
Romans had a saying, that when the Gauls had taken Rome, and Camillus, with the
rest of the Patriots were at Veij, then, though the walls of Rome stood where
they did before, yet Rome was not in Rome but at Veij; I shall not meddle with
those Episcopal dissentions in the ancient Churches, commonly called schisms,
nor those about the Popedom Spalato lib. 4. de rep. eccles. cap. 11.
thirty in number, as they are reckoned: Schism simply and nakedly is a
breaking off, or breaking off from the communion of the Church, upon such
grounds as have no weight in the word of God to allow them, as namely when
Schisma ni fallor est eadem opinantem atque e^dem ritu colentem quo caeteri,
solo congregationis delectari dissidio. Aug. contra Faustum. lib. 20. et contra
Cresconium grammat.
the same faith or doctrine in substantialls is held, and there is accordance
and agreement in them: yet through passions and private ends or fancies, there
is offense taken at lesser matters of fact or order, and so the divorce is made
for such faults in the yoke fellow as are far short of adultery, as if the
members of any of the seven Churches should have separated, because of some
dross in those Golden Candlesticks. The Donatist who separated upon that
principle, that there was no true Church where good and bad were mixed; and that
the chafe in the floor made the wheat unclean, or that the communion of the
godly was blasted and polluted by the mixture of ungodly ones amongst them, was
in open schism: both in breaking off from the Churches of Christ upon that
reason, and in assumeing liberty to erect new Churches, only which, he called
the true Churches of Christ.

Now for haeresy; it is schism and somewhat more as the Apostle implies, and
what is that majus quid as Tertullian calls it, or that somewhat more, the
answer is given in that generally received saying of Jerome, haeresis
perversum dogma habet Haeresy goes with a perverse opinion, or error in
doctrine, which I conceive to be a very truth, (though Grotius in 1 Cor. 11.
Grotius affirm that ex vi vocis it be nihil aliud quam schisma) because the
word haeresy in all authors, from the first use of it has signified a sentence
or dogmaticall tenet or assertion, as the several Sects of Philosophers who
differd in their opinions are called haeresies and therefore Jamblichus lib. 2.
cap. 1.
Jamblichus having written of the life of Pythagoras, now says he it remains
that I speak (...) concerning his tenets or opinions, so the sects of Saducees
and Pharisees who differd in opinions are called haeresies, and the Hoeresin
Syri vocant (...) Doctrinam Drusius in Act. 24. 5.
Syriake calls haeresy, doctrine, in which sense it must be taken. Acts. 28.
22. this haeresy that is this doctrine concerning Christ is every where spoken
against or contradicted, and the Apostles Peter and Jude are express, that
these haeresies are brought in by false teachers, and are opposite to the
faith, denying Christ Jesus the Lord and his redemption. 2. Pet. 2. 1. Jude. 3.
4. upon all which considerations, and that (as Tertullian elegantly says)
haeresy is a degenerate thing, which arises from the corruption and
adulterating of the truth ( tanquam caprificus a papauere fici, oleaster, ex
olivae grano etc.) I am clear enough that in haeresy there must be matter of
opinion or doctrine, and so the meaning of the Apostle in this place of the
Corinthians is to show, that as there were already schisms amongst them, and
dividing into parties as their partiality, affection, and selfe-respects led
them, so, there must be also haeresies or errors in doctrine which should
fight against the truth of the Gospel, and patronize vicious, and filthy lusts
of the flesh, to which both errors, and lusts there would be some that would
decline, but those that were approved and sound-hearted would be made manifest
among them, and so I conclude that haeresy is a renting or tearing the
communion of the Church, as it is schism, and a subverting of the doctrine of
truth and holiness as it is haeresy, like sedition in the common wealth, (for
schism as one says is an ecclesiastical sedition) when it is not only made
against the faults of some persons, or their miscarriage in government, or some
abuses in fact, but arises from principles or errors opposite and destructive
to the fundamental laws and justice of the Kingdom.

The second place is that Gal. 5. 19. 20. The works of the flesh are manifest
which are adultery fornication. etc. Seditions, heresies, (...), translated
divisions. Romans 16. 17. is here translated seditions, seditions or divisions
and haeresies may well be set together for they go together, haeresies are
works of the flesh, manifest works of the flesh, The works of the flesh are
said to be manifest, either because they are the product and fruits of that
inward corruption called flesh, and are the tokens and marks of a carnal man,
or because they may be discerned and known by the Mr. Perkins in Galath 5.
light of reason and of a natural conscience, except the light be by strength
of lusts extinct* or by the judgment of God darkened or put out. Divines
usually from this place do prove against the Papists, that by flesh is not
only meant the sensual appetite or inferior faculties of the Soul, but the
higher also, as the mind and judgment, because haeresy is an error of the
mind and so no doubt it is, though it may be called carnal also in respect of
those fleshly lusts or ends which carry men thereinto, and are exercised under
the patronage thereof. Austin sometime says that in his judgment, it either
not at all, or very hardly can be regularly defined Aut non omnino aut
difficulter etc. Aug. ad quod vult deum in proefatione.
what makes an haeretick, but he comes very near it in another place saying
he is an haeretick (in my opinion) who for some or other temporal profit
especially his own glory or dignity, does either beget De vtilitate credendi
cap. 1. qui alicuiustemporalis commodi and maxim glorioe principatusque sui
gratia. etc.
or follow false and new opinions, The Scripture notion of the word haeresy,
runs very much this way, and it is to be feared that men's self ends, wealth,
eminency, interests have too much ingrediency into their opinions in these
times, the Lord will discover and blast the doctrine which he hates, and them
also that hold up such opinions, as are under his anathema and happily against
the conscience also, of those that follow them, for their private and unworthy
ends.

The third place is that Titus. 3. 10. 11. A man that is an haeretick after the
first and second admonition reject. Knowing that he that is such, is subverted,
and sins being condemned of himself. In the former verse there is an
exhortation to avoid foolish questions and genealogies and contentions and
striveings about the Law because they are unprofitable and vain, and then it
follows. A man that is a haeretick. etc. whence the Examen censurae. page 272.
and 280.
Arminians interpret an haeretick to be one that makes contention and division
upon trifling and slighty questions, who is condemned of himself because he
litigates and makes a stir about such things as himself knows to be of
small importance, but I conceive the matter not to be so slighty as they would
make it, for it is said of such a one (...) he is subverted, as a Ship that
turns up her keele or a house when the foundation is turned topsy turvy, and
therefore Deuteronomy. 32. 20. where the extremely desperate estate of a people at
last cast, is expressed, the Greek renders it by the word used in this text.
(...) it is a people turned upside down or subverted, which also the (...)
Subvertit ut cum superior pars in imam vertitur Avenarius.
Hebrew word imports both in this place and else where, and so haeresy is
concluded to be a subversive thing and not a peevish litigation about slight
questions, as the Arminians would put it off, but thus much may be collected
from the cohaerence, that a man may be denominated an haeretick for doctrinall
and dogmaticall errors holden and contentiously defended and maintained, and
it is observed by some that words of this form and termination as (...) do
signify an aptitude or readiness, and so the Cameron my^^thec cui volupe est
tueri falsas and erroneas ^piniones.
word in the text signifies, one that with complacency and choice adheres to
such errors, but the greatest doubt is what is meant by those words, he
sins being condemned of himself, which Chrisost. in Titus. 3. 10. 11.
Chrysostom refers to the admonitions precedent, for in that such a man has
been admonisht, he cannot reply in his own defense (...) etc. no man has
showed me my error, no man has better instructed me, and so has his mouth
stopped and is condemned of his own conscience, and it is not to be denied that
very many interpreters both ancient and modern by the word (...) do
understand a man that is convinced in his own conscience that he erres, and
that he goes contrary to his own light, sciens, volens, but this
interpretation is by Minus Cels^s page 13. Estius in locum, cum multis aliis.
many disallowd and argued against, that moderate and sweet breathed De
Arrianis. lib. 5.
Salvian speakeing of the Arrians says, Haeretici sunt, non scientes, apud nos
non apud se, quod illi nobis, hoc nos illis etc. They are Haereticks but not
knowingly, with us they are, but not with themselves, And indeed the word in
the text does not necessarily carry so far, as that an haeretick is condemned
of his own conscience, but as (...) is a man taught of himself, without a
Master, so (...) is a man condemned of himself, not merely misled by others to
whom he has given up himself blindfold, but as one that has electively taken
up and with a fixed self-will is resolved to persist, in his error and way,
which he thinks to be truth, and that he does Godgood service in holding on in
it, there are two things that may be clearly taken up. 1. That it is made the
character of an haeretick to sin because condemned of himself. 2. That another
man may know that he is subverted and sins being self condemned, for 'its said
after admonition reject him Knowing that he that is such is subverted. etc. But
how shall this be known? Is it because he sins against common notions or
principles within the ken of natures light? This restraines haeresy which is a
subverting of the faith only to that which is contrary to light of nature,
which light of nature may be in some particular so defaced, like a
superscription on old coin, that though I may know he sins, yet he is not
convinced in himself. Is it then because he takes up an opinion for his lusts
sake and private ends against his light and knowledge? Then indeed he sins
because condemned of himself, but how can another know it? It rests therefore
that an haeretick rejecting admonition may be said to be condemned of himself,
because he chooses his own errors, and rejects the truth and so
interpretative that is vertually and by consequence is condemned of himself,
as they who thrust away the word from them, did judge themselves unworthy of
eternal life. Acts. 13. 46. Here is (as you see) an (...) or self condemning
without conviction of conscience or knowledge of their own sin in it.

The fourth place is the Text which we have in hand, and this whole chapter,
compared with the Epistle of Jude, in both which haeresy is graphically
described, as has before been opend. That which remains to be done, is the
drawing up of that has been said concerning the meaning of the word, or the
explication of the things, out of the Scriptures alleged, into a result, and
that is this. The Scripture seems to make haeresy a complicate evil in which
there is these three things (whether all of them essential ingredients, or
some of them be usual attendants or concomitants I dispute not)

1. Dogmaticall or doctrinall error, even over throwing the faith or (...) 2.
lim. 2. 18. Funditas evertunt, solo equa^t.
subverting the pillars and foundations of the doctrine of Christ which Jude
calls the common salvation ver. 3. 2. Separation from, or renting of the unity
and communion of the Church, some time Schisma eructat in here sin ut non nemo
ait.
schism introduces haeresy, when men are run out upon peevishness of spirit
or some unwarrantable grounds, they commonly run on into error of opinion and
doctrine, being caught like a loose and wandering sheep, severd from the flock-
by the wolves which lie in wait for such, sometimes the schism follows upon
the error of opinion drunk in, and so departure from the truth, is attended
with departure from the society and communion of the Church, Jude having
described haereticks, says ver. 19. (...) these are they that separate
themselves. 3. A loose and carnal course taken up and followed either
privately or openly, and that under the patronage and protection of these
dogmaticall errors, Their lives are as full of Athisme as their opinions of
blasphemy or false-hood, all which being laid together, it appears that an
haereticke's understanding and mind is corrupted, a good conscience is thrust
away, his will electively adheres to error and false ways; his affections are
drowned in sensuality and lusts, he is subverted and sins being self
condemned, either (...). Oicumen in tit. 3. 8.
formerlly, by his own conscience and light yet remaining, or Ideo sibi dam
natus quia in quo damnatur sibi eligit Tertull, de proe
virtually by his voluntary rejection of Gods truth to stick to his own
error, and so in conclusion (except the Lord pull him out of the fire by some
happy hand in the mean time) he brings upon himself swift destruction. As
touching pertinacy or obstinacy which is generally by Divines put into the
definition of haeresie according to that saying: errare possum, haereticus esse
nolo, I shall say but this, that obstinacy may be considered, either in
respect of the crime of haeresie, or of the censure and rejection of an
Haereticke.

In respect of the crime of haeresie two ways. First, that an error in it
self not haeresie is made haeresie, by obstinacy, as some of the Papists will
have that to be haeresie which is stiffly holden by any man after the Rhemists
Annot. in Tit. 3. 10.
determination or admonition of the Church, when a Council, or that
transcendent thing called the Pope has defined by the authority of his
infallible Chair, that such an error is haeresie, and has put it under
Anathema, though Error in fide non ideo haeresis quia ab ecclesia damnatus sed
quia fidei contrarius. Altenstaig, etc. verbo, haeresis and T^rre crem, summa,
lib. 4. 2 part. cap. 3.
others of them (in my opinion) say more rightly, that an error in faith is
not therefore haeresie, because condemned by the Church: but because contrary
to the faith: or secondly, that an error subverting the faith is not haeresie,
unless attended with obstinacy, and that (as I conceive) cannot be said; for
as Constancy in that which is good, as namely faith or justice, does not make
faith to be faith, or justice to be justice: so neither does obstinacy in
evil, or error, make that error to be haeresie; but as virtue is
commendable, and rendered more glorious by constancy, so is haeresie aggravated
and made more high by obstinacy. The essence or nature, and so the denomination
of haeresie is not to be measured by obstinacy against the decision or
admonition of the Church, (for then every such obstinate error should be
haeresie) but by the contrariety and opposition of it to the principles of
faith which are razed or overthrown.

In respect of the censure and rejection of an Haeretick, (which rejection,
whether it be by a private believer or by sentence of the Church I now dispute
not) I suppose obstinacy is requisite: for as in other scandalls the rule of
proceeding is. If he hear not thee, or if he hear not the Church: so its
said, a man that is an Haereticke, reject, after the first and second
admonition; Contumacy is a common adjunct of sin, in order to the final
judgment or sentence of the Church in excommunication; In a word, I cannot
read those words, Titus 3. 10. Thus, or in this sense. (...).
A man that after the first and second admonition is an Haereticke, as if he
then became an Haereticke by standing out against or after admonition, but
thus, reject a man haereticall; after the first and second admonition, which
argues and demonstrates, that he may be an Haeretick before he be obstinate,
and so obstinacy is not essential to the nature or being of haeresie, Though I
confess, (and do suggest it to your observation and saddest thoughts) that
Haeretickes are generally and usually stricken with obstinacy, few of them that
run into this labyrinth do either seek, or find the way out; when the
vital parts of faith are putrified and corrupted in any Patient, the recovery
is hopeless; weigh seriously that expression or mark set on these very men by
Jude, ver. 12. Trees twice dead, plucked up by the roots; when do you see such
a tree recover life and fruit? Its a hard rescue to fetch a man off that is
prisoner to an erring conscience, especially if he be fettered by both legs,
his judgment being captivated by error, and his affections enslaved by lusts;
we must do our duty, and of some have compassion, and others of them save with
fear: (...) snatching them out of the fire, Jude, verse 22. 23. Though they
complain of violence offered to their liberty, when they are pulled out of the
fire. For (as Invitum qui servat idem facit ^ccidenti Horat.
the saying is) he that saves a man against his will, has no more thanks for
his labor then if he killed him. It is a matter of wonder and amazement to see
men of eminent parts and learning, of great reputation for Religion,
captivated, carried away, and made prey of, by senseless and absurd fancies
and opinions: but that we know there are no delusions or lies, but are strong
when God delivers a man up to them in way of punishment for not receiving the
truth with love thereof. The Lord give us to receive his truth with fear and
trembling, and make us thankful (whom in this time of wantonness (as some
call it) or rather wickedness of opinions, he has kept from shipwreck of
faith, and made to stand upright when men that have lived strictly and
religiously (as (...) Chrysostom. Epistola 4. ad Olymp.
Chrysostom said of Pelagius) seem to warp and to be drawn awry.

Having thus farrre laid open the nature and danger of haeresie by the
Scriptures, I should now come to the use of all: but that in few words I desire
to put you in mind in what notion the word haeresie has passed amongst men in
common acceptance, and that I shall do in these two words.

1. The Ecclesiastical or Scholasticall acceptance is this: T^rrecrem. sum.
lib. 4.
Haeresie is an error or assertion contrary to the faith in points
fundamental or momentous, holden or maintained by a man professing the
Christian faith: this they call simple haeresie, and such a one an Haereticke:
licet ab ecclesia non recesserit, though (says In Gal. cap. 5.
Jerome) he does not separate or make secession from the Church: and though
he cannot be blemished with wickedness moral, or in conversation. All
momentous truths are not strictly so called fundamental; there are truths (as
I may say) of second and third magnitude; like stones in a building which be
next unto, or upon the foundation; what these are which are precisely
fundamental, and what is the boundary of them, and by what certain measure
they must be measured, if it exceed not my skill to determine (as I dare not
say but it may) yet it is a work beyond my time. This only I say to the point
in hand, That the formalis ratio or nature of haeresie as it is distinguished
from schism and fleshly lusts, is rightly stated to consist in an error or
assertion, contrary to, and destructive of the faith, and the degree of pravity
in the error, is correspondent to the degree of importance of the truth that is
destroyed by it or denied.

2. The vulgar, and indeed abusive acceptance of the word, is an infamy or
reproach which usually men flinge in the face of others at random, that are not
of their opinion: and its too true (as a learned man says) that haeresie and
schism are two theological scare-crowes, many times set up to scare people
and affright them. The strongest party of the two commonly cries out of
haeresie: the weakest party cry out of persecution, so the Papist puts a mark
or brand of haereticall pravity upon, and calls all Haeretickes, who are
opposite to their Spalato. lib. 1. c^p. 10.
false doctrines or filthy lusts; Haeresie was taken in a large sense, when the
L. Cook his Institutes.
Lollards were indicted for haeresie, because they held it not meritorious to
go in pilgrimage to Saint Thomas, or Mary of Walsingham: or when Virgilius
Bishop of Saltzburg was condemned for the haeresie of holding that there were
Antipodes; Apology, cap. 7.
Bellarmine tells K. James that for all his believing the Scriptures, the three
Creeds, the four great and general Counsels, yet he might be an Haereticke:
and his meaning was, because the Popes infallibility or supremacy was not in
any of the Kings Creeds. As the intolerable abuse of excommunication formerly,
made no man to value it above the price at which he could buy it off; so the
abuse of this name, and throwing it about at random, makes it not regarded,
which yet is a fearful thing in it self, and bringing swift destruction; It
has been stretched too far to be a brand stigmatizing true believers, and to
scare men from prying into the truth by making it odious, and it is shriveled
and shrunk up too much, even almost to nothing by such as are afraid to hit
themselves by defining it: but is there not such a thing? is there not such a
damnable sin? why then do such horrible sins as the sin against the holy
Ghost, and the sin of haeresie, lie like a terra incognita undiscovered,
unpreacht against? Seeing there is to be found in Scripture, especially in the
Apostolical Epistles, so much said in description of, and for caution against
damnable haeresies and doctrines, and the false teachers which privily bring
them in, and bring upon themselves and many that follow their pernicious ways,
such fearful destruction.

That which now remains is to draw up that which has been said into matter of
use and application.

Protestants once again, by declaring your selves against the heterodoxies and
dangerous errors of the present times, for the infection spreads by reason of
many that go abroad with running sores upon them; and if the Apostle, when he
gave all diligence to write to believers of the common salvation, thought it
needful for him to write to them, and exhort them that they should earnestly
contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, upon this ground and reason
that there were certain men crept in unawares, etc. Jude 3. 4. You cannot
think it impertinent and unseasonable at this time to be exhorted to the same
earnest contending for the faith, for you are beset with danger on all sides,
the contagion is epidemicall, many are distracted with here is Christ, and
there is Christ, and are misled into pernicious ways: yea even some that
seemed to be good ears of come are mil-dewd and almost blasted, I do
therefore exhort you to consider the danger, as you may easily sum it up from
that which has been said, for you have heard that there shall be false
Teachers amongst you, we need not say there, shall be, but more suitable to our
own condition we may say, There are as its said, 1 John 4. 4. many false
Prophets are gone out into the world; you see they are gone out, I would we
might see that they were come in again. 2. That these are they who bring in
damnable haeresies, they go out to bring these in, they are ringleaders, or
(as Tertullian said of Philosophers) the patriarchs of haeresies. 3. That they
bring in these damnable haeresies privily, they spawn first in quaeries or
plausible beginnings (the greatest Crocodile did at first lie in an egg
Franzius historia animalium.
Paulo majus anserino, little bigger then a goose-egge) 2 Cor. 11. 15.
themselves are transformed as Ministers of righteousness: 2 Pet. 2. 3. Romans
16. 18.
their words are composed and good, their speeches are fair, their artifice is
Ephesians. 4. 14.
full of slight and cunning craftiness, and therefore they creep at unawares
not only into houses, but into men's bosoms also. 4. That haeresies are
damnable and destructive poison, though given in honey, they arise and are made
up coede Scripturarum (as Tertullian says) by felling down the goodly timber
of the holy Scriptures; 2 Pet. 3. 16.
wrested to the destruction of them that wrest them, they turn grace into
lasciviousness; deny the Lord Jesus Christ, overthrow the faith, subvert the
soul, carry men down the stream of lust and liberty, and so bring swift
destruction. 5. That many shall follow these pernicious ways, Romans 16. 18.
the simple are deceived, the learned are given up to 2 These 2. 12.
strong delusions, the unstable are carried about like children with every Ephesians.
4. 14.
wind of doctrine: Those that by profession of the truth had escaped the
pollutions of the world, are again 2 Pet. 2. 20.
entangled and overcome, and so the latter end of many (that are carried away
either by speciousnesse of error or liberty of lust) is worse then the
beginning. 6. That the last times shall be most of all infested with these
pernicious errors. 1 Timothy 4. 1. Jude 17. 18.
The spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits: the Apostles have foretold that
there shall be mockers in the last time: and by this (says ^ John 2. 18.
the Apostle) we know that it is the last time because there are many
Antichrists, and we may very well understand by the last times, not only the
times of the Gospel in general, but the time of Antichrists declining as well
as of his arising and growth. The last of the last times: For as the last times
of the Jewish Church (after it had shaken off the captivity and idolatry) were
pestered and infested most of all with haeresies until Christ came with a new
doctrine of the Gospel, and until the desolation of the frame of that Church:
so the last days of Gospel Churches having shaken off the second Babylonish
captivity and idolatry, shall be infested with these dangerous errors and
haeresies, and happily until the very second coming of Christ, or at least
until he shall gloriously declare himself in the destruction of the beast and
false Prophet and in the calling of the Jews.

These things being laid together do cry aloud unto you, to consider your
danger, and to hearken to the frequent inculcations of the Apostles in their
Epistles, in almost all their 2 Cor. 11. 3.
Epistles, describing false teachers to be like the Serpent that beguiled Eve,
branding them with the name of Jannes and Jambres, Balaam, false Apostles,
deceitful workers, ministers of Satan, etc. stigmatizing their doctrins with
the names of damnable haeresies, doctrines of Devils, etc. Fortifying
Christians with effectual arguments and exhortations against the impressions
and infections of such poisonous errors. And if you look upon those Epistles
which were sent from heaven to the seven Churches, you shall find that the
greatest part of those comminations in them contained, are thundered forth
against haeresies or doctrinall errors, maintaining or cherishing (as I may
call them) haereticall lusts, there we find them Revel. 2. 2.
that said they were Apostles, but were liars, the cap. 2. 9. 14. 15. 20. 24.
blasphemy of such as said they were Jews, but were the Synagogue of Satan, the
doctrine of Balaam, the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, the teaching and seducing
of Jezebel, the depths of Satan, etc. The Churches are commended, or the
Angels of those Churches, who found out these disguised seducers, and kept the
truth uninfected by them, and those Angels or Churches blamed which Revel. 2.
15.
had them and suffered them in their bosom. These things I offer to your
serious and sad consideration, you have not made use of the point, as soon as
you have said The Minister railes. Its not my meaning to pour out all this
that has been said upon every error either preached or followed in our times:
but to show you that false teachers and haeresies must be and shall be in the
Gospel Churches: and to put you in mind what the Scripture says concerning
them, and how much you are concerned to look about you: for I observe that men
are not so jealous over themselves, or so afraid of Verse. 20.
corruption of their minds as they ought to be, nor so sensible of sin in
intellectual errors as in moral corruptions, and yet we know diseases in the
head are mortal too: and that a fish begins to corrupt and stink in the head
and so throughout; corrupt manners usually and naturally follow upon corrupt
minds; they that are not sound in the faith, no wonder if they be not sound in
the fear, and in the ways of God, whither will this new scepticisme come and
into what will it be resolved? but into Athiesme, when men begin to fall; we
see by experience, that many fall from story to story till they come to the
very bottom, And therefore I exhort and beseech you all to that which the
scripture exhorts and injoynes upon Christians, who are in danger of being
seduced by false teachers or their doctrines, and that is, to try the spirits
whether they are of God. 1. John. 4. 1. To contend for the faith once delivered
Jude. 3. To beware lest you be carried away with the error of lawless men 2.
Pet. 3. 17. To turn away from such as creep into houses and lead captive silly
women, 2. Tim. 3. 5. 6. To avoid foolish questions which are unprofitable and
vain Titus. 3. 9. To hold faith and a good conscience. 1. Tim. 1. 19. To
continue in the things that you have learned and been assured of out of the
word of God, 2. Tim. 3. 14. And lastly If there come any unto you, and bring
not this doctrine receive him not into your house neither say to him (...) 2.
Epistle. of John. 10. 11. For he that bids him god speed is partaker of his
evil deeds, where the Apostle supposes that false teachers are men of evil
deeds, besides their false doctrines, or that indeed their false doctrine is
evil deeds in the plural number, and therefore not to be slighted off as a
thing of the mind or mental mistake only, you see that to countenance or
encourage such teachers is to be partaker of their evil deeds, and whatsoever
credit you will give to the report of lib. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus concerning John his leaping out of the bath from Cerinthus or
Polycarp his refuseal of Marcion his acquaintance, yet, the observation which
he makes upon those reports or histories, is to be taken notice of that the
Apostles and their followers, would Tantum Apostoli and eorum discipuli etc.
Iren lib. 3. cap. 3.
not so much as verbo tenus communicate with any of them that had adulterated
the truth, how much less should private Christians close with such seducers
who are more likely to pull them into the water, then they to pull them out,
Naturally we are tinder too apt to take fire by their sparks, he that fishes
with an haereticall bait may happily catch more in a month, than some godly
Minister shall bring to Christ with all his travel and pains, as long as he
lives, for he has the advantage of the bait and therein lies the odds of
success between preaching of error and preaching of the truth, I marvel
(says the Apostle) that you are so soon removed from him, that called you
into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel. Gal. 1. 6. there was the wonder
(...) that they were removed so quickly, and the Apostles wonder may be ours
also, we have been a people of as powerful godliness, as any in the world;
practical divinity was improved to a great height of clearenesse and
sweetness but I fear that I may truly say we were best in worst times, we
held our cloak in the wind and now are laying it off in the sun, A miserable
declination from the life and power of godliness is come to pass within these
few years, our practicals, our inward and close ways of walking with God in
faith and love, are sublimed into fancies and vapor out into fumes of new
opinions, and which is worst of all, we take this dropsy to be growth, and
conceive our selves to be more spiritual and refined because more ayry and
notionall. The Lord humble us for our declensions and swervings from the 1 Timothy
6. 3.
end of the commandment (which is love out of a pure heart and of a good
conscience and of faith unfeigned) and for our turnings aside to vain
ianglings, The best way of fortification of our selves against the allurements
and assaults of false teachers is 1. To be grounded in the principles of the
doctrines of Christ, or else we shall easily be tumbled up and down like loose
stones that lie not fast in the building upon the foundation. 2. To study and
adhere unto the doctrine which is 1 Timothy 1. 5. 6.
according to godliness, practical and edifying truths, which draw up the
heart into acquaintance and communion with God, and draw it out in love and
obedience to him, For its good that the heart be stablisht with grace, Heb. 13.
9. 3. To hold faith and a good conscience 1. Tim. 1. 19. for if we thrust away
a good conscience by entertaining base lusts and ends, the shipwreck of faith
will follow. 4. To pray for confirmation and establishment by the hand of God,
for as it is not a strong constitution that is a protection against the plague,
so neither is it parts and learning which secure us from believing lies and
delusions. Its a mercy for which we are not enough thankful, that God keeps
any of us standing upright when others shrink awry, or that we are enabled to
discern between truth and error, and to stand for the one, and withstand the
other; when so many that have driven a great trade of profession are broken and
turned bankerupts.

5. To keep as a treasure those truths wherein you have formerly found comfort,
and which have been attested and confirmed to you by your own experience, sit
upon those flowers still and suck their fresh honey every day. A Christian
very hardly parts with those truths that have been sealed up to his experience,
but its no wonder that a man should lose that out of his head which he never
had in his heart.

bring in or follow these pernicious ways of damnable haeresy, you shall see
the crop which you shall reap, swift destruction, you are under judgment which
slumbers not. It will be destructive to you to wrest the Scriptures. 2. Pet. 5.
16. and to make merchandise of men's souls for sinful ends. 2. Pet. 2. 3. To
corrupt the minds of men from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2. Cor. 11. 3.
and to cause divisions and scandalls Romans 16. 17. are things which will cost
you dear. lay to heart the terrible expressions of wrath which are fulminated
against such men in Scripture, There may be differences in opinion, between
them that are godly, which are not inconsistent, with the peace of the Churches
and for which its unlawful (...) ( as the historian says) to make butter and
cheese of one another, Its a discreet rule which is laid down by one Conradus
Bergius. dedictamine, etc.
Si non idem sentimus de veritate at saltem de pondere If we cannot agree upon
the truth of every question or point of divinity yet at least lets be agreed
concerning the weight and moment thereof, so as not to make as great a stir
about a tile of the house, as if it were a foundation stone, nor erect new
parties or Churches upon every lesser variation; but to contend for, or pretend
a liberty of professing or publishing such docttrins as overthrow the faith and
subvert the soul under the name of liberty of conscience can be no other then
(...) 2. Tim. 3. 9. a manifest folly or madness. Is this liberty any part of
Christ's purchase? Has he made men free to sin and deny him that bought them?
what yoke of bondage does this liberty free us from? Gal. 5. 1. should we
claim a liberty of being in bondage to error? or promise to men a liberty of
being servants to corruption, which the falseteachers in effect did 2. Pet. 2.
19. God has (as one says) reserved to himself as his prerogative three
things. Ex nihilo creare, futura praedicere, conscientijs dominari. To create
out of nothing, to foretell things to come, to have dominion over conscience,
and it is true that while a thing is within, in the conscience, its out of man's
reach, but when 'its acted and comes abroad then it comes into man's
jurisdiction and is cognizable in foro humano, God only is judge of thoughts,
men also are judges of actions, Its a great mistake and of very ill consequence
to imagine that a man is always bound to act or practice according to the
light or judgment of conscience though rightly informed in thesi, for then I
see not, that there can be any place for that rule given by the Apostle. Rom:
14. 22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God, Truth it self though
never to be denied yet is not always to be declared, for the hurt or scandal
may be greater, then an inseasonable profession or practice of that which is in
it self lawful may be worth, but the mistake is yet more gross to imagine
that an erring conscience is a sufficient protection or warranty for an evil
act. Its sin to go againstan erring conscience, ( Stante dictamine) as its sin
to ravish and force awhore. Its sin also to act according to the dictate of an
erring conscience as to committ adul tery with consent. To make conscience the
final judge of actions, is to wipe out the hand writing of the word of God,
which does condemn many times, those things which conscience justifies, yea
and men also may pass just judgment on delusions or lies though those that
vent them do believe them for truths; If conscience be warrant enough for
practices and opinions, and liberty of conscience be a sufficient license to
vent or act them, I cannot see but the judicatories either of Church or State
may shut up their Shop, and be resolved into the judicatory of every man's
private conscience. And put the case that the Magistrate should conceive
himself bound in conscience to draw forth his authority against false
teachers, or their damnable haeresies, and (upon that supposed error) should
challenge a liberty of judging, as we do of acting, would our liberty give us
any ease so long as he had his, and were it not better for him to judge and for
us to walk by a known rule? and if we should say that his liberty of judging
is unlawful, it is as easy for him to say that our liberty of preaching or
professing errors, is so too.

To you that are Ministers of the word, that you would draw forth the sword of
the Spirit against these spirits of error, as not only the duty you owe to
Gods truth and men's souls requires, but also the pressing examples of the
Apostles do constrain you; let not the Lord Jesus Christ and his offices, be
denied by false teachers and by your silence too, and the Lord grant that it
may not be said of you as of the Ministers of Ephesus Acts. 20. 30. also of
your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw away
Disciples after them. Catharinus said of some middle-region men in those times,
that they were Luther anunculi half or dough-baked Lutherans; Let us not half
between two opinions but be valiant for the truth. He is but half a good
Shepherd that feeds the sheep in good pasture, but defends them not from the
wolves; It belongs to you (...) Titus. 1. 11. to stop their mouths that is by
conviction as is plain by the ninth verse as Christ (...) Matthew. 22. 34. Stopped
the Sadduces mouths by silencing their arguments. They will tell you that
arguments of ure seca, fire and faggot are not fit arguments for Ministers,
that their minds ought to be enlightened, not their bodies burned, and the truth
is, the keys are given to Peter not the sword, He usurps that without
authority, the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, Malchus ear is not to
be cut off by us. But will they that plead exemption from violence, suffer and
endure the word of conviction? will they afford their ears and patiently bear
the examination of their errors? I fear they will not; such is their love to
and their plerophory of error, Nay will they not rather cast dirt upon the
Ministry, and use all stratagems to undermine it, decrying their calling and
their livelihood or tithes which among all their destructive errors must
needs be confessed to be a saveing doctrine, whatsoever be the event, you that
are Gods Ministers must venture into the Lions mouth to savea sheep, and
assert and vindicate the truth of God from being taken captive by error: for
if either his truth or his people be lost by your default, the account will be
heavy.

Arrius in Alexand. was but as one spark, a little water at first would have
quenched that fire which afterward set almost all the world in flames. I see by
your order for keeping of this solemn day, that you take notice of the growth
of error, haeresie and blasphemy, I would you had taken such notice of the
beginnings of them. If you take notice of these as a judgment upon us, then
search out the sin for which this judgment comes. If you take notice of them
as our sin, then let every man labor to own it so far as by participation
it is made his own, that so we may be truly humbled, and renew our Vows and
Covenants to own and stand up for the truth of God, against all invasions of
error and haeresie; you as Magistrates, we as Ministers, all as men that have
souls to be saved or lost. Its a good rule, In eo serviunt reges deo, in quo
non possunt illi servire nisi ut reges, Kings and Princes, and indeed all
magistrates do therein serve God, wherein they cannot serve him but as
Magistrates: we are exhorted to pray for Kings and all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2.

There is (as Divines distinguish) simple haeresie and complicate.

Simple haeresie is an opinion or assertion holden and maintained contrary to,
and subversive of the faith by one that professes the Christian Religion:
Complicate haeresie is that which is attended with schism, sedition,
blasphemy, where one opinion lies with another, and begets a new bastard: a new
monster growing up into a multiformity more and more, until it break forth into
such dangerous symptoms as the forenamed.

The schismatic Haereticke upon his opinion breaks off from the communion of
the Church, and runs out into separation, setting up his new light (as he calls
it) in a new candlestick.

The blasphemous Haereticke strikes through the name of the great and glorious
God, or his truth with despightfull reproaches not to be named.

The seditious Haereticke troubles the peace of the Church and State, as an
army is troubled by Mutineers.

The seducing Haereticke panders to his bed all he can, and goes up and down
to vent his poison to the infection of others, privily bringing in damnable
haeresies.

There is a great contest about simple haeresie whether it come under your
sword or no in respect of capital punishment. The Vide 18. argumenta
Lutheranorum apud Conradum. Bergium de haeresi.
Lutherans are negative and s^are very many others, Haereticidium ob simplicem
aut nudam haeresin nemo nostrum simpliciter asseruit. None of us (say they)
Censura in cap. 24.
have asserted haereticide or capital punishment for simple haeresie. And
Calvin in opusc. de Serveto.
Calvin says of Servetus, vel sola modestia potuisset vitam redimere, that he
might have saved his life had he been but modest. And to such I wish light and
not fire, let bloody Papists only have this brand of cruelty upon them to
confute errors by fire and faggot.

For the blasphemous and seditious Haeretickes, both Haereticum seditiosum and
blasphemum capitali supplicio dignum nemo ex nostris facile impugnabit. Tota
quaestio est de haeretico simplici. Meisnerus Philos. sobsect 2 cap. 4.
Lutherans and others of the Reformed churches do agree that they may be
punished capitally, that is for their blasphemy or sedition; but the
Schlichringius pro Socino contra Meisneru^ page 457.
Socinian stands out here also, and denies it; alleging that the punishment
of false Prophets in the old Testament was speciali jure by special law
granted to the Israelites, and therefore you must not look (says the
Socinian) into the old Testament for a rule of proceeding against false
Prophets and blasphemers: Nor (says Calvin de Serveto in opusc. Catharinus in
3 Titus 10.
Calvin and Catharinus) can you find in the new Testament any precept for the
punishment of Thieves, Traitors, Adulterers, Witches, murderers and the like,
and yet they may, or at least some of them be capitally punished: for the
Gospel destroys not the just laws of civil policy or Commonwealths; but I
will not enter upon the debate of this point, neither bringing in the
Scriptures or reasons for it, nor answering the arguments brought against it,
of which arguments this I suggest (by the way) to your observation, that some
of them do even ship in one bottom the moral duties commanded in the old
Testament, and the typical ceremonies or shadows Some of them do make Which
Erastas denies not as to Haereticks or such as keep not the faith, These. 9. and
70.
against Ecclesiastical censures as well as civil, and some of them do carry
further then happily they are intended, even to take off civil punishments of
sins against the second Table also: neither do I see any just reason, that
if the office of a Magistrate have any place in the matters of the first Table,
he can punish sedition, which is against his own name or dignity, and stand
still and look on with his hands tied, whiles the name and honor of the great
God is openly traduced or blasphemed.

For the seducing Haereticke, he is to be prohibited and restrained: you will
not suffer a man that has a running plague sore to go abroad to infect, though
his shutting up be not in way of punishment, as if he was punished because he
has the sore, but in way of prevention of contagion, as the restraint of the
Leper was. You pull down another man's house and that justly when it is on fire
to prevent the burning of the whole Town: one way to put out the fire in the
Oven, is to shut it up. Many errors and haeresies would die of themselves if
they had not free vent. Falsi doctores sathanae lenones says Calvin: False
teachers are the Devils panders; would you suffer panders to come into your
houses and solicit the chastity of your children? would you suffer Mountebanks
to sell poison upon a stage, to destroy the bodies and lives of people? This
the Examen censurae, page 285.
Remonstrants in scorn call our palmarium argumentum: but it is not to be
despised as if it was void of reason. You that are Christian Magistrates should
not forget the souls of them that live under your shadow, There is a Minus
Celsus in disputatione de haereticis. etc. page 194. etc.
learned man who argues against the punishing of Haereticks with death, and
pitches upon this as the solida, vera, certa, ratio, the solid, true, and
certain reason why other flagitious offenders are to be punished, but not
Haereticks: because haeresie (says he) is the error of a depraved mind, an
intellectual error: but other moral vices arise from a depraved and corrupt
will, and the error of the understanding is not (says he) to be punished with
death, but that it is to be restrained from spreading and infecting, the
comparisons which he brings in do fully signify. For you would not (says he)
put a Physician to death as a murderer who upon mere mistake gives his patient
a potion of poison in stead of good medicine, nor a mad man that breaks out and
kills and slaies such as he meets with, because this proceeds from laesion of
his understanding, though I do not concur with this supposition that haeresie
is a a mere act of the understanding: for it has its denomination from the
act of the will choosing the error: yet thus far I go with it, that such
pretended Physicians as hold that to be wholesome which is poison, and minister
it to their Patients, are not to be licensed to practice, nor such mad men
suffered to be loose to exercise their fury; damnable haeresies can never be
prevented, if false teachers may have liberty to bring them in. Its one thing
to suffer Jews, Turks, Papists, Haeretickes, to live in the kingdom or City,
and another thing to give them liberty or freedom of Trade, to open their shop
and call in Customers to buy their destructive wares; Thou have them that hold
the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, Revel. 2. 15. Thou suffer that woman
Jezebel which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
servants, was a sore charge laid by Christ upon those Churches.

Nor is it the Pulpit which can keep off the infection, whiles the poison is
carried up and down in books, and cried at men's doors every day, in which
there are many strange doctrines going abroad open faced, and some more strange
which go veiled, and dropped into the Reader by insinuation, there seem to be
very strange dreams about the manner of Christ's being in the Saints, and Gods
being manifest in their flesh, and about the Kingdom of the Saints, and the
licking of the dust of their feet by the world. There are mysteries if the
world was ripe for them; I take notice of one thing in a late book which has a
very ill aspect, brought in by way of enquiry, what is meant by the word
Scriptures when it is asserted, that the denying of the Scriptures to be the
word of God, should be holden worthy of death. For says the Author, either the
English Scriptures, or Scriptures in English, are meant by the word Scriptures,
or the Hebrew and Greek Copies or originalls. The former cannot be meant with
reason, because God did not speak to his Prophets and Apostles in the English
tongue: nor does the English translation agree in all things with the original
or the true sense of it; Nor the latter, for the greatest part of men in the
Kingdom do not understand or know them. If this dilem be good, what is become
of the certain foundation of our hope or faith or comfort; how can we search
the Scriptures without going first to school to learn Hebrew and Greek. Its
well known that our Savior himself and the Apostles do usually cite the
Greek translation or Septuagint, when they quote the Scriptures of the old
Testament, and yet that translation had many variations in it from the
original, and happily more then our English translation has. The Apostle citing
a place out of the Septuagint, where they express not the original (...),
says (...) it is contained in Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 6. And there is no question
but the Hellenists and western Jews scattered up and down in Greece and Italy,
etc. used the Greek translation of the Scriptures in their Synagogues, as
appears by the confluence of the Greeks and Gentiles to them who understood not
Hebrew, and yet they of Beraea, a city Plin. lib. 4. cap. 10. (...). Stephanus
(...).
of Macedonia, are commended for searching the Scriptures of the old Testament,
and examining of Paul's doctrine by them: and in that search there were Greeks
that bare the Jews company, as appears, Acts 17. 11, 12. And what Scriptures
could they search but the Scriptures of the Greek Translation; I could easily
demonstrate that the Scripture calls the original translated, scripture, and
not without just reason: for the Scripture stands not in cortice verborum but
in medulla sensus, its the same wine in this vessel which was drawn out of that.
Translations are but vessels or taps (as I may call them) to set Scriptures
abroach; as for faults and errors in that translation, if that argument be
able to batter and make a breach, let it but have rope enough, and it will make
as great a breach in the Hebrew, for when you come to find that there are variae
lectiones, and that in the Margent truer then that in the Text, as in that
famous place (...) in textu. (...) in margin. Vide Foord in Psalm 22.
Psalm. 22. 17. or shall question the true pointing or printing of the
original, whither will not this wild argument run away with you, until you
come to find the very original written by the Prophets own hand, or by the hand
of some amanuensis infallibly directed and guided; The Scriptures expressed in
English are the word of God. The deficiency of exact translation of this or
that particular word does not invalidate the canon or body of the Scriptures.
But I shall not further proceed in this chase; I have but a word or two left,
and that is to exhort you to quicken up your zeal for God and his truth:
search out and remove the obstructions that are in and amongst your selves,
whether private ends or State ends, or whatsoever they be. Let not Reformation
and religion be cried up for design, and to serve turns; settle it speedily.
Send forth the Confession that it may testify to the world that you hold the
form of sound and wholesome words: Let some government and order be
established; religion is the ball of contention, many men's hopes lie in our
differences, and their interests are served upon them. We have professed enough
for reformation and purity, and have covenanted to endeavor it. The world is
weary of words, they look for fruit; Let this day set an edge upon you. No man
take a breake-fast of this fast, let not our ruin be under your hand. There
was a But in Naamans story: he was such and such a man, but a Leper; You have
done worthily, Covenanted seriously: But the matter of Reformation lies most of
it as yet in the Covenant, and is but little crept out of that shell; It may be
the foolishness of many opinions on foot, makes you slight them, as Calvin in
opusc. de Serveto.
Calvin said of Servetus his first onset, securum me reddidit ipsa dogmatum
fatuitas: but be not secure, (...) Socrates lib. 1. de Arrio.
a great fire may rise out of a small spark. Let the souls of so many
thousands of people be precious in your eyes, and the Lord make your name like
the name of those that have built the house of God; I pray you let me not be
understood to ship in one and the same bottom every error or mistake with
damnable haeresies; some differences in opinion are as the strivings (as L.
Verulam: Advancement of learning.
one elegantly says) of one Israelite with another: and these Moses quiets and
parts them fairly, and some (namely haeresies fighting against the very
foundation) are like the Egyptian striving with the Israelite whom Moses smites
down. There must be differences made between error and haeresie, erroneous and
Heretics, seducers and seduced, I would I might entreat, nay press it upon
those that are called pure Independents, that they would zealously and
sincerely declare against the doctrinall errors and haeresies of these days,
that such pernicious opinions may not shelter themselves under their name or
wing, nor ever any indulgence or toleration be either desired or granted upon
such a reason, as all may come in at the same breach or port, for that would
be but a selling of the Church into a liberty of being in captivity to
destructive confusions and errors.

FINIS.
Page 11. lin. 5. for dote r. doceat. P. 30. l. 15. for sigmenta r. sigmenta.
p. 43. l. 30 for because r. being. p. 45. l. 29. for formerly r. fermally.

Die Jovis, 11o Martij. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament that Mr. Rows and Mr. Gewen do
from this House give thanks unto Mr. Vines and Mr. Hodges for the great pains
they took in their Sermons preached on the 10. Martij, 1646. at Margarets
Westminster before the House of Commons, being a day of public Humiliation
for the growth of Errors, Haeresies, etc. And they are to desire them to print
their Sermons, wherein they are to have the like privilege in printing of
them, as others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsinge. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to Print my Sermon. RICHARD VINES.

(...) OBEDIENCE TO MAGISTRATES, Both Supreme and Subordinate.

In three SERMONS, Preached upon the Anniversarie Election-day of three Lord
Majors successively, viz.

Sr. THOMAS VINER, Elected, September 29. 1653.

Sr. CHRISTOPHER PACK, on the same day, 1654.

Alderman JOHN DETHICKE Esquire. now Lord Elect, chosen the same day. 1655. At the
Church of Lawrence Jewrie London,

Together With a fourth Sermon tending toward a description of the corruption
of the mind, Preached at Paul's on the 24th day of June, 1655.

By RICHARD VINES.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be learned, ye that are Judges of the earth.

Kiss the Son, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun against Dunstans Church in
Fleetsteet, 1656.

To The right Honorable Sir CHRISTOPHER PACK, Lord Major of the City of
London and the Honorable Court of Aldermen there.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IN compliance with your Order and my own duty; I have embarked into this
service of committing these Se^mons to public view, which did both receive
life at first, and do now begin to walk abroad by your Command, not doubting of
the same Candor from your eye, which was afforded by your ear, there being
little in them that might commend them to the world, or You, beside their
seasonablenesse to the Occasion, and time in which they were born.

Though the Government of this City be worthily renowned through the world,
yet it must be acknowledged unto the good will of Him that dwelt in the Bush,
that our eyes have seen, and do see this our Jerusalem, a quiet Habitation.

And though the Magistrate be called the Corner, the Shield, the Nail the
Stay, etc. of the Commonwealth, yet all things would doubtless soon swerve
into Anarchie and discomposure: if he that puts a Bridle into the mouth of the
Sea, should not still the querulous disposition of the People, and make them
subject.

There is one thing which makes the burden of this great people somewhat more
tolerable (as I hope) and that is Religion, planted within your Jurisdiction,
which teaches subjection for Conscience sake, even to the most Morose, much
more to the Godly and benign Magistrate.

For sober Religion, teaches us to obey the Minister, and Sword Bearer, of
God; both for the Lords sake, who gives him his Commission, and for our own,
who receive the benefit: And indeed, no man that is wise for himself, would if
he might either lop the Tree, whose shadow shelters him, or go about to
weaken subjection, and so pluck away the Ivy from the Tree that supports it,
especially, when He that climbs the Tree, does it not to fill his own pocket,
but to shake down the fruit to them that are under it. But (my Lord) I must not
make too great a porch to a small building, and therefore shall only say this,
that a public Spirit most becomes a Public Person; and that the whole work
of Magistracy is a self-denial; so as if he keep that in his eye, that he is
to rule propter Dominum, his example will the better teach the subject to obey,
propter Domiminum, for the Lord, and the true Bounds and Bonds of this Relation
between Magistrate and Subject shall be inviolably kept; which shall be the
prayer of your Honors

October. 15. 1655. most humble servant in the Lords work, RI. VINES.

The Reader is desired if the Printers mistakes following be not correctted to
his hand, that he will take notice of them in the reading.
In the first Sermon.
Page 4 line 3 read (...), p. 5 l. 22 r. seated, p. 9 l. 24 as supreme, p. 11
l. 8 r. (...), l. 22 r. the misery, p. 13. l. 17 r. (...), p. 14 l. 20 r. they
shall be taught, p. 16 l. 13 r. sweetens, p. 21 l. 5 dele not, p. 22 l. 18. r.
it would, p. 23 l. 15 r. nostra aliena, p. 24 l. 28 dele he. p. 25. l. 13 r.
tolerably good.

In the second Sermon:
P. 2 l. 24 r. tho, p. 3 l. 12 r. Pests and, l. 26 r. (...), p. 9 l. 19, r.
(...), p. 15 l. 26 dele no, p. 16 l. 6 r. (...).

In the third Sermon.
P. 11 l. 4 (...).

In the fourth Sermon.
P. 2 l. 20 r. Christ: l. 25 r. (...), P. 3 l. 23 r. degenerate, p. 4 l. 13 r.
of liberty, l. 27 r. for its p 6 l. 6 r. unleavenednes, l. 20 r.
conversational, p. 11 l. 31 r. leave. P. 14 l. ul^. r. not so, p. 15 l. 23 r.
ergo, p. 17 l. 4 r. a simplicity, p. 19 l. 4 r. woing to, l. 21 r. over again,
p. 20 l. 17 r. milia.

Subjection to MAGISTRATES both Supreme and Subordinate.
1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, 14. or unto Governors as
unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well
doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. 16. As free and not
using (or not having) your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God.
NO instructions are directed in the Apostolic Epistles to Civil Magistrates,
as Christian, for none of them (especially which were in Supremacy) were so at
that time.

Husbands and wives, fathers and children, masters and servants, have their
particular instructions delivered into their hands; but as for Magistrates,
though their authority and office be strongly maintained, yet it is the subject
that is especially spoken unto, and charged with subjection, by pressing
Arguments; that so a Christian, who by his Christianity, is bonus vir, may, by
his due subjection to that ordinance of God and man: the Magistrate, be bonus
Civis, a good Commonwealths man.

Nor are the Arguments more pressing, then the occasion; for the Jewish
Christians (unto whom dispersed, after the dissolution of their own estate, 1
Pet. 1. 1.
through the Asiatique regions, our Apostle is thought to write) were not quit
of the relics of that old ferment, which generally sowred that whole Nation;
( viz. a mutinous and froward disposition to all Magistracy) besides their own;
with which scab they might infect other Christians, who had both plausible
Arguments, and great temptations to conclude it very incongruous, that the
subjects of the kingdom of Christ, called to the best and highest liberty by
the Gospel, should submit themselves to the sword and scepter of Infidels,
Tyrants, Persecutors, whose laws forbidding the profession of the Gospel; or
commanding abominable Idolatry, they were obliged by a greater obligation, and
upon a higher penalty not to obey; and that was the very reason, that the
Heathen calumninated them with open mouth, as absolute pests of the
Commonwealth, enemies of mankind, subverters of all Authority.

Our Apostle though writing (as it is said) under Nero, whose universal
wickedness, and particular cruelty against Christians might give the greatest
advantage unto temptations of disobedience unto, and scorn of his authority;
does yet call for subjection to authority of whatsoever form or degree, both
Supreme, and Subordinate.

For having given forth general Instructions unto all Christians for a Godly
conversation. ver. 11, 12. he descends to relative duties of subjects to
Magistrates, of servants to Masters, which as then they were most questionable,
so they are always most burdensome; and he calls for them as parts of a Godly
conversation. Sins against our relations as in all men unnatural, so in a
Christian they are scandalous. A child, a subject, a servant, not better for
his religion in the duties which their relation does bespeak, is so far from
being an ornament to his profession (as the meanest may be) that they bring
shame upon it, and are in some respect Titus 2. 10.
worse then an Infidel.

This duty he teaches in the 13. and 14th and he persuades in the 15. and 16.
verses; moving them as they were Christians, to muzzle the mouths of ignorant
and foolish men, that study to take, or make all occasions of calumniating
their profession; for so says he, is the will of God, ver. 15. and removing
that argument which as Christians they might stumble at, viz. their Gospel
liberty, he grants verse 16. and then excepts against the abuse of it, As free
and not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness: for it is a liberty
from sin, not to sin; a liberty to serve God, not to disobey the Magistrate,
who is the Minister of God. A liberty from obedience to Magistrates or Masters,
contra dominum, but not a liberty from subjection, to them, propter Dominum, as
the text says.

In the 13. and 14. verses you have.

1. The Magistrate (...) his dignity and office.

2. The subjects (...) his duty and subjection.

The Magistrate is lifted up supra alios, above others in authority; but his
office is propter alios, for the benefit of others that are in society: And you
have,

1. The denomination of the Magistrate, he is called the ordinance of man.

2. The distribution of his authority, into supreme, and subordinate, whether
to the King, etc. or unto Governors sent by him.

The subjects duty is encouraged, 1. By the grand motive thereof; For the Lords
sake. 2. The great benefit that redounds unto the society by the Magistrate,
viz. the punishment of evil doers, and the praise or protection of them that do
well. From what is said of the Magistrate, we may observe;

1. That the civil Magistrate is the ordinance of man.

2. That this ordinance of man is more then one; every ordinance of man.

3. As namely, the Supreme Authority over the place governed, and the
Subalterne, or intermedial: The King or Governors.

4. This office or authority, is exercised respectively in things, punishments
and praise, and toward persons, evil doers, well doers; for the punishment,
etc.

From what is said to private persons, or private Christians; we may also
observe.

1. That they are enjoined subjection to the Magistrate.

2. To every form or degree of civil Magistracy.

The motive unto this subjection is, for the Lords sake.

4. And the common good of mankind, or of the society wherein they live.

The explication of these shall be singly made, the application to the present
occasion, shall be jointly from all of them together.



This denomination is not elsewhere given to him, nor the word (...) signifying
creature, or creation, in Scripture so used, yet it is good and proper
language, they use to say Creare consulem etc. to create a Magistrate by
suffrage or election. It is a creation which you are going about this day, and
the Lord Major (it is not spoken per (...) by diminution) is a creature of man
for the civil Magistrate (not properly the laws of men) is thus denominated as
is plain by the distribution made into supreme, and subalterne, and by the
punishment and praise belonging to his office, which point out a person, or an
office called by this name; And why ordinance of man? Government is sealed in,
and managed by man, and so is an ordinance of man subjective. It Is exercised
and conversant about men, and so it is an ordinance of man objective. It Is
ordained for the benefit of men and so it is an ordinance of man finaliter. But
in these senses an office immediately set up by God, suppose an Apostle in the
Church may be called (as I do not find it is) an ordinance of man, therefore
our Apostle writing to Christians that were, or might be scattered into diverse
Countries where they might find diverse forms, and kinds of Civil Government,
and diverse degrees, and ranks of subordination of Magistrates does specially
signify that the designation of the forms of Government, and the persons
governing, with all their varieties one from another, are the ordinance of man
modelling, and moulding their policies by their wisdom, Romans 13. 2, 3.
for their good, nor is this contrary to Paul, who tells us that the higher
powers are (...) of God as the Efficient (...) from God as the first and
highest of the Rank and Series, so the circles of the water are one from
another, all from the first mover, Magistracy abstractly considered, is not an
Ordinance of man, but of God; Man may create the Magistrate, the Magistracy is
of God; not only by permission, for so are tyrannies, violences,
exhorbitancies of the power, nor by approbation only, for then Magistracy
should owe more to man the maker, then God the approover; nor only by
suggestion of it to our nature, wherein there is so universal an instinct
toward Government for relief of our weak and impotent nature, more unarmed
then bruites, and so undefensible, that Aristotle confessed man to be (...) by
nature inclined to society, but it is of God, by institution and appointment,
by a silent word, Dixit, he said, let there be light, Dixi Psalm. 82. 6. I have
said ye are gods. And this is the word of God which comes unto the Magistrate,
as Christ says, John 10. 35. and so is the Minister of God, says Paul, and to
be obeyed, for the Lord, says my text: Marital authority is of God, yet the
woman has a free choice and consent in taking of an husband, and then is her
subjection and obedience due by virtue of Gods institution; you bring your
Plate to the mint, it is stamped with the superscription, then it is called
Caesar's coin, the States money, because it is current by their authority. From
the several sense of these words which may be all true, though not all
apposite; I infer two things.

1. That they which are for extirpation of all Civil government, do seem to
have put off humanity, and to have extinguished that universal sense and
instinct of all nations and of mankind; what are your Cities and Commonwealths
but heaps or herds of men rather then societies; companies may be of beasts,
societies are of men: If there be societies, there must be laws; if laws, there
must be Magistrates; the law gives life to the magistrate, the Magistrate life
to the law; Angels are occasional, Magistrates are standing Ministers of God.
He needs the agency of neither, he will use both.

2. This title is not given to the Magistrate in disparagement or diminution,
that had been no fit Argument to enforce subjection; but it shows the favor
of God in giving this Magna Charta to humane societies, as to choose such
forms of Government, and such persons for Governors, as he may stamp with his
Authority for our good; non potestatem, sed regem creat Respublica, the
Commonwealth creates not Magistracy, but the Magistrate; I would have better
thoughts of a Magistrate in a Commonwealth, then of a King in a Comedy: there
is a propter dominum, for the Lord.

Tacitus tells us in Rome. The Eastern Countries generally addicted to Kings,
suetus regibus Oriens, says he, in Tacitus; Athens, Carthage, Rome, famous
Commonwealths. The Israelites had some variations, but now under the Gospel
it is a general Maxim. The Principles, the Profession of the Gospel, though
abhorrent from heathenish religions, yet is consistent with all manner of Civil
Governments; the Jewish religion could not so well consist with other Policies,
but the Gospel, which may be preached through the world, bids no defiance to
the Civil magistracy. All the Kings and Judges of the earth may kiss the Son
without loss or detriment to their dignities. It sets not the slave free from
his master, but makes him a better servant, It sets not the subject free from
his superior but makes him a better subject, this is a good guest that meddles
not with the household government where he lies, but pays well for his
entertainment, you hear Christ say, give to Caesar, not take from Caesar that
which is Caesar's; therefore they must needs be mistaken that will have the
Gospel consist with no Christian Magistracy, which may well consist with any.

Caesar the Roman Emperor, under whose Empire those Countries, 1 Pet. 1. did
lie, for howsoever the name of a King was hateful to the Romans after the Regi
fugnum, yet the Greek Writers do frequently call the Emperor (...) King and so
the Scripture, Joh. 10. 15. (...). we have no king but Caesar, and in what hand
soever, one or more, that the Headship or Supremacy lies, the Scripture calls
that sovereignty, Kings, Revel. 17. 10. The seven heads are seven Kings, and
those were seven Soveraignties of Rome, as Kings, Consuls etc. many of which
are numbered by Tacitus in his first page, and in some such sense may be
understood, those places in the Judges. There was no King in Israel, no
Magistrate to restrain such arbitrary enormities; I speak this upon my
conscience, neither to flatter, nor yet to elevate the authority of Kings,
where they obtain, but to show that no jus Divinum falls more necessarily upon
that form of Government then another, and that the word translated supreme with
reference to subordinate Governors is elsewhere, Romans 13. 1 Timothy 2. ascribed
to all Magistrates, with reference to the subject, and may be so used here in
the judgment of learned Interpreters, and those words Governors sent by him,
are not (as some say) referred to the King, but to the remote antecedent, the
Lord; And Estius his reason is, The end of sending Governors to punish Calvin.
Estius.
evil doers, and protect them that do well, was not in the eye of the Roman
Emperor, but is always in the intention of God, that they should do so, I
will not labor to destroy either sense, that which ascribes the mission of
Subordinate Magistrates unto God is true and pious, that which derives their
Commission from the Supreme, is Supreme, is true and apposite to the Text. It
follows hence.

That not only Magistrates, but degrees thereof are needful, God hedges in the
authority of the Inferior Governor, the Presidents of Provinces, Proconsuls,
Curators from contempt, they are sent, they are Ministers of God, Ministers of
the Supreme, under Authority, as the Centurion said, yet in command; a twopence
has the stamp as well as a shilling.

The Subordinate Magistrate brings the benefit of common Justice home to our
own door, in Israel the small towns had a Triumvirate, three to sit in their
gates, the Cities three and twenty, and all with dependence upon the Sanedrim
or constant Parliament sitting at the Temple in Jerusalem.

That there be a Supreme, whose power extends to the whole sphere is needful in
the Commonwealth, but pernicious in the Church, except it be that of Christ,
which admits of no Compeer, no Second; In all Armies, all Commonwealths there
must be a Supremacy lodged somewhere, else it is like a faggot without a bond,
many sticks no faggot, justice cannot be finally done, and so not done, where
there is not a Center to give rest, and to stop, and determine all motions,
questions, quarrels, appeals, there is no order (say Philosophers) nisi cum
relatione ad aliquid primum, without reference, or respect to some First, and
therefore all Commonwealths, for the preservation of unity and peace within
themselves will have some Supremacy, which as the Center of a Circle is one,
and can be no more then one, I do not mean more then one man, but more then one
Supreme,, so our Apostle speaks of Governors, as many, of Supreme, as of one.

Both the Supreme and the Subordinate Governor, their office is, for the
punishment of those that do evil, and for the praise of them that do well: this
is the end of Magistracy, not always of the Magistrate; he may aim at the
dignity, not at the duty of his place, and clamber the tree to fill his pocket;
not to shake the fruit for them that are under it; but they are set above
others; for others; not for themselves: for (as Seneca said) the Commonwealth
is not for them, but they for the Commonwealth: they are called by names of
Dignity, Principalities, Eminent Powers, Gods; as by names of duty, and that in
respect of the whole Commonwealth, Foundations, Corner-stones fathers of their
country, in respect of the Church Nursing fathers, in respect of the laws
(...), Keepers of the laws; not Lords of them: in respect of offenders, they
are Gods swordbearers, in respect of well doers, shield-bearers, healers,
benefactors, this in respect of their office, but in respect of their private,
they may be Foxes, as Herod; Lions, as Nero.

2 For punishment, and for praise, the Apostle Paul too uses this word praise,
Rom 13. 3. the praise of a private man is commendation, the praise of a
Magistrate is encouragement and protection, if there were no severity in a
Commonwealth it would be quite overrun with wicked men, more intolerable then
wild beasts and vermin; There was no Magistrate or Heir of restraint in Laish,
Judges 18. 7. and so they became a prey easily, you co^ceive not their misery
of that which some call a liberty to do every one what is good in their own
eyes, better live where nothing, then where all things are lawful; And there
must be praise too, a Magistrates office is executed by his tongue, as well as
by his hand, this is a word that might have expressed a Magistrare even in
state of Innocence, wherein (some hold) there should have been Imperium blandum
though not onerosum, what need have good men, Saints (say they) of Civil
Magistracy the (...) of anti-Magistraticall men, of whom I may say as he said
of Cato, he speaks as if we were in Platoes Commonwealth not in Faece Romuli;
if we could make men, we should have less need to make Magistrates, yet there
would be need too, I would all were honest men that call themselves Saints; If
they were all Saints, they are not all Angels, they may do evil; Moses had a
great task, though most of his charge were Church Members, preventing justice
is an excellent part of a Magistrate: It Is a point of justice to whip an idle
beggar, but more excellent to prevent Idleness and beggary, a flock of sheep
must have a shepherd, though there be no Wolves in the flock, there may be
some about them. The Magistrate is no hinderance to goodness, which is
doubled, when one is both a good man, and a good subject.

3. For the punishment of evil doers, the praise of well doers, and herein he
speaks accurately and properly, so Paul, Romans 13. 3. If thou do evil fear; If
thou will not fear, do well, for the Magistrates are a terror to evil works;
Pilate spoke like a Magistrate what evil has he done, The Magistrate judges of
persons by their causes and their crimes; an ill man may be right in his cause,
a good man may be an evil doer, suffer not as evil doers, says the Apostle to
good Christians, in nostro Foro, we call a godly man a good man, you upon the
Exchange call an able and a rich man a good man, but as to the eye of the Law
and of the Magistrate, which should be but one, men are judged good or evil by
their crimes, or by their causes, not by their own persons, as the balance
tells you not which is Gold, which Iron, but which is good weight, and which too
light; and if in this diversity of Opinions among us, a Magistrate brided
happily by his opinion to think all of his judgment or party good men, and so
give them the white stone, and turn the edge of the axe toward others, then
upon that account it would follow that all the Christians in the world should
be judged evil doers, and all of them punished by the heathen Magistrate, and I
should think that the skin of such a Judge was worthy to be flead off, to make
a Cushion for other Judges to sit upon, for I think that which Latimer speaks
off, is worn out before now, Pardon me in this expression it is but against
acceptance of persons, in them that turn Judgment into wormwood, that either
justify the wicked, or take the righteousness of the righteous from him.

2. From what is said to private Christians.

That they are enjoined subjection to the Magistrate whether Supreme or
Subordinate, (...) the word used by Paul, Romans 13. Tit. 3. and by Peter here
enclosing all the duties which this relation does bespeak; Praying for him,
paying tribute to him, living under him, as Honor in the fifth Commandment;
Nullum Animal, says one, morosius homine, no creature more sturdy and peevish
then man; subjection is a hard duty to corrupt nature, but dominion sweet; The
Bramble would fain be King over the Trees, and calls too, and braggs of his
shadow, which is scarce able to hide a Grasshopper, and threatens fire to come
out of him to burn the Cedars, Judges 9. 15. Oh that some body would make me a
Judge, says Absalon; Subjection to obedience is not pleasing, subjection to
punishment more harsh, and yet so large is this subjection Omnis anima, Romans
13. 1. Must of necessity be subject, ver. 5. it is not a Point of liberty or
arbitrary choice, if a City or such a Company of people should agree, and make
an order that there should be no Magistracy, that agreement is null and void as
against the Law of God, and Nature, as I suppose.

I Have not read any pleadings against Magistracy in Heathen Authors, but
there are such to be found amongst Christians, against Christian Magistrates;
and thereby you may see what products are mis-begotten out of the Scripture,
wrested, and set upon the wrack, whereby it is made to speak what it never
meant, that place, 1 Cor. 7. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye servants of
men; pleads, say they, against servitude and subjection, and so it does to men's
lusts; But it carries further then they would have it, for by that rule that
there must be no servants, there must be no Masters, and then the rules given
to both are void; And that place Heb. 8. pleads against Ministers that should
be taught of God, and not every one of his brother; but it carries too far too,
for by that rule they must not preach no more then we: Monstrous and misshapen
births have been begotten upon the holy Scripture, by the unlearned folly, and
unsober wit of men, and as for those prohibitions of private revenge or
retaliation, Matthew. 5. They rather argue that God has put his sword into the
Magistrates hands for my good, and therefore, has forbidden me to smite with
it; we therefore plead for subjection to Magistracy, to their Authority, not
their lusts; neither do we by subjection to Magistracy which is of God, thereby
justify their sins and enormities whatsoever.

The Romans had pierced into Asia, and got possession by no better Title, then
the Lion, and the Fox could make them, and the Emperors that now had conquered
those Romans, were as wicked as the earth bore, and if subjection to their
Authority had drawn into consequence the justification of their Actions or
Injuries, then the injunction had been very hard, and more then God, or any
Magistrate good or bad does ordinarily require of any Subject; the subjection
of a child to his Father, does not justify the whoredom in which his father
did beget him.

for the Lords sake, this invites obedience and sweetens, and encourages it,
that it is for the Lord, by whom the Magistrate has his Authority; for when
he exercises it, he sustains as it were his Person, stands in his stead, bears
his Image, and is his Minister: it is the Magistrates bridle, that he rules for
God: It is the Subjects spur, that he obeyes for God. How little does he fear
the face of a great Man that is Commissioned from the Highest, you shall not be
afraid of the face of Man, for the judgment is Gods, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.

What an awful command lays it upon the Subject, especially, if a Christian,
when he sees God in the Magistrate: Now he will obey, not because he sees
fasces and securim, but for Conscience sake; the clearest example whereof, We
see in the Primitive Christians, whose power and number needed not to have
feared the sword, had they not more feared the sin of opposition, nor any
particular example in Scripture, is clearer then that of Ambrose, who durst not
side with Maximus a great Commander, though the Emperor young Valentinian was
both an Arrian Heretic, and had been intollerably injurious to the Church, and
to Ambrose himself at Millaine: How secure is that Magistrate without his
bundle of rods and axe, whose Subjects have Consciences, that can see God in
Magistracy, through all the Magistrate his sins and oppressions. It is
propter Dominum, that invites unto that sweetness the duty, that binds the
hands, and bridles the mouth, and it is that also that limits the subjection,
For the Lord; not against him, there is a laudable disobedience; Nature it self
teaches, Socrates to reply, as the Apostles did, We will obey God, rather then
you, else we obey not as an Israelite, but as a Jezreelite, that took the
command and destroyed Naboth. Here contrary to the sense of all good men, and
of reason are those Parasites of Authority, Court-flatterers, that can blow up
Authority, till it be too bigg for it self, and make them believe they are
gods, and must be obeyed, command they what they will.

For the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well; If the
Ship founder in the Sea, who can hope to secure his private Cabin, why does
water forsake his own Center to run upward? but to prevent a vacuitie in the
Universe; our own peace, lies in the peace of the City; and therefore says
the Scripture, Seek the peace of it, Jer. 29. 7. The labor is the Magistrates,
the good is ours: and it is the greatest good that we can expect or enjoy in
this life; viz. A quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and houestie, 1 Timothy 2. Godly and honest they make us not, but they make our lives quiet and
peaceable; through their vigilancie we sleep, through their care, we are
secure; through their public employment, we attend our private.

It is through the Magistrate, that we live not more belluin^, as a Heard of
Beasts, that every Enemy is not Master of our lives, that any man, (as Austine)
can say, Haec Villamea est, and good men have the most benefit by the
Magistrate; the miseries of Anarchy would fall most heavy on them; and
therefore, they of all men have least reason to cut down the Tree that most
shaddoweth them.

Thus far for Explication, the Applicacation follows, and first, generally to
the Magistrate, and to the Subject; then particularly, with respect to the
season.

To the MAGISTRATE, and that in three Uses.
1. THat he may lawfully take the sword which God and Man puts into his hand;
It is not lawful in a Heathen hand, and unlawful in a Christians. The sense
of all Orthodoxe Christians descending from the Apostles to these days, makes
it plain, He is the Minister of God, his sword bearer, his sheild-bearer; Let
it not be preached out of your hand by a Jesuit, in a Socinian, or in what
cloak soever.

It Is not much to be doubted, that such Emissaries have left their nests to
make Proselites amongst us, for where the sore is, there are the flies; nor any
wonder they should call the Pope Christ's vicar, when they are at home; and
Antichrist when they are here: when the Devil appeared to Christ as a Devil, he
comes with if's; If thou be the Son of God? when he is in the possessed, Then,
Thou art Christ the Son of God, when they are at home, the Magistrate is little
better then the Popes Executioner, or hangman, when they are here, they would
not have the Magistrate so much, being ready by their principles, and the old
revenge, to perform that office themselves, and therefore they are restless
until they accomplish that which Demosthenes observed, that the Wolves and
Foxes would be at agreement with the sheep, but they must first deliver up
their dogs, the old act is to bring Magistracy first out of reputation, and
then where is their authority; let them take what shape, and pipe what tune
they will, let not Argus close his eyes.

2. Remember that Government is not for them that Govern; but them that are
Governed: not for private, but public ends; every thing that moves, though it
be a stone, moves to the Center of the world, you are eccentrick when either
honor or wealth take you up; the shepherd may receive the fleece, and eat the
milk of his flock, but his office is to keep the sheep, for this cause, Romans
13. ye receive tribute because you do (...) attend mainly and continually on
Governing, Nehemiah upon occasion did not take it, but yet there is that is
called the bread of the Governor, cap. 5. 14.

3. If our subjection be propter Dominum, then use your authority propter
Dominum, he that keeps sheep feeds their bodies, he that rules over men that
have souls, must consider that you may not, cannot compel faith or conscience,
but you have a business in matter of Religion, not as Uzziah, but as Hezekiah
(says Dr. Reynolds) by encouraging the Ministers and pulling down the nests of
Idolatry, you know the fourth Commandment is directed to the Master, to the
father, to the Magistrate, The ten Tribes after they had cast off Gods Religion
never had a good King, and their Kingdom unsettled and tottering, as a learned
Knight observes from those words, 1 Kings 14. 15. they were as a reed shaken in
the water, that moves this way and that way, and never stands quiet, and
therefore let it be upon your hearts that you are the Ministers of God for
Government, to punish the evil and to praise the good, and we are the Ministers
of God for the reprooving of the evil, and encouragement of the good; Moses and
Aaron both helpful to one another, both Ministers of God in their way; and
though the Church and Commonwealth be two bodies, not severally but
respectively, yet one and the same man may be a member of both, and therefore
the soundness or sickness of the Church, is of great concernment to the
Commonwealth, both Physician and Surgeon are conversant about one body, the
one respects the inward disease, the other the outward sore, so Haereticus qui
errat, is under our, haereticus qui turbat under your office; we may be one
without the other but not in a Christian Commonwealth, and therefore let the
one uphold the other, Ministry uphold Magistracy, Magistracy uphold Ministry,
the want of the one will make too much work for the other, and let the Pole
that holds up the brazen Serpent, stand, I speak as to the office of the
Ministry, for their maintenance; the subject of the time for discourse, I have
little to say, nor is it needful to speak to you (blessed be God) but this
observe that God has seated our Argument in every other man's breast; even in
their breasts that maintain us, as if God would have them to feel their own
Arguments, and acknowledge ours in their own.

The Magistrate, for this cause receives tribute, because he attends on the
Commonwealth;

That Is our Argument.

The soldier has our Argument in his breast, who goes not to warfare at his
own charge.

The husbandman has it also, who plants a vineyard; who plowes, and sowes, and
does not reap the fruit?

The shepherd has our Argument at home, who feeds the flock, and eats not
the milk?

The very labourer has our Argument, for the labourer is worthy of his hire.

The Ox if he could speak (as once the Ass did, and reproved the madness of
the man) would use our Argument; I thrash, muzzle me not. And are not we in
these lists? Yea, for if we sow spiritual things, why should not we reap of
your carnal things, a fit Argument for a Merchant upon the Exchange, for this
is but a spiritual exchange, carnal things for Spiritual things; Happily they
will allow us Alms, but Scripture is not content with that word. It must be
honor, and because that might not be interpreted by a jejune reverence, it is
called a double honor, let any man in his calling, show a title better assured.

To the subject.
whether supreme, or subordinate; and to them I say, pay your duty to the
Magistrate for his Protection; pray for them, for all that are in Authority,
and hold up Moses hands by Prayer, 1 Timothy 2. and be subject to their
Authority, for it is of God; and as the old Proverb is, must, is for the King;
so there is a must here, You must be subject to the Magistrate, the branches of
it are lopt by very many, the Papists make him the supreme, yet a servant to
the Pope to bear up his train: The Donatist of old, and many now cry, Quid
Imperatori cum Eeclesia? and there are in the World, that are for Root and
Branch; but the Orthodox Christian, neither is a Parasite to flatter the
Authority into exorbitancie, nor a demolisher thereof.

If I had time to set before you the misery of Anarchy, I would make you
tremble at the thought of it, for then you should see men as motes in a
Sunbeame, fly up and down, one upward, and another down, a thousand ways, and
neither life nor liberty, nor property could be called your own, and what
should Paul do for his appeal to Caesar, let the men and their actions be what
they may, yet the Authority is for our good, Caesar noster est a nostro Domino
constitutus (says Tertullian) Caesar is ours, set over us by our Lord.

More particularly,
First, for you (my Lord) that are the setting Sun: It is your happiness that
you can use that speech of Hezekiah, There has been peace in your days; I
commend to you that excellent close of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 3. when he laid
down his Government, Whose Ox have I taken, whose Ass, or whom have I
defrauded, of whose hand have I received any bribe? Go off with thanksgivings
to God, and let this City and your own conscience give you thanks, but withal
set all accounts clear between God and your soul, and remember that a year of
Majoralty may bring more sin upon you, then all the days of your life: I
mean, such sins as are called our nostra lerna, our-other men's sins which
are such as happily a Magistrate little thinks of.

Secondly, For you the Electors, I suppose you know your rule, take heed of
that which is the bane of all societies, sedition and tumultuousnesse, and
unquietness, I know you may be deceived, in your choice, the Historian says
of Galba that he was omnium judic^o dignus imperio, nisi imperasset, some men's
sins go before, and some follow after, and we know not what unseen leakes may
be in a vessel, until, there be something put into it, but let your aim be
right and hearts be unbiased; It Is a great liberty you have to choose whom you
must be subject unto, and a great happiness that you have so many good men to
choose out off, we undervalue the greatest benefits when they are common, and
you lift up the hand in course many time, rather then in conscience.

In the general, your eye should be pitched upon a good man, and upon a fit
man: for every good man is not fit for this service, nor for this time. The
Hebrew Masters recount seven properties of a fit man, marked out in two places
of holy Scripture, Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 1.

First, An able man, that is as the word imports, a stout man, well resolved
against bribes and fears persuasions and menaces, not like an empty balance
that stands tottering, and a penny weight determines it. It is a cursed
Principle of Machiavels, among his other Paradoxes in policy; he would have a
subordinate Magistrate, instar molae trusatilis, like a hand-mill which a
superior Magistrate may easily turn round, as he will.

Secondly, Fearing God, for he that rules for God has need to fear him with a
pious fear: and he that fears God as a private man, will in all likely hood,
fear him as a Magistrate; in serving God being a Magistrate, in those things
wherein he cannot serve him, but as a Magistrate: For, In hoc, (says
Augustine,) serviunt Reges Deo, in quo non possunt nisi ut Reges.

Thirdly, Men of Truth, or just men. He that rules over men, must needs be
just, 2 Samuel, 23. and he that is by giving suum cuique, the long coat to the
Dwarf, if it be his: for default whereof, Cyrus his Master, whipped him when he
was a Boy, because he considered in the childish controversy that came before
him, were like a Tailor, for whom the Garment was most fit, then like a Judge
whose the coat was.

Fourthly, Hating Covetousness; that bribes throw not dust in his eyes. He is
the best Magistrate that is good for nothing, A rare Virtue!

Fifthly, A Wise Man; One that (as they say) has his third eye; that is,
Experience: For an ignorant Magistrate, does justice by adventure, and that
oftentimes is by misadventure. It is a saying of Luther, That if a wise man,
and a good man both cannot be had, rather choose a man liberally good, then
intollerably ignorant; As if you were to seek a Pilot, a Lawyer, a Physician,
you would choose such a one, as in his faculty is skillful.

Sixthly, A known man; or One of good fame for Reputation makes Authority
valued, which other wise is rendered contemptible.

Seventhly, One that is of the Chief of the Tribes, Deuteronomie 1. 15. A
Cedar, an Olive, a Vine, not a Bramble. For three things the Earth (says the
Scripture) is disquieted, A servant when he reigns, etc. Nec Bellua tetrior
ulla est.

And for Conclusion,

You Sir, that shall be Lord Major in Fifty three, as has been a year
male-ominated to the government of this City; do not you fear the Stars; every
old woman that can dream a tale is not one of the destinies: He gave this
reason, why the old Oracles in his time grew silent, because, says he, men are
grown minus creduli, do you trust God with your self, who has trusted you with
so great a City, enter your Office with prayer and fasting, that another spirit
may come upon you; and that he that has girt you, may bless you. Keep if it be
possible the State which the City has allowed you, as Joseph in Egypt did
that, which the King had put upon him, for he that despises himself is the
more easily despised by others; and let Religion have your Countenance, which
has crowned this land with so many blessings, such miraculous preservations,
as are peculiar to England; remember whose Minister you are, that so you may
have courage, and for what end, that you may maintain your comfort.

FINIS.
SUBJECTION TO MAGISTRATES BOTH Supreme and Subordinate.

Laid open in a Second SERMON upon that subject.

Preached at the Election of the Lord MAYOR of LONDON, on Michaelmas day, 1654.

By Richard Vines, preacher of Gods Word at Laurence Jury, London.

TITUS 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against St Dunstans Church. 1655.

The Second SERMON At the Election of the LORD MAYOR OF LONDON.
1 PET. 2. 15, 16.
BEing appointed to this service upon your last Election day in 1653. the
providence of God led me to that Text verses 13 1, 4. of this Chapter, and
because the two verses following are homogeneal to the same subject, and
suitable to the season, I will proceed,

Verses 15, 16. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God.

IN which words the Apostle re-inforces the charge laid upon all of Christian
name, converted Jews, and Gentiles, that lived in those Asiatick Provinces
specified 1 Pet. 1. 1. and consequently upon every soul, as Paul's expression
is, Romans 13. 1. of whatsoever elevation, they be in christianity (as Chrysostom
says.)

The charge given is of subjection to Magistracy, verse 13. every ordinance of
man, that obtains over the places where they live, tho different from that form
that was calculated for the meridian of the Jews native Country, whether the
Magistrate was Heathen or Christian; a Nero or a Constantine. Yea, and to every
rank of the scale of Magistracy, whether supreme or subordinate; for the fear
may force subjection rather to the Emperor, then an inferior Curator; yet that
which is for conscience sake, looks not so much at the value of the piece as at
the superscription, which is propter Dominum for the Lords sake.

And this charge is reinforced,
1. By reason given for it ver. 15. 2. By their reasons against it answered
ver. 16.
The reason given for it is twofold,
1. That it is the will of God. 2. That so they shall stop the mouth of
ignorant and foolish men, that calumniated Christians for seditious Beasts and
Antimagistratical Rebels.
Their tacit reason, or objection against this subjection appears ver. 16. to
be this.

Christianity is a free estate redeemed from slavery, especially to such men as
hate our name, our profession, our Lord, tread us down as dirt, make bonefires
of us, meat and sport for lions, drudges in their metal mines etc.

Which he answers,
1. By Concession. 2. By Correction.
1. By Concession he grants their liberty (...) as free Christianity is a free
state, by their redemption, by their spiritual nativity, Children of a free
venture, Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4.

2. By Correction, Correcting the abuse as not using the liberty, for a cloak
or vail of wickedness and sedition.

2. Regulating the use of it, but as the servants of God, who having ordained
the powers, is served by them, by your subjection to them.

For the order of my proceedings, I shall first unfold the Doctrinal matter
altogether. Then infer the Practical use of all. And lastly, make personal
application according to the season.

For the Doctrinal matter of the 15th verse. I sum it up thus.



Particularly the reasons are,
1. That this is a duty well pleasing to God, for it is his will. 2. That by so
well doing they shall gain or maintain the credit of religion, by silencing the
open mouth of ignorant and foolish men.
It is enjoined upon Christians by command, verse 13. submit your selves, and
it is also urged by Argument of reason in my text, and it is to be remarked,
with what importunity subjection is required of Christians in this place, in
the 13th of the Romans, and the 3d of Titus, (...). Romans 13. 5. you must needs
be subject, such importunity of command and reason is used, as may suggest to
us, some doubt of the indisposedness or aversion of Christians above other men
toward Magistracy. And indeed the Apostle signifies of some Pseudo-Christians
in the last times. 2 Timothy 3. 1. that they shall be lovers of themselves,
traitors, heady etc. having a form of godliness. Yea, and it seems there was
such a spawn of Christians in being even in those times, for both the Apostles
Peter and Jude, as if they spoke with one mouth, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jude 8. do tell
us of some of them that despised government, speak evil of dignities. And you
may conceive that from the examples of some, the infamy would redound upon the
whole profession; yet that this libertinisme flows from the lusts of professed
Christians, and not from the principles of Christianity, I prove thus.

1. Because Christianity does not extinguish the common law of nature, nor the
common notions of truth or goodness, that are in a natural conscience, but
rather ripens and improves them, for otherwise when one puts on the Christian,
he should put off the man. All truth is ours, all truth and goodness, though
the pearl be found in the dunghill yet it is set in the ring of Christianity, I
speak to wisemen says the Apostle, and again does not nature teach you; And
therefore the sense of authority must be as deeply planted in him who is (...)
by nature sociable as well as others and the sense of brutality as remote from
him, who has not the armor of horns and hoofs for his self-defence more then
other men.

2. The particular principles of Christianity do well consent with the use and
fruit of magistracy, and not in the least fight against, or oppose the office.

The use and fruit of it is a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, for this is good and acceptable with God. 1 Timothy 2. 3. Quietness and
godliness, Peace and honesty, what can be more agreeable to our profession.

That the principles of it are not of least tincture of aversness to the office
is plain, by the Doctrine which reckons the resistance thereof, the resistance
of the ordinance of God, and involves every resister under condemnation, Romans
13. 2. and by the grand pattern of our profession Christ Jesus, who being
tempted upon the question said, Date Caesari, and looked through Pilate to the
gift of his power from above; yea and wrought one of his miracles upon the ear
of an officer rashly wounded by Peter in defense of him.

The reason of this point is, that howsoever the Jewish religion in their
nation might have a government calculated and cut out unto it in some respects;
yet Christianity is so compounded and made up of spirituals, as may well comply
with any form of civil Commonwealth in the world with every ordinance of man,
whether monarchical etc. Or mixed; and therefore though it reform a nation, yet
need not form it: As the water washes the vessel, but complies with the form
of the vessel, be it a barrel or a bottle; and this is the point that the
Fathers do much insist upon in their Apologies, that their principles do not
fight against Magistratical authority.

3. As I have argued from the principles, so let me argue from the interest of
christianity, for a Christian has a greater fraught in this ship then another
man, His life, liberty, safety, property, peace, is secured to him by the
common Justice, as he is a subject; His godliness and honesty is secured by the
indulgence or law of the Magistrate as he is a Christian, and this is an
excellent couple godliness and honesty, for honesty gives credit, and many
times protection to godliness, for who is he that will harm you? 1 Pet. 3. 13.
yet if the outrage be so diabolical as to persecute the name, and profession of
godliness coupled with honesty, then in patience possess your souls, but you
must needs be subject, for this was the case of those Christians to whom the
Apostle writes this lesson.

If the tree drop thorough, you must not cut it down, for it is not your tree,
and it may yield better fruit.

If the fire burn the house, you must not quench all the fire in the town, for
the Community receives benefit, and the ordination is of God.

Thus far I have showen that neither the principles nor interests of
Christianity do carry the least tincture of indisposition against Magistracy,
and why then is the scripture so solicitous in inculcating upon them this duty
of subjection.

1. The reason that respects the Christians of those times is, that so great
was the provocation offered to this profession at that time, that the pot had
need to be cooled for running over, never was any religion of any kind so
universally and implacably entertained with causless outrage; which shows both
the diabolical spirit of the enemy and the verity of the Christian Religion.

2. The other respects Christians of all times, for they by their Christianity
have such Dignity, privileges and liberties of spiritual nature, that through
pride and corruption are very obnoxious to be abused to carnal liberty, and as
the next verse says, made a cloak of wickedness, especially if a wary
distinction be not kept between obedience and subjection; for obedience to
their commands is often unjust, because the thing commanded is unlawful, but
subjection respects the authority, which is the image of God and not to be
resisted.

So much for the general.

The first particular reason is, That so is the will of God. I shall not enter
into distinctions about Gods will; here may be conceived (...), the will of his
pleasure, according to which his purposes, his providence, and their effects
are ordered, and (...) Romans 12. 13. the good and acceptable will of God, which
orders our actions and obedience, for obedience respects not, as obedience the
matter of a command that it be profitable or pleasant, but the will of the
Commander, from whence it has the denomination of obedience.

The will of God is 1. the highest reason.

2. The most obliging of a Christian.

3. The most proper reason for subjection.

The will of God is the highest reason, as the command is the highest rule,
there must be some supreme will, for there is no order, sine relatione ad
aliquid primum, as in the order of causes; I will hear the heaven, the heaven
shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, and that shall hear
Jezreel, Hosea 2. 22. so in the scale of Magistracy, one rank is above another,
until we arise up to the supreme, for there is in every Commonwealth whether
in one hand or in more, some supreme, wherein there must be some arbitrariness
in legislation or law-making.

2. The will of God is most obliging of a Christian, whose prayer is fiat
voluntas Domini; It has the greatest awe upon him above all interests and all
reasons, it is the welspring of all saving grace, and the presence and favor
of God accompanies our obedience to his will, the father has not left me alone
John 8. 29. for I do always those things that please him.

3. It is the most proper, and preponderating reason that can be given for this
relation of Magistracy and subjection.

1. The ordinance of Magistracy is of God, the powers that be are ordained of
God Romans 13. 1.

2. This ordination is for the good of man, for he is the Minister of God for
good; the heathen could say the Commonwealth is not for the Magistrate, but he
for the Commonwealth, and therefore they are called Healers, Shields, Comers,
etc.

3. It makes all sufferings tolerable, even though the Magistrate use us
harshly, for it is the will of God.

4. It makes Christianity acceptable to Nations, because it yields subjection
to government, who otherwise would be extirpate and rooted out, etc.

And this the first reason, the second is that the will of God is, that we put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

In handling of which, I should have handled these points;

1. There will be calumnies cast upon Christianity.

2. They are ignorant and foolish men that calumniate Christianity.

3. Its Gods will that we should stop the mouth, and put these calumnies to
silence.

4. Its practical godliness of conversation, of which subjection to Authority
is a part, that puts to silence the mouths of profane men that are opened
against Religion; for he says (...).

And this point I would have spoken a little, to have shown, that it is not an
opinionative profession, but a practical conversation that gains reputation to
Religion, and cleares off seandals; but Religion without honesty is but for the
stage, brings Infamy from very Heathens; hardens men in their sins; opens the
mouth of scandals; causes an enemy to blaspheme, and heaps discomfort on our
selves.

So much for the reason, verse 15. now to the preoccupation of the objection,
We are free, verse 16. and the points are three.

1. That part of Christianity which is most obnoxious to abuse, is Christian
liberty.

2. The abuse of this liberty is to make it, or use it for a cloak of
wickedness, looseness, sedition.

3. The right use of this liberty is the employment and exercise of it in Gods
service.

1. This part is most obnoxious to abuse, the sound of the name suggests to
carnal ear, a carnal liberty. True liberty is a power to do what we ought, not
what we will. I confels Christianity is a free state, but the freedoms of this
city of God, this kingdom of Christ, are as the city and kingdom is not of this
world. A Christian is free from servility of a legal spirit, by the spirit of
Adoption, from the yoke of legal bondage, by Gospel doctrine, from dominion of
sin, by renewing grace; from condemnation and curse by the right of Christ; and
all through the redemption or price that ransomed him into freedom. But as to
his outward condition, no man his condition is better by Religion. He that is a
slave is not made free; He that has no title is not entitled to another man's
property, but a sanctified use of his own. He that is a private man is not made
a Ruler, much less is a wicked man let loose to lust and licentiousness.

The bond of filial subjection to parents; of servants to masters; of subjects
to magistrates is not dissolved, but strengthened and sweetened by
Christianity, we are free from dominion of men's lusts, not of men's laws.

2. The abuse of this liberty is to use it as a vail or cloak of wickedness,
and wickedness under such a cloak is double iniquity. The zelots among the
Jews, who were the greatest vipers that ever breathed, had the Temple, the
Religion, the freedom of that people for the cloak of their horrible outrages.

And we may justly complain, that almost the whole piece of Religion is cut out
into cloaks, and these cloakmen are of many parties, their cloaks of many
fashions.

The fiery zelot has a cloak for his fury, the zeal of God.

The libertine has a cloak for his looseness of life, Christian liberty.

The scandalous has a cloak for his scandals, he is free in conscience.

The Politician has a cloak for his dissimulation, he is made all things to
all men, to gain some.

And these cloaks are first for hiding their inward pretenses or intentions.

2. For coloring their absurd and unreasonable purposes.

3. For deceiving of simple men into their snare, by promise of sanctity and
liberty.

4. For defending their abominable and scandalous practices, tantum religio
potuit suadere malorum.

Oh Religion! how is thy precious name abused to be a servant to self ends, a
pander to their lusts, a stirrup to ambition, a stalking horse to their own
game, an Ivy-bush to draw customers, a painted sepulcher over stinking and
rotten bones?

3. The right use of Christian liberty is the employment and exercise of it in
Gods service, for Christ's freemen are Gods servants; as free, but as servants
of God, Romans 6. 18. being made free from sin, ye became the servants of God.
Grace is free, but there is no greater obligation to obedience. The law is a
law of liberty, but it is a bond of duty; let your freedom enlarge you to
service; let your service limit and bound your freedom, Gal. 5. 13. Brethren ye
have bin called to liberty, only use not your liberty for an occasion to the
flesh.

So much of the Doctrinal matter.

The Practical use follows.

Use 1. To encourage Magistracy and regulate it.

1. To encourage the Magistrate in acceptance of this power and in the
management of it; for he is the sword bearer and Minister of God for public
good, it is God that has made the people subject to this authority, and put
upon them this bridle of subjection, for else nullum animal moresius homine no
creature more froward then man.

2. To regulate the Magistrate that he rule for God, otherwise he dissolves
that very obedience by which men are bound to him, for it is the universal
sense of all men, that we must not give the things of God to Caesar, whether it
be fit to obey God rather then men, was a speech of natural light spoken by
Socrates before the Apostle was born: God and our selves and the Magistrate
too, are injured by such obedience. The Thebean legion as they were an eternal
example of patience in suffering and subjection to Authority, so of no
disobedience to his command.

2. To command the people to support, maintain, encourage, bear the frowardness
of authority, for it is the will of God; the Magistracy may pull down it self
by injustice and tyranny, but let not Gods servants pull down his image; for
unspeakable is the misery of Anarchy where every thing is lawful, and there
are as many tyrants as men, as many laws as wills, the Commonwealth is but
Cyclops Den, (...) etc. and all is turned into force, and what remedy is there,
and by whom, for as Histories tell us, the soldier when he draws the sword
most usually loses the scabbard, and in a common shipwreck no particular man
can expect to save his own cabin.

3. Abuse not Christian liberty into looseness of life, or opposition to just
authority; The Apostle above all precautions that, the titles of greater
freedom; saintship and holiness are dangerous engines in the hand of pride and
lust and self ends; a Christian Magistrate has most jealousy of these false
cloaks.

Some distinguish down Magistracy, by allowing the Heathen, not the Christian
Magistracy, and therefore think that this is to be levelled, as against
gospel-freedom, which is against the sense of all Christians since Constantine,
and the prayers of all before him. Is not a Christian more apt to preserve
godliness and honesty, which is the Magistrates work? Is the Christian Church
to be worse then the Jewish, and to have no nursing fathers, and when the
gospel comes in, must Magistracy go out a sad lesson: Is it not said Psalm. 2.
be wise therefore O ye Kings, kiss the Son, and must that kiss cost them, their
kingdoms for their wisdom.

But you reply, that a Christian is a law to himself, Authority destroys this
freedom, and this is the foundation of your utopia.

Well, and is he not a Minister to himself, and so no ministry, a law to
himself, and so no law of God in force, has he not a sabbath of his own, and
so no sabbath, a Magistrate to himself, and so no Magistrate?

This, as the Apostle says, is the cloak, but what is under it? we may see
what, namely, you would get the Magistrat's sword into your own hand, Law your
own, Authority your own, no property but yours, no liberty but yours, and then
as much of all as you will, and more then enough.

Others there are for a fifth Monarchy, and I doubt upon a like design, let us
not be taken with new words, Christ's kingdom does not come into rank or order
with secular Monarchies, as to be called fifth or sixth, for they sought down
another as you know, but my kingdom is not of this world, else would my
children fight, this kingdom of Christ is already set up Dan. 2, 24. in the
days of these kings says the Text, Messiah the Prince is the king, and he
rules his saints, and therefore it is a Jewish conceit to dream of a temporal,
and as they call it, a fifth Monarchy, for that conceit has cost the Jews
dear; and if greater glory be to come, yet we must not bring it in as Jews then
false christ's, by head and shoulders.

The personal application of this point is the next and the last part, of which
briefly.

1. To you the Electors of the Lord Mayor, of whom the less is needful, because
I believe he is already conceived in your thoughts, and this day only to be
born by the midwifry of your hands. Its said by Plato, (...). Community of
interest couples men, but privacy distracts and divides. Let the common
interest of the City render you all of a mind: and let no man pursue his
private respects. Its true, no man knows whether the bell be cracked or no until
it sound; but for to guide you in your Election, you have (as I showed in my
last,) certain characters given of a good and fit Magistrate, and shall not now
repea^. The Spirit of grace makes him good, and the spirit of government makes
him fit; and if he be e^emplary, he will teach by his example; if not, he can
hardly punish that in another whe^^of himself is guilty.

In Scripture Magistrates are called by great names of principalities and
powers, though ^o^e of the best men, and they are called by names of goodness,
shields, rulers, healers, corners, gods, which shows what they should
principally affect to be.

God ordains the Magistracy which we must necessarily obey, in things lawful;
you design the Magistrate that we may the more willingly submit, and so there
is a divine and humane creation both.

2. To you, nameless Sir, into whose hand the Lord Mayor that now is shall
resign up the sword of his authority, which with much wisdom and moderation he
has thus far executed and honored;

Remember that this great people are yours, to serve and observe your just
commands; and you are their servant to serve their just rights and privileges.
They choose you supreme in this orb and sphere, not sole; you are to be Co^sul,
not Dictator; the Honorable Aldermen, and the right Worshipful Common Council
have also their shoulders under this burden.

Be you encouraged to give up your self to public use, and to the interest of
this renowned City; neither betraying her liberties through cowardice, nor
hazarding them in rashness: And if there should arise cross winds under your
government, remember that you are Pilo^ of a ship, not fraught with your own
goods, but with the lives, liberties, and welfare of the whole City, and so as
your wisdom may dictate to you labor in such emergents, to put them into a
safe harbor, if it may be.

And let your courage and diligence run out against those flagitious sins that
undermine the peace of our Commonwealth, swearing, drunkenness, whoredom and
their nests; I say their nests, for the best reformation of such birds is to
pull down their nests.

And because there are amongst us a certain sort of Pagans in Christendom, that
use not the means of faith, but under the color of liberty, take a liberty for
no conscience, for lust and filthiness; remember that, remember is the first
word of the 4th Commandment, which God committed to parents, to masters, to
governors to see observed; for he that is a Magistrate without care of Relion,
may be compared rather to a herdsman of cattle then accounted a governor of
christians.

It may be your sword will not reach all of this sort, but you must know, that
the moral acts of a Magistrate may work much, his tongue, his frown, his word
of counsel and reproof, in all which he may worthily exercise his zeal for God.

And finally, let Magistracy and Ministry support one the other; for when one
of these twins decay and dye, the other will not long survive in any
slourishing condition.

FINIS.
SVBJECTION TO MAGISTRATES: BOTH Divine and Subordinate, Presented in a third
SERMON, Preached at the Election of the Lord Major of London, on Michaelmas
day, 1655.

By Richard Vines, Preacher of Gods Word at Laurence Jury London.

Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher power, for there is no
power but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun, over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1656.

Subjection to Magistrates both Supreme and Subordinate, The Third Sermon, at
the Election of the Lord Major of LONDON.
TITUS 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, etc.
SUbjection to Civil Magistracy, even that, which obtained in the world at
that time pressed upon them of Christian profession with such cogent Arguments;
as are used by St. Paul, Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. and by St Peter, 1. Epist. Cap. 2.
verse. 13, 14, 15. does perspicuously intimate that which Calvin observes, what
ado the Apostles had to contain the new World of Christianity within the true
bounds of this duty, which he calls in my text (...), obedience to Magistracy.
For

1 The aspect or influence of Civil Authority at that time, Heathenish, was
very malignant to Christianity.

2 The Gospel liberty unto which the Christians were called, was by many
Pseudochristians stretched beyond the line, and mistaken, or misused unto
scandal and abuse.

3 That old ferment of the Jews, being a mutinous and seditions temper against
all Foreign and Gentile authority, in defense of their own (...), had with
either Jewish Fables, Titus 1. 14. spread into the Island, and inflamed the
natural humor thereof, which (as one observed) was always seditious, and whose
infamous character given of them by Epimenides, one of their own, even a
Prophet of their own, the Apostle verifies, Titus 1. verse. 12, 13. The Cretians
are always liars, evil beasts, idle bellies.

Whether some particular Reason at that timeindisposed Christians to subjection
unto Magistracy? or whether the universal pride of man aspiring Adam-like to a
condition above himself? be the reason, that every Absalon aspires to be made
Judge, and every thistle or bramble aspires to be a King, I shall not now
enquire, but observe that not only the Apostles do inculcate this point of
subjection, but also in this text the Apostle charges the local Minister to put
the Christians, his Auditors in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers, to obey Magistrates, and so leaves the Doctrine, as by entail upon all
Ministers, and the duty upon all Christians, in all times.

In the Anatomy of this text, there will arise four considerable parts, which I
will form up into as many points of Doctrine.

1 Who the Remembrancer is, whom the Apostle does charge (...), to put them in
mind, and that is Titus, and all Colleagues with him in the Ministerial
Office, the Apostle one of the highest authority Ecclesiastical, provides for
the maintenance of the highest authority Political in the Commonwealth, and if
the people will submit to the Minister of Doctrine, it may be presumed they
will subject themselves to the Magistrate, who is the Minister of God for
government, this first part I sum up into this point.

1 That the Minister of the Word ought in his place and office to endeavor
that the Scepter of Majesty in the highest, the Sword of Magistratical
authority in the lower hand, be kept in possession of their rights and dues,
which are subjection and obedience of the people.

2 Whose Remembrancer the Minister is, and they are Christians by their
profession, who come to his crib to feed, Not heathens, who neither acknowledge
any authority of God in the Minister, nor are much moved to this duty of
obedience for conscience toward God, but rather for fear, whereof (I mean the
punishment) the Magistrate himself, not the Minister, is the proper executioner
or Minister (...), says the text, put them in mind, and so the second point
is.

No Christian who is by his Christianity municeps Coeli, a freeman of
Jerusalem, has by his Christianity any privilege that may exempt him from, or
loosen the bands of that civil Authority which is over him, no, though it
remain unchristian.

3 These things wherewith Christians must be charged in relation to civil
authority are summed up under two heads, subjection, obedience, put them in
mind (...). The one of these calls for subjection to the function or office,
remember your subordination, that you are placed in a lower orb, and therefore
what the Higher powers may look for of inferior subjects, what the master
though crabbed and crooked, may expect of his servants, that is, subjection,
you must perform, Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Titus 2. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 18, etc.

The other of these calls for obedience to their Laws and Commands, and that is
(...), which though in the notion of the word it signify to obey Magistrates
or Rulers, and is so turned in our last English Translation in this place, yet
is applied to obedience to God, Acts 5. 29, 32. or unto our listenings to the
persuasions of men, though no Magistrates, Acts 27. 21. I confess, that
subjection and obedience in common intention of speech do not much differ.

When the word subject is set alone without a second, it includes obedience,
Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Titus 2. verse 5. and 9 Luke 2. 51. Jam. 4. 7.

When the word obedient is set alone without a second it comprehends
subjection, Acts 5. 29, etc. (I mean this of a voluntary and not enforced
subjection. Luke 10. 17) But when both these words are used together in the
same place, as they are in this text, they may be more accurately distinguished.

Subjection relates to the person, that is supreme in place, function office,
and the contrary, or opposite hereunto is resistance; (...) and (...), are
opposed, Romans 13. 2. that is, subjection and resistance.

Obedience properly relates to the Magistrate his Edicts, Laws, lawful and
honest commands.

And it has ordinarily been pleaded by honest disobeyers of unjust commands;
We refuse not to be subject, we resist not, we oppose not the authority;
therefore we submit our selves to the penalty of the Magistrates infliction
without resistance; but we dare not, we will not perform the command enjoined,
Dan. 3. 18. and thus its plain, there may be subjection to just authority (for
that is good and lawful) when there is not obedience unto unjust commands: the
one being ordained of God; when the command may be contrary to, and against
Gods.

The third point is the sum of that debt, which the subject owes to the civil
Magistrate, is to be subject to him in his place or office, and to be obedient
to him in his commands; I might say honest obedience, but that I look not to be
carped, no more then the Apostles did, that gave this command to servants, to
obey their masters in all things, Col. 3. 22. nor yet (though I acknowledge the
subject, or the servant to be (as he said) (...) a rational instrument) would I
open a gap for every unquiet and unsober dispute, that on purpose, to shift off
the Magistrates or the Masters commands, may think it enough to pretend they
are not honest, and so the Master shall indeed be the Master, but the servant
is the Judge, the Magistrate is the Magistrate, but the subject is the Judge,
which indeed he is of his own action, by the judgment of Discretion, but not
of the command by the judgment of Authority, for that would be an easy way to
overturn both authority and obedience, and to leave all to the best disputant.

4 Those to whom this debt is to be paid, are the principalities and powers,
they are all that are in rank of Magistracy respectively, both the Highest and
the Subordinate in this Scale; Principalities and Powers, says the text,
(...), principalities, that is (...), supereminent, or superexcellent powers,
Romans 13. 1. that are in highest orb (...) powers, those that are Presidents of
Provinces, who though not in highest orb of Supremacy, are yet in a nearer
orb to you, as being in the Sphere where you live. So the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 2. 14. Commands subjection, whether to them he calls (...) Kings, so the
Greek Authors call the Roman Emperors, meaning by Kings, such as was at that
time (...) in the Soverignty, and by (...) Governors, the inferior Officers
and Governors under the Supreme, and the Apostle Paul thus expresses the
several ranks of Magistrates, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Kings, and all that are in authority.

The Point of Doctrine is,

That this debt of subjection and obedience is due to all that have share in
the Civil Government respectively, whether they be in the Supremacy or in
Subordination.

The superscription that is upon a two pence, owns the same authority as that
which is upon a twelvepence, that word, Romans 13. 4, 6, the Ruler is, (...),
Gods Minister to thee for good, Gods public officer commends all Magistracy to
us. If the Supreme Officer was like the Sun, which by his motion carries his
light through his whole circuit, we should need no more, but himself, but he is
like the Sea that having all fullness in it self, sends from it self foun^ains
and rivers to water all the Continent whither the Sea it self cannot come; And
God while he kept the chief Government over Israel (as I way say in his own
hand, whereupon Josephus calls it a Theocracy) did as we know, erect under
himself Judges or Dictators in their necessities who (as one observes) did
always prosper in their achievements, Cunaeus de Repub.
being (as I may say) Gods Lievtenants. In want of which we read, that there
was no King in Israel, not because the Sanhedrin did not sit at those times,
but because there was no Chief or Sovereign Magistrate that might exercise
coercion, and work deliverance in Gods stead. As for the dispensation of common
Justice they had the Seventy, the Viginti Triumvirate in the greater, and a
Triumvirate in the lesser Towns, and thus the public Justice was brought home
to them, till there arose some hard matter to be determined by Appeal, whose
judgment was final in the case, Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10, 11, 12.

And therefore, if there be any (as there are) that think it necessary that the
Judicials of the Jews, and that the form and mode of Government that obtained
amongst them be re-introduced into other States and Kingdoms they may please to
consider, that even the Jewish form was variable, that the Apostle Peter
commands Christian subjection to every humane ordinance, and that Paul says,
that the powers that be (that is in the world at that time) are ordained of
God, Romans 13. 2.

These are the four points, which being thus cut out shall be made up into
further use in their order.

From the first of them, the Ministers duty to put the people in mind of their
obedience to Magistracy you may learn.

1 This duty is charged upon the Minister as the public remembrancer of the
people to whom is committed the dispensation of sound doctrine, Titus 2. 1.
serving to keep them right in the duties of their relations toward one
another, and therefore it appears that God will honor the standing Ministry
with this public service, that the flock may not stand at any man's courtesy
that will feed them (I say not poison them) but expect it from some hand of
standing duty, and it appears that our Antimagistratical men, do for the same
reason cry down the Ministry, as Demosthenes observed the sheep were required
to deliver up their Dogs that wakened them by their batking at the coming of
Wolves or Thieves.

2 A faithful Ministry is very useful to Civil Magistracy in discharge of
this office of putting the people in mind of their subjection to authority,
for commonly people are querulous and waspishly froward against authority, and
subjection to man's nature is grievous, good service does the Minister of Gods
Word do for the Magistrate, who is also called the Minister of God in bearing
of his sword, and let these two Ministers like twins supporting one the other
flourish and live together, good service does the Minister also for the people
in warning them of their duty, and of their doing it for conscience sake, for
heathen Kingdoms and Policies that want this office of remembrancers do usually
more obey for wrath then conscience. Oh! let not the Minister of the Word who
is their Remembrancer cut the girdle of this relation between Magistrate and
subject by blowing the one up into Tyranny, or laying him low into contempt or
contumely, or by pulling away the other, viz. the subject as an Ivy from the
tree that supports and sustains it, for surely you ought not to turn your host
out of doors, that gives the Gospel house-room and hospitality in his
Territories, no though he were a Heathen, vae soli, woe be to either of them
that is alone, I know and am sorry that the Pulpit which is the Watchtower
whence this Remembrancer gives warning, is sometimes so partial and so
passionate as rather to seem to blow Sheba his Trumpet, or to throw dirt in the
face of Authority, for I believe that God has put this office on the Gospel
Minister, partly to sweeten and make the Gospel acceptable to States and
Magistrates, which otherwise as a Boutefeau would (to speak humanely) have been
hunted out of all places.

I confess, it is not our place as the Heralds to blazon titles, or
pragmatically to model forms and modes of Policy, such have produced unhappy
Empericks of the Body Politic, as unhappy as Abiathar in being factor for
Adonijah, 1 Kings 2. 26. or as Phaeton undertaking the Chariot of the Sun, but
our office is to put servants in mind to be subject (...). 1 Timothy 6. 1. to their
own masters, and wives to be subject, (...), 1 Pet. 3. 1. to their own
husbands, so the people to be subject to their own Magistrates, viz. the powers
that be in place and possession of Magistracy. And therefore according to their
partiality and fancy do cry up a Magistrate, that is of their own party or
opinion, and the same man they cry down that is otherwise minded, seem to me to
miss the true grounds of subjection to him, which Sophocles hit better upon,
saying, what then? Must we obey? Why not, says he? (...), for they are Rulers
in place of Magistracy, and the Apostle seems to hold to this rule, for he
checks his own mistake of calling Ananias the High Priest, whited wall; by
alleging that text of speaking evil of the Ruler of his people; and yet it is
probable he knew not that he came into that place by lineal succession, but
irregularly and surreptitiously, as most of them had done since the time of the
Macchabees, and our Savior told the captious Jews, that they receiving Caesar's
Coin a sign of his Soverignty must in reason give to Caesar what was his.

3 God is the countenancer and approver of Civil Magistracy, as appears in that
he will have the Minister of his Word to put the people in mind to be subject
to it, for it is the ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. and as the Romans made the
Tribunes (...), inviolable, so has God secured Magistracy from resistance by
denouncing damnation to resisters, God will maintain his own Ministers, and
such are Magistrates though Heathen, but you must distinguish between the
function or office it self, which maintains peace and safety, a peaceable and
quiet life in godliness and honesty, and between the unlawful commands and
lusts of the Magistrate, we may not resist the office, we must not obey the
unjust commands. If Jeroboam set up his Calves, or Nebuchadnezzar his Image, We
will not serve thy gods, Dan. 3. 38. is the best answer, our disobedience is
our best obedience, God has countenanced and honored disobeyers of sinful
commands, as we see in the three Worthies, but God has not favored seditious
perturbers of the Magistrate, as we see in Absalom and Sheba, etc.

From the second point I shall commend to your further satisfaction two things.

1 Let no professed Christian imagine himself to be by his Christianity the
more free, or exempt from the civil authority, that is over him though it be
Heathenish for this you shall neither learn from the head, nor from the
Doctrine of our Christian profession. Our Lord Christ for his part acknowledged
that Pilate his power over him was given of God, and our doctrine is, that
every man wherein he is called must therein abide with God, 1 Cor. 7. 24. not
forbidding a man thereby to better his condition (if we may) but to use it
rather, v. 21. but showing that his privileges though they be great, yet are
they spiritual, and that his outward condition and state is not changed, or
bettered by becoming Christian, the wife is not freed from her heathen
husband, the bond servant is not made free from his master, the Subject not
exempt from his tyrant, nor the prisoner from his prison, for then the Gospel
hook would catch selfe-ended persons for the bait sake, but we have a better
rule religio christiana non tollit ordinationes politicus the Christian
religion does not abrogate the wholesome ordinances of the State.

2 Neither does Christianity, prohibit a Christian to be a Magistrate, nor a
Christian subject to pay him subjection, It is true unto the unlawful commands
either of the heathen or Christian Magistrate it may be pleaded in bar, Acts
5. 29. We ought to obey God rather then men, but it was a spice of that
desperate Doctrine of those Pseudochristians the Gnostics to please their
deluded followers and themselves by promising liberty, 2 Pet. 2. 19. An egg of
the same bird was that fury (call ye it) or delusion of those Rustic
Peasants, Libertines of Germany in our ancestors days, who arose in such swarms
to take the sword out of the Magistrates hand to put it into their own
scabbard, and to level their estates, into more plainness and evenness,
pretending that the sword of civil Authority becomes not a Christian hand, nor
do we say they find it in such a hand in all the New Testament as if it might
please them to have Pilate a Judge because he judged Christ; no other must fit
us. But shall we think? that John would not forbid the Publican his office as
if inconsistent with Christianity, and Christ has forbidden the Magistrate
his; Are the Jewish Magistrates called Gods? and do the Prophets call them
Shields for their protection, Corners for their support, Nails for their
uniting of the people. Zac. 10. 6. Isa. 22. 23. Hos. 4. 18. Does the New
Testament call them Dignities, Principalities, Powers, yea the very heathen
Magistrates, Ministers and Officers for God and for thy Good. Romans 13. Do the
Heathens Plato and Homer call them (...), Saviors and Shepherds of the
people, (for so they are by the intention of their office and place, though
they be Nero's for blood and lust,) and shall they that are promised to be
nursing fathers, Isa. 49. that are commanded to be so wise as to kiss the son,
Psalm 2. that are prophefied to tread upon the Heathen Empire, and crush the
bloody Dragon, be unfit to make a nail in the Gospel Commonwealth?

What must we turn our direction cross to the Apostle, and put Christians in
mind not to be subject to Christian Magistrates, and make them incapable of
Government of Christians that are most fit for it, and for whom we must pray
that we may live, a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God, our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 13 Qui regna
dat coelestia, non adimit terrena, Will Christ take men's kingdoms away if they
turn Christians? Will he that is King of Kings have under his Empire no
Christian Kings? surely the Apostle commands, 1 Timothy 6. 2. Those servants that
have believing masters, the rather to do them service, and why the subject that
has a believing Magistrate should not do so too, I know not. In fine, I might
argue against this denial of Christian Magistracy by argument drawn from the
scanpall which it draws upon Religion (whereof Christ teaches every Christian
to be chary, Matthew. 17. 27.) but that I find this kind of Libertines are not
much moved with such arguments, nor are they much date or in request with many
that most pretend to holiness, in these times.

I have used this length upon this place of Doctrine, not because the sober
part of men (as I hope) do much need it, but as the Apostle says, 2 Th^s. 2.
2. That you be not soon sheken in mind, as that the day of Christ is at hand,
so I say to you that you be not shaken in mind, as that the Kingdom of Christ
(as some say) was at the threshold, even now in 1656. For as its said, Luke 17.
20. this Kingdom comes not with observation. Its a Jewish fancy to look for
such pomp and splendour as temporal Monarchs are furnished with; It is within and
already (says he) amongst you, for my Kingdom is not of this world. It was set
up in the days of those Kings (as Daniel says, Cap. 2. 44. and shall never be
destroyed, but certainly that such a temporal Kingdom of Christ is so near as
shall put down the temporal civil Magistracy as now it obtains, as Tapers that
are eclipsed by the Sun, or Candle-rushes put out by Torches, is more then I
can affirm, and has some unpleasant reflection upon the Magistracy Christian.

From the third Point observe:

That this great debt of subjection and obedience be duly paid without
grudging, two things call for payment. 1 The command of God whose Officer the
Magistrate is. 2 Your own good by whom you sleep, you walk, you are masters
of your own, you are Masters of your lives, you hold all these at this
Rent-service, your subjection. There is a certain light in man's mind, that
tells them they cannot live together in society without this nail, the mutinous
members that rose up against the belly for eating up their labors were quieted
by this oratory, that it did but digest the meat for them, nothing more
pernicions then the inferior his refusal of obedience to the Magistrate,
especially you that are Christians have most benefit by Magistracy, for you are
exposed to more envy of wicked men by your profession, and are by your
principles more unarmed from private revenge.

Besides that, you hold your Religion, your greatest treasure in peaceable
possession by his inspection and protection, except the Magistrate shall
profess himself a Gallio that cares for no such thing, or be like Esarhaddon,
that sent into the Kingdom of subdued Israel, a mixture or gallimaufrey of
several Religions in design, ut in commune consulere non sineret religionum
diversitas, that is, That diversity of Religion might hinder common counsels.

But this Province, I confess, properly belongs to the Sovereigne, though for
the executive part to every Magistrate in his order and place, as the cause of
the false prophet pertained to the Supreme Judicature, therefore our Savior
says (as Cunaeus observes) Cunaeus de Repub.
that a Prophet could not perish out of Jerusalem. Blasphemy hurts the name,
Heresy the Truth, Idolatry the worship of God, of these the Magistrate is as
he is called the heir of restraint, Judges 18. 17. for in this the Prince as a
Prince may serve God and cannot do it as he is as a private man, I bespeak this
at the Magistrates hand, I mean restraint, for that God expects it at his hand
is plain by that, that Idolatry was set up in Micah his house, Judges 17. 8.
because at that time there was no King in Israel. Those that said, Quid
Imperatoricum Ecclesia (the Donatists) are justly upbraided by Augustine, that
when the Emperor was against them, they cried that cry, When for them they
changed their note as their own partiality and interest led them, as all such
kind of spirits, will still do at this day.

The Magistrate will punish corporal adultery, will prohibit the sale of
poisonous Drugs, and there is no great reason, but that the calamity of the
Commonwealth may be prevented, which may accure by depravation of Religion,
for thereby Respublica detrimentum capit, as History and Experience may inform;
as for the Ministers way, it is conviction, so Christ dealt with the Saducees,
and the Churches way is binding by Coercion; and the Magistrates way, is
restraint an coercion in a civil way.

The Doctrine of this Church always was, that the intermedling of the Civil
Magistrate in sacris, was not that of Uzzia, but of Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. not
to perform them, but to see them done, as Reinolds against Heart says. The
Inferences from the fourth point are these which follow.

1 To put you in mind of the Extent of this duty of subjection and obedience,
it reaches from him that is in highest, to him that is of lowest rank in
Magistracy, all that have the stamp or mark of authority upon them, though the
money differ in value, yet there is a superscription on the least piece, which
speaks the same authority, the image of Caesar was upon a penny. The lower
Officers are the Supreme, his eyes, ears, hands, and therefore in them
Magistracy may be wounded, be subject, (says the Apostle) to every ordinance
of man, whether he be Supreme, or Governors under him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and it
must be to both for the same reason, for the Lords sake, for conscience sake,
Romans 13. The honor of a child due to his father, there, the subjection of a
servant to a Master, the respect of a wife toward a Husband, and so the
subjection of a subject to a Magistrate are not paid according to the grandeur
of the person of the Superior, but according to the relation in which he
stands, to thee and me; but yet this is not so much considered as it ought to
be.

2 To encourage the Magistrate what he may justly expect from the people under
him, while he acts within his sphere, and stretches not his commands beyond his
place; so though he be in lowestorbe, yet he has by office a share, and some
pittance of authority wherein as Gods Minister for the conservation of the
Peace and safety of the body he may expect protection and act (boldly, though
not proudly) as not fearing the contempt of lofty spirits, but let every lower
officer, carry in his eye the law of his place, for though the zeal of Phineas
be highly commended by God in such a case as many men do not understand the
warrant, which doubtless was unquestionable, as also that of Moses in his
killing the Egyptian, yet ordinarily, the subordinate Magistrate shall do well
to observe the law of his place and verge of his power, so that he himself is
like the genus subalternum, that is, but a private man in respect of that
authority which is above, and Paramount to the place that he is in, and we know
that a two pence will go but for a two pence, though it have a lawful
superscription as a bigger piece.

3 To enform the subject that howsoever he may be a greater man in birth,
estate, riches, etc. then the Magistrate, whom he disdainfully overlooks, as
the Cedar does the shrub, yet that God does command subjection and obedience to
the Magistrate both supreme and lower, not merely for or according to the
length of his sword, but for conscience toward God, upon whom the despising of
his meanest Ministers reflects dishonor, and unto whom it is a displeasure, as
the clipping but of two pe^ces as to the Prince, whose honor is thereby taken to
be diminished, though they be of small value.

I shall conclude with a word to you that are the Electors of this next years
Lord Major, know that your (...) or Suffrage, is a talent that is put into your
hand, of which you must give account, it was an ancient constitution in the
Election of a Bishop, Ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum: not seniority
or order of course, but merit should make a Bishop. I know not whom you have in
eye, let both be, if you please, and as it was said, 1 Samuel 16. 8. Look not
upon externals, the man's countenance, but look unto those seven qualifications,
(as the Hebrews number them) which God requires in a Head or Judge, Exodus 18.
21. Deuteronomy. 1. 15. which are all required (as is observed) to be found in him
that is but one of Triumvirate, or but a Captain of Tens, how much more in a
Lord Major of London.

And you, Sir, whom the Lord will honor, pray that God would please to
inaugurate you into your Government by pouring another spirit on you, and the
Lord support and guide you to follow the pattern of their wisdom that have
broke the Ice before you in this weighty service.

FINIS.
The Books following are printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against S. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet.
12 Sermons preached upon several eminent occasions by Mr. Richard Vines. Viz.

1 Calebs Integrity, A Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, on Numb. 14, 24.

2 The Imposture of Seducing Teachers, discovered in a Spittle Sermon before
the Lord Major, Aldermen, etc. On Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.

3 Magnalia Dei ab Aquilone, A Thanksgiving Sermon before both Houses of
Parliament, on Isai. 63. 8.

4 The posture of David's spirit in a doubtful Condition, a Fast Sermon before
the House of Commons, on 2 Samuel 15 25, 26.

5 The Happiness of Israel, A Thanksgiving Sermon before both Houses of
Parliament, and the City of London, on Deuteronomy. 33. 29.

6 The purifying unclean Hearts and Hands, A Fast Sermon before the House of
Commons, on James 4. 6.

7 The Hearse of the Renowned Robert Earl of Essex, A Sermon at his Funeral on
2 Samuel 3. 38.

8 The Authors, Nature and Danger of Heresy, a Fast Sermon before the House of
Commons, on 2 Col. 2. 1.

9, 10, 11. Subjection to Magistrates both supreme and subordinate, in three
Sermons preached at the Elections of the Lord Major of the City of London, 3
years successively, on 2 Pet 13. 14, 15, 16.

12 Corruption of Mind described, In a Sermon preached at Paul's on 2 Cor. 2.
17.

The Growth and Spreading of Heresy, a Fast Sermon before the House of Commons
by Mr. Thomas Hodges on 2 Pet. 2. 2.

The Noble Order, a Fast Sermon before the House of Lords by Mr. Daniel Evance,
on 1 Samuel 2. 30.

A Vindication of the Birth, Privilege or Covenant Holiness of Believers and
their Office in the times of the Gospel, with the right of Infants to Baptism,
by Mr. Thomas Blake in answer to Mr. Tombs.

Vindiciae Foederis, or a Treatise of the Covenant of God entered with mankind
in the several kinds and degrees of it by Mr. Thomas Blake.

The Covenant sealed, or a Treatise of the Sacraments of both Covenants,
Polemicall aod Practical, especially of the Sacraments of the Covenant of
Grace, by Mr. Thomas Blake.

Saint Augustines Confessions, translated into English, illustrated with notes,
wherein diverse Antiquities are explained by Dr. Wats.

A New A. B. C. or short Catechism composed according to the Rules and
Directions concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in case
of ignorance; published for the help of ignorant people by Mr. John Buckley
Pastor of Thurlestone in Devon.

THE CORRUPTION OF MIND.

DESCRIBED.

In a Sermon preached at Paul's the 24. day of June. 1655.

By RICHARD VINES Preacher of Gods Word at Laurence-Jury, London.

2 COR. 2. 17. We are not as many which corrupt the Word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God speak we in Christ.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street.

The Corruption of Mind DESCRIBED.
2 Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ, or (...) toward Christ.
AS the mother of Christ truly was, so the Church of Christ may be truly called
(...) (as Clem. Alex. says) a virgin mother.

The fruitfulness of her womb to bring forth children unto God.

The fullness of her breasts to bring them up unto God, speak her a mother.

The simplicity of the faith, chastity of worship, sincerity of love, integrity
of life, speak her a virgin.

Christ answers the type of him the high Priest, Levit. 21. 14. A widow or a
harlot, he shall not take, but he shall take a virgin to wife.

And therefore it is the scope of the Gospel Ministers whom God sends (as
Abraham did his servant with Commission to procure a wife for his son) (...) to
fit and treat a match to espouse chaste virgins unto Christ, ver. 2.

Which scope if we do but carry in our eye, and aim at in our Ministry, we
should avoid the too much used folly, and embrace the successful foolishness
of Gospel-preaching. We may justly ask the cause of our Apostle his fear, lest
this Corinthian virgin should become a Thais; for unjust suspicion is a kind of
slander to chastity: and the question is, how the Apostle could say, I am
jealous; for the virgin was not espoused to him, but Christ's Ministers are but
the spokes-men, the (...), treating for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. they neither sow
nor mow for themselves, therefore he takes off the doubt in that expression, I
am jealous over you (...), with jealousy of God.

And he gives the reason; The first Adams Eve was corrupted from her virgin
righteousness, and so may the second Adams espoused virgin (the Corinthian
Church) be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Eve by the Serpent
which was Satanae leno, the Devils pander. The Corinthians by such Preachers as
he describes to be (...), 2. Cor. 2 17. Corrupters of the Word, as hucksters by
their mixtures do jugulare vinum, adulterate the viginity of good wine.

In these words you may consider two things.

1 The object of the Apostle his fear.

2 The instance or example, whence he draws a similitude, showing the way and
means of accomplishing that he fears.

1 The thing he fears is the corruption and constupration of this espoused
virgin, which corruption he describes,

1 By the seat of it, the mind, (...) lest your minds be corrupted, for the
foul vessel corrupts the purest liquor, corruption begins in the mind, as
they say the fish begins to stink at the head, and we know defluxions from the
head corrupt the vitals and lower region.

2 The term a quo, is the simplicity or chastity that is toward Christ, which
they had before, and which is required in them that are espoused to Christ
Jesus, who are then corrupted, when they generate and deviate from their
simplicity of faith and worship; for, we cannot say of any of these virgins
espoused to Christ, as was said of that virgin, the mother of our Lord, that
before they came together, she was found to be with child by the holy Ghost.

2 The instance or example made use of for describing the way of corrupting the
mind from the simplicity that is in Christ, is the first and ancientest
example in the world, lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve, etc. This
part of the Text contains the sicut and sic the As, So, and there are four
things in it.

As the Serpent, that is, Satan in his instrument; for the Devil appears not in
his own colors, the Serpent does not always wear the same slough or skin,
the Devil sheaths himself in a fit case for his purpose, for he is (...)
unsociable with man; therefore has his ministers, ver. 15. deceitful workers,
false Apostles, and these instruments he puts on, he tempts the proud by, ye
shall be as Gods, the sensual by the promise, liberty, and some by ostentation
of holiness; for, there is a Pharisaical, a monastical, a superstitious
holiness, a holiness of man's making, he tempts Christ by Peter, Come behind
me, Satan.

2 The Serpent beguiled the woman Eve, for the woman by the Serpent, the man by
the woman, the stronger by the weaker vessel, the husband by the wife; as the
Angler takes the small fish by a worm, and then that small fish taken does
become a bait for the greater fish; so it is said of his agents they lead
captive silly women, they deceive the hearts of the sipmle, Romans 16. 18

3 The way of the Serpents deceiving the woman, was by corrupting of her mind,
see its the Apostles observation, 1 Timothy 2. 14. that not the man, but the woman
was deceived, because she believed that God had enviously set them in a lower
Orb than they might be in, if they eat of the fruit of that tree of knowledge.

4 This deceiving of the woman was by subtilty, as it appears by many respects,
wherein the serpent prevaricated the words of God, and perverted their meaning,
this subtilty or (...), Cogging of the dice is ascribed to deceivers, Ephesians. 4.
14.

The sum is,

The Gospel-state of the Church is called a new Creation: I create a new
heavens and a new earth; in this new creation God has set forth another Adam
Jesus Christ, out of this Adam dying, as out of the first sleeping, God has
formed a Church, this Church is espoused to the Lord Christ, as Eve was to the
first as a chaste virgin, and there are Serpents now, as there was one then,
that attempt the corrupting of the virginity of this Church; and therefore
says the Apostle, But I fear, etc.

From the first part of the text, the thing feared, I take up two Doctrines.

1 The simplicity that is in Christ, is to be holden untainted.

2 The corruption of the mind is the cause of deviation, or recess from that
simplicity.

I begin with the first.

The virgin chastity of the soul espoused to Christ Jesus, which loves not to
be painted with any Fucus of meretricious gaudiness, simpleness or simplicity
in vulgar speech, and sometimes in Scripture sounds toward foolish credulity
or want of wit.

But in the true notion of the word it signifies a freedom from composition,
and so we call the simplicity of Gods being, which is without all composition.

Most commonly it is a freedom from mixture of heterogeneal things which might
adulterate purity. In Doctrine unlearnedness, in faith unfainedness in love
sincerity, in worship chastity, in life and conversation integrity, do make up
that we call simplicity of Christ, which I shall compendiate into these three.

1 Simplicity of Doctrine. 2 Of Worship. 3 Of life.
1 The simplicity of Christ was personal; for being in the form of God, he
emptied himself, and took on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 6.

Official, in the acting of offices of his Priest, Prophet, and King, in great
simplicity.

Doctrinal, in the preaching of the Gospel.

Conversionall, in the deportment of his life.

But now I speak of the simplicity of his Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Gospel
which is a mystery that exceeds in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9. and which the Angels
stoop down to pry into, and yet is in contempt as foolishness with the wisdom
of this world that Which is a quintessence above al clementary learning, and
transcendent above every predicament, has been entertained with Stand thou
here, or sit under my footstool; whereas that which the Apostle calls vain
Philosophy, and (...), science falsely so called, has been entertained with Sit
thou here in a good place. The Doctrine of which you are born, is called (...),
incorruptible sad, and which you are nourished by, is called (...), sincere
milk, which denotes simplicity. Christ for righteousness, Christ for a root on
whom the branches do live dependingly, for the root bears them, and
derivingly, for the root feeds them is the sum of this doctrine.

Here is no mixture of Jewish rites, as if we would look for Christ in that
manger wherein he lay when he was a babe; the bird is now hatched, and the
eggshel lies empty.

Here is no corrival of man's works to spoil this simplicity, there remains no
place for them, as they are meritorious, for that sets them in the chair of
Christ; nor as they are motives of God to justify, for that sets them in the
place of freegrace, nor as conditions of the Covenant, for that sets them in
the place of faith, but as they are fruits of holiness, for that sets them in
their own place, assigned to them by this Doctrine.

2 Simplicity of worship, which is called spirit, and truth Joh. 4. 23. not
Judaicall and shadowish, not Samaritan and idolatrous, but spiritual and inward.

The Apostle calls the Jewish types, which were rich, beggarly Elements, we
have them in the rich plainness of the Gospel. In matter of worship, that of
Austin is the truth, and Socrates had seen it before, colendus est quomodo se
colendum praeceperit, as himself has commanded.

Those that were mint-masters of worship, used to feign correspondence with
some deity, that under that reputation they might vend off their devices.

God must stamp that worship as shall be current, man is apt to indulge his eye
in Gods worship; It Is the hardest thing (says one) to leave our eye and fancy
behind us (as Abraham did his servants, when we go up into the monnt to
sacrifice.) The spiritual part of religion, is the hardest part.

If we look into Justin Martyr, and see how the dress of worship was changed,
by degrees we shall find, that it became at length quasi reductus in Ecclesiam
Judaismus, unbecoming the purity of this virgin.

3 The simplicity of life; It was an excellent testimonial subscribed by the
Apostle his conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 2. that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we
have had our conversation in this world.

The form of godliness, is but a Mathematical body, consisting of lineaments
only: Religion is practical and always married to honesty and righteousness
toward men; religious dishonesty is worse than a Christian married to a
Heathen; in the times we live, that saying is too true, universus mundus
exercet histrioniam, all men almost disguise and act parts.

Men either make it a stalking horse to their own game, a footstool to their
ends, a covert of gold for their filthy designs, or lodge it only in the
cock-loft of a cold brain, and not in the warm room of affections.

And the simplicity of Christ, is broken into a multiplicity of senses and
ways.

Let this Point for use recommend to Ministers and people both the simplicity
of Christ.

1 To the Ministry; for though this be not a place to teach them, yet it is a
place to teach you what to say, and what to expect of Archippus, videlicet the
simplicity of Christ both in the matter and manner of the delivery of this
Doctrine.

1 Simplicity for the matter of the Doctrine, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, faith he that had sitten at the feet of Gamaliel; for (though that of
Justin Martyr be true, (...), All truth spoken by Plato or Aristotle is ours,
and that which is true in Philosophy; is true also in every place; yet) it is
of the seed of the Word, quod Christus nascitur in cord auditorum.

We must set bread before hungry souls, and not be like the Schoolmen, that
set men upon gnawing hard stones.

All learning may be spent upon the simplicity of the Gospel.

In breaking down strong holds, meeting with subtilty of men's hearts, raising
up the dejected Spirit prostrate under sin, counter-mining the methods and
stratagems of the Devil, and you will find that the old Adam in men's hearts
is too hard for young Melancthon, and who is sufficient for these things?

2 Simplicity for manner of delivery for painted glass is more gaudy, but
clear glass transmits more light, the rule is to clothe spiritual things with
spiritual words 1 Cor. 2. 13.

Its vain oil that is spent in strong lines, that hang together, as sand
without lime, standing together as letters in the Hebrew, one not touching
another.

Let a crucified Christ be preached in a crucified Phrase, and though you preach
not with embroidery of silver and gold, yet surge and ambula, if you make the
hearer arise and walk, its far the better.

It is not (...), to divide the Word a right (a word taken from culling up of
the sacrifices) to shred the intrals into mince meat, or to put the text to
death and torment, so as to make the people eat the flesh with the blood; Keep
the true pattern of wholesome words.

The People
Are exhorted to hold fast this threefold simplicity of Christ in Doctrine
worship, and conversation.

In Doctrine; All Scripture centers in, and looks to Christ, both Old Testament
and New as the Cherubims to one another, and both to the mercy seat; he was
then swathed up in types, he is now unvaled in a rich plainnes of the Gospel,
those precious stones which God promises to build his Church, Isa. 54. 13. Do
all come but to this, All thy children shall be taught of God.

In worship, spirit and truth are better than Jerusalem and this mountain,
therefore be satisfied in simplicity of Gospel-sacraments, which as DuPlessis
observes, have been made by men, the port-gates of superstititon and curiosity,
because the eye has somewhat to do in them, as corruption began at the tree in
Paradise, and came in by the eye.

In life, that your voice be not only smooth, and hands rough; for practical
holiness is the life of religion, else we may have golden heads, and feet of
clay.

To conclude, let it be our joint aim, the simplicity that is in Christ, and
be not too indulgent to your ears, which has sometime been the vanity of
hearers of those Sermons at Paul's, coming hither for Jewels to hang in their
ears, rather then for wholesome Bread.

Let not the tree of Knowledge be preferred before the tree of life, lest when
you come to die, you cry out with Croesus, Solon, Solon, who had before time
taught him of blessedness without regard.

There is such multiplicity of opinions, that most men count it impossible to
reduce the swarm into one hive, especially because men usually lay so much
weight, every man upon his own opinion, not considering that the kingdom of God
consists not in meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Hence it is that one unchurches another, and unchrists
another, and solos credit habendos esse deos quos ipse colit, as the Poet
anciently leaves the question about the bigness, distance, motion of the Sun,
to Mathematicians, thou may have as much benefit by the Sun, as they that
altercate about them.

Above all things lay not the foundation of your communion in the agreement one
of another with you in all your private opinions, that is a principle that will
divide the Church in semper divisibilia, that makes the foundation of the house
of the twig of a tree, not of the body.

And peradventure, as there are not two of a hundred of one face, so not of one
opinion in all things extrinsecal, nay happily, says a learned man, not Peter
and Paul.

Certa sunt in paucis, (says Tertullian) fundamentals are few, they that make
too many of them, make the fewer Christians, if a man hold fast the simplicity
of Christ in Doctrine, worship, life; though not admitted into your fellowship,
yet they will be in your Communion through Christ, whether you will or no.

Doct. 2d.
The Corruption of the mind is the cause of deviation, or recess from the
simplicity that is in Christ.

This Point gives occasion to entreat of the corruption of the mind; the word
(...) sometimes signifies plots, devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11 ordinarily the
reasonings, apprehension, judgment, the leading faculty of the soul, which is
the subject and seat of this corruption.

This is not meant of natural corruption, which is a part of original fin, for
it is the corruption of Gospel Truth formerly received, especially doctrinall
corruption: and therefore the Apostle having said, Christ, the same yesterday,
to day and for ever; presently adds, Be not carried away by diverse and strange
Doctrines, Heb. 13. 9.

The Text affords me three things, for the opening of this Point.

1 The corruption of mind here feared, is of them that have received the
virgin truth; a sad thing that they that blossom so fair, should be blasted or
cankered; it is not corruption of life he fears, but of mind; many are
tainted in their intellectuals, that make a fair show in morals; the Apostle
prophesies of a time that will come, That men will not endure sound doctrine
(they will not embrace, nay, they will not endure it) but will turn away their
ears from the truth, and be turned to fables, 2 Timothy 4. 3.

2 This corruption of mind is to be feared, both by Ministers for the flock,
and also by parents and masters, yet there are few, as woeful experience shows
us; and therefore young men, and unballast are negligently suffered without
bridle to rush into the infection, as if it was nothing to have the leprosy in
the head, to make shipwreck of faith, to corrupt the simplicity of Christ to
bear that fearful brand, 2 Timothy 3. 8. men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, The light of the body (says our Savior) is the eye. If
that be single, the whole body is full of light; if evil, the bed is full of
darkness, the mind is the Pilot or Steers-man, and if we weigh truths at a
false beam, we may take and mistak^ the most desperate error for the most
precious truth.

3 The first point or step of recess and of deviation from the simplicity of
Christ, is the corruption of mind, how many stairs do men fall? how many
floores high, until they fall even into Atheism, from a zealous profession? A
reprobate mind is the punishment of a corrupt mind, To. 1. 28 They did not like
to retein God in their knowledge, therefore God gave them over to a reprobate
mind: therefore we had need to keep principles pure; for the cloud, that at
first shows, but like a man's hand, may suddenly overspread the whole heaven.

The causes of this corruption of mind, are these and such like.
1 The mind being the upper region, is corrupted from the lower region;
passions, lusts, interests by-ends, do bribe the mind to be advocate for
error, and mis-biasse the judgment; the staff that is straight of it self,
seems crooked in the water, by refraction of the species, or duplicity of the
medium; and we know that our eye or brain is distempered by suffusions of
choler, etc. from a foul stomach.

2 Ungroundedness in the truth, betrays the mind to deceit and error; an
empty barn is soon blown down; oh, that our people were so ungrounded in
Catechistical doctrine, which is indeed the reason, that they are an easy prey
to all kind of Sectaries, and do cedere occupanti (as I may say) fall to the
first occupant.

3 A mere notion, which is like light without heat, a winter-snow, a thing
without sense, and feeling of any powerful operation, and work of truth upon
the heart is but a slender guard from this corruption of the mind; a man
without much ado recedes from barren notions; he that feels the warmth and
power is not easily changed; they did not receive the truth with love of the
truth, and therefore God gave them up to efficacy of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

4 A satiety or dislike of saving doctrine: when novelty is preferred, because
it is new, and ancient truth, like an old Minister, now adays is less
regarded; the stomach is crude and queasie, and so relishes trash better then
wholesome food.

5 The letting loose of wild reason to dispute out faith; reason is but a
Dwarf, too low to behold Christ, except it climb into the fig tree, and go let
sober men be content with that which is so frequently said, It Is written.

6 Pride of knowledge is very dangerous; the ancient pride is this, and the
Apostle thus expresses it, Eccles. 2. 18. being vainly pufft up in his fleshly
mind.

7 Unsuspitious credulity of others eminent in appearance of holiness, does at
unawares enwrap many well meaning men: The Novatians would not admit lapsed men
to communion. The Donatists would not bear with mixture in their Churches as
they pretended; both these sorts of men did bear a plausible show of holiness
in their opinions; but God does not approve a holiness of man's making; for
that which is indeed holiness must have upon it Gods superscription.

Use.
For the Use of this Doctrine, let me bespeak you in the words of S. Peter,
Epist. 2. Cap. 3. Verse. penult. Take heed, lest being led away by the error of
the wicked, (or of lawless men) ye fall from your own steadfastness. This
Caveat I might enforce upon you from diverse Topics or places; as namely, the
dangerousnesse of this disease which seizes on the head, from whence (as says
the Greek Proverb) the fish does first begin to be corrupted, as also from the
easiness of being infected, and from the difficulty of the cure: but having
spoke enough of the first of these, I will only use a few words concerning the
two latter.

1 It Is as easy to be infected, as it is for sheep to catch the rot by feeding
in rotten pastures; and our experience shows us, that one that angles with such
baits, catches more fish in a week, than preaching of Christ, and the
simplicity of him will catch in some years, for error has something in us, as
he that gave the reason for the faster growth of weeds than sweet herbs, said
that the soil was natural mother to the one, and but stepmother to the other.

2 There is no simplicity of truth, a multiplicity of error; the straight line
between point and point can be but one; the oblique lines, many; therefore it
is easy to hang upon one tender-hook or other, that look so many and even
contrary ways.

3 Error is many times more specious to our shallow, proud, corrupt reason,
than the truth of God, whose depths and mysteries cannot otherwise be answered,
then with, Tu quis es?

4 The mint-masters of error do usually fashion their doctrines to
flesh-pleasing, and man-pleasing; ye shall not easily find that false prophets
did preach the burdens of the Lord, but rather as Peter observes, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
they promise liberty, which is so taking a thing, that looking humanely, we may
wonder that Christ preaching repentance, self-denial, the cross, should gain
any.

So much for the easiness of being infected; then next a word for the
difficulty of the cure.
1 The cure is difficult, because men are hard to be convinced of the sin and
falsehood, il with zeal and open profession they have maintained it; therefore
they in the Council of Trent (as the history relates) would hardly be drawn to
admit of any recess from their former errors, ne viderentur errasse, lest they
might seem to have erred, and so weaken the credit of all they held before, as
the crack made in Ice, uses to run further, then where it is first made.

But if in punishment upon them that receive not the truth in love, God do give
men up to efficacy of error, or do otherwise recompense their error, by
delivering them up to vile affections and lusts, Romans 1. 27. who shall then
pull off that fearful seal of God, that seals them up in stupidity, and under
a reprobate mind.

2 Therein men are great lovers of their own fancies; Amat quisque quod a se
repertum est, no mother but loves her own babe.

3 A conceit that errors of mind are not sin, as moral sins are, but there
are diseases of the head, as well as seated in other parts.

And certainly, these capital distempers do great prejudice to practical
holiness, being like suckers that bear no fruit, but do divert and draw away
the sap from the fruit-bearing branches.

So much for the first part, the object of the fear, lest the minds of the
Corinthians should be corrupted from the simplicity of Christ: the second part
is the resemblance of false teachers to the serpent, and this manner of
beguiling Eve by subtilty, lest as the serpent, etc.

From which words the Point is obvious.

Doct. 2.
As Eve was beguiled by the subtilty of the serpent, so are men's minds
corrupted by false teachers from the simplicity of Christ; False Doctors;
Satanae lenones, says one, they are Satan's instruments, as the serpent was,
the Devil his Pandors, worsting to the deflowering of Christ's espoused Virgins.

The wisdom of the serpent is commanded and warranted to Gods people, the
subtilty of the serpent is found in these subverters of the chastity of
Doctrine; I cannot, I may not spend any time in this point, for I have no sand
left; only observe,

1 That the defection, the corruption of men principled with pure doctrine is
feared. Gospelprinciples are not so much to be scanned by curiosity of reason,
as received in simplicity of faith.

2 The Apostle alleges the most ancient example of corruption of mind that is
in the world; that which men call New Light is many times but some exploded
error furbisht up, and old ways are but acted once again. There is properly
no new truth, but there may be new discoveries.

3 What a sharp comparison does he use to resemble false teachers? unto the
devil his first instrument used by him; and therefore let no man temeraciously
say, they are holy men, they aim at more refined degree of holiness then
others: for it is no wonder, says the Apostle, that if Satan be transformed
into an Angel of light, his Ministers also be transformed or disguised, as the
Ministers of righteousness.

4 The Serpent took Eve at the beginning, and subtly ravished her of her
integrity, we must look to our selves; it is the usual time to set upon us in
our infancy of knowledge, either to disgrace the truth newly brought to light,
or to displant it before it do take root.

5 That corrupters come with subtilty, and have their slights, Ephesians. 4. 14.
they come with good words, Romans 16. 17. they beguile with enticing words, Col.
2. 4. they speak lies in hypocrisy: 1 Timothy 4. 2. they can wear the rough
garment, and sheeps clothing.

Their subtilty may be observed in the Serpentine which they imitate.

1 The serpent set upon the weaker sex, and the Apostle says, they lead
captive silly women.

2 They are subtle in being modest at first, millea erroris sunt verecunda,
Has God said, Genesis 3. says the serpent, the deceiver begins with queries
rather then downright assertions.

3 They will take their rise from Gods Word, and rather wrest then deny it, as
the serpent here perverted those words, the knowledge of good and evil, to
another sense and meaning.

4 They promise magnificent and great things, they promise them liberty, says
Peter. 2 Pet. 2. 18. Ye shall be as gods, says the serpent, what great bubbles
are usually spoken of glory, joy, familiarity with God, etc.

5 They comply with man's pride, with self, etc. and fit the bait to the fish.
They allure through the lusts of the flesh, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 18.

6 They draw a man from practical obedience unto extrinsecal, and mere empty
speculations (for the theorie is pleasant and easy, but the truth is bitter.

7 They bring points of faith, to the bar and test of captious reason: God in
the prohibition of this tree, had shown much arbitrariness of will, to make
probation of man's obedience, and therefore they ought not to have been
arraigned coram non Judice, as neither the clear points of faith.

The time pulls me by the ear, and therefore for close, as deceivers have the
Serpents subtilty, so get you the Serpents wisdom, and if I were to prescribe
prophylacticks or preservatives I would exhort you, 1 To hold the head, and so
to fortify the vitals from this epidemick infection, Col. 2. 19. 2 To pursue
practical doctrine, solid meat, and let alone these sweet meats; the tree of
knowledge is fair to look on, the tree of life better to feed on. 3 Affect not
things above the Word, a holiness, a zeal, a knowledge, above what is written:
Eve went some what further then Gods Word gave warrant when she replied,
neither shall ye touch it: so there are many will say, This is the holier way,
this is the better, not having any Word for it. 4. Avoid the house of
infection, the Fowlers net, From such turn away, faith the Scripture, if the
woman will confer with the Serpent; you see what comes on it, it is the itch and
pride after novelties that exposes us to temptations.

FINIS.
Vines on the Sacrament.

A TREATISE OF THE Right Institution, Administration, and Receiving of the
SACRAMENT OF THE Lord's Supper.

Delivered in XX, SERMONS at St Laurence-Jury, London

By the late Reverend and Learned Minister of the Gospel Mr Richard Vines
sometime Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1657.

TO THE READER.
THe Posthumous Works of Learned Writers, like fatherless Children, are exposed
to many wrongs and injuries; Yea such has been the fraud of some Impostors in
the Church, that they have taken away the live children of famous men, and put
their dead ones in the room; Hence are those spurious and supposititious Books
which have wandered up and down with their counterfeit Passes. That therefore
no suspicious thoughts may possess thee concerning this Treatise, which is here
published under the Name of that Learned and Eminent man Mr Vines, I do upon
sure and unquestionable Evidences give my public Testimony, that it is his
proper and genuine Work, printed by the Copy that was written with his own hand.

Thy Well-wisher ANTHONY BURGESS.
Sutton-Coldfield, Sep. 20. 1656.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Passover or Paschal Lamb; It Is signification, and the Analogy
or Resemblance between it, and Christ our Passover. CHAP. II. Of Errors and
Corruptions in the Church; How soon they spring up; When they are a ground of
Separation, and when not; That this Ordinance must be suitable to Gods
Institutions: And the Communicants must be suitable to this Ordinance. CHAP.
III. That the Lord Jesus is the Author of this Sacrament. CHAP. IV. Of the time
of this Sacraments Institution, and of Judas betraying Christ. CHAP. V. Why
Christ deferred the instituting of the Supper until the night in which he was
betrayed. CHAP. VI. Of the Outward or Elements of this Ordinance of the
Supper. CHAP. VII. Some Observations upon the precedent Discourses. CHAP. VIII.
Of the Real Presence. CHAP. IX. Of the inward things signified or represented
in this Supper. CHAP. X. A fonr-fold Exhortation from the premises. CHAP. XI.
Of Christ's Mandate or Charge for the celebration of this Ordinance in
Remembrance of him. CHAP. XII. Of doing this in remembrance of Christ; The
Properties of this Memorial. CHAP. XIII. A Lamentation for the neglect of this
Ordinance. CHAP. XIII. How much it concerns Ministers to Teach, and all to
Learn the true meaning of this Ordinance. CHAP. XIV. The great Business that
lies upon the Communicant, as often as he eats this Bread and drinks this Cup, he
shows the Lords Death. CHAP. XV. The Lord's Supper is an itterable Ordinance.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Continuance of this and other Gospel Ordinances in the
Church. CHAP. XVII. Of Worthy and Unworthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper. CHAP.
XVIII. The Uses which are to be made of the two last Theses. CHAP. XIX. What
must be done where Discipline cannot be executed for want of Administrators.
CHAP. XX. Whether a Godly man lawfully may, or ought to stand as a Member of,
and hold Communion in the Ordinances of God with such a Congregation as is mixed
(as they call it) that is, where men visibly scandalous in Life and
Conversation are mingled with the Good in the Participation and use of Divine
Ordinances? Or, Whether this Mixture of Heterogeneals do not pollute the
Ordinances, and the Communion to the Godly, so as they are concerned to
separate from such Communion? CHAP. XXI. Whether the Lords Supper be a
Converting Ordinance? CHAP. XXII. Of Worthy and Unworthy Receiving, with some
Cautions to prevent mis-judging our selves in the Case. CHAP. XXIII. Of Worthy
Receiving, etc. CHAP. XXIV. That a Godly man may receive the Sacrament
unworthily. CHAP. XXV. Of the Graces which are to be exercised and set on work
in the Use of this Sacrament. CHAP. XXVI. Motives to quicken Endeavors to a fit
or worthy Participation of this Ordinance. CHAP. XXVII. False and insufficient
Qualifications for the Receiving of this Sacrament. CHAP. XXVIII. The Fruit and
Benefit of worthy Receiving. CHAP. XXIX. The Sinfulness of Eating and Drinking
unworthily. CHAP. XXX. The Cause of this Sin, Viz. Not discerning the Lords
Body. CHAP. XXXI. The Aggravations of the Sin of unworthy Receiving. CHAP.
XXXII. The Danger of this Sin. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Examination in order to this
Sacrament.
The Bookseller to the READER.
THis Treatise was very fairly writ by the Reverend Author Mr Richard Vines
now with God, and perfected for the Press with his own Hand; after which a
great part of it was lost, and carried by a stranger that took it up; thirty
miles off, which yet (by a good Providence of God) was brought to his own hands
again, to his great rejoicing, and I hope the Churches great benefit, which
seems to be the design of that unexpected Providence, now that it is made
public. He omitted to divide it into Chapters and Sections (for the pleasure
of the Reader) which notwithstanding is now done, together with the Contents of
every Chapter, and of most of the Sections, which I thought good to certify,
lest any expressions therein should seem unsuitable to the Authors own Genius,
and derogatory to his worth.

A TREATISE OF THE Right Institution, Administration and Receiving of the
SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER.
CHAPTER I. Of the Passover or Paschall-Lamb; Its signification, and the
Analogy or Resemblance between it and Christ our Passover.
1 COR. 5. 7, 8. For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let
us keep the Feast, not with old leven, etc.
. 1.
IT is usual in handling the nature and use of Sacraments to begin with the
notion of a Sacrament in general, and then to descend to particular
Sacraments, which we call Baptism and the Lords Supper in their order, But the
Field is large and the compass great, and therefore I begin where the Lords
Supper it self began, and therefore I begin where the Lords Supper it self
began, and that is at the Passover, at the death whereof, and out of the ashes
of i^, this Sacrament of ours like another Phoenix did arise, for our Lord at
his last Passover called (...) his dying Passover, did institute and ordain
this, which is to live and remain till he come again, and which Scaliger and
others have observed, the very materials of our Sacramental Supper were taken
out of the Paschall Supper, for that very bread which the Master of the Family
used of custom (not by any Scripture-command) to bless and give to the
fraternity, saying, Holachma degnania, (...), This is the bread of affliction
which the Fathers did eat in Egypt, and that Cup which he blessed and gave to
them to drink called the Cup of the hymn, or Cos hallel, because the hymn
followed after and closed all; That bread, and that Cup, did Christ according
to the rite severally bless and give, saying, This is my body, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood, and so he put a new Superscription or signification
upon the old metal, and let all blind and bold Expositors know, that if they
expound not many phrases and things in the New Testament out of the old Records
of Jewish writings or customs, they shall but fancy and not expound the Text
as may be confirmed, says Scaliger sexcentis argumentis by very many arguments.

In handling of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper I shall select such practical
and preparative doctrine as is necessary for your knowledge that ye may discern
the Lords body, and not be guilty of it, and for your practice that you may
examine your selves, and not eat and drink unworthily: For if I should lanch
out into controversies, there would be no end; There has been more paper
written upon those six syllables, but five in English, This is my body, then
would contain a just and large Commentary upon the whole Bible.

I begin with the Passover which was the second (for Circumcision was the
first) ordinary standing Sacrament of the Jewish Church, beginning at their
going forth out of Egypt, and continuing till the Death of Christ, when the
Lords Supper did commence or begin, and so displaced it; The Passover,
signified what should be the Lords Supper, what is fulfilled in Christ; In the
Passover, were represented the Sufferings and Death of Christ by a Lamb slain
roasted with fire; In the Supper, by bread broken, and wine poured forth. The
outward symbols or signs differ; But Christ is the same under both; As
Circumcision theirs, baptism ours, are different signs and rites, but the
inward Circumcision and Regeneration both one; Theirs were both bloody
Sacraments, for the blood of Christ was to be shed, ours unbloudy, for the
blood is shed, and our English well translates the word Passover, the Greek
and Latin keep the word Pascha, which gave some occasion to derive it from the
Greek (...) to suffer a mistake; The word is Pesach, from Pasach, which is to
leap or pass over: For when Israel after long servitude in Egypt was on wing
to be gone, God commanded them in their several Families to kill Seh a Lamb or
kid, to roast it whole, to eat it within doors that night, to sprinkle the side
and upper door-posts with the blood, not the threshold propter reverentiam and
significationem, Christ's blood must not be trampled on, and so doing they
should be safe from the destroying Angel that rode circuit that night to kill
all Egypts firstborn, but he past over all the houses of Israel sprinkled with
blood, and hence the name Passe-over the Etymon whereof is given by God
himself, Exodus 12. 27. We have the kernel in this shell, the marrow of this
bone, a Passover as well as they, but ours is Christ, our Passover is Christ,
says the Text.

2.
We proceed, Our Passover Christ is or was sacrificed for us; Our Passover
Christ was a true Sacrifice, but whether their Passover was a Sacrifice or no,
it is in question: The Papists swallow it greedily, hoping thereby to prove our
Supper to be both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament as their Passover (they say)
was, but there are others both Lutheran and Calvinist, as Gerald. in harmon.
Rivet on Exodus 12. that do not yield the Passover a proper Sacrifice, though
it be so called Exo. 12. 27. It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, for
the Greek word (...), and the Hebrew Zabach are sometimes taken generally for
mactare, when there is no Sacrifice, and they find in Egypt at the first
Passover no Priest but the head of the Family, or (...), no Altar, no offering
of the Lamb to God, no expiation, nor is it necessary that it should be a
Sacrifice to type a Sacrifice, for the Serpent on the Pole signified Christ
crucified, and so the Passover as a Sacrament may figure out a Sacrifice, as
our Supper is the commemoration of a Sacrifice, but not a Sacrifice; On the
other hand Calvin and others, the Jewish Writers and many from them do hold it
to be a Sacrifice and a Sacrament, for the Scripture calls it Sacrifice, and
this blood is shed at first by the Pater-familia's that was a Priest (no other
being yet consecrated) in after times by the Priests or Levites, and the blood
brought to the Altar, as it was blood shed to a religious end, a blood
preservative from destroying Angels, and therefore a proper Sacrifice: What
shall we say? I Will promise you not to puzzle you with controversies and
disputes, for I had rather The difference between a Sacrifice and a Sacrament.
set meat before you which you may eat, then hard bones to gnaw upon; The truth
is, a Sacrifice is something offered up to God by men, a Sacrament is offered
and given to man by God to be eaten or used in his Name, and so that part of
the offering which is offered up to God may be called a Sacrifice, and that
part eaten or used by man a Sacrament, the very body and blood of Christ was a
Sacrifice, no Sacrament: The bread and wine as used are a Sacrament no
Sacrifice, The Passover was the figure of a true Deuteronomy. 16. 5.
Sacrifice, Christ and we may call it so, because the Scripture does: It
follows (...) Let us keep the Feast, What is that? Ye shall find that after
the Passover Lamb was eaten the next day began the Feast, Numb. 28. 16, 17.
and the Passover is called Feast, too, Ex^d. 12. 15. etc. and that continued
seven days, kept in great festivity and solemnity, but with unleavened bread,
the Apostle alludes hereunto, Our Passover is sacrificed, therefore let us
henceforth, etc. We that have received the sprinkling of blood, and eaten his
flesh by faith, live all our days in a holy rejoicing and thanksgiving, which
is a continual Feast, and let us cast out the incestuous Corinthians out of
our Society, for he is a leven, ver. 6, 7. and let us purge out of our selves,
malice, wickedness, etc. For they are leven, ver. 8. that we may be a holy
Congregation, and a holy people, and so the argument of the Apostle stands
thus, from the example of the Old Passover, Those for whom Christ the
Passover is sacrificed ought as holy Congregations and holy people to be
unleavened with sin and wickedness, and to walk before God in an unleavened
sincerity, but for us Christ the Passover is sacrificed, therefore let us keep
the Feast, etc.

I have explained the words, and now we shall consider this Passover two ways.

1. As a Sacrifice or figure of a Sacrifice, and so it refers to Christ our
Passover, Christ is sacrificed for us.

2. As a Sacrament, and so it relates to us, and shows us our duty upon that
Sacrifice, (...) Let us keep the Feast, The Sacrifice is given for us, the
Sacrament is given to us: From the first,

Our Passover is Christ sacrificed for us, We have a Doct. Our Passover is
Christ sacrificed for us.
Passover, but it is Christ sacrificed: And here before I show the Analogy or
resemblance between the Passover and Christ, we shall note three or four
things.

. 3.
1. They in the Old Church of Israel had Christ as well (though not so clear)
as we, 1 Cor. 10. 4. The Rock that followed our Fathers in the Wilderness was
Christ, the Passover was Christ, the personal Types such as Isaac on the
Wood, the real Types as their bloody Sacrifices were Christ; He was then in
his swaddling clouts swathed up in shadows and types, and not naked; as now Gal.
3. 1. those Types being anatomized, unbowelled are full of Gospel, full of
Christ, the death of Christ pecus prosunt quam fuit, says Bernard de coena;
Christ is the marrow in the bone, the kernel in the shell, yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever, the sum and sweet of all Ordinances, therefore
those that say they were filled with temporal promises, but had no spiritual,
derogate too much from them as that they were Swine filled with husks, and
speak a wondrous Paradox; that those that had so much faith, Heb. 11. should
have no Christ, we give them the right hand of fellowship, and they were the
elder brother, yet we have the double portion.

. 4.
2. Mark the form of speech, Christ our Passover, that is, our Paschall Lamb,
which is also called the Passover, Exodus ^2. ^1. Kill the Passover, Now the
Passover properly was the Angels passing over the Israelites houses, and not
the Lamb, but we must learn to understand Sacramental phrases, the sign
called the thing signified, the figure called the thing figured, The Rock was
Christ; Christ our Passover, that is, paschal Lamb, Circumcision called the
Covenant, Gen 17. 13. My Covenant shall be in your flesh, this will be allowed
in every place but one, and that is this one, This is my body, For the Lutheran
stands up for a corporal presence under the Signs, The Papist for a change of
the Bread and Wine into Christ's body and blood; No conferences, no disputes, no
condescensions will satisfy them, and yet we say very fairly, the very body of
Christ born of the Virgin, that died on the Cross, that sits in heaven, is
present in this Sacrament, but not in the Bread or Wine, but to the faithful
Receiver, not in the Elements but to the Communicants, but all this will not
serve turn; These two Prepositions Con and Trans have bred more jarres, and
cost more blood since they were born (and there is neither of them in this
cause six hundred years old) then can be well imagined.

. 4.
3. The Passover figured Christ, and yet the Jews ordinarily saw not Christ in
it; It is plain in their celebration of the Passover, or their Rituals, they
take notice of, and commemorate their Egyptian slavery, and their deliverance,
and so they were commanded, but of Christ not a syllable; It entered not into
them that a Lamb roasted should figure the Messiah, as they had formed him in
their thoughts, and so they held the Passover as a (...) looking backward, but
as a Type looking forward, no knowledge except the faithful had some glimpse
of it, and this is the great fault of men in all Sacraments, they mind not the
inwards of a Sacrament, nor look for the kernel, they did so, and we also, not
discerning the Lords body, is not that it which makes us guilty of his body and
blood, there is in all Sacraments res terrena and res coelestis, as Irenaeus.
Earthly men see the earthly part, they eat, they drink, It feeds not, they eat
shells, the inwards within the bone are marrow, Christ; Christ set spiritual
food before our bodies, viz. ayery, set corporal before the soul, and you
illude both, says Parisiensis, de Euchar. sub finem.

. 5.
^. The Passover is Christ sacrificed, not Christ a Lamb unspotted, but Christ
a Lamb roasted with fire, and this tells you that the Passover and our Supper
represent Christ crucified, Christ dying or dead; It is the death of Christ,
not his Resurrection, nor ascension, that is here set forth, Ye show the Lords
death till he come, this is the sight which a sinful soul would see, this is
the comfortable spectacle, to see the price paying, the ransom laying down,
the thing in doing; Hence he draws the hope and comfort of Redemption, and
therefore the bread was broken, and the Cup was full of blood to represent to
the life this life giving Death to Christ; The Papists have cheated the people
of the blood by a trick of concomitancy, telling them that the bread is his
body, and his body has blood in it, we have a word of Institution of both
severally, the life of the representation is the blood shed, the Passover is a
Lamb slain and roasted, and the blood on the doorpos^, and by providence, if the
Papists will allow all to eat, then we have expressly for the Cup a Bibite ex
hoc omnes, Mat. 26. 27. Drink ye all of it; So that it is the Death of Christ
here represented, and which is one step further, it is a Sacrifice Death, which
works and makes atonement, this was it that all the Sacrifices, that the
Passover did prefigure, a Sacrifice death, that should deliver and make
expiation; This Cup (says Christ) is the New Testament in my blood, which is
shed for you and many for remission of sins, a death, and such a kind of death
as in our Sacrament set forth a Sacrifice Death, therefore it is said sacrificed
for us.

. 7.
Now let us come to the Analogy or resemblance between the Passover and Christ
sacrificed, wherein I shall The resemblance between the Passover and Christ
sacrificed.
endeavor to avoid the vanity and curiosity of making similitudes to run of
all four, which is incident to men in handling Types, Parables, and similitudes
which like a string over-stretched makes a jar and disharmony, and shows more
fondnes, then soundness.

1. The Paschal must be a male-Lamb without blemish, the son of a year taken
from the Sheep or Goats, Exo. 12. 5. and this resembles Christ himself and his
perfection, there were many blemishes which the superstitious or curious Jews
observed to the number of fifty or seventy, any blemish disabled i^, Christ was
without all blemish, nothing was excepted from other men, or his likeness to
them but sin, in all Points tempted like as wear, yet without sin; Heb. 4. 15.
He was of masculine perfection, at the perfection of his age, about 33 or 34
years, of Lamb-l^ke humility and meekness; which are noted in him as exemplary
graces; He was figured out in the Lamb of the daily Sacrifice, in the Lamb of
the Passover, in Abraham's Ram in stead of Isaac, in the Scapegoat, Lev. 16.
21. and pointed out by John Baptist under this Name, Behold the Lamb of God;
It Is implied, Heb. 9. 28. he shall appear the second time, (...), that in his
first coming he was not without, but we must distinguish of sin, ours imputed
to him, and so he was made sin for us, so as to bear it in his body, which at
his second coming he shall not bear nor be laden with as he was before, and
therefore is said to come without sin both his and ours.

2. This Paschall-Lamb was to be separated from the flock, and set apart for
Sacrifice on the tenth day of the month, but not killed till the 14. day in
the Evening, or according to that vexed phrase between the two Evenings, that
is, in the afternoon, when the Sun declined before Sunset, and about the same
time of day our Savior (the true Passover) was slain, but in a further
meaning it shows that Christ was set apart and fore-designed of God to be our
Passover long before, not in his decree, but his promise, and the predictions
of the Prophets which have been since the world began, Luke 1. 70. but now in
the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9. 26. He suffered between the two Evenings of the world, which
was in his declination, when he came that was our Evening, and the latter is to
come, the days of his appearance are called often the last days, and though
that have another meaning, showing the unalterableness of the
Gospel Ordinances, contrary to those of the Law, yet we may affirm, that it was
past the noon of the world, when he came, and the time shall not be so long
after unto Sunset, as before.

3. This paschal Lamb must be killed, the blood taken into a basin, sprinkled
with hysop, shall be on every door, the flesh roasted with fire not eaten raw or
boiled in water, the head, the legs, the inwards, Exodus 12. 7, 8, 9, 22. and
this may set forth unto us the unutterable sufferings of Christ, both in his
soul and body, which the Scripture sets out to the life with such an emphasis
of words, I mean especially those of his soul, scorched with the sense of Gods
extreme wrath, which are expressed by words extraordinary, (...), Sweating like
drops of blood, with expression of strong cries and tears; Oh man thou
understandest not the sufferings of this Passover roasted with fire forbidden
to be boiled in scalding water, for that expresses not the sufferings in
extremity, and what is all this for? Even to make Christ more pleasant meat to
thee, which if thou feed upon, and with a bunch of hysop sprinkle this blood,
applying it by faith, eating this roasted flesh, and drinking this blood poured
forth, it will feast thy soul, and secure thee from the wrath of God, which is
the next.

4. The destroying Angel seeing this blood on the door posts, passes over the
house, goes and kills the Egyptians firstborn, and executes Gods last plague
upon them, in the mean time the Israelites were safe within the protection of
blood, Exodus 12. 12, 13. and here is the safety of those Israelites; Believers
that have applied by faith the blood of Jesus Christ, when God shall let loose
his last and final plagues upon the world, they shall be safe; Hell, and wrath,
and condemnation shall not touch them, When I see the blood (says he) I Will
pass over you, Exodus 12. 13, 23. nothing else will save you; God looks at
nothing but the blood of Christ upon you; Happy they, that before God ride his
circuit of destruction, to make a cry in all Egypt, are gotten under the
Sanctuary of blood, for then the plague shall not be upon you, when I smite the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 12. 13.

5. After the Israelites had been secured from the stroke of that dismal
night, then presently they march away, are hired by the Egyptians to be gone,
the four hundred and thirty years were out, and God being punctual in his
times, finishes their captivity that hour, and begins to fulfill his promises
that he had made to them of bringing them to their promised Land, Exodus 12. 31,
32, 33, etc. 41, 42. and here we see, that when a soul has long lien in the
base bondage under sin and the devil, and comes to take hold of Christ, and
is sprinkled with his blood, and enters Covenant with God in Christ, then is he
set free from his bondage, and then he goes out of Egypt, and then all the
promises begin to open upon him, and he sets upon his heavenly journey, and no
Pharaoh can hinder him any longer; All the sweet promises of peace, and
comfort, and hope, begin to be made good to him, for they are all Yea and Amen
in Christ; the Devil, and all his power and instruments cannot hold him, the
blood is upon him, from that hour he is a freeman, to own no Lord but God, and
yet still he has a Wilderness to go through, but he is miraculously carried as
Israel was through it; but this must not be expected, that they should eat the
Passover and stay in Egypt still, they must go out of their bondage, that are
sprinkled with this blood by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent out thy
prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water, says he in a like case, Zech. 9.
11. and happily this Type is yet to be fulfilled in the Gospel Churches, whom the
Lord will deliver out of the hands of their oppressing tyrants, Pope or Turk,
not by the Sword but Ordinances of his Covenant, and then if they shall pursue
a people under blood, as Pharaoh did, there will be a red Sea to swallow them
horse and man. And so much for the Passover, as referring to Christ our
Sacrifice, for that it does so, is plain by this. That which is said of the
Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12. 46. is expressly applied to, and fulfilled in Christ,
John 19. 36. So much for the Passover as a Sacrifice, or as the figure of our
Sacrifice and theirs, Christ Jesus.

. 8.
Now we proceed to consider it as a Sacrament, not ours, but theirs, nor yet a
figure of our Sacrament in Considered as a Sacrament.
propriety, though often so called in transi^^, and much contended for by
Papists, For what Jew could ever have found out our Supper figured in that
Passover? and in what propriety can our Sacrament be the Sacrament of another?
Christ is the res Sacramenti of theirs and ours, there they meet, as the inward
Circumcision and Regeneration is the thing of their Circumcision and our
Baptism, but that one Sacrament should be the figure of another, is absurd and
void of reason; As two pictures of one man, are both resemblances of that one
man, but one is not the picture of another, and yet because the Passover has
the common nature of a Sacrament, does set forth the same Christ as our Supper,
and that the Apostle draws an Argument from it, to persuade Gospel-Christians
to holiness: Therefore we shall consider what significancy there is in it, for
though the signs be not ours, yet the significancy is

. 9.
First, The Passover or Paschal Lamb, as killed and roasted, and the blood
sprinkled was a Sacrifice, The signification of the Passover.
as eaten by the Israelites and feasted upon, it was a Sacrament, and in
aftertimes, both by Jewish Records, and by Scripture, I conceive it appears, 2
Chro. 3^. 11. Ezra 6 20. that the Levites killed the Paschals, the Priests
sprinkled the blood on the Altar, and then they took the Lamb to their (...),
or Families, or Chambers in Jerusalem, and there did eat it; so in our Supper
there is a Sacrifice slain, and offered up for atonement, and that is Christ
his body and blood, and then there is an eating and drinking of this Sacrifice
in the Sacrament of bread and wine, as in many Sacrifices of the Law, there was
first an offering up to ^od, and then a feasting on the remainder; we have a
true Sacrifice, Christ offered up to God for us; we have a true Sacrament, as
that Sacrifice is eaten and drunk by us; the oblation belongs to God to
propitiate and redeem; the communication belongs to us, to be refresht and
nourisht; their eating the Passover was no Sacrifice, but a Sacrament; our
eating and drinking bread and wine is no Sacrifice but a Sacrament; their
killing and rosting of the Lamb made it eatable; Christ his sacrificing of
himself for us, renders him fit nourishment to us; Had he not been a Sacrifice
offered up for us, what profit had there been in eating and drinking
sacramentally and spiritually that body and blood? This consideration is of
special remark, you feast upon a sacrifice, you live, you feed upon a sacrifice
toll Sacrificium. toll Sacramentum, the mouth eats the Sacrament, the eye of
faith discerns the sacrifice, Christ is the sacrifice, the Sacrament no
sacrifice, but the commemoration and communication of a sacrifice; and here the
reason must be observed, why God did institute their Passover, and our
answerable Sacrament to consist in meat and drink, eating and drinking, and I
conceive thus, that it being the most proper way to partake of a sacrifice, for
how else can it be? Therefore we eat and drink in way of participation of our
sacrifice; Hence the phrase, Living upon Heb. 13. 10.
the Altar, eating of the Altar; and thus if we carry our eye to the earthly
part in the Supper, and to the heavenly part, that is to the Sacrament, and the
sacrifice represented, and feed upon the sacrifice represented, as well as the
Sacrament representing, we then discern the Lords body. This is the first
(...), de hoc plus intra.

2. Their Passover was instituted as an Ordinance for ever, for a memorial of
their Deliverance in Egypt, and their eduction out of it, a commemoration it
was, and to be observed for ever, that is, in all succeeding generations,
whiles their Polity and Religion stood, Exodus 12. 14, 24, 42. and therefore we
read in Jewish Writers, and there is some foot-step or original of it, Exodus
26. 27. What mean you by this service, that in every company of
Passeover-communicants, there was some one that rehearsed and made
commemoration, Haggadah shet pesuch, the history Buxt^rf. Chal. Lexic.
of the Passover, and so God that would have the sacrifice of Christ for our
sin, that greatest work of his, and our deliverance thereby from worse then
Egypt, or destroying Angel, to be observed and kept in mind by a lasting
trophy or monument, viz: our Supper: The Apostle in allusion to their custom,
uses a word (...) ^ Cor. 11. 26. Ye do show, As often as ye eat this bread and
drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he come, or ye do
commemorate and with affection and thanksgiving set it forth, and as theirs was
for ever, till Christ's first coming, so ours is for ever, till his second
coming; so long as their Church continued they were charged with this
Ordinance; so long as the Gospel Church continues, they are charged with this,
and therefore neither of the Doctrine of the Gospel, nor of the Sacraments
shall there be any removal or alteration till Christ come.

3. Their Passover in Egypt was eaten in their several Families or societies,
A Lamb for a house, except it were too little, Exodus 12. 3, 4. and in after
times when this was repealed, Deuteronomy. 16. 6, 7. and was confined to the place
that God should choose, and so to Jerusalem, then though the Lamb might be slain
in the holy Court, and the blood sprinkled on the Altar, yet they did carry it
home to their hired chambers, and there did eat in companies, not less then ten
in a fraternity, Joseph de bello lib. 7. cap. 17. nor above twenty, but no man
alone, Solum epulari non licet, says Joseph, Christ and his company made one
society; so though Christ be our Sacrifice, once offered up upon the cross a
sacrifice to God, yet does our Supper bring him home to us into our Churches,
and into our souls. There is an application of him to be made, the blood
sprinkled on our doors, the Paschal brought home to our own house; Take ye, Eat
ye, Drink ye; God comes to particulars with us, and the application of the
sacrifice is the life of the Sacrament; we must eat and drink at home, in our
own souls; Christ comes home to us, and yet this Supper ought as the Passover
to be eaten in societies, I know no reason for one alone, there must be a
(...), a company, for it is a communion, one makes not a communion; The Apostle
1 Cor. 11. 20. When you come (...) into a meeting, v. 33, 34. when you come
together, tarry one for another; hence it has been anciently called (...), a
meeting, a Congregation. It Is Gods Ordinance (says a learned man) that the
Lords Hilders^^ Joh. 4 p. 122.
Supper be administered in public Assemblies; How can there be a Communicant
without a Communion, sed de hoc infra, not that the walls of a Church do make it
a communion, but a meeting of believers?

4. Their Passover was eaten with unlevened bread and sour or bitter herbs,
Exodus 12. 8. There are many circumstances and ceremonies found in the Jewish
Authors about the searching out of all leven, yea with candles at noonday, and
an execration of all leven, if any should remain unfound, and the bitter herbs
were in constant use, the unlevened bread remembered them, what haste they went
out of Egypt in, Exodus 12. 34. and the bitter herbs, what affliction and
bondage they had suffered, and further they saw not; The Apostle interprets
leven, malice and wickedness; unlevened bread, sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.
8. and so it teaches us, how Christ is to be received by us, and what manner of
persons they must be that apply and receive Jesus Christ; They must remember
their bondage under sin, not with delight but bitterness, and feel the sour
taste of their former ways, as sinners contrite and broken; bitter herbs are
good sauce for the paschal Lamb; sin felt sets an edge on the stomach as
vinegar; Christ relishes well to such a soul; When thou come to eat his
Supper, bring thy own sauce with thee, bitter herbs, and refresh on thy self
the memory of thy old ways and former lusts; that is the sauce, the bread is
unleavened bread; you cannot eat the Lamb and leaven togegether; a secure
hypocrite, a filthy swine not purged from sin, to think to have Christ and
his sin too, to be pardoned and not purged, to be saved and not sanctified;
Away, and never think to eat this Lamb with leavened bread; come with bitter
herbs thou may, contrition for sin, but come not with and in thy sins, for
that is eating with leavened bread; therefore search it out, and let thy sins
be searched out as with a candle, and let them be execrable to thee, that God
may see thy hatred of them, and thy loathing of thy self for them.

5. Their Passover in Egypt, was to be eaten with loins girded in procinctu,
shoes on feet, and staff in hand, and ye shall eat in haste, Exodus 12. 11. and
therefore standing as ready to be instantly on their march to leave the Land of
Egypt, and go to seek their promised country, which signifies to us, that we
must receive Christ and his blood with intention and purpose to leave the
dominions of Pharaoh, the Kingdom, service and bondage of sin, and the Devil,
and from that hour to set forward toward our heavenly country; This is that
hard Doctrine of the Gospel; This makes men neglect, refuse Jesus Christ,
because they cannot part with sin, they will not resolve to quit their former
course, as he that went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions: So we
would fain be saved, but go away sorrowful, for we have powerful, pleasing
and profitable lusts. And as it may allude to our Supper; Let it teach us to
come to the Table of the Lord with staves in our hand, and our loins girded up,
as men resolving to march, and begin a new and holy life, Henceforth not to
serve sin, Romans 6. 6. But of this I spoke before.

6. In their Passover they must roast and eat a whole Lamb, and nothing of it
must remain till the morning: If any did remain it must be burnt with fire,
Exodus 11. 9, 10. the flesh must be eaten, not a bone broken, Numb. 9. 12. This
shows, that Christ is all meat, there is no offal in him, there is variety of
nourishment for all our uses, righteousness, and peace, and comfort, and
contentment to fill our capacities, relieve temptations, pardon and purge away
our sins, but we must not divide, but take him whole, his merit and Spirit, his
salvation and Sovereignty; Christ our Way, our Truth, our Life; What an unhappy
Doctrine is that of the Papists, that takes the blood from us, and will not let
the people drink? It is as if they should not allow our Passover to be a whole
Lamb, and as unhappy they, that do not only rent his coat, but break his bones
by depraving the fundamentals of Gospel-Doctrine, and tearing the Creed,
Article from Article, and nothing left, until the morning, tells us, That in
the morning-light of the Gospel, all those shadows should be abolisht and
disclaimed, or as Rivet says, That Sacraments are not Sacraments, but in their
use, and while they are used, as the bread and wine after the use are no
Sacraments, as a mear stone is a boundary in it is place, remove it, and it is
lapis not limes.

7. No uncircumcised person might eat the Passover, nor no unclean person that
was under an uncleanness, Exodus 12. 44, 48. Numb. 9. 7. where the instance is
of some unclean by the dead, but it extends to other uncleanness, leprous or
menstruous, etc. Joseph. de bello lib. 7. cap. 17. and yet there was provision
made for the unclean, that they might keep the Passover in the second month,
as they did in Hezekiah his Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 13. but for the
uncircumcised there was no provision, and this sets forth to us two sorts of
men that are incapable of worthy coming to the Lords Supper.

1. The uncircumcised that are strangers and foreiners Two sorts incapable of
the Lords Supper.
to the Church, and not initiated by the first Sacrament of Baptism, no person
of what condition soever that is unbaptized can come to the Supper, for he is
not entered and admitted into Church Fellowship or Communion by the first
Sacrament: He is not one of the house, or of the fraternity, where the Lamb is
eaten, and out of the house the Passover must not be carried; they that are
out of the Church have no right to the privileges of the Church, as they that
are no freemen have not the privilege of the City. It was never known in the
old Church, that an uncircumcised person, nor in the Gospel Church that an
unbaptized, did partake of either of the Suppers, theirs or ours, for both of
them are second Sacraments, not firsts, the way to the Table has ever been by
the Font or Laver of washing. Of this more hereafter.

2. The domestics that are of the house, that are Almost one and twenty
hundred thousand all pure. Joseph. cap. 17. lib. 7. de bello Judaic.
circumcised Israelites, yet if they be at the time of the Passover unclean,
they may not eat it, was a case came into question thus, some were unclean, put
the case to Moses, he respited the decision till he had asked of the Lord, and
the Lord adjudged it, that he should be put off to the Passover of the second
month; and this tells us by way of allusion, that a member of the Church
baptized, yea a true believer may be unfit at some particular time to come to
the Lords Table, and may eat and drink unworthily; Were not the Corinthians
such men, and in such a case, 1 Cor. 11? Were they not punished for their
unworthy coming, and yet doubtless some of them godly, and all professed
Christians? But of this more also.

10.
8. There were in the first Passover in Egypt, used and commanded by express
word, certain rituals or occasionals, which as Jewish Writers and practice
shows, were omitted and not used in aftertimes. As 1. The eating in dispersed
houses, afterward in Jerusalem only. 2. The taking up the Lamb four days
before, which we read not of afterward. 3. The striking of the door-posts with
the blood. 4. The not going out of the house that night, which in aftertimes
Christ and his Disciples did. 5. The eating it in traveling posture in
procinctu, with staves, etc. which we find our Savior, and read that the
Jews did in another posture of discumbency, a lying on beds, etc. These or some
of these were occasional at the first, and the occasion ceasing, custom had
ruled it otherwise without offense; for in our Supper the Lord celebrated and
instituted it at night, in or at the end of the paschal and common supper. 2.
In unlevened bread. 3. Late at night. 4. In a gesture of discumbency, a leaning
or lying posture, Joh. 3. 13. 5. In a chamber of a private house. 6. Without
presence of any woman. 7. Consecrating, a blessing the bread and See Evang. for
so used in Passover.
the Cup severally and apart. 8. Singing the hymn at the close of all, as was
usual, etc. And these, or many of these were occasional circumstances by reason
of the custom and Rite of the paschal Supper, or the particular exigency at
that time; And what then? Do they oblige to a hairs breadth all after-ages? Do
they that impose any one of these themselves hold to all of them? Shall we be
supercilious and superstitious in observing all occasional or local customs?
Why do we not appear in sackcloth at our Fasts? Where is that osculum pacis? As
the Apostle said about the 1 Cor. 11. 16.
length of hair, so I say, If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. If Christ had celebrated the Supper with his
loins girt, and staff in hand, had we been bound to it, and yet we must not
raffle this thread too far, and under color of an occasional circumstance,
change or mutilate the real substance, as the Papist that takes away the Cup
which Christ blessed, and breaks not the Bread, as he did, and of a Sacrament
makes a Sacrifice; the Matter and Form, the intended Analogy between the Sign,
and the Thing signified, will guide us in our distinguishing Substance from
Accidents.

I here make an end, though in this Point, and in this Lamb, which was served
in with Legs and Purtenance, I might find out other lesser Resemblances, which
I shall not; but having shown you, what fresh Marrow lies in the old Bones of
this Passeover-Sacrifice, will hereafter set forth our Lords Supper before you.

CHAP. II. Of Errors and Corruptions in the Church; How soon they sprung up;
When they are a ground of Separation, and when not. That this Ordinance must be
suitable to Gods Institution: And the Communicants must be suitable to this
Ordinance.
1 COR. 11. 83. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered
unto you, etc.
THis Epistle is directed to the Church of God in 1 Cor. 1 2. Grotius in initio
hujus Epistolae. Heylin Geog. page 388. 1 Cor. 1. 5, 7.
Corinth, which was sometime a slately City of Greece, much renowned in ancient
Authors, but now is a place of small note, being together with other Cities
mentioned in the New Testament, swallowed up by that great Leviathan of the
Land, the Turki^h Empire. In this City was a famous Christian Church of the
highest degree of elevation for parts and gifts, and spiritual endowments, but
their beauty was blemished with as great blots, schisms, 1 Cor. 1. 11. Denial of
the Resurrection of the dead by some of them, 1 Cor. 15. 12. and in this
Chapter with a grand abuse of that high and precious Ordinance the Supper of
the Lord with ordinary and unwashen hands, polluting it with their own
intemperance and drunkenness, not brought from their own homes, or from the
Tavern to the Table, but used at the very Table it self, which that you may
understand, you may take notice, that it was an ancient custom, (...), says
Zonaras in Council. 6. in Trullo. in the Primitive times, that the rich and
wealthier sort of Christians did by a common purse or contributions, furnish
out solemn feasts in the very meeting places, or Churches, and there sit down
promiscuously the rich and poor, which feasts were called (...), Feasts of
Love, or Brotherly-charity, to testify the intimate affection of Christians
among themselves. The Scripture speaks of them, Jude verse. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
and the ancient Fathers make often mention of them; The occasion of them might
be this; It Is plain, that the Heathens at their Sacrifice had their festival
entertainments, (...), in their Idols Temple, that the Jews in their
Eucharistical Sacrifices feasted before the Lord, God as it were entertaining
them to eat and drink with him, and that Christ and his Apostles feasted
together at the Paschal Supper before the celebration of the Lords Supper, and
so by imitation very obvious, the Christians had taken up a custom of feasting
at their religious meetings, at which entertainments no Heathens were present,
and thereupon they suspected and scandalized the Christians for these feasts,
de pabulo crudae and post convivium mesto Tertul. Apol. c. 7 etc. 39.
that they eat and drunk the flesh and blood of a child, and that after they
had filled themselves with wine and good cheer, they fell to incestuous and
promiscuous lusts, but the ancient Fathers wipe off these aspersions, etc.

. 2.
The abuse of these feasts the Apostle reproves from the 17. verse of this
Chapter, for they fomented their schisms and parties, even at these feasts,
one party and their faction sorting themselves together in one corner, another
at another, as their humor led them, and so the common love was broken by
private divisions; then followed another abuse, the poor that could send in
nothing, had nothing, but were set light by, and suffered to starve, while they
were filling themselves, and which was worst of all, they were intemperate at
their feasts, eating and drinking excessively, one is hungry, another is
drunken, verse. 21. The word may signify had drank liberally; as it is said of
Joseph and his brethren, Gen 43. ult. and as the word is used, John 2. 10. The
Sum is, there was

. 3.
1. Siding and sorting themselves into parties with their messes and dishes of
good cheer, each faction by themselves, verse. 18. which is contrary to the
nature or name of (...), Feasts of Love. One party went to it before another
came, v. 21. and 33.


2. Here was a slighting and laying aside the poor Christians that could send
in nothing, contrary to the nature of a religious communion, ver. 28, 22.

3. Here was intemperance and excess, ver. 21. contrary to Christian sobriety.

4. These feasts were made in the Assembly or meeting place (as we say the
Church) as appears ver. 22. Have ye not houses? And

. 4.
5. With these juncats and feasts they joined the celebration Beza. in Act. 2.
in illis convivis. Grot. in Mat. 26. 25. Casaub. Ex^re. 16.
of the Lord's Supper, Mensis suis pascebant, says Austin. Epist. 118. and
therefore the Apostle tells them, they defaced it, verse. ^1. This is not to eat
the Lord's Supper, for quod non rite fit, fieri non dicitur; and he does
therefore set forth the Lords institution of the Supper, verse. 23. that they
might see the bare and naked nature of it, one thing is doubtful, Whether the
Lord's Supper was celebrated at the beginning or end of these feasts? And the
doubt rises, Because in this Chapter, as is conceived by learned Diodat
Estius. Cajetan. in loc. Gerard. in har. p. 461.
men, the feast went before; as in Christ's last Supper, the paschal Lamb was
first eaten, and the Cup was taken after Supper, verse. 25. and the unworthy
coming to it, mentioned v. ^9. and the punishment of this Church for their
unworthiness, verse. ^0. argues, That their feasting first had unfitted them for
the participation of this Ordinance, and yet Chrysostom and Donaras says,
(...), After the participation of the Lords Supper the feast was; and that Vbi
supra.
is true, for aftertimes, for the reproof of the Apostle happily had removed the
feast unto the last place for good reasons* but the feasts were not quite
removed out of the Churches of Greece and Africa, where Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
we find them continuing: Insomuch as the Synod of Laodicea which was about
three hundred years after Christ, and before the Nicene Council, made a Canon,
cap. 22. (...), etc. That it is not fit the Agapae should be in Churches or
public places of worship, and so these ancient Feasts grew out by little and
little, and now no remainders of them in all Christendom.

I have been the longer upon this, because I think otherwise you would not
clearly understand the foregoing verses, that touch upon the abuse, nor the
cause and reason of the Corinthians coming unworthily to the Lords-Table, and
so I have set up a light in the entry, by which you may find the way into the
better understanding of all that follows in this Chapter, wherein he sets the
Lords Supper to rights, which was drowned in a feast; Then he orders the
address of the Communicants, which through the aforesaid misdemeanors had come
to it unworthily, and then exhorts them to make it a Communion and not a
Division, as they had done, Tarry one for another, verse. 33. and to prevent the
intemperance of public Feasts, he bids them, if they must eat before they come
to the Lords Supper, Let them eat at home, verse. ult. and so clearly abrogates,
not the Feasts, but the order of them, as foregoing the Lords Supper; and here
we shall stand a little and make observation.

. 5.
The Apostle interdicts not all eating or drinking before the Lords Supper, but
this feasting, and the abuses growing thence, he does forbid. Those words, A
man may eat before he come to the Lords Table.
verse ult. If any man hunger, let him eat at home, that they come not together
unto condemnation, teach us, That this Feasting was before the Sacrament, and
that a man may eat at home, if occasion be, before he come to the public
Assembly. To put a necessity upon Fasting, is to put Superstition into it; for
our Savior at first celebrated it after Supper, by necessity of the Law of the
Passover, but binds us not by his example to eat first, nor by any rule to
fast before it, therefore it is of free observation and use, yet the custom of
coming fasting had spread over the Aug. Epist. 118 Per universum orbem mos isto
servatur. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11. 26.
universal Church in Austins time, Per universum orbem, mosiste servatur;
Chrysostem speaks too highly of it, (...), that thou may be worthy to
receive, for setting it aside as any piece of spiritual preparation, and I know
not why it may not stand, Omnes jejuni celebramus, says that Light of France.
Chamier. de Euch. lib. 6 cap 1.. 13.
All the French Churches celebrate the Supper fasting; I hold to the Rule, If
any man hunger, etc. either of these is best which puts the body in best tune,
to serve (as I may say) the soul in a holy duty.

. 6.
How soon abuse crept into this Ordinance of the Supper. It was not above
twenty or thirty year from the nativity or birth of this Ordinance when this
Epistle was written, it was nothing so long from the birth or foundation of
this Church to this time. The Apostle had sown good corn in this field by his
Doctrine. I have delivered unto you the naked institution of Christ, and now it
stands in need of weeding. The Devil was not asleep in the very Apostles Error
and corruption sprung up in the Church betime.
times. He raised up Simon Magus, and after him a fry of Gnostics, or knowing
people, so they would be called, but falsely, says Irenaeus, to corrupt the
Doctrine; and it was betimes that the Devil set his foot in this most excellent
Ordinance, and from first to last there have been scarce any times wherein some
soil has not cleaved to this Sacrament, every Age adding or declaring
somewhat, till it became a monster, unlike it self in the Romish Mass, which
is a Mass of Idolatry and abomination, a very abomination of desolation to
this Ordinance, the stamp of Christ's institution being so defaced, that he that
minted it cannot own his own coin; for being an outward Ordinance, consisting
of outward elements and actions, the fancy of men thinks, this and that
dressing would do better, and so by putting on more ornaments, as they call
them, they quite spoil the feature of the child; and if men would be tampering
while the Apostles lived, what would they do after? If I should say, that the
unhappiest and oldest weeds have grown in this Garden, I should not speak far
wide; I may say of it, as Solomon says of man, Eccles. 7. 29. Loc, this have I
found, that God has made man right, but they have sought out many inventions.

. 7.
The Apostle does not command those that were pure from these abuses to
separate from their Communion with the rest, whom he reproves for their sin
of Of separation, when sinful, and when lawful.
coming unworthily. We know not who, or how many were free, but it may seem the
poorest were the purest, as commonly they are; but he that reproves schism does
not command separation; He assayes the cure another way,

1. By setting the Ordinance right according to Christ's Institution.

2. By rectifying the Communicants from their unworthy coming, and so gives
both a purgation, disallowing their schism, not allowing any separation.

If Babylon become ahabitation of Devils, then come out of her my people, Rev.
18. 2, 4. Yea flee out and deliver your souls, Jer. 51. 6.

If Christ must be coupled with Belial, the Temple of God with Idols, as it is
when Christians participate in Heathenish Sacrifices and Idolatries, then, Come
out from among them, and be ye separate, 1 Cor. 6. 16, 7. You have an old and
famous example in them that left all to go to Jerusalem when Jereboam set up
his Calves, and cast out the Priests of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14, 16. For if
Bethel turn Bethaven, the house of God become the house of iniquity, then, Come
out of Gilgal, Go not up to Bethaven Hos. 4. 15.

If any that is called a brother, a Professor of the Christian Religion, be a
Fornicatour, or Idolater, or covetous, have no free familiarity with him, with
such an one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Turn away from them, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

If they bring corrupt Doctrine, house them not, salute them not, Epist. a.
John 10. for that makes you partaker in their sin, verse. 11. If their works
be unfruitful works of darkness, be not partakers with them, have no
fellowship with their works, Ephesians. 5. 7, 11.

These separations are duty, and unto duty, but for a Corinthian to separate
from Gods Church and Gods Ordinance, because some come unworthily to the Lords
Table is no duty, because there is no command, it is no duty, and therefore we
read not this word, Come forth, in any of those Epistles written to the seven
Churches, Revel. ^. and 3. against which Christ says, He has such and such
things; they that lived in the impurer, are not called forth into the purer
Churches, but there are promises made to them that keep themselves pure, and
duties enjoined them toward the impure part, for we may not make these Churches
and Babylon all one, nor make every disease the plague: Shall the sons of God,
the Angels, forsake the Lords presence, because Satan comes also amongst them?
Job 1. 6. Must Shem and Japhet leap out of Noah's Ark, because there is a Cham
there; Would not our Savior rather have sent for John Baptist to have baptized
him, rather than himself have come from Nazareth to Bethabara, which some
compute Hildersam in Joh. 4. Lect. 26 p. 122.
fourteen Dutch miles, that is of ours fifty six? If that generation of vipers
that came also to John's Baptism, had either polluted the water, or the
Ordinance unto Christ? Matthew. 3. 7, 14. But of this more afterward.

. 8.
The abuses reproved were such as depraved the Ordinance, and the corruptions
such as put themselves forth in the Communicants at the very time of their
participation. The Lords Supper, was so intermedled with their festival cheer,
as the difference between the Lords body, and their own repast was not truly
made. They discerned not the Lords body. Their corruptions which at all times
are blameworthy, as divisions, intemperance, slighting the poor brethren, do
now appear most odious and unsuitable, I note hereupon, That sin never does
us more hurt than in frustrating and disabling the use and fruit of Ordinances.
This is not, says he, to eat the Lords Supper, verse. 20. You come together not
for the better, but for the worse, verse. 17. We are the worse, when we bring
such sins as carnalize the heart, and disapten us for spiritual fruition and
enjoyment; An outward reverence, as it is an argument of a serious spirit; so
it is becoming the Ordinances of the Gospel; The meeting of the Church is the
greatest meeting in the world, the irreverent use of the Lords Supper, called
for a sudden Reformation, Other things, says the Apostle, ^^li I set in order
when I come, verse. ult. but this cannot stay, it is a matter of importance, that
the reverence of this Ordinance be preserved, bring not hither then the
behavior of a Tavern, or of your meeting at the Hall of your Company, though
grave, but the deportment of Christians that come to the best and greatest
Table in the world: It Is true, I could worship Christ though lying in a manger,
but I should not put him in a manger, if I had a better room for him in my
Inn; Let all things be done decently, or beautifully, 1 Cor. 14. ult.

. 9.
The words are, For I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you; A good recommendation of his Doctrine, a good preparative to make way for
Cameron. Myrothec. in loc. Horac. lib. 2. Satyr. 8. Aeneid. l. 2.
their acceptance of it, I received it from the Lord. The expression is
Hebrewish, with whom; the Teacher is said to give, Prove. 9. 9. The Scholar to
receive, and the Latin owns both the words in that sense, That which I have
learned, I also have delivered; This very Doctrine he had taught them by word
of mouth, but now upon occasion of their swerving from it, he repeats and
writes them a copy of it for perpetual memory. Beza is in this place a
Hypercritick from the word (...) not (...), and will have it thus, Ut a Domino
profectum, I received it upon report, as from the Lord: It weakens not the
credit of the Doctrine, whether the Apostle had it by immediate revelation, as
most say, or by report of eyewitnesses, or both; He did receive it from the
Lord, and from the Lord he hands it to the Church, and therein, as Estius
says, he is a fourth Evangelist, for John Estius in loc,
recites not the institution of the Supper, though he speak upon the borders of
it, and so Paul makes the fourth relator.

The Observations hence are,

. 10.
1. The best way to redress and remedy abuses and corruptions Justum regulum
adjubet Martyr. Institutio Christi certa regula. Calvin.
crept into this Ordinance, is to reduce it to the Lords Institution. This the
Apostle here does, having opened the nature of the disease, he applies this
medicine, For I have received of the Lord, etc. Our Savior had used this way
upon the question of Divorce, which was grown very abusive, and stood in need
of regulation; he tries it by the standard of the first institution, yea though
the authority and antiquity of Moses was pleaded, But, says Christ, from the
beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8. Though error be old, yet truth is first.
All corruptions of Ordinances are deviations from their institution, and
therefore the false copy must be corrected by the true original, The
institution of Christ is the certain Rule; He instituted it for a Communion,
therefore O Corinthians, your divisions and contempt of the poor is unsuitable.
He instituted it as a Sacrament of his body and blood for spiritual repast,
therefore your intemperance and common use of it at your feasts, is not
agreeable to the nature and use of it, as the standard discovers false weights
and measures, and a straight rule, a crooked line, so the institution of our
Lord, corruptions. The Popish-masse would not be found in the mass, if it were
tried by this Rule; but we must distinguish between Christ's institution of this
Sacrament, and his celebration of it, though at the same time. The institution
shows the nature and use of it, and abides as a perpetual Rule, He took bread,
he blessed, he broke, he gave, etc. His celebration of it was by reason of the
Passover attended by very many occasional circumstances, after Supper, in a
private room, in such a gesture, to such a number, in unlevened bread, etc.
It Is no corruption to vary in these occasional circumstances, except we must
always keep Passeovers too. I showed you before out of Jewish Writers, That
the Passover of aftertimes, even that of Christ varied in such particulars
from the first Passover in Egypt, without corruption, and so this Supper in
all ages has varied from the first celebration in such occasionals. He, says
Naz anzen, Naz. Not. 40.
celebrated the Supper, (...), in an upper room, we in our houses of prayer; he
after, we before Supper; he before his death, we after his Resurrection, and so
accordingly all Divines. It is universalis notio, says Chamier, an universal
notion Chamier. de Euchar. l. 8. c. 7.
that the circumstances of an individual action be distinguished from those that
pertain to the Law thereof, and these may be of good use for instruction, not
of necessary use for imitation; I say with learned Hooker, Hooker Eccles.
Polit. l. 5. p. 366
To do throughout every like circumstance with Christ were to err more from
the purpose he aimed at, then we now do by not following them with so nice
strictness; What is superstition but to make that necessary which is
indifferent, and that a part of worship which is an accident to it? So
Constantine the Emperor deferred his Baptism, and almost mist it, because he
would have been baptized in Jordan, as Christ was. Hold the institution, but be
not superstitious without a command, or hoc facite, in the circumstances that
fall out at the time of celebration.

. 11.
That the Apostle received from the Lord what he delivered to the Church. This
high and honorable Ordinance, This Ordinance we receive from the Lord.
the Passover of the Christian Church, we can receive from no higher hand,
than the Lord, we may receive from no lower; our faith can be resolved into no
lower authority than the Lord. I believe and receive this, and use it, and
expect the fruit, not because Paul delivers it to me, but because he receives
it from the Lord, and so the Apostle leads our faith to the original, the first
authority, and higher we need not, we cannot go: It was the dignity of an
Apostle to be a receiver from the Lord, or else he could not have had the
authority of a deliverer to the Church. See the difference between Christ and
Paul in this matter of delivery to the Church, in Matthew. 5. 21, 31, 33. Ye have
heard it has been said of old thus and thus, But I say to you; He speaks like
the Lord, But I say; when Paul comes to speak, Then, I have received from the
Lord, he speaks as an Ambassador, or a servant; No other authority ought to
take place in the Church, but of Christ only.

. 12.
The Apostles were of high authority in the Church of Christ, first Apostles,
says the Text, 1 Cor. 12. 28. yet they were but receivers, there was a higher
authority which they advance, I have received from the Lord; See the scale or
ladder of faith; we receive our Doctrine from the Scriptures, the Scriptures
from the Apostles and others that were inspired; they from Christ, and Christ
as Mediator says, He has received his mission from God; and here alone our
faith stands, and is quietly settled, so in the Commonwealth, you receive a
warrant from the Constable, a meaner man then you, he from the Justice, he from
the Council, they from the supreme power.

And what need or reason was there that he should avouch his receiving the
doctrine of this Sacrament from the Lord? Was it for that he wrote to the
Corinthians, a proud and stomackfull people that had his person in some
contempt in comparison of their preachers, who by their tinkling eloquence led
them by the ears into captivity, and were partners with, or patrons of them in
these abuses? Therefore he brings the name of the Lord to bear down their
naughty stomachs, and the Lords institution to whip these corruptions out of
the Temple: Or

Rather was it for a closer reason; He that believes to receive a soul-benefit
from an outward Ordinance of eating and drinking bread and wine, had need to
see good ground for his believing, for they are incommensurate and improper to
the soul; the body may more easily be fed with air, than the soul with bread
and wine; Therefore he appeals to the Lord, for the benefit is from the
author, the virtue and fruit from the institution; He that by a piece of brass
healed a mo^tal sting, can by bread (as I may say) feed the hungry soul; He put
clay in my eyes (says the blind man) He sent me to the pool of Siloam, and I
washed, and do see, Joh. 9. 15.

. 13.
That the Apostle delivered to the Church what he had received from the Lord
also delivered unto you, ( Et omnibus Ecc esiis meo ministerio fundatis) and
all M^rton in loc. P. Martyr.
Churches founded by my Ministry; He did receive and deliver, but not institute
this Ordinance; He that will institute a Sacrament makes himself a God, says
Peter Martyr, Had he not received he had wanted authority? Had he not
delivered, he had wanted faithfulness and honesty, as a messenger that keeps
the God always had officers in his Church.
Ring sent to a friend? God has ever had in his Church such as should be
receivers and deliverers, an office of men, taken from among men, and ordained
for men in things pertaining to God, as it is defined, Heb. 5. 1. but all are
not receivers, as Paul, by immediate hand from the Lord; Moses receives the
Law, and the pattern in the Mount; he was a receiver and deliverer, the Priests
in their generations did receive and deliver, but they were bound to the Law,
and to the Testimony: So in the Christian Churches the Apostles receive the
Word and Sacraments from the Law, they see the pattern in the Mount, then there
are others in their generations that receive and deliver too, but they are
bound to the Law and Testimony. Hear the Apostle 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that
thou have heard of me, commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also: So that here is Paul that received from the Lord, Timothy from
Paul, other faithful men from Timothy, and others from those faithful men;
There is no government of any Commonwealth on earth, but they have their
Officers to receive Laws and Commands from the highest, and to convey and
deliver them to the people.

. 14.
The Apostle received from the Lord two things, His Commission and his Errand;
His Commission to be an Apostle, Romans 1. 5. From Christ we have received our
Apostleship, and this he may show to the people, as he does to these
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9. 1. Am I not an Apostle? etc. but he does not deliver
this to them; His errand, and that is the Doctrine of the Gospel, and this he
does both receive and deliver, I have delivered unto you; so an Ambassador
has a Commission, and that he may show, but delivers not; and he has an
errand, and that he receives from his Lord, and delivers to them to whom he is
sent. There were Prophets in Jeremiah's time that would be deliverers, but they
neither received Commission, Jer. 14. 14. I sent them not; nor errand, Jer. 23.
16. Their vision was of their own heart; The one of these being wanting made a
false prophet. I fear we have many more deliverers then receivers from the Lord,
either they want one of these legs, or both, and yet (which is the wonder they
run) having received neither Commission nor Errand from the Lord.

. 15.
He delivers that to the Church, all that, only that, which first he had
recived from the Lord; the arrow flees with strength, that is shot out of such
a Bow; He was a faithful Ambassador or Steward, we have all that, and nothing
but that which comes from the Lord; a good depositary that fails not of his
trust, the loss of a little of Gods truth, is as the loss of a Diamond out of
a Ring: Christ speaks of the least iota's or tittles of the Law, as precious
things, and permanent. It was the admirable wit of Homer, to make (in his
Poems) Ambassadors to speak in the same words, as they received their errand
by the same spirit, and the same inspiration that he received this Doctrine
from the Lord, he also delivered it to the Church. How pure does this Ordinance
of the Supper come to our hands? What credit ought it to be of with us? You
know the Heathens, and so Mahomet that impostor, that set up or devised the
heathenish Theology or Worship, they feigned a conversation with some god or
goddess, a spirit, that their votes might be received of the people with awe
and credit; for the conscience of man stoops to none but God, from whom we are
assured by the Apostle that we have this Ordinance, That I received, I also
delivered to you.

. 16.
That what the Apostle had formerly delivered to the Corinthians by lively
voice, now he writes upon the occasion of abuses grown in, How easily do
corruptions steal Estius in loc.
in? How soon do we forget the Law of Ordinances and institutions of Christ? It
could not be many years since he had delivered the manner of this Ordinance,
What necessity there is of having the Scripture written.
and now he repeats it in writing: What necessity is there of having the
Scripture written? That it may continue and pass pure from generation to
generation. Men find it very requisite that their Laws be written and upon
record; what inconveniences would follow, if not? While the Church of God
consisted of few persons or families, as in Noah and Abraham's time, there was
the word of God, but not Scripture. It was handed down from father to son by
tradition, and the frequent appearances of God to them, supplied defects; but
afterward God began the example, and wrote the Decalogue in Tables of stone,
the ancientest writing this day in all the world, then Moses also wrote the
Scripture, and he is the ancientest writer in the world; if all the Greek Law
givers or Poets be compared with him, they are but ( heri aut nudius tertius
says Cunaeus and Josephus) as of yesterday, hundreds of years before the
Trojan war, yet not so many, as Theoph. ad Autolycum. affirms, The Jews had the
Old Which was in Jephaes days 900. or 1000.
Testament written, though they were so frequently visited by extraordinary
Prophets; and the Jewish Masoreth had so industriously mended and numbered all
the letters in every word of the Old Testament, that they knew the number, and
could as easily miss one as you can miss a pearl off your chain, and hereof
we have the benefit, C^dicem portat Judaeus unde credat Christianus, The Jew
says Austin, though Aug. in sa. 56
himself an unbeliever is our Library Keeper, and carries the book after us out
of which we get our faith: for how often does our Lord and his Apostles cite
those Records; Nor would the Lord let the New Testament be unwritten, which in
the wide world, over which the Gospel spreads, would have been mangled and
transfigured into a thousand shapes. Remember sometimes in your prayers to give
God thanks for the Gospel written, the Jews never forget the Law in theirs. And
yet again, I note it, that many parts of the New Testament were written on
accidental occasions, as ill manners occasion good Laws; so Paul writes this
Epistle, and this part that I preach upon: So the Epistle to the Galatians, an
occasion of false teachers that mingled Moses and Christ, Law and Gospel; and
all Writers give this occasion for that lofty and sublime piece, In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was, etc. because the hellish Gnostics
did even then begin to adulterate the simplicity of the Gospel, and to bring
Christ unto a lower rank, and therefore he uses their very words (...) and
(...) Grot. in Proleg. ad Johan.
which they had in Plato and Pythagoras his School, and applies them to Christ
Jesus; we get this excellent piece of Scripture which entreats upon the
preparation of the Communicant above any, above all other, and we get it by the
abuses and corruptions reigning then in Corinth, upon occasion of their sin,
the whole Church has gained a Rule for ever, I had almost said, as it is said
in another respect, foelix culpa, happy were these corruptions.

. 17.
The safest, simplest, certainest Rule by which a Communicant may examine
himself, whether he come worthily to this Table, is to do it by the nature, use
and end of the Lords Supper. The Apostle had found great fault with the
Corinthians manner of communicating, to prevent By what rule men are to examine
whether they come worthily to the Lords Supper.
which he gives one short Rule in these words, Let a man examine himself; but
he sets down no form of this self-examination; He does not answer the question,
How? Yea, he delivers the institution of Christ in all points, as that Rule to
square the Communicant; For if a man do rightly calculate, he shall find that
here is presented and represented the closest union and communion of the soul
with Christ, the most spiritual intimacy, the most humbling and passionate
prospect of a broken Christ, the most refreshing water that runs out of that
smitten Rock, the most real exhibition and affording of this to me; and indeed
the sweetest and nearest intercourse with our Lord, is here set forth, as in no
other Ordinance, for the manner of it, and then what does this bespeak? Does a
feast so set forth bespeak a swine? Are Superstition, Ignorance, Profaneness,
fit garments to come in to such a Supper? Are those Christ-killing-sinnes of
ours, which caused this breaking of him, fit companions for us to bring to the
eating of him? That is, as if we should bring to the Lords Table the bloody
knife that killed him; Let a man but use his reason with his faith, and ask
this broken bread, this poured wine, what they mean, or what they speak, and
they will tell him enough, whereby he may examine himself, and this is
Chemnitius his Rule for examination, Chem. Exam. de preperatione.
whom a great man of this Nation says, to be the best Scholar of all the
Lutherans (Sic inquit Montacut. origenes.)

The result of all that has been said, comes to these two instructions,
pertaining either to Minister, or people, or both.

1. That this Ordinance of the Supper be suitable to the Exodus 25. 40. Heb. 8.
5.
institution of Christ.

2. That the Communicant be suitable to the Ordinance, and then both things
which the Apostle speaks unto here, both sorts of abuses or corruptions,
whether in the Ordinance, or of the Communicants, are set to rights, and all is
right.

. 18.
1. That the Ordinance be suitable to the institution; For see (says he) that
thou make all things according to This Ordinance must be administered according
to Gods institution.
the pattern showed thee in the Mount; Moses had no liberty to vary from the
matter or form, or any particular; and have not we an institution, and the
pattern of this Ordinance set before us, not in the Mount, but in the
upper-room, where Christ celebrated the first Supper, and gave forth a hoc
facite, This do as often as ye do it, hoc facite, is as much as, See that ye make
or do all things according to the pattern; The Apostles were not now at a
Councel-Table with their Lord, to give their vote what manner of Sacrament
should be appointed, but as guests to take and eat at present such cheer as the
Master set before them, and in aftertimes to do This, Do this in remembrance
of me, and yet our Lord Christ would have his Ordinances administered (...)
decently. Clemens the ancientest of Fathers in his Epistle to these
Corinthians, has an excellent saying, (...), We ought to do all those things
orderly which our Master has commanded us to do; For Christ himself was no
friend to slovenliness, or loathsome nastiness (as one observes) Hildersam in
John 4.
out of that Mark 14. 15. He shall show you an upper room furnished and
prepared; but presumption is bold, Superstition adventurous, as if it was
called to council with God, makes no bones of clipping his coin; and therefore
this Sacrament has been filled with many devices, and long groaned under their
inventions, which after long possession plead prescription, and come in
aftertimes to be counted parts, which at first were but scabs or wens. The
Apostle did not, durst not deliver but what he had received; but they that have
less power than the Apostle, dare deliver what they received not, and by
adding or substracting, do plainly find fault with Gods own model: Why should
the Papist give into the mouth of his Communicant a whole wafer, but that he is
afraid to break the bread least some loose crumbs should fall? Why does he cheat
the people wholly of the Cup, but upon pretense that a drop of the blood might
be shed or spilt? May we not think that they are too nice, and more scrupulous
than Christ, at whose breaking bread there might fall crumbs, and in the
Apostles drinking, drops from the cup? Superstition is foolish, that pretends
holiness, and corrupts Ordinances, and had rather make than take a Sacrament;
We have the Minister in the name and stead of Christ Jesus; if this be denied
(as it is by some) I shall at present affirm but this, That the reverend and
most ancient Father Justin Martyr in his second Apology to the Roman Emperor,
written about fifty years after the death of John the Apostle, sets out (as I
shall show you) the full manner of their administration of this Sacrament, and
therein says, the (...), or Minister, does pour forth prayer, and gives thanks
over the bread and wine, which (I can give no account of private corners) has
been practiced in the Christian Churches, till this very time and year, being
1500 years at least. The Minister takes the bread, and likewise takes the Cup.
He gives thanks or blesses over the Bread and Cup He breaks the Bread, he
says, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye. He pronounces, This bread is the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ. This Cup is the New Testament in his blood. You do take, you
eat, you drink. This the Minister does; this you do for a remembrance and
commemoration of Christ, showing forth his death; and this is an Ordinance
suitable to the institution.

. 19.
2. That the Communicant be suitable to the Ordinance. When the Song is truly
set and pricked, the singer must Of worthy communicating.
keep time and tune, or else all is not right; The Papists have the Ordinance
unsuitable to the institution, and we alas have Communicants unsuitable to the
Ordinance. That word which follows in this Chapter, that dangerous word (...),
unworthily; what is it but unsutably, we must measure, and fashion the
Communicant by the Ordinance: He must of necessity be a Disciple, to such
Christ spoke, Take ye, eat ye, etc. not as ye are Apostles, but as Disciples;
He must bring with him a Christ receiving, or a Christ applying faith, for
Take, Eat, without a hand or mouth of the soul he cannot; He must come with
hunger and thirst for strength and refreshment, for he does come to a Table to
eat and drink the staff of bread the cordial cheering wine; This strength and
nourishment is by virtue of his union with Christ himself, and communion,
therefore he comes to eat the very body, and drink the very blood of Christ; He
comes as a confederate with God, to receive the seal, or as a Legator to
receive a Legacy bequeathed by Will, viz. Christ and remission of sins in
Christ, for this Cup is the New Covenant, or New Testament sealed with Christ's
blood; He comes as to a festival commemoration, where the founder of the feast
is remembered with praise and honor, Do it in remembrance of me; He looks
through and beyond the broken bread and wine poured out, to a broken body and
the shed blood of Christ; He looks at another taking, then taking of bread;
another eating and drinking than of bread and wine, viz. the taking to himself,
and the spiritual and intimate application of Christ's body and blood, For he
discerns the Lords body, and therefore comes as a consecrated person to
consecrated elements, to broken bread with a broken heart, full of affections,
as the Ordinance is full of mysteries, and here is a Communicant suitable to
the Ordinance, and so Paul, who received of the Lord, and delivered unto them
the institution of Christ, has set to rights both the Ordinance, and the
Corinthian Communicant.

CHAP. III. That the Lord Jesus is the Author of this Sacrament.
1 COR. 11. 23. That the Lord Jesus, etc.
I Shall follow the track of the Apostle, who goes before me in the two points
I am to entreat upon.

1. The Nature and Use of this Sacrament.

2. The due Preparation of the Communicant.

Of these in order, and with what brevity I can, contenting my self to speak in
decimo sexto, what might be spoken in folio, in hope that your proficiency by
Mr Anthony Burgess and Mr Love.
your former most worthy teachers, may excuse me the labor of so large a
volume.

The next words I come unto, do plainly point out unto us.

1. The Author of the institution, The Lord Jesus.

2. The Time of it, The same night in which he was betrayed. Doct. 1. The
Author of this Sacrament.


The Author of this institution is the Lord Jesus. The consent of all the
Evangelists that write the History, puts this out of all controversy; Christ
was personally present both celebrating and instituting this Ordinance; He is
res Sacramenti, the thing of the Sacrament, and Author Sacramenti, the Author
of the Sacrament, the feast-maker, and the feast; Out of this pierced side (as
Austin alludes) there came forth both blood and water, the two Sacraments of
the Church; He took the bread, he blessed, he brake it, he gave it, it may well
be called the Lords Supper, yea the Lord is the Supper, This is my body, this
is my blood.

. 1.
First, The Lord Jesus is Author, the Mediator of the new Covenant, the
Testator of the new Testament, appoints the seal of that Covenant, and ratifies
that Testament with his blood; He is the Lord to whom is committed the
Sovereignty and Government of his Church, therefore he makes Officers, Laws and
Ordinances. The Lords day, and the Lords Supper are particularly in Scripture
called by Rev. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 11.
his name, The Lords; The Lords day ex illius resurrectione festivitatem suam
habere coepit, took its festivity Epist. 119.
from his Resurrection, as Austin; The Lords Supper is the memorial of his
death, so his death and resurrection, a Supper, and a day to memorize them.

As he is Lord, so his Laws bind whatsoever they be, though Abraham be
commanded to kill his son, for the Laws of God have not their obligation from
the quality of the Law, but from the authority of the Lord the Lawgiver: As he
is Jesus a Savior, so his Laws are benefits and liberties tending to
salvation; as the Laws of your City are freedoms, and your freedoms laws, so
you obey them ^s Laws, enjoy them as freedoms, they are our benefit and our
duty; His invitation is to a Supper, it is the invitation of a Lord, it is the
Supper of a Savior.

. 2.
Secondly, There must be institution of a Sacrament. The elements are ciphers,
till the institution make them figures. Institution is as necessary to a
Sacrament, as superscription is to money, for it is created (...), of things
that did not appear, Sacraments are of that rank of things, Quae nihil sunt
sine institutione, says Chamier, they were bread and wine Chamier. de Euchar.
l. 7. c. 10
indeed before, but they were nothing to that relation which Christ put upon
them; a seal of a thousand a year is made of a peny-worth of wax; What was a
piece of brass to the healing of a mortal sting? Nothing, till God put an use
upon it, that all that looked to it being bitten should be healed.

. 3.
Thirdly, There must be a divine institution to make a Sacrament. The Legatee
does not seal the will, but the Testatour, the Granter seals the Deed, not the
Grantee; the Delinquent seals not the pardon, but the Keeper of the seal, Sola
divina institutio facit Sacramentum, Montac. origin. part. 1. page 73.
says a learned man; Take that away, and it cease to be a Sacrament; The
Supreme Power only can coin money, in other its capital. All the whole Church
together cannot make a Sacrament, then it should be the Churches Supper, not
the Lords, and it is theirs to eat, but not to make, Ejus est signa Synopsis de
coena. 7.
gratiae addere, cujus est gratiamtribuere, He may add the signs of grace,
that can give the grace. There is a fourfold word requisite to a Sacrament,

1. A word of institution, which appoints the matter and form.

2. A word of Sanctification or blessing, to set them apart from common use.

3. A word of Promise of some good to the Communicant, and so we have here a
promise of the Lords body and blood; The promises of Sacraments, (as is well
observed by the Centuriators) are vestitae Centur^mag. ce^t. 1.
promiss^ones, clothed promises: He that believes shall be saved, is a naked
promise: He that eats this bread, etc. shall have Christ as a clothed promise.

4. A word of Command, as we have the (...) Buckler. Pr^t. evidence.
in Baptism, so hoc facite here, as a learned man. Let the Word be added to the
Element, and you have a Sacrament. Austin.

. 4.
Fourthly, It Is the institution that gives the nature and efficacy to a
Sacrament. He that mints the money, sets the value and price upon it. A
Sacrament is an outward and visible sign, but it is not a natural, but a
voluntary sign, nor yet a bare sign as the picture of Hercules is a sign of
Hercules, and no more; we must not make the Sacraments, (...), empty names,
empty figures, empty representations, that resemble and signify something, and
no more; as the Sacrament was a crucifix, and the Supper painted resemblances
of meat and drink, this is a hungry feast; he must have his stomach in his eye,
that is fed with it, but the Sacraments are signacula, symbola, seals and
pledges, or instruments offering, exhibiting and making present to our faith
the very benefits which they signify, the very body and blood of Christ is not
only represented, but present to a believer, and brought home to his soul, yet
they are not natural instruments Montac. orig. part. 1. p. 67.
in which the inward grace is contained, as in a vessel, as the Romish
Praesentialists and Schoolmen dream, like plasters which have in themselves a
virtue or power to heal a wound, or a medicine to expel poison, but they are
moral and voluntary means or instruments serving to the purpose ex destinatione
by appointment, as the brazen Serpent to heal the sting. Bernard has writ upon
it, As (says he) in vestitures, and possessions, Bernard. de coena.
and assurances, do pass by the staff and ring, Annulus non valet quicquam,
haereditas est quam quaerebam, The ring avails little, I seek the inheritance
that is confirmed and conveyed by it; so we say, the Lands, Inheritance, etc.
do pass by the great Seal, for so I come to have and hold, and they are mine
by it; Thus the Sacrament is a seal of confirmation and conveyance of the
inward grace to the hand or faith of a believing soul; And as really as the
estate does pass by the Seal into your right and possession, not by any inward
work or power of the Seal in it self, but by the use it is of, in sealing and
conveying; so really is Christ, and all his treasure passed over unto you that
receive him by faith, not in respect of any worthiness or virtue in the very
outward Sacrament, but in and by the use it is of, by Christ's appointment to
seal, confirm and convey; that excellent place speaks my mind fully, 1 Cor.
10. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, Is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, Is it not the Communion of the body
of Christ? He says not barely representation, as a sign, but communion or
participation as a conveying seal; I declare this to you, because some believe
too much, and think the outward Sacrament works (I know not how) like a
plaster by some virtue contained in them, that is opere operato, as they
barbarously speak; and others believe-too little, as if they were mere and
empty signs and resemblances of Christ's body and blood; as if a woman should
receive a ring merely, because the picture of her beloved is engraven on it,
and not as a ring of espousals, really sealing and confirming the contract, and
assuring himself hers, sed de hoe infra.

. 5.
The Use which may be hence inferred is twofold.

The Lord Jesus is author, therefore this Supper is not ours that are
Ministers, but it is the Lords. Alexander Ales. pars 4. quaest. 49. memb. 1.
Hales has an excellent Rule, which I shall make use of hereafter, it is this,
Sacerdos est dispensator non Dominus Sacramentorum Ecclesiae, non dat suum, sed
reddit alienum, quod de jure negari non potest, The Minister is the Dispenser
or Steward, not the Lord of the Sacraments of the Church. He gives not that
which is his, but restores that which is another, which de jure cannot be
denied to him to whom it is Homil. 83. in Mat.
due, and therefore Chrysostom speaks to his fellow Ministers, and calls them
(...), Distributers, Dispensers, as you are of the poors bread in the Church,
which some Benefactour formerly appointed to be bestowed on them by his Will,
and of his Gift, to whom the Lord gives it; We cannot deny, if they be within
the Sphere of our office, and to whom the Lord denies we cannot give. A man
comes to an Executour, Sir, I come to you for a certain Legacy given me by my
Fathers will, whereof you are Executour, the gift bequeathed is not yours, and
you are but the hand, whereby the Donour was pleased to hand it unto me: True,
says the Executour, there is such a Legacy bequeathed, but if you look the
Will, you shall find it given with some limitations and proviso's: See the
words, ver. 28. of this Chapter, (...), and so, there is an And so; But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat, and so let him drink: It is confessed on
all hands, The Conditions being performed, the claim is good; but if it can be
said, You are not a Disciple, and to such only this Legacy was bequeathed by
Christ, or the Church has set on you the brand of a Heathen or a Publican,
though you was a Disciple, and you have for the present by your sin forfeited
the right you had, until by your repentance you return again, why then all
will say, that an Executour or Administratour may not act directly contrary to
the Will, for he is not the Testatour to do what he will, but he is
Administratour to observe, and not to violate the Will.

. 6.
The Lord Jesus is author from him, therefore let the benefit and efficacy of
this Ordinance be expected; for it has and veritatem, and virtutem, both esse
and operari, being and working from the author; As money has the stamp and
the value from the supreme power; and here is the difference between natural
and moral instruments (we take the word instrument largely pro medio for a
mean) that if the Sacraments were natural means or instruments, in which (as
the Schoolman does) the very virtue, or the grace and benefit by them conveyed
were contrived, then were the virtue and benefit to be expected from
themselves, and no otherwise from the author, than as author of the
instrument; as the Candle gives light whether the maker of it be present or no,
and the plaster heals by a quality in it self, but a moral instrument not so,
being empty of any virtue to such an effect, except the author do work by it,
or ( ad praesentiamejus) at the presence of it; as the Serpent of brass on the
Pole, the Clay and Spittle on the eye, the Lambs blood on door-posts, had in
themselves no power to their several effects, but as they were appointed and
used by God or Christ. It is very hard to believe that there is a true and real
exhibition of Christ's body and blood to my faith, as there is of the bread and
wine to the mouth of the receiver; sottish and superstitious people, that use
charms or enchanted means for diseases, etc. never ask themselves, How these
things work, by any natural virtue in them, or by the devil the author of
them; And so here, there are thousands that have a reverend esteem of these
mysteries, yea and a superstitious conceit, thinking that there is some good in
them, and imagining at least that they shall be better for them, but whether to
apply their eye to the very things themselves, or to Christ they know not, nor
matter not, but rest in a confused imagination, just as they that u^e charms.
Now for redress of this confused notion, I commend that of famous Dr Whitaker,
Quasi De Euchar. page 624. in 40.
Chri^^^s in medio sederet, etc. As if Christ fate amongst ^ou, and did the
same as in the first Supper, so ought ^ve to think of this Sacrament, and that
is to see Christ, to take, and bless, and say to us, This is my body, take and
eat; This is my blood, Drink ye all of it, a very effectual consideration,
according to that good old solemn word, used to be spoken to the people at this
Table, Surjum corda, Have your hearts upward, to which they answered, Habemus
ad Dominum.

Now as to others that have their eyes so near the book that they see the
worse, I mean such as by curious enquiry, and too much niceness, how it is
possible that the eating of a piece of bread, and drinking of a sup of wine,
should exhibit and convey to the faith of a believer, the very true and real
body and blood of Christ, do dispute themselves into a naked figure and sign,
as a painted supper represents a true. I say this, That God imitates men in
their assurances or conveyances, as we read of his oath, of his earnest, of his
seal; so that as men in passing of estates and inheritances, do make Deeds, and
seal them, and deliver them, and then the real estate is not conveyed out by
virtue of a bit of wax, but by the Donors sealing that wax, and fastening it to
his Deed, and delivering it as his Act and Deed: So God, or the Lord Jesus
Christ makes a Covenant of giving Christ and eternal life to believers, and
appoints Sacraments to be Seals of that Covenant, and delivers this sealed
Covenant to a believer, and thereby really and truly the Lord Jesus Christ; for
in hoc sacro, speaking of the Supper, says Bernard, non solum quaelibet
gratia. sed Sermon. de caena. 2.
ille in quo est, omnis gratia, not only some one certain grace is given, but
he in whom is all grace viz. Christ Jesus the Lord. And yet I must not say,
that God has so tied himself, or us, to the sacrament^l Seals, as that no man
can have Christ, or the inheritance without them, for that faith which eats and
drinks the flesh and blood of Christ extra Sacramentum, Joh. 6. 50, 51, 53, 54.
does save, and the Covenant ( whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved)
passes the estate effectually to a believer, though it be never sealed
sacramentally, so a Will unsealed and unwritten too, will stand good to many
purposes. The Emperor Valentinian earnestly desired Baptism, but before
Ambrose could come died; He was said, says Ambrose, voto Baptismi, by the
desire of Baptism: No, The desire was good, but it was his faith in Christ that
saved him. Creed and manducasti, says Austin, Believe and thou have eaten;
What then need we care for Sacraments? Yea, the Covenant passes the Estate, the
Seal secures and quiets it; God need neither add to his Promise, Oath or Seal,
to bind himself thereby, but to settle us.

CHAP. IV. Of the Time of this Sacraments Institution; And of Judas his
betraying Christ.
SO much of the Author, now to the Time of this The time.
Institution, In the same night wherein he was betrayed; The Lord Jesus was
betrayed, he was betrayed in the night, The same night in which he was
betrayed, he instituted and celebrated this Supper.

. 1.
First, The Lord Jesus was betrayed. The same word signifies Gods delivering up
his Son to death, Romans 8. 32. and Judas his delivering up his Master to the
Jews, Luke 22. 4. and the Jews their delivering of him up to Pilate, Mat. 27.
18. God is not said to betray his Son, because according to his purpose, and
out of his love to mankind, he delivered him to death for their redemption,
but both the Jews and Judas are said to have betrayed him, they for envy
seeking his blood, Matthew. 27. 18. He for covetousness seeking money, Matthew. 26.
15. for it is thought that Judas conceived that Christ would slip out of the
mids of them, and go away, as often he had done, and then his Master were safe,
and he had his money, for it is said, Matthew. 27. 2. that then Judas which had
betrayed him, when he saw that Christ was condemned, repented himself. It Is a
good saying, that we should not look on pleasure, as it comes toward us, but as
it goes from us. Sin before it be committed seems to the eye of lust full of
profit, pleasure, after commission when the lust is spent, Ammon hates Tamar
for whom he was sick before.

But the traitor sticks fastest to Judas; he is (...) the betrayer of Christ
his Lord and Master, and therefore the brand is set upon him, Judas Iscariot
who betrayed him, as on Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, and how did he
betray him? He brought a band of men to the place where Christ was, and marked
him out unto them with a kiss, Matthew. 26. 48. This is he, take him, and hold
him fast. This Text refers not to Gods delivering up of Christ, nor to the Luke
22. 48.
Jews, but to Judas; for it is said, In the night that he was betrayed, and that
was by Judas only.

. 2.
being an instrument to bring to pass Gods holy council and purpose, plunged
himself by his sin into deep damnation. It was Gods purpose and decree that
Christ should die, and he himself delivered him up to death, but as God holily
and justly does what Joseph's brethren do sinfully, so he delivers up the Lord
Jesus by wicked hands, Luke 22. 22. The Son of man goes, viz dies, (...), as
it was decreed and determined, But woe to that man by whom he is betrayed, it
had been good for that man that he had not been born. It is according as it is
decreed, yet woe to that man, etc. Acts 2. 23. He was delivered by the
determinate council and foreknowledge of God, but you have slain him by wicked
hands; God brings his holy councels, purposes and decrees to pass by most
wicked instruments; The giving up his Son to death was the most glorious work
of grace and love that ever was, but effected by most wicked hands. Godly men
could not be employed in such services. An Artificer uses a crooked tool to do
that which he cannot do by a strait one; The secret will of God is no rule of
our obedience, Nec omnis revelata, says Ainsw. not every revealed Medull a
lib. cap. 1.. 23.
will neither his instance is of Jeroboam to whom it was revealed long before
that he should have ten Tribes, 1 King. 11. ^1. which yet peccavit occupando,
he sinned in assuming, 2 Chronicles. 3. 5, 6, 7. The revealing of an event, which
God has determined, or those actions, whereby that event shall be brought to
pass, gives no warrant, for else Hazael, being told 2 King. 8. 12.
before, and Judas too, what they should both do, might have been pleaded for
justification; After a wonderful manner, says Austin, that is against Gods
will, which is not besides it. It Is against the will of his command, which is
our rule, which is not beside the will of his purpose, and yet may be our sin,
God is just and gracious in delivering up his Son to death, but Judas and the
Jews sin horribly in it, there is Romans 12. 2. That good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God, which the godly are to hold unto, but for the Act. 2. 23.
(...), Gods determinate council Pharaoh and Judas, and Herod, and Pilate, the
worst names in the whole world, may be the instruments and damned midwives to
bring it to the birth; for (as Mr Brightman says in another case) a fair and
perfect child born does not make any thing the better, the adultery in which
it was begotten: so the being the work of Gods purpose, nothing warrants the
act of any man, or of Judas that betrayed Christ. I must not enlarge upon these.

. 3.
The Lord Jesus was betrayed in the night. Judas marches as Captain of the band
of men, and Officers of the Chief-Priests and Pharisees, unto the Garden with
Lanterns, Torches, Weapons, Joh. 18. 3. They are cunning to do their work in
the night without notice, and noise, and tumult; He that about an hour or two
ago had been at Passover with Christ, now betrays him; He had sold him before,
and now delivers him.

. 4.
Observe here the pattern of a wicked heart made worse by spiritual Ordinances.
Whether Judas was present at, and participant of the Lords Supper, that is,
whether he received both Sacraments, the Passover and the Lords Supper, we may
happily hereafter consider, but at the Passover he was at that Passover, which
Christ says, he had heartily desired to eat with them, Luke 22. 15. and with
the holiest society in the world, but he was a Serpent in Paradise all the
while.

. 5.
His Character is this: 1. He was purse-bearer and receiver of the
contributions that came in, and steward to lay out upon occasion, and because
he inverted the public stock to his private use, he is called a thief, John
^2. 6.

2. His Covetousness in time began to fly at great gain; for though he
retained to such a Master, and was both a Teacher and Preacher of heavenly
Doctrine, yet he thrives from a thief to a traitor, and exposed to sale the
most precious jewel, Jesus Christ, Luke 22. 3.

3. Of this sin he went breeding, and came full Matthew. 26. 16.
of it to the Passover; This he had premeditated, and with this he was
pr^possest, and with no better preparation comes to the Sacrament, to which he
came not to repent of his sin, but to cover it: So some men use Religion, and
his success was according, for what he was conceived with before, now is
quickened, After the sop Satan entered into him, Joh. 13. 27.

4. He goes from the Sacrament full of Satan, and within few hours sels that
blood which should have been sprinkled on his door-posts.

6.
This is a fearful example to all that after such a president dare venture
upon a Sacrament, to which they come with purpose to go on in those sins they
bring to it, as he did, whether covetousness, as his was, or luxury,
drunkenness, looseness of life, fraud, rapine, ungodly callings, unjust use of
their callings, etc. they think to receive Christ in the Sacrament, and Satan
receives them; for you must know, That as Christ is presented in the Sacrament,
so Satan is present at it, to enter in after the morsel, being first by the
morsel sealed to be his. Sins of purpose and resolution, are the key that opens
the door for his entrance, do not look at Judas his particular sin of selling
his Master, that was not yet, but look at his purpose and resolution to commit
the sin, for that was now even at the Sacrament, that was it that set open
the door to the Devil, and such a purpose to continue in your sins, will do
the like office for Satan in you, as in him, that is, hold the door open. The
Devil had put it into Judas heart, Joh. 13. 2. and after the Supper he entered
into him, verse. 27.

It Is true, the best of us bring sin and corruption in us, and with us to the
Lords Table, it is well if it be sour herbs to this Passover, but it must not
be unleavened bread, sweet sins; we may come with sour sins, but not with
sweet. The Apostles (as Luke relates, Chap. 22. 24.) had some ambition and
desire of greatness in them, which even now began to peep up, and our Savior
checks it, and they also freshly come from the Lords Table showed infirmity,
they could not pray with him, they all ran away from him, after denied him:
What alas, so soon after the Sacrament? We learn this excellent lesson, to
bewail our corruptions that bubble up in us, even while we are at the Table,
and those in us which still appear in us, when we are newly gone from it.

But there is great difference between their sins and Judasses, they thought of
some preferment under Christ, and he made a preferment of him; He like a false
soldier forsook his colors, and fled to the other side; They were routed and
ran away with intent to return again, for (...): His was an old fire that had
long lien in him, and been fed by him: Theirs were some sparklings that
sparkled, and soon went out: His was premeditated and purposed sin, theirs upon
the sudden temptation; They were imperfectly good, he was perfectly evil, as
was said of Simon Magus, Act. 8 2^. Thou art in the gall of bitterness, not,
there is some gall of bitterness in thee.

I have said this, and laid open Judas to affright men, not from the Supper,
but unto preparation or self-examination, And so let him come, says the Text.
I will wash mine hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, Psalm.
^6. 6. For when or where do ye read such an expression, as verse. 29. He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats damnation, drinks damnation to himself: It
puts me in mind of a comparison of Chrysostoms in his Sermon de proditione
Judae. As corporal food, finding (...), a stomach possessed with ferment, vicious
humors, does more hurt than good, and increases the disease, not of it is own
nature, but by fault of the stomach: So this Sacrament received by wicked men,
aggravates their condemnation, not of it self, but through their unrepented
sins.

The same night in which he was betrayed, the Lord Jesus did both institute and
celebrate this Sacrament. The concurrent testimony of the Evangelists, and of
Paul in this Text, asserts it as the first Passover in Egypt, was eaten in
the night, so was this Supper, and as that was kept in aftertimes as a
memorial of the destroying Angel, his passing over the houses of Israel, until
the death of Christ: So this is kept as a memorial of the deliverance of the
Church from eternal destruction by the death of Christ, until his second
coming.

CHAP. V. Why Christ deferred the instituting of this Supper, until the night
in which he was betrayed.
THat Christ could have ordained this Supper before this time there is no
doubt, but why he deferred it to this night in which he was betrayed, (...),
Chrysostom. in loc.
says Chrysostom, was not without some reason; and the Lord himself intimates
as much, Luke 22. 15. With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with
you, before I suffer: Which Reasons are diverse, and may be ordered to two heads:

1. Why he instituted it at the close of the Supper, for after Supper he took
the Cup, v. 24.

2. Why he instituted and celebrated it a few hours (if hours) before he was
betrayed.

. 1.
First, Being ordained at or at the end of the Passover and Supper annexed,
which some call coena justa Gro^ius.
or apolytica, the dimissory Supper it must of necessity be at night, for the
Passover was eaten at the beginning or forepart of the night, therefore
Christ was necessitate legis adactus, says Peter Martyr, moved by In locum.
necessity of the Law to do it in the night, and after Supper, as substituting
it in the place and room of the Passover (as Paraeus) which he first
fulfilled, and then abrogated it, and he abrogated it as one that did not
impugn it, for it was an Ordinance of God, and therefore he did not tear it
down, as some old hangings off the wall, but he did fulfill it by observing it,
and decently laid it in the grave by placing in its room the memorial of an
infinitely greater, and more largely extending mercy, than the deliverance from
Egypt was: So that when he whom that roasted and slain Lamb did type out, was
as the true Passover slain and sacrificed, then it was time the body being
present to draw a curtain over the picture, and in stead of that commemoration
used at the Passover, when they broke the bread, and distributed it, saying,
This is the bread of affliction, which our Fathers suffered in Egypt, to put a
new memorial upon it, This is my body broken for you; This is my blood shed for
you, and as that continued in the Church till the body came which that shadow
represented; so shall this continue in the Church, till the person come alive,
which is here represented dying, and then an end of this too

2. At the end of the paschal Supper, to show that Jansen. Harm. p. 105.
in this Sacrament there is no bodily repast intended, for they had already
supped, but a spiritual refection of the soul. The roasted Lamb might afford the
guests a belly-full; so the Religion, and Ordinances, and Promises in the Law
were more outward and bodily, but this Sacrament of the Gospel is an after
Supper modicum, full of spiritual signification, but not so stuffie for outward
matter, that we may prepare, not (as Austin says) our months, but our faith,
and expect to satisfy not the hunger and thirst of the body, as they might,
but the hunger and thirst of the soul, which in this little model may find
enough and overmeasure: The Temple-service among the Jews was an Heb. 9. 1, 10.
Romans 2. penult.
outward Religion, and as their Ordinances were outward, so they generally were
Jews outwardly; we wonder that they so little saw and tasted the marrow and
kernel of them, and stuck in the rind feeding on the crust of most Ordinances,
as if a man should think the cloth would heal the sore, and not the plaster
spread upon it; but if we take estimate of them by our selves, we shall find
that most of us should have been as they in that case, for God having ordained
for us outward Sacraments, for number few, for observation easy, for
signification excellent, as Austin speaks, Epist. 118.
we are for the general, but outward in them, and though we be clearlier taught
what is within them, yet we are in the use of them, but outwardly reverent as
they, and do not spiritually and inwardly enjoy the kernel of them, which the
Apostle took notice of, when he said, Not discerning the Lords body, and so
they are seals indeed, but rather seals of a Letter, which shut it up, than
seals of a Deed or Covenant conveying the Estate to us.

3. Though it be not a reason why this Ordinance was appointed after the
Passeover-Supper, yet I may observe it to you in this place, that hence it is
called The Lords Supper, from the Author it is called the Lords, and from the
Time it is called a Supper, being celebrated in the night, and at the close of
Supper. Some later Maldonat. in Mat. 26. 26. Estius in 1 Cor. 11. 20.
Jesuits do tax the novelty of the name, and affirm, Nullus in Scriptura
locus, etc. No place of Scripture calls it so; for the term in this Chapter
refers, say they, to the (...), or Feasts of Love, used with it, they may say
as well, that Lords Table (1 Cor. 10. 21.) refers to them too, which we believe
not; it is a spiritual feast, that which Matthew calls a dinner, Matthew. 22. 4.
is called by Luke a Supper, Luke 14. 16. but we call it the Lords Supper,
though it be received in the morning, or any other time of day, with reference
to the time of the first institution, as the Passover in aftertimes was
called the Passover, not because there was any destroying Angel past over
their houses every year, but in respect of the first Passover in Egypt, and
in memory of that, wherein there was a passing over the Israelites houses, and
a destroying of the Egyptians firstborn. I could name to you many other
names, that this Sacrament bears in Scripture and ancient Authors, far more
ancient then their M^ssa, which is but once found in Ambrose, and in none
before him, or the Sacrament of the Altar, as they call it, but I insist not
now on names. He that will may see them in Casaub. Exercit. 16.

. 2.
Secondly, Why the Lord Jesus ordained it a very little before he was betrayed.

1. He now seals his will, which men use to do Paraeus in loc.
when they are in sight of death. This is the New Testament (says he) in my
blood; when men make their Wills, they bequeath their body to the earth. Christ
bequeaths his body and blood to us; He bestows his body natural on his body
mystical, the Church; The Testatour is Christ, Heb. 9. 16. The Legacy bestowed
is himself, and all spiritual benefits with him, My body and blood; The heirs
are, all believers, Disciples; The Executours for the outward part are those to
whom he says, Hoc facite, do this, execute this my Will; The Witnesses are the
Evangelists, and Saint Paul; Here is a perfect sealing then of a Testament,
which is of force by the death of the Testatour, and nothing must be added or
taken away, for it is a Will sealed and Gal. 3. 15.
published.

2. To leave it as his ultimum vale, or last memorial Aug. Epist. 118
of precious relish and esteem; when men are going, then they give memorial
gifts unto their friends, then they give their pictures, Keep this for me,
Remember me, when you see me not; When men are dying, then they pull their ring
off their finger, and leave it with their beloved; Oh what impression have the
verba morientis, the word of a dying man! As if a man, says Chrysostom,
should say to children, These were your fathers dying words, This was his last
charge, This he spoke and died, and there is nothing that is remembered with
more awe, more affection than the last words, the last gift of dying friends.

3. To testify his dearest love to his Church and people, that when death was
in sight, and all the unspeakable sorrows, shame and suffering, were now ready
to invade him, when injuries from men were ready to load him, and the justice
of God upon sin to be demonstrated on him, all these did not make him forget
his love; His love to his poor people overtop'd all; He loved them to the end,
Joh. 13. 2. and expressed it at the last, and when he was in expectation of
utmost sorrow, he forgets not his love to his.

4. To fortify his Disciples against temptations, which were now rushing in
upon them, when they should presently see their Lord led away as a prisoner to
be arraigned, and themselves scattered and discouraged. Peter denying, bloody
enemies insulting, then to fortify their hearts, Let not your hearts be
troubled, Joh. 1^. 1. He administers this Sacrament to strengthen the Union and
Communion between him and them, and to tie them to him so fast, that the gates
of hell might not prevail against them, that their faith might not fail, though
it fainted, as was said to Peter, and though they fall, yet they might not
utterly be cast down, as the Psalmist says; They had before eaten the body,
which they after saw broken, and drunk the blood which they after saw shed; The
broken body was not theirs that broke it; The blood shed was not theirs that
shed it, but it was theirs that had before eaten it, and drunk it; so God
underprops his weak servants before the wind blow, and seasonably antidotes
the hearts before the bitter cup, that they may stand fast, though for fear
they runaway.

5. That when we iterate this Sacrament our hearts may be pricked with
remembrance of this dismal night, Chrysostom in loc.
(...), says Chrysostom, that he might exceedingly prick us; for a wounded
heart is a good preparative to the receiving of a wounded Savior, He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 53. 5.
Let a man survey this night how his blessed Savior was for him betrayed into
the hands of bloody men; This right he was plunged into most doleful sorrows;
He was amazed and laden with grief, exceeding sorrowful, in a woeful agony,
sweating like drops of blood, running down to the ground without any comfort
from any man; his chief Disciples could not pray with him, all fled and ran
away from him, betrayed by one of his own, denied by another, sending forth
loud cries and tears; God smit the Shepherd, scattered the flock, an Angel from
heaven strengthening him, an Angel that had not the benefit of Redemption by
him, but not a man for whose Redemption this was: Oh the dark eclypse that now
seized on this Sun of righteousness! Who can express the anguish and dolor
of this night, (...), though he was a very stone, says Chrysostom, it would
melt him, wound him? Therefore I exhort you all, when you come to this
Sacrament, bring this night with you, bring this night with you in which he was
betrayed: It is a night of observation to be remembered, as was said of the
first Passover in Egypt, Exodus 12. 42. so it may be said of the night of this
first Supper, read, read again, or get some body to read to you, this History
related by Matthew or St Luke, and water your meditations with sorrowful
tears, not as he that wept when he read the History of Dido in the Poet, out o^
an imaginary compassion, but as beholding in this glass both your sins, and
your redemption. This do in remembrance of him.

CHAP. VI. Of the outward of this Ordinance of the Supper.
1 COR. 11. 23, 24, 25. He took bread, and when he had given thanks, etc.
. 1.
IN the Sacrament of Baptism there is but one outward element, water; in this
of the Supper two, bread and wine, which though they distinctly signify, the
one the body, the other the blood of Christ, yet because they set forth one
nourishment of the body by bread and drink, of the soul by the body and blood
of Christ, and make but one commemoration of Christ and his death. This do in
remembrance of me, verse. 24. Drink it in remembrance of me, verse. 25. For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords
death, verse. 26. Therefore as several dishes are but one Supper, so these
several signs are the parts of one Sacrament.

To avoid tautology and coincidency, I mean to open the parts distinctly, and
yet to take together element with element, rule with rule, action with action,
as fitly yoked together jointly, and so be as soon at the end of the one, as of
the other, which course of handling that word in Luke 22. 20. whom of all the
Evangelists Paul does nearliest agree with, and verse. 25. of this Chapter
(...), Likewise, or, After the same manner, points me unto, and if there be any
word in the three Evangelists that write the History of the institution
(whereof one that is Matthew was present at the action) that may serve for the
beautifying or clearing of any point, as we go along, we shall take it also
into the contexture of our Discourse.

The Method and order is, to handle,
1. The outward Ordinance of this Supper. 2. The inward thing signified or
represented. 3. The mandate or command, Do this. 4. The end, For remembrance of
me.
. 2.
The outward Ordinance is properly called the Sacrament; the inward kernel or
thing signified, is called Res Sacramenti, the thing of the Sacrament; for the
Sacrament is the outward visible sign; and therefore it is very absurdly said
of Bellarmine, and other Lib. ^. de Euch. cap. 24.
Papists, who have lest nothing but accidents, and shadow of bread and wine,
that Jesus Christ in the Eucharist is the figure and remembrance of himself, as
if one should say, that the King is the picture, or image of himself; for as Dr
Whitaker observes, The De Sacram. page 616.
body and blood of Christ is no Sacrament, but the thing it self whereof the
Sacrament is taken; As the contract is no ring, but that whereof the ring is a
pledge; The Covenant is no Seal, but that whereof the Seal is, though in vulgar
speech, when we take the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament in
complexion, we use to say, that the Sacrament consists of two parts, Terrena
and coelesti, as Irenaeus says, an earthly Iren. l. 4. c. 34. Whitak. de
Sacram. 626.
and a heavenly, an outward and an inward, a visible and an invisible, Ut duae
naturae in Christo.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or the outward Ordinance consists.

1. Of materials or elements, bread and wine.

2. Of rituals or actions about those elements, and they are,

1. The Rites used by Christ, or some other in his name, He took bread, he
blessed, etc.

2. The Actions of the Communicants, They take and eat, they take and drink;
And so ye have a Sacrament consisting of several elements, and sundry outward
rites and actions, all concurring to the essence or integrity of this Sacrament.


I begin with the Elements, and they are

1. Two, viz. Bread and Wine: Our Melchisedech entertains the children of
Abraham, as that Melchisedech did Abraham himself, Genesis 18. ^8. He brought
forth to him bread and wine. Christ did not take these two by accident, because
he found them then on the Table, but by choice and election for their use in
signifying. The old Church of Israel had a Table-Sacrament, the Passover, and
Christ will have the Gospel Church to have a Table-Sacrament too, this Supper;
but as before Christ their Sacrifices and Sacraments were all bloody: So when
Christ the substance of all Sacrifices and Sacraments has suffered, the
Sacraments of the Gospel and Sacrifices are unbloudy: Many Divines show the
convenience of Bread and Wine to be the materials of this Sacrament, Vide J
nsen. Harm. p. 626.
and some with too much fancy, The representation of his Body broken, and of
his Blood shed. The participation of his Body and Blood for soulstrength, and
soul-refreshment, could not be better shadowed forth than by the staff of
Bread; and cheerful Wine; which as they are the most common* so the most
necessary and prime materials that are used at our tables, answering both our
appetites of hunger and thirst; weakness is strengthened by bread, faintness
cherisht by wine, the faint and feeble soul by Christ. Famine and thirst are
importunate things, no delights of the eye, no Music to the ear can satisfy
them. Violent desires toward Christ are not to be excused, but praised: For
his Flesh is meat indeed, his Blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55.

2. Bread and Wine severally and asunder, to set forth his death, wherein
Corpus a sanguine separatum fuit, says Jansenius, his Body and his Blood Harm.
896.
was sundred. The Papists, as to their Priests and some Kings or Princes, will
allow bread and wine, but as to the common people, bread or wine they say by
concomitancy, the blood is in the bread virtually, and so they shut up the
wounds of Christ by their dry Mass. But Christ would represent himself here not
as a Lamb, but a Lamb sacrificed and slain; and therefore the blood is severed
from the body, as the money is not a prisoners ransom, while it lies in the
chest, but when it is paid: So the blood of Christ as shed is our ransom. As
Israel in the wilderness had a type of Christ, Manna which they did eat, and
the rock also of which they drank, so have we the memorials of his body and
blood, that we may eat and drink.

And which is the sum of all that may be said on this point, since the Lord
was pleased even under the Gospel to continue that old way of Fellowship and
Communion with his Church, by entertaining them at his own Table, upon his own
cheer in an Ordinance of eating and drinking; as he always allowed the
Israelites to feast with him upon the remainders of the Sacrifices in token of
followship: and the very Heathens did by feasting on their Sacrifices testify
their fellowship with their Idols, as is plain, 1 Cor. 10. 18, 19, 20. I see
not how more fit materials could be used then Bread and Wine, which as they
best stand with the simplicity of the Gospel, so they are the most common and
necessary attendants in all feasts, and do both together set forth that full
and perfect nourishment which we find in Christ.

As for that I find in Cyprian, and from him in Cyp. Epist. 76. Aug. Tract. in
Jo. cap. 6. 26.
August. and after both, in most Divines, That as one bread is made of many
grains, and one cup of wine of many grapes, so the Church is one Body of many
Members; whose Communion and Fellowship is here professed, testified and
signified by their participation of one Bread and of one Cup: The allusion is
proper, and not unlike that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 17. We being many are
one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. And this
union of members was anciently professed with all dearness of love and
affection in the use of this Ordinance; and they delighted to express their
division and separation from all the world, their combination and
concorporation among themselves, by all entercourses of love and dearness that
could be; their Feasts of Love, their Kiss, mentioned in Scripture and ancient
Authors, are hereof great witnesses.

But what shall those places or Countries do that have no bread of corn, no
fruit of the vine: I confess that though God said in the Passover, a Lamb
Exodus 12. 5.
or Kid, yet Christ expresses nothing there of other materials, and therefore
in case of extreme necessity, where the proper Elements cannot be had, they
must either be without the Ordinance, or celebrate in that which is
Analogicall, and which passes for bread with them, or wine with them; which
it is better (say some) to do, than wholly to be deprived; ^oulin Buckler page
531. Beza Epist. 2.
but this Eclipse is not likely to be seen in our Horison, therefore I shall
not further discuss it.


So much of the Elements, Bread and Wine.

Now I proceed to the Rites or Actions; and first them of Christ's using, in
which you are to use your eye: as in the Word preached God speaks to your ear,
so here he speaks to your eye. The Sacrament is a visible Word, and therefore I
hold it requisite that the Communicant be within sight of the Elements and
Actions, that he may see the bread and the wine, Taken, Blessed, Broken, Poured
forth; and not in corners and holes, whence he has not the actions under
command of his eye. Not that I deny but a blind man may receive the Sacrament,
but that all means of spiritual impression must be used. Behold, says Moses,
the blood of the Covenant, Exodus 24. 8.

The first Action of Christ is, He took bread, likewife after supper, the cup,
so Paul, so Luke. He took the bread, he took the cup, so Matthew and Mark: of
the two Elements the Bread is first taken both by Christ, and by the
Communicant: This order is to be held by the consent of all the four Writers;
And of Christ's Action, let us Note

1. That Christ took the Bread into his hands, he took the Cup into his hands,
observing the rite and custom then used, and gave thanks over the Bread,
holding it in his hands, and so over the Cup, having it in his hands: This is
the first step toward the separating and setting apart the Elements; he took
them in his hand, see there was a solemn rite that the pater familias did use
to take into his hands and bless these principal parts of the meal or feast.
The taking of the Lamb was the first action toward the Paschall, Exodus 12. 2,
5, 21.

2. That Christ took and blessed the Bread and the Cup severally, one after the
other: He took Bread and blessed, and pronounced, This is my Body. Afterward he
took the Cup and blessed, and pronounced, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood: The Evangelists Matthew and Mark express it, Luke and Paul likewise
confirm it; and if there were nothing else, the very rule and usage amongst the
Jews to bless them severally, would prove it to us.

3. But whether there was any intervall of time between his taking and blessing
the Bread and the Wine, is a harder knot: Matthew and Mark say, As they were
eating, or as they did eat, he took Bread: Luke and Paul say, After they had
supped he took the Cup: This seems to plead for some intervall of time, Videtur
says Calvin in 1 Cer. 11. 25. In Mar. 14. 22. Beza.
and yet if Matthew and Mark be viewed alone, the Action seems to be continued:
What wedge must be used for this knot? Beza hints that (...) may be variously
translated, When they had eaten: but I shall not grant Beza his Interpretation,
but hold to our own, and appeal to the rule or custom then received amongst the
Jews, to decide the Controversy: for if those words, As they were eating, be
all one with those of Paul, After they had supped, then how does Paul and Luke
so frequently and emphatically apply them to the Cup, which may by that
interpretation be said of the Bread also. The rise Gretius in Matthew. 26. 26.
was, that while they were eating, not the Passover Lamb (for so all that
Christ did was after supper) but the post coenam or after supper, the second
course, and toward the end thereof, the Master took bread and blessed and brake
it, and distributed it with a signification of the bread of affliction in
Egypt; then at the very close, and after all eating, the Cup was taken and
blessed, what intervall of time went between I know not. Non constat, says
Calvin, whether Calvin in ^ Co. 11. 25.
the Action was continued, but I believe the Bread was eaten, before the Cup
was blessed or taken; and Christ that instituted no new Rites, but set a Hugh
Brought.
new superscription on the old metal, imitated this custom, and took and
blessed the Bread while they were yet eating, and took and blessed the Cup at the
close after all, and so all are agreed: And here let me show you a reason why
the Churches now are not bound to consecrate and distribute the Bread before
they consecrate the Wine, as it was in Christ's Supper, because the Rite was so
at that time, and the thing being merely occasional, is not obligatory, but
indifferent: We pronounce the words of signification, This is my Body, This Cup
is, etc. severally, but we do not distribute the Bread before we bless the
Wine; that Christ did occasionally to the Rite.

4. The Bread which Christ took into his hands, was such as was obvious and
ordinary, on the Table at that time, (...), says Matthew, signanter; some
Cameron in Mycoth. Matthew. 26.
peculiar Bread designed and prepared for that use, doubtless unleavened,
according to Law and custom; and yet the Greek Church stiffly holds to leavened
bread, on opinion that Christ kept his last Passover on the 13th day of the
month, one day before the time by Law prefixed for leaven to commence; and of
this opinion for the day is a late Learned Writer, in his answer to six
Queries, who also holds that Christ and his Disciples at this time did eat no
Lamb, but kept only the usual post coenum or aftersupper. As to the time I
assent not, and therefore hold the bread unleavened, in which the Romanist
celebrates the Supper; and Calvin would not contend in so slight a matter,
against the same custom used in Geneva; nor do we make it any matter of moment,
but bless such as the Table does afford, being pure and wholesome, as the use
requires.

The Cup which Christ took has this mark, it (...). ^os. Hallel.
was a Cup after they had supped; and that was the Cup of the Hallell, or of
the Hymn the last Cup, which used very solemnly to be blessed; this mark, after
supper, differences it from that Cup, Luke 22. 17. He took the cup and gave
thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among your selves: This is not the
Cup which Christ took into his Supper, for that comes after, ver. 20. There
were diverse Cups solemnly blessed and given round at this Passover feast, three
or four, therefore this which Christ took in, is the very last, after which
they eat and drunk no more that time: And the last Cup was even among the
Heathens counted solemn and sacred, in honorem Grotius in Matthew. 26. 26.
(...), in honor of their good Genius, etc.


The second Rite or Action used by Christ, was giving thanks; He took Bread and
giving thanks he brake; likewise also the Cup. He took the Bread and blessed,
Matthew. 26. ^6. Mark 14. 22. He took Bread and gave thanks, Luke 22 19. and St
Paul here: Two of them say of the Bread, He blessed: Two of them say of the
same Bread, He gave thanks. They all say of the Cup, He gave thanks; and yet in
another place, 1 Cor. 10. 6. The Cup of blessing which we bless; what can be
more plainly inferred hence, then that these two words (...), are in this
business of one signification and effect, as in Mark 8. 6, 7. He gave thanks
and brake the bread or loaves, the fishes he blessed. Shall we be so trivially
curious as to seek criticisms in a thing so plain. Not only our Divines, but
Romanists also consent, he blessed the Bread by thanksgiving and prayer over it;
He prayed God, he blessed God, or he gave God thanks, and thereby blessed the Bread
and Wine; therefore it is said, The Cup of blessing which we bless, apply the
one of these words to God, he gave him thanks, the other to the Bread, as
Paraeus and others, all comes to one, the Bread and the Cup were blessed by
Prayer and In loc. Jansen. Harm. p. 96.
Thanksgiving. Thus the Jew in his form blessed his Bread and Cup, by blessing
God that created the fruit of the earth, and of the vine, and these two words
in Greek express but that one in the Hebrew Barak, as Maldonate and Paraeus
note, and this blessing is that we call Consecration or Sanctification, by
which the Elements are set apart to holy use, and segregated from common or
profane; For the further clearing of which,

First, That Christ, whether at miraculous meals, Calvin. in loc. P. Martyr. in
locum. Mark 6. 41.
or at common sittings down with his Disciples, Luke 24. 30. Matthew. 14, 19.
always gave thanks and blessed the bread. Let his holy example be a command to
us. The Jew held his meat profane, until he had blessed it. He had a form of
Religion beyond most of us, therefore the Apostle uses the word, It Is
sanctified; It Is sanctified, or made legitimate unto us by the Word that
warrants it, and prayer that blesses it, 1 Timothy 4. 5. For shame either learn
of Christ, or of the Jew; mock not God with pulling a hat over your face, but
give thanks and bless.

Secondly, We find no form of words used by Christ in this Consecration or
Blessing, none of the Evangelists tell us, what words he used, but they
express the action in the same words of ordinary grace at meals, He gave
thanks, he blessed, in what words Estius in loc.
it is not reported to us; He prayed (says Estius) that the Bread and Wine
might be turned into his very body and blood; So he imagines; But who told him
so? No Scripture nor ancient Father. The Jewish form of words is known in their
Rituals, Rara benedictio (says Scaliger) without these solemn words, Blessed
be thou, O Lord, that have sanctified us by thy commands, and given us a charge
concerning such or such a thing. In reason Christ did accomode his blessing to
the occasion, praising God for his Redemption of mankind, and for the coming
of his Kingdom, for his new Testament or Covenant, and a blessing upon his
Ordinances and people. Ignorantia licita est, says Scotus, It Is a lawful
ignorance not to know Lib. 4. did. 8. qu. 2.
the words of consecration. But as to those operative and conversive words (as
they call them) This is my body, wherein the Schoolmen show their learned
fopperies, those almighty words, whereby a silly Priest makes his maker; And as
Lapide hyperbolically See Annot. in 1 Cor. 11. 25.
says, If Christ had not been incarnate, would have incarnated him; They must
not be angry, if with Pope Innocent the third, that great Creator of
Transubstantiation, we deny them to be the words of Consecration for three
Reasons:

1. Because Christ bad his Disciples, Take and Eat This is my body. Reasons why
they are not the words of consecration.
before he pronounced those words, This is my Body, and he did not sure bid
them, Take and Eat the Bread before it was blessed and consecrated.

2. Because the words of consecration or blessing should in reason be spoken to
God, not to the Disciples of the bread, as these are.

3. Because these words, This is my Body are assertive, signifying what the
bread is, and (as one of themselves says) should be false and untrue, if they
should not signify what the bread is, before the words be pronounced, not what
they shall be afterward. God when he created light, said not, This is light,
but Let there be light. 4 Christ spoke these words at the consecration.


Thirdly, The form of Consecration or blessing used by the Churches of Christ
is Thanksgiving and Prayer, reciting the words of Institution, as they are here
in Paul, or the other Evangelists. We (says Lib. 6. de Euch. cap. 5.. 12.
Chamier speaking of the French Churches) do religiously observe, to pray to
God that these Elements which Christ has sanctified may be profitable to us
unto salvation, and we recite to a word the first Institution of this Ordinance
out of Saint Paul, viz. in this very Chapter. So the Church of England in their
form, so is it directed since, Thanksgiving, Prayer, and the words of
Institution recited, as for Exhortations ad populum, then also used, with which
anciently in England, and now, we first begin, together with places of
Scripture memorized and in ulatum of the worthy, they are rather to consecrate
you, and quicken up unto liveliness your faith and graces. Now we may not take
(...), strictly to exclude prayer; For as Chrysostom observes, it denotes the
praising of Exercit. p. 382. P. Martyr. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.
God, the giving of thanks, prayer, and the blessing of the Symbols, and
therefore we read in Justin Martyr, in this action, (...), and (...) Epist. 2.
Lib. de Trin. 3. cap. 4.
(...), and Austin calls it Panem prece mystica celebratum; So Jerome Jansen.
Harm. p. 99.
ad Evagrium. So others, So generally Christ made choice of, and sanctified
these Species, or these kinds, Bread and Wine to be the Materials or Elements
of his Supper, and these we bless by prayer and thanksgiving, reciting his
Institution, The Cup of blessing which we bless, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and this is
verbum ad Elementum, or sanctifying by the Word and Prayer, and from this word
(...), giving thanks: The Lords Supper has been anciently called (...), the
Eucharist, (...), says Justin, (...) Apol. ^.
(...). Origin. cont. Cells. l. 8.


Fourthly, I told you before, that this Action or Rule is Christ's, He gave
thanks, or he blessed, and for aftertimes he commanded his Apostles, hoc
facite. This was not then the action of the Communicant, they eat and drink,
but they do not consecrate, this is the action of those that Christ authorizeth
by a lawful calling to be Stewards of his Word and Sacraments. The
Pater-familias did bless the Bread and Cup in and unto his own family or
company, because it was a house, a chamber-supper, but the Temple service of
sacrificing was lawful to none, but to a Priest; and if Christ has ordained a
lawful calling of Officers and Ministers, called his for the service of his
Church under the Gospel, as it appears to us; this act of all others does
properly belong to them to bless in his Name, for it is (...), public Office,
we find no Rule or Example in Scripture to the contrary, and if that be a good
argument in point of calling, which is delivered Heb. 7. 13, 14. that of the
Tribe of Judah no man gave attendance at the Altar, for Moses spoke nothing of
that Tribe concerning Priesthood, then we may reasonably argue, That no private
man that is not called by God can perform the Office of a public Minister, for
Christ spoke nothing of them concerning the Stewardship of his Mysteries.
Justin Martyr is clear the (...) did Apol. 2.
bless and consecrate, the Deacons did indeed carry about the bread and wine,
and deliver them, but not bless them, and therefore Jerome speaking of the
difference between a Deacon, and a Presbyter, or a Minister, says, What does
the Deacon swell against the Ministers ad quorum preces corpus Domini
conficitur, by or at whose prayers the body of Christ is made? Whitak. de
Euchar. 651.
I shall not be tedious in this point, Convenit inter omnes Pontificios.
Instit. l. 4. e. 15.. 20.
It Is agreed on all hands by the Papists for the Character sake, and for our
Divines. Calvin says, De Euchar page 656.
It Is a part of the Ecclesiastical Ministry to dispense the Sacraments, and if
you will, you may see Whitakers de Euchar. who acknowledges, That the efficacy
of the Sacrament depends not on the person or quality of the Minister (though
Jerome on 2. Ephan. 3. has a strange passage to the contrary) yet that it is no
Sacrament, except he that celebrates it have authority from Christ Jesus, whom
he calls Sacrilegious and Profane persons that dare attempt it without
Commission, and makes the difference thus, What if any man shall set a public
Seal, which he has stolen into his hands, Is it all one as if done by a
public Notary, or allowed Officer? No, surely. I know there is a little
dissertation de coena, that debates the Question, what may be done, ubi
Pastores desunt? And I know the Socinians, those Levellers of Divinity, that
slight Christ into a mere man, his blood from a Sacrifice to a Martyrdom, the
Sacraments into void and empty figures, and the Ministers into fore men of the
Jury, if so much; but stand you in the old ways in this point.


Fifthly, The change of the Elements of bread and wine by virtue of Christ's
sanctifying or blessing them, is not any change or alteration of the Elements
themselves, but of their use and office; The change is relative, not inherent,
Panis certa conservatione, Co^^. Faust. l. 20. c. 13. Apol. 2.
fit mysticus, says Austin; now the bread is not common bread, says Justin,
(...), etc. The bread when it does percipere vocationem Dei, says Irenaeus,
then it is not common bread, but the Lib. 4. c. 34. and l. 5 c. 4.
Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ. If the bread should be changed in
substance, what argument could the ancient Fathers have found thence to prove
against Marcion? that Christ had not a fantastical Iren l. 5 c. 4.
and aerie body; And how again could they every where allude thus, that the
Divine Nature of Christ did not destroy the humane? As the symbolical Nature of
the Elements destroys not the substantial and natural being; The water of
Baptism is water still; The Rock that was Christ, was a Rock still; The Serpent
on the Pole was brass still; The great Seal that conveys a great Estate is Wax
still. The use, the office, the relation of these sacramental mysteries is high
and admirable, and because the spiritual signification and use is so admirable,
therefore the Fathers (...), exceeding rhetorically and hyperbolically do speak
of them to awaken and quicken, and cheer up the spirits of people to look upon
and use them in their symbolical use, as instruments and exhibitive conveyances
of Christ to our faith. Bellarmine triumphs in one word of Cyprian de Coena,
Lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 9.
Panis non effigy, sed natura mutatus, nullam admittit solutionem, a crack of
vanity; That piece is later then Cyprian, but if his, by sin of first
parents, natura humana, humane nature was changed, says Austin, Aug. de cin.
lib. 14. c. 12.
and when a man is regenerated, his nature is changed, say we, how, not his
flesh, his body, but quality, etc. Naturam expellas furca licet, what is that
but Vide Forbes Epist. Theol. p. 537.
quality or custom, not substance; The holiness of any thing sanctified to
God, infers a change of use and relation, but not of substance, consecrations
of times, persons, places, things, may appropriate them to holy use and ends,
and there is accordingly an esteem or reverence of such things so set apart,
but the substance of the things is as it was; for consecration is not a
Philosophers-stone, holy things may be spent in their use, as the Sacrifices of
old, the Paschal Lamb, the bread and wine in the Supper, but the sanctifying of
them to that use does not first change them into the thing signified, and so
destroy the sign and signification, as the relation is destroyed sublato
fundamento; Every Papist is bound to have the faith of miracles; for the
miracle of turning stones into bread is nothing so great as this of turning
bread into Christ's body. Maldonate has a story, that in his days there was a
book came forth, De Art nihil credendi, and that there was but one true saying
in it, which was this, He that will be an Atheist, let him first be a
Calvinist, and if there had been in that book, He that will believe any thing,
let him first be a Papist, there had been another, or rather, one true saying
indeed.


Thirdly, The next Rite or action of Christ, He brake it, and so say all the
three Evangelists, and he said, as here it follows, This is my body broken for
you, and concerning his blood both Matthew and Luke say thus, This is my blood
which is shed for you, which (as some say) was in the parallel, the Cup
represented correspondent to the breaking of the bread by the Morton in loc.
pouring forth of the wine out of some greater vessel into the Cup, and so the
bread is broken, the wine is poured out, as the body of Christ was crucified,
and his blood shed: Upon this Action we shall for memory sake speak of these
particulars:

1. That from hence the Eucharist or Lords Supper has been called (...), The
breaking of bread, as the phrase, Acts 2. 42, Acts 20. 7. have been
interpreted: So Paul 1 Cor. 10. 16. The bread which we break, Is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? Thus some love to speak in our days, calling
(I wish it be not out of singularity) this Sacrament, The breaking of bread,
which as it is by Synecdoche of the part for the whole, so it was used by the
Hebrews of any common feast or meal, when they did eat together, and is applied
to this Sacrament, but at second hand; They began all their solemn meals with
blessing, and breaking of bread, and their feasting was called eating of bread,
Genesis 4^. 25. a form of Casaub. Exerc. 16 p. p. 339. Beza in Act. 2. 42. and 46.
speech new and insolent to Greek and Latin ears, who called their feasts by
the other element (...), or convivia, drinkings together.

2. Christ at all other meals, where he was Master of the meal and blessed, did
also break the bread, for he that prayed the blessing, was by the Jews called
Giodw. in Antiq. Jewish. in the Passover ex Drusi^.
Habbotseang, the breaker at his meal-meals, and at other, he blessed and brake,
but in this Paschal Postcaenium, or Supper, (to which you must still have your
eye) the usual Rite was, That he that blessed broke the Grot. in Mat. 26. Scult.
de emend. l. 6. p. 536
bread into parts to be distributed to the guests or sitters, and the pieces
were about the bigness of an Olive, Morton. in loc. Martyr. in loc. Beza. in
Act. 2.
says Scaliger. He that brake did eat one, and the rest were communicated; for
their bread at this time was not, as learned men say, great and thick loaves,
but 42. Steph. Glossa Mat. 26.
broad and thin, instar placentae, like your Cakes here in England; If they
were thick as ours, then may the knife Leviter scindere non obscindere, and so
be broken.

3. The Churches of God do many of them hold this Ceremony of breaking of the
bread, and it ought to be holden. Our Churches, says Paraeus, do Par. in loc.
rightly observe it: And in all our Churches (says Chamier) we use it: And it
has a command, Do this, Chamier. De Euchar. lib. 7. c. 11. Piscat. in loc.
Paraeas i^ 1 Cor. 11. contro. 2 sed non integram.
says Piscator. And therefore it is not adiaphorous or indifferent: And there
is a Dissertation in Paraeus fully debating the point, in which he does not
say, The Sacrament is null without it; nor does Beza say so, Epist. 2. Nor yet
that it is merely indifferent and left to choice, but useful and requisite, he
holds it for good ends and significations, as I shall show, and he affirms,
That it continued in the Church, and was used for a thousand years after
Christ. But the Papists as sacrilegious, they steal away the Cup from the
people; So they use the Bread superstitiously, making their Host into pines
nummularios, little round wafers, like our money, and put them whole into the
mouths of the Communicants; For, says the learned Jansenius, The Church (viz.
of Rome) does laudably Harm. 895.
observe, that the Eucharist be touched only by sacred hands (viz. the Priests:
As for Christ (says he) Promore fecit, he followed the Custom or Rite at that
time.

4. This Bread was broken, and Wine poured forth: Calvin. in loc. P. Martyr. in
locum. Beza in loc.


1. For the more lively representation of the death and grievous sufferings of
our Lord; for though a bone of him was not broken, nor his body properly, yet
the Apostle calls it broken in regard of those wounds, and pains, and torments,
which brought forth a violent death, and all this for us; As the corn is not
grinded or baked, nor the bread cut or broken, but for us, that the breaking of
his body might break our hearts, and his flowing blood, shed our tears; for it
is the highest representation of death, the bread broken, and wine poured
forth, and is usefully observed to raise up such affections, as the sight of a
dying Christ may work even in a heart of stone, as Chrysostom said before.

2. It was broken for distribution sake; for in Hebrew speech, to break bread
to the hungry, is to distribute it, Lam. 4. 4 and this has another meaning in
it, and sets forth the communion and fellowship of the Church, all partaking of
one Christ, and feeding on him, and his death unto eternal life, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We being many are one bread; We are one body, and of one holy fellowship and
communion, For we are all partakers of that one bread; for Christ is that
common center in whom we meet, and by union with him, we have communion with
one another; and thus the signification is lively, one bread broken and divided
amongst many Communicants, who are one, is one Christ given wholly to every
believer, and all believers one in Christ. This brotherhood was observed and
noted for their mutual love in those times, when their profession of Christ
distinguished them from all the Heathens about them, and when they were enclosed
round by observing and cruel men that envied and hated them to death; now that
heat is diffused, and not so concentered by the antiperistasis, and so is not
so warm; we stand in need of persecution to make us love one another.


Fourthly, The fourth Rite or Action of Christ, He gave it to his Disciples,
which in this place you find not, but in the implication of the word Accipite,
Take ye, but all the three Evangelists Matthew, Mark, Luke, expressly say, He
gave to the Disciples, He gave to them; for the word Disciple, I leave it a
while, and only speak of the Action, He gave, that the Disciples received the
bread and wine from Christ into their hands, and not put by him into their
mouths, I make no question, as I shall touch afterward: Nor do I doubt but they
received them from his hand, for he blessed and brake, and reached them forth
to them, and so the people may be said to receive them from the hand of the
Minister that consecrates either mediately or immediately, which may be the
true meaning of that speech of Tertullian, Nec de aliorum manu De Corona.
quam praesiden^ium sumimus, nor we take them (says he) from the hands of
others, but of our Presidents or Ministers, but the clear Question will be,
Whether Christ did with his own hand give to every particular person into his
hand, the bread and the cup? And, Whether there were any words spoken
particularly to every one in the delivery of them, as for instance, Take thou,
Eat thou, Drink thou?

For the first, Whether Christ did with his own hand deliver the bread and cup
into the hand of every particular Communicant, viz. immediately? We must look
still to the rite or custom used in the Paschal Supper; and if we consider
that well, we shall see it probable, that the Pater-familias did not rise from
his discumbency or posture of lying, to go to every particular person, or that
every one came to his hand, for there might be twenty at the Table, and not all
within the reach of his hand, nor do we find that Christ rose up, nor that
they rose up to receive them. He said, Take ye, eat ye, Drink all of it; and
though he might give the Cup to the next into his hand, yet his speech is
general to them all, and so the bread and the cup past in the Postcaenium, or
Paschal Supper. Maldonate says, He reached out the Maldona in Mat. 26. 26.
bread sigillatim, but the cup he gave to the next, and he to the next; for, he
says, Luk 21. 17. Take this, and divide it among your selves, wherein though
he De emend. l. 6. Martyr. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.
be mistaken in the cup, as not being the same with ours, ut supra, yet the
rite and manner of distribution is very like to be the same in both: So
Scaliger, that the Master first delivered the cup to the second, the second to
the next, till it had past through the (...), or Table; and Jansenius says,
That he Jans. Harm. p. 895.
gave to each particular his part, Aut patinam tradidit propinquioribus, or
gave the plate or dish with broken bread in it to them that sat nearest, and
then successively and in order it passed along: As also, says he, he delivered
the Cup, so that every Communicant had his part from the hand of Christ, either
immediately or mediatly. As for after times, and not long after, that of Justin
Martyr is express, that when the Ministers had blessed, the Deacons did carry
it and deliver it to the several Communicants, and did either put each part
into each persons hand, or as I find in Clem. Alex and. Strom. lib. 1. (...),
the distributers do suffer or permit each person to take his part of the bread.
There might be different Rites in several Churches as to this point, and of no
great moment one way or other; but for all the Communicants sitting down at the
very Table by companies, and their sitting and receiving the Elements, I find
not in my simple reading in Antiquity, when Communicants grew numerous, and met
in one common place to perform Divine Offices: but so did Christ and all other
Paschall societies, which eat in chambers and houses, and as I showed you
before, were not under ten nor above twenty of a company.

Let then the Lords and his Disciples sitting at the same Table in that Rituall
posture and manner then in use be holden as indifferent or appendant to the
Paschall custom; for we shall never hit that pattern in all respects, because
they sat at the Table while Christ blessed and brake the Bread, which we that
have several Tables full do not, nor can do; and let the Disciples dividing
among themselves, or handing both the Bread and Cup from one to another, be
accounted indifferent too, and hardly and not conveniently imitable in our
numbers, yea and not certain neither (though very probable to me) for if one,
as Peter Martyr holds it so, yet another, as Martyr. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.
Paraus in locum, says, that it is not obscure out of the History, that when
the Lord said, Take ye, Benedict^m and fractum panem singulis manu p^^rexisse,
he reached the Bread to every person with his hand.

Let us touch the other Question, Whether there were any words spoken to every
one at the delivering into his hands; and here indeed we find nothing but Take
ye, eat, this is my Body broken for you: Drink ye all of it, this is the Cup of
the New Testament; and doubtless the whole Institution needs not to every
single person be repeated, having been recited in the Consecration: Yet you
know that in the form used in England, the Minister was appointed to deliver
Bread and Wine into the Communicants particular hands, with a prescript form of
words, The Body of our Lord, The Blood of our Lord, etc. and Chemnitius Examen.
de praparat. ad coenam.
the best Scholar of all called Lutheran, says, that the form of applying the
words of Institution to every Communicant, mihi maxim probatur, is best of all
approved by him: And that in these words the Sacrament was delivered in the
Church of old time, he calls in for witness Ambrose, who has indeed these lib.
4. de Sac. sub finem.
words, the Minister says Corpus Christi, and tu dicis Amen, The body of
Christ, and thou say Amen: And before this time Novatus distributing the
Mysteries to every one his part, adjured them into his faction first (...), in
stead of saying Amen, Histor. lib. 6. cap. 35.
says Eusebius: which Amen it seems every Communicant said when the Bread was
put into his hand, as Justin Martyr says, when the Minister has finished his
Consecration-prayer, all the people present Apol. 2.
(...) makes acclamation to it saying Amen. I Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. p. 366.
conclude with Learned Hooker, that upon the ground that Sacraments are
particularly applying Ordinances, and we are dull and heavy-hearted, If [ I
Baptize thee] offend not, why should [ Eat thou] offend any man? I conclude
upon the whole matter, that what is most to the reverence of this Ordinance,
and serves best to raise up and elevate the peoples hearts, shall be followed
by me.

So much for the opening of the Rites or Actions used by Christ, or that are to
be used by any Minister that shall in his Name celebrate this Ordinance, He
took the Bread, and the Cup, He blessed or gave thanks, He brake, he gave: In
which it is to be noted, that he did not recede from the then received rite or
custom for both the Elements; and the rites are quite through the same which
were usually and by custom at that present on foot in their Paschall
Solemnities; and which is more, yet this Bread and Cup so blessed and given at
these Solemnities are not found to stand by any express command of holy
Scripture, but were such as their wisdom had by custom made use of in this
service, of that Bread and that Cup the Lord was pleased to make the Seals of
his Body and Blood, as Hugh Broughton, our Learned Broughton in Dan. page 46.
Countryman, observes.


Now I proceed to the other sort of outward Rites or Actions pertaining to the
Communicants, which are these; He said, Take eat; He said, Drink ye all of it,
as you may see in St Matthew, who was Myroth. lin Matthew. 26. 26.
present in the action, and as it is here. Forsan at haec sunt vetus formula,
etc. says Cameron. Happily that this was the old Rite, but in the Jewish Rituals
that are now, as it is recited by Cameron in the Hebrew, and by Scaliger in
Greek, it is somewhat diverse. Scaliger de Emend. lib. 6. page 536.
Thus every one that is hungry, let him come and eat, and whosoever has need, let
him come and keep the Passover.

1. Take ye: It is to be understood of taking in the hand, for it is not likely
that Christ rose and put the Bread and Wine in every ones mouth, says Beza
Epist. 2.
Beza, but as the Cup passed from the nearest to Christ to them more remote; so
it is probable (says the same Author) that the Bread also did. There is a great
stir about the Communicants taking the Elements in his hand, not as though,
if other wise, the Sacrament was a nullity, as Beza proves; for a Bezain Epist.
2.
man may have no hands to take it with, but for the decency and significancy
thereof: The taking in the mouth only being more like that of Bruits, which
take their meat with mouth or beak as Chamier says, than that of men; and
there is a whole Chapter spent in reciting Antiquities for this taking in the
hand, in Chamier, who saves me the labor to recite any of De Euchar. l 7. cap.
ult.
them to you, and this is all upon occasion of the Papists, who take the Bread
into their mouths, and touch it not with hand, out of a too superstitious
veneration Beza Epist. 2.
of the Elements, as Beza notes: Nor do they of them that search out the
footsteps of this custom rise any higher than about five or six hundred years
ago.

The signification of it is, the appropriation of Christ to our selves, whom
God makes ours by his gift, and we make ours by faith, even as truly as if he
were put into our very hand. They that make Paraeus in lo.
Taking and Eating diverse Rites of diverse significations, as many of our
excellent Divines do, do tell us that there are diverse degrees of faith, that
by taking Christ we have propriety in him, He is ours: by eating his Body and
drinking his Blood we have comfort and refreshment from him; and that he is
first ours in claim, before he be ours in comfort; as first take, then eat. In
the use of the brazen Serpent our believing was set forth by an act of our eye,
Joh. 3. 14.
looking up; but here it is set forth by an act of ourhand, retension or
receiving; the promise of Adoption is made to our receiving Christ, Joh. 1. 12
and our faith must be a Christ taking, a Christ-receiving faith: Christ would
be ours, else he would not have instituted this Christ-applying Ordinance: He
came into the hand of murderers that slew him, that crucified and wounded and
dying, he might be taken in the hand of thy faith; faith like the hand has a
faculty of working and bringing forth obedience, but like the hand again, it
has a taking and receiving faculty, which is the most excellent, the
justifying act of faith, taking Christ.

Take ye, is not a bare permission but a command, it is our duty, as well as our
benefit, to receive Christ, and consequently not to receive him, is both sin
and misery.


2. Eat ye, drink ye all of it: Christ speaks and repeats often Joh. 6. the
eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, at which some of his followers
took offense, conceiving him carnally and literally, which he told them were to
be understood spiritually, ver. 63. There is a spiritual eating and drinking
Christ his flesh and blood by faith only, which is extra-symbolicall or without
the Sacrament, for that Doctrine was delivered a year or two before this
Sacrament was instituted; and it is such, as without which ye have no life in
you, ver. 53. which may not be said of all that never received this Sacrament;
but that spiritual eating and drinking is here symbolized, as that flesh and
blood is: For the understanding of which, let us neither be like the carnal
Israelite that did eat Manna, and drink of the Rock, but neither saw nor tasted
Christ in them; nor on the other side let us be like the Capernaites, Joh. 6.
that had a gross apprehension of eating very flesh, and drinking man's blood,
but rightly conceive the meaning thus:

1. The first and not the least thing is this, that This is the one and only
Ordinance under the Gospel where eating and drinking are Sacred and Religious
acts: for in all the world, among all sorts of men, friendship, fellowship,
communion, are maintained and shown in feasting together, eating and drinking
together; and our God never let his Church be without such an Ordinance,
wherein he and his people might testify this fellowship and communion: In the
Law there was not only a Lamb roasted, but in all their Shelamim or
Peace Offerings, they that brought them had part to feast upon and make good
cheer as at all their feasts they rejoiced before the Lord, God bidding them to
his own Table to feed upon Sacrifices, for they that eat of the Sacrifices are
partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18. and Rev. 3. ^0. I will come in and sup
with him, and he with me: Thus God entertains his friends, invites them to eat
and drink with him upon his own Sacrifices, upon Christ the great Sacrifice:
It Is Gods own cheer, provided for such Abraham's as are the friends of God: What
a favor and condescension of God is this! What honor and dignity is dust and
^shes graced with, to sit together and feast and have fellowship with God in an
Ordinance of eating and drinking the flesh and blood of this Sacrifice Jesus
Christ! Nay, and further yet, It was a custom in Covenants making that the
Consederates feasted, eat and drank together; therefore Birith the Hebrew word
Covenant, may come of Barah to eat, and so still, and further it is implied
that this is a Covenant solemnity, an eating and drinking of confederates
together, God smells a savor of rest in the Sacrifice of Christ, and we eat and
drink of that flesh and blood sacrificed unto God, and renew our Covenant with
him, and he with us, by mutual feeling, he to be ours, we his. I am so taken
up with this, that if no more be said, I should be satisfied, but there is more.

2. That Christ is full and perfect nourishment of the soul, both meat and
drink; Joh. 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink indeed, far
beyond Manna, which yet was called Angels food, as the substance is beyond the
type: sights may please the eye, sounds or airs the ear, but they are not so
necessary as nourishment unto life; life cannot be maintained without
nourishment; growing bodies (...), says Hypocrates: growing Christians stand
in need of much nourishment to bring them up to their (...), the stature of a
full Christ: decaying Christians stand in need of nourishment to repair
decaies: Every life, be it never so little must be nourisht, so necessary is
Christ to every Christian, and still more of Christ, for his meat is Christ,
his drink is Christ. As nothing so necessary, so neither so sweet and pleasant,
sights are pleasing to the eye, and smells to the sense, but nothing is so close
and delightful as the meat and drink to the sense of tasting; Christ is sweet
to faith, as meat and drink to hunger: There is no content comparable to the
receiving of Christ. He is Manna, the best Bread and Wine, the best drink. The
fruition of the joys of heaven is set forth by the pleasure of eating and
drinking, Luke 22. 30. That you may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom.
It was experimentally said of Galeacius that all the delights of this world are
not comparable to an hours enjoyment of Christ Jesus.

2. No act of ours could so well have signified the close and intimate union of
Christ with a Believer: We may see at a distance, and hear and smell, but not
taste nor eat nor drink; the meat and drink is concorporated into us, and is
made flesh and bone with us, Job. 6. 56. He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: Christ must be present to the faith of a
Christian, for we cannot eat and drink that which is absent. This union with
Christ is real, though mystical, and it is lively drawn forth in this
Ordinance, under the resemblance of eating and drinking: We hardly conceive,
and hardly believe it, but when we see the graft live, we are sure it is knit;
and we may be as sure of our union with Christ, by his spiritual sap of Grace
which we find is in us.

4. This command, Take and eat, goes before the pronouncing of the words, This
is my Body; Aquinas says it is a Hysteron Proteron, but I shall not take his
word, let us hear him speak that was present, an ear witness, an eye witness
Matthew. 26. 26, 27. Take eat, This is my Body; Drink ye all of it, For this is
my Blood: what stands this For for, if drink ye, did not go before? This
observation is noted by almost all Divines from Peter Martyr, and Mr Hooker
makes use of it thus, That Christ is not present in the Elements, but in the
worthy receiver: The order of the words shows it, first eat and drink, then it
follows, for this is my Body, and this is my Blood: an ingenious observation
that cuts the hamstrings of the Popish or corporal presence in or under the
outward signs, as if it were a knife set in the Text to cut that intricate
knot, that makes such a garboyle in the Text: when you take and eat by faith,
then is the Body and Blood of Christ present to you, but not latent and hidden
in the Bread or Cup: The union of Christ is not otherwise with the Bread then
as the thing signified with the sign, but it is with the Communicant, the
Hooker. Eccles. Polit. p. 359.
believer really, though spiritually; the sacramental signs do exhibit Christ,
but not contain him under them, they contain not the grace which God bestows
with or by them.


So have I opened to you the outward Elements, the outward Rites or Actions of
this Sacrament, whether those of Christ, or of the Communicant, and these are
genuine and proper, by which the Sacrament is suitable to the Institution; as
for other Rites which time or superstition have introduced without example or
command they are, adulterine and spurious, especially the adoration of the
Eucharist upon opinion of the conversion of the bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ, which whether it be performed at the elevation or lifting
up of the host by the Priest in the Mass, or at the circumgestation or
carrying it up and down in procession in the streets, as is usual in Popish
countries, is no better then abominable Idolatry, even by their own confession;
For Costerus says, That the bread-worship was the greatest Idolatry that ever
was in the world. If the bread be not turned into the true and natural body of
Christ, as (says a learned man) Dr J. Burgess Lawf. of kneeling, p. 113.
upon my soul it is not, and if the persuasion of Christ's real presence in the
Eucharist, will by no means excuse their adoration from Idolatry, much less
excusable is any Protestant who is persuaded of the contrary. As for other
circumstances of the action, as the time, viz. at night, in the close of the
Paschal Supper, the place an upper-room or chamber, Mark ^4. 15. The guest;
twelve in number, Matthew. 26. 20. The gesture which was discubiture or lying on
couch-b^ds fitted to the Table, which the Jews were at the Passover by custom
fixed unto, as appears by the ritual, In other Scaliger. lib. 6. De emend. page
534.
nights we sit or lie on couches, but in this we lie along. These, I say, are
movables, and not of the freehold of this Ordinance: Nor shall I say any thing
of the D. Burgess, ubi supra p. 112.
gesture, which as it was used in England has been an apple of contention and
much written pro and con. The Reformed Churches vary, some sit at, some about
the Table, some receive this Sacrament passing by the Table in order, as in a
Marah, as in the Reformed Churches in France, and I condemn them not; and for
those Divines of the Reformed Churches that disliked our gesture used here in
England, they did not many of them pronounce it simply unlawful, but
inconvenient, because it was a gesture of adoration, and did not serve to pull
the bread worship out of men's minds, nor was so suitable to this Ordinance,
which is a Table Ordinance, nor to set forth that fellowship and communion,
which is expressed in eating and drinking with our Lord, these were their
reasons, and I do not know that I have any occasion to debate the point, but to
leave it determinable by the Churches of God, as may be most suitable to the
Decorum and nature of this Ordinance, for if I should, some of you might happily
say, that I made a Funeral-sermon for meeting at Sacrament.

Having laid open the parts of this Supper, let us upon the whole matter stand
still a little and make Observation.

CHAP. VII. Some Observations upon the precedent Discourses.
. 1.
NOte here the simplicity of this high and excellent Ordinance, the feast is
dressed out in plainness and simplicity, answerable to the simplicity of the
Gospel, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Here is no outward pomp or
ostentation, no stateliness to take the eye, for as gaudy attire becomes not
mourning, so this Sacrament setting forth the passion and sufferings, the death
and bloodshed of our Lord had not been suitable to him in his lowest estate and
darkest eclipse, if it should have shined in outward luster. It was Tertullians
Observation, Nihil obdurat, etc. nothing Lib. de baptism
so hardens the minds of men, as the simplicity of the works, and yet the
magnificence of the promise, that great and glorious things should be found
under so plain a dress, as a rich diamond in a plain case, to the end that the
eye of faith might be more exercised then the eye of the body, and that the
spiritual and inward part might be looked after and intended, Is not this the
Carpenters son? was a great stumbling block: and so may the simplicity of the
two Sacraments be to us. The Temple, Utensils and Service were rich and
stately; Christ was prefigured in golden Types, But grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. But we have a better Covenant, and better Promises,
Heb. 8. 6. And if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remains exceeds in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. but that was an
outward, this an inward glory; that was in Moses face, this in the face of
Christ; that the carnal Jew might see, this the spiritual Christian sees; We
saw his glory, Joh. 1. 14. or rather there the glory was veiled, But we with
open face behold the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 18. The glory of their
Ordinance was a stumbling block to them, for they rested in the cabinet, and
looked not for the jewels; The meannesse of our Ordinances are a stumbling
block to us, for we look not for the treasure in such earthen vessels. God does
great things by poorest means, Jericho's walls fall at the sound of Ramshorns,
the fiery sting is healed by a piece of brass, the sight restored to the
blind by the use of spittle and clay; The figure in this Sacrament is poor,
the thing signified heavenly and rich; the Seal is mean, the inheritance or
estate is great, but why were the types so rich, and our memorials so poor? You
know Spectacles are for diverse sights, they had finer Spectacles, we better
eyes; They had less spirit stirring in the Ordinances then, than we now; if
their Tree had more shadow, we have more fruit.

. 2.
Secondly, Take along with you always the Analogy, proportion and similitude
between a Sacrament, and the thing of a Sacrament, between the sign and the
thing signified. It Is Austin his Rule, If Epist. 23. and alibi.
a Sacrament should not have similitude and resemblance with that whereof it is
a Sacrament, it should not be a Sacrament; and from this similitude or
resemblance it is that the sign is called by the name of the thing signified,
as the bread, Christ's body, the wine is called Christ's blood; The Rock was
Christ, Circumcision called the Covenant; The Lamb called the Passover; and in
common speech, When we look on a Picture, we say, This is Casar, this is
Augustus, this is Hercules; nothing more ordinary. In the Sacrament this
similitude is a similitude of proportionality (says Bonaventure) consisting of
four terms: You are most of you Arithmeticians, and you have a golden Rule,
called, The Rule of Three, because three terms being given, the fourth is
given; and this sets forth to you the Analogy of a Sacrament in four terms; As
water in Baptism washes the body, so the Spirit by his grace, or the blood of
Christ cleanses the soul; As the bread and wine nourish and refresh the body,
so the body and blood of Christ nourishes and refreshes the soul: As by the
hand we take, and with our mouth we eat and drink the bread and wine, so by
faith we receive the body and blood of Jesus Christ; If you destroy the
similitude, you destroy the Sacrament, as the Papists do by their
Transubstantiation, for they destroy the Analogy: Thus the accidents of Bread
and Wine, or the Species, do not nourish the Body (say we;) Nor the very Body
and Blood of Christ does not pass into bodily nourishment (say they) (for it
was horrible to imagine it) therefore there is no resemblance, the similitude
is destroyed, and so the Sacrament.

. 3.
Thirdly, It is a most true, most firm and golden Rule, That a Sacrament out of
the use appointed Chamier. de Luchar. l. 7. e. 4.. 11. and l. 8. c. 3 Forbes.
Hist. Theol p. 550.
by God, has not the nature of, nor is any more a Sacrament. It is not a
Sacrament extra usum, out of the actual use. There must not only be Bread and
Wine, but Blessing, and Taking, and Eating, and Drinking, or else to us there
is no Sacrament; The Bread and Wine upon the Table are no Sacrament, but the
eating and drinking of Bread and Wine; As in Baptism, the water is no
Sacrament, but the washing with water is. The Papists confess this of every
Sacrament, and of Baptism, but not of the Lords Supper, which for
Transubstantiation-sake, which troubles the whole Scaene, they hold to be a
perfect Sacrament by consecration, whether it be received by the Communicant,
yea or no, and this is the Doctrine of their Schoolmen, and Aquin. part. 3. Qu.
80. and aliis Scholasticis.
all others of their confession; We appeal to the Text, Take, Eat, This is my
body; It Is so, being taken and eaten, and not otherwise, The remains of Bread
and Wine are no Sacrament, it is the use which gives the reason and nature of a
Sacrament, and when and where the use is not, the Sacrament is not. It Is true
in our vulgar speech we call it the Sacrament, as on the Table; as the beast
might be called a Sacrifice before it was slain, being destined and appointed
thereunto 1 Samuel 13. 9 Whitak. de^^ acram. p 621, 624, etc.
(as Whitaker says) but it is no Sacrifice till slain and offered; nor was the
Lamb a Passover, but as it was eaten and roasted; so a mere stone, is a stone,
wheresoever it be, but not a boundary, but in the use; and an earnest is money,
but not an earnest, except taken upon agreement; Bread and Wine are Elements,
but not a Sacrament, till all the Rites and Actions be observed, which God has
appointed, viz. in the participation and use, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 18. The Cup of
blessing and the bread, are the Communion of the body and blood of Christ,
being partaken and received, not else.

There is some kind of Argument urged against this Rule from the reservation
of the Bread especially, and of the Wine, which is read of in Antiquity, and
that was either private reservation, when the Communicant carried home the
Bread, and kept it in his chest for his private use to eat of privately, or
else it was by the Ministers to give to lapsed Christians in time of extremity
or sickness that were debarred of public participation: The first is
mentioned Cypr. de lapsis.
by ancient Authors, and by some commended, as Ambrose de obitu. Satyr.
Nazian. Epitaph pro sor. This is excused by Jewel against Harding; As in time
Forbes Hist. Theol. p. 553. Col. 1.
of persecution, when Christians might be deprived of the public Ordinance,
and by others on other grounds. Burgess of knealing.


The other has one only ex^mple in true Antiquity, and that is Serapions
case, Eusebius. Histor. lib. 6. cap. 34. and is excused by Chemnitius, as if Chem.
de coena. Examen. p. 93.
it was to oppose the Novatian opinion, of not restoring the lapsed, though
penitent unto the Communion of the Sacrament; Of both these, I see no clear
warrant in the Institution of Christ, and therefore say with Cyprian, Non quod
al^quis ante nos, etc. We are not to look what any has done before us, but
what he did and commanded that was before all, even Jesus Christ.

. 4.
Fourthly, It is the peoples right to receive the Cup as well as the Bread,
Drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26. 27. Moulin Buckler p. 529.
They all drank of it, Mark 14. 23. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink of
this Cup, says Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Nothing more plain, and yet whether it be
the ambition of the Priests, that would exalt themselves above the people, or
whether it be the fruit of Transubstantiation, or both, this Cup is taken from
the people in the Roman Churches, but it was not taken away by public Decree,
till the Council of Constance, Anno 1416. since which time there was great
petitioning to the Council of Trent, for the Cup, but Chem. Exam. de coena. p.
134, 135. Council. Trid. Sess. 6.
they referred it to the Pope, in whose hands it lies, and it seems will lie,
till God put another cup into his hand to drink. And so you see that that
Council of Constance that burnt John Husse and Jerome did let out the blood of
good Christians, and shut up the blood of Christ from them. I conclude, Let us
follow that which is simplest and purest according to Christ's Institution, and
neither superstitiously reserve, nor impiously mutilate the holy Ordinance.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Real Presence.
NOw I draw on to the Anatomy of the viscera, the entrails and inwards of this
Ordinance under the outside, whereof if you take off the cover, you shall find
such cheer as never was in any other feast, This is my body (says Christ)
which is broken for you (says Paul) Which is given for you (says Mat. 26 26,
27 28 Mark 14. 22, 24. Luke 22. 20.
Luke) This Cup is the New Testament in my blood (says Paul) Which is shed for
you (says Luke;) Or as Matthew and Mark, This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many, for remission of sins, says Matthew,
which is shed for many, says Mark, which is shed for you, says Luke. And all
these together are my Text at this time.

. 1.
In this Sacrament, Mirifice lusit Satan, says an excellent Author, Satan
has played his pranks, and Chamier. de Euchar. l. ^ c. 1.. 1.
tried conclusions upon Divines, how he could infatuate aad make them mad, such
cart-loads of perplexities, alterations, absurdities, and wild fancies have
they been possessed with in the agitation of this point, and discussion of these
very words, which as a Reverend D. Rainolds Medit.
Divine says truly, are clear and easy to a spiritual ear or mind, it is the
carnal fancy that perplexes all, and corrupts the Text, which had been clear,
if the water had not been muddied with dirty hands: so Nicodemus understands
Christ carnally in matter of Joh. 3.
Regeneration, and talks of entering again into our mothers womb: So the
Disciples of Cap^rnaum understand that excellent Doctrine of Christ, John 6.
about eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; of the very Cannibal eating of
man's flesh and blood: The very antidote he gave them would serve here, John 6.
63. The words that I speak, they are spirit, and they are life, that is, their
spiritual meaning is lively, and if we could agree on this, then we should give
our Hooker. l. 5. p. 359.
selves more to meditate with silence what we have by this Sacrament, and less
dispute the manner how, for this heavenly food is given for satisfying empty
souls, and not exercising our curious and subtle wits; for it often comes to
pass, that curious sifting and disputing Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 364.
too boldly chils all warmth of our zeal, and brings soundness of belief into
great hazard.

. 2.
The words have been and are interpreted in diverse senses, the most notable I
have observed to be five, I Hooker speaking of Ancients, lib. 5. page 362.
say the most notable for there are more.

1. That Christ is present in this Sacrament by his efficacy and power, to
realize and exhibit virtue to, and by the Ordinance, Nec ullo modo se absentat
divina Majestas a Ministeriis. Cyprian. de Caena, and other Ancients.

2. That Christ his very body is present with, or in or under the outward
elements, as the Consubstantiatists, or Lutheran says.

3. That Christ is really present, but modum nescimus, we know not the manner
how, and in this dark some of our learned men spoke of late, to what intent
they best knew.

4. That there is a real turning of the substance of Bread and Wine into the
very substance of Christ's Body and Blood. Thus the Papists or
Transubstantiatists.

5. That the Bread and Wine are sacramentally Christ's Body and Blood, or the
memorials thereof, symbolically representing and exhibiting to the faithful
Christians, himself, and so say We.

. 3.
And yet all parties in their difference profess themselves clear, and that
they follow the true, naked and literal sense in their judgment. Chemnitius
that learned Examen de Eucbar. p. 65. Col. 1.
Luther an professes, That he imbraceth that sense which holds the true and
substantial presence of Christ in the Supper, which the words in their proper,
and genuine, and usual signification hold forth. The Papist professes, That he
has the very plain letter of the words, and the sense literal; So far as
Lapide, I know not whether with more confidence or impudence says, That if God
ask him at the day of Judgment, why he held so, he will confidently say, Tu
docuisti, Thou have taught me. We are as clear, Vide Lee in Annot. in loc.
that we follow the true proper literal sense, and that says a learned man,
Upon my soul, there is no such D. Jo. Burgess, Kneeling at Sacram^nt. p. 113.
turning of the Bread into Christ's Body, as the Papist affirms.


I shall open the words severally, This is my Body, about which there is the
greatest heat and quarrel.

In the Rite of the Paschal Supper, when the bread Cameron. Myr^thec. in Mat.
26. Sc^^iger. de Emend lib. 6. page 536.
was given, there was a solemn signification put upon it, This is the bread of
affliction, and our Savior transferring that bread into his Supper, gave a new
signification, This is my body; In the first Rite there was no turning the
substance of bread, nor yet in this second. Mouliu Bucklet p. 471.


For our clearer understanding, we must constantly hold these two things:

1. That Christ gave bread. 2. That this bread was his body.
First, Christ gave bread to his Disciples at this Supper; for that which he
took, which he blessed, which he brake, was bread, He took bread, and that he
gave, saying, This is my body which is broken for you; for the bread was broken
as a sign that his body should be crucified, and bread the Apostle calls it
after consecration, thrice in this Chapter, verse. 26, 27, 28. and 1 Cor. 10.
16. The bread which we break, and ver. 17. We are all partakers of that one
bread, and he calls it so, not because it was bread before, for he might so have
called it wheat; a man might be called a boy, ripe wine verjuice, but because
it is so, except all our senses be put out and extinguished with the bread.

Secondly, This bread is Christ's body; What body? Even his own natural body,
which is given for you, Luke 22. 19. which is broken for you, as in my Text;
What blood? Even that which is shed for you, Matthew. 26. 28. Luke 22. ^0. But
how can this be, it is impossible that bread while it is bread, as we have
proved it is, should be Christ's body, or wine, while it is wine, should be his
blood? It Is very true, that it is impossible, Disparatum de disparato non
proprium praedicatur, therefore we must seek for a possible Calvin. in 1 Cor.
11.
meaning, and of necessity conclude with Calvin, Sacramentalem esse
loquutionem, that it is a sacramental form of speech, the sign bears the name
of the thing signified, as in vulgar, and in Scripture language, for in
Scripture both signs figuratively representing, or sacramentally sealing, do
bear the name of the things represented or sealed, as ^en. 40. 12. The three
branches are three days, verse. 18. The three baskets are three days, Genesis 41.
26. The seven ears of corn are seven years; the seven kine are seven years.
Ezekiel. 37. 11. These dry bones are the whole house of Israel. Dan. 2. 38. Thou,
O King, art this head of gold, Dan. 7. 17. The four beasts are four Kings. Gal.
4. 25. This Agar is mount Sinai. Revel. 17. 9. The seven heads are seven
mountains: So in sacramentals, Circumcision is called the Covenant, Gen 17. 13.
And a token of the Covenant, v. 11. And a seal of the righteousness of Faith,
Romans 4. 11. The Lamb is called the Passover, Exodus 12. 21. The Rock was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. and in this Sacrament, This Cup is the New Testament;
What shall we require further, the form of speech is plain, a child may
understand it? And it is without example in all Scripture, that the sign
should be, or be changed into the substance of the thing signified; and which
is further to be said, The Hebrew Tongue, or the Syriack, in which Christ spoke
does not use in this form of speech any copula of subject and predicate, either
is, or signifies but sometimes, and not always a Pronoun, as in these places
by me cited in the Old Testament; There is no [ is] nor other Verb, but thus
the seven ears of corn, they seven years, the four beasts, four Kings, which
when Cameron. Myrothec. in Mat. 26. Moulin. Buckler p. 478.
they come to be translated into Greek or Latin, then the idiome of the
language requires it, and says [ is] The Rock was Christ, and so in the
present case, Hoo lach ma, this bread of affliction, that is, This is the bread
of affliction.


I proceed to the next part, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood; or,
This is the blood of the New Testament, where the contenders are a little
cooler, and must perforce allow a Trope or figurative speech; for the Cup sure
is not changed into a Covenant or Testament, nor the blood of Christ neither,
nor the wine; The cup is not put for the blood of Christ, for then it would be
thus, This blood is the New Testament in my blood, a pure non sense, that
Papists cannot salve without invention of two bloods, but the cup is put for
the wine; This wine is the New Testament (...), ratified in my blood; The wine
represents, and by representation is the very blood of Christ, which confirms
and ratifies, Gods Gospel Covenant, or the New Testament, bequeathing to
believers the Legacy of remission of sins in Christ, for that Christ gave
wine, and not very blood in the cup, is that which Matthew and Mark say, Matthew.
26. 29. Mark 14. 25. I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine; Peri
Haggephen, was the word signantly used Stegman. disp. 51. p. 593.
for wine in the Paschal Rite, The fruit of the vine. That Climax and Gradation
of Luther is pleasant, The Cup contains the wine, the wine exhibits the blood
of Christ, the blood of Christ ratifies and confirms the New Covenant, the New
Covenant promises remission of sins: Therefore the drinking of this Cup,
applies, seals, confirms to believers the promise of remission of sins; And
the allusion is excellent, as Cameron in Mat. 26. 27.
the Apostle observes, Heb. 9. 20. out of Exodus 24. 8. that Moses said, This is
the blood of the Covenant which God has enjoined you; for all covenant with
man fallen is sealed with blood, that, under the Law with typical blood, this,
of the Gospel by the very blood of Christ; For without blood is no remission,
Heb. 9. 22. And of this Covenant-confirming blood of Christ, this wine is the
lively representation or memorial.

The particulars thus cast up, are summed up into this total, as the sense and
meaning of this Ordinance:

. 6.
First, This bread is my body, this wine is my blood, as representations and
memorials of my body broken, and my blood shed, figuring and signifying my
death and suffering for you, but this is not all, for God does not feed us with
empty shows and void figures only representing, as the footstep in the snow
the foot, or the picture of Hercules represents Hercules; This would bring the
Sacrament to a Socinian emptiness, as a matter of our duty only, not as of
Gods conferring any benefit upon us; This is more like the Sign of a Shop,
than the Seal of a Deed, and would rather serve the eye, than refresh the soul
by eating and drinking, as meat and drink. Therefore.

Secondly, This Bread is my Body, This Cup is the Calvin. in 1 Cor. 11.
New Testament in my blood, as Pledges, Seals and instrumental means of
exhibition, solemnly Pe^. Martyr. ibid. H^^aker. Eccles. Pola. p. 359. Paraeus
in 1 Cor. 11.
conveying, though symbolically to the faith of a believer, Christ himself, for
union and communion, and the benefits of his death, remission of finnes; as the
pledge confirms the contract, the Seal passes or conveyeth the estate, by
which we are as truly partakers of Christ Jesus, if we receive by faith, as we
are partakers of bread and wine for nourishment; this is a high signification
and use, it is full, and rich, and comfortable, and this I prove by that of the
Apostle, wherein I rest as a full explication of the phrase in hand, 1 Cor. 10.
16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, Is it not the Communion of the blood
of Christ? The bread which we break, Is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? Here is Participation, Communion; and he says, Is it not, Is it not?
As a known and received truth amongst Christians, and with this I content my
self, as clear and full against all contenders and gainsayers.

As for the Ancients, I refer you to a whole Parliament of them, called
together, and voting down Transubstantiation. Crakanthorpe Defens. cap. 73.
against that unhappy man, the Archbishop of Spalato, who had before his last
revolt said, Omnes Patres, All the Fathers are against the Real Presence, but
he unsaid it again afterward to his Justin. Apol. 2.
loss. Justin Martyr calls the bread (...), Bread over which thanks were given.
Irenaeus the very same. Tertullian and Origin prove, That Tertul. l. 4. contra
Marc. ^. 40. Origin.
Christ had a true body, against the Phantasticks, because the bread is a
figure and sign of a true body. Hierom calls it a representation; and Austin is
Greek Fathers call them (...) Dionysius. Basilius. Theodores.
totus Calvinianus in the point: There are rhetorical flourishes, hyperbolies,
and high expressions sometimes to procure honor to the Ordinance, or quicken
up the Communicants, but in judgment they are with us, Crakantherp Defens.
cap. 73.. 30. (...) lingua (...), Chry. hom. 82. in Matthew. sanguinem sugimus
Cyp. de caena, and such hyperbolies, etc.

So much be spoken for the explication of the words, which are so ravelled and
perplexed by contrary senses.

CHAP. IX. Of the Inward thing signified or represented in this Supper.
I. What is presented to the Believer.
NOw we shall proceed to open to you what Christ presents unto and sets before
the faithful in this Supper, and what the faithful do receive in the right
use thereof.

For the first, There is here presented and set before you in this Supper,

1. Christ himself sacrificed for you, with the fruits and benefits of his
death, or of the sacrifice of himself.

2. The New Testament or the New Covenant, confirmed and ratified by his Blood,
with the contents of that Covenant, viz. Remission of sins, and other benefits
by consequence flowing from it.

. 1.
1. Here is Christ himself sacrificed for you, with the Fruits and Benefits
accruing from his death, presented and set before you: The efficacy of his
Hooker Eccl. lib. 5. page 360.
Body and Blood is not all that is here presented to be received, as is consist
by the true Protestant Churches of our Confession, but first and principally
Christ himself; as the influence of heaven is in plants, beasts, men, but there
is not such a thing only here set forth, but a Divine and mystical Union with
Christ himself; for here is a participation says the Apostle, of the Body and
Blood of Christ, who is exhibited, as really and truly present, not opposing
real to spiritual, but to chimericall or fantastical, nor intending his
presence in the Elements, as contained in them, but to the faith of the
receiver, who has union with him. The very Body and Blood of Christ, that Body
which was fastened Peter Martyr in 1 Cor. 11. 24. Calvin in 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
to the Cross, that Blood which was shed was a Sacrifice, as offered up to God,
is meat and drink, as offered unto us; and therefore our Divines say, that
Christ is truly and really, but yet spiritually, given to us, as he was given
for us. This is my Body which is broken for you, given for you, says the Text,
and that which was given for you, is given to you: He was given for you in the
Sacrifice, he is given to you in the Sacrament, with those blessed fruits and
benefits that flow from his Death.

. 2.
2. Here is presented to you the New Testament, a Covenant ratified and
confirmed in his Blood, with the benefits and privileges thereof. It is called
New, either from the excellency of it, as the word New sometimes signifies, or
for the durableness and perpetuity of it, as the Apostle explains it, Heb. 8.
ult. in opposition to the Old made with Israel, Cameron in Myreth. Matthew. 26.
which was to determine and vanish away as to the form of dispensation. This
Covenant is, That God will be our God, and we shall be his people: That he will
forgive our iniquities and remember our sins no more, etc. and the Blood of
Christ is the sanction of this Covenant, for without Blood is no remission; the
blood of Christ is the Seal which ratifies the truth and validity of this
Covenant: The Wine in this Sacrament represents that Blood of Christ, and is
not so properly a Seal confirming the Covenant in it self, as conveying the
comfort and participation of it unto us; or if you will, it is a Seal of
Remission of sin to us, which is an Article of the Covenant that is sealed by
the Blood of Christ, and therefore it is said, This is the blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many, for Remission of sins.

. 3.
And so you have here presented to your Faith Christ himself sacrificed for
you, the New Covenant confirmed by Christ's Blood shed for the pardon of sins,
which are the highest and most glorious things of Gods gift to mankind, who
has in the dishes of this outward Sacrament set before you such good cheer to
feed upon, as all Sacrifices under the Law and Feasts were but the mere shadows
of. Take heed of thinking meanly of the furniture of this Table: God has no
better provision to set before a sinner, than his Sons flesh and blood, and his
Covenant of grace sealed and confirmed: our Socinian likes not this, that word,
My Body broken for you, my Blood shed for remission of sins, makes him
bestirre himself to turn off the Body broken to the bread, and the Blood shed
to the wine: and so you see two extremes, the Papist turns bread into Christ's
Body, and wine into Blood; the Socinian on the other hand, that which is spoken
of the Body puts off upon the bread, and that of the Blood upon the wine, that
the death of Christ might not be a proper Sacrifice for us.


What the faithful do receive in the right use of this Ordinance? and this is
easily answered: For as guests at the Table receive the meat and drink set
before them, so having seen what God presents to them, we shall easily find
what they receive at this Table, and that is,

1. The faithful communicant receives Christ himself, or his Body and Blood:
Faith is a receiving of Christ himself, we cannot receive the benefits that
come by him without receiving of himself; as in Marriage the consent is, I take
thee, not I take thine, and yet this is consequent, upon that, our union with
Christ is strengthened and more closed; and this union with Christ is one of
those great mysteries, Ephesians. 5. 32. resembled by man and wise, who are one
flesh, though a thousand miles asunder; and as she is under covert, and free
from arrest of Law for debt, so a Believer by his union with Christ is under
coverture, and the curse and condemnation of Gods Law cannot touch him: or as
members knit, or branches united to the tree, receive influx of life and
spirits from the head and root, so Believers united to Christ by his Spirit
receive influences and spirit and life from him by virtue of their union, I in
them, says Christ, Joh. 7. 23, 26. The inhabitation of Christ in his people,
seems to be expressed by their eating and drinking of his Body and Blood
spiritually, and that inhabitation cannot be without a presence of him; such as
his inhabitation is, such is his presence, both real, and yet both spiritual,
he dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

. 5.
2. The faithful communicant receives the confirmation of that Covenant which
is his only comfort. He takes hold of the Covenant by the Seal of it, the Blood
of Christ, the several articles whereof, as that God will be our God, and that
in Christ, he will forgive us all our sins, etc. are particularly sealed up for
our better evidence and peace and security, that we may be enabled to make a
personal and particular claim of the benefits and privileges of it, which are
called The unsearchable riches of Christ.

. 6.
And from hence, ver. 12. the receiving of Christ himself, and of the Covenant
made in Christ and confirmed in his Blood, does follow that which is usually
said to be the benefit of this Sacrament, the strengthening, refreshing,
sustentation of the soul by those graces, comforts, hopes, which flow by
consequence from Christ or the Covenant, so that whatsoever a man may expect
for bodily strength or reparation from bread and wine, the like he may expect
from Christ or the Covenant for his soul; life maintained, graces quickened,
deadness enlivened, resolutions enabled, hope erected, faith strengthened,
lusts subdued, which follow by consequence upon our union with Christ, and our
interest in the Covenant, in the sense of which when a Christian walks, he is
in a good frame and posture of spirit.

CHAP. X. A fourfold Exhortation from the premises.
FRom what has been said upon this point, I would possess you with four things.

. 1.
I. That you hold fast and stick to the true sense and right meaning of these
words, This is my Body. This is the Blood of the New Testament, which has been
so perplexed and depraved by superstition, and the vanity of humane inventions,
especially since the rise of the Schoolmen, whose itch of Disputation has bred
such a scab, that there has been left no soundness in the place, which has
been tortured with such Convulsions, Distortions and Absurdities, that the
sense, which to a chaste and simple ear is easy and smooth, has been raveld
into knots inextricable; and this Text of all other has suffered infinite
injuries, and been made the stage of impudent fooleries, which have brought and
buried out of sight the true meaning of them, and made our Savior that used to
speak vulgarly and easily, to delude the senses, amuse the reason, nonplus the
faith of sober Believers. And though it be truly said, The sense of Scripture
is the Scripture, and that the right understanding of these words, carries you
in a right line, to the nature, use and benefit of this Or inance, yet let me
say this more to you as English men, That the true meaning of them has been
conveyed to you by the blood of your own Martyrs, who in Q Mary her days, were
most of them put to the test upon the point of Real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and bare witness against it, and I do believe that if Popery do ever
make another attempt upon you, it will play upon you with his battery at this
place.


The Churches of our Confession have warily and justly avoided the extremes on
both sides.

1. The first extreme is that which some did fear in Zuinglius and others at
first, and yet is unjustly charged upon us by many, viz. That the Sacraments
are (...), naked signs, empty figures and shadows, merely representing the
death of Christ, as the Picture of Hercules resembles and represents Hercules,
which we disclaim, and leave it to Socinianizing spirits, and other Levellers
of Divinity; for we are taught that Sacramental signs are more than mere
representing signs, being Seals which do confirm and make over unto us the
spiritual benefit which they represent and exhibit, also they are signs which
God commands us to use, and in their right use he conferres upon us the
benefit, as the Seal passes a Right to the Estate promised and conveyed, as the
Apostle says, Romans 4. 11. He received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ; The bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? not representation only, but communion
or participation also; for the picture of a loaf of bread feeds not the hungry,
nor does the Ivy-bush refresh the weary, and therefore there is not only a
representation of the body of Christ broken, by the breaking of the bread, but
Take and eat and drink, which denotes participation of the body and blood of
Christ.

2. The other extreme is twofold: 1. That the very body and blood of Christ is,
as it were, molded up with the bread and wine, or hidden under them, which is
the sense of the Consubstantiatists or Lutheran Churches; and this, though it
be too gross an opinion, yet is not liable to so many monsters, and
incompresensible absurdities as the other, which is, 2. That the bread and wine
cease to be, and are evoided, being turned or change, the substance of them
into the very substance of the flesh and blood of Christ, which is hidden under
the species or outward accidents of bread and wine, a monstrous Paradox, holden
stiffly by the Transubstantiatists or Papists.

The middle way holden by the Churches of our Confession, is, That the outward
Elements do represent as Signs and exhibit as Seals and moral Instruments to
the faith of the receiver, the very Body and Blood of Christ sacrificed, as
spiritual repast for our souls and spiritually given and taken, but that they
continue not as incorporated with them, nor are converted into the very
natural Body of Christ, as locally or corporally, there to be received by the
mouth of the receiver.

We hold a difference or change of bread and wine blessed, but it is a change
of signification not of substance, a relative change, not real, a change in
regard of use and esteem, not of their natural substance, as the wax, now a
Seal to a Conveyance is wax still, but not a Seal, not of that value till now;
all the Rhetorical flowers used by the Ancients reach no further, if they do,
we cannot keep them company: We hold that the Body and Blood of Christ is
really, that is, truly exhibited and present to the faith of the receiver; and
we might express the real presence, as real is opposed to imaginary or
chimericall, were it not for caption and misunderstanding; none of ours denies
the Body of Christ to be really, though spiritually eaten by a Believer; nay it
is immotum axioma, whatsoever is eaten, in that it is Forbes p. 53^.
eaten, it must be present; no man can eat a thing that is absent, but the
presence with or under the Elements is one thing, and the presence to the soul
and faith of a Believer is another: We know no union of Christ's Body with bread
and Wine, but with his members, which is real and mystical, not real and
corporal; therefore Christ says, Take eat, before he say, This is my Body, as
if it were his Body to their faith, not as in the outward Element.

This is my Body.
For attestation of this sense, many Arguments may be mustred up together.

1. Compare one part of this Sacrament with the other: This cup is the New
Testament in my Blood, that is by Metonymy, the Seal of the New Testament, but
not the New Testament it self: so, This is my Body, that is the Sign and Seal
of it, but not it self.

2. Compare the one Sacrament of the Gospel with the other: In Baptism the
water is water without real alteration, so here the bread is bread, the wine
is wine, not changed into flesh or blood.

3. Compare the Sacraments of the Old Testament with the New: Circumcision is
the Covenant because the Sign or Seal of it, the Lamb is the Passover because
the memorial or sign of it, so the bread is my Body, the wine is my Blood in
the same form of speech.

4. The Language in which our Savior spoke, had no other property of
expression, there being no word for [ signifie] but [ is] in stead thereof, as
Learned men say; and its certain the Scripture in both Testaments, Hebrew and
Greek, uses the same form in a hundred places, giving the name of the thing
signified to the sign, as has been shown, as the seven ears of corn are seven
years. The dry bones are the house of Israel. The seven Candlesticks are seven
Churches, etc.

5. The words, This is my Body, are not proper in the Lutheran sense, no more
than to say, This Cloak is Peter, because Peter is in it: nor in the Popish
sense, except the Body of Christ be there before the words be pronounced, This
is my Body, which should rather be thus, Let this be my Body; as God said, Let
there be light, not This is light, for it was not light before.

6. The spiritual benefit which is eating and drinking Christ's Body and Blood
by faith, is no less in our sense, than if there were his very flesh, for
Christ says, The flesh profits nothing, Joh. 6. and the Papists hold that the
eating of Christ's flesh by wicked men profits nothing, except besides the
Sacramental, there be a spiritual feeding upon Christ, which we affirm.

7. The Apostles understood these words as we do, and as the Hebrews had ever
understood the same expression for form in the Old Testament, else they would
have been amazed and startled at it, and have asked some question as they were
inquifitive enough in lesser matters, but they saw Christ fit at table, and eat
and drink first himself, and therefore could not be ignorant of their meaning.

8. The Capernaite Disciples, Joh. 6. having taken offense at those frequent
expressions of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, understanding them
carnally, were answered by Christ himself, The flesh profits nothing, The words
that I speak are spirit and life, as if he himself would give the
interpretation.

9. The Apostle thrice in this Chapter following calls it still bread after
consecration, as also in the Chapter foregoing, and surely he that never before
did, would not delude the senses of his Disciples in this Ordinance; and
himself calls it wine too, Matthew. 26. 26. I will not henceforth drink of this
fruit of the Vine, which is the Periphrasis usual among the Jews for wine.

10. The remembrance of Christ, the showing forth his death till he come, do
import the absence of his Body, which the Scripture tells us, ascended into
heaven and there is contained, in lieu of his corporal absence he sent the
Spirit to abide for ever as another Comforter: Memorials and monuments are of
things absent.

11. For the Ancient Fathers they prove against the Marcionites, that held the
Body of Christ to be merely fantastical, That it is substantial, because the
Elements of bread and wine are substantial, which was no good argument, if
only the accidents or shadows of the Elements do remain; and all along
downwards they call the outward Elements, symbols, Forbes p. 561.
types, figures, signs of Christ's Body, until about the year 1215. when
subtle and superstitious Disputes grew hot about the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, which occasioned Innocent the third to introduce both name of
Transubstantiation and thing, not before openly heard of, and so as a Decree of
the Lateran Council, vented it as a point of faith, since which time the
Council of Trent has confirmed Sess 13. ca. 4.
the Decree, and the word, as most fit and proper, which are the rotten, yet
the best props upon which Transubstantiation does stand at this day, being upon
the first birth of it, as I said even now, opposed Forbes p. 609 col 1.
by the Waldenses, and afterward by Wicliff, and those that followed them, and
shall be opposed by all Orthodox, till that Dagon fall.


II. To reject with utmost detestation the impossible and incomprehensible
Error of Transubstantiation, and corporal presence, by which Doctrine a silly
Priest does that which all the Angels cannot do, and that is, Make his Maker,
as they call the Host; and people do devour their God, and yet they justify it
by Gods omnipotency, that God is able to effect it, which is no better an
argument than the Turks may justify most of the fooleries of their Alcoran.
There are two grounds for the rejection of this abomination.

1. The Idolatry and Sacrilege which does ensue upon it, and that is the
adoration and worship of the Host, a piece of bread, and the mutilation or
maiming of the Sacrament by bread only, and the propitiatory Sacrifice of
Christ himself in the Mass, who was once only offered up to God upon the Cross,
all which are the issue of this Error.

2. The monsters of contradiction and absurdity to sense and reason which
follow thereupon. It was begotten by feigned miracles and fabulous Legends, and
is the mother of blasphemies and inextricable absurdities, which set faith it
self on the rack, and which though they would seem easily to blow away, yet by
their straggling it appears they strive with that they cannot master. The point
of Consubstantiation has brought forth a grand absurdity, maintained by some
Pseudo-Lutherans, the Ubiquity of Christ's Body in all places.

But this of Transubstantiation surpasses all, as I show thus,

1. Suppose Christ sitting at the table with his Disciples, and eating this
bread and drinking this cup first, as the custom at the Paschall Supper was,
and as the Papists generally, and the Fathers hold, and we deny not, because
the Scripture seems plain for it, (...), Matthew. 26. 19. Henceforth I will not
drink of the fruit of the Vine; supposing, I say, this, How is it possible or
imaginable that he should eat himself? or how can he sit at table, and yet be
in the mouths of his Apostles? Was he at the same time in his Apostles mouths
or stomachs, while he sat and rose from table, and discoursed those three
Chapters of John 15, 16, 17? or while he sweat that Bloody sweat in his Agony
in the Garden, etc. a monstrous impossibility!

2. It Is Impossible to make that which was before existent and in being: Can a
father beget a son that Chelling. p. 70.
is already begotten? Can an Architect build a house that is already built? Can
the body of Christ, which is before the conversion of the bread, be made or
produced by the turning of bread into it? Can he that was conceived by the holy
Ghost born of the Virgin be made by pronouncing of four or five words? If ever
delusions were strong, these are, Nam factum facere and factum infectum facere,
are equally impossible.

3. They say that the substance of bread and wine is avoided, and that only the
accidents remain, so that there is length and nothing long, breadth and nothing
broad, thickness and nothing thick, whiteness and nothing white, moisture and
nothing moist, sweetness and nothing sweet, that is, a long, broad, thick,
white, moist, sweet Nothing. The Priest pours out nothing but lines and
colors, when he pours out the wine, for these accidents of bread and wine are
not in the bread, because that is avoided and vanished, and they are not in the
Body of Christ, as themselves say, and yet it is plain this bread and wine do
nourish the body, and is the body nourishable by mere accidents? Can there be
plainer contradictions?

4. Can the same body at the same time have his just dimensions, distance of
parts, symmetry, proportion, as the Body of Christ has, and yet not have
these, because all parts? yea the whole Body of Christ, say they, are in one
and the self same point or crum of bread.

5. Can the Body of Christ which is much greater be wholly contained in a wafer
or piece of bread, in his full dimensions, and that as many times as there are
points, crumbs, drops in the bread or wine?

6. Can the bread be turned into the very Body of Christ, and yet not anything
of that bread become anything of Christ, nor the matter nor form nor accidents
of bread be made either the matter or form or accidents of Christ?

7. Can the same thing, as Christ's true Body, at the same time be wholly above
it self, and wholly below it self, within and without it self? can it be moved,
and yet be still? be carried from one place to another, and yet not move? be
brought from heaven to earth, and yet not come out of heaven? who then can
assure me that when he hung upon the Cross, he was not walking somewhere else,
crucified and not crucified, eaten and not eaten, alive in one, dead in another
place, as in case the Apostles celebrated this Supper while Christ was in the
grave.

8. What dishonor do these men render the Body of Christ obnoxious unto, to be
eaten by wicked men, by bruit creatures, by mice, by other vermin, to be cast
into some unclean place? for so long as the form of bread remains, so long the
Body of Christ is there, though it be in the mouth or belly of a mouse, says
Ales and the rest of the Schoolmen, who do one where or other acknowledge the
most of these monstrous absurdities, and go about to heal and salve them. I
surcease from raking further into this ungrateful sink, whose name
Transubstantiation is but of yesterday in comparison, and which dishonours the
Body of Christ into a monster, destroies the nature of the Sacrament, and fills
the world with dreadful contentions and broils; and let us but observe, 1.
What grievous impositions the Romanists lay upon the faith of them that are
devoted to her communion. 2. What contradictions and absurdities the common
people do ignorantly and implicitly believe. 3. What strong delusions even to
believe lies God gives up Learned men unto, that refuse the simplicity of the
truth for interests and politic ends! 4. What a mercy of God it is to deliver
us from that tyranny, which leaves us no other choice, but to swallow and
digest such impossible things, or to be sacrificed in flames; and the Lord
forbid the re-entrance of that Religion among us, which in all likelihood will
cost us our souls or our lives.

. 5.
III. Having past the most rugged and craggy part of my way, now we shall have
a sweeter and smoother way; and the third thing that I commend to you is, To
keep fixed your eyes and hearts upon the inward of this Sacrament, which Christ
himself does anatomize and unfold to you, saying, This is my Body, This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood, teaching all Ministers to explain the outward
Ordinance what it means, and all communicants to set their hearts upon it; for
as the Parchment and Wax are little worth, but the Estate conveyed, so the
Bread and Wine do but convey by their use, the Body and Blood of Christ, and
the Covenant of grace and peace confirmed unto us; and as we use to search and
pick out of every corner of the shell that is broken, as of a Wallnut, the
kernel that is in it, so we should study the marrow and kernel of this
Ordinance, to lose the sight and use of nothing here presented; God loses
honor and praise, and we benefit and com ort, when we look not to the inwards
of an outward Ordinance, especially when Christ himself and all the great and
capital benefits that accrue by him, are not only represented but confirmed,
and to be participated: They that look upon a mere representation of Christ's
death in this Ordinance, reduce it to a pretense or shadow, and look for too
little, for it is a seali^g Ordinance: They that look for his very Body to be
eaten, look for too much; we may expect from Gods institutions the grace or
benefit which God appoints them to exhibit, and in the way wherein he so
appoints: Then have we the benefit of his death, when we have him; and here is
offered to Calvin in 1 Cor. 11.
you not the benefit only, but the Body in which he suffered; his body was a
Sacrifice, here it is spiritual food, we feed upon that Sacrifice as the
manner was; the Covenant was confirmed by his Blood, here we feast upon it; the
Blood was shed that he might reconcile to God, it is drunk that we may be
partakers of that Reconciler, and that reconciliation. He shall confirm the
Covenant with mercy, is Daniels phrase, Dan. 9. 29. The memorial we celebrate,
the benefit we participate here, and the great Question, Whether I have
remission of sins, whereat we stick, is here answered to a doubting soul, that
believes in desire, not in comfort, as sure as God can devise by outward
Ordinance. The Word answers that question by description of qualification of
the person, a Believer: The Spirit answers it by witnessing and sealing it up
to our spirits that we are children: The graces of Regeneration do answer it,
as fruit does to the life of the tree, by demonstration: This Sacrament answers
it by exhibition and offering Christ to me that I may appropriate him, for the
blood was shed for you, says Christ, Luke 22. 20. for you that take and eat
and drink.

. 6.
IV. The communicant should be one that seeks union and communion with Christ,
for he that is not a Jew inwardly, eats but outwardly. Finis non intus, dente
non mente, as Austin expresses the inward of Ordinances are enjoyed by them
that inwardly are Christians: the Covenant is sealed to them that come to the
terms of that Covenant: those that bring inward graces receive inward benefits:
Sed de hoc plura.

CHAP. XI. Of Christ's mandate or charge for the celebration of this Ordinance
in remembrance of Him.
1 COR. 11. 24, 25, 26. This do in remembrance of me. This do ye, as often as ye
drink it in remembrance of me. For as often, etc.
. 1.
SO much be spoken upon the outward part or Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the
Elements and Rites: He took bread, and giving thanks he brake it, and gave it:
Likewise also the cup after Supper. And so much also touching the Kernel and
Marrow of the Feast; This is my Body broken for you: This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood. And now having past through our thorny and perplexed
way, encombred with adversaries, through whom we must fight our way, we are
come into a fairer and clearer road, as into a champain, not so much infested
with enemies and Disputes: For whether it be that a practical conscience be
easilier satisfied than a subtle wit, or that the devil does most labor to
corrupt our intellectuals, that so as once he may corrupt our worship and our
morals, or whatsoever the reason be, there are more wranglings and Disputes
raised about speculative and theoreticall Points, than about matters of
practice or moral obedience.

These words contain our Savior his mandate or charge for the celebration of
this Ordinance, together with the end whereunto it serves: This do in
remembrance of me: This do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. This do
ye, there is the charge: for remembrance of me, there is the end. None of the
Evangelists have these words but Luke only, out of whom either our Apostle
takes the words, or at least symbolizeth with him, making them or rendering them
as part of Christ's own words spoken by himself at the first Institution and
C^lebration of his Supper; and which you may observe, the two Elements Bread
and Wine taken and received, though they have distinct significations, Christ's
Body broken and his Blood shed, yet they meet as two lines in this one point,
The remembrance of Christ. This do in remembrance of me, is spoken of eating
the bread, ver. 24. This drink in remembrance of me, is spoken of the cup, ver.
25. The use of both the signs makes up but one memorial of Christ, once
dying, once sacrificed up to God for us; and I shall take up the words in this
one Point,

. 2.
The Lord Christ has left it in charge and commandment, that his Church or
people should celebrate this Supper for a remembrance of him. Or if you will
read the words thus, (...), for my memorial, or for my commemoration. What
impression has the dying charge or commandment of a Testator upon his children
or executors? Christ builds a monument for himself before he die, plain and
simple to the eye, but a lasting monument that must continue till he come
again, ver. 26. One of the seven wonders of the Heathen world was Mausolaeum, a
Monument or Tomb. The goodliest monument which distinguishes and beautifies the
Christian Church, is this of Christ's own erecting, his Memorial. The second
Temple built after the captivity of Babylon, was far inferior in outward
magnificence and splendor to the first, built by Solomon: and the Jews observe
five things to be wanting in the second, which were in the first, as the Ark,
etc. yet God promises, Hag. 2. 9. The glory of this latter house shall be
greater then the former, because Christ the desire of all Nations should come,
and fill it with glory, ver. 7. And shall not the presence of Christ's Body and
Blood in this Sacrament excel in glory, all the typical glory of Sacrifices
and Sacraments of the Law? They were but shadows of him that should come, this
the memorial of him that died and is alive. The particulars comprehended under
this Point are these:

. 3.
First, There is a command and charge in the words, Do this, it is more then a
Warrant which gives authority, it is a Command that requires duty: It is more
than a Command, it is a Charge of a dying Testatour or Savior, laying an
injunction upon his Church to do this. For both Sacraments of the Gospel we
have the word of command: The Baptizate, Go and Disciple all Nations, baptizing
them, is the word for Baptism: Hoc facite, This do ye in remembrance of me, is
the word for the Supper. There must be in a Sacrament, First, An outward
Element. Secondly, A word of promise. Thirdly, A word of command to use it to
that end, as none but Whitak. de Sacr. Qu. 6. de numero.
the supreme power has authority to stamp or coin legitimate, and current
money, so none but God can institute and make a Sacrament. The Sacraments are
parts of Gods instituted worship, standing by positive appointment of God, The
eating and drinking of bread and wine in their natural being or use, are no
more memorials, symbols and pledges of Christ's body and blood, than the form of
a Serpent in brass of healing those that were bitten with fiery Serpents; no
man can authoritatively institute a Sacrament, or prescribe to God any part of
his worship, I have received of the Lord, says the Apostle, that which I
delivered also unto you, and the reason is good; He only can make a Sacrament,
who can make good the promise or grace thereby represented and exhibited.

. 4.
Secondly, The charge is to Do this, that is, to celebrate this Supper: Chist
limits and confines us to Jans. Harm in Mat 26.
this, as God did Moses: See thou do all things according to the pattern shown
thee in the Mount; If we vary from the pattern there lies a quis requisivit
against us, Who hath-required this at your hands? So God checks our inventions
and superstition in creating will worship, by adding or detracting, as we may
not coin, so neither wash, or clip, or embase that which is stamped by the
Lord, (...), referrs to that which went before, Eat this blessed and broken
Bread, the next words explain it, Do this as often as ye drink it, principally it
relates to the actions of Gerard. Harm. cap. 171.
Communicants, Do this, that is, Eat ye, Drink ye, and consequently to the
actions of the Dispenser or Minister, Do this, that is, Bless ye, Break ye,
which are antecedent to eating and drinking, and so all the external rites or
actions of this Sacrament may come under the command, Do this, but we may not
stretch the (...) to accessories and circumstances appendant, not to the upper
room, nor to the night after Supper, nor to the gesture of discubiture; for
neither the injunction of the Passover did in after times extend to all the
circumstances used at the first Passover in Egypt, as the Hebrews note. The
Papist seems to epsy here some glimpse of proof of the real Sacrifice of
Christ in his Mass, from the word here used Facite, which in Latin sometimes
signifies to sacrifice or offer, and so it does with an ablative case, which is
not here, but the thread is too fine to hold, for if the word signify so
somewhere, it is not consequent that therefore here; where the word (...), Do
this, plainly limits it to the actions of the Communicants, as I have said. The
Ordinances of God are most powerful and proper, when they are themselves pure,
plain, naked of all humane disguizes or embellishments, and therefore I bespeak
all Communicants, Ministers and people, not to study how to add more glory or
gracefulness to this Ordinance, as they suppose, but to rest in, and submit to
that which we find in Christ's example, or first original, and suffer your
selves to be limited to do this, Do this in remembrance of me.


Thirdly, This charge or command, Do this, is given to the Church, the Saints,
Disciples of Christ. It is true, the Apostles only were present at Christ's
first celebration, He sat down with the twelve, says the Text, and so the
command was directed to them only; But how? Not to the Apostles as Apostles,
but as Communicants, as representing the Church Lucas Brug. in Eva^g.
or people of Christ, or to the Apostles as Dispensers of it, and to them as
receivers of it; For when Christ said to the Apostles, Go and baptize, Do this
in remembrance of me, he intended not that either Sacrament should die with
them, but from them continue in succession of all times, therefore Do it in
remembrance of me; they received it in anticipation of his death, but it was to
endure as a memorial of it, as the Passeover-Lamb was first eaten in Egypt, or
slain before the destroying Angel passed through the Land, but intended for a
memorial for ever in all generations, till Christ came, and therefore the
Apostle here delivers it to the Church of Corinth, the very institution of
Christ is delivered to this Church, and the use of it enjoined to them, and all
Churches till he come again, ver. 26.

When I say it is a command given to the Church, or to the Saints, I mean, that
it is an inner commandment, an inner Ordinance, (as there was inner Ordinances
in the Temple) for Church Members and Disciples. The command of hearing the
Word is given to all. The commandment of being baptized is to believers, as a
Sacrament of their initiation or entrance, or admission. To make a Disciple,
and to baptize one, seems to be put for the same, John 4. 1, 2. but this
commandment, Do this, lies more inner yet, it appertains to them that are
Disciples already, or Church Members, which was signified in the ancient
Christian Churches by the baptistery or font at the Church-door, and by the
Table intra Cancellos within the Chancel; so in the Passover, a stranger was
not admitted to the Pasleover, but when he was circumcised, then let him come
near and keep it, Exodus 12. 44, 48. Let him come near, says the Text, for it
is an inner Ordinance, and the Communicants must be such at least, whom the
Apostle calls (...), 1 Cor. 5. those that are within, for here is that inner
fellowship and communion of the Saints and members of Christ exercised and
professed. This then is that peculiar and most inward command and privilege
that appertains to an enclosed company, it is a pasture enclosed, not a common;
Here Christ holds a more familiar presence and fellowship with his peculiar
people, to whom he vouchsafes an interior admission; Shall not we then keep
this charge, and observe this commandment, and enjoy this privilege properly
belonging to Disciples? Oh it was this that made Christians of old, when they
were for their sin debarred and excluded, so cry, weep, lament their sad
case, that they should depart as it were from the presence of their Lord, and
stand aloof in the court that had been admitted into the parlour or chamber of
presence; and for those that were in the school of catechism, called (...), it
was the utmost end to which they did aspire, and for which they waited a long
attendance to be admitted to this communion, and then properly called sideles,
this was the highest form.


Fourthly, The end wherefore this Ordinance was instituted, and is celebrated
is for the remembrance of Christ, for it is (...), a memorial of that great,
that universal Sacrifice, Christ Jesus; Memorials of dying friends, though
plain are precious, and of great account with all men, being kept amongst their
(...), or esteemed treasures, and we may see how little Christ receded from the
intent of the Passover, which was a memorial of the Hebrews deliverance in
Egypt, Exodus 12. 14. and transferred to a greater memorial of himself, by whom
is wrought a greater and more universal deliverance of the Church; The day of
the Jews Sabbath was changed to the first day of the week for celebration of
the resurrection of Christ, and so the creating of a new Heaven, and a new
earth that day; The paschal rite of the Jew was changed from a memorial of
their deliverance from Egypt into a memorial of the death of Christ, by which
we have a greater deliverance; Their Passover was to be observed by them in
their generations for ever, Exodus 12. 24. and our Supper is an Ordinance to be
observed by the Gospel-churches for ever; Their ever was Christ's first coming,
our ever is till he come again; It Is twice repeated, For remembrance of me;
both the eating of the bread and drinking of the wine are but one memorial,
which is the (...), or bufinesse of this Ordinance; All Churches and Christians
could not see the Lord dying, for he died but once, and therefore they have a
glass or representation of that death, which as it is always in the efficacy
and effect, so it might always live and be fresh in our memory, the
commemoration of that Sacrifice which never is, never needs to be repeated, is
repeated often in this Sacrament, and this Sacrifice of Christ as it was
promised and prefigured in old Types and Sacrifices, so was it performed ence
in truth upon the cross, and is often celebrated in this Sacrament of memory.

This memorial is solemn, this remembrance must be practical.

CHAP. XII. Of doing this in remembrance of Christ; The Properties of this
Memorial.
. 1.
It Is a solemn memorial instituted by Christ himself, Great deliverances have
solemn commemorations, such was the Passover, the feast of Purim, the Encaenia
or feast of Dedication; Great victories, have their days of Thanksgiving;
great deliverances, benefits. Benefactours are honored with solemn memorials;
private remembrances which every man may agitate in his own mind are too low
expressions of public, and eminent, and universal benefits, therefore Christ
will set up his own monument, and ordain a solemn Ordinance for remembrance of
himself, to be observed by all that have his memory, and it is one of the great
Sea-marks of the Church of Christ, he did not set up anniversaries or festivals
for his Nativity, Circumcision, Ascension, etc. which the Churches in after
times observed, but he did set up in gross this solemn memorial of himself,
and that is principally of his death; His death I say, For ye show the Lords
death, ver. 26. And why? Because his death is the expiation of sin, therein
was made the Sacrifice of Atonement; Redemption, Reconciliation was made
thereby, the Covenant confirmed, the love of God to man demonstrated, the
justice of God for sin exemplified, the foundation of our righteousness,
hope, peace and victory laid, the fullness of merit, the mirror of mercy, the
admiration of Angels, the center of all Christianity, and the sum of all
Scripture types, Prophecies, Promises, the most admirable of all the works of
God that ever were; and indeed all that can be said, and more then can be said
was here to be seen, and is here to be remembered.

Secondly, This remembrance of Christ must be lively and practical; There is a
naked, historical, theoretical remembrance, a review of the Species or Ideas
formerly imprinted in the mind; So Absalom is remembered in his Pillar, and
Lot's wife in her pillar of salt, merely historically; and there is a practical
remembrance, which connotes affections fruitful effect, and so in common
speech to remember is to requite good or evil, and in Scripture phrase, God
remembers our sins, our services, when he punishes or rewards, Remember me, O
my God, and spare me, Nehem. 13. 22. with infinite the like. Our remembrance of
Christ in this Supp^r sets awork all that is within us; Our sorrow for sin,
as Peter's remembrance of his words, when the Cock crew, Mark 14. 7^. He wept
bitterly; our faith to believe in, and receive him, so Psalm. 20. 7. We will
remember, that is, trust in the Name of our God. It sets on work our
thanksgiving, for so great a benefit ingages resolutions, blows up the coals of
love, fills with admiration. What would the sight of Christ bleeding on the
cress for us, groaning under our sins, have wrought on tender heart? The same,
as far as a reflection can work (which is weaker than the direct Species) should
be the temper of our hearts, when we see him and his death personated, and
acted in this Sacrament, here we see him dying, paying our ransom: Oh the
dreadful example of Gods justice upon sin! Oh the sweetest example of Gods
mercy to a sinner, actually acting their several parts in this sp^ctacle of
Christ represented to our says, as yet hanging on the cross, the Lamb of God
is as yet smoking upon the Altar, which takes away the sins of the world, if
you seel not your remembrance of Christ, it is nothing; If you exercise only
wit and invention, it is barren, but the exercise of affection is the best
commemoration; He that brings sin hither as bitter herbs shall be sweetly
refresht with Christ our Passover


Quest. To whom is this remembrance made?

Ausw. 1. We make it unto, and within our selves, whetting upon our hearts the
fruit and benefit we receive from him, and the torments and pains he endured
for us.

2. We make this remembrance to others, to all the world, by our solemn
profession of Christ and his death, as that we stand unto for remission of
sins, and acceptance with God. Let the Jew or Infidel laugh at us for trusting
to a crucified Savior and memorizing him in a piece of bread and cup of wine.
It is our joy and triumph, we live, and hope to die in, and if need be for this
profession.

3. We make this remembrance to God, we set before him the Sacrifice of his own
Son, and put him in mind by him to be merciful to us, we inculcate the
death of Christ to God, and set before him these monuments, we say and pray,
Lord remember Mede Diatribi^ Mal. 6. c. 1. v. 11. Forbes. Hist. Theol. p. 618.
Call. 2.
that Sacrifice which we here remember: If thou remember our sins we will
remember thy Christ, pardon us in the name of that Sacrifice, which we
commemorate, and make mention of before thee; and this is the reason why the
Ancients so often called this Ordinance a Sacrifice, which Chrysostom recalling
himself, says, Chrysostom. in Heb. Homil. 17. page Grecat. 856.
(...), rather the commemoration of a Sacrifice, because they offered up their
prayers and thanksgiving in the name of Christ the Sacrifice here commemorated,
for here is no real sacrificing of Christ to God, that turns the Table into a
cross, but here is the commemoration of a Sacrifice, and a feasting and
feeding thereupon by faith, as men that are in covenant and fellowship with God.

CHAP. XIII. A Lamentation for the neglect of this Ordinance.
NOw to the Use of this point, The Lord has left it in charge, that his Church
do celebrate this Ordinance in remembrance of him. And

. 1.
First, We may bewail that great eclipse which has befallen this Ordinance
here with us of later years, the like to which has not been seen in England
since it became Protestant, the remembrance and memorial of Christ has been
even forgotten, and the Ordinance of Communion been rendered as the apple of
contention and division, a matter of quarrel rather than of use, the loss that
is gained by this intermission or neglect, or disuse or it is very great, for
we lose an inestimable benefit by it, the solemn remembrance of Christ with the
comforts thence resulting, we lose a duty by it; for Christ said, Do this, and
is it not a great loss to lose so signal a note of the Church of Christ, so
great a benefit, and the visible mischief has been very great, for hereby
separation has been mightily advanced, the people like sheep wanting fodder at
their own crib, have scattered themselves to other cribs and pastures, where
they might find sustenance, and several communions have been taken up on the
same reason that water being carn'd or stopped from this old channel, finds out
or makes other watercourse, and leaves the other channel dry, and the
generality of the people by their too easy patience under so great a famine
have given too sad an argument, how easily they would part with all Religion,
that have so carelessly suffered the loss of so great a part thereof, as this
Ordinance is.

I know that we shall like Joseph's brethren be ready to transfer the fault on
others, no man will own it, and yet happily we are all guilty, it but in this,
that the Apostle said to the Corinthians in another case, 1 Cor. 5. 2. And ye
are puffed up, and have not rather mourned; For had not pride and envy,
discontent and security prevailed over us, we might have mourned and lamented
after, or over this loss or eclypse, and thereby have manifested not only a
good disposition of heart in feeling the want of Ordinances, but a very good
sign that God would restore it, and a good part of preparation in our selves to
the due and orderly receiving of it; the child is either very sullen or sick
that cries not for his bread.


If we look upon the reason or occasions of that great eclypse which has
befallen this Ordinance for so long a time, and in so many places of this Land,
we might be long upon so unpleasing a subject, but I shall but touch, and so
away.

1. As I look upon God without whose hand this could not come to pass. I
acknowledge that when he brings a man, or a Church into an incapacity of
Sacraments, as Israel in the wilderness, or as in that case then, that a man
was unclean by reason of a dead, body, or in a journey far off, Numb. 9. 10.
and such, like cases now; There is a relaxation of this command for the time,
and either necessity or, duty may dispense with our forbearance; And I further
say, That God is just in punishing us with this loss or stroke for our abuse
and contempt of this holy Ordinance in former times, by shutting out those that
were fit to be admitted, merely upon a ceremonious inconformity, and compelling
in upon penalty, that by this test they might find out Recusant Papists, such
as were contrary to their own rules, sottishly ignorant, notoriously wicked;
and therefore I conceive this storm may be upon us, and this breach in this
Ordinance; for the Lord tells Israel, that when in good intention they sought to
bring up the Ark of God, and laid it on a Cart, which should have been carried
on the shoulders of the Levites, he made a breach upon them, for that they
sought him not after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. For God is severely holy
in exacting of us the due order of his Ordinances, as we may see in Nadab and
Ab^hu, and in that great rule, Numb. 10. 3. I will be sanctified in them that
come nigh me: When we take hold of misshapen Ordinances put out of form by
us, we take a knise by the edge, and not the haft, we cut our fingers.

2. As for them of the Separation, whose advantage it was, and of some of them
the design to have us broken, that they might thrive as the people on the
Seacoast do by the wrack; They (I say) while some were laboring, and all were
waiting for to have Gods order stamped by civil Authority, not to give esteem
or value to that which is of God, but to make it more current with us; As the
stamp makes not the gold more precious, but more current in common use; While I
say some were endeavoring this, or happily some of you will say, While men slept
the envious man sowed his tares, and took his opportunity of that long
vacation, as Israel did of Moses his absence in the Mount, and they planted
their battery here upon this Sacrament, and cried down promiscuous Communions
with all their might, laying a good foundation, That only visible Saints are
fit Communicants, which is true as to the Churches Admission; That real Saints
only are worthy Communicants, which is true too, as to the inward grace or
benefit, but then, as always in such cases it is the superstructure was hay
and stubble; That Saints are only such as are of their making and judging; And,
That they that are of their opinion or party, though vicious in life and empty
of true grace, are Saints; and thence come the several Communions and divisions
molded up together into several bodies, for and by interests, passions and
worldly ends, which I speak not of all, for some godly souls might be carried
away to enjoy this Sacrament in a Communion more pleasing to them, as Aaron was
in the business of the golden Calf, and others were mightily taken with it,
who hardly passing for honest men at home in their own Churches, were presently
canonized ^or Saints, All the Congregation are Saints, every one of them, says
Corah, Numb. 16. 3.

3. When I look upon the standing Ministers, who should dispense the Sacrament,
I must plead this for them, that while it is their intention and practice to
make the door of this Sacrament no wider, no narrower than Christ has made it,
they cannot be condemned. It may be so wide, as to let in the uncircumcised to
the Passover, and bring Greeks into the Temple, as they said of Paul. It may
be so narrow, as to shut out fit and worthy Communicants for circumstances, for
mere ceremonies, as in former times; There is great difference between Christ's
real members and guests at this Table, and as I may say the visible Churches
members or guests; If he be a visible Professor of faith unshipwrackt, of
capacity to discern the Lords body, of life without scandal, he is a guest of
the Church, and yet not happily a true member of Christ, but a Jew outwardly in
letter, a Simon Magus, a Judas, an hypocrite; We are not Domini, but
Dispensatores, Lords of the Sacrament we are not, Stewards we may be, but the
Steward cannot invite to his Masters Table, whom the Master will not have his
guest, nor shut out any whom the Master has invited; The Priests that were
partial in the Law, did God make base and contemptible before the people, Mal.
2. 9. and their partiality was in admitting the blind, lame and blemished
Sacrifices of the rich, or of their friends: Such partiality will embase the
Ministers of Christ, and the Lord taxes the Prophetesses for like partiality,
Ezekiel. 13. 19. For handfuls of barley, and pieces of bread, they slay the souls
that should not die; they save the souls alive that should not live; These are
the two extremes, which as applied to our purpose is to shut the door against
them that should come in, and open the door to them that should not enter,
which if any do for handfuls of barley etc. for partial respects and carnal
ends, their sin is great.

4. If we look on the generality of people in this Land, they are not prepared,
and which is worse, they will not be. How many are bruits for their knowledge,
and beasts for their lives? The only way to bring them and the Sacrament
together, is either to stoop the Ordinance to them, and being so set on tilt, I
fear it will run dregs, or to elevate and lift them up to the Ordinance, and
that is the only way to be attempted; God grant success. When the ignorant,
superstitious, profane are weeded out, the Garden will hardly look green;
These are they that hold up old corruptions; Religion is nothing with them but
an ancient custom, or tradition received from father to son, The high places
were not taken away, for as yet the people had not prepared their heart to the
God of their Fathers, 2. Chron. 20. 33. For the frowardness of those places
where security, senslesnesse of spiritual things, opposition, is predominant,
this Rule would be laid, That there is no reason to deny those that are godly
the liberty of performance of this duty, or enjoyment of this benefit; Why are
they starved, because others will not, or ought not to eat? Did the Church that
lived amongst Jews or Heathens always want this Sacrament? They were sometimes
disturbed and persecuted, when the Civil Magistrate turned the edge of the Axe
toward them; but they lost not the Ordinance. Why but we have no rule
established by Civil Authority, or rather no Government: Nor had the Primitive
Church for 300 years, when the vigor of Discipline was strongest; How was
their Discipline of force, Per pacta conventu, by consent, whereby all
Discipline is valid. He that will be of our body, must submit to the Laws and
Rules of that Corporation he is free of, whether to be enfranchised or
disfranchised: What if wicked men break in and abuse our Sacrament? what if
Heathens had so done in the Primitive Church? If they eat our bread, it is no
Sacrament to them. If extreme violence be used or feared, we have the
protection of the Magistrate, or as the first Christians, we have our houses to
break the Lords bread in.


Quest. If the command be so high, the memorial so sweet, the benefit so
great, What may be done that there may be no obstruction between my soul and
this duty, this remembrance, this benefit?

Ans. I Will set my self amongst you, and be as the lowest of the people, and this
should be my rule, I would abate and submit, and strip my self of all carnal
respects, pride, stomach-envy discontent, scorn, etc. rather than deprive my
self of this benefit, or hinder my self from coming to meet my Lord Christ: It
should be point of conscience that should hinder me, or nothing. And now on the
other side, I Will set my self in place of a Minister or Church Officer, and my
rule is this, I will abate and strip my self of all pride, interest, enmity
contempt of my neighbor, partiality, base and carnal respects, rather than
keep my self from giving it to you, and would bring it to a point of conscience
only, that shall forbid me or nothing; when it is at a point of conscience,
then both I and you must examine whether our consciences be not bound by
error, that which binds you may loosen me, that which binds me may loosen you;
if we inform one another, and if error be found, I will cut the bond and set
my self at liberty, to receive or give the Lords Supper: and I am consident
that if carnal thoughts, reasons and respects were cut off on all sides,
thousands would be reduced that stand off, both from their duty and from their
benefit: It was the case of many of pre^ious memory, that liked not the
Ceremonies, yet submitted to those inconveniences, rather than lose that
benefit which by their submission to them might be gained.

4.
Do this; and upon wha^ terms he runs the loss of such a benefit, as to keep a
memorial of Christ: It Is a kind of Thanksgiving to Christ, to commemorate his
death and sufferings for us. As there is an exhibition of Christ and his grace
to a faithful receiver, so the benefit should draw us to the use of this
Ordinance. As it is a command, a dying command of Christ, Do this in
remembrance of me, so the duty or conscience of duty should impell and move us.
The two Sacraments of old were both of them back with cutting off in case of
neglect, Genesis 19. 14. Numb. 9. 18. The positive worship of God in Sacraments,
is not easily, either misperformed or neglected. You w^^^y, God affrighted his
people of old unto his Sacraments, but now we fright you from them: Far be it
from us, we affright you into preparation, not from the Sacrament, as Joshua
did the people, Josh. 24. 19. Ye cannot serve, the Lord, for he is a holy God,
he will not forgive your sin: it was a quickening speech, not a discouraging:
we would not have you run on the point of this Ordinance. Why, but if it be a
command, how can we be debarred? If Christ say, Do this, who can say, Do not
this? I have answered this already. The command here is not an outward
commandment, as I may say, but an inward, not given to all the world, but to
Christ's Disciples, to certain qualified persons, as the command of the
Passover was limited to the circumcised and to the clean, and this also to a
man that examines himself, and so let him eat of this bread, etc. It Is a duty
and a privilege both, of all outward Ordinances the inmost.

. 5.
Go and sin no more: but he that takes heart to sin because Christ died, seems
neither to see his own sin nor death, in the death of Christ.


viz. in the remembrance of Christ, the survey of whom is enriched with
excellent fruit of renewing our repentance, quickening our faith elevating our
affections; and the impression made upon us by this lively spectacle of a dying
Savior, cannot but work as the bloody Robes of Caesar did upon the people,
when they were hanged out in sight by Marc. Anthony; and therefore it is
suitable to the end of this Sacrament, to be exercising our memories, minds
and affections in the perusal of Christ Jesus. I know that some Churches use
to sing a Psalm, while the action is performing, whom I condemn not, as a means
to keep the heart intent, and in spiritual frame or fixedness, but should
rather choose a silent meditation and employment of the mind in the remembrance
of Christ, for that is more suitable to the end of this Ordinance, and to
Christ's example and institution, who according to the custom of the Jews filled
the time of action with commemoration, and closed it with a Hymn: and if we may
give credit to the Jewish Writers, and others out of them, as Hugo Broughton
shows in his Commentaries on Daniel, the Psalms of the Hallel or Hymn sung by
the Jews, was the 113, 114, and so onward; and it is very probable that Christ
and the Apostles did not herein vary, for they sung a Hymn at the close, as
Matthew. 26. 30. which example I need not stand to improve against the
Anti-psalmists of this age.

There are several pertinent meditations that may fully take up the time of
the action with great advantage and benefit to our souls, as namely,

1. The dreadfulness of Gods justice which with a terrible stroke did smite the
great Shepherd for our sins, the least dram of it would have sunk us to all
eternity.

2. The cursed nature of sin that so exasperates the holy God, and makes such
a breach between God and the creature, as can never be made up but by the
broken body of the Lord of Glory.

3. What it cost to redeem a soul, a mass of gold as big as the whole earth,
not valuable with one drop of this blood.

4. What an infinite love broke forth, that God, rather than let our souls be
lost, would send his eternal Son, and make him sin for us.

5. What a great work it is to reconcile a sinner to his God, all names of men
and Angels are nothing to it, all their sufferings would not pay a penny of
this debt, which is not dissolved by any blood but of the Lord of Glory.

6. That God would not only pardon sin, by giving forth a general pardon, as a
King pardons rebels; but so pardon, as might even melt the hardest heart, and
for ever humble, and silence, and satisfy it by the love of God, and the
sufficiency of that Sacrifice, whose virtue extends to thousands, and lasts
always.

7. That the gracious Covenant of God made with all that beleeeve in Christ, is
sealed and ratified with such blood, as there needs no doubt of the validity of
the Covenant, though one man bad as many sins on him as all the world.

8. That Gods way of saving man by a Mediator, the death of a Mediator, does
oblige man to be the than krullest creature in the world: Angels that sinned
not, have need of no Mediator; Angels that sinned have none; man that sinned,
and therefore needs one, has one given to him, The man Christ Jesus.

9. That as God gave Christ for you, so he gives him to you, that he that was
your Sacrifice offered up to God, might in this Sacrament be offered unto you,
as meat and drink, as spiritual repast, that as we live by Christ, so we may
live upon him, being entertained as confederates to feast with God upon the
Sacrifice offered up unto him. It is a fruitful field of Meditation, through
which ye may walk the time of celebration, and then breathe out your
Meditations in a Song of praise, as the close and music of this heavenly
Feast: Concerning which Hymn, wherewith the Jews did usually close the coenam
apolyticam, or dimissory Supper, calling it the Hallel, from the first word of
it Hallelujah, you may consult not only the Jewish Writers, but our Learned
men, Cameron Myroth in Matthew. 16. 30. Drusius in Matthew. 26. ^^. Hugo Broughton
in Dan. page 46. beside Paulus Burgensis, Gerard Harm. Fol. 178. col. 3. who do
also point out to us the 113. and 114. Psalms, as that Hymn; for though some
others do rather conceive it a new Hymn composed by our Savior, Grotius in
Matthew. 26.
and the 17 Chapter of St John to be it, we find no reason to go with them in
that opinion, both because our Savior did not easily vary from the Rite or
Custom received, nor could the Disciples have sung with him in consort, except
we imagine such a praelection of it to them, as is used by us now a days,
which will not be proved.

CHAP. XIII. How much it concerns Ministers to Teach, and all to Learn the
true meaning of this Ordinance.
1 COR. 11. 26, 27. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
do show the death of the Lord until he come. Wherefore whosoever does eat this
bread and drink this cup of the Lord, etc.
When this Ordinance of the Supper is suitable to the Institution, and the
Communicant is suitable to the Ordinance, then all is right. Of the former I
have acquitted my self, by setting forth the nature, use, end of this
Sacrament, according to our Lords Institution, recited by the Evangelists, and
by St Paul in this place.

. 1.
Now I am to proceed unto the later, which is to render the Communicant
suitable to the Ordinance, of which our Savior did not in the Institution
directly speak, but the Apostle in this place speaks more fully and directly
unto, than in any other place is found, the abuses and distempers of the
Corinthians leading him most properly to it; and though in Popish Churches the
grand error and abuse lies in the unsutableness of their Mass to the
Institution, yet in Reformed Churches, who endeavor to imitate the pattern in
the Mount, the common sin lies in the unsutableness of the Communicant to the
Ordinance; and so the point of worship stands between us; and the Papists, much
alike as it stood between the Samaritans and the Jews of old, The Samaritans
used a false worship, Ye worship ye know not what, Joh. 4. 22. The Jews had a
true worship, but were carnal, and for the most part formal worshippers. The
Feast is prepared, dressed, and ordered according to the Institution of Christ:
Now the guests are to be surveyed and tried, whether they come worthily or
unworthily, by the test or ticket of the Apostles Doctrine following to the end
of the Chapter; of which I shall say this in general.

1. That the Apostles Doctrine in this place is properly calculated for the
rectifying the abuses and unworthiness of the Corinthians, as ye may see at the
33, 34, verses, but so also most other Scriptures occasionally written, are of
general use, their latitude is greater than their particular direction.

2. That the Apostle spends the most of his Doctrine upon eating and drinking
unworthily, setting home the sin and danger of it, for, the occasion, viz. the
sin of the Corinthians, required it; and yet doubtless the point of
worthiness, should in order of nature be first stated, before unworthiness can
be understood, for how should I know sin, except first I knew a law of duty;
how a crooked line, except I know what is straight: and therefore to attent
consideration, the Apostle will be found to begin there, as I shall show you
afterward.

3. That the Apostle in setting home the sin and danger of eating and
drinking unworthily, speaks thunder and lightning in very pertinent, but yet
new and unusual phrases, which are (...), have no brother in any other part of
Scripture, as guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, eating and drinking
judgment or damnation, etc. full of terror, and fit for compunction. These of
the 26 verse are the words of St Paul, who having recited what Christ did and
said at the first celebration and institution of this Sacrament, goes about to
set his Corinthian communicants to right, teaching them and us, what is the
meaning of this Ordinance, and what the (...), or main business of a
communicant is, that so he may eat and drink worthily, viz. To show forth the
Lords death; this he collects from the institution, this he inculcates upon the
communicant, as the great business which he is to do, that he may be suitable
to the Ordinance.

The words have no difficulty, but what may best be opened in every point as it
comes to hand: The first Point shall be from the connection or whole words:

. 2.
People have need to be taught what the meaning of this Ordinance is, and what
is the main business of the Communicant. The Apostle has set forth this
Sacrament, and now teaches them what is the meaning or great business intended
in it. For as often as, etc. Outward Ordinances consisting of visible matter,
as most of the Jewish Ordinances did, and our Sacraments do, do ordinarily
terminate and bound the eye of the ignorant, that cannot, and of the Christian
outwardly, that does not look within the rind or shell of them: The time is
not lost that is bestowed either by us in the anatomy and opening, or by you in
learning and spelling out the mind and meaning of an Ordinance of God. When
your children, Exodus 12. 26. shall say unto you, What mean you by this service?
ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, etc. And in another
instance, When your children shall say, What mean you by these stones? ye shall
answer, Josh. 4. 6. The waters of Jordan were cut off, etc. This was the veil
that covered the eye of the Jews, they had Sacrifices, Washings, manifold
Rites, but were not able to spell and put together, they generally little
dreamd of the meaning of them, but were as the Apostle calls them, Jews
outwardly and in the letter; for it pleased God in the times of that
dispensation, to give his people the kernel, but enclosed in a hard shell; to
give them a pillar of fire, but in a cloud; to hide the light in a dark
lantern, to convey the truth in shadows. Now that the obscurity is taken off
the Ordinances, there remains an ignorance upon our hearts, and many of us know
as little the meaning of our Sacraments, as the Jews did of theirs; there is
scarce any of our ignorant, superstitious, profane persons, but they think
there is some holiness in this Sacrament, and therefore they put on a posture
of some reverence for the time, but the particular use of it, or the spiritual
importance they know not, and therefore rest in the opus operatum, and receive
the Sacrament as a medicinal potion naturally working, or worship that which
should be made use of by faith, for the nourishment of the soul.

. 3.
The Use of this point may be for Instruction of both Minister and people.

First, The Minister is hereby taught, That it is not only his duty to give the
Sacrament, but also to teach the Sacrament; he gives the outward Elements, he
teaches the inward meaning of them; he gives the bone, and shows the marrow
that is in it; otherwise you take the Sacrament by rote, and he gives you
integram nucem, as Bernard says, a whose nut, to a child that cannot crack it,
and so partakes in that sin and guilt being dumb, which you contract being
blind. Our Savior when he gave the Bread and the Cup, said also, This is my
Body, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, and so taught the meaning. St.
Paul when he had recited the Institution, shows the mind of it, As often as ye
eat, ye show the Lords death. And you are to be taught what is Gods meaning,
and what is the meaning of your own actions; Gods meaning is to make a
representation of Christ's death and sufferings, by the breaking of the bread,
and to afford you the communion of his Body and Blood, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The
meaning of your actions is to make commemoration of Christ, and to show forth
his death: Gods meaning is to dress out Christ in best manner and fittest for a
sinner, Christ broken, Christ bleeding; and the meaning of your eating and
drinking, is to feed sorrowfully and sweetly upon Christ, so prepared and
presented to you, for your repast and comfort. But now, if the same cup taken
with such ingredients, would be deadly poison, with such a lively Cordial,
would you not expect that the Physician should teach you to make it Cordial,
so the Lords Supper worthily received, is the most sovereign Cordial: But some
again may eat and drink damnation to themselves, Would you not expect that the
Minister, if he have either conscience of his duty, or respect to your souls,
should teach you to avoid the danger and obtain the benefit? If you do not, yet
God looks for it at our hands, Ezekiel. 44. 23. And they (the Priests) shall teach
my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause men to
discern between the unclean and clean; for else you may eat and drink damnation
to us, as well as to your selves.

. 4.
Secondly, The people are taught, To know the meaning of the Sacrament, before
they take it: That Is a terrible expression, ver. 29. He eats and drinks
damnation to himself not discerning the Lords Body, that is, not knowing the
meaning, the nature, use and end of the Ordinance, which to understand is a
good part of preparation, and without it, there can be no right or true
preparation. And therefore all you that intend to be Supper-communicants,
attend: The first lesson which you must learn, the first question to be
answered is, What is the true meaning of this Ordinance? what is the main
business of it? for it is supposed in those words, Exodus 12. 26. When your
children shall say to you, What mean you by this service, (i. Passover,) that
the father should be able to teach his child, as it is there directed, and
that the child should, as his first lesson be taught what is meant, To know
what the meaning of this Ordinance is.

1. It is a proper and excellent antidote or remedy of such abuses and
miscarriages as creep in at the door, either of ignorance, superstition, or
profaneness; and the Apostle signifies so much here, by applying this
corrective to those distempers which then reigned in the Church of Corinth, as
if he had said, Could you come and eat and drink so rudely, proudly,
confusedly, irreverently, unworthily, if ye did consider but what ye ought to
do? that is, exercise communion with Christ, keep a commemoration of him, show
forth his death.

2. This will direct all your preparations to the true end, your prayers,
meditations, self-examination, will be answerable and suitable to the
Ordinance. Here is not the eating of a piece of bread, nor the drinking of a
cup of wine in a public company of sober men and of my betters (which yet is
enough to the putting on my better clothes, and framing my self to a grave
composure) but here I am to meet my Lord Christ, and to receive him as my
Savior, I am to have the Covenant of mercy sealed to me in his blood; I am to
make a thankful memorial of Christ, and to profess my embracement and
adherence to his death, as my only comfort; therefore be thou awakened, O my
faith, my godly sorrow, my spiritual appetite, my thankfulness, that I may go
out to Christ, and he come in to me.

3. This takes off all slighting and undervaluing of this Ordinance, which
appears to an outward and carnal eye, No better bread or wine than I can have
at home, for in this plain case is a rich Jewel, this bread is the body, this
wine is the Blood of the Lord of Glory; and therefore I must not value the seal
by the worth of the wax, which is not worth a penny, but by the pardon, or the
inheritance, which passes, and is conveyed by it.

4. This keeps me from running blindfold into the sin of guiltiness of the Body
and Blood of the Lord, and so into condemnation, for as the same Signet or Seal
of a Prince, does to one seal a pardon, to another an execution; so this very
Sacrament is to a Believer a seal of pardon, to another, as it were, the seal
of his condemnation.

5. Lastly, The preparation so much spoken of, and the self-examination
required by the Apostle, cannot be imagined to refer to the eating of bread
and drinking wine, but to the inward thing of the Sacrament: it necessarily
follows that those inward graces that enable us to have communion with Christ,
and make commemoration of him, can never be known or sought, except we know the
meaning of this Sacrament, for it is that which gives the Law and Rule of all
our preparations. And so I have shown you the reasons why we should labor to
understand the language of this Ordinance.

So much of this general Point, the second Point shall be taken from those
words, Ye show the Lords death, or show ye, for the word might be construed
imparatively, but that the particle [ For] would not then so well consist.

CHAP. XIV. The great business that lies upon the Communicant, as often as he
eats this Bread and drinks this Cup, is to show the Lords Death.


. 1.
First, It is the Lords death which in this Sacrament is shown forth: The two
standing Sacraments of the Jewish Church, Circumcision and the Passover, did
both appear in blood. The two standing Sacraments of the Gospel, do also
refer to death, We are buried with him by Baptism, into death, Romans 6. 4. and
in the Supper, we show the Lords death. As of all deliverances and benefits
vouchsafed to Israel of old, God would have the Passeover-deliverance
celebrated by a constant memorial in all generations; so of all that Christ
does for us, it is his death that must be shown forth in all generations of the
Church, till he come again: and therefore this Ordinance is speculum crucifixi,
as Calvin says; and In 1 Cor. 11.
the memorial, not so much of Christ's life or resurrection, De satisfact. cap.
1.
says Grotius, as of his death. This death has no second in all the world,
for it was the death of the Son of God, the death of the Lamb of God.

1. Of the Son of God, the Lord of Glory, whose highness and excellency gave
price and value to his death. Had he not been man he could not have suffered:
Had he not been the Son of God, God blessed for ever, he could not have
satisfied and conquered.

2. Of the Lamb of God, and therefore his death was a Sacrifice, and that is
more than a Martyrdom; for though a Martyr may be said to seal with his blood
that truth he dies upon, yet no blood can seal the Covenant but this of Christ,
no death can ratify the Testament but the Testators death: Had the death been
the death of the Lord, a most excellent person, and not also the death of a
Lamb for Sacrifice, to make atonement, it had wanted one of his properties,
but it was both. As it was the death of the Lord of Glory, the Son of God, so
it gave us the most illustrious testimony and example of the love of God, as
ever was or could be, and that the Scripture often points unto. As it was the
death of the Lamb of God, so it was a Sacrifice death, wherein he was made
sin for us, and bore our sins in his Body. As it was the Joh. 11. 13. Romans
5. Gal. 2. 20.
death both of the Son of God, and the Lamb of God, so it reconciled us
sinners unto God, and meritoriously redeemed and ransomed us from our bondage
to the curse and wrath of God, the only ground and foundation of our hope,
peace and comfort.

. 2.
Secondly, It is the business of the Communicant to show forth this death of
the Lord: The Ordinance it self is full of death, what other language does
bread broken, and the blood severed from the body, speak but a dying Christ: As
the Ordinance, so the Communicant does by eating and drinking, in fact declare
and annunciate his profession of adherence to, and embracement of the death of
Christ, we solemnly and publicly avow, both to God and men, that we stick
unto, and abide by the death of the Lord, for remission of sin, and
reconciliation of our persons to God; and it is a solemn part of Gods positive
worship, to show forth the death of Christ our Lord, not by a mere historical
relation, but a practical and public profession of our faith, and acceptance
thereof, which though at all times we may remember, yet God would have a solemn
Ordinance in his Gospel-Churches, for the commemoration and showing of it
forth, which Ordinance is this of the Supper. I know men are witty to elude
Ordinances, and to flatter themselves with private devotions and meditations,
but when God has set up an Ordinance on purpose, for the public and solemn
showing of the Lords death; let them consider it, that are not only careless of
the benefit of it, but fail of their duty, by not presenting themselves at this
solemn showing of the Lords death: but how can it be expected that they that
show not the life of Christ by a godly conversation, should care to show forth
his death by public profession; or rather, how can it be construed that they
do it out of conscience of duty, and not out of mere superstition, expecting
that from the Sacrament, which the Papist expects from his auricular
confession, that is, to quit the old score, that he may more freely begin upon
a new.

But I may not forget that which is very learnedly observed, that the Apostle
using the word (...), which frequently is used for publishing and preaching
Schiud. in loc. Haggada.
the Gospel, does allude to the Haggada, as it was called by the Jewish custom
at the Passover, and that was a set and solemn declaration or annunciation of
the Lords passing over the houses sprinkled with blood, of their slavery and
hard bondage in Egypt, and their deliverance thence, teaching us, in this our
Gospel-Passeover, to show forth our hard bondage under sin, and the Lords
justice passing over all the souls sprinkled with this blood, and thereby
delivering us from our spiritual Egypt.

. 3.
hoc agere, to be intent upon, and taken up with this employment, Show ye forth
the Lords death, this must be your actual exercise at the time of eating and
drinking, the death of Christ must fill your eyes, your ears, your lips, your
thoughts: If any of you could see Christ dying, the sight would wholly take you
up; and you come as near to see him dying; as an Ordinance can bring you, in a
representation: If any where, that Psalm. 2. 11. takes place here, Rejoice with
trembling, Tremble, for you see the weight of sin upon the Lord Christ, and
the severity and wrathful indignation of God against sin, both those
terrors cannot be seen in a clearer glass, than the death of the Lord: Rejoice
for the love that delivers up Christ is unparalled, and the death of the Lord
is succedaneous, a Sacrifice death, the Sacrifice bears the sin, and takes it
off you; there is a nunc dimitiis for all you that take Christ in your arms, I
would not be thinking of the joys of heaven, the second coming of Christ,
absolutely and abstractly considered, but showing forth his death: As in
prayer, good thoughts, if impertinent, are distractions, and to be whipped for
vagrants, so here, If my heart present to me the anger and terrible wrath of a
just and holy God, I show the Lords death; If the Law take me by the throat,
and say, Pay that thou owe, I show the Lords death; If conscience ask me what
I have to show for pardon of sin, and peace with God, I show the Lords death.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, Its Christ that died.

CHAP. XV. The Lords Supper is an iterable Ordinance.
THe third Point is taken up from the words (...), For as often as ye eat this
bread, etc.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an iterable Ordinance, which is to be
repeated: Our Savior gives a hint of this in those words, This do for a
remembrance of me, and the Apostle from him, For as often, etc. The word often,
is sometimes opposed to seldom, and sometimes to once, as Heb. 9. 25, 26. Nor
yet that he should offer himself often, as the High priest enters into the
holy place every year: For then he must have often suffered since the
foundation of the world.

The Sacrifice of Christ, or the offering of him up, was but once, Heb. 9. 26.
The Sacrament of his body and blood is often as a memorial of that Sacrifice,
and the comparison used in that place, is this; As man dies but once, so Christ
also: As in the Sacraments of the Jews, the first of them Circumcision, was but
once, nor indeed could be, but the Passover often, once every year; and Christ
was but once circumcised, but kept the Passover often: So in the Sacraments of
the New Testament, Baptism is but once, Christ was but once baptized, but the
Supper often, which though Christ celebrated but once, yet he gave order for
the repetition of it, I will not now take up the discussion, why Baptism but
once, the Supper often, the Scripture gives us no hint for the repetition of
the one, but it does for the other, and the old saying is plausible, Semel
nascimur, saepius pascimur, we are but once born, but we are often nourisht.
God did more punctually and precisely under the Law prescribe the times of
their Sacraments, the eighth day for circumcision, such a day of such a month
yearly for the Passover, as he also did the times and place, and other
circumstances of his worship, for the people were more servile then, and the
worship more outward, but under the Gospel circumstances are at more liberty,
and spiritualnesse more called for, and therefore in this Sacrament for
instance, we have nothing, for how often, but we have, for how worthily, as a
learned man observes, and therefore under correction it was not so right,
M^^cul. de coe^^. Lib 4. distinct. 13. Qu. 5.
that when as Durand says, The primitive devotion of communicating every day,
was grown so cool, that it came to be commanded on the three great festivals,
whereof Easter was by Innocent the first made Anno 1200.
of the Quorum: (I might instance nearer home) enjoining all to it at that
time; For of this Chrysostom had complained long before that at those times the
people either of custom, or by Law crowded in (...), who as well, (...), O the
custom, says he, O the partiality of men. The truth is, I find, that in
times of persecution threatening Christians either to arm themselves, or in fear
of being scattered and dispersed, took every occasion to celebrate the Supper,
and Justin Martyr signifies, that their solemn meetings on the Lords days were
accompanied with this feast, and that the Question, how often is propounded in
Austine and Chrysostom, and Austin persuades and exhorts every Lord's Day,
Austin. Eccles. Dogm. cap. 53. Chrysostom. hom. 13. h^b. Gerard. Harm. cap. 171.
if the heart be prepared, and Chrysostom says, that a pure conscience may
come as often as it will, but for a wicked man (...), once is too often; and to
conclude, if the necessity of our infirmities, the great benefit, the honor of
this memorial may be heard to speak, we shall come to this Rule, That frequency
beget not a customary formality or fastidious satiety, as Manna did, nor
seldomnesse beget forgetfulness, or superstitiousnesse extraordinarinesse, and
under this caution I leave the determination of the times unto the Church.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Continuance of this and other Gospel Ordinances in the
Church.
THe fourth point arises from the last words, Until he come, and it is this,
This Ordinance, and so all Gospel Ordinances are to continue in force in the
Churches, until Christ come, and this point cleaves into two parts.

. 1.
First, The Lord Christ will come again, he is called (...), Heb. 10. 37. He
that shall come, he shall appear the second time, Heb. 9. 28. as in the old
Church of Israel, there was a glorious Temple, then a captivity that followed;
after the captivity a second Temple, and then Christ came; So in
Gospel-Churches, there was first a glorious Virgin primitive Church, then
followed a captivity under Antichrist, and that captivity shall be followed
with a second Temple, a Reformed Church, and then Christ shall come again; but
as the Church of God waited near four thousand years from the first promise of
Christ made to Adam, to his first coming, so shall the Church of the Gospel
wait many years from that promise of Christ's second coming, Act. 1. 11. until
it be; The first Christians did not imagine so long Revolution of time, until
Christ's second coming, as we have seen sixteen hundred, and how many yet are to
run out we know not; The Apostle checks it in the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
2. who began to think that the day of Christ was at hand, and the Christians in
Justins time, who were most of them of the millenary opinion ((...), says he)
did not think it should be so long ere the thousand years should commence; and
in Tertullians time, they used in their public prayers to pray pro mora finis,
for delay of the end in respect of Antichrists tyranny, but the Jews are the
example of the efficacy of error, that have overshot already that which is
Christ's first coming by above sixteen hundred years; and are yet gazing; we
rest in this, there is a fullness of time for Christ's first, and so for his
second coming, and then he will come, our hope, our comfort, our salvation, do
all lie upon it, and therefore we look for it.

Secondly, This Ordinance of the Supper is to continue till Christ come; the
meaning is not, That men shall not deface and dishonor it in some places, but
that it shall continue in force, though not in use: God will not alter or
discharge it, and the like, for there is the like reason may be said of other
standing Ordinances of worship. The Jewish Passover was an Ordinance for ever,
but that ever had an end when Christ came; and the Ordinances of that Church,
though they might be defaced and destroyed for a time, yet were in force till
Christ's first coming, and so the Gospel-Sacraments, Worship, Ordinances, and
(may it please you) Ministry shall be in force, and God grant in use, for the
time of their Ever, and that is Christ's second coming. The legal Sacrifices and
Ordinances were (as the Apostle expounds Heb. 12. 27.
the Prophet) to be shaken down and removed by the bringing in of a better
Covenant, and other Ordinances by Christ Jesus, but the Ordinances of the
Gospel cannot be shaken, are never to be removed by any other Ordinance, or any
new Church, but only to cease and expire with the worlds end. The Scripture
closes and shuts it self up with this, Come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 20.

. 3.
The Use of this Point may be,

1. To confirm us in the use and esteem of the Ordinances of Christ, which have
no other period then the world, wiser we cannot be than he that thought them
necessary, but we may be prouder than we should by thinking our selves in a
state of perfection and not infirmity, which Christ has provided for, by his
Ordinances; of the Sacrament he says, Till I come; Of the Gospel Ministry, he
says, I am with you to the worlds end; The devil is foolishly subtle now
adays under a pretense of immediate spirit, crying down Ordinances, and the
Gospel Spirit must put down Gospel Ordinances, what Christ set up, the Spirit
must demolish, and it is a Spirit indeed, but a perverse one, as you may see by
the same argument cast in another mould; The water only refreshes and quenches
thirst, therefore cut off all the cocks and pipes, you know my meaning.

. 4.
2. This point may stop the mouth of those degenerate Apostates, the shame of
Christianity, that mock at the common principles and fundamentals of our faith,
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 4. They are Infidels in
their faith, that they may be Epicures in life; We have not waited half so long
for his second coming, as the old believers did for his first; God has
somewhat to do in the world, besides the saving of us; Time is not so long, if
it be measured by his span, as by ours, a thousand years are as one day, and
then what shall we say to the real Presentialists? who will have Christ to come
into every Sacrament, and yet it is said, Till he come, as if he were not
personally there, at present? The Scripture says nothing of Christ's corporal
invisible presence on earth, takes notice of a first coming and a second, but
no more; and yet lastly, What shall we say to those that are called Seekers,
and to the Sans-Ordinance men, and the Supra ordinance men, that will be
without and are above Ordinances? I say no more then this, Christ is not yet
come the second time, and as it was his first coming that set them up: So it is
his second only that shall take them down; Let not pride infatuate you, for as
it is a miserable case when the best plea or excuse for a man is to say, he was
drunk, he was mad; so it is but a sorry excuse for blasphemy, to say, It is his
conscience; let the Ordinances of Christ have his own date, viz. till he come.

. 5.
This Bread and this Cup, where we find it called Bread still after
Consecration in confutation of Popish Transubstantiation, and both Bread and
Cup allowed to the Communicants; a shame to Popish Sacrilege, that has robbed
the Sacrament of one of them; but enough was said of both these before, when I
handled the words of Institution.

CHAP. XVII. Of worthy and unworthy Receiving of the Lords Supper.
1 COR. 11. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
THis verse has a mark in it is forehead (the word (...), Wherefore) whereby
at first sight it looks like an inference or collection from that which went
before, where the Apostle having laid down the Institution of this Sacrament in
the use thereof, gathers from thence, That whosoever eats this bread, etc.
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

. 1.
The sin of receiving unworthily is largely insisted on in the following part
of this Chapter, where the aggravation of this sin is shown by the special
guilt that attends it, and that is a guiltiness of the Lords body, by the
particular cause of this guiltiness, Not discerning the Lords body, by the
judgment that follows upon it, damnation or punishment, by the way of
prevention of the sin, the guilt and judgment, and that is self-examination,
and selfjudging, self-examination for the prevention of the sin, self-judging
for prevention of the punishment inflicted by God.

So that for a particular sin properly incident to the abuse or miscarriage
of men in this Ordinance, there is very much said to show the nature and danger
of it, because the distempers reigning amongst the Corinthians, did herein show
themselves, which the Apostle studies to discover and to heal, and we by so ill
an occasion gain such ^ piece of Doctrine as is not so fully delivered on th^^
subject in any other place of Scripture, for the better guidance and steerage
to stand off from those rocks which the Corinthians fell foul upon.

. 2.
I must first explain the words [ Worthily and unworthily] He that knows one,
knows both; as he that knows a right line, knows a crooked; The right
interpretation of them is the hinge on which hangs the true understanding of
all that is to be said hereafter, and yet they have been cloudily and
confusedly sensed by many that expound by fancy, and at random, because they do
not first set down the right rule of exposition, and so are themselves, and
leave also their hearers in a mist.

We use to denominate the Communicant worthy or unworthy, not at all intending
any merit or meritorious condignity, for such a worthiness is the greatest
unworthiness, but a meetnesse and congruity of the action to the rule of the
action, and therefore the Apostle applies worthiness or unworthiness to the
manner of communicating, He that eats and drinks unworthily. In all
Ordinances, either preaching, prayer, Sacraments, the eye of God is much upon
the manner, how they are performed, which I might make my first point, but that
I will not shoot my arrow at so great a compass.

Worthiness is relative, and refers to the rule of the action, which here is
the institution, the Nature, Use and End of this Sacrament: for to eat and
drink worthily, is to do it answerably and suitably to the Ordinance, when the
Communicant has, and so exercises such graces, qualifications and deportment,
inward and outward, as this Sacrament does require, bespeak and call for; And
the contrary is unworthiness, when the manner of communicating, or the
Communicant is not suitable or answerable to the Ordinance, either because he
has not, or exercises not the qualifications, that the Sacrament requires in
a worthy receiver, or brings a contrary disposition to it, and this
interpretation is easy, natural and convincing; for the Apostle lays down the
institution first, and then infers what receiving unworthily is, as a strait
Rule discovers a crooked line by the incompliance of it to the Rule; and thus
the Scripture, which advances not the merit, but the meetnesse of actions and
persons, uses to speak, as Ephesians. 4. 1. Walk ((...),) worthily of your
calling, Phil. 1. 2^. ((...)* As becomes the Gospel, Romans 16. 2. Worthy of
Saints, or as it becomes worthy of the Lord, Col. 1. 10. that is, as becomes
people that are the Lords, Worthy of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1^. in all which places
it is required, that we walk or live answerable to such condition, calling or
relation, or engagement, and so to eat and drink worthily, is as it is meet and
answerable, as becomes such an Ordinance.

And if any should object, as well they may, Why the Apostle does not first
tell us, what it is, or how we may receive worthily, for the abuse is not known
but by the right use, the privation by the habit, the deviation by the rule,
the crooked line by the straight.

I answer, the Apostle insists upon the unworthy receiving, because that was
the case before him, but he did not forget himself, as if he had not shown what
it is to receive worthily; for though he name not the word, but as implied in
the word unworthily, yet he had enough declared the thing by his laying down
the Institution of this Sacrament, which is the rule of worthiness. It being
nothing else but the answerablenesse of the Communicant to the Ordinance, which
every man that once knows the Ordinance must also know, if he apply the rule
and his action together, and so I am confident you have the meaning of worthily
and unworthily.

. 3.
After the explication of the words. Let us form the point of Doctrine.

This Bread and this Cup of the Lord may be received worthily, and they may be
received unworthily. I mean de facto unworthily. If any doubt of the collection
of this point the very expression (...), Whosoever shall eat and drink
unworthily, implies the one, and plainly expresses the other part of the point.
The Communicant may come and eat suitably to the Ordinance or Institution, and
then he receives worthily, and he may come and eat unsuitably to the exigence
of the Ordinance, and then he receives unworthily: So that the point is an
undoubted truth, except any can demonstrate, that no Communicant can eat and
drink worthily, and then to what purpose is the Institution, but to bring
damnation or judgment on all that partake of it, but I wave the proof. The
point is clear in its own light; only let me acquaint you, that my intention
is to weave all I have to say into this one main point. For herein I will show
the qualifications of a worthy, and the defaults of an unworthy Communicant,
then the special guilt that aggravates the sin of unworthy receiving, He
shall be guilty of the body, etc. then the particular cause of unworthiness
assigned, and that is not discerning the Lords body; Then the fearful danger
of this sin, whereby a man is said to eat and drink judgment to himself,
then the way of prevention of this sin, that we fall not into it, Let a man
examine himself. Then the prevention of the judgment in case we fall into the
sin, If we would judge our selves, etc.


Quest. There may arise a Question thus, Worthily and unworthily are words that
belong to the manner of communicating, and cannot be applied to any but
Communicants, but is there not a third sort of persons, viz. non-Communicants,
such as may not come to this Table, or eat and drink here? And were it not
requisite to know whether there be any, and who be such, as well as to know who
comes worthily, who unworthily? This indeed is a Question the more material,
because it is in our days of great agitation, and therefore I intend to
dispatch it first, that I may have to deal only with Communicants worthy or
unworthy. And for answer to it, I first make and lay down this general Position.

That as it is said of some Havens, they are barred, Thesis. I.
so is this Ordinance of the Lords Supper a barred Ordinance, a several not a
common field, a recept for a select company, not a common Inn or Ordinary.
It Is a Table in this respect like yours, which is not spread for every one to
run unto, and sit down that will, but for your children, your guests, your
friends; or if you think I have spoken too low, It Is like the Table of a common
Hall, which is not yet common to all the world, but to such a Corporation or
Fraternity. And it may be said without hyperbole, that there is scarce a
Christian Church in the world this day, nor has been in any Age since Christ,
who have not enclosed, made several and impaled this Ordinance of the Supper:
And if I could but lead your eye into the Primitive Churches, you would wonder
at the fortifications they made about it, There you should see the Catech^meni
that were in the school of Catechism, learners of the Doctrine of Christianity,
admitted indeed to hear the Sermon, ( Tertullian calls them Audientes) but never
grumbling at the Ite missa est, Go you are dismissed: When the Fideles or
Communicants went to this service; And there you should see the Lapsi or
Poenitentes, Christians that had fallen into open and manifest scandals,
standing a long time upon the four stairs or degrees of public repentance,
weeping for admission, and bewailing their sin and suspension from the Lords
board, which rigor of Discipline, though full of sharpness and asperity, yet
the reverence of this Ordinance, the Heathens among whom they lived, that
watched for their haltings, and the great temptations to Idolatry and
Apostasy, by fear of persecutions and continual Alarms, may plead some excuse
of that severity: In short, though some have made the gate wider than others,
yet all have impaled the Ordinance, and taken it from the common; The Word
indeed preached or read lies open to all: the high ways and hedges may be
compelled in to fill up the place where it sounds, and Baptism may be
administered at the entrance, for imitation and listing of soldiers under
Christ's colors: but the Lords Supper ever was intra Cancellos, within the
mound, for it is the inmost Ordinance that we have, for Church Members,
Disciples, not lying open to the streets, but as an inner room within a room,
an Ordinance for fellowship of Saints and Christians, that are past the Font;
All have not right to it, and some that have had right, may for the time have
forfeited and lost their capacity.

This is my general position, which (as in the sequel will be clear to you) may
be proved by a threefold evidence:

1. By evidence of fact, the universal sense and consent of all Christian
Churches, and thereby it will appear that it is no new Doctrine.

2. By evidence of Scripture, by which it will appear to be no false Doctrine,
for it is past all doubt, that the Passover in the old Church was a barred
Ordinance, shut up from the uncircumcised and the unclean, and the Supper in
the New Testament is so too: In the 28 verse, Let a man examine himself, and
so; the word And so, is a limitation and a proviso, and contains in it,
otherwise not. When men have traversed the Point to the utmost, this little
word (...), and so, as it opens the door to such as are so qualified, so it is
a bar, and shuts it against them that are not: And it is Chrysostom his note
upon the man that came in without his wedding garment, Matthew. 22. 12. that the
King said not, (...), but (...), that is, he said not, Why did thou sit down
and eat? but, How came thou in hither?

3. By evidence of Reason; for those that have no right or no capacity, may not
communicate, nor those that having had a right or capacity, have lost it for
present by some grievous sin, and the censure of the Church, which I shall
pursue more particularly and distinctly: In the mean time, I thus conclude my
general Position; We have warrant and may call all men, Turks and Jews, unto
the Word of the Gospel: The Word calls them all to faith in Christ and
repentance: If they enter not into Covenant, the seals of the Covenant are not
for them: If they do enter Covenant, then the Sacraments or Seals follow, for
the Covenant does not follow the Seal, but the Seal the Covenant, I hope to
rational men this appears reason; to me it appears above contradiction.

So much for the general Position or Thesis. Now I will proceed to confirm it
particularly according to the three fold evidence.


The first is the evidence of Fact, the universal and concurrent sense and
consent of the Ancient Churches of Christ, to the intent it may appear to be no
new doctrine, and so the odium cast upon it, as upon an upstart, or one of the
new devices of this age, by such as are too tender to their lusts and sinful
liberties, may be taken off: and though I reverence the gray hairs, and despise
not the custom of the Churches of God, as St Paul says, ver. 16. yet I make
them not Dictators but Consuls only, and that testimony they give shall be but
in matter of Fact, their own practice, which those in our days that set open
too wide a gate to this Ordinance, seem to take very little notice of: And I
begin with Justin Martyr, who seems (says Bellar.) to be the first of De
Script. Eccl.
those, after the Apostles times, whose writings are come to our hand. He in
his second Apology says, That it is lawful for no other person to partake of
the Eucharist, viz. this Sacrament, but such an one as believes the Doctrines
taught in the Gospel to be true, that is baptized for remission of sins, that
so lives as Christ has delivered; where you find the three requisites of
partaking in this Ordinance, are Faith, Baptism, and good Conversation. This is
the most ancient Testimony of the custom of the Christian Church in his time,
and for that age fully stops the mouth of all contradiction.

For the Ages after this Author, both those that passed under the Heathen, and
under Christian Emperors, I shall not cloy the Reader with citing the
Testimonies of the Ancients by retale, because there Cypr. Pass. Tertullian de
P^nit.
was a form of Discipline or Government, which obtained in all Churches, Greek,
African, Roman, which with great consent prohibited access to this Sacrament,
unto two sorts principally. 1. Those that were yet in the School of learning
the grounds of Christianity. 2. Those that having been reckoned among the
fideles, were for some great sin put into the School of correction; and these
two sorts do answer those so much spoken of now adays, the ignorant and the
scandalous. I say, there was a form of Discipline that took place, as appears
by that of Origin in his third Book against C^lsus, so much magnified and
insisted on by Blondell, and it is this, De Jureplebis, page 94.
That among the Christians there were appointed certain men to enquire into
(...) the lives and conversations of those that came to this Table, that they
might prohibit them who had committed finne forbidden from access to this
public Convention: A clear place against them that will have none sequestered
for a time from participation of the Lords Table.

1. The first sort of which were such as having a mind to relinquish
Heathenism and Idolatry, yielded up themselves to learn the Doctrine and rule
of Christianity, and these were called Catechumenoi, or hearers, who were
instructed and trained up to learn until they had attained cum alique profectu
convenienti, Aug. de Fide and Operibus.
some convenient proficiency to become comp^^^tes, that is, to give up their
names to be baptized, till which they were always dismissed, with Ite missa est,
when the faithful went on to the Lords Table, and the Officers thereto
pertaining.

2. The second sort were such as having been Communicants, styled Fideles in
opposition to the Catechumeni; and Stantes in opposition to the Lapsi, did
afterward lapse or fall into Heathenish Idolatry, by offering to Idols, and
these were thurificati, renegates, or else they gave money to be excused from
that abhorred act, professing themselves Christians, but they would buy it out,
and these were called Libellatici, or they were traditores, such as in
Dioclesian's Forbes 649, etc. and 646.
cruel time delivered up their Bibles to the fire, or they fell into some
atrocious and notorious sin, Heresy, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Murder, etc. and
these were sequestered from the Lords Table, and put to the School of
repentance, called (...), by Balsamon, the stairs or degrees of correction,
which were four, through which they passed with weeping and sorrow, some
longer, some shorter time, till they were reconciled to the Church, and so
readmitted to the Table, Cyp. Epist. 28, 38, 39, 52. Cypr. de Orat. Dominica:
Yea and after the date and danger was out of being compelled to offer to Idols,
in the times of Christian Emperors, Chrysostom charges the Ministers under
him, that if they knew a man to offer himself to the Table that is a gross and
open sinner, they should prohibit him, (...), etc. though he be a Lord
General, though a great Commander, though he wear a Diadem, as Ambrose forbad
and interdicted Theodosius, And if you say (says he) I dare not do it, then
tell me of him, Homil. 83. in Matthew.
and I for my part, (...), etc. will part with my life, before I will allow him
the Lords Board, (...), let us stave off all notorious persons absolutely. Was
this a copy of his particular zeal, or rather a testimony of the ancient
Discipline, the vigor of which being drowned in the dead sea of Popery, yet
even therein the rubbish or skeleton thereof is seen, by the Doctrine of their
Schoolmen, and by the Council of Trent, which requires of necessity to a man in
mortal sin, that he that will come to the Council. Trid. do praparat. ad
Euch. cap. 7. can. 11.
Mass, must premise Auricular or Sacramental confession and penance; for they
also have their preparation to the Sacrament, such as it is: As for the
Lutheran Churches they have an exploration of all, what they understand of this
Sacrament, and before the Communion, a certain confession of sin, which
Chemnitius calls paenam institutam. And as for Chem. Exa. de praparat. ad Euchar.
the Churches of our Confession, you may read their Confessions and Books of
Discipline, and be satisfied: I will instance only The Church of England,
English Liturgy Rubric before Commun. and after Confirmation.
by rule whereof no notorious and obstinate offendour might be admitted, nor
none that had not their Catechism perfect, which are the two points of
ignorance and scandal. If this rule had been followed, and this Law put in
execution, the practice would have been no new thing in England, as even the
old rule is now by some accounted. I conclude with that which one argues, as
out of the common rule of the Church in Austin's Epistle ad Januarium, Austin
Epist. 118.
Epist. 118. That if there be such a course or force of sin in any man, he is
to be removed from the Lords board, by the authority of the chief, and put into
the School of penitence, till he be reconciled to the Church.

And so much be said of the evidence of Fact, as appears in the rules of the
Churches, both ancient and later, both corrupter and purer; not that I or that
I wish any else to be absolutely swayed by this Authority, for there may be
error in the practice of the Church, yea error universally received, as in
that of giving this Sacrament to infants, upon that ground, Jeh. 6. ^3. Except
ye eat the flesh, etc. ye have no life in you; and yet it was the practice of
the Church so to do, both in Cyprians and Austin's time, but I prove the
evidence of Fact by this Argument, otherwise not to be proved at all: and I do
not expect that any should condemn so ancient a practice, nor think they do,
but rather do conceive that the bottom of the business is the disrellish of
that Authority by which it is to be done. Bucephalus will be ridden by none but
Alexander, and it was the saying of Cardinal Matheo Langi concerning Luther,
That the Church of Rome, the Mass, the Court, the lives of Priests and Friars,
stood in need to be Reformed, but that a poor rascal Monk (meaning Luther)
Heilin. Geog. in Bavaria.
should begin all, that he deemed intolerable, and not to be endured.


The second evidence is that of Scripture, which is first in dignity, but I put
it second, because it justifies the Fact for the substance thereof; and here it
is confessed that no Turk, Jew, Infidel, is debarred by reason of his Nation,
for Scythian and Barbarian, bond and free are all one, We are all baptized into
one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles bond or free, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and have
been made to drink into one Spirit: and therefore the word of the Gospel lies
open to all Nations and people, without partition wall, such as between the
Jews and others of old time; but the bar lies in point of Religion, for if
they lie in their Idolatry and Infidelity, though they may come to the Word,
yet not to the Table of the Lord.

Who are to be kept from the Sacrament.
1. The Jews that serve the Tabernacle, and stick to the old Service under the
Legal shadows, are excepted: We have an Altar, or rather a Sacrifice, Jesus
Christ our sin-offering, whereof they have no right to eat, Heb. 13. 10. that
is, no right of Communion with us, or Christ: The place is difficult, but
easily cleared by Levit. 6. 30. for as the Priests that served at the Altar,
had no right to eat of the flesh of the sin-offering, whose blood was brought
into the Sanctuary, but burnt it must be without the Camp, so the Jews that
hold to the Legal service, have no right of eating the flesh of Christ, whose
blood was brought into the Holy place of heaven (virtually) and his body
suffered without the gates of earthly Jerusalem, thereby signifying that they
were discommended, that hold to the Legal service.

2. Heathens and Infidels are excluded from this Table, because they are
extraneous and without, so they are called, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to
judge, or censure, them that are without; they are without the gates of the
Church, not obnoxious to the Government, nor allowed the privileges of it; and
they that are without the gate, cannot be admitted to the Table, until they
come in and be members of the family.

3. All unbaptized persons are excepted by the order of our Sacraments, whereof
Baptism is first for insition and implantation into the Body of Christ, and the
Lords Table, for further coalition and growth; this order is confirmed by the
use or business of the Sacraments, the one being of Regeneration, and so first,
the other of Communion, and so the second: See 1 Cor. 12. 13. By one spirit are
we baptized into one Body, and have been all made to drink into one spirit;
first baptized, and then made to drink, which order the Church of Christ has
held from the beginning, as it is said by Justin, (...), Apol. 2.
After the new Convert is thus washed, we bring him to our meetings where the
Eucharist is.

4. Those that are under a present incapacity of performing such antecedaneous
acts of preparation, or which are to be exercised in the act of communicating,
provided that this incapacity be visible, as I may say, or manifest unto us, as
in infants, idiots, stupid ignorants, bruits in the shape of men, who though
baptized, yet are not capable of discerning the Lords Body, or of examining
themselves, who seem to be excepted, ver. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat and drink. And so, I know a mad man may have lucid intervals, and a
poor ignorant soul may be brought to know the letters, and spell the first
syllables of Christianity, against either of which I would not shut the door;
but if the ignorant cannot be gotten beyond sottishness and stupidity, nor got
out of his obstinacy in blindness, I should be very unwilling to let him run
blinofold down the precipice, or leave the door open for him to fall into
condemnation; not that I envy him a benefit, but pity his downfall, which I
ought to hinder, or at least not to help forward: and I may say of such an one,
as the Apostle of the Law, Romans 7. 13. Shall that which is good be made death
unto him? God forbid: Especially considering that the Apostle having said, Let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat, does in the next words come on
again, ver. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.

As for infants, though the Churches of ancient time admitted them after
Baptism to partake of the P Martyr in Musculus de caena.
Lords Supper, for some hundreds of years, and one or two of our Reforming
Divines speak somewhat favorably of it; yet the ground they went upon, Joh. 6.
53. that otherwise they had not salvation, is disclaimed by all, both because
that Chapter speaks nothing of Sacramental or Symbolicall eating the flesh of
Christ, and drinking his blood; and also was delivered by Christ a year or two
before this Sacrament was born into the world, and because there is so much
activity and exercise required in a Communicant, as viz. to remember the Lords
death, to show it forth, to discern the Lords body, to examine ones self, to
judge ones self; therefore is that ancient practice obsolete, and as by tacit
consent deserted, and in room thereof we admit now, not by their years, for a
man of threescore may be a child in understanding, and a child in years may
be a man, but by their discretion and knowledge in the mystery of Christ: and
if the Parents or Pastors care, the blossoming of grace, and pregnancy in the
child, were answerable to my desires, I should, as I am, for great reasons, be
fore^^ly admissions of them, as namely, that the benefit and refreshing of this
Ordinance might curb the over-growth of the sins and lusts of youth, and help
forward the growth of their graces to an early maturity.

Those that are professed Christians, baptized-Church-members, whether they
live in open practice, or fall under the guilt of some gross and scandalous
sin, are for that time as they be impenitent, to be secluded from, or not
admitted unto this Communion; and this is an adjudged case in Scripture, 1 Cor
5. where one for terrible incest, notoriously manifest, detested by very
Heathens, remained in the Communion of the Church, through neglect of their
duty, which the Apostle reproves; and having shown what power they had of
judging such as were within, members of their Church, enjoins them to purge out
the leaven, and to cast out from themselves that wicked person: and least any
perverse gainsayer should restrain this power to this one sin, the Apostle
says, ver. 11. If any that is called a brother be a fornicatour, a covetous,
or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or extortioner, the Church has
power to judge them that are within; But what is this to the Sacrament? enough
verily, for he that is cast out of the house, is certainly cast out from the
household table; and the abstention from Communion, so much named in Cyprian, or
(...), or seclusion Forb^s 631.
mentioned in the Canons, and whatsoever word is used for this casting one out
of Church Communion, here if any where it operates and works, in forbidding the
use of the Table, where the (...) of Church society and communion is; as for
instance, Divorce though it extend further, yet signifies nothing at all, is no
Divorce, if not a thoro or mensa, from bed or board, so this restention is
nothing, it works nothing, (I speak not of a private avoidance of familiarity
with wicked persons, which lies on private persons) if not to this seclusion
from the Table: I shall not further urge the example of the old Testament,
which debarres the uncircumcised and the unclean for the time, from the
Passover: and I deny not that under that worldly Sanctuary, and those carnal
Ordinances, as they are called, Heb. 9. 1, 10. Legal uncleanness might
debar, when spiritual and moral did not, as now moral filthiness may, when
legal uncleanness is not; for that uncleanness under the Law, had a spiritual
signification, and though it was not always sin, yet it signified moral
pollution, as the leaven which was held Hag. 2. 13.
execrable and must be cast out, at the Passover is spiritually applied to
another meaning by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. Purge out the old leaven, ver. 7. for
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: the old leaven, that is the wicked
and incestuous person ( Beza, Slater, alii) out of your society, and malice and
wickedness out of your lives, ver. 8. and therefore the Argument which is drawn
from the signification of the legal type, is not so contemptible, as a Learned
man of M. Hu^frey.
late would seem to make it, since the Apostle seems to argue from the leaven
cast out at the Passover, as I have hinted.


The third evidence is that of reason, which was this, that such as have no
right to eat, or have lost for present, right or capacity, should not intrude
themselves: I say those that have no right, and they are those, that as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 12. are mere strangers to the Covenant; for in reason
the Covenant must go before the Seal, and not the Seal before the Covenant; and
therefore they were Disciples to whom Christ said, Take and eat, not aliens or
strangers to the Gospel Covenant, whereof it was ordained a Sacrament, infidels
or unbeleevers, which answer to the uncircumcised, were debarred the Passover.
Or else they are such as having had both right unto, and use of this Ordinance,
have afterward lost their capacity for the time, by some gross and enormous
crime, which has brought them under sequestration or deprivation by the
censure of the Church; and these answer the unclean under the Law, who having
right to the Passover as Churchmembers, were yet forbidden the use, during
such uncleanness; for against such is the key turned, and the door shut, until
and unless by their repentance for their sin, they be restored to their
right, and the sequestration be taken off; for so in the ancient Churches,
while the Lapsi lay under penance, and were in the School of repentance, they
could not communicate, the Crier said, (...), as Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Ephesians.
and if the same Author and the same place may be heard, ye shall learn from
him the very two sorts which I am speaking of; There ought, says he, to come
to this Table, neither any, (...), of them that are not initiated and entered
Disciples, (...), nor any of those that are professors and members, but
unclean or flagitious, whose sins are such, ut judicatur excommunicandus, as
it is said in Austin Epist. 118. ad Januarium.

Now there is reason that such as lie in manifest and enormous sin without
repentance, should either forbear, or by the Church be forbidden access to the
terrible mysteries, as Chrysostom often calls (...)
them.

1. That they should forbear being made acquainted what a fearful sin they
boldly adventure upon, viz. to be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, the
very naming of it being able to strike terror, and what danger they rush
themselves into of eating and drinking damnation to themselves, as it were
professedly seeking and solemnly setting their hands to their own ruin; for
though every sin have death the wages of it, yet for a man to provoke his own
destruction, and solemnly seal it upon himself, is most fearful: Who would not
tremble to eat such a sop as should be presently followed with Satan, or to eat
such forbidden fruit as is sawced with this bitter sauce, Morte morieris, Thou
shall die: for if this bread enter into a man filthy and polluted, Calvin.
Instit. lib. 4. ca. 17.
Majore illum ruina praecipitat; and he that has purpose to sin, gravatur
magis, says Austin, he is De Eccles. Dogmat. cap. 35.
laden with a greater guilt: He takes poison, both by reason of his guiltiness
of other sins, and of the abuse of the Sacrament, says Bernard. And
therefore let Sermon. de caena. 2
men consider what they are like to reap, that either ravish and force, or
secretly think themselves well if they can steal the Sacrament* for he that is
in mortal sin, sins mortally (as Alensis says) and Pars 4. Q^. 46
that because, as the Schoolmen say, Committit falsum Aquin. 3. pars. Quaest.
8. and Esti^. lib. 4. distinct. 12.
in Sacramento, he commits a falsehood in this Sacrament, professing himself to
come to and receive Christ, to whom he is an enemy and a stranger; he mocks God
solemnly: And therefore as Mr Seldom De Synodecis p. 254.
says, If Judas that had a deliberate purpose of betraying Christ, had of
himself therefore gone forth because he was so unworthy, certum ipsi laudi
fuisset, verily it had been a credit and commendation to him to have forborne;
and indeed there would appear some conscience in such forbearance, whereas
there appears nothing but blindness, boldness, pride, custom, etc. in a
dangerous intrusion: I cannot encourage men to forbear this Ordinance, nor
allow the excuse of those that flatter themselves in such forbearance by their
sin, as I have heard some, they cannot come to the Sacrament, because they
are not in charity: Sin may be an impediment, but it is not an excuse; if you
be in manifest and flagitious sin ye may not come, but that sin excuses
not, for you ought to find a third way, that is to repent and lay aside your
sin, that you may come. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, says
the Apostle. As in the Marriage feast, Matthew. 22. he that came without his
wedding garment was cast out, and they that pretending excuses, came not, are
said not to be worthy, v. 8. What then is to be done? this third, to have a
wedding garment and come too. Instance, a drunken servant that forbears to wait
at his Masters table because he is drunk, but yet that is no excuse, for he
ought to be sober and wait also: And this answers a captious fallacy or
objection which may be made by some.

There is reason that the Church should forbid openly criminous persons from
access to the Lords Table.

1. It would be not only contra veritatem, but contra charitatem, to make such
partakers of the holy Supper: They are the words of Learned Grotius, Grotius de
imperio, p. 229.
who cannot be suspected to speak partially in this cause, but to speak the
sense of Antiquity: Against truth, for the seal, says he, is not to be applied
to him, to whom the thing signified, manifestly belongs not: and therefore in
the Churches of old it was wont to be proclaimed, (...), Holy things to holy
persons: And Chrysostom shows, that one with a loud and terrible Homil 17. ad
Hebr.
voice pronounced, (...), for pearls are not to be cast to swine. Against
charity it is to suffer a blind soul that discerns not the Lords body, to fall
into the pit which we have left open: No mother would suffer her child to eat
that which may be poison to it, no shepherd would call his sheep into such
pastures as will certainly rot them; no friend would put a sword into the hand
of a furious man; no Physician would reach water to an Hydropick that eagerly
thirsts for it. It was charity as well as duty in that Jehojada, 2 Chronicles. 23.
19. that set porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none that was
unclean in any thing should enter in. The diseased or dropick man is angry and
frets sore against those that keep water from him, but they are his best
fri^nds that do it.

2. The admittance of ignorant, malicious, unclean, scandalous, drunkards,
blasphemers, and such manifest works of the flesh, of which it is said, that
those that do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 19,
21. will render the Lords Table a common Ordinary, a common lane, a common
shore, and fill the Church of God, and the society of Saints, with all
prodigious lusts and heresies, as if it were a stie of unclean swine; and what
an ulcerous body would that Church be, where such a common liberty does reign?
when so many spots should be in your feasts of love, Jude ^2. so much old
leaven, to leaven the lump by their example; when as the Apostle in the case
tells us, a little leaven would do it, and therefore purge it out, says he,
purge out 1 Cor. 5. 6.
that leaven while it is little: For as when the multitude a major part of a
Town or City becomes infected, who shall shut them up, Si contagio peccandi
multitudinem invaserit, says Austin, then farewell all censures. And therefore
if any shall encourage the Church to keep (as I may so say) open house in this
Grotius de imperio page 233.
case, does little less, considering the corruption of men that would account
such a liberty a warrant, than if I should counsel you to plant weeds in your
Garden, or bring stones into your Vineyard.

3. This would give occasion and advantage to separation, and put into the
hands of men an argument to withdraw from such society and communion, and to
rend themselves off from the body so corrupted; not that I justify separation
upon such ground, as I intend to show hereafter; for the people were
blameworthy that abhorred the offerings of the Lord, for the wickedness of Eli
his sons, 1 Samuel 2. 17. and yet their wickedness was to be abhorred which
gave the occasion: Woe be to him by whom the offense comes. The Matthew. 18. 7.
mouth that blasphemeth the truth and way of God is wicked, but the sin of him
that opens that mouth is also to be condemned. We are told, Ezra 6. 21. that
all such as had separated themselves from the filthiness of the Heathen of the
Land, came to the Passover; and if we separate not from the filthiness of the
Heathen, there are many that will separate from the filthiness of the Church,
and we shall in vain call them back into a house infected with the plague, when
once they are broken out.

4. The Church has little or none other way, as the Church, to keep the holy
things from being profaned, to correct the sins and lapses of her children,
Ezekiel. 22. 26.
to preserve it self from being gangrened, to defend and wipe off scandals, but
this way of privation of privileges, and calling of the peccant from her
Communion, shutting this door against rebellious children, and what should the
Church have done all the while the Civil Magistrate gave no assistance, if they
had not used this power of their own, to maintain themselves free from scandals
and heresies, and to keep the credit of their corporation, which otherwise
would be the most contemptible corporation in the world, and of no better
credit than Algier, or any City of miscreants; for if God have deposited his
Word and Ordinances with his Church, and committed them to it, the case is
hard, if they might not put to the door against unjust invaders of her
privileges; as if one should commit a Vineyard to be kept, and not allow a
hedge to be made about it. Now all men know, that almost all the coercion or
correction that lies in the Churches hand, is the debarment of privileges of
the Church, that is of the Sacraments; for the Word lies open to all, as the
outward Court to all comers; and as for civil punishments, they are neither
proper, nor the Churches; the rod belongs to Moses; And whereas it may be said,
The Church has the word of God, and by that they denounce judgment, declare
sin, wound the profane, prohibit the unworthy from this Table; I grant it;
and it is a necessary and proper means, but withal, I say, If a City or
Commonwealth have Laws proclaimed and expounded, and penalties set forth and
declared, but no execution of any restraint or punishment, no power to correct
or punish; I need not tell you, how full we should be of thieves and felons for
all that.

Thus much be said in confirmation and maintenance of my general Position, That
the Lords Supper is a barred Ordinance, which I have endeavored to make good
by evidence of Fact, by evidence of Scripture, and by evidence of Reason, for
the satisfaction of your scruples (if any be) and the settling of animosities:
Much more might have been said and argued upon the point; For if the very
Heathens in their idolatrous Sacrifices by their light of reason, did no less,
as appears by their (...), in Callimachus.
Callimachus, and Procul o procul este profani, in Virgil. Away, away all you
that are profane. If both Heathens, and the Church of God had some that did
(...), survey the Sacrifices, that they had no blemish that might disable them
from being presented to God. If in the Olympic games or masteries Chrysostom.
hom. 17. ad heb.
the Crier made Proclamation, If any man come out and accuse this Co^batant or
Antagonist, that he is a thief, a sl^ve, etc. being a dishonor for a
Gentleman, a Freeman to enter lists with such a fellow. If the old Druids in
France had a form of Excommunic^tion Caesar. Commentaries.
out of their Society, and it was accounted a mighty punishment. If the Essens
a Sect among the Jews in Christ's time, had it in use to cast out of their
Society such as were offensive, as Josephus tells us. If the Synagogues had a
form of dissynagoguing offenses, Grot. de imp. page 232.
though they abused it, as all Church Censures are, when they spare the
carrion-Crows, and vex the Doves; I say, if all this, and much more, why then
should this be accounted a new and unreasonable, either Doctrine or practice? I
end this point with a request, That every one of you would rather labor and
study to prevent all occasion of using this course, than to remove the old
Landmarks.

. 8. Who may not be denied this Ordinance.
The second general Position is this, That though Thesis. II.
this Sacrament be a barred Ordinance, denied to some, yet it cannot be denied
to any baptized visible Professor of the Gospel, but upon such grounds, and in
such manner and order as God has appointed or allowed; And this takes off the
odium and terror of the former point; This settles and quiets all mistakes of
them, For God is not the Author of confusion, but of order and peace in all
the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33. Let all things be done in order,
ver. 40. And therefore the Apostle, when he had enjoined Timothy, To rebuke
them that sin before all, that others may fear, 1 Timothy ^. ^0. does in the
next words lay a serious charge upon him, To observe these things without
preferring one before another, and to do nothing by partiality. Would you call
that a well-governed City, a well-ordered house, or rather a Cycleps den, where
every one may cast out another, and he himself, as the Rabbis in the latter
end of the Jewish State, ridiculously excommunicated one the other; As
promiscuous access is not to be allowed, so neither promiscuous denial; As one
may intrude and usurp the Lords Supper rashly, so he may be as rashly
forbidden; As there is an ignorant and scandalous rushing in, so there is an
ignorant and scandalous thrusting out; The door may be opened and shut both,
errante clave: If, I say, that a gangrened leg or arm may and must sometimes be
cut off, Does it follow that for every sore before healing plasters be used,
we must run to the Knife or Axe? Or if, I say, a robber or murderer may be
put to death, must I therefore have him to the next tree without further trial
or judgment? The case is plain, but particularly handled thus.

1. It cannot be denied to a repentant sinner, one that does renew his purpose
of amendment, and after his fall with Peter bewails it bitterly, whatsoever his
sins have been, for which he has been punished or censured; Repentance does
dissolve the bands, and pull away the bar from the door, repentance prevents
the punishment, I Will cast them into great tribulation, except they repent, as it
prevents, so it restores a man, as Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent, so iniquity shall not
be your ruin. This was the Novatian rigor and error, they would not allow
lapsed Christians that had fallen into sin, the benefit of repentance and
restoring to the holy Table, but leave them to Gods mercy, for to the peace and
communion of the Church, they must not return; But the Orthodox Churches did
allow repentance to be medicinal; Yea the very Church Censures were not
intended to be mortal, but to be medicinal, viz. that sin might be destroyed,
but the soul saved, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and here is a difference between civil
sentences of death, and Church Censures. If a man be condemned to die for
felony, his repentance does not acquit or restore him from the sentence of
death, but it restores a man to his Church-priviledge that had lost it; it is
Tabula post naufragium, like a plank or board after a Shipwreck which saves
from drowning him that gets to it.

Object. Some may object, That this is an obvious and easy Engine to open any
door that is shut; for if a man make a verbal profession of his repentance, and
say, I repent of my sins, and that is to my self, you know not my heart, I
demand my right.

Answ. The Discipline of the Church is not to be exposed to mockery, nor is it
a mere external Pageant; I will know, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 20. not the
speech of them that are puffed up, but the power, For the Kingdom of God is not
in word, but in power; Hypocritical and superficial expressions signify
nothing, but the powerful work of grace and regeneration which changes the
heart; and because the Objection may be made by some ( ex animo) intending to
show with how easy a word, as Nollem factum, or I repent to blow the door open
to himself, therefore I answer it, That though I should rest in a serious
profession of faith and repentance, which is not pulled down again by a wicked
life, or scandalous sin; As Philip rested in it, when the Eunuch answered
him, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Act. 8. 37. and so was
baptized; yet when a man lies under the charge of our censure, for some
scandalous sin the case is otherwise; for as it is in such sins as are with
damage to another, it is not enough to profess repentance, but there must be
Zacheus his repentance, that is, restitution and reparation of injury, if one
be able; so in scandalous sins, whereby the Church is injured and offended;
There was always in the ancient Churches a certain Discipline (as Chemnitius
says) whereby the repentance of men Depraeparat. p. 95.
was explored and tried, whether it were serious, slighty and superficial,
Sayings served not the turn, the Church had received a wound, the mouth of the
enemy was opened to blaspheme, and therefore it was her honor to be satisfied
in that reparation, which was made by repentance, that God might regain his
visible honor by the repentance which he had lost by the scandal, and there is
ground for it, 2 Cor. ^. 6, 7, 8. where the incestuous person lies humbled and
overwhelmed with great sorrow, and therefore the Apostle writes to the Church
to be content to comfort, to forgive him, and to confirm their love toward
him. This is no dallying matter, when the fall is scandalous, the repentance
must be serious; Peter thrice denies Christ, and Christ asks Peter three times,
Love thou me?

2. A visible professor of Christian Religion, that stains not his profession
with a wicked course of life, or some scandalous act, cannot be debarred his
right of Communion with the visible Church in her privileges; Many are in the
external Covenant and Kingdom of Christ, who are not truly regenerate, nor
lively members of Christ himself; inward grace makes a member of the Church
invisible, and the profession makes a visible. The Sacraments are given to the
visible Church, we cannot discern or judge infallibly, who is regenerate, who
an hypocrite, a visible Judge is not to go by an invisible rule, You shall know
them (says Christ) by their fruits: He does not say, You shall know them by
their sap; It Is one Question, Who is a true member of Christ's body, and truly
in Christ? It Is another Question, Whom we may communicate with? It Is one
Question, Who comes and eats, and drinks unworthily? So do hypocrites: It Is
another Question, Who may not come at all? and those are visible unbelievers,
and scandalous persons, usitatissima phrasi (says Chemnitius) in the most
usual phrase of Scripture they are called holy and Saints, who are Saints by
calling, Disciples of Christ, separated from infidelity and Heathenism unto the
worship of God by their faith of the Gospel; It must be evidence of some fact,
or disorderly walking which is proved, that must give ground to discommon or
dis-franchize a reputed Member, Who ever heard of witnesses to prove a man
unregenerate? Oh but in judgment of charity at least, he must be truly
regenerate! I would all the Congregation were holy; That Is the best corn-field
that has fewest weeds or tares, but (as I conceive) the Church is to proceed
by an infallible Rule, not a judgment of charity; Charity gives a good
temperament unto our judgment, and holds the balance mercifully, but God has
set a Rule to judge by, If one that is named a brother be a fornicatour, or
Idolater, or a railer, or drunkard, 1 Cor. 5. 11. It is the visible Rule of his
own word, who may, and who may not be debarred our fellowship or ^ociety;
Charity may hold the scales, but the scales are Gods word, which tells us, who
are inter-Commoners and Covenantors, and Sacramento tenus, Communicants,
whether they be truly regenerate or no, for I have no Rule to judge that, and
he may have right in for^ externo, because he answers to the visible Rule of
judging, for he is a brother called; he is, as the Apostle says, within, and
not outwardly scandalous. The Kingdom of heaven is likened to ten Virgins,
whereof five were foolish: The Bridegroom might shut out the foolish, but the
wise could not forbid them to attend or trim their Lamps, Mat. ^5.

3. No secret sin that lies in the bosom of the heart, is a sufficient ground
of a man's being debarred or prohibited by the Church to come to this Table. It
may be a cause of a man's eating and drinking unworthily, but of his debarment
to come, it cannot be; It may be a cause of forbearance to come, not of
prohibition; and the reason is, De secretis non judicat Ecclesia, secret sins
are without the Churches cognizance: Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 5. 28. He that
looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his
heart; but that adultery is not punishable by any, but him that knows the
heart. The Schoolmen teach, That if a Priest have men's Durand. l. 4. Did. 9.
Quaest. 5.. 7. Ales. part. 4. Quaest. 49. number. 1.
secret sins under seal of Confession, he may not forbid the person in the
face of the Congregation, for then he is not Corrector, but Proditor. Christ
knew Judas his rottenness, his theft was acted, his treason intended, and now
in hatching, yet he suffered him. I know it is a great Question, Whether Judas
received the Lords Supper? But that indeed is not the Question, but this,
Whether he was debarred or forbidden by Christ, or no? And there is no foot
step of proof for it, I say, that is the Question in this point; and yet to
speak a word of the other. It runs current by general vote of Antiquity, ten
for one, That Judas Vide Seldom. de Synedriis lib. 1. cap. 9. Vasquez. Tom. 3.
Disp. 217.
did receive the Lords Supper. Hilary is quoted against it, but he also, as
Vasquez truly observes, is against his communicating in the Passover too; Now
we find he sat down to the Passover, Matthew. 26. 20. and was hinted by Christ
at the very Table to be the Traitor, One of you, verse. 21. and there is no
mention of his deserting the company so early; that word of connection, Luke 22.
21. But behold the hand of him that betrays me, is with me on the Table,
speaks very fair for it, that the connection may be preserved with former words,
Those that are against it, as some learned men are, answer the Text by
anticipations, Muscul. de ^ana and multi.
and give their reasons, That it is not likely Christ would eat with such an
hypocrite, etc. But reason is no demonstration in matter of fact, as a learned
man says, The great stresse lies upon one word, Joh. 13. 30. Judas taking the
sop went out immediately; This sop, say they, was given at the Paschal Supper
before the Lords Supper, whatsoever it was, it was an index of the Traitor,
and given to distinguish him, therefore not a common giving it to all, as the
common custom was, and wonder it is that the Apostles should interpret Christ's
words, Do it quickly of buying things for the feast, which is a sign they
dreamed of no Excommunication by those words, nor yet wondered that there
should be such haste to provide and cater, as that he must rise from the Table,
while the Paschal Supper was eating, which Paschal Supper and the Lords Supper,
was, as it were, all one to them, not distinguished, but by the signification
put upon the bread and wine, just when they were delivered, being indeed the
Paschal Rites, and no other, viz. materially, and therefore I see not but (...)
here may signify, as it does, Matthew. 13. 5. (...), The seed in stony places
sprung up forthwith, not so soon as sowed, but by reason of shallowness of the
earth, and heat of the rock, sooner then ordinary seed, and so Judas went out
forthwith, not before the end of the Paschal Supper, which was also the end of
the Lords Supper, both being at once, and concluded by one hymn, but before the
long speech, Vasquez. Tom. 3. Disp. 217. cap. 2.
which was continued after Supper by Christ, John 13. and Joh. 14. for he left
Christ and the other together in the room, and before that last Sermon was gone
about his intended plot, and this as it is the common, so also (as I suppose)
the true opinion, which is hinted, as the consent of the Church of England, in
the Exhortation before the Communion, where you find these words, If any of
you be a blasphemer Confessio Belgica.
of God, an hinderer or slanderer of his Word, an adulterer, or be in malice,
or envy, or any other grievous crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this
holy Table, lest after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into
you as he entered into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquities, and bring
you to destruction both of body and soul

But this example pleads nothing for admission of openly notorious and
scandalous sinners; for though Christ knew Judas, yet his sins had not yet
scandalously broke forth, and therefore he was present, as a secret sinner, of
whom there could be no just accusation, nor evident proof, and so no object as
yet of any ecclesiastical censure in an ordinary and orderly Tom. pars 3. Qu.
81.
way, as Aquinas says.

4. No private trespass against a private scandal given to a Christian
brother, is the immediate object of this debarment from public Communion, for
in such cases there is an order, viz. The golden Rule of Christ is to be
observed, Matthew. 18. 15. Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone,
if he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; if not then, take one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established;
If yet he hear not, or neglect, Tell it to the Church; The business here to be
done, is not so much to resarciate the damage or injury done to thee, or to
make him pay what he owes, that belongs to Westminster Hall, not the Church,
but to gain a brother to repent, that is the work. And here we may complain of a
great neglect of this duty of private reproof or admonition: Men would have
their private offenses brought upon the public stage, at first dash they
expect the Church should proceed to do their work at first instance, they
forget that, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart,
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. The
Church would have less to do, if this course were held, the matter would be
stopped, the offendour gained by this private plaster, which if it do the cure,
what need we go to the Chyrurgion: Men have their own private plasters, and
until the sore rankle, they call not the Chyrurgions to counsel: Men are apt
to run to the Church or Minister with private whispers, and what can they do
by Gods Word upon private whispers, just nothing, go and do your own duty: Let
Christ's order be observed, He will not have a member of the Church made a
Publican or Heathen at first dash, there are three neglectings to hear before
that be, If he hear not thee, If he hear not two or three, If he hear not the
Church, but if he do hear thee, then no end of bringing two or three; If he
hear two or three, then no telling of the Church; If he hear the Church, then
is he no Heathen or Publican unto thee: How rashly and passionately do many
separate from the Church, because she cannot, does not cast out her members
upon their private whispers, let them go and separate also from the
Commonwealth, because she does not banish or put to death upon private
information. Do they neglect their own duty to their brother, and will they
make the Church a Heathen and a Publican to them, for not doing that which by
Christ's order they cannot do?

5. The proper, and adequate, and immediate object of this debarment from the
Communion of the Church, is a scandalous person, that holds either a course, or
has committed the act of a scandalous sin, And what call you that? It may be
explained thus:

1. Some atrocious or grievous sin, of first magnitude, If any that is called
a brother be a fornicator, idolater, covetous, etc. 1 Cor. 5. There is a list
with an Et catera, Gal. 5. 19. where they are called, Works of the flesh, and
they that do such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; As also 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, nor
fornicatours, idolaters, adulterers, abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, and such
were some of you. These the Papists call mortal sins, they bring scandal on the
Church, provoke God, blot out our comfort, waste the conscience, etc. but there
are quotidian sins of daily incursion, common to all godly men, infirmities,
which like little flies are not to be knocked down with so great a hammer, whose
absolute cure can hardly be expected, or performed by such as are subject to
the like passions themselves; divorce or banishment are too great, but for such
offenses as are directly contrariant to the respective societies of marriage or
Commonwealth.

2. It must be an open and manifest sin, else it is 1 Cor. 5. 1.
not scandalous, (...), It is reported commonly fornication, and such
fornication. Chrysostom says, he speaks (...), concerning manifest sins,
when he charges his Ministers to admit no scandalous offendour: Now to render a
sin manifest or notorious, I suppose first it is requisite,

1. That it manifestly be a sin, and this is quaestio juris, for a thing may
be commonly cried down under the name of an enormous crime, and yet indeed be
very doubtful, I instance usury, where the Question is, What it is? Then,
Whether this in question be usury? Then, Whether all usury be sinful? For
there are great names of learning and godliness, who upon considerable reasons
do deny it.

2. That it be manifest, that the sin be committed; for it is one thing to
know simply, and another to know judicially, and known it must be, either by
evidence of fact, or confession, or conviction, if it be, and yet appear not,
it is as if it were not, De non existentibus and non apparentibus eadem ratio,
if it come to that pass, that the offendour put himself upon conviction, then
the process must be Secundum allegata and probata, in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word must stand (says our Savior upon this point) If I
were to judge the fact, which I my self do know, but yet it is not proved, I
durst not make a censure, but should rather, Exuere personam judicis, and
induere personam testis; And as Jerome says, Cont Ruffin. lib. 2.
A single witness is not to be believed, Ne Catoni quidem, No, though he were
Cato; You would be loath to lose your horse, your goods, but upon sufficient
conviction, and I hope, you think that to lose your right to the Sacrament, is
a greater loss. I like well of that of Durand Lib. 4. Did. ^. Qu. 5.. 7. Aug.
in 1 Cor. 5. If any be a brother.
out of Austine, We cannot prohib^re a Communione, any man, but he that either
confesses his sin, or is convict of it before the secular Judgment, or in
the face of the Church. You see what a sufficient hedge the Scripture and
Reason has made about the right of a Communicant.

Sixthly, No private person by any private Authority, can dispossess a visible
member of his right of Communion; As in the Commonwealth Justice is necessary,
but private persons do not bear the Sword. It Is unreasonable that a man laying
claim to the Ordinance should at any man's private discretion be denied, What
inconveniences and mischiefs would this fill the Church of God with? How full
of scandals? This would not heal scandals, but make them. Nor can I warrant or
encourage any private or single Minister ordinarily to assume the power of
jurisdiction, to cast out of the Church, as it once did Diotrephes, 2 Epist. of
John verse. 10. and I say ordinarily, because Saint Paul delivered to Satan
Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20. For the Pastor is not Dominus, but
Dispensator Sacramentorum, (as Alensis says) not the Head of the Sacraments,
but the Steward; And it would go very ill with the best Communicants many
times, if the power lay in that hand. He that preaches against them would make
no bones to forbid them the Table, and they that least deferved it should feel
the severity most; but our Savior his Rule is, Tell the Church; and that
Matthew. 18.
rebuke which was given to the incestuous Corinthian, was inflicted by many, 2
Cor. 2. 6. It Is true, The Minister may alone perform the executive part, and
pronounce the words, as the Crier does the Proclamation, and peradventure
withdraw his hand from reaching forth the Sacrament to a scandalous person, but
that is no act of Jurisdiction, or casting out the scandalous person, as I
shall (it may be) show anon.

Seventhly, The Church it self does not ordinarily cast out a meritorious
sinner without previous Admonition, and hearty seeking of a lost Sheep; for
there are few that would cut off an unsound Leg or Arm, before they had tried
all ways; And our Savior says, If he neglect to hear the Church, (Matthew. 18.
17.) as implying, That the Church deals with him by Exhortations and
entreaties, such as may overcome his obstinacy, rather then punish it, and had
rather heal him than cut him off. And so in the first general Position, I
fortified the Sacrament against undue Intrusion: And in this second I have
fortified the Right of the Communicant against unjust invasion.

And having showed you the truth of this Point in two general Positions; The
first was, That this Ordinance is barred, and lies not open to all that may
intrude. The second was, That the right of a visible Churchmember is hedged
in, and cannot be hand over head invaded, and taken away from him. Now I shall
shortly show you what Use may be made of all this.

CHAP. XVIII. The Uses which are to be made of the two last Theses.
. 1.
THat the truth lies between these two. I say, between a forcible Entry, or
violent Intrusion unto this Ordinance, and an unjust invasion of the
Communicants right; For both the Ordinance it self, and right of the
Communicant are hedged in; As in all Corporations, whosoever will, may not
intrude into the freedom, nor yet the rights belonging to that freedom be taken
away, but in an orderly way. That which God has made common, we may not
enclose or make several, v^z. the Gospel or preaching thereof, and that which
God has made several, we may not make common, that is, this Sacrament; As he
cannot allow this Table to any that are not of the house, so neither can we
turn out of the house such as have right to come to this Table: Some are
displeased that they should not have the same right to the Word, and to the
Table; No, for as thou art a sinful man, thou have a right, and duty to hear
the Gospel, though an Heathen, but not to this Sacrament, till thou be a
Christian, and duly qualified professor of Christ: Are you not pleased that
God gives you a nearer and more inward admittance unto Communion and fellowship
with Christ, than to Jews and Infidels, and such as are called Christians, but
little better than they? Would you not have him make more of his children, than
of common servants? While you would raise up a right unto wicked men to Gods
inner Ordinance, you do but depresse and lay low the difference and favor,
which he vouchsafes to his Covenant people; A King may send a Proclamation of
pardon to rebels, while the Sword is in their hand, but he seals it not to
them, or invites them to his Table, till they submit and accept conditions.

. 2.
No private grudge, or distance, or animosity of any man in authority can
warrant the dispossession of any just right of a Communicant to this Ordinance.
I have told you already, We are not Lords of the Sacrament, but Stewards; the
Table is the Lords Table, not ours; No servant can upon any private grudge
against his fellow servants forbid him the house or table provided by the
Master; No private Citizen can forbid the privilege and rights of freedom to
his fellow-citizen; This is but the exercising of private revenge by the way of
Gods public Ordinance, and to prostitute the same to our envy and malice; The
King said to his servants, bind him hand and foot, that has not the
wedding garment, and take him away, Matthew. 27. 13. The King said it, Let all
the Lords servants take heed of casting out any, but upon the Lords warrant,
and upon his command. I should tremble that my self, or any else should make my
Office serve my private spleen, neither can any man lose his right upon my
supposition or suspicion of scandalous sin, but clear and convictive evidence.

And what I say of private grudge, I would be understood to say of private
differences in opinion, speculative or practick, provided they be such as godly
men do ordinarily dissent in; or (as the Apostle says) Such things wherein the
Kingdom of God consists not, Romans 14. 17. For verse. 3. Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not. Let not him that eats not, judge him that eats,
and the reason is given, verse. 4. He is another man's servant, to his own Master
he stands or falls. Such discord need break no music, we may as soon make all
faces alike; as all judgments, and we should not be so proud as to think all
are Blackmores besides us. For God has received him (says the Apostle, Romans
14. 3. therefore let us receive him, and let him receive at the Lords board,
and yet I would have no man think, that I dare speak in favor of, or invite
heresy to the Lords Table; For as there is a great difference between our
daily sins, and those we call scandalous, or flagrant, and atrocious, so
there is also between many errors of judgment, and pernicious heresies; And
if we compare such heresies with scandalous sins of moral life, you shall
find, that heresy is more infectious and pestilential, though the other may
be as mortal; So the Plague is more to be avoided than the Dropsy: Heresy
overthrows the faith of other men more easily, than drunkenness does their
morals by the example; By scandalous sins we open others mouths to blaspheme,
by heresy we our selves blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20. And you find that it is said
of heresies, as it is of Adultery, Murder, They that do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 19. And if there be any thing higher, it is
said, They bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 2. and therefore
they are as far removed from this Table, as any other.

. 4.
And what I have said of private grudge, or private differences in judgment; I
say, lastly, of private respects or partiality, which neither shuts nor opens
the door well; and if I were to allow or disallow Communicants, I would not
admit my near relations, Wife, Children, Servants, Kindred, Friends, but upon
the same terms I would admit my enemy, his relations, his Wife, Children; and
if I should disallow any of them upon the same terms, I would forbid mine own,
else were I a Jam. 2. 4.
respecter of persons, and a judge of evil thoughts; Nor would I stretch out my
hand to a Parliamentman, and withdraw it from a Scavenger on the same terms;
Nor should a godly man, Flagranti in crimine, under the scandal of
drunkenness, or adultery, find any more welcome than another man under the
same sin, until repentance made some difference; For still I go upon the
same Rule or principle; The Table is not ours; We make not the Feast; We are
not Lords and Masters of the Ordinance, but Stewards, Servitours, Dispensers,
that must act ad voluntatem Domini.

. 5.
The third Use of this Point, may be to satisfy our querulous and complaining
dispositions, when we see many who are but Jews outwardly, and they are no
Jews; Many that have a form, but not the power of godliness: Many that walk
disorderly, as the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. Many that desire to make a
fair show, and do (...), set a good face on it, Galat. 6. 12. but are rotten at
the core, etc. They complain, Why are they suffered? Why are not they cast
out* Why do they remain spots in our feasts, as Jude says, etc? And it cannot
be denied, we plead not for hypocrites, we are not Advocates and Patrons of
foolish Virgins, they come unworthily, though they come, and that is bad
enough, but why do they come at all? The Answer is, That violence must not be
offered to that Rule, Order and way, which God has set down for the
prohibiting of any visible member from his right. It Is fit that thieves and
robbers, and cheaters were either reformed or purged out of the Commonwealth,
but yet it must be in the course of Law, or else the remedy would be a
mischief; That in the mouth of two or three Witnesses (says Christ, Matthew. 18.
16.) every word may be established. It is not a thing to be done at random, as
I have showed; Every sore leg is not presently to be cut off, there may be as
sore a one under a silk stocking: The Church sins, if she neglect her duty;
but I must tell you, That you must do your duty first. Have you (in private
offenses) gone first to your offensive brother, and told him of his fault in
private, and then if he be not gained, have you born witness against him? And
has he been convinced of his sin by due conviction? Or does he stand out
against conviction and admonition? And is he obstinate, and does persist in his
sin? One may murder a Felon, he should happily die, but he dies innocently, if
he die by a private hand; A man that deserves to be cast out, may be cast out
injuriously, viz. a non judice. I confess the Argument is plausible, That the
Church, the livelier and purer it is, the better it is, So the Corn-field is
best that has no weeds; The Corn that is clean dressed from chafe and cockle is
the purest, but it is rare to find such a field, or to find such a floor in
the Garner, so it is, but not in the barn-floor. I like holiness which is of
Gods making, not that which is of man's making. The Novatians, or Cathari, the
Donatists also pretended both to a holiness above all the Churches of God in
the world, but there is (as Calvin observed, none of them left in the world to
be seen, whereas the true Churches of Christ continue, and I hope shall
continue, though they be like Israel going forth of Egypt, that had a mixed
multitude among them, as the Scripture speaks.

CHAP. XIX. What must be done where Discipline cannot be executed for want of
Administrators.
. 1.
HAving said, That the Lords Supper is a barred Ordinance, and yet that the
just rights of the Communicant ought not to be invaded. I shall now proceed
before I go further; Two or three Questions of moment and importance; The
Answer to which will both clear the former Doctrine more fully, and also
anticipate such Objections, as may be raised up against it.

Quest. 1. The first Question is this, What is to be done in such case, wherein
the former Doctrine is impracticable, by reason that the Church or particular
society, whereof thou art a member, be not in capacity to exercise such
Discipline, for want of such due Administratours as may bring to execution the
aforesaid order of Debarment from, or Admittance to the Lords Table?

Before I answer this great Question, I must tell you that I have cause to fear
least it be said of me, as Cicero said of Cato, His opinion of, and affection
to the Commonwealth is excellent good, but he is offensive, Quia loquitur
tanquam in Repub. Platonis, non tanquam in faece Romuli, because he speaks as
if he were in Plat^. his Commonwealth, not as in the dregs of Romulus: So you
may say, that I speak as if I was in the Primitive Church, and not in the dregs
of corruption, which profaneness and superstition have brought in upon us; but
notwithstanding the Clock that goes false must be reduced by the Sunne-dial,
and not that by the Clock that erres; We may justly complain of, and bewail the
evil genius of the times and men, that if they can hear novelties every
Lordsday from some ambulatory Preachers, and they also can vapor up and down
with two or three Sermons calculated to serve any Meridian, do not either look
for, or prize a settled condition of Ministry and Sacraments in the Church, but
rather cry, So would we have it, Let every man do that which is right in his
own eyes; and we little think that so many breaches and distractions are
amongst us, because we seek not the Lord after the due order. It was an old
complaint, that the coming in of the world into the Church was the decay of
Christianity, while Emperors were Heathen, and persecutions of the very name
Christian, were frequent, the Discipline was vigorous, when men came in to
Christianity with no other resolution, than to suffer for it, and made account
to save nothing by it, but their souls, the Discipline was able to keep them in
compass, but when Christian Emperors came in, and set the broad gates open to
the world, then they thronged into Christianity for fashion, interest,
preferment, as all do now upon custom, example, education, and hence is the
decay and corruption of Discipline, Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, every one
under form and color of Religion, providing immunity and impunity for their
own lusts, which having said, and thereby pointed with my finger to the sore,
which I cannot heal, I shall answer to the Question.

. 2.
1. The strait is great, where there is not a just and orderly power to
separate or sever the precious from the vile, to deny their bread to children,
or to cast the childrens bread to dogs, and there will be found a great deal of
self-denial necessary in this case; The affirmative command of giving the Lords
bread to his children; and the negative command of not casting pearls before
swine, are both to be observed, and the only expedient that I know is, that
both Minister and people do the duty of their place, without usurpation of
further power, than they have by Gods warrant, and then all will be as well,
not as it might, but as it can, as it was in Hezekiah his Passover in the
second month, 2 Chronicles. 30. Many in the Congregation were not sanctified, verse.
17. Many came out of the Tribes of Israel, which had not cleansed themselves,
they did eat the Passover otherwise than it was written, verse. 18. Here you
see it was not so well as it ought, but it was as well as it could at that
time, and therefore Hezekiah prayed, The good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not according to the purification
of the Sanctuary, and the Lord healed the people, verse. 20. And therefore to
speak more particularly to the point; I cannot counsel, but bewail the
intermission of the Lords Supper in such Churches where there are a number of
worthy Communicants, at least visibly, though there be no power of juridical
exclusion of the unworthy. The Helvetian or Switzerland Churches claim to be
Churches, and have the notes of Word and Sacraments, though this order of
Discipline be not settled among them, and I am not he that shall blot out their
name: There is an express command, Do this, and a very great obligation; There
is an excellent benefit of this Ordinance, which if it stir up the thirst of
Gods people to desire, or rather claim it at the Ministers hand, I see no
ground for the refusal: I know the Sacraments of ordinary use were intermitted
in the wilderness, wholly or mostly, and they were recompensed with
extraordinary, 1 Cor. 10. but that arose on another occasion than this I speak
of; for alas, How many Churches in England, or if you will, good Christians in
them, shall everlastingly be deprived of this high Ordinance, and the benefit
of it, shall lie under the temptation of separation, shall lose this mark of a
Church, and shall in effect be equally debarred of this Communion with Christ,
as wicked men are, and that also not for any default of theirs, but for their
unhappiness of being planted in a Vineyard that wants a wall or hedge?

. 3.
2. A particular Church having administration of the Word and Sacraments, is
not bound always to want a hedge, pale or door unto the Supper of the Lord, in
case the Civil Power is not pleased to intermeddle or interpose in these
affairs, but are (as I conceive) bound to use all warrantable means to preserve
their society from infection and scandal, and the Ordinance from undue
invasion, by giving up themselves to such inspection, as God has entrusted it
with, and themselves have chosen, and by associating themselves with other
Churches of God, that the unity may be preserved of the body of Christ, for the
Arch is firm by the mutual support of the stones, and their joining to the
top-stone; For the Church is a body or society with which God has deposited
his Ordinances, and given it power to meet and assemble themselves together for
performance of them, and it were a wonder that they should not have a power of
exercising them in a right manner.

I do not arrogate unto the Church any the least power of outward force or
coercion, for that belongs to him that bears the Sword, who if he do not give
effect to the censures of the Church, yet they have their effect by the consent
of the Church it self, Ex Disciplina confederata, as they say, which is that by
which he that consents to be of that body is subject to the Laws and Rules of
it, and is cut off, if he prove a rotten member. To give light to this point,
How stood the Discipline of Synagogues, from which I am apt to think our
Christian Churches took much of their pattern? They had a power to discommon
their own members, and it seems to me that their (...), or agreement among
themselves was that which gave effect to their censures, Joh 9. 22. And what is
the government of Colleges, Corporations and petty Courts in
Countrey-villages, where the Bylaws and amerciaments and penalties are by
agreement, north warting the municipal Laws of the Commonwealth: He that will
enjoy the privileges and freedoms of such a body, must be subject to the Rules
and Laws of that society; and so the Christian Churches under Heathen Emperors
could do no more but disfranchize their own members from the privileges of the
Church, of which body they had by their own consent come in to be members, and
so submitted themselves to them. The Emperors gave not this power to the
Church, but God who gave them his great Charter to be a City and Corporation of
his own, did eo ipso, give them this power, without which they might be a
Cyclops den, or chaos, but not a regular Society; And upon this ground (as I
conceive) the Apostle reproves the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. and 1 Cor. 5. for not
doing those things to prevent scandal, which they were empowered and enabled to
have done as a Church of Christians: And if any man had been of such stomach or
disposition in those times, as not to have cared a straw for those
Church Censures, so long as the Civil power touched him not in purse, body,
liberty, it was enough to proclaim him fitter for to be a Heathen than a
Christian; For it is admirable to consider, as it is most evident, That a Church
censure, a Suspension from the Communion of the Church wrought more sorrow, and
trouble, and heartbreaking, than the fire and faggot of the persecution: In
conclusion and upon the whole matter, as he said of the Romans, they must
redire ad casas, return to their poor shepherd cottages again: So I say, that
in case of this necessity, when the Civil power contributes not assistance or
furtherance to the Church, she must consider the case of the primitive
Churches, and what intrinsecally belongs to her to do, as a corporation or body
of Gods making, with no other power of self preservation from scandals of
members, but purging them out, nor from injuries of forreiners, but suffering.

. 4.
3. Every particular member of the Church ought to withdraw or refrain from
such conversation with a scandalous brother, as may either give occasion of
scandal to others, or infection to himself. The Apostle allows civil commerce
or intercourse with Heathens and Infidels, if we live among them, and the bonds
of natural and civil relations or duties must not be violated on pretense of
Christianity, but an arbitrary, familiar and intimate society or fellowship
with them that live or act scandalously, does but soil our selves, harden them,
offend sober Christians. It Is a caution much inculcate in Scripture, Withdraw
from every brother that walks disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Have no company with
them, that they may be ashamed, verse. 14. Turn away from such wicked formalists
as have no power of godliness, and under the form of it are so wicked, 2 Timothy
3. 5. With a brother that is scandalous, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 12, Them
that cause divisions and scandals mark, and avoid them, Romans 16. 17. These, and
the like expressions some Learned men draw into consequence, to prove that
which we know rather the name of, than the nature of the thing,
Excommunication: Others understood Grot. do Imp. p. 231.
by them Nullum actum privato majorem, no act greater than private avoidance of
company, which is that I now speak of; For in the primitive times, when the
Heathens observed of Christians, how they loved each other, and when the
Christians, had in use certain remarkable testifications of this love, by their
feasts of love, and holy kiss, etc. It was a mark or note of reproof and shame
to be shunned and avoided by the brethren, for scandalous sin, and it was
medicinal to him that was so avoided, and in that regard a duty in conscience
and charity to be performed; and I would that all distances created amongst
brethren by passion and envy were reduced to this, then we should find, that
though we had not power to separate an offender from the Church, yet the
separating of our selves from him, would work much good, and be in some measure
an Excommunication; For it is certain, that a great part of the effect thereof
lies in the non Communion or withdrawment of the people from him that is
scandalous; and as certain, that if we flatter and encourage the sins of men
by our samiliarity and fellowship, Excommunication it self would be but a lost
Ordinance, and of no effect; For it is my opinion, That if Excommunication,
greater and lesser, as they are called was in full proportion reduced into
practice, yet except the people that are members of the Church did make
conscience of imparting their fellowship to such as were cut off, it would be
little better then a wooden dagger, and rather serve to create passion and fury
than humility and shame in them.

5.
4. The Ministers duty is by Doctrine to declare the sin and danger of undue
intrusion to the Table of the Lord, which is a ministerial prohibition of the
unworthy, a comminatory seclusion, though not juridical, a power of the Keys;
And this is openly denied by none who speak out of conscience, and not
unreasonable lusts; The Apostle in this Chapter takes this course in terrible
expressions, pronouncing and denouncing judgment to the unworthy, other holy
and famous Worthies of the Church in their generations, do rather thunder than
speak, Better that a millstone was hanged about his neck, and he cast into the
sea, than that a man with an impure conscience take and eat this morsel, says
Cyprian, or the Author De Caena, and so Chrysostom pours out himself in his
Homilies and Sermons on this point with great sharpnes^e, and accounts this
which is done with the voice a seclusion or keeping of men back ( Hom. 13. ad
Hebraeos) and so it is and Page 467. Homil. 83. in Mat. Hom. 86. ad pop.
Antioch. Tract. 62. in Jo. Amb. ad Heb. 10.
may justly be called, for it is a ministerial prohibition of the unworthy;
Chrysostom compares this sin with theirs that slew Christ; Austin, sin of
Judas; Ambrose, with the sin of the Jews; Basil makes the Question, Lib. 2.
de Bapt. cap. 3. Whether it be (...) without danger to come not purged from
filthiness of flesh and spirit; and answers it by the unclean persons coming
to holy things, making that uncleanness (...), typically to denote moral
uncleanness, which I rather note for his sake that slights this Argument. And
therefore let all Ministers be stirred up to use this prohibition the more, and
the rather when other is wanting, in discharge of his duty to God and men's
souls, which though it be not better liked than the practical seclusion, yet
men are more patient under it, I hope out of conviction of conscience, and not
because they may, notwithstanding this, lie still in the crowd without that
particular mark, which the actual seclusion sets upon them.

6.
5. The Minister that dispenses the Sacrament by giving it into the hand of the
Communicant, may in this case with more reason suspend his own act, and
withdraw his hand from one that he sees and knows to be a scandalous person, as
he might do in cafe a Hookers Pref.
Turk, Jew or excommunicate person should intrude unto the Table of the Lord,
in which case, viz. of Excommunication. Calvin says, He would die rather than
reach forth his hand to give the Sacrament to such an one. It Is true, you will
reply, This may be done in the case of such as are debarred by the Church, but
not in the case of a scandalous sinner, not yet so judged? For answer to which
Objection, I say, That indeed there are men of great renown for learning and
holiness, that hold, If a M. Ball. Trial, p. 205.
Minister know a man unworthy he must yet receive him, because he cannot
manifest it to the Church. If a man's unworthiness be notorious. and yet not so
judged by them that have authority, he must administer the Sacramental Signs to
him, not as one worthy or unworthy, but as one as yet undivided from them. And
the truth is, the Minister alone, singly as a Minister, has not by warrant of
the Word, the power of Excommunication or Suspension in his hand, as Grotius de
imperio, p. 230.
is generally holden; nor will I dispute; but this with holding of his hand
from actual giving of the outward Signs, is no act of censure, no Suspension of
the person, no casting of him out, but as those that allow it say, An Act of
liberty, as a Physicians not giving drink to an hydropick person, or the
withholding his own Sword from a furious man, for the time of his rage, and (as
says the Authors last cited) a Minister may do this by the same right whereby
he does by Doctrine declare such a man's incapacity, or whereby a private
Christian withdraws his fellowship or society; Nor otherwise can Chrysostom
charge to Ministers to hinder the unworthy, which he presses in his 83. Homil.
on Matthew, on pain of being guilty of their blood, be understood; for it must
be meant of such scandalous sinners known to them, but not so judged by the
Church, they being kept from access, or sight of the holy mysteries in his
time by the censure of the Church; and I as little doubt of the judgment of
many learned men, or of the intention of the Church of England in the Rule
given to the Minister before the Communion in the case of some emergent scandal
at the present time; nor do I conceive that any learned man would deny this
liberty to a Minister, to withhold his hand from some mankiller, drunkard,
perjured, etc. that has been convicted before the Civil Authority, though no
censure of the Church be against or upon him: Nor is that charge given to
Timothy very far from proving it, Lay hands suddenly on no man, Be not
partakers of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22. If the Rule of Analogy or
proportion may be here allowed, and I believe, that had not the profit of the
Courts more swaid then point of conscience, this Suspension of act had not been
a crime; For the Schoolmen generally allow the Dhrand. part. 4. Did. 9 Quaest.
5. aliique.
Minister to deny the Sacrament to any that is in mortal sin, if it be but
notorious by evidence of fact. And so much for this point, which I have spoken
the more unto, because it is a Question that may often come to hand, even in
our times, and the places in which we live, and only with this intention, that
I would have the Sacraments on their wheels, and yet so that their male
administration bring not epidemick judgments upon us, as the receiving
unworthily did on the Church of Corinth.

CHAP. XX. Whether a Godly man lawfully may, or ought to stand as a Member of,
and hold Communion in the Ordinances of God with such a Congregation as is mixed
(as they call it) that is, where men visibly Scandalous in Life and
Conversation are mingled with the Good in the Participation and Use of Divine
Ordinances? Or, Whether this Mixture of Heterogeneals do not pollute the
Ordinances, and the Communion to the Godly, so as they are concerned to
Separate from such Communion.
. 1.
BEfore I make particular Answer to this Question, I must tell you, That all
serious and weighty Christians have cause to lament the levity and inconstancy
of people of our times, and the spirit of Separation which so easily puts them
upon wing to practice and plead for separation, as they did for Divorce upon
every cause, Matthew. 19. 3. There are many make but a humor of it, being
ignorant of the greatness of the sin of renting asunder the Unity and Union
of the body of Christ, which Chrysostom aggravates Homil. 11. in Ephesians.
and recites a saying of a holy man before his time, (he means Cyprian) (...),
which might seem a very bold speech, and that is, That the blood of Martyrdom
cannot wash off this stain, which many account an ornament, not a sin. Among
other principles of Separation, this which I have now to speak unto, that we
must excommunicate our selves from Gods Ordinances (if men of wicked life be
not excommunicate) for fear of pollution by them, is Donatistical, and urged by
Parmenian the Vide cap. 21. Epist. ad Parmenianum and alibi.
Donatist, and answered by Austin many hundred years ago, and now retrimed and
revived, being called a new truth, as we commonly call a new fashion, that
which lately come up, though about forty year ago, or in our memory, it was a
fashion laid aside and rejected. And the truth is, That the reason of this
Separation seems plausible to easy capacities, such as the Apostle calls Romans
16. 17. (...), the simple, because it pretends to set up holiness, both of
Ordinances and people, but if it be weighed by the standard of Scripture, will
be found too light, and the two sorts of complainers directly opposite to one
another, will be found erroneous, both them that complain of any hedge at all
about the Sacrament, and they that complain and therefore separate, because the
hedge is not so sufficient as may keep off every undue intruder.

Let us then by Scripture Rule lay down the Answer to this Question, and that
orderly, and in certain Theses.

. 2.
First, I shall grant, That the very notion and nature of the Church denotes a
separation; God separates his Church from Infidels, and them that are
extraneous and strangers to the Covenant; He separates them to be his
inheritance, his peculiar treasure above Levit. 20 24. 1 King. 8. 53.
other people, and they also do and ought to separate themselves from communion
with Devils in idolatrous service and worship, Nehem. 9. 2. Come out from among
them, and be ye separate, 2 Cor. 6. 17. This is not necessary to be a local
Separation for present. There was a mixed multitude of uncircumcised people, No
just Proselytes (as Mr Seldom says) with Isreal's De Synedriis cap. 2.
in the wilderness after their separation from Egypt, but this separation is
moral or foederal, God calls them, propounds the terms of his Covenant, they
professedly submit and ac^ept, Exodus 19. 5, 8. and now they are separate, set
apart, sanctified by dedication unto God and his service, and are called no
more Heathens, Infidels, but Saints, Gods people, believers, Christians, or the
like.

. 3.
Secondly, All that are thus separated by their professed submission unto, and
acceptance of the Covenant are not true members of Christ, or of his body. All
the people, when God did but generally propound a Covenant to them, professed
with open voice their yeeldance, and the Lord acquiesced in it, Exodus 19. 5, 8,
9. and the same people when they heard the particular Laws of that Covenant,
professed again they would do them, Exodus 24. 3. and so it became, as we say,
Done and done on both sides, and yet he that should affirm all these, though
newly baptized to be truly regenerate, were very wide of the truth; for there
are many reputative members that are in the visible Society and fellowship of
the Church and it is Ordinances, that are but Jews outwardly, and they are,
says the Apostle, no Jews, and yet they are circumcised and eat the Passover,
and communicate in Ordinances, and (if we will not be captious in words) are
true members of the visible Society, yet no members of Christ's mystical Body,
nor yet can they be dispossessed by us of their right unto Ordinances; for we
have no judgment of their spiritual and inward Estates, nor any Command, nor
any Rule to dispossess them, nor any example of God himself, who lets the corn
and chaff lie together in area, and separates them locally in horreo, as Austin
speaks; and this body howsoever consisting of members heterogeneall, yet being
taken together in gross or in the lump, has very sublime and honorable
compellation, both in the Old Testament, A holy Nation, a Exodus 19. 5, 6, etc.
Kingdom of Priests, Gods special treasure; and in the New, The Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25. 1.
for so the Gospel net, that contains both good and bad, is called; and so the
whole knot of wise and foolish Virgins, and yet it is plain, that in this
Kingdom there are children that are to be cast out, and scandalous persons for
Doctrine, and them that work iniquity for Practice that are to be gathered out
at last, Mat. 13. 41.

. 4.
Thirdly, Whereupon we grant, That it is rare and hard to find a visible Church
in any Age or time that was without corruption or mixture of good and bad in
it; They that talk of purity of Churches, may more easily find in the world a
body that has never a frecken or spot, than a Church without corruption, and
yet both a body and a Church be beautiful for all that. The Scripture gives us
a perfect delineation of the Church, as it ought to be in Rules of faith and
holiness, but yet shows us plainly, that it being Gods pleasure, that the Net
should gather both good and bad, and the servants inviting to the marriage did
bring in both good and bad; it must needs be consequent, that many of those
that are called are not chosen, That all that are of Israel, are not Israel.
Had not this mixture served more to Gods glory, even the glory of his inwardly
discriminating grace, it is likely it had not been: So that as they say of the
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, these Languages may be pure in books, but hardly to be
found purely spoken by any Nation now in the world, so are the rules of faith
and life pure and perfect in the Word, and yet not so perfectly observed by the
visible Church. And if a man suppose that a number or Colony of really holy
persons might be picked out of the Churches, and embody themselves into a
Church, Are they sure this would be answerable to their fancy? Did not the
Donatists dream so of themselves? And what may one think of their children in
time? Does not the purest seed we sow come up with straw and chaff? If they
hold Communion with the visible Church, Is it not all one? If they do not, Is
it not worse and more clearly without warrant?

. 5.
The Church may be corrupted many ways in Doctrine, Ordinances, Worship, and
this I account the worst, because it is the corruption of the best, as the
corruption of blood that runs through all the body, the poisoning of Springs
and Rivers that run through a Nation, is worse than a sore finger in the body,
or a ground of thistles in the Nation, and there are degrees of this
corruption, the Doctrine in some remote points, hay and stubble upon the
foundation, the Worship in some rituals or rites of men's invention or custom.
How many Scripture Churches do ye find thus corrupted, and yet no Separation
of Christ from the Jewish Church, nor any commanded to the godly of Corinth, in
the Provinces of Galatia, or those of Asia in the Revelation? I must in such
case avoid the corruption, hold the Communion, Hear them in Moses chair, and
yet beware of their leaven; but if corruptions invade the fundamentals, the
foundation of Doctrine is destroyed, the worship is become idolatrous, the
leprosy is gotten into the walls and substance of the house, and which is above
all, If the Church impose such Laws of their Communion, as there is necessity
of doing or approving things unlawful, or I am ruined and undone, then must I
either break with God or men, and in that case, Come out of Babylon: The
Churches of Protestants so separated from them of Rome; it was a necessary and
just Separation, the Laws of their Communion were ruinous to the soul, if we
hold it; to the body and life, if we held it not.

6.
In sum then, and in conclusion of this part about Doctrine or Worship, which
is but upon the bie to the Question. If a corrupt Church, as Israel was, have
their Ordinances according to the pattern in the Mount; If it may be said, as
Peter to Christ, John 6. 68. when some Disciples separated themselves, Thou
have the words of eternal life; If as Christ said in matter of Worship, John 4.
Salvation is of the Jews, than, as he said, Whether shall we go? Why do we
separate? And yet I would not be mistaken by the simplest man, as if I
accounted it separation, if a Christian hear a Sermon, or receive the Sacrament
in another Congregation; For he that takes a meal at another Table does not
thereby separate from his own house; or if a Christian at liberty to dispose
his dwelling, shall remove and sit down under more fruitful Ordinances; I
account not this secession a Separation, no more than if being sickly, and
having not health in the City, he remove his seat into the Country for purer
air, because in so doing he removes from the City, but renounces not his
freedom therein, nor disclaims in like proportion the Communion of the Church.


But now to the point of Separation, because there is found, not kept in the
Communion of the Church, but not cast out of it, some scandalous for life and
conversation, visibly unworthy of the Ordinance of the Supper; For let it be
granted, that in Adams family there be a Cain, in Noah's a Cham, in Christ's a
Judas; and if Cain go forth, yet Adam does not, Noah does not, Christ does not;
Let them be separated, let not me separate my self; Let the wicked be
discommon'd, not the godly, for the godly are in the right, and may stand in it
as a man at his own table in his own house, or in his own ground; If others
that ought not do intrude, it is they that must be excluded, for they are
trespassers, not he that is owner and in his right. It Is very true, say you, but
they are not cast out. I answer, There may be sufficient: cause to cast out
obstinate sinners, and yet not sufficient cause for me to leave the Church. I
find that God accepts of such that sigh and cry for all the abominations that
are done in Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 4. That God commands us, To have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. 11.
That he wills us, To withdraw from them that walk disorderly, and commends it, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. That he bids his people, Plead with their mother plead, Hos. 2. 2.
These are duties for private Christians to perform in this case; but I find
not that they must separate from Communion in Ordinances upon that cause. For I
pray you consider,

1. Happily there is no Rule in the Word, or no proof by sufficient evidence of
the fact, or no competent Authority by which such a sinner, as thou instancest
in, may be cast out, And shall this be done disorderly? Shall one disorder be
rectified by another?

2. Thou for thy part have no power to cast him out, and every member must not
usurp and snatch the power of Excommunication to himself, for then as he usurps
the Sacrament, so thou usurpest the Keys, he unworthily, thou unlawfully.

3. It may be the sin of the Church that such are not cast out, but is that
sin a just cause of thy Separation? I have a few things against thee, thou
have them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, thou have them that hold the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, says Christ to the Church of P^rgamus, Revel. 2.
14, 15. Thou suffer that woman Jezabel to seduce my servants, and commit
fornication, says he to the Church in Thyatyra, verse. 20. but upon the rest
that are free, I put no other burden, Hold fast till I come, But where is any
separation commanded in this case? Not any: And for the Church of Laodicea,
whose temper was so loathsome, as her self is threatened to be spued out; from
which (says Mr Brightman) who would not think of flying very quickly, meaning
by his parallel the Church of England; yet because Revel. 3. 30. The Lord
stands at the door and knocks, is present with, and by his Ordinances to all in
this Church, therefore does that holy man mightily inveigh against their wicked
and blasphemous error (so he calls it) that fell away from this Church; Will
they be ashamed (says he) to sit down there where they see Christ not to be
ashamed? Are they holier and purer then he? Can they deny themselves to be
believers in Christ before their separation from us? Came it not by our
preaching, etc? Adi locum.

And indeed the Argument is considerable, If God afford his Communion with a
Church by his own Ordinances, and his Grace and Spirit; It would be unnatural
and peevish in a child to forsake his Mother, while his Father ownes her for
his Wife.

Fourthly, The presence of wicked men at Gods Ordinances pollutes not them that
are neither accessory to their sin, nor indeed to their presence there. If
the Ordinances be polluted by the unclean, to themselves it is polluted, not to
me, He shall bear his own burden; He eats and drinks damnation to himself, 1
Cor. 11. 29. I come to the Sacrament, it is my duty and my right, Shall I sin
in separating from Ordinances, because he sins in coming to them, and the
Church sins in not excluding him? The wickedness of Eli his sons made men
abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. but they transgrest in so doing,
shall I go forth from the marriage feast having a wedding garment, because one
comes in thither without it? Must not I offer my gift at the Altar, because
another comes thither that should first go and be reconciled to his brother?
Shall I leap out of Noah's Ark, because a Cham is in it? Shall I separate from
Gods children in Communion of Gods Ordinances, when it is not arbitrary, and at
my liberty to do so, because I see a sinful intruder, and do my private duty
by mourning, that such a one may be taken away from among us, 1 Cor. 5. 2. and
yet perform my public duty also. And therefore to avow Separation upon this
ground, is,

. 8.
1. To maintain a principle destructive to the communion of the Church visible,
which is a body molded up of Jews outwardly, and Jews inwardly (as I may say)
and if one part destroy or pollute the communion of the other part, is not all
ruined? Let a man but conceive in his mind, How this principle pursued would
in the time of the Jewish Church have rouled and rooted out all visible
Communion in Ordinances out of the world? And if one incestuous person not cast
out at Corinth, had polluted the communion of the whole Church, and some one
like sinner in another had done the like, had not all been polluted, and a
ground of separation laid through all points of the Compass, till we had
separated through the whole circle.

2. An adventurous and bold assertion, that carries farther than we are aware;
for why then did not Judas being to Christ a known wicked man, pollute the
Communion to our Savior at the Passover and Supper? And why did not the
wicked Jews pollute Christ's Communion in the Ordinances of God in that Church?
And how could all the holy servants of God and Prophets in the Old, or the
Apostles and Christians in the New escape this pollution, it being well known
that there were hypocrites, and such as being vicious under form of
godliness, as 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. which remained in Church Communion.

3. A great mistake, for it grows hence, that as Parmenian said, Si corruptis
sociaris, etc. If you be Lib. 3. c. 21.
joined or associate with corrupt men, how can ye be clean? And Austin answers,
True: If we be joined in society with them, that is, commit sin with them, or
consent, or favor them in sin; but if a man do not this, Nullo modo sociatur,
he is no way joined with them, for it is not the local contact or conjunction,
but the moral conjunction that defiles, and we are as morally separate and
severed from them when they are at the Lords Table, as if they were in place
distant. It Is they that join with us in our profession, not we with them in
their sins; if their profession be hypocritical, that infects not us, for
spiritually infected we are not by contagion but consent; nor do we profess
our selves to be of one body with them, any otherwise 1. Cor. 10. 17.
than all that communicate with hypocrites do, viz. upon supposition, that they
are as they profess members of the body, which if they be not our profession
is not false, but theirs is, and yet I confess, that those are best Churches,
where the presumption of godliness in the members, is most reasonable.

. 9.
In sum and for conclusion, we defend the communion of the visible Church in
Gods Ordinances, but we defend not the sin of them that profess to know God,
but in works deny him. It was a sad complaint of Salvian long ago, Praeter
paucissimes, De Gudern. l. 3.
etc. Besides some few that serve the Lord in Spirit, quid est omnis caetus
Christianorum, Free our Communion from this exception by amendment of their
lives, and that the godly would, as the School says, Abuti alieno peccato,
make good use of other men's sins and their own; for even they are mixed persons
(as I may say) having flesh and Spirit, as well as our Churches are mixed of
good and bad, and that they would stir up their graces to be the better for
other men's sins, and perform the duties required of them at such a time, and
not give way to thoughts of Separation, which pulls a good stake out of a rotten
hedge, where it did more good by standing, than by removal, For unto the pure
all things are pure, but to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing
pure, Tit. 1. 15. whereby it is plain, that what is impure to them that are
defiled, is not made impure to them that are pure, and so I conclude with this
recapitulation.

The Separation of the Church from wicked men and infidels, by Gods calling and
Covenant with it, is as necessary as the profession of faith and holiness. The
Church her Separation, or casting out of obstinately wicked men from her
communion, is defended for the recovery of lapsed members, and the avoidance of
infection of, and scandal to her self. The secession of those good people from
the Idolatry erected by Jeroboam to worship at Jerusalem is allowed, 2 Chronicles.
11. 16. The negative Separation, or the not communicating in the worship of
Baal, not so much as by knees or lips of those seven thousand in Israel, is
liked of by the Lord, 1 King. 19. 18. The avoidance of private familiarity with
scandalous sinners, is often commanded, ut supra. The flying of Gods people out
of Babylon, where Idolatry is maintained by force and tyranny, is called for
and required. The Separation of heretical and vicious members from the Church
is branded with a black coal, Jude v. 19. These be they that separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, which above all men they pretend
unto. But the Separation of the godly from Gods Ordinances, because of the
corrupt lives of some in the Church, is no where by any syllable of Scripture
allowed or countenanced, being contrary to the example, and not warranted by
command of Christ or his Apostles, and it is a vain pretending to a holiness
above their Rule or their example; All that I would is an order in the Church,
I should rejoice to behold, as says he, your order, and the stedfastness of
your faith, Col. ^. 5. which too many too much slight and undervalue; for as
one said, Order in an Army kills no body, yet without it the Army is but a rout,
neither able to offend or defend; so happily order in the Church converts no
body, yet without it I see not how the Church should attain her end, or
preserve themselves, in begetting or breeding up souls to God.

CHAP. XXI. Whether the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance?
. 1.
Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance? There is
a conversion of a regenerate man, from some Luke 22. 32.
fall or sin, as in that saying, When thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren, and so a man that is godly may be often converted, that is, raised up
from lapses and backslidings. Of this the Question is not; for this is but as
the blowing in of the candle, when the flame is gone out, by exciting or
wakening the fire that yet glows in the weeck of the candle, which may be done
by this Sacrament; But the Question is, Whether God does offer or exhibit the
first grace, for conversion of an unbeliever or unregenerate man; for as
Davenant rightly says, The first faith must be given to an unbeliever, as the
first light is that which comes into mere darkness.

This Question is but an upstart among us, which has risen on occasion of
seclusion of some from this Sacrament, and indeed quite overthrows it, if the
Sacrament be a converting Ordinance; for upon this ground we may invite the
most wicked to the Table, as well as to the Word, namely for conversion; and it
were a great sin to prohibit any from the appointed means of their conversion.

. 2.
For answer to the Question, I premise,

That, it is the Doctrine of Whitaker, that as the Word is the mean and
instrument of grace, so is the Sacrament, in general, the one is applied to the
ear, the other to the eye; This is the difference, The Word begins and works
grace in the heart ( For faith comes by hearing) but the Sacrament is objected
to the eye, and does not begin the work of grace, but nourishes and increases
it, for faith is not begotten by the Sacraments, but only augmented. Thus he.
The Doctrine of physical operation is exploded by all the orthodox, Sacraments
do not work grace, as a plaster cures a sore, that is a blind conceit of
ignorant souls, but God by them, or in their use imparts grace, as he did
healing by the brazen Serpent. Now God by Baptism solemnly represents and seals
to his people their planting into Christ, We are planted by Baptism into the
likeness of his death, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. And by one Spirit we are all baptized
into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and therefore Baptism is called, the Sacrament of
our implanting, ingraffing, incorporating into Christ, and so is a Sacrament of
initiation, Ye are all children of God by faith in Christ; For as many of you
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 2^. God was
pleased to have his Covenant sealed by Baptism, as to the first grace of that
Covenant, as by Circumcision also under the Law, and so we are solemnly listed
and admitted to be his, and called by his name; But then as to the grace of
education of his children up unto maturity and ripeness by confirming them,
and strengthening and causing them to grow, etc. He has ordained another
Sacrament, which is called the second, because it presupposes the first, as
Passover did Circumcision, and that is the Lords Supper, of which learned
Hooker says, The grace Eccles. pol. l. 5. page 536.
which we have by it does not begin, but continue grace or life, no man
therefore receives this Sacrament before Baptism, because no dead thing is
capable of nourishment; That which grows must of necessity first live: And to
this purpose all our learned Divines have given their suffrage; And the
Papists, though Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 2. and 7. Can. 5. and 11. Bellarm.
de Euch. c. 17. l. 4. Catech-sub fin. Confess. cap. de Sac. c. 29.
they differ from us in denying remission of sins in this Sacrament, in
favor to their Sacrament of penance, yet they hold it to be an Ordinance of
nutrition, and so do all their Schoolmen; and so does the Church of England,
The strengthening and refreshing of our souls, etc. I need not number Authors
or Churches. It is so plain a case, that I wonder they that have stood up in
defense of it as a converting Ordinance, have not taken notice of it; There is
an Army to a man against them, and the ancient Christian Churches are so clear
in it, that they admitted no convert from the Heathen to either Baptism or
Supper, till they had testified their faith and repentance, nor were they
called fideles, till they were baptized and admitted to the Supper, whatsoever
knowledge, faith or repentance so ever they showed before.

Let me first clear the state of the Question, and then give you the Reasons.

For the first.

First, I do not deny that a man having some knowledge of the Gospel, and
visibly professing it (for I do not think that any does imagine that the very
popping of the elements into a mere Heathens mouth may convert him) may be
truly and really converted at the Sacrament, for who shall lock up the hands of
the Spirit, so as the Laver of Regeneration, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost? Tit. 3. 5. The work of the Lord, and a man's eating and drinking may not
be together; Or do we think that this time and conversion are incompossible?
No, I think not so: Nor do I question or doubt that the Word of God adjoined to
the Sacrament, it being accompanied with the Gospel-promises, and the lively
painting forth of Christ may not work coversion, for why the word out of a
Pulpit, and the word at a Table, or in any other place, should not have this
same effect, I see not; You will say, This is the clothed use of the
Sacrament, the administration being accompanied with the Word, and so still it
is the Word that converts. But what will you say to the naked use and
application of the signs, that is, the act of distribution, Taking, Eating,
Drinking, Do these convert or confer the first grace? I answer, I am not
curious in delivering the very nick of time of man's conversion, I affirm not,
that so it is, nor deny that so it may be, The wind blows when and where it
lists. This yet is not the Question; But whether there be found any declared
intention, any institution and appointment of God, that this Ordinance shall
convert souls, or has made it apt for that purpose, so as we may look for such
efficacy from it by virtue of Gods institution thereof to this end? For it is a
merely positive Ordinance, and the effect or efficiency must be expected in
virtue of the appointment and institution, and I cannot assent, that the
institution of the Supper promises this effect.

Greg. de Valentia, and others of the Schoolmen, De effi^acia Euch punct.
distinguish between the primary, and per se effects of the Lords Supper, and
these that are per accidens, not of institution, among which he instances the
conferring of the first grace, and so Vasquez says, that he does not hold,
That this Sacrament conveys Vasquez. Tom. 3. Disp. 205.
the first grace by virtue of institution or appointment to that end, and yet
cites Bonaventure, that the first grace may be given here secundum
misericordiam of Gods mere mercy, not secundum institutionem according to the
institution of the Ordinance; And this I say in answer to the Question. But
does it follow hence, that therefore all may come, be invited, or admitted,
because we say that which God can do, not what he has promised or declared
that he will? Prater intentional or accidental effects give no ground to seek
them at such a cause as is not ordained to work them, though happily some have
been converted at that time. Must a man that seeks a Kingdom be sent to seek
his fathers Asses, because Saul heard such news at such a time? Must we run a
man through with a sword to save his life, because one did so once, and let out
a secret impostume? Because some Minister has been converted at his
Ordination, Is therefore the laying on of hands instituted for that purpose?
Because a man has been converted at his marriage, where the Sermon and
benediction have wrought on him: Is therefore marriage a converting Ordinance?
I might add a great deal more for illustration of this point, if I questioned
your apprehension.

Secondly, There is difference to be made between the qualifications of a man
to his admittance to this Sacrament, and the qualifications of him unto the
inward grace, benefit, or effect of it: If one be a baptized person, a knowing
professor of the Gospel, against whom there lies no bar of notorious
ignorance or scandal, though it appear not that he is truly regenerate and
sincere in grace, yet he has admittance, he claims upon such a right, as the
Church cannot justly disallow, no more than an Israelite circumcised and clean
could be debarred the Passover; but as to the effect and benefit of the Supper
to his soul, there is required more than so, even true faith in Christ, and
regeneration, that he may exercise such graces as the benefits are promised
unto, and come to the Seals of the Covenant with the condition of the Covenant;
The wise Virgins cannot forbid the foolish from waiting with them, for they
have lamps as well as they, but the Lord shuts the door against them from
entering in with him, for their oil was out. Glory not in this, that the Church
admits you to the Table, but labor for the grace to feed upon the dainties set
upon it, many have the liberty to use it, that have not the benefit or effect
of that use; many have a hundred times tasted bread and wine, that never once
tasted the body and blood of Christ.


The Reasons proving the Lords Supper not to be an Ordinance appointed for
conversion.

The first is that of Vasquez, No effects can be ascribed Reas. 1. Tom. 3.
Disp. 205. c. 4.
to this Sacrament, which fall not under the signification of it; they cannot,
do not exhibit any grace, but what they signify or figure out; the sign and
the thing signified are not such strangers, as that one thing be signified, and
another wrought; The Rock that followed them does not set forth Christ for
meat, nor does the Manna set forth Christ for spiritual drink, What can be
expected in Circumcision, but the cutting off native corruption or
concupiscence? What in Baptism of water, but the washing away the sordes or
filthiness of our nativity, or fleshly birth? Now the: conversion of a sinner
is not signified in this Sacrament, or sealed, there is no outward element that
sets it forth to us, and why so? Because it is instituted: in bread and wine,
eating and drinking, and is it not evident that all this speaks growth,
nourishment, comfort, strength, but it speaks not the giving of life? Does
bread and wine give life to one that is dead? Can they congruously signify the
first grace of spiritual life? It Is against sense and reason: but life is
preserved and cherisht, and continued by them, and therefore this Sacrament is
set forth (says Durand) Durand. lib 4. Did. 7. qu. 1.
under the form of nourishment; If you say, But here is Christ set forth, who
is our life as well as our meat, he gives, and he maintains it in us, True, but
he is set forth in this Sacrament as the one of these, he does both, he begins
life in us, but in this Ordinance, which is a Supper, his body and blood are
set upon the Table for refection and nourishment of men that take, and eat, and
drink, and they are living men: Meat is not set before dead folks, My flesh is
meat indeed, my blood is drink indeed, says Joh. 6.
he, and so is Christ here set forth. As the use of corporal food is not
congruous, but to one that lives corporally: So, etc. Durand. ubi supra.

This Sacrament by the institution of it appears to presuppose those that reap
the sweet and benefit of it to be converts, and in grace, namely to have faith
in Christ, and to be living members, and if this be presupposed by this
Ordinance, then it is not first wrought by it. They must be in Christ, that
have benefit by it, for them it is instituted and ordained, not for such as are
out of Christ to bring them in, but for such as are in Christ to bring them up
in him; To my apprehension that is clear, 1 Cor. 12. 13. We are by one Spirit
baptized into one body, and then, we are all made to drink into one Spirit, and
that is it which ye often read in Divines, That the Baptism of Regeneration is
presupposed to the Supper of Communion, they are children whose bread this is,
living members, and not wooden legs that are capable of this benefit; Unto
admittance to the outward Ordinance, Regeneration is not necessary, but unto
the inward benefit and effect it is pre-required in some measure, and
presupposed. The fatted calf is for the returning Prodigal; They are the
friends of God that feed at this Table, Communis mensa symbolum amicitiae,
says Estius, who also observes that ad cibi sumptionem vita Estius in 4. sen.
cap. 12.
requiritur in sumente, Life is presupposed to be in him that takes, and eats,
and drinks, spiritual life in him that does it spiritually. It is a communion
of Christ's body, and that presupposes union; The gra^^ communicates not with
the stock, until it be knit, Why shall we think it strange that God should
provide some Ordinances for those that are in grace already, wherein he and his
may have communion and fellowship, and his very provission shows for whom he
provides? It Is absurd to give meat and drink to dead folks, for they are no
more nourisht by it (says Bellarmine) than stones; Christ promises Bell. de
Euch. cap. 18. lib. 4.
to sup with him, and he with me, When? When the door is opened, the voice
heard, and Christ let in first, Revel. 3. 20. And so ye see the grace of
Conversion is presupposed to the benefit of this Ordinance.

Object. If any reply, Here is Christ represented to us in his riches of Grace,
his death and Sacrifice, and therefore this Ordinance may as well convert as
confirm, and beget, as bring up.

Answ. The institution must limit the use of Ordinances; This Ordinance of the
Supper is a representation of Christ, but quo modo of Christ, dying, not rising
or sitting in heaven, so it exhibits Christ, but how? as meat and drink, and
the end is not conversion, but Communion, so Christ was typified in the brazen
Serpent, but how? as lifted up to heal the pierced soul of every one that
believes in him, because Christ is all in all things, for every use, yet in
such and such an Ordinance, he is of limited use, and limited by the
institution to be received to such an end, or else all Ordinances may be
confounded and tumbled together.

That the Word is the only instrument of God to beget faith, or work Each
Sacrament represents some respect or mode of the Covenant, but seals the whole
Covenant. Ames. Medulla.
conversion, and there are many expressions of Scripture, tending to prove it.
But you will say, I do but beg the Question in affirming it only to be so, and
so having said enough already, I will not now stand to prove the exclusive, but
only in a word, say, That the Word is the great Charter of Gods Covenant; His
Covenant is to make us his, to entertain us as his, and so the Word is a seed
of our new birth, and the milk or meat of our spiritual growth. Unto this
Covenant or Indenture hang two seals, the one seals our engraffing and
implanting unto Christ, and that is Baptism; the other seals our fellowship
with, and building up in Christ, and that is the Lords Supper, the whole
Covenant is sealed by both, but respectively, the one looking at our first
entrance and admission, the other to our progress and consummation, and both
the seals are applied only to them that are in Covenant for their certioration
and comfort that they are lifted into the service of Christ, and that they
shall be kept in constant pay.

5.
I have given two Reasons, the one taken from the signification, the other from
the end of the institution of this Sacrament, to prove that it is not ordained
for a converting Ordinance, and have shown you, that though a man may be
converted at this time, yet that proves not the institution of it to that end
no more than if a sick man be to take a medicine, and prayer be made for the
prosperous success of that medicine, and by something suggested to the mind
of that man by that prayer, whereby he is converted, therefore the medicine
should be called a converting Ordinance, because the institution of an
Ordinance leads on the denomination of it, and so have also shown you, that
upon this ground mis-laid and mistaken, we cannot allow of all unconverted men's
coming or invitation; The Word is indeed a converting Ordinance, and therefore
those that believe not, that oppose themselves, that are dead in sins, may be
admitted and invited to it; If they come not with faith, they may come for
faith; If they come unclean, they may yet come to be cleansed; but the Lords
Supper is not of that nature. It is a more inward Ordinance, and presupposes
some foundation laid by the Word, that it may have effect; the converting
Ordinance must go before the confirming; the qualifications of a receiver are
not the same with the necessary qualifications of a hearer; and (which I
conceive Divines mean in part by requiring Baptism before the Supper) the grace
properly sealed in Baptism is necessary to the obtainment of that grace which
is properly sealed in the Supper; As Christ washed his Disciples feet before he
celebrated and administered this Sacrament. It Is true, God has showed us, that
we should not call any man common or unclean, as Act. 10. 28. that is, legally,
or unclean by his Nation, as if the distance and partition wall between Jew and
Gentile was yet standing, but morally unclean there are still, and we may call
them so, or else we must call evil good, and this uncleanness is not proper to
the sinners of the Gentiles, but even Jews by nature; Christians (as I may say)
by nature are many of them unclean, wherein I would not confirm them, but
endeavor to wash them from it.

And there is yet another offer made to prove an universal access to this
Table, without limitation or restriction aforesaid, and that is this, That the
Sacrament seals to the veracity of God, the truth of his Covenant, the Articles
thereof are true and firm, and the offer of them by God is serious and in good
earnest to induce our faith thereof, and our acceptance; this Ordinance was
appointed as a testification of the truth, and reality, and of the offer of the
Promises unto us, and therefore why may not all come, here is no seal to a
blank; The seal is to Gods Covenant, not our inherent graces; The Promises are
true, the offer real whether we have faith or no.

Take, Eat, Drink, are part of the sealing use, or the applying use, and which
puts this out of doubt, it is said, That this bread we break, This Cup we bless
is the Communion of the body and blood of Christ; And what is that but
participation? For as Chemnitius observes, Chem. exam. de Praeparat. ad caenam.
The great thorn in a weak believer that disquiets him, is this, Christ is
indeed full and sweet, the Promises true and precious, but have I any share?
Have I any portion in them? Have I any right or interest? Now this is that
which is sealed to a believer; and of it self though no man believe it, seals
(as was said before) the truth and reality of the Promise, and of Gods offer;
for I shall not deny that. Now if a man through want of faith be not capable of
this effect or use of the Seal, it is not for mere want of that capacity that
he is prohibited the Lords Table, for then all unregenerate men, and all that
are not converted should be forbidden, which we teach not, but it is for
scandalous and enormous sin persisted in with obstinacy and scorn, it is
because he has not so much as a little beam of light, to know what he does, or
what danger he runs upon.

. 6.
Bell. de Euch. cap. 18. lib. 4.
but still the same grace, degree of grace may be bestowed, and without that
Faith, does not impart any grace at all; As the life maintained by meat and
drink is the same life; Does it therefore follow that meat and drink may convey
life into a dead man, because it maintains it in a living? No: It Is true, the
same life in a dead man would make him live, but the life maintained in a man
by meat and drink is therefore maintained, because there is a life in the man
that can eat and drink, receive nourishment, by which the meat is made
nutritive and lively, which otherwise could not be; And so there must be life
in the Patient, else the Plaster or Medicine, if applied to a dead man, would
not recover or strengthen life: I deny not but if the Sacrament could convey
the same grace to a dead man, as it does to a living, that dead man would live,
but that it cannot do, because it works by way of nourishment, which the dead
receive not.

Quest. If niceties may be heard, we shall have no end; Suppose (says one) a
godly man fall into scandalous sin, and therein lie impenitent, Why do you
not forthwith admit him to the Sacrament, which, you say, may help toward his
conversion from a fall, though it convert not a man from the state of nature?

Answ. I answer, That this Ordinanee does excite and quicken grace, by which a
Christian may recover his fall; and yet, if I say, such a Plaster is good to
heal a sore, it will not follow, that therefore it must forthwith be applied,
for there is proud flesh, and a rotten core first to be eaten out with
corrosives, and then the Plaster may be used: So if there be such or such a
sin under which a godly man lies, there is another 1 Cor. 5.
Ordinance of God first to be applied, for destruction of the flesh, for to
bring shame and confusion, and that is the casting of him out, the putting of
him away from the society of the faithful, and when that corrosive has
wrought, than the Sacrament is to be applied for his strengthening and
refreshing.

Having acquit my self of this Digression, I now return to the Point which I
propounded and explained, before I took the turn which I have travailed, and
am now in the ready way again.

CHAP. XXII. Of Worthy and Unworthy Receiving; With some Cautions to prevent
mis-judging our selves in the Case.
. 1.
THe Point formerly propounded is, That this Sacrament may be received
worthily, and it may also be received unworthily, I mean de facto, worthily and
unworthily refer to the manner of communicating; The Apostle expresses but
the one of them, being led thereunto by the occasion at present, but having
precisely laid down the institution of the Supper, which regul^tes the manner
of receiving, he said enough to make us know what it is to receive unworthily,
and consequently (for the right line is judge of the crooked) what to receive
unworthily; and therefore after he had laid forth the institution, he brings in
this 27th verse with (...), Wherefore, or so that, as concluding the manner of
receiving from the very nature, use and end of the Ordinance.

I know worthily and unworthily are opposites, and sometimes competent to the
same person at the same time, or in the use of the same element, either the
bread or the Cup. Upon which last words you may ask me, May a man receive the
bread worthily, and the Cup unworthily? And I answer, That the reading of this
Text dis-junctively, Whosoever shall Estius in loc.
eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, which some of the
Papists contend for in favor of their dry Mass, has occasioned the starting
of that Question, which yet I will not contend about in this place, but leave
it to such resolution as may be given by the sequel of our discourse, for I
naturally abhor the crumbling of Scripture into crumbs, when it is delivered
to us, as the bread in this Ordinance is, not by crumbs, when it is delivered to
us, as the bread in this Ordinance is, not by crumbs, but by the piece. Three
things I would have you bear in mind.

1. That these words refer to the manner of communicating, and consequently
to the act, or actual receiving of the Sacrament; and therefore the Text says,
He that eats and drinks unworthily, these adverbial expressions denote the mode
or manner of the act, and cannot be applied to any man out of the very act.

2. That yet they connote some aptitude, or inaptitude, some fitness or
unfitness of the person from whence this manner of the action does proceed, as
acts refer to some habit or disposition, whence they arise, and so we call a
worthy or unworthy Communicant, one that has or wants such qualifications, or
such frame of spirit as is apt to bring forth suitable actions, and these
qualifications denominate the person antecedaneous to the act, as we call a
valiant man, before we fight; a worthy Communicant, though not in the act; we
need no place of Scripture to name a Communicant worthy or unworthy, for if it
denominate the act worthily, unworthily, then Logic and Reason will suppose an
aptitude or disposition of the person whence this act comes.

3. That howsoever in our English use, and so in the Latin, we mean by
worthiness and unworthiness of some person or action, an extraordinary
perfection or excellency, or an extraordinary poorness and baseness, yet here
the words must be interpreted relatively, that is, in relation to the
Ordinance, and so they import no more then fitly, condecently, answerably,
becomingly, or contrarily. If the manner of eating or drinking be answerable
to, and becoming of the Ordinance, being such as the exigence and nature
thereof does demand or bespeak of us, then we receive it worthily; for as you
cannot tell, whether a man act a part well, unless you know what part it is,
the (...) or decorum whereof must be observed; and as a picture may be very
curious and lively, and yet very false, if it answer not the prototype; so that
eating or drinking, which is according to the Ordinance or demands thereof is
worthily, and that which is not answerable is unworthily; and thus the word is
to be interpreted, when we read of walking-worthy of God, worthy of the
Gospel, or as it becomes Saints, etc. So that to receive this Sacrament in
that holy manner, and to that end with such spirit and affection, as the
institution or nature of the Ordinance, is to receive worthily, Certa norma est
ipsa institutio, Exam. de prae^a. ad Euchar.
says Chemnitius.

I have recommended to you the sense and meaning of the words, and before I go
further will infer from them two or three Corollaries, or Cautions requisite to
stand in the front of my following Discourse for prevention of mistake of my
words.

Jacob did, and yet go away halting, that was no sign of prevailing, yet the
Text tells us, by his strength he had power with God, he prevailed; Oh but he
went lame away, True, but he wept and made supplication to him, Hos. 12. ^, ^.
The Apostle Paul does not find fault with his prayer, because it prevailed not
at first for removal of the thorn, nor with God neither, but he had his eye
opened to see the use of that thorn, like a corrosive to eat away the proud
flesh growing, and that contented him, the stay of the thorn was answer to his
prayer, when he saw the use of it, and was supported under it, 2 Cor. 12. 8. We
look for Gods answer to us in our prayer, or in his Ordinance, as that man that
looked for the Sun rising toward the East, whereas he that looked Westward
for it on the top of the high Tower or Steeple, saw it first: To see and to
have the use of a sin or corruption, is a better answer of an Ordinance many
times, than to be quit of it; For (as Austin says) Proud hearts have need of
sins as proud sores of eating plasters; And therefore to answer this point
nearer home, and nearer the case it self. The Apostles that were near Christ at
this first Sacrament, within few hours after it betrayed their weakness, they
fled from him, they hid themselves, and the strongest of them took the greatest
fall; Shall we say they communicated unworthily, because the success was so
bad? No, for we must not measure altogether by that Rule, but by the manner of
receiving; if such graces and affections be then set on work, as the Ordinance
does bespeak; It Is well observed, that the recording of the sins of holy men
in Scripture, is as profitable and useful to the Church, as the record of
their graces or heroical acts; For as we look upon their graces, we are ashamed
of our selves, and instructed to imitation, as we look on their sins and
failings, we are not discouraged unto desperation, and the Scripture it self
directs us to some such like use, Jam. 5. 17. Elias was a man subject to like
passions as we are, viz. to like afflictions, and to like fruit trees. It Is
Gods part of the Covenant to finish our faith and support our graces, to revive
our spirits, and subdue our corruptions. It Is our part to believe and walk
humbly with God, not only in our conversation, but the use of his ordinances;
Let us mind our own part, and take comfort in the acting of grace at least, if
we have not the desired benefit and fruit of Ordinances to comfort us; For were
I to choose, I had rather exercise grace in my communion with God, than enjoy a
sensible rapture; I speak it to improve a Christian in his gracious actings,
though I know withal that at last the fruit will fall into his bosom; for he
that goes out weeping, and bears precious seed, shall doubtless come again
with joy, and bring his sheaves, Psalm 126. 6. And again, Hosea 6. 2. After two
days he will revive us, in the third (as Christ was raised) he will raise us
up, then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord; in the mean time
before this fruit be ripe, the very running of the sap is a certain sign the
Tree lives. And so I have given you a measure or rule of judging, whether you
receive worthily.

Secondly, Think not that the Sacrament conveyes or contributes any thing to
you as a medicinal potion or plaster; Does the Physic work, and so the
plaster, by an inherent or inward virtue in it self, not by any virtue in the
Phyfician or Chyrurgeon? So ignorant and superstitious people look on the
Sacrament, they think it saves them, and does them good, they know not how, and
so regard the matter more than the manner of receiving, they mistake Gods
manner of working by Sacraments, and therefore regard not their own manner of
receiving them, and are so fond, as if they could eat and drink away their
sins, and had by very receiving this bread and wine quit all old scores, and
were fresh to begin upon a new account, as the Papist thinks of his auricular
confession.

. 2.
It is a very excellent and profitable knowledge to understand how God conveys
grace by the Sacrament; I speak not of understanding subtilties, but the plain
and open use of the Ordinance. Now I cannot possibly conceive, how the
elementals of bread and wine, can or do any otherwise convey to or afford me
any spiritual grace, but as instruments and means by Gods mere positive
appointment and ordination, representing, testifying, sealing to me not only
Gods reality of promise or Covenant in offering Christ, but my interest and
propriety in Christ, and the benefits that flow from Union and Communion with
Christ; and therefore that reviving, refreshing increase of grace, power of
mortification of lusts, Come no otherwise to me by the use of this Ordinance,
than as it seals Christ to me, and by sealing Christ or the Covenant to me does
confirm faith, revive the heart, elevate the affections, strengthen
resolutions, fortify against lusts and temptations; for it is a sure Rule, The
nearer applications of Christ to the soul and his benefits in way of taste or
assurance, the more quickening grace of all sorts, follows thereupon; As the
nearer approach of the Sun in the Spring, cheers up and revives all things
that live, but things stark dead are as dead then, as in deep of winter. Let me
convey this to you by a familiar similitude; A man has an Estate, the Wool,
the Wine, the Corn that grows out of that Estate clothes him, refreshes him,
feeds him, but the Seal that confirms and assures this Estate to him, does no
otherwise cloth, or refresh, or feed him, than as it confirms that estate to
him, out of which all these do rise: And by this you may plainly understand how
grace is conveyed by this Sacrament, which does seal up to you, and assure you
of Christ, and the Covenant of promises in Christ, out of which all these
graces grow and flow: Do ye understand this? Then it follows,

1. That for any man to imagine that the very eating and drinking this bread
and this Cup should cure and heal his soul, is as fond as to think the very
seal or wax of a Deed should either seed or clothe him, for in that case it is
not a seal, but a piece of wax, how infinitely do our common people undervalue
this Sacrament, that make but a piece of holy bread of it, which is an
exhibition of the body of Christ, as they that value a seal by the worth of the
wax, and not by the Estate thereby confirmed.

2. That it is absolutely necessary to bring to this Sacrament, that grace which
is necessary to the receiving of Christ himself, Quid paras dentem? What does
the providing of teeth to eat (says Austin) What avail is all outward
preparation? The thing that is exhibited to us is Christ his body broken, his
blood shed, Christ dying, Christ a Sacrifice offered up to God is here
commemorated, and is here offered, and that inward grace which is necessary to
receive and close with Christ, must be brought with you; That grace is found by
and from the word, and that grace must be used here, and exercised. The
Covenant requires it, and the Seal is the Seal of the Covenant; You cannot take
the Seal and leave the Covenant, you cannot enter Covenant without faith and
Repentance, you do but expect that the Seal should seal a lie to you, if you
expect remission of sins to be sealed without your faith in Christ. It Is
impossible that the Word and Sacrament should be opposite, as that the Covenant
and Seal thereof should disagree. As therefore if one would know what a Seal
conveys or confirms, let him read the Deed, and the Conditions of it, and
there it is learned, So if you would know what the Sacrament seals to you, hear
what the Word says, Mercy and Grace to a believer in Christ, and to no other,
which he that will receive from this fountain, must bring his vessel with him,
for qui fide vacuus, for as manducat non intus Chem. Exam. etc.
dente non mente, August.



. 3.
1. That words of high sound, in vulgar and common acceptance, when they come
to be undertaken in a Gospel-sense and notion, do shrink into a mere
contemptiblenesse with worldly wise men; For as the Gospel uses some Greek
words in a sense unknown to eloquent profane Authors, so it has a notion of
Blessedness, Perfection, Glory, Worthiness, which relishes not the palate,
nor bears any show in the world. If Aristotle describe blessedness, what a
deal of humane perfection and accomplishments of fortune does he crowd into it,
for which he is derided by other Sects? But if Christ describe blessedness in
the Gospel, what do you hear of, but poverty of Spirit, purity of heart,
meekness, mourning, suffering for righteousness sake, wherein there is no
more show of blessedness to a worldly man, than there was in Christ of Majesty
to Herod and his men of war? So perfection in Gospel-phrase is a disclaiming
thereof, and sense of our imperfection, Phil. 3. 12. And the Spirit of glory
rests upon you that suffer, 1 Pet. 4. 14. And your worthiness is rather the
sense of your unworthiness: Thus the Gospel construes these high sounding
words, and the reason is, because the Gospel placing our righteousness and our
happiness in the having of Christ, and taking every man utterly off his own
bottom, does thereby come to a new reckoning, that is not used in the whole
world, and accounts them full that are most empty, rich that are poor, blessed,
that are in their own sense, or outward condition, miserable, possessing all
things, that have nothing; and so in this point in hand, according to Luther's
paradoxal expression, which our Whitaker approves, is Est optime dispositus,
qui est pessime dispositus, He is most worthy that is most unworthy, viz. that
is sensible of his unworthiness.

2. If this worthiness of a Communicant should Whitak. de Sacram. p. 658.
be imagined to signify any meritorious or proud congruities of our virtues,
works, righteousness, it would be the greatest unworthiness that could be;
What should such proud creatures come to a Sacrament or memorial of Christ's
death, for that being no sin with them to be expiated by that death^* Thou
say, I am rich, I stand in need of nothing; go anoint thy eyes that thou
may see, Revel. 5. This Pool of Siloam is for such as have infirmities. Nor
does the Gospel require perfect faith, or perfect repentance or grace, for
that is against the nature of this Sacrament, which is to last no longer than
our imperfections and infirmities last, that is, until Christ come. So as
there is no better Argument of our imperfection, than the command of growing in
grace, so neither is any a fit patient for this medicine, but the weak and
impotent, the doubting and complaining soul. The Gospel knows not the name of
attainers, nor the thing. Not that I have attained, or were already perfect,
Phil. 3. 12. This meat and drink is for growing children, which as the old
Physician ( Hippocrates says) must be often-nourisht. How long might a man
examine himself before he find this temper in himself, that he wants nothing?
there can be no wonder that such a one is above Ordinances, especially this,
which though it be one of the highest Ordinances of the Church, yet is
accommodated to the use of the lowest believer; The Apostles communicated in it
before the Spirit was sent down solemnly upon them, they were but ignorant and
raw, when Christ said, Take, Eat, Drink ye all of it.

3. If thou have the seminals of grace mixed with a mass of corruptions (as
gold at first is mixed with much earth) there may be worthiness, despise not
small things; Natural generation, begins in a small thing, a little drop, and
so Regeneration. If there be sense of sin, if thirst after Christ, there is
something, Thou art discouraged with thy daily lapses, why drink of this wine
for thy often infirmities; Thou art overborn with strong lusts, come, and eat,
and drink to nourish thy weak graces, keep them alive to fight, though they do
not conquer and triumph. Thou can not say, thou have faith, but can thou
feel thy want of it, and mourn for it? This smoke comes from some invisible
spark: Thou art not (thou say) in Covenant, and the Seal belongs not to
thee; But art thou willing to be in it, and come into the bond of the Lord? Is
it the longing of thy soul to be engaged into the ways of God, and
disenthrall'd from the sweet bondage of sin? In a word, Let thy sins and
corruptions be strong and violent, thy wants many, thy weakness great: Let
them be as thou say, as thou fear, yet if there be a groaning sense, a
longing desire of remedy, affections piercing of, and breathing after Christ;
If there be a seed of God in thy heart, which is kept alive in the midst of so
much corruption, by no less a miracle than if a spark be kept alive in the
sea, then surely there is a Gospel-meetnesse in thee to be partaker of this
Supper; Here is Christ cooked ready to thy weakest and lowest faith in obvious
materials of meat and drink: Let not the pride of any worthiness bring thee,
nor the sense of unworthiness keep thee back.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Worthy Receiving, etc.
. 1.
I Now proceed to handle this point, That this Bread may be eaten, and this Cup
of the Lord may be drunk worthily. It is the highest grace that the eternal God
should admit sinful dust and ashes to be his consederates, that from his Altar
he should furnish a Table for them, and feed them with that flesh and blood
which is offered up unto himself a Sacrifice Ephesians. 5. 1.
for a sweet smelling savor, that he should account them to eat and drink
worthily, who account not themselves worthy to eat and drink; Merit and
worthiness have both their due place; merit belongs to the Sacrifice, Christ
Jesus, worthiness to the Communicant who eats and drinks in such manner as
becomes the nature, and is answerable to the use and end of this Ordinance.

I shall come up to the manner of receiving worthily, by certain orderly steps:
As


1. There is a certain peculiar preparation due to the celebration of this
Ordinance; for where the manner is so contrary, as worthily and unworthily, and
the effect of the Ordinance much depending upon the manner of receiving it, and
the benefit so great, as communion of Christ's body, the danger no less than of
condemnation; reason will tell us, that there is a preparation requisite, that
the fruit may be of the Tree of Life, and not of the Tree of knowledge of good
and evil, Eat and die. It Is either too much blindness or boldness to rush
upon this Ordinance without preparation. Nature induces not a new form without
preparing the matter. Art as it helps, so it imitates nature, else that which
is medicinal may be mortal; Our Savior did not only use, but honor
preparations, when he fasted and prayed in order to his great work; To the
Passover there belonged (...), a solemn preparation; the Lamb was taken up on
the tenth day, the leaven was enquired after and purged out, which if they have
now no obligation, yet they have a meaning; and you use to have Sermons for
preparation, which are but preparatives to preparation, they do but light the
candle, but you must, as that woman, Luke 15. 8. Sweep the house, and seek
diligently, else Sermon-preparation may (as I fear it often does) go without
soul preparation: That word verse. 28. And so let him eat, Gerard. d^ Sac.
Caena. c. 23.
tells us plainly, that somewhat must go before. The Papists distinguish of
preparation, sufficient and probable, but that which is probable may be
insufficient, and so no man be certain that he comes worthily. A fit dispute
for such as would have meritorious preparations, so much sanctity as indeed
needs no Sacrament, which therefore, they say, takes away only venial sins.
I would not bring so much to the Sacrament, as to look for little from it;
Those that came to the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. wanted the Sanctuary
purification, yet they prepared their hearts to seek God, The good Lord pardon,
says Hezckiah; Here was a preparation, with a Dominus misereatur, The good
Lord pardon. I look for no preparation that shall not stand in need of mercy:
If I see so much in my self, as makes my self empty, and that emptiness does
make me a thirst for Christ, then I shall not dispute my preparation, but deny
my worthiness, and yet come.


2. These words worthily and unworthily, as I have often said, express the
manner of our receiving this Sacrament, and that manner is either outward or
inward; The outward manner is either duly to observe the outward Rites that are
prescribed without mutilation or addition, whereby the face of the Ordinance is
defaced, and looks not like it self; or (which I intend) such decent outward
behavior as is suitable to the holiness and reverence of the Ordinance; and
if I be not deceived, the Apostle in this place taxes the rudeness and
irreverence of the visible carriage, or rather miscarriage of the Corinthians
in the handling or celebration thereof, and therefore expostulates with them,
verse. 22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? Does that freedom of
behavior become the Congregation, which you use at your own Tables? Is
quaffing and jollity a becoming deportment? Is it not scandalous and offensive
to use that liberty here, which is rather fit for an Ordinary, or a Tavern? Let
me speak freely to you, we have almost lost that reverence, devotion, gravity,
decency which formerly and anciently ado^ned the public Ordinances and
Administrations, and our experience may teach us, that while we decline the
extreme of curiosity, superstition, pomp and starelinesse, we incline to the
other of irreverence, profaneness, loosnesse, sordidnesse; While we talk of
worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, we exempt our bodies from adoration, and
both forget that our bodies are part of Christ's purchase, and the Rule that is
inferred thereupon, Glorify therefore God in your body and in your spirit, 1
Cor. 6. 20. For do we not profane our eyes by wandering, our tongues by
talking, our faces by laughing, and the Ordinance of God by all? I would there
were not cause to wish that our public meetings had more composedness of
outward behavior, but when sometimes, and in some places the Pulpit looks like
a stage, and the house of prayer like a playhouse; we may justly fear least a
Corinthian rudeness come up to the Lords Table also, and think it needful to
reprove such lightness, as is offensive to serious devotion or common gravity.
The Moralist his Rule to remedy lightness of carriage; is to set Socrates, or
some grave man before your eyes for the rudeness of the Scene was shamed and
bridled by the presence of Cato. We have a better rule, set God before you,
with whom we have to do, who has also promised to be in the mids of two or
three that are congregated in his name; Consider that the Angels are
Spect^tours and Guardians of your Assemblies, for that I take to be the
plainest sense of that saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 10. and that other
phrase, verse. 9. of discerning the body of the Lord, does denote, not only a
knowing that the Lords body is represented by the bread (as it is commonly
interpreted) but such a minding of the body of Christ here represented and
exhibited to our faith, or may produce a difference of our behavior and
carriage in the use of this Ordinance from that which we use in eating of
common bread, wherein men otherwise-knowing (as these Corinthians) might fail
and be defective. In short, because a loose carriage is ordinarily an argument
of a loose spirit, therefore I have said this to compose the outward behavior
of Communicants to a suitable comeliness and decency in the use of holy
Ordinances, Hoc agite is the old word.


3. By having those graces which are to be exercised, and set on work at the
Lords Table, a believer shall try and judge of his fitness to come unto it. I
shall show you in the next, That the exercise of grace is requisite unto the
act of receiving worthily, but it is the having of that grace, whereby a man
shall try and judge of his fitness to come; For (I suppose) first, that there
is some previous disposition or qualification, which gives capacity or
meetnesse to come to this Table, as the word, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him come, does clearly prove, and then that this fitness or habitual
qualification is the having or exciting of those graces which are to be
exercised and set a work; As a soldier is accoutred and furnished with such
weapons, as in fight are to be exercised and used, and therefore a Christian
that would try or know his own fitness or worthiness, confiders first what
graces are to be set on work in the act of receiving, and then examines whether
he have them beforehand or no: Plain sense and reason shows, that a dead man
is not fit to eat and drink, because he cannot exercise any act of life,
without which he neither eats nor can be refresht, and therefore we must
conclude, that there is an habitual fitness required to be in the person that
communicates worthily.


Now there are some (and they godly souls) that set the pitch of this fitness
or worthiness too high, and there are others that are carnal set it too low,
and it must be confessed there is a latitude in it, it receives magis and minus,
as Christians themselves are of diverse elevations, some are smoking flax, some
are shining lights.

If we set it too high, besides that Infants in grace, and low statured
Christians cannot reach it, we do but discomfort and dishearten our selves,
for we take a false measure, and because we find not that we can cut out to
that measure, we are at a loss, and happily if we would follow it home, we might
cast out every one of the Apostles from the first Supper, who were certainly
very raw Christians, and of as low a form as we are, being after that time
upbraided by Christ with their unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16. 14.
And if we should do so, we should censure our Savior of too much indulgence,
who reproved their sin, and yet received them to his Table, Luke 22. 19, 24.
I have no warrant to set the mark so high, that the least of Gods children
qualified, should not reach it; for I confider, that this Sacrament was
ordained for the Church, during the estate of imperfection, and for remedy of
weakness and infirmity, not like the Tree of Life, which man was debarred
from, for his sin in the forbidden fruit; and as Luther said, A child may
receive a Ring as well as a Giant, and the least Candle points upwards as well
as the greatest Torch. Great Masters of Families (as the Prodigal observed)
allow the meanest of their domestic servants to come to the Tables end, and
eat of their bread. Many sins, many backslidings, if there be contrition and
godly sorrow, serve for bitter herbs to eat the Passover with; Many wants and
weaknesses may be accompanied with vehement desires, hunger and thirst: Low
graces may occasion low hearts, when God makes the disease a preparative, why
should we refuse the medicine?

If we set the pitch of this fitness too low in some empty forms of Religion,
or some eminent works, and moral virtues, or some conceited perfections which
feed our pride, we shall take in many that have nothing of Christ in them;
Gospel-qualifications are most suitable to a Gospel Ordinance; We are not
prepared for Christ by ostentation of works, but sense of misery; The sense of
unworthiness is our worthiness; A little vessel that is empty, will receive
more than a great one that is full; A broken Christ requires a broken heart: To
be rich, and full, and righteous in the Gospel-Dictionary, do signify
obstructions, and impediments of our happiness; where the naked are clothed,
the hungry are fed, the ungodly are justified, the weary are refresht, the sick
are healed, the stung with fiery Serpents are recovered, the returning lost
child is feasted, and they that thirst do buy wine and milk without money and
without price; And hence it follows,

That no unregenerate man that lies dead in trespasses and sins, without a
seed, a spark of Gospel Grace, having no initials of true Repentance and Faith
in Christ, can be in capacity to eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ
worthily, and with effect, for such a one is a stranger to the Covenant, and
uncircumcised, and therefore expressly debarred this Passover, Exodus 12. 43.
Where there is no life there can be no reception of nourishment. He that is
void of the Condition of the Covenant cannot receive the benefit, nor eat the
Supper that wants the Wedding Garment. This is a severe point, and disclaims
the greatest part of men from eating and drinking worthily, because they have
no ticket of grace renewing or regenerating, they are not Disciples indeed,
they are branches in Christ by external ingraffing, John 15. 2. but have not
the life of Christ in them; They that are not in the body of Christ, do not eat
his body, says Austin; They that are not members of him do not spiritually
feed on him, Panem Domin^, they do e^t as Judas, not Panem Dominum. Ego hoc
axtoma teneo, says Calvin, that without the Spirit Christ is not received in
this Sacrament. The Papists go no less, Catholici omnes (says Vasquez) all
agree in this, That it is necessary for a worthy Communicant to be in the state
of grace and sanctification, and therefore howsoever any person be furnished
with endowments of nature and education, famous for eminent works and virtues,
adorned with civil and fair conversation, yet without something of Christ, some
work of the Spirit, some seed of Regeneration, he cannot eat and drink
worthily, and with effect; And this Doctrine is the rather requisite to be
taught, because men may flatter themselves in that they have past the test, are
admitted with approbation to this Table, and allowed the liberty thereof, for
all this may be, and yet your case no better than Saul's, that would needs be
honored before the people; than Judas's who was not thrust out from the
Sacrament, than his who was let in by the servants to the feast, but cast out
by the King for want of his Wedding Garment. You enjoy a privilege to eat and
drink, but what? judgment and condemnation to your selves, Oh consider it, The
Lord of this feast will come to view his guests, he will turn out some that the
servants let in, he will say, Friend, How came thou in hither? He answered
not, Lord, I was called in, I was admitted in by thy servants, No, He was dumb,
he had nothing to plead, he had not a Wedding Garment, For he is not a Jew that
is one outwardly, Romans 2. penult.


The actual exercise of our graces is requisite to our eating and drinking
worthily. The instrument must be in tune beforehand, as I showed you in the
former, but now the strings are stricken, now they make their music. The
activity and imploiment of our faith and affections is now required, and our
graces must be on their wheels; now the sails are spread to catch the gale
which sweetly breathes from this holy Ordinance, for here it is said, Take, Eat,
Take and drink; and as the eye, the hand, the mouth are now in actual
imploiment, as to the Sacrament, or outward part, so faith which is the eye,
hand, mouth of the soul, and all the affections are to be actually employed, as
to the inward thing, the body and blood of Christ; Not the having of an eye,
but looking up to the brazen Serpent healed the biting. It Is not enough to have
faith, but we must believe. Now that the Sacrament is in use, now must our
graces be in use too. Now that God actually offers and presents Christ's body
and blood to my faith; Now let the hand of faith go forth and take Christ in.
Awake my faith, and see the atonement of my sins in the broken body of my
Savior! Awake repentance, and hear the strong cries, and see the doleful
agony of him that bears our chastisement! Awake my memory, and call to mind
that Egypt wherein I was, and the blood of the Passover which removed the
destroying Angel from my soul! Awake all that is within me to bless and praise
the Lord. Oh let this Cross crucify my lusts and passions! Let this death
stay my reigning sins, as Joshua did the Kings of Canaan! Now let the Altar
smoke with the Sacrifice of a loving heart inflamed with holy fi^e of Gods love
to me; Now the wax is warm, Oh let the Seal be stamped fair that I may see the
impression always after! Now that God shows forth to methe death of his Son
for me, let me show forth that death of Christ to God again, as that which I
stick unto, and abide by, for my righteousness and peace with God. Alas, if my
graces be now asleep, they are next a kin to dead; We might have sweet, we
might have fruitful Sacraments had we but lively graces; Graces upon their
wing, not lying sullen, and benumbed with cold, therefore blow up your graces,
as the Apostle his phrase is, blow the smothering fire, the embers into a flame
by pertinent meditation; Be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that this King of
glory may come in; And that I may speak to the comfort of a godly soul, Let
grace run forth at what tap it will, so there be but vent, whether at the
uppermost of high praises, or at the lower of melting humblings; If the fire
flame, rise high, thou have more comfort; If it smoke, God will not quench-it,
and that is some comfort: Some have a finer taste, and relish their meat with
higher gust and more delight than others, and yet others be nourisht as well,
as much as they; So happily some receive Christ with greater delectation, and yet
thy soul may be nourisht as well as theirs.

CHAP. XXIV. That a Godly man may receive the Sacrament unworthily.
HAving shown you the qualifications of a worthy Communicant beforehand, and
that the actual exercise of grace is requisite at present for receiving
worthily, I make this Observation.

. 1.
That a man who is in a state of grace, and so godly, may yet receive the Lords
Supper unworthily, and without effect, not for want of habitual fitness or
qualification, but for want of the actual exercise of grace at present, or
because of some distempers which overtake and surprise him in the act of
communicating. This Point it may be at first sight looks strangely, but upon
consideration will be found too true; For if we look back to the Passover, we
find, that an Israelite circumcised, and so qualified to eat the Passover,
yea a true Israelite might be unclean at the present time, and so incapable of
keeping it; And we have at home in this Text, an example and a proof of this
Point. These Corinthians are looked upon as, and supposed to be (and no doubt
some of them were) godly and regenerate persons, who yet contracted epidemical
judgments upon them, Many sick, weak, etc. and that for a sin they little
thought of, their undue and unfit coming to the Lords Table; they are
distinguished from the world, verse. 32, Of whom its said, (...), verse. 30. For
this cause you are judged of the Lord, and chastened; and hence the word (...),
is contended to import only temporal judgment in this place. I confess this
Point is controverted and disputed, and more abroad than at home amongst us.
Vasquez seems to me to hold, That it is enough that a man be in a state of
grace, and that every godly man receives worthily, or else should sin
mortally; But it is no new Doctrine with us, That a regenerate man may sin
mortally (as they speak) or commit a sin meritorious of condemnation; We must
not lessen regenerate men's sins, which in diverse respects are the greater,
because the person is regenerate; Even they that are babes in Christ, may be
carnal, and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3. ^. And therefore Cajetan on the other side
requires actual Devotion, as necessary to the fruit of this Sacrament; and his
Argument is, Because the Sacrament works according to the manner of its
signification; And therefore as meat and drink to the end they may nourish, do
require that we cooperate by some act of life, to receive and digest them; so
there is necessary some act of inward grace to meet with and receive this
spiritual food, that it may nourish and refresh us; and I hold the Argument
good and firm; Nor do I find any privilege of a regenerate man, that he
cannot commit this sin: He may be under a spiritual Apoplexy or stupidity, as
David for a time seems to have been: He may be overgrown with a crust, a
coldness, a security, and so unfit by disease, though not by death.
Chrysostom saw this truth, when he speaks of some that may not eat, because
not initiated, (...), and others, though they be members, yet are (...),
unclean. It Is true, It is proper to the godly to receive worthily, but it is
proper, Soli sed non semper, only they do so, but not they always, and
therefore I turn my speech to you, and desire that you be not rendered secure
and negligent by this false principle, that a regenerate man cannot receive the
Sacrament unworthily, for this is the ready way to fall into that sin which
you imagine your selves free from, by taking you off from that
self-examination, that trimming of your Lamps, that purging out of the old
Leaven, that blowing up of your Graces into act, which is so requisite unto
your meeting with your Lord in this Ordinance.

I know that for the most part those do charge themselves with this sin of
receiving unworthily, that have least cause; The worthiest Communicants are to
their own eye the worst; They never acted their graces lively at the Sacrament;
They never felt the present delights and fatness of this Ordinance; They have
been always encumbered with doubts, with fears and distempers, and have often
gone away with more anguish of spirit than they came, and a world of such
complaints there are; and I confess it is not ordinary that gracious persons
do stand in good opinion with themselves, but yet Jacobs going away halting
from God, was not an argument that he had not prevailed; Sick people may be
nourisht and strengthened with that meat which they cannot taste or relish in
their mouth; Grace is more apt to see sin than it self; for the eye does not
see it self, and the more it grows in light, the more tender in sense: In
spirituals it is true: But I shall speak a Paradox, Those diseases we feel and
are sick of, seldom prove mortal, that is, when the affections melt with
sorrow, and not the conscience amazed with horror, though I would not nourish
complaints against my self, yet I had rather have the sense of Paul, Romans 7.
wherein he complains of himself, than his confidence, when he said, I verily
thought I ought to do, etc. and I think a proud confidence both a greater cause
and sign of unworthy receiving, than humble fear and sense of imperfection,
for even this is a grace to be exercised at the Lords Table.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Graces which are to be exercised and set on work in the use
of this Sacrament.
. 1.
THe Graces which are to be exercised and set on work in the use of this
Sacrament, are pointed at, and taught us by the Ordinance it self: For when the
Apostle bids every man to examine himself, he should leave us in a wilderness
and wide world, for he tells us not of what, but that the Ordinance it self is
the Rule of this examination, and does bespeak those graces which make us fit
to come unto it. This is the way that Chemnitius goes, whereby to find what
those graces are which enable us to receive the benefit and effect here to be
expected: And to me it seems an excellent way, For hereby the Communicant (as I
have often said) is made suitable to the Ordinance, and the examination is kept
within its bounds: So that if any should quarrel, and say, You require such
things of us, as you have no warrant for; You lay burdens of your own
invention, we appeal to the Ordinance it self, and require nor more, nor less
than may be deduced from it, and demonstrate; We know that in all Sacraments
there is Analogy or proportion, and so in this, the elements broken bread, and
wine pouned forth, or the body and blood of Christ, the actions of Taking,
Eating and Drinking the outward elements, do denote the acts of a Communicants
soul, receiving and feeding upon Christ, and such acts there must be to answer
unto the outward actions. So as if you tell me of any sensible object, it is
easy to show what sense it belongs unto, for if it be light or color, it
belongs to the eye, if it be any sound, it belongs to the ear, etc. So this
Sacrament being surveyed and studied, it is not hard to find what graces are
to be set on work accordingly: And this Rule, that I may not guess at random,
I shall follow in the ensuing Discourse.

First, It Is necessary that the Communicant have knowledge of the Nature, Use,
and End of this Sacrament, and that is demonstrate thus: Here are outward
elements and actions, which do signify some other thing, as namely, the body
and blood of Christ, as himself expounds it, offered by God unto, and to be
received by the Communicant, and therefore there must be knowledge to discern
and understand this mystery that is hidden under a visible outside, to wit, the
Sacrifice of Christ's body, which is represented, and the confirmation of the
Gospel Covenant by his blood; for without this knowledge a man comes
blinde-fold, eats and drinks as a bruit, takes the dish for the meat, and is no
otherwise refresht than a thirsty man would be by eating and sucking a
sign-post, which does but signify that there is wine within. It was a childs
Question, Exodus 12. 26. What mean you by this service? And I would our ignorant
people would so play the child, for they do but eat the shell, and gnaw the
bone of the outward service, because they know not the meaning of it; So the
carnal Jew knew not the meaning of the Rites and Types then used, nor saw both
Law and Gospel in their Sacrifices, both which they were full of; I confess
the knowledge of this Sacrament draws with it the knowledge of our lost estate,
(as Passover is not understood without Egypt) in sin and misery; For where
Christ appears bloody, there sin must needs appear deadly, and those
fundamentals and grounds of Christianity, which are but the A. B. C. of
Religion, must be known, but it is not the knowledge of a Scholar, but the
knowledge of a Christian, which we plead for, so much as may serve to look into
the entrails of this Sacrament, and may lead on the affections to value, prize,
thirst after Jesus Christ, whom if we see not, we cannot desire or love, Visus
est prima amor is linea, fight is the first line of love, nor can we believe in
him, until we see, John 6. 40. Whosoever see the Son, and believes in him,
shall have everlasting life. I should not charge a poor Christian with any
great rate of knowledge, for the quality is more to be regarded than the
quantity; If he know both sin and Christ by taste, as well as by sight, if he
have a distinguishing and favoury knowledge of the things of the Spirit, and
there be, as it is in embers, a great heat, though but little light, then is it
good, though not great. I know that Questions demodo in all points of Divinity
are hard to answer. It Is well if we can answer a Question aere. I may know what
sin is, and yet not tell how it enters, and comes at first into my soul. The
Apostles took Christ at this time for their Savior and Lord, the true Messiah,
but how he should execute all the pa^ts of his Office, they did not clearly
understand, and yet did at and drink with him at his Table.

. 3.
Secondly, This is not all, but it is first, as light was at the Creation, the
first creature, but all the world was not made when light was; He is not wholly
fitted that has knowledge, there must be a Christ-receiving, or a
Christ-taking faith, and this is shown thus, God offers the body and blood of
his Son, which was shed for the remission of sin, and says, Take ye, Eat
ye, Drink ye, and that inward act, which answers to this outward action,
whereby we do receive Christ that is exhibited we call faith; when Christ is
tendered to us in the Word, we believe ex-promisso; when offered in the Supper,
we believe ex pignore; There we have a promise, here a pawn or pledge: This
faith is the taking hand, which goes forth to the offering-hand of God. This
taking, eating, drinking, are but faith appropriating and applying Christ: You
say, you believe, What believe you? That God offers Christ to your faith;
What Is a poor man the richer for believing that one offers him a shilling?
What Is a condemned man the better for believing that a pardon is offered to
him? This is but a faith of the truth of the offer; But do ye receive Christ
offered? Do you close in with Christ? Do you take him into you? Here is the
best Covenant, sealed with the best blood that ever was; You believe this to be
a truth, but come not in to this Covenant, that says does but serve to your
just condemnation; It is the Christ-receiving, not the truth acknowledging
says that brings salvation to you. If men did but know what saving says is,
we should have either more or ^ewer believers, more, for they would renounce
that superficial thing cahed faith, and buy gold tried in the fire; Fewer, for
they would not count themselves to believe by that faith which they have; A
woman may believe a man to be rich and honorable, and ^eall in his suit, yet
that belief does not make a marriage, but actual consent to take him for a
husband; For says gives as well as takes, it gives a man up to Christ, as well
as takes Christ to be a Savior. It is not true faith that blows hot and cold
out of the same mouth, and cries Hosanna to Christ a Savior, but yet I will
not have him reign over me: This Sacrament presents Christ to faith thus, It
presents Christ himself, his body and blood, not the benefits of Christ apart
and abstract, but Christ himself. It presents Christ for intimate union with
us, as the nourishment is to the body: It presents him really, as the bread and
wine is really taken and received: It presents him crucified and suffering, as
if he was now dving and bleeding, in whom faith finds reconciliation,
remission, justification and redemption, so is it acted and exercised in this
Ordinance.

. 4.
Thirdly, The third grace that is freshly revived, and set on work in this
Sacrament is Repentance, and that appears thus, Here is represented, Goes
Justi^e against our sin, in bruising his own Son, with fore and dreadful
breaches made upon him, and this Justice is mixed with goodness in transferring
and laying upon the Sacrifice the delinquencies and sins, which had they been
charged on us, had sunk us into the bottom of perdition, and who that sees
this shall not tremble at the fearful wrath of God, which Angels and men could
not stand before? Who shall not mourn over Christ, whom we have pierced, as
it is said of them, Zech. 12. 10? Who can love the knife that slew his friend? I
mean the sin that our Savior bore in his body on the Tree: This
consideration here presented to you, if you follow Christ from the Garden to
Golgotha, should me thinks affect the soul of a believer.

1. With tender meltings of godly sorrow for sin.

2. With fresh purpose of amendment of life.

1. With godly sorrow for sin; To hear the strong cries, and see the
streaming blood of Christ; for can there be a greater demonstration, either of
Gods Justice toward sin, or of his goodness to a sinner? They say an adamant
will be broken by blood, but alas the heart of man has lost ingenuity, or else
the blood of Christ would make us love sin as bad as the terrors of Mount
Sinai, yea and to love it less, and hate it more; Fear may break a man, but
goodness melts him; The terrors of the Lord may amaze and leave a man as hard
still, but godly sorrow makes tender, and changes the disposition of the soul,
Revive then the sense of your sin, even pardoned sins do revive godly sorrow,
and the more, because he tastes goodness and grace to him unworthy; the sweet
of the Passover is lost for want of bitter herbs.

2. With fresh purpose of amendment, a needful grace to be renewed at this
Sacrament; we should eat this Passover with shoes on our feat, and slaves in
our hand, ready to march out of Egypt; We cannot eat the Passover and stay in
Egypt still; God confirms his Covenant, and we must restipulate with God to
cast out and execrate the old Leaven: Let Us carry wounded sins from this
Table; Bring wonded hearts, and carry away wounded sins: Let Us learn to die
to sin, by seeing Christ die for sin, Mutet vitam qui vult accipere vitam,
says Austine, The Covenant of Grace is sealed. Let us seal a Covenant of
Obedience; By the merit of Christ's death we are purchased to be Gods, not our
own; By the power of his Death we are slain, dead to sin: But here I must
break out to meet with our common purposers and resolvers, which (if ever in
their lives) do now, when they come toward the Lords Table, flatter God and
themselves with a new beginning of a new life, from this time they are
resolved, that the ear that has heard them, shall hear them swear no more; The
eye that has seen them, shall see them drunk no more, etc. I would these
green cords would hold, but we find this righteousness is but a morning dew,
their Sampson lusts, when they awake break all these cords, And why? Because
these purposes arise from a fit of conscience, not from a principle of life or
love, and so they prove but Lucida intervalla, they return to their madness
again, when the fit takes them. I would such men would resolve to be ashamed
of these resolutions, which so often leave them in the dirt, that self
confusion may carry them out of their own strength, which selfe-resolution
does but arm them with, and therefore does not stand; For he that has the
Falling Sickness may resolve to fall no more; but in vain, until the disease
be purged.

These are the principal, the staple graces to be exercised in this Ordinance,
there are others which are included in these, which I but name: As

. 5.
Fourthly, Spiritual appetite of hunger and thirst after Christ, who is here
offered, as full nourishment for the soul, under the form of bread and wine. I
account gracious desires to be the immediate products of regenerated graces,
and very comfortable testimonies of life spiritual, 1 Peter 2. 2. but it is
called vehement desire, 2 Cor. 7. 11. in difference from the sluggards desires,
which are but wishes, and which every man pretneds unto, though it be plain
they are but of Balaam's temper, who desired to die the death of the righteous,
but loved the wages of unrighteousness; God helps his people much by giving
them good desires, both for that they make prayer warm, and give great comfort
in the midst of sad complaints, yea they bring us to the Word, and to the
Sacrament, where the want which occasions the desire may be supplied; Keep them
alive, and they will keep you alive; Sharpen and whet them as men do
indifferent stomachs with vinegar; Sense of sin, and desire of grace are
excellent preparatives to this Supper.

. 6.
Fifthly, Love to fellow members of the body of Christ, For we are all
partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. If we eat together all of one loaf,
let us love them with whom we have this fellowship and Communion. The
Love Feasts of the Primitive Church are read of, but alas they are lost; I mean
not the feasts, but the Love, and in stead thereof, In^oelix lolium, unhappy
feuds, quarrels, divisions, rents abound, as if we were not children of one
Table. Corinth is come into England, I hear that when you come together in the
Church, there are divisions among you, 1 Cor. 11. 18. Ours are wider divisions,
we do not come together in the Church, one Table is profane to another, and
yet the Apostle faith, If I have all Faith, If I suffer death, without Charity,
I am nothing, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. It Is almost Popery to
speak of Charity; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
love one another, says Christ: And this was the old mark, but truly it is
almost worn out; Oh let us revive it at this Sacrament; where God seals the
pardon of our Talents, Let Us learn to forgive the pence of our brethren. Of
all sins, the Apostle interprets the Leaven to be purged out, of malice, 1
Cor. 5. 8. Purge out malice; For Love is the cement of this Fellowship and
Communion of members, which are supposed to have one life, because nourisht
with the same nourishment, that is Christ.

. 7.
Sixthly, The last grace I will speak of, which is here to be exercised, or
call it rather a duty, if you please, It Is Thankfulness, without which the
memorial or remembrance of Christ's death is but a dry and fruitless
commemoration. Humility makes thankful; The Samaritane Leper returned to give
thanks; He was more remote from expectation of cure, and therefore the more
thankful; The sense of our own unworthiness, and of the great disproportion
between Christ and us, may raise up our thanksgiving to a higher flame. The
lowest hearts rise highest in gratitude, pride and merit are unthankful.

And so I have shown you those graces, which being exercised, do fit us to
receive worthily, and set the heart in tune to this Ordinance. The Lord
satisfy you with the fatness of his house, and make you drink of the river of
his pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8.

CHAP. XXVI. Motives to quicken Endeavors to a fit or worthy Participation of
this Ordinance.
. 1.
modus orandi, or manner how the Sacrament works, or contributes to spiritual
grace, is not of vulgar disquisition. I signified to you last day, that
Questions de modo in all parts of Divinity, are usually difficult to unty. All
confess that Sacraments work by institution of God, as the brazen Serpent
healed the fiery sting, but that is yet too short; For does Gods institution
elevate the nature of the Sacrament to produce the effect? Then is that effect
plainly miraculous, and the faith of miracles should be required; Or does the
institution of God appoint the signification and obsignation of the Sacrament
in such and such an use of it? This indeed is according to rule of Schools and
of our Divines, Modus operandi sequitur modum significandi, and then it is
plain, that there must be somewhat in the Communicant, both to understand their
signification, and to receive the obsignation and sealing by the use of them,
for otherwise they are but (...), empty names, as an Hebrew word to an English
^ar, and hence it is that, I say, the capacity must be excited and awakened for
the fit participation of this Sacrament, or else it is nothing to us but bread
and wine, and the spiritual benefit is lost.

That you may have always at hand (as a fyle to sharpen your endeavors.) some
brief Motives and Reasons to awaken you; I shall briefly recite and offer to
you these few.

Motive I.
1. That as your coming worthily may yield a great improvement of your
spiritual state, so your coming unworthily may add much to your guilt and
condemnation; The same passage through the red sea was safe to the Israelites
by faith, the Egyptians assaying to do the like were all drowned, Heb. 11. 29.
Let no man say, Why may not I receive good by the Sacrament, as well as any
other, for the Egyptians (...), trying conclusions were drowned; The same
Sacrament, like the Cloud, is to one the refreshing shadow, to another the
consuming fire; The bread as broken, is the Communion of the body of Christ, 1
Cor. 10. 16. and yet, he that eats unworthily, eats condemnation to himself, 1
Cor. 11. That which is Manna to a believer, is to a Judas poison, as the
Ancients speak, and all this is vitio sumentis, through the sin of the receiver
who eats Quails under wrath, Psalm. 78. 31. and sits down to Haman's feast,
Esth. 7.

Motive II.
2. Though a Christian is not altogether to judge of his receiving worthily by
the fruitful success and benefit which he finds, but by the exercise of his
grace, and by his sacramental disposition, yet the fruit does not follow,
except there be a right use, and worthy participation of the Ordinance. Some
are so childish, and such spiritual sensualists, that if they have not sensible
and sweet joy or comfort, or a present removal of their thorn, they conclude
they come unworthily. It Is our fault, that as Israel in the wilderness, we
limit God to give that we desire, or else murmur and think we have nothing: So
it is in this Sacrament, and so in our prayers we are passionately desirous of
serving even our own lusts, Jam. 4. 3. The after-fruit cannot be the measure of
our worthy receiving, but the present gracious frame of spirit, and exercise of
our graces: As by fair and beautiful children we cannot judge of lawful
marriage, but by consent declared, and ritely given at the present time, and
yet the fruit and benefit comes not, but in and by the way of receiving
worthily, we judge of our selves to be fit guests by the wedding garment, not
the sweet taste of the Supper, and yet we cannot sit down and eat, except we
have the wedding garment. We love a sweet willing disposition in a child,
ready to do what it can, than always to be crying for plums. God highly prizes
those that set on work their obediential graces, to observe the Law of any
Ordinance, and perform it* for if we can lust for quails, and yet murmur at the
way of the wilderness, we are too like the carnal Israelites; There is in all
spiritual joys, comforts and raptures, two parts, the one is the fruition of
the sweet of them, the other is the serviceable use of them to oil the wheels,
and with more freedom to perform hardest duties of obedience. Now if in this
latter respect we improve or seek them, it is far the better to like in any
Christian, for it is Gods part or share, The joy of the Lord is your strength,
yet duty is the door by which reward enters, as reaping comes by sowing, They
that sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6. 8.

Motive III.
3. There is a sacramental disposition requisite to a Sacramental Communion,
and it is a very spiritual disposition, as the Communion is spiritual: This
disposition is not one single grace, but a complexion or temperament made up of
diverse ingredients, which are not all distinctly and eminently acted by every
man at this present, but some of them, as occasion and necessity may require. I
have already shown you them in general, and told you, that they are bespoken by
the Sacrament it self, and as it were deduced from it. This Sacrament affords
us the communion of Christ's death, where his body broken, and blood shed are
set before us; Here we communicate of a dying Christ, in heaven we shall have
him as a Tree of life. This is that epulum foederale, or Covenant-feast made
for confederates, God is one party, and the faithful are the other, and both
parties of confederates do ( sic dicam) partake of the same foederal Sacrifice,
Christ Jesus, the blood of the Sacrifice is offered up to God. The same blood
in the Sacrament is offered and given to us, as it is said, Exodus 24. 6. Moses
took half the blood and sprinkled it on the Altar, and he sprinkled the other
on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant. If we understood the
Ordinance, we should easily agree, that a sacramental disposition is a very
spiritual disposition, and requires the very purest addresses that we can make
to it, where God himself entertains his people with no other cheer than which
satisfies himself, and will have them taste of that which he himself is pleased
and delighted with, that is (I say again) Christ Jesus. Now in this so near
approach to God, ye have an excellent Rule, as in all other approaches, Levit.
10. 3. I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, the case was, that two
Priests had taken strange or other fire, not Gods fire from his Altar, but
other fire, common fire, and so themselves became the Sacrifice, for God will
not be slighted. If we bring fire, and it be not his own but ours, we may be
consumed by it, but he not pleased. To which end and purpose, that we be not
found in this case, and under this wrath, I shall endeavor to show you that
strange fire, or those false and insufficient qualifications which men draw
nigh to God in this Sacrament withal, to their own hurt and prejudice.

CHAP. XXVII. False and insufficient Qualifications for the Receiving of this
Sacrament.
. 1.
A Fair carriage of outward life, or a good complexion of moral virtues is not
a sacramental disposition; but rather show a plethorick constitution, a
self-fulnesse, a self-righteousnesse, which are the greatest obstructions
against Christ that can be: I confess grace often dwells in a worse house, and
in rougher natures and constitutions; but all the stars do not make day. The
metal of these virtues is very good, but they want a superscription upon them;
there may be nothing of Christ, and he that comes worthily to this Sacrament
must have somewhat of Christ in him; or must be in some necessity of him, that
he may eat with sour herbs; A man may come with less sin unworthily, I say
less, than a worthy Communicant; For it is not the number or quality of sin,
but the sense of, and repentance for it, that is here considerable; A bottle
stopped with gold receives not so much as an empty shell; it is Christ that must
be in your eye and thirst, or else your fire is strange fire.

II. A man may be humiliatus, not humilis, humbled not humble; The Angels that
sinned were tumbled down into a lower place without any abatement of their
God-opposing pride, man-opposing malice: If God pound thee in a mortar by
crosses, pains, miseries, dreadful horrors of conscience, yet pride lives, an
argument whereof is, thou will not adventure thy soul on free grace without
something to recommend thee to it, and he that has nothing else will have his
misery to be his worthiness, and the murmurings which a broken estate, and
broken body and spirit do belch forth, what are they but fumes and smoke of
pride: Cut a Be in pieces, yet she puts forth her sting; There are many long
for humbling breaches, smarting sorrows, and it may be their intention is good,
but the bottom is merit and pride most commonly, they would make their
humiliations their Christ: Alas, if God should charge but one sin in his full
weight on thee, it would break thee as a great stone an egge-shell. Did it not
so in Angels? Who would be a Pharaoh, Cain, or Judas? Is not broken iron,
broken ice hard still as ever? But true humility is a Leveller, there are (2
Cor. 10. 5.) two things (...), Every high thing, and that is taken away, and
(...), every device, and that is brought into captivity, not only to the
salvation, but to the obedience of Christ; The metal must be melted as well as
broken, and it is enough melted, when it will run into the mold, and take the
impression: Is the will conquered and changed to receive Gods Image, Submit to
Christ his righteousness, and to his Sovereignty, to receive the promises, and
take up the yoke of crosses and commandments? Art thou humbled for sin and
hate it, humbled under thy own righteousness, and castest it out? Art thou
willing to take Christ a Savior and a Lord, to have him, and be his, not on
terms of thine own, but terms of the Covenant? Draw nigh to God, this is not
strange fire, for it has melted thee, and not only tormented thee.

III. Thou find in thy self a faith, whereby thou assentest to the goodness
and veracity of God, the truth and all sufficiency of Christ, the whole tenor
of the Covenant, and Doctrine of the Gospel. I say with James Chap. 2. 19. Thou
believe that God is one, (...) thou do well, (...), so believe the devils;
They have so great knowledge and conviction, that they believe more than we do,
because they know more, but this faith has no seat in the will, or at least
draws it not to election of the good things believed to be; A man may be called
an orthodox believer, by virtue of this faith, and it is sides recta, not vera,
a right faith not a true, sana, but not salvifica, sound faith, but not saving,
if thou bring this faith only, thou shall receive only the outward sign, for
it is a seeing eye, but not a receiving hand, and many shallow effects it may
have by virtue of the general mercies and promises of God, but the Sacrament
says, Take, Eat, and therefore there is besides this a Christ-receiving or a
Christ-accepting faith, for not to those that believed by mere conviction, John
2. 23. did Christ impart himself, but to as many as received him, Joh. 1. 12.
Weakness of faith in our times is properly said of this manner of believing.
It Is the receiving hand that shakes with the palsy; Few complain of weakness
of faith historical, nor of the hardness of it, because it is not encountered
with discouragements, sins, temptations, as saving faith is, because the whole
adventure of the soul lies upon it, and God knows when we come to shoot the
gulf, and to renounce all false hopes, or true fears, and cast our selves on
Christ, we do it with great difficulty, for without Gods attraction it is
impossible; and this is the faith which we must be exercised in, and which is
confirmed by this Sacrament, and a rare faith it is, even in the believing
world; For it gives up man to Christ, as well as receives Christ; And the
dis-interessing of self-love, and the interessing of Christ into pre-eminence
and government is very rare and infrequent; For I count that no receiving of
Christ, which divides him, and takes so much as self-love would serve it self
upon, but brings not every thought into captivity to the obedience of him.

IV. If thou find in thy affections any appearances or seeming impressions of
grace, be not over-credulous till the bottom be searched, for there lies
abundance of self-love, and self-interest, even when there is a good
countenance and fore-side; as in the zeal of Jehu, which carried in the
forehead of it, The Lord of hosts, but there was a byas within that wheeled
toward his own interest, I shall name but four, and that briefly.

2.
1. The love of God which is a reflex of his first love to us; As the Sunbeams
which come from the wall are the reflex of the beams that first smite upon it,
and there may be a love of God upon terms of his beneficence, providence,
patience, general goodness to mankind without any love of Christ in
sincerity, which is upon special and distinguishing grounds, for that love of
God which is over-topt by self-love, is not accounted love of God, but rather a
lust of serving our selves upon him, which is the last resort of the love of
most men to God, but it may be distinguished thus, If it arise from the sense of
that distinguishing love of God to thy soul, whereby he has drawn thee to
Christ out of the pit of common perdition, and that without any worthiness in
thee, or contributions of thine to that inestimable grace, yea notwithstanding
that contrariety and opposition to him, wherein thou wast above many others
engaged, the very thought whereof does ever inflame the heart unto a man's dying
day: If it be a love to God for his holiness and his sanctification of thee to
bear his Image, and to be like him: If it be a love of complacency and
friendship, to delight thy self in God, and to affect Union and Communion with
him: If it produce a willingness to confederate with him, and to be in league,
against all interests of the flesh and world: I love my master, I will not go
out free, or be at my own freedom.

2. The second affection is desire of grace, and of spiritual things. I
conceive there may be a carnal desire of things spiritual, and carnal prayers
for spiritual gifts, namely to consume them upon our lusts of pride and
vainglory, which is the desire of Simon Magus; a desire to die the death of
the righteous, which was the wish of Balaam, a desire of forgiveness of sin
to be freed from condemnation by mere self love, a desire of heaven too, to
open unto us, for happiness not holiness or communion with God, a desire
comfort to anguish of conscience, and that rather for ease, than for grace, a
desire of grace it self, as a necessary bridge unto, or sign of salvation;
Give us of your oil (say they) for our lamps are out; Many fallacies may be in
our desires, and yet I account them, when they are refined from dross, to be
most comfortable signs of spiritual life, for Christ makes thirsting after
rightcousnesse the character of a blessed man, Matthew. 5. and the Apostle makes
them a fruit of repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and a sign of regencration, 1 Pet.
2. 2. if they arise from a taste of the graciousnesse of God, and carry on to
the sincere Word for growth in grace, and be spent in endeavors of obedience,
and exercise of communion with God, equally longing to be Christ's, as to have
Christ: He that shall deny to a poor soul the comfort of such desires puts out
the spark that smokes in the wick of the candle, when the flame is gone out
before.

3. The third affection is fear, the fear of the terrors of the Lord, and
those punishments which according to his threats wait upon sin. Estius
propounds the case, Whether a man under servile fear may come to the Lords
Supper? And answers, No, but with distinction, the fear of wrath may be used as
a bridle to curb the insolency and luxuriency of the flesh, by saying hell and
damnation close to it, and so the regenerate, whose flesh is impetuous, may
make use of this fear to restrain the propension of it, but then if this fear
be merely of punishment, so that were it not for that, he would with all his
heart give himself over to commit iniquity with greediness, then it is plain,
that the willingness to sin lives, and this horror of conscience nothing at
all changes the inclination of the will, no more than the whip or chain does
the nature of a Fox or Wolf, and the case is no other than that of a child
that will colly himself with the cole that is black and dead, but dare not touch
the fire cole which burns his fingers, and there is no comfort in such
restraints from sin, nor have such fears any spark of grace in them.

4. The fourth affection is sorrow for sin, which may be worldly and carnal,
and no other than Pharaoh his, Take away this plague; or the pangs of a whore
that returns to folly; But there is a sorrow according to God, which works
repentance unto salvation, and brings forth those seven fruits, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
which change the frame of the heart, a happy mother of so many good children:
These are the pangs of a godly soul, and it is one of the first steps unto, or
parts of the Resurrection of a Christian from his false, and is caused not
merely by wrath, but as Peter's weeping was by the looks of Christ; The
reproofs, the frowns, the offense of a gracious God, thaws the heart into
melting tears, and would do so, though there were no hell; As a meek child
needs no other house of correction than his fathers looks. I am loath to be of
that opinion which banishes godly sorrow out of Religion; For if I were so
happy as to want new matter and occasion for it, yet sometimes to review old
forgiven sins, and the rather, because forgiven with fresh bleeding heart, does
excellently keep down swelling of pride, and gives a fresh and new relish to
Christ Jesus, so the overflowing stoods do enrich the adjacent grounds, and
make them fresh and green. And so much concerning these affections.

V. The fifth Consideration is of purposes of amendment, which we named before,
among the preparatives to this Sacrament, which there are few but have at one
time or other, and men do exceedingly befool and flatter themselves in them;
For we have known that upon conviction of conscience and shame, for many years
together by fits and moods, and for the skinning over some gallings of
conscience, men fly to purposes of repentance, and put them on, and bind
themselves by vows or other bonds, to do no more, and yet experience tells us,
that Sampson did not easilier break the cords that bound him than these men do
break their purposes, and cancel all bonds and resolutions, and so a sick man's
purposes are very often no other than the vows of a Mariner in a storm at sea,
who for the time will be or do any thing, but when the danger is blown over,
they are as they were. You ask, What such are to do? And the answer is ready,
Resolution without mortification is to little purpose, the lust must be
mortified that carries the sway and dominion; For as the purposes of a man in
his lucid intervals, or of one that has the Falling sickness to fall no more,
is to little purpose, without some application to the disease that still lies
within, and will return and break all dams that are made by the stream of it;
so are resolutions upon conviction of conscience without effectual exercise of
mortification by setting upon that root and lust which between whiles does but
sleep, and will awaken again. Let the patient see and search his sin, and
apply the corzy of the Law, and use those sharp medicines which eat out a
rotten core, and follow that sharp work of mortification, or else all is to
little purpose.

VI. The last thing I mentioned was thankfulness, a grace proper to the
Eucharist, which signifies thankfulness, and is the denomination of this
Sacrament, wherein thanksgiving is so eminently required and exercised, and it
^ises either from the general ground, or from the special; The general is Gods
Philanthropy, which shows it self in a sic dilexit, by giving Christ a Savior
to us, and not to the Angels that sinned, and is worthy to fill our hearts and
mouths with admiration to all eternity; But the special ground is Gods
incorporation of us particularly into Christ by giving that differencing grace,
which distinguishes not from Devils, but from reprobates and hypocrites, and
all that are called, but not chosen, which is a mark of special favor;
Thanksgiving for this shall be the work of heaven, where we shall better
understand and look upon our former misery, as a fyle to set off and illustrate
our glorious redemption, and to this tune ought our hearts to be set here, For
in this rejoice not, that the devils fall before you, but that your names are
written in heaven; and we have cause while we are in this lower orb to be
thankful, for the least mustar-seed of faith and grace, whose work is to set a
byas upon the will, to choose God, and set up his interest above all interests
of self or world, and he keeps this spark alive in worst times by no less a
miracle than a spark of fire in the sea, and that he inables this little grace
to fight and combat (and that is in Scripture to conquer) against the
powerful fears and oppressions of the world, and the powerful allurements of
lust, and ease, and pleasures of sin, which is a Sunshine that usually puts
out our fire more easily than cold and nipping frosts, which rather make it
hotter, and this is the meaning of that phrase, He will not quench, etc. till
he send forth judgment unto victory; The smoke ends in victory.

Motive IV.
After this digression, the fourth Motive or Consideration follows, exciting
endeavor to come to this Sacrament in a sacramental disposition, and that is
taken from the benefit or fruit of it to a worthy receiver; for the exercise of
grace is well rewarded, and the labor and pains bestowed in preparation or
trimming of our Lamps, is paid to us in the fruit and benefit of this
Ordinance; And therefore, since as Bellarmine acknowledges the Question about
the effect is of so near a kin to the preparation unto this Sacrament, I shall
briefly touch the point of the fruit and benefit thereof, and that in these two
points,

1. That there is a great benefit and fruit of this Ordinance.

2. What that fruit and benefit is.

CHAP. XXVIII. The fruit and benefit of Worthy Receiving.
. 1.
1. THere is a great benefit of this Sacrament to them that communicate therein
preparedly; though all be not agreed, what the benefit is, as may be seen by
the Doctrine of the Papists, the Socinians, the Orthodox, yet that there is a
benefit, few will deny; and if it be denied, the sensible experience of many
godly Christians does attest it, to which experience the Apostle sometimes
appeals, saying, Gal. 3. ^. This only would I learn of you; and for others
that will not own their experiences, or have them not, reason may convince
them, That as God made no useless creature, so he ordains no fruitless
institutions, that this Ordinance being instituted for the use of his select
people and confederates, and that at such a time as our Lord Christ had the
very powers of darkness to encounter with, therefore it is an Ordinance of
some moment, which began at the death, and stands in force until the second
coming of Christ, and if nothing el^e could be said, this is enough. That the
guilt and danger of receiving unworthily being so dreadful, there must in
reason be some proportion of benefit and fruit to the receiving worthily, which
reason may convince any rational man, that there is not only a good, but that
good is of very great proportion and degree, and that ye shall not come for
fruit to a barren fig tree.

I have reason to demonstrate both these points:

1. That there is a benefit.

2. What that is.

Reason (I say) to show that there is a benefit.


1. Least this Sacrament of so great moment be vilified and brought to
contempt, as a dry teat or empty vessel, they must needs neglect both the use
of this Sacrament, and all preparation thereunto that undervalue it, as
fruitless and not beneficial; Who will take any pains to go to a dry Well that
has no water in it? It Is vain to urge preparations on them that are not
persuaded of any benefit in it; And though I will not dispute, Whether the
supreme Lord may not oblige his creature, man, for probation and trial of his
obedience, to a duty whence no other benefit should redound, but the very duty
of obedience, As if he oblige Abraham by a Law to sacrifice his son, yet I
conceive that Gods standing Ordinances and Laws, do not only oblige a duty, but
intend a benefit, and thereby invite obedience, as it is said, Deuteronomy. 10. 13.
What does the Lord require of thee, but to keep his Commandments for thy good?
And that therefore there is a benefit of the right use of this Sacrament, by
which we may lawfully be excited and impelled to observe the Ordinance, as we
climb the tree for the fruit that is upon it; It Is true, an unworthy
Communicant reaps no other benefit than somewhat that is like that which the
Apostle calls, the advantage and profit of the Jew, Romans 3. 1. Romans 9. 4. viz.
Tabulas and sigilla foederis, the Tables and Seals of the Covenant, but the
reason that he receives no inward and spiritual fruit, is not because there is
no water in this Well, but because he has no bucket to draw it forth; For God
offers and holds forth Christ and the benefits of the Covenant, his hand is not
empty, but our hand is full of sin and self-righteousnesse, that we cannot
receive it, for they that will receive must bring a capacity. It Is a known
truth, He that means to receive a benefit which is conveyed by way of Covenant,
must bring the Condition of that Covenant in his hand, as he that comes to a
table brings life and stomach.

I know there are some, and they godly, that fear, or happily will boldly affirm,
that they were never sensible of the benefit of this Sacrament; They hear of
good fruit, but they have not tasted it, and therefore their edge is dull and
flat to the receiving of it. To which I answer this, That if there be an
exercise of the graces required in the act of receiving, they may not deny the
fruit of the Ordinance, because they are not so clearly sensible at the
present, for happily they limit God to the present time, or confine their
expectations to some particular fruit, as elevation of heart, sensible comfort,
clear assurance, or the like, which because they find not, they think they
have nothing. I have showed you before, That God answers the expectations and
satisfies the necessity of his people by giving some other grace than we would
have, or have our eye upon, as Paul's prayers were answered in sufficient grace,
not the removing of the thorn; We cry for comfortable signs, and God gives
obediential and serviceable graces; We look for spiritual gifts, he gives
humbling grace; We would have conquest of sin, God gives power to encounter
it; We look for lively grace, and God keeps grace alive; We expect at present,
God afterward gives us it; in bodily nourishment it is not possible for a man to
tell what degree of nourishment he received by such a meal, yet he finds that
he lives, and is strengthened, and he may be nourisht by that which he does not
relish with delight. As for those that upon pretense of spirit and spirituality
have cast off Ordinances, as fruitless unto them, I should wish they would
consider, whether they be not rather besides their wits, than above Ordinances,
seeing Christ himself does not only by his institution but example, commend
this Sacrament unto us, as a standing Ordinance, for the whole Church until he
come, and so has commended the Ministry also, till we all come to a full
stature, Ephesians. 4. 11. I would know how that spirit which has carried them to
the pinnacle of the Temple, and has set them above Ordinances, or that
witnesses to them without graces, can be proved to be the Spirit of Christ, and
if they would show us how they can live without meat and drink too, there would
be some hope that they might be starved into their senses and right minds.

. 3.
So much for the first, That there is a fruit and benefit by this Ordinance:
And now to the second, What that benefit is, and I have reason to show what it
is.

1. Because superstitious and carnal persons do expect what they have no
warrant to expect, perverting the use of this Sacrament to other intents and
ends, than it has by institution of Christ; The sick man too superstitiously
conceives that the opus operatum is a viaticum, that will pay his fare for a
present passage into heaven, or that it is like a Popish shrift that blots out
all sin, and wipes off the old score. If in stead of making the right use we
idolize the brazen Serpent, and worship it, what is it but superstition? which
to avoid, the only way is to mind the institution, and the end thereof, or
else we shall look for that which God never intended to convey by it, as Eve
was deceived in the fruit of the Tree she are of.

2. Because commonly men have confused thoughts of a benefit, but they know not
what; They think it is good for something, but they know not what, and so do as
it were take physic merely upon trust, not knowing what is in it; Hence is
that awfulnesse of this Ordinance with all men, they must be holy now at this
time, they must not follow their wicked and loose ways; They are going to the
Sacrament, and they go with an ignorant reverence, not knowing what is either
the fruit or the danger of it. So much for the first.


Now to that point, What the effect, as some call it, or the fruit and benefit
of this Sacrament is?

I answer generally, and then more particularly. 1. Generally.


1. The benefit of the Sacrament is of an higher nature than these creatures
are able to convey, and therefore they are stamped and made instrumental by an
institution of God; It had been both vain and superstitious to have expected
spiritual benefit by the use of these elements, had not the word of institution
given a new relation to them, which without it they have not. There might a
similitude or representation have bin borrowed to signify the sufferings of
Christ, but that would not have made a Sacrament, any more than marriage
representing the mystical union of Christ and the Church is therefore a
Sacrament; There must be a promise and a command of God added to the visible
creature, whereby the use of it to such a purpose is warranted and authorized,
therefore we must look higher than the outward elements, or their power; An Axe
is more than iron; A Seal is more than wax; Gods institution renders the
creatures of bread and wine (which as Bellarmine notes, though two elements are
but one instrument or seal) useful to spiritual effects, not by elevating
their natures, as the iron or wax being instruments are not elevated to any
efficacy, as physical instruments, but by appointing their use and working by
them, therefore that Question, How can bread and wine, How can water reach or
touch the soul is impertinent? for it refers to a natural causation; but moral
relation needs no contact, there is a benefit follows upon the right use of
them, which comes not through them tanquam per canalem but from God by the use
of such means, as an estate is conveyed from the donor by a seal of wax.

2. The benefits and blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace are sealed,
and the graces of the Covenant are improved in a believer by this Ordinance,
Christ, Christ crucified, or rather in crucifying, together with such benefits
as are immediately sealed in his death, reconciliation, redemption, remission
of sins, as on Gods part offered to a sinner, are here obsignate and sealed:
And faith in Christ, repentance from dead works, etc. are here exercised,
excited, confirmed, renewed, the main fundamental and essential benefits and
graces which are in most necessary order to salvation, are here in act, not
such things as some Christians have, and some have not, But the common
necessaries of the Covenant, both on Gods part and ours, without which no
Christian can be saved; And therefore I cannot but wonder, that many
well-meaning souls should fix their eyes on such benefits or gifts to be given
in this Sacrament, as are not (...) to a Christian, but eminencies of some, and
not of all; they look for gifts of prayer, of memory, freedom from passions,
some Parts or Endowments, which they see others excel in, and if they gain not
these, they gain nothing, they are unworthy, etc. Alas that you should so
mistake, I tell you, Covenant-benefits, Covenant graces, the radicals, the
vitals, are they which receive improvement here; here is Christ offered, and
faith is quickened; here Christ crucified is exhibited, and here repentance is
renewed, the main benefits that God can give, the main graces that we can have,
such as are essential, without which salvation is not. This I would have
observed for the honor of the Ordinance, and the quickening of address to it.

And another thing also, viz. That when you hear us use the words exhibit,
convey, confer, afford grace or spiritual benefits: You are to understand,
that this is not per mod^m emplastri, seu medicae potionis, not as a natural
agent, but per modum sigilli, or Sacramenti, in a way proper to a Sacrament; As
we say, an estate passes by the Seal, that is, is assured or confirmed, or as
we say the promise or contract passes by a Ring, words which every one
understands; and doubtless the benefit and fruit of the Sacrament is afforded
in a peculiar way; As the Word, besides begetting grace, does also increase and
confirm, but not in the same way as the Sacrament does; as it may be the same
bargain that passes by promise, by oath, by earnest, by seal, yet these are
several ways of certioration; so it is the same grace that is nourisht by the
Sacrament, as by the Word, but the way is diverse; That of the Sacrament is by
way of sign and seal, that of the Word by way of Promise or Covenant-agreement;
nay the two Sacraments themselves do d^ff^r in their proprieties, Baptism seals
the Covenant by way of initiation, and the Lords Supper by way of nutrition or
augmentation. God did not make or multiply Ordinances at random without their
distinct and peculiar use, for the exhibiting to us the same Christ, the same
graces, the same benefits, as men have several ways of assurance making, one
to another.


So much generally. For the particular, we shall consider,

1. What is here done. 2. What is hence received.

For the first, There is here done by Christ two things, and answerably two
things by a believer in Christ.

Two things principally are here done by God, or by Christ.

1. Christ crucified is really exhibited to the faith of a believer.

2. The gracious Covenant which God has made in Christ is sealed to a believer.

1. Christ crucified, together with all those benefits More particularly.
that ensue upon his death, is really exhibited to a believer; for there is not
a mere representation, or empty figure, but a real and true exhibition of
Christ himself, as broken for our sins. The word accipite, Take ye, Eat ye,
does evidently confirm it to us; If there were only a resemblance or figurative
representation, then See ye, were more properly said, but Take, Eat, this is my
body, plainly shows, that Christ himself is here given to a believer. I think
we look so much on the representation, that we forget the exhibition, and
therefore should labor to conclude, that Christ himself, as in the state of a
redeeming Savior is truly and indeed holden forth and presented to our faith,
as verily as any benefit can be offered and holden forth by one man to another.
This body and blood was really offered up to God for us, which is in this
Sacrament really offered and applied to us by our faith: Answerable to this
exhibition of Christ himself, the believer performs an act of Communion, 1 Cor.
10. 16. partaking of the body and blood of Christ in a spiritual sense, for
spiritual nourishment, increase and building up; for the new creature is fed
and maintained by Christ, and by virtue of union with him, we have communion,
as the Vinebranches by their union with the Vine, receive sap and nourishment;
So as we have not graces without Christ, nor benefits without Christ, but first
in order of nature we have union as members of him, and then of his fullness we
receive; For a Christian is like a branch that has nothing of its own, but
what it receives from the root, as it self springs from the root, so the
increase and growth of it is from the root also; He is as the Moon, which, as
appears in the Eclypse, has no light of it self, but increases and comes to
full; as it receives from the Sun; Let no man think that a believer has no
further use of Christ after his first believing and receiving of him, for then
this Sacrament would not be useful, the effect whereof, as Durand says, is
not absolutely necessary to salvation, as if one could not be in a state of
salvation without it, because it serves for confirmation of one that is already
in a saving state; and it is plain, that a great part of Christ's Office is
exercised in preserving and continuing of them in him, who are already members
of him, and therefore is the finish^r as well as author of our faith, for we
live in him, and from him, and our grace is maintained by emanations from
Christ, as the light by continual emanations from the Sun, and therefore this
Ordinance of Communion of Christ, and the exercise of such acts of communion
are of prime use and benefit, as the branch that shoots from the Tree, grows
and lives from that root which gave to it the first being by a contrived influx
of sap into it. And this is the first combination of Gods act, and of ours.

2. The second combination is, The gracious Covenant which God has made in
Christ, is sealed to a believer; The common nature of a Sacrament is to be a
seal of Justification or Righteousness with God by faith in Christ, Romans 4.
11. As a seal refers to some Covenant, so the Sacrament refers to Gods Covenant
with man, which is this, That God promises to accept into favor, and into his
propriety all that do believe in, and receive Christ, and to bestow upon them
all the blessings and benefits thereof. God gives Christ in way of Covenant; He
covenants with Christ our Lord, that he should give his soul an offering and a
Sacrifice for sin, and in so doing should see his seed, Isa. 53. 10. So
Arminius in this point is orthodox. Of this Covenant the death or blood of
Christ is the Condition which Christ accepted and performed.

The Covenant of God with us is, That all that believe in Christ that died, and
receive him for their Lord and Savior, shall have remission of sins, etc. and
of this Covenant the blood of Christ is the ratification, as the Testators
death ratifies the Will or Testament, for it is blood that does (...), dedicate
the Testament, Heb. ^. 18. and so in the words of this Chapter, This Cup is the
New Testament (or Covenant) in my blood, viz. (...), dedicated thereby, and
this blood we receive in this Sacrament, as the Seal of the gracious Covenant
made with us; So that if doubts arise concerning the reality of God, and
surenesse of this Covenant that speaks so much grace and mercy, we look upon
and take hold of this Seal of blood, and are thereby settled, and therein
acquiesce.

Answerable to this act of God, the believer accepts of, and submits to this
Covenant and the Conditions of it, viz. to believe, and to have God for our
God, and thereof makes a solemn profession in this Sacrament, giving up himself
to Christ, as Lord and Savior, restipulating and striking hands with him, to
be his, and so binds himself, and does as it were seal a counterpart to God
again, and not only so, but comes into a claim of all the riches and legacies
of the Will or Covenant, because he has accepted and here declares his
acceptance of the Covenant. The Seal is indeed properly of that which is Gods
part of the Covenant to perform and give, and is no more but offered, until we
subscribe and set our hands to it, and then it is complete, and the benefits may
be claimed, as the benefit of any conditional promise may be, when the
condition is performed; And least you should stumble at that word, I must let
you know, That the Will accepting and submitting to the conditions, is the
performance of the conditions required, and so the gracious God that might pro
imperio, require duty and allegiance of his creature, condescends to us to
enter into a Covenant of Grace with us, and vouchsafes us the honor of coming
into Covenant with him, that so he might settle and maintain a communion and
correspondence between himself and his people, and there might be a mutual bond
of engagement each to other, which is solemnly professed, as often as we meet
with God in this Sacrament, because we are so apt to disbelieve and waver about
his promises, and to halt and decline from our obligations to him. And this is
the second combination of action, according to that which is to be remembered at
every sealing day, (the Sacrament is a sealing day) Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, etc. And
the Lord has avouched thee to be his peculiar people, as he has promised
thee. So much for the first, What is here done.


2. I come to the second, What is here received, and I do not mean to say, what
every believer does sensibly receive, but what God has appointed by this
Sacrament to convey, and what may be received by a believer in the right use of
it, not always to his own sense, but according to the nature of this Ordinance.

I will not say that which some affirm (but it is Apocryphal) of the Manna
which the Israelites did eat, that it had the taste that every man desired; But
this I may say, that as Calvin of himself, When I have Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 7.
said all, I have said but little, the tongue is overcome, yea the mind is
overwhelmed; I say then in one word,

1. Christ is here received, the body and blood of Christ into intimate Union,
as the nourishment of our souls. What is more ours than the meat we eat? What
is more nearly joined to us, than that which becomes part of our selves? The
Scripture by the language it uses has even overcome our apprehensions; A man
may eat the fruit that has no interest in the Tree, but here the believing
eater grows into the Tree, he that drinks, drinks the fountain, he comes to a
closer Union with the conduit-pipe of all grace, the flesh of Jesus Christ; You
know the best meat and drink does you no good, except it be made your own; nor
is Christ of worth, except he be ours, he is, as if he were not. Toll meum,
toll Deum, we must be happy by a Christ within us, Know you not that Christ is
in you, except you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. ^. There was a crowd touched
Christ, but virtue went out of him to none but one that touched him by faith; So
there is a throng about the Table, but none receive Christ, but those that by
faith take and eat his crucified body. If Christ himself be h^re received, what
spiritual grace is there that is not in him.

It is somewhat a gross conceit to ask, How Christ in heaven, and a believer
on earth can be united? For man and wife are one flesh, though a thousand miles
asunder; And we know, that as the Apostle says, Col. 2. 19. there are bands
and joints whereby the Head and every Member, the root and every branch are
united, and they in this mystical union are Spirit and faith. He that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. And so according to that strange
expression, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians.
5. 30 A phrase which signifies that the humane nature of Christ is the root of
this Union, but not to be exagitated by too subtle curiosity, because
mystical.

2. A believer in Christ may here receive remission of sin, not venial
only, as Papists teach, but deadly and mortal: Oh, but we may not come with
such sins! Yes, with repentance and remorse for them; We may bring our sins
to the head of our Sacrifice, and put them thereupon by Bellarm. de Euch l. 4 c
18.
confession. Bellarmine resolves all the difference between Papists and
Protestants about the effect of this Sacrament into this, That the Papists
deny, the Protestants hold remission of sin to be given here, and the Papists
do it in favor of their Sacrament of Penance, that one Sacrament may not rob
another, but Scripture tells us, Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many for remission of sin; Shed for remission,
that is true, says Bellarmine, not given in the Sacrament, a mere evasion, for
we drink the blood that was shed, even that which confirms the New Testament,
which promises remission of sin. The great Argument wherein he triumphs
before the victory, is, That a believer has remission of sins before he
comes, viz by his faith in Christ, and that is true, Nemo cibum Christi accipit
nisi actu sanatus, but in this Sacrament the pardon passes obsignante sigillo,
before a believer is pardoned by the Covenant; and here that pardon is sealed,
and sealed it cannot be, except it be before, for the pardon of forgiven sins
is sealed, as Abraham received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had before, Romans 4. 11. And this is needful
for relief of our doubts, and fears, and waverings; For this is the great
Question of anxiety, which troubles the soul; Are my sins pardoned? Are my
sins blotted out? And God has, says Chemnitius, instituted this Sacrament for
solution of this Question, to the weak faith, Ecce signum, Behold the Seal,
believe upon the Word, believe upon the Seal of God. Luther gathers it by a
gradation, The Cup is put for the Wine, the Wine signifies the blood, the blood
is the blood of the New Testament, Matthew. 26. 28. The New Testament contains
the gracious pardon of sin to a believer; And if remission of sin be an
Article of the Covenant, the Seal must reach it; Therefore all that have
wounded their souls with grievous sins be wounded again with sorrow, put off
the purpose of sinning, bring repentance and faith, touch the hemme of Christ,
receive here the pardon of sin, question not the Seal or truth of it.

3. That I may not divide into further particulars, there is by this Sacrament
a communication of a greater proportion of Gospel Spirit, For we have been all
made to drink into one Spirit, 2 Cor. 12. 13. which Spirit plentifully bestows
his several fruits and graces, for the growing up of a member into Christ the
Head in all things, Ephesians. 4. 15. from whence we have not only those Auxilia
actualia, actual influences, and aids of delight, comfort, evidence, sweet
tastes, powerful motions and impressions, which Vasquez calls, grace
sacramental, and says, That Gra^ia Sacramentalis non est gratia habitualis,
sed auxilia quaedam actualia, which I conceive is an error; For though a man
have a sweet taste and transient delight in meat or wine, yet there is also a
permanent and abiding nourishment proceeding from that he eats or drinks: So
here the very habitual graces are nourisht, strengthened, excited: It may be a
man at present does not feel that strength he does receive, nor is sensible of
the intention of his graces: For the same Vasquez says, Intentionem habituum
infus^rum sub experimento humano cadere non posse; And it is true at present
time; But the growth of grace manifests it self in time; We do not see our
selves or others grow, but that we are grown is plain enough; nor do we see
how much the light increases by every step of the Sun rising higher; for our
growth is graduall, and by imperceptible instances and degrees, when power of
resisting temptations, mortify lusts, which before were too hard for us, does
appear, we may see our growth, as we see our shadows are shortened, but how
much in a minute we see not, and may say, That the graces which this Ordinance
requires and excites, are thereby strengthened and enlarged, and therefore the
Rule is good, What Grace thou would have strengthened by this Ordinance,
that do thou set on work, and exercise in it, for that is Sowing to the
Spirit, as the Apostle calls it; And I make no question but a believer shall
find the benefit of this Sacrament in his obedience also, for the fuller the
Vessel is, the faster it will run out at the tap: If the habits increase,
the fruit of obedience will be proportionable; We mend a barren Tree at the
root, sweeten the sap there, and the Tree is more fruitful; When Jacob had
seen the sweet vision in Bethel, then he lifted up his feet, Genes. 29. 1. it
put mettle into him.

So much for this Point, the Benefit of this Sacrament, which being dis-used,
as at this time, is a great loss to the improvement of Christians, though they
see it not. The Christians in persecuting times, when a storm was coming, then
were they most diligent to frequent this Table, to lay in store for a hard
Winter, and fortify their resolutions. And let this Benefit be a Motive to the
use of Preparation, which was the reason I have handled it in this place, for
there is no Promise, no Benefit to one that comes to this Table unworthily.

CHAP. XXIX. The Sinfulness of Eating and Drinking Unworthily.
. 1.
I Have said, concerning eating this Bread and drinking of this Cup of the Lord
worthily. Now I come to the other branch, The eating and drinking unworthily;
What that is has been sufficiently opened already. The Antithesis or
opposition between worthily and unworthily is such, as if you know the one, you
know both, as he that knows what a right line is, knows what is a crooked or
oblique; Worthily to eat is in such manner as is answerable and suitable to the
nature, end, and use of the Ordinance, and unworthily to eat is contrary, that
is without a sacramental or Supper-disposition, and otherwise then is fit, that
these holy mysteries be handled and entreated, as I have before proved.

The Point I shall take up is this,

. 2.
To eat the bread and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, is a sin of an
high Nature, and of consequence dangerous. It is a fearful sin, and attended
with fearful effect. It is of a high nature, as appears by that peculiar guilt
which is contracted, he shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, it
is of fearful consequence, He eats and drinks judgment to himself. Thou
see, says Chrysos^em, (...), In loc.
what a terrible word the Apostle speaks, speaks, nay thunders, so as may awake
the secure soul into a trembling. The example of Nadab and Abihu, their being
made Sacrifices themselves, was enough to give warning to all after them
against offering of strange fire, and was the occasion of that excellent Rule
which God gave at that time to be observed in all our near approaches to him, I
will be sanctified of all that come nigh me, Lev. 10. 3.

There are four things to be opened:

1. The sin it self, viz. Eating and drinking unworthily.

2. The cause of the sin, Not discerning the Lords b^dy.

3. The aggravation of the sin by the object and peculiar nature of it, viz.
A guiltiness of the body and blood of Christ.

4. The danger that attends or follows upon it, He eats and drinks judgment to
himself.

. 3.
1. The sin is Eating and drinking unworthily, and it is a peculiar sin or
transgression of the Law of this Ordinance; One may do what the Law requires,
and yet sin grievously, if the manner of doing be vicious and corrupt; Men
may be content, if the matter by their Law required be done, whether with a
good will or an evil, but God is not so, who values the disposition of heart,
when the thing in command sometimes is not done; so he hearkened to Hezekiah his
prayer for them that prepared their heart to seek God, though not legally
purified, 2 Chronicles. 31. 19. and is highly displeased when the command, Do this,
is observed, but it is done unworthily, and therefore they say, he is pleased
with been, not merely with bonum. The Ordinance it self is the Index or
Touchstone of unworthiness: Here is Christ offered and presented to thee, and
thou have no faith; Christ broken, bleeding for sin, and thou have no
repentance; Christ for spiritual nourishment, and thou have no appetite. The
Covenant is sealed, and thou art no confederate, strengthening and refreshing
grace conveyed, and thou art a dead man; Communion of Christ's body and blood,
and thou art no member in Union with him: How unsatiable art thou to the
Ordinance, and therefore eatest and drinkest unworthily.

. 4.
This word [ unworthily] may he taken two ways, Privative and Contrary; Taken
privatively, it is as much as not worthily, not suitably to the Nature and Use
of the Ordinance; Taken contrarily, it is as much as wickedly, so we say, a man
deals unworthily that is basely, unjustly, injuriously.

In the first sense,

He that has no spiritual grace, and therefore cannot exercise it, or he that
has some, but does not exercise it, may come unworthily, for the words, Take
ye, eat ye, do denote, and so require the exercise and acting of our graces,
such as have no grace can exercise none, as a dead body without life cannot
exercise an act of life, it cannot take and eat. Hear what the Schoolman says,
Statum gratiae, etc. that a state of holiness and grace is necessary to the
worthy receiving of this Sacrament; And I believe the ancient Fathers were of
this sense by the order of Baptism, the Sacrament of Regeneration going before
the Supper an Ordinance of corroboration, and this Rule speaks plainly, no man
unregenerate receives this Sacrament worthily. It Is a Doctrine of hard
digestion, but hard wedges cleave hard knots, make that the point of your
examination.

. 5.
Such as have some grace, and do not exercise it, but are either stupid or
presumptuous, they have a wedding garment, but do not put it on; Pride and
presumption of grace betrays many a man to fin, and to come to this Table
unworthily; These Corinthians were most blown up of any, and they are punished
for eating and drinking unworthily; Let no Christian be secure, as if he could
not come unworthily, and so neglect the trimming of his Lamps. The best
swimmers are soonest drowned; I would not crush the least spark of grace, I
mean by having grace, that spark in the flax, and by exercise the very smoke of
that spark, Christ would not let them be drowned, whom he calls (...), o ye of
little faith, he exercised his faith that Matthew. 8. 26.
said, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.

In the second sense taken contrary, unworthily is

He that comes to this Table with a conscience imbrued in guilt without
remorse, or lives in practice and custom of foul sins and lusts, we have such
as come out of the adulterous bed, newly stepped off the alebench; their hands
are full of bribes and extortions, their mouths belch out lying, swearing and
revenge, they come to the Sacrament in superstition to be shriven, to sin
again, not in repentance to be forgiven, to go away and sin no more, their
prosanenesse dreams of a cure, not of a conquest, they are willing to leave
their sins upon Christ's back, only while they go and fetch more; There is a
wretched crew of such Communicants, tha^ make conscience of the Sacrament, and
make no conscience of those sins they live in. Judas came impudently, and in
the purpose of horrible sin, Parta timeat qui paria audet, says Novarine,
Let them fear the like, that dare do the like; God was not pleased with them,
that did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, the
reason is given, they were idolaters, and committers of fornication, and other
enormous sins, 1 Cor. 10. And who, you will say, can come without sin? I
say, there are remaining sins in the regenerate, but not reserved sins: If
you hold the course and custom of those sins, which your conscience cannot
but tell you of, you do but add the sin of receiving unworthily to the rest
of your sins, and blow up the fire of Gods wrath the hotter against you; why
then (you say) better stay away then come, to load our selves with more guilt?
If you will not come, because you will not repent, and cast off your sins,
you proclaim your just condemnation, in preferring your sins before Christ
Jesus. If ye come without true repentance, you eat and drink your own
damnation, nothing can lead you out of this labyrinth, but repentance and
conversion: Therefore as the Prophet said to some that desired the day of the
Lord, To what end is it for you? It Is darkness and not light; so shall I say to
many that are forward to rush into the Lords Table without fear. To what end is
it for you? The bread and wine ye eat and drink is but your own condemnation:
Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to Amos 5 18.
take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and art not
reformed, Psalm. 50. 16, 17?

CHAP. XXX. The Cause of this Sin, viz. Not discerning the Lords Body.
. 1.
2. THe cause of this sin of eating unworthily is, not discerning the Lords
body, ver. 2^. The word (...) signifies to make difference between one thing
and another; Act. 15. 9. Heb. 5. 14. and in this place to discern and put a
difference between two, and those two things, as the common stream runs, are
common bread and wine, and this Bread and Cup of the Lord, which are employed
to another use and end than promiscuous and common bread at your own tables,
for this is called the Bread of the Lord, the Body of Christ in respect of
signification and use, I find no fault with this exposition, (...), etc. says
Justin, We receive not this Bread as common bread, nor this Cup as common wine,
which has no other use than to refresh the body, I say, I find no fault, but
why may not, Not discerning the Lords Body signify thus much? Not minding the
body of Christ signified by the Bread, but looking all upon the shell or sign,
and not the kernel or inward thing, which should be regarded with greatest
intention: Let me not offend in the terms of this distinction.


There is a speculative discerning of the Body of Christ, and there is a
practical.

The speculative discerning is the notion or knowledge of the signification of
the outward elements.

That the Bread and Wine do represent Christ's Body and Blood, That the Bread
broken represents his Body broken etc. This is an easy piece of knowledge, as
easy as to know that a picture or figure do represent such a man, and there is
no great measure of knowledge to construe all parts or rites of the Sacrament
into a true meaning.

In this sense not to discern the Lords body is directly to inhere and stick in
the bread and wine, as bread and wine, and to take the picture for the man: It
may be there be some such brutish ignorants, that discorn not the meat from
the dish, nor the marrow from the bone, such as these are, are fit to be
excluded, because where there is no Analogy holden, there can be no Sacrament.
The Analogy, I say, between the outward Sacrament, and inward thing, must
either be known, or it is to us no Sacrament; For a similitude, resemblance, or
Analogy, must be between two things at least, and therefore those that in a
blind and brutish ignorance know nothing, but the outward part do not
properly receive a Sacrament, but are like the carnal Jews that knew not the
meaning of their Sacrifices, or of those types of Christ which they had; The
brazen Serpent was Christ, the Rock they drank of was Christ, but many of them
dreamed not of him in the use of them. I do not believe these Corinthians, men
of such knowledge, were such bruits, for the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 16. speaks to
them as wisemen, who knew this, saying, The Bread we break, Is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ, etc. Therefore


The practical discerning of the Lords body is, when the body and blood of
Christ are so minded and intended, as to compose the inward man, and the
outward behavior of the Communicant into such a posture of spirit and
carriage, as is suitable to Christ's body and blood there offered and exhibited
unto faith, and the not discerning the Lords body, is when the behavior is so
loose and rude, the inward man so discomposed and carnal, as that
interpretative, they may be said not to mind, or not to discern the Lords
body; So we would say of one whose carriage is wanton and loose in the presence
of his fathers corpse lying in presence in a coffin or beer, you do not mind,
you consider not who lies there, because if he did, another countenance and
carriage would beseem him, and so the Corinthians are taxed here for such
carriage of theirs, as proclaimed they had no serious thoughts, no sad and
fixed mind upon Christ bleeding and broken, for that consideration would have
bespoken another frame of spirit, and form of behavior. The result of this
explication is,

The Apostle gives us a twofold cause of eating and drinking unworthily.

1. If we understand not, know not the Analogy or resemblance of the bread and
wine to the body and blood of Christ, but stick in the rind or shell, and feed
only on the husks, as upon common bread and common wine, and resting in that,
as knowing not the use or end, which makes the difference, which renders all
brutish ignorant people unworthy receivers, And how should I make them know
the danger that know not thus f^rre of the use of this Ordinance? Willingness
to be taught would help it, if they were not more willing to run blindefold
into the pit, than proudly unwilling to discover their fillinesse and
ignorance, and if they be unwilling, It Is no cruelty but charity to keep a
blind man from running into a pit.

2. If we understand the meaning of the outward elements by rote or notional
knowledge, but do not seriously and with a fixed intention consider and look
wishly upon Christ's body and blood represented, offered, and to be exhibited to
our faith, for this will compose our outward behavior and inward spirit; this
bespeaks faith, repentance, affections suitable; this composes us unto
reverence and serious behavior: Imagine the very Body of the Lord Jesus was
presented to your eye, broken, bruised, bleeding for thy sins under the
stroke of Gods terrible justice, and so offered unto thee for thy salvation,
Would not thy soul raise up all affections, and muster up all it is forces, to
receive him, to open to him, to thirst after him, to admire and praise him? And
does not God in this Ordinance really hold him forth to thee as such, and so to
be received? The nature of the feast to which we are invited, teaches us how to
dress our selves; To a funeral we come in mourning, to a marriage in a
wedding garment; The very minding of the body of Christ teaches men to come
worthily, that is suitably, and the not minding of it with fixed intention is
the cause that we come loosly, carnally, and so unworthily.

CHAP. XXXI. The Aggravations of the Sin of Unworthy Receiving.
. 1.
3. THe aggravation of unworthy receiving follows, (...), He shall be holden
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, or God will judge and repute him
guilty of the body of Christ unworthily received and entreated, or guilty of
the unworthy handling, or of the contempt and violation of Christ's body and
blood, the memorial of whose death is profaned by your irreverence, and this
appointed means of your participation of it is undervalued; What a high sound
is there in these words, He shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord?
and the eclypsis is left open to be filled with some fearful word, guilty of
neglect, of contempt, of profane violation of, and injury to this body, the
body of our Lord. For the right understanding of which phrase,


1. The Papists, and no less the Lutherans, do hence infer, That the very
Body and Blood of Christ is eaten and drunk by the mouth of the Communicant,
which they call Sacramental eating, and the reason is, How else is an unworthy
Receiver guilty of his Body? We of our Confession that hold the Corporeal
Presence of Christ under the Bread impossible, as well as false, do therefore
infer, That that Body which is not corporally there cannot be eaten, and
therefore the guiltiness of Christ's Body is not by the oral eating.

2. We expound it thus, Whatsoever irreverence, slightness, neglect or
contempt is used by any in the celebration of this Ordinance is reputed and
adjudged to redound to the very Body and Blood of Christ: As it is Treason
against the State to embase their coin, to abuse a Picture is dishonor to the
person, to hang a man in effigy, or subvert ones Statue (as the Romans used)
are interpreted to the disgrace of the man whose they are; And thus it is here,
by reason of that near relation and analogy which this Bread and Cup have to
Christ himself, so the uncircumcised man-child, Genesis 17. 14. is said to have
broken my covenant, and therefore the Fathers reckon an unworthy receivers
sin to be like that of Judas, the Jews, the Soldiers, that abused and
dishonored the very Body and Blood of Christ; and this is a peculiar guilt
that attends upon the celebration of this Ordinance, wherein Christ condescends
to come so near us, by offering his Body and Blood to us, and this
condescension to be neglected and refused; Think of this, and measure not the
sin by your own apprehension of it, but by the account which God makes of it,
who accounts all them that come unworthily to vilify the Body, the sufferings
of his Son our Lord, and to despise the Seal of that gracious Covenant, which
we make our selves believe we do not do.

The result from hence is,

. 3.
1. The sins of wicked Christians against Gospel Ordinances are of highest
nature, and incur greater guilt. It Is said of Christians, That after
illumination and taste fall away, they crucify to themselves again the Son
of God, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6. 6. And they that sin wilfully after
the knowledge of the truth, are said to have trodden under foot the Son of
God, and counted the blood of the Covenant a common thing, and to have done
despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10. 19, 26. A mere Heathen is out of
capacity of guiltiness of these high sins; He is not guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord, which was never offered to him in this Sacrament. No
aggravations of sin are like to the aggravations of the sins of wicked
Christians, their guilt is not of so high complexion that never knew of Christ;
either we must be saved, or we cannot be so easily damned, the weight of sins
against Christ is heavier than of those that are merely against the Law of God;
We are the earth that drinks in the rain that comes upon us; If we bear briars
and thorns, we are nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 7, 8.

2. How many do that, they think least of, and are guilty of that, they once
imagine not themselves to be guilty of: but few of a thousand will own this
guiltiness of the Body and Blood of Christ, and yet as often as they do or
have eaten and drunk at this Table unworthily, so often they have incurred and
renewed this guilt? Do not they say at the last day, When saw we thee an hungry
or in prison? Did the Jews think they pierced their true Messiah? There are not
many Christians in name and profession such, that can be convinced, that they
hate and despise Christ as much as the very Jews that crucified him, which yet
may be demonstrate by clear arguments. The Jew honored the name of the
Messiah, and expected great things of him, and yet hated and rejected him
blindfold; and so we call Christ Savior and Lord, and besprinkle him with
sweet water, but his reign and government over us, we utterly despise and hate,
and prefer a sordid lust far before him.

CHAP. XXXII. The Danger of this Sin.
. 1.
4. THe fourth thing expounded was the danger of this sin, He eats and drinks
judgment to himself; if he be a godly man that eats and drinks unworthily, or
happily also damnation, if he be an hypocrite, for the word (...), may
respectively extend to both. A strange phrase it is to eat and drink judgment,
but it is allusive, and per mimesin, as sure as he eats of the Bread and drinks
of the Cup unworthily, so sure is judgment to follow thereupon, or to
accompany it, for he eats judgment, but it is to himself, not to others,
except they be partakers in his sin, which may be diverse ways; So as we have
reason to insert in all our prayers, Lord forgive our nostra aliena, our other
men's sins, but without partnership in the sin we need not fear share in the
judgment, He eats it to himself; and therefore that argument of the Donatist,
which is rise now a days, Si corruptis sociaris, etc. If you be joined with
wicked men, how can you be clean? If you pray with them, hear with them,
receive the Sacrament with them, was answered by Austin, True, says he, if we
be joined, but that is not in bodily presence locally, but by consent or
allowance, and so we are no more joined then Christ and the Apostles were
joined with Judas at the Passover or Supper, who I believe was not defiled by
his presence, as neither were those guests that came in to the marriage by the
presence of him that had no wedding garment; It Is true, example may defile by
contagion and infection, but allowance and consent defiles by accessarinesse
unto the sin.


How precious an Ordinance is this Supper, and yet how dangerous? There is life
and death set before you It Is on one side a refreshing cloud, on the other a
flaming fire; so by the same water and way were the Israelites saved, and the
Aegypians attempting the like were drowned: Thus Christ also is a precious
stone to believers, a stumbling and a crushing stone to unbelievers, and the
Word is a savor of life, and a savor of death; Some men's eyes are opened by
it, and some are shut; The same Ark is to Israel a glory, to the Philistims a
scourge; Here is honey in the same rose to the Be, and poison to the Spider,
and it is according as you eat and drink worthily or unworthily. We read in
Scripture, that when people cried to Christ for cure, usually he put it upon
their faith, According to your faith, and, If thou can believe; and we never
read of any one that cried, that he was put by for want of faith; for if they
gave never so little account, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, it was
accepted. The benefit of this Ordinance is according to your Faith, Repentance,
and if you can give but any account of them to God, you may drink Christ out of
this Rock, but if you be in sins of love and delight, and come in your
wickedness, you take the Sword by the point, not by the haft, and you shall
smart for your presumption.

Secondly, The horrible thunder of the Apostle in this place, is not to
deter, but to prepare Communicants; An humble soul is affrighted with the
terror, and dare not draw nigh this fiery Mount, but it is not spoken to
affright from the Sacrament, but to enforce a due preparation; When the
destroying Angel rode his circuit, the Israelites lay secure within the line of
blood: This blood here offered will protect thee from this condemnation
threatened, if thou fly to it. But

Thirdly, The ignorant that are without knowledge, and the scandalous without
repentance, who are by the common vote of men excepted against, as unfit
Communicants, they may know that this is a dreadful eating and drinking, which
is accompanied with such a guiltiness, and wi^h such judgment, and yet this
fiery Sword will not keep them off, they will be rushing in to this Tree of
Life. It is not envy, malice, or partiality, but it is charity to entreat you
not to lust so eagerly after those Quails, which while they are in your mouths,
the wrath of God is like to fall upon you, both of you have marks enough of
condemnation upon you; Desire not to add more, be sure the King will survey
and view his guests, you cannot escape in the crowd; What if you be taken from
the Table, and cast into utter darkness? It concerns me to give you warning;
If you take the Alarm, and first labor for knowledge, and seek repentance
by the means appointed to beget them, and to beget you unto God: Well, If not
then, it concerns the Church to show you mercy in making stay of you from
falling into the fire. For,

Fourthly, The eating and drinking of the Lords Bread, and the Lords Cup
unworthily, is a sin dangerous to Commonwealths and Churches, for it brings
judgment, Epidemick judgment, so it did upon this Church of Corinth, (...),
For this cause many among you are sick and die: Happily they had some common and
mortal sickness or mortality, and knew not the cause of it. Happy we, if we
knew the particular cause of Gods angry visitations, sin in the general we
acknowledge, but we own not our particular sins; We have had many, and
great, and common calamities, but are fallen from assigning them to the abuse
of the Sacrament, and yet we must confess that what has been a door at which
judgments have entered may be so again: Howsoever, I think, that rationally I
may excite public Authority to restrain or to make provision of restraint for
such sins as are pernicious to Commonwealths, in bringing forth public
judgments, which eat up and consume the people, and such is this sin, as I
have shown: I know no Powers can command or compel faith or saving grace, but
it is a sure fallacy to infer from thence, that he may not restrain sins
that bring public judgments, or not bring the people to the means of faith.
It Is a saying, that a man cannot make his Horse drink without he will, but yet
he may have him to the water. God directed the fourth Commandment to
Governors, and Parents, and Masters, and thereby either supposed they had, or
else gave them a Power or Commission to see the Sabbath kept within their
Jurisdictions, not I confess to force the Ger Toshab, or Proselyte of the
gate, to undertake the whole Religion of the Jew, but only the seven
Commandments, as they call them, given to Noah, and not to violate the Sabbath:
If he will live among them, he must observe the Sabbath.

. 3.
Fifthly, You must carefully distinguish between the ground of a man's
receiving unworthily, which is, that he has no seed of spiritual grace, or
comes with reservation of some sin happily known to none but himself, and God
he is not truly within the Covenant, and therefore cannot receive the benefit
of the Covenant, but the ground of the Churches Admission is, that he is
reputed a member, and has not forfeited his right by any known sin justly
and duly proved against him; For all visible proceedings of the Church, or
Civil State, either must be Secundum allega^a and probata; Secret surmises, or
doubtful presumptions, are no ground of just sentence; though a man do eat
and drink unworthily, yet he cannot always be debarred, while he stands a
visible member, and is not proved or alleged guilty of some sin that may
dismember him. Judas was not cast out from the Supper for a Thief or a
Traitor, because that he was so, yet it was not visibly and duly proved
against him. Sin is not scandalous, till it be known: If it be known to me,
I must perform the office of a brother before I tell the Church: And if it was
known to me, that a man was not regenerate, I durst give him the Sacrament,
yea I must, until he be orderly convict of sin that may debar him, for the
Rule of Gods Word is best reason, and that Rule establishes an order, If he
hear not the Church, let him be to thee a Heathen and a Publican, until then,
and upon my private knowledge, he is not to be a Heathen unto me. But of this
enough before.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Examination in order to this Sacrament.
1 COR. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of this Cup.
. 1.
HAving shown you, That to a man that eats and drinks worthily, this Ordinance
is (as I may say) a Tree of Life, but to the unworthy a Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, drawing upon them a heavy guilt and condemnation. Now I come to
that expedient which the holy Ghost affords us, both for the obtainment of the
Benefit, and for the avoidance of the Judgment, and that is in these words,
But let a man examine himself. In which words we observe two things,

First, That Admission and Access unto the Lords Table is given with a
proviso, in these words, (...).

Secondly, That God affords the use of the Lords Table to a professed Christian
upon fore going selfexamination.

The first of these [ And so] I have been all this while in handling, though
not in terms, yet in effect, and have taught you, That no man may come hand
over head, at all adventures, for that the Sacrament is not a Common without
hedge or bar, but a Several, enclosed, as appears by this short word [ And
so] The celebration of this Ordinance requires some previous preparation, and
bespeaks some due and competent qualifications of the Communicant therein. This
medicine that it may have its effect and fruit, requires a preparative; One
duty prepares unto another, I Will wash my hands in innocence (says the Psalmist)
and so will I compass thine Altar: The unclean under the Law had their
Purifications before they drew near to God in his holy Ordinances, for, says
God, I will be sanctified in all that draw nigh to me. I hope you are not only
convinced of this, but well satisfied in it, by what I have delivered to you,
and therefore I will not draw the Saw, and say over again what is already
settled.


The Lord affords the free use of his Table to a professed Christian upon
foregoing Self-examination. This is the proviso of this privilege; Here is
Admission, and Access here is free, both invitation and allowance, But let a
man examine himself, and so, etc.

1. Let a man (...), that is, (...), Every man, as the Hebrew language
sometimes expresses it self? What, every man an examiner? Yea, of himself, For
what man knows the things of a man, but the Spirit of man which is in him? 1
Cor. 2. 11. a partial examiner, you may truly say, but it is at his peril; The
Rule whereby he must proceed is impartial, man that has a reasonable soul has
this power above bruits, which have not that we call conscience, that he can
make reflection upon himself, he can accuse, testify, judge of, and call
himself to account; But is every man in the world meant here? The word examine
rightly interpreted will answer that Question, in the mean time I think it has
this restraint, every man, or every one of you, and of them that are such as
you Corinthians, visible professors of Christ, incorporate by Baptism.
Churchmembers, that have all outward qualifications unto this Sacrament, every
such man, Let him examine himself.

2. Let every man examine, (...), as we try metal or gold by the touchstone, or
by the fire, so the Greek version of the Septuagint uses this word, Prove. 17.
3. God tries the hearts, he tries man by tentations, afflictions, as gold by
fire; man tries himself, as gold or silver by the Touchstone, the Rule and
Standard of this examination is the word of God, called ^ Canon, as a man that
will not trust the fair looks of a piece of money, rubs it on the stone, and
thereby discerns it, whether true or spurious; so not trusting the superficial
outsides and form, which flatters us. We must bring our selves to the
standard, and thereby judge whether we be dross or gold.

3. Let every man examine himself, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove
your own selves. Chrysostom 1 Cor. 11. 28.
takes this word signantly, (...), etc. He does not bid one (says he) to
examine another, but a man himself to prove and search himself: And Paraeus on
the place, speaking in opposition unto, and detestation of the Popish Auricular
Confession, says, Non dicit Sacerdotes probent, etc. He says not, Let the
Priests examine and dive into men's consciences, but every man himself, not that
we refuse any just trial, but we abhor their tyranny and superstition. I know
men are backward to have their wounds searched, and very partial and indulgent
to themselves, but if conscience be set on work in the duty, this unpopular
Tribunal, this (...), as Chrysostom calls it, is the most excellent, for a man
is within himself, others are without him, and he that is within may search the
house bette^ than he that stands without; Our secret hypocrisies and heart
lusts may be discerned by our selves, not by another, and there is no man's
heart but stoops most of all, and is laid flat in the dust under
self-conviction, self-judgement, Therefore let a man examine himself.

And so I have opened the words, Let a man examine himself, which if any one
cannot do, as infants, stupid ignorants, men besides themselves, or will not
do, because he hates the light which discovers him, or does not do, because
worldly employments possess him, or dare not do, least he create trouble and
pain to himself, then he has not performed the provilo, which is, And so let
him eat of this Bread, etc.

Quest. There may be in some of your thoughts, as there has been in mine, a
Question upon this, and it is thus, What if Judas by reflection upon himself
find that he is conceived with a treasonable intention, which he minds to
pursue, and to bring forth? What if any man upon examination of himself find
himself without any spark, and without any desire of grace? What if he be a
scorner of all godliness, and purposes so to be, a vicious and flagitious
slave of sin, and will not be made free, Shall he come and eat this Bread,
because he has examined himself? Shall he plead his privilege, because he
has examined himself?

Solut. If this were so, then Examination, is required for Examination sake,
but that is not so; for self-examination is a duty, (...), tending to a further
end, and that is our meetnesse and fitness to come to this Table, it is to
find a sacramental disposition (...) is that we may find (...), as a learned
man says, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, that is
the end and effect, Lam. 3. 40. Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith,
examine whether Jesus Christ be in you, 2 Cor. 13. 5. So here, Let a man
examine himself, that is, Let him prove in himself a disposition of fitness
and meetnesse, and so let him come, as a man that tries gold at the stone, he
will not take it, because he tries it, for he finds it copper, but if it be
indeed true gold; So one will not go abroad, because he has beheld himself in
the Looking-glass, for he may find deformity and filthiness, but because he
has corrected all inconcinnity by the glass, and composed his dress; And so
except we will prevaricate the holy Ghost intends a fitness and meetnesse
found by this self-examination, and then, and so, Let him come and eat, etc.
The garment is not made by taking measure, nor the wedding garment by mere
examination.

For the clearer opening of this point of self-examination, I might thus
distinguish, There is a selfexamination required of all men, of all Christians,
of all Communicants.

That which is required of all men, is, To search and try their ways in order
to conversion or repentance, Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our selves, and
turn unto the Lord, which if diligently done they might know and own their
misery, and find an absolute necessity of conversion, the want of this is the
reason that men lie so fast asleep in security, and pursue their beloved sins
without check or control, Jer. 8. 6. No man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, What have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth
into the battle; And how is that? He mocks at fear, and is not affrighted, He
says among the Trumpets, Ha, ha, Job 39. 19, etc. It would take off their edge
and metal; If men did but consider and believe how directly their ways point
toward the eternal damnation of their souls. The Rule of this Examination, or
the glass which makes this reflection is the severe Law of God which involves
all sinners under a curse.

That which is required of all Christians is to prove their own works, whether
they be wrought in God, in order to their own comfort, Gal. 6. 4. Let every man
prove his own work, and so shall he have rejoicing in himself, And this is the
sweet and immediate reward of all sincere duties, which leave a sweet taste, or
savor behind them, Heb. 11. 5. Enoch before his Translation had this
testimony that he pleased God: This is that reward, which God gives his people
before their translation, as first fruits before the harvest, the unspeakable
comfort of a sincere duty; Nor only his works, but a Christian is to examine
his spiritual estate, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Whether you be in the faith, Know ye not
that Christ is in you, we should not only be, but know we are, and this by
examining, The Rule of which examination is the Gospel, which gives marks and
evidences of it.

That which is required of all Communicants is, to examine their fitness and
meetnesse, which is their worthiness to come and eat at the Lords Table, and
the Rule of this Examination is the Ordinance it self, or the institution of
it, as I have before showed, for the graces to be exercised in it, and bespoken
by it, are the Rule by which we must examine our selves, whether we have them
in us or no, and this self-examination, this particular whereof the Sacrament
it self is the Rule, is that I have to insist upon, and therefore I am not
bound by the Law of the Text to fly so great a compass, as to handle the
commonplace of self-examination in all his latitude, neither will I do it, but
only premise certain general practical positions, whereby we may be either
moved unto, or directed in the performance of this unpleasing duty,
self-examination, and they are these.


First, The benefit of self-acquaintance is exceeding great (...), is one of
the old wise sentences, though interpreted by them the proud way, not as
Relig^on teaches the humble way; Of all acquaintances which you can have in
this world, this is the nearest acquaintance, and indeed the hardest to get, if
we were not unwilling to get acquaintance with our selves, the Scripture need
not use so frequent exhortations: How miserable are they which pursue
discoveries, and amasse knowledge of almost every thing, and yet live and die
strangers to themselves? One of the first works which the Word and Spirit works
in men, is to give them a light to go down into the dark cellar of their
hearts, and make discoveries; then a man begins to be amazed, and tremble at
the fight of himself. It Is said of the lost son, Luke 15. that he came to
himself; Self-knowledge is the School-mistress of humility; We are proud,
because we know not our selves; He that knows not himself must needs be proud;
He that knows himself loathes himself; He that knows his sins, sees necessity of
Christ; He that knows his wants, prays; He that knows his weakness, fears and
flies to the Rock; He that brings knowledge of himself to a Sermon, gathers out
of the garden those herbs that are medicinal to him; He that knows his own
temptations, avoids the occasions that use to ensnare him; He that knows his
own experiences, hopes with patience, when he sees no light: It Is true, the
heart is deceitful, and who can know it? But we need not taste all the water
in the Sea to know it to be brackish, nor taste every crab to know the tree; We
know the earth well enough, though we never dug to the center; no man is
bound to number all his sins or thoughts, God has taught us, that all a
natural man's imaginations are only evil, continually evil; It Is enough to know
our selves judgingly, so far as may occasion us to know Christ savingly,
whose riches are unsearchable, and cannot thoroughly be known, and perfectly.

Secondly, A man may be deceived in his spiritual estate all his life time, for
want of self-examination in a due manner, by a right Rule we are full of
selfflattery, and of hypocrisy; we disguise and extenuate our sins, we set a
varnish and good aspect on our works and virtues; Before his conversion Paul
Romans 7.
thought himself alive, and that he was in the right, afterward he calls it,
Confidence in the flesh. After a Phil. 3.
man comes into the opinion and profession of Christ, he may be in the case of
the Church of Laodicea, Thou say I am rich, and know not that thou art
naked; The Jew outwardly, thinks he is a Jew inwardly; The foolish Virgins do
not see but that they are wise. I know there is a Rule of certain discerning,
but if we put not our selves into the scales, we may seem to our selves to be
good weight when we are too light. I do not think that all hypocrites are
discovered to themselves, which is the saddest mistake that can be in the
world, never to be convinced, till we hear that word, Depart, I know ye not;
Not that I think that any sincere heart, that is willing to come unto the
light, and cries with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 23. Search me, O Lord, and try
me, does ever perish in this deceit, for such a one has Christ, and therefore
has life; and we are not saved, because we know we have him, but because we
have him, Some are in Christ, but do not perfectly own it. It Is a safe error,
but they that think they believe in him and do not, are not saved because they
think they do, but damned because they do not, and this is a dangerous error.
The Lord put it into your hearts to examine your selves, and prove your selves,
the only way I know to get out of this flattering mistake.

Thirdly, Men that live in the bosom of the Church, are by nothing more kept
out of Christ, than the opinion that they have him already. They have a faith
which keeps them from faith, and a believing that holds them fast in unbelief.
Dr Whitakers approves that saying of Melancthon, That historical faith
infinitely differs from justifying faith, and therefore (which I would have
observed) the Corinthians whom the Apostle exhorts to examine themselves,
Whether they were in the faith, whether Christ Jesus was in them, were not
Heathen Corinthians, but the Church, professed Christians already, and such as
had a faith of profession, and then that Text will prove, that those that have
some faith may be in the Apostles sense reprobates, because they are not in the
faith. It concerns us all, that are professed members of the Church as they
were; Can faith save you, says James, Chap. 2. meaning a superficial,
opinionative, inoperative faith? Alas he tells you of believing devils, that by
confession of all are damned; Let not this faith keep you from Christ, which
does not close you with him, you may be a graff to the stock with a string, but
it will not knit and live, because it is not engraffed in: So you may be
reputed Christians and believers by an outward profession and agglutination, by
that faith you have, but never live spiritually or eternally by it, because
Christ Jesus is not in you; All the terror of the Lord draws no blood; All
invitations of the Gospel move not, And why? Because you lie under the shell
and shelter of this faith and believing, which defeats the operation both of
Law and Gospel, till God open your eyes to see through it, and bring you to see
the need of a Christ accepting faith.

Fourthly, There are but two spiritual estates, and all men while in this world
must be in the one or other, not in both at once, and they are usually known by
the names of nature and grace, or as Scripture usually, darkness and light,
death or life; This is a compendious Rule, and brings this work of
self-examination into a narrow room upon this interrogatory, Art thou in the
state of unbelief and unregeneration, or translated into the Kingdom of Christ
Jesus? Art thou in the narrow, or in the broad way? There is a great latitude,
and many varieties and degrees of men in each of these, but from Rahab to
Abraham, from O ye of little faith, to O woman, great is thy faith, all are
under the line of life, and so from the best flower in natures garden to the
sharpest thorn, all under the black line of death; The discovery is the sooner
made, because the partition is but into two, goats and sheep, walking in two
several ways, to two several ends: You will say, Unto which of these will ye
reckon them that are in transitu, as it were, in the birth, in the passage? I
should say, that as we reckon ^he daybreak to the day, and the embryon of a man
is reckoned to humane kind, and the contracted woman is called wife; so though
I love not to distinguish of these moments, yet if any daybreak of light, any
seed of faith or good desires, any little of Christ appear in any, I should
reckon them to the happier part the regenerate, for they are smoking flax, and
bruised reeds under the sweet promise of Christ, to be blown up, and to be
strengthened, and so would I have them comfortably in their self-examinations
to reckon themselves: As likewise all men in the world may compendiously reckon
themselves under sin and wrath, and in state of damnation, upon and by the
argument, which is the convictive argument of the holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 9. All
men are under sin that believe not in Christ, Of sin, because they believe
not in me, and it reaches all the world: Not believing in Christ proves every
man under sin, if not propter infidelitatem, for their unbelief, therefore
Thomas and other Schoolmen deny it, as to them, that never heard of Christ, yet
ratione infidelitatis by reason of their not believing, The wrath of God abides
upon them, as all confess, and as the Scripture speaks. These four things may
serve as motives to this duty of self examination, and there are two more that
rather look like directions therein.

Fifthly, The Rule of this self-examination must be (according to the
properties of a Rule) a known and certain inflexible Rule, that is not partial
to or against us; for how shall we proceed from examination of our selves to
judge our selves, verse. 31. if the process be not regulated, so as the
judgment may be true and certain; therefore the word of God must be that Canon
or measure, by which, if we will not be deceived, we must be tried, for that
must judge us another day; by a false standard, or a false touchstone, or false
rule we discern nothing; and therefore when thou go about this work, banish
all thy own flattering reasons, all other men's foolish and fraudulent comforts
and counsels; Let the Word of God sit upon thee, and stand or fall before that
Tribunal; See thou not how the Pharisee flattered himself, judging himself by
his own traditional exercises? The young man flattered himself, All this have I
done; Paul shows upon what confidences he flattered himself, and indeed every
man will be in good estate, if he may judge by his own fancy, flattery or
conceit, but false mediums beget but fallacies in conclusion, and our souls are
betrayed and undone by Lesbian rules, a sincere heart will not stand to that
test, knowing that flesh and blood may speak good to me, as the false Prophets
to Ahab, and the word of God speak evil, as Michaiah did unto him; God is not
pleased that any man should bear false witness against, or for himself; We may
neither proudly and partially acquit our selves upon false and flattering
persuasions, nor on the other hand deny the least evidence of grace, and of the
Spirit in our selves, wherein the godly do often deserve blame by slighting and
undervaluing the work of grace in their hearts; There are proud self complaints
as well as self flatteries; The Word is the most impartial Judge of our state,
or of our actions.

Sixthly, It Is necessary to stick upon the work of self-examination, until we
bring it to an issue, and be able to make a judgment upon our own selves, for
we are apt to pull off the plaster, when it begins to smart before it has
done its work, and are unwilling to set up all our reasonings, and bring them
to a non plus, and so we never know our selves, never judge our selves;
sometimes a man is Sermon-shaken, and his heart begins to tremble, and to
question with it self, and if he would but follow the stroke he might come to
find out his condition, but he lets the iron cool again, and like Felix when
he trembled, he dismisses Paul till another time; This the Apostle shows us in
these words, Jam. 1. 24. he goes away from the glass, and straightway forgets
what manner of man he was, and therefore he says, we must look into the
glass, and continue therein, resolving to be deaf to flesh and blood, friends,
carnal counsels, and by the Rule of the Word to bring the Question to an issue,
whether pro or con, for us, or against as.


I have laid down these six Rules, which are of good use, and great service in
the examination of our selves at all times, or at any time. Now I come to the
particular business of the Text, which is selfexamination in order to our
worthy coming to the Lords Table, for that is the work which lies before us; And
for your better instruction, I shall draw down your thoughts in order to the
point, by certain considerations.

1. The Rule of this self-examination is the very Ordinance according to
Christ's Institution heretofore recited; You see the Apostle does not
particularly number or rehearse what the graces, or what the requisites are
upon which interrogatories the examination must be made; He says not, Let a
man examine himself of this, and of that, but Let a man examine himself; The
reason is that which I learn from Chemnitius, That if the Ordinances Chem.
exam. de Euchar.
be the Rule by which the examination is to be made, then it will follow, that
what such a representation of Christ's death and sufferings, and such a
demonstration of Gods offended Justic^, as is here made, what such an offer and
exhibition of Christ his body and blood unto us, for communion thereof, does
bespeak and require of us; That frame of spirit, those affections, those graces
are requisite unto the Communicant, which what they are has been already
deduced from the nature of the Ordinance it self, and by me declared.

2. They being known what they are, it follows that a man examine himself,
whether they be in us, for else we cannot come suitably to the Ordinance, nor
take and eat the body and blood offered to us, the effect and fruit of
self-examination being to know our own selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Whether Christ be
in us, Whether we be in the faith; To know what graces are required, is no
point of self-examination, but whether we be in some measure furnished with them
or no, and by the duty enjoined it is easily inferred, That a man may know
whether he have those graces, for else all examination was unprofitable and
vain, and known they are by reflection and insight into our selves, as a man
knows his thoughts, his own purposes, his meaning, and can ^ell them to another
being asked; so we may know the graces and workings of the Spirit in our
hearts, Qui credit fid^m suam videt in Austin. de trin. l. 13. c. 1.
cord suo, says Austin, that is, except such a darkness and smoke be within,
that they appear not, as sometimes clouds arise and cover the face of the Sun,
but that is not for want of an eye, but for want of clearness in the object,
and then if there be a vapor upon the glass, it makes no reflection; And there
is great reason that a man should not only have the graces required, but should
by self-examination know that he has them, because otherwise he might
blindfold, and at all adventures rush upon the Ordinance, and eat and drink
damnation to himself.

3. Because a man can only then be said to know he has the graces required,
when he does discern and distinguish them from all counterfeits or semblances
that are like, therefore is self-examination necessary; For as gold has
copper, a counterfeit of it self: so have all true graces some thing like
themselves, and called by their name, which are not right, but some slighty ore
lying nearer day; As there is a faith called which is not faith, a repentance
not repentance, a love of God which is not the love of God, a sorrow for sin
which is not godly sorrow, there is meekness, not a grace, but a moral virtue,
etc. And therefore examination of our selves is both necessary and difficult,
that we take not Leah for Rachel, and so come to the Lords Table to no more
purpose than he that goes to the market with a brass shilling, which he thinks
to be good money.

4. Then we have this privilege, And so let him eat of this bread, etc. When
we by examination find that we have, though but a seed or spawne of those
right and genuine graces which are differenced and distinguished from all
semblances and counterfeits which are called by the same name; If every faith
confessing Christ were saving; If every nollem factum, I am sorry, were true
repentance; If every man's saying dolet, it grieves me, were godly sorrow, there
are few or none that could be called unworthy, but there is a difference that
makes distinction between semblance and truth, which few do find in
themselves, because they rest in generals and equivocals. I have in a Sermon
upon this point formerly given the Characters of true grace, and need not say
it over again at this time. Let every man examine the truth of his graces by
these Characters, and so make use of this privilege, Let him eat etc.

And if I might give you the Iliads in a nut-shell, these are the differences
and the characters.


The Difference between Nature and Grace is,

1. Nature begins all his actions from, and refers all unto self, pride,
profit, pleasure, glory, common honesty of men to men; Grace has this
Character, it turns the face of, and sets a by as on the heart, whereby it
intends, aims to seek to please, to know God, and therefore discovers that we
saw not, that emptiness of, and enmity to God which is in us; In a word, it
sets up Gods interest above self, which nature cannot do.

2. Between knowledge and knowledge. There is a special knowledge of God and of
the Word, which is large and beautiful, but the character of true knowledge is
affection, as the light that is joined with heat and assimilation of a man to
that he knows, forming 2 Cor. 3. ult.
and conforming to the image of God, We are changed into the same image; We
shall be like him, for we shall see him, 1 John 3. 1.

3. Between faith and faith. There is a Christ confessing, a Christ
acknowledging faith, Alii cogitant pij cr^dunt, says Austin, but the character
of true faith is, That it accepts of, and closes with Christ himself, both as a
Lord and Savior, and that upon Gospelterms, to deny self, and take up his
Cross, and be his, and this faith is inseparable from holiness, or a godly
life, never to be found in a wicked or unregenerate man.

4. Between Repentance and Repentance. There is a Repentance like that of
Judas, full of anguish, a tormenting anguish of spirit; But the character of
repentance unto salvation, is the rise of it from godly sorrow, which feels
love, the nature of it is a purpose to sin no more, but to cleave to God, the
effect of it is fruit unto holiness; Conviction, contrition, conversion, make
it perfect.

5. Between Love and Love. There is a love of God arising from self-love, so
one Publican loves another, as a Benefactour: But the character of true love
is, that it rises from sense of his first and saving love to us lost sinners,
and carries us on to desire him, to delight in him, to have fellowship, to be
in friendship with him, and to be like him.

6. Between Desire and Desire. There is a desire of salvation to be out of
hell, a desire of grace merely as a sign and security for heaven to ease our
painful anguish; But the character of true desire is sanctification as well as
salvation, grace, not merely for a bridge to heaven, but for Union, Communion
and Conformity with, and unto Christ Jesus.

I will proceed no further, this is a taste of what I before delivered; These
are the graces of a Communicant; These are their Differences and Characters;
These lead you on to the privilege granted, And so let him come and eat, etc.

Great Use may be made of this point, and the Use is rather to be made by you
than me, for so the Text, Let a man examine himself, but I will point you to it
in a word or two.


So let him eat. Let me exhort you to perform this work carefully,
conscionably. I have said enough, to move you, enough to direct you, the
benefit is great, the danger great, the means to obtain the benefit to escape
the danger is this; If you find sin labor to bring repentance; If you need
a Savior, come and take him as freshly bleeding, but bring thirst and faith
with you; Have an eye to the Serpent on a pole, rest your souls as the Dove did
upon this Ark, a crucified Christ; but do not deceive your souls, by a slight
performance; Call your lives and ways to the bar; Examine, judge your selves;
Do not neglect, because no body sees you, there is a God will search out your
sin, and judge also; You have great employments, make opportunity, you are in
suits, one Ordinance of God does not disable another, you may lawfully pursue
your right, and yet pursue peace, and keep charity; If you suffer wrong,
forgive, it is glorious; If you do wrong, Leave your gift at the Altar, and be
reconciled first, that is more glorious; Set apart time, set apart your selves,
Commune with your heart in your closet in silence, no man casts up his accounts
in a crowd or throng, you need no other business while you do this; Seek of
God by prayer and fasting a selfsearching heart, and do it as if ye were to
die; make the accounts between God and your souls even, and sequester your
selves to that purpose; for so when you cast up your accounts, you use to shut
up your shops.

2. That Donatistical principle of separation from Congregations or Churches,
wherein there is a mixture of worthy and unworthy, does from hence receive some
check; for a man is to examine himself concerning his fitness, and if he eats
unworthily he eats damnation or judgment to himself, and therefore a private
member has here no call or warrant to examine the fitness of others, nor do
they that are unworthy eat judgment to him, but to themselves; But of this I
have already spoken at large.


I know you will ask me, what I say to that examination of men and women,
competents or candidates of this Sacrament, which has been observed in your
Congregations of later time; for the exploration only of their competency of
knowledge in order to their Admission to the Lords Table; I profess my hearty
sorrow for the rents and discontents which have ensued, not will I stand up to
justify any scandalous procedure, which has armed any man with argument or
indignation, but shall clearly without any fraud or prevarication declare my
opinion upon the thing it self.

1. I do not enforce it upon this Text, which does not intend an Examination
merely by propounding Questions, but a finding out of our spiritual estate, and
of that whole fitness and meetnesse required of us in order to our access to
the Lords Table; That in question was an exploration by question, touching
knowledge, competent or sufficient; This in the Text is required before every
Sacrament, that but once in order to first Admission, and therefore as I prove
it not by this Text, so I must needs say, it is not disproved by it; And
therefore they that infer from hence against all Examination by others, must
necessarily destroy all catechizing, whether by parents, masters or others,
which cannot be; Every man is bound to examine himself, but not bound from
examining others that are under his charge, for then he should be bound from
his duty, and therefore it holds not negatively, that no man may examine
another, and so both parts may let this Text rest.

2. The Church of Christ did never hold her self unconcerned in the admittance
of members into her society. In the primitive ^hurches; when men of years came
in unto the Church from Idolatry and Heathenism, they passed a severe test, and
were catechized a long time before they became competents for Baptism, and at
their Baptism had questions propounded, and by them answered, as touching their
faith and purpose of life, and having past the test, then it was needless at
the Supper, except they fell into gross sin, but that case and ours is
different, when all are baptized in infancy, and therefore must be cat^chized
and instructed in the fundamentals of Religion, and have the test of the Church
before they come to the Lords Table, or else never.

3. Therefore in all Gospel Churches, we may find footsteps of this
exploration, look into the Romish and Popish way, they have auricular
Confession, which is a mixture of tyranny and superstition, but the people must
pass this test, which did not they ignorantly take for an easy way of pardon
of sin, they would be sensible of as extreme slavery; and it is Paraeus his
observation, That this Confession was of old instituted ad hanc probationem,
for this trial or probation of men's fitness to this Sacrament. The Lutherans
have such a way of Examination and Confession too, as Chemnitius confesses; And
the Augustan Confession, as Bellarmine notes, is plain for it, Nulli
admittuntur nisi prius explerati; And so in England it was ordered, That no man
should be admitted that had not learnt his Catechism, etc. I do not bring these
instances to any end, but to cry down the ignorant opinion of novelty and
strangeness; For if we in England had followed our own Rule, it had not been
such a stranger as it now seems,

4. The intent and end of this Examination in question was, partly that thereby
the Church might know her own members, and their due qualifications, partly
that there might be a help to prepare, and put into the way such as could not
examine themselves; For if the Church should afford her Communion to all at all
adventures, to what scandal and contempt should she prostitute her self and the
Ordinance, there would be no wisdom in making her Communion like that of a
common Inn, where known and unknown are all alike; Nor would there be charity
to suffer blind folks to run into an open pit, and rush on the sword-point; You
may observe how willingly a patient will answer a Physician questioning him
about his bodily estate; And a clyent his counselor questioning him about his
title or cause, because both are in order to advise, and help of them that
cannot help themselves, and such is this, if it were so well interpreted; but
misrepresentation and prejudice judges otherwise, for men lo^k upon it as a
dominion over their faith, not a help to their weakness, especially if they see
a distance kept, and authority assumed; They look upon it as an arraignment,
and take themselves to come to a Bar or Tribunal to be examined upon
delinquency, which kind of distances I like not in such a business as tends to
society and communion, where poor and rich are all one in Christ Jesus; And if
any man through mistake have conceived, That this does but set up a Tribunal
upon him, to dive into h^s breast, to extort his secrets like an auricular
confession, I blame him not of his backwardness to appear, for so should I, for
I abhor both that tyranny, and that superstition, but if no more be but that
the Church would know my faith or help my ignorance, I see not but I may
conclude with Mr Hooker, a man I know of reverence with you in his fifth book
of Ecclesiastical Polity, when in answer to Mr Cartwright upon this point, has
these words, The Examination of Communicants when need requires for the
profitable use it may have in such cases, we reject not; And so Paraeus, Examen
publicum aut privatum non respuimus 1 Cor. 11.
modo absit, so as tyranny and superstition be kept out.

Give me leave upon those words of Mr Hooker to infer and say,

1. To them that ask for a direct precept or injunction for this in the New
Testament: I answer, That it is a point of order, not of faith; It Is of
profitable use, says Hooker, not of absolute necessity, for then I must be
examined too, and it would extend to all the world, as well as us, and yet you
exact it not at Ministers hands, nor men of known sufficiency, Therefore it is
not of absolute necessity, but of order, I mean not of necessity to worthy
receivers.

3. In some cases profitable; and I must tell you we were in a singular and
particular case here in England; for you know men and women had been by Law
compelled to receive the Sacrament so often in a year, which compulsion, to
discover Recusancy, with the neglect of catechizing, brought in a world of
people blind and unworthy, the Remedy and Reformation of which inveterate
abuse, and the prevention of Separation from our Churches (had no order been
appointed) which must have universally followed by the necessity of the thing,
and instigation of them that lay on the advantage, were such reasons as could
enforce no less; Nor do I know how possibly otherwise the matter could be
remedied or r^drest, not intended to despise any that had right before, and had
been long admitted.

3. The principal thing is, that the end of this Examination be obtained,
though the form or manner be not punctual, as namely, That a man have competent
knowledge of this Ordinance, and be so known to have, whether by good testimony
of others that are able, or by our acquaintance, or by conference, or he is a
learned man, a knowing man, a Minister of the Word, which may be justly
presumed to have due knowledge, as Paul presumed that Agrippa believed the
Prophets. I say in these cases, the end of Examination is attained: Nay, if one
should come and declare himself by confession of his Christian faith, and
purpose of life without any Question propounded or asked, I should not so dote
upon Questions and forms of Examination, as not to pass such a one for a
knowing man, because I have attained the end of all Examination, which is, I
know, that he has knowledge competent, not that I would encourage any man to
break a wholesome order, or establishment; for the Scripture requires, and the
Apostle enjoined to see order in the Church, Col. 2. 5. But that I would
principally intend the thing it self above the form, not denying the right
which he has by his knowledge and profession, nor thrusting him upon a
separation merely upon a form, except in one case, that a man intend to break a
public order, and to destroy it by his example; As if a man tear my hedge upon
a just occasion, I take no offense, but if he purpose to let all the Swine into
my corn, I should oppose him.

4. I could wish that all Examination were bounded and limited to such
Questions as are of necessity to this Sacrament; There were printed some few
Questions and Answers, as the rule and bounds of it some five or six years
since; For I dare not trust the discretion of all men without a gage; And if
any man should ask me such a Question as is not necessary, or for a Scholar to
know, or to pry into my secr^ts, I should, though I could answer, crave excuse.
I am afraid of, and terribly hate auricular confession, I love no step toward
it, and therefore I would not answer upon my own liberty.

5. Though some will say, I can declare my self to my Minister, but not
otherwise. I confess the Pastor has the greatest account to make of his
people, and is most concerned: But what if the Church will not trust him with
that report, as all Ministers are not to be trusted with it, such is their
loosnesse in this point, and too much facility? And were I to choose, I had
rather do it under the eye of witnesses, especially in conversing with women,
who though in one regard, their modesty hinders to speak before others, yet in
other regards is matter of occasion to them that are ill minded, which must
needs be avoided, providing things honest, not before God but men.

6. Lastly, Let men lay conscience to the point, and set by passion and
prejudice, both examiner and examined, and in humility and meeknes deny
themselves, to keep up some face of order in these broken times; Let your
thirst to this Sacrament carry you through a thorn-hedge, and I on the other
hand shall stoop low, rather than a thirsty soul should want the Sacrament, or
be thrust on the Rock of Separation, and so we shall meet at the end, though
differ in the way. It should be a very sorry answer indeed, that I would not
make the best of, and (I hope) you would not make the worst of any error or
infirmity in me, I know Order in an Army (as he says) kills no body, yet
without it they are a Rout, and not an Army.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABuses in Ordinances no ground for separation. 30 Actions in the Lords Supper
of
Christ. 76 Communicants. 95

B
BRead must be broken, and why. 88 Benefit of worthy receiving 314 1.
Generally. 1. It is of higher nature then the Elements of themselves can
convey. 319 2. Blessings of the Covenant are sealed, and graces of the Covenant
improved. 320
2. Particularly. 1. What God conveys: 1. Christ and his benefits. 322 2. The
Covenant sealed. 324
2. What believers receive. 1 The body and blood of Christ. 326 2. Remission of
sin. 327 3. Communication of greater proportion of Gospelspirit. 329



C
COvetousness cause of Judas Treason. 47 Counsel of God fulfilled by wicked
instruments. 58 Consecration of Elements, by what words. 81 Cups diverse in the
Passover. 79
D
DIscipline, what to be done where it cannot be duly administered. 223
Discerning the Lords body, what it is. 338 Danger of unworthy eating. 345
E
ELements, what they signify 73 Must be taken severally. ib. Were severally
blessed. 77 By what words consecrated. 81 Ought to be consecrated only by a
Presbyter. 83 Changed only in their use 85 Whether given by Christ immediately
to all. 91 Inward signification of them. 117 They work not physically. 267
Examination of our selves required to right participation of the Lords Supper.
352 Examination. 3. 1. Of Men. 356 2. Of Christians. ib. 3. Of Communicants. 357
Motives to, and Directions for it. 358 Examination by Elders. 370
F
FAsting not necessary before the Lords Supper. 29 Fitness for the Lords
Supper, wherein it consists. 278 May be set too high or too low. 279
G
GRaces to be exercised in Communicants. 289 1. Knowledge of Nature. Use, End
of this Ordinance. 290 2. Christ-receiving faith 292 3. Repentance. 293 4.
Spiritual appetite after Christ. 296 5. Love to fellow members. 297 6.
Thankefulness. 298
Grace that is true how differenced from counterfeits. 367 Guilty of the body
and blood of Christ, what. 342 Ground of worthy receiving, and of the Churches
admission different. 343
I
JEwish writings and customs needful to expound the New Testament. 2
Institution best rule for Reformation. 34 Words of it explained. 111 Irreverent
carriage reproved. 277 Judas intended not Christ's death. 57
K
KNowledge of the Nature, Use and End of this Ordinance required in a
Communicant. 290
L
Lord's Supper, Elements of it taken from Passover. 2 Who capable of worthy
receiving. 20 Occasional circumstances not obliging. 22 Christ the Author of
it. 48 Why instituted at night. 63 After Supper. ib. Little before betrayed. 66
An Ordinance of F^llowship. 98 What it exhibits. 120 An inner Ordinance only
for believers. 140 The End of it, the remembrance of Christ. 141 Occasions of
the neglect of it. 148 How obstructions may be removed. 153 How our minds
should be exercised in it. 156 The great work of it, to show Christ's death. 167
An Ordinance to be repeated. 171 Must continue till Christ come. 174 A barred
Ordinance. 182 Who ought to be debarred. 191 Not a converting Ordinance by
Institution. 247 Yet may occasionally convert 250 Love Feasts, how abused. 30
M
Mixed Communion no ground for separation. 234 Motives to endeavors after right
participation. 300 Motives to self-examination. 358
N
NEcessity of teaching and learning the true meaning of the Lord's Supper. 161
P
PApists must have faith of miracles. 86 Passover represented Christ's death. 3
Why so called. ib. Whether a Sacrifice. 5
Christ our Passover. 6 It looked Backward as a remembrancer. 8 Forward as a
type. 8
How it resembles Christ sacrificed. 9 Christ in the Sacrament. 13
Preparation for the Lords Supper. 274
Q
QUalification for worthy receiving false and insufficient. 304 Qualifications
of remembrance of Christ's death. 143
R
REmembrance of Christ's death. 143 To whom it is made. 145 Rites and gestures
spurious in Lord's Supper. 101
S
SAcrament and Sacrifice how differ. 5 Sacrament must resemble the thing
signified. 104 Consists only in the use. 106 Scriptures necessity. 40
Separation not grounded on Abuses in Ordinances. 30 Mixed Communions. 234
Sign taken for thing signified 7 Sins of Judas and Disciples how differed. 61
Sins scandalous, what. 212 Sins notorious, what. 213 Socinian error. 120
T
TRansubstantiation, its rise. 128 Arguments against it. 130
V
UNworthy receiving a great and dangerous sin 332 The cause of the sin, Not
discerning, etc. 337 Aggravations of the sin. 341 Danger of it. 345 Dangerous
to Church and State. 348 A godly person may receive Unworthily. 285
W
WOrthy and unworthy receiving. 45, 180, 263 Worthy receiving not to be
measured by success. 265 What required to it. 283 Benefit of it. 314 Who
capable of it. 20 False qualifications for it. 304
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 27 r to suffer; p 4. l. 18 Gerard. p. 5. l. 2. r. paterfamilias.
p. 6. l. 3 prius prosunt. p. 8. r.. 5 and 6. p 8. l. 28. r. not only hrist. p.
9 l. 7. r. this life-giving death of. p. 22. l. 15. r. and b^essing p. 33. l.
14 Hebrewish; with whom the, etc. p. 37. l. 24. r. the Lord; I have received of
the Lord that which also I delivered. p 44. l. 31. r. (...). p. 5^. l. 13. r.
Author, from him therefore. l. 22. r. Schoolman says) l. 23. r. were contained
p. 58. l. 13. r. says Ames p. 77. l. 16. r. Post-coenium. p. 85. l. 17. r.
Marcion, l. 18. 1. body? l. 20. r. humane, l. 22. r. being? p. 93. l. 32. r.
(...). p. 95. l. 12. r. Thus, Every. p. 143. l. 14. r. Benefits, Benefactors.


