VINCULUM SOCIETATIS, OR THE Tie of good Company. Being a Choice COLLECTION Of
the Newest SONGS now in Use. WITH THROUGH BASS to each SONG for the Harpsichord,
Theorbo, or Bass-Viol.

The FIRST BOOK of this CHARACTER.

depiction of angels playing musical instruments

LONDON, Printed by F. Clark, T. Moore, and J. Heptinstall, for John Carr, and
R. C. and are to be Sold by John Carr at the Middle Temple-Gate, and Sam. Scott
at the Miter by Temple-Barr. Anno Domini, 1687.

TO ALL TRUE LOVERS OE MUSIC.
Gentlemen,
WE well hope, our former diligent endeavors, (according to our capacity) to
serve the Musical Souls of our Nation, have been so hearty, that no very great
aspersion can ly upon us for a total neglect of our duty: We also thankfully
acknowledge the kind reception our labors have hitherto found from the
Ingenious, and the good natured; by which we have been so far encouraged, as
yet to add One (Ornament at least) to our many former Attempts, and that is,
this New Character of the Notes of the Songs in this Book, less troublesome to
the Eye, then those of the Old way, which (if acceptable) will add fresh vigor
to our future industry, and add much to the numerous obligations you have
already heaped upon,

Gentlemen, Yours JOHN CARR.

Licensed

June the 8th 1687. R. C.

A Table of the SONGS contained in this Book.
A.
Page. Page. AH Charming Nymph 4
B.
Bring out your Cunny Skins 6 Bring back my Comforts 20
C.
Celia at last thy pride 5 Cease mighty Love 10 Cinthia it is owned I too long 24
Could softning melting looks 32
F.
Farewell all the Arts of Love 13
H.
How long Devine Celinda 25 Set by Mr. Sam. Ackroyd.
I
I Love without measure 8 I Will Languish no more 12
L
Let formal Lovers 1 Leave to him all our Cares 33
M
My wanderer at last Retreats 11
P
Phillis I must needs Confess 26 Phillis what ever Love 30
S
Spite of thy Godhead 9 See the Lovely Maid 22 Silvia be no longer Kind 23 She
alas whom all admired 28
T
These full too hours 18 The Gods are not more blessed 21 Thyrsis unjustly you
complain 29
W
When Cloris once thought 2 When the Gods at a banquet 14 When first I sought
my Jenny's love 17 When V and I together meet 31
MUSIC Books sold by John Carr at the Middle Temple Gate.
THE Musical Entertainment performed at a Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's Day.
Nov. 22. 1683. The Words made by Mr. Christopher Fishburn, and set to Music,
in two, three, four and six Parts, by Mr. Henry Purcel, Composer in Ordinary to
His Sacred Majesty, and one of the Organists of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal.

The second Book of the Musical Entertainment, performed at a Musical Feast on
St. Cecilia's day, Nov. 22. 1684. The Words made by the late ingenious Mr. John
Oldham, Author of the Satyr on the Jesuits, and other excellent Poems; and set
to Muscik; in two, three, four and five Parts, by Dr. John Blow, Master of the
Children, and one of the Organists, of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal.

An Essay to the Advancement of Music, by T. Salmon Price 2 s.

The Vocal and Instrumental Music in Psyche, with the Instrumental Music in
the Tempest. Price 2 s. Melothesia, or Rules for Playing a continual Bass on
the Harpsichord. Price 3 s.

Tripla Concordia, or new Airs for three Parts for Treble and Bass-Viol.

Easy Lessons on the Gettars for young Practitioners, Single, and some of 2
Parts, by Seignior Francisco.

Also all sorts of Musical Instruments, and Strings.

Mr. Hen. Purcell.
^ LET formal Lovers still pursue
I envy not their Care,
a tedious Seige perhaps may do
at last to gain the Fair,
such whining Methods I disdain
a Mistress to o -- blige,
where a fair summons will not gain
the Town's not worth a Siege.
The Eastern Monarchs Victories
Had not gone on so far
Had he Engaged his Enemies
By formal steps of War,
To general Beauty I lay claim,
From each fair Eye it is hurld,
Where e're I come like him I Will gain
And love ore all the World.
Mr. Fran. Forcer.
^ WHen Cloris once thought her Conquest Complete, and her Charms had made way
for her Pride, and Languishing Strephon had thrown at her Feet a Heart She so
often had tried, and the faithful young Lover did over and over discover a
Passion, that were She not Marble, might move her: The hard hearted Nymph to
requite all his pain, instead of his Love paid him with disdain, ^ She bids him
re-tire and not feed his desire with the hopes of her Love which he never must
gain; Whilst Cruel, Cruel Cloris Strephon cried, pity, pity him that lies to
Love and to your Eyes a Loyal and unblemished Sacrifice. Oh ye Shepherds take
heed where your Flocks you do seed, lest your Hearts as your Lambs should
stray, for if Cloris surprise you once with her Eyes, you are lost and undone,
your Liberty's gone, and you must be for ever her Prey.

Mr. Fran. Forcer.
^ Ah Charming Nymph were I a Swain too weak I fear would prove my resolutions
a -- against Love, tho they were fortified by your disdain, often I with
discontented Sighs have said, oh, why was I a feeble Woman made, but what I
thought my Misery is now become my Guard, and from a Fate more hard, it was
ordained to rescue me, else to thy Charms Philoclia I had bowed, and died
unpityed, unpityed, unpityed by the gazing Crowd.

^ CElia at last thy Pride and Scorn
has lost the Man thy Slave was Born,
I Have broke my Heart to break my Chain,
and now must never Love a -- gain
Yet much of Torture in the Cure
I do confess I do endure.
Thus is the Battle lost and won,
but Oh the Victor is undone.
Glory has now my Heart possessed,
And love of Arms Enflamed my Breast;
The puny God in Chains shall wait,
Whilst Pride and Honor sit in state,
But oh my Glories I despise
Since I must shun those Killing Eyes.
Thus is the Battle, etc.
Farewell my Trophies since I find
No Beauty left to tempt my mind,
To make my last of Actions brave,
I Will die her Victor and her Slave:
Weep that the World no more can give,
But scorn this Conquest to outlive.
Thus is the Battle, etc.
Mr. Sam. Ackroyd.
^ BRing out your Cunny Skins, bring out your Cunny Skins Maids to me, and hold
them fair that I may see, Gray, Black and Blew, for the smaller Skins I Will give
you Bracelets, Laces, Pins, and for your whole Cunny here is ready Money, come
gentle Jone do thou begin with thy black Cunny thy black Cunny Skin, and Mary
and Jone will follow with their Silver Haird Skins and Yallow, the White Cunny
^ Skin I will not lay by, for though it be faint it is fair to the Eye, the
Gray it is worn, but yet for my Money, give me the bonny bonny black Cunny, come
away fair Maids your Skins will decay, come and take Money Maids put your Wares
away, ha'ye any Cunny Skins, ha'ye any Cunny Skins, ha'ye any Cunny Skins here
to sell.

Mr. Sam. Ackroyd.
^ I Love without measure,
and sure I shall find
a Fountain of Pleasure
for my Celia's now kind:
My Heart so In -- spir'd
I kissed and ad -- mir'd
and She never re-tir'd
but I still de -- sir'd.
There Is no such Devertion
As in her soft Arms,
To tell her my passion,
And to talk of her Charms,
I must be possessing,
I long for the Blessing
Of Loves sweet expressing
By natures kind Dressing.
With my passion I strove
To wait for the power,
And the pleasure of Love
But for one happy hour,
With eager desire
At last I came nier,
Her Eyes darted Fire,
My Soul did expire.
Mr. Rob. King.
Mr. Hen. Purcel.
^ SPite of the Godhead powerful Love I will my torments hide, but what Vail of
life must prove a Sa -- cri -- fice to Pride, Pride thou art become my Goddess
now, to Thee I Will Alters Rear, to Thee each Morning pay my Vow and offer every
Tear, but oh, but oh I fear, should Philomon once take thy Injured part, I soon
should cast the Idol down and offer him my heart.

Mr. D. Purcel.
^ CEase mighty Love to tear a Heart
that owns thy Power Divine,
thou needs no Quiver nor no Dart
to make the Conquest thine;
for who a -- lass thy Deities durst despise,
when thou have weapons suc -- h as Celia's Eyes.
Now Celia you my Heart have won,
Oh be not too severe,
Do not your humble Slave disown,
Nor kill him with Despair;
Be not unjust to scorn my Vestal Fire,
Which you and none but you could ere Expire.
Mr. Moses Snow.
^ MY Wan -- der -- er at at last re -- Xtreats
to his forsaken Breast,
having discovered all the Cheats,
that drew him from his rest
thought himself safe in this a -- bode,
when Cloe proved it vain,
by ways as in -- no -- cent as odd,
she tempts him or a -- gain.

With untaught Eyes, unpractic'd Art,
She does her Slave subdue:
Scorns meanly to beguile a Heart,
But clams it as her due.
Let Tyrants then her Conquest boast,
And keep their few in awe:
She governs all and ever must,
Who reigns by Nature Law.
Mr. Rich. Brown.
^ I Will languish no more at the glance of your Eye;
can view you all over and never fetch a deep sigh:
No more shall your voice Siren -- like charm my Heart;
in vain you may sigh, use in vain all your Art:
No Madam I Am free, when I Am Captive a -- gain,
let me unpitied feel a -- gen my old pain.
I Will Libertine turn, use all things in Common,
No more than one Dish be bound to one Woman,
Yet I still love the Sex but my Bottle before 'em,
I Will use 'em sometimes but I Will never Adore 'em,
Go Madam be wise when a Woodcocks ith noose,
Be sure hold him fast least like me he get loose.
A 2 Voc.
^ Farewell all the Arts of Love
Fancy to Witch first did move,
and at the last did empty prove,
the Goddess which you did a -- door
enjoyed con -- ti -- nues to be so no more,
but turns to a Woman as before,
the Goddess which you did adore
enjoyed con -- ti -- nues to be so no more,
but turns to Woe -- man as be -- fore.
Why then all this thought of care,
Hopes and fears and often despair,
All to possess your self that is fair,
An easy Beauty's every best,
Tho she lodge not in your Breast,
You soon shall find a place of rest,
An easy Beauty's, etc.
A 2 Voc.
Mr. Sam. Ackroyd.
^ WHen the Gods at a Banquet did Revel above, did When the Gods at a Banquet
did Revel, did Revel above and Gannimed filled out a Bumper to Jove, A -- pollo
and Bacchus their Revel above and Gannimed filled out a Bumper to Jove, A --
pollo and Bacchus their Joy to Inspire, the Muses and Graces called in to the
Quuire: Divine was the Joy to Inspire, the Muses and Graces called in to the
Quire: Divine was the Music, their Pleasure extreme, and Beauty and Loyalty
still was the Theme, to Music, their Pleasure extreme, and Beauty and Loyalty
still was the Theme, to Jove and Juno's Health full Bowls were Crowned, and to
The Immortal, and to the immortal Jove and Juno's Health full Bowls were
Crowned, and to the immortal ^ Powers went round who from their Thrones did
their bright Goblets throw in Frollick Powers, Powers went round from their
Thrones, from their Thrones did their bright Goblets throw in Frollick down
upon the world, upon the world below: then to express how Loyal down upon the
world, upon the world, the world below: then to express how Loyal we'll appear,
though we are no Gods we'll i -- mi -- tate 'em near, and drink full we'll appear,
though we are no Gods we'll i -- mi -- tate 'em near, and Bowls, and drink full
Bowls to Jove and Juno here. Caesar and drink full Bowls, and drink full Bowls
to Jove and Juno here. Caesar and Gloria -- na let it be the brightest Queen on
Earth, the greatest Monarch he Gloria -- na let it be the brightest Queen on
Earth, and greatest Monarch he ^ and if the Gods deny to pledge the same, we'll
throw our empty Glasses up to them. Mighty and if the Gods deny to pledge the
same, we'll throw our empty Glasses up to them. James and Apollo upon us does
smile, upon us does smile, the God of this Year and the Mighty James and Apollo
upon us, upon us does smile, the God of this Year and the King of this Isle,
all feuds we will shun that e -- nervate his sway, since all are his King of
this Isle, all feuds we will shun that e -- nervate his sway, since all are his
Subjects we'll jointly o -- bey: both English and Irish in this shall a --
gree, who Subjects we'll jointly o -- bey: both English and Irish in this shall
a -- gree, who serve the King best the best Nation shall be. serve the King
best the best Nation shall be.

^ WHen first I sought my Jenny's Love
she dashed my hopes with cold disdain,
no Tears the Cruel Lass could move
to hear my Vows or ease my pain,
She Would chide and frown and call me Loon
and bid me from her sight be gone,
with scorn my Presents She Would return,
and all my Amorous Letters burn.
But now my Constancy She Is found,
The lovely fair relenting Maid
With kind consent my hopes has Crowned,
And all my sufferings over paid;
She Will kiss and toy
And call me Joy,
In Love the livelong day employ,
She Will look and smile on me alone,
And only grieve she e're did frown.
Mr. Fran. Forcer.
^ These full two hours now have I gazing been, what Comfort by it can I gain,
to look on Heaven with mighty gulf be -- tween was the great Miser's greatest
pain: so near was he to Heavens delight as with the blessed converse he might,
yet could not get one drop of Water by it. Ah wretch I seem to touch her now:
but oh, but oh, what boundless spaces does us part! fortune and ^ Friends and
all Earths emty show my lowness and her high desert, but those might
Conquerable prove nothing does me so far remove as the hard Souls Aversion of
my Love; so Travelers that lose their way by night when from afar they came to
espy the uncertain glimmerings of a tapers light, like flattering hopes and
think it night, till wearied with the fruitless pain they sit them down and
weep in vain, and there in darkness and despair re -- main.

Mr. Ric. Brown.
^ BRing back my Comforts and re -- turn
for well you know that I,
in such a vigorous passion burn,
that missing you I die.
slow Re -- turn return in -- sult no more,
re -- turn return and me re -- store
to those slow sequestered Joys,
to those sequestered Joys
I had be -- fore.
Absence in most, that quenches Love,
And cool their warm desire,
The Ardour of my Heart improve,
And makes the flame aspire.
The Maxim therefore I deny,
And term it, tho a Tyrany,
A Nurse to purest Faith and Constancy.
Mr. Tho. Tedway.
^ The Gods are not more blessed then he
who fixing his glad Eyes on thee
does ever hear and ev' -- ry long
Charmed with the Mu -- sick, Charmed with the Mu -- sick of thy Tongue
that sees with more then hu -- mane Grace
sweet smiles A -- dorn A -- minta's Face.
But when to pity you incline,
And so become much more Devine,
What mortal can support the Joy
The mighty blessing does destroy,
Ah! would you have your Damon live,
Your Favors less profusely give.
A 2 Voc.
Mr. Tho. Tedway.
^ SEE, see, see the lovely Maid and Paradise and See, see, see, see, see the
lovely Maid and Paradise Pa -- ra -- dise in Bed displayed, like blushing Morn,
like blushing Morn she in Bed in Bed displayed, like blushing Morn, like
blushing Morn she lies, and lies and sings the tryumphs, sings the try -- umph
of her Eyes. The wanton Cupids sings the tryumphs of her Eyes, and sings the
triumph of her Eyes. The wanton Cupids play and sport their -- lit -- tle
Hearts away, whilst all a round them throng. To play and sport their little
Hearts away whilst all a round them throng, to hear the Music hear the Music
of her Tongne, to hear the Music, hear the Music of her Tongue. of her
Tongue, to hear the Music of her Tongue, to hear the Music of her Tongue.

^ SIlvia be no lon -- ger kind,
the kind be -- tray their power
still to the proud and false inclined
our Ty -- rants we A -- door,
fru -- ition which should make our bliss di -- stroys,
and kindness which should most in -- gage us cloys.
Be cruel and secure your Reign,
Myrtilla's Pride and Scorn,
Her haughty looks and fierce disdain,
Show her for Empire born;
Oh cursed disease of our fantastic mind,
The Cruel we pursue and fly the Kind.
Mr. Tho. Tedway.
^ CYnthia it is owned that I too long
on Womankind did rail,
to think that a re -- can -- ting Song
should after all prevail,
but had you then but marked my Eyes,
or could have vew'd my heart
you would seen thro'all that thin disguise
they all -- ways took your part, they all -- ways took your part.
^ HOW long devine Ce -- lin -- da shall I mourn
how long disclose my sorrow all in vain
yet find not one soft look or kind return
no sign of ease to sooth my growing pain.
Ah Cruel, ah Cru -- el, Cru -- el Charming fair,
or cure my love or my dis -- pair, or cure my love or my dis -- pair.
All night the thoughts of you forbids my rest,
Nor can the noisie business of the day
Divert the constant trouble of my breast,
Or the tormenting Passions there allay;
Ah cruel charming Maid,
When shall this mighty debt of Love be paid.
^ PHillis I must needs confess
that I am fic -- kle grown of late,
and now to Celia's Charms Ad -- dress
that love which yours did first create.
Not that I think your Beauty less
then hers who does my Heart possess,
but it is the will of fate, it is the will of fate, but it is the will of fate,
^ tho you may think the practice strange
I Will Ju -- sti -- fie the roaring flame,
nor fear the Amorous Gods revenge,
since I still love tho not the same,
for tho my heart does hourly range
he looses nothing by the change,
since I still play his game, I still play his game, since I still play his
game.
^ SHE, She, alas, She, a-lass, whom all admired is dead, She a -- lass whom
all admired is dead, a -- lass She Is dead, and with her all that is brisk or gay
is fled, She a -- lass, She a -- lass, whom all admired is dead, no Rat -- ling
Coaches now run up and down, nor Am' -- rous Sparks amuse the wondering Town all
pen -- sive in their Chambers sit and mourn and mourn the fair the sweet Cor --
rin -- na's dead and gone, She a -- lass, She a -- lass whom all admired is
dead.

A Song in Bellamira, or, the Mistress.
Set by Mr. Tho. Shndwell.
^ THyrsis un -- just -- ly you com -- plain,
and tax my tender heart,
with want of pity for your pain,
or sense of your dissert.
By secret and misterious Springs
alas our passions move,
we Women are fan-tastick things
that like be -- fore we love.
You may be handsome and have Wit,
Be secret and well bred,
The Parson Love must to us fit,
He only can succeed.
Some die and yet are never believed,
Others we trust too soon,
Helping our selves to be deceived,
And proud to be undone.
^ PHillis what ever love or you
for my dis -- pairing shall or -- dain,
my suffering Heart shall still be true,
and with the Tor -- ments and with the Tor -- ments that en -- sue
may break but never com -- plain.
My grief when Phil -- lis Is un -- kind
no rude re -- sent -- ments shall be -- tray
it is calm as Vows for Hea -- ven de -- signed,
and gentle as the Southern Winds
^ that fans the blooming May.
No slights shall make my pas -- sion less,
my Love shall me -- rit tho it starve
for as possession we confess
the highest degree of happiness
the next is to de -- serve.
A Catch for 3 Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcel.
^ WHen V and I to -- gether meet,
we make up 6 in House or Street,
yet I and V may meet once more,
and then we 2 can make but 4,
but when that V from I am gone,
alas poor I can make but one.
Dr. John (...)
^ COuld softning melting looks pre -- vail,
Phillis might ever hope success,
her beauties power would not fail,
did not her cheapness make it less,
but such advances, but such advances she does make,
who loved her once must her forsake,
but such advances she does make,
who loved her once must her for -- sake.
She who is too eagerly inclined
To catch at Love lets go her fame,
And it is beneath a generous mind
To catch ignoble yiedling game.
But in resistance, but in resistance such force lies,
It Charms beyond the brightest Eyes.

