AN ANSWER TO A LIBELL, WRITTEN BY D. COSENS AGAINST THE GREAT General
Council of Laterane under Pope Innocent the third.

Wherein the many and great errors of the said D. Cosens, are manifested to the
world.

By THOMAS VANE Doctor in Divinity of Cambridge.

2. Tim. 3.13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived. Printed at PARIS Anno Dom. 1646. With Permission
and Approbation.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST ACCOMPLISHED Gentleman, Sr KENELME DIGBY KNIGHT etc.
SIR,
I do not dedicate this, craving your protection thereof against calumny, and
censure; the greatest Princes (I know) cannot do it; yea their own persons
are not censure-proofe against the meanest varlets. Nor hereby to engage you to
any favor or defense thereof, beyond the direction of your own judgment; your
free mind (I know) disdaynes to stoop to such a lure, and mine to cast it
out. Let the book suffer its own fate, for so it will; he that finds fault
with it, let him tell me so? and if I cannot defend it, I will acknowledge the
error. Nor to take occasion to flatter you; you are above it: and impossible
attempts vanish even in the undertaking. Nor yet to pay you your due praise, I
am below it; and Fame her self discharges that debt, borrowing the tongues of
all men for her help: But to testify the honor I bear you, for your
transcendent worth in your self; and the gratitude, for your great favors to
me. It wants proportion (I confess) to either; which proceeds from my poverty
of materials: but as small pictures compared with greater tables, so this
(being all I have to offer) may present me as lively, though not so largely

SIR, Your most humble and obliged servant, THO. VANE.

TO THE READER.
READER, Doctor Cosens (since his coming into these parts) has written diverse
papers against the Catholic doctrine and belief; and has showed them, or
delivered the substance of the^ in discourse to diverse persons, thereby to draw
them, or keep them from the Catholic Communion; who not having ability or
leisure to examine their truth, I believe, thought better of them than they
deserved. These papers of his came afterward into the hands of several
Catholics, and each one answered that which he happened on, or which was (if
any was) more particularly addressed to him; which is the reason that he has
more answerers than one, though to them all, any one was more than enough.
Amongst his papers, this against the fowrth Council of Lateran came to my
hands, to which I soon after returned a brief answer, and so the matter
rested; but hearing since that he, and some that think well of him, have
triumphed in these his works, as though he had gained great victories; that I
might vndeceiue them, for so much as I undertook, (if at least they will
suffer it,) and to inform all others, that please to read, I thought good a
little to enlarge my former answer, and to print it with Mr. Carres. And others
there are, at least one other, that I know, who if he thought fit to print
what he has written in answer to Doctor Cosens, could perhaps discover more
corruptions of his than we have done. But here are more than enough to warrant
us to say of him, as 1. kings 5.25.
Abigal said of Nabal; for by his deeds he makes true the signification of his
name: and that they that rely on him, will be like those that lean on a
broken reedy staff, which will run into their hands, and wound instead of
supporting them.

D.C. OF THE GREAT General Council of Lateran under Innocentius the third;
said to be Maximum and celeberrimum Concilium, Anno Domini 1215.
MAXIMVM, for the number of eight hundred Priors and Abbots (who had no voices
in Counsels but by privilege from the Pope) was as great again as the number
of the Bishops. Celeberrimum, for it was every where famous for this one thing
of special note in it, that so many men met together to no purpose; met, but
did nothing. Therefore of this so Great and so famous a Council, these be the
words of Platina, (who was the Popes own Secretary,) in vita Innocent. III.
Venere multa tum quidem in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte
potuit, quod and Pisani and Genuenses maritimo, and Cisalpini terrestri bello
interse certarent. Eo itaque proficiscens tollendae discordiae causa Pontifex,
Perusii moritur. And to the same purpose are the words of Matthew. Paris (in
Historia minori) who lived in the same time when this Council was called
together. Concilium illud Generale, quod more papali, grandia prima front prae
se tulit, in risum and scomma desiit, quo Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates,
Decanos, Archidiaconos, omnesque ad id Concilium accedentes ludificatus est.
(For after the Pope was gone to appease the tumults between the Genuenses and
them of Pisa, there was nothing done) Et cum nihil geri in tanto negotio
cernerent, redeundi ad sua cupidi, veniam sigillatim petierunt. Quibus Papa non
concessit, antequam sibi grandem pecuniam promisissent, quam a mercatoribus
Romany prius accipere mutuo, Papaeque soluere coacti sunt, antequam discedere
Roma potuissent. Papa iam accepta pecunia, quaestuosum Concilium dissoluit
gratis, totusque Clerus abiit tristis.

ANSWER.
It was called, Maximum, you say, for the number of eight hundred Priors and
Abbots, (who had no voice in Council but by privilege from the Pope) was as
great again as the number of the Bishops. It Is true that it was justly called
maximum partly for this reason, though not for this only, for the number of
voices, not only of Bishops who have their suffrages by common right, but even
of Abbots and Priors, who have theirs by the Popes grant, does mainly
contribute to the greatness of a Counsel. Yet suppose the greatness of this
Council be to be measured by the number of Bishops only, how many can there be
named greater? but very few in the world; and therefore it may well be called,
Maximum. And Celeberrimum also; not, that so many met together, but did
nothing, (as you say;) but because there were present the Pope in person, two
Patriarchs in person, and the other two by their Legates, the Greek and Roman
Emperors by their Legates, the Ambassadors of the kings of France, Spain,
England, Jerusalem and Cyprus, with others; as I shall prove anon. But if to
be famous for doing nothing, and for being to no purpose deserve the title of
Celeberrimum, these goodly objections, when they are well known, will justly
bear that title on their brow.

You further tell us, that Platina (whose words you cite) was the Popes own
Secretary: and you do it either to no purpose, or else to insinuate, that
therefore he was more knowing in the truth of the story, or the more faithful
historian, or both. For the former, it had indeed been likely, if he had
been Secretary to the Pope, under whom this Council assembled, as any one
would think you meant, when you added this note in such a weighty parenthesis.
But certain it is, that Platina was borne many years after the celebration of
this Council, and died in the year 1481. which was above 260. years after
this Council; as says Trithemius de scriptorib. Eccles. as he is cited in
the works of Platina, the page before the Epistle. This therefore is but a
deceiptfull insinuation of yours. Or if you did not say this with intent to
deceive others, but were your self deceived; surely your care to inform your
self well before you write, is very small. Besides if it were true, that he
had been the Popes own Secretary, as for greater emphasis you express it,
yet his authority cannot counterpoyse the authority of all that are of a
contrary mind, (to that you think Platina was of,) whom I shall by and by
produce. And lastly Platina does not affirm to the prejudice of this Council,
that which you erroneously imagine he does, as I shall presently show. As for
his faithfulness, I do not think you will make his being the Popes own
Secretary an argument thereof; men of your coat are not such honourers of the
Pope.

Now for the words themselves of Platina, you misunderstand them; for you apply
those words, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit, generally, to the whole
business of the Council, whereas the intent of them, at the most, is but
particular concerning the Holy Land, as the foregoing words do show, which
are these: At Pontifex vbi videret Saracenorum potentiam in Asia concrescere,
apud Lateranum, maximum Concilium celebrat. Venere multa tum quidem in
consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit, quod and Pisani and
Genuenses maritimo, and Cisalpini terrestri bello interse certabant. These
words then, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit, are at the most to be
referred to the buisinesse of the Holy Land, of sending aid thither, and
making resistance against the Turks in Asia, and to nothing else. And the
reason why nothing could be decreed in that matter, was the wars he
mentions, which could not be a hindrance from their making of other Canons in
that Council.

And as it is apparent enough, that this at most, was the meaning of Platina,
to wit, that nothing was decreed concerning the Holy war; and that therefore
this place makes nothing to your purpose, who hereby would make void all the
Canons of this Council; so it is also apparent that Platina (if so much was
his meaning) was deceived even in that; and that there was something decreed
concerning the sending of assistance to the Holy Land, as appears by the
decree of the Expedition, which is at the end of the Canons, whose truth I
shall further prove by and by. Yea, and that Platina did not so much as deny
the decree of the Expedition, in his words, nec decerni quicquam aperte potuit,
is very probable; for then he would rather have said, nec decerni quicquam
potuit, absolutely; but his qualification of it by the word aperte, seems to
grant that something was done, though not aperte. And that something was
decreed, is manifest by that which I shall say hereafter; what then he means
by these words, nec aperte, in that which was decreed, is not manifest. Perhaps
by Decree, he means the execution of the Decree, in actual warring against
the Turks, wherein there was nothing openly done, whatsoever might be
secretly done tending to their prejudice. If this be his meaning, (as no other
can be with truth in the thing) then, though his words be obscure, and
improper to signify thus much, yet his meaning is true, but nothing to your
purpose.

But Nauclerus does open this obscurity, and makes it clear against you; for
he speaking of the same buisinesse, and using the same words with Platina, in
the rest, instead of Platina's aperte, he says apt; ^ Vol. 2.^.914.
nec decerni tamen quicquam apt potuit, quod and Pisani and Genuenses etc.
There could nothing be fitly, conveniently, and to the purpose decreed in
regard of the time because of the wars in Europe. And immediately after he
says, (to confute that which you say, that there was nothing done here)
Editae tamen nonnullae constitutiones referuntur, but there are diverse
constitutions declared to be made.

As for Matthew Paris his Historiae minor, I cannot meet with it, and in the
volume of his whole works both mayor and minor, set forth lately by D. Wats of
London: I can find no such words as you cite. And if you had been willing
that your quotation should have been examined, you would have given a man a
nearer aim than a whole history, whether mayor or minor, to find it in,
especially in a quotation so important to your main design; unless you meant
to give a man more trouble than is fair in one that writes a controversy. The
like you have also done in some of your following authorities. But if these
words, Et cum nihil geri in tanto negotio cernerent, which are all that
concern your purpose, be to be found in him, he speaks of the same
expedition of the Holy Land, and of the execution thereof, not of the Decree it
self, as the word geri will as well bear in its signification: and if he
mea^t otherwise he had no good intelligence in the buisinesse, (as I shall
presently prove;) for though he lived in the same time of this Council, yet
he lived in a far dista^t place. And his words, in ta^to negotio, do surely
point at some one particular matter, which though it have been the occasion of
calling many Counsels, yet when the Prelates were met, they discussed and
decreed many other things for the good of the Church. So that though it be
true that nothing was executed in the great business of the Holy wars, by
reason of the wars in christendom, yet it is far from proving that which
you so boldly affirm, that neither the Decree of the expedition for the Holy
Land, nor any one Canon was made in this Council. They met (say you) but did
nothing; nor have you (I am sure) done any thing against them. And that you may
further see the integrity of this your Author, in matters concerning the person
of this Pope, (which is the purport of all the other words by you alleged out
of him,) read Baronius in his last tome, anno 1197. who tells us, that this
Matthew Paris seems to have writ his history of purpose to take occasion to
sclander the Popes; and then reciting a story, concludes thus. Vidisti Lector
Parts ingenium, animique male compositi malam sententiam, res fingere, verbaque
formare indigna Romano Pontifice, and ab hoc vno tam patenti mendacio caetera
discas, and caueas vide asque qua tunc sit homo fide dignus, cu^ totus sit in
carpendis Romans Eccles. Pontificibus. And therefore his accusation of the Pope
for exacting a great sum of money of the Council, first as it is impertinent
to your buisinesse, (for his couetounsesse could not nullify the Canons of the
Council) so also is it most unlikely to be true, because Paris is recorded for
a slanderer, and Pope Innocent III. for a worthy and excellent man. Nauclerus
vol. 2. p. 876.
Nauclerus calls him, vir doctrina and moribus insignis. And Platina, in his
life, says, constat cum in quouis genere vitae probatissimum fuisse, dignumque
qui inter Sanctos Pontifices censeatur. And again in the next words to those
you cite, cuius vita adeo probata fuit, vt post eius mortem, nihil eorum quae
in vita egerit, laudanerit, improbaueritque, immutatum est. The same also says
Nauclerus; and adds, quin and religionis apprime studiosus. But you are glad to
cite any thing to the disparagement of a Pope, though there be no color of
truth for it.

Now that nothing at all was done in this Council, which is the main matter
you drive at, Vol. 2. p. 915.
and for which you have misinterpreted the meaning of Platina and Paris, is
very untrue. Which I prove, first by the authority of Gregory IX. who lived in
the time of this Council, and was created Pope but about eleven years after,
and commanded the Decrees should be put in the body of the Canon law, wherein
he used the service of Raymundus, of whom Platina thus writes, In vita Greg.
IX. fine.
Raymundum autem Barchinonensem, quo adiutore in compilando libro Decretalium,
Gregorius vsus est, ita quidam tam laudant, So say the Annal Eccles post Baron
tom 13. p. 439 XV.
vt maiori commendatione laudari nemo possit. And Binius in the life of the
said Gregory IX says that this Raymundus was Canonized by Clement VIII.

Secondly, S. Thom. 4. sent. did. 17. q 3. art. 1 ad tertiam.
I prove it by the testimony of the greatest Divines of that age, S. Thomas,
and S. Bonauenture, who speaking of the precept of yearly confession, S Bonau.
4. sent did. 17 q. 2. arg. 3.
say that the Church did institute it, and the Fathers command it in this
Council.

Thirdly, by the testimony of the Council of Trent, which speaking of the same
Decree, calls it, Conc. Tria sess. 14 can 8.
the constitution of the great Lateran Council. And that the Acts of this
Council were always extant, and are not counterfeit, appears, in that they
now are, and have been in the body of the Canon law, ever since the time of
Greg, IX. who commanded them to be inserted; and Annal. Eccles. post Baron.
tom. 13. anno 1234. XV.
anno 1234. which were but nineteen years after the Council, approved the
collection. Neither could any man have means to know the truth of the Canons
better than he, the Council having been held not long before, by his uncle,
in that city, where he being Pope could command the sight of all the
monuments; and many were still alive who had been present in the Council
celebrated but nineteen years before the publishing of these Canons, and knew
therefore what was done in it, better than those who were further removed,
either in time as Platina was, or in place as was Matthew Paris, if they had
(as you suppose) said any thing against it. Nor was it likely that Pope Gregory
either would or could have obtruded them before the eyes of such great Prelates
and Princes, for decrees made in Council, had they not been so indeed. Nor
would the Church (the things there determined so much concerning her) nor they
who did so much emulate her proceedings, have been silent, had such a thing
been attempted.

Lastly I prove that there were Canons made in this Council, yea and that
those Canons were received in England, (a thing which you deny toward the end
of your discourse) by a Matthew. Paris. hist. ma. anno 1222.
general Counsel (so it is styled) of England, held at Oxford, by Stephen
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1222. which was but seven years after
this of Lateran, and about 12. years before the Canons thereof were put into
the Decretalls by Gregory IX. where toward the end it is said, Binij Council.
tom. 7. part. 2.2. fol. 833.
Vt autem omnia fine bono concludantur, Lateranense Concilium sub sanctae
recordationis Papa Innocentio celebratum, in praestatione decimarum in aliis
capitulis praecipimus obseruari. But this is not all you have to say against
this Council;

C.
There be many things besides, which may make us justly to suspect the
authority of this pretended great Council. For first, before Cochlaeus put it
forth, it was never extant; and it was but lately neither that he put it
forth, in the year 1538. Three years before, when Merlin put forth the
Counsels; there was no such Council, that he met withal, to set out; it is
not in his edition. But Cochlaeus (a man not so well to be trusted, and who
feigned many things in writing Luthers life) tells us, that he had the Decrees
of this Council out of an ancient book; but where he got that book, or who
first compiled it, or of what authority it was, he tells us nothing at all. It
is most likely, that ancient book was no other but the book of the Popes
Decretalls, where those things that are said by him to be decreed in this
Council, are here and there scattered in several places. Those scatterings
(I believe) did Cochlaeus, or some other, collect together, and made up one
body of them in manner and form of a Council. But so ill-fauored a form has
he given it, that often it betrayeth it self not to be genuine, and taken out
of any authenticke copy.

ANSWER.
You further say, that there are many things besides, which may make you justly
suspect the authority of this pretended great Council, as you are pleased to
call it. I easily believe that there are many things that make you not only to
suspect, but flatly to reject the authority of this and many other General
Counsels, but none justly. But it is not the authority of this General
Council, (which is the same in all,) but the verity of the Canons and Decrees
thereof (you would have said) and the authority of the^ that affirm those
Decrees, that you with so much sagacity suspect. And if you think the Council
and the Canons thereof but pretended, which are acknowledged true by the voice
of all the Catholics of the world, what shall make them to be accounted
real? or shall the voice, of one pretended Deane diminish their reality? And
if you think this Council but pretendedly Great, which consisted of the
greatest number, of the greatest persons both Ecclesiastical and secular, that
ever met together in the world, I must needs think that the common sense and
understanding of a man, is in you but pretended. Does not Platina the Popes
own Secretary, close by the words cited by you, say, Pontifex apud Lateranum,
maximum Concilium celebrat? And does not your own Matthew Paris, in the words
by you cited, say Concilium illud Generale? besides many more and better
witnesses. And can you after all this, call it so scornefully a pretended
Great Council? yea no General Council, no Council at all? as you do in the
latter end of your pamphlet. Surely you are Goliath that defy the whole host
of Israel, yet every one, though as little as David, is able to cut of your
head, with your own sword.

Now the grounds of your suspicion, whereby you would dismount the Canons of
this great Council, are so feeble, that they show you are no skillful
enginier. Whereof one is, because Merlin has it not in his edition, he could
not meet with it, to set it forth. But this is a poor argument; for first we
know that there were many other Counsels which Merlin could not meet with,
which have since been put forth, and Protestants I think will not deny, that
there were such, as the second of Nice, four of Lateran, two of Lions, one of
Vienne, and one of Florence; and this of Florence was celebrated later than any
that he sets down, and was the last General one that was held before his
publishing of his book, about fowerscore years before it. And yet it seems
that he could not meet with the Records of this Council, or else he did
purposely omit it, which is not likely, how much more easy then was it for him
to miss this of Lateran, which was held about 300. years before. Besides, it
is manifest that neither the world at that time, nor he himself did believe,
that he had set forth all the Counsels; as appears by the king of France his
Privilege at the beginning of his work, and his own words at the end of his
Epistle before the second volume. The words of the kings Privilege are these,
Concilia quae in Ecclesia a temporibus Apostolorum vsque ad concessum
Basiliensem celebrata potuerunt coaceruari, by which it appears that as they
were all that they could then get, so they were not absolutely and certainly
all that were. The words of Merlin himself are these. Nam si authentica,
integra, solida, and a me^dis expertia fuerint exe^plaria, vnde haec fideliter
excerpta sunt, apprime castigata sunt, pura, vera, and sincera quae profero,
suoru^ Archetyporu^ quidem germanam conditionem prae se ferentia, quae si grato
animo tuleris, propediem (confide) ampliora nostris te sudoribus assecuturum:
by which it likewise appears that he did believe that there were diverse
others which he had not set down. Now for you to infer that because he
could not meet with this Council of Lateran, therefore there was none such, is
a very unjust consequence, and is as strong against the eight other above
named, as against this.

Another ground of your shrewd suspicion is, because Cochlaeus first put it
forth, and because he put it forth but lately; so that you object both
against the person, and against the time. For the person of Cochlaeus, you say,
he was not a man so well to be trusted; and to make that probable, you say,
that he feigned many things in writing Luthers life. Against the time of
Cochlaeus his edition you object, because it was lately set forth, to wit, in
the year 1538. three years after Merlin set forth his edition of the
Counsels. I will first consider the truth of what you say, and then the force
thereof. Concerning Cochlaeus his edition of this or any other Council, I can
find nothing, but that Bellarmine in his controversies reckons him amongst such
as have writ of the Counsels, yet he does not reckon it amongst the catalogue
of his works, in his book de Script. Eccles. nor can I find is here in
Paris. Yet taking what you say in this for granted, I do not find that he was
a man less to be trusted than Merlin, or any other; for Bell: calls him, Vir
doctissimus, and fidei Catholicae propugnator eximius; and therefore you who
traduce a man without any proof are much less to be trusted than he: yea than
any man I know, for your many falsifications, proved both in this and your
other writings. As for your saying that he feigned many things in writing
Luthers life, that is but a new slander which as you do not offer to prove, so
it is impossible you should; for how can you know the heart of another man from
whence his faigning must proceed? He may indeed write that which is false, but
that he did so by his own fiction, and not by others misinformation, you
cannot be assured, unless he himself had confessed it, which you do not
prove that he has. Nor do you prove so much as that he has written any
thing false of Luther.

You also suspect Cochlaeus his edition of the Counsels in regard of the time,
because he set it forth lately. And what I pray, is lately? you say, the year
1538. which is a hundred and eight years ago. Indeed in comparison of the
Apostles times it is but lately, but in comparison of the invention of
printing, which was but about two hundred years ago, and according to the
ordinary account of scholars in editions of books, I believe none will
account a book set forth a hundred and eight years ago, a thing lately set
forth. Much less have you reason to account it so, seeing you do not account
Merlins so, which yet (as you say) was set out but three years before. It is a
paradox to say, Merlin an ancient writer in the year 1535. Cochlaeus a late
writer in the year 1538. Can three years odds in a hundred and eleven make
one to be called late, and therefore to be (as you say) suspected, and not the
other? Surely if this your argument of latenesse be good against one, it is so
against both; whereby you may, according to your prudence, suspect all the
Counsels set forth by Merlin. But I will give your suspicion yet more scope;
for Merlin published the Counsels in the year 1524. as appears by the last
words of the whole work; so that Cochlaeus his edition was full fourteen
years after Merlins, according to your computation of Cochlaeus. And now to
turn the point of your argument upon your self, this laternesse of Cochlaeus
is so far from being a ground of suspision, that it is (by just so much) a
stronger confirmation of the truth and exactness of his work. It was but by
accident that the Counsels were printed at any time; they might have been let
alone till this present year, or not printed at all, would that have made you
suspect the truth of them all? it would then have made the world suspect you
for a very weak man, or rather have put you below all suspicion. But it so
falling out that the Counsels were printed at several times, by the care of
several men, the later they were printed, the more means had the publisher to
make further search, and to inform himself out of the Manuscripts more fully;
as we find, that in all editions of books, the latest (if the publisher apply
due diligence) are most full, most pure, and most correct. I hope you will not
say that the late edition of S. Chrysostom by Sr. Henry Sauill, is therefore
the more suspicious. So that here is neither truth in the grounds of your
suspicion, nor reason that this last should be any ground, though it were true.

You say moreover, that Cochlaeus says, that he had the Decrees of this
Council out of an ancient book, but where he got that book, or who first
compiled it, or of what authority it was, he tells us nothing at all. And you
add your conjecture, as weak as your former suspicion, that it is most
likely, that that book was the Popes Decretalls, where the supposed Canons of
This Council are scattered in several places. Concerning Cochlaeus I can say
nothing, seeing I cannot meet (as I said before) with this his work that you
cite, but I will favor you so far as to suppose you say true, and the^
consider the purpose of it, which indeed is none at all. But for that he had
it out of an ancient book is much to his purpose, which book (I will be bold
to conjecture, seeing you are so for your liking) was the very Original of the
Council it self; and where he got it, is impertinent for you to demand. And
for this my conjecture I will give you good ground, this, that in Crabs edition
of the Counsels I find an Epistle to the Reader before the beginning of this
Council, the title whereof is this; Bartholomeus Laurens Nouimagensis, Lectori;
the beginning of the Epistle this. Haec sunt quae ex Archetypo illo cuius supra
mentio fit, lectu adeo difficili, summo labor descripsimus; quae si cui grata
and vtilia fuerint, primum gratias agat Deo, qui horum qualecunque exemplar
hucusque seruauit; deinde F. Petro Crab, qui hoc ipsum vt inter Co^cilia
ederetur, procurauit. And this perhaps is the preface which you mention
hereafter and ascribe to Cochlaeus, for other I find not. But whose soever it
was, it proves thus much, that this Council (which was first published (that I
can find) by Peter Crab) was taken out of the Original Record, than which there
can be no better authority; and so he says again in the body of his Epistle,
certe in editione hac sedulo curatum est, ne quicquam ei ab Archetypo alienum
ingeri posset. And in this edition is the Decree of the expeditio^, and the
others, which in particular you hereafter seek to nullify, whereby those
objections are beforehand answered; yet I will say more when I come to them.
But suppose the Decrees of this Council had been taken out of the Popes
Decretalls (the original being lost, as were the Canons of the first Council
of Nice, which makes so much uncertainty about the number of the^) into which
they were inserted (as I showed before) by Gregory the ninth, but a few years
after they were made; in several places, according to the several titles to
which they were to be referred (which you disgracefully call scattering) what
impeachment is this unto their credit? The Popes Decretalls are a testimony of
no small reputation amongst all learned Christians. And why I pray scatterings?
the Decretalls are not a collection of the Counsels, that so you should expect
every Canon in his order, but a digestion of the Canons of all the Counsels
that pertayne to one matter, under one head; like the collection of the
Statutes of England by Rastall and others; (out of which if one would undertake
to extract all the laws made in Queen Elizabeth's reign, he must look
perhaps in a hundred several places) which yet I think you will not call
scattering, but methodicall digestion. But these are the reproaches thrown
upon the chief spiritual father of the Christian world, by those whom God
has (like Symeon and Leui) for the cruel schism they have made in the
Church, divided in Iaacob and scattered in Israel. But from whence soever the
first publisher of this Council took the Canons thereof, certain it is that
they were acknowledged, and ascribed to this Council, by a testimony above all
exception, namely, of the whole clergy of England in a Council at Oxford, as I
have showed before, and that, 12. years before the book of the Decretalls was
compiled. So that from the Decretalls is not the first view that we have of
the Canons of this Council.

You again repeat, and say, Those scatterings (you believe) Cochlaeus or some
other did collect together, and made up one body of them in manner and form of
a Council. But so ill favored a form he has given it, that it often
betrayeth it self not to be genuine, and taken out of any authentic coppie.
Even now you said (without doubt) that it was Cochlaeus that set forth this
Council, now, it was he or some other; and this I must needs grant is very
true; for if it be set forth, certainly it was either by one or another. And if
it were not Cochlaeus, then have you lost much labor in seeking to poison his
credit herein. And if it were some other, then is your decrying this Council
by reason of this edition of Cochlaeus, of no force, for then I affirm, that
this some other, was a man of the greatest credit of all other, and so the case
is clear against you, out of your own words, and you say nothing here to
impeach the credit of this other; which I wonder at, for you may as well speak
against you know not whom, as say you know not what, as you do in all this
discourse. You took it ill of Cochlaeus that he did not tell you where he
had that ancient book; and have not we much more reason to take it ill of
you, that will not tell us who it was that first put forth this Counsel you so
much find fault with, nor give us any aim to find out this editio^ you mean
(written by you know not whom) from any other? but although you here fail us,
yet you think you come home to us in that which follows; and although you
know not who first put forth this Council, and that we know that both first
and last have done it in the same manner; yet without relation to the
publisher, the very form of this Council, you say is so ill favored, that it
often betrayeth it self not to be genuine, and taken out of any authentic
copy. Which deep charge of yours against this Council will recoyle upon your
self, and by the ill favored form thereof, betray it self not to be
schollerly, nor taken out of any authentic copy, either of reason or
authority.

C.
For secondly, who will believe? who can persuade himself, that this Council
of Lateran should cite the Council of Lateran in the Decrees and Canons which
were there compiled? that is, that it should cite it self, as a Council not
now sitting, but passed and held a long time (or some time at least) before it?
The style of other Counsels uses to be, Haec sancta Synodus decernit, or
placuit huic Sanctae Synodo, as a session now in being, when they make their
Decree. But this Council of Lateran speaks of it self, as of some other
Lateran Council, then was at that time sitting, Fuit, and noscitur fuisse, as
of some decrees made before, six several times together; once in the 11.
chapt. twice in the 29. three times more in the 33. 46 and 61. Chapters. In
Lateranensi Co^cilio pia fuit institutione prouisum. De multa prouide^tia fuit
in Laterane^si Co^cilio prohibitu^. Deuoluatur collatio secundum statutum
Lateranensis Concilii. Et in Lateranensi Concilio noscitur fuisse prohibitum.
Will any man think these be the words of the Council of Lateran it self?

ANSWER.
Will any man think these be the words of a man that considers what he says?
who will believe, who can persuade himself, that a pillar of his sect, should
frame an accusation against a Council, which (to phrase it most gently,) is (I
believe) the greatest oversight that ever was yet committed in this kind? You
say that this Council while it was sitting, does cite it self, as a Council
that had sitten some while before; and to prove it you allege six places,
wherein there is mention of the Council of Lateran; and you most weakly
imagine, that the Council of Lateran there spoken of, is this Council of
Lateran that speaks. Know then (and a great shame it is that you should be
guilty of such an ignorance, as not to know it before you framed this terrible
objection) that there were four Counsels of Lateran, (according to the most
received opinion concerning the place) of which three were before this; and the
Council of Lateran cited in this, was that which was celebrated next before
this, under Pope Alexander the third, in the year 1180, wherein all those
places you (more punctually than any other) do allege, are to be found. And
is it possible that you (who talk sometimes, as if you had been Secretary to
all the Counsels) could be so ignorant, as never to have read or heard of any
Council of Latera^ but this, so that finding in this the Council of Lateran
cited, you should think this Council cited it self? for if you had but read
this Council in Binius, you should have found all these places by you cited,
referred in the marge^t to their particular chapters, in the former Council of
Lateran, under Alexander the third. Or if any man had forged this Council (as
you injuriously to us imagine) could you think him so silly a fellow, as to
conceive such a gross absurdity as this, should steal away unobserved? And if
he did not believe he should always escape undiscovered, (as to his eternal
unhappiness, by your seuerer inquisition, he has not,) could you think him
so foolish as to do a thing in it self most absurd and impertinent, which had
no end in it, (for it was all one whether this Council cited the Council of
Lateran or no,) and which could arrive at no other end, but the ruin of that
which was his maine design, namely, the begetting of the worlds belief to
this his edition of this Council; to which he must needs foresee, that this
would be the undoubted overthrow?

But howeuer, you make bold to slight and traduce some particular Catholics,
though most learned and virtuous, yet (to use a frequent word of your own, but
much more seasonably) I wonder how you dare, so easily to condemn all
Catholics in general; as to suppose that all the Popes, Catholic Bishops,
Divines, Canonists, and other learned men innumerable of the Catholic Church,
yea those whose interest is mightily concerned in this Council, even all
temporal Princes, whose Lay-dependants are not few in number, nor faint in
courage, nor all defective in learning, but some of them very eminent therein,
were all so blind to this grand absurdity as not to see it, if they were
Clergy, not one amongst so many millions not to have so much fear of the God
of heaven nor honesty as to discover it; if they were of the Laity, not to have
so much regard to the God of this world, proper interest and to humane
prudence, as to publish this prodigious forgery; but to suffer these Canons to
be blanched over with the title of a great General Council, and by that
means current through the world, until you with much industry and art, come
and discover this long hidden secret, and mystery of iniquity, to Catholics
eternal shame (as you surely think) and your own eternal honor.

But now you may see, that when men with pride and obstinacy fight against the
truth, they fall into that pit of shame and folly, that they prepared for
others. Yea you go on with more courage than foresight, thus;

C.
Therefore thirdly, Cochlaeus is feign to excuse the matter by a conjecture, (in
his preface to this Council set forth by Crab) that these decrees were
collected and brought into this form, wherein he presents them, by Pope
Innocentius himself, some while after the Council was done. He cites three
chap. of the Council to that purpose, (three of those six that are named
before) and says, the Reader will easily deprehend as much. But what reader will
like it well, that the decrees of a Council should be written some while after
the Counsel is ended? It was always the use of Counsels to write their own
decrees, and to sign them too, before they went away. And Innocent the Pope
was not so weak a Scribe, as to make the Synod it self speak after such a
manner, In Laterane^si Concilio noscitur fuisse prohibitum; or, fiat hoc,
secundum quod prouisum est in Lateranensi Concilio etc. which certainly is not
the style of the same Council concerning it self; Innocent the third knew
well enough what belonged to it.

ANSWER.
First you made Cochlaeus guilty of a foul fault, and now you bring him in
making an excuse, and both falsely. First, I can find no such conjecture as
you speak of, and secondly if it were to be found, it is no excuse. You say it
is to be found in his preface to this Council set forth by Crab; but we may
sooner gather the Sibylls leaves than find it, for there is no such thing.
There is indeed an epistle of Bartholomaeus Laurens, which I have mentioned
before, and by which you were confuted, it being thereby proved that that
edition was taken out of the original, for which there needs no excuse.
Besides, it is a thing in it self improbable, that Cochlaeus who (as you say)
wrote this Council himself, should afterward write a preface to another man's
edition of the same Council. But suppose this conjecture you mention (to wit,
that these decrees were collected and brought into this form he presents them,
by Pope Innocent himself, some while after the Council was done) be some
where to be found; what excuse is this I pray, or what does it excuse? If the
conjecture be true, it confimes the whole cause against you: namely, that all
these decrees were made in the Council; if it be false, it is nothing. But you
draw co^sequences from hence which are certainly most pitiful and
inconsequent, with which while you think to strengthen your cause, you do
weaken the credit of your own understanding.

You say, what reader will like it well; that the decrees of a Council should
be written some while after the Council is ended? And I say, what reader (but
your captious self) will dislike it? Indeed if the decrees of the Council had
been written some while before the Council began, you might justly have
asked, who would have liked it; but to ask who will like, that they should be
written afterward, is most ridiculous. But you suppose, because it is said in
the conjecture you allege, that they were collected and digested into the
form they are in, after the Council was done, that therefore they were not
written in any form, no not at all in the Council it self; to which purpose
you say, that it was always the use of Counsels to write their own decrees,
and to sign them too, (as very pertinently you add) before they went away;
intimating hereby, that they did not so in this Council; and your reason is,
because Pope Innocent did collect them into the form they now are in, some
while after the Council was done. Surely you did not consider what all
impartial men would conceive of your ability, seeing you make such an
inference as this; so poor, that few in the world would have made themselves
guilty of the like. And I demand of all the world, whether the decrees of the
Council could not be written, and signed too, by, and in the Council, and yet
be brought into this form, or method, wherein theynow are by Pope Innocent
some while after? every one that has but common sense will conclude against
you. Yea his collecting and putting them into a form some while after, is a
proof (clean contrary to what you infer, namely) that they were written
some where, and in some form or other before. For otherwise from whence should
Pope Innocent collect these decrees? out of his memory? that is most
improbable. Collection imports not the inuenting or making them, but the
gathering of them out of some Records or other; and out of the original it is
most likely (if he gathered them at all) that he took his collection, seeing
he lived in the time and place of this Council, and was present and president
therein. Your argument then is no better than this, The Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles were collected and brought into a form written and
printed, again and again, after the first writers were dead and gone;
therefore they were not at first written by themselves or their assigns.

You further labor to assoyle Pope Innocent from the guilt of forging these
Decrees, (for you take it for granted that they were forged, and Cochlaeus you
are most constant to, for the man that forged them,) because Pope Innocent was
not so weak ascribe (you say) to make the Synod quote it self; Wherein you
might well have spared your pains, for Quis (quaeso) vnquam vituperauit
Herculem? who, I pray, ever accused Pope Innocent hereof? you think Cochlaeus
does, because he conjectures (as you say) that these Decrees were collected and
brought into this form by Pope Innocent, after the Council was dissolved; as
if to collect decrees, and bring them into some or other form after the
dissolution of the Council, were all one as to forge them? A conceit surely
unworthy of any judicious man. Innocent the Pope (you say, and truly,) was not
so weak a Scribe as to make the Synod quote it self, he knew well enough what
belonged to it. Yet so unhappy are you, that you cannot support this truth,
(which no body puts you to, by denying) but by affirming a greater falsehood,
namely, that this Council does cite it self. But if you had been so good a
Scribe, as to have known as well what belongs to the making of objections
against a Council, as Pope Innocent did the style of Counsels, you would I
think have kept your own counsel, and been more silent in this matter. But
you go on, and say.

C.
We had best therefore believe Platina, non est decretum ibi quicquam; non
potuit ibi decerni quicquam. Improbauit Innocentius ipse Abbatis Ioachim
libellum, damnauit ipse Almericum. He says, It was not the Council of Lateran
that made any decrees to condemn them; but that Pope Innocent condemned them
himfelse. And we may well conclude, That both these and other things, de
quibus nihil decerni potuit in Concilio, were by the Pope set down in his own
Decretalls; out of which he took those Canons, whoeuer he was that compiled
them into the form of a Council.

ANSWER.
You say, we had best therefore believe Platina; which I grant we may do,
but not your sense of his words, which I have already refuted. But what degree
of trust soever we yield unto Platina himself, I am sure we had best give
none unto you, in your citation of Platina, who have wronged both him and us,
in all that you have here alleged. All that he says, is what you brought,
and is answered in the beginning, nec decerni tamen quicqua^ aperte potuit;
instead whereof you make him say, non est decretum ibi quicqua^; no^ potuit ibi
decerni quicqua^; wherein besides the explication and change of the words, you
leave out the main word aperte, which changes the whole sense. Platina says,
nothing could be decreed openly, you allege him saying, there was not, nor
could be any thing at all decreed, whereas the decreeing of nothing openly,
does imply that something was decreed, though not openly; and for the meaning
of Platina's words, I refer the reader to the first paragraph, where I show,
that these words of Platina were spoken with relation to the business of the
Holy wars, and not concerning the decrees of this Council.

And as here you leave out a word to the corrupting of the sense, so in the
following words which you allege, (as if they were placed in Platina as they
are in you, and were a further proof of the same assertion, whereas they have
no connection together in sense, and are above a dozen lines asunder,) you put
in a word, which is the very hindge on which the sense is turned, and turned
contrary to the assured truth thereof; and that is the word, Ipse, he himself,
as if the condemnation of Almericus and the book of Ioachim had been the
Popes act without the Council, that so you might prove the Council falsified,
wherein the said acts are recorded to have passed. And then you add as another
saying of Platina, or as your construction of the former words of Platina, He
says, it was not the Council of Lateran that made any decrees to condemn
them, but that Pope Innocent condemned them himself. But Platina has neither
any such formal words, nor are they the meaning of the words he has; for his
saying the Pope did condemn them, does not necessarily imply that the Council
of Lateran did not condemn them, for it might be done by both, either
severally or together, and this latter way it was done, as I have already
proved, and do now again by the testimony of Beluac. l. 30 hist. cap. 64.
Beluacensis, who speaking of this Council says, that the Abbot Ioachim and
Almericus were condemned therein. So that you are Ipse, He himself, that have
falsified Platina, laid unjust objections against the Council of Lateran, and
(aperte) manifestly condemned your self of foul play by the evidence of the
fact,

For a close to this section, you say, we may well conclude, that both these
and other things de quibus nihil decerni potuit in Concilio, were by the Pope
set down in his own Decretalls; out of which he took these Canons, whoeuer
he was that compiled them into the form of a Council. Your conclusion is like
your premises, there is no truth in either of them both; you say, that both
these and other things, (I suppose you mean all the Canons ascribed to this
Council,) were set down by the Pope in his own Decretalls, that is,
according to your meaning, invented by the Pope, and put first into his
Decretalls; for if they were first decreed in Council, and afterward put into
the Decretalls, it is not for your purpose, but against you; and that it was
so, I have already sufficiently proved; and do yet again by the title of
these constitutions, as they are set down in the Decretalls; which are not
barely ascribed to the Pope, as many others are; but to him in a general
Council; thus, Innocentius tertius in Concilio generali. We may therefore
well conclude; that your conclusion built on your extreme corruption of
Platina, having so rotten a foundation must needs fall to the ground.

Lastly you say, that he took them out of the Popes own Decretalls, whoeuer
he was that compiled the Canons into the form of a Council. But I have proved
before, that he took them out of the original Records of the Council; and if
he had taken them out the Popes Decretalls, it had been well enough; those
Decretalls not being the Popes own, singly, as you have said, but the Popes
and Counsels of Lateran together, as I have many ways proved. So that of all
that you have hitherto said, there is not one word but is either untrue, or
impertinent; and to use your own words, de quibus nihil decerni potest. Yet as
if you had not said enough of this nature, you go on to make faults, in steed
of finding them (as you suppose) in others.

C.
For the third Canon of this Council (concerning the excommunication of
temporal Princes, and the Popes power to free their subjects from all
obedience to them, and to give away their kingdoms) is indeed one of the
Extrauagants;, cap. 13. de Haereticis, that is, Pope Innocents own Decree, and
not the Counsels of Lateran, vbi nihil decerni potuit. So in the 71. Canon,
concerning the recovery of the Holy Land from the Saracens (for which this
Council was chiefly called, and met together) the compiler has made the words
to run in a Popes style, and not in the style of a Council, Ad liberandam
terram sanctam de manibus impiorum, sacro Concilio approbante definimus, etc.
neither in the Council was there any such Decree made; as both Card.
Bellarmine (against king James's Apology,) and Eudaemon Cidonius (in his
Parall. Torti and Tortur.) do confess out of Platina. He therefore that made
these two decrees, of absoluing subjects from obedience to their Princes, and
of recovering the land of promise from the Saracens, may well be thought to
have made that decree also of Transubstantiation, which has made such a noise
in the world, and for which this Council is so often quoted under the name of
Maximum omnium, Generale, and celeberrimum Concilium.

Answer.
The third Canon of this Council, concerning the excommunication of temporal
Princes, you say, is one of the Extrauagants, cap. 13. de Haereticis, but you
are very Extrauagant in saying so; for there is no such matter in the place by
you cited, nor indeed any such place as you have here rashly set down. All
that is to be found is this; that in the fifth book of the Extrauagants, there
is a Title de Haereticis, under which title are only three chapters, and in
them not a word of this matter. And this for the truth of your quotation; I
will now consider the sense of what you say, and the truth thereof. The third
Canon (say you) is one of the Extrauagants, that is, Pope Innocents own
Decree. By which it seems, that it is the same thing with you, to be one of
the Extrauagants, and to be Pope Innoce^ts own Decree; as if the Extrauaga^ts
were Pope Innoce^ts own decrees; whereas it is apparent by the titles to whom
they are ascribed, that not one of them was made by Pope Innocent; so mightily
are you mistaken in this matter. This Decree then is not Pope Innocents own,
and not the Counsels of Lateran, as you say, but Pope Innocents own, and the
Counsels of Lateran; his, in and with the Council of Lateran, as I have
proved. You also cite your self (for it is to be found in no author else)
against the Council of Lateran, saying, vbi nihil decerni potuit, where
nothing could be decreed; against which I oppose (besides all that I have said
before) a man of much better authority, Albertus Crantzius, who says Crantz.
Metrop. l. 9. cap. 1. sect. Innoc. 3.
Concilium maximum congregauit Lateranum; ibi multa constituta, quae hodie
extant in corpore iuris, there many things were decreed, which are at this day
extant in the body of the law.

Moreover the sense of this Canon you do lamely, and with change of the
terms set down; for there is no mention of kings nor kingdoms; and then the
Popes absoluing of the vassalls of temporal Lords (for those are the words of
the Canon) from their fidelity to them, and exposing their land to be occupied
by Catholics, expressed to be but in the case of neglect to purge their land of
heresy, and continuance therein after excommunication by the Bishops, and after
a years contempt of making satisfaction; and then there is added this
reservation also, Saluo iure Domini principalis, etc. saving the right of the
principal Lord, so that he give no obstacle hereunto, nor oppose any
impediment. Now this power of the Pope, whatsoever it be, is far from that
which your confused words insinuate, which to your weaker readers (I suppose)
will sound, as if the Pope had power to absolve the subjects of any kings from
their fidelity, and dispose of their kingdoms when, to whom, and for what
cause so ever they pleased; which is nothing so. Yet if this power of the Popes
were so vast as you believe it, or would have others to believe it, why should
it trouble you? And why should you be more tender of the interest of Princes
than they themselves, and all their courts about them, who either received this
Canon immediately from the Council, as I have said and proved, or else suffered
it to be coseningly thrust upon them, as you have said, but not proved.

And I wonder that you a Protestant, should fasten upon this decree of deposing
of Princes by the Pope, (to make the decrees of this Council odious and
incredible,) when as it is well known, that the Popes in sixteen hundred
years, have not deposed so many, as Protestants in one hundred; for almost
whersoere the gangrene of that heresy has spread it self, they have either
actually deposed and expelled their Princes, as in Swede, Denmark, Scotland,
Netherlands, Geneua; or diverse times attempted by violence to do it, as in
France often, in Bohemia, in Poland, and now it is feared in England. And if
you say, that though these Puritan Protestants have both taught and done these
things, yet the true Protestant of the Church of England, he never taught such
doctrine, he cannot think such a thought without horror; surely we have
nothing but your bare and often broken word for our security. For what
experience has the king, or his few predecessors of your religion had, that in
case they should have deprived you of your desires, as they denied to grant
the desires of the Puritanes, if they should have turned you out of your
Bishoppricks and Deaneries, taken from you the Church usurped Livings, set up a
religion that would not have endured wiuing preachers, what experience have
they had, that in these or the like cases, your Protestants of the Church of
England would not attempt their destruction, and if they were able, lay the axe
on their necks, as your Supreme Gouuernour of your Church of England Queen
Elizabeth and her instruments did, on the neck of the renowned Mary Queen of
Scotland, and Dowager of France.

Can you then think much that the Pope, a person of an other quality, and more
dis-interessed than the subjects of Princes, should have some kind of power,
by all convenient ways to reduce and correct heretical Princes? Especially
seeing the Emperors, Kings, and Princes gave their votes unto this Decree, and
were, for so much as concerned themselves, the makers thereof. But you will not
believe that this decree was made in the Council, but think that you have
proved the contrary. My advice then is that you acquaint the Kings and Princes
on this side the seas, with this strange cheat that is put upon them; it is
like to be a matter of high acceptance to them, of great reproach to their
unfaithful servants, that would not discover that which you have done, and of
great praise and preferment to your self.

You further object against the Act of the expedition for the recovery of the
Holy Land, (which you call the 71. Canon, but no body else does so that I know)
because it runs, say you, in a Popes style not in the style of a Council. By
which I perceive, that though you are one of the Court yet you are none of the
Council, for you are not skild in the styles of Popes and Counsels.

Otherwise you would have known, that it is the manner in those Counsels
where the Pope himself is present, to decree things in his name, with this
addition, sacro approbante Concilio, as in the Council of Florence in literis
vnionis, even as Acts of Parliament of England, are made in the kings name,
with the advice or consent of the two houses.

You say moreover, that Card. Bellarmine and Eudaemon Cidonius do confess out
of Platina, that there was no such decree made. Your Eudaemon Cidonius I cannot
meet with here, nor is it much material, for that answer which serves your
quotation of Bell: will serve him also, seeing (as you say) it is both their
confessions out of Platina. For the finding of your citatio^s out of Bell: you
use us very ill, giving us no direction, but a book of perhaps twenty leaves
in folio to find out twenty words, which when we have found, to recompense
our pains, we find your mistake and falsehood. For Bellarm. does not speak
directly of the particular chapter of the expedition, whether that were made in
the Council or no, but of the buisinesse of the Holy War in general, de hoc
articulo, cu^ multa disputata fuissent, nihil certi definiri potuit; and there
is a difference sure betwixt nihil certi, and nihil omnino, nothing certain,
and nothing at all, as you would have it. And I suppose this nihil certi is
meant in regard of the further and more particular managing of the war, from
which they were hindered by the present war in Christendom, and which is no
denial of the Decree of the expedition, which consists of a few general heads
concerning the raising of contributions to this great work from the clergy,
(wherein the Pope himself gave a great example) of punishments on those that
hindered it and indulgence to them that advanced it, with the like. All which
though they were undoubtedly decreed, yet it may be said with Bell: out of
Platina, that after much disputation there was nothing certain defined, in
regard of the nearer and more particular articles for the managing of the
war, being put from it by the present war in Christendom. Yea it might be
said nihil certi in regard of this decree it self, not of the letter and
intention of it, but of the wars at home, yea rather the contrary was certain,
namely, that it was not executed. And if Platina (or Bellarmine out of him) had
intended to exclude this Decree of the expedition (which is all that we
affirm to be done in that kind) why did they express it with these
reseruations, of aperte and certi, and not say directly and without limitation
nihil as you do? which had been more plain, and agreeable to the gravity of
those writers. Therefore by these reseruations they must needs intend some
thing, which (as I conceive) is that which I have expressed. Howsoever,
certain we are, that this Decree was made in the Council, by all that proof
whereby we have proved the whole Council, of which this is a part; and
particularly (because you here make a particular objection against it) by
Matthew. Paris, who intimates so much, by repeating Matthew. Paris hist. ma. p.
189.
the substance of this very Decree, in almost as many words as they are in the
Council, which are too long to set down here.

Your further say, that he that made these two decrees, of absoluing subjects
from obedience to their Princes, and of recovering the land of Promise from the
Saracens, may well be thought to have made the decree of Transubstantiation
also. And you say truth in that, but it will not help you; for Pope Innocent
made them all, but, sacro approbante Concilio, that is, the whole Council,
consisting of the Pope and the rest of the Prelates, decreed them Nor have you
reason so to boggle at the word Transubstantiation, or at this Council for the
word; seeing the thing knew no beginning since our Savior, as our Catholic
books do sufficiently prove; and even the word it self was in use before
this Council, as appears by Roger Houenden in Henrico 2. where he has these
words. Annal. ^.576.
Confessi sunt etiam, quod Sacerdos noster, bonus sieve malus, iustus vel
iniustus, corpus and sanguinem Christi posset conficere, and perministerium
huiusmodi Sacerdotis, and virtutem diuinorum verborum, quae a Domino prolata
sunt, panis and vinum in corpus and sanguinem Christi vere transubstantiantur.
Also by Blesensis, who was king Henry the second his Chaplayne, who says
Blesens. p. 140.
Et vt gratia exempli, in vno Sacramentorum videas abyssum profundissimam, and
humano sensui imperceptibilem, pane and vino transubstantiatis virtute verborum
caelestium in corpus and sanguinem Christi etc. Both these wrote in the days
of Henry the second, and the Council of Lat. was held in the days of king
John, who reigned the second after him. And in both these good English authors,
do we find the word transubstantiated, applied to the bread and wine changed
into the body and blood of Christ; nor do we find in any story, that these
men were questioned for the use of these words, as if they did import any thing
more in their sense, than that which was the general belief of that and the
foregoing ages. It is not therefore the Decree of transubstantiation made in
this Council afterward, which has made such a noise in the world, as you say
it has, but the heretics and Schismatiques that have opposed it.

Nor was this Counsel for this decrees sake called Maximu^ omniu^, generale,
and celeberrimum, but because it was summoned by the Pope from all parts of the
Christian world, and there met together the greatest and most renowned assembly
both of Clergy and Laity, that ever was in the world: which therefore it ill
becomes you to deride. In fine, the three particular decrees you here oppose,
but have proved nothing against them, are first inserted into the Decretalls,
which was done by Pope Gregory IX. not many years after the Council was held;
who therein used the service of one of the best men of the world, as I have
proved before. Secondly, they are put into the number of the Canons of this
Council by Crab: who (as I have also proved) took them out of the Original
Records. Thirdly, they are also reckoned amongst the rest of the Canons, by all
others that have made edition of this Council, as Surius, Binius, and
whosoever else. Lastly, they are received and allowed by the Catholic Church,
the strongest testimony of all others; and do you think to overthrow them?
Who is sufficient for this? he therefore that attempts it, deserves the name of
haereticorum maximus omnium, generalis and celeberrimus. In the next place, you
invade us with an Arithmeticall argument; but when I have reckoned with you, it
will appear that you are not a man of good account; for thus you cast it;

C.
But as it should seem, he that first composed it, and styled it so, or
afterward set it forth, and entitled it a General Council, had not his
lesson perfect. For between the seventh and the eighth General Council, I
trow there cannot another General Council interueene, as this notwithstanding
is made to do, if it were so Great and so General, as they say it is. They
count the second of Nice for the seventh General, which was held in the year
787. and the Council of Florence (held in the year 1449.) for the eighth
General, as is there, in the last session of it, expressly set down; Finis
octaui Concilii Generalis factus est 21. Iulii etc. So that unless they will
make two eight general Counsels, this of Lateran could be none.

ANSWER.
You pass from the matter of this Council, to disprove the title thereof; and
say, he that entitled it a general Council had not his lesson perfect, and
that because (as you say) they count the second of Nice for the seventh
general Council, and the Council of Florence for the eighth, and between
the seventh and the eighth there cannot another interueene, as this is made to
do, if it were so great and so general, as they say it is. Truly if he that
published this Council, had had his lesson no perfecter than he that made
these objections, he deserved to be whipped for a trewant, for never were there
such idle objections made. I pray who are these, they, that account the
Council of Florence the eighth general Council? your reader cannot but
think you mean us Roman Catholics, against whom you here dispute, and whom
you would make to appear so simple, that they cannot tell eight. But it is not
the Roman account, I trow, that you here follow, but the schismatic
Grecian, who yet will give you no more thanks for it, nor no more admit you a
member of their Church, than will the Catholics. You must know then, if you
did not before, that the eighth general Council was celebrated in
Constantinople against Photius, who made a schism between the Latin and
Greek Church, they of the schism rejected this eighth, and many other
general Counsels, which were celebrated in the west; amongst which this
fourth of Lateran (you so strongly and weakly fight against) was one; until
the Grecians meeting again with the Latins in the Council of Florence, the
Grecians called that the eighth general Council; which yet soon after they
rejected, and so at this day allow but seven. But if men may receive and reject
Counsels at their pleasure, then you may with the Lutherans allow but six;
with the Eutychians which are yet in Asia, but the first three; with the
Nestorians which are yet in the East, but the first two; with the Arrians and
Trinitarians which are in Hungary and Poland, none at all. And this you and
yours may do with as good reason, as they do reject and revile this of
Lateran, and above all, the sacred Oecumenicall Council of Trent.

And that you may again fall into the fault, of which you falsely accuse
others; you are out in your computation of the years of the holding of the
Council of Florence; but this I do not mention as a matter of moment, it
being brought in but on the by. But I cannot omit a weighty passage that you
have a little before, where you say, that between the seventh and the eighth
general Council you trow, there cannot come another, if it were so great and
so general, as this is said to be. Whereby you intimate, that the greatness of
this Council was the hindera^ce that it could not come between the seventh
and the eighth, and by consequence, that if it had been a little one, it might
have come between; which is a very new and pretty fancy. A little general
Council it seems might have crowded in between the seventh and the eighth as
an appendix to the former, or otherwise have found place and union with it
under the same name and number of the seventh, but this being so great and so
general, could not possibly find a room betwixt them, but that it must make
two eights, as you say, rather than an eighth and a ninth, which ninth (if it
had been so, in this case) might yet have been called the eighth in some
other respect, as I have showed. But I had thought that Counsels in regard of
number being of discrete quantity, did not require any place by reason of their
greatness, (as if they were in this regard, of continued quantity also,) more
than if they had been little: the abstract number of eight, (I trow) can no
more come in, between seven and eight, in a small subject tha^ in a great; and
therefore the greatness of this Council was no more hinderance to its coming
in between the seventh and the eighth, without cha^ging the name and order of
the number, than if it had been never so little.

You tell us also, that in the last session of the Council of Florence it is
expressly set down, Finis octaui Concilij generalis, etc. yet the words more
expressly than you have set the^ down are, Finis generalis octauae Synodi,
which though not different in substance, yet the difference of the words
Concilium and Synodus if you had understood the reason thereof, had been
enough to prevent your objection. For it appears hy an epistle of
Bartholomaeus Abramus to the Archbishop of Rauenna, set down by Crab at the
beginning of this Council, and by Binius at the end, that the Latin Original
of this Council was lost, and that this that is now extant, was translated by
the said Abramus out of the Greek, for which reason he uses the word Synodus
according to the Greek, and not Concilium; and it is called octaua because it
was so in the greek which he translated; and the Greeks set it down so,
because (as I said before) they accounted no Counsels general, but where they
themselves were present and which they did receive, of which this was indeed
the eighth. But this account is (for very good reasons) rejected by Praefat.
huic Synod.
Surius and Notis in Council. Florent.
Binius, and by all Catholics. And Crab though he have no caveat upon this
place, yet that you may see he spoke according to the letter of the greek
copy, and not his own mind, he calls all the Counsels betwixt the 2. of
Nice, and Florence, General Counsels; all that the Church accounts so; and
particularly of this Council of Lateran he says, Instituta generalis Concilij
Lateranensis tempore Innocentij Papae tertij.

In the end of this section you make this notable conclusion; So that unless
they will make two eight general Counsels, this of Lateran could be none;
which out of your discourse may as justly be inferred thus, so that unless
they will make two, or nine eight general Counsels, that of Constantinople
the fourth, the four of Lateran, the two of Lions, that of Vienne, that of
Pisa, that of Florence, or some one of these could be none. Could be none, is a
false consequence, could not be the eighth, is true; nor is that of Florence or
Lateran numbered for the eighth by any Catholics at this day, but this is
reckoned the twelfth, that most commonly the sixteenth. But that the number of
eight, which you so hunt here, may come in (because nos numeri sumus) he that
first made this objection (which I believe was not you) shall by my consent be
reckoned Sapientum octauus, the eighth wise man, which he shall be without a
rival, there shall not be two of them; especially if he that next aspires to
it be a great one, for then (I trow) he cannot interucene in the order of
number, between the eighth and the ninth, as you have taught us for our
learning.

C.
Besides, if it were a general Council, how came it to pass, that the Canons
of it were never generally received? as amongst us in the Church and kingdom
of England they were not, and as without doubt they would have been, had the
Council in those days been accounted general, and the Decrees of it under
that style and title sent abroad into the world. But with us in England ever
since that time, and contrary to the 46. pretended Canon of it, subsidies have
been paid to the king, inconsulto Pontifice; and against the 41. Canon, with
us Currit praescriptio, though oftentimes ex bona fide ortum non habeat; and
yet again contrary to the third Canon there, with us, Clericorum bona qui de
haeresi conuicti sunt, they go not to the use of the Church, but are always
brought into the kings Exchequer.

ANSWER.
The generality of this Council you further go about to disprove, because the
Canons thereof were not (as you say) generally received; and this you prove,
because they were not received in England; but that they were not received in
England you do not prove, but by three instances, which you do not prove; and
if you had, they had proved nothing. For it is not properly the general
receiving that makes a Council to be general, but the general calling
thereof from all parts of the Christian world, and such was this. Otherwise no
Council could be styled general in the calling of it, or while it was
sitting, or when it was concluded, until it did appear that all the world had
received it, which is a condition that never happened to any Council, because
some or other heretics (against whom all general Counsels have been
commonly called) or perhaps all, did refuse to receive it. So that by this your
character of a general Council, you have plainly casheired all the general
Counsels that ever were, for even the first four, which you seem to
magnify, and grant them the title of General, were the Canons of them
generally received? It is manifest that they were not, but were rejected by all
those sorts of heretics who were the occasion of their calling.

Moreover, your reason to prove that the canons of this Council of Lateran
were not generally received to wit, because they were not received in England;
if it were true, yet it is inconsequent, and your deceit or mistake lies in
the indistinction of the word Canons, whereof some be of faith, some of manners
and discipline. Now that a Council be accounted to be generally received, it
is not required that the Canons of discipline and practice be received in all
kingdoms, but it is sufficient that the Canons concerning matters of faith be
generally received, to style the reception general, and the Council general,
for so much as the generality of reception can contribute to the title of its
being general. As for example, the kingdom of France does not receive the
decrees of the Council of Trent concerning government, but of faith it does,
as do all other Catholic Countries, for which reason, even this kingdom
which denies to receive the Council of Trent in matters of government, does
notwithstanding acknowledge it general. By which it appears, that you are not
so well versed in General Counsels and their reception, as to know distinctly
the meaning of the words according to their Catholic use. Now there is no
doubt that the kingdom of England did receive this Council for the matters of
faith, otherwise it would have been noted heretical as now it is, and for its
not receiving the Canons of discipline and government, you prove not but by
your own bare word, which I may most justly deny; yet I have other proofs
against you.

But first I will take notice of your mistake (if not vnfaithfullnesse) in your
description of the 46. pretended Canon (as you call it) contrary to which, you
say, subsidies have been paid to the king, inconsulto Pontifice; as if that
Canon had said, that no subsidies at all should be paid to the king but by the
advice of the Pope, whereas the Canon speaks only of the subsidies of the
Clergy, as requiring the Popes advice. As for the practice of England contrary
to these three Canons you mention, if it be true (which I do not believe,
because I have heard good lawyers in England say the contrary in one, which
concerns prescription) yet it does not prove that these Canons were not
received; for these crossings of the Canons may happen, either through
indulgence of the Pope granted to the kings, or the kings usurpation contrary
to the Canons received; or in your insta^ce of prescription, through the
headstrong impiety of the people, who will not observe the good laws they
receive, being contrary to their evil customs. If England had observed all
the Canons they have heretofore received, when they were as wise, as learned,
as pious, as judicious (at the least) as now they are, you and I (I believe)
should not have been at this bay, that now we are. Now contrary to your
proofelesse assertion, I prove that the Canons of this Council were received
in England, as well those of manners as of faith; first by the testimony of
Linwood, and the municipall laws of the land, as they are affirmed by
Franciscus a sancta Clara, in his article of transubstantiation.

Secondly by the Council of Oxford before cited, held by the then Archbishop
of Canterbury, but seven years after this of Lateran, (which was the very
first Council in the world, that was held after this) where it is said, Binij
tom. 7. part. 2. page 833.
That all things may be concluded which a good end, we enjoin that the Lateran
Council celebrated under Pope Innocent of holy memory, in the paying of
tithes, and in the other chapters be observed. By which it appears, how much
you are deceived, in saying that in England the Canons of this Council were
not received: as you also are in saying.

C.
Lastly, I believe no good story can be showed to confirm the pretended title
of this Council, that the Patriarch of Jerusalem and Constantinople were
present at it, and 70. Metropolitans besides; though that will not make it
general neither, for want of the two other Patriarchs of Antioche and
Alexandria, who are not mentioned to have been among them. Howsoever, nihil
ibi actum quod quidem constet; and so was it neither any General Council, nor
so much as any Council at all.

ANSWER.
What you believe imports not, for I know you believe many heresies and errors,
amongst which errors this is one, That no good story can be showed that the
Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople were present at this Council etc.
One is said to be present either in person or by deputy; that those two
Patriarchs which you first mention, were there in person, is affirmed by
Platina, Paris, and Vrspergensis; and that the other two were there by their
deputies, with above 70. Metropolitanes, besides a very great number of
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, some in person, and some by Proxy;
and with these the Legates and deputies of the two Emperors, of all (or almost
all) the Kings, Princes, cities and other places of the Christian world, is
recorded by Paris, and Vrspergensis. And I suppose you will not deny any of
them to be good historians, especially Paris and Platina, whom you called in,
in the beginning of this your work, as witnesses (as you thought) against the
Canons of this Council. Matthew. Paris. hist. may. p. 188. l. e.
Paris and Vrsperge^sis speak almost in the same words; Vrspergens. Chronic.
p. 320.
thus: Anno ab Incarnatione Verbi 1215. celebrataest sancta vniuersalis Synodus
Romae, in Ecclesia Saluatoris, quae Constantiniana vocatur, mense Nouembri,
praesidente Domino Innocentio Papa tertio, Pontificatus eius anno 18. in quo
fuerunt Episcopi 412. inter quos extiterunt de praecipuis Patriarchis duo,
videlicet, Constant: and Hierosol: Antiochenus autem graui languore detentus,
venire non potuit, sed misit pro se Vicarium, Anthedarensem Episcopum:
Alexandrinus vero sub Saracenorum dominio constitutus, fecit quod potuit,
mittens pro se Diaconum suum Germanum; Primates autem and Metropolitam 71.
caeterum Abbates and Priores vltra octingentos; Archiepiscoporum vero and
Episcoporum, Abbatum, and Priorum, and Capitulorum absentium Procuratorum non
fuit certus numerus comprehensus. Legatorum vero Regis Siciliae in Romanorum
Imperatorem electi, Imperatoris Constantinopolitani, Regis Franciae, Regis
Angliae, Regis Vngariae, Regis Hierosolymitani, Regis Cypri, Regis Arragoniae,
necnon and aliorum Principum, and Magnatum ciuitatum, aliorumque locorum inge^s
fuit multitudo. Here is your erroneous belief plainly and amply confuted. I
wonder what histories you have read concerning this Council, that these should
escape you; especially Paris the Popes dear friend, and Platina the Popes own
Secretary. I have therefore reason to believe that you took up these objections
upon trust, and of men that were not faithful, who have greatly deceived you.
And therefore the title of this Council which you again so scornefully and
boldly call pretended, shall be really accounted General, by the best and
noblest part of the world, the Catholic Church, when all other pretended
Churches, Counsels, and their Canons, their Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters
shall have no being, nor memory but of dishonor.

You further say, (according to your manner, without proof,) that this
Council vas not General, for want of the personal presence of two of the
Patriarchs; wherein you are much mistaken: for otherwise the first four
commonly styled General, and for such acknowledged by very many Protestants,
cannot be truly such, because the Chief Patriarch, the Bishop of Rome, was not
present in any of them, but by his Legates. Unless you will say, that though
two may not be absent, yet one may, especially when that one is the Pope, a man
who^ you (I know) can very well spare, not only out of the Council, but out of
the world. And yet I wonder that you that have had the fortune to be the
pretended Deane of S. Peter's Borough and the pretended Master of S. Peter's
house, should yet be such an enemy to S. Peter's chair. But if you desire to
know what makes a Council general, and what are the insufficiencies thereof,
which you ought to have expressed and proved, before you had shot your hasty
bolt of condemnation against this Council, read Turrecremata, and Canus upon
this subject.

You at last conclude thus, Howsoever, nihil ibi actum quod quidem constet, and
so was it neither any general Council, nor so much as any Council at all.
Wherein first your proposition is false and has no authority (that I know of)
but the worst in the world, your own. Yet you set it down in Latin, as if
they were the words of some author, but neither express the place, nor so much
as his name, and therefore I take it for yours, and reject it. Secondly if it
were true that nothing was done there, yet your inference from thence is
inco^sequent, to wit, that therefore it was neither any general Council, nor
so much as any Council at all; concerning the nullities of a Council, or of
the generality thereof, I need say no more than I have done, seeing it rests on
you to prove, that doing nothing is one. And for your affirmation that nothing
was done, I have fully disproued it through this whole discourse. I will
therefore only add the testimony of Matthew. Paris, who though he were no friend
to this Pope, as I have showed before, yet speaking of this Council in the
place above cited, says thus: His omnibus congregatis in suo loco praefato,
and iuxta morem Conciliorum Generalium in suis ordinibus singulis collocatis,
facto prius ab ipso Papa exhortationis sermon, recitata sunt in pleno Concilio
capitula 60. (wherein is a mistake in the figure, it should be 70.) quae aliis
placabilia, aliis videbantur onerosa. Tandem de negotio Crucifixi and
subiectione terrae sanctae verbum praedicationis exorsus, subiunxit dicens, Ad
haec ne quid in negotio Jesus Christi de contingentibus omittatatur, volumus and
mandamus, etc. And so repeats at large the substance of the Decree of the
Expedition for the recovery of the Holy land. So that it is manifest by this,
and that which has been said before, that there were many things done in this
Council, yea all that are affirmed to be. And it is called a Council, and a
general Council, by Vrspergensis, Paris, Platina, Grantzius, Nauclerus,
Beluace^sis, and all that I can find that have any way written thereof, except
your vncontrowlable self. Besides it has the allowance of the Holy Catholic
Church, the awful spouse of Christ, more true, more wise, more vigilant, and
infinitely more reverend then all the sects and Synagogues of Schismatiques, and
Heretics; and therefore their obiectio^s against her, whom they ought to
believe and reverence above all things on the earth, especially when they are
propounded peremptorily, as these are, are fitter to be rejected than to be
answered. I conclude with the words of Surius: a Nemo sanae mentis ambigere
potest, hanc quae sequitur Synodum Lateranensem cum primis insignem and vere
oecumenicam fuisse, quippe in qua de negotiis religionis summa Latinae and
Graecae Ecclesiae concordia tractatum est, cuique interfuere Patriarcha
Constantinopolitanus, and Hierosolymitanus, and Archiepiscopi tum Lani tum
Graeci 70. Episcopi 412. Abbates and Priores plus 800. simul omnes Praelati
1215. aut eo plures. Nec defuere Legati Graeci and Romani Imperatoris, Regum
Jerusalem, Galliae, Hispaniae, Angliae, and aliorum. Quod si vero ea cuiquam
propterea minus ponderis habere videatur, quod recentior sit, ille certe
Christum mendacem facere velle videtur, qui perennem praesentiam suam promisit
Ecclesiae suae, and Spiritum sanctum suum, Spiritum veritatis, qui cum illa
maneat in aeternum. Manet sua semper Catholicae Ecclesiae authoritas, quam
quisquis contemnere ausus est, non ille efficit vt ea minor sit, sed se dignum
reddit, qui eius pondere penitus opprimatur.

No man well in his wits can doubt, that this Council of Lateran was very
famous, and truly general, because therein were handled the matters of
Religion, with very great agreement of the Greek and Latin Churches, and
wherein were present the Patriarch of Constantinople, and Jerusalem, and 70.
Archbishops Greek and Latin, Bishops 412. Abbots and Priors above 800. all the
Prelates together were one thousand two hundred and fifteen, or more. Neither
were there absent the Ambassadors of the Greek and Roman Emperors, of the
kings of Jerusalem, France, Spain, England, and others. But if this Council
seem to any to have less weight, because it is later, he truly seems to be
willing to make Christ a liar, who has promised his perpetual presence to his
Church, and his Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, which remains with her for
ever? The authority of the Catholic Church does always abide here, which who
soever presumes to despise, he does not lessen her, but renders himself worthy
to be crusshed to pieces with her weight.

And now instead of your proving the Catholic writers liars, and forgers, and
the Catholic Church credulous, negligent, and ignorant (which you
endeavored) you have proved your self, unwise, unlearned, and audacious; and
I believe will loose all credit and reputation of integrity, or capacity, in
the judgment of all prudent men, of what religion soever they be, that shall
read these your unworthy works. But suppose the thing it self were true,
that you have labored for (abstracting the authority to the contrary) to wit,
that there had been no Canons made in this Council, yea suppose there had
never been any such thing as this Council, what is it to your purpose? What
article of our Catholic Faith is thereby cancelled? how is your invisible
Church of England, or your Chapel in France (where God has his Church)
defended? Not at all, by ought that you have said. No nor by your Mimique
acting of the priest in hearing of confessions, (which we perhaps shall hear
too, at the third or fourth hand, for as you have no character of priesthood
for the hearing of Confessions, so neither have you any seal upon your lips)
whereby though like the asinus apud Cumanos in the lio^s skin, you bray and
keep some in awe, yet it may be they will be instructed to discover you, and
make your vain aspiring the object of their contempt and laughter, as it is of
ours, and even of all your fellow reformadoes. Your own conclusion therefore
which you discharge against us, recoyles upon your self, nihil ibi actum, quod
quide^ constet; in all that you have done, it is certain that you have done
nothing. And your objections and discourse have in them neither any general
counsel, nor (except the Counsel of the ungodly) so much as any counsel at
all.

And now let me tell you, that it were much more for your credit, to forbear
such bold brauing of the whole Catholic Church, especially in a Catholic
Country, and in the Court of a Catholic Queen, and that with such feeble and
vnschollerly arguments; of which, (were not your judgment ecclipsed by
partiality, and your passion swelld by opposition, and your ouerweening
conceit of your self the producer of extraordinary confidence and insolence
in you) you could not render your self guilty. Also your presumptuous and
offensive language, even to the Masters of those schools wherein you are not
worthy to be a disciple, is sufficiently observed; though covered with that
patience which you have not deserved; Otherwise, your weakness, or malice, or
both, would ere this have been characterd on your brow, had not the hands of
our Catholic Priests been bound up with modesty, and charity, and respect to
those, who see, suffer, but (I believe approve not your boisterous behavior.
And in this buisinesse of writing, your shame is laid open with the books you
cite, wherein your quotations are not sooner examined, than your corruptions
are discovered. If therefore you have not grace enough to become a virtuous
Roman Catholic, of which you made show (as there is good proof) when you
came first into these parts, yet learn at least to be rational in your
discourse, honest in your allegations, and civil in your language, both to
particular reverend and learned men, and especially toward the whole
Catholic Church. And then if you have a disposition to say or write any more,
you shall be answered with solidity, and equal ciuility.

And whereas one Mr Crowder has reported, that I have renounced the book I
lately set forth, and will not stand to it; and that Doctor Holden who approved
it for Catholic, has also refused to justify it; or words to this purpose;
and gives this for his reason, why he does not publish the answer which he
and his Coadiutors (as it is said) have framed thereunto: which is indeed but a
retreat for their inability to answer it; I say, it is false in him whosoever
says it, and malicious in him that invented it. And I further profess to him
and to the world, that (notwithstanding the slanders to the contrary) I do
auow the said book for mine, and for Catholic, and so does Doctor Holden.
And if he, or any, or all his fellow Ministers, will publish any thing that
they will call an answer thereunto, they shall not loose their labor, they
shall have a reply; wherein I make no question their weakness shall be made to
appear, as herein appears the weakness of D. Cosens.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF D. Cosens, or any one on his behalf, shall say that I have not here set
down truly what he wrote; whosoever desires to be satisfied therein, may if he
please see the original under his own hand, which is in my keeping. And
although his name be not set to it, yet every one that knows his hand, will
grant he wrote it, and the Countess of Denbigh by whose order I received it,
said that it was delivered to her by Doctor Cosens. Which paper, and others of
his also (he inwardly shrinking at his own guilt) has mightily labored to
recall into his own hands, that so there might remain no handwriting of his
own against him; but it was not fit that one of his temper should find so
much favor, but that they should remain upon the perpetual registry of time,
by being committed to the press; seeing he has deserved to have part of the
divine handwriting against him, that was against the blasphemous Baltazar;
THEKEL, Thou art weighed in a balance, and art found too light.

ERRATA.
^ 15. in the margent oner against the ^ line, put, page 877. C. p. 16. This
quotation in the margent [vol. 2. p. ^15.] place it six lines higher. p. 39. ^.
24. after see it, add, or seeing it. p. 40. l, 19. for yea. read, yet. p. 52.
l. 12. for explication, read, duplication. p. 60. l. 3. before expressed, read,
is p. 64. l. 14. after vnionis, add, and in diverse other Counsels. p. 66. l.
13. after intention of it, add, but of the execution, which was not certain,
nor likely; and for but read because. p. 68. l. 10 after iniustus draw a little
line. p. 91 l. 10. after be add, done. p. 93. l. 23. for here, read hers.


