THE PASSION OF DIDO FOR AENEAS. As it is Incomparably expressed in the Fourth
Book of Virgil. TRANSLATED By Edmund Waller and Sidney Godolphin. Esqrs.

-- Ubi quid datur oti
Illudo chartis: hoc est mediocribus illis
Ex vitiis unum --
Horat. l. Sat. 4^. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Peter Parker, at the
Leg and Star over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1679.

The Argument.
DIdo was espoused a virgin to Sichaeus; and both lived happy in their mutual
love, until her brother Pigmalion, who was then King of Tire, the place of
their abode, by some close treachery slew Sichaeus in hopes to possess his
great wealth, and to dispose of his Wife; All which, her husbands ghost
appearing in her sleep, discovered; telling her also where he had hid a
considerable treasure, of which Pigmalion knew not. This she took, and, in the
company of such friends she could best trust, and most hated the Tyrant; fled
from thence to seek her fortune in some safer place. At length arriving on the
shore of Lybia, partly for money, partly by the favor of some
neighbour-Princes, affected with her beauty, and the hope to obtain her in
marriage, she got possesion of that ground where the famous City of Carthage
was afterward built; whose foundation she had not only laid, but made some
good progress in the structure; when the wandering Trojan Aeneas was by Tempest
Shipwrackt on some part of her dominion. His great Fame, good mine, and well
relating of his story, prevailed so with her that she not only repaired his
Ships, and feasted him and his Company with great magnificence; but let him so
far into her affection, That she esteemed him, (at least did not doubt but to
make him) her husband. When his necessary pursuit of other designs occasioned
his sudden Departure, and her Tragedy.

This fourth book describing only her passion, deep sense of his ingratitude,
and her death, has been always esteemed the best piece of the best of Poets;
has been translated into all Languages, and in our days at least ten times by
several Pens, into English. It is freely left to the Reader; which he will
prefer.

This was done (all but a very little) by that incomparable person as well for
virtue as wit, Mr. Sidney Godolphin only for his own divertion, and with less
care, then so exact a judgment as his would have used, if he had intended it
should have ever been made public.

THE PASSION OF DIDO FOR AENEAS.
Translated out of the fourth Book Of VIRGIL.
MEan while the Queen fanning a secret fire,
In her own breast revolves her deep Desire
she often reflects upon the princely grace
Of great Aeneas, and that noble race
From whence he springs; her wounded fancy feeds
On his discourse, his high Heroic deeds,
His words his looks, her waking thoughts employ,
And when she sleeps, she sees him with more joy,
But seldom sleeps: For when the shades of night
Had left their Empire to the rising Light,
Folding her Sister in her arms, she says,
What unacquainted thoughts, what dreams are these*
How great a Guest within our walls we hold,
How wise in Counsel, and in Arms how bold?
The mortal seed of man acknowledge fear
But this brave Prince his equal mind does bear
Above all Chance. Did not my changelesse vow
And mine own will engage me to allow
No other Love; my first Affection dead
And with the Soul of my Sichaeus fled:
Were not all joys grown tastlesse, and the name
Of Love offensive, since I lost that flame;
I might perhaps indulge this one desire.
For, Anna, I confess since funeral fire
Embraced Sichaeus, this first beam of Light
Has offered comfort to so dark a night,
Unwonted motions in my thoughts retriv'd,
I find and feel the brand of care revived.
But may the earth, while yet alive, devour
This hapless frame, and Jove his thunder pour
Upon my head, and sink me to that shade
That silent deep, whence no return is made*
Before I do those sacred Knots unty,
Which bind me to so dear a memory.
He first unto my soul this ardor gave,
And may he hold it in his quiet grave,
This said, she weeps afresh. Anna replies,
O Chiefly Loved and Dearer then mine eyes,
Sad and alone for ever will you wast
Your verdant youth, nor natures bounties taste
In their due-season? think you that the dead
In their cold urns welcome the tears we shead?
What though no prayrs have yet had power to move
Your thoughts to entertain a second love;
Yet will you now with your own heart contest?
Nor give admittance to a pleasing guest?
Consider where this new Plantation lies,
And amidst whom these wall^ of Carthage rise:
Here the Getulians, fierce Numidians there,
On either side engage your watchful fear.
Propitious Heaven^ it seems, and Juno lead
These Trojans here with so desired an aid:
This match will mix your fortunes and advance
The Tyrian State above all force or chance.
Invoke the powers above, with so^t delay
Engage the Dardan Prince to longer s^ay:
Till the swollen Seas and winds their fury spend,
And Calmer Gales his purposes attend.
This speech revives the Courage of the Dame
And through her burning veins dilates the flame.
First to the holy temple they repair
And seek indulgence from above by praire:
Law-giving Ceres, Phoebus they invoke,
But above all do Venus Altars smoke
Propitious to the bands of Love; the Queen
With her own hands, the Heifer's horns between,
Poures the full bowls, or midst the sacrifice
Intentive walks, as the rich Odours rise
Fresh gifts she brings, and with a thought full brain
Surveyes the panting Livers of the slain;
Blind prophesies, Vain Altars, bootlesse Prayer
How little help they? while so near a care
Presses the Queen and mingled with her blood
Spreads secret poison through the purple ^^oud.
The Hapless Dido is enraged by love,
And with uncertain thoughts does wildly move.
So when a Shepherds roving Arrows find
And pierce (to him unknown) some careless Hind
She flies through woods and seeks the streams oppressed
The deadly Arrow rankles in her breast.
Now to the Walls she leads her Trojan Chief,
And with this food she entertained her grief
Shows the Sidonian-vvealth, and, as she speaks,
Her own discourse by care diverred breaks;
The evening closes with another ^east
And there again sh'invites the princely Guest
To tell his dangers past, and there again
She drinks together deeper Love and Pain.
But when the Prince (night's darker ensign spread
And sleepy dew upon all Mortails shed)
Does bid farewell, she waking there alone
Deserted mourns that her Dear Guest is gone*
Or keeps Ascanius in her Arms, to prove
If likeness can delude her restless Love.
Mean while her stately structures slowly rise,
Halfe-finisht Carthage rude and broken lies.
That high design, to heaven exalted frame,
Confused appears, and li^e a ruin lame.
Which when surveyed by Juno from above
And that the Queen neglects her fame for love*
Approaching Venus, thus Saturnia says:
What ample Trophies, never-dying praise,
To you and to your Cupid will be paid?
That two such Gods one woman have betrayed.
I know with what design you used this Art
Planting Aeneas thus in Dido's heart,
Suspecting least these walls of Ours might prove
Faithless to him if not secured by Love*
But shall this partial quarrel never cease?
May we not now ^ixe on eternal peace?
Fair Dido loves and feels your golden Dart;
Give but like ardour to Aeneas Heart,
And we will rule this State with equal power,
And give the Trojan Carthage for a Dower.
Venus replies (seeing the wife of Jove
To cross the height of Roman greatness strove
With this deceit), What madness can refuse
Friendship with you where you a friendship choose?
But whether Jove will favor this design
And the great people in one Empire join;
This in your prayers, who are his wife, does lie.
Juno returns; Impose this task on me,
For what is now in hand let this suffice.
The Trojan Prince with his unhappy prize
The wounded Queen, to chase the flying Dear
Soon as the beams of Morning-light appear
Hyes to the Fields; there, on the goodly train
A darkning shower I Will pour of hayl and rain,
Shake heaven with thunder, while the pale troop rid^
Dispersed with fear and lo^t without a guide:
One Cave in her dark bosom shall afford
Shelter to Dido and the Trojan Lord,
And if, as I, propitious to their love
You shine; this shall their Hymeneall prove;
All rites shall here be done. Venus with smiles
Consents, but laughs within, at Juno's wiles.
The morning come, early at light's first ray
The gallant youth rise with the cheerful day:
^harp Javelins in their hands, their Coursers by
They walk amidst the hound's impatient Cry:
Nearer the gates the Tyrian Peers artend,
And wait the Queen now ready to descend.
Her prouder Steed as filled with high disdain
^tamps the dull Earth, and Chavves the frothy Reine.
Mounted at last, her golden Quiver on
^y'd up with gold, her Hair which gold-like shone
Her purple garment, claspt with gold, in head
Of her fair troop, the brighter Queen does lead
With these the Trojans, and their great Chief close
As one fair stream into another flows.
He like Apollo in his light and heat
When he returns unto his Native ^ear
Of Delos, and fresh verdure does restore
Forsaking Xanthus and the Lycian shore
Thus he on Cynthus tops, his own retreat
Securely walks, thus welcome and thus great
^he Dryop^ans and the Cretans by,
^o does his quiver clash; not less then he
Aeneas shines, like beauty's in his face
And in his motions like attractive grace.
While thus they climb the pathless hills, the cry
^ursuesthe fearful herds which headlong fly
^own to the vales, and on the boundless plain
(...) longer chase in view of all maintain.
But glad Ascanius spurrs his willing horse
^ow these, now those, out-passing in the Course.
He wishes some incensed Bore his prey,
Or Lion from the Hills would Cross his way.
Mean while the gathering Clouds obscure the Po^^
They flash out lightning and in Thunder roll:
A bitter storm succeeds, the troops divide
And ore the Hills dispersed to Coverts ride.
One Cave in her dark bosom does afford
Shelter to Dido and the Trojan Lord.
Heaven shines with fire, earth shakes at this success
The Conscious air is filled with Prodigies.
This was the hour, which gave the fatal blow,
The pregnant spring of all succeeding woe.
Tender respects no more have power to move
The hapless Queen, no more she hides her love,
But does her Crime express with Hymen's name,
And lives exposed a Theme to various fame.
Fame the most swift of ills, which in her course
And motion spreads, and flying gathers force
Sprung from a scarce discerned seed, does tread
On the Low ground, but lifts to heaven her head.
She (as it is said) was of that monstrous birth
The latest Sister, which the teeming earth
Brought forth, to war with heaven it self alone;
Surviving all her brothers overthrown.
Thousands of plumes advance her easy flight,
As many eyes enlarge her piercing sight,
As many ears to catch reports, and then
As many tongues to spread those tales again,
The silent night cannot the voice allay
Of this ill boading Dame, in the bright day
She sits upon the City walls a spy
And takes delight all fears to multiply:
She now through Lybia's Empire does diffuse
Talk of Aeneas, and th'unwelcome news
Of Dido's love, that he late fled from Troy
Such envied power and greatness does enjoy.
This the leight Dame proclames in every Ear
And to Iarbas does the message bear;
Iarbas who had felt fair Didos scorn,
Joves Son of ravished Garamant is born,
Who hallowed had to his great father's name
An hundred altars, which together flame
With ceaseless incense to the powers above,
Eternal fires pledges of humble love.
Mad with the news, the Lybian Monarch lays
Prostrate himself before the Throne, and says;
All powerful Jove, propitious to the Moors
Whom Lybia more then any Land adores
Beholdst thou this? or does in vain our fear
Ascribe just vengeance to the Thunderer?
She, who a stranger with out leave have gained
Possession here, from us the power obtained
To plant a Town, has thought her self above
The prize and merit of our Ardent Love;
Yet now with joy receives into our Land
The flying Trojan and his Conquered band,
Resignes to him her beauty, fame, and power,
Prefers the Phrygian to the scorned Moore.
Is this our pay, our recompense, while we
Consume our flocks in sacrifice to thee?
While thus he pours his grief before the shrines
And Sacred Altars; mighty Jove inclines,
Looking on Carthage and the amorous pair
Who in their pleasure quench all nobler care.
He thus bespeaks his swift Ambassador;
Go, Son, and hie thee to the Tyrian shore
And to the Dardan Prince (whose generous fire
Is now betrayed by Love, and low desire)
This message bear, 'Twas not this destiny
His fairest Mother promised us when she
Preserved him from the powerful Arms of Greece;
She gave us then far other hopes then these,
That he from conquered Alba should extend
His Empire to the Worlds remotest end,
And spread the fame of Teucer's mighty race.
If in his thoughts these honors have no place,
If he have lost all sense of high renown;
Ah can he yet envy the Towers of Rome
To his Ascanius and fair Latium's sway?
This message to the Phrygian Prince convay,
And bid him hoise his sails* Swift Mercury
Takes the command, and through the Air does fly
His shining wings of Gold, and in his hand
The Ensign, of his power, his sacred wand;
That wand which long-clos'd eyes does bless with light
And seals up others in erernall night.
With this he cuts the Air, and yielding Clouds;
At length sees Atlas top, Atlas which shrouds
His pine-Crown'd head in Heaven, and does sustain
Incessant storms of new formed wind and rain.
Here first he stoops low as the earth, and then
Imployes his wings with all their speed again:
Till the vast seas orepast and Lybia's sands
He slacks his Course at Carthage, and there Lands.
Where when arrived he finds the Trojan King
Viewing the Walls, intent in ordering
The strength and beauty of the new-raised Town
To whom the winged Cyllenius thus begun:
Ah, too, too mindlesse of your own affairs,
Your thoughts immerst in less concerning cares,
Can you in Tyrian wealth and greatness joy?
And Carthage build, forgetful of your Troy?
Great Jove, who rules and fills the spacious All
The evermoving Spheers, the fixed Ball,
Sends me to ask, With what unblest design
You do the hopes of better fates resign,
And glory due to Teucer's mighty race:
If in your thoughts these honors have no place,
If you have lost all sense of high renown;
Ah, can you yet envy the towers of Rome
To your Ascanius, and fair Latium's sway?
Hermes (this said) returns the ayery way
He came; but cold Amazement does surprise
Aeneas speechless tongue and fixed Eyes:
His pious fears urge him in haste to fly
The too Loved Land and dear captivity.
But this resolved, what way is left t'infuse
The Unhappy Queen with this unwelcome news?
A thousand counsels wander in his mind
Now here, now there, successively inclined
This he prefers, he calls Eurilochus
The bold Cloanthus, trusted Mnestheus,
Gives them in charge that they the fleet prepare
Gather their troops but yet disguise their care
That he mean while will to the Queen impart
At some fit time his much divided heart:
Or when his Canvas-wings are spread to fly
Impute to heaven the sad Necessity.
Thus he resolves and thus commands these Peers
But nothing can escape the wakefull fears
Of the enamored Queen, whose tender breast
Presages all, by the first change impressed
Before the ill arrives: already Fame
(Which lately did the Lybian Prince inflame)
Now takes delight to spread this ill report,
That the glad Phygians ^o their ships resort
Preparing flight. The Jealous Queen pursues
Through every part the much amazing news.
The more she hears, the more enraged with grief
She thus at last invades the Trojan Chief.
Could thy dissembling heart consent to fly
This Hated Land in cruel secrecy?
Perfidious man, can thou so soon remove
The bands of vows, and dearer bands of Love?
Nor spare one word? nor shed one tear to save
My Life descending to the cruel grave?
Why yet in Winter to the storming Maine
Do thou expose thy wandering slcet again?
Cruel and false! did thou not seek a land
Unknown? did now the Ancient Ilium stand,
Were this a time through hazards such as these
To seek thy Troy through Winter winds and Seas?
Whom do thou fly? By these unfeigned tears
I do adjure thee, by these loving fears,
By my own life, or (what is more) by thine,
By all that has obliged Thee yet of mine,
Pity my fall, and show at least some grace
To these my prayrs, if prayrs may yet have place,
For thee, the hate and envy I support
Of the Numidians and the Lybian Court;
For thee I have displeased my Own, and lost
That modesty, which I alone could boast;
That better fame, by which I had survived
My funeral fire and after death had lived.
What have I left, or whither shall I fly?
Shall I attend Pigmalion's cruelty?
Or till Iarbus do in fetters Lead
The proud despiser of his love and bed?
I never could have thought my self undone,
Had but kind Heaven indulged me with a Son
Resembling thee, in whose (though Childish) face
I might retrive thy Look and princely grace.
Sad Dido pauses here. The Trojan Chief
Restrains within the motions of his grief,
Then thus replies; You never can repeat,
Great Queen, the sum of my unquestioned Debt.
Nor while my active Soul informs this frame,
Ever shall I forget Eliza's Name.
I urge no more, Let it suffice that I
In thanklesse silence never meant to fly;
Nor did I ever to those bonds pretend
Which now you charge me as a faithless friend;
Had I bin trusted to design my fate,
When Troy betrayed fell by the Grecians hate,
I from the ashes of that dear-lov'd Town
Had there restored another Ilium.
But now the Lycian Oracle commands,
A pollo now assigns the Ausonian Lands,
And thither bids us send our thoughts and care
And only fix our expectation there,
Fair Carthage you and your own work survay
A stranger born a foreign Scepter sway.
And shall it be a crime (ah lass!) if we
Desire at last to rest in Italy?
No night does pass in which I do not see
The old Anchises image beckning me;
Nor is there day in which I not reflect
On my Ascanius, and that loved aspect
To whom by fate the Hesperian Town is due.
Hither of late Joves winged Herald flew
Nor did he in delusive Dreams appear;
A wake, I did the angry message hear.
Then fairest Queen do not this fate withstand,
Unwillingly I leave your Happy Land.
While thus he talks, the much distempered Dame
Incenst within, breaks forth into this flame.
Nor were thou of the gentle Goddess breed,
Nor art thou sprung from great Anchises seed,
Perfidious man! but from some savage stock
Hewn from the Marble of some Mountain Rock
For why should I disguise this height of ill
And still deceived expect new favor still?
Did he let fall one pitying word, one tear?
Or did he with one sigh my passion hear?
What shall I do? for now alas, I see
That neither Juno daignes to favor me,
Nor Jove himself looks down with equal eyes,
The earth is faithless, faithless are the skies.
Shipwrackt and cast upon the barren shore,
Pursued by cruel fates, forsaken, poor,
I gave thee harbor in my simple breast
Ah ill-advis'd, ah too-unmindfull guest
I saved thy fleet, thy friends, and faithless Thee;
But now (for sooth) Apollo's Augury
The Oracles are urged to incite,
And angry Jove commands thy sudden flight,
Is Heaven concerned? does care of humane fate
Disturb the calmness of the Immortal State?
Thou hearst me not, regardlesse of my cry,
Go then and through the Seas seek Italy,
Through the deaf Seas and through the angry Wind,
And such compassion as thou usest find:
There may thou call on Dido's name in vain,
I Will follow thee, be present in thy pain.
And when cold death shall this mixt-frame divide,
My Ghost shall lacquey by thy frighted side,
Thou dearly shall repent; the news of this
Shall overtake my soul, and give it bliss.
Nor waiting answer from the Prince she flies,
And wishes she had power to shun all eyes
But fainting soon and to her chamber led
She threw her self upon her Ivory bed.
Pious Aeneas, though his noble breast
Softened by love was with much grief oppressed,
Though feign he would with gentle words assuage
The Queens high passion and divert her rage,
Suspends not yet his Heaven-inspired care
But does his fleet without delay prepare.
The Trojans ply the work, the busy Maine
Is filled with noise, the Ships now float again:
On every side are seen descending down
Long troops which bring provision from the Town.
So when the winter-fearing Ants invade
Some heaps of Corn the Husbandman had made;
The Sable Army marches, and with prey
Laden return, pressing the Leafy way,
Some help the weaker, and their shoulders lend,
Others the order of the march attend,
Bring up the troops, and punish all delay.
What were thy thoughts, sad Dido, on that day?
How deep thy sighs? when from thy Tower above
Thou see the Phrygians in such order move
And hear'st the Tumult of the Clamorous Sea.
All-conquering Love! who can resist thy sway?
Once more the Queen to humble tears descends,
And Language to her grief once more she lends,
That she might leave no remedy untried
Nor Counsel unexplor'd, before she died.
Anna, she said, thou see the peopled Sea,
The Phrygians now their fatal Anchors weigh
Ready to loose; I feel their great Chief's scorn
Which if foreseen I might perhaps have born.
But now I make this one, this last request,
You in this faithless man have interest
You know his gentlest times, and best can find
What ways are left to mollify his mind.
Go then and use all Pitty-moving Art
And if you can soften his harder heart.
Not I at Aulis, did with Greece conspire
Nor did I bring one brand to Troy's last fire
I never rent Anchises Honored Tomb,
Why should he then my sad entreaty shun?
I do not urge (as once) our marriage ties
Those sacred bonds which now he does despise,
Nor that he would fair Italy resign
I only ask respite, and breathing time,
Till my dejected mind learn to comply
(Taught by degrees) with so great misery.
All this her weeping Sister does repeat
To the stern man, whom nothing could entreat.
Lost here her prayrs and fruit less were her tears,
Fate and great Jove had stopped his gentle Ears.
As when loud winds a well-grown Oak would rend
Up by the roots, this way and that they bend
His reeling Trunk, and with a boisterous sound
Scatter his leaves and strew them on the ground:
He fixed stands, as deep his root dothly
Down to the Center as his top is high.
No less on every side the Hero pressed
Feels Love and pity shake his noble breast.
And down his Cheeks though fruitless tears do roll,
Unmoved remains the purpose of his soul.
Then Dido urged with approaching fate
Begins the light of cruel Heaven to hate;
Her resolution to dispatch and dye
Confirmed by many a horrid prodigy.
The water consecrate for sacrifice
Appears all black to her amazed eyes
The wine to putrid blood converted flows
Which from her, none, not her own sister knows.
Besides there stood as sacred to her Lord
A marble Temple which she much adored,
With snowy fleeces and fresh garlands Crowned,
Hence every night proceeds a dreadful sound.
Her husbands voice invites her to his Tomb
And dismal Owls presage the ills to come,
Besides, the prophefies of Wizards old
Increast her terror and her fall foretold,
Scorned and deserted to her self she seems
And finds Aeneas cruel in her dreams,
So, to mad Pentheus, double Thebes appears,
And furies howl in his distempered ears.
Orestes so with like Distraction tossed
Is made to fly his Mothers angry ghost.
Now grief and fury at their height arrive,
Death she decrees, and thus does it contrive.
Her grieved Sister with a cheerful grace
(Hope well-dissembled shining in her face)
She thus deceives. (Dear Sister) let us prove
The cure I have invented for my love.
Beyond the Land of Aethiopia lies
The place where Atlas does support the skies;
Hence came an old Magician that did keep
The Hesperian fruit, and made the Dragon sleep.
Her potent charms do troubled souls relieve
And where she lists, makes calmest minds to grieve,
The course of Rivers or of Heaven can stop,
And call trees down from th'ayry mountains top.
Witness the Gods, and thou my dearest part,
How loath am I to tempt this guilty Art.
Erect a pile, and on it let us place
That bed where I my ruin did embrace.
With all the relics of our impious guest,
Arms, spoils, and presents; Let the Pile be dressed,
(The knowing-woman thus prescribes) that we
May rouz the man out of our memory;
Thus speaks the Queen, but hides the fatal end
For which she does those sacred rites pretend.
Nor worse effects of grief her Sister thought
Would follow, than Sychaeus murder wrought,
Therefore obeys her; and now heaped high
The Cloven Oaks and lofty Pines do ly,
Hung all with wreaths and flowery Garlands round;
So by her self was her own funeral Crowned.
Upon the top, the Trojan image lies,
And his sharp Sword wherewith anon she dies.
They by the altar stand, while with loose hair
The Magic Prophetess begins her prayr
On Chao's, Erebus, and all the Gods,
Which in the infernal shades, have their aboads
She loudly calls besprinkling all the room
With drops supposed from Lethes lake to come.
She seeks the knot which on the forehead grows
Of newfoal'd Colts, and herbs by moonlight mowes.
A Cake of Leven in her pious hands
Holds the devoted Queen and barefoot stands,
One tender foot was bare, the other shod,
Her robe ungirt, invoking every God
And every power, if any be above
Which takes regard of ill-requited love.
Now was the time when weary mortals steep
Their careful temples in the dew of sleep.
On seas on earth, and all that in them dwell
A deathlike quiet, and deep silence fell,
But not on Dido, whose untamed mind
Refused to be by sacred night confined.
A double passion in her breast does move
Love and fierce anger for neglected Love,
Thus she afflicts her soul, What shall I do
With fate inverted, shall I humbly woo?
And some proud Prince in wild Numidia born
Pray to a^cept me and forget my scorn?
Or shall I with the ungrateful Trojan go,
Quit all my state, and wait upon my Foe?
Is not enough by sad experience known,
The perjured race of false Laomedon?
With my Sidonians shall I give them chase?
Bands hardly forced from their native place?
No, die, and let this sword thy fury tame,
Naught but thy blood can quench thy guilty flame.
Ah Sister! vanquished with my passion thou
Betraidst me first, dispensing with my vow.
Had I bin constant to Sycheus still
And single-liv'd, I had not known this ill.
Such thoughts torment the Queen's enraged breast,
While the Dardanian does securely rest
In his tall ship for sudden flight prepared,
To whom once more the Son of Jove appeared:
Thus seemed to speak the youthful Diety,
Voice, Hair, and Col^ur all like Mercury.
Fair Venus seed! Can thou indulge thy sleep?
Nor better guard in such great danger keep,
Mad by neglect to lose so fair a wind?
If here thy ships the purple morning find,
Thou shall behold this hostile harbor shine
With a new fleet, and fire, to ruin thine.
She meditates revenge resolved to die,
Weigh anchor quickly, and her fury fly.
This said, the God in shades of Night retired
Amazed Aeneas with the warning fired
Shakes off dull sleep, and rouzing up his men,
Behold! the Gods command our flight again,
Fall to your oars, and all your Canvas spread,
What God soever that thus vouchsaf'st to lead
We follow gladly and thy will obey,
Assist us still smoothing our happy way,
And make the rest propitious. With that word
He cuts the Cable with his shining sword;
Through all the Navy does like ardour reign
They quit the shore and rush into the Main
Placed on their banks, the lusty Trojan sweep
Nuptunes smooth face, and cleave the yielding deep.
Aurora now leaving her watery bed,
Colors the East with a presaging Red;
Soon as the Dawn began to clear the sky,
Down to the shore the sad Queen cast her Ey;
Where when she does the empty port survay,
And now the fleet with wings displayed at Sea,
Her hands held up, her golden tresses torn,
Must we, says she, of force endure this scorn?
Can we not have recourse to arms? not meet
This fraud with fraud? not burn this wicked fleet?
Have fly, pursue, row, and let every hand
Snatch up with speed some swift revenging brand.
Where am I now? alas what words are these
How late this hope? see how they plow the seas,
Unhappy Dido! cruel fate devoures
Thy wretched Life, thou feel'st the angry powers,
This rage had once bin f^tter then thy love,
See how he does his far-fam'd faith approve!
He who through burning Ilium (as they say)
Did bear his Country gods untoucht away,
Who through the flames the old Anchises led,
Why saw I not the perjured Villain dead?
Why did I not on slain Iulus feast
And at that banquet make the Father guest?
Suppose there had bin doubt in the success
What could I fear of all left comfortless?
I should have ruined all, Father and Son,
And the whole stock, and then my self among.
Thou Sun who with thy light do all survay,
And Juno, witness to that fatal day,
Which sealed our loves, revengefull Hecat^,
And all ye powers that see Eliza die
Receive these prayrs, if, all sea-dangers past,
The Trojan needs must reach some shore at last;
If nothing can withstand this fixed decree,
A peaceful land yet may he never see.
War entertain him and a haughty foe
And may he never one calm slumber know.
Hatred pursue him, furies give him chase
And rend Iulus from his dear embrace;
Himself at last without a grave exposed
A prey to Vultures in no urne enclosed.
I form my latest breath into this prayer:
And o ye Tyrians be it then your care
TO afflict with war this race in time to come,
And send such bloody offerings to my Tomb.
Our seas their seas, our shores their shores oppose,
Our arms their arms, and be our Children foes:
Here sighing deep revolving in her mind,
What way she might the freeest passage find
From hated life. Bercea standing by
Nurse to Sycheus; Dearest nurse, says she,
Go call my Sister, tell her I prepare
The magic rites, ordained to heal my care.
But be she first with water sprinkled thrice
And with her bring th'appoynted sacrifice.
And you, with pious wreaths your temples bound,
Enter the circle of the holy ground:
I Will give the Trojans Image to the fire,
As that consumes so shall my grief expire.
The aged Nurse obeys with trembling have
And now the Queen all bounds of sorrow past
Her heart oppressed, her Visage wan and pale
And her whole mind bent on her funeral,
Goes to the place, where stood the sacred Pile;
And here diverted by her grief a while
Melted in tears, at first she does behold
The Trojans Image, sword, and robes of gold.
Dear relics, says she, while the powers above
Were so content, the objects of my love,
But now my sad reproaches; at that word
She mounts the Pile, and draws the shining sword.
What it is to live, enough says she I know;
And to the will of fate I nothing ow.
Nor shall I now a worthless Ghost descend,
Having with honor first revenged my friend,
Built him a stately Town, happy and more
Had the false Trojan never touched this shore.
Then lifting up her hands to strike, shall I
Dye unrevenged she says, however die.
Forsaken thus, thus to the shades I have,
And blot out all remembrance of the past.
May the false Trojan see these flames from far
And in his thoughts the fatal omen bare!
With this the blood came rushing from her side
Deep in her breast the reeking sword was died.
Her frighted Servants in distraction run
And with their Cries they fill the amazed Town.
Such is the noise when the prevailing foes
Enter a breach and slaughter over-flowes.
Her frantic Sister with a furious pace
Pierced to the heart comes running to the place.
Ah Dearest! says she, was this fraud for me
These altars dressed, for such a tragedy?
Why was I not invited to thy fate,
Nor made thy Partner in thy worst estate?
Ah! you have slain your selfand me and all
People and Nobles in one funeral.
O give me leave, if yet you not resign
Your latest breath, to suck that soul with mine.
With that she does the high raised Pile ascend
And weeping does embrace her dying friend,
Thrice on her arms the Queen supports her head
And thrice again falls grovelling on her bed.
Thrice with disclosed eyes she seeks the light
And thrice with sighing folds again her sight.
Then Juno looking with a pitying ey
Upon so sad and lasting misery
Since deepest wounds can no free passage give
To self-destroyers who refuse to live
Sent Iris down to cut the fatal hayr
Which done, her whole life vanished into Air;
FINIS.

