A Complete Collection OF ALL THE LAWS OF VIRGINIA NOW IN FORCE.

Carefully Copied from the ASSEMBLY RECORDS.

To which is Annexed an ALPHABETICAL TABLE.

LONDON, Printed by T. J. for J. P. and are to be sold by Tho. Mercer at the
Sign of the Half Moon the Corner Shop of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

To His Excellency FRANCIS LORD HOWARD, BARON of EFFINGHAM, His MAJESTY'S
LIEUTENANT and GOVERNOR GENERAL OF VIRGINIA.
May it please your Excellency,
THough I know it a high Presumption in me to affix so great a Name to these
Papers, yet I likewise very well know how heinous and apparent a Praemunire I
should incurr against all Equity and Justice, and in more particular manner
against my bounden Duty to your Lordship, to Entitle any other to their
Protection, or to set up any Foreign Power to be Supreme and Paramount to that
of your Excellency's over them: You my Lord being at this time seated in the
great and honorable Station of Governor General under his most Sacred
Majesty, of that Place which the subject Matter of these Papers particularly
relate to.

My Lord, Those many Gracious and Regal Grants and Privileges which his most
Excellent Majesty and Royal Ancestors (of ever blessed Memory) have from time
to time bestowed upon this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia, since the first
Settlement of the English there, have given being to these Laws for the better
Government thereof; it being impossible for any number of Men to be at Peace or
to flourish and prosper without good Laws, which are the firm Pillars of
Government, and the strong Bonds of all Humane Society. One had as good live in
a Desert amongst Savage Beasts, as among Men without Law to defend him; for
Laws are the Hedges on either side the Road, which hinders from breaking into
other Men's Propriety.

Laws are every Man's Civil Armor, that Guards him from the Gripes of Rapine
and all other Outrageous Assaults and Insolences, and indeed it is for this
chiefly that Laws are of use amongst us, not only to be our Guide, but also our
Shield.

The Great and Universal Monarch of the World, the Supreme Being, at first, in
the very Infancy of Time gave unto Man a Law upon Parole, inscribed in his
heart, that by those inward Dictates he might be guided and bounded in the
whole Course and Road of his Life; but such has the Pravity of Humane Nature
been, that this Divine Inscription is in a great measure defaced; so that Kings
and Princes have found it of absolute necessity to give Literal and Prescripted
Laws for the Government and Well-being of Mankind in their respective Places
and Societies.

These Papers being a Collection of the Laws of this Place, presume not to
Instruct your Excellency, who in the fair Volume of your great Mind have all
the Laws of Equity and Justice engraven, and the vast Universal Idea of
whatever can be called good in Mankind is there stamped. But my Lord, these
Papers which contain Laws, and therefore ought to preserve others from Calumny
and Censures, yet cannot themselves; humbly crave your Excellencies Patronage,
which proves a Sanctuary to all Goodness, so well as your Power is a Terror to
all Vice.

The Design of this Collection of Laws is the Good of the Inhabitants of this
Place, for Laws though Enacted, stand in little stead and use till they are
promulgated and made known to all persons concerned in the Obedience of them:
Not my Lord that I accuse all the Inhabitants here with ignorance of their
Duty, but, may it please your Excellency, The knowledge of all things that are
good, the more diffusive the better, and I hope my Lord, that my honest and
good intent herein will lessen and expiate in some measure my presumption in
this Dedication to your Excellency.

Your Illustrious Forefathers have been always famous for their constant and
exemplary Loyalty to their Prince, and some of them have received the Signal
Marks of Royal Bounty. Your Excellency has eminently and deservedly partaken of
both, for his most Sacred Majesty (whom God grant long to Reign) seeing you
treading in the same Steps of Loyalty with your Virtuous and Noble Ancestors,
has in his Princely Wisdom been pleased to entrust your Lordship with the
Weighty and Honorable Employment of Lieutenant and Governor General of
VIRGINIA.

How happy is his Majesty in so Wise and Faithful a Subject and Minister! And
how happy is your Excellency in serving a King whose Wisdom cannot only discern
and justly value, but whose Goodness and Power can also Recompense the Merits
of a Subject never so great!

But my Lord, I dare not extend my self upon your Excellencies Panegyric,
which is an infinite Subject, and requires the Pen of the most Skilful Orator:
I shall therefore content my self to admire with other Men what I cannot
comprehend, lest I should offend and be injurious to your Excellency by my
little and weak Expressions, which are far below my thoughts, and my thoughts
far below your great and high Merits; which necessarily forces all Men (whose
happiness it is to know your Lordship) to aspire, and I more than all others, to
take the liberty to write and style my self

My most Honored Lord, Your Excellencies most Humble most Devoted and most
Obedient Servant J. P.

A Complete Collection OF THE LAWS OF VIRGINIA AT A Grand Assembly HELD AT
JAMES CITY 23 MARCH 1662.
WHEREAS the late unhappy Distractions caused frequent Change in the Government
of this Country, and those produced so many Alterations in the Laws, that the
people knew not well what to obey, nor the Judges what to punish: By which
means Injustice was hardly to be avoided, and the Just Freedom of the People,
by the uncertainty and licentiousness of the Laws, hardly to be preserved. This
Assembly taking the same into their serious Considerations, and gravely
weighing the Obligations they are to discharge to God, the King, and the
Country, have by settling the Laws, diligently endeavored to prevent the like
Inconveniences, by causing the whole Body of the Laws to be revived, all
unnecessary Acts, and chiefly such as might keep in memory our forced deviation
from His Majesty's Obedience, to be repealed and expunged; and those that are
in force to be brought into one Volume: And lest any prejudice might arise by
the ignorance of the Times from whence those Acts were in force, they have
added the Dates of every Act, to the end that Courts might rightly administer
Justice and give Sentence according to Law for any thing happening at any time
since any Law was in force: And have also endeavored in all things as near as
the Capacity and Constitution of this Country would admit, to adhere to those
excellent and often refined Laws of England, to which we profess and
acknowledge all Reverence and Obedience. And that the Laws made by us are
intended by us but as Brief Memorials of that which the Capacity of our Courts
is utterly unable to collect out of its vast Volumes, though sometimes perhaps,
for the difference of our and their Condition, varying in small things, but far
from the presumption of contradicting any thing therein contained. And because
it is impossible to honor the King as we should, unless we serve and fear God
as we ought. And that they might show their equal care, they have set down
certain Rules to be observed in the Government of the Church, until God shall
please to turn His Majesty's Pious Thoughts toward us, and provide a better
supply of Ministers among us.

BE it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, That all the following Laws continued or made by this Assembly, shall
be hereafter reputed the Laws of this Country, by which all Courts of
Judicature are to proceed in giving of Sentence; and to which all persons are
strictly required to yield all due obedience: And that all other Acts not in
this Collection mentioned, to be to all intents and purposes utterly abrogated
and repealed; unless Suit be commenced for any thing done in the time when a
Law now repealed was in force: in which Case the producing that Law shall
excuse any Person for doing any thing acording to the Tenor thereof.

I. Church to be built, or Chapel of Ease.
BE it Enacted for the Advancement of Gods Glory and the more decent
Celebration of his Divine Ordinances, A Church to be built in each Parish.
there be a Church decently built in each Parish of the Country, unless any
Parish as now settled, by reason of the fewness or poverty of the Inhabitants,
be incapable of sustaining so great a Charge; in which Case it is Enacted that
such Parishes shall be joined to the great Parish of the same County, Small
Parishes to have Chapels of Ease.
and that a Chapel of Ease be built in such places, at the particular Charge
of that place.

II. Vestries appointed.
THat for the making and proportioning of the Levies and Assessments for
building and repairing the Churches and Chapels, Provision for the Poor,
Maintenance of the Minister, and such other necessary Uses, A Vestry in each
Parish, consisting of Twelve Men, to be chose by the Major part of the
Parishioners.
and for the more orderly Managing all Parochial Affairs, Be it Enacted that
Twelve of the most able Men of each Parish be by the Major part of the said
Parish chose to be a Vestry; out of which number the Minister and Vestry to
make Choice of two Churchwardens yearly, as at, so in Case of the Death of any
Vestry-man or his departure out of the Parish, that the said Minister and
Vestry make Choice of another to supply his Room. None to be admitted of the
Vestry without taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
And be it further Enacted that none shall be admitted to be of the Vestry that
does not take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to his Majesty, and
subscribe to be conformable to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England.

III. Glebes to be laid out.
Provision for the Minister.
THat for the better encouragement and accommodation of the Ministry, there be
Glebes laid out in every Parish, and a convenient House built for the reception
and abode of the Minister according to his Majesty's Instructions. His
Maintenance to be worth 80 l per Annum besides his Perquisites and Glebe.
And that such Provision be made for his Maintenance in the valuable and
current Commodities of the Country, as may be really worth Fourscore Pounds
per Annum, besides his Perquisites and the Glebe: Viz. If in Tobacco at the
rate of Twelve Shillings the Hundred, in Corn at Ten Shillings the Barrel, if
in Money by Bills of Exchange, Security to be given for the certain Payment,
and in Case of protest to be recovered here with Fifty per Cent. for Damages.

IV. Ministers to be Inducted. 1642.
No Minister to Officiate without producing Testimonials of his having received
his Ordination of some Bishop of England.
THat for the preservation of Purity and Unity of Doctrine and Discipline in the
Church, and the right Administration of the Sacraments, no Minister be admitted
to officiate in this Country but such as shall produce to the Governor a
Testimonial that he has received his Ordination from some Bishop in England,
and shall then subscribe to be conformable to the Orders and Constitutions of
the Church of England and the Laws there established; upon which the Governor
is hereby requested to induct the said Minister into any Parish that shall make
presentation of him: And if any other Person pretending himself a Minister,
shall contrary to this Act presume to Teach or Preach publicly or privately,
the Governor and Council are hereby desired and empowered to suspend and
silence the Person so offending: And upon his obstinate persistence to compel
him to depart the Country with the first Convenience, as it has been formerly
provided, by the 77 Act made at James City the 2 of March, 1642.

V. Ministers to provide Readers. 1661.
THat every Parish not having a Minister to Officiate every Sunday, Divine
Service to be read each other Sunday.
to make Choice of a grave and sober Person, of good Life and Conversation, to
read Divine Service every intervening Sunday at the Parish Church, when the
Minister preaches at any other place.

VI. Liturgy to be Read.
THat the Canons set down in the Liturgy of the Church of England for
celebrating Divine Service and Administration of the Sacraments, Canons and
Liturgies of the Church of England to be observed.
be duly observed and kept: And that the whole Liturgy, according to the said
Injunctions, be by the Minister or Reader at Church and Chapel every Sunday
thoroughly read.

VII. Church Catechism.
No other Catechism but that in the Common Prayer to be used.
THat neither Minister nor Reader teach any other Catechism then that by the
Canons appointed and inserted in the Book of Common Prayer: And that the
Minister expound no other then that: That our Fundamentals at least may be well
laid, and that no Reader upon presumption of his own abilities do attempt the
expounding that or any other Catechism or the Scriptures.

VIII. Ministers to Preach Weekly.
Ministers to preach Weekly.

Sacraments to be Administered at least twice in the year.


THat the Minister of every Parish preach constantly every Sunday: Viz. One
Sunday in a Month at each Chapel of Ease in his Parish, if there be any, and
the other in his Parish Church, and that twice a year at least he administer
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there.

IX. Sundays not to be profaned.
The Lords day to be kept Holy.
THat the Lords day be kept Holy, and that no Journeys be made on that day,
except in Case of emergent Necessity; And that no other thing be used or done
that may tend to the Profanation of that day: Divine Service and Preaching to
be diligently attended.
But that all and every person and persons inhabiting in this Country, having
no lawful excuse to absent, shall upon every Sunday and the four Holy Days
hereafter mentioned, diligently resort to their Parish Church or Chapel
accustomed, then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the time of
Common Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God, upon penalty of being Fined
Fifty pounds of Tobacco, by the County Court upon presentment made by the
Churchwardens, who are to Collect the same with the Parish Levies: Provided
always, That this Act conclude not Quakers or other Recusants, who out of
Nonconformity to the Church, totally absent themselves, but that they shall be
liable to such Fines and Punishments as by the Statute of 23 of Eliz. are
Imposed on them; being for every Months absence Twenty pounds Sterling; and if
they forbear a Twelvemonth, then to give good security for their Behavior,
besides their payment for their Monthly absence, according to the Tenor of the
said Statute: Quakers to be presented as by 23 Eliz.

Presentiments of Defaulters to be made by the Churchwardens.


And that all Quakers for Assembling in unlawful Assemblies and Conventicles,
be fined and pay each of them there taken 200 l. of Tobacco for each time they
shall be for such unlawful Meetings presented by the Churchwardens to the
County Courts.

X. January the 30th. to be kept a Fast.
WHereas our late Surrender and Submission to that execrable power that so
bloodily massacred the late King Charles the First of ever blessed Memory, has
made us by acknowledging them, guilty of their Crimes, to show our serious and
hearty repentance and detestation of that Barbarous Act; Be it Enacted, A
yearly Fast on the 30th. of January.
That the Thirtieth of January, the day the said King was Beheaded, be annually
solemnized with Fasting and Prayers, that our Sorrows may expiate our Crime,
and our Tears wash away our Guilt.

XI. May 29th. to be kept holy.
SInce God of his Mercy has been pleased to Restore our late distracted
Kingdoms to Peace and Unity; And his late distressed Majesty to the Throne of
his Royal Ancestors: The 29th of May to be Celebrated as an Holy day.
Be it Enacted, That in Testimony of our Thankfulness and Joy, the Twenty-Ninth
of May, the day of his Majesty's Birth and happy Restitution, be annually
Celebrated as an Holy day.

XII. None to be Married but by Ministers, nor by them, but by License, or
publishing the Banes.
Marriage to be performed by Ministers only, and according to the Laws of
England.
THat no Marriage be solemnized or reputed valid in Law, but such as is made by
the Minister according to the Laws of England; And that no Minister Marry any
person without License from the Governor of his Deputy, or thrice publication
of Banes according to the prescription of the Rubric in the Common Prayer
Book, which enjoins, That if the persons to be Married, dwell in several
Parishes, None to be Married without License or publication of Banes.
the Banes must be asked in both Parishes, and that the Curate of the one
Parish shall not solemnize the Matrimony until he have a Certificate from the
Curate of the other Parish that the Banes have been there thrice published and
no objection made against the Parties joining together: And if any Minister
shall contrary to this Act Marry any persons, he shall be Fined Ten thousand
pounds of Tobacco: The Penalty.
And any pretended Marriage made by any other then a Minister be reputed Null;
and the Children born out of such Marriage of the Parents, esteemed
illegitimate: And the Parents suffer such punishment as by the Law prohibiting
Fornication ought to be Inflicted.

XIII. Churchwardens to make Presentment.
THat the Churchwardens shall twice every year, Churchwardens shall make
Presentiments of all Misdemeanors twice in the year.
viz. In December Court and April Court, deliver a true Presentment in Writing
of such Misdemeanors, as by their Knowledge or by common Fame have been
commmitted whilst they have been Churchwardens, namely Swearing, Profaning
Gods holy Name, or Sabbath abusing, or contemning his holy Word and Sacraments,
or absenting themselves from the Exercise thereof: Presentiments for what.
As also of those foul and abominable sins of Drunkenness, Fornication, and
Adultery; and of all Malicious and Envious Slandering and Backbiting: for the
better manifestation whereof, the said Churchwardens are Empowered to Cause
all such Persons upon whose reports they ground their Presentiments, to appear
at the respective County Courts, to which the Presentiments are made, to give in
their Evidences concerning the same.

XIV. Burying of Servants or others privately, prohibited.
WHereas the private Burial of Servants and others, Private Burials prohibited.
give occasion of much Scandal against diverse Persons, and sometimes not
undeservedly, of being guilty of their Deaths; from which, if the person
suspected be Innocent, there can be no Vindication, nor if Guilty no
Punishment, by reason they are for the most part Buried without the Knowledge or
View of any others then such of the Family, as by nearness of Relation, as
being Husband, Wife, or Child, are unwilling, or as Servants, are fearful to
make discovery if Murder were Committed: for Remedy whereof, as also for
taking away that Barbarous Custom of exposing the Corpse of the Dead, by making
their Graves in Common and Unfenced Places, to the prey of Hogs and other
Vermin; Places to be set apart for Public Burial.
Be it Enacted, That there be in every Parish Three or Four, or more Places
appointed, according to the greatness or littleness of the same, to be set
apart and fenced in for Places of Public Burial for that Precinct: And
further, That before the Corpse be Buried, there be at least three or four of
the Neighbors called, who may in case of Suspicion view the Corpse; and if
none, yet according to the decent Custom of all Christendom, they may accompany
it to the Grave. And be it further Enacted, That no persons, whether Free or
Servants, shall be Buried in any other place than those so appointed, unless
such who by their own Appointments in their life time have signified their
desire of being interred in any particular place else where.

XV. Churchwardens to keep the Church in repair and provide Ornaments.
Churches to be Repaired.
ANd it is further Enacted, That the said Churchwardens take care, and be
empowered during their Church-wardenship, A Great Bible, two
Common-Prayer-Books, a Communion Cloth and other Ornaments to be provided.
to keep the Church in Repair, provide Books and decent Ornaments: (Viz.) a
Great Bible, two Common Prayer Books, a Communion Cloth and Napkins, a Pulpit
and Cushion, this present year and after annually: something toward Communion
Plate, Pulpit Cloth and Bell, as the Ability of the Parish will permit: And
that they the said Churchwardens do faithfully Collect the Ministers Dues,
Churchwardens to Collect the Ministers Dues.
Cause them to be brought to Convenient places, and honestly pay them, and that
of all their Disburssments and Receipts they give a true Account to the Vestry
when by them required, who are empowered by a former Branch of this Act to levy
the same upon the Parish, and by this to give the said Churchwardens a
sufficient Discharge.

XVI. Registers to be kept by the Ministers or Readers.
WHereas many Differences do frequently arise about the Age of Orphans, and
Inquiries are often made for persons imported into this Country and here
deceased, and no positive Certificates can be granted of the Age of one, or
Death of the other, by reason no Registers have been kept, which might by the
Records there entered, evidence the same. Births, Burials, and Marriages, to be
recorded.
Be it therefore Enacted, That the Minister or Reader of every Parish shall
well, truly, and plainly Record all Births, Burials, or Marriages that shall
happen within the precincts of that Parish, in a Book to be provided by the
Vestry for that purpose, and if any Master of a Family, or other person
concerned, shall omit the giving Notice to the said Minister or Reader of the
day of the Birth, Death, The neglect to be fined.
or Marriage of any to him or them, related, the space of a Month, such person
for such his Neglect be Fined One hundred pounds of Tobacco, and that the
Ministers have for their Entry of such Birth, Death, or Marriage, Three pounds
of Tobacco, and if they neglect Entering the same as aforesaid, that they be
Fined upon discovery made of the said Neglect, Five hundred pounds of Tobacco
to the use of the Parish.

XVII. Licenses for Marriage how to issue.
ANd whereas many times Licenses are granted, and the persons are married out
of the Parishes, which Licenses have been usually granted by the Governors,
whose knowledge of persons cannot possibly extend over the whole Country: Be it
Enacted, How Licenses for Marriage are to be granted.
That henceforward, all persons desiring Licenses for Marriage, shall first
repair to the Clerk of the County Court, and there give Bond with good
Security, that there is no lawful Cause to obstruct their said Marriage: And
that upon Receipt of such Bond, the said Clerk shall write the License, and
Certify to the first in Commission for that County, or such other, whom it
shall please the Governor to depute, that he has taken a Bond as aforesaid,
who by virtue thereof shall sign the said License and direct the same to the
Ministers. And to the end that the Legal Grant of the said License may be made
evident, and the Governor ascertained of his just Dues, It is further Enacted,
That the said Clerk shall yearly, in September Court return the Names of the
parties Married, and of the Security to the Secretarys Office, there to be
recorded; Fees for Licenses how to be levied.
And further, That he deliver an account of the Fees due for the said Licenses
to the Sheriff or Collector of the County, who is hereby required to collect
the same with the Levies, and to make payment thereof to the Governor and
others to whom they are due; And any Clerk making default in any of the
premises, to forfeit one Thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use of the
Governor, the Fees for the Licenses to be as follows: viz. To the Governor
Two hundred Pounds of Tobacco, or Twenty Shillings Sterling; To the Clerk for
writing the Bond License Certificate, and returning the same to the Office,
Fifty Pounds of Tobacco: The Fees ascertained.
And to the Secretary, for recording the same in the Office as aforesaid, Forty
Pounds of Tobacco; and the Minister marrying with a License Two hundred Pounds
of Tobacco, or Twenty Shillings Sterling; if by Banes Fifty Pounds of Tobacco
or Five Shillings.

XVIII. Provision for a College.
WHereas the want of able and faithful Ministers in this Country deprives us
of those great Blessings and Mercies that always attend upon the Service of
God; which want, by reason of our great distance from our Native Country,
cannot in probability be always supplied from thence: Be it Enacted, That for
the Advance of Learning, Education of Youth, Supply of the Ministry, and
Promotion of Piety, A College and Free School.
there be Land taken up or purchased for a College and Free School: And that
there be with as much speed as may be convenient Housing erected thereon, for
entertainment of Students and Scholars.

Whereas an ancient Practice of this Country, Lands of persons Intestate.
has contrary to Law and Reason ignorantly vested the Lands of persons
intestate in the hands of Administrators; of whom diverse persons have purchased
and hold their Lands by no other Titles than such Sales, which can be of no
validity against the Claim of the King, whom no time can prescribe, and to whom
if an heir appear not, the Land must of necessity devolve: And if the King
should at any time give express Order to an Escheator to make enquiry into the
Titles we hold by, the said Escheator, cannot by virtue of his Office but find
all such Lands for the King; Which we Francis Morison and Thomas Ludwel, who
are at present Entrusted by his Majesty's Treasurer, to make composition of all
Lands so escheated to his Majesty; taking into our serious Consideration, and
out of our tender Care of many poor men, who by the loss of Lands, thus perhaps
dearly purchased and honestly paid for, and out of our sense of the many
Inconveniences and great Damages would fall upon them by being ousted out of
their Possessions, by the severity of a too rigorous Escheator; And that on the
other side, we might not seem to debar his Majesty of his just Ri^es, we have
thought it convenient to propose a certain Rule for compositions of all Lands
held by any pretended Right two years, by which, while the power is in our
hands, we shall proceed; and if the Assembly think it a Favor, we shall join
with them, making it our request to Major Norwood his Majesty's Treasurer, to
get his Majesty to confine them, that no succeeding Escheator may at his
pleasure rigorously exceed these our moderate and reasonable Demands.

1. We concede that any person, haying been two years in possession of any
Land, that ought to have been vested in his Majesty by Escheat, shall pay for
his Composition but One Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, for every fifty Acres,
besides the Fees for finding the Office and drawing the Conveyance.

2. That every person, having been so in possession two years, as aforesaid,
shall have Eight Months time to Petition for, and make their Composition: But
if they defer it longer, and another sue for it and obtain it, they can impute
the Blame to nothing but their own Neglect.

3. That where there is a Widow, she shall enjoy the Land of her Husband during
her life, and be admitted in the first place to make her Composition for the
Fee-simple, in case she signify her desire within the time aforesaid.

4. That all Lands Escheated before the two years aforesaid, the person
concerned shall pay for his Composition as aforesaid: But all Lands which shall
hereafter lapse, or which have lapsed within the two years last past, the
Composition to be made for, with those by his Majesty's Treasurer appointed and
authorized thereunto: And that the Widow be admitted, in the first place, she
making her Claim within Eight Months according to the Proposition abovesaid.

XIX. COURTS.
Courts formerly called Quarter Courts, to be henceforth styled General Courts.
Whereas the name of Quarter Courts, is altogether unsuitable to the nature of
those Courts held by the Governor and Council, both in respect there are but
three of these Courts in the year, as also because they are not equally
distributed in the Quarters of the year, September and November being too near,
and March too long from them to admit of that Title. Be it therefore Enacted,
That the said Courts be no longer Styled Quarter Courts, but that they be
henceforth called General Courts, a Name more suitable to the Nature of them,
as being places where all Persons and Causes have generally Audience, and
receive Determination.

Whereas the Acts of Assembly already made, are very defective in prescribing
the Rules to be observed in the Proceedings, both in those General and the
Particular County Courts; for want whereof many Errors are committed, the
respects due to the Courts, so nearly representing his Majesty's Sacred Person,
by the clamorous unmannerliness of the people lost: and the order, gravity, and
decorum, which should manifest the Authority of a Court, in the Court it self
neglected: And in regard the long omission of those hugely material, though in
themselves little things of form, has caused all things still to continue in
the first Disorders; It has appeared necessary to this present Grand Assembly,
to set down the Rules and Forms themselves, for the beginning, continuance, and
proceedings in the said Courts as follows. And it is therefore Enacted, That
the General Courts begin and continue as follows.

General Courts to begin and continue. Rules for the beginning, continuance,
and proceedings in Courts.

That March Court begin the Twentieth of March, if it be not Saturday or
Sunday, and then the Monday following, and hold Eighteen days, not accounting
Sundays in the number.

That September Court begin the Twentieth of September, if it be not Saturday
or Sunday, and then to begin the Monday following, and hold Twelve days, not
accounting Sundays in the number.

That November Court begin the Twentieth of November, if it be not Saturday or
Sunday, and then to begin the Monday after, and hold Twelve days, not
accounting Sundays in the number.

That Adjournments of the said Courts be always avoided, and that they begin
precisely upon the day, that all persons knowing the day of the return of the
Writs, may accordingly give their Attendance.

Style how Entered. How the Style of the Court shall be entered.

That the Style of the Court be entered thus,

AT a General Court held at James City the Twentieth of (...) by His Majesty's
Governor and Council in the (...) year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
CHARLES the Second, by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
King, Defendor of the Faith, etc. and in the year of our Lord God (...) present.

Insert the Names of the Governor and Council.
Manner of proceeding in Court.
Silence commanded, then let the Crier or Undersheriff make Proclamation, and
say,

O Yes! O Yes! O Yes! Silence is commanded in the Court while His Majesty's
Governor and Council are sitting, upon pain of Imprisonment.

Suitors to appear.
After Silence commanded, let the Crier make Proclamation, saying,

ALL manner of persons that have any thing to do at this Court, draw near and
give your attendance; and if any one have any Plaint to enter or Suit to
prosecute, let them come forth and they shall be heard.

When Silence is thus commanded, and Proclamation made, upon calling the Docket
the Crier shall call for the Plaintiff.

Calling the Plaintiff.
A. B. come forth and prosecute thy Action against C. D. or else thou will be
Nonsuit.

And the Plaintiff putting in his Declaration, the Crier shall call for the
Defendant.

Calling for the Defendant.
C. D. come forth and save thee and thy Bail, or else thou will forfeit thy
Recognizance.

Warrants for Proceedings to be issued by the Clerk.
For Proceedings in the said Courts, Warrants to be issued by the Clerk.

XX. Actions to be proportioned.
BE it Enacted, Actions shall be proportioned to the number of Twenty for each
day.
That Warrants be issued by the Clerks of the General Courts, and the said
Clerk so proportion the number of his Actions, that there be for each day
Twenty: And that until there be Twenty Actions entered for the first day, no
Warrant issue for the second; and then Twenty for the second before any issue
for the third: and so proportionably Twenty per day, for so many days as there
are Actions to fill with that number: It being unreasonable that the Governor
and Council should wait a Week for a straggling Business entered at a particular
man's pleasure. And in case any special Warrant issue, that for the
extraordinariness of the business may require the Governors own signing: It is
Enacted, That the person first go to the Clerk, and there enter his Action, and
the day of the Return, before his Warrant shall be signed.

And whereas some scruples have arisen about the time Warrants may be served,
viz. Whether ten days before the Return, that is the day mentioned in the Writ
to appear, At what time Warrants may be served.
It is hereby declared that Warrants may be served at any time, if there be ten
days between the Serving and the Return as aforesaid: And further, That it may
be done in Court time for the same Court, if there be ten days between the
Serving.

XXI. Courts to sit from Eight to Eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon, and from
One to Three Afternoon.
How long Courts shall Sit.
BE it also further Enacted, That the Court shall each day sit from Eight of the
Clock to Eleven in the Forenoon; and from One to Three in the Afternoon. And
for avoiding all Errors that may happen in the Draught for the Orders by the
Clerk, either through his misapprehending the sense of the Court, or the
partial Information of any person concerned, which he being distracted with the
multitude of Business may unwittingly assent to, That all Orders of the day be
by the Clerk drawn up against next Morning, and then read in open Court in
presence of the Plantiff and Defendant, if they will be present, when Rule will
be given by the Court for Amendment of Errors, Amendment of Errors.
if any be, before they be Entered upon Record; and the Plantiff or Defendant,
if they have any new matter of Plea, shall then have liberty to plead it in
Arrest of Judgment: And the Orders thus publicly read and confirmed, shall be
signed by the Secretary, which shall remain upon File in the Office for the
full justification of the Clerk, who is to enter them in the Book of Records.

XXII. The Plaintiff to File his Declaration Three days before the day of
Hearing.
Declarations to be filed three days at least before Pleading.
ANd whereas the Clerk is enjoined to enter Twenty Actions for each day, and the
Court to sit at certain hours, so also it is hereby Enacted, That the Plantiff
File his Declaration in the Office, at least three days before the day of
Hearing: in which time the Defendant may take a Copy thereof, the Original
still remaining in the Office, and provide his Answer in writing ready to
present to the Governor and Council at the day of Hearing: And further, That
if the Plantiff fail either in not appearing to prosecute, or in neglecting to
File his Declaration, as is hereby enjoined, he shall pay to the Defendant if
he lived within Fifty miles of James City, The Penalty of a Default.
One hundred and Fifty pounds of Tobacco for a Nonsuit; and if he dwell
further off, then Three hundred and Fifty pounds of Tobacco besides his
Amercement to the Public. And if the Defendant make default, the Judgment to
pass against the Bail for the thing sued for; or if no Bail be returned, then
against the Sheriff, besides his Amercement of One thousand pounds of Tobacco,
laid upon him by Act for not making Returns; Provided that the Bail and Sheriff
have respite of Execution until the next Court: when if they bring in the
person of the Party, the Judgment of the first Court granted to be reversed,
but the Amercement awarded against the Sheriff to continue and not be remitted.

XXIII. Adjournment to the two last days for Determination of References by
Avisare Volumus, or Actions entered in Court time.
ANd whereas this Act enjoins the proportioning so many Actions to a day, but
gives liberty to Arrest in Court time to the last days of the Court, and
whereas some Cases of Difficulty may be presented, Adjournment to the two last
days for determination o^ References by Avisare Volumus.
upon which the Court may desire to advise. Be it therefore Enacted, That as
soon as the Court has sat so many days as are filled with Actions, it shall be
Adjourned to the two last days of that Court; and whatever the Court has
referred by their Avisare Volumus, and all Actions entered in Court time as
aforesaid, shall be then tried and determined.

XXIV. Criminal Causes to be tried at the General Court.
Crimminal causes to be Tried only at General Courts, and on the Fourth day.
WHereas men of the greatest Abilities both of Judgment and Integrity, do
usually meet at the General Courts, whither their Ocasions do frequently call
them, and because any thing that concerns Life or Limb, requires the ablest
Juries to enquire of it: Be it Enacted, That all Criminal Causes, that concern
either Life or Member, shall be tried at the General Courts, only the Fourth
day of the said Courts; Juries to be Chosen, out of the Neighborhood.
And because the Laws of England do enjoin Juries to be chosen out of the
Neighborhood where the Fact was committed: according to which the remoteness
of our Habitations does not admit us so fully to practice, as we desire; yet
that we may come to them as near as possible we may, and because it is very
requisite that part of the Jury, at least, should come from thence, who by
reason of their nearer acquaintance with the business, may give information of
diverse Circumstances to the rest of the Jury: Be it therefore Enacted, That
immediately after the commitment of any person found Criminal by the Grand
Inquest, The manner of proceeding by Juries in Cases Criminal.
the Sheriff of the County to whose Custody he is committed, shall give notice
thereof to the Secretaries Office at James City, and the Clerk of that Office
shall presently send a Venire Facias to the said Sheriff to impannel Six men of
the ablest and nearest of the Inhabitants of his County, Sheriffs to Impanel
Juries.
to that place where the Fact was committed, to be of the Jury for Trial of
that Cause, returnable the said Fourth day of the next General Court, where the
said Jurymen are bound to appear, What Allowance Jurymen shall have for their
Charges.
and for their Charges, the Country shall allow to each Man Twenty pounds of
Tobacco per day, for each day they may be reasonably coming to, and returning
from James City, and Fifty pounds of Tobacco per day, during their Attendance
there about it, (Viz.) from the day they are by the Writ to appear, until they
be discharged; and that the rest of the Jury be made up of the Bystanders.

XXV. The Governor and Two of the Council to go the Circuit.
Whereas the Honorable Governor out of his singular care of his due
Administration of Justice in all Courts, and that he might be the better
enabled to render his Majesty an exact account of the Government, has been
pleased to take upon him and the Council, the pains of Visiting all the County
Courts of the Country: Be it therefore Enacted, That the Honorable Governor
and one of the Council, or upon the urgent Affairs of the Country hindering
the Governor, The Governor or Two of the Council, wh m he shall
Commissionate, to go the Circuit yearly.
that the Governor commissionate too of the Council for every River, yearly in
August, to set Judges in all the County Courts, and there hear and determine
all Causes then depending in them, by Action or Reference, from any other
preceding Court in that County: Provided no Councellor be appointed to go the
Circuit in the River wherein he does inhabit.

XXVI. Appeals how to be made.
Whereas many appeals are made from County Courts to General Courts, and from
General Courts to Assemblies, whereby the speedy Execution of Justice is often
retarded, and many persons disabled by the Charge of going to James City to
prosecute, are forced many times to desist from the Claim of their just Rights:
Be it therefore Enacted, Appeals from County Courts, how to be made, and to
whom.
That for the avoiding Delays and for the ease of the Inhabitants, all Appeals
made in any Court after the General Court in March, be referred to the Hearing
of the Governor or Itenerary Councils in their Circuit, from whose Sentence
there, if any person will appeal, if the Governor be present, shall be made to
the next Assembly; if two of the Council, then to the next General Court: from
which the said Counselors, during the Trial of such Cause or Causes, in which
they had at the County Courts given their Opinions, shall be suspended; but
because in the Winter time the General Courts are more frequent, and all Causes
there receive a speedier determination, and because Tobacco being only then
payable, may be paid in kind: Appeals when they shall be made to the General
Court.
It is Enacted, That all Appeals made from October, December, and other
intervening County Courts, be made to the next succeeding General Court, and
from thence to the Assembly, and because there may be as great Errors of
Judgment or Will in matters of small value as in the greatest: It is further
Enacted, That Appeals shall lie open, as aforesaid, for any thing of what value
soever: Always provided, That the Appellant put in good Security for
Prosecuting the Appeal, and payment of Fifty per Cent. Damages to the
Defendant, if the Appellant be cast in the Suit for his unjust molestation:
Proviso's in ease of Appeals.
Provided also, That no Appeals be made from Northampton County, whose
remoteness and dangerousness of passage, is such, as is not, for inconsiderable
Causes to be attempted under the value limited by former Acts of Assembly, In
wha^ Cases only App^als are to be m^^^ from N^^^h^mpton County.
being Three thousand pounds of Tobacco, or Thirty pound Sterling, any thing in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding: And be it further Enacted, That all
Causes of what Value or Nature soever, not touching Life or Member, may be
tried at the County Courts; and that no Arrest be made to the General Court in
any Action under the value of Sixteen hundred pound of Tobacco, No Appeals from
County Courts to the General Court, save only in Cases Criminal.
or Sixteen pounds Sterling, upon penalty of Five hundred pound of Tobacco, to
be paid by the Plantiff to the Defendant for his Charges.

XXVII. Amerciaments in the General Courts Fifty Pound of Tobacco per Cause, in
County Courts Thirty per Cause.
WHereas many Suits are raised upon frivolous occasions by Litigous persons,
for prevention thereof for the future, be it Enacted and Confirmed, That all
persons whatsoever that are cast in any Cause, be they Plantiffs or Defendants,
Amerciaments in General and County Courts stated.
shall be amerced (besides the Damages and Costs to the Recoverers) Fifty
pounds of Tobacco in General Courts to the use of the Public, and in the
County Courts Thirty pounds of Tobacco for the maintenance of the
Commissioners; for the due Collecting whereof, be it Enacted, That the Clerks
of the General Courts, and the several County Courts, An Account to be kept of
Amerciaments.
keep an exact Account of the Amerciaments, and deliver or send the same to the
several Sheriffs of the particular Counties, who are hereby required to collect
the same with the Levies; and are accordingly empowered for Default of payment,
to make Distress; Sheriffs to collect them.
and commanded not to return any Arrears (Executors and Administrators, who
cannot pay without Orders, always excepted.)

XXVIII. Subpoena's to be issued by the Clerk.
BE it also Enacted, When the Clerk shall issue Subpoena's, and when a Dedimus
Potestatem
That the Clerk of the General Court shall issue Subpoena's from the
Secretaries Office for all Evidences required in the Trial of any Cause there
depending, if the Witnesses required do not dwell beyond the Bay, or the North
side of James River; and if they do, that then a Dedimus Potestatem shall issue
for taking the Deposition in the County or Counties, where the Witnesses do
dwell: Evidence shall be given viva voce in Cases Criminal.
Provided always, That in Criminal Causes all Witnesses be bound over to give
in their Evidences viva voce at the Trial in the General Court.

XXIX. Dedimus Potestatem how to issue.
WHereas many Causes between parties and parties, are lost for want of
Evidence, who living so far remote cannot, but at a Charge and Expense far
exceeding the value of the Cause, be brought to give it viva voce, at the
General Court, or at the County Courts, if the party dwell out of the County;
or else a greater mischief is introduced, by the partial and illegal
Examination of Witnesses in presence of but one party, before some one
Commissioner, perhaps too favorably inclined to the party, in whose behalf the
Depositions are taken; besides the trouble, expense, and hindrance of the
Witnesses themselves, who many times are forced One hundred Miles from the
Place of their Residence, for a small allowance, to give Evidence in Trials of
petty and inconsiderable values; for remedy whereof, and that all Parties may
with more convenience, less trouble and cost, have their Evidences impartially
and legally taken: Be it Enacted and Confirmed, That if the Cause to be tried
at the General Court, the Governor, if in any County Court, any one of the
Council or the Judge of the Court, A Dedimus Potestatem in what Cases to be
granted, by whom, and to whom it shall be directed.
shall Grant and Sign a Writ of Dedimus Potestatem, for Examination of
Witnesses, in the Counties where they dwell; directed to Three such Persons as
the Plaintiff and Defendant, if they both desire the Writ, shall by consent
make choice of and nominate; but if it be the single request of either
Plaintiff or Defendant, then the Governor, Councellor, or Judge of the County
Court, out of Court time, shall nominate and appoint three or more such
indifferent Persons to Examine all such Witnesses, as by the Party desiring the
Writ they shall be moved to Summon before them; and to this end the
Commissioners thus made choice of, or appointed to execute the Writ, or any two
of them, shall by the said Writ be empowered and required to appoint a time and
place when and where they will receive the Evidences, and to issue out
Subpoena's for their Appearances accordingly; and if upon such Summons any of
the Witnesses refuse and neglect to come and give in their Evidences, then the
Commissioners or any two of them, The Nonappearance of Witnesses in case of a
Dedimus Potestatem finable.
be further empowered by this Act to lay such a Fine upon them as the Act of
Assembly gives in such Cases for Nonappearance of Witnesses at the General or
County Courts: Provided always, That the Parties procuring the Writ, shall give
the Party concerned against him, notice of the time and place, when and where
the Commissioners intend to sit, at least ten days before the day appointed by
the said Commissioners for putting it into Execution. And be it further
Enacted, That the said Commissioners or any two of them, which take the said
Examinations, shall immediately subscribe them, seal them and the Writ up, and
return them with the Writ so sealed up, to the Clerk of the General Court, if
the writ issue from the Governor, or else to the Clerk of the County Court
whence the Warrant issued, by either of the said Clerks to be read at the time
of the Trials of the Cause, in either of the said Courts.

XXX. Penalties for Nonappearance of Evidences.
BE it also Enacted, That the Penalties to be inserted in Sub-poena's to the
General Courts for Nonappearance of the Evidences summoned, Penalty of
Nonappearance upon Sub-poena 's.
be One thousand Pounds of Tobacco, and for like Default of the County Courts
Three hundred and Fifty Pound of Tobacco, and that all Witnesses summoned to
give in their Evidences at either of the said Courts, Charges allowed to
Witnesses.
shall be allowed for their necessary time spent in coming and going to and
from the said Courts, Twenty Pounds of Tobacco per day; and for the time they
attend there until they have given in their Evidences, Forty Pounds of Tobacco
per day; and because many, maliciously to aggravate the charge of the Suit,
summon many more Witnesses then are needful; Be it therefore further Enacted,
That there shall not be allowed in any Bill of Costs, the charge of above Three
Witnesses to any one Action, The number of Witnesses limited.
unless for proof of several Matters incident thereunto, which severally may
require the attestation of Two Witnesses.

XXXI. County Courts Appointed.
BE it also Enacted for the more due Administration of Justice in the several
Counties, and the greater ease of the People in obtaining the same, the Courts
be continued in each County, County Courts their Institution, and how to be
formed.
as of long time has been accustomed, and that the said Courts do consist of
Eight of the most able, honest, and judicious Persons in the County; which
Eight, or any Four of them, whereof one to be always of the Quorum, are to be
empowered by Commission from the Governor for the time being to act, according
to the Laws of England and of this Country, and to empower them severally, and
out of Court, to act and do all such things as by the Laws of England are to be
done by Justices of the Peace there. And be it further Enacted, That the
Persons thus Commissionated, Members of County Courts shall take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath of a Justice of Peace.
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath of a Justice of
Peace, that they be called Justices of Peace, that the Courts be stilled County
Courts; and further, That the Justices do keep the said Courts precisely upon
the days appointed by this and former Acts of Assembly, (viz.) At what places,
and when County Courts shall be held.
Henrico the 1 day Charles City the 3 day James City the 6 day Isle of Wight
the 9 day Nanzemond the 12 day Lower Norfolk 15 day Elizabeth City the 18 day
Warwick County the 21 day York County the 24 day Nothampton the 28 day, New
Kent the 28 day, Gloucester the 16 day, Lancaster the Rappahanoch the Surry the
Northumberland the Westmorland the


And all Adjournments by all means possible be avoided, and that all the
Justices of the said Courts respectively, shall duly attend the same, and shall
not depart or absent themselves from thence without the license and consent of
the rest of the Justices there present; and if any of them shall happen to have
a lawful Cause of absence, it is thought fit that in such Cases they shall upon
the First day of the Court, signify the same to the Court by Writing, and that
they make good proof of the Truth thereof at the next ensuing Court, or else
being delinquent in the premises, every Justice so offending shall forfeit for
every time of his absence Three hundred pounds of Tobacco, to be imposed by the
Court, and disposed of to the good of the County.

XXXII. No Arrest without Entry of Action.
BE it also Enacted, That all Actions to the County Courts and Subpoenas for
Witnesses, or in Chancery, be first entered with the Clerk of the County, or his
known Deputy, before any Arrest made or Summons served, under Penalty of Five
hundred pound of Tobacco, to be levied upon the Sheriff that shall presume to
serve any Process contrary to the Tenor hereof: And be it Enacted, That the
Plantiff in any Action, shall at least the day before the Court, enter his Bill
of Complaint, Actions to be entered before Arrests.
and leave it in the Clerks hands, that the Defendant if he will may have a
Copy thereof, and accordingly provide his Answer, but the Original Declaration
or Bill to be always filed in the Office.

XXXIII. The Defendant to put in his Answer.
ANd be it further Enacted, That for the better regulating and keeping the
Records, and transfering the President to Posterity, as also for prevention of
new Suits upon mistake of the grounds of others, that as the Plantiff, both in
General Courts and County Courts files his Declaration, so the Defendant in
both those Courts shall also put in his Answer in writing, Answers to
Declarations shall be filed.
and that the Judgment, if for the Plantiff, be endorsed on the Declaration,
if for the Defendant on the Answer, and further that all Evidences concerning
that Cause, be filed together with them, and by the Clerk carefully preserved.

XXXIV. Form of Entering the Court.
BE it also Enacted, That the Form for Entering the Style of the Court, Form of
Entry in County Courts.
Proclamation for Silence, the Cryers calling the Plantiff and the Defendant to
Answer, be observed in the County Courts, as well as in the General Courts,
varying only in the Title of the Court and the Assessors.

XXXV. Court not to take Cognizance of any thing under Two hundred Pounds of
Tobacco.
AND be it also Enacted, That the Court shall not take Cognizance of any Cause
under the value of Two hundred pounds of Tobacco, or Twenty Shillings Sterling,
which a private Justice may, and is hereby authorized and impovvered to hear
and determine. And whereas many Vexatious persons do very much trouble the
Courts and their Neighbors for babbling words, Of what things Courts shall
take Cognizance.
sometimes passionately but not maliciously spoken, Be it therefore Enacted,
What Defamations are actionable.
That no Action be admitted for Defamation in any Court, where the words are
not Actionable; and further, that there be no words Actionable, but such as if
true, might have brought the person to suffer Punishment by Law; any other to
be cast out of the Court, and the Plantiff to be Nonsuited: not that liberty
is hereby given or intended to any scurrilous person to abuse others at his
pleasure, but that his Majesty's Courts be not for such Brawls forced to wave
matters of greater consequence: and because offenses of this Nature may be
determined by a particular Justice, who is hereby empowered to bind the persons
so offending to the good Behavior, or if they find not good security for the
same, to commit them to Prison till they find it.

XXXVI. Private Courts Prohibited.
WHereas many things are acted, and Administrations granted at private Courts,
which tends to the apparent Damage of diverse of the Inhabitants of this
Country, Be it therefore Enacted, Private Courts prohibited.
That no private Courts be kept, but that all business triable or grantable, by
or at the County Courts, be tried and granted in open Court at the times and
places by Law appointed: Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful for
the d spatch of Merchants and other Sea affairs, A Proviso made.
which cannot without much prejudice and detriment to the said Merchants or
Masters, be deferred till the Courts in course should come, it is Enacted, That
it shall be lawful for any Justice of the Quorum, by his Warrant directed to
the Sheriff, to call a particular Court, and to summon any person or persons
before them.

XXXVII. Trials by Juries.
WHereas the Seventieth Act made in 1642, and continued, by the Ninety first
Act 1657, seems to restrain both Plantiff and Defendant from trial by Juries,
unless the Plantiff in his Declaration, or the Defendant upon entry of his
Appearance, do desire the same; which restriction is quite contrary to the Law
of England; by which, the trial of all matters of Fact is as appropriate and
inherent in the Jury as matter of Law is in the Judges; for which causes, and
that we may in all our Trials come as near as may be to the Laws of England, by
which we are to be governed, as our present Capacities will admit, Be it
Enacted, That every morning the Court sits, whether the General or County
Courts, Juries appointed as well in County Courts as in the General Courts.
the Sheriff of the County in which it sits, shall impannel a Jury to attend
the Court that day, to try such Causes as the Court shall find proper to be
referred to them; and that when ever a Jury is sent out, an Officer sworn to
that purpose shall keep them from Meat and Drink, until they have agreed on
their Verdict.

XXXVIII. Grand Juries to present Offenders.
WHereas the several Laws instituted and made for the redress of several
Misdemeanors and Offenses, either through the remissness of the County Courts,
or the Justices that keep the same, or else through the Defect of the Laws, in
not appointing some peculiar Officers to look narrowly after the Offenders, and
to make presentment thereof to the said Justices at their County Courts; by
which means the Laws themselves are slighted and contemned and become wholely
useless and ineffectual: Be it therefore Enacted and Confirmed, That Juries of
Inquest be Impanneled and Sworn in every County, to enquire of breach of all
Penal Laws in their several Counties, and that they make Presentment thereof to
the General County Courts twice yearly (Viz.) in April Court and December
Court, Grand Juries shall in each County twice a year make Presentiments.
when the Justices are to receive them, and find them according to Law, and to
take for Evidence the Presentment of the Jury, if made upon the certain
knowledge of any of them; or otherwise the Parties that inform the Jury to give
their Evidence to the next Justice, in presence of the Party presented; which
Deposition being produced by the Jury with their Presentment, shall be
sufficient ground for the Court to pass Judgment against the Offenders.

XXXIX. Pillories to be Erected at each Court.
WHereas many Offenses are punishable by the Laws of England and of this
Country with Corporal Punishments, A Pillory, a Whipping Post, and a Pair of
Stocks, etc. to be set up in every County.
for executing whereof no such Provision has been made as the said Laws
require: Be it therefore Enacted, That in every County, the Court cause to be
set up a Pillory, a pair of Stocks, and a Whipping-Post near the Court House,
and a Ducking-Stool, in such place as they shall think convenient; that such
Offenders as by the Laws are to suffer by any of them, may be punished
according to their Demerits; and the Court not causing the said Pillory,
Whipping-Post, Stocks and Ducking-stool, to be erected within Six Months after
the Date of this Act, shall be fined Five thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use
of the Public.

XL. Fines to be disposed of by the Assembly.
WHereas diverse Trespasses against the Public, are punishable by Fines, which
are by the present Law to be disposed of to the use of the Counties in which
the Trespass is committed, and yet nothing done for the good of any County, as
was intended; whereby it may be presumed that the said Fines are either not
gathered, whereby the Trespassers by this lenity and impunity are encouraged to
persist in their contempts of the Laws, or else the said Fines are by some evil
Common-Wealths-men perverted to their private uses; for prevention whereof for
the future, Courts only shall impose and collect Fines.
Be it Enacted, That the Courts shall only lay and collect the Fines, and that
they cause the Clerk of their respective Courts to keep an Account thereof, and
to return the Estreatments to the Clerk, of the Assembly at James City, by the
third of the General Court held there in March yearly.

And it is further Enacted, That the said Clerk of the Assembly do annually
attend accordingly, during the time, at the place aforesaid, to receive them,
and at the next Assembly to present them to the Burgesses, who are to order the
disposal of the said Fines, as to them shall seem most necessary for the good
and benefit of the several respective Counties wherein they accrued due; always
proportioning to every County the use of all the Fines which were levied
therein.

XLI. Supersedeas by whom, and how grantable.
WHereas the Writ of Supersedeas, has of late been too frequently granted upon
slight pretenses of Error in the Court, thereby not only injuriously delaying
Justice, and keeping Men from their just Dues, but also bringing Calumnies and
Aspersions upon the Courts themselves; Be it therefore Enacted, That no
Supersedeas whatsoever shall hereafter be granted, No Supersedeas shall be
granted but by the Governor, and two of the Council.
but by the Governor and two of the Council, nor by them, unless the party
desiring it, make it probably appear to them that there is Error in the
Judgment, and shall then also give good Security to make good his Plea; and if
he be cast at the next General Court, to pay the Principal with Five and Twenty
per Cent. Damages, besides Costs.

XLII. Prisons to be built in each County.
WHereas the first Act of the Assembly held at James City the 3d of November
1647, and continued by the Assembly held there the third of March 1657, for
prevention of Escapes for Prisoners; has Enacted, That suffiicent Prisons
should be built in each County, and that an House built after the form of a
Virginia House, (our Abilities not extending to build stronger) should be
accounted a sufficient Prison, and that any person being a Prisoner for Debt or
Crime: And breaking one of those Prisons, should be proceeded against as a
Felon, and that neither Court, Commissioner, nor Sheriff, should be answerable
for such escape, and whereas the Sixty first Act of the Assembly, held at James
City, the said Thirteenth of March 1657, makes the several Counties not
building such Prisons liable to the Sheriff for the escape of any person
committed to his Custody; which Acts, have for want of a Penalty, never been
put into Execution; for want whereof Felons may escape, and Debtors for want of
due restraint delay always and defraud oftentimes, the Creditor of his just
Dues, and by means thereof the Law it self made wholly void; which intended
principally that all Men should by that restraint have been forced to make a
speedier satisfaction: For remedy whereof, be it hereby Enacted, A Prison to be
built at the charge of the County.
That according to the said Acts, a good strong Prison after the form of
Virginia Houses, be builded within Eight Months after the date of this Act, by
the Court, at the charge of the County, upon Penalty of being fined Five
thousand pounds of Tobacco, and be answerable for Escapes as aforesaid; and the
person breaking Prison, Breaking of Prison shall be adjudged Felony.
shall according to the said Act. of the third of November 1647, be adjudged a
Felon; and that no person under Execution for Debt, or imprisoned for Felony,
shall have the benefit of the Rules; Who shall have the benefit of the Rules.
and all other persons having the benefit of the Rules, shall be secured and
lie in Prison every night, at the Peril of the Sherriff.

XLIII. Dwellers within the Rules of any Prison, not to have any benefit
thereof.
AND be it Enacted, That if the Sheriff shall permit any person dwelling within
the Rules of any Prison, that is by Warrant or Order of Law committed to
Prison, to walk abroad out of Prison, Such as dwell within the Rules shall not
enjoy the benefit of them.
though with a Keeper, and to have the benefit of the Rules, or to lodge in his
own House; the said Sheriff, upon Proof thereof made at the County Court by the
Plantiff, shall be ordered to pay the Debt, as in case of Escapes.

XLIV. Sheriff to be chosen in the Commission.
FOrasmuch as the Comissioners of the County Courts; are by the Laws of this
Country answerable for the Levies and Estreatments of each County, of which the
Sheriff is usually the Collector, One of the Commissioners of each County shall
be chosen Sheriff there.
be it therefore Enacted, That none but one of the Commissioners of each
County, shall be Sheriff for that County: And further, That the Commissioners
shall exercise the Office of Sheriff successively, as they hold their places in
Commission, Sheriffs shall hold their Office a whole year and no longer.
every one a whole year and no longer: Provided, That every such Commissioner,
before he be admitted to take his Oath, give in good Security for the due
Execution of his Office, and Performance of the Trust committed to him, and
then his Oath be administered to him. And be it further Enacted, That no Under
Sheriff shall execute the Office of Under Sheriff in the same County above one
Year; The Under Sheriff.
Provided always, That the Sheriffs of James City, who are more immediate
Officers than any other, to the General Courts and the Public, shall be left
to the Governors free Choice: And further, That if the Governor see cause,
for the better promoting any of his Majesty's special Services, it shall be
left to his discretion to pass by any Person in any other Commission, and to
give the Place to those in the Commission he shall think most meet to supply
the exigent of the present Occasions, but because the Laws as well of England
as of this Country, prohibit the Executing the Office of Sheriff by any Person
two years together, the Governor is earnestly desired by the Assembly in any
of his Elections not to infringe those Laws.

XLV. Sheriffs not making Return.
Whereas the Sheriffs, often through neglect, often for favor to the Debtors,
omit the serving the Process to them directed, and making Returns thereof
according to Law; by means whereof the Courts are prolonged, Justice is
delayed, and the Parties by their attendance and expenses very much endamaged:
Be it therefore Enacted, Sheriffs not making timely Returns, fined 1000 l. of
Tobacco.
That every Sheriff failing to make sufficient Return; (that is, That the Writ
is executed, and the Name of the Bail taken of any Warrant to him directed
three days at least before the day of the Return of the Writ in the General
Court, and two days before the County Courts) shall be amerced One thousand
Pounds of Tobacco, one half to the Plaintiff, if he sue for it, and the other
half to the County: Provided, That the said Plaintiff prove the delivery of the
Warrant to the Sheriff.

XLVI. Sheriffs to take Bail.
BE it also Enacted, Sheriffs shall take sufficient Bail in Arrests.
That all Sheriffs shall take sufficient Bail of Persons arrested, and perform
the Award of the Court, and if the Sheriffs shall neglect to take sufficient
Bail of the Party arrested, or otherwise consent to be the cause of his escape,
then the said Sheriff shall be liable to pay the Award of the Court himself;
and shall also pay, in case the consent to the escape be proved, One thousand
Pounds of Tobacco, one half to the Public, the other half to the Party
grieved, for his delay in recovering the Debt; but if Bail be taken, and the
Party appear not to answer the Suit, then Judgment shall be awarded against the
Bail: Always provided, That the Sheriff or Bail, shall if they desire it, have
an Attachment against the Estate of the Party arrested and not appearing: And
further, That if the Sheriff or Bail, shall the next Court after that to which
the Arrest was made, bring forth the Body of the Party so arrested, to answer
the Suit, then the Sheriff or Bail shall be acquitted for the Judgment passed
against them.

XLVII. Non est Inventus.
BE it also Enacted, That if any Sheriff shall return a Non est Inventus, upon
which an Atachment by a former Act has been usually granted, when perhaps
neither the Sheriff nor his Officer, have been at the house of the Defendants,
to the great damage and disparagement of the said Defendant by having his Goods
attached: Be it therefore Enacted, The Method of Proceedings relating to a Non
est Inventus.
That henceforth the Sheriff, or his Officer, shall declare upon one of their
Oaths, that he has been at the house of the Defendants, and has there left a
Copy of his Writ, before his return of Non est inventus be admitted; and if he
shall refuse to make such Oath, then Order to pass against him, according to
the Act for Non-Returns: but if the Return be proved and allowed in Court, then
after thrice summoning the Defendant by Proclamation in Court, an Attachment
shall issue against his Estate, returnable the Court following; where if the
Defendant appear not to replevin the Attachment, Judgment shall be granted to
the Plaintiff for his Debt; being made evidently appear to the Court that it is
justly due to him.

XLVIII. Apprisement of Goods.
BE it Enacted for the equal Aprisement of Goods seized by Execution, That the
Plaintiff and Defendant shall choose each of them two indifferent Men for that
purpose, and in case of disagreement, the said four or three of them shall
choose an Umpire, which Umpire so chosen, shall be sworn by the next
Commissioner to apprize such Goods indifferently, and his Umpirage to be final:
Goods seized, by whom they shall be appraized.
And be it further Enacted, That if Plaintiff or Defendant shall neglect to
appoint Apprizes within three days after Execution is served, notice being
given them by the Sheriff, to whom the Execution was directed, that then the
Sheriff in such case of neglect, shall choose and appoint Apprizers either for
the Plaintiff or Defendant, for apprizing the Goods by him seized upon
Execution, as aforesaid: And be it further Enacted, Goods shall remain in the
Plaintiffs possession till after Appraisement.
That before such Aprizement, the Sheriff shall not remove the Goods out of the
Possession of the Plaintiff, and the surplusage, if any be, returned to him;
but after Apprizement made, as aforesaid, the property to vest in the Sheriff
for the use of the Creditor, to whom the Sheriff shall give notice that he may
take them into his own possession: And because there can be no Averment against
a Record, it is further Eenacted, That the Sheriff make return of the Execution
to that Clerk of the County that granted it, by him to be entered upon Record
under the Order it was issued upon; that so the Satisfaction as well as the
Judgment, may be authentickly proved, if occasion require.

Whereas the Act for the relief of poor Prisoners, has, What persons shall
have the benefit of the Act, made for relief of poor prisoners.
contrary to the intent thereof, been extended to Men of all Capacities, and by
that means an inconsiderable part of their Estates, or at least unprofitable to
him whose dependence is Tobacco, according to his agreement forced for
satisfaction: Be it therefore Enacted, That henceforth every Debtor under
Execution for Debt shall be detained in Prison until he has paid the Debt in
kind; but that real poor Men, laid under Execution for a Debt under One
thousand Pounds of Tobacco, shall still have liberty by part of their Estate by
some Justice of the County indifferently assigned, and by Apprizers summoned by
the Sheriff, and sworn equally to apprize the said Estate, shall make Payment
thereof to their Creditor, and redeem their Persons.

XLIX. No Commissioner, Clerk, or Sheriff, to be Attorneys in the Court where
they officiate.
No Commissioner, Clerk, or Sheriff, shall be Attorney in that Court wherein he
officiates.
BE it Enacted, That neither Sheriff, Commissioner, Undersheriff, or Clerk of
any Court within this Collony, shall be permitted to plead as an Attorney, in
any persons behalf in the Court wherein he officiates, and the said
Commissioner, Sheriff, Undersheriff, or Clerk offending herein, shall for
every Default be fined One thousand Pounds of Tobacco, The Court may
notwithstanding permit a Commissioner to plead a poor man's cause.
to the use of the County: Provided always, That if any poor person, not able
to plead his own Cause, shall request the Court to assign him one of the
Commissioners to plead for him; it shall be lawful for the Court to grant it,
and for the Commissioner to plead accordingly; but the Councellor,
Commissioner, etc. so pleading the poor man's Cause, not to give Judgment
therein: Provided also, That any Commissioner, Sheriff, Undersheriff, or
Clerk, acting as General Attorney for any persons, absent out of the Country
or County, and negotiating their Affairs, and so liable to be sued for their
Imployers; such persons, notwithstanding this Act, shall have liberty also to
Plead and Prosecute in any Cause that shall any way concern their said
Imployers.

L. Publication of Writs for Election of Burgesses.
WHereas frequent Complaints are made by the People, that they have no notice
of the time appointed for the Election of Burgesses; and by that means are
deprived of giving their Voices in the Election of their own representatives;
Writs for Election of Burgesses shall be read publicly in Churches.
Be it Enacted henceforward, That the Sheriffs of the respective Counties,
shall upon the Receipt of the Writs, cause Copies thereof, with the day
appointed, for the Election endorsed, to be sent to the Minister or Reader of
every Parish in their County; who is to read the same to the People two Sundays
successively, both in the Church and Chapel of Ease to it belonging; to the
end that no person may pretend Ignorance; and return the same to the Sheriff
with his attestation subscribed, that he has published the same according to
the tenor of this Act; which Attestation shall be sufficient to discharge the
Sheriff from blame: but if the Sheriff neglect to send Copies, as aforesaid,
then to be fined Two thousand Pounds of Tobacco, to the use of the County;
Freemen neglecting to givc their Votes at Elections of Burgesses shall be fined
200 l. of Tobacco.
and every Freeman, after such Publication made, neglecting to come and give
his Vote at the day appointed for Election, shall be amerced Two hundred pounds
of Tobacco to the use of the County: And be it further Enacted, That if the
Sheriff shall not before the day of the Return, make his due return of the
Writ, with the names of the Burgesses endorsed into the Secretaries Office at
James City, the said Sheriff so neglecting, shall be Fined Two thousand pounds
of Tobacco to the Public.

LI. Public Levies to be first paid.
BE it also Enacted, That no Sheriff shall, where he receives Tobacco of any
Person indebted for his Levies, and also for Fees, and other debts due to
himself or any other Officers, and not paying the whole in kind; by which means
for part thereof distress must be made, shall presume to convert the Tobacco in
kind to his own or any other use; and force the Country Creditor to accept of
the Distress, or stay for his Debt, Debts due to the public shall be first
paid:
but that all Debts due to the Public be first paid, and the Tobacco in kind
paid to the Creditor of the public, whose reputation is by these Evasions
often vilified; and that the Sheriff making Default herein, shall be fined Ten
thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use of the public, upon proof thereof made
in any Court of Record in this Country.

LII. The Sheriff, upon the instance of the Treasurer or his Deputy, to collect
the Quit Rents.
Quit Rents shall be collected by the Sheriff, and shall be paid in Tobacco or
Money.
ANd be it further Enacted, That the Sheriff being his Majesty's immediate
Officer, shall upon the instance of his Majesty's Treasurer, or his Deputy
here, be compelled to receive all such Quit Rents as the said Treasurer, or his
Deputy, shall give him order to receive in his County; and that the said
Quit-Rents be paid as the Levies, in the direct specie of Tobacco or Money: And
that no particular Fees or Debts be preferred before them, under like penalty
as for the payment of other Debts before the Levies.

LIII. List of Tythables how to be taken.
WHereas the fraud of Sheriffs, in bringing in the List of the Tythables, has
very much augmented the Taxes of the Country: Be it Enacted, That for the
better discovery of the Number of Tythables, Each County to be divided into
several Precincts, for the more exact discovery of Tythables.
each County shall be divided into several Precincts; in each of which a
Commissioner shall be by the Court appointed to take a List of the Tythables,
to be brought or sent in under the hand of the Master of every Family, of the
names and number of Tythables he has in his Family; and if he bring in a false
List, the said Master shall pay treble Duties; Treble Duties shall be paid for
every Tythable person concealed.
for every person so by him concealed: And be it further Enacted, That the said
Commissioner give public notice in Writing, to be read and set up at the door
of the Church or Chapel of Ease, of the Precincts he is to take Account of,
and of the day he will receive them: Provided the day be before the Tenth of
June at farthest, at which time every person neglecting to bring in his List as
aforesaid, shall be adjudged a concealer, and pay accordingly; and every
Commissioner failing in giving notice, neglecting to take the List, conniving
at others concealment, or not giving a true List of his own Tythables, shall
also pay treble Duties as aforesaid: And be it further Enacted, That every
Commissioner in August Court following, shall deliver the Account so taken by
him, and the Subscriptions of the several Masters of Families, to the Clerk of
the County Court, who shall return an exact List of the Families to the Clerk
of the Assembly, the first or second day of every September General Court.

LIVE. What Persons are Tythable.
WHereas several disputes have been made of what persons were Tythable, It is
hereby Enacted and Declared, That all Male persons of what Age soever, imported
into this Country, shall be brought into the List, and be liable to the
Payment of all Taxes; Who shall be liable to the payment of Taxes.
and all Negroes Male or Famale, being imported, shall be accounted Tythable;
and all Indian servants Male or Famale, however procured, being adjudged
Sixteen years of Age, shall be likewise Tythable; from which none shall be
exempted but such Christians only as are either Natives of this Country, or
are imported Free by their Parents or others; who shall not be liable to the
payment of Levies, What Persons are exempted.
until they be Sixteen years of Age, or such others, as by particular Acts of
Assembly are exempted.

LV. Counselors and Ten Persons to be exempted out of the Levy.
Counselors of State, and Ten Persons of their Family, exempted from all
public Charges and Taxes.
BE it Enacted, That each Councellor of State for this Country, shall be freely
exempted from all public Charges and Taxes for themselves and Ten of their
Family, the Ministers and Church-Duties excepted; and further, That all
Ministers officiateing in any Cure of this Country, shall for their attendance
on the General Courts and Assemblies, be exempted themselves, and Six of their
Family, from paying any public Taxes: and further, Some others also exempted.
That all persons that come into this Country, at the last coming in of Sir
Thomas Yates, shall have their own persons exempted from paying of any public
Taxes, Church Duties excepted; and also from their personal Service in the Wars.

LVI. Artificers not planting Tobacco, freed from payment of the Levy.
Artificers or Handy-crafts men, who plant no Tobacco, are freed from the
payment of Levies for Three Years.
ANd whereas all Persons, Artificers and others, are forced to neglect their
Trades, and to plant Tobacco, merely for the payment of their Levies: Be it
Enacted, That what Artificer or Handycrafts-man soever will employ himself and
Servants only about their Trades, and not plant any Tobacco at all; every such
Artificer and Handycrafts-man so following his Trade and not Planting Tobacco,
Such Persons if they shall plant Tobacco contrary to the Tenor of thhis Act,
shall pay double Levies.
either by himself or servants, shall for his Encouragment be exempted from
paying any Levies, either for himself or servants, for the Term of Three years,
except it be for the Ministers Dues and Church Duties: Provided always, That if
any person claiming the benefit of this Act, shall directly or indirectly, at
home or abroad, plant or tend, or cause to be planted or tended any Tobacco,
contrary to the intent of this Act, or hire out his Servant or Servants to
others to plant or tend Tobacco, he shall be censuered to pay double Levies for
himself and all his Tythables, to the use of the County.

LVII. Counselors to raise a Levy.
WHereas the necessary Charge of the Country does enforce the raising of an
Annual Levy, which being commonly done by an Assembly, the charge of which does
most times equal, if not exceed, all other Taxes of the Country; Be it
therefore Enacted, That the Governor and Council in September 1662, The
Governor and Council, shall have power to raise and proportion a Levy for
defraying the Country Debts and Sallaries.
shall have power to raise and proportion a Levy to defray the Country Debts
and Sallaries allowed by the Assembly, and such other Debts also as they shall
find justly and necessarily due, according to the number of Tythables:
Provided, the whole amount not to more then Twenty pounds of Tobacco per pole.
And this Act to continue for three years, unless some urgent occasion present
in the mean time of calling an Assembly, and that the Levy may be truly
proportoned: Be it Enacted further, That every Clerk of a County Court transmit
the Certificate of the number of Tythables in his County, to the Secretarys
Office, in every September Court.

LVIII. No Arrests to be made on the Sabbath Days.
WHereas it has been the frequent practice of Sheriffs and their Officers, for
their own ease and benefit, to repair to the Churches and other places of
Public Meetings, on purpose to serve Warrants and Executions and other Writs;
by which means Men in danger of Arrests, have been deterred from the Service of
God and the King: Be it Enacted, That no Sheriff nor his Officer, shall from
henceforth execute any Writ or Warrant upon any person or persons, No Arrests
shall be made on Sundays, nor on the 30th of January or 29th of May, etc.
either upon the Sabbath Day, or upon the day of Humiliation for the Death of
the late King of ever blessed Memmory, or upon the days appointed for
Thanksgiving for his Majesty's happy Inauguration, and for the Deliverances of
this Country from the too bloody Massacres, nor at the times of General Musters
or Election of Burgesses. Prison-breakers, Felons or Persons under suspicion of
F^lony, or gui^ty of a Riot, excepted.
Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful for the Sheriff or any other
Officer, to apprehend and carry to Prison any person or persons for Riots,
Felony, or Suspicion of Felony, or escape out of Prison, when under Execution,
upon any day, at any place, any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

LIX. Reward for killing of Wolves.
WHereas great Complaint is made of the frequent and many Injuries done by
Wolves to the Cattle and Hogs of several Inhabitants of this Country; It is
therefore Enacted, The Reward for k lling of Wolves, what, to be paid by the
County.
for the Encouragment of those that will make it their business to kill and
destroy them, that they shall be paid by the County in which they are killed;
for every Woolf destroyed by Pit, Trap, or otherwise Two hundred pounds of
Tobacco: Provided, he make Proof before the next Commissioner how the Woolf was
killed, and bring in his head, and take from the said Commissioner a
Certificate thereof; which being produced to the Court, when they are
proportioning the Levy, shall be sufficient to have the said Reward raised upon
the County, and to be paid to such persons as it is justly due.

LX. Commissioners to take Security of Sheriffs.
BE it also Enacted, That the Commissioners of every County, shall be
answerable to the Public, for all Levies laid upon their County by Act of
Assembly, and for the Sheriffs performance of his place; and in regard thereof,
are hereby Empowered before the admission of any Sheriff into his office, The
Sheriff shall give security to the County Commissioners, for the faithful
discharge of his Office.
to take such Security of him as they shall think fit and sufficient to save
themselves harmless, for the receiving and discharging all Public Duties;
whether Quit-Rents, Levies, or Officers Fees, committed to his Charge or
Collection, and for the due performance of his Office. Provided, That no
Commissioner shall be liable, but such as were of the Commission when the
defect was made.

LXI. Judgment before Commissioners.
BE it Enacted, Acknowledgment of a Debt before Two Commissioners, shall be
accounted in the nature of a Judgment, and Execution shall issue in case of
Non-payment.
That the voluntary Confession and Acknowledgment of a Debt by the Debtor,
under his Hand and Seal before two Commissioners, of which one of the Quorum,
shall be accounted in Law in the nature of a Judgment, the said Commissioners
attesting the same under their Hands, and so certifying it to the Clerk of the
County Court to enter it upon Record; upon which Writing so Acknowledged,
Attested, and Recorded, Execution shall issue in case the Debt be not paid, as
if Judgment had been granted for the same in open Court: Provided, That if no
Execution issue within a Year after such acknowledgment, then a Scire Facias
shall issue before any Writ of Execution shall issue forth.

LXII. Persons removing into the Bay.
FOR avoiding of Creditors charges and troubles in recovering their Debts, by
reason of diverse Persons removing themselves from the Places where they
contracted their Debts, into remote Counties; Be it Enacted, That no Person
whatsoever, No Person shall remove out of the County where he dwells, without
setting up his Name on the Church or Chapel door, three Sundays, with his
intent to remove, and whither.
shall remove out of the County where he dwells, unless he first set up his
Name at the Door of the Parish Church or Chapel where he dwells three Sundays
together, and in the same express his intent of leaving the County, and
certify the Place he is about to remove to, and take Certificate thereof from
the Minister or Reader of the said Church or Chapel, and the Churchwardens of
the Parish, to the Clerk of the County Court, who shall grant him thereupon a
License to depart: Provided always, That if the said Person so removing pay not
his Debts contracted before his removing, according to the tenor of the
specialties by which they are due; it shall be lawful for any of his Creditors
by a Warrant from the Secretaries Office, to bring the Debtor personally before
the Governor or any of the Council, for what value soever the Debt be of, and
there put in sufficient security for performance of his Obligation according to
the tenor thereof, in case the day of payment be not past (any restriction in
any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding) and then to take out Execution
against his Body or Estate for satisfaction of the said Debt.

Cattle shall not be removed out of the County without notice first given to
Four of the Neighborhood.
And be it further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons, shall before or after
Certificate obtained as aforesaid, remove or transport any Cattle out of the
County he dwelled in, without notice given to Four of the nearest Inhabitants,
who are hereby required to take special notice of the Ear-Mark, and Color of
the Cattle to be removed, and make a List of them and their Marks, and carry
the same subscribed by the said Viewers, to the Clerk of the County Court to be
Recorded, he shall upon lawful Conviction, forfeit for every Beast transported
contrary to the tenor of this Act, No Merchant or Mariner shall transport any
person out of the Country without Certificate.
One thousand Pounds of Tobacco, one half to the Public, and the other half to
him that shall make the complaint against the Party so offending: And if any
Merchant, Mariner, or any other Person whatsoever, shall transport any Person
or Persons out of his County, without Certificate as aforesaid, the said
Merchant, Mariner, or other Person, so offending, shall be liable to the
payment of all the Debts and Engagements of the Party transported, being due at
the time of his removal.

LXIII. English Weights and Measures.
WHereas daily Experience shows that much fraud and deceit is practiced in
this Collony by false Weights and Measures, for prevention thereof, English
Weights and Measures shall be used in this Collony.
Be it Enacted, That no Inhabitant nor Trader hither, shall buy or sell, or
otherwise make use of in Trading, any other Weights or Measures than are used
and made according to the Statute of (...) in that case provided; and for
discovery of abuses, Be it further Enacted, Every County shall be provided with
Weights and Measures from England.
That the Commissioners of every County, do provide at the charge of the
County, sealed Weights, of Half hundreds, Quarterns, Half Quarterns, Seven
Pounds, Four Pounds, Two Pounds, One Pound, Measures of Ell and Yard, of
Bushel, Half Bushel, Peck, and Gallon, of Winchester Measure, Gallon, Pottle,
Quart, Pint, of Wine Measure out of England; and that the said Weights and
Measures be kept by the first of every Commission at his house, and with them a
burnt Mark of (...) and a Stamp for Leaden Weights, and Pewter Pots, whither
all Persons not using Weights and Measures brought out of England and sealed
there, shall bring all their Barrels (which are to contain Five Bushels) and
other Measures, to be sealed, and their Stilhars to be tried; and all Persons
selling by other Weights or Measures not sealed and tried as aforesaid, shall
forfeit One thousand Pounds of Tobacco, one half to the Public, the other half
to the Party that shall make his complaint; and if the Commissioners shall make
default of producing such Weights, Measures, Scales, and Stamps, as by this Act
they are enjoined by the first of December 1663, the said Commissioners shall
be fined Five thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use of the Public,

LXIV. County Courts to grant Probates and Administrations.
BE it Enacted, That the County Courts shall be empowered to grant Probates of
Wills, Probates of Wills and Administrations upon the Estates of persons dying
Intestate, may be granted by the County Courts.
and Administrations upon the Estates of persons dying intestate, to take
Security and receive the Inventories of the said Estates: Provided, That the
Clerk of the County Court, when he sends or carries the said Probates, or
Commissions of Administrations to be signed, do then also certify into the
Secretaries Office the name of the Testator or the party deceased, the
Executors or Administrators, and their Security; the County and Parish where
they dwell, and the Court wherein the Administration is granted, to the end
that strangers and others Creditors, invested in the Estate, may be the better
enabled to find out the Records, in which the account of the Estate is entered;
and be informed how they may come to their just dues.

LXV. Administrations to whom to be granted.
Whereas Commission of Administration are suddenly obtained, and the Estate as
suddenly disposed of, under the pretense of greatest Creditor, or next of Kin;
whereby oftentimes they that really are so, are the one defrauded of his just
Debt, and the other debarred of his Right and Interest, before either can have
notice of the parties Decase: Be it therefore Enacted, No Administration shall
be granted, till Nine Months after the parties decease; except to the Widow or
Child.
That no Administration be granted, until Nine Months after the parties
Decease; except to the Widow or Child, and then to be immediately granted; the
said Widow or Child bringing in sufficient Security for performing all things
the Law requires, and saving the Court harmless: And be it further Enacted,
That in case the said Widow or Child do Administer, the Estate shall be
inventoried, and Apprizement made by four Men appointed by the Court, and sworn
by a Justice of that Court as formerly; which Inventory and Apprizement shall
by the said Widow or Child, be brought into the next Court held in that County,
unless the Court for Reasons showed them, may think fit to grant Liberty to
bring it in the Court; but in Case the Decedent die without Widow or Child,
Then it is Enacted, That the Estate for the better Improvement thereof, be sold
by the Court at an Outcry, and the Purchasers all putting in Security and
acknowledging Judgments for their Debts; which by the Court shall be Assigned
to the several Creditors of the Decedent, and paid according to the priority in
Law, and the surplusage remaining (if any) to be delivered to the next Kinsman
of the Decedent, it he appears; or if none prove himself such within three
years, then the Court to give an account of the said Surplusage to the
Assembly, who are to dispose of the same to the use of the County, allowing to
the Court, or whom they entrust for the managing of it, for his reasonable
costs and pains. And when the Widow, or Child, administers (the surplusage
after Debts paid, and the Funeral charge, according to the quality of the
person, allowed for) shall be equally divided between the Widow and Children,
(viz.) one full Third of the Personal Estate to the Widow, The Widow to have
one third of the Estate (Debts being first paid) the other two thirds to be
divided amongst the children.
and the other Two Thirds among the Children, if any of which die before it
come to Age, his Proportion to be divided among the surviving Children. And
whereas it has been the frequent evil practice of Administrators, as soon as
they have obtained an Order to administer, to act as Administrators by Virtue
of that Order, without giving security, or taking out their Commissions, so
that the Estate being imbezelled away, no account can be given thereof: Be it
therefore Enacted, That whoever pretends to administer upon any Estate, shall
bring to the Court sufficient security before the Order shall be granted; and
an Order thus obtained legally, Administrators shall give in security to the
Court.
by giving such security, to be truly accountable to bring in a true Inventory,
and to perform such things as the Administrators by Law are enjoined, shall not
at any time after be reversed, unless the Party that obtained the same die
before he has given an account of the Estate, and obtained his Quietus, in
whicn case, the Court is empowered to grant the Administration of that Estate
so not accounted for, to some other Person, who may by Virtue thereof, call his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of the former Administrators, to account;
who shall pay out of the said deceased Administrators Estate, all such Debts as
shall be found due to the Estate he administered upon, in the first place.

LXVI. Concerning Orphans.
COncerning Orphans Estates, Be it Enacted, That all Wills and Testaments be
firm and inviolable, unless the Executors or Overseers, do refuse to execute
the Trust reposed in them by the Testator, in which case, the Court may appoint
others to act according to the Will: but if the said Will be so made that no
Person will undertake the managing of the Estate or Education of the Orphans,
according to the tenor of it, then that the Estate by the appointment of the
Court shall be managed according to the Rules set down for the ordering the
Estate of persons Intestate, as follows:

Orphans shall be maintained by the Interest and increase of their Stock if
su^ficient, if not shall be bo^nd Apprentices.
First, That no account be allowed for Diet, Cloths, Physic, or else against
any Orphans Estate, but they to be Educated and provided for, by the Interest
of the Estate and Increase of their Stock, according to the proportion of their
Estates, if it will bear it; but if the Estate be so mean and inconsiderable,
that it will not extend to a free Education, then it is Enacted, That such
Orphans shall be bound Apprentices to some Handycraft Trade, until One and
twenty years of age; except some Kinsman or Relation will maintain them for the
Interest of the small Estate they have, without diminution of the Principal:
which, whether great or small, always to be delivered to the Orphan at the
years appointed by Law.

That all Cattle, Horses, and Sheep, be returned in kind by the Guardian
according to the age and number when as he received them; Cattle, Horses, and
Sheep shall be returned in kind.
and because several had, before the first making of this Act Estates of
Orphans in their hands, which they kept for the male increase and giving the
yearly Account of the augmentation or diminution of the Orphans Stock, which by
the carelessness or wickedness of the Guardians was usually consumed before
they came to age, and disputes thereupon arise in the several Courts, how such
persons should be proceeded with, and Accounts of Orphans Estates, how to be
given them; it is hereby declared, That all persons possessed of
Orphans-Stocks, before the first making this act, shall be bound to deliver to
the Orphan, when he comes to age, such and so many of any kind as he was
possessed of, when he gave his account to the next Orphans Court succeeding the
Publication thereof.

That all Plate and Money be preserved and delivered in kind, according to the
weight and quantity, Plate and Money shall be also returned in kind, other
Household Stuff shall be appraised and sold.
that other Household Stuff and Lumber be apprized in Money, and the value
thereof paid by the Guardian to the Orphan, when he comes to age in the
Country, Commodities at the price current, as it shall be worth at the time in
the place where the Orphan Estate is managed.

That the Court take able and sufficient security for Orphans Estates, and
enquire yearly of the Security; and if the Court see Cause, to have it changed
and called in, and placed as the Court shall think fit, the said Court to
inquire also whether Orphans be kept, maintained and educated according to
their Estates; and if they find any notorious defect to remove the Orphans to
other Gaurdians, and also for those that are bound Apprentices, to change their
Masters if they use them rigorously, or neglect to teach them their Trades.
That no more be allowed to Guardians for Collecting of Debts due to any Estate
than Ten in the Hundred, Ten per Cent allowed to Guardians for collecting Debts
due to Orphans.
the usual allowance of Merchants to their Factors and Attorneys.

That Thirty Pounds of Tobacco per day, be allowed to each Apprizer for
Apprizement of any Estate, (if they will take it) and no more. Allowance for
Appraisement, and for Funeral Charges regulated.
That no allowance be made by the Court of excessive, Funeral expenses, but
that a Regulation thereof be made according to the proportion of the Estate and
the quality of the person.

LXVII. Orphans Land not to be Aliened.
BE it also Enacted, for the future benefit of all Orphans; That the several
County Courts, do take into their serious Consideration and Care, that the
Lands in their County belonging to any Orphan, be not aliened, sold, or taken
up, as deserted Land by any persons during the minority of the Orphan, and that
the Guardians or Overseers of any Orphan, do not Let, Set, or Farm out any Land
belonging to any Orphan, for longer Term than until the Orphan be of age; and
that an especial care be had, that the Tenant shall improve the Plantation, by
planting an Orchard and building a good House; and that the Tenant be bound to
maintain good Fence about the Orchard, and keep the House in sufficient repair,
Timber upon Orphans Land, not to be wasted, and the Houses to be kept in repair.
and leave it Tenantable at his surrender, and that Provision be made in the
Lease for preventing all waste of Timber, or employing it to any other use,
then the use of the Plantation.

LXVIII. Grants of Land.
BE it hereby Enacted, That any person or persons, claiming Land as due by
Importation of Servants, shall first prove their Title or just Right before the
Governor and Council, How persons claiming Land by importation of Servants
must prove their Title.
or produce Certificates from the County Courts to the Secretarys Office,
before any Survey be made or Grant admitted; it being unreasonable that others
furnished with Rights should be debarred by Pretense of a survey which in it
self is no Title.

LXIX. Deserted Lands.
BE it also Enacted, No Deserted Land shall be taken up by Patent, till after
the term of Three Years, without Order obtained of the Governor and Council.
That no Patent of Land shall hereafter pass upon pretense that the Land is
deserted for want of planting within the time of Three years, unless proof
thereof be made before the Governor and Council, and an Order obtained from
them for the Patenting thereof; neither shall the first Petitioner for any
Deserted Land be denied of having the first Grant, he making his Rights appear,
when he Petitions for the Land. And whereas the former Act concerning Deserted
Lands, reserved to the first taker up, his Rights to take up Land in an other
Place: It is here Enacted, That in regard he has had the benefits of his
Rights, held the Land in Possession, might make use of the Timber without
contradiction, and yet neither pays the King any Rents, nor suffers him to
admit any new Tenant; that the Rights as well as the Land shall be forfei^ed,
and the Grantee made incapable of using any of them afterward: Provided, That
any Person having taken up Land deserted before the making of this Act in
November 1652, shall not by Virtue of this Act, be outed of Possession.

LXX. Seating upon others Dividends.
WHereas diverse Suits have risen about seating ignorantly upon other Men's
Lands, Any Person who has built upon Lands supposed his own, but upon Survey
prove to belong to another, shall have the charge thereof allowed by the right
Owner.
for deciding the same; Be it Enacted, That if any Person whatsoever, has
built or seated upon any Lands supposed his own, but proving by a just Survey,
to belong to another, the charge of such building, seating, or clearing, shall
by Twelve Men upon their Oaths be indifferently valued, and the consideration
by the said Twelve Men so adjudged, shall be paid by the Owner of the Land, to
the first Seater that was at the charge; but if that shall amount to more than
the said Owner is willing to disburse, then the said Twelve Men shall make a
valuation of what the Land was worth before the Seating thereof, Or else shall
Purchase the Land.

Twelve Men upon Oath, are to decide any Controversy arising thereupon.


which the Seator shall accordingly pay to the true Owner: Provided always,
That no consideratien shall be allowed for building or clearing, to any Person
that shall obstinately persist after lawful warning given him to desist.

LXXI. Not to shoot or range upon other Men's Lands.
WHereas the Rights and Interests of the Inhabitants are very much infringed by
the hunting and shooting of diverse Men upon their Neighbors Dividends,
contrary to the Privileges granted them by their Patents; whereby many
injuries do daily happen to the Owners of the said Land: No Person shall hunt
or shoot within the limits of an others Dividend, without leave of the
Proprietor.
Be it Enacted, That if any Planter or other, shall hunt or shoot within the
limits of an others Dividend, without leave first obtained from the Proprietor,
he or they so offending, shall forfeit for every such Trespass, Four hundred
Pounds of Tobacco, one half to the Owner of the Land, and the other half to
Public Uses; notwithstanding it shall be lawful for any Person or Persons to
hunt or shoot upon any Dividend of Land not planted or seated, though taken up
without restraint or penalty: Provided also, That it shall be lawful for any
Person that has shot any Game without the limits of any other Man's Land, to
pursue the same into any Man's Dividend, and freely to carry away the same, as
also to seek or fetch his own Cattle or Hoggs off of any Man's Land, Cattle not
to be fetched off of another Land, till after notice given him thereof.

Licenses for hunting wild Hoggs,


first giving notice to the Owner of the Land of his intent, and of the time he
intends to stay upon it; to the end that the said Owner may, if he think fit to
send one to see what Cattle or Hogs he drives away: Provided always, That it
shall be lawful for the Governor to Commissionate some Gentlemen to give
License to Persons to hunt wild Hogs upon any Man's Land without their fenced
Plantations.

LXXII. Lands Five years in Possession.
WHereas sundry Suits and Controversies have been, and daily do arise, about
Claims and Titles to Lands, to the great impoverishing of diverse Persons; for
remedy whereof, and for the better Establishing the Inhabitants in the Rights
and Possessions hereafter: Be it Enacted, That all Persons whatsoever, that
have or do pretend any Title to any Land, shall prosecute their Claims before
the said Land has been peaceably enjoyed Five years; otherwise it shall be a
good Plea in Bar for the Possessor of such Land claimed or possessed, to affirm
he has had peaceable Possession without Claim by Commencement, Five Years
peaceable possession of Land, shall confirm a Title thereto.
or Prosecution of Suit full Five years; proof whereof, shall be a sufficient
Confirmation to the Possessor, and shall conclude the Claim and Title of the
Pretender; and this Act to extend to all such as have not prosecuted their
Title within Five years, since the 6th day of October 1646: Always provided,
That the limitation of Five years in this Act expressed, shall not bar Orphans
nor Widows under Covert, This Act shall not extend to Widows, Orphans, or
Persons of an unsound Mind.
nor Persons out of the Country, nor Persons of unsound Minds: But that the
said Orphans shall have Five years after they be of age, Women Five years free
from Coverture, (viz.) if she marry again before her Five Years are expired,
and her Husband omit to make claim, his omission shall be a good bar against
him; but if the Woman survive, she shall have so long time allowed her to claim
in as will make up the first time of her fredom, five years: Persons of unsound
Mind, five years after their recovery from their impotence; Nor to such as live
out of the Country.

Care taken in such Cases.


Persons out of the Country, five years after their arrival into the Country:
Provided they come in within two years after the Title to the Land became due,
in which times if they claim not as aforesaid, to be utterly barred for ever;
for otherwise the expectation of Heirs out of England, where there is none born
here, must in a short time leave the greatest part of the Country un-seated,
and un-peopled, no Man knowing how or of whom, either to Purchase or take Lease.

LXXIII. Against Fradulent Conveyances.
Conveyances of Estates shall be acknowledged before the Governor at the
General ^ourt, or before the Justices at County-Courts.
BE it Enacted and confirmed, That no person or persons whatsoever shall pass
over by Conveyance; or otherwise, any part of his Estate, whether Lands, Goods,
or Cattle, whereby his Creditors not having notice thereof, might be defrauded
of their just Debts; unless such Conveyance or other Deeds be acknowledged
before the Governor and Council at the General Court, or before the Justices
at the County Courts; and there Registered in a Book for that purpose, within
Six Months after such alienation: and whoever shall make over or alienate any
part of his Estate, otherwise than is here expressed, the same shall not be
accounted valid in Law, nor shall it bar any Creditor by seizing the same by
Law for satisfaction of the Debt, the Property of the Estate not being legally
vested in any but the first Vendor: And it is further Enacted, That any
conveyance made, And shall be Registered within Six Months.
and acknowledged, and recorded, shall not be held good in Law, against any
Creditors or former Purchasers, until Four Months after such acknowledgment
made and recorded, in which time the Creditors or former Purchasers, may show
for what cause the said Conveyance is to be accounted fraudulent; but if none
appear within the said Four Months after the first acknowledgment in Court,
Otherwise shall not be valid in Law.
then the Sale shall be for ever after good against all other claimers or
pretenders whatsoever, unless such as pretend to overthrow the first Sellers
Title, in whom only five years possession can bar: Provided, That this Act
shall not extend to such persons who for satisfaction of just Debts, Who are
exempted from this Act.
shall make a Bill of Sale of their Estates, or any part thereof, and deliver
it bona fide into the Possession of the Creditor; but such Act shall be good
and valid to all intents and purposes, this Act being made only to prevent
fraud and deceit.

LXXIV. Quit-Rents how to be Paid.
WHereas his Majesty has by his Commissioners appointed a Treasurer to receive
the Quit-Rents and others Fees and Profits due to his Majesty; and the payment
of Quit-Rents being due in Money, which we, being destitute of Coin, cannot
procure: Be it Enacted, That those persons that cannot procure Money, shall pay
their said Rents in Tobacco, at Two pence per Pound, to such Collector or
Collectors, as by his Majesty's Treasurer shall be appointed; Quit-Rents may be
paid in Tobacco at two pence per Pound.
and that the Country paying the Rents double, the two next years shall be
acquitted from all Arears, by assent of the Honorable Sir William Berkly, who
is Authorized by the Treasurer to make Composition.

LXXV. Surveyors of Land.
BE it Enacted that Surveyors of Land shall demand no more than Twenty Pounds
of Yobacco, for Measuring One hundred Acres of Land, What prizes shall be
allowed for the Surveying of Lands.
if the parcel exceed Five hundred Acres, but if under, to be allowed One
hundred pounds of Tobacco, and for the same shall deliver an Exact Plot of each
parcel Surveyed and Measured; and if any Surveyor upon reasonable Demand, shall
refuse to Measure the Dividend for any person whatsoever; for the Consideration
and Satisfaction aforesaid; such Surveyor shall be liable to the Censure of the
Court in that County where he lives; and if any Surveyor shall be desired to
go further from his place of Residence, then he can return in one day; such
Surveyor shall have the Allowance of Thirty pounds of Tobacco per day, for
every days Absence from his Dwelling; and if his passage cannot be but by
Water, then such persons as shall employ him, shall provide for his Transport
out and home: Provided no Pay to be received before the Plot delivered.

LXXVI. Land to be plainly Marked and Bounded.
WHereas many contentious Suits do arise about Titles to Land, occasioned much
through the fraudulent and under-hand-dealing of Surveyors; who frequently make
sales of the Surveys by them made in the behalf of one person to another;
whereby often times he that had the first and justest Right, is unjustly
deprived of his Due; for prevention whereof for the future, Be it Enacted and
ordained, No Surveyor shall give a Plot of any Land Surveyed by him, till Six
Months after the drawing thereof.
That no Surveyor of Land shall give a Plot of any Land surveyed by him unto
any person whatsoever, until Six Months after such Plot is drawn, according to
its Survey; and that all Land surveyed, shall be at the surveying thereof
plainly marked and Bounded; for all persons to take notice of; that none may by
the Ignorance of the bounds, entrench upon another Right; and the persons
offending, either in giving out of Surveys contrary to this act, or not
sufficiently marking his Bounds, to forfeit Five hundred Pounds of Tobacco, for
every Hundred Acres the Survey shall be given of to the use of the Country.

LXXVII. What Fences shall be sufficient.
Fences shall be four foot and a half high, otherwise no Damage to be allowed
for trespass.
BE it also Enacted and Confirmed, by this present Grand Assembly, That every
Planter shall make a sufficient Fence about his cleared ground at the least
four Foot and a half high; which if he shall be deficient in, what trespass or
damage soever he shall receive or sustain, by Hogs, Goats, or Cattle, shall be
his own loss and detriment; and also if it shall happen, that any person shall
hunt any of the said Horses, Mares, Hogs, Goats or Cattle, that shall so offend
and do them harm, he shall make satisfaction for any of them that shall be so
hurt to the owners of them, to be recovered in any Court of Justice within the
Collony: And it is further Enacted, That where any Horses, Mares, Cattle, or
Hogs, shall endamage any person for want of such Fence, as aforesaid; and the
party damnifying, do wilfully kill, or otherwise hurt, so as the Cattle, Hogs,
Horses, or Mares, do die of such hurt, whether by Dogs set upon them or
otherwise; in such case, the owner of the ground shall not only be liable to
satisfy the value of such Horses, Mares, Hogs or Cattle, but by virtue of this
Act, be adjudged to satisfy double the value of such Horses, Mares, Hogs or
Cattle so killed, to the owners of them. And further, be it Enacted, That where
the Fence shall be adjudged sufficient (Viz.) Four foot and a half high, and
close down to the bottom; that in case any Damage or Trespass be then done or
committed to any person having such Fences, by either Horses, Mares, Goats, or
any other Cattle whatsoever, the owners of such Horses, Mares, etc. shall be
liable to make satisfaction for their Trespass and Damage to the person
injured, Satisfaction in case of Trespass.
in case the Fence be found by two honest men, appointed by the next
Commissioner, to be sufficient.

LXXVIII. Bounds of Lands to be every Four years renewed by the view of the
Neighborhood.
WHereas many contentious Suits are daily incited and stirred up about the
bounds of Land; for which no remedy yet has been provided: The 57th Act
prohibiting Re-Surveys, not applying the expected Remedies, for if the Survey
be just, yet Surveyors being for the most part careless of seeing the Trees
Marked, or the owners never renewing them, in a short time the Chops being
grown up, or the Trees fallen, the bounds become as uncertain as at first: And
upon a new Survey, the least variation of a Compass alters the situation of
the whole Neighborhood, and deprives many persons of Houses, Orchards, and
all to their infinite loss and trouble: for prevention whereof, Be it Enacted,
That within Twelve Months after this Act, all the Inhabitants of every Neck and
Tract of Land adjoining, shall go in procession, and see the marked Trees of
every man's Land in those Precincts to be renewed, and the same Course to be
taken once in every Four years; by which means, the Inconveniency of
Clandestine Surveys will be taken away; and the Bounds will be so generally
known, and the Marks so fresh, that no alteration can be made afterward. And
be it further Enacted, Bounds being once settled by the consent of the
Proprietors, shall take off all Claim to future alteration thereof.
That the Bounds by the consent of the present Proprietors, being once thus
settled, shall conclude the said Proprietors, and all others claiming from or
under any of them, from any future alteration of their Bounds, be there within
the said Bounds more or less Lands than they pretend to; and if it shall happen
any difference to be at present, that cannot be by the Neighbors themselves
decided: Be it further Enacted, That two honest and able Surveyors, shall in
presence of the Neighborhood lay out the Land in Controversy, and the Bounds
laid out to be the certain Bounds; and ever after to be renewed and continue so
(but the person causing the Difference to pay the Charge of the Survey) it
tending much more to the preservation of Friendship among Neighbors, to have a
present and final Decision of their differences, while Men yet live that are
acquainted with the first Surveys, and while Land is yet at a low Value, then
it will be when time has raced out all knowledge to the Bounds, and added a
great Value to the Land: Be it Enacted further, That each County Court shall
appoint and order the Vestries of each Parish to divide the Parishes into so
many Precincts as they shall think necessary for the Neigbours to join in and
see each others Mark renewed, and to appoint certain days between Easter and
Whitsontide, to go the said Processions, and put this Act into effectual
Execution; Days to be appointed upon which Procession shall be made.
and in case the Court shall omit to make such orders, and to send the same to
the several Vestries of the Parishes in their Counties, they shall be fined Ten
thousand pounds of Tobacco, and the Vestries failing to order the Precincts and
the Persons to go together, shall be fined Twelve hundred pounds of Tobacco,
and the person failing go upon the day appointed, or to renew his Mark
accordingly, shall for his neglect be fined Three hundred and fifty Pounds of
Tobacco.

LXXIX. Surveyors for High Ways.
Whereas through the frequent Alterations of the Highways, by felling of
Trees over them, and many times taking them into fenced Plantations, to the
great hindrance of Travelers and Traders; Be it therefore Enacted, The
Justices shall yearly appoint Surveyors of the Highways.
That the Justices do yearly in October Court, appoint Surveyors of the
Highways, who shall first lay out the most convenient ways to the Church, to
the Court, to James Town, and from County to County; and make the said ways
Forty foot broad, and make Bridges where there is occasion; and the Ways being
thus laid out and Bridges made, they shall cause the said Ways to be kept clear
from Logs, and the Bridges in good repair; Highways shall be kept clear, and
Bridges in good repair.
that all his Majesty's Subjects may have free and safe Passage about their
occasions: and to effect the same, the Vestries of every Parish, are upon the
desire of the Surveyor, hereby enjoined and empowered to order the
Parishioners, every one according to the number of Tythables he has in his
Family, to send Men upon the days by the Surveyors appointed, to help them in
clearing the Ways or making or repairing the Bridges, according to the intent
and purpose of this Act; and if any Court shall omit the appointing Surveyors,
or they neglect the executing their Office, or the Vestry to order the Work, or
any person to send help, Vestries of each Parish shall take care thereof.
according to the said Vestries order, the said Court Surveyors, Vestry, or
Person, shall be amerced Five hundred pound of Tobacco to the use of the
County: And if any person shall contrary to this Act, fell Trees upon the
Highways, The Penalty of Felling Trees on the Highway, or encroaching upon
the same.
and not clear the same, or enclose any part of the said Highways within any
fence, the Grand Jury shall present the same as a common Nuisance, and the
Enclosure shall be thrown open, and the offender be fined One thousand pound of
Tobacco, to the use of the County; and if any Counties have Creek or Swamp,
limiting the bounds between the said Counties, it is Enacted, That both
Counties bounding upon such Passage, shall contribute to the making the Bridge,
or making the way over it.

LXXX. Tobacco when to be demanded.
WHereas many Creditors for several By-respects, neglect the demanding the
Tobacco, due to them in due time, by that means enforcing the Debtor to the
inconveniency of not disposing of his Tobacco, and yet not paying his Debts, to
the great damage and prejudice of the said Debtor: Be it therefore Enacted,
That every person or persons not demanding his or their Debts between the Tenth
of October and the last of January, Tobacco due shall be demanded, between the
Tenth of October and the last of January.
shall not sue or implead any person or persons Indebted to him or them for
present Payment; but it shall be lawful for any persons owing Tobacco, to
dispose of the same for his own use after the said last of January, if it have
not been demanded according to the tenor of this Act, and no Execution to issue
for a Tobacco Debt, but against the person, who shall have liberty to free
himself, by putting in security to pay the Debt the following Crop. Provided
always, That it shall be lawful for the Creditor to sue or implead his Debtor
for security for his Debt against the next year, any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

LXXXI. Judgments and Specialties how long Pleadable.
WHereas the nature of our Trade in Virginia, enforces us to Engage by Bills,
Bonds, and other Writings, for discharge of which, in part or in whole, the
Debtor is often constrained to accept of the Receipts, the said Bills, Bonds,
Judgments and other Writings remaining still in the hands of the said Creditor,
and the Receipt being often times lost, the Debtor, and especially the
Executors and Administrators of a person deceased, not being able to prove
payment, those Debts are frequently demanded and unjustly recovered, which
before had been justly paid and discharged; for remedy whereof, Be it Enacted,
That no Bills or Bonds be of force or recoverable Five years after the date of
the said Bills or Bonds, or any Bills or Bonds heretofore made, Bills and Bonds
of persons Deceased, in what time recoverable.
five years after the date of this Act; as also that no Judgment shall be of
force seven years after the Grant thereof or after the date of this Act as
aforesaid; but if the Debtor shall depart the Country, and leave no Attorney to
answer for him, or any other way conceal or privily remove himself into any
part of the Country, and by that means render the renewing of the Bill
impossible; such time of his Absence or Concealment shall not be accounted any
part of the Five or Seven years limited.

LXXXII. Attorneys for Business out of England.
WHereas many persons in this Country, entertain as Attorneys, many troublesome
businesses out of England and other places, when justly there is no occasion
for such Molestation, and yet the Parties molested, are left destitute of
Relief, by reason the said Disturbers have no Estate in this Country to
satisfy Damages they are condemned in: Be it therefore Enacted, Attorneys out
of England shall give security to pay Costs and Damages, if cast in Law Suits.
That no Attorney by any power out of England, or elsewhere, shall sue or
implead any person of this Collony, without giving first good Security, that he
the said Attorney shall pay all such Costs and Damages as the Court shall award
against him; where the Law shall find that he the said. Attorney has by that
power unjustly molested the Defendant.

LXXXIII. Burgesses.
Whereas no Provision has been made for the certain Conveyance of public
Writs for the Election of Burgesses; whereby the delivering the said Writs
being retarded, the Sheriff has no time to give notice to the people according
to Law, nor make a timely return of the Writs, nor can the Burgesses appear at
the day; for remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by this present Grand Assembly,
Allowance to the Secretary for conveying Writs of Election to the Sheriffs of
each County.
That the Secretary provide for the timely conveyance of the Writs into every
County, to be delivered to the Sheriff thereof; and for his pains be paid One
Hogshead of Tobacco, weighing Three hundred and Fifty pounds for every County;
and in Case any Neglect be proved against him, that he be fined for such
neglect at the discretion of the Assembly: Always provided he have the Writs
signed Forty days before the day of the Return.

LXXXIV. Burgesses ascertained.
WHereas the charge of the Assemblies is much augmented by the great number of
Burgesses, unnecessarily chosen by several Parishes: Be it Enacted, Two
Burgesses from each County.
That hereafter no County shall send above two Burgesses, who shall be Elected
at those places in each County where the County Courts are usually kept.
Provided always, That James City being the Metropolis of the Country, One for
James City in particular.
shall have the Privilege to Elect a Burgess for themselves, and every County
that will lay out One hundred Acres of Land, and people it with One hundred
Tythable persons; that place shall enjoy the like Privilege.

LXXXV. Burgesses Charges ascertained.
WHereas the immoderate Expenses of the Burgesses causing diverse heart-burnings
between them and the People occasioned an Injunction to make agreement for the
allowance before the Election, which may hereafter probably induce interested
persons to purchase Votes, by offering to serve at low Rates; by which means,
that Candor and Freedom which should be in the Choice of persons credited with
so honorable and great a trust, might be very much prejudiced, and the place
it self become mercenary and contemptible: Be it therefore Enacted, That the
maintenance of every Burgess shall be One hundred and Fifty pounds of Tobacco
and Cask per day, besides the necessary charge of going to the Assembly and
returning.

LXXXVI. Burgesses to appear upon the Day.
Whereas many Inconveniences happen by the not appearing of Burgesses, upon
the precise day of the Return of the Writ; as leaving the business of the
greatest Importance, the prudent choice of a Speaker to a small party that
first appears; upon which diverse Animosities may arise in some that dislike the
Election, to the great detriment of the Public Affairs; which by this means
are retarded, and the charges of those Counties whose Burgesses first appeared
increased; Be it therefore Enacted, That what Burgess soever shall fail in
making his Appearance and attending the Assembly, precisely upon the day of the
return of the Writ, shall be fined for every days Absence, Fine laid upon
Burgesses for not appearing on the precise day of the Writ.
Three hundred pounds of Tobacco, to be disposed of by the Assembly, unless he
be obstructed by some such Impediment as the House shall judge might be a
lawful and reasonable Cause to hinder his Coming.

LXXXVII. Burgesses not to be Arrested.
FOR the dispatch and reputation of the Public Business, Be it Enacted, That
none of the Burgesses of any Assembly, nor any of their Attendants, shall be
Arrested from the time of their Election, until Ten Days after the Dissolution
of the Assembly wherein he serves as a Burgess: Provided, That if the Assembly
be Adjourned for above a Month, Burgesses not to be Arrested unless the
Assembly be adjourned for above a Month.
the several Burgesses shall Ten days after that Session be liable to Arrests
and other Processes; and if in the interval of Sessions they be Arrested and
Prosecuted to Execution, and that served, the Execution shall be suspended Ten
days before the next Session of that Assembly, and continue so until Ten days
after it, at which time the privilege of Burgess shall cease and determine.

LXXXVIII. No Order to contradict an Act.
BE it Enacted and Confirmed, That no Act of Court or Proclamation, No act of
Court or Proclamation shall contradict an Act of Assembly.
shall upon any pretense whatsoever enjoin Obedience thereunto contrary to any
Act of an Assembly, until the reversal of that Act by a succeeding Assembly.

LXXXIX. Assemblies to enquire after the Breach of Laws.
WHereas several Laws have been by diverse Assemblies made for the good of this
Country, which for want of due Observation have not produced the desired
Effect; And whereas it is by this Assembly Enacted, That the Grand Jury of
Inquests should twice annually make Presentment of the breach of all Penal
Laws; and that the Assembly should dispose of the Fines levied upon the several
Offenders for the use of the Counties wherein they accrued due: Be it Enacted,
That for the future the first day of every succeeding Assembly, shall be
employed in receiving the said Presentiments of the Grand Jury, and to enquire
into the remissness of Juries and Courts, and how the Laws have been put in
Execution, and disposing the Fines, that by that means the Laws may be restored
to their due Vigor, and Offenders be deterred from Neglect or Contempt, when
they shall find a severe Account of their Observation is so diligently enquired
into.

XC. Public Letters how to be Conveyed.
WHereas the remoteness of diverse places in the Country from James City, and
the necessity of communicating diverse Businesses to the utmost limits of it,
would, if messengers were pressed purposely, put the Country to an annual great
expense, for prevention thereof, Be it Enacted, That all Letters superscribed
for the use of his Majesty or the Public, shall be immediately conveyed from
Plantation to Plantation, to the place and person they are directed to, under
the penalty of Three hundred and Fifty pounds of Tobacco to each default; and
if any Person be put thereby to any extraordinary Charge, Extraordinary Charges
in conveying public Letters to be allowed by the County Courts.
the Court of each County is hereby authorized to judge thereof and to levy
payment for the same; the Superscriptions being signed by the Governor, some
one of the Quorum, or the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Major of a
Regiment; and where any person in the Family the said Letters come to, can
Write, such person is required to endorse the day and hour he received them,
that the neglect or contempt of any person stopping them may be the better
known, and be punished accordingly.

XCI. Divulgers of false News.
WHereas many idle and busie-headed People, do forge and divulge false Rumors
and Reports, to the great disturbance of the Peace of his Royal Majesty's liege
People in this Collony: Be it Enacted, That what person or persons soever shall
forge or divulge any such false Reports, tending to the trouble of the Country;
Divulgers of false News fined Two thousand pounds of Tobacco, and to give
Security for their good Behavior.
he shall be by the next Justice of the Peace sent for and bound over to the
next County Court, where if he produce not his Author he shall be fined Two
thousand pound of Tobacco, (or less if the Court think fit to lessen it) and
besides give Bond for his Behavior, if it appear to the Court that he did
maliciously publish or invent it.

XCII. Surgeons Accounts regulated.
Whereas the excessive and immoderate Prices exacted by diverse a varitious and
griping practicioners in Physic and Surgery, has caused several
hard-hearted Masters, swayed by profitable more than charitable respects,
rather to expose a sick Servant to a hazard of the recovery, than put
themselves to the certain charge of a rigorous, though unskilful Physician;
whose demands, for the most part exceed the purchase of the Patient; many other
poor people also being forced to give themselves over to a lingering Disease,
rather than ruin themselves, by endeavoring to procure an uncertain Remedy:
for redress thereof for the future, Be it Enacted, That it shall be lawful for
any person or persons conceiving the Account of the Physician or Surgeon
unreasonable, to Arrest the said Physician or Surgeon to the General or
County Court, Appeal to the General or County Courts, when Physicicians or
Surgeons are unreasonable in their Demands.
where the Physician or Surgeon shall declare upon his Oath the true Value,
Cost and Quantity of the Drugs administered; for which, the Court shall grant
Order against the Plantiff with Fifty per Cent. advance, and such consideration
for his Care, Visits and Attendance, as they shall judge he has deserved; and
if it shall appear by Evidence, that the said Physician or Surgeon has
neglected his Patient while he was under Cure, the Court shall censure him to
pay so much, as they in their discretion shall think reasonable.

XCIII. Surgeons Accounts Pleadable after decease of the Party.
WHereas by Act of many Assemblies no Accounts are Pleadable against dead men's
Estates, whereby many Scruples have been made about the Accounts of Physicians
and Surgeons, who cannot possibly take Bill: Be it therefore Enacted, That
Physicians and Surgeons Accounts shall be Pleadable and Recoverable, for
means administered and pains taken in the time of Sickness, whereof the Party
dies, and where the patient recovers Six Months after such Recovery and no
longer.

XCIV. Discounts to be made in Courts.
BE it Enacted, For the avoiding many causeless Suits in Law, that where any
Suit shall be commenced in any Court for a Debt, that if the Defendant has
either Bill, Bond, or Account of the Plantiffs, wherein he proves the Plantiff
Debtor, such Debt of the Plaintiff shall be discounted out of the Debt he
claims of the Defendant, and Judgment shall be given for no more than the
Balance of the Debt will amount to, consideration being always made of the
times their several Debts have been due, and accordingly Allowance made for the
time; and because it many times happens that the Defendants in such cases do
procure Bill or Accounts of the Plaintiffs from other men, which he perhaps can
discount with those to whom he passed such Speciality or Account: It is
therefore Enacted, That no Bill or Account that being assigned over, shall by
the Assignee be pleadable against the Debtor, in such Bill or Account, unless
the Assignee can prove that he gave the Debtor notice before his acceptance of
the Assignment, and that the Debtor at that time pretended to no discount
against it.

XCV. Accounts against Dead Men's Estates.
WHereas too sad Experience has showed that Accounts against the Estates of
persons deceased, have often unjustly devoured the Estates, and brought the
Wives and Children to Poverty and Ruin; and whereas as well the Laws of England
as of this Country permit not any thing to be Pleadable against any person that
cannot wage his Law, which Executors and Administrators are utterly incapable
of: Be it therefore Enacted, That no Book Debts or Accounts shall be henceforth
pleadable against the Estate of any person deceased, nor against any living, if
the said Person shall upon his Oath deny the same to be due, unless they be
such Accounts as by particular Acts of the Assembly, as Officers Fees, Levies
and Surgeons Accounts are Pleadable; neither shall any Man be put to his
Oath upon an Ordinary Keepers Account, Debts due to Ordinary Keepers.
but the said Ordinary Keeper shall take the hand of any person (calling for
any Drink or Provision) to his Book or else his Bill, or otherwise his Debt
shall not be Pleadable.

XCVI. Ballancing Accounts of deceased persons.
AND whereas diverse Men being indebted to others upon Account, may be induced
to deliver Goods to them or their Assigns in Balance, yet take no Receipt,
which Account upon the death of either party may be brought by his Executors or
Administrators against the Survivor, of which he cannot upon his Oath deny the
Receipt, yet that Account, though justly balanced before, is often recovered
by this Act prohibiting Accounts against Dead Men's Estates, yet leaving liberty
to their Executors or Administrators to sue for an Acount due to the Estate of
the person deceased: Be it therefore Enacted, Accounts against a dead man's
Estate, shall be admitted in Discount.
That Accounts against a Dead Man's Estate being sufficiently proved, shall be
admitted in discount of an Account, due to such Dead Man's Estate; but if the
Account brought against the Estate, exceed that due to the Estate, the
Survivor, for the overplus shall be dismissed without day. Provided also, That
where the Party charged as Debtor to any one, shall refuse upon his Oath to
deny the Account brought against him (except an Ordinary Keepers, which it is
impossible to keep in Memory, or any part thereof) the Court shall take the
Account to be due, as by confession, and shall give Judgment for so much
thereof as he shall not deny as aforesaid.

XCVII. Ordinary Keepers how to Sell.
WHereas continual Complaints are made of the Exaction of Ordinary Keepers and
others in the Rate and Measures of Strong Drink, by them retailed and sold: Be
it Enacted, That no Person after the First of March, One thousand six hundred
sixty and three, shall sell or vend by retail any Wine, Beer, or other Strong
Drink, of what sort soever, by any Measures but English Sealed Measures, of
Pints, Quarts, Pottles, or Gallons, and that every one that now does, Ordinary
Keepers shall sell by English Measures.
or hereafter shall keep any Ordinary, shall by the said first of March 1663,
provide such Measures to sell by in his House; and in case he fail, shall be
put down from keeping any Ordinary, and fined Five thousand Pounds of Tobacco
to the use of the public. Provided always, That it shall be lawful for them to
sell English Strong Waters, coming over in Cases, by the Bottle, in the same
Bottles they bought them.

And for preventing many Disorders and Riots in Ordinaries and other places
where Drink is retailed, Be it Enacted, None to retail Drink but such as have
Licenses.
That no person or persons whatsoever, shall in their Houses retail any Drink,
but such as shall obtain a License from the Commissioner of the County where he
lives, signed by the first in Commission of that Court, by giving Bond
according to the Laws of England, and further obliging himself to sell at the
rates set by the Commissioners, and to pay annually to the Governor Three
hundred and fifty Pounds of Tobacco and Cask for his License.

XCVIII. Servants how long to Serve.
Whereas the Thirteenth Act 1659, does Enact, That all persons brought as
Servants into this Country, of what Christian Nation soever they be, should
serve no longer than our own Nation, which is Five Years, All Servants coming
in without Indenture, shall serve Five years, if above Sixteen years of Age,
and all under till they are Four and twenty.
if above Sixteen Years of Age, if under, until One and twenty, as by the
Thirtieth Act of the said Assembly appears; and in regard the said Thirtieth
Act does contrary to Law, look backward, and set free several Servants Aliens,
purchased upon a former Act of Assembly made the Fourth of (...) 1654. Be it
therefore Enacted, That all Aliens and others coming in while that Act and the
others are in force, shall serve according to those Acts; and that for the
future, all the aforesaid Acts shall be repealed, and all Servants hereafter
coming in without Indenture shall serve Five Years, if above Sixteen Years of
Age, and all under that Age shall serve until they be Four and twenty Years
Old, that being the time limited by the Laws of England, and that the several
Courts at the Request of the Master make Inspection and judge of their Age.

XCIX. Against secret Marriage.
Whereas much loss and detriment does arise to diverse Masters of Families by
the Secret Marriages of Servants, the said Servants through that occasion
neglecting their Works and often purloining their Masters Goods and Provisions:
Be it therefore Enacted, That no Minister either Publish the Banes, or
Celebrate the Contract of Marriage between any Servants, unless he have from
both their Masters a Certificate that it is done with their consent; Servants
may not be Married without producing Certificates from their Masters.
and the Minister doing otherwise shall be Fined Ten thousand Pounds of
Tobacco, and the said Servants both Man and Woman, that shall by any indirect
means procure themselves to be Married without consent of his and her Master,
shall for such their Offense, each of them serve their respective Masters One
whole Year after the time of Service by Indenture is expired: And if any person
being free, shall clandestinely marry with a Servant as aforesaid, he or she so
marrying, shall pay to the Master of the Servant Fifteen hundred Pounds of
Tobacco or a Years Service, and the Servant so being married shall abide with
his or her Master the time by Indenture or Custom, and a year after as
aforesaid.

C. Against Fornication.
FOR restraint of the filthy Sin of Fornication; Be it Enacted, That what Man
or Woman soever shall commit Fornication, he and she so offending, Persons
convicted of fornication, Fined Five hundred pounds of Tobacco.
upon proof thereof by Confession or Evidence, shall pay each of them Five
hundred Pounds of Tobacco, Five to the use of the Parish or Parishes they dwell
in, and be bound to their good Behavior, and be Imprisoned till they find
security to be bound with them; and if they or either of them committing
Fornication as aforesaid, be Servants, then the Masters of such Servants so
offending shall pay the said Five hundred pounds of Tobacco as aforesaid, for
which the said Servant shall serve half a year after the time by Indenture or
Custom is Expired; Servants guilty thereof how to be punished.
and if the Master shall refuse to pay the Fine, then the Servant to be
Whipped; and if it happen, that a Bastard Child be gotten in such Fornication,
then the Woman, if a Servant, in regard of the loss and trouble her Master
sustains by her having a Bastard, shall serve two years after her time by
Indenture is Expired, or pay Two thousand pounds of Tobacco to her Master,
besides the Fine or Punishment for committing the offense, and the reputed
Father to put in security to keep the Child and save the Parish harmless.

CI. Hired Servants.
Whereas diverse persons, that by Indenture, Custom, or After-Contracts for
Wages, being Servants to several Men, do many times run away to Plantations far
remote; and there being unknown, procure Entertainment with others for Wages or
Shares, to the great damage, and sometimes utter undoing of their true Masters,
and also of those that ignorantly entertain them, by paying the Fine; for
prevention whereof for the future, and for the better discovery of such
Run-aways: Be it Enacted, That all Servants at the Expiration of their time,
shall with their Master or a sufficient Testimonial from him, Servants when
their time is expired shall take Certificates of their Freedom.
go to the Court in that County where he served, and there enter his Freedom,
and take Certificate thereof from the Clerk of the said Court; which
Certificate shall be sufficient Warrant for any person to entertain him into
his Service; and whoever after his first time by Indenture is expired, and
Certificate thereof taken out as aforesaid; shall again upon any Terms become
servant to another, the Master then hiring the said Servant shall take his
Certificate of Freedom and keep it until the time contracted for be expired;
and whoever shall entertain or harbor any Servant, or hired Freeman running
away from his Masters Service, and not having a Certificate as aforesaid, shall
pay to the Master of the said servant Thirty pounds of Tobacco per day and
night for all the time they shall harbor or entertain them. And produce them
when entertained by other Masters.
Provided that if such Runaway Servants shall forge a Certificate or steal the
true one from the Master he is hired to, and by that means procure himself
Entertainment, the person entertaining him shall be free from the Fine, but the
Servant stealing or forging a Certificate, shall be punished for his forgery,
by standing in the Pillory two hours upon a Court day; and if any person coming
free into the Country, shall by any Contract agree with one person, and before
the time agreed for be accomplished, shall depart to annother, he shall first
perform the tenor of his Contract first made, and pay the apparent Damages that
shall arise by his breach of Covenant, and shall after that satssfied, be
liable to the payment of what Damages any other Contractor with him shall
recover of him by Law; and in regard the Certificates of Freedoms may be worn
out and lost, and by those means New ones be required: It is further Enacted,
That every Clerk upon such pretense granting a new Certificate, shall mention
in that the loss of the first, and that for that cause this second was issued.

CII. Run-aways.
WHereas there are diverse loitering Run-aways in this Country, who very often
absent themselves from their Masters service, and sometimes in a long time
cannot be found, the loss of their time and the charge of the seeking them,
often exceeding the value of their labor: Be it therefore Enacted, That all
Run-aways that shall absent themselves from their said Masters Service, shall
be liable to make satisfaction by service, after the times by Custom or
Indenture are expired (Viz.) double their time of service so neglected; and if
the time of their Running away was in the Crop, and the charge of recovering
them extraordinary, the Court shall adudg a longer time of Service,
proportionable to the Damage the Master shall make appear he has sustained;
and because the adjudging the time they should serve, is often referred until
the time by Indenture is expired, when the proof of what is due is very
uncertain: Be it Enacted, Runaway Servants shall serve their Masters twice the
time of their absence, after the time of their Indenture is expired.
That the Master of any Runaway that intends to take the benefit of this Act,
shall as soon as he has recovered him, carry him to the next Commissioner and
there declare and prove the time of his absence, and the Charge he has been at
in his Recovery; which Commissioner thereupon shall grant his Certificate, and
the Court on that Certificate pass Judgment for the time he shall serve for his
absence.

And in case any English Servant shall run away in Company of any Negroes, who
are incapable of making Satisfaction by Addition of time: It is Enacted, That
the English so running away in the company with them, shall at any time of
Service to their own Masters expired, English servants running away in company
with Negroes.
serve the Masters of the said Negroes for their absence, so long as they
should have done by this Act, if they had not been Slaves, every Christian in
company serving his proportion; and if the Negroes be lost or die in such time
of their being run away, the Christian Servants in company with them, shall by
Proportion among them either pay Four thousand five hundred pounds of Tobacco
and Cask, or four years Service for every Negro so lost or dead.

CIII. Cruelty of Masters prohibited.
WHereas the Barbarous usage of some Servants by cruel Masters, brings so much
Scandal and Infamy to the Country in general, that people who would willingly
adventure themselves hither, are through fear thereof diverted, and by that
means the supplies of particular men, and the well-seating of his Majesty's
Country very much obstructed: Be it therefore Enacted, That every Master shall
provide for his Servants competent Diet, Clothing and Lodging, and that he
shall not exceed the bounds of moderation, in correcting them beyond the merit
of their offenses; and that it shall be lawful for any Servant, giving notice
to their Masters, having just cause of complaint against them, for harsh and
bad usage, Servants too rigorously dealt withal, or wanting Necessaries, may
make complaint to the Commissioners.
or else for want of Diet or convenient Necessaries; to repair to the next
Commissioner to make his or their Complaint; and if the said Commissioner shall
find by just proof that the said Servants cause of Complaint is just, the said
Commissioner is hereby requied to give order for the Warning of such Master to
the next County Court, where the matter in difference shall be determined, and
the Servant have remedy for his grievance.

CIV. Against Unruly Servants.
Whereas the Audacious Unruliness of many Stubborn and Incorrigible Servants,
resisting their Masters and Overseers, has brought many Mischiefs and Losses
to diverse Inhabi^ants of this Country. Be it Enacted and Ordained, One Years
Service to be given, for striking a Master or Mistress.
That ^^e Servant that shall lay violent hands on his or her Master, Mistress,
or Overseer, and be Convicted thereof by Confession or Evidence of his Fellow
Servant, or otherwise, before any Court in this Country, the same Court is
hereby Required and Authorized to Order such Servant to serve his or her
Master, or Mistress, or their Assigns, One year after his or her time by
Indenture or Custom is expired. Be it Enacted, That no Person or persons
whatsoever, for any Offense committed, shall be adjudged to serve the Country
as Collony Servants.

CV. Against Trading with Servants.
WHereas diverse ill-disposed Persons do secretly and covertly Truck and Trade
with other Men's Servants and Apprentices, who to the great injury of their
Masters, are thereby induced and encouraged to Steal, Purloyn, and Imbezle
their Masters Goods: Be it therefore Enacted, No Person shall Trade with
Servants without License or Consent of their Masters.
That what Person or Persons soever shall Buy, Sell, Trade or Truck with any
Servant for any Commodity whatsoever, without License or Consent of the said
Servants Master, he or they so offending against the Premises, shall suffer One
Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize, give Bond with Security for his
good Behavior; and also shall Forfeit to the Master of the said Servant Four
times the Value of the things so Bought, Sold, Trucked or Traded for.

CVI. No Tobacco to be Planted after the Tenth of July.
WHereas it has been taken into serious Consideration, that the Improvement of
our only Commodity Tobacco, can no ways be effected but by lessening the
Quantity and amending the Quality. And further, That all Stints will prove
clearly inconsistent with the being of the Country, while Maryland remains a
distinct Government, unless of such a Nature as may produce both the aforesaid
Effects without Abridgement of any Man's Endeavors or confining him to any set
Number of Plants; for which cause the Assembly has Enacted, That no Tobacco be
Planted after the Tenth of July; The Penalty of Transgressing this Act.
And that whosoever shall directly or indirectly Plant, or Re-plant, or cause
to be Planted or Re-planted any Tobacco after the said Tenth of July, shall
Forfeit Ten thousand Pounds of Tobacco, to the use of the Public.

CVII. No Seconds or Slips.
ANd be it further Enacted, That what Person or Persons soever shall tend, or
suffer, or cause to be tended any second Tops or Slips, shall Forfeit Ten
thousand Pounds of Tobacco to the Public. Be it furthr Enacted, That what
Person or Persons soever shall Save, Pack, or Sell, or Send away any Ground
Leaves, which are hereby required to be totally suppressed, shall forfeit for
every Hogshead proved to have the Quantity of Five Pounds of Ground-Leaf
Tobacco in it, Ground-Leaves of Tobacco shall not be packed up for Sale.
Five thousand Pounds of Tobacco to the use of the public. And it is further
Enacted, That the Grand Jury shall take particular care of the Observation of
this Act, and shall make due Presentment to the County Courts of any such as
shall Plant or Tend any Tobacco contrary to the tenor hereof.

CVIII. Improvements of Staple Commodities.
Whereas the uncertain Value of Tobacco, the Unstapleness of the Commodity,
and the probability of its Planting in other places, threaten this Country
with the danger of an unavoidable ruin, which must in time fall upon it by the
increase of the makers of it among our selves (who have already so glutted all
Markets, that great quantities are yearly left in the Country, and that which
is sent out, sold at so mean and inconsiderable a Rate, as neither Merchant nor
Planter can well subsist by) unless some other Course be speedily taken for
Improvement of such other Commodities as the Country will produce, and making
as many of them as we can into Manufactures, and giving Encouragement to all
persons of what Ability soever to attempt it, which the former Acts for
Encouragement to make Staple Commodities have been defective in, by only
proposing Rewards to great quantities of every Commodity made, which whoever
goes about, must if he fail, be ruined, or if he make the quantity proposed,
will have no need of the gratuity, which is better to be suited proportionably
to the meanest quantity. Be it therefore Enacted, That the Assembly this
present year send into England for a considerable quantity of Flax Seed to be
distributed into the several Counties, Flax-Seed to be distributed into each
County.
and deliver it to certain persons who may sell it out to several Inhabitants,
and the produce thereof be paid the Year following with the levy, and the
Country Stock by that means made good, according to the Fifth Act of Assembly
1661, to make their proportions of Flax. And whoever will Spin the Flax and
Cause the Yarn to to be Weaved into Cloth of a Yard wide, shall for every Yard
of Cloth so Woven of Yarn made of Flax grown in the Country, Allowance for
every Yard of Linen and Woollen Cloth made of the product of the Country by
the public.
have Three Pounds of Tobacco. And for every Yard of Woollen Cloth made of Yarn
here Spun in the Country, Five Pounds of Tobacco, which upon produce of
Certificate from some Justice of Peace in the County, that he has seen the
same in Loome, and that to his knowledge it was really made in the Country as
aforesaid, shall upon producing the same to the Governor and Council, be paid
so much in the public levy in the same County where they dwell.

CIX. An Act for Mulberry-Trees.
Whereas by experience Silk will be the most Profitable Commodity for the
Country, if well managed: And whereas the greatest conducement thereunto
required, is Provision of Mulberry-Trees: Ten Mulberry Trees shall be Planted
upon every hundred Acres of Land holden in Fee.
Be it Enacted and Confirmed by this present Grand Assembly, That every
Proprietor of Land within the Collony of Virginia, shall for every hundred
Acres of Land holden in Fee, Plant upon the said Land, Ten Mulberry-Trees at
twelve foot distance each from other, and secure them by Weeding and a
sufficient Fence from Cattle and Horses, etc. between this and the last of
December 1663; and for every Tree that shall be wanting and untended in manner
aforesaid, of the said Proportion, at the said last of December 1663, The
Penalty of delinquency.
he the said Proprietor that shall be so delinquent, shall pay Twenty pounds of
Tobacco to the public: Provided that this Act do not extend to Orphans, until
the Expiration of Five years after their full age; and then if deliquent, to be
liable as aforesaid, and no man planting more then his number, shall excuse any
that has planted less: Provided also that this Act extend not to such
Proprietors as are not in actual possession. And because his Majesty has taken
particular notice of the great folly and negligence of the Country, in omitting
the propagation of so Noble and Staple a Commodity: It is Enacted, That the
Grand Jury do strictly inquire into the Breach of this Act, and make
Presentment thereof, that the Offenders may accordingly be punished: And be it
further Enacted, That for the encouragment of all Persons that shall endeavor
to make Silk, Fifty pound of Tobacco allowed by the Public for every pound of
Wound Silk.
there shall be allowed in the Public Levy to any one for every pound of Wound
Silk he shall make, Fifty pound of Tobacco, to be raised in the Public Levy,
and paid in the County or Counties where they dwell that make it.

CX. Encouragment to build Vessels.
FOr Encouragement of building Vessels in this Country and the promoting of
Trade: Be it Enacted, That whoever shall build a Vessel of any burden decked
and fitted to go to Sea, Fifty pound of Tobacco per Tun allowed by the Public
for all Vessels built in this Collony.
shall for every Tun burden the said Vessel shall contain, receive upon proof
of her being so built, Fifty pound of Tobacco out of the Public Levy.

Whereas Colonel Edmund Scarbrough has to his particular great Charge, but to
the Infinite good of the Country, erected a Salt Work, for which he has
received deserved Thanks the last Assembly, this Assembly for his greater
Encouragment, has thought fit to grant him the use of Money raised this year
out of the Two Shillings per hundred in Northampton County; Salt-Work.
with condition that he make repayment of the same to those the Assembly shall
allot it the next year, in Salt at Two Shillings and Sixpence per Bushel, and
Soap at (...) And be it further Enacted, That after the first of September
1663, no Master of Ship, Barque or Vessel, or any other person, Merchant or
Trader, shall bring in any Salt into the Country of Northampton, under the
Penalty of confiscating his Ship, Barque or Vessel, and goods, to the end that
he and others may be encouraged in their industrious Endeavors to promote the
Good of the Country.

CXI. Tan-Houses to be Erected.
BE it also Enacted, That according to the first Act of Assembly 1660, there be
Erected in each County, at the Charge of the County, one or more Tan-Houses;
and that they Provide Tanners, Curriers and Shoomakers, to Tan, Curry, and make
the Hides of the Country into Leather and Shoes; and that the persons
entrusted with the over sight of the Workmen, and the managing the Trade, do
allow to the Inhabitants of the County for ever dry Hide they bring, Prices to
be allowed for Hides.
at the rate of Two pounds of Tobacco per pound, and sell their Shoes for
Thirty pounds of Tobacco for plain Shoes, and Thirty five pounds of Tobacco
for Wooden-heels, and French-falls of the Six largest Sizes, and Twenty pounds
of Tobacco a pair for the smallest Shoes. Rates for Shoes.


CXII. Two Acres of Corn for each Tythable.
BE it hereby Enacted, That all persons within this Collony, shall Plant or
Tend for every Tythable person tending a Crop in their Family, Two Acres of
Corn or Pulse, under the Penalty of Five hundred pounds of Tobacco for every
Acre neglected as aforsaid, to be paid by the Delinquent, and to be levied by
the Sheriff for the Counties use; and the Grand Jury in their several Limits to
look strictly after the breach of this Act: And for Encouragement for Men to
sow English Wheat, which may be a Staple Commodity to vent out of the Country:
Or one Acre of English Wheat.
It is further Enacted, That the sowing of one Acre of Wheat, shall excuse the
planting of the two Acres of Indian Corn, or other Corn or Pulse, as this Act
enjoins.

CXIII. Stray-Horses, etc.
FOr remedy of the great abuse and wrong done in taking up of Stray-Horses,
Cattle, and Boats lost, not only in concealing them, but in using and employing
them, to the hurt and damage of the Owners: Be it Enacted by this present Grand
Assembly, That every person or persons that shall take up and keep any
Stray-Horses, Cattle, or Boat, shall cause the said Horses and Cattle, with the
Mark, Stature and Color, and the said Boat, Stray Horses, Cattle, etc. shall
within a Month after they are taken up, be Cried publicly in all the Churches
and Chapels of the County.

What to be done in case the Owner be not found.


with her Proportion, and what was found in her, to be cried publicly in all
the Churches and Chapels in the County, within one Month after the taking them
up; and in the mean time securely to lay up the said Boat: And if no Owner
appear upon this Public Notice given, then to publish the same, and set it up
in Writing at the next County Court; where if no Owner appear, then it shall be
lawful for him to make use of the said Boat until the Owner do appear; What to
be done in case the Owner be not found.
who shall allow him for his pains One hundred pounds of Tobacco.

CXIV. Free Trade.
BE it Enacted, That Free-Trade be allowed to all the Inhabitants of this
Country to buy and sell at their best advantage; Trade permitted with the
Indians.
and that all Acts concerning Engrossing be from henceforth repealed and made
void: Provided always, But not for Beaver, Otter, or any other Furs without
Commission.
that no person or persons shall have any Commerce or Trade with any Indians
for Beaver, Otter, or any other Furs, except those commissionated by the
Governor.

CXV. Exportation of Hides.
WHereas the Exportation of Hides, Wool, and Iron, is generally conceived to
be much prejudicial to the Commonwealth and good of this Collony: Be it
therefore Enacted by the Authority of this present Grand Assembly, Hides,
Wool, and Iron, shall not be exported.
That what person or persons soever shall export out of this Country either
Wool, Hides or Iron, shall for every of their Offenses in so doing, pay as
follows, viz. for every Hide so exported the Sum of One thousand pounds of
Tobacco; and for every pound of Iron Ten pounds of Tobacco, and for every pound
of Wool, Fifty pounds of Tobacco; the one half of which said Payments and
Forfeitures shall be paid to the Informer, and the other half to the Public.

CXVI. Exportation of Money.
Pieces of Eight shall pass for Five Shillings Current.
BE it hereby Enacted by this Grand Assembly, That no false Money shall pass for
Current in this Country, but pieces of Eight that are good and of Silver,
shall pass for Five Shillings Current Money, upon Penalty of Twenty Shillings
to be paid by the Refusers of them: No person shall export above the Sum of
Forty Shillings.
And that none shall export Money out of this Country above the Sum of Forty
Shillings; If any shall exceed the same Sum to forfeit double thereof.

CXVII. Size of Virginia-Hogsheads.
IT is Enacted upon the complaint of diverse Masters and Merchants of Ships
against the incertainty and extraordinary Size of Cask which has been very
much prejudicial to them, That a certain Size of all Tobacco Cask of
Virginia-Hogsheads shall be as follows, Virginia Hogsheads shall be 43 Inches
in length, and the heads 26 Inches over.
viz. Forty Three Inches in length, and the head Twenty six Inches wide, with
the Bouge proportionable; and whoever shall make Cask of a greater size, shall
pay upon proof made to any Court, if he be a Freeman, otherwise his Master or
Mistress that imploys him, Three thousand Pounds of Tobacco, the one half to
the Informer the other half to the County where the Cask is made. And it any
Cask shall be made of Timber not seasoned, then such Cask to be burnt.

CXVIII. Against private taking away Boats.
FOrasmuch as diverse persons suffer great Damages by private and concealed
taking away Boats of Canoos without License from the Owners thereof: It is
Enacted and Confirmed by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners or
each County Court shall be hereby empowered (if required) to order and give
satisfaction from the party so trespassing to those injured by want of his or
their Boat, Boats, or Canoos, Five hundred Pounds of Tobacco Penalty to the
Owner, and what Damage the Boat sustains.

CXIX. Against Shooting.
WHereas it is much to be doubted the common Enemy the Indians, if opportunity
serve, will suddenly Invade this Country, and bring it to a total Subjection of
the same; And whereas the only means for discovery of their Plots is by
Alarums, of which no certainty can be had, in respect of the frequent Shooting
of Guns in Drinkings, whereby they proclaim and justify that beastly Vice: Be
it therefore Enacted, Shooting off Guns at Drinkings or Marriages forbidden.
That what Person or Persons soever, shall after publication hereof Shoot any
Guns at Drinkings or Marriages (Burials excepted) such person or persons so
offending shall forfeit Two hundred Pounds of Tobacco to the public, to be
levied by distress in Case of refusal.

CXX. Supply of Ammunition.
BE it Enacted, That a provident Supply be made of Guns, Powder, and Shot to
our own people, and this strictly to be looked to by the Officers of the
Militia; Every person able to bear Arms, shall keep in his House a Gun, 2 l. of
Powder, and 8 l. of Shot.
viz. That every man able to bear Arms, have in his House a fixed Gun, two
pounds of Powder, and eight pounds of Shot at least; which are to be provided
by every man for his Family before the last of March next: And whosoever shall
fail in making such provision, to be fined Fifty pounds of Tobacco, to be laid
out by the County Courts for a Common Stock of Ammunition for the County; the
Enquiry referred to the Grand Jury.

CXXI. Against Exacting Millers.
WHereas by a Second Act of a Grand Assembly Anno 1645; It was Ordered and
Established, for the Reforming the great abuse of Millers in Exacting Excessive
and Illegal Toll, That no Person or Persons using or occupying any Mill, should
take or receive for the Grinding of any Grain, or exchanging it for Meal, above
the sixth part thereof for Toll; which Act has not taken such Effect as was
intended thereby, in respect as is conceived, neither Penalty was imposed
therein upon the Offender, Millers shall receive in Corn, and deliver it out by
Statute Weights and Scales.
nor the Execution thereof was given in direction to any particular Officer. It
is therefore thought fit to enlarge the said Act, and by Virtue thereof to
require all Millers and Owners of Mills, to provide by the Five and twentieth
day of June next come Twelvemonth, Stilhards or Statute Weights and Scales, by
which they are to receive in and deliver out all Grain: And that they do
sufficiently grind and exchange the said Grain so brought, upon the penalty (in
case they do exact beyond the said proportion for grinding or exchanging, or in
case of default of such Weights or Scales, Penalty upon Millers Exactions.
or for not sufficiently grinding) of the sum of One thousand pounds of
Tobacco, and that the Grand Jury enquire thereof.

CXXII. Against Exportation of English Goods.
WHereas the necessities of this Country are relieved chiefly by the
Importation of English Goods, and that relief much obstructed by many that
bring in unnecessary Commodities, and make sale thereof for Tobacco; which they
again truck for Substantial Commodities, as Clothing and the like: and by that
means leave the Country destitute of its own Supplies: It is hereby Enacted,
That what person or persons soever, shall after the First of June next export
out of the Collony any English Goods, not by him formerly imported, shall upon
discovery forfeit such Goods, and be fined the value, the one half to the
Informer, and the other to the Public.

CXXIII. No Mares or Sheep to be transported.
IT is also Enacted, That no Mares or Sheep be transported out of the Country,
upon treble the value to be forfeited by the Offender, and by him paid, one
half to the Informer and the other half to the Public.

CXXIV. Against Selling of Rum but in places appointed.
WHereas the excessive abuse of Rum has by experience been found to bring
Diseases and Death to diverse people, and the purchasing thereof made by the
exporting and unfurnishing the Country of its own Supplies and Staple
Commodities: It is Enacted, That what Vessel soever shall after the First of
March 1663, Six pence payable for every Gallon of Rum, and One penny for every
pound of Pavele Sugar brought on Shore at any other Port than is appointed by
the Assembly.
except such as belong wholly to Inhabitants of this Country, bring in them
any Rum or Pavele Sugar; the said Vessels so bringing it in, shall not unload
or sell the same at any place or places, but such as are by Act of Assembly
appointed Ports for the vent of the said Commodities; and shall bring the same
on Shore, and enter the quantity, and pay for every Gallon of Rum Six pence
Custom, and for every pound of Pavele Sugar One penny, before they shall be
permitted to sell or dispose of any part thereof.

CXXV. Against Stealing of Hoggs.
WHereas the Stealing and Killing of Hoggs is a Crime usually committed; and
seldom or never detected or prosecuted in this Collony: Hogg-Stealers shall pay
2000 l. of Tobacco, half to the Owner, and half to the Informer.

Or else shall serve two years, one to the Owner, and one to the Informer.


Be it therefore Enacted, That for the better prevention thereof, that whosover
shall steal or unlawfully kill any Hogg which is not his own; and the said Fact
being proved by sufficient Evidence, he or they so offending, shall pay to the
Owner of the said Hogg One thousand pounds of Tobacco, and One thousand pounds
of Tobacco to the Informer. And in case of inability to pay and satisfy the
said Sums, the person so offending shall serve Two years; viz. One year to the
right Owner of the said Hogg, and the other to the Informer. And if any person
be found to bring home any Hog or Hogs so killed, without their Ears, shall be
adjudged a Hog-stealer, and to be proceeded against accordingly. And that such
persons as shall receive such Hogs into their Houses, and not immediately
discover the same to the next Commissioner, then such Receiver shall be
proceeded against as if he had been an Actor in the Trespass. And in case the
Owner of the Hog inform, he to have both the Fines.

CXXVI. Masters of Ships to provide Four Months Provision.
BE it Enacted, Masters of Ships shall give sufficient Allowance of Diet to
Passengers.

And take care that poor Servants have good Lodging.


That all Masters of Ships shall be obliged hereby to provide Four Months
allowance of Victuals for Passengers at their setting forth from the Downs or
other Ports of England, and to give the Passengers sufficient allowance of Diet
all the Voyage: And Commanders of Ships respectively, to take care that poor
Servants do not want Bedding in the Voyage. In which particulars aforesaid, if
any shall offend, they shall be liable to grievous Censure here according to
the merit of the Offense.

CXXVII. Concerning Passes.
BE it also Enacted and Confirmed, No Macter of a Ship shall Transport any
person out of this Collony; except the said person produce a Pass.
That no Master of any Ship, Vessel, Boat, or Barque, shall transport any
person or persons out of this Collony, except the said person or persons
produce a Pass under the hand of the Secretary, or such whom he shall depute or
appoint, upon the penalty to pay all such Debts as any such person shall stand
indebted to any person within this Collony at his or their departure, and pay a
Thousand pounds of Tobacco to the Secretary for his Contempt. And it is further
Enacted, That before any such Pass shall be signed to any person, he or they
shall bring a Certificate from the Monthly Court where he or they reside, The
Method to be observed in granting such Passes.
that he has set up his Name upon a Court day, ten days at least before his
departure, at the County Court where he resides: Or otherwise shall put in
sufficient Security for the payment of all Debts that are due or owing from
them to any person within this Country, or his Name to be published and set up
at the Church door two Sundays in each Parish in the County where it is
presumed all persons will be; and the Readers Testimonial to the Clerk shall be
sufficient Warrant for him to grant a Certificate: And the Secretary and
Security after a year and a day to be discharged.

CXXVIII. Impositions of 2 s. each Hogshead.
THis present Grand Assembly of Virginia, taking into serious Consideration the
burdensome and unequal way of laying Taxes by the Pole, and how they may with
most honor and ease support the Government, in well paying his Majesty's
Officers, and as means perhaps of introducing Money, and an Encouragement to
Men to produce other useful and beneficial Commodities, have thought fit to
impose two Shillings per Hoshead upon every Hogshead of Tobacco that shall be
Shipped on Board of any Ship or other Vessel within Virginia to be exported;
and the Collectors of the said Imposition to dispose of no part thereof, but by
order of the Grand Assembly only: Be it therefore Ordained and Enacted by this
present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, And it is hereby Enacted,
That the Master and Masters of all and every Ship and Vessel coming to Trade in
Virginia, shall upon demand made by the Collector or Collectors, who shall by
order of Assembly be empowered to receive the said Imposition from every Ship
or Vessel, enter into security to pay such Collector or Collectors two
Shillings for every Hogshead of Tobacco, that shall upon any account whatsoever
be Shipped on Board his Ship or Vessel to be exported: The said Payment either
to be made in Money, Bills of Exchange, or Goods at Thirty per Cent. Advance
upon the Price of such Goods at the first Penny, and all Freighters to be
accomptable to the said Masters for the Tobacco by them Shipped.

Be it also Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Masters of Ships
shall give an Account of their Freight to the Collector upon Oath.
for the discovery of the number of Hogsheads each Ship or Vessel contains,
that the Master of such Ship or Vessel shall deliver his Boats-swains Book to
the perusal of the Collector, and make Oath of the Truth of the same so far as
he knows; and that the Mates, Boats-swain, or any other Sea man be sworn, if
the Collectors see cause to discover the Truth of the said Freight.

And if any Master of Ship or Vessel, shall wittingly or willingly conceal any
part of his Freight from the Collector, Masters of Ships concealing any part of
their Freight, fined 100 l. Sterling.
and shall thereof be lawfully convicted; then the said Master shall forfeit
for every such Offense the Sum of One hundred pounds Sterling, one Moiety
thereof to go to the Informer, and the other to the Public, and to be
recovered by Action of Debt, Bill or Plaint in General Court or County Court,
by virtue of this Act, against which no Assoin, Wager of Law or Protection to
be allowed to any Person so offending: Be it further Enacted and Ordained, That
if any Masters shall pass Bills of Exchange for the said Imposition, that then
the Collectors are hereby required to take sufficient Caution of the said
Master for the true and good Payment of the same: It is hereby also Ordained
and Enacted, That the Collectors of the several Rivers and Places in Virginia,
for the Receiving of the said Two Shillings per Hogshead, be appointed and
confirmed by this present Grand Assembly, and give sufficient Security and
Caution for the due Execution of the trust thereby reposed in them; and to be
accomptable to the next Assembly according to the tenor of this Act; The
Collectors Sallary.
and the said Collectors to be allowed Ten per Cent. sallery for collecting the
said Imposition: Provided always, and it is hereby Ordained and Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That this present Act of Assembly be and remain in force.

CXXIX. Every Inhabitant in Northumberland and Westmorland Counties to give an
Account how many Hogsheads of Tobacco they made, and to whom sold.
WHereas the Imposition of Two Shillings per Hogshead cannot conveniently be
levied upon Masters of Ships that come into Potomack River, by reason of their
Anchoring in the Dominions of the Lord Baltemore, whence they send their Sloops
and Boats to fetch the Tobacco made in this Country without paying the said
Imposition. Be it therefore Enacted, That every Planter in the Counties of
Northumberland and Westmorland, shall certify into the Collectors Office, or
unto his Deputy, the number of Hogsheads of Tobacco made by him and his Family,
and to whom they are sold, and shall not suffer any of the said Hogsheads of
Tobacco to be carried out of his House until he receive Certificate from the
said Collector, that the Imposition of the said Tobacco is paid: And if any
Planter shall contrary to this Act, suffer any of his Tobacco to be carried on
board any Ship, Boat, or Sloop,; without such Certificate, then the said
Planter to be Fined 20 s. for every Hogshead so carried away without
Certificate as aforesaid.

Whereas the like inconveniences are incident to Northampton County and lower
Norfolk, in recovering the Impositions of Two, and Ten Shillings per Hogshead;
as to the River of Potomack, by reason of the transportation of much of the
Tobacco made in those places in Sloops to Maryland: Be it Enacted, That the
Provitional Act made the last Assembly for Payment of those Duties in Potomack
River, extend and be in force in the said Counties of Lower Norfolk and
Northampton, and that the Collectors appoint certain Persons to take account of
the Planters according to the tenor of this Act.

CXXX. Payment of Fort-Duties in Accomack, etc.
Whereas there is an Act of the last Assembly providing for the securing of
the payment of the 2 s. per Hdd. due to the Country, but no Provision made
therein for the securing the payment of Fort Duties of Potomack, Accomack, and
Lyn Haven, Three pence per Hogshead payable for Fort Duties in Accomack, etc.
from whence they fetch their Tobacco in Sloops: Be it Enacted, That the said
Act shall extend as well to cause the Planters loading it, to reserve and make
payment of Three Pence per Hogshead for Fort Duties of the said Tobacco, as for
the payment of the 2 s. per Hogshead.

CXXXI. Ten Shillings per Hogshead,
WHereas the prudence of all Nations has provided for the defraying the
public necessary Charges of the Country, rather by laying an Imposition upon
the Adventurers for the Staple Commodities of the Country, by the exportation
of which the greatest advantage accrues, then by taxing the persons of the
Inhabitants; this present Grand Assembly endeavoring as much as in them lies,
to ease the burden of the People; and taking into Consideration the great
benefit that accrues to other Countries, by the Customs arising from our
Commodity Tobacco; and that Virginia, whose particular Staple it is, has from
it, nor from the Adventurers hither, no public advantage; We have thought it
necessary and convenient, and accordingly have Enacted and Confirmed, That all
Merchants, Masters of Ships and Mariners, trading to Virginia, and not bound by
Charter-party to return and discharge in any of the English Dominions in
Europe, shall pay for every Hogshead of Tobacco, they shall load aboard any
Ship, Barque, or other Vessel, arriving here after the First of August next,
and not bound as aforesaid, Ten Shillings Sterling either in Money or good
Bills of Exchange, Inhabitants of this Country trading on Bottoms belonging to
Virginia-Owners, freed from payment of the 10 s. per Hogshead.
with good Caution or in good valuable Commodities, at 25 per Cent. Advance:
Provided always. That all Adventurers Inhabitants of this Country, trading in
Bottoms belonging to Virginia-Owners, shall be free from the said Imposition;
it tending to the advancement of Trade here, and the encouragement of the
Inhabitants to purchase Vessels, and of Mariners to make this their place of
Residence.

CXXXII. Castle-Duties to be Paid.
WHereas the Castle-Duties granted by his Majesty to Colonel Francis Morrison,
Captain of the Fort at Point-Comfort, are rendered of no value, by the Charge of
Boat and hands going to Collect them; and the inconsiderableness of the
Commodities they are paid in, being commonly the refuse of their cargo: Be it
therefore Enacted, Masters of Ships shall give an Account of the Bdrthen of
their Vessels; and a List of their Passengers, to the Collector of
Castle-Duties.
That all Masters of Ships and other Vessels, being thereunto required by the
Officer appointed by the said Colonel Morrison, shall give in a true Burden
of the Ships or Vessels, and the List of their Passengers, at such convenient
places, and to such persons, as the said Colonel Morrison shall in each River
appoint, upon Oath to be administered by his said Collector or Officer, if a
Commissioner, or else by any one or two Commissioners; and if any Master shall
make false Entry either of his Burden or List of Passengers, then he shall
upon proof thereof made, pay Treble Duties for the number of Passengers or
quantity of Tuns concealed; the same to be recovered out of the Estate of the
Master so offending; and the like Penalty upon all such Masters, as shall
without coming into Harbor, fetch away their loading in Sloops or Boats: Half
a pound of Powder, 3 l. of Leaden Shot, and 6 d. per Poll, payable for Castle
Duties.
And what Master soever shall not pay his Duties in kind, being half a pound of
Powder, and three pound of Leaden-Shot per Tun, and Six pence per Poll for
every person imported, not being a Mariner, that then he shall pay in lieu
thereof One Shilling per Tun, and Six pence per Poll, either in Money or Goods,
as they cost at the first Penny; and that the Collectors thereof transmit the
said Entries of Ships and Passengers, under the hand of the said Masters, to
the said Colonel Morrison, to be by him recorded in his Fort-Book, as formerly
has been accustomed.

CXXXIII. Ships to come up to James City.
Whereas the Kings Majesty's frequent Instructions, has Commanded that all
Masters of Ships arriving in this Country, should before they break Bulk bring
up their Ships to James City, which by reason of the seating of the Inhabitants
in diverse Rivers, cannot without much prejudice to the said Masters extend to
all parts of the Country; yet that his Majesty's Commands may as much as in us
lies be effectually obeyed; We the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this
Grand Assembly, have thought fit to Enact, and be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all Ships whatsoever arriving in James River, Ships arriving in
James River, shall be brought up to James City.
do accordingly with the first Fair Wind and Weather after their arrival, bring
up their Ships to James City, and there make Entry of their Ships, take out
License to Trade, and perform such other things as they shall be there
certified the Laws of the Country do enjoin them.

CXXXIV. Privilege of Virginia-Owners.
Whereas some doubts have arisen about the privilege of Virginia-Owners and
their exemption from the payment of the Duties of Two, and Ten Shillings per
Hogshead: Be it Enacted and Declared, That the said Privilege is granted only
to the Owners and Adventurers in such Vessels as solely and wholly belong to
the Inhabitants of this Country, Such Vessels only as solely and wholly belong
to the Inhabitants of this Collony freed from payment of the 2 s. and 10 s. per
Hogshead.
and not to such persons as are only Partners of Vessels, whose other Partners
dwell in other Countries, and the Governor be Judge of such Proprieties and
certify the same to the Collectors.

CXXXV. A Public Notary appointed.
Whereas for want of a Public Notary, the Certificates and other Instruments
to be sent out of this Country, have not that Credit given them in Foreign
parts as duly they ought: Be it therefore Enacted, That Henry Randolph Clerk of
the Assembly, be authorized and sworn a Public Notary for this Country, to
whose attestation at home and abroad We desire all Credence may be given.

CXXXVI. Acts concerning the Indians.
WHereas the mutual Discontents, Complaints, Jealousies and Fears, of English
and Indians, proceed chiefly from the violent Intrusions of diverse English made
into their Lands, forcing the Indians, by way of Revenge, to kill the Cattle
and Hogs of the English; and by that means Injuries being done on both sides,
Reports and Rumors are spread of the hostile Inventions of each to others,
tending infinitely to the disturbance of the Peace of his Majesty's Country;
and whereas the Laws prohibiting the purchase of any Indians Lands, (unless
acknowledged at General Courts or Assemblies, by reason it is as easy to
fright them to a public as well as a private acknowledgment) are made
fruitless and ineffectual, corrupt Interpreters often adding to this Mischief,
by rendering them willing to surrender, when indeed they intended to have
received a confirmation of their own Rights, and a redress of their Wrongs;
which Mischiefs had they continued, must needs have involved the Country into
an inevitable and destructive War: For Remedy of which Inconveniences, and that
for the future a sure equitable Peace may be established, the Governor,
Council, and Burgesses, out of their tender care of Justice, and the Peace of
this his Majesty's Country; have Enacted, Ordained and Confirmed, and do by
these presents Enact, Ordain, and Confirm, That for the future, No Indian King
or other, shall upon any pretense alien or sell, nor no English for any Cause
or Consideration whatsoever, purchase or buy, No Purchase shall be made by the
English, of any Lands now justly claimed or actually possessed by the Indians.
any Tract or parcel of Land now justly claimed, or actually possessed by any
Indian or Indians whatsoever; all such Bargains and Sales hereafter made or
pretended to be made, being hereby declared to be invalid, void, and null, any
Acknowledgment, Surrender Law, or Custom, formerly used to the contrary
notwithstanding: And further, That the Indians properties in their goods, be
hereby assured and confirmed to them, and their persons so secured, that
whoever shall defraud or take from them their Goods, No Injuries shall be done
to the Indians.
or do hurt or injury to their persons, shall make such Satisfaction, and
suffer such Punishments as the Laws of England, or this Country do inflict, if
the same had been done to an Englishman.

And be it further Enacted, That what Englishman has already, contrary to the
Laws formerly in force, for surrendering and acknowledging Indians-Lands, made
encroachments or seated upon them, shall if th^^ make not good proof of their
Title, upon Complaint ma^e, be by Order directed to the Sheriff to execute,
rem^ved from their Seats of Land thus wrongfully incroached and all Houses by
them, built upon the said Lands be demolished and burned.

And be it further Enacted, That all English Men having by Surrenders made at
Quarrter-Courts or Assemblies, Such of the English as are seated near the
Indians, shall assist them in making a Fence.
procured a colorable right to any Land, by the said English now seated within
Three Miles of any Indians, for prevention of the injuries done to the Indians
by the said English Men's Hogs and Cattle, shall send such number of hands as
they shall be appointed by Commissioners to be authorized by the Governor, to
help the Indians to fence in a Corn Field, proportionable to the number of
Persons the said Indian Town does consist of; and that after such Fence once
made sufficiently, according to the Act of the Assembly, if the Indians keep it
not in repair, what damages soever they shall afterward sustain, shall be at
the hazard and sole loss of them the said Indians.

And be it further Enacted, That for the better relief of the poor Indians,
whom the seating of the English has forced from their wonted conveniences of
Oystering, Fishing, and Gathering Tuchahoe Cortenions, and other wild Fruits,
by which they were wonted for a great part of the year to subsist: Be it
therefore Enacted, Granted, and Confirmed, That the said Indians, Poor Indians
may be licenced to Fish for Oysters, and gather Wild Fruits.

Provided they come not Armed.


upon address made to Two of the Justices of that County, they desiring to
Oyster, or Gather Wild Fruits in as aforesaid; they the said Justices shall
grant a License to the said Indians to Oyster or gather Wild Fruits, as
aforesaid: Provided the said Justices limit the time the Indians are to stay;
and the Indians bring not with them any Guns or Ammunitions, or other offensive
Weapons, but only such Tools or Implements as serve for the end of their
coming: And if any English Man shall presume to take from the Indians so coming
in, any of their Goods, or shall Kill, Wound, or Maim any Indian, he shall
suffer as if he had done the same to an English Man, and be Fined for his
contempt.

No person whatever shall buy or receive any Commodity of the Indians, without
license.
And because many underhand and unlicensed Traders do truck and trade with the
Indians (contrary to the Act of Assembly, and to the great prejudice of all
such as legally procure Commissions from the Governor) under pretense that the
things truck^ for be given them by the Indians: Be it therefore Enacted That
what persons soever, shall upon any pretense whatsoever, buy, take, or receive,
any thing or commodity, from an Indian, shall upon proof thereof at any Court,
be ordered to pay treble the value of the thing received, to the person injured
thereby.

Differences arising in Trade with the Indians, shall be referred to the
Governor.
And because sometimes differences may arise between the Indians and those they
trade with, which if we should proceed by way of Arrest, might tend much to the
disturbance of the peace of the Country: Be it therefore Enacted, That any
Commissionated Trader having a Difference with any Indian King or other, shall
repair to the Governor for him or such other as he shall appoint, to determine
the matter in controversy between them.

And because the imprisonment of an Indian may bring a War upon the Country,
No person shall Imprison any Indian King without Warrant from the Governor and
two of the Council.
and consequently the making of Peace and War being wrested out of those hands
it is by his Majesty's Commission entrusted, into the power of every Individual
in the Country: Be it therefore Enacted, That no person of what quality
soever, presume to imprison any Indian King, without a special Warrant from the
Governor and two of the Council, as they will answer the contrary at their
uttermost peril.

And because this Act cannot be put in Execution without Commissioners to view
the present Bounds of the English and Indians: Be it therefore Enacted, That
the Honorable Governor be desired and authorized to appoint uninteressed
persons Commissioners, Bounds betwixt the English and the Indians, shall be
fix.

And Commissioners thereto appointed, shall view the same annually.


to go with parties of Horse to the several Indian Towns, and there to proclaim
these and the following Articles of Peace between us and the Indians, to settle
the Bounds between us, and to appoint others of the most integrity, to fix the
time and assess the Work, to help the Indians fence, and all other things by
this Act enjoined. And for prevention of future Intrenchments beyond the Bounds
once fixed, Be it further Enacted, That the Governor be desired and authorized
to commissionate certain Persons annually to visit the same, and to take care
that no intrenchment be henceforth made upon the Indians.

And because an interval between the Indians, cannot in the present nearness of
seating, be so laid out as may wholly secure the English from the Indians
coming in and pilfering things from them, if a free intercourse be admitted: Be
it therefore Enacted, for the prevention thereof, and to the end that the
Nations may be distinguished, and so if they are taken in the manner of doing
any injuries, the sufferers know to what Kings to address themselves for
remedy, That Badges ( viz. Silver Plates and Copper Plates, with the Name of
the Town graven upon them,) be given to all adjacent Kings within our
protection; Indians shall not come within the bounds of the English, without
Badges.
and that all the said Kings give it in charge to their People, that none of
them presume upon what occasion soever, to come within the English Bounds
without those Badges upon them, or one with a Badge in their company; and if
any damage or injury be done to any English Man by them or any of them, that
then the King or Great Man of the Place the Badges denote, shall be answerable
for it; and if any shall, notwithstanding this Injunction, be found in our
Bounds without any such Badge, or not accompanied with one that shall have
them, that then it shall be lawful for any English Man to carry him or them
before any Justice of the Peace, who shall keep him or them in safe custody,
until their King or Great Man ransom them, by paying One hundred Arms length of
Roranoake for each Indian so taken, to be disposed of by the Public: Provided
always, That if any English Man shall be found or proved to have taken away any
of their Badges, thereby to make the Indians guilty of breaking this Law, That
then the person so offending shall be set in the Pillory two hours on the
Court-day, in the County where they have committed the Offense, with their
Fault in great Letters written upon them, and to be fined Five thousand Pounds
of Tobacco to the use of the Public; and in case of disability, lie Six Months
in Prison, without Bail or Main-prize: And be it further Enacted, That all
Indian Kings Tributary to the English, Indian Kings who are tributary to the
English, shall acquaint them of any Invasion they know of, intended by any
strange Indians upon this Collony.
when they have the least notice of any March by any strange Indians, near our
Quarters, shall repair themselves, or at least send some one of their Great
Men, to the next of the Militia, which shall be nominated and appointed by the
Governor for that purpose, and acquaint him with as much as they know
concerning the Nation, the Numbers, and which Way they conceive they will bend
their Course; and if they then shall desire any aid from us to secure them,
that a Party be sent presently out by the Colonel of the Militia to that
purpose; which by this our assistance and reciprocal care, will make them and
us have an equal interest in each others preservation; while on the other side
we being ignorant of the Marches of Foreigners, impute all damages we then
receive which is then commonly most to our Neighbors, how innocent soever.

And it is further Enacted, That if any Indian, by the inveigling of any
English, or of his own will, shall without leave of the King or great Man of
the Place, come within the bounds limited them, and there procure harbor or
entertainment, Penalty of harboring Runaway Indians.
it shall be lawful for any English Man to take the said Indian and to convey
him to his Town to be punished, and to recover of the English Man that
harbored or entertained him, so much per day as by the Law for entertaining
other run-aways is recoverable.

And be it further Enacted, That what English Man, Trader, or other, shall
bring in any Indians as Servants, and shall assign them over to any other,
shall not sell them for Slaves, nor for any other time than English of the like
ages should serve by Act of Assembly.

And because heretofore many entertained Indians by Licenses of particular
Persons, No person shall entertain any of the Neighboring Indians for Servants
without License from the Governor.
who did much damage to their Neighbors: Be it henceforth Enacted, That no
Person of what Quality soever, shall entertain any of our Neighboring Indians
as servants or otherwise, unless by a License obtained from the Governor
himself upon their Obligation that desire it, to be answerable for all the
injuries and damages that the Indians by them entertained, shall do to any
English.

CXXXVII. Clerks Fees to be paid.
WHereas by a former Act of Assembly, Clerks of Courts were made incapable of
recovering their Fees after they had been Two Years due: Be it Enacted, That
the said Act be repealed, and that all their Accounts shall be Three years
pleadable, Clerks Fees shall be pleadable Three years.
and that hereafter all Sheriffs or Collectors shall either receive, distrain
for, or secure by Bill, all Secretary or Clerk of Courts Accounts delivered
them, and be allowed Ten per Cent. for what is received, and Five per Cent. for
what Bills are taken; and the Sheriff or other Collector not receiving, or
securing as aforesaid, to be responsible for the Account omitted: Provided,
That they the said Sheriff or Collector, shall not be liable for the Account of
any Person removing out of the County before the laying the Levy, unless they
receive the Levies or Sheriffs Fees, and then to be acccountable for the Clerks
Fees also: Provided also, That the Clerks deliver or send their Accounts
attested under their Hands, to the said Sheriff or Collectors, within four days
after laying the Levy in their several Counties.

The Secretaries Fees.
BE it Enacted and Confirmed by this present Grand Assembly, That the
Secretaries Fees shall be as follows: viz. l. Tob. Imprimis, For a Patent and
recording it, 80 For a Commission of Administration and recording it, 60 For a
Probate and recording it, 60 For a Commission to trade, 50 For a Deposition, 15
For a Bond and recording it, 40 For a Copy of a Patent, 30 For recording a
Letter of Attorney, 30 For recording a Will, 30 For a common Warrant, 15 For an
Order, 15 For a Copy of an Order, 15 For recording a Bill or Receipt, 10 For an
Execution, 30 For a Pass, 30 For a Subpoena, 15 For a Petition if writ, 15 For
a Certificate for Lands, 15 For a Copy of an Act of Assembly, 15 For recording
a Bill of Sale or such like, 30 For a Commission for the Militia or Court, 50

County-Court-Clerks-Fees.
BE it also further Enacted, That the County-Court-Clerks-Fees be as follows:
viz. l. Tob. Imprimis, For an Action, 8 For entering an Order, 8 For the Copy of
an Order, 8 For an Execution, 15 For an Attatchment, 15 For a Deposition, 10
For a Copy of a Deposition, 10 For Administrations and Probates, both at 60 For
a Subpoena, 10 For a Petition if they write it, 10 For Entry of a Petition, 3
For a Certificate for Land, 20 For any other Certificate, 10 For recording of
any Business (Orphans excepted.) 20 For recording Inventories and Conveyances,
30 For a Scire Facias in any Court, 10

And if any thing else be done by them then what is here expressed, the
Commissioners to adjudge the Fee.

The Sheriffs Fees.
BE it also Enacted, That the Sheriffs Fees shall be as follows: viz. l. Tob.
Imprimis, For an Arrest, 10 For Bond, 15 For going into Prison, 10 For
Whipping, 20 For Pillory, 20 For serving a Subpoena, 10 For serving an
Execution if under 100 l. of Tobacco, 10 If above 100 to 500, 20 If above 500
to a Thousand, 40 If unto Two Thousand, 60 If above Two Thousand, Ten Pounds
per Thousand. For Summoning and Impannelling a Jury for every Cause Twelve
Pounds of Tobacco, and for every person Summoned Five Pounds of Tobacco.
Attatchments as for Arrests. And if further trouble; to be allowed by the Court.

And whereas some of the Sheriffs Fees upon Execution have heretofore seemed to
have been Arbitrary, this Assembly have thought fit to ascertain them, and to
Enact, That he shall have for Summoning every Appraizer Ten Pounds of Tobacco,
and the Appraizer to have Thirty Pounds of Tobacco per Cause if they finish it
in one day, and 30 per day if they are longer about it.

The Clerk of the Assemblies Fees.
BE it Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, That the Clerk of the Assemblies
Fees shall be as follows: viz. l. Tob. Imprimis, For Entry of a Cause by
Return, Plea, or Petition, 20 For an Order and Copy of an Order, 20 For
Denization, 50 For Naturalizing, 50 For County Courts Commissions, 50 For
Militia Commissions if granted by Assembly, 50 For Copying the Acts of every
Assembly, 300 For the whole Body of the Acts Writing, 300 For Attesting Act of
Assembly copying Answer and Replies.

CXXXVIII. Interpreters made of the Country.
WHereas Coll. John Flood has long and faithfully served this Country in the
Office of an Interpreter, and being now deceased: It is Enacted, That Thomas
Flood, Son of the said Coll. John Flood, shall be received into the place of
his Father, and that Henry Newcombe be likewise made Interpreter for the
Norwood.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY the 23d of December 1662, and in the
Fourteenth Year of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES II.
I. An Act concerning Sheriffs, making false Returns.
WHereas the Sheriffs of the several respective Counties, do often contrary to
act of Assembly, accept of the promise of the Party Arrested, instead of taking
Bail, which by Act he is enjoined to do, and yet to save himself Harmless, does
make false Returns, viz. That the Writ could not be Executed, whereby the
Creditor is delayed in the Suit, or Non est inventus, whereby Attachment Issues
to the damage of the Defendant: Be it therefore Enacted by this present Grand
Assembly and the Authority thereof, The Penalty of Sheriffs making false
Returns.
That every Sheriff that shall be proved to have executed the Writ, and yet
make such false Return, shall be fined Three thousand pounds of Tobacco, one
half to the Public and the other half to the Party damaged or delayed, as
aforesaid.

II. An Act concerning Servants, Owners of Goods.
WHereas many Servants imported into this Country, being ignorant of the
Customs here, do sometimes bring in with them a small Parcel of Goods, or have
them sent afterward by their Friends, which usually either the party that
Imports them, or he to whom they are Assigned, as Servants converted to their
own use: Be it therefore Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the
Authority thereof, Servants Goods are to be disposed of for their own use.
That all Servants bringing Goods in with them, not being their Own wearing
Apparel, or having them Consigned to them during the time of their Service,
shall have the propriety in their own Goods, and by permission of their Masters
dispose of the same for their own future advantage.

III. An Act against Persons that refuse to have their Children Baptized.
WHereas many Scismatical Persons, either out of aversness to the Orthodox
Established Religion, or out of the newfangled conceits of their own Heretical
inventions, refuse to have their Children Baptized: Be it therefore Enacted by
this present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, That all and every
person and persons, that in contempt of the Divine Sacrament of Baptism, The
Penalty of refusing to have Children Baptized.
shall refuse, when he or they may carry their Children to a Lawful Minister in
that County, where he or they dwell, to have them Baptized, shall be amerced
Two thousand pounds of Tobacco, half to the Parish, half to the Informer.

IV. An Act declaring how Judgment shall be passed upon a Non est Inventus
Returned.
WHereas by the present Law when a Non est Inventus is Returned, Attachment is
granted Returnable the next Court, and Judgment upon the Attachment the Court
following; yet if the Arrest be upon an Action of the Case, upon Account
prescribes no way of making proof of the Debt, the Act for Accounts referring
them to the Oath of the Debtor: Proceedings in case of a Non est Inventus.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That henceforth in all
such Cases the Creditors Oath shall be taken to his Account, and Judgment pass
for the same he deposes to be due to him; and in like manner where Bail is
taken, and the Defendant appears not upon proof made by the Oath of the
Creditor, as aforesaid, Judgment shall pass against the Bail for the Debt.

V. An Act for Punishment of Scandalous Persons.
Whereas many Babbling Women slander and scandalize their Neighbors, Babbling
and Slanderous Women, to be punished by Ducking.
for which their poor Husbands are often involved in chargeable and vexatious
Suits, and cast in great Damages: Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That in Actions of Slander, occasioned by the Wife, after Judgment
passed for the Damages, the Woman shall be punished by Ducking; and if the
Slander be so enormous as to be adjudged at greater Damages then Five hundred
pounds of Tobacco, then the Woman to suffer a Ducking for each Five hundred
pounds of Tobacco adjudged against the Husband, if he refuse to pay the Tobacco.

VI. An Act concerning VVomen-Servants, got with Child by their Masters.
Whereas by an Act of Assembly made the 23 of March 1661, every Woman-Servant
having a Bastard, is (to repair the trouble and charges sustained by the
Master) to serve two years after her time by Indenture is expired, and late
experience showing that some dissolute Masters having themselves gotten their
Women-Servants with Child, Women-Servants gotten with Child by their Masters,
how to be dealt withal.
yet have shamelesly claimed the benefit of their Service; and on the other
side, if a Woman got with Child by her Master, should be freed from that
Service, it might probably induce such loose persons to lay all their Bastards
to their Masters: It is therefore thought fit and acccordingly Enacted, That
from henceforward each Woman-Servant got with Child by her Master, shall after
her time by Indenture or Custom is expired, be by the Churchwardens of the
Parish where she lived, when she was brought to Bed of such Bastard, sold for
two years, and the Tobacco be employed by the Vestry for the use of the Parish.

VII. An Act compelling VVitnesses Subpoenaed, to deliver their Evidence upon
Oath.
Whereas the Law of the Country already made, prescribes no way of compelling
Witnesses to give in their Evidence upon Oath: Refusal of giving Evidence
punishable by Imprisonment.
Be it therefore Enacted, That henceforth all Witnesses Subpoenaed to give
Evidence in any cause, if they refuse to declare it upon Oath, shall be
committed to Prison, and there remain until they declare their Evidence upon
Oath.

VIII. An Act concerning Servants being the reputed Father of Bastard-Children.
Whereas by the present Law of this Country, the punishment of a reputed
Father of a Bastard-Child, is the keeping of the Child, and saving the Parish
harmless; Reputed Fathers of Bastard-Children, if Servants, how to be dealt
withal.
and if it should happen the reputed Father to be a Servant, who can no ways
accomplish the penalty of that act: Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That where any Bastard-Child is gotten by a Servant, the Parish
shall take care to keep the Child, during the time the reputed Father has to
serve by Indenture or Custom, and that after the said reputed Father is Free,
he shall make Satisfaction to the Parish.

IX. An Act enjoining the recording all Conveyances made in England in the
Secretaries Office.
Whereas daily Experience shows that many Persons, Inhabitants of this
Country, do privily make over their Estates to others in England, and by that
means defraud all their Creditors in this Country of their just Debts: Be it
therefore Enacted, That all Conveyances of any Estates in this Country made
over to any person in England, or Authentic Copies, All Conveyances shall be
recorded in the Secretaries Office.
shall be sent over to this Country the next Shipping after they are made, and
be here manifested in the General-Court, and recorded in the Secretaries
Office, or else to be held for fraudulent and of no force, to the barring the
Claim of any Creditor in this Country.

X. An Act for Defendants in Appeals, to give in Security to answer the Appeal.
WHereas by the Laws of this Country, all Appelants from any Court are bound
to Prosecute their Appeals, but the Defendant left at liberty without Security
for his Appearance: All Defendants in Appeals shall give Bail for their
Appearance.
Be it therefore Enacted, That henceforth all Defendants in Appeals shall give
Bail for their Appearance, as in case of Arrests, and the Sheriff and Bail to
be responsible for Nonappearance, as in case of Arrests.

XI. An Act concerning Servants, brought in under Sixteen years of age.
WHereas by act of Assembly, the several Courts are appointed Judges of the age
of Servants, coming in without Indentures, Servants brought in without
Indentures, what to be done in that Case.
but no time limited after their arrival for the bringing of them to those
Courts: Be it therefore Enacted, That every Master buying or bringing in a
Servant without Indentures, shall be, and hereby is enjoined to carry him to
the Court, within four Months after he has bought him, when the best Judgment
may be given of his Age, or else the Servant shall not serve any longer than
those of Sixteen years are to serve by the Custom of the Country.

XII. An Act for Mulatto Children, being bound or free according to Condition
of the Mother.
WHereas some doubts have arisen, whether Children got by an English Man upon a
Negro Woman, should be Slaves or Free: Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by
this present Grand Assembly, That all Children born in this Country,
Fornication with a Negro-Man or Woman punishable.
shall be held Bond or Free according to the condition of the Mother, and that
if any Christian shall commit Fornication with a Negro Man or Woman; he or she
so offending, shall pay double the Fines imposed on Fornication by the former
Act.

XIII. An Act declaring VVomen-Servants Tythable.
WHereas diverse persons purchase Women-Servants to work in the Ground, that
thereby they may avoid the payment of Levies: Be it therefore Enacted,
Woman-Servants working in the Ground Tythable.
That all Women-Servants, whose common Employment is working in the Ground,
shall be reputed Tythable, and Levies paid for them accordingly, and that every
Master of a Family not giving an account of such in his List of Tythables,
shall be fined as for other Concealments.

XIV. An Act ascertaining Damages upon Bills protested.
Vide Act 18th Anno 1666.

XV. An Act impowering Counties or Parishes to make Bylaws.
WHereas some particular Inconveniences may happen in a respective County or
Parish, which cannot well be concluded or remedied by a General Law: It is
therefore Enacted, Bylaws to be obeyed by the Inhabitants of the said Counties.
That the respective Counties, and the several Parishes in those Counties,
shall have, and hereby are empowered to have liberty to make Bylaws for
themselves; which Laws so constituted and approved by the Major part of the
said Counties or Parishes, shall be binding upon them as fully as any General
Act.

XV. An Act for building a Town.
Vide Act 5th 1680.

XVI. An Act for the Imposition of 2 s. per Hogshead.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been graciously pleased by his
Instructions to the Right Honorable Sir William Berkley, bearing date the 12th
day of September 1662, Two Shillings to be paid for every Hogshead of Tobacco
Exported. Upon default to be confiscated.
to confirm the Imposition of Two Shillings, imposed by a former Act of
Assembly upon every Hogshead of Tobacco exported out of this Collony, with the
Limitations offered to his Majesty by his Majesty's Council of Trade for the
Plantations. Be it therefore Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, That the
Limitations of the said Order of his Majesty's Council for Plantations, be
strictly observed; And that no Merchant, Master, Mariner, or any person or
persons, that shall receive and Ship on board any Ship, Vessel, Barque, Sloop
or Boat, any Tobacco, before the said Imposition of Two Shillings per Hogshead
be duly paid in Moneys, or in the value thereof, in Goods or Merchandises, unto
the Collector or Collectors appointed by the Right Honorable the Governor,
and due Certificate or Cocquet from him or them received. And in Case any
Master shall receive any Tobaccoes on board, without such Cocquets or
Certificates first had from the said Collector or Collectors; all such goods to
be Confiscated to the use of the Public.

XVII. An Act concerning Castle Duties.
WHereas the Act of Assembly enjoining each Master of a Family to provide a
certain quantity of Powder and Shot, for each Tythable in his Family, is
rendered altogether ineffectual, unless a Means be prescribed how such Powder
should be procured: Be it Enacted and Ordained by this present Grand Assembly,
That for the better Supply of the Country, All Masters of Ships and Vessels
may pay their Fort Duties in kind, viz. Half a Pound of Merchantable Musket
Powder and Three Pound of Leaden Shot for each Tun their Ship or Vessel is of
Burden, to the Captain of the Fort. The Masters of Ships may pay their Fort
Duties in Musket Powder and Shot.
And that the said Captain of the Fort shall be paid for what the said Powder
and Shot shall amount to out of the Impost of 2 s. per Hogshead in Bills of
Exchange, at the rate he received it from the Masters, viz. at One Shilling per
Pound Powder, and Two Pence per Pound Shot: And it is further Enacted, That if
any of the Masters of Ships or other Vessels, shall not pay their respective
Fort Duties of Half a Pound of Powder and Three Pound of Shot, and Six Pence
per Poll, all of them in their very kinds, that then the said Masters shall pay
the same to the said Captain of the Fort, or in his Absence to his Attorney or
Attorneys in Money or good Bills of Exchange; any other Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

XVIII. An Act Imposing a Tax upon Horses,
Repealed by the Second Act of Assembly, Anno 1665.

XIX. An Act for Encouragement to Build Vessels,
Repealed by Act 15. 1666.

XX. An Act for Handy-craft-men to pay Levies.
Whereas the necessity of the Country requires the laying upon it
extraordinary Taxes at present: Handy-crafts-men shall pay Levies.
Be it therefore Enacted, That the former Act exempting Tradesmen and
Handy-crafts-men from paying Levies be suspended for Five years, and they to
pay as formerly.

XXI. An Act concerning Hides.
Whereas the Act restraining the Exportation of Hides, lays the Penalty only
upon the Buyer, and therefore produced not the Effect intended thereby, which
was the supply of the Country with Leather: Be it therefore Enacted, That
whosoever shall sell or otherwise dispose of any Hides contrary to the intent
of the ^ormer Act, Such as sell Hides for Exportation, fined 1000 l. of Tobacco
for every Hide so sold.
shall be Fined for every Hide so by him sold or o^herwise disposed of, to be
exported, One Thousand Pounds of T^b^^co. Provided (...) Sale may be made of
Hides to any person living in the Country, the Clause in a former Act
prohibiting the same to be sold in the Country to the contrary notwithstanding.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY September 10th 1663, and in the
Fifteenth Year of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES II.
I. An Act probibiting the unlawful Assembling of Quakers.
WHereas it is evident of late times, that certain persons under the names of
Quakers, and other names of separation, have taken up and maintained sundry
dangerous Opinions and ^enets: And whereas the said persons under pretense of
Religious Worship, do often Assemble themselves in great numbers in several
parts of this Country, to the great indangering its public peace and safety,
and to the terror of the People, by maintaining a secret and strict
Correspondency amongst themselves, and in the mean time separating themselves
from the rest of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects, and from the Public
Congregations and places of Divine Worship and Service; for redressing whereof,
and better preventing the many Mischiefs and Dangers that may and do arise by
such dangerous Tenets and unlawful Assemblies: Be it Enacted, by this present
Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, That if any person or persons
commonly called Quakers, or any other Separatist whatsoever in this Collony,
shall at any time after the Publishing this Act in the several respective
Counties, depart from the place of their several Habitations, and Assemble
themselves to the number of Five or more, Quakers, ^y other Separatists
Assembling to the number of five under a pretense of Religious Worship, how to
be punished.
of the age of Sixteen years or upwards, at any one time, in any one place,
under a pretense of joining in a Religious Worship, not Authorized of England
nor of this Country; That then in all and every such Case and Cases, the Party
so Offending, being thereof Lawfully Convicted by the Verdict of Twelve Men, or
by his own Confession, or by notorious Evidence of the Fact, shall for the
first Offense, each Person forfeit and pay Two hundred pounds of Tobacco; and
if any such person or persons being once convicted, shall again Offend therein,
and shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully Convicted; shall for the Second
Offense forfeit and pay Five hundred pounds of Tobacco, to be levied by
Distress or Sale of the Goods of the Party so convicted, by Warrant from any
one Justice of the Peace, before whom they shall be so convicted, rendering the
Overplus to the Owners if any be; and for want of such distress, or for want of
Ability of any Person amongst them to pay the said Fine or Fines, then it shall
be lawful to levy and recover the same, from the rest of the Separatists or
Quakers, or any one of them then present, that are of greater Abilities to pay
the said Fine or Fines: And if any person after he or she in form aforesaid,
Such persons being convicted the Third time shall be banished this Collony.
has been twice convicted of any the said Offenses, shall Offend therein the
third time, and thereof lawfully convicted, that then every such person so
Offending and Convict as aforesaid, shall for his or her third Offense be
Banished this Collony of Virginia to the place the Governor and Council shall
appoint: And be it further Enacted by the Power and Authority aforesaid, That
each Master of Ship or Vessel that shall import or bring in any Quakers into
this Collony, to reside after the first day of July next, unless by virtue of
an Act of Parliament made in England, the Nineteenth day of May, in the
Fourteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King, shall be fined
Five thousand pounds of Tobacco, to be levied by Distress and Sale of the
Masters Goods, by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace in the County where any
such person or persons shall arrive, the same being proved by sufficient
Evidence; and the said Master shall be further enjoined to carry him or them
out of the Country again when his Ship returns, and to take especial Care to
secure him, her, or them, so brought in as aforesaid, from spreading any
seditious Tenets, whilst he, she, or they, remain in the Country: And be it
further Enacted, Inhabitants that shall entertain Preaching Quakers, to be
fined.
That any person or persons Inhabitants of this Country, that shall entertain
any Quakers in or near their Houses, to teach or preach, shall likewise be
fined Five thousand pounds of Tobacco for each time they do so entertain them,
to be levied by Distress and Sale of the persons Goods, by Order from the
Justices of the Peace in the next County Court held for that County where the
Fact was committed, before whom the said Fact shall be by Evidence proved: And
be it further Enacted, for prevention of Neglects in the due Execution of this
Act, by any Magistrate or Magistrates, Officer or Officers of this Collony,
that in case any Justice of the Peace or any other Officer shall neglect the
performance of their Duty in prosecuting this Act, or shall directly or
indirectly connive at any Breaches thereof, he or they for every such Offense
shall be fined Two thousand Pounds of Tobacco, to be levied by Distress and
Sale of the Gooods of the person so offending, he or they being thereof
lawfully convicted by the Virdict of Twelve men, by his own confession, or
evidence of Fact: Justices of Peace within the limits of their Commission to
hear and determine Offenses of this kind, and to grant their Warrants for
levying of Fines.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Justices
the Peace in their several Counties, shall be hereafter empowered to enquire,
hear, and determine all and every the Offenses aforesaid within the limits of
their Commission, and to give Warrant for the levying and distressing the Fines
upon the Goods of the persons offending; all which said Fines mentioned in this
Act shall be disposed of to the use and uses; purpose and purposes following;
viz: The Two hundred, and Five hundred Pounds of Tobacco imposed on the Quakers
and other Separatists for unlawful Assembling, shall be paid half to the
Informer, half to the use of the Parish where the Fact was committed; that the
Five thousand Pounds of Tobacco imposed on each Master that shall bring in any
Quaker, Levies and Fines for unlawful Assemblies, how to be disposed of.
shall be paid half to the Informer, half to the use of the Parishes in the
County where the person or persons do arrive; that the Five thousand pounds of
Tobacco imposed upon every Inhabitant that shall entertain as aforesaid in or
near his House any Quaker, shall be paid half to the Informer, half to the
Parishes in the County where he lives for Pious uses; Provided always that the
charge of their Apprehending must be first defrayed: That the Two thousand
Pounds of Tobacco imposed upon any Magistrate or other Officer that shall
neglect the due Prosecution of this Act, shall be paid half to the Informer,
half to the Parishes in the County where he lives: Provided always, and be it
further Enacted, That if any of the said persons, Quakers or other Separatists,
shall after such Conviction as aforesaid, give Security, that he, she, or they,
for the time to come forbear to meet in any such unlawful Assemblies as
aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth such person or persons shall be
discharged from all the Penalties aforesaid, any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding: And be it further Enacted, That all Officers of this
Country be hereby strictly enjoined to take notice of this Act, and to see the
same put in due Execution.

II. An Act concerning the Bounds of this Collony on the Eastern-Shore.
HIS Majesty's Interest on the Eastern Shore of Virginia, together with some
Concernments of the Lord Baltamores, coming into Consideration of the Right
Honorable Governor, and Council, and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, they
pretermitting for the present some other of His Majesty's Concerns of Land
until a fitter opportunity do think fit for the present to Enact, And be it
further Enacted by the said Right Honorable the Governor, Council, and
Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, That Publication
be made so soon as possible by Coll. Edmund Scarbrough his Majesty's Surveyor
General of Virginia; Commanding in His Majesty's Name all the Inhabitants of
the Eastern Shore of Virginia from Watkins Point Southward to render Obedience
to his Majesty's Government of Virginia, and make payment of his Majesty's
Rents and all public Dues to His Majesty's Collony of Virginia. And whereas it
has been controverted by some ignorant ill-disposed persons, where Wa^tkins
Point the Lord Baltamores Sou^hermost Bounds on the Eastern Shore is situate;
This Grand Assembly by the c^re and special Enquiry of Five able selected
Surveyors and Two Burgesses, and on the due Examination thereof, conclude the
same place of Wattkins Point to be the Northside of Wiccacommico River on the
Eastern Shore, The bounds of this Collony on the Eastern Shore.
and near unto and on the South side of the Straight Lymbo, opposite to
Potux^nt River; which place, according to Capt. John Smith, and Discoverers
with him, in the year 1608 was so named, being the Lord Baltemores Bounds on
the Eastern Shore, within which Bounds his Majesty's Subjects which now are
seated, are hereby commanded to yield due Obedience at their perils: And in
case the Lord Baltamores Lieutenants or Deputies shall not be fully convinced
of his or their actual or pretended Intrusions: This Grand Assembly of Virginia
in due obedience making the particular part of Virginia their present care, on
His Majesty's behalf do engage and command Coll. Edmund Scarbrough, Mr. John
Catlett, and Mr. Richard Lawrence, or any two of them, whereof his Majesty's
Surveyor General to be one, That upon convenient Notice and Assignment of time
and place at Monakin, or any other part of His Majesty's Country of Virginia,
on the Eastern Shore, they or any two of them as aforesaid, shall give a
Meeting to the Lord Baltamores Lieutenants or Deputies, or his or their
Substitutes as aforesaid, the account whereof to be returned to his Majesty's
Governor and Council of Virginia, and debate and determination thereof; and in
the mean time all the Inabitants on the Eastern Shore as aforesaid, are
required in his Majesty's Name to conform due Obedience to this Act of
Assembly: Be it also Enacted, That the Surveyor General of Virginia aforesaid,
is hereby commanded and authorized to improve his best Abilities in all other
his Majesty's Concerns of Land relating to Virginia, especially that to the
Northward of Forty Degrees of Latitude, being the utmost Bounds of the said
Lord Baltamores Grant, and to give an account of his proceedings therein to the
Right Honorable Governor and Council of Virginia.

III. An Act prohibiting the Exportation of Deer-Skins or Calves-Skins.
Vide Act 12. Anno 1680.

IV. An Act prohibiting the Entertainment of Indians without Badges.
SInce it is manifest that diverse Thefts are committed by Indians on the South
side of James River, with which the Neighboring Indians being taxed, say and
affirm it to be done by the Tuscaroraes and other remote Nations, who lying
sculking about the English Plantations for private sinister Commerce, cannot be
so easily discovered and taken, by reason that the penalty by Law for Indians
coming in without a Badge is laid on the Indians only and not on the English
entertaining them: No English man shall entertain Indians without Badges.
Be it therefore Enacted, That what Englishman soever shall privately entertain
any Indian or Indians of any Nation, not having a Badge according to Law, shall
be liable to the same Censure and Penalty as the Law imposes upon an Indian
for such their illegal coming in; and that the Informer or Discoverer thereof
shall have half of the said Penalty.

V. An Act for better payment of the 10 s. per Hogshead
Repealed by the 7th Act. Anno 1665.

VI. An Act concerning the Salt-VVork at Accomack
Repealed by 7th Act. Anno 1666.

VII. An Act for the exacter Discovery of concealed Tythables.
WHereas diverse Masters of Families, notwithstanding the many Laws made to the
contrary, do conceal some of their Families legally Tythable to a very
considerable number as may justly be suspected in the whole Country, and
consequently do enlarge the Taxes of those that do legally conform, for Remedy
of the like Abuses hereafter: Be it therefore Enacted by this Grand Assembly,
and the Authority thereof, That every Master of a Family shall give an exact
Account of all Tythable persons in their said Family, with their several Names,
to the next Magistrate appointed to receive the List, annually by the 10th of
June. And in Case any such Master of a Family shall conceal any person or
persons of his Family, Masters to be fined for concealing Tythable persons in
their Families.
then every such concealed person or persons shall be forfeited to him that
shall make it appear, unless he was bought after the 10th day of June: But if
any such concealed person, being a Servant, has less than a year to serve, or
if the person concealed be a Freeman, then for every such person the Master of
the Family shall forfeit One thousand Weight of Tobacco: Provided always, That
Women Servants be exempted out of this Act, which whether they are Tythable or
not, is referred to the County Court to judge and determine.

VIII. An Act concerning the pursuit of Run-aways.
WHereas the ordinary way of making pursuit after Runaway Servants by Hues and
Cries, is by Experience found ineffectual for the recovery of them, and the
pursuit at the particular Charge of the Master oftentimes impossible; for
Remedy whereof, it is Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the Authority
thereof, That Pursuit after Run-aways be made at the Charge of the Country;
for effecting whereof, any Justice at the instance of the Master or Masters of
the Servants run away, is hereby required, Authorized, and Empowered, to Issue
his Warrant for the pressing of Boat and Hands, or other dispatches, to make
pursuit, the Charge whereof shall be defrayed in the next County Levy; Pursuit
of Run-aways, to be made at the charge of the County.
and in case the said Fugitives, should notwithstanding such pursuit, make an
Escape to any of the Dutch Plantations: It is Enacted, That Letters be written
to the respective Governors of those Plantations to make siezure of all such
Fugitive Servants, and to return them by the next convenient passage to any of
the Collectors of the Rivers, the Vessel that brings them is bound to, and for
satisfaction of their Charges, the said Collectors are hereby Authorized to
give them his Certificate of the Receipt of his Servant, and of the Sum the
Charge amounts to, which being produced by the said Importer or his Agent to
the next Assembly or Committee for the Levy, the Sum certified shall be by them
raised and paid to the said Importer or his lawful Agent, at such place as he
shall desire: And it is further Enacted, That the said Collector shall with as
much speed as may be, certify the Master of the said Servant of his having him
in Custody: The Public shall be reimbursed for the Charge of their Importation.
And in case the Master of the said Servant will pay the Charge of his
Importation, then the said Collector is required to take the Bill of the said
Master, with security if needful, to the use of the Public, and to receive the
same when due to the use aforesaid, and to deliver such Master or Masters, his
or their Servant or Servants, who shall serve his or their Master or Masters
for the time of his or their Absence and Charge disbursed, according to a
former Act of Assembly in that Case provided; but if the said Master or Masters
shall refuse to pay the Charge, then the said Collector is hereby empowered to
sell the said Servant or Servants, or hire him or them out for so long time as
may re-imburse the Public disbursment after which time expired; the said
Servant or Servants shall be returned to his or their Master or Masters, and
serve him or them the remainder of his or their time, and also for the time of
his or their being run away, in which, what he serves for satisfaction of the
Public shall not be accounted: And it is further Enacted, That if the said
Servant or Servants be taken by the pursuit of the County, Satisfacti- shall be
made to the County.
That the County shall have such satisfaction as the Public by Hire or Sale of
the Servant.

IX. An Act for the half of all Fines, to be paid to the Informer.
WHereas several Penal Acts of Assembly refer the disposal of the fines to the
Assembly, who ever intended the half thereof to the Informer, The half of all
Fines whatsoever, shall be paid to the Informer.
yet for better Encouragement of such, and better Discovery of those that break
and contemn the Law: It is thought fit to Enact, and be it by these presents
Enacted, That the half of all Fines incurred by any Person offending against
any Penal Law, be conferred on the Informer and Discoverer of any such offenses.

X. An Act concerning Foreign Debts.
Whereas it was ommitted to be inserted in the Printed Laws of this Country,
that Moneys due in England for any Consideration not imported into this
Country should not be Pleadable here; It is therefore Enacted and Declared, No
Debts Pleadable in Virginia, but for Goods imported thither.
That the said Act was never repealed, but that it has always been and still
does continue in force, and that according to the tenor thereof, no Debt
whatsoever is Pleadable against any Inhabitant of this Country, but for Goods
imported into this Country.

XI. An Act permitting persons under Execution to redeem their Bodies with
their Estates.
SInce the Act for payment of Executions in kind exposed most Men in the
Country to ruin, by the Malice of their two riged Creditors, who by that Act
might, taking the advantage often times, when Tobacco or Money, the two things
most usually obliged for, were not in possibility to be procured, detain their
persons in Prison to the destruction of their Credit, Families and Fortunes:
The Proceedings in case of an Execution for Debt, and what relief may be had
therein.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly and the Authority thereof, That the said Act, as too full of rigor,
be repealed; and that instead thereof, it be Enacted, That when any person
shall be laid under Execution for Debt, he shall first make Oath that he has
not directly or indirectly any specifical Tobacco or Money to answer the Debt,
and then shall tender an Estate to the treble value of the Debt; and in case of
disability an Inventory of his whole Estate upon Oath to the Creditor, who
shall have liberty to make choice of any of the Estate so tendered for
satisfaction of his Debt, which being appraised by Four Men Chosen, two by the
Creditor, and two by the Debtor, shall be by the Sheriff delivered to the
Creditor, and the Debtor be acquitted: But if the whole Estate will not
satisfy the Debt, then the person of the Debtor to remain in Prison, and in
case of disagreement between the Debtor and the Creditor, either in choice of
the Estate or Apprizers, then it shall be lawful for the next Commissioner to
appoint Four indifferent persons to choose, appoint and apprize what part of
the said Estate shall satisfy the Debt; and in case of their Disagreement, the
said next Commissioner shall be and hereby is empowered to determine the
controversy.

XII. An Act concerning a Stint,
repealed by the 3d. Act. Anno. 1664.

XIII. An Act respiting the time for Planting Mulberry-Trees,
which is according to Act. until the last of December Anno 1666.

XIV. An Act for keeping Holy the 13th of September.
WHereas it is Evident that certain Mutinous Villains had entered into such a
desperate Conspiracy as had brought an inevitable ruin upon the Country, The
Thirteenth of September, to be kept Holy.
had not God in his infinite Mercy prevented it; This Grand Assembly to testify
their thanks to Almighty God for so miraculous a Preservation: Have Enacted,
That the Thirteenth of September, the day when this villainous Plot should have
been put into Execution, be annually kept Holy, to keep the same in a perpetual
Commemoration.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY September 20th, 1664.
I. An Act for the priority of Payment to the Countrey-Creditors.
WHereas many Persons coming into this Country possessed of visible Estates,
do by that means obtain Credit here, and contract several Engagements;
notwithstanding which Engagements past for valuable Considerations, it often
happens that the whole Estate is by pretended Accounts out of England, Debts
contracted in Virginia shall be first satisfied.
and Foreign parts taken away, and the Country Creditors deprived by that
means of their just Dues; which this present Grand Assembly taking into their
serious consideration, Have therefore Enacted, That in such Cases, all Courts
shall give a priority in Judgments for Debts contracted in the Country, if the
Claim be made within Twelve Months, before which time no Foreign Debt shall be
Pleadable, unless there be Effects remaining after the Country Debts are paid:
But this Assembly intending hereby but only the prevention of frauds, not the
prejudice of any just Creditor that has bona fide adventured his Goods into
this Country, has therefore further Enacted, That if any Factor coming out of
England or any other of his Majesty's Plantations, shall within two Months
after his Arrival, make Entry in any Court of Record, of the name of the Person
adventuring by him, and the value of the Goods adventured, every such
Adventurer shall, if the Factor die, have equal Pleading with the Inhabitants
of this Country. But in case no such Entry be made, all Goods imported shall
be taken to be the proper Estate of the Possessor: And to the end all Merchants
and other Persons concerned, may have notice hereof: It is further Enacted,
That this Act shall not be in force, until the first of March, 1665.

II. An Act for Frontiers to be seated with Four able Hands.
WHereas Experience has evidenced, that the weakness of the Frontier
Plantations has animated the Indians to commit several horrid Murders; This
Grand Assembly endeavoring as much as may be the prevention thereof for the
future, have Enacted, Plantations on the Frontiers to be strengthened with Four
able Men well armed.
and by these presents do Enact, That no person shall hereafter seat above the
Plantations already seated, but with Four able Hands well Armed at his first
seating down. Provided, That such Persons that have already patented Land in
any remote Parts, may have Seven years granted them, to seat and strengthen
each particular Plantation with the aforesaid number of Four Men, or else
desert their Land.

III. An Act for Liberty to Plant.
Whereas many Endeavors have been used, to induce the Province of Maryland,
to comply with this Government in the Endeavors of lessening the Quantity and
advancing the Value of Tobacco, which could it have been effected, had
undoubtedly much augmented the Happiness and Prosperity of both Countries; but
since the Government of Maryland, have after so many Treaties and frustrated
Expectations, still continued their aversness; Acts restraining, Planting,
Repealed.
This Grand Assembly not thinking fit to lay a restriction upon this Government
while they have so great a liberty; have therefore repealed and anulled, and do
by these Presents repeal and anull all Acts or Proclamations whatsoever, any
way restraining the Inhabitants of this Country from making their utmost
benefit of their Labor the ensuing year.

IV. An Act for the proportioning all Actions to the Forenoon and Afternoon.
WHereas the dispatch of business to the General Courts, is very much retarded
by the liberty granted to all persons Arrested to the said Courts, to appear at
any time within the day assigned in the Writ by the Plantiff, by which means
most Causes are referred to the Afternoon; and that time being insufficient to
hear and determine the said Causes, the Court is thereby necessitated to put
Business out of Course, by referring them to the next Morning: For prevention
of which Inconveniences, this Grand Assembly have thought fit to Enact, and it
is by the Authority thereof Enacted, The time for Issuing out of Writs,
regulated.
That all Writs that shall for the future issue out of the Secretaries Office
returnable to the General Court, shall be divided according to the respective
days into Ten for the Forenoon, and Ten for the Afternoon; and if the Plantiff
shall at that time fail in appearing to prosesecute, a Nonsuit shall be
granted against him, and Judgment against the Defendant, or Bail, or Sheriff,
in case the Defendant fail of his Attendance to Answer.

V. An Act concerning the regulating the Secretaries-Office.
WHereas it is evident, that in all Countries the well and ill keeping of the
Records, is of the highest Consequence, as being the only means to preserve the
Rights and Properties of all the Inhabitants of the same; and since it appears
that there has been a great Neglect in keeping the Records in this Country:
For remedy whereof for the future, the Grand Assembly at the instance of the
present Secretary Thomas Ludwel Esquire; have thought fit to Enact, and be it by
the Authority thereof Enacted, That Captain Robert Ellison, The Records to be
carefully Stated.
Mr. Walter Chiles, and the Clerk of the Assembly, be appointed by the House to
examine and state the Records as they now are; and that for the future, as soon
as there is a place convenient to receive them, No person may be permitted to
view them without public Order, except only the Clerks of the Office, or whom
else the Secretary shall appoint.
no Person may have a view of them, unless upon public Order, but the Clerks
of the Office, or whom else the Secretary shall appoint; it being impossible to
keep the Records certain, when they are prostituted to the view of every one
that will look into them, who may as their interest leads, rend out what may
make against them: Provided, That any Person, having occasion, may be with the
Clerk when he makes the Search, for which Search there shall be paid to the
Clerk for his Fee, One Shilling, or Ten pounds of Tobacco, besides paying for
the Copy of the thing searched for: The Clerks Fee for searching the Records.
And it is further Enacted, That but half that Fee shall be paid to the Clerk
for searching the County Court Records.

VI. An Act for conveneing of the People, upon the Summons of the Burgesses, to
adjourn Assemblies.
Whereas the principal end of the Convention of Assemblies, is the making
Provisions for the peoples Safety and redress of the Grievances, which being
usually made known to the Burgesses of the respective Counties at the place and
time of their Elections, which upon Adjournment of Alsemblies is not done,
Notice to be given to the people by Proclamation, when the Assemblies are to be
adjourned.
by reason the Sheriff does not make publication of their Summons: It is
Enacted, That for Convention of the Burgesses at this or future Assemblies
adjourned, timely notice may be given to the people by publication in the
Parish Churches of the day appointed by the Sheriff of their meeting at the
usual places of Election, to present their Grievances to the Burgesses.

VII. An Act concerning Widows Thirds.
WHereas some doubts have arisen about the proportioning and assigning the
Thirds of the Estates of persons Intestate to their Widow: All Estates of
persons Intestated to be divided into Thirds, and the Widow to have her Thirds
and choice after Division.
It is for Explanation thereof, Enacted by the Grand Assembly and the Authority
thereof, That the Estates of all Persons Intestate where the Will is doubtful
whether personal or real, viz. Land cleared or Wood Land and Housing, may be
according to the quantity or quality of the said Land and Housing divided
equally into Thirds, and the Widow to have her Thirds and choice after the
Division.

VIII. An Act Repealing the Act concerning Rumme.
WHereas there was by a former Act of Assembly made at James City, March 20th
1661, The Act concerning Rumme and Paveal Sugars Repealed.
an Imposition laid upon Rumme and Paveal Sugars; the House upon Consideration
of the difficulties of collecting the said Impost, and the defining Pavea^
Sugars, and principally the Obstructions it may bring to the Trade of the
Country, have thought fit to Enact, That the said Act be totally repealed.

IX. An Act concerning Arrests in Court times.
Whereas diverse persons repairing to James City in the time of Quarter Courts
and Assemblies, some about service of the Public, some to give Evidences, No
Arrests shall be served at James City during the General Assembly, nor five
days before and after; except upon persons dwelling in James City County.
others to their other occasions, which by the malice of some persons taking
them at an advantage, are arrested to a present Answer; for fear whereof,
diverse persons do absent themselves, to the great prejudice of the Public
Affairs, and the Obstruction of Justice: It is therefore Ordered, That no
Arrests Five days before the General Courts or Assemblies, or Five days after
the General Courts or Assemblies be served upon any person at James City,
except he be an Inhabitant of James City-County.

At a Grand Assembly held at James City October the 20th Anno 1665.
I. An Act Impowering a Justice of the Peace to grant Attachments.
WHereas it has been scrupled whether a particular Justice of the Peace might
in any case issue an Attachment; this Assembly have thought fit to declare,
That in case of suspicion of any persons intentions to remove out of the County
where he dwells, either to conceal himself in the Country, or withdraw
himself out of the Country, whereby the ordinary proceedings at Law cannot be
had against him: In what case one Justice of Peace may may grant Attachments.
It is and may be lawful for any Justice of the Peace to issue out an
Attatchment against so much of the Estate of the person so suspected to remove,
as by the Claim made shall in his judgment appear due to the Creditor;
replievable by security given or appearance at the next Court: Provided, That
the said Justice take sufficient Security of him that desires the Attachment to
pay the Damages the Court shall award to the Defendant, in case the Plantiff be
cast in the Suit.

II. An Act for Repealing of the Act for defraying the Encouragement for
killing VVoolves by a Tax upon Horses.
Whereas the Act for Levying the Encouragement of killing of Woolves upon
Horses, The Act for Levying Money on Horses for encouraging the killing of
Woolves repealed.
by reason of the great inequality thereof, imposes too great a burden upon
those Frontier Counties which have most Woolves killed and fewest Horses to
bear the Charge: It is therefore Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the
Authority thereof, That that Act shall be, and hereby is repealed, and the
former Law for paying the Encouragement per Poll be revived and continued.

III. An Act prohibiting the Sale of Arms to the Indians.
Whereas there was formerly a Law in force prohibiting the Sale of Arms,
Ammunition, or Guns, to the Indians, which upon consideration of the said
Indians being furnished by the Dutch, was omitted: It being then thought
impolitick to debar our selves from so great an advantage as might accrue to us
by the Indians Trade, when we could not prevent the supply; yet since those
envious Neighbors are now by his Majesty's Justice and Prudence removed from
us, and the Trade now likely to be in our hands, and none to furnish them
besides our own Nation, which in these times of eminent Danger has scarce
ability to furnish our own wants: It is therefore Enacted by this Grand
Assembly and the Authority thereof, That the Sale of Arms, Guns, Powder and
Shot, Any person selling Ammunition to Indians, for the first Offense shall be
fined 10000 l. of Tobacco, and for the second be prosecuted as a Felon.
be wholly prohibited, and that whosoever, contrary to the intent of this Act,
shall by himself or any other, sell or barter Powder, Shot, Guns, or Ammunition
to any Ind^an, shall be fined Ten thousand Pounds of Tobacco, or suffer Two
years Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize for the first Offense, and for the
second to be proceeded against as Felons.

IV. An Additional Act for better restraining the Exportation of Hides
Repealed by 12 Act Anno 1680. Vide.

V. An Act concerning the intent of some former Penalties.
Whereas certain doubts have arisen in giving Judgment upon a Penal Law, as
stealing of Hoggs, taking away of Boats, and the like, where several persons
may be Actors in committing the same Offenses, viz. whether the Penalties
imposed are to be levied upon all the Actors in general, Where several are
Actors in the same Crime, every one to be fined.
and the payment of the Penalty specified in the Act by any one should acquit
the rest, or else Judgment pass for the entire Sum against every particular and
individual Offender: Be it Enacted for the better deterring people from
committing such Offenses, That in all such Cases every particular Offender may
be singly prosecuted and have Judgment passed against him for the whole Fine;
And because the Laws have been silent in prescribing any way to punish Servants
guilty of the Breaches of such Acts where Freemen are to pay a Fine, of which
they are during their Service wholly incapable, and might be encouraged to
attempt it, should their punishment be respited, until their time of Service is
expired: Be it therefore Enacted, Servants that are Offenders, not being
capable of paying a Fine, are to receive Corporal Punishment.
That in all Cases where a Freeman is Punishable by Fine, a Servant shall
receive Corporal Punishment viz. For every Five hundred pounds of Tobacco,
Twenty Lashes; and so many such several Punishments as are Five hundred Pounds
of Tobacco included in the Fine, unless their Master or other Acquaintance will
Redeem them by making Payment: And it is further Enacted, That if any Person
shall by procurement of the Servant upon promise and agreement for future
Service, pay the Fine and Release him from Punishment, such Agreement made,
shall notwithstanding the Coverture, bind such Servant to performance after his
time by Indenture is Expired: And further that the Master have like Remedy
against the Servant, in Case of his Trespassing against him.

VI. An Act concerning Bounding of Counties and Parishes.
Whereas there is a Law that binds us to the Bounding of our Lands: Counties
and Parishes to be Bounded.
Be it Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, That
the same Law be in force to the Bounding of our Counties and Parishes.

VII. An Act repealing the Act of 10 s. per Hogshead.
WHereas the imposition of Ten Shillings per Hogshead on Vessels trading from
New England and the adjacent Plantations, has probably hindered their trading
in this Country, The Act for Payment of 10 s. per Hogshead repealed.
and drawn much trading to Maryland, which the Burgesses taking into their
serious Consideration, and requesting the Right Honorable Sir William Berkley
Knight and Governor, who most heartily and willingly granted the taking off
the said imposition of 10 s. per Hogshead: Be it therefore Enacted by this
present Grand Assembly, That all Vessels trading here out of New England, or
any other the adjacient Plantations in America, shall from henceforth be free
from the imposition of 10 s. per Hogshead, and pay no other Dues, Duties or
Customs, then any other Ships or Vessels trading here out of England, or any
other his Majesty's Dominions.

VIII. An Act concerning the Indians.
The Act concerning Murders committed by Indians made General.
WHereas at a Grand Assembly held at James City September the 10th 1663, it was
provided, That where any Murder was committed by the Indians upon the English,
the next Town of Indians was to use their uttermost Endeavor for the bringing
in and discovering the Actors and Doers thereof, and in regard the said Act was
only limited upon the Northern-Indians: This Grand Assembly have thought fit to
Enact, and be it Enacted, That the said Law be made a General Law against all
Indians whatsoever; and where any Murders shall be committed upon the English,
the next Town is to use all their care and diligence in finding the Doers and
Actors of the said Murders: And be it further Enacted, That if any Englishman
be murdered, the next Town shall be answerable for it, with their Lives and
Liberties to the use of the public; and that the Honorable Governor be
humbly requested forthwith to empower such persons as his Honor shall think
fit in each County on such occasions for putting the said Law into immediate
execution. And that it be made known to all Indians whatsoever by those persons
so commissioned, within Two Months after the said Law is in force: And be it
further Enacted by this Grand Assembly, That the said Indians shall not have
power within themselves, The Weromance or chief Commander of the Indians, shall
be chosen by the Governor of Virginia.
to elect or constitute their own Weromance or Chief Commander; but the present
Honorable Governor and his Successors, from time to time shall constitute and
authorize such Persons, in whose Fidelity they may find greatest cause to
repose a confidence to be Commander of the respective Towns; and in case the
Indians shall refuse their Obedience to, or Murder such person, then that
Nation of Indians so refusing or offending, to be accounted Enemies and Rebels,
and be proceeded against accordingly: And whereas the careless manner of the
English in going un-armed to Churches, Courts, and other Public Meetings, may
probably in time, incite the Indians to make some desperate attempt upon them:
It is further Enacted, That the Honorable Governor be requested to issue his
Commands to the Officers of the Militia, to take care to prevent the same: And
it is further Enacted, No person shall harbor or employ any Indian, without
having first given Security, and obtained License of the Governor.
That any person or persons, that shall harbor, entertain or employ any
Indian, shall be fined Five thousand pounds of Tobacco, or suffer one years
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize, unless such as shall give sufficient
Security to the County Court, and upon such security obtain a Certificate from
the said Court, and upon that Certificate a License from the Governor: And
whereas by the former Articles of Agreement, it was provided that no Indians
which were seated: on the South Side of James River, should come over the
Black-Water, or the Southern Branches thereof: It is hereby Enacted, That the
said Southern Branches of Black-Water, be from the head of those Branches to
the present Appomattuck Indian Town, and thence cross the River by a continued
Line to the present Monakin Town, be the bounds of the Indians on the
South Side of James River.

IX. An Act concerning the Building of a Fort.
A Fort ordered to be Built.
IN Obedience to his Majesty's Royal Commands, and for the better defense of the
Country, this Assembly have thought fit to Enact, and be it Enacted, That a
Fort be Built with all convenient Expedition, where the Right Honorable the
Governor shall think most convenient; and that Fourscore thousand Pounds of
Tobacco be levied to that purpose, The Governor to direct where.
besides the sale of the King of Potomacks-Land: Be it further Enacted, That
his Honor give power to press Carpenters, Laborers and other Workmen; and
that the Carpenters finding themselves Diet and Lodging, be allowed Forty five
Pounds of Tobacco per day: And for the better expediting and finishing the said
Fort, Provisions for Building the same.
It is hereby Enacted, That it shall be lawful for the Surveyor of the Workmen,
to cause Pines to be fallen in any man's Land for that use, paying to the
Proprietor of the Land Six pence for each Tree: And it is further Enacted, That
each person of the Trained-Bands in James City and Surrey Counties, contribute
Six days Work toward the perfecting the said Fort, and to bring their own
Provisions with them: And be it further Enacted, That Capt. William Bassett be
Authorized Surveyor of the whole Work, and have Command of the Workmen therein
employed, the County gratifying him the said Capt. Bassett with Ten thousand
pounds of Tobacco; And the Assembly taking into Consideration what persons be
fit to keep the Fort, and be Captain of the same. Have Enacted, and it is
hereby Enacted, That the said Soldiers that attend the Governor at General
Courts, be ordered to keep the Fort; those Courts excepted where a single
Sentinel will be sufficient, and that the Capt. of the Guard have the Command
of the Fort, and receive a fitting Annual Satisfaction for the same; and that
the Soldiers likewise may have a competent Addition to the former pay: And it
is further Enacted, That no Tobaccoes for these occasions be levied this year.

X. An Act Preparatory to a Stint or Cessation.
Vide Act 1. October 23d 1666.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, June 5th 1666.
I. An Act for a Cessation.
Vide Act 1. October. 23. Anno 1666.

II. An Act concerning Tenders of Tobacco.
WHereas it has been and still is the constant Endeavors of this Assembly to
give all possible Encouragement to Merchants and Traders into this Collony, and
has hitherto left the receiving or refusing their Debts to their
own-discretions, without other restrictions to them or liberty to the Planter
then this, That if by the last of January the Creditor did not demand his
Tobacco, it might then be lawful for the Debtor to dispose of it; leaving the
Debtor still liable to be sued that year for Security for his Debt. Upon which
diverse persons for their private advantages did omit the demanding of the
Tobacco in time, and thereby rendering the Planter incapable of disposing of his
Tobacco or clearing himself from the Engagements. For redress of which
inconveniences, Creditors to demand and receive their Tobacco by the last of
January.
Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly
and the Authority thereof, That if the Creditor refuse or omit to demand and
receive his Tobacco by the last of January, that then it shall be lawful for
the Debtor at any time between that and the Twentieth of February, to address
himself to the two next convenient Justices of the Peace, who are hereby
required and empowered to appoint three honest and able Men of the
Neighborhood on their Oaths, to view the Tobacco: And if they find it legally
Merchantable, whether Old or New, then to weigh and mark it for the use of the
Creditor, on whose account the Tobacco so viewed and approved as aforesaid
shall after lie; the Debtor still endeavoring to secure it as before the
Tender: and the Debtor upon producing the Certificate of the said Tender from
the said Justices to the next Court, Difference between Debtor and Creditor
whether the Tobacco tendered be merchantable or not, to be decided by an Vmpire.
that Court shall by their Order discharge the Debtor from his Debt, provided
the Tender be made in place according to Specialty. And it is further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case of Difference between the Debtor and
Creditor, or his Attorney, if either of them be present, whether the Tobacco
tendered be merchantable or not, then, two Commissioners as aforesaid, are
hereby empowered to appoint a third person as an Indifferent Umpire to
determine the difference between them.

III. An Act for Altering the Day of the General Court.
WHereas the Right Honorable the Governor and Council, for diverse Reasons
them thereunto moving, have desired that the General Court beginning by the
present Act the Twentieth day of March, may hence forth be held the 15th day of
April: The General Court to be held on the Fifteenth of April.
It is Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, That
the said Court be not hereafter held upon the 20th day of March, but upon the
15th day of April, as by this Act is Provided and Confirmed.

IV. An Act for repeal of the Act preparatory to a Stint.
Whereas the Act preparatory for a Stint or Cessation, imposed a Rate upon
Wheat of Three Shillings or Thirty Pounds of Tobacco per Bushel: The Governor,
Council, and Burgesses of this Assembly considering the Low Prizes Tobacco has
been purchased at, and lest the Creditor should draw the price there set into
president, have thought fit to Enact, and do Enact by the Authority thereof,
That the said Act be to all intents and purposes repealed and made void and
null.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY October 23d Anno 1680.
I. An Act for a Cessation.
The Act for Cessation of Planting Tobacco from the First of February 1666, to
the First of February 1667, declared to remain in force.
WHereas at an Assembly held at James City the Fifth of June 1666, it was
Enacted, That a Cessation from Sowing, Setting, Planting, or Tending Tobacco,
from the First of February 1666, until the First of February 1667, should be
established in this Country of Virginia, in case the Province of Carolina
should give their assent to the same, as the Province of Maryland by their Act
of Assembly had engaged to do: Both their said Acts of Assembly of Maryland
and this Country impowering certain Commissioners to treat and conclude of the
best means of security for putting the said Acts into effectual execution: By
virtue whereof the Commissioners in the said Act nominated and appointed, did
upon the Tenth day of July following meet at James-City, and then and there
concluded and agreed upon certain means and ways for putting the said Acts into
effectual practice, and for the prevention of all frauds and deceits that might
be practiced therein, as by the Articles there made more fully does appear. At
which Meeting the Commissioners of that Province of Carolina did also oblige
themselves that the Province of Carolina should by an Act of their Assembly
confirm the Agreements aforesaid, and transmit the said Act to the honorable
Governors of Virginia and Maryland by the last of September next ensuing. But
whereas by reason of the said Provinces then Engagement in repelling the
Assaults of the adjacent Indians, that their Acts, though fully at their
Assembly confirmed, could not be sent to Virginia and Mary Land by the time in
the Articles agreed upon. For which cause the Governor and Council of Mary
Land, though they still acknowledge the Act it self for a total Cessation from
Planting as aforesaid to remain in its full force, and in pursuance of the
Establishment thereof, have caused a Proclamation to issue, requiring and
commanding all persons in the said Province to yield conformity and due
obedience thereto: of which to testify their full intents of executing the
said Act, transmitted a Copy to the Right honorable the Governor of Virginia,
yet in his Letter declaring, That by reason of the said Act of Carolina's not
coming to them by the time in the Treaty prefixed, They conceived that all the
Articles in the said Treaty containing the means to have the Act assuredly and
without fraud put into practice became void: And for that cause another Treaty
must of necessity be required, which Reasons the Governor, Council, and
Burgesses of this Grand Assembly taking into their serious Consideration, have
Enacted and Declared, and by these Presents do Enact and Declare, That the
aforesaid Act of the Fifth of June, prohibiting the Sowing, Setting, Planting
or Tending Tobacco from the First of February 1666, until the First of February
1667, is and remains in full force, and is hereby Ratified and Confirmed: And
all persons are required to take notice thereof, and yield their due obedience
thereunto. For the surer Establishment thereof, the Commissioners in the
aforesaid Act nominated and appointed, or so many of them as are there
required, are hereby again empowered and desired to renew the former Treaty
with the Commissioners of Mary Land, and to re-establish the Articles in the
former Treaty agreed upon and concluded; the Grand Assembly hereby obliging
themselves, That the Public Faith given by the said Commissioners for
observance of the said Articles under their Hands and Seals, and the like
reciprocally taken from the Commissioners of Mary Land, shall bind this
Country and every Inhabitant thereof, to a full performance in the said Act.
And that no scruple may remain, are fully agreed, That Two Instruments of one
Tenor, made one to the Governor of Virginia, the other to the Lieutenant
General of Mary Land from the Governor of Carolina, That the Inhabitants of
that Province will truly observe the Articles agreed upon between the
Governors of Virginia and Mary Land, Maryland to concur in the Cessation.
shall be accepted and reputed a sufficient Engagement for the Conformity of
that Province in the observance of that Act; And if there should appear to the
Commissioners any emergent occasion for any thing or things in the aforesaid
Treaty Concluded and Agreed upon to be added or altered, they are by this Act
empowered to proceed therein as they in their discretions shall find the
necessity of Affairs to require: And the Governors Honor is hereby requested
by his Honors Commission and Instructions, to confirm the full Power and
Authority unto them; and to the intent that Notice may be given to the
Honorable Lieutenant General of Maryland, of our Intentions to renew the
Treaty the Governors Honor hereby requesting to send Message to the
Lieutenant General of Maryland to certify to him that upon the 7th day of
Dectember next, or as soon after as Wind and Weather will permit, the
Commissioners of this Country will meet the Commissioners appointed for that
Province at St. Maryes in Maryland, to put in Execution the aforesaid act of
Assembly; by which means all Obstacles and Doubts will be taken away, and the
aforesaid Law receive a plenary and effectual Execution: And it is further
Enacted, That the Governors Honor be requested so soon as possible after the
Conclusion of the Treaty, to publish and declare by his Honors Proclamation
the full intent and tenor thereof to the several Counties of this Collony.

II. An Act showing how Debts are to be paid the Cessation year.
WHereas it is apparent to all that the Establishment of a Cessation from
Planting, will certainly advance the Gains of the Merchant, by giving him time
to vend his Commodities: And for that Consideration it might be justly
expected, that he should make some proportionate abatement in his Debts; Yet
this Assembly whose care it has ever been to preserve the Rights and
Properties of every Person free from the least violation, have still continued
the same entire, and have only for the supply of peoples Necessities and
enabling them to provide for their Subsistence in the Vacant year from
Planting, have Enacted, and by the Governor, Debts due the Cessation-year, to
be paid one half down.

Time to be allowed for the other half, giving reasonable Security.


Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof; Be it
Enacted, That for all Debts already Contracted to be paid this present year in
Tobacco, except public Dues; any Debtor paying one half of the said Debt in
kind, shall have liberty for the payment of the other half until the 10th of
November 1668, giving reasonable Security, if requested, to pay the remaining
half at the time aforesaid: and in case the Creditor will not stay out that
time, but prosecute the Debtor for payment to be made sooner, it shall be in
the liberty and choice of the Debtor to make Tender of his Estate before the
next Justice of Peace, to legal valuation, for Payment of the said Second
Moiety: Provided, That if the said Debt be under Two Hogsheads of Tobacco, it
shall not be lawful for the Debtor to prejudice the Creditor by breaking a
Hogshead of Tobacco, and paying a Parcel thereof.

III. An Act for Valuation of Commodities for payment of Public Dues.
BE it also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Public Dues
this year, in regard of the Cessation and Cause that expectation of advancing
the Value of Tobacco, there be an abatement of the Sums formerly allowed: And
that all Public and County Debts, Ministers and Parish Dues, Officers Fees,
Fines, Quit Rents, and all other Rates and Debts generally that shall be
contracted and become due in the vacant year from Planting, may be paid in the
Country Commodities at the Rates here following: Valuation of Commodities for
payment of Public Dues, during the Cessation from Planting.
Viz. Wheat, Garravances, and English Pease per Bushel Forty pounds of
Tobacco, or Four Shillings, Indian Corn shell'd Two Shillings or Twenty pounds
of Tobacco, Barley per Bushel Thirty five pounds of Tobacco or Three Shillings
six pence. Wound Silk per pound Two hundred pounds of Tobacco or Twenty
Shillings, Indian Pease of all sorts except Garravances per Bushel Thirty five
pounds of Tobacco or Three Shillings six pence, Oats per Bushel Thirty pounds
of Tobacco or Three Shillings: Provided, That for prevention of Inconveniences
that the Receiver is subject to, if he have not Cask to carry his Grain, it is
further Enacted, That the Debtor shall provide and pay the Grain in Cask, and
the Creditor to allow him Ten per Cent. as in case of Tobacco. No rate is set
upon Flax, by reason of the uncertainty of the Quantity; nor Beef not Pork,
because perishable; but both these left to valuation according to Condition and
Goodness.

IV. An Act for Rating of Ordinary Keepers.
Vide Act 3. Anno 1671, and Act 10. Anno 1676/7.

V. An Act ascertaining Surveyors Fees.
Whereas the Act concerning the Fees of Surveyors, by reason of the low rates
set therein, which seems to have been first made above Twenty years since, when
Tobacco bore a greater value then can now be expected, deters any Man of Parts,
Abilities, or Integrity, from exercising the said Functions, in the faithful
and well discharge whereof, the peace and possession of the Inhabitants of this
Country are so much concerned, and yet for want of a Penalty therein
expressed, leaves a Liberty to every one to extort from the People what Sums
they please: Be it therefore Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the
Authority thereof, That for encouragment of able Men in that Science to
practice the same, that the Fees limited in that Act be doubled; viz. Fees
formerly allowed to Surveyors doubled.
Forty pounds of Tobacco for measuring every Hundred Acres of Land, if the
whole Divident exceed not, or amount to One thousand Acres; but if under that
Quantity, then Four hundred pounds of Tobacco; and for the same shall deliver
an exact Plat of the Land Surveyed: And if any Surveyor upon reasonable Demand,
Surveyors refusing to measure Land at the Rates herein appointed, to be fined.
not being by Sickness or any other lawful Impediment hindered, shall refuse to
measure the Land of any Person whatsoever, for the Consideration and
Satisfaction aforesaid; every such Surveyor shall be fined and pay for such his
Refusal, Four thousand pounds of Tobacco; and for exceeding the Fee, Two
hundred pounds of Tobacco for every Hundred Acres, half to the Party injured,
and the other half to the Informer, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any
Court of Judicature in Virginia: But if the Surveyor go further from home, then
he can return in a day, then such Satisfaction to be allowed him as by the
former Act is allowed.

VI. An Act repealing the Act of Encouragement for Killing of VVoolves.
Whereas in some Frontier Counties the number of Woolves killed and brought in
by Indians, though from never so remote places, has very much increased the
Taxes of the said Counties when no benefit has accrued; the Heads of the said
Woolves being purchased by some Inhabitants there, for Lucre of Encouragement
given by Act, to the insupportable burden of the people: Be it Enacted by this
present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, County Courts shall make
Bylaws for rewarding the Killing of Woolves.
That the allowance for Woolves killed by Indians, and the injury of the
persons and places by whom and when they are killed, be wholly left to the
County Courts by their Bylaws to take care and provide for, as shall be found
most requisite for the convenience and occasions of each County:
Notwithstanding the Governor and Council have assented to this, at the desire
of the Burgesses, are of Opinion that this Act will be by the chief desire
thereof quickly repealed.

VII. An Act concerning the Salt-VVork at Accomack.
Whereas the County of Northampton has showed, That by a former Act of
Assembly, the importation of Salt into that County was prohibited for the
greater Encouragment of Coll. Edmund Scarburgh, Salt permitted to be again
imported and sold in Northampton County.
who had erected a Salt-work at Accomack, but he not furnishing the wants of
the People in that County of Northampton according to expectation, and the Law
restraining their Relief from other places: Be it therefore Enacted by this
present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, That the said Act, for so
much as relates to that County of Northampton, be henceforth repealed, and
Liberty and License granted and given to any person to import and sell Salt
there as freely as before that Act of restraint he might have done; Colonel
Scarburgh himself having given his full assent to this Repeal.

VIII. An Act concerning Indians,
repealed by the 5th Act Anno 1671.

IX. An Act for Supply of Ammunition.
Each County empowered to make Bylaws for the provision of necessary
Ammunition at the County Charge.
Whereas there is a general Complaint of the want of Ammunition for defense of
the Country in these times of eminent Danger: It is Enacted by this Grand
Assembly and the Authority thereof, That each County shall by their Bylaws be
empowered to make such Provision thereof at a County Charge, as their several
Occasions shall be found necessary to require.

X. An Act for Setting up Looms in each County.
WHereas the present obstruction of Trade and the nakedness of the Country, do
sufficiently Evidence the necessity of providing a supply of our Wants, by
improving all means of raising and promoting Manufactures among our selves, and
the Governors Honor having by apparent Demonstrations manifested, that our
Poverty and Necessity proceed more from want of Industry then defect of
Ability, since that Five Women, or Children of Twelve or Thirteen years of age,
may with much ease provide sufficient Clothing for Thirty persons if they
would betake themselves to Spinning, which cannot be Objected against, if
Weavers and Looms were once provided: For the better Effecting whereof, A Loom
to be set up and a Weaver provided for each County within Two years.
Be it Enacted by the Authority of this Grand Assembly, That within two years
at furthest after the date of this Act, the Commissioners of each County Court
shall provide and set up a Loom and a Weaver in each of the respective Counties
of this Country at the charge of the County; And that no private person
setting up a Loom at his own Charge, shall excuse the County from setting up a
public one; but that every Court neglecting to perform the Tenor of this Act,
shall be fined Two thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use of the Public and
Informer: Provided that the executing thereof in the Counties of Rappahanack,
Stafford, Westmorland and Northumberland, who by the newness of their Grounds
pretend themselves incapable of making Provision for the soon Employment of a
Weaver, be respited for Four years after the date hereof.

XI. An Act Imposing a Fine for entertaining Run-aways.
WHereas diverse ill disposed Persons not valuing the Fine imposed by Act, which
by the inconsiderableness thereof, they think not worth the Pains or Charge of
recovery, do harbor and give Entertainment to Loitering Runaway Servants for
two or three days, or more; thereby encouraging the said Servants in such lewd
courses: For prevention whereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority of this present
Grand Assembly, Such as entertain Run-aways fined.
That what person-soever, contrary to the Act in force, shall harbor or
entertain any such Runaway Servant, shall be fined and pay Sixty pounds of
Tobacco for each day and night he shall so harbor them, to be recovered by the
Master or Owner of the said Servant, by Action of Debt in any Court of
Judicature in this Country. This Act extending only to those Servants that
serve by their first Indenture.

XII. An Act concerning Servants coming in without Indentures.
Whereas the present Act in force prescribing how long Servants coming in
without Indentures shall serve, enjoins all Servants adjudged by the Courts to
be Sixteen years of Age, to serve but Five years, and all under to serve until
they be Twenty four years old; by which inequality a Servant if adjudged never
so little under Sixteen years, pays for that small time Three years Service;
and if he be adjudged more, then the Master loses the like: Be it therefore
Enacted, That the said Act be from henceforth altered and amended; viz. That
all Servants coming in without Indentures after the Expiration of this Session
of Assembly, The time Servants coming in without Indentures shall serve.
shall serve according to their Age, viz. If adjudged Nineteen years or above,
then to serve Five years; if under that Age, then to serve so many years as he
wants of Twenty four, when his Age is adjudged by the Court: And that every
Master intending to Claim the benefit of this Act, is hereby required within
Two Courts at furthest, after he has bought or imported a Servant as
aforesaid, to carry him to the Court, who by a present Inspection at that time
will be best enabled to pass Judgment upon the Matter.

XIII. An Act for Criminals to bear their own Charges.
WHereas the Charge of prosecuting Criminal Persons has been hitherto usually
defrayed, part by the Public, Criminals (having Estates) shall defray the
Charge of their own prosecution.

Otherwise to be prosecuted at the Charge of the County.


but most by those Counties where the Offenders dwelt or the Fact was
committed, for avoidance of which Charge it is probable that many Lewd Livers
by a too favorable Censure escape their deserved Punishments: Be it therefore
Enacted by the Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, That where the person
committed has Estate sufficient to defray the Charge of his Prosecution, the
Public or County shall not be charged, but the whole paid out of the
Delinquents Estate, and the Public and County only then liable to satisfy
where no Estate or not sufficient can be found and discovered.

XIV. A Dispensation for Lower Norfolk to ship their Tobacco,
a private Act.

XV. An Act repealing the Acts of Encouragement.
WHereas the Prudence and Care of the Public Good in former Assemblies,
thought fit for the Advance and Promotion of Trade, Manufactures, and Staple
Commodities in the Country, to grant out of the Public certain Encouragements
for Building of Vessels, making of Silk, Cloth, etc. By which means diverse
people being induced to put the same in practice, have by their success made
evident demonstrations how beneficial the same will be; This Assembly in hopes
that all People now convinced of the Profits accruing thereby, will of their
own accord vigorously prosecute those apparent profitable designs; Have
therefore for the ease of the Public Taxes thought fit to Enact, and by this
Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, All Acts of Encouragement repealed
except the Act releasing the Imposition of 2 s. per Hogshead to the Inhabitants
rf this Collony.
it is Enacted, That all Acts of Encouragment of Silk, Building of Vessels, or
any other things else, henceforth be generally and totally Repealed and Void,
except the Act for release of the Impost of two Shillings per Hogshead to
Inhabitants of this Country adventuring in Vessels belonging properly and
solely to Virginia-Owners, according to the 134th Act of Assembly. And
moreover, That the Act for not planting Mulberry-Trees, which every one
intending to make Silk, now voluntarily propagate, be also repealed and made
void.

XVI. An Act for Millers to Grind according to Turn.
WHereas diverse Owners and Keepers of Public Mills in this Country, do refuse
to Grind Corn according to Turn, for the Reward and Toll already set and
appointed by Act; Be it enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and the
authority thereof, that what person soever, Master, Owner or Lessee of any
Mill, shall refuse to grind as aforesaid, shall be fined and amerced, One
Thousand Pounds of Tobacco for every such offense; And if the Miller so
refusing be a servant, he shall be punished at the discretion of the
County Court, where the offense shall be committed, and complained of, unless
the said servant can prove that what he did was done by order of the Master;
which Fine shall be recovered by any person injured by Action of Debt in the
Court of that County where the offense was committed.

XVII. An Act Including Sheep in the 77th Act.
WHereas the seventy seventh Act concerning the Insufficiency of Fences,
prohibits any injury to be done to several sorts of Beasts and Cattle, amongst
which Sheep are not Included, It is hereby enacted, Sheep Comprehended in the
Act concerning insufficiency of Fences.
that from henceforth Sheep shall be comprehended in the said Act, and damages
recovered for any injuries done to them, by virtue of the Act aforesaid, as for
other Cattle is there provided.

XVIII. An Act Ascertaining Damages upon Protested Bills of Exchange.
WHereas it appears that many Bills of Exchange drawn upon persons in England
by people resident in this Country, in confidence that the Goods by them sent,
might produce effects sufficient to satisfy them, which expectation being
frustated sometimes by the miscarrying of the Ship, sometimes by not sail of
the Goods, or pretense thereof by the Parties on whom they were drawn, causes
the said Bills to be protested, and by the great damage of thirty per Cent.
Damages upon protested Bills of Exchange shall not exceed 15. per Cent.
given by Act against the Party that charged them is found to tend too much to
the detriment and prejudice of the Inhabitants of this Country, It is therefore
enacted by this Present Grand Assembly and, the authority thereof, that from
henceforth the damage upon Bills of Exchange protested, shall not exceed
fifteen per Cent. and that the former Act giving thirty per Cent. be hereby
repealed and made void.

XIX. An Act declaring that no Justice shall take Fee.
Whereas there is an Act intended for the Relief of poor people, that Causes
not exceeding the value of twenty shillings sterling. or two hundred pounds of
Tobacco, might be determined by a Justice of the Peace without further suit;
and whereas Complaint has been made that some of the Justices have contrary to
the good intent of the said Act exacted Fees from the Parties coming before
them for Justice, to a greater value then the thing sued for amounted to; It is
enacted by this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, that it shall not be
lawful for any Justice of the Peace to receive of any person any Fees for any
Cause or Matters brought before him or determined by him.

XX. An Act declaring what is meant by Seating of Land.
Whereas there is in all Pattents a provisional Clause for Planting or Seating
the Land therein granted within three years, but never yet by any Law declared
what was meant by that Clause, Building a house and keeping a stock one whole
year upon Land, shall be accounted sufficient seating thereof.
nor what should be accounted sufficient Seating or Planting; This Grand
Assembly, for the better explanation thereof, have declared and enacted, and by
the authority thereof, do enact and declare, That building a house, and keeping
a stock one whole year upon the Land, shall be accounted Seating, and that
clearing, Planting and Tending an Acre of ground for one year, shall be
accounted Planting, and that either of these shall be adjudged as a sufficient
performance of the condition required by the Patent; and that after such
Planting or Seating the Land as aforesaid, and continuance of paying the
Quit-Rents, no Land shall be adjudged to be deserted.

XXI. An Act concerning Imperfect Pattents.
Whereas the Honorable Thomas Ludwell Esquire, has Informed the Assembly,
that he finds in the Records, many Patents for great parcels of Land, for which
there appears not any Rights upon Record of them extant, upon which the
Assembly, taking the Premises into serious consideration, and also the great
trouble and prejudice that may ensue to diverse honest Inhabitants of this
Country, in asserting their Titles, though in truth never so good, yet by these
neglects of the Clerk, rendered in strictness of Law altogether invalid, for
Remedy whereof, the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Present Grand
Assembly have enacted, and it is by the authority thereof, Enacted and
Ordained, that for preservation of all Present Tytles and prevention of future
Trouble, That all Lands held by former Patents, of which there is no Record
extant, or to which there are no Rights annexed in the Records until the date
of this Present Assembly, Fumer Patets shall remain firm and valid although no
Record thereof be extant.
shall for ever be held valid and firm, according to the claims of the several
Patents, those defects being found to have happened by the neglect of the Clerk
in those times in not making present entry of the Rights delivered to them, and
the Casualty of of two several Fires whereby many of those Rights, with other
Papers were destroyed, the Assembly hereby rendering Thanks to Mr. Secretary for
his care of preventing future trouble, All Patents shall for the future be
composed with the Record be some they pass the Office.
and requesting him to continue it in not suffering any Patent hereafter to
pass the Office, before the Rights are entered, and the Patent compared with
the Record.

XXII. An Act commanding Law Books to be provided for each County.
Whereas for the better Conformity of the Procedings of the Courts of this
Country to the Laws of England, it appears necessary, that for the better
direction therein, all the former Statutes at large, and those made since the
beginning of the Reign of his most Sacred Majesty that now is, and some other
esteemed Books of Law, be purchased; It is therefore by this Grand Assembly,
and the authority thereof, accordingly enacted, that all the aforesaid
Statute-Rooks, and Daltons Justice of the Peace, and Office of a Sheriff: and
Swainbournes Book of Wills and Testaments be sent for by Mr. Auditor, and paid
for out of the two shillings per Hogshead, and the like Books to be sent for by
some of the Commissioners of the County-Courts for the use of the Respective
Counties, and paid for out of the County-Levy.

XXIII. An Act Imposing Fines on Refractory Persons.
Whereas the Officers of the Militia have Complained, that diverse Refractory
Persons have in Contempt of authority impowering them, and to the ruin of all
Military Discipline refused to appear upon the days of exercise and other times
when required to attend upon public service; It is enacted by this Grand
Assembly, Such as refus to appear on the days appointed for the exercise of the
Militia. fined an hundred pounds of Tobacco.
that every person neglecting to appear, shall for every such Neglect be
amerced and fined, one hundred pounds of Tobacco, to be disposed of by the
Militia, for the use of the Regiment; And that the Commanders return of such
Fines to the Sheriffs of the Respective Counties shall be sufficient Warrant,
in case of the Parties denial of payment to levy the same by distress.
Provided, that if before the laying of the Levy, the Party Amerced do show to
his Commander such cause of his absence as by the Commander, shall be adjudged
reasonable then the Party to be excused and the Fine not returned.

XXIV. An Act for the better explanation of the 16th Act in the Printed Book.
Whereas the sixteenth Act for Sheriffs to take Bail was misinterpreted, and
some words left out; It is Enacted, that for prevention of Mistakes in Courts
of Judicature, a Copy be transcribed out of the Original for Correction of
mistakes of the Printed Book which follows; Be it also hereby enacted, That
all Sheriffs shall take sufficient Bail of all persons Arrested, with this
condition, to bring forth the Party Arrested or perform the award of the Court,
and if they shall neglect to take sufficient Bail of the Party arrested, or
otherwise consent to be the cause of his escape, then the said Sheriff shall be
liable to pay the award of the Court himself; Sheriffs neglecting to take Bail
or consenting to the escape of the Prisoner shall pay the award of the Court,
shall be fined a 1000 l. of Tobacco, if his consent to the escape be proved.
and shall also pay in case the Consent to the escape be proved, one thousand
pounds of Tobacco, one half the Public, the other half to the Party grieved
for his delay in recovering the Debt, but if Bail be taken, and the Party
appears not to answer, then Judgment shall be awarded against the Bail, always
provided that the Sheriff or Bail, shall if he desire it have an Attachment
against the Estate of the Party arrested, and not appearing, and further, that
if the Sheriff or Bail shall at the next Court to that which the arrest was
made, appear and bring forth the Body of the Party so arrested to answer the
suit; Then the Sheriff or Bail shall be acquitted from the Judgment past
against them.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY September 3. Anno 1667.
I. An Act for Tobacco of Maryland growth to be free from Duties.
WHereas there is an Order at present in force, requiring that all Tobacco
though of Maryland growth, shipped in Ships riding in any Harbor of Virginia,
should pay the Impost of two shillings per Hogshead; and whereas at present the
Inhabitants of the south side of Virginia in Potomack River are enforced for
their present necessity, to lay out or Ship the greatest part of their Tobacco
in Ships riding in the Government of Maryland, for which as is said, they are
to pay the like Duties of two shillings per Hogshead, as is paid for Maryland
Tobacco shipped upon Ships riding in Virginia; Be it Enacted by the Governor,
Council and Burgesses of this Present Grand Assembly, and the authority
thereof, That for Relief of the said Inhabitants of Virginia, who are otherwise
likely to pay double Duties, That no Tobaccoes of the growth of Maryland,
though laden in Ships riding in any Harbor in Virginia, shall be liable to pay
any Virginia Duties from the date of this Act until the first of October, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, 1668. Nor after, if the next Assembly find
cause to continue it. How long this Act shall continue in force, and upon what
conditions to be repealed.
Provided that if the Government of Maryland do lay Impost upon
Virginia-Tobacco shipped in Ships riding in their Harbor, then this Act to be
absolutely Void and Null, and all Tobacco of Maryland growth laden a board any
Ship in Virginia to pay Duties as formerly. Provided also, that if any person
shall fraudulently send on board any Ship in Virginia, Tobacccoes of the growth
of Virginia, and pretend the same to be of the growth of Maryland intending
thereby to defraud the Country of their Dues, he shall forfeit the Tobacco so
laden and concealed.

II. An Act declaring that Baptism of Slaves does not exempt them from Bondage.
WHereas some doubts have arisen whether Children that are Slaves by Birth, and
by the Charity and Piety of the Owners made partakers of the Blessed Sacrament
of Baptism should by virtue of their Baptism be made free; It is enacted and
declared by this Present Grand Assembly, and the authority thereof, that the
conferring of Baptism does not alter the condition of the person as to his
Bondage or Freedom That diverse Masters freed from this doubt may more Carefully
endeavor the propagating of Christianity by permitting Children though Slaves,
or those of greater growth if capable to be admitted to that Sacrament.

III. An Act of encouragement for Erecting Mills.
WHereas it would conduce much to the Convenience of this Country both for
grinding of Corn, and nearer Roads if Mills were erected at convenient places,
which diverse persons would willingly do, if not obstructed by the perverseness
of some persons, not permitting others, though not willing themselves to
promote so public a good; It is enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and
the authority thereof, Two Commisioners may be empowered by the County Court,
to appoint conveninient places whereon to erect Mills.
that if any person willing to erect one or more Mills upon convenient places,
has Land only on one side the said place, and the Owner of the Land on the
other side, refuse to let him have an Acre of Land to the use aforesaid, That
then the Countie-Court upon request of the Party so refused, shall order and
empower two Commissioners, or such other Credible Person as they shall think
fit to view the said Land; And if it take not away housing, or Orchards, or
other immediate Conveniences, then to vallue the said quantity of Land, and to
put the same into the possession of the Party building the said Mill or Mills,
he paying the consideration the Land is valued at; And it is further enacted,
Also for building of Churches or Court-houses.
that the like liberty shall be granted for two Acres of Land and no more for
erecting Churches or Court-houses. Provided that in case of desertion of any
Structure, the Land shall revert to the first Proprietor, he paying what he
received for it.

IV. An Act for Roads to Houses.
Whereas the dispatch of Business in this Country, is much obstructed for want
of Bridle ways to the several houses and Plantations, It is Enacted by this
Grand Assembly, and the authority thereof, that every person having a
Plantation, Convenient passage for Man and Horse shall be made to every
Plantation.
shall at the most plain and convenient place that leads to his house make a
Gate in the Fence, for the Convenience of passage of Man and Horse to his
house, about their Occasions at discretion of the Owners.

V. An Act against Exportation of Corn.
Vide Act 3. Anno 1675/6.

VI. An Act for Rating of Ordinary-Keepers.
Vide Act 10. Anno 1676.

VII. An Act for Forts to be built in each River.
Vide Act 2. Anno 1668. and Act 1. Anno 1672.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, September 17. 1668.
I. An Act for Establishing a Fast.
WHereas the many Sins of this Country may justly provoke the Anger of Almighty
God against us, and draw down his Judgments upon us, unless diverted by a
timely and hearty Repentance; The Governor, Council and Burgesses, taking the
same into their serious consideration, have enacted, and do by these Presents
enact, That the 27th day of August next, be set a part for a day of
Humiliation, hereby strictly requiring all persons on that day, to repair to
their Respective Parish-Churches, with Fasting and Prayer, to Implore Gods
Mercy, and deprecate the Evils justly impending over us; And be it further
enacted, that if any person or persons in contempt hereof, shall be found on
that day Gaming, Drinking, or Working, (works of necessity excepted) he or they
so offending, upon Presentment of the Churchwardens, and proof thereof made to
the Vestry, shall be fined one hundred pounds of Tobacco, half to the Informer,
half to the poor of the Parish; And it is further enacted, that all Ministers
in the Parish where they reside be required to repair themselves to the
solemnizing that day.

II. An Act for dispensation of Ship riding under the Forts.
WHereas the Act for erecting Forts enjoynes all Ships trading into this
Country to ride within the command of the Forts, now erected for security of
the said Ships in times of War and Danger, and since God has restored to us
the Blessing of an Universal Peace, by which the necessity occasioning that
injunction is taken away; The Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, for the ease and convenience of the Inhabitants and Traders have
enacted, and by these Presents do enact, That License and Liberty shall be, and
hereby is granted to all Merchants and Masters of any Ship or Vessel that
already is or hereafter shall come into any River of this Country, Ships
permitted to Ride in any part of the River, where they may most conveniently
unload.
to ride with their Ships in any part of that River, they shall make choice of,
for better dispatch of their Affairs, and this permission to continue in force,
until the Governors Honor find just cause to command the contrary.

III. An Act concerning Damages in Appeals.
WHereas the present Act about Appeals, seeming to take care only of the
damages sustained by Creditors in actions of Debt, is difficult in prescribing
a Remedy upon actions in the Case Trespass, etc. By which impunity litigious
persons do more boldly persist in stirring up and prosecuting malicious and
unjust suits, to the great trouble, vexation and damage of many honest men,
and the breach of His Majesty's Peace for Redressing whereof, It is enacted by
the Governor Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, Costs and Damages
given in County-Courts upon Appeal to the General Court if cast there, shall be
raised 50. per Cent.
and the authority thereof, That in all actions the damages, costs and
reasonable expenses of suit recovered against the Appellant in the County Court
by Judgment or Verdict of a Jury, shall have fifty per Cent. raised upon all
those costs and damages in the General Court or Assembly (if Appeal be made to
the General Court) against the person Appealing if cast in the suit.

IV. An Act about Correction of Runaways.
WHereas it has been questioned whether Servants running away may be punnished
with corporal punishment by their Master or Magistrate, since the Act already
made gives the Master satisfaction by prolonging their time of Service:
Corporal punishment may be inflicted on Runaways.
It is enacted and declared, That corporal punishment moderately inflicted on a
Runaway-Servant by Master or Magistrate, shall not deprive the Master of the
Satisfaction allowed by the Law; the one being as necessary to reclaim them
from further persisting in that idle course, as the other is just, to repair
the Damages sustained by the Master.

V. An Act Impowering County-Courts to build Work Houses, assisted by the
Vestry.
Vide Act 10. An. 1666

VI An Act permitting the Exportation of Horses and Mares.
WHereas the numbers of Horses and Mares is so increased, that there appears
not any occasion to continue the Restraint of their Exportation; It is enacted
by this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, That the Exportation of
Horses and Mares shall be from henceforth free, and the Act prohibiting it
Repealed.

VII. An Act Continuing the Tax on Negro-Women.
WHereas some doubts have arisen whether Negro-Women set free, were still to be
accounted Tythable, according to a former Act; Negro-women though enjoying the
privilege of freedom, not exempt from the payment of Taxes.
It is declared by this Grand Assembly, That Negro-Women, though permitted to
enjoy the Privilege of their Freedom, yet ought not in all respects to be
admitted a full fruition of the Exemptions and Immunities of the English, and
are therefore still liable to payment of Taxes.

VIII. An Act concerning the Property of Tobacco.
WHereas some question has been made whether weighing or marking, or both,
Marking of Tobacco alone, sufficient to Transfer the Property thereof.
transferred the property of Tobacco; some persons having both by weight and
mark received, and yet by the alteration of their own occasions have after
refused the Tobacco so received, and upon pretense of non-acceptance, having
the Specialties still in their hands, have recovered Judgments for sums that
justly were discharged: Therefore be it enacted by this present Grand Assembly,
and the Authority thereof, That Marking alone (being the usual way of
appropriating all things) without Weighing, does transfer the property of
Tobacco to him that sets, or causes to be set his mark upon it: And that for
ascertaining the sum paid, if the Receiver have not convenience to weigh it
when he marks it, then he that pays it away, may after ten days respite, desire
any Commissioner of that County to weigh the Tobacco, or cause it to be
weighed; and the Attestation of the said Commissioner, or the oath of the
person or persons by him deputed, shall oblige the Creditor to discount, or
allow the quantity.

IX. An Act for Restraint of Tipling-Houses.
WHereas the excessive number of Ordinaries and Tipling-Houses, set up for the
advance of a private Gain, are found to be full of mischief and
ill-convenience, by cherishing Idleness and Debauchedness in a sort of loose
and careless persons, who neglecting their Calling, mispend their time in
Drunkenness; and having once contracted Debts beyond their Abilities of
payment, make Escapes out of the Country, to the detriment of the Public, the
loss of their particular Creditors, Not above one or two Tipling-houses or
Ordinaries to be in each County.
and often to the Charge of the Parish where they lived: Be it enacted and
declared, That the Commissioners of each County Court be required to take
especial care for the Suppressing and Restraint of the exorbitant number of
Ordinaries and Tipling-Houses in their respective Counties: And not to permit
in any County more then one or two, Except on Great Roads Ports, etc. as the
County Courts shall see necessary.
and those near the Courthouse, and no more; unless in Public Places, as
Ports, Ferries, and great Roads, where they may be necessary for the
Accommodation of Travelers, according as their several Courts shall find the
necessity of their Counties require. And further, That the said Commissioners
take good Security for those to whom Licenses are granted to conform themselves
to the Laws; Such as have Licenses to keep them, shall give security to the
County Court Commissioners.
And that all persons keeping Tipling-houses without License shall be fined two
thousand pounds of Tobacco, half to the County, half to the Informer, for each
time he offends.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the 20th Day of October, Anno 1669.
I. An Act about the Casual Killing of Slaves.
WHEREAS the only Law in Force for Punishment of Refractory Persons, Resisting
their Masters, Mistresses, or Overseer, cannot be Inflicted on Negroes; Nor the
Obstinance of many of them, by other than violent means Suppressed: Be it
Enacted by this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, That if any Slave
resist his Master, Slaves resisting when Corrected if they chance to be killed;
their death shall not be accounted Felony.
or others by his Masters order correcting him, and by the Extremity of the
Correction should chance to dye, such death shall not be accounted Felony; But
the Master, or that other Person by his Master appointed to punish him, be
acquit from Molestation: Since it cannot be presumed that Prepensive Malice,
which alone makes Murder Felony, should induce any Man to destroy his own
Estate.

II. An Act against the Importation of Horses and Mares.
WHereas the last Assembly partly to restrain the numerous increase of Horses,
now growing rather Burdensome, then any way advantageous to the Country;
partly to encourage Trade, did permit that Mares might be exported; this
Assembly taking Care that both the ends aforesaid, might be advanced: Have
Enacted, And by these presents do Enact, No Horses, or Mares to be Imported
upon Penalty of Siezure.
That no Horses or Mares after the last of December next, shall be by any
Person or Persons Imported, or brought into this Colony from any other
Plantation or Government whatsoever; And that if any other Person or Persons
shall contrary to the Intent of this Act, by any ways or means bring into this
Country any Horse or Mare, after the last of December aforesaid; The Sheriff of
that County into which they shall be brought, is hereby strictly required and
enjoined, to make present Siezure of the said Mares or Horses, for the use of
the Public, and to render an account thereof, to the next Assembly; and out of
the Value, the moiety thereof to be allowed to the Informers.

III. An Act for Re-examination of Orders in the County-Courts.
WHereas the Twenty Second Act of Assembly, March 23. 1661. Prescribes a way of
Re-examination of Orders in the General Court, but no mention made in the
County-Courts. County-Courts shall re-examine their Orders.
It is hereby Enacted, that the Course that Act prescribes for the General
Courts, shall be strictly Observed in the County-Courts; and the County Court
omitting according to that Act to re-examine and Sign their Orders, shall be
fined for every such Omission One Thousand Pound of Tobacco, whereof the
Sheriff shall give Account to the next Assembly, who are to dispose the same to
the Use of the Public.

IV. An Act for the Fee of a Dedimus Potestatem.
WHereas the Act granting Commission of Dedimus Potestatem, omitting the Fee,
The Fee of a Dedimus Potestatem Assertained.
has caused great extortion in diverse Clerks: It is Enacted that a Fee for a
Dedimus Issuing from the General Court, shall be ascertained at Fifty pounds of
Tobacco, and in the County Court, at Twenty five pounds of Tobacco each
Commission.

V. An Act for freeing Virginia-Owners from Castle-Duties.
WHereas the Act for Encouragement of Virginia, Virginia Owners exempted from
Castle Duties.
Owners Exempts them from payment of the Two Shillings Per Hogshead. It is
hereby Enacted, that they be also exempted from paying the Castle Duties for
their greater Encouragement.

VI. An Act for Encouragement to make Silk.
WHereas the Advancement for the making of Silk will undoubtedly tend greatest
as to the present Honor and Reputation, so to the future great benefit and
profit of the Country; It is Enacted, that the former Encourae-gment of Fifty
Pounds of Tobacco, for every pound of wound Silk, be allowed as formerly out of
the Public. Fifty pound of Tobacco allowed by the Public for every pound of
Wound-Silk.


VII. An Act for each County to send two Burgesses.
WHereas several Inconveniences have arisen by the Act, giving liberty to the
Counties to choose one or two Burgesses at discretion, as the Retarding the
business of the House, when those single Burgesses are upon Committees, or have
any Suit of their own, or differences between diverse Parishes in the Counties;
Or have their Appearance hindered by Sickness or otherwise. In all which
occasions, the County that sends, or part of it, are deprived of the privilege
of their Representatives; Each County to send two Burgesses.
It is Enacted that each County after this present Session, shall be enjoined
to return two Burgesses for the better service of the Public.

VIII. An Act for Encouragement to Apprehend Runawayes.
Vide Act the first, Anno 1670.

IX. An Act for destroying Wolves,
Repealed by Act 10. 1670.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the Third of October, Anno 1670.
I. An Act concerning Runaways.
Whereas the Act made the last Assembly for encouragement to Apprehend
Runnawayes, has seemed too Burdensome to the Public, by the greatness of the
Sum there granted to the taker of them up. And also difficient in some things
very necessary for the restraint of Runawayes. Upon Consideration whereof, It
is Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, That the former Act of October, 1669. be
Continued in its full force; But the Sum of one Thousand Pounds of Tobacco
therein granted to the Taker of them up, Rewards for the Apprehending of
Runawayes limited.
shall be and hereby is reduced to two Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, if the
Runaway be found above ten Miles from his Masters House. And one hundred Pounds
of Tobacco, if found above five miles from his Masters house, to be paid by the
Public, in the County where the Party dwells, If it can be for every servant
of what quality soever; And that the servant not being Slave, who are also
comprehended in this Act, after the expiration of his full time due to his
Master, shall serve any person he shall be assigned to, by the Assembly or any
Commissioner from them, the Term of 4 Months for every two hundred pounds of
Tobacco paid for him, The Assign giving Commission to the said Commissioners
to repay the Tobaceo to the Public. And the Commissioners receiving such
Commission to return it to the County Court, and the County Court to the
Assembly; And that the said Runaway may be the more easily detected, It is
further Enacted that every Master having a Servant that has Runaway twice,
shall be, and hereby is Enjoined and Commanded to keep his Hair close cut. And
that every Master failing herein, How Masters are to deal with Runawayes.
shall be fined One Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, for every time the said Fugitive
shall after the second time be taken up, half to the Public, half to the
Informer. And for the better preventing such attempts, It is further Enacted.
That every Constable into whose hands the said Fugitive shall by any
Commissioners Warrant be first Committed, The Duty of Counstables in Conveying
Runawayes to their Masters.
shall be, and hereby is enjoined by virtue of this Act, though omitted in the
Warrant, to whip him severely, and then to Convey him to the next Constable
toward his Masters House, who is to give him the like Correction, and so every
Constable, through whose Precincts he passes, to do the like. And that
Constables may be the more Careful in their Offices; It is further Enacted,
That every Constable into whose Custody the Runaway shall be Committed, shall
give a Receipt to the Constable or Party he receives them from, to the end,
that if the said Fugitive should by negligence of any Constable make an escape,
such negligence might be discovered; and for the Offense, pay Four Hundred
Pounds of Tobacco, half to the Public, half to the Informer, and the Fine io
the former Act of One Thousand Pounds of Tobacco to be Repealed. And because
such Runawayes, after the expiration of their time, may by virtue of their
Masters Certificate Remove from the place they dwell, in and by such
Concealment defraud the Public of what has been disbursed for him, It is
further Enacted, That every Respective Master Owner of such Servants indebted
to the Public, shall immediately after the time of such Servant is expired,
deliver him to the next Justice, who is to deliver him to the next Sheriff to
be secured till the next County Court, there to be Proceeded with, as the Law
directs, unless such Servant can procure sufficient Security to pay the Penalty
laid on him by the Act; And that every Master giving Certificate before such
Delivery of such Servant to the Justice, shall Repay the Public whatsoever
bath been disburst for the Recovery of his Servant during the time he served
him.

II. An Act Concerning Fences.
Whereas the Act for Fences does not sufficiently provide for Remedy of those
many damages done by Unruly Horses, breaking into Cornfieldsd, it is by the
Authority of this Grand Assembly Enacted, That the Owner of such Horses shall
be, and hereby is required and enjoined to take some effectual course for
Restraining them, from Trespassing their Neighbors, from the Twentieth of
July, to the last of October in every year; it being much fitter that Richmen,
who have the benefit of such Horses, should provide for their restraint, then
the Poor enjoined to the impossibility of very high Fences: and if any Horse,
or Horses shall at any time break into any Corn-Field, the Fence being four
foot and a half high, Fences of Cornfieldsd to be four foot and a half high.
then the Owner of such Horse, or Horses, upon proof of the damage, shall pay
for the First Trespass, single damages, and for every Trespass afterward
double damages to the Party Grieved: And because question has been made about
the sufficiency of Fences, Damages for Trespass.
according to the former Act, enjoining them to be close to the bottom, It is
hereby Enacted, that being so close as nothing mentioned in the former Act, can
creep through, is only by that Act intended.

III. An Act for the Election of Burgesses, and by whom.
Whereas many endeavors have been used for the public good in the Election
of Burgesses, and whereas the usual way of choosing, is by the Votes of all
Persons, who having served their time, are Freemen of the Country, who having
little interest in the Country, do oftener make Tumults at the Election, to the
great disturbance of His Majesty's Peace, then by their discretion in their
Votes, provide for the conservation thereof, by making choice of Persons fitly
qualified, for the discharge of so great a Trust, and whereas the Laws of
England grant a Voice in such Elections, Now but Freeholders and Housekeepers,
shall have a voice in Elections of Burgesses.
only to such as by their Estates real or personal have interest enough to tie
them to an endeavor of the public good; It is hereby Enacted, That none but
Freeholders and Housekeepers, who only are answerable to the public for the
Levies, shall hereafter have a Voice in the Election of any Burgess in this
Country, and that the Election be at the Courthouse.

IV. An Act for Lists of Tytheables to be Published.
WHereas many endeavors have been used for prevention of Frauds in taking the
Lists of Tytheables; It is hereby Enacted, for the surer discovery thereof,
that at the next Court after the tenth of June in every County, the names and
numbers of Tytheables in every List taken by the Respective Justices in their
Respective Precincts limited them, be taken by the Clerk of the County Court,
and by him written, and set up at the Court Door, Lists of Tythcables shall be
set up at the Court-Door.
all that Court-day, to the end that if any concealment have been made, the
persons living near them may discover them to the Court, and such Penalties be
inflicted on them as by the former Law is enjoined

V. An Act declaring no Indians nor Negroes to buy Christian-Servants.
WHereas it has been questioned, whether Indians or Negroes manumitted, or
otherwise free, could be capable of purchasing Christian Servants; It is
Enacted, Indians and Negroes may buy their own Natives, but not Christians.
that no Negro nor Indian though baptized, and enjoying their own Freedom,
shall be capable of any such purchase of Christians; but yet not debarred from
buying any of of their own Nation.

VI. An Act showing how Certificates for Marriages shall Issue*
WHereas Complaint has been made, that diverse Persons to the defeating the
Law, and Defrauding Parents and Guardians of that natural right, and just
Privilege, in disposing of their Children and Orphans in Marriage, have
clandestinely procured the Clerk of other Counties, then that the Parents live
in, to give them Certificates, for Licenses, and so the Parents by the
inequality of the match dishonored, and the Child ruinated in her Fortunes; It
is Enacted, that the Act for Licenses to Issue one Certificate from the Clerk
of the County Court, be declared to extend to no other Clerk; but of that
County where the Maid, her Parents or Guardian dwells, and that the Clerk of
that County shall not grant any such Certificates without the personal consent
of the Parent or Guardian; Certificates for marriage not to be granted without
the Consent of the Parent or Guardian.
and that in every Certificate the Clerk shall expressly averr the same, and
every Clerk that shall grant them otherwise then before, expressed to forfeit
his place.

VII. An Act concerning Litigious Suits.
Whereas Diverse Litigious Suites are conceived merely out of envy and Malice,
to the ruin of diverse poor men, by forcing them to a neglect of their
domestic affairs, and unnecessary expenses, during their attendance at General
Courts: It is hereby Enacted, that in all cases where the Molestation shall be
found to be unjust, the party so molesting without cause, What Damages are
allowed in Case of Litigious Suites.
may be enforced to pay to the party grieved for every day, he may be
reasonably in going to James City, and returning home thirty pound of Tobacco
per day, and for every day of his Attendance to answer sixty pound of Tobacco
per day, besides his Ordinary Nonsuit allowed by a former act, and costs of
Court.

VIII. An Act concerning Commissioners Warrants.
Whereas it has been doubted whether the Warrant of any Commissioners be in
force, to constrain a Constable of another County to prosecute, by Hue and Cry;
or to apprehend or convey Runaways to the next Constable: It is hereby Enacted
and Declared, that the said Warrant directed first to a Constable within his
own Precincts, Constables are to obey Comissioners Warrants.
and so from Constable to Constable for avoiding delays in such necessary
Pursuits, obliege every Constable to whom it shall come to the observance and
performance of the Contents, of this Precept.

IX. An Act of Penalty for not returning two Burgesses.
Whereas the Act for Electing two Burgesses for each County for want of a
Fine, has not had the due observance it ought; It is Enacted, that every
County not sending two Burgesses Penalty on Countys for not sending two
Burgesses.
to every Session of Assembly, shall be fined ten Thousand pounds of Tobacco,
to the Use of the Public.

X. An Act Repealing the Act about Wolves.
WHereas the Act for Encouragement of Indians to kill Wolves, and paying the
Tribute, Beaver in Wolves-heads, has not produced such Effects as was hoped
and desired, It is therefore Enacted, that the Act concerning the destruction
of Wolves, and paying the encouragement by the Public be Repealed, and the
former Act to remain in force.

XI. An Act for the better payment of Two Shillings Per Hogs-Head,
vide Act 3. Anno 1680.

XII. An Act concerning who shall be Slaves.
WHereas some disputes have arisen whether Indians taken in War by any other
Nation, and by that Nation that takes them sold to the English, are Servants
for Life, or Term of Years; It is Resolved and Enacted, that all Servants not
being Christians, imported into this Country by Shipping, shall be Slaves for
their life time, All Servants imported not being Christians shall be Slaves
during Life.
but what shall come by Land shall serve if Boys and Girls, until thirty years
of Age, if Men and women, twlve years and no longer. But those that come by
Land for a time limited.


At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the Twentieth of September, Anno 1671.
I. An Act Prohibiting Millers the taking of more then one eight part of
English Grain Toll, for Grinding thereof.
Whereas diverse Complaints have been Exhibited against the greatness of Toll
paid to Millers, for Grinding of Corn, for the Regulating whereof for the
future, Be it Enacted and Ordained, by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of
this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof; And it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained, That no Miller shall take for grinding of English Grain, more than
one eighth part, and for grinding of Indian Corn, Millers shall take but one
eighth part for Grinding English Corn, and one sixth for Indian.
more than one sixth part, as formerly; and that every Miller exceeding herein
shall undergo such Fine and Penalty as is imposed by a former Act made at James
City, the 23d. of October, 1666.

II. An Act permitting the Exportation of Wool Hides, and Iron.
Vide Act 12. Anno 1680.

III. An Act for moderating the Rates of Liquors.
Vide Act 10. Anno 1676/7

IV. An Act providing how Negroes belonging to Orphans of Intestates shall be
disposed of.
WHereas in the former Act concerning the Estates of Persons dying Intestate,
It is Provided, That Sheep, Horses, and Cattle, should be delivered in kind to
the Orphans, when they come of Age according to the several Ages the said
Cattle, were of when the Guardian took them into his possession, to which some
have desired that Negroes might be added, this Assembly considering the
difficulty of procuring Negroes in kind, as also the Vallue and Hazard of their
Lives, have doubted whether any sufficient men would be found, who would engage
themselves to deliver Negroes of equal ages, if the specifical Negroes should
dye, or become by age or accident inserviceable; be it therefore Enacted and
Ordained by this Grand Assembly, The Disposal of Negroes belonging to Orphans,
referred to the County-Courts
and the Authority thereof, That the consideration of this be referred to the
County-Courts, who are hereby Authorized, and empowered either to cause such
Negroes to be duly apprized, sold at an Outcry, or preserved in kind, as they
shall find it most expedient for the preservation, Improvement, or advancement,
of the Estate and Interest of such Orphans.

V. An Act Repealing the Act making it death for Indians coming into
Henrico-County.
WHereas the Burgesses for the County of Henrico have showed several
inconveniences and hazards, that may happen, by the liberty granted to the
English, to kill any Indian coming within the bounds of that County, Indians
permitted to come into Henrico-County.
which this Assembly taking into consideration, have Enacted, and it is hereby
Enacted and Ordained by the Authority thereof, that the said Act be Repealed;
and the Indians permitted to come into the said County as well as others, about
their lawful occasions, Provided they be no where entertained but by License
legally obtained from the Right Honorable the Governor, as in other places.

VI. An Act concerning Sheriffs Fees for Arrests.
WHereas Complaints have been made that some Sheriffs extorted greater Fees for
Arrests then were allowed by Law, viz. Twenty Pounds of Tobacco for commitment
and Releasment, whether the person were Imprisoned or not, It is Enacted and
Declared by this Grand Assembly, That the just Fee for an Arrest is Ten Pounds
of Tobacco, for the Bond Five Pounds of Tobacco, The Fee due to the Sheriff for
an Arrest.
and not any thing for Commitment, or Releasment, unless the Person were
actually put in Prison.

VII. An Act for Naturalization,
Vide Act II. Anno 1680.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the Four and Twentieth of September,
Anno 1672.
I. An Act for the defense of the Country.
Whereas for the necessary Defense of this Country, and Security of the Ships
and Vessels trading thereto; It has been Enacted, that sundry Forts should be
built in convenient places, upon the Rivers, which accordingly have been
effected, but forasmuch as the Materials wherewith the said Forts were built
were not sufficient nor lasting, some have sufferred utter Demolishment, some
very ruinous, and some with some small charge are capable of Reparation; This
Grand Assembly taking the same into their serious consideration, and desirous
as much as in them lies, to provide for the safety of this his Majesty's
Country, so far forth as the present Capacity thereof will admit; Has thought
fit to enact, and it is hereby Enacted and ordained, Forts ruinated and
demolished shall be built anew, or repaired with Brick.
by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the
Authority thereof, that the Forts on all the Rivers be built substantially with
Brick in all such places, where the Demolishment, or ruin of the former forts
shall require to be built anew, and that those Forts that are capable of being
repaired, shall also be done with Brick, in all such places where the
demolishment or Ruin of the former Forts shall require; and that the
Commissioners of the Respective Associations do take care that this Act be put
into speedy and Effectual Execution, and whereas the Moneys rising from the
Fort-Duties, have been designed to remain in Stock for the use of the
Respective Forts, which at present is not sufficient to defray this charge of
building and repairing; Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
it shall and may be Lawful for the Comissioners of each Association, and they
are hereby fully authorized and Empowered to Assess, How Levies are to be made
for effecting it.
and Levy so much Tobaccoes in their Respective Counties, as shall be wanting
and needful for the building and repairing of their Respective Forts as
aforesaid, and whereas the Act of 1667 has provided for the Mannagement and
Command of the Forts; It is hereby further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that this additional be thereunto made; viz. That upon all Alarms or sudden
Invasions, or Occasions in the absence of the Major Generals, the next Colonel
or adjacent Commander to any Fort, shall draw down of his Regiment his or their
Company or Companies sufficient for the defense thereof, till further order of
the Superior Officers; And forasmuch as against all times of danger, it ought
to be the care of all men to provide that their Arms and Habiliments of war be
always kept fixed and fit for Service, and that Armourers and Smiths may be
encouraged to work; It is also enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Rates of
Smiths, Armourers, etc. to be assertained.
that the Commissioners of the Respective Associations, shall and do Ascertain
the Rates for the work of Armourers and Smiths and such Artificers. And for the
prevention of the great trouble that usually accrues to Artificers in
Collecting several small Parcels in payment for work done, that the said
Artificers shall take from under the hands of those for whom they work, and
return the same to the Commissioners aforesaid, which accounts by them shall
also be returned, Rated into their Respective County Courts, when the Levy is
laid, the Artificers to be paid entire by the Counties, and the Counties
Reimbursed The said Artificers to be paid by the Counties, and the Counties to
be Reinbursed.
by the Person for whom the work was done, And that the said Artificers may not
delay people which repair to them with their Arms, be strictly enjoined under a
Fine to be imposed by the said Commissioners, to lay aside all other works to
go about this of Arms. And whereas it has been a frequent and evil practice of
many men upon sight of Ships or Vessels newly arriving, to go on Board, not
knowing whether they be Friends or enemies, by means whereof opportunity has
been given and taken by the Enemies, to obtain intelligence to the great
prejudice of the Country, for prevention whereof for the future; Be it Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be lawful for any Cannooe-Boat or
Sloop to go on Board any Ship or Vessel, that shall arrive into any part of
Virginia, before the said Ship or Vessel send on shore, No Boat to go on Board
a Ship newly arrived, before the said Vessel send on shore.
and thereby are known what they are. And if any shall offend in this kind,
each Cannooe or Boat shall be amerced 400. Pounds of Tobacco, and Cask, and
Sloope One Thousand Pounds of Tobacco and Cask to be recovered by Action of
Law, One Moytie to the use of the County, where the Offense shall be Committed,
and the other Moytie to the Informer; But if Servants only have the Rule of
the Cannooe-Boat or Sloop, they to receive corporal punishment of Forty Lashes,
but redeemeable by the Fine aforesaid, provided always that this Clause of the
present Act for preventing intelligence to the Enemy, do and shall continue in
Force during times of War and no longer.

II. An Additional Act concerning Orphans Estates.
WHereas the sixty sixth Act of the Grand Assembly, Holden at James City the
23d. of March, 1661. has laid down several Rules unto the County-Courts, for
the management and securing the Estates of Orphans. Now for as much as it has
been manifested to this Assembly, that some Courts have endeavored to dispose
of some Estate of Orphans according to the Act have not found any persons
willing to take and secure them in manner and form as that Law requires. This
Grand Assembly taking the same into their Consideration, and desiring that such
an expedient might be provided, That in such Cases neither the Courts nor the
Orphans may be prejudiced, have thought fit that an Additional Act be made
thereto. Be it therefore Enacted, By the Governor, Council and Burgesses of
this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof; That it shall, and may be
lawful for the County-Courts, County-Courts Authorized to dispose of Orphans
Estates.
to dispose of Orphans Estates according to the best of their judgment and
advantage of the Orphans. In such Cases where the said Courts cannot find
persons, will take Orphans Estates according to the before Recited Act.

III. An Act concerning Tytheables born in the Country.
FOr the better discovery of what persons born in this Country, are and ought
to be accounted Tytheables, and the ages of the younger sort the better known.
Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly,
and by the Authority thereof; persons appointed by the County-Courts shall take
Lists of Tytheables.
That all persons who are appointed by the County-Courts, to take the Lists of
Tytheables each County shall take an account of all Negroe Mulatto, and Indian
Children within their several Precincts. And the Masters or Owners of such
Children, are to make appear upon Oath or Evidence the ages of them. And that
all Negroe and Mulatto Children and Slaves that shall be born in this Country,
The Births of Negro and Muletto Children and Slaves born in Virginia shall be
Registered
shall by their Respective Masters or Owners within Twelve Months after their
Births, be Registered in the Parish Register with their exact Ages. And in
default thereof, the said Master or Owner shall pay Leavie for them for that
year, and so yearly till such Register be made. And it is further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That all Negro Women born in this Country, shall be
accounted Titheables at sixteen years of age.

IV. An Act limiting how long accounts shall be Pleadable.
FOr the prevention and avoiding of many Suits and Controversies, it has
seemed Convenient to this Grand Assembly, to limit a time beyond which accounts
may not be pleadable, for as much also as there is a Law, which admits no Bills
pleadable after five years; Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Accounts shall not be pleadable
after three years by persons living in this Country
Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
that accounts shall not be pleadable after three years by any person living in
this Country. And not after five years by any person, that shall lay claim by
accounts out of this Country this Act not relating any thing to the Act
concerning accounts against dead men's Estates.

V. An Act concerning Servants Sold for the custom.
WHereas it has been the Practice of diverse Servants, who have been sold for
the custom of the Country after the departure of the Ship wherein they arrive;
And Persons who sold them to produce or pretend Indentures for shorter time:
Whereupon disputes have frequently arisen between the said Servants and their
Masters for Prevention whereof for the future: be it Enacted, by the Governor
Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof; that
every Servant who comes Inpresumable without Indenture, and so sold for the
Custom, shall by his Master be brought before some Justice of the Peace, to
declare whether he has any Indenture, and if the Servant shall allege he
has, Indentures to be produced.
but cannot as then produce it, the said Justice shall in the Case Assign him
one Months time, within which if the said Servant fail to produce it, he shall
be barred from his Claim; by reason of any pretended Indenture whatsoever.

VI. An Act concerning Masters of Ships and Collectors,
Vide Act the third, Anno 1680.

VII. An Act for Suppressing of Vagabonds and disposing of poor children to
Trades.
WHereas some wholesome Laws and Statutes have by the Wisdom of several
Parliaments of England been made and are in force; as well for the Suppression
of Vagrant and Idle Persons as setting the poor on work, The neglect of which
Laws amongst us has encouraged and much increased the number of Vagabonds,
idle and desolute Persons; Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted and
ordained, by the Governor Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly and the
Authority thereof, that the Justices of peace in every County do put the Laws
of England against Vagrant Idle and desolate Persons, The Laws of England shall
be put in Execution aginst Idle and vagrant Persons.
into strict Execution; And that the Respective County-Courts shall and hereby
are authorized and Empowered to place out all Children, whose Parents are not
able to bring them up Apprentices to Trades; Poor Children to be provided for.
The Males till one and twenty years of Age, and the Females to other necessary
Employments until eighteen years of Age and no longer, and the Church wardens
of every Parish shall be strictly enjoined by the Courts to give an account
annually at their Orphans Courts, of all such children, within their Parish as
they judge to be within the said Capacity.

VIII. An Act for the apprehension and Suppression of Runaway Negroes and
Slaves.
FOrasmuch as it has been manifested to this Grand Assembly, that many Negroes
have been and still are out in Rebellion in sundry parts of this Country, and
that no means have been found for the Apprehension and Suppression of them;
from whence many mischiefs of very dangerous consequence may arise to the
Country if either other Negroes Indians or Servants should happen to fly forth,
and join with them, for the Prevention whereof; Be it Enacted by the Governor
Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, that
if any Negroe Mulatto, Indian Slave or Servant, for life runaway, and shall be
persued by Hue and Cry: Runaway Negooes and Slaves shall be persued by Hue and
Cry.
It shall and may be Lawful for any Person who shall endeavor to take them
upon the Resistance of such Negroe Mulatto, Indian Slave or Servant for life,
to kill or wound him or them so Resisting, Provided always, and it is the true
intent and meaning thereof: That such Negroe Mulatto, Indian Slave or Servant
for life be named and described in the Hue and cry, Runaway Negroes Mulatto
Indians Slaves or Servants for life resisting may be killed.
which is also to be signed by the Master or owner of the said Runaway: And if
it happen that such Negroe Mulatto, Indian Slave, or Servant for life, do dye
of any wound in such their Resistance obtained: The Master or owner of such,
shall receive Satisfaction from the Public, The Master shall receive
Satisfaction from the Public.
for his Negroe Mulatto, Indian Slave, or Servant for life, so killed or dying
of such wounds, and the Persons who shall kill or wound by virtue of any such
Hue and cry, any such so resisting in manner as aforesaid shall not be
questioned for the same, he forthwith giving notice thereof, and returning the
Hue and cry, or warrant to the Master or owner of him or them so killed or
wounded, or to the next Justice of the Peace: And it is further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, At what rates such Negroes and Slaves shall be vallued.
that all such Negroes and Slaves shall be vallued at four thousand five
hundred Pounds of Tobacco and cask a piece, and Indians at three thousand
pounds of Tobacco and cask, and further if it shall happen that any Negroe
Mulatto, Indian Slave, or Servant for Life in such their Resistance, to receive
any wound whereof they may not happen to dye; but shall lie any considerable
time sick or disabled; Then also the Master or owner of the same so sick or
disabled, shall receive from the public a Reasonable Satisfaction for such
damages as they shall make appear they have sustained thereby at the
County Court. Who shall thereupon grant the Master or owner a Certificate to
the next Assembly of what damages they shall make appear. The Neighbor Indians
required to sieze Runaways and bring them before some Justice of the Peace.
And it is further Enacted, that the Neighbor Indians do, and they are hereby
required and enjoined to sieze all Runaways whatsoever that shall happen to
come amongst them, and to bring them before some Justice of the Peace, who upon
the Receipt of such servant or servants, slave or slaves from the Indians shall
pay unto the said Indian or Indians for a Recompense for each twenty Arms
length of Rhoanoke or the value thereof, The Recompense allowed for so doing.
as the Indian shall like of, for which the said Justice of the Peace shall
receive from the public two hundred and fifty pounds of Tobacco, and the said
Justice is to proceed in conveying the runaway to his Master according to the
Law, How long this Act shall continue in Force
in such cases already provided this act to continue in force until the next
assembly, and no longer unless then it be thought fit to continue it.

IX. An Act concerning Swamps and Marshes.
WHereas several Inconveniences may arise to many of the Inhabitants of this
Country, who have Lands adjoining to Swamps Marshes and sunken Lands
unpattented, If any others who are disjoined from the same may be admitted
presently to take up and Patent them. This Grand Assembly taking the same into
their Consideration, and being willing that men's very Conveniences be
preserved unto them, from which in this case they need not depart but by their
own default have Enacted and ordained, and it is by the Governor Council and
Burgesses of this Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, enacted and
ordained; That it shall not be lawful for any Person whatsoever to take up any
Marshes swamps or sunken Lands adjoining to any man's Land, who may take up
Swamps, Marshes or sunken Lands.
but shall first give notice to the Owner or owners of the Land to which it
adjoineth, who shall have one years time to resolve whether he or they will
take up the same or no, and in Case at the Expiration of that term the owner or
owners of the Land adjoining to the said Land Marsh or Swain shall then refuse
to survey and Patent the same. The method to be followed in that case.
It shall then be lawful for the first person who gave notice as aforesaid to
survey and Patent the same acording to Law.

X. An Act declaring men's Notes how far pleadable against their Estates if dead.
WHereas it has been Controverted whether Notes, charged on persons by a Man
in his life time are pleadable after his decease for Determination whereof,
Notes pleadable after Decease of the Party.
the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, have Enacted and
Ordained, and by the Authority aforesaid, It is Enacted and Ordained, That all
such Notes shall be pleadable if by Comparing of hands or otherwise it shall
appear to have been the Act of the Decedent, A proviso in that Case.
and the person who claims make Oath of the Justice thereof; And that he has
not received satisfaction for the same, or any part thereof. Provided always
it be sued for within Twelve Months after the Parties decease, and within three
years at most after the Date of this Act.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the 20th Day of October, Anno 1673
I. An Act for the Establishing the Dowers of Widows.
Whereas many Doubts have arisen concerning the Estates of persons dying
intestate, and of what part thereof ought to, appertain to the Widow, for the
Clearing whereof, Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this
Grand Assembly, Intestate Estates.
and the Authority thereof, that where persons dye intestate, the Widow shall
be endowed with the third part of the real Estate to be equally divided as to
Housing Fenced Grounds, Orchards, Widows shall be endowed with the third part
of Estate Real.
Woods and other valuable Conveniences during her natural life. And the third
part of the Estate personal, if there be but one or two Children; But if there
be any number of Children more how many soever in that Case, the personal
Estate to be divided amongst the widow and all her Children, The provision for
Children in such Cases.
share and share alike. And in Case the Husband make Will, that he has it in
his power to devise more to his wife than is above determined, but not less.

II. An Act providing for the supply of Arms and Ammunition.
FOr the better supply of the Country with Arms and Ammunition, Be it Enacted
by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the
Authority thereof, Captains of Foot and Horse to take an account of what Arms
and Ammunition are wanting.
that the Captains of Foot and Horse in each County do take a strict and
particular account of what Arms and Ammunition are wanting in their several
Companies and Troops, and represent the same to their Respective Colonels at
the next Countie-Court, after January next; But if there be not any Colonel of
Horse within their County, then the Captain of Horse to represent the said
wants immediately to the Countie-Courts, unto which Courts at the next Sessions
following, the Colonels aforesaid are by this Ast enjoined to return and
represent the wants of the Militia in their said Counties, as they shall
receive the same from their subordinate Officers aforesaid, an Acconut thereof
shall be given to the County-Courts.
and if any Captain of a Foot Company or Horse, or Colonel of any Regiment
shall fail, to perform his or their duty herein, shall be fined namely every
Captain One Thousand Pounds of Tobacco; And Colonel Two Thousand Pounds of
Tobacco; Officers neglecting their duty therein to be Fined.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the particular
Countie-Courts be empowered upon their Respective Counties, to raise and lay a
Leavy for the providing of Arms and Ammunition for supplying the wants
aforesaid, That is to say, Muskets and Swords for the Foot, and Pistols, Swords
and Carabines for Horse; And also for every Listed Soldier at the least Two
Pounds of Powder, Levies to be raised by County-Courts for providing of
Ammunition in their Respective Counties.
and six pounds of Shot. The said Arms and Ammunition by the Courts, provided,
as aforesaid to remain in the hands of the Officers of the Militia, for them to
distribute the same as there shall be occasion, and that those to whom
distribution of Arms and Ammunition shall be made do pay for the same at a
Reasonable Rate, What Ammunition shall be provided.
to be Collected by the Sheriff or Collector as in Case of Levies and public
dues to the use, and toward the Reimbursement of the Counties. And if any
Court or Courts shall fail in their duties to provide within one year after
such presentment made by the Officers of the Militia aforesaid of their wants
aforesaid for the full supplying thereof in manner aforesaid, they shall be
fined ten Thousand Pounds of Tobacco to be paid as also the other Fines imposed
by this Act to the use of the Respective Counties, and that the Burgesses of
the several Counties be required, and are hereby enjoined to give an account
unto the Assembly how this Act is put into Execution.

III. An Act for the better putting into execution the Act for Processions.
Whereas it has been Represented to this Assembly that the Act for
Processions has been hindered to be put in Execution for that the ascertaining
the Bounds of Orphans Land is not thereby provided for, Processions shall be
continued.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority of the same, that the Lands of the Orphans be also
Comprised in that Act that is to say, The Bounds of Orphans Lands, to be laid
forth and by whom.
when difference shall happen to arise concerning the Bounds of Orphans Lands,
and that the said differences cannot otherwise be determined, nor the bounds of
the adjacent Lands discovered, that then such Orphans Lands be laid forth by
two honest able Surveyers in presence of the Neighborhood, and two such men as
shall be appointed by the Countie-Courts, on the behalf of the Orphan and the
charge thereby accruing, sustained in manner following, viz. The Orphan to pay
one half of the Survey of his own Land, and the Owner or Owners of the Land
adjacent whose bounds are thereby also ascertained the other half and the whole
charge of surveying his or their Lands.

IV. An Act for the Advancement of the Manufactory of Flax and Hemp.
FOrasmuch as it much conduces to the well being of any Country that the
necessities thereof be supplied from their own Industry within themselves; And
that the less they have occasion for from abroad the less will be depending on
foreign supplies, whereof the Calamity of Way and other Accidents may prevent
them. And whereas this Assembly having taken into their Consideration the low
and contemptable price, we are allowed for our Tobaccoes occasioned chiefly by
the great quantities yearly made, Provision made for the Manufacture of Flax
and Hemp.
have thought fit if it may be to abate that quantity by advancing the more
useful and necessary Manufactory of Flax and Hemp; And in order thereunto have
Enacted and Ordained, And it is by the Governor Council and Burgesses of this
Grand Assembly, and by the authority of the same, Enacted and Ordained; That
the Respective County-courts within this colony do at the cost and charge of
their Counties at or before the twentieth day of October, which shall be in the
year 1675. procure one quart of Flax seed, One quart of Flaxseed and the like
quantity of Hempseed shall be distributed to every tythable Person in each
County.
and one quart of Hemp seed for every tythable Person within their Counties and
the same cause to be distributed among the Inhabitants, and that the courts
failing to procure the said Flax seed or Hemp seed, and thereof to make
Distribution in manner as aforesaid; be fined five thousand pounds of Tobacco:
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every tythable
within this Country the next year after the Distribution do make or cause to be
made one pound of dressed Flax, and one pound of dressed Hemp, or two pounds of
either, and so yearly and every year under the Penalty of sixty pounds of
Tobacco, One Pound of Dressed Flax or Hemp to be yearly delivered, for every
quart of seed
for every pound of Flax or Hemp neglected to be made as aforesaid, The same to
be made by such Master owner or overseer of any Family or Company of Servants,
or any other tythable that shall be found defficient in the Premises, and for
the better discovery of such neglect and difficiency, that all Masters owners
or overseers who have the charge of Families, Companies of Servants and other
tythables at the time of laying the Levies in their Counties, do produce u^^o
those Persons who are appointed to take the lists of tythables in each county
the said quantity of Flax or Hemp, or either of them by this act enjoined to be
made, and the same delivered upon oath that it is of his or their own growth.

V. An Act concerning Tradesmen and other Artificers to pay Levies.
FOr Explication of the Laws which have seemed to Exempt Artificers, etc. from
paying Levies: Be it Enacted by the Governor Council and Burgesses of this
Grand Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, All Merchants Tradesmen and
Artificers, above the age of 16 shall pay Levies.
that no Tradesmen Merchants, nor any Artificers whatever above the age of
sixteen years be exempted for the future from payment of Levies, any Act
Custom, or usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the Twenty first of September, Anno
1674.
I. An Act for an Address and Supplication to be made to the Kings most
excellent Majesty.
An Act for an Address and Supplication to his Majesty.
WHereas this Grand Assembly are deeply sensible of the many and grievous
Pressures that are daily growing, and still likely to grow, and be imposed upon
the Inhabitants of this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia by certain Lords
Pattentees who under Colou^ and pretense of promoting the good of the Colony,
and augmenting his Majesty's Revenues, have obtained certain Letters, Pattents,
and grants derogating and in prejudice of many Royal Concessions and grants
from time to time, granted by his Majesty and his royal. Progenitors, in favor
to this Colony all which may be justly feared, the said Lords by their Deputies
and Ministers will endeavor to make void, and of none effect by imposing new
rents and Services altering the form of our Tennors, compelling us to new
Surveys and new Patents, imposing fines and Compositions on Surplusage Lands
and Lapses at their will and pleasure by Nominating of Sheriffs, Escheators
Surveyors, and other Officers and in effect devesting the Government of those
just Powers and Authority by which this Colony has hitherto been kept in Peace
and Tranquillity, and all men's rights and Properties preserved unto them, and
whereas the said Grand Assembly on great Deliberation have considered by what
convenient ways and means those Agrievances might be removed, how our Liberties
Privileges, immunities, rights and Properties might be had, made and
established to us and our Posterity, have thought fit that an humble Address
and Supplication be made to his Sacred Majesty by this Grand Assembly in the
name of this his Majesty's most Loyal Colony; setting forth as well by what
Legal Grants and Concessions his Majesty and his Royal Progenitors have from
time to time been graciously pleased to indulge this Colony the grievous
Pressures likely to grow on us, by reason of the late Grants to the Lords; That
his Majesty would graciously please to Revoke the said Grants to the Lords, and
for securing us from our fears in time to come, of being removed from his
Majesty's immediate Protection, To confirm our Liberties, Privileges,
Immunities, rights and Properties as aforesaid by his Majesty's Royal Charter,
and that certain Gentlemen in whose honor integrity and Care for promoting the
good of this Country; this Grand Assembly have a just Confidence, be desired to
Address themselves to his Majesty in the name of the Grand Assembly and
Negotiate in England all other public affairs of this Country, and because it
is manifest that a work of this Nature is not to be undertook nor effectually
prosecuted without money, and that we be not imprudently wanting to our selves,
in a matter of so great Importance this Grand Assembly have thought fit that a
sum of Money be raised of and from the Inhabitants of this Country, to be used
and Employed toward the Accomplishment of the ends and Purposes aforesaid; Be
it therefore Enacted by the Governor Council and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, that fifty pounds of Tobacco besides Cask
and Sallary be Levied from every tythable person within this Colony this
present year, Levies to be made for carrying on the same.
and fifty pounds of Tobacco besides cask and Sallary the next year, and that
this be disposed to several Undertakers at the rate of Eight Shillings per
Cent. for producing Money as aforesaid, and Accomplishing the ends and Purposes
aforesaid, in manner and Form following, viz. The Fifty pounds of Tobacco to be
Levied this present year in the Counties of York, New-Kent, Gloucester and
Middlesex, be paid to the several Undertakers of those Counties, at eight
Shillings per Cent, How to be raised.
by the Sheriff or Collectors of those Respective Counties; They paying double
the money this present year, That Fifty pounds of Tobacco per Poll, does amount
to at Eight Shillings per Cent. and to accept of their full Compensation of
their present disbursments, Fifty pounds of Tobacco per Poll. of the same
Counties aforesaid, the next year, and that the Undertakers for the rest of the
Counties in Virginia pay no more money then Fifty pounds of Tobacco does amount
to, at Eight Shilling per Cent. this present year to be paid them by the
Sheriffs or Collectors of those Counties aforesaid, and the like sum of money
next year upon payment made to them of fifty pounds of Tobacco per Poll. and
ordered them to be Levied, and that all Sheriffs and Collectors who have the
charge of those Payments to the Undertakers, be and are hereby strictly
required to cause Payment to be made of the best Tobaccoes, and as convenient
as may be: Provided always, that if no Undertakers do present themselves for
any of those remaining Counties, that then the Respective County-courts are
hereby required and commanded to Ship the Tobaccoes within the Counties for
England, and consigne it to sufficient Merchants, and to cause the neat produce
of it to be paid unto Mr. Secretary Ludwel and Colonel Daniel Park, for the
Account of the Grand Assembly of Virginia: And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that the money which shall be found due on the balance of
the Account of the two Shillings per Hogshead, be also remitted into England,
to the Order of the Grand Assembly as aforesaid, And whereas this Grand
Assembly are also sensible by the lowness of the public Revenue, that money
may yet be wanting for the advance and carrying on this most necessary work; Be
it also further Enacted, by this Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, that
seventy pounds of Tobacco per cause in the general Courts, and fifty pounds of
Tobacco per cause in the County-courts shall be amerced in the name of the
Penalty, upon every Person that shall be cast in any suit except in Action of
debt, in which if any be cast, he or they so cast as aforesaid, shall be
Amerced in the general court Fifty pounds of Tobacco, if in the County Court
thirty pounds of Tobacco, and in case of appeals double, Provided nevertheless
that all causes of Orphans be out of this clause of amercements utterly excused
and foreprized, and be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
clerks of the county courts give account of the said amercements also of all
lines arising on Penal Laws at the raising of the Levy, when the courts are to
deliver them to the Sheriffs, and the Sheriffs be, and hereby are authorized
and enjoined to collect and distrain for the same, as in case of Levies, and
the courts are hereby authorized and empowered to dispose of the Tobaccoes to
the best advantage of the country, and be accountable to the Grand Assembly for
the Uses aforesaid, and that this clause of amercements be of force the next
court after Publication hereof in each county, and so remain until the next
Assembly, and no longer, unless it be thought fit to continue it.

II. An Act Ascertaining allowances for evidences summoned to the General Court.
WHereas it has been Considered that the allowance which the Law has formerly
given to witnesses who are often summoned from remote places, to give in
evidence at the General Courts, is too little. thirty pound of Tobacco per diem
allowed to witnesses that come 20 miles, and upwards to James City, and 60.
pound per diem during their attendance there.
As also for their attendance and expense in town; Be it enacted by the
Governor, Council, and Burgesses, of this Grand Assembly, and by the Authority
thereof, that thirty pounds of Tobacco per diem be paid to such witnesses as
come to James City twenty miles and upwards; and that all witnesses have sixty
pounds of Tobacco per diem for their expenses the time of their attendance
there.

III. An Act prohibitting the Justices of the several County-Courts, for
Levying Tobaccoes upon the People for their accomodations and expenses whilst
they are keeping Court.
WHereas it has been Complained of, to this Grand Assembly, that it has been
the frequent practices of some of the Justices of the several County-Courts of
this Country at the time of Laying their Levy to assess upon the People of
their respective Counties, certain sums of Tobacco for the paying and
Satisfying their expenses and accomodations whilst they are holding Courts, and
attending thereupon, which practice is by the Grand Assembly adjudged illegal,
be it therefore enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses, of this Grand
Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, That no County from henceforth pay or
allow for accommodation of the Justices, at their County-Courts, any Order
usuage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

IV. An Act Commanding such Indians who keep Hoggs to mark the same.
WHereas Complaint has been made that diverse the Inhabitants of this Country
have received mischief by the Indians in their Stock of Hoggs, against whom
rarely any Legal proof can be produced to discover and Convict them; Be it
therefore enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses, of his Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof that Indian proof as well as other legal
proof shall from henceforth be good against all such Indians to Convict them on
the Act against Hoggs stealing; The Hoggs of Indians shall be marked with a
Particular mark signifying to what Town they belong.
And that those of the Indians who keep Hoggs, do and hereby are enjoined and
required to give such a particular mark for that town where they live, as shall
be appointed by the adjacent Counties.

V. An Act Impowering Feem Coverts to make good acknowledgment of Sales of Land.
WHereas the Legal way in England in passing Estates where the Inheritance in a
Feem Covert Is by way of fine and recovery. And it being the usual way in this
Country for many years, we having no fines and recoveries, that Sales have
been made by the Husband and wife of the Inheritance, of the wife by
Conveyance, from them and the said Conveyance acknowledged in the General or
County-Courts, by the Husband and wife; The Wife being first privately examined
by the Court whether she acknowledges the same freely, but there being no Act
of Assembly to Authorize the same; Be it therefore enacted by the Governor,
Council, and Burgesses, of this Grand Assembly and by the Authority thereof;
that all such Sales and acknowledgements, All Sales and acknowledgments that
are made by Husband and wife to stand good in Law.
That by Husband and Wife have at any time hertofore been made in manner and
form as aforesaid, or shall hereafter be made shall be good and effectual
against the said Husband and Wife, their and every of their heirs and Assigns.
And against all other Persons Clayming by from or under them or any of them;
and that to all Intents and purposes: As if the same had been done by fine or
Recovery or by any other ways whatsoever.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the 7th Day of March, Anno 1675/6.
I. An Act for the Safeguard and defense of the Country against the Indians,
Vide Act the 1st.. Anno 1679.

II. An Act prohibitting trade with Indians
Vide Act the 3d. Anno 1677. and Act 8. Anno 1680.

III. An Act prohibitting the exportation of Corn, etc.
WHereas the Countries preparation for war in all likelihood may cause a more
then ordinary expense of Provisions; It is therefore thought fit it be enacted,
and it is by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses, of this Grand Assembly, and
Authority thereof, enacted and Ordained that no Corn or other Provision from
and after the fifth day of April next shall be exported out of this Colony
under the penalty of two hundred pounds of Tobacco for every Barrel of Corn,
No Corn shall be exported under penalty of paying 200. pound of Tobacco, for
every Barrel thereof and twice the price of other Provisions.
and double the price of any other provision, to be paid by the party exporting
it. Provided nevertheless that it shall and may be Lawful, for those who have
already laden any Corn or Provisions on board, and have purchased others to
lade the same within the time before limited, but not afterward, and the same
so laden to export without Impeachment, any thing in this Act to the Contrary
notwithstanding. And it is further enacted, The term this Act shall continue
in force.
That this restraint Continue till the last day of July next, and no longer,
unless the honorable Governor think fit to Continue the Restraint.

At a Grand Assembly held at JAMES CITY, the fifth of June, Anno 1676.
ALL the Acts and Orders of this Assembly are Repealed, made Void and Null by
His most Sacred Majesty's Instructions and Proclamation; And also by the fourth
Act of Assembly, bearing date at Green-Spring the twentieth of February, Anno
1676/7.

At a Grand Assembly begun at Green-Spring, the Twentieth of February, Anno
1676/7.
.I An Act of Indemnity and free Pardon,
Repealed by his Excellencies Proclamation, Anno 1680.

II. An Act of Attainder,
Repealed by his Excellencies Proclamation, Anno 1680.

III. An Act inflicting Pains, Penalties and Fines upon great Offenders,
Repealed by his Excellencies Proclamation, Anno 1680.

IV. An Act Declaring all the Acts, Orders, and Proceedings of a Grand Assembly
held at James City in the Month of June, 1676. Void, Null, and Repealed.
WHereas Nathaniel Bacon the younger in the Month of June, 1676. Whilst the
Governor, Council and Burgesses were met and Convened together at a Grand
Assembly, to Consult the great Concerns of the Country, did enter James City
in a Rebellious manner, with a considerable number of Armed Men, to the number
of six hundred, or thereabouts, All Acts of Assembly made during the Rebellion
raised by Bacon, Repealed.
Environing and Besieging the Governor, Council and Burgesses, and offering
force and violence to them, and every of them, threatening them with sudden
death, if they would not grant his unreasonable, unlawful Rebellious and
Treasonable Demands, and by his Threats and offered violence did obtain to
himself whatsoever he so unlawfully demanded. And whereas the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, by his gracious Proclamation, and the Right Honorable the
Governor by his Proclamation has long since declared all the Proceedings of
the said Assembly to be void in Law; Be it therefore Enacted by this present
Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, That all Acts, Orders, and
Proceedings of the said Grand Assembly be Repealed, and made void and Null.

V. An Act for Relief of such Loyal Persons as have suffered Loss by the late
Rebels, Repealed by His Excellencies Proclamation, Anno 1680.
Vide Act 1. 1680.

VI. An Act ascertaining the price of Cockquets.
Whereas Complaint has been made to this Assembly, that for times past, there
has been usually taken and received several and diverse Sums of Money from the
Inhabitants of, and Traders into this Collonie, under the notion of
Cockquet-money, in some places one penny per Hogshead, and in some places
twelve-pence for each Cockquet, or several Bill of Loading for Tobacco shipped,
or diverse and sundry marks in one Bill of loading; and that there has hitherto
been no Law or Act of Assembly for the same; Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that from and after the publication hereof,
One halfpenny Per Hogs-Head payable for all Bills of Loading not containing
above Twenty Hogs-Heads.
the Rate and Price for every Cockquet be as follows, viz. One halfpenny per
Hogshead for all such quantities and parcels as shall be contained in one Bill
of loading or Entry, which shall not exceed the number of Twenty Hogsheads, and
twelve-pence for every Cockquet, for all such quantities as shall be contained
in one Bill of loading or Entry which shall exceed the number of Twenty
Hogsheads, In Bills of Loading exceeding that number 12 d. for every Cockquet.
and no more shall be taken for each Cockquet although different marks shall be
contained in one and the same Entry or Bill of loading. And be it further
Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, And it is
hereby Enacted, that the Acts of Assembly, made in the year 1661/2. The Act
made in the year 1666. and 1669. which allows the impost money of two shillings
Per Hogshead to such Owners as dwell and reside in Virginia; A Repeal made of
several Acts Relating to the payment of 2 s, per Hogshead Impost.
be from henceforth Repealed, except only to such Owners of Ships or Vessels
as already have been built, or hereafter shall be built in Virginia, and shall
wholly belong bona fide to Owners residing in this Country; Provided always
that such Ships as are now within the Capes, and are wholly belonging to
Virginia-Owners, be for this present Voyage free from paying the said Impost of
Two Shillings, according to the intent and meaning of the aforerecited Acts.
And be it further Enacted, that for the time to come there be no Fees taken for
Vessels or Ships built in this Colony, and belonging wholly to the Inhabitants
of this Country, other than two shillings sixpence for Entry, what Fees are
to be taken for Vessels built in this Colony, and belonging wholly to the
Inhabitants thereof.
two shillings and sixpence for License to Trade, two Shillings and sixpence
for clearing, and two shillings and sixpence for the Bond.

VII. An Act Limiting Masters dealing with their Servants.
WHereas several Complaints are made that diverse and sundry Masters of Servants
during the time of several their Servants servitude and more especially, some
small time before the expiration of their service, do by indirect means make
sundry and diverse bargains and Agreements, to the Servants great Injury, hurt,
and damage, who because of his Coverture is drawn in and often times
necessitated to Comply with the avaritious tempers and unreasonable desires of
such Masters; for the prevention whereof for the Future; Be it Enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, That from and after Publication hereof, it shall not be lawful for any
Masters of Servants, to make any Bargain or Agreement with his Servant before
the time of his first Service, by Indenture or Custom of the Country, is
expired and fully ended, either for such Servants, Corn and Clothes, or
otherwise, No Master shall make any Bargain or Contract with his Servant
before the full time of his service be expired, unless it be in the presence
of, and with the approbation, of some Justice of the peace.
except the same be made and Confirmed betwixt such Master and Servant
bargaining and agreeing in the presence and with the approbation and good
liking of some one or more Justices of the peace in the County where such
Master resides, upon the penalty of forfeiting to such Servant, such time of
service as shall be due to the Master, at the time of making such Bargain,
otherwise and in other manner then is herein set down by this Law, meant, and
intended, and also all other advantages and agreements, contained, conditioned
for, or included in such Bargain or Agreement, whatsoever.

VIII. An Act Limiting times of Receipt and Payment of Public Tobacco.
Whereas several persons have been and still are liable to be prejudiced by
the Remissness of Sheriffs and Collectors of the Public, and County-Leavies,
who often take advantageous times to demand and receive the public Dues, and
other Collections, for which they may in several Cases make seizure and
distress; for prevention whereof for the future, Be it Enacted by this present
Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof; And it is hereby Enacted, That the
80th. Act of Assembly in the Printed Book of Acts, Limiting a certain time when
Creditors shall demand their Debts, shall be interpreted and holden to extend
to Sheriffs and other Collectors of the Public, and Countie-Leavies, and of
all other Sheriffs and Clerks Fees; And also that all public Countie-Debtors
and all Debtors of or for Sheriffs or Clerks Fees, may have the benefit and
Liberty of the second Act of Assembly made in the year 1666. which admits of
Tenders of Tobacco to the Creditors according to the full intent, meaning or
purport thereof; And be it further Enacted by this Grand Assembly, and the
Authority thereof, That in Case of Collecting the public or Countie-Dues or
other Fees as aforesaid, any Sheriff or Collector shall at any time make
seizure or distress of more Tobaccoes then is at that time due from the Debtor;
That in all such Cases, A Regulation of Seizures made of Tobacco due to the
Public
the person seizing shall make immediate satisfaction to the party from whom
they shall make such seizure, or otherways that he be allowed to take his
Overplus Tobaccoes out of the Hogshead so seized, and that no Sheriff or other
public Collector shall or may from or after the publication of this Act
presume to make seizure of any Hogshead of Tobacco before that time paid away
and marked; And if there be at that time other Merchantable Tobaccoes ready in
such Plantation where such seizure was made, and which shall be offered and
tendered by the Debtor. And be it further Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, And it is hereby
Enacted, That the Justices holding Court, be by virtue of this Act for the time
to come fully empowered to Commissionate and appoint the Respective Collector
or Collectors of the public, and Countie-Levies. And whereas Complaint has
been made that sometimes one and the same person has officiated at the same
time in the Office of Justice, as Justice of the Peace, and Clerk of the
Countie-Court. which has been found inconvenient for the prevention whereof
for the future; Be it Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, No person shall
be Justice of the Peace or High Sheriff and Clerk of the County Court at the
same time.
and the authority thereof, That no person whatsoever shall be capable at the
same time of being a Justice of the Peace, and Clerk of the County Court, or
being at one and the same time High Sheriff of the County, and
County-Court-Clerks and for the greater ease of the Inhabitants of this
Country, Be it enacted by this present Grand Assembly, The County-Clerk may
depute the High Sheriff or Undersheriff to enter Actions.
and the authority thereof, And it is hereby enacted, that from and after the
publication of this Act, it shall and may be lawful for the County Court Clerk
to depute the High Sheriff or Undersheriff of the County, to enter such
actions as shall be brought to them or either of them; and that such Entry be
held good in Law. And for the better guide of the County-Courts and more sure
administration of Justice, be it enacted by this present Grand Assembly. and
the authority thereof, That such of the Honorable Council of State as will
please at any time to fit in any Court of Virginia shall and may have equal
vote with every Justice of the Peace, of or belonging to the said Court; and
that such Counselor so sitting with the Court, be by the Clerk entered to sit
there, Members of the Council of State, may sit in any Court in Virginia.
and be equally liable and responsible with every other Justice of Peace for
all such Acts or Orders of Court he shall at any time of such sitting with the
Court, give Vote and assent to. And be it further enacted by this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, No person not born in Virginia shall be
capable of bearing any Office there, till they have dwelt three years in the
Country, unless Commissionated by His Majesty.
and it is hereby enacted, that no person whatsoever not born in this Country
from and after the publication of this Act, shall be capable of bearing any
Office within this Colony of Virginia, whether Civil or Military, unless
Commissionated by his Most Sacred Majesty, before such person have been
dwelling and residing three years in this Colony. And be it further enacted by
the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the authority
thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that all such persons as have been Convicted
in England or elsewhere, and are either now Residing or shall hereafter come
into this Country, Persons Convicted in England, shall be held incapable of
bearing Office in Virginia.
be for ever incapable of bearing any Office Civil or Military, within this his
Majesty's Colony of Virginia. And be it further Enacted by this present Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, that whereas the 64th. Act in the printed
book, does empower the County-Courts to grant probates and administrations,
which probates and administrations are usually signed by the Right Honorable
the Governor, Any two Justices of the Quorum, may sign probates of Wills and
Letters of administration
which is not only burdensome to his Honor, but inconvenient to the
Inhabitants, Be it Enacted, that from and after publication hereof, it shall
and may be lawful for any two Justices of the Quorum in their Respective
Counties, to sign such probates and letters of administration, and the same so
signed shall be held and deemed good in Law, provided always that Certificates
thereof be sent to Mr. Secretataries Office, as is provided by the aforesaid
Act of Assembly.

IX. An Act Repealing the Act allowing free Tythables to diverse Persons.
Whereas by several Acts of Assembly it is provided, that every Respective
Councellor, and ten of his Family, shall be free from paying any public or
County-Levies, and also that every Minister and six Tythables for their
attendance at James City in General Court-times, and times of Assembly, be free
from paying Levies; which Laws are found unequal and inconvenient; Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof; And it is hereby Enacted, that all former
Laws relating hereunto, be henceforth Repealed; and that instead thereof there
be annually paid and allowed out of the Moneys arising upon the Impost of two
Shillings per Hogshead to the Counselors attending General Courts and
Assemblies, over and besides the two hundred and Fifty pounds Sterling
according to several Acts and Orders of Assembly, usually heretofore paid them,
one hundred pounds Sterling, which together with the said two hundred and fifty
pounds Sterling, makes in the whole three hundred and fifty pounds Sterling;
and that all the said three hundred and fifty pounds Sterling to be annually
paid as aforesaid, Allowance to the Counselors attending at General Courts.
shall be distributed and proportioned amongst the several Counselors
attending at General Courts and Assemblies according to their Attendance at the
same proportionably; which distribution and proportioning shall be annually
made by the right honorable the Governor, and the several Counselors
according to their attendance, more or less, at General Courts or Assemblies.
And be it further Enacted by this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof,
that there be annually paid out of the said Impost money to such Minister or
Ministers, as by the Right Honorable the Governor shall be appointed, and
shall attend at General Courts or Assemblies, five pounds Sterling for their
attendance, Minister to have 5 pound allowed him for his Attendance on the
General Court.
for every General Court or Assembly they shall attend; and that no Person or
Persons heretofore tythable by any Law. Custom or usuage, be from henceforth
exempted from paying public or County-Levies, the Right Honorable the
Governor and his Servants excepted, Who only are exempted from the payment of
public or County-Levies
the Single Persons of every one of the Council, and also all Ministers
beneficed in this Country, and such Lame or Impotent Persons as either already
are, or shall from time to time be ordered to be exempted out of the Lists, by
the County-courts where they dwell.

X. An Act Regulating Ordinaries, and the Prices of Liquors.
Whereas the Multiplicity of Ordinaries in this Colony is found to be
pernicious and hurtful to the Inhabitants; Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, Not more than two Ordinarys in any one County, except in that where
the General Court is held.
and it is hereby Enacted, that from and after the Publication of this Act,
there shall not be admitted, suffered or licenced, above two Ordinaries in any
one County of this Colony at one time, except in that County where the general
court shall be held; and that the power of granting Licenses be in the
Respective County courts, the Right Honorable the Governor being paid for
such Licenses according to former Laws in such cases; and that no Person be
Licenced to keep Ordinaries, but such as are accountable, and will enter into
sufficient bond to find and provide constantly for Travelers good Diet,
Lodging and horsmeat, and will rate and sell their Provisions and Liquors
according to the rates and prices hereafter set down, and allowed by this Law,
upon such Penalties and Forfeitures as shall be therein provided and inflicted,
which Penalties shall be and belong the one half to the person or persons who
shall inform of and sue for the same, and the other half to the County wherein
the same shall be forfeited. And be it Enacted by this Grand Assembly, and the
Authority thereof, that all Ordinaries selling Liquors, do demand or take no
more for Virginia Drams, Strong Beer or Ale, then is set down in the Act of
Assembly, What prices shall be paid at Ordinaries for Liquors, Diet and Lodging.
made in September 1671. that the rate for Cider and Perry, if boiled, be
twenty pounds of Tobacco for one Gallon, and if Raw, eighteen pounds of Tobacco
per Gallon; that the price of lodging be three pounds of Tobacco for one Night;
that the price of Diet, where the general court of Assembly is held, be twelve
pounds of Tobacco each meal for the Master, and eight pound for the Servant;
and in all other Ordinaries in the Countries ten pounds of Tobacco each meal
for the Master, and six pound for the Servant; that the rate of Horse-Pastorage
be six pounds of Tobacco for one day and Night; and if housed, Horse-Pastorage,
Hay and Oats.
for straw and Hay eight pounds of Tobacco the day and night, and for Indian
Corn after the rate of forty pounds of Tobacco per Bushel, and for Oats after
the rate of sixty pounds of Tobacco per Bushel; and that all Ordinary-keepers
be, and are hereby enjoined to secure all Horses that they have charge of,
Justices to appoint the prices of Liquors twice in the year.
from running away and being stolen, upon the Penalty of paying the charge of
finding the Horse or Horses, or paying for them if lost; and that the Justices
of every Respective Court, within this Colony be enjoined in the Months of May
and November, yearly to meet at their County-court-house, and assess and set
the rates on all Liquors as are not herein mentioned, and rated according as
the Market price then rules for such Liquors; and that no Ordinary-keeper
presume to advance and take for such Liquors so by the Justices rated above
Cent per Cent Profit, upon the Penalty and forfeit of Ten-fold such Exactions,
and over rates by them demanded or taken; and that all such Persons buying and
Expending at Ordinaries, who shall at any time pay greater rates, then is
hereby allowed and set down, forfeit and pay for every such Payment, or
Obligation for Payment, Five fold the sum so overpaid, and that all those
County-courts neglecting to meet and assess the Rates and Prices as aforesaid,
be fined five thousand pounds of Tobacco and cask, all which fines shall come
and belong the one half to the use of the County where such Forfeiture is made,
the other half to him or them who shall inform of, or sue for the same.

XI. An Act disposing Amerciaments upon cast Actions.
WHereas by an Act of Assembly made in the year 1674. It was Enacted, that
certain Amerciaments, therein set down, shall be paid upon Actions cast at Law,
and that an account of such Amerciaments be returned to the Assembly to be by
them disposed of; Be it therefore Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and
the authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that the said Act be from
henceforth Repealed, and that all Tobaccoes which have been received, and are
become due by reason of the said Act of Assembly, Amerciaments upon Actions
cast at Law, repealed.
and Amerciaments be paid and disposed to the use of the Counties, where the
same became due, toward the Defraying of that Countys-charge, and that the
several Respective County-Courts enquire into the same, and dispose of them
accordingly.

XII. An Act concerning Servants who were out in Rebellion,
Repealed by his Excellencies Proclamation, Anno 1680.

XIII. An Act for the laying of Parish Levies.
FOr the better and more equal laying of Parish Levies and dues, be it Enacted
by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the
authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that the Freeholders and House
keepers, in each Respective County, shall and may after Publication hereof have
Liberty to choose fix able discreet Housekeepers, or Freeholders to sit with
the Vestry, and have their equal Votes, with the other Vestry men at the
assessing the Parish Taxes, Six able housekeepers may assist the vestry in the
assessing of Parish Taxes.
and where the Parishes shall either refuse or neglect to choose such men, or
being chosen they shall not appear and attend the time appointed, by the Vestry
for assessing the same, having had Notice thereof by Publication at the Court
or Parish Church, the Vestry to proceed without them, and that there be a day
nominated and appointed annually in September, by the Eldest Justice in
Commission in the Parish for such Election as aforesaid, and in case no one
Justice shall recide in that Parish, then the day to be Nominated and appointed
by the Judge of the Court.

XIV. An Act Repealing the Act of Encouragement for killing Wolves.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly,
and the Authority thereof, that all Acts giving Encouragement for killing of
Wolves be Repealed, Particular Counties Authorized to make Bylaws for the
killing of Wolves.
and that in place thereof, there be Liberty granted to each Respective County
to make such Bylaws for Encouragement of killing Wolves, as they shall-think
fit.

XV. An Act giving Seven Years time to seat Frontier Lands.
WHereas by reason of the late Murders Committed by Barbarous Indians, which
they continue daily to commit, and also by reason of the frequent Incursions,
and the late destructions and troubles amongst us, very many of the Inhabitants
of this Country, his Majesty's Liege People have been enforced to forsake
their Plantations, and leave their Lands uninhabited, especially in the
Frontier Counties; Be it therefore Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and
the Authority thereof; and it is hereby Enacted, that all Lands or Tracts of
Land forsaken or uninhabited by reason of the Incursions of the Indians, and
the late troubles and distractions amongst us, shall not lie desert by want of
due Seating, and planting such Lands, in less time then seven years from the
date of this Act. And that for the time to come, Frontier Counties to be
planted and inhabited.
seven years time be allowed from the date of this Act, for the Seating and
planting such Lands as are already taken up, and patented in the frontier
Counties of this Colony.

XVI. An Act Regulating Burgesses Expenses.
WHereas by former Acts and Orders of Assembly, it is provided, Enacted and
Ordered, that the Allowance to every respective Burgess for his necessary
Expense and charge, attending at Assemblies, be for every day one hundred and
Fifty pounds of Tobacco, over and besides the necessary charge and expenses of
his coming to, and returning from the Assembly, and also the inavoidable cost
and necessary charges of his waiting Servant and Horses, is complained of as
grievous and burdensome to the people: This Assembly having taken the same
into their serious consideration, Do enact, and Be it enacted by the Governor,
Council, and Burgesses of this grand Assembly, and the authority thereof, and
It is hereby enacted, That for the time to come, the allowance to each and
every respective Burgess which shall attend at any Assembly hereafter to be
called, be one hundred and twenty pound of Tobacco and Cask per day; and for
such allowance to commence and begin two days before the first day of every
Assembly, What Allowance Burgesses shall have during their attendance at the
Grand Assembly.
and two days after, for convenient time for every Burgess to return home. And
to prevent the great charge and abuse that may accrue by Burgesses coming to
Assemblies by Sloops and Boats, Be it enacted by this present Grand Assembly,
and the authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, That over and above the
one hundred and twenty pounds of Tobacco per day, allowed to each Burgess for
his expense, there be allowed for the charge of a Sloop, two men to sail the
said Sloop, and their provisions, for the two Counties of Northampton and
Accomack, sixty pounds of Tobacco per day, and no more; and that the charge of
a Boat, two men to row, and their Provisions, bringing such Burgesses as can
come none other way but by water, be thirty six pounds of Tobacco per day, and
no more; and that the charge for Horse-hire for such Burgesses as come by land,
be ten pounds of Tobacco per day, for each Horse so used; and that their
unavoidable charge, and payments for passage by Ferry over the Rivers, in their
coming to Assemblies, and returning home, be also allowed them. And be it
further enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and the authority thereof; And
it is hereby enacted that if emergent occasion shall require that an Assembly
be called, before there are houses of entertainment built, that then those
Burgesses that must of necessity come by water in sloopes, have the same
allowance with the Eastern Shore, Burgesses and those other Burgesses who must
necessitously use Boats to bring their Provisions and other necessaries, and
that for the time to come no expense of Committees be allowed of, or brought to
the public account.

XVII. An Act for opening Courts of Judicature.
Whereas by reason of the late horrid Rebellion all Courts of Judicature have
been shut up, and the rightful and due course of Justice could not possibly be
taken and administered: Be it therefore enacted by this present Grand Assembly,
and the Authority thereof, that from and after the date of this Act, all Courts
of Judicature may be opened; and that the Respective Justices of the several
County-Courts do assemble themselves together, and hold Courts according to the
Laws, and according to the usual manner, and Custom of the Country, at the
usual places and days appointed by Law, or by them accustomed to be held, that
Justice may again be freely exercised, and done in all cases where it shall be
required.

At a Grand Assembly begun at Middle-Plantation, October the Tenth, Anno 1677.
I. An Act imposing Fines upon Delinquency of Grand Juries.
FOr as much as the thirty eighth Act of Assembly in the Printed Laws,
directing and commanding that Juries of Inquest be Impanelled and Sworn in
every County, to the ends and purposes therein mentioned, is by reason there
is no Fine set upon the Justices neglecting to appoint and swear the same; Nor
upon the Jurors not making due enquiry and Presentment according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, become generally neglected and unexecuted; Be it
Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the
Authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, Fines laid on Justices of Peace
for neglecting to Impanel Grand-Juries.
That the Justices of Peace of each County of Virginia, neglecting and
omitting once every year before or upon the last day of April, to make Choice
of and swear a Jury of Inquest, according to the true intent and meaning of the
before Recited Law, shall be Fined for every such omission Two Thousand Pounds
of Tobacco, the one half to the Informer, and the other half to the Counties
use; And each Jury of Inquest not making appearance at the time appointed in
the Law, or not making Inquest and Presentment according to the intent and
meaning thereof, shall be Fined, each Juryman making such default, Two Hundred
Pounds of Tobacco, the one half of which Fines to be paid to the Informer, and
the other half to the use of the Counties for each such default whereof they
shall be lawfully Convict.

II. An Act Prohibitting private Compositions.
FOr as much as very many Complaints have been made of the unreasonable
Compositions made by diverse persons for Trespasses done in time of the late
Rebellion, for prevention whereof for the future, Be it Enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Present Grand Assembly, and the
Authority thereof, And it is hereby Enacted that for the time to come, no
Composition shall be made with any person whatsoever, for any Horses, Boats
Arms, Cattle, Hoggs, Sheep, Goods or any other matter or thing whatsoever,
plundered or taken from them in the late Rebellion; But such only as shall be
made and acknowledged in open Court, and that each Court be; and are hereby
required, Compositions Relating to Damages* received in the late Rebellion, to
be made and acknowledged in Court or else to be invalid.
to take Cognizance of such Compositions, and see that they are not oppressive;
and whatsoever Agreement or Composition shall be other ways made, or any Bill
or Obligation taken for such Compositions, to be Null and Void; And be it
further Enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof; And
it is hereby Enacted, That all such persons who for the time to come, shall
bring their Suits; in any Court of Record for any Trespass or Trespasses
Committed in time of the late Rebellion, shall before their Suits shall be
admitted ascertain, and prove their whole loss or claim for the Trespass done
at that time or times for which they shall bring such account, and also give
their account upon their Oaths, if the same shall be required, of what Goods
have been returned, what recovered by Law, and what Composition they have made
for the same or any part thereof, to the end it may be known when such claims
or suits may have end. And for as much as diverse ill-disposed persons do
frequently notwitstanding the Late Act of Assembly, requiring the Country not
to renew the Quarrels Breaches and Heart-burnings amongst us, in using by-names
and terms of distinction, viz. Traytor-Rebel, Rogue-Rebel, or such like, by
which means it will be impossible ever to unite this Colony to its former
estate of love and friendship, though wished for, and desired by all good
people, Be it Enacted, by this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that whosoever shall presume to use any such
aggravations or terms of distinction as aforesaid, Persons provoking others by
aggravations or terms of distinction fined four Hundred Pounds of Tobacco.
and shall be thereof lawfully convict, shall for every such Offense forfeit
and pay Four Hundred Pounds of Tobacco to the use of the Parish where such
Offense shall be committed; and whereas on the other side, diverse insolent
persons who have been deeply concerned in the late Rebellion, will and do
notwithstanding their guilt, presuming upon the gracious pardon granted by his
Majesty, with unseemly and offensive Language urge and provoke those who have
been Loyal and great sufferers in those late unhappy times, to utter in their
passion such words as otherways they would not do, both which being highly
esteemed injurious and prejudicial not only to his Majesty's Peace, but also to
the desired Unity of this Colony, Be it therefore Enacted by this Present Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, And it is hereby Enacted, that whosoever
shall at any time offer such provocation, by any Language to any Loyal Person
whatsoever, as shall by the Court, where the same shall be complained of, be
adjudged a sufficient provocation for retorting bad language, such person using
such provocations be also Fined, and pay Four Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, and
Cask to be disposed of by the Vestry, to the use of the Parish where such
Offense shall be Committed.

III. An Act Licencing Trading with Indians.
FOr as much as the total prohibition of Trading with Indians, is experimented
and found hurtful and prejudicial to this his Majesty's Colony, and the
Inhabitants thereof, Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of
this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby
Enacted, that all Indians whatsoever being in amity and friendship with us,
from henceforth shall have free and full liberty to come in amongst us, and
bring in any Commodities whatsoever to the places, and at the respective times
hereafter mentioned, Trade permitted with the Indians.
and to Trade with, sell, or Truck for the same, with the English resorting
thither, but no where else for any Commodities whatsoever; and that such Marts
or Fairs continue twenty days, and no longer, that is to say, that the Public
Marts or Fairs for James River be the one where the Justices of Peace in
Henrico-County, At what places and times Marts or Fairs shall be held for Trade
with the Indians.
being met and set in Court, shall appoint and nominate, and the other for the
southside of James River to be at the Isle of Wight County-Court-House, the
beginning of which Marts or Fairs at the head of James River to be the first
day of April, and the first day of September, every year; How long such Marts
or Fairs shall Continue.
the beginning of the Marts or Fair for the south side of James River to be the
tenth day of May and tenth day of November yearly; the place for the Mart or
Fair in York-River to be appointed and set down by the Justices of Peace in
New-Kent County, being met and sat in Court, the beginning of which Mart or
Fair to be yearly the tenth day of April, and tenth day of September; the place
for the Mart or Fair in Rapphannack River to be appointed, and set down by the
Justices of Peace in Rapphannack County being met, and set in Court, the
beginning of which Mart or Fair to be yearly the twentieth day of April, and
twentieth day of September; the place for the Mart or Fair in Potomack-River to
be appointed and set down by the Justices of Peace in Stafford-Countie, being
met and set in Court, the beginning of which Mart or Fair, to be yearly the
thirtieth day of April, and thirtieth day of September; the place for the Mart
or Fair in Accomack-County, to be appointed and set down by the Justices of
Peace in that County, being met and set in Court, the beginning of which Mart
or Fair to be yearly the tenth day of March, and tenth day of September; the
place for the Mart or Fair in Northampton-Countie, to be at that Courts
appointment also, the beginning of which Mart or Fair, to be yearly the tenth
day of May and tenth day of November, and if any of those days shall happen to
fall upon a Sunday, then such Mart or Fair which shall so happen to fall upon a
Sunday, shall begin the next day following, Penalty upon such as shall Trade
with Indians, at other places or times than is herein specified.
and whosoever shall truck trade, or deal with any Indian or Indians
whatsoever, at any other time or place then is herein mentioned and set down
shall forfeit and pay for every such offense, five thousand Pounds of Tobacco,
the one half to the Informer, and the other half to the use of the Public;
always provided, that the dues belonging to the Right Honorable the Governor
be reserved as formerly; and to the intent, that there may be books kept of
what is bought and sold, Trucked, Traded, and dealt for in such and every the
Respective Marts and Fairs, that the Clerk of the County Court, where such Mart
or Fair is held, Accounts to be taken by the Clerk of the County, or whom else
the Governor shall please to appoint, of what is bought and sold in the Marts
or Fair aforesaid.
or such other whom the Right Honorable the Governor for the time being shall
appoint the Clerk thereof, and take account and place the same in fair writing
in a book, of all what is bought, sold, Trucked, Exchanged, or dealt for, and
for his fee it shall be lawful to have, receive and take to himself, the one
twentieth part of all Indian Commodities, there Sold, Trucked; Traded or Dealt
for.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful for any Indian wanting Corn,
until such respective marts or fairs at the several respective places shall
first begin, but not after that time to buy, such Indian Corn as they shall
have need of, from any Person, or at any place where they can buy the same, any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that the Wiccacommico Indians living in Northumberland County,
and the Chies-Lake-Indians living in Gloucester County, to have such Liberty and
rules for their trading with the English, as shall be set, appointed and
allowed them by order and appointment of the respective County-courts in each
County, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that it shall not be lawful, or permitted to any Indian or
Indians resorting to or meeting at any those aforesaid marts or fairs, to
travel with, or carry Arms, Indians Resorting to the said Marts shall not come
armed.
or appear there armed, except only the carrying home such arms and Ammunition
as they shall then and there purchase, and shall be found registered in the
Clerks Book, for which they shall have with them his Certificate.

Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Act, that no
Person or Persons shall be hindered from entertaining any Indians in their
Houses, who shall have the right Honorable the Governors License so to do,
according to a former Law in that case provided, any thing in this Law to the
contrary notwithstanding.

IV. An Act Imposing Fines on Sheriffs, concealing Tythables.
BE it enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this present Grand
Assembly, and the authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that whatsoever
Sheriff, Collector or Receiver of the public or County Levy, shall be found to
Levy and receive Tobaccoes, due upon concealed Tythables, and shall not give
account to the next County Court thereof, after his such Receipt or Collection
of the ^ame, but shall convert or endeavor by such Concealment to convert the
same to his own use, and shall be thereof lawfully convict, shall be fined and
pay the Penalties enjoined in the former Act or Acts of Assembly for concealed
Tythables.

V. An Act ascertaining the Price of double Patents.
FOrasmuch as diverse persons making advantage thereof to themselves, thereby to
save the trouble and charge of seating new, taken up Dividends of land, do
customarily, add new Tracts of Land to former Patented Dividends: Be it
therefore Enacted, by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this present
Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that it
shall and may be lawful in such cases for Mr. Secretary to take as his due Fee
so many times eighty pounds of Tobacco, as there are several Tracts of land in
such Patent; but where several old Tracts of land fomerly Patented shall be
drawn into one new Patent, and no new lands not Patented before added
thereunto, in such cases the Fee for such patent shall not exceed eighty pounds
of Tobacco.

VI. An Act for the Imposition of Two Shillings on every five hundred pounds of
Bulk Tobacco,
Vide Act the third, Anno 1680.

VII. An Act for Delivery of Strey-Horses, etc.
Repealed by his Excellencies Proclamation, Anno 1680.

VIII. An Act restraining the impress of Timber, etc.
FOrasmuch as diverse complaints have been made, that it has been heretofore
practical to impress, and take from any man's land, such Timber trees as those
who pretended to have such power were pleased to take, to the great hurt and
damage of such persons, Owners of the said land and Timber, from whom the same
has been taken, and contrary to the Right of Inheritance in and to the said
Lands and Timber, to the end no such abuses, and Infringment of Properties may
for the future be offered and done, be it enacted by the Governor, Council,
and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the authority thereof: and it is
hereby enacted, that no Person or Persons under pretense of any power or
Warrant whatsoever, that shall be employed for the time to come, to procure or
impress Timber for public use, Persons Empowered to Impress Timber, shall
first make composition, or agreement with the Owners thereof.
or other purpose, use, or intent whatsoever, shall or may take or impress any
Timber from any man's land whatsoever, before he or they so empowered or
pretending to be empowered, shall have first made Composition or Agreement with
the Owner thereof, for the price of the same, and shall have made ready
payment, or given sufficient caution for payment, according to such Composition
and Agreement, upon the Penalty of paying for each Timber-tree, so taken
without Composition or Agreement as aforesaid, five pounds Sterlin, according
to a former Law in such like cases, made and provided.

Provided always, that if the Owner of such Timber as shall be wanted for
public uses, shall be unreasonable in his setting a price thereon, finding the
advantage of the necessity thereof, Two men of the Neighborhood shall value
Timber to be impressed for public Service in case the Owner be unreasonable in
his demands.
to be had and taken for public uses, that in such cases it shall be lawful to
procure a Valuation thereof, to be had and taken by two good and honest men, of
the Neighborhood, upon their Corporal Oaths, which prices being paid or
secured to be paid, shall in such cases be final and Determinative, and
forasmuch as Diverse Complaints have also been made to this Assembly, of Diverse
injuries and abuses which have been lately perpetrated and done by persons
employed to impress necessaries for public occasions, and also diverse
complaints have been made, that of, late diverse persons have presumed to
impress sloopes, Carts; Boats, Horses, etc. without lawful power so to do, to
rectify and prevent the like abuses for the time to come; Be it further enacted
by the Governor, Such as shall Impress sloopes, Shallops, Boats Horses, Carts,
Arms, Provisions, etc. shall produce their Warrants for so doing, to the Owners
thereof.
Council, and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the authority thereof; and
it is hereby enacted, that from henceforth no person whatsoever shall presume
to impress any sloop, Shallop, Boat, or other Vessel, Horses, Carts, Arms,
Provisions goods or Merchandise whatsoever, without sufficient Warrant, and
that such Warrant be showed to such Person, from whom they are about to impress
such Sloops, Boats, etc. and that whosoever shall by virtue of a Legal Warrant
impress any Sloop-Boat, Shallop or Vessel, shall thereby have power to cause
two men of the ablest of the Neighborhood, to view and appraise such Vessel in
the best of their Judgment, Things Impressed shall be appraised by two men of
the Neighborhood.
to the full vallue, and also to ascertain the vallue of the hire thereof,
either by the day or by the Month, and that Instruments or Writings be drawn,
intimating the vallue, and also the price of the hire by the day, or by the
Month, of which a Duplicate to be drawn, the one of which to remain with the
appraisers, and the other part with the Owner or Owners of such Sloop-Boat,
etc. and such Owner to bring such Instrument or Writing to the next
County Court, where if such Sloop Boat, etc. were impressed for the use of that
County, then to be paid out of the County Levy, according to the Tenor of the
Writing or Instrument, but if the same were impressed for the use of the
Public, then the County Court is to return Certificate of such writing or
Instrument, to the next Assembly, where Satisfaction shall be made according to
the Tenor of the said writing or Instrument, but if it shall happen that such
Sloop Boat, etc. shall be cast away, or lost in the Service, that then the
Owner of such Sloop Boat, Vessel, Horses, etc. shall be at his choice whether
he will have the vallue according to appraisement, And the wages for the hire
thereof ascertained.
or the wages ascertained in the writing, which the public or County must see
punctually paid; and if it shall happen that the public or County shall have
occasion to impress Provisions of what Nature or kind soever, the impressor is
likewise empowered to cause two men of the ablest of the Neighborhood, to
appraise the same, and return a note, Certifying the quantity and price to the
next County Court, where if impressed for the Counties use, to be paid out of the
County Levy, and if for the public use, the County Court to return an account
thereof to the next Assembly, where full Satisfaction shall be made according
to the appraisement, and if the County or Public shall impress any man, that
he be paid if betwixt the tenth of September, and the tenth of March, Wages
allowed men, impressed for the County, or public Service.
ten pounds of Tobacco per day, and if betwixt the tenth of March and the tenth
of September, fifteen pounds of Tobacco per day, for the first ten days, and if
he shall be continued in such Employment more then ten days at a time, then for
all such time as he shall serve above ten days between September and March,
after the rate of two hundred pounds of Tobacco per Month, and betwixt March
and September, after the rate of three hundred pound of Tobacco per Month, and
if any Horse or Horses be impressed by the public or County, Rates allowed for
Horses impressed.
the Owner or Owners of such Horses, shall receive fifteen pounds of Tobacco
per day for the first Twenty days, and if he be continued longer then twenty
days, then for all the time he shall be employed over and above the twenty
days, after the rate of ten pounds of Tobacco per day, and before the
Impressor shall take such Horse or Horses, impress away, he shall first bring
two able honest men of the Neighborhood to appraise the said Horse or Horses,
and a writing shall be drawn and signed, intimating the vallue, and if such
Horse or Horses be killed in the Service, or otherways lost, it shall be at the
choice of the Owner of such Horse or Horses, to receive the vallue as appraised
or the wages for hire, if for the use of the County, to be paid by the County,
if for the use of the public, to be punctually paid upon returning Certificate
from the County Court, as in case of Sloops, and in case any person or persons
shall notwithstanding this Law presume to impress and carry away any Sloop-Boat
or other Vessel, or any Cart, Horse, Arms, Provisions or any other matter or
thing whatsoever, contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof, shall be
fined and amerced double the vallue of any such Sloop-Boat, etc. Horses, Arms,
Provisions, or any other matter or thing so by him Impressed, and taken away to
the use of the Owner or Owners of such Goods to be recovered by Action of
Trespass, in any Court of Judicature in this Colony.

IX. An Act for settling the Form of Pattents.
MR. Secretary Ludwell, having presented a new Form of a Patent, exactly
agreeing with the new and late Charter, under the Broad Seal of England, in
these following words: To all to whom, etc. I, etc. send, etc. Whereas His Most
Sacred Majesty has been graciously pleased by his Royal Letters, Patents,
under the Great Seal of England; hearing Date at Westminster, the tenth day of
October, in the twenty eighth year of his Reign, amongst other things in his
said Letters, Patents, contained to continue and confirm the Ancient
Privileges and Power of granting fifty Acres of Land for every person imported
into this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia, now know ye, that I the said, etc.
do with the consent of the Council of State, accordingly give and grant unto A.
B. etc. Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, That all Patents
shall be drawn henceforward in the abovesaid Form and words, to the end they
may be firm, sure and valid in Law.

X. An Act ascertaining Coroners-Fees.
FOr as much as some doubts have arisen concerning Coroners- Fees, in this
Colony, and it being necessary to declare by a Law what the same shall be; Be
it therefore Enacted, by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this present
Grand Assembly, Thirteen shillings and four-pence or 30 and one hundred three
pounds of Tobacco the Coroners Fee.
and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that a Fee for a
Coroners-Inquest be thirteen shillings and four-pence, according to the
allowance in England, in such Cases, or one hundred thirty three pounds of
Tobacco, and Cask, at the choice of the Coroners, to be paid out of the Estate
of the person Deceased, In Counties where there is no Corner, a Justice of
Peace shall perform his Office, and receive the Fee aforesaid.
if such there be, and for want of such Estate by the County where the Party
causing the Inquest shall dye, and where there is no Coroner in the County,
that the Justice of Peace doing the Office shall have the Fee.

XI. An Act declaring the year 1676. to be out of the Statute of Limitations.
FOr as much as by reason of the late unhappy Rebellion all Judicial
Proceedings were impeaded and hindered for the greatest part of the last year,
being the year of our Lord, 1676. Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Burgesses of this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is
hereby Enacted, That the year 1676. shall not be accounted as one year,
included and meant in the Statute of Limitations for Payment or Demand of Debts
due by Bill, Bond or Judgment, or in the Clause and Proviso of Patents for
Seating of Lands, but that in those and suchlike Cases, the said year of our
Lord be passed by, and not accounted of for one of those years therein or
thereby meant and mentioned.

XII. An Act for Signing Executions on Judgments in the Assembly.
IT having been proposed in this Assembly, how and by whom Executions issuing
upon Judgments granted by the Grand Assembly, shall issue and be signed, Be it
Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Present Grand Assembly,
Executions on Judgments granted by the Assembly, shall be drawn by the Clerk
and signed by the Honorable Governor.
and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, That all Executions
issuing upon Judgments granted by the Grand Assembly, shall be written and
drawn by the Clerk of the Assembly, and signed only by the Right Honorable the
Governor; his Honor being the Head of the Grand Assembly.

At a Grand Assembly begun at JAMES CITY, the 25th of April, Anno 1679.
I. An Act for the Defense of the Country against the Incursions of the
Indian-Enemy.
WHereas this Grand Assembly have taken into sad and serious consideration the
sundry Murders, Rapines, and many Depredations lately committed and done by
Indians on the Inhabitants of the Country, and the great danger the
Frontier-Counties are exposed to by the frequent incursions of Indians; For
prevention whereof, Four houses for Stores and Garrisons ordered to be built at
the public charge
and for the future security of the Country, Be it Enacted by the Governor,
Council and Burgesses of this present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, That four Houses for Stores or Garrisons be
Erected and Built at the heads of the four great Rivers, viz. At the head of
Potomack-River, Places where.
at Niapsco near Occoquan, one storehouse to be strongly built, The Dimensions
thereof.
and well covered to be sixty foot long, and Twenty foot broad, and one small
house of ten-foot square, strongly built for Ammunition, both which to be built
and paid for at the Public Charge, and that Major Isaac Allerton, Colonel
St. Legior Cod, and Colonel George Mason, take upon them to provide the
several necessaries hereafter mentioned, Necessaries to be provided for the
said Storehouses, and the persons appointed to procure the same.
for the said work and houses, for which they shall be reimbursed by the
Public in the Respective Counties where they live, that is to say eight
thousand eight-penny-nails, five thousand ten-penny-Nails, four thousand
Twenty-penny-Nails, four Iron-pots, of about eight gallons each, with
Pot-hooks, four Iron-Pestles, two Hair-Cifters course, twelve Milk-Trays, six
Spades, two Cross-cut-Saws, six VVedges, two broad Axes, six falling Axes, six
Hilling-Hoes, two drawing knives, two Hand-Saws, one Grindstone, one Froe, two
Hammers, six Gimblets, two Augers, one of an inch, one of an inch and half, two
Files one Adz, two Frying Pans, two Stock-locks, ten bushels of Salt, and four
washing-tubbs. At the head of Rappahannack-River, one Storehouse or Garrison,
with a small House, both of the demensions before mentioned, and that Major
Lawrence-Smith do procure the several necessaries above mentioned, for which he
shall be allowed by the Public in Tobaccoes in Glocester-County, at the rate
of Ten Shillings Per Hundred with Cask. At the head of Mattapony at or above
the Indian Towns, one Storehouse or Garrison, with a small house for
Ammunition of the demensions aforesaid, and that Captain Richard Johnson do
procure and provide the several necessaries above mentioned, for which he shall
be allowed by the Public, in Tobaccoes, to be paid in New-Kent-County, at the
rate of ten shillings per hundred with Cask. At the head of James River on the
south side, above Captain William Birds, one Storehouse or Garrison, with a
small house for Ammunition of like demensions aforesaid, and that Captain
William Bird do procure and provide the several necessaries before mentioned,
for which he shall be paid by the Public in Henrico-County.

And be it further Enacted, by this Present Grand Assembly, Every Forty
Tythable shall be assessed to fit and set forth one Horseman well Armed.
and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, That every Forty
Tythables within this Colony, be assessed and obliged to fit, and set forth
one able and sufficient man, and horse, with furniture well and completely
Armed, with a Case of good Pistols, and Carabine or short Gun, and a Sword,
together with two pound of Powder, and ten pounds of Leaden Bullet or high Swan
Shot; and also that each Respective Forty Tythables do provide and send up to
the said Storehouses, five bushels of shell'd Indian-Corn, and two bushels of
Meal, eighty pounds of good well salted Pork, The Provision to be allowed such
Man and his Horse for four Months.
or one hundred pounds of good well salted Beef for four Months provision for
such man, and his Horse, and so to supply him four months punctually.

And be it further Enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that immediately after the Publication of
this Law, the several Justices, and Militia Officers of each County do Assemble
themselves at some convenient place, and consider of, proportion, and divide
the Respective Tythables of their County into Fortyes, which Forty Tythables so
by them divided and appointed to find a Man, Horse, Arms, The Militia-Officers
of each County, to Proportion a Division of the Tythables in their said
Counties.
Ammunition and Provision as is before expressed, shall either refuse, neglect
or be incapable to fit out such Man and Horse Arms, Provision and Ammunition,
in manner aforesaid, that then the Justices and Militia-Officers of the said
County do, and they are hereby empowered to impress Man and Horse, with Arms,
Ammunition and Provision as is beforesaid, and send them to the said
Storehouse or Garrison, and assess the said Delinquent Tythables the whole
Charge thereof, and cause the same to be Levied and paid, where the same shall
be Due.

And be it further Enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that the Pay of each private Soldier or
Trooper for his personal service shall be after the Rate of two hundred pounds
of Tobacco and Cask per Month, Private Soldiers Pay.
and so proportionabley for a greater or lesser time, and for a Horse eighty
pounds of Tobacco and Cask Per Month, and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser time; and if after the proportioning the Tythables of each or any County
into Forties and less number shall remain, such Tythables shall be assessed by
the Justices proportionably to the rest, to help to defray the whole Charge.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby
Enacted, that whenever it shall happen that any one or more such Soldier or
Soldiers so fitted out as aforesaid, shall dye, or become unable or unfit for
service, or if such Horse sent to such service as aforesaid, Horses dying or
being killed or disabled in service, the Justices and Militia-Officers may
impress others in their Room.
shall happen to dye, be killed lost or disabled for service, or if any Arms so
fitted, and sent out shall be lost, broken, spoiled or become unserviceable,
and that the Forty Tythables to whom they or any of them appertained, shall be
delinquent in fitting and sending out other in their stead, that then in such
case the Respective Justices and Militia-Officers shall impress, and are hereby
empowered to impress others in their Room; but if such Horse shall dye or be
killed in the Country service, and good Certificate be made thereof by the
Commander in Chief of the Garrison to which he belonged, to the Assembly, or
that such Arms as are lost and broken, were lost and broken in the service, and
not by neglect or fault of the Soldier to whom they belonged; and then such
Horses or Arms shall be paid for by the Public, according to the Certificate
of the Chief Commander; but in case any Soldier shall wilfully or carelessly
spoil his Horse, or kill or lose him, or spoil lose or imbezil his Arms, in
such case such Soldier shall be liable, and he is hereby made liable to make
full satisfaction for the same to the said Forty Tythables, who fitted the same
out.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted,
that in case any Soldier, Horse or Arms fitted out and sent by any Respective
number of Tythables shall by the Justices and Militia-Officers, be judged unfit
for such services, that then in such case the said Justices and
Militia-Officers do return such man Horse or Arms, and immediately impress
others in their Room, and assess the Pay and Cost to whom the other belonged,
or by whom they were sent out,

And be it further Enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and tha Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that forasmuch as the present necessity of
the times require able and prudent Commanders, who have both Courage and good
conduct, that a Captains Pay be Twelve hundred Pounds of Tobacco and Cask, Per
Month, he finding himself Horse, A Captains pay to be 1200 l. of Tobacco and
Cask per Month.
Arms, Provision, etc. and that one of the Listed Soldiers which he shall make
choice of, do wait and attend him, that a Lieutenants pay be 850 l. of Tobacco
and Cask Per Month the Cornets pay 600 l. of Tobacco and Cask Per Month, the
Surgeons Pay 850 l. of Tobacco and Cask, Per Month; The Lievtenants pay 850
l. of Tobacco and Cask per Month.
each of those Respective Officers finding themselves horses, arms, ammunition
and Provision, and if any of the said Officers, shall lose or have any of their
horses killed in the service, that in such case such horses so lost, or killed
to be paid for by the Public. The Cornets and Chirurgions Pay.


And be it further Enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted that a box of Medicines be bought or impressed
by the Commander in Chief of each Garrison, to the vallue of five Pounds
sterling, ot thereabouts, not exceeding the said sum, for the use of the
Garrisons, and the Payment thereof, such Captain drawing a note upon the next
Collector of two Shillings per Hogshead, to be by him paid and allowed to him
in the public account.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Corporals and Trumpeters
pay.
and it is hereby enacted, that a Corporals pay and a Trumpeters pay be fifty
pounds of Tobacco per Month, over and above a private Soldiers pay, which
Overplus pay of fifty per Month, together with other Officers pay before
mentioned, shall be paid and defrayed by the public.

And whereas diverse Counties who are to send Provisions etc. to the Respective
Garrisons, lie far Remote from the said Garrisons, it is hereby Enacted that
the Justices and Militia-Officers of such Counties take care to send up their
Provisions and ammunition with the best Convenience, and greatest Security,
which charge shall be paid for and defrayed by the public.

And be it further Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and the authority
thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that the Soldiers to be raised in each
Respective County, by virtue of this Act, are forthwith with all possible
convenience to be raised, and are to Repair to the several Garrisons, and to be
upon the place on the Twentieth day of June next at furthest, and if possible
sooner; and that each Respective County send their Proportions of men as is
hereafter set down and expressed, viz. Henrico County, Northside of
Charles-City County, Warrick County, The proportions of men which the several
Countyes shall send to the Garrisons.
Elizabeth-City County, James-City County, together with four Soldiers from
Lower Norfolk County, four from Nanzemund, four from the Isle of Wight, three
from Surrey, and two from the South Side of Charles-City County, be sent to the
Garrison at the head of James-River, New-Kent County, York County, and one 3d.
part of Gloucester County Soldiers be sent to the Garrison at the head of
Mattopony, Middlesex County, Rapahannack County, and two third parts of
Gloucester County, Soldiers be sent to the Garrison at the head of Rapahannack
River, Stafford, Westmerland, Northumberland, and Lancaster County Soldiers to
be sent to Potomack Garrison, (...) Lower Norfolk, Nanzemund, Isle of Wight,
Surrey, and the South Side of Charles City Counties, Soldiers to be Rangers
for the Security of their Respective Counties, according to such Orders and
Directions as shall be agreed upon, and made by their Militia-Officers.

And be it further Enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that for the ease of public charge, each
Respective Soldier be and he is hereby enjoined to be Assistant, by all
convenient and possible ways for the securing themselves, and building the
Guard House, and Storehouse or Houses, that is to say, in falling, malling or
doing any other matter or thing requisite or necessary, and also in fencing to
make Pasture to secure their Horses, etc.

And be it also further Enacted by this present Grand Assembly and the
Authority thereof, Each Garrison shall be supplied with a good Boat and Oars
and it is hereby enacted, that each Garrison be supplied with a good Boat and
Oars, such as may be sufficent to pass over at least three or four Horses at a
time, and that the Commander in chief of each Respective Garrison be, and he is
hereby enabled to procure and bargain for such Boats and Oars, to be
accordingly paid for, by the public upon his Certificate of the price thereof,
a Boat and Oars for Mattapony Garrison, being already promised to be provided
by Colonel John West.

And be it further enacted by this present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that four of the Neighboring Indians to
each Garrison shall be commanded by the Commander in chief thereof, Four of the
Neighboring Indians to each Garrison shall attend there.
to be always attending at each Garrison; and because there is no Neighbor
Indians on Virginia side, residing near the Garrison in Potomack River, the
Commander in chief of that Garrison, is hereby empowered and requested to hire
four of the Matteoman-Indians in Mary Land, for the service of that Garrison.

And to avoid all mistakes and harms that may ensue by being unacquainted with
our Neighbor and Friendly Indians, and to the end we may the better know them
from our enemies in our Ranging and Marches, be it enacted by this present
Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, That all and every Indian Town have
speedy notice, that if at any time any of them, or any of their Friends that
may Repair to their Towns, shall happen to meet with any of our Soldiers
ranging in the Woods, or shall come near any of our Plantations or People, in
any place or places whatsoever, that they must not fly, hide themselves, or
make any Opposition, and that if they do, they may be proceeded against with
all manner of Hostility as enemies; but if they shall stand peaceably, and
discourse the English, and give true account who and what they are, and upon
their near approaches lay down their Arms, that then they shall be civilly
treated, and no harm shall be done or offered to them.

And forasmuch as the said Garrisons may not be at any time left destitute of
sufficient defense against any enemy that shall or may attempt the same; Be it
enacted, Ammunition to be kept in the Garrisons for store.
that ten long Guns or Muskets be provided, with one Barrel of Gunpowder, and
leaden shot or Bullet, proportionable thereto, for each Garrison, to be kept in
the Storehouse belonging to it, for a Reserve and Defense for the same; and
that the charge of such Arms, powder, or bullet, if the same cannot be
procured from his Majesty's store, be paid for and defrayed by the Public.

And to the end that the Eastern Shore may not be altogether left without
defense against the enemy, if any shall attempt thereon, or any Suspicion of
such attempts shall arise among the Inhabitants there, be it enacted by this
present Grand Assembly and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted,
that the Inhabitants on the Eastern Shore may have, and it is hereby declared,
that they have the same Liberty to make Garrisons, and raise Soldiers in
manner and form as is allowed to the several Counties on the Western Shore, or
to raise or employ their Soldiers in Ranging, as they find Occasion.

And be it further enacted, by this present Grand Assembly and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that the several Associations on the
South Side James-River shall and may, as they see Occasion, erect like Houses
and Garrisons, as is at the heads of the other great Rivers toward which they
shall be equally allowed by the public, with the other Garrisons before
mentioned, and such Officers as are employed in ranging either on the Eastern
Shore, on the South Side of James-River, to be paid for the time of their
Service by the Public, equally with other Officers at the Garrisons.

And for the better Encouragement and more orderly Government of the Soldiers,
What Indian Prisoners, or plunder the soldiers take shall be free purchase.
that what Indian-Prisoners or Plunders shall be taken in War, shall be free
purchase to the Soldier taking the same; and where any difference shall happen
among the Soldiers in such or like matters, the same to be adjudged, decided,
and determined, by their Respective chief Commander, and all such Soldiers as
shall be maimed or disabled in the Service, have an annual Pension allowed them
by the Public at the Discretion of the Assembly, Soldiers maimed or disabled
in Service shall have an Annual pension.
and that the Articles of War be published and practiced, as is directed in the
Act of Assembly, made in the year 1675.

II. An Additional Act for the better Preventing stealing of Hogs.
WHereas notwithstanding the former Law against Hog-stealing, the same is daily
practiced to the great damage of the Inhabitants of this Country, for
prevention whereof, Be it enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of
this Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that
this following Addition be made to the former Law, viz. That for the first
Offense of Hog-stealing, whereof any person shall be convict, the party shall
be adjudged according to the said Law, and if any Person having been once
Convict of Hog-stealing, Persons the second time convict of stealing Hogs,
shall stand in the Pillory with their Ears nailed thereto.
shall a second time be convict thereof, then for such his default he shall
stand two hours in the Pillory, and have both his ears nailed thereto, and at
the Expiration of the said two hours, have his Ears cut loose from the Nails,
which Penalty and Punishment shall be adjudged and inflicted against and upon
the Offender by any County Court in Virginia, any Law to the contrary
notwithstanding, And the third time shall be prosecuted as Felons.
and whosoever shall be taken a third time stealing of Hogs, that then he be
tried by the Laws of England, as in case of Felony.

III. An Additional and Declaratory Law, Impowering County-Courts to make
Bylaws.
Whereas there is great necessities oftentimes of particular Counties to make
Bylaws proper only to themselves, and the former Act of Assembly to that
purpose being too general, and consequently not so easy to be put in practice:
Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgess of this Grand
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that for the
future two men be made choice of, Two men shall be chosen in each Parish by the
Freeholders and Housekeepers, to sit with the Justices in County-Courts, for
making of Bylaws.
in each Parish by the Major Votes of the Freeholders and Housekeepers in the
said Parish; At such time and place as by the County-courts shall be appointed,
which two so chosen as aforesaid shall be Returned by the Church Wardens, and
shall sit in the several County-Courts, and have their equal Votes with the
several Justices for the making of Bylaws, and where the County shall consist
of one Parish only, there four men shall be chosen, and Returned in manner as
aforesaid, and shall have equal Votes with the several Justices for the making
Bylaws, and all such Bylaws so made, shall be firm and binding to the
Inhabitants of such County any Law usuage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding, Inhabitants of the County shall obey the Bylaws thereof.
and for as much as diverse great Parishes have in them several Chapels of
ease, Be it therefore Enacted by this Present Grand Assembly, and the authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that the Inhabitants within the Precincts of
every such Chapel of ease, may elect one Representative for every such
Chapel, to sit and vote with the Justices, in making such Bylaws as
aforesaid, the time and place for such Election to be also appointed by the
County-courts.

IV. An Act declaring how far Accounts are Pleadable against Dead Men's Estates.
Whereas the 95th Act of Assembly in the Printed Laws making no Accounts
pleadable against Dead Men's Estates, is found too severe, and that many
Executors and Administrators of Dead men's Wills and Estates, have had and taken
too great an advantage thereby, to the Defrauding and great Prejudice of many
Creditors to such Estates, for prevention whereof for the time to come, and to
the end all just debts may be recovered against the Debtors Estate: Be it
Enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this Grand Assembly, and the
authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that from henceforward all
accounts brought against a Dead Man's Estate for any Debt made and Contracted
within one year before the Parties Death, but no longer shall be pleadable, and
recoverable against the Debtors estate, and for no longer time, without
prescription, if the party in Debt shall after contracting such Debt, remove or
abscond himself from the County where he lived, at contracting the same.
Provided always, No Debts pleadable against dead men's Estates, but such as were
contracted within one year before their decease.
that all such accounts and claims as shall be brought against a dead man's
estate, be fairly proved in Court by the Oath of the Creditor, and one Witness
more, and that the party claiming and Suing for such Debt do himself appear,
and in open Court make Oath upon the Holy Evangelist, that the same is really
due, without any discount to be made, or Credit to be given that he knows of.

V. An Act Repealing the 129th Act of Assembly, in the Printed Book.
Whereas the 129th Act of Assembly in the Printed Book of Laws, enjoining the
Inhabitants on Potomack River, and on the eastern shore, not to make delivery
of their Tobaccoes by them sold or paid away without certificate from the
collector, that the impost is paid thereof to him under the Penalty of Twenty
Shillings for every Hogshead, by them suffered to be taken out of their
Possession, is found grievous to the said Inhabitants, all other the
Inhabitants of Virginia, being at their Liberty to sell, and deliver their own
Tobaccoes to the best advantage, Be it enacted by this present Grand Assembly,
and the authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that the said 129th Act of
Assembly be and from henceforth stand Repealed, The Act Prohibiting the
Inhabitants on Potomach River, and on the Estern Shore to Ship their Tobaccoes
without Certificate Repealed
and that the Inhabitants on Potomack River, and on the Eastern Shore have like
and equal Liberty and Privilege with the rest his Majesty's Subjects in this
Colony, to sell, dispose, pay, and make Delivery of their Tobacco to their best
advantage and Convenience.

VI. An Act Ascertaining Collectors Fees for entry and clearing Ships, etc.
WHereas several Complaints have been made, to this present Grand Assembly,
that several Collectors in this Colony have exacted, and taken great and
unreasonable Fees, for entering and clearing Ships and smaller Vessels, trading
into this Country, which if permitted and continued, might prove prejudicial
to trade; for prevention whereof for the future, Be it enacted by this present
Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby enacted, that from
hence forward, no Collector or Collectors shall or may demand or take other
Fees for entering and clearing of any Ship or Vessel coming into this country,
then by this Law is ascertained and allowed to be taken, that is to say, for
every Ship or smaller vessel, Burden twenty Tuns or under, fifteen Shillings
and no more; and for every Ship and other vessel burden above Twenty Tuns,
thirty Shillings and no more; which Sums shall be in full Payment of his Fees,
for entering, clearing, License to Trade, and for taking such Bonds as are by
Law enjoined to be given and taken at the entering and clearing of Ships and
other vessels Trading hither.

VII. An Act for Securing Orphans Estates.
WHereas the 66th Act of Assembly in the Printed Book Relating to Orphans
Estates, is found too short and deficient, and that by the neglect of the
Courts in taking Security upon granting Orders for Administrations, great
Prejudices have ensued and may ensue; For the better prevention thereof for the
future, Be it Enacted, by this present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby enacted, That before any order for Administrations
shall be granted to issue forth from the Office, so as Letters of
Administration shall or may thereupon pass, and be signed by the Justices, as
by the Laws is directed and enjoined; good security shall be taken for the
Parties due Administration according to Law.

And be it further Enacted, by this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that all Justices sitting in Court,
Administrators of Orphans Estates shall give good security.
whenever Administrations are sued for and granted, and shall upon granting
Order or Orders of Administration, neglect to make order for security as is
before enjoined to be taken, shall thereby, and for such their neglect become
liable to make good such Estate in case the same shall be imbezelled by such
Administrators. And it is also further Enacted, that all Justices of the Peace,
stand enjoined, and are hereby required before they sign Letters of
Administration, to demand Certificate from the Clerk, that security is given
according to Law, and duly entered upon Record, to the end all Orphans, etc. may
be secured in their Estates, and the Justices safe, in the due execution of
their Office and Places.

VIII. An Act prohibiting the Importation of Tobaccoes into this Colony.
FOr as much as the Importation of Tobaccoes into this Colony from Carolina,
and other Parts without the Capes, has been found very prejudicial to this
Country, and the Inhabitants thereof; for prevention of like mischief, and
inconvenience for the future, Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Burgesses of this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority thereof, and it is
hereby Enacted, that from and after the tenth day of October next after this
present Sessions, no Tobaccoes packt in Cask or otherways, shall be brought
from without the Capes of Virginia into this Colony, either in Boat, Sloop, or
other Vessel whatsoever, to be Landed on shore, sold or Shipped off in any Ship
or other Vessel riding in this Colony, except only by such persons as shall
make it appear, that they are Inhabitants of Lower-Norfolk-County, and that the
Tobaccoes by them brought round the Capes, is of the growth of the said County,
upon Penalty of Forfeiting all such Tobaccoes so brought into this Colony,
contrary to the intent and meaning of this Act; one half of such Tobaccoes so
forfeited to be to the use of the Kings Majesty, and the other half to be
equally divided between the Informer and the Country.

Provided always that it shall be lawful for any Merchant or other person
inhabiting in this Country to fetch from Carolina commonly called the South,
and bring hither all such Tobaccoes as are already due to him before the making
this Law.

Provided also that such Merchant, or other Inhabitant of this Country, as
shall pretend to have Tobaccoes due there, and expects liberty of importing the
same into this Country, do within three months next after the Publication of
this Act, repair to the Court in the County where he lives, and there make Oath
upon the Holy Evangelists, what sums of Tobacco is due to him there, and that
the same was due to him before the Publication of this Act, and cause the same
to be entered upon Record, and further that such Merchant or other person
residing in this Country, and having Tobaccoes due to him in Carolina, and
claiming the benefit of this Law, to import the same into this Colony, shall
and do immediately, and before he shall unload the same, either out of Boat,
Sloop or other Vessel, bringing the same into this Country, repair to the next
or nearest Collector of the impost of two Shillings Per Hogshead, and make
entry with him of all such Tobaccoes as he shall bring in; and do also make
Oath upon the Holy Evangelists before such Collector or other Magistrate whom
he shall appoint, that such Tobaccoes so brought in, is such part of what
Tobaccoes was due to him in Foreign Parts, before the making this Act, the
total whereof he has already signified to the County Court where he resides,
according to the Injunctions of the Law.

IX. An Act forbidding Mary-Land-Vessels Trading into this Country, without
making Due Entry.
WHereas by several Laws which long have been and now are of force in
Maryland, all Ships, Sloops, Boats or other Vessels, belonging to Virgnia, are
enforced to make Entry with the Respective Collector, before they can be
permitted to make delivery of any Goods, or take on Board any Tobaccoes to
import hither, and consequently to pay considerable sums of money to such
Officer for such Entry, though the Goods or Concern thither carried be of very
small vallue, which severity this Assembly having taken into consideration, do
adjudg it very unneighbourly; Be it therefore Enacted, by the Governor,
Council and Burgesses of this Present Grand Assembly, and the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted, that no Ship, Sloop, Boat or other Vessel
belonging to any the Inhabitants of Maryland, or coming from thence, shall
from henceforth be permitted to bring in any manner of Goods or Commodities of
what vallue soever, into any of the Rivers or Parts of this Government, and
unload the same either on Board any other Vessel, or on shore, without first
making due Entry thereof with the Collector of these Precincts, No Vessel
belonging to the Inhabitants of Maryland, shall unload in any Port of Virginia
without Entry first made upon Penalty of forfeiture of the said Vessel and
Cargo.
under the Penalty of forfeiting such Sloop, Boat, etc. or other Vessel,
together with such Goods and Merchandises as shall be so unloaden as aforesaid,
the one half to the Informer, and the other half to the use of the Count^y
where the seizure is made, and the several Collectors are hereby earnestly
required and enjoined to take particular care in this matter, and this Law to
stand in force, until the Mary-Landers shall repeal their severe Law before
Nominated.

At a General Assembly begun at JAMES CITY the eighth day of June, Anno 1680.
I. An Act of free and general Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion.
THe Kings Most Excellent Majesty, having taken into serious and gracious
consideration, the present state and condition of his Colony of Virginia, and
reflecting on the late Rebelion raised there by Nathaniel Bacon Junior
Deceased, his Accomplices and Abettors, and how many of his good Subjects were
drawn into the same, and seduced from their Allegiance by the specious
pretenses set forth by ths said Nathaniel Bacon, who have since by their
dutiful behavior showed themselves sensible thereof, and repenting for the
same, and to the intent, that no Crime whatsoever committed against his said
Majesty and Government, may hereafter rise in Judgment, or be brought in
question against any of them, to their least endammagement, either in Lives,
Liberties, Estates, or to the prejudice of their Reputations by any reproach,
or term of distinction, and to turn all seeds of future discord and the
remembrances thereof into utter oblivion, as well in his Majesty's own Breast,
as in the breast of his Majesty's Subjects one toward another, Free and
general Pardon for the Accomplices in Bacons Rebellion.
and out of an earnest desire to put an end to all suits, quarrels and
controversies whatsoever, that by occasion of the said Rebellion, and late
distractions, have arisen and may arise, between any of his Majesty's Subjects,
and in pursuance of his Majesty's gracious Proclamation of Pardon, bearing date
the twenty seventh day of October, 1676. and in the twenty eighth year of his
Reign, is graciously pleased that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the General Assembly,
that all manner of Treasons, Misprision of Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Crimes
and Misdemenours committed, acted, councelled or done by any persons
whatsoever, upon or at any time, before the sixteenth day of January, 1676. in
the twenty eighth year of his Majesty's Reign, other then the persons hereafter
excepted, in such manner as they are excepted, by virtue or color of any
Command, Power, Authority, Warrant, Commission or Instructions from Sir William
Birkley late Governor of Virginia, Deceased, or of or from any peson deriving,
or pretending to derive mediately or immediately, any Commission, Power or
Authority from the Grand Assembly in Virginia, held in June, 1676. or of or
from Nathaniel Bacon Deceased, assuming unto himself the Authority of, or
Reputed to be Commander in chief of all the Forces in Virginia, by Land or Sea,
or from any other person or persons deriving or pretending to derive any
Authority from them or either of them, be Pardoned, Released, Discharged and
put in utter Oblivion, and that as firmly and fully to all intents and
purposes, as if they or every of them, had been herein particularly named and
expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every such
person and persons, their and every of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators (except as hereafter excepted) that were actually engaged in
Aiding, Acting or Advising, Assisting, Abetting or Councelling the said
Rebellon, shall have and enjoy all and every their Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels whatsoever forfeited to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors for any of the Crimes aforesaid, in the same manner, and
as freely to all intents and purposes, as if they had not been forfeited, yet
so that they and every of them and their Estates Real and personal shall be
subject and liable to pay all and singular their just Debts in the same manner
as if they had committed no Rebellion, Crimes or Offenses, except and always
foreprized out of this Act, the abovenamed Nathaniel Bacon Junior, the
principle contriver, beginner and maintainer of the said Rebellion, who having
taken up Arms under pretense of an Indian War, assumed unto himself the Title
of General, and did afterward chase away the then Governor, there rob, kill,
and continue to destroy several other of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, that
refused to take the detestable Oaths imposed by the said Bacon, until it
pleased the Almighty to send him the said Bacon, an infamous and exemplary
death, whereby he has escaped the punishment in this world so justly due to
his person; Be it therefore Enacted, Nathaniel Bacon Junior Attainted of
High Treason.
and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Nathaniel
Bacon Junior, shall be by virtue of this Act, and is hereby adjudged to be
convicted, and attainted of High Treason to all intents and purposes as if he
had been convict or attainted thereof by due course of Law, in his life time,
and that all the Estate Real and Personal whereof he was seized or possessed
upon the fifth day of June, 1676. or at any time after, within the Colony of
Virginia, shall be forfeited to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and is hereby declared to be vested in His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
without any Office or Inquisition thereof, to be hereafter taken or found.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, that this Act nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend to Pardon discharge, or give any other benefit
whatsoever, unto Giles Bland, Anthony Arnold, Richard Turner, Richard Pomfrey,
John Isles, Robert Stokes, John Whitson, and William Scarbrough, alias
Scarburgh, who were all legally Convicted Attainted and Executed for their
Horrid Treasons, Persons excluded from the benefit of the Act of Indemnity.
and Rebellions, or to Richard Lawrence who fired James City and is since fled
notwithstanding his Majesty's gracious Proclamation, but that the persons last
aforesaid, and their Estates are out of this Act, wholly excepted and
foreprized, Provided also and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that if Joseph Ingram, Gregory Walklate, Thomas Whaley, John Forth, and John
Longolon, shall at any time after the passing this Act, accept or exercise any
Office or Public employment whatsoever, within the said Colony of Virginia,
that then such of them as do so accept or exercise as aforesaid, shall to all
intents and purposes, stand as if he or they had been totally excepted by name
out of this Act. And whereas many of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects cannot but be
very great sufferers by the Spoils and Rapines committed during the late
Rebellion, to the intent that they may have as much Relief therein, as may
possibly stand with the quiet of the Country, as also for the avoiding and
determining the endless Suits and Prosecutions which must necessarily ensue, if
care be not taken to prevent the same; Provision made for Relief of such as
were sufferers by the late Rebellion.
It is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that as to any wrong
or injury which has been committed by any person or persons at any time
between the first day of May and the sixteenth day of January, 1676. whereby
the Goods or Commodities of any his Majesty's Subjects in Virginia, have been
destroyed or spoiled, or have been impaired or made worse and for which no
Judgment has been actually obtained, before the 25th day of April 1679. on the
one and thirtieth year of his Majesty's Reign no account, suit, Process or
satisfaction be at any time hereafter required, prosecuted, made or given for
the same, from or against any person or persons whatsoever.

Provided always, that where the Goods of any of his Majesty's Subjects not
actually engaged in the said Rebellion, or being aiding or assisting to the
same, have been wrongfully taken away between the said first day of May, and
the said sixteenth day of January, and shall be found in the possession of any
other person or persons, it shall and may be lawful, for the Owner or Owners of
such Goods or Commodities, his or their Executors or Administrators, to take,
sue for, and recover the same by all legal means, any thing in this Act
contained, or any other Laws, Acts or Statutes to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that no further Punishment, Satisfaction or Damages, shall be
Recovered or Inflicted on any Christian Servants that have ^eserted their
Masters, or been active in the late Rebellion; then that time incurring between
the said first day of May, and the said sixteenth day of January, shall be
accounted no part of their time of Service: And be it further Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that no Verdict, Judgment and Indictment, Informations,
Decrees, Sentences, Probats of Wills, Administrations, Writs, or Actings on, or
return of Writs, Orders, or other Proceedings whatsoever in Law and Equity,
had, made, given, taken, or done, or depending in any Courts whatsoever, or
before any Judges within the said Colony of Virginia, nor any Actings, Process,
Proceedings or Executions thereupon had, made, given, done, or suffered, before
the passing of this Act, within our said Colony, shall be avoided, for or by
Reason that the Premises or any of them were commenced, prosecuted, had, made,
held or done, by or before any Person, pretending and assuming the Name Title,
Authority, and Dignity of Governor of the said Colony, though he were not
legally so, or before any Person or Persons, pretending and assuming the name
Title, and Authority of Counselors in the said Colony, though not legally so,
but that all and every such Verdicts, Judgments, and other things above
mentioned, and the actings, doings, and Proceedings thereupon, shall be of such
and of no other Force, Effect, and vallue, then as if such Person so Assuming
the name Title, Authority and Dignity of Governor, had been legally
Commissioned by his Majesty thereunto, and as if such Person or Persons
pretending the name, Title, and authority of Councellor there, had been legally
authorized thereunto. And whereas during the Licentiousness of the late times,
several ill disposed Persons took upon them to asperse the Government, and
defame the Governor and chief Magistrates of the said Colony, raising false
and Scandalous Reports, without which our good Subjects there could not have
been so easily led away, which cannot but tend to the future Disturbance of the
Peace, and Welfare thereof, if not timely prevented by Inflicting Punishments
proportionate to the greatness of the Crime; Be it therefore enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that whosoever shall after the passing of this Act,
maliciously and advisedly by writing, speaking, or otherwise, express, publish,
utter or declare, any Words, Sentences, or other thing or things, to incite or
stir up the People to the dislike of any Person appointed by his Maje^^y to be
Governor or Commander in chief of the said Colony, Any Person who shall either
by words or writing defame the Governor, shall suffer a years Imprisonment
without Bail, etc.
or tending to the dishonor or defaming of the said Governor or Commander in
chief, for the time being, and being thereof legally convicted, shall be
imprisoned during one year without Bail or Mainprize, and incur such
Forfeitures as shall be adjudged, not exceeding the sum of five hundred pounds
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Sucessors. And it is in like
manner Enacted, that whosoever shall maliciously and advisedly, by writing,
speaking, or otherwise, express, publish, utter and declare, any words,
Sentences, or other things, to incite or stir up the People to the dislike of
his Majesty's Counselors, Judges, or other principal Officers within the said
Colony, tending to the dishonor or defaming of the said Counselors, Judges,
or other principal Officers, and being thereof Lawfully convicted, shall be
imprisoned during three Months, without Bail or Mainprize, and incur such
Forfeiture as shall be adjudged, not exceeding the sum of one hundred pounds,
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, any Act or Acts,
Order or Orders, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

II. An Act for Naturalization.
WHereas nothing can contribute more to the speedy settling and peopling of this
his Majesty's Colony of Virginia, then that all possible encouragement should
be given to persons of different Nations, to Transport themselves hither with
their Families and Stocks, for to settle, plant, or Reside, by investing them
with all the Rights and Privileges of any of his Majesty's natural Freeborn
Subjects, within the said Colony; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the General Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful for
the Governor or Commander in chief, for the time being, or any of his
Successors, Governors of this Colony, by a public Instrument under the broad
Seal thereof, to declare any Alien or Aliens, Forreigner or Foreigners being
already settled, or Inhabitants of this his Majesty's Colony, or such as shall
hereafter come for to settle, The Governor may naturalize such Foreigners as
shall seat themselves in this Colony.
plant, or reside in it, and having taken the Oath of Alleigance, before the
Governor or commander in chief, for the time being, to be to all intents and
purposes, fully and completely naturalized; and the said Persons so approved of
and named in the said Letters Pattents as aforesaid, shall by virtue of this
Act have and enjoy to them and their Heirs the same Immunities and Rights, of
and unto the Laws and Privileges of this Colony, and as fully and amply as any
other of his Majesty's Natural born Subjects have or enjoy within the same, as
if they themselves had been born within any of his Majesty's Realms or
Dominions; any former Law, Act, Ordinance, usuage, or custom to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. And to the intent the said Letters Patent and
instrument under the Broad Seal of this Colony as aforesaid, may be obtained
without any great difficulty or charge, be it further enacted, that the
Governor or Commander in chief, shall have and receive for the same forty
Shillings, and his Clerk for writing of it, ten Shillings, and no more; and
whereas several Aliens and Foreigners that have formerly transported
themselves to this his Majesty's Colony, and have taken up and Patented in
their own Name, several Parcels of Land, or otherwise made purchase of Lands,
Houses, Tenements or other real interest, and have afterward sold the same to
some of his Majesty's Liege People, or Inhabitants of this Colony; It is
therefore hereby Enacted and Ordained, by the authority aforesaid, that all
such person or persons, that shall have so bought of any Alien or Aliens, any
Lands, Houses, or T^nements, be secured, and by virtue of this present Act for
ever confirmed in the quiet and peaceable Possession of the said Purchases,
unto them and their Heirs for ever, any former Law, Usuage, or Custom, to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided that nothing in this Act contained, shall be construed to enable or
give power or Privilege to any Forreigner to do or execute any matter or
thing, which by any of the Acts made in England, concerning his Majesty's
Plantations he is disabled to do or execute.

III. An Act for raising a Public Revenue for the better Support of the
Government, of this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia.
WHereas there is a great and continual charge Required for the Maintenance of
the Governor, and several other Officers and Persons, as also for the Fort and
Fortifications, besides many other contingent expenses, absolutely necessary
for the Support of the Government of this Colony; Be it therefore enacted, and
it is hereby enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
consent of the General Assembly, that for every Hogshead of Tobacco, that shall
at any time hereafter be exported out of this Colony, by Land or water, to any
other place whatsoever, Two Shillings to be paid for every Hogshead of Tobacco
exported.
there shall be paid by the Exporter two Shillings of current money of England,
as also for every five hundred pounds of Tobacco exported in Bulk or otherwise,
and so proportionable for a greater or lesser quantity, the same to be to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for ever, to and for the
better Support of the Government, of this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia, in
such manner as is herein before expressed, and to and for no other use, intent,
and purpose whatsoever. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that all Ships or vessels whatsoever, coming to this Colony, or any part
thereof, shall Respectively pay for every Tun, such Ships or vessel shall
contain, one half pound of good and new Gunpowder, and three pounds of Leaden
Shot, or one Shilling three pence Sterling in lieu thereof, as also Sixpence
per Poll for every person imported, not being actually a Mariner in pay, All
Ships or Vessels whatever coming to this Colony shall pay al. of Powder and 3
l. of Shot, or 1 s. 3 d. money, in Lieu thereof.
the same to be also to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors for ever, for the better support of the Government of this his
Majesty's Colony of Virginia, in such manner as is herein before expressed, and
to and for no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever.

And for the better discovery and preventing of Frauds, Be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, Sixpence per Poll payable for all Persons imported,
Mariners excepted.
that the Master of every Ship or Vessel, shall deliver his Boatswains Book to
the perusal of the Respective Collectors, and make Oath of the truth thereof,
to the best of his knowledge, and that the Mate, Boatswain, Seamen, or other
persons be also sworn if there be cause, for the discovery of the truth of the
freight; and if any Master shall wittingly or willingly conceal any part of his
Freight, or make false entry of the burden of his Ship or Vessel, or number of
persons imported as aforesaid, that then the said Master shall forfeit for
every such Offense the sum of One Hundred Pounds Sterling, as also the treble
duties for every Hogshead, or five hundred pounds of Tobacco, and for every Tun
concealed; one Moitie to the Informer, and the other Moitie to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to and for the uses above
mentioned, and to be recovered by action of Debt, Bill or Plaint, by virtue of
this Act, against which no essoing, wager of Law, or protection to be allowed
to any person so offending.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Respective master of every Ship and Vessel, shall enter into a Bond of Twenty
Pounds Sterling to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
for the payment of the Duties of so many Hogsheads, or five hundred pounds of
Tobacco as shall upon due Certificate appear to be entered in the Custom-house
in England, more than shall be entered and paid to the Respective Collectors,
and other Officers in Virginia, unless the said Collectors and Officers be
fully satisfied of the true number of Hogsheads and Freight of the said Ships
and Vessels; the said Bond to be made without any Fee, and to be void to all
intents, as if never made, if not put in suit, upon due Certificate to be
procured by the Respective Collectors from the Custom-house in England within
one year from the making thereof, which said Collectors and other Officers are
hereby required to use their utmost diligence in the due execution of this Act,
and shall be allowed their usual salleries, or such other as by the Governor
or Commander in Chief for the time being, with the advice of the Council, shall
be adjudged necessary for Collecting the said imposition; which said Governor
or Commander in Chief, for the time being, is also hereby further Authorized
and empowered from time to time with the advice of the Council as is before
specified, to give such reasonable allowances and encouragement, as shall be
adjudged fitting, not exceeding ten per Centum, to such Masters of Ships or
other persons, as shall give in true accounts, and advance and pay down the
above mentioned dutys either in money or good and sufficient Bills of Exchange,
to the satisfaction of the Respective Collectors.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted and declared by the Authority
aforesaid, that the Act of Assembly in the Printed Book, Entitled, Imposition
of two shillings per Hogshead, made at a Grand Assembly held at James City the
23d of March 1661. also one other Act, Entitled, An Act for the imposition of
two shillings per Hogshead, made at James City the second of December, 1662.
also one Act in the Printed Book, Entitled, Castle-duties to be paid, made at
a Grand Assembly holden at James City the 23d of March, 1661. and all other
former Acts for the raising or levying of two shillings per Hogshead Impost
upon Tobaccoes exported out of this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia, or for
raising or levying, Castle Duties, Tunnage, or head-money be and are hereby by
virtue of this Act fully Repealed and made void to all intents and purposes,
any thing in this Act, or any other Law, Statute, Custom, Usuage, or
instructions whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, and declared by the Authority
aforesaid, that the Privileges of Virginia-Owners of Ships, expressed and set
down in the CXXXIIII. Act, in the Printed Book (Entitled Privilege of
Virginia-Owners) made at James City the 23d of March, 1661. and one Act made at
James-City the 20th. of October, 1669. (Entitled, An Act for freeing
Virginia-Owners from Castle-Duties) shall be, and are hereby meant and intended
to be in full force, power and virtue, to the benefit, use and privilege of
all and every such Owner or Owners, any thing in this Act, or any other Act,
Law, Statute, Custom, usuage or Instructions whatsoever, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

IV. An Act for continuation of the several Fortifications and Garrisons, at
the heads of the four great Rivers.
WHereas the number of Soldiers at the several Garrisons appointed by Act of
Assembly made at James-City, the 25th day of April, 1679. is found too
chargeable for the great poverty of the Inhabitants of this Country, and
longer to lie under, and nevertheless, the holding up any maintaining the said
Garrisons, and Fortifications against the incursions of the Indian-Enemy is
deemed of absolute necessity; Be it therefore Enacted and it is hereby Enacted
by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the General
Assembly, that the clause in the said Law, appointing Forty Tithables, to set
forth one Soldier, be from henceforth wholly repealed and made void, and that
the said Garrisons and Fortifications be continued, and that from henceforward,
the number of Soldiers at each Garrison, Each Garrison to have twenty
Soldiers, besides the chief Commander.
over and besides the Commander in chief thereof, be twenty in number, out of
which number, two Corporals to be chosen by each Respective Commander in chief,
and that such twenty Soldiers for each Garrison as aforesaid, be appointed and
chosen, as also their Horses, Arms and Furniture, out of those who are now
there, or ought to be there, by each Respective Commander proportionally out of
the several Counties to which they appertain, and that for a supply of the said
twenty Soldiers, Horses, Arms or Furniture so made choice of as aforesaid, and
happening to dye, or any ways become disabled by sickness or otherways, that
then such dificiency upon notice given by the Commander in chief to the
Justices, or first in Commission of such County Court, to which County such
Soldier or Soldiers, etc. shall belong, shall forthwith be supplied according
as the aforesaid Act of Assembly made the 25th of April, 1679. directs, and it
is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that each Officer and Soldiers
pay shall be and continue, as is set down in the said recited Act of Assembly,
which charge shall be borne and allowed by the Public, and for the lessening
the charge heretofore brought for transporting provisions, and the better and
more sure providing the same; Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
each Soldier be allowed such Proportions of Corn and Meat, as is set down in
the before recited Law, and that Colonel William Bird as undertaker in this
Present Assembly, do forthwith begin, and all along continue from four months
to four months, Persons entrusted to make Provision for the Soldiers belonging
to the Garrisons
to provide and furnish the provision and Corn for the Garrisons and Soldiers
at the head of James River, and deliver the same so convenient to the
Garrisons, as that the same may be conveniently secured and fetched in by the
Soldiers thereof, without further charge to the Country.

Their Allowan^^.
For which Provisions he the said Colonel William Bird shall be paid and allowed
by the public, after the rate of two Thousand pounds of Tobacco and Cask per
Annum, for each Soldier at the said Fort; and that Captain John Langhorn as
Undertaker in this present Grand Assembly, make like Provisions and delivery
thereof, for York River Fort, and have like pay from the public, and that
Robert Beverly as Undertaker in this present Grand Assembly, make like
Provisions and Delivery thereof, for Rapahannack River Fort, and have like pay
from the public, and that the Rules in the former Law be observed for
providing Provisions for Potomack Fort, and because by Reason of the Poverty of
this Country, the number of Soldiers appointed for each Garrison at the
Countries charge, is so few, and that in all likelihood there may be found
emergent Occasion to Reinforce each Garrison with one or more Soldiers; his
Excellency is humbly Requested as he shall see cause from time to time to place
in each Garrison such Number of his Majesty's Foot-souldiers now in the
Country, as from time to time shall be thought fit and needful; and for such
Soldiers so placed, their Allowance of Provisions shall be from time to time,
made and provided at the Countries charges, as is proportioned and allowed for
the other, all such Soldiers being furnished and supplied with his Majesty's
Arms and Ammunition, and provided with their own Bedding to be carried to such
Garrison at the charge of the country, and to the end such Provisions as
aforesaid may be always ready and at hand, it is hereby Enacted, by the
Authority aforesaid, that every Undertaker hereby and herein in this Act
nominated do for the first four Months and for every other succeeding four
Months, provide and lay in for each Garrison five Months proportionable
Allowance, and also from time to time, furnish such other quantities
proportionable, and for each such Supernumerary Soldier as shall be sent
according to the time such Soldiers shall be continued there, Five Months
Provisions in each Garrison.
and as the said Undertakers shall from time to time receive Notice thereof,
and Direction for the same from each Respective Commander, in chief for such
Garrison as he has Undertaken for, and for such Provisions he shall be paid by
the public, according to the Rates before mentioned.

Provided always, and his Excellency is desired if he see cause, to draw off
ten of the Soldiers from each Garrison, for the ease of the Country, supplying
the same with ten of his Majesty's Soldiers at each Garrison, and such ten to
have the Horses, Arms, and Furniture of those that shall be withdrawn.

V. An Act for Cohabitation, and Encouragement of Trade and Manufacture.
THis present General Assembly having taken into their serious consideration
the great necessity, usefulness, and advantages of Cohabitation in this his
Majesty's Colony of Virginia, and observing and foreseeing the great
extremities his Majesty's Subjects here; must necessarily fall under by the
present and continued Lowness of the price of Tobacco, the only Commodity and
Manufacture of this Country, if the same be not by all prudential ways and
means prevented; and considering that the building of Storehouses for the
reception of all Merchandises, imported, and receiving, Securing, and laying
ready all Tobaccoes, for exportation and for Sales, and disposal of all Goods,
Merchandises, and Tobaccos imported or exported into or from this his Majesty's
Colony of Virginia, will be one great means of advancement thereof, do pray
your Majesty that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the Consent of the General Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Fifty Acres of Land in each County
shall be set apart to Erect Storehouses upon, for the use of the said County.
that thereby within two Months next and imediatly after publication hereof in
every respective County within this his Majesty's Colony, fifty Acres of Land
purchased by the Feoffees of the several Counties at the rates herafter set
down, and measured about, laid out and appointed for a Town for Storehouses,
etc. for such County as is hereafter set down, and Expressed; that is to say,
Places in each County where the said Storehouses shall be built.


In Henrico County at Verina, where the Courthouse is.

In Charles-City County at Flower-de-hundred over against Swynyards.

In Surry County at Smiths Fort.

In James-City County at James-City.

In Isle of Wight County at Pates-field at the parting of Pagan Creek.

In Nanzemund County at Colonel Dues Point, alias Huffs-point.

In Warwick County at the mouth of Deep Creek on Mr. Mathew's Land.

In Elizabeth-City County, on the West Side Hampton River, on Mr. Thomas Jarvis
his Plantation where he now lives.

In Lower Norfolk County on Nicholas Wise his Land on the Eastern Branch of
Elizabeth River, on the Entrance of the Branch.

In York County on Mrs. Redds Land where the Shipp Honors Store was, including
the Low Beach for Landing Wharfes, etc. and the Old field where Webber dwelt
for Cohabitation.

In new Kent County at the Brick-house along the high Land in the old field
from Marsh to Marsh.

In Gloucester County at Tindalls Point, on Tindalls Creek side, on John
Williams his Land.

In Middlesex County on the West Side of Ralph Wormleys Esquire, his Creek,
against the Plantation where he now lives.

In Rappahannack County at Hobbs his hole.

In Stafford County at Peace point at the mouth of Aquia on the North-side.

In Westmorland County at Noming on the Land of Mr. William Hardridge.

In Accomack County at Colverts Neck on the North-westside, at the head of
Anancock Creek.

In Northampton County at the North-side of Kings Creek, beginning at the
mouth, and so along the Creek, on the Land belonging to Mr. Secretarys Office.

In Lancaster County on the North-side Corotomen River, against the place where
the Ships ride, on a point of Land belonging to Mr. Edward Carter, about a
quarter of a mile up the Creek which divides Mr. Thomas Chewnings and the
Courthouse.

In Northumberland County at Chickacony.

And Be it forther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby
Enacted, That the price to be paid by each County, for each respective Fifty
Acres of Land, nominated as aforesaid, shall be ten thousand pounds of Tobacco
and Cask, which sum the Owner or Owners thereof, shall be and are hereby
constrained to accept, What price the County shall pay for the said fifty Acres
of Land.
take, and receive, as a full and valluable price and consideration for the
said Land for ever; and for which he shall pass and acknowledge an authentic
Deed in Law to such person or persons, his or their heirs and assigns for
ever, as shall be nominated by the Justices of the County Court, as Feoffees in
trust, and to and for the use of the County. And for Encouragement of all and
every such person and persons as will build a dwelling House, and a Warehouse
thereupon, every such person and persons shall have assigned him or them, by
the Justice or Justices of the County Feoffee or Feoffers in the Deed named, or
in case of the Death or absence of one or more of them, then by such other as
shall be appointed by the Court, Encouragement to such as will build a Dwelling
house on the aforesaid Land.
one half Acre of the said Land in Fee-simple, he paying to the County one
hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask, and building such Dweling-house, and
Warehouse thereupon, as by this Act is enjoined: and in case any person shall
desire more then one half Acre, that then there be assigned him one half Acre
more in manner aforesaid, he building thereupon one other Dwelling House and
one Warehouse, and paying the County one hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask
for the same. And it is hereby further Enacted, that every such person or
persons as shall desire and purchase such Lands as aforesaid, and shall not
begin to build thereupon within three Months after such purchase, and so
continue to the finishing such building as by this Act is enjoined, shall
forfeit all such Tobaccos and Land, the same to revert to the County, so as to
be Sold and assigned to any other person or persons desiring the same on the
prices and Conditions aforesaid. And it is hereby further Enacted that the
Surveyor or Surveyors appointed to lay out the said fifty Acres in the several
appointed places, Surveyors of the said Land shall be paid by the Public.
Their Allowance.
be paid and allowed by the Public according to Act of Assembly; and that
every Surveyor for Laying out every Dividual half Acre, and giving a Plot
thereof, shall be paid by him that shall employ him twenty pounds of Tobacco
and Cask, and no more. And such Surveyor as upon timely notice given him shall
refuse to survey and lay out the same, or shall demand more then what is herein
allowed, upon due proof thereof made, shall pay to the party agrieved five
hundred pounds of Tobacco, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any Court of
Judicature. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is
hereby Enacted, that all Tobaccoes whatsoever which shall be made within this
his Majesty's Country from and after the first day of January next ensuing, All
Tobaccoes and other Goods and Merchandises what ever of the growth of this
Colony, to be exported shall be brought to the places aforesaid.
and all other Goods and Merchandises whatsoever, of the growth of this Colony
to be Exported, shall be brought to the said appointed places, where all such
Tobaccoe and all Goods and Merchandises whatsoever of the growth or production
of this Colony, are to be bought, sold, Shipped off and freighted; and whosoever
shall presume to Buy, Sell, freight or Ship off any Tobacco or other Goods and
Merchandises aforesaid, next after the time aforesaid, before the same is
brought to such appointed places, upon due proof thereof made, shall forfeit,
and lose all such Tobacco, or other Merchandises whatsoever, one half to his
Majesty, and the other half to the informer, any Law, Usage, or Custom to the
Contrary notwithstanding. And all Goods, Wares, English Servants, Negroes, and
other Slaves and Merchandises whatsoever, that shall be imported into this
Colony, Goods Imported shall be Landed and sold there.
from or after the 29th Day of September which shall be in the year 1681. shall
be landed and laid on shore, bought, and Sold, at such appointed places as
aforesaid, and at no other place whatsoever, under like penalty and forfeiture
thereof.

Provided always that it shall and may be Lawful, for any person whatsoever,
to have liberty to buy and Sell between themselves any Horses, Mares, Cattle,
Horses, Cattle English grain etc. and other Provisions, excepted.
Sheep Corn, English grain, or any other manner of provisions whatsoever; and
also liberty to carry Hides to the Tanners, where the Tan-houses are, any thing
in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. And to prevent Exactions that may
be used by Sloop-men who must necessarily be employed to bring the said
Tobaccoes to the said appointed places, and for the Owners of Warehouses for
Storage thereof, it is hereby Enacted, that the Owner of the Tobacco bringing
the same to the Waterside, where it is to be taken on Board, Prices appointed
for sloop-hire from the said Warc-houses.
shall pay for Sloop-hire no more then Twenty Pounds of Tobacco and Cask for
each Hogshead, if the said Tobaccoes be within thirty miles of the said
Warehouse, to which it is to be brought, and at what distance soever further,
forty pounds of Tobacco and Cask for each Hogshead, and no more upon penalty of
forfeiting one hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask for each Hogshead, by him who
shall demand, receive or take more, to the use of the Party grieved; and for
Storage of any Hogshead of Tobacco in any Warehouse, the Owner thereof shall
pay to the Ware-house-keeper ten pounds of Tobacco for the first day, or for a
Month, and for every month after six pounds of Tobacco and no more.

And whereas there are several persons who are so Remote from Landings proper
for taking their Tobaccoes on Board the Soops or* Boats for Transporting the
same to the appointed places, It is therefore hereby further Enacted, that in
case any Person or Persons, Owners of such Lands, which shall be convenient to
build a house upon, convenient for securing such Tobaccoes, until the same can
be shipped, shall refuse to build such house for securing such Tobaccoes as
aforesaid, that in sucb cases liberty be granted, and liberty is hereby granted
to any person or persons whatsoever, for so much Land as he or they may
conveniently build such fitting house upon, for securing such Tobaccoes, as
shall be brought thither in order to transporting the same, to the Warehouses
appointed by this Act, he or they who shall desire the same and build thereon
according as by this Law is intended, paying to the Owner thereof, such Price
and Prices as are set down and ordered to be paid in the Act of Assembly,
providing for Lands, for Churches and Mills, and that there be allowed free
liberty of ingress and egress to and from such house or houses, not committing
any Trespass, Tobaccoes during their Transporting unto, and whilst they are
continued in the houses aforesaid are exempt from any Execution or Attachment
for Debts contracted before the making this Act.
and for encouragement of all that shall Transport their Tobaccoes to the
appointed places mentioned in this Act, it is also hereby Enacted, that no
Execution, Attachment or other Process in Law, shall be executed or laid upon
any the said Tobaccoe^ in the time of the Transportation thereof, to the said
appointed places, or in the Warehouses for any Debt, contracted before the
passing this Act, the party that removes or transports such Tobaccoes having
first made Oath before a Magistrate, that he is really and Bona fide
Transporting the same to one of the said Warehouses, and for encouragement of
Carpenters, Sawyers, Brickmakers, Briclayers, Laborers, and all other
Tradesmen whatsoever, that will cohabit, dwell, and exercise their Trades
within the said appointed places, or any of them, it is hereby enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that all such persons so inhabiting, shall within the
limits and bounds of the several respective places be wholly free from any
arrest of their persons, or seizure of their Estates, for such Debts as were
formerly contracted for, and during the term of five years to come next after
the publication of this Law, Tradesmen who will dwell in the places aforesaid
shall be freed from the payment of former Debts of five years.
not barring the Creditor or Creditors to sue for, and recover their Debts when
the time of five years is expired, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And it is hereby further Enacted, that all such Tradesmen, and Laborers
cohabiting in the places aforesaid, and not planting tending or making Tobacco,
shall be free and acquit from paying any Public Levy during the term of five
years from the Publication of this Act.

Provided always, and it is hereby meant and intended to be meant, Such persons
not Planting Tobacco shall also-be freed from the paymen of public Levyes for
5. years.
that all such Debts as shall accrue by any bargain or contract made or to be
made, within the limits of the said appointed places, or any one of them,
immediate Process may be granted thereon any thing in this Law to the contrary
notwithstanding, and for the more sure reserving all such Tobaccoes, as shall
be brought to the aforesaid Stores or Warehouses, No Collector shall make
seizure of any Tobaccoes while in such places for public County, or Parish
Levies.
to the use and advantage of the Owners thereof, it is hereby further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, that no Collector or Collectors of Levy or
Parish-Tiths shall make distress or seizure of any Tobaccoes in such places for
public County, or Parish-Levies or for Sheriffs or Clerks-Fees, but that all
Sheriffs and Public Collectors shall be and hereby are enjoined to Collect,
and receive the Tobaccoes Due in their Collections as heretofore was usual and
the Public or other Creditor to receive the same accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby
Enacted, that for the better adnavcement of the Price of Tobacco, and lessening
of Freight that no Merchant, Facture, or Adventurer whatsoever, arriving with
any Goods, VVares, Servants, Slaves or other Merchandise whatsoever, into this
Colony shall presume to buy, Ship off, or Freight any Tobacco whatsoever, from
any of the before appointed places at any time or times before the twentieth
day of March, 1681. by which time it may be presumed and believed all Tobaccoes
whatsoever, which shall be made in this Colony, may be brought to the said
appointed places, under the Penalty of forfeiting and losing all such Goods,
VVares, etc. and all Tobaccoes so purchased one half to his Majesty, and the
other half to him or them that shall or will inform or sue for the same, any
Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Persons dwelling within the said appointed places have liberty to sell their
Tobacco at any time.
Provided always, and it is hereby meant and intended, that this Restriction
shall continue two years from the said twentieth of March and no longer.

Provided always that notwithstanding any thing in this Act contained, any
Inhabitant dwelling within the said appointed places, have liberty to fell such
Goods and Merchandises as they have of their own at any time.

Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, that if two or more Counties lying
convenient to each other, shall within the two months before recited agree
together on one common place and Town for each their Counties, and lay out the
ground for the same in Common betwixt and amongst them, Where two or more
Counties lie conveniently one such Warehouse may serve in Common.
and there build houses as by this Act is enjoined that then such one Town so
agreed on, appointed, laid out, and built upon, shall serve and be sufficient
for such two or more Counties, any thing in this Law to the contray
notwithstanding, and it is hereby further Enacted, that all Magistrates take
due care to see this Act be strictly observed and put in E^ecution.

VI. An Act Ascertaining Attorneys Fees.
Whereas all Courts in this Country are many times hindered and troubled in
their Judicial proceedings, by the impertinent discourses of many busy and
ignorant men who will pretend to assist their Friend in his business, and to
clear the matter more plainly to the court, although never desired or Requested
thereunto, by the person whom they pretend to assist, and many times to the
Destruction of his cause, No Person not licenced by the Governor shall plead as
an Atorney in the General or County-Courts
and great trouble and hinderance of the court, for prevention whereof for the
future, Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
consent of the General Assembly: And it is hereby enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that no Person or Persons whatsoever, shall practice as an Attorney,
or appear to plead in the General court, or any County Court in this country,
but such as shall be first Licenced by his Excellency, or Successors thereunto,
and that any one that shall presume to plead in the General court, or any
County or other Court, without such License first obtained, and had; shall
forfeit for every such Offense committed in the County Court six hundred pounds
of Tobacco, The Penalty.
and in the general court 2000 pounds of Tobacco, the one half to our Sovereign
Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, and the other half to the Informer, to
be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in the said court
or courts where such Offense shall be committed, and be it further enacted by
the authority aforesaid, that no Attorney or Attorneys so Licenced as
aforesaid, take, demand or receive from any persons for any cause in the
general court, Five hundred pound of Tobacco the Attorney Fee for pleading a
Cause in the General Court and 150 for every cause in County-courts.
and bringing the same to Judgment, more then five hundred pounds of Tobacco
and Cask, and for any cause in the County Court, and bringing the same there to
Jugdement, more then one hundred and fifty pounds of Tobacco and Cask: and it
is hereby declared and enacted, that every Attorney or Attorneys shall have for
every cause he undertakes in the general court, five hundred pounds of Tobacco
and Cask, and for every cause he undertakes in the County Court, one hundred
and fifty pounds of Tobacco and Cask, which he may Lawfully claim without any
Pre-agreement, made with the parties for the same, and be it further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby Enacted, that all such Attorney or
Attorneys that shall refuse to plead any cause in the general court for the
aforesaid ascertained Fee, of five hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask, shall
forfeit and pay to the person grieved, five hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask,
after Legal conviction on due proof thereof made to be Recovered by due Process
of Law, Fine laid on Attorneys Refusing to plead for the Fee aforesaid.
and upon Refusal of any cause in the County Court, shall pay to the party
grieved one hundred and fifty pounds of Tobacco and Cask, after legal
conviction as aforesaid, to be Recovered by due process of Law.

Any Person may notwithstanding plead his own cause.
Provided always, that this Act or any clause therein shall not extend to debar
any man that is capable of pleading and managing his own cause in any the said
general or County-courts, but that he may be permitted and allowed to plead and
manage his own business, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

VII. An Act Ascertaining the time when Negro-Children shall be Tythable.
WHereas it is deemed too hard and severe, that children as well Christian as
Slaves, imported into this Colony, should be liable to Taxes, before they are
capable of working. Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the consent of the General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that all Negro Children imported or to be imported into
this Colony, shall within three months after the publication of this Law, or
after their arrival be brought to the County Court, where their Age shall be
adjudged of by the Judges holding Court, and put upon Record, which said Negro
or other Slave so brought to Court Adjudged and Recorded, shall not be
accounted Tythable, until he attains the age of twelve years, Negro Children
imported shall not be accounted Tythable till 12 years of Age.
any former Law, Usuage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby
enacted, that no Christian Servants imported into this Country, And Christian
Servants Imported, not till they are 14.
shall be Tythable before they attain to the age of fourteen years, any former
Law, Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

VIII. An Act Licensing a Free Trade with Indians.
BE it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the General Assembly, that all former Acts of Assembly Restraining, Limiting
and Forbidding Trading with Indians, be and stand hereby Repealed, and they are
hereby Repealed; and that henceforth there be a free and open Trade, The time
this Act shall continue in force.
for all persons at all times and places with our friendly Indians; and that
this Act continue in force, until the end of the next Sessions of Assembly.

IX. An Act ascertaining Allowance for Cask.
BE it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and with the consent of the
General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted, that from and after the Publication
of this Law, the allowance of Cask for Public County and Parrish-Levys, and
for Clerks and Sheriffs Fees, be eight per Cent. and no more; Allowance of Cask
for Public, and County Levys etc. shall be eight per Cent. and no more.
and that all Sheriffs or other Collectors of the same shall allow the Planter
or others, eight per Cent. for his Cask, as aforesaid, upon Penalty of paying
for refusing so to do, one hundred pounds of Tobacco to the Party grieved, and
to whom he shall deny such allowance, on due proof thereof made, to be
recovered by action of Debt in any Court of Record, or before one single
Justice of the Peace, if the same exceed not Two Hundred Pounds of Tobacco.

X An Act for preventing Negroes Insurrection.
WHereas the frequent meeting of considerable numbers of Negro-Slaves under
pretense of Feasts and Burials, is judged and deemed of dangerous consequence,
for prevention whereof for the future; Be* it enacted by the Kings most
excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the General Assembly, and it is
hereby enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the Publication
of this Law, it shall not be lawful for any Negro or other Slave to carry or
arm himself with any Club, Staff, Gun, Sword or any other Weapon of Defense,
Negroes shall not go armed nor depart from off their masters ground without
Certificate.
or offense nor to go or depart from off his Masters Ground, without a
Certificate from his Master, Mistress, or Overseer And such permission not to
be granted but upon particular and necessary occasions, and every Negro or
Slave so offending, not having Certificate as aforesaid, shall be sent to the
next Constable, who is hereby enjoined and required to give the said Negro
twenty lashes on the bare back well laid on, and so sent home to his said
Master, Mistress or Overseer; Resistance of Negroes or any other slaves
punished.
and it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Negro or
other Slave, shall presume to lift up his hand in opposition against any
Christian, shall for every such Offense upon due proof made thereof by the Oath
of the Party before a Magistrate, have and receive thirty lashes on the bare
back well laid on. And it is hereby further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that if any Negroe or other Slave shall absent himself from his
masters service, and lie hid and lurking in obscure places, committing injuries
to the Inhabitants, and shall resist any person or persons that shall by any
lawful authority be employed to apprehend and take the said Negroe that then in
case of such resistance, Fugitive-Negroes resisting such as are employed to
apprehend them may be killed.
it shall be lawful for such person or persons to kill the said Negroe or
Slave, so lying out and resisting; and that this Law be once every six months
published at the Respective County-Courts and Parish Churches within this
Colony.

XI. An Act for Presentation and Delivery of Grievances.
FOr as much as it has been the frequent practice of ill disposed and
seditious persons, to deliver to their Burgesses, and they to the Assembly,
scandalous and seditious Papers, and to entitle or call them the Grievances of
such County or Counties wherein they dwell, neither giveing or presenting the
same in lawful manner, nor in truth being known to any other of his Majesty's
good Subjects, of such County whose Title they bear; Be it enacted by the Kings
most excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the General Assembly,
Sberiffs of each County shall before every Sessions of Assembly appoint a time
and place for receiving Presentiments of Grievances. Such Presentiments shall be
signed.
and it is hereby enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Sheriffs of each
County shall before every Session of Assembly, appoint a time and place for
presenting, giving and receiving all County-Grievances, which shall be signed
by the Parties giving the same, and attested by the Clerk of the County Court.
or Chief Magistrate, so to be; and all other private Propositions or particular
Ag-grievance shall be signed by the Party delivering the same, or not to be
received into the Assembly.

XII. An Act prohibiting the exportation of Raw-Hides and Deer-Skins.
BE it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the General Assembly, and it is hereby enacted, that from and after Publication
of this Act, it shall not be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever to
export out of this his Majesty's Colony of Virginia, any Untainted-Hides or
Deer-Skins, upon the Penalty of paying for every Raw-Hide or Deer-Skin, one
hundred Pounds of Tobacco and Cask, that shall be found on Board any Ship,
Boat, Sloop or other Vessel, in order to such Exportation, over and besides the
forfeiture, of all such Raw-Hides or Deer-Skins so found in exportation; the
one half to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other half to him
that shall make Information thereof; And all Collectors of the two shillings
per Hogshead, and penny per Pound Customs, are hereby required and enjoined on
every Information and Suspicion of such exportation, to make diligent search
and seizure accordingly.

XIII. An Act Prohibiting Unlawful Disturbances of Divine Service.
BE it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the General Assembly, and it is hereby enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
whosoever from and after the publication of this Act, Any Person that shall
disturb the Minister, during the Exercise of his Ministerial Function, shall
for the first Offense be fined 200 l. of Tobacco, and 500 for every such
Offense after.
shall appear in any Church or Chapel within this his Majesty's Colony, whilst
the Minister is exercising his Ministerial Function, and shall disturb him by
Words or any other manner of means whatsoever, or shall there appear in any
unseemly or undecent Gesture, any Justice, Sheriff, or other Officers then
present shall put such person or persons so offending under Restraint during
Divine Service, who shall also for the first Offense be fined two hundred
pounds of Tobacco and Cask. And for every such Offense as shall be by them or
any of them committed after in the like Quallity, shall be fined five hundred
pounds of like Tobacco and Cask, for every such Offense; which Fines shall be
Levied by the Sheriff upon the Estate of the person or persons so offending by
virtue of a Warrant from a Justice of the peace; and such Justice of the peace
that shall refuse or neglect to put this Law into severe Execution, shall be
fined five hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask, to the use of the Parish for
every such neglect.

XIV. An Act Reviving, and Reinforcing an Act made at JAMES-CITY, the 20th. of
October, 1665. and putting the same in Due Execution.
BE it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
the eighth Act of Assembly made at JAMES-CITY, the 20th. of October, 1665.
Entitled, An Act concerning Indians: Be and hereby is Revived and Reinforced,
to the end the same be put in due and Effectual Execution.

XV. An Act for the well clearing the Heads of the Rivers and Creeks, from
Loggs and Trees, for the more safe Passage of Sloops and Boats.
Whereas the Neglect of clearing the Heads and others parts of Rivers and
Creeks, from Loggs, Trees, Roots of Trees, and other Rubbish, has occasioned
and endangered the loss of several Sloopes, Boats, Tobaccoes, and Merchandising
Goods, in Carriage thereof, to and from the Ships; for the better prevention
thereof for the future, Justices of the Country Courts shall annually appoint
the Surveyors of the Rivers and Creeks to clear the same from all trees, Loggs,
Rubbish, etc.
Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
from and after the Publication of this Law, the Respective Justices of the
several County-Courts, do annually in June or July-Courts appoint and order the
Surveyors for the Rivers to clear all, and all manner of Loggs, Trees, Roots of
Trees, and other Rubbish, as may any ways hurt and endanger any Sloop, Boat, or
other Vessel, from out of the Respective Rivers, or Creeks heads, or parts of
any River or Rivers, Creek or Creeks, within their County, and limited bounds,
as Surveyors; which said clearing and Removeal of all Loggs, Trees, Roots of
Trees, and other Rubbish, shall be as aforesaid annually performed, according
to the true intent and meaning of this Act, under such pains and penalties for
every Delinquent and Offender, as are set down in 97th Act of Assembly, in the
Printed Book; Entitled, Such as shall fall Trees into the Rivers and not clear
away the same, fined 500 l. of Tobacco.
Surveyors for Highways: And if any shall presume to fall Trees into the
Rivers or Creeks, and not clear the same, the Offender shall be fined five
hundred pounds of Tobacco the first Offense, to the use of the County: And for
the second, one Thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use aforesaid.

XVI. Additional Fees Ascertained to County Court Clerks.
BE it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the General Assembly, and it is hereby enacted, that Those Additional Fees
hereafter set down, over and besides the fees nominated in the Printed Book, be
demanded and taken by County Court Clerks, as just fees, and none other, viz.

l. Tobacco. For writing a pair of Indentures, if amongst the parties, as they
can agree; if bound by the Court. 40. For a Bond. 10. For a Retraxit. 4. For
siling, endorsing, Bill, Account, Petition or such like. 3. For all Answers to
Petitions, if writ by themselves. 10. If not writ by them, and so for a
Petition. 5. For a Warrant by command of Court or Justice. 10. For a Chancery
Bill, if written in the way of other usual Petitions, and exceed not one side
of a whose Sheet of Paper. 20. If more, every such side 10. Recording the
Panel of a Jury, and their Oath 10. Returning and Recording Executions. 10.
Returning and Recording Attachments. 5. Recording the Acknowledgment for
Satisfaction of a Judgment. 10. For taking Inventories of Estates, at
Appraisement, and outcryes, if the Clerk be employed he ought to be agreed with
for that and his Attendance: or if not agreed with, the Court to award for his
pains and trouble as they see cause. For Returning Administrations, and Probats
of wills, with their Security, into the Secretaries Office, having a
Certificate from the Office, of having so done. 40. For procuring the signing
of Administration, and Probats. 10. For writing and Publishing any Persons
Departure, or for Stray-horses, or such like, at the Court-house-door, if writ
by themselves. 5. For Recording the same. 5. For Acknowledging Land in Court,
and Recording thereof, and Copy. 25. For Relinquishing Dowers, and recording
thereof 20. For a Caveat. 5. For entering and Returning References on the
Docket. 5. For a Quietus and Recording it. 25. For a Bill of Costs. 3. For a
private Courts Attendance there. 200. For Attendance at the Executing a
Dedimus, and return thereof to the Office. 100. For returning Appeals and
Securities. 39. For recording the Issuing an Attachment. 3.

And if any Clerk of a County Court shall exact and take greater sums for any
Fee then is here, or in the Printed Book, or by any other Law set down and
established, and shall be legally convict thereof, Penalty of Clerks exacting
greater fees than is here appointed.
such Person so offending shall forfeit for every pound of Tobacco so exacted
and taken, ten pounds of like, to the Person or Persons so overcharged, to be
Recovered by Action of Debt; any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

XVII. An Act Restraining Striking and Killing Fish at Unseasonable Times.
THe Inhabitants and Freeholders of the several Counties of Gloucester,
Middlesex and Lancaster, by their Burgesses at this Assembly, complaining that
the striking and killing of Fish with Giggs and Harping-Irons, is very
prejudicial, injurious, and destructive to themselves in particular, and the
whole Country in General: And praying that by a Provincial Law, there may be
Restraint put upon such striking and destructive killing of Fish, betwixt the
Months of March and November. Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the General Assembly, and it is
hereby enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from hence forward it shall not
be lawful betwixt the first day of April, and the first day of November, No
Person shall strike or kill fish, betwixt the first of April, and the first of
November, in the Counties of Gloucester, Middlesex, and Lancaster, upon Penalty
of forfeiting 500 l. of Tobacco.
for any person or persons whatsoever, to kill or strike any fish whatsoever
within the bounds and limits on the Waters or Shoars of Gloucester County,
Middlesex County, or Lancaster County, with Gigg, Harping-Iron, or any other
such like Instrument made, or to be made, of Iron, Wood, or other ways, upon
Penalty of forfeiting and paying for every time, such Person shall be lawfully
convict thereof, five hundred pounds of Tobacco and Cask, one half to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other half to him or them that shall
inform thereof, and sue for the same, to be Recovered against every such
Offender or Offenders, in any of his Majesty's Courts of this Colony of
Virginia, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, any Law, Custom, or
Usage, to the contrary notwithstanding.

At a General Assembly, begun at JAMES-CITY, November 10. 1682. and in the four
and thirtieth Year, of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by
the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, etc.
I. An Act to Repeal a former Law, making Indians, and others Free.
VVHeres by the Twelfth Act of Assembly held at James City, the third day of
October, Anno Domini, 1670. Entitled, An Act, declaring who shall be Slaves,
it is Enacted, that all Servants not being Christians, being imported into this
Country by shipping, shall be Slaves, but what shall come by Land, shall serve,
if Boys and Girls, until thirty years of age; if men or women, twelve years
and no longer: And for as much as many Negroes, Moors, and Mulattoes and others
born of, and in Heathenish Idolatrous Pagan and Mahumetan Parentage and
Country, have heretofore, and hereafter may be purchased, procured or otherwise
obtained as Slaves, of, from, or out of such their Heathenish Conutry by some
well disposed Christian, who after such their obtaining and purchasing such
Negro, Moor or Mulatto as their Slave, out of a pious zeal have wrought the
conversion of such Slave to the Christian Faith, which by the Law of this
Country, does not manumit them or make them free, and afterward such their
Conversion, it has and may often happen, that such Owner or Master of such
Slave, being for some reason enforced to bring or send such Slave into this
Country to sell or dispose of, for his necessity or advantage, he the said
Master or Owner of such servant which notwithstanding his Conversion is really
his Slave, or his Factor or Agent must be constrained either to carry back or
export again the said slave to some other place, where they may sell him for a
slave, or else depart from their just right and Title to such slave, and sell
him here for no longer time then the English or other Christians are to serve,
to the great loss and damage of such Master or Owner, and to the great
discouragement of bringing in such slaves for the future, and to no advantage
at all, of the Planter or Buyer; and whereas also those Indians which are taken
in War or otherwise by our Neighbor Indians Confederates or Tributaries to his
Majesty and this his Plantation of Virginia, are slaves to them the said
Neighboring Indians that so take them, and by them are likewise sold to his
Majesty's Subjects here as slaves; Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor,
Council and Burgesses of this General-Assembly, and it is Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that all the said recited Act of the third of October,
1670. Be and is hereby repealed, and made utterly void, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever. And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
all servants except Turks and Moors, whilst in amity with his Majesty, which
from and after Publication of this Act shall be brought or imported into this
Country, Indian Slaves etc. though afterward Converted to Christianity, shall
not withstanding continue Slaves still.
either by Sea or Land, whether Negroes, Moors, Mulattoes or Indians, who and
whose Parents and Native Country were not Christians at the time of the first
purchase of such servants by some Christian, although afterward and before
such their importation, and bringing into this Country, they shall be converted
to the Christian Faith, and all Indians which shall hereafter be sold by our
Neighboring Indians, or any other Trafficquing with us, and for as slaves are
hereby adjudged, deemed and taken, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to
be slaves to all intents and purposes, any Law, Usage or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding.

II. An Act declaring Indian-Women-Servants Tythables.
WHereas it has been doubted, whether Indian-Women-Servants sold to the
English, above the age of sixteen years, be Tythables; Be it enacted and
declared, and it is hereby enacted and declared by the Governor, Council and
Burgesses of this General Assembly, and the authority thereof, That all
Indian-Women are and shall be Tythables, and ought to pay Levies in like
manner, as Negro Women brought into this Country, do and ought to pay.

III. An Additional Act for the better preventing Insurrections by Negroes.
WHereas a certain Act of Assembly held at James City, the eighth day of June,
in the year of our Lord, 1680. Entitled, An Act preventing Negroes
Insurrections, has not had its intended effect for want of due notice thereof
being taken; It is enacted by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this
Present General Assembly, and by the authority thereof, that for the better
putting the said Act in due execution, the Churchwardens of each Parish in
this Country, at the charge of the Parish, by the first day of January next,
provide True Copies of this and the aforesaid Act, and make, or cause entry
thereof to be made in the Register Book of the said Parish, The Act of the
eighth of June, 1680. for preventing Insurrections of the Indians, shall be
read publicly in all Churches and Chapels of Ease twice every year.
and that the Minister or Reader of each Parish, shall twice every year, viz.
Some one Sunday or Lord's Day in each of the Months of September and March, in
each Parish Church or Chapel of Ease, in each Parish, in the time of Divine
Service after the Reading of the Second Lesson, Read and Publish both this
present and the aforesaid recited Act, under Pain such Churchwarden, Minister
or Reader making default, to forfeit each of them six hundred pounds of
Tobacco, one half to the Informer, and the other half to the use of the Poor of
the said Parish. And for the further better preventing of such Insurrections by
Negroes or Slaves; Be it likewise Enacted, No person shall permit any Indian or
Slave, not belonging to him, to continue on this Plantation above four hours
without leave of the said Indians or slaves Master.
and it is hereby Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no Master or
Overseer, shall at any time after the twentieth day of January next, knowingly
permit or suffer without the leave or license of his or their Master or
Overseer, any Negro or Slave not properly belonging to him or them, to remain
or be upon his or their Plantation above the space of four hours, at any one
time contrary to the intent of the before recited Act, upon pain to forfeit
being thereof lawfully convicted before some one Justice of the Peace within
the County where the Fact shall be committed, by the Oath of Two Witnesses at
the least, the Sum of two hundred pounds of Tobacco in Cask, for each time so
offending, to him or them that will sue for the same, for which the said
Justice is hereby empowered to award Judgment and Execution.

IV. An Act Prohibiting the Exportation of any Iron, Wool, Wolfels, Skins,
Hides, or Leather.
Whereas it is found by experience that Iron, Wool, Wolfels Skins and Hides,
Tanned or Untanned, of any Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow, or Calf, are very
necessary and profitable for the use, and support of the Country, and would be
found profitable for the setting to work many men women and children in this
Country, which lie idle for want of Employment, some naked for want of such
Necessaries as might be wrought out of the same, which they are kept from by
Reason of the great quantities of them Yearly exported out of the Country, to
the great Impoverishment of the Inhabitants thereof; for the better preventing
and avoiding such Losses and Inconveniences that have happened, and do and may
happen to this Dominion, by and through the carrying and conveying away, the
Exportation and Transportation of Iron, Wool, Woolfs-Skins, or Hides Tanned or
Untanned, of any Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow or Calf, out of and from this
Country, and for the better setting on work the poorer and weaker sort of
People of this Country, and to the intent that the full and best use and
benefit of such principal Native Commodities, may come and redound, and be unto
and amongst the Inhabitants of the same, the House of Burgesses now assembled,
do pray that it may be enacted, and be it enacted, by the Governor, Council,
and Burgesses of this General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the first day of January next,
shall directly or indirectly, export, transport, carry, or convey, or cause to
be exported, transported, carried or conveyed out of, or from the Dominion or
country of Virginia, into any parts or places out of the same, any Iron, Wool,
Wolfels, Skins, or Hides, or any manner of Leather, Tanned or Untanned, of any
Deer, Ox Steer, Bull, Cow or Calf, nor shall directly nor indirectly load or
lay on board, or cause to be laden or laid on board, in any Ship, Sloop, Boat
or other Vessel, in any place or port within this Dominion; any such Iron,
Wool, Woolfels, Skins, or Hides, Tanned or Untanned, of any Deer, Ox Steer,
Bull, Cow or Calf, except only such Hides and Iron as shall appear by the Oath
of the Owner, to be directly transporting to some Tan-house or Smiths in this
Country, to be there wrought up. And be it further enacted, by the Authority
aforesaid, that all and every the Offender and Offenders, Offense and Offenses
aforesaid, shall be Subject and Liable to the Respective Pains Penalties,
Forfeiture of Iron, Wool, Hides, etc. (Tanned or Vntanned) put on Board for
Exportation.
and Forfeiture hereafter following, (that is to say,) the said Iron, Wool,
Woolfels, Skins, or Hides, or any manner of Leather, Tanned or Untanned, of any
Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow, or Calf, so put on board, to be Exported,
Transported, carried, conveyed, or laden, contrary to this Act, shall be
forfeited; and that every Offender and Offenders therein, shall forfeit forty
pounds of Tobacco, for every pound of Wool, and Woolfels, and one hundred and
fifty pounds of Tobacco, for every Skin or Hide, or any manner of Leather
Tanned or Untanned, of any Deer, Ox, Bull, Cow or Calf; and Ten Pounds of
Tobacco for every pound of Iron, and also the Owner or Owners, of such Ship or
Vessel, knowing such Offense, shall forfeit all their Interest in the said Ship
or Vessel, with all their Apparel and Furniture, to them and every of them
belonging, and the Master, Penalty upon such as are privy ther^o.
Mariner or Seamen thereof knowing such offense, or being aiding or assisting
thereunto, shall forfeit all their Goods and Chattels, and have Imprisonment
for the space of three months without Bail or Mainprize, the one Moity of which
said Penalties and Forfeitures, shall be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and the other Moity to him that will sue for the same, by action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoin,
Protection or wager of Law shall be allowed. And be it further enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That every offense that shall be done or committed
contrary to this Act, shall and may be enquired of, heard, examined, tried and
determined in the County, where such Iron, Wool, Wolfels, Skins, or Hides, or
any manner of Leather Tanned or Untanned, of Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow or
Calf, respectively shall be so laden or laid on Board as aforesaid, contrary
to this Act, or else in the County where such Offender shall happen to be
apprehended or arrested for such Offense, in such manner and form, and to such
effects to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been wholly and
altogether committed at, and in such County.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person
or persons whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter, be impeached for any
offense aforesaid, unlsss such person or persons shall be Prosecuted within two
years next ensuing such offense committed. Prosecution shall be made within two
years after the Offense committed.
And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful, to and for any person or persons, to seize, take and challenge to his
and their own use and behoof, and to the use of the King, his Heirs and
Successors, all and all manner of such Iron, Wool, Woolfels, Skins or Hides,
Tanned or Untanned, of Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Any Person may make seizure of
such Iron, Wool, Hides, etc. as are found on Boaod for exportatien, and shall
have the Moity thereof for so doing.
Cow or Calf, as he or they shall happen to see, find, know of, or discover to
be laid on Board of any Ship or other Vessel or Boat, to the intent and purpose
to be exported, or conveyed out of the Country, contrary to the true meaning of
this Act, and that such person or persons that shall happen to seiz, take or
challenge any such Iron, Wool, Woolfels, Skins or Hides, Tanned or Untanned, of
Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow or Calf, as aforesaid, shall have the full Moiety
thereof to all intents and purposes. And be it further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that whatever person or persons, shall from and after the first day
of January next, sell or dispose, vend or barter, to or with any Merchant not
being an Inhabitant of this Country, or to or with any Master of, or Mariner,
or other person, belonging to any Ship, Vessel, Boat or Sloop, any Iron, Wool,
Woolfels, Skins or Hides, or any manner of Leather Tanned or Untanned, of any
Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow or Calf, the person or persons so offending, (and
being thereof lawfully convicted) shall forfeit and pay for every Hide, or any
manner of Leather Tanned or Untanned, of any Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow or
Calf,, one hundred pounds of Tobacco, and for every pound of Wool or Woolfels,
twenty pounds of Tobacco, and for every pound of Iron, five pound of Tobacco
sold, so disposed or batered as is aforesaid, the one half to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, and the other half to him or them that will sue for the
same, by Action of Debt, Plaint or Information, in any Court of Record, wherein
no Essoin, Protection or wager of Law shall be allowed or granted. And for the
better putting this Act into Execution, Be it enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that all Justices of the Peace in every Respective County, Justices
of Peace shall sue Warrants to the Sheriffs or other Officers to be assisting
in the seizure in case of Oposition.
be required and enjoined upon notice to him or them given, of any Skins, Iron,
Wool, VVoolfels, Hides, Tanned or Untanned, of any Deer, Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow
or Calf, being on Board any Ship, Sloop or Vessel, or of any opposition,
resistance, made in the seizure thereof, to issue out his VVarrant, to the
High Sheriff, Undersheriff, Constable or other Officer Requiring them to go on
board such Ship, Sloop, or Vessel, and there to make diligent search and
seizure of the said Hides, Skins, Iron, Wool, Woolfels, or any Leather, Tanned
or Untanned, found on board the Ship, Sloop, or Vessel; or if any Justice or
Justices of the peace, upon Request to him or them made, Refuse or Neglect to
Issue out Warrant, or any Sheriff, Undersheriff, or other Officer, shall
Refuse to execute such Warrant, he or they so offending, shall forfeit three
thousand pound of Tobacco and Cask; or if any person or persons, Penal^ies upon
such Justices, Sheriffs, and others as shall not give due obedience to this Act.
shall upon command made to him in his Majesty's Name, refuse to be aiding or
assisting to such Sheriff, or other Officer in the Execution of such Warrant,
every such person so offending, shall forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds of
Tobacco with Cask, one half of all such Fines and Forfeitures to be paid to the
Kings Majesty, and the other half to him or them that will inform to be
recovered as is before directed; And it is further Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that every Collector in this Country, shall at the entry of every
Ship or Vessel, acquaint every Master of such Ship or Vessel with this Act, and
enter a particular clause in the condition of their Entry-Bond, for the
performance of the same.

Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Act, that if
any person or persons, shall hereafter be sued or impleaded by virtue hereof,
for the breach of any clause or prohibition herein contained upon the
Forfeitures or Penalties herein before mentioned, expressed or provided, that
then and in such case such person or persons so prosecuted, sued or impleaded,
shall not be liablebe subject to be sued, impleaded or Prosecuted by any other
Law heretofore made or provided against the exportation of any of the Hides,
Iron, Wool, Skins, or other things herein before enumerated, any other or
former Law, The time this Act shall continue in force.
Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this Act shall continue in force until the tenth day of
November, which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1685. and from thence, to the
end of the next Session of Assembly.

V. An Act Directing how Commissions of Dedimus Potestatem, and other Writs,
shall Issue.
WHereas the present course of signing Commissions of Dedimus Potestatem Writs
of Execution, and Attachment by the Governor, in causes depending in the
General Court, is found by experience to be very Burdensome and grievous to
Suitors, the Burgesses now assembled do pray, That it may be enacted, and be it
enacted, by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this present General
Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, that all Writs or Commissions to
examine witnesses called Dedimus Potestatem, A Dedimus Potestatem, may be
signed by any Member of the Council.
at the Request of either of the Parties, Plaintiff, or Defendant in any cause
now depending, or which shall or may hereafter depend in the General Court,
shall and may be issued and signed by any one of the Honorable Council in such
Form, and according to such Rules and Directions as are by Law already
prescribed and laid down, and that all writs of Execution, and writs of
Attachment awarded by any Order or Judgment of the said Court, shall and may be
issued forth of the Secretaries Office, by the Clerk there attending, and for
that purpose authorized by the Secretary, and by him signed, without putting
the parties to the trouble of attending, Writs of Execution and Writs of
Attachment how to issue.
or sending to the Governor for his sign, as has been formerly used, and all
such writs to be Returnable to the Secretaries Office, any former Law, Custom
or Usage, to the contrary notwithstanding.

VI. An Act Repealing the sixth Act of Assembly, of June, 1680. about Attorneys.
FOrasmuch as the sixth Act of Assembly made at James-City, the 8th. day of
June, 1680. concerning Attorneys, is found inconvenient, Be it therefore
enacted, by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this General Assembly, and
it is enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the aforesaid Act of Assembly,
and every clause thereof, from henceforth be Repealed, and made Void.

VII. An Act Disbanding the present Soldiers in Garrison, in the Forts, at the
Heads of the several Rivers; as also, for the Raising of other Forces in their
stead.
WHereas the present Garrisons in the several Forts, built according to an Act
of Assembly, held at James-City, the 8th day of June, 1680. Entitled, An Act
for Continuation of the several Garrisons and Fortifications at the heads of
the four great Rivers; are by experience found very burthensom, and chargeable
to the Country, and forasmuch as the apprehensions of Dangers, from the
Incursions of certain Indian-Enemies, induced that Assembly to erect those
Forts, and place those Garrisons in them; are for the most part removed by
peace, concluded with those Indians then our Enemies; the House of Burgesses
now assembled, do pray, that it may be enacted, and be it enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this General Assembly, and by the authority
thereof, that the several Forts and Garrisons be dismantled, and the Forces,
Officers, and Soldiers therein, and in each of them disbanded, some time
between this and the 30th. day of this instant December, and that each Officer
and Soldier by the time aforesaid, do actually deliver up his Horse, Arms and
Furniture, to the Respective Owners of them; and forasmuch as it may be
dangerous and of evil Consequence, to leave the frontiers of the Country, and
heads of the aforesaid Rivers, altogether ungarded; it is hereby enacted, that
twenty men well furnished with Horses and all other Accoutrements, be raised
and listed in each of the Counties of Henrico, New-Kent, Rappahannack, and
Stafford, Twenty Men well furnished with Horses shall be raised in each County
viz. of Henrico, New-Kent, Reppahanuack and Stafford.
of such Housekeepers belonging to the said Counties, as shall voluntarily
offer themselves for this Service, and for want of such or so many
Housekeepers that then the said Number shall be made up of such freemen as
shall willingly offer themselves, and give security to the Militia-Officers of
that County, to perform all services and other things, as by this Act is
enjoined them, but in case such twenty men, quallified as aforesaid, shall not
be found in each of the said Counties, then it shall and may be Lawful for the
Militia-Officers of the said Counties, to impress such and so many men
furnished as aforesaid, as shall be wanting to complete the number required by
this Act; and his Excellency the Governor General, or in his absence the Right
Honorable the Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor is hereby desired to make choice
of, and commissionate some fit and able Person, in each of the aforesaid
Counties, who is a Housekeeper, therein to command, lead, train, conduct, and
exercise the said Twenty soldiers to be raised in the said County, of which he
shall be appointed and commissionated, by his Excellency the Governor General,
the Lieutenant or Deputy Governor, as is aforesaid. And it is further enacted,
That the chief Officers of the Militia in each of the said Respective Counties,
shall make choice of the most able and fittest person, out of such twenty men,
as to them shall seem most fit and convenient to be Corporal of the said Troop
of that County, who in the absence of the Captain of the Troop occasioned by
sickness or otherwise, is to Lead, Train, Command, and Exercise, the said
Troop, or Company of Twenty Men; and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the pay of each Officer and Soldier shall be as follows, to the Captain
of each Troop, finding himself Horse, Arms, Ammunition and Provision, eight
Thousand pound of Tobacco, with Cask, out of the Public Levy, for one whole
year, and so after that Rate for a shorter or longer time; The Captain of each
such troop consisting of 20 men, shall have 8000 l. of Tobacco and Cask per
Annum.
To the Corporal of each Troop, Three Thousand Pounds of Tobacco with Cask, as
aforesaid for one whole year, and so after that Rate, for a longer or shorter
time, to each Soldier finding himself Horse, Arms, Furniture, Provision,
Ammunition, and other necessaries as aforesaid, two thousand pound of Tobacco
in Cask, as aforesaid, and so after that Rate, Corporals and private Soldiers
pay.
for a longer or shorter time. And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that each Captain, or in his absence, his Corporal shall once every Month,
Muster, Train, Exercise, Instruct, and Discipline the Troop or Soldiers under
his Command, The said troops shall be trained and Exercised once a Month.
on pain to forfeit five hundred pounds of Tobacco in Cask for every time, he
shall neglect such Muster or Exercise, unless occasioned by sickness, and that
every Captain, or in his absence, occasioned by sickness, his Corporal shall at
the least once in every fourteen days, Range and Scout, And shall once in every
14. days range and scout about the frontiers of the County for which they
serve.
about the Frontiers of the County, for which they serve, and in such other
places as shall be most likely for the Discovery of the Enemy, under pain of
forfeiting for every time, he shall neglect such Ranging and Scouting, one
Thousand pounds of Tobacco and Cask; and that every Soldier that shall neglect
or omit to appear at such Muster, shall forfeit one hundred pounds of Tobacco
in Cask, and for not Scouting and Ranging as aforesaid, two hundred pounds of
Tobacco and Cask, for every such default; all which Forfeitures to be Recovered
by Action of Debt, by him or them, that will inform, the one half to the
Informer, and the other half to the use of the County. And be it further
enacted, by the auhtority aforesaid, that upon Notice, Advice, or Discovery of
the Approach or Attempt of any Enemy, the said Captain or Corporal of the
Troop, is hereby Required to give speedy Advice thereof, to some one or more of
the chief Officers of the Militia, The Captain of the said troop upon approach
of any Enemy, shall give Notice thereof to the Officers of the Militia.
and he or they to his Excellency the Governor, the Right Honorable the
Deputy Governor, or some one of the Honorable Council; and in the mean time,
to observe and attend the Motion of the Enemy only, unless he shall obstinately
persist to commit Acts of Hostility, and in such cases of Necessity to engage
or destroy them, if he see cause; and in all things to attend and execute such
Orders and Commands as he shall receive from the Governor and Council. And it
is further enacted, That for their better Management, and Or^ering their
Horses, and making them fit for service, no Soldier presume to use or bring to
service any other Horse, then that only which shall be first Mustered, and
approved of, of which each Captain is to take such Particular Notice as that he
may know the Horse again, unless in case such Horse shall be by some accident
made unfit for service, in which case such Soldier may provide himself of
another able Horse in his stead, which he is likewise not to part with, unless
for his first Horse again: and this Act to continue in force for three years,
from the first day of January now next ensuing.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Recited Act of the 8th. of June, 1680. Entitled, An Act for the
Continuation of the several Garrisons and Fortifications at the Heads of the
four great Rivers, be Repealed, and it is hereby Repealed for three years,
under his Majesty's good Liking, and after until his Majesty's Pleasure, shall
be signified to the contrary, any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

VIII. An Act imposing further Penalties upon any person or persons that shall
Publish, or Declare that the Acts of Assembly of Virginia are not of force.
THis Assembly taking into their serious consideration, that diverse ill
disposed persons, wickedly intending to invalid the Laws of this Country, and
bring them into contempt and disrepute, have moved and stirred certain doubts,
whether there be any Laws in force and efficacy, so as to be binding to his
Majesty's Subjects, being in this his Majesty's Dominion of Virginia; for
preventing of such mischiefs, Be it enacted by the Governor, Council and
Burgesses of this General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and declared, That
if any person or persons shall at any times after the Publishing this Present
Act, maliciously and advisedly publish and declare, by words or writing, the
Acts of Assembly of Virginia, not repealed, expired, vacated or annulled by the
Kings Most Excellent Majesty, are not of force, or binding within this his said
Majesty's Dominion, to all his Majesty's Subjects inhabiting, or being therein,
such person or persons so offending, shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be
factious and seditious, and contemners of the Laws, and being thereof lawfully
Convicted, shall for the first offense be fined one Thousand Pounds of Tobacco,
and suffer one months Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize; and for the
second offense, Two Thousand Pounds of Tobacco, and two months Imprisonment,
and for every such offense after, double the Penalties and Forfeitures
aforesaid, one half of which Forfeitures to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and the other half to the Informer, to be recovered by action of
Debt, in any of his Majesty's Courts, in this his Majesty's Country; which said
Penalties are to be added and imposed over and besides all other Punishments
that may be legally inflicted on such Offenders.

IX. An Act Repealing an Exception in the 9th Act of Assembly, made Anno 1664.
WHereas the 9th Act of Assembly made at James City, the twentieth day of
September, 1664. Entitled, An Act concerning Arrests in Court-time, exempt the
Inhabitants of James-City-County from the benefit thereof, leaving them liable
to Arrests in time of General Courts and Assemblies, which is found injurious
to many of the Inhabitants of the said County; Be it therefore enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this General Assembly, and it it enacted by
the authority aforesaid, that the latter clause of the said Recited Act,
whereby the Inhabitants of the said County are excepted out of the said Act,
The Inhabitants of James-City-County, freed from Arrests, during the General
Assembly.
be repealed and made void, and that the Inhabitants of the said County, have
equal benefit of the said Recited Act, with the other Inhabitants of this
Country.

Provided always nevertheless, that this Act shall not extend to the
Inhabitants of James-City, but that they and every of them, shall be liable to
Arrests in Court-time, as though the Exception in the said Act of Assembly, But
not the Inhabitants of James-City.
Anno 1664. did still remain in full force, any thing in this Act before
mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

X. An Act that Witnesses be free from Arrests.
FOr as much as many Persons Summoned or Subpena'd as Evidences in Causes
depending in the Courts of this Country many times fail in appearing, for fear
of being Arrested, when they appear at Courts as Witnesses, whereby many times
many Inhabitants of this Country lose their Suits and just due; Be it enacted
by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of this General Assembly, and it is
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from henceforth all Persons Subpena'd
as Evidences, or Witnesses in any Cause or matter depending in any Court in
Virginia, shall be free from Arrests for any Debts or Trespass, except at the
Kings Suit, during their Attendance at Courts, and their direct coming to
Court, and Returning Home.

XI. An Act for the Encouragement of the Manufactories of Linen and Woollen
Cloth.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this General
Assemby, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That what person
or persons soever shall produce to the County Court, where he or they shall
Reside, a Certificate under the hands of two Justices of the Peace of the same
County, (whereof one to be of the Quorum) that such Person or Persons have
produced to them upon Oath, of his or their own Growth or Manufacture, a
greater or lesser Quantity of Flax Seed, Hemp Seed, or either of them, shall
have given and allowed him or them for encouragement to persist in so useful a
Manufacture for every peck of flax-seed, four and twenty pounds of Tobacco, and
for every Peck of Hemp Seed, twenty pounds of Tobacco, for which the
County Court is empowered to give every person or persons Certificate thereof,
24 l. of Tobacco allowed by the public for every peck of Flax-Seed, of the
Growth of the Country, and 20 l. of Tobacco for every peck of Hemp Seed.
attested by their Clerk, which shall be a sufficient proof to the General
Assembly to order the said person or persons their said encouragement out of
the Public Levy; provided such Certificate from the Justices to the
County Court, be filed at the Court, and fixed up there, to the intent that all
persons whatever, may have a view of the same. And be it further Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that what person or persons soever, shall by his industry
of his own growth and manufacture work up his flax and Hemp, fit for the
spindle, and produce the same to the next County Court, Allowance for Flax or
Hemp wrought.
or make the same appear by Certificate as aforesaid for every pound so wrought
up either of Flax or Hemp, he or they shall be allowed two pounds of Tobacco
for his or their encouragement by the Public, and a Certificate thereof shall
be given from the said County Court, to the General Assembly, which Certificate
shall be a sufficient proof for him, to be allowed out of the Public Levy. And
be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for the further and
better encouragement of the aforesaid Manufacture of Hemp and Flax, and for the
working up our Wool into Cloth, that every person that shall make or cause to
be made, the said Hemp or Flax, so wrought to the Spindle as aforesaid into
Linen Cloth, that such person or Persons shall be allowed for every Ell of
such Linen, that shall be three quarters of a yard wide or more, six pounds of
Tobacco, and for every yard of Woolen-Cloth or Linsey Woolsey of the like
breadth six pounds of Tobacco, to be paid by the Public; Allowance for the
same made into Cloth, also for Woollen Cloth, and for Linsey-Woolsey.
such person or persons producing the said Linen or Woolen-Cloth, or Linsey
Woolsey to the County Court, where he or they shall reside, who are hereby
required and empowered to examine and enquire, and take proof, that the said
Linen, or Woolen, or Linsey-Woolsey, are of their proper growth and
manufacture, and accordingly Certify the same to the next Assembly, which
Certificate shall be received as proof to the Assembly, for the allowing
thereof, out of the Public Levy. And whereas it is well hoped, that by the
encouragement aforesaid, there will be such great quantities of Flax-Seed, and
Hemp Seed, produced in this Country, as will abundantly furnish the Inhabitants
for the end ands purposes hereafter mentioned, and that the Inhabitants be
remembered carefully to provide themselves seed the next ensuing year for the
year following; Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That every
Tythable Person that shall be in the Country in the year 1684. according as he
is usually noted, or set down in the List of Tythables, For Every Tythable in
the year 1684. shall be made one pound of Flax and one pound of Hemp dressed,
or two pounds of either and so yearly after.
shall make or cause to be made, one pound of Dressed Flax, and one pound of
dressed Hemp, or two pounds of either, and yearly, and every year thereafter,
under the Penalty of fifty pounds of Tobacco, for every pound of Flax or Hemp
neglected or omittted to be made as aforesaid, the same to be paid, the one
half to the County, the other to the Informer, by such Master, Owner, or
Overseer, of any family or company of Servants or any other Tythable that shall
be found to neglect or omit as aforesaid, and for the better discovery of such
neglect or omission, that all Masters, Owners, or Overseers, who have the
charge of Families, and company of Servants and other Tythables, shall at some
convenient time before the laying of the Levy in the Respective Counties, The
Penalty of a Default.
produce before some Justice of the Peace of the County, the aforesaid quantity
of Hemp, or Flax, as is herein enjoined to be made, and the same deliver upon
Oath, which Oath the said Justice is hereby empowered to administer, that the
Flax or Hemp so produced, is of his own growth and manufacture. And be it
further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Allowance by the Public for Hats
made of Wool or Furr of the growth of this Country.
that there shall be allowed and paid out of the Public Levy, for every
well-wrought Hat, made of Wool or Furr in this Country to the maker thereof,
ten pounds of Tobacco; and for every dozen pairs of men's or women's woolen or
worsted Hose, twelve pounds of Tobacco, to be proved and certified in such
manner and form, as in this Act before is expressed, for Linen and
Woolen-cloth.

The time this Act shall continue in force
Provided always nevertheless, and it is the true intent and meaning of this
Act, that this Law shall continue in force, until the tenth day of November,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1685. and no longer, any thing in this
Act before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

XII. An Act for the Advancement of Manufactures of the growth of this Country,
and for the better and more speedy payment of Debts and Levies.
FOr encouragement of Manufactures and improvement of Commodities of the growth
of the Country, and also ascertaining the Rates and Prices Be it enacted by the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of this General Assembly, that all Debts
either in Money or Tobacco, contracted after publication hereof in this his
Majesty's Colony and Dominion of Virginia, where the Debtor upon demand of the
Creditor, cannot pay the same in specie or kind, and shall upon his Oath
declare before some one Justice of the Peace, (which Oath the said Justice is
hereby empowered and required to administer) the sum of money or quantity of
Tobacco he has here or elsewhere, and shall make tender of so much toward
payment of his Debt that then and in such case it shall and may be lawful for
every such Debtor to make payment of his Debt or the Remainder thereof in the
Commodities and Manufactures of this Country hereafter mentioned, Debts may be
paid in Commodities of the growth and Mnnufocturos of this Country.
at the Rates and Prices hereafter following, viz.

Tobacco at ten shillings per Cent; Wheat, English Pease, and Galavances, at
four shillings, or forty pound of Tobacco per Bushel; Barley, Oats, and all
other Indian Pease, at three shillings seven pence farthing, or thirty six
pound of Tobacco per Bushel; Indian Corn shelled, two shillings, At what Rates
such Commodities shall be valued.
or twenty pound of Tobacco per Bushel; Flax from the break or Swingle, seven
pence farthing, or six pound of Tobacco per pound; Hemp rended, pealed, or
braked, four pence three farthings, or four pound of Tobacco per pound; Wool
washed before shearing, nine pence three farthings, or eight pound of Tobacco
per pound; Butter six pence, or five pound of Tobacco per pound; Tallow four
pence three farthings, or four pound of Tobacco per pound; Fresh Pork with
head, feet, and leaf, or without, twelve shillings, or one hundred and twenty
pound of Tobacco per Cent; Fresh Beef, ten shillings, or one hundred pound of
Tobacco per Cent; Inch Plank for one thousand foot, fifteen shillings, or one
hundred and fifty pound of Tobacco; Tar in Barrel, cont. thirty two Gallons,
fifteen shillings, or one hundred and fifty pound of Tobacco; Pipe-Staves per
thousand, six-score to the Cent. three pound, or six hundred pound of Tobacco;
Hogshead-Staves per thousand, six-score to the Cent. two pound eight shillings,
or four hundred and eighty pound of Tobacco; Barrel-Staves per thousand,
six-score to the Cent, one pound thirteen shillings seven pence farthing, or
three hundred thirty six pound of Tobacco Buck-Skins dressed, each two shillings
four pence three far things, or twenty four pound of Tobacco; undrest one
shilling two pence farthing, or twelve pound of Tobacco; Doe-Skins dressed, each
one shilling nine pence halfpenny, or eighteen pound of Tobacco, Undrest,
eleven pence, or nine pound of Tobacco.

Which Commodities must be at the time of tender, good, sound, wholesome, and
Merchantable, in their kind; and if any difference happen therein, the same
shall be determined by two of the Neighborhood, appointed and required
thereunto, Vhis Act extends not to quit Rents, and Customs. How long this Act
is to continue in force.
by the next Justice of the Peace. Provided: and it is hereby enacted and
declared, that this Act or any thing therein contained, does not extend to the
Quit-Rents or other his Majesty's Dues or Customs.

Provided always nevertheless, and it is the true intent and meaning of this
Act, that this Law shall continue in force, until the tenth day of November,
which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1685. and no longer, any thing in this
Act contained, to the contrary notwithstanding.

XIII. An Act for the Public Levy.
BE it enacted by the Governor, Council, and Burgesses of this General
Assembly, and the Authority thereof, that the sum of eighty nine pounds of
Tobacco be paid by every tythable Person within this his Majesty's Colony and
Dominions of Virginia, for the payment and defraying of the public charge of
the Country, being the public Levy for this present year, and that it be paid
by the collectors of the several counties, to the several Persons, to whom it
is proportioned by this Present General Assembly.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE
A
Accounts.
ACcounts against Dead Men's Estates, Page. 70. Ballancing Accounts of Deceased
Persons, ibid. Accounts against Dead Men's Estates, shall be admitted in
Discount; Page. 71. Accounts shall not be pleadable after Three years by
persons living in the Country, Page. 179.
Actions and Arrests.
Actions shall be proportioned to the number of Twenty for each day, Page. 17.
No Arrest without Entry of Action first made, Page. 27. Sheriffs shall take
sufficient Bail of Persons Arrested, Page. 35. No Arrest shall be made on
Sundays, Page. 43. Nor on the Thirtieth of January or Twenty-ninth of May,
Page. 44. Prison-breakers, Felons, etc. excepted; ibid. Actions proportioned to
the Forenoon and Afternoon, Page. 127. No Arrest shall be served at James City
during the General Assembly, nor Five days before and after, except upon
persons dwellng in James City-County; Page. 130. Sheriffs Fees for Arrests,
Page. 175. Inhabitants of James City-County freed from Arrests during the
General Assembly, Page. 295
Acts.
No Act of Court or Proclamation shall contradict an Act of Assembly, Page. 66.
All Acts for Encouragement repealed, except the Act releasing the Imposition of
Two Shillings per Hogshead to the Inhabitants of this Collony; Page. (148.) All
Acts of Assembly made during Bacon's Rebellion repealed, Page. 199. An Act
declaring the year 1676 to be out of the Statute of Limitations, Page. 227. An
Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion; Page. 246. Persons
excluded from the benefit of the said Act, Page. 248. An Act for Raising a
Public Revenue for the better support of the Government of this Collony, Page.
254. Penalties upon such as shall publish or declare that the Acts of Assembly
are not of force, Page. 294.
Address.
An Act for an Address and Supplication to the King's Majesty, Page. 190.
Levies for carrying on the same, Page. 191. How to be raised, ibid.
Administrations, etc.
To whom Administrations shall be granted, Page. 48. Administrations shall not
be granted till Nine Months after the Parties decease, ibid. Administrators
shall give in Security to the Court, Page. 49.
Amerciaments.
Amerciaments in General and County Courts stated, in the former 50 l. of
Tobacco per Cause, in the later 30 l. Page. 23. An Account to be kept of
Amerciaments, ibid. Sheriffs shall collect Amerciaments, ibid. An Act disposing
Amerciaments upon cast Actions, Page. 208.
Ammunition.
An Act for supply of Ammunition, Page. 86. Every person able to bear Arms,
shall keep in his house a Gun, 2 l. of Powder, and 8 l. of Shot; ibid. An Act
for supply of Ammunition, Page. 148. Each County empowered to make Bylaws for
the provision of necessary Ammunitition at the Charge of the County, ibid. An
Act for the supply of Arms and Ammunition, Page. 185. Captains of Foot and
Horse to take an account of what Arms and Ammunition are wanting; Page. 186. An
Account thereof shall be given to the County Courts, ibid. Levies to be raised
by the County Courts, for providing of Ammunition in their respective Counties;
ibid. What Ammunition shall be provided, ibid.
Appeals.
How Appeals shall be made, Page. 21. When they shall be made to the
General-Court, Page. 22. Proviso's in Case of Appeals, ibid. In what Cases only
Appeals shall be made from Northampton-County; ibid. No Appeals from
County-Courts to the General-Court, save only in Cases Criminal, ibid. Appeals
to the General or County Courts, when Physicians or Surgeons, are unreasonable
in their Demands; Page. 68. Defendants in Appeals shall give security to Answer
the Appeal, Page. 110. Damages given in County-Courts, upon Appeal to the
General Court, if cast there, shall be raised 50 per Cent. Page. 158.
Appraisement.
Appraisement of Goods Seized, by whom; Page. 37. Goods shall remain in the
Plantiffs Possession, till after Appraisement; ibid. Allowance for
Appraisement, and for Funeral Charges, Page. 51. Things Impressed, shall be
Appraised by two Men of the Neighborhood; Page. 222.
Artificers, Tradesmen, etc.
Artificers not planting Tobacco, freed from the payment of Levies for three
years; Page. 42. But shall pay double Levies in case they Claim the benefit of
this Act and Transgress, Page. 43. Handicrafts-men shall pay Levies, Page. 114.
The Rates of Smiths, Armorers, etc. ascertained, Page. 176. Artificers to be
paid by the County, and the County reimbursed, ibid. Artificers, Merchants and
Tradesman, above the Age of Sixteen, shall pay Levies; Page. 189. Tradesmen
dwelling in the places appointed for County-Warehouses, freed from the payment
of former Debts for Five years; Page. 265. Also from public Levies, if they
plant no Tobacco; ibid.
Assemblies.
Assemblies to enquire after the breach of Laws, Page. 66. Notice to be given
to the people by Proclamation, when the Assemblies are to be Adjourned; Page.
128.
Attorneys.
No Commissioner, Clerk or Sheriff, shall Plead as an Attorney, in that Court
wherein he Officiates; Page. 38. Attorneys out of England shall give security
to pay Costs and Damages, if cast in Law, Suits; Page. 63. No person not being
Licenced by the Governor shall Plead as an Attorney, in the General or County
Courts; Page. 267. Any person may notwithstanding Plead his own Cause, Page.
268. Five hundred pounds of Tobacco the Attorneys Fee for pleading a Cause in
the General Court, and One hundred and Fifty for every Cause in County Courts;
ibid. Fine laid on Attorneys for refusing to Plead for the Fees aforesaid,
ibid. Avisare Volumus, Page. 19.

B.
Baptism.
THe Penalty of refusing to have Children Baptized, Page. 106. Baptism of
Slaves does not exempt them from Bondage; Page. 155.
Bills and Bonds.
Bills and Bonds of persons Deceased, how long recoverable, Page. 63. Damages
upon protested Bills of Exchange, shall not exceed 15 per Cent. Page. 150.
Notes of dead persons, how far Pleadable against their Estates, Page. 184.
Births shall be Registered, Page. 11.

Boats and Sloops.
Against private taking away of Boats, Page. 85. No Boat shall go on Board a
Vessel newly Arrived, before the said Vessel send on Shore, Page. 177. Such as
shall impress Boats, etc. shall produce their Warrants for so doing to the
Owners thereof; Page. 222. Sloop-hire from the County-Warehouse to the Water
side; Page. 264.
Bounds.
Bounds betwixt the English and the Indians to be fixed, Page. 99 Commissioners
shall view the same Annually, ibid. Bounds of this Collony on the
Eastern-Shoar, Page. 118. Counties and Parishes to be Bounded, Page. 133.
Burgesses.
Writs for Election of Burgesses, shall be read publicly in Churches, Page.
38. Freemen neglecting to give their Votes at the Election of Burgesses, fined
200 l. of Tobacco; Page. 39. The Secretary shall convey Writs to the Sheriffs
of each County for the Election of Burgesses, Page. 64. Two Burgesses from each
County, ibid. One for James City in particular, ibid. Burgesses shall appear on
the precise day of the return of the Writ, Page. 65. Burgesses shall not be
Arrested unless the Assembly be adjourned for above a Month, Page. 66. Each
County shall send two Burgesses, Page. 164. None but Freeholders and
Housekeepers, shall have a voice in Elections of Burgesses, Page. 168.
Penalties on Counties not sending two Burgesses, Page. 171. Expenses of
Burgesses regulated, Page. 211. The Allowance Burgesses shall have, during
their Attendance at the Grand Assembly, Page. 212.
Burials.
Private Burials prohibited, Page. 9. Places to be set apart for public
Burials, Page. 10. Burials shall be Registered, Page. 11.
C.
Cask.
THe Size of Virginia Hogsheads, Page. 84. Virginia Hogsheads shall be 43
Inches in length, and the heads 26 Inches over; ibid. Allowance of Cask for
Public and County Levies, etc. shall be 8. per Cent. and no more; Page. 271.
Castle Duties.
Castle Duties to be paid, Page. 94. Half a pound of Powder and three pound of
Leaden Shot per Tun, and 6 d. per Poll, payable for Castle Duties, ibid. An Act
concerning Castle Duties, Page. 113. Virginia-Owners exempted from Castle
Duties, Page. 163.
Cessation.
The Act for a Cessation from Planting Tobacco from the First of Feb. 1666, to
the First Feb. 1667. declared to remain in force, Page. 140. Debts due the
Cessation Year to be paid one half down, and time to be allowed for the other
half, Page. 143. Valua ion of Commodities for payment of public Duties during
the Cessation from Planting, Page. 144.
Children.
Mulatto Children to be Bond or Free according to the Condition of their
Mother, Page. 111. Poor Children to be provided for, Page. 181. Provision for
Children when Persons die Intestate, Page. 185. When Negro Children shall be
accounted Tythable, Page. 269.
Church.
A Church to be built in each Parish, Page. 3. In small Parishes Chapels of
Ease, ibid. Church Catechism only to be used, Page. 6. Land allotted for
building of Churches, Page. 156.
Churchwardens.
Churchwardens shall present Recusants, Page. 7. -- Shall make Presentment of
Misdemeanors twice in the Year, Page. 9. What Crimes they shall make
Presentment of, ibid. Churchwardens shall keep the Churches in repair, and
provide Ornaments, Page. 10. -- Shall Collect the Ministers Dues, ibid.
Chyrurgeons.
Chyrurgeons Accounts regulated, Page. 68. Chyrurgeons Accounts Pleadable after
decease of the Party, Page. 69.
Circuit.
The Governor or two of the Council whom he shall commissionate, to go the
Circuit yearly, Page. 21.
Clerks.
The Clerk shall issue Subpoenas, Page. 23. When he shall issue a Subpoena, and
when a Dedimus Potestatem, ibid. Clerks Fees to be paid, Page. 101. Clerks Fees
shall be pleadable 3 years, ibid. County Court-Clerks Fees, Page. 102. Clerk of
the Assemblies Fees, Page. 104. No person shall be a Justice of the Peace, or
High Sheriff and Clerk of the County at the same time, Page. 203. The County
Clerk may depute the High Sheriff or Undersheriff to enter Action, ibid.
Additional Fees ascertained to County-Court-Clerks, Page. 278. Penalty of
Clerks exacting greater Fees than is appointed, Page. 280.
Cloth.
Allowance made by the Public for every Yard of Linen and Woollen Cloth made
of the product of the Country, Page. 79. An Act for the Encouragement of the
Manufacture of Linen and Woollen-Cloth, Page. 296. Allowance made by the
Public for Linen or Woollen-Cloth of the Growth and Manufacture of the
Country, Page. 297. College or Free School. Page. 12.
Lands shall be taken up or purchased for that use, Page. 13.
Compositions.
Private Compositions for Damages sustained in the Rebellion, prohibited, Page.
215.
Contracts.
No Master shall make any Contract with his Servant before his Service be
expired, unless with the Approbation of some Justice of the Peace, Page. 202.
Conveyances.
An Act against Fraudulent Conveyances, Page. 56. Conveyances of Estates shall
be acknowledged before the Governor at the General Court, or before the
Justices at County-Courts, ibid. Such Conveyances shall be Registered within 6
Months, or otherwise shall not be good in Law, ibid. Who are exempted from this
Act, ibid. Conveyances made in England shall be Recorded in the Secretaries
Office, Page. 110.
Council.
Members of the Council of State may sit in any Court in Virginia, Page. 204.
Allowance to Counselors attending at General Courts, Page. 205.
Cocquets.
The price of Cocquets ascertained, Page. 200. One half penny per Hogshead
payable for all Bills of Lading not containing above 20 Hogsheads, ibid. In
Bills of Lading exceeding that number Twelve Pence for every Cocquet, ibid.
Corn.
Two Acres of Corn for each Tythable, Page. 82. Or one Acre of English Wheat,
ibid. Corn shall not be Exported upon penalty of paying 200 l. of Tobacco for
every Barrel thereof, and twice the price of other provisions, Page. 197.
Coroner.
An Act ascertaining Coroners Fees, Page. 226. In Counties where there is no
Coroner a Justice of Peace shall perform his Office and receive the Fee due to
the Coroner, ibid.
County.
A Pillory, a Whipping Post, a pair of Stocks, etc. to be set up in each
County, Page. 31. No person shall remove out of the County where he dwells,
without first setting up his Name on the Church-door three Sundays, with his
intention of removeing and whither, Page. 46. Cattle shall not be removed out
of the County withoue notice first given to four of the Neighborhood, ibid.
Counties or Parishes to make Bylaws, which Laws shall be obeyed by the
Inhabitants of the said Counties or Parishes, Page. 112. Inhabitants of the
County shall obey the Bylaws thereof, Page. 237. Where two or more Counties
lie conveniently, one public Warehouse may serve in common between them,
Page. 266.
Courts.
Courts formerly called Quarter Courts, to be hence forth styled
General-Courts, Page. 14. Rules for the beginning, continuance, and proceedings
in Courts, Page. 15. How the Style of the Court shall be entered, ibid. Warrants
for Proceedings in Courts to be issued by the Clerk, Page. 16. How long Courts
shall sit each day, Page. 18. Criminal Causes shall be tried only at the
General Courts, and on the Fourth day, Page. 20. County-Courts appointed, and
how to be formed, Page. 26. Members of County-Courts shall take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath of a Justice of Peace, ibid. An what
places, and when, County Courts shall be held, ibid. Form for entering the Style
of the County-Courts, Page. 28. Court shall not take Cognizance of any thing
under 200 l. of Tobacco, ibid. Private-Courts prohibited, Page. 29. County
Courts may grant Probates of Wills and Administrations upon the Estates of
Persons dying intestate, Page. 48. Discounts to be made in Courts, Page. 69.
The General Court to be held the 15th of April, Page. 139. Land alloted for
building Court Houses, Page. 156. County Courts shall re-examine their Orders,
Page. 162. An Act for opening Courts of Judicature, Page. 213. An Act
impowering County-Courts to make Bylaws, Page. 237. Two Men of each Parish
chose by the Freeholders and Housekeepers shall sit with the Justices in
County Courts for making Bylaws. ibid.
Criminals.
When several are Actors in the same Crime, every one shall be fined, Page.
132. Criminals having Estates shall defray the Charge of their own Prosecution,
Page. (147.) Otherwise to be prosecuted at the Charge of the County, ibid.
D
Debts.
NO Debts pleadable in Virginia for Goods Imported thither, Page. 123. Debts
contracted in Virginia shall be the first paid, Page. 125. No Debts pleadable
against Dead Men's Estates, but such as were contracted within One year before
their decease, Page. 239.
Declaration.
Plantiff shall file his Declaration three days before the day of Hearing,
Page. 18. Defendant shall put in his Appeal to the Plantiffs Declaration, Page.
28.
Dedimus Potestatem.
How a Dedimus-Potestatem shall issue, Page. 24. -- In what Cases to be
granted, by whom, and to whom it shall be directed, ibid. The Fee for a Dedimus
Potestatem, Page. 163. A Dedimus Potestatem may be signed by any Member of the
Council, Page. 290.
Defamation.
What Defamations are Actionable, Page. 29. Babbling and Slanderous Women to be
punished by Ducking, Page. 107. Persons provoking others by Aggravations or
Terms of Distinctions fined 400 l. of Tobacco. Page. 216. Any person who shall
either by Words or Writing Defame the Governor, shall suffer a years
Imprisonment, without Bail, etc. Page. 250.
E.
Errors.
A Amendment thereof, Page. 18.
Evidence.
Evidence shall be given Viva Voce in Cases Criminal, Page. 24. Penalties of
Nonappearance upon Subpoenas, Page. 25. Allowance for Evidences summoned to
the General Court; Page. 193.
Execution.
An Act permitting persons under Execution to redeem their Bodies with their
Estates; Page. 123. Proceedings in case of an Execution for Debt, and what
relief may be had therein; Page. 124. Executions issuing upon Judgment granted
by the Assembly, shall be drawn by the Clerk, and signed by the Governor;
Page. 228. Writs of Execution and Writs of Attachment, how to issue, Page. 290.
Exportation.
No Merchant or Mariner, shall Transport any person out of this Collony without
Certificate; Page. 46 Against Exportation of English-Goods; Page. 87. Mares and
Sheep, not to be Transported, ibid. Exportation of Iron, Wool, Wollfells,
Skins, Hides or Leather, prohibited; Page. 285.
F.
Fasts, etc.
A Fast to be kept annually on the 30th of January, Page. 7. The 29th of May
appointed to be kept Holy, Page. 8. The 13th of September to be annually kept
Holy, Page. 125. A Fast appointed, Page. 157.
Fences.
Fences shall be four foot and a half high, or else no Damages to be allowed
for Trespass; Page. 58. Sheep comprehended in the Act concerning insufficiency
of Fences, Page. 149. Fences of Cornfieldsd shall be four foot and a half high,
Page. 167.
Fines.
Courts only shall impose and collect Fines, Page. 32. An account thereof shall
be kept by the Clerk, ibid.
Fish.
An Act restraining the striking and killing of Fish, between the first of
April and first of November; Page. 281.
Flax and Hemp.
Flax-seed to be distributed into each County, Page. 79. An Act for the
Manufacture thereof, Page. 188. One Quart of Flax-seed, and the like quantity
of Hemp Seed, to be distributed to every Tythable person in each County; ibid.
One pound of dressed Flax or Hemp, to be yearly made for every Quart of Seed
received, ibid. Twenty four pound of Tobacco allowed by the public for every
Peck of Flax-seed of the growth of the Country, and Twenty pounds of Tobacco
for every Peck of Hemp Seed; Page. 296. For every Tythable in the year 1684,
shall be made one pound of Flax, and one pound of Hemp dressed, or Two pounds
of either, and so yearly after; Page. 297.
Fornication.
An Act against Fornication, Page. 73 Persons convicted of Fornication, fined
500 l. of Tobacco; ibid. Fornication with a Negro-man, or Woman punishable;
Page. 111.
Forts and Fort-duties.
Three pence per Hogshead payable for Fort-Duties in Accomack, etc. Page. 93.
Masters of Ships may pay their Fort-Duties in Musquet-Powder and Shot, Page.
113. A Fort ordered to be Built, Page. 136. Forts ruinated and demolished shall
be built anew, or repaired with Brick, Page. 176. Levies for building and
repairing Forts, ibid.
Frontiers.
Plantations on the Frontiers to be strengthened with four able hands well
Armed, Page. 126. An Act giving Seven years time for seating Frontier-Lands,
Page. 210.
G.
Garrisons.
FOur Houses for Stores and Garrisons, ordered to be built at the public
Charge, Page. 229. Places where they shall be Built, ibid. The Dimensions
thereof, ibid. Necessaries to be provided for the said Storehouses, and the
persons appointed to procure the same; Page. 230. The proportions of Men, which
the several Counties shall send to the Garrisons; Page. 233. Each Garrison
shall be supplied with a good Boat and Oars, Page. 234. Four of the
Neighbouring-Indians to each Garrison shall attend there, ibid. Ammunition to
be kept in Garrisons for store, Page. 235. An Act for the continuation of the
several Fortifications and Garrisons at the heads of the Four great Rivers;
Page. 257. Each Garrison to have Twenty Soldiers, besides the Chief Commander,
Page. 258. Persons entrusted to make Provision for the Soldiers belonging to
the Garrisons; ibid. Their Allowance, ibid. Five Months Provision to be laid in
for each Garrison; Page. 259.
Grievances.
An Act for presentation and delivery of Grievances, Page. 273. Sheriffs of
each County shall before every Session of Assembly appoint a time and place for
receiving Presentiments of Grievances; Page. 274. Such Presentiments of
Grievances shall be signed, ibid.
H.
Hatts.
ALlowance by the Public, for Hatts made of Wool or Furre of the growth of
the Country, Page. 298.
Hides and Skins.
Prices to be allowed for Hides, Page. 82. Hides not to be exported, Page. 83.
Such as sell Hides for exportation fined 1000 l. of Tobacco for every Hide so
sold, Page. 115. An Act prohibiting the exportation of Raw-Hides and
Deer-Skins, Page. 274. Hides and Skins, shall not be exported upon penalty of
Forfeiture, Page. 285.
Hogs.
Licenses for hunting of Wild-Hogs, Page. 54. Stealers of Hogs shall pay Two
hundred pound of Tobacco, half to the Owner, and half to the Informer; Page.
88. Or else shall serve two years, one to the Owner, and one to the Informer,
ibid. Hogs belonging to Indians shall have a particular mark signifying to what
Town they belong, Page. 194. An additional Act for the better preventing
Stealing of Hogs, Page. 236. Persons the Second time convicted of Stealing
Hogs, shall stand in the Pillory with their Ears nailed thereto; ibid. And the
third time shall be prosecuted as Felons; ibid.
Horses.
Stray-Horses, Page. 82. Stray-Horses, Cattle, etc. shall within a Month after
they are taken up, be cried publicly in all the Churches and Chapels of the
County; Page. 83. What is to be done in case the Owner be not found, ibid. The
Act levying Money on Horses, for Encouraging the killing of Wolves, repealed,
Page. 131. No Horses or Mares to be exported upon penalty of Seizure, Page.
162.
I.
Impositions.
IMposition of Two Shillings upon every Hogshead of Tobacco shipped for
Exportation, Page. 90. Imposition of 10 s. per Hogshead, Page. 93. Inhabitants
of this Country trading on Bottoms belonging to Virginia-Owners, freed from
payment of the 10 s. per Hogshead; Page. 94 An Imposition of 2 s. per Hogshead
upon Tobacco exported, Page. 112. Upon default of payment to be confiscated,
Page. 113. The Imposition of 10 s. per Hogshead repealed; Page. 134. Who are
exempted from the payment of Two Shillings per Hogshead, Page. 260.
Impress.
The price for the Hire of things Impressed, shall be ascertained, Page. 223.
Wages allowed to men impressed for the Public, or County-Service, ibid. Rates
allowed for Horses impressed, ibid. Horses dying or being killed or disabled in
the Countries Service, the Justices and Militia-Officers may Impress others in
their room; Page. 231.
Indians.
Acts concerning the Indians, Page. 96. No Englishman shall make purchase of
any Lands now justly claimed or actually possessed by the Indians, Page. 97. No
Injuries shall be done to the Indians, ibid. The Indians shall be assisted in
making a Fence, ibid. Poor Indians permitted to Fish for Oysters and gather
wild Fruits, provided they come not Armed, Page. 98. None shall buy or receive
any Commodities of the Indians without License, ibid. Differences arising in
Trading with the Indians, shall be referred to the Governor, ibid. No person
shall Imprison an Indian King without License from the Governor and two of the
Council, Page. 99. Indians shall not come within the Bounds of the English
without Badges, ibid. Indian Kings who are Tributary to the English, shall
acquaint them of any Invasion they know of intended by any strange Indians upon
this Collony, Page. 100. Penalty of harboring Run-away-Indians, ibid. None
shall entertain any of the Neighboring Indians for Servants, without License
from the Governor, Page. 101. None of the English shall entertain Indians
without Badges, Page. 120. Whosoever shall sell Arms to the Indians, shall for
the first offense be fined 10000 l. of Tobacco, and for the second be
prosecuted as a Felon, Page. 132. An Act concerning Murders committed by the
Indians, Page. 134. The Weromance, or Chief Commander of the Indians shall be
chosen by the Governor of Virginia, Page. 135. None shall entertain Indians
without License from the Governor, ibid. Indians and Negroes may buy their own
Natives but not Christians, Page. 168. Indians permitted to come into
Henrico-County, Page. 174. Trade permitted with the Indians, Page. 217. At what
places and times Marts or Fairs shall be held for Trade with the Indians, ibid.
H^w long such Marts or Fairs shall continue, ibid. Penalty upon such as shall
Trade with the Indians at other places or times than is appointed, Page. 218.
Account shall be taken of what is bought and sold at such Fairs, ibid. Indians
resorting to the said Marts or Fairs shall not come Armed, Page. 219. An Act
for Defense of the Country against the Incursions of the Indians, Page. 229.
An Act Licensing a Free-Trade with the Indians, Page. 270. The time the said
Act shall continue in force, ibid. An Act concerning Indians, made October 20th
1665, reinforced, Page. 277. Indian-Slaves, etc. though afterward converted
to Christianity, shall continue Slaves still, Page. 283. Indian-Women Servants
Tythable, Page. 284. The Act of the 8th June 1680, for preventing Insurrections
of the Indians appointed to be read publicly in all Churches and Chapels of
Ease twice every year, Page. 285. No person shall permit an Indian or Slave not
belonging to him to continue upon his Plantation above four hours at a time
without leave of the said Indians, or Slaves Master, ibid.
Informers.
The Informer shall have the half of all Fines, Page. 123. Interpreters made to
the Country, Page. 104. Iron not to be Exported upon penalty of Forfeiture,
Page. 285.

Judgments.
Acknowledgment of a Debt before two Commissioners, shall be accounted in the
nature of a Judgment, and Execution shall issue in case of Non-payment, Page.
45. Judgment upon return of Non est Inventus, Page. 107.
Juries.
Juries shall be chosen out of the Neighborhood, Page. 20. The manner of
proceeding by Juries in Cases Criminal, ibid. What allowance Jurymen shall
have for their Charges. ibid. Juries appointed as well in County Courts as in
the General Court, Page. 30. Grand Jury shall in each County twice in the year
make Presentiments, Page. 31. Delinquency of Grand Juries Fined, Page. 214.
Justices of the Peace.
In what case a Justice of the Peace may grant Attachments, Page. 130. Justices
shall not take Fees, Page. 150. Justices of the County-Courts shall not Levy
Tobaccoes upon the people for their Accomodations and Expenses whilst they are
keeping Court, Page. 193. Any two Justices of the Quorum may sign Probates of
Wills and Letters of Administration, Page. 204. Justices of Peace neglecting to
Impannel Grand Juries, fined 2000 l. of Tobacco, Page. 214.
L.
Land.
LAnds of Persons intestate, Page. 13. How persons claiming Land by Importation
of Servants must prove their Title, Page. 52. Deserted Lands, Page. 53. No
Deserted Land shall be taken up by Patent till after the term of 3 years,
without Order obtained of the Governor and Council, ibid. Seating upon others
Dividends, ibid. Such as have built upon Lands supposed their own, but upon
Survey prove to belong to another, shall have the charge thereof allowed by the
Right Owner, ibid. Or else shall purchase the Land, Page. 54. Twelve Men upon
Oath are to decide any Controversy arising thereupon, ibid. Cattle shall not
be fetched off another Man's Land till after notice be given him thereof, ibid.
Five years peaceable possession of Land shall confirm a Title thereto, Page.
55. The Lands of Widows, Orphans, and persons of unsound mind, and of such as
live out of the Country, excepted, ibid. Land shall be plainly Marked and
Bounded, Page. 58. Bounds of Land shall be every four years renewed by the View
of the Neighborhood, Page. 59. Bounds of Land once settled by the consent of
the Proprietors, shall take off all claim to future alteration thereof, Page.
60. An Act declaring what is meant by seating of Land, Page. 151. Building a
House and keeping a Stock One whole Year upon Land shall be accounted a
sufficient sea^ing thereof, ibid. Sale of Land made by Husband and Wife shall
stand good in Law, Page. 195. Leather may not be Exported, Page. 285.
Letter.
How Public Letters shall be conveyed, Page. 67. Extraordinary Charges in
conveying Public Letters shall be allowed by the County. ibid,
Levies.
Public Levies shall be first paid, Page. 39. Counselors of State, and ten
persons of their Family exempted from payment of Levies, Page. 42. Some others
exempted, ibid. Governor and Council have power to raise a Levy for defraying
the Country Debts and Salleries, Page. 43. Who only are exempted from the
payment of Public and County Levies, Page. 206.
Liquors.
An Act regulating the Prices of Liquors, Page. 206. Justices of the Peace to
appoint the Prices of Liquors twice in the year, Page. 207. Liturgy of the
Church of England shall be read in Churches, Page. 8.

M.
Manufactures.
AN Act for Encouragement of Manufactures, Page. 296. An Act for the
advancement of Manufactures and for the better Payment, of Debts and Levies,
Page. 298. Debts may be paid in Commodities of the Growth and Manufacture of
the Country, Page. 299. At what Rates such Commodities shall be valued, ibid.
Marriages.
Marriage to be performed by none but Misters, Page. 8. Marriage shall not be
Solemnized till after publishing of Banes or Licenses, ibid. How Licenses for
Marriage shall issue, Page. 11. Fees for such Licenses how to be levied, Page.
12. Against secret Marriages, Page. 72. Servants may not marry without
producing Certificates from their Masters, Page. 73. Certificates for Marriages
shall not be granted without the consent of the Parent or Guardian, Page. 169.
Maryland to concur in the Cessation, Page. 142. Tobacco of Maryland growth to
be free from Duties, Page. 154. No Vessels belonging to the Inhabitants of
Maryland shall unload in any part of Virginia without Entry first made, upon
penalty of forfeiture of the said Vessel and Cargo, Page. 245.
Masters.
Cruelty of Masters prohibited, Page. 76. One Years sorvice to be given for
striking a Master or Mistress, Page. 77. An Act limiting Masters dealing with
their Servants, Page. 201.
Militia.
Such as refuse to appear on the days appointed for the Exercise of the
Militia, fined 100 pounds of Tobacco, Page. 153. Private Soldiers pay, Page.
231. The Captains pay to be 1200 l. of Tobacco and Cask per Month, Page. 232.
The Lieutenants pay 850 l. of Tobacco and Cask per Month, ibid. The Cornets and
Chyrurgeons Pay, ibid. Corporals and Trumpeters pay, Page. 233. What Indian
Prisoners or Plunder the Soldiers shall take shall be free Purchase; Page.
235. Soldiers maimed or disabled in service, shall have an Annual Pension,
Page. 236. Twenty Men well furnished with Horses, shall be raised in each of
the Counties of Henrico, New-Kent, Rappahannock, and Stafford; Page. 291. The
Captain of such Troop to have 800 l. Tobacco per Annum, Page. 292. Corporals
and Private Soldiers Pay, ibid. The said Troop shall be trained and exercised
once a Month, ibid. And shall range and scout about the Frontiers of the County
for which they serve, once every Fortnight, Page. 293.
Millers and Mills.
An Act against Exacting Millers, Page. 86. Millers shall receive in Corn, and
deliver it out by Statute Weights and Scales; ibid. Penalty upon Millers
Exactions, Page. 87. An Act concerning Millers, Page. 149. An Act encouraging
the Building of Mills, Page. 156. Millers shall take but one Eighth part for
grinding English Corn, and one Sixth for Indian, Page. 173.
Minister.
Glebes to be laid out and a House built for the Minister, Page. 4. -- His
Maintenance to be worth 80 l. per Annum besides Perquisites and Glebes, ibid.
Minister shall not officiate without producing Testimonials that he received
Orders of some Bishop of the Church of England, Page. 5. Ministers to provide
Readers, ibid. Ministers shall preach weekly, Page. 6. And shall administer the
Sacrament at least twice in the year, ibid. Ministers or Readers shall keep
Registers, Page. 11. Minister to have 5 l. allowed him for his attendance at
General Courts, Page. 206. Ministers exempted from payment of Public or County
Levies, ibid. Any person who shall disturb the Minister during the Exercise of
his Ministerial Function, shall for the first Offense be fined 200 l. of
Tobacco and 500 l. for every such Offense after; Page. 276.
Money.
The Exportation thereof prohibited, Page. 84. Pieces of Eight shall pass for 5
s. current, ibid. No person shall export above the sum of Forty Shillings,
ibid.
Mulberry Trees.
Ten Mulberry Trees shall be planted upon every 100 Acres of Land holden in
Fee, Page. 80.
N.
Naturalization.
AN Act for Naturalization, Page. 252. The Governor may Naturalize such
Foreigners as shall seat themselves in this Collony, ibid.
Negroes.
Negro-women though enjoying the privilege of Freedom, not exempted from the
payment of Taxes, Page. 159. Birth of Negro and Mulatto Children and Slaves
born in Virginia, shall be registered, Page. 179. Runaway Negroes and Slaves
shall be pursued by Hue and Cry, Page. 182. Runaway Negroes, Mulatto-Indians,
Slaves or Servants for life, resisting may be killed, ibid. And the Master or
Owner of such Negro, etc. shall receive satisfaction of the Public, ibid. At
what Rates such Negroes and Slaves shall be valued, ibid. An Act for preventing
Negroes Insurrections, Page. 272. Negroes shall not go armed, nor depart from
off their Masters ground without Certificate, Page. 273. Resistance of Negroes
or other Slaves how punished, ibid. Fugitive Negroes resisting such as are
employed to apprehend them, may be killed; ibid.
News.
Divulgers of False News fined 200 l. of Tobacco, and to give Security for
their good Behavior, Page. 68. A Public Notary appointed, Page. 96.

O.
Offices.
NO person not born in Virginia shall be capable of bearing Office there till
he has dwelt Three years in the Country, unless commissionated by his Majesty,
Page. 204. Persons convicted in England shall be held incapable of bearing
Office in Virginia, ibid.
Ordinaries.
Ordinary-Keepers Accounts, Page. 70. Ordinary-Keepers shall sell by English
Measures, Page. 71. None shall retail Drink without License, ibid. An Act for
restraint of Tipling-houses; Page. 160. Not above one or two Ordinaries or
Tipling-houses to be in each County, ibid. Except on Great Roads, Ports, etc.
ibid. Such as have Licenses to keep them shall give Security to the County
Court Commissioners, ibid. Not more than two Ordinaries shall be permitted to
be kept in one County, exceptin that where the General Court is held, Page.
206. What Prices shall be paid at Ordinaries for Liquors, Diet, and Lodging,
Page. 207. Prices for Horse-Pastorage and Oats, ibid.
Orphans.
Orphans shall be maintained by the Interest and Increase of their Stock (if
sufficient) if not, shall be bound Apprentices, Page. 50. Cattle, Sheep and
Horses belonging to Orphans, shall be returned to them in kind when they come
to Age; ibid. Plate and Money shall be also returned in kind, other
Houshould-Stuff shall be appraised and sold, Page. 51. Ten per Cent. allowed to
Guardians, for collecting Debts due to Orphans, ibid. Orphans Land not to be
Aliened, Page. 52. Timber upon Orphans Land shall not be wasted, and the Houses
shall be kept in repair; ibid. The disposal of Negroes belonging to Orphans,
referred to the County Courts, Page. 174 County Courts authorized to dispose of
Orphans Estates, Page. 178. The Bounds of Orphans Lands to be laid forth, and
by whom, Page. 187. An Act for securing Orphans Estates, Page. 241.
Administrators of Orphans Estates shall give good security, Page. 242.
P.
Parish Levies.
AN Act for the more equal laying of Parish Levies, Page. 209. Six able
Housekeepers may assist the Vestry in assessing of Parish Taxes, ibid.
Passes.
No Master of a Ship shall transport any person out of this Collony, except the
said Person produce a Pass; Page. 89. The Method to be observed in granting
such Passes. Page. 90.
Patents.
An Act concerning imperfect Patents, Page. 151. Former Patents shall remain
firm and valid, although no Record thereof be extant, Page. 152. All Patents
shall for the future be compared with the Record, before they pass the Office;
ibid. The price of double Patents, Page. 220. An Act for the setting the Form
of Patents, Page. 225.
Planting.
An Act giving liberty to Plant, Page. 127.
Prison.
A Prison shall be built in each County, Page. 33. Breaking Prison shall be
accounted Felony, ibid. Who shall have the benefit of the Rules, ibid. Such as
dwell within the Rules shall not have the benefit of them, Page. 34. What
persons shall have the benefit of the Act made for the relief of poor
Prisoners, Page. 37.
Processions.
Days to be appointed upon which Procession shall be made; Page. 60.
Processions ordered to be continued, Page. 167.
Q.
Quakers.
QUakers shall be prosecuted by the Statute of 23 Eliz. Page. 7. The unlawful
Assembling of Quakers prohibited, Page. 115. Quakers, etc. Assembling to the
number of Five, under a pretense of Religious Worship, how to be punished,
Page. 116. Persons so offending, being the third time convicted, shall be
Banished the Country; ibid. Inhabitants that shall entertain Preaching-Quakers
to be Fined, Page. 117.
Quit-Rents.
Quit-Rents shall be collected by the Sheriff, Page. 40. -- They shall be paid
in Tobacco or Money, ibid. Quit-Rents may be paid in Tobacco at Two pence per
pound, Page. 57.
R.
Records.
THe Records shall be carefully Stated, Page. 128. No person may be permitted
to view them without Public Orders, except only the Clerks of the Office, or
whom else the Secretary shall appoint; ibid. The Clerks Fee for searching the
Records, ibid. Provision made for the Relief of such as were Sufferers by the
late Rebellion, Page. 249.
Rivers.
Justices of the County Courts shall annually appoint the Surveyors of the
Rivers and Creeks to clear the same from Trees, Logs, Rubbish, etc. Page. 278.
Such as shall Fell Trees into the Rivers and not clear away the same, fined 500
l. of Tob co; ibid.
Roads.
An Act for Roads to Houses, Page. 156. Convenient Passage for Man and Horse
shall be made to every Plantation; ibid.
Rum, etc.
-- To be sold only in places appointed, Page. 88. Six pence to be paid for
every Gallon of Rum, and One penny for every pound of Pavele Sugar brought on
Shore at any other Port than is appointed by the Assembly; ibid. The Act
concerning Rum and Pavele Sugars repealed, Page. 129.
Run-aways.
Run-away-Servants shall serve their Masters twice the time of their Absence,
after their time by Indenture is Expired, Page. 75. English-Servants running
away in Company with Negroes, how to be dealt withal; Page. 76. An Act
concerning the pursuit of Run-aways, Page. 122. Pursuit of Run-aways to be made
at the County Charge, ibid. Such as shall entertain Run-aways fined, Page.
(146) Corporal punishment may be Inflicted on Run-aways, Page. 158. The Rewards
for apprehending of Run-aways limited, Page. 165. How Masters are to deal with
Run-aways, Page. 166. The Duty of Constables in conveying Run-aways to their
Masters, ibid. The Neighboring Indians required to seize Run-aways, Page. 182.
The Recompense allowed them for so doing, Page. 183. How long this Act to
continue in force, ibid.
S.
Salt.
SAlt-work, Page. 81. Salt permitted to be again imported and sold in
Northampton County, Page. 147. Secretaries Fees. Page. 102.
An Act regulating the Secretaries-Office, Page. 128.
Servants.
Servants, how long to serve, Page. 72. Servants coming in without Indenture,
shall serve Five years if above Sixteen years of Age, and all under till they
are Four and Twenty; ibid. Servants guilty of Fornication, how to be punished,
Page. 73. Hired-Servants, Page. 74. Servants when their time is expired shall
take a Certificate of their Freedom, and produce the same when they are
entertained by other Masters; ibid. Servants too rigorously dealt withal, or
wanting Necessaries, may make complaint to the Commissioners; Page. 76. Against
Unruly-Servants, Page. 77. Against Trading with Servants, ibid. No person shall
Trade with Servants, without License or consent of their Masters; ibid.
Servants Goods shall be disposed of to their own use, Page. 106. Women-Servants
gotten with Child by their Masters, how to be dealt withal, Page. 108. An Act
concerning Servants being the reputed Fathers of Bastard Children; Page. 109.
Servants brought in without Indentures, Page. 110. Servants for Offenses
committed to receive corporal Punishment, Page. 133. The time Servants coming
in without Indentures shall serve, Page. (146.) An Act concerning Servants sold
for the Custom, Page. 180.
Seizure.
Seizures of Tobaccoes due to the Public, regulated, Page. 203. No Seizure
shall be made of Tobacco, while in the County-Warehouse, for Public, County,
or Parish Levies, Page. 265. Siezure to be made of Iron, Wool, Hides, etc.
shipped for exportation, Page. 288.
Shooting.
No person shall Shoot or Range upon another Land, without leave of the
Proprietor, Page. 54. Shooting off Guns at Drinkings or Marriages forbidden,
Page. 85.
Shoes.
Rates to be allowed for Shoes, Page. 82.
Sheriffs.
Sheriffs to Impannel Juries, Page. 20. One of the Commissioners of each County
shall be chosen Sheriff thereof, Page. 34. Sheriffs shall hold their Office the
term of One whole Year and no longer, ibid. Under Sheriff, ibid. Sheriffs not
making timely Returns fined 1000 l. of Tobacco, Page. 35. Sheriffs Return of ^a
Non Est Inventus, Page. 36. Sheriffs shall give Security to the County
Commissioners for the faithful discharge of their Office, Page. 45. Sheriffs
Fees, Page. 103. The Penalty of Sheriffs making false Returns, Page. 105.
Sheriffs neglecting to take Bail, or consenting to the Escape of the Prisoner,
shall pay the Award of the Court and be fined 1000 l. of Tobacco, Page. 154.
Sheriffs to be fined for concealing Tythables, Page. 219.
Ships and Vessels.
Fifty Pounds of Tobacco per Tun allowed by the Public for all Vessels built
in this Collony, Page. 81. Masters of Ships shall take in Four Months
Provision, Page. 89. -- Shall give sufficient Allowance of Diet to Passengers,
and take care that Poor Servants have good Lodging, ibid. Masters of Ships
shall give an Account of their Freight upon Oath, to the Collectors of the
Imposition of 2 s. per Hogshead, Page. 91. Masters of Ships concealing any part
of their Freight, fined 100 l. Sterling, ibid. Masters shall give an Account of
the Burden of their Vessels, and a List of their Passengers to the Collectors
of Castle Duties, Page. 94. Ships arriving in James River shall be brought up
to James City, Page. 95. Such Vessels as belong solely and wholly to the
Inhabitants of this Collony, freed from payment of the 2 s. and 10 s. per
Hogshead, Page. 96. Ships permitted to ride in any part of the River where they
may most conveniently unload, Page. 158. What Fees shall be taken for Vessels
built in Virginia, and belonging wholly to the Inhabitants thereof, Page. 201.
An Act ascertaining Collectors Fees for Entering and Clearing Ships, Page. 240.
All Ships or Vessels whatever, coming to this Collony, shall for every Tun
Burden pay half a Pound of Powder and Three Pound of Shot, or 1 s. 3 d. Money
in lieu thereof, Page. 255. Six pence per Poll payable for all persons Imported
(Mariners excepted) ibid.
Silk.
Fifty Pound of Tobacco allowed by the Public for every pound of Wound Silk,
Page. 80. Encouragement to make Silk, Page. 164.
Slaves.
Slaves Resisting when corrected, if they chance to be killed, their death
shall not be accounted Felony, Page. 161. All Servants Imported, not being
Christians, shall be Slaves during life, Page 172. But those that come by Land
for a time limited, ibid.
Storehouses.
Fifty Acres of Land in each County shall be set apart to Erect Storehouses
upon, for the use of the said County, Page. 261. Places appointed in each
County where they shall be built, ibid. What Price the County shall pay for the
said 50 Acres of Land, Page. 262. Encouragement to such as will build a
Dwelling House on the aforesaid Land, ibid. The Surveyors of the said Land
shhll be paid by the Public, Page. 263. All Tobaccoes and other Goods and
Merchandises whatever of the growth of this Collony to be Exported, shall be
brought to the County Warehouses, ibid. Goods Imported shall be landed and
sold there, ibid. Persons dwelling in the said appointed places, have liberty
to sell their Tobaccoes at any time, Page. 266. Sunday to be kept holy, 6.
Divine Service and Preaching shall he diligently attended, ibid.
Suits.
What Damages are allowed in case of Litigious Suits, Page. 170
Supersedeas.
Shall be granted only by the Governor and two of the Council, Page. 32.
Surveyors of Land.
What Prices shall be allowed to Surveyors of Land, Page. 57. No Surveyor shall
give a Plot of any Land surveyed by him, till six Months after the drawing
thereof, Page. 58: Surveyors Fees ascertained, Page. 145. The Fees formerly
allowed to Surveyors doubled, ibid. Surveyors refusing to measure Land at the
Rates appointed, to be fined, ibid.
Swamps and Marshes.
Who may take up Swamps and Marshes, Page. 183. The Method to be followed
therein, Page. 184.
T
A Tann-house to be Erected, Page. 81.
Timber.
An Act restraining the Impress of Timber, Page. 221. Persons empowered to
impress Timber, shall first make Composition or Agreement with the Owners
thereof, Page. 222. Two Men of the Neighborhood shall value Timber to be
impressed for Public service, in case the Owner be unreasonable in his
Demands, ibid.
Tythables.
How the Lists thereof shall be taken, Page. 40. Each County shall be divided
into several Precincts for the more exact discovery of Tythables, ibid. T^^b^
Duties shall be paid for every Tythable person concealed, ibid. What Persons
are Tythable, Page. 41. Who are liable to the payment of Taxes and who are
exempted, ibid. Women Servants working in the Ground Tythable, Page. 111. An
Act for the more exact Discovery of concealed Tythables, Page. 121. Masters of
Families fined who shall conceal Tythables in their Families, ibid. Lists of
Tythables shall be put up at the Court D^^r, Page. 168. Persons appointed by
the County Courts, shall take Lists of Tythables, Page. 178. An Act allowing
Free Tythables to diverse persons repealed, Page. 205. Every Forty Tythables
shall be assessed to fit and set forth One Horseman well Armed. Page. 230.
Provision to be allowed such Man and his Horse for four Months, Page. 231. The
Militia Officers of each County, to proportion a division of the Tythables in
their said Counties; ibid. Negro-Children imported, shall not be accounted
Tythable, till Twelve years of Age, Page. 269. Christian Servants imported,
shall not be Tythable till Fourteen years of Age; Page. 270.
Tobacco.
Tobacco due shall be demanded betwixt the Tenth of October and the last of
January; Page. 62. No Tobacco to be planted after the Second of July, Page. 78.
No Seconds or Slips, ibid. Ground-leaves of Tobacco shall not be Packed up for
Sale, ibid. The Inhabitants of Northumberland and Westmorland-Counties, shall
give an account how many Hogsheads of Tobacco they made, and to whom sold;
Page. 92. Creditors to demand and receive their Tobacco by the last of January,
Page. 138. Difference between the Debtor and Creditor, whether the Tobacco
tendered be Merchantable or no, to be decided by an Umpire; ibid. The marking
of Tobacco alone,, declared to be sufficient for transferring the property
thereof, Page. 159. An Act limiting times for receipt and payment of public
Tobaccoes; Page. 202. The Inhabitants of Potomack River, and the Eastern Shore,
permitted to ship their Tobacco without Certificate, Page. 240. An Act
prohibiting the Importation of Tobacco into this Collony, Page. 242. Two
Shillings to be paid for every Hogshead of Tobacco exported, Page. 254.
Tobaccoes during their Transporting unto, and so long as they continue in the
County-Warehouses, are exempt from any Execution or Attachment for Debts
contracted before the making of this Act; Page. 265.
Trade.
Free-Trade, Page. 83. Trade permitted with the Indians, ibid. But not for
Beavor, Otter, or any either Furs without Commission, ibid. An Act for
encouragement of Trade and Manufacture, Page. 260.
Treason.
Nath. Bacon Junior attainted of High Treason, Page. 248.
Trespass.
Satisfaction in case of Trespass, Page. 59. Damages allowed for Trespass,
Page. 167.
V.
Vagabonds.
AN Act for suppressing them, Page. 181. The Laws of England to be put in
Execution against Idle and Vagrant Persons, ibid. Vestries appointed, Page. 3.
The Vestry to consist of Twelve Men chose by the major part of the
Parishoners, ibid. Such as come on the Vestry shall take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, Page. 4. Vestries shall take care of the Highways,
Page. 61.
W.
Highways.
THe Justices shall yearly appoint Surveyors of the Highways, Page. 91.
Highways shall be kept clear, and Bridges in good repair, ibid. Penalty of
Felling Trees on the Highways or encroaching upon the same, ibid.
Warrants.
At what time Warrants are to be served, Page. 17. Constables shall obey
Commissioners Warrants, Page. 170.
A Weaver.
To be provided and Loom set up in each County within Two years, Page. (145.)
Weights and Measures.
English Weights and Measures shall be used in this Collony, Page. 47. Every
County shall be provided with Weights and Measures from England, ibid.
Widows.
Widow to have one Third of the Estate (Debts being first paid) the other Two
Thirds to be divided amongst the Children, Page. 49. Estates of persons dying
Intestate to be divided into Thirds, and the Widow to have her Thirds, and
choice after the Division, Page. 129. Widows shall be endowed with a Third part
of Estates Real, Page. 185.
Witnesses.
The Nonappearance of Witnesses finable in case of a Dedimus Potestatem, Page.
25. Charges allowed to Witnesses, ibid. Number of Witnesses limited, Page. 26.
Witnesses Subpoena'd to give their Evidence upon Oath, Page. 108. Refusal to
give Evidence punishable by Imprisonment, ibid. Witnesses allowed 30 l. of
Tobacco per Diem if they come 20 Miles or upwards to James City, Page. 193. And
Sixty Pound of Tobacco per Diem for their Expenses during their Attendance
there, ibid. Witnesses shall be free from Arrests, Page. 295.
Woolves.
The Reward for killing of Woolves, Page. 44. To be paid by the County, ibid.
County Courts shall make By Laws for Rewarding the killing of Woolves, Page.
146. The Act encouraging the killing of Woolves Repealed, Page. 171. Particular
Counties Authorized to make Bylaws for the kil^^ng of Woolves, Page. 210.
Wool.
Shall not be Exported upon Penalty of Forfeiture, Page. 285.
Woollen.
Vide Cloth.
FINIS.

