Licensed.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

The Court of Curiosity. Wherein, By the ALGEBRA and LOT, The most Intricate
Questions are Resolved, and NOCTURNAL DREAMS AND VISIONS

Explained, According to the Doctrine of the Ancients.

To which is also added, a Treatise of PHYSIOGNOMY.

Published in French By Marck de Vulson, Sieur de la Colombiere, Knight of the
Order of St. Micheal, and Gentleman in ordinary to the French King.

Translated into English by J. G. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1669.

To the LADIES Of our BRITISH ISLE.
Ladies,
It Is for your Diversion, that this Treatise has crossed the Sea, and
undergone the hazard of a Voyage. If you meet here with any favorable
Interpretation of those pleasant Dreams that soften your sweet slumbers,
commend the Author; if any thing falls out contrary to your expectation, blame
not the Translator, whose sole design was your satisfaction. This Tractate
has had the happiness to breathe in the air of two foreign Kingdoms with
Applause; those of the most Catholic and most Christian Kings; and beyond all
controversy, it will meet with no worse Entertainment in a third, I mean that
of the Defender of the Faith, whose Subjects come short of none of the
Europeans in civility. I confess that in this small spot of ground, there grow
no Rhetorical flowers; Here are no Ingenii lascivientis flosculi; no
Excrescencies of Lasciviating Wit; for the subject will not admit of a florid
style: yet I Will be bold to affirm, here is that which stamps the Impression of
beautiful upon the World, and renders the whole Universe Amiable, Variety.
Inest sua Gratia parvis, is a Sentence that carries as much Truth as Antiquity
in the womb of it; and Nature has ever been so provident, as to supply the
want of Bulk in minute things, with an Exact Symmetry, and Comely Proportion.
And herein Art (her Chiefest Ape) does nearly imitate Her: for indisputably
there was more Artifice and subtilty manifested in the smaller proportion of
Regiomontanus his Iron fly, then in the larger Dimensions of his Wooden Eagle.

The Author in his discourse upon this Subject, intends no Rigorous Imposition
upon your faith, nor to Commit a Rape upon your Belief; for such Arts, as this
of Oneiropolie, have no other foundation to support them, but the instable
Basis of Conjecture. This was not invented to unhinge the Brain, or torture the
Phancie; but rather to Divert, and Exercise in your Ladyships that pleasant
Ague of the Diaphragm, Laughter. The most refined Wits that ever I met with in
this our Modern Age, when tired out in the eager pursuit after sublimer
learning, as the noble Recerches of Philosophy, or dark Intrigues of
State-Politie, have ever had recourse to some such Innocent Divertisement,
which like Hellebore purges away Melancholy, the Epidemique distemper of the
sedentary Student. Well may I therefore, with modesty, trace the footsteps of
such Eminent Authors, and plead that old saying for taking up this new Subject
(for I presume there are few Tracts of this nature in any Language, and fewest
in our Own.)

Quod decuit Tantos, cur mihi turpe putem? The Rough-draught of this
Translation, was the Product of some of those Horae subsecivae that were
snatched from the Hurry of a Tumultuous City-employment, and since licked into
that shape wherein it is now presented to your Ladyships, under the quiet calm
of a Rural Recreation. I have met here with some Gallicisms, or French Idioms,
which were so peevish and sullen, that they would not, by any means, be
persuaded to speak plain English; in so much that I was constrained to force
them to appear in the most familiar Terms, and usual expressions of our
Language. The Alphabetical Table of Dreams is inverted, because they would not
follow in the same order in English as they did in French, but I have neither
added to, nor diminished the number of them, and so consequently have done the
Author no injury, having only in some particulars deviated from his Method, for
the Reader's advantage. As for that additional piece of Physiognomie; which is
the very study of the Complexion, I need say but little in vindication of it.
It Is a known Proverb, Facies Index Rerum: the Character and sentiments of the
Mind, are plainly and fairly legible in the Countenance; nor will it ever enter
into my thoughts, that you can possibly have any Aversion for an Art, whose
chiefest subject is that Part your Ladyships are so curious, by all Artificial
Embellishments and Auxiliatory Helps imaginable, to preserve. But lest I be
accused of too much Rudeness for detaining you so long in the Porch of this
Palace, I will now open the Portal, and give you free admittance into this
Court of Curiosity; where, that the Entertainment may in some measure Answer
your Expectation, it is the earnest desire of

Your Ladyships most obedient Servant, J. G.

ERRATA.
IN the use of the Figure, line 5. read end. l. 21. r. lower, l. 32. r. which.
Numb. 1. Answ. 6. dele be. Numb. 10. Answ 8 r. intention. Numb. 35. Answ. 10.
r. must. page 6. line 31. r. nor. p. 9. l. 6. r. Simonides. p. 9. l 34. r.
presages. p. 10. l. 4. dele of. p. 12 l. 25. r. offices. p. 13. l. 14. r. of.
p. 15. l. 8. r. unto, and l. 12. r. eminent. p. 21. l. 29. r. Sea port. p. 24.
l. 2. add one. p. 29. l. 9. dele their. p. 48. l. 30. dele grown. p. 54. l. 32.
r. Wenne. p 74. l. 26. dele he. p. 76. l. 13. r. leaner. p 82. l. 13 and 14.
dele assistance of, or. p. 87. l. 20. r. hairy. p. 1^1 l. 12. r. intrinsic. p.
117. r. Divinity. p. 127. l 34. dele the wit. p. 140. l. 3. r. fiensse. p. 153.
l. 19. r. petty. p. 160. l. 1. r. affecta^ion. p. 167 l 8. r. said. p. 173. l.
26. r. Theft. p. 180. l. 4. r. color'd. p. 198. l. 21. and 22. r. Vertebra. p.
100. l. 4. add is. p. 202. l. 14. r. pierced.

The Use of the following Figure, in order to the finding out of the Answers to
the Questions proposed.
YOu must lay your fingers on one point of the Figure following, and count till
you come to Twelve, either upward or downward, on the right or left side; and
then reckon the number of points that remain to the very and of the corner of
the Figure, and no further: and retaining in your memory the remainder over and
above the number Twelve, then go to the Question proposed, and count downwards
from the same number which you had remaining; and then look for the number in
the Answers according to the number you meet with after you have done counting
at the Questions; and then come to the Answer for the Question according to the
first number retained in your memory. For Example: If the Person that is
Curious touches that point with his finger which is marked with the figure 2,
then drawing downwards as those small points show you, you must count till you
come to Twelve, and then reckon the three that remain to the right corner at
the lover end of the Figure; and so come to the Question, which was this,
Whether a Person shall have many Friends; which is the seventh Question: so
that reckoning the three that remain, you proceed till you come to Nine, which
signifies the ninth Number, and the third Answer; which is this: You shall have
many Friends.

Again, for the same Question: Suppose you touch at the Figure 3, and count
upwards (as you see the pricks go) till you come to the corner, there remain
five, with you are to reckon from the Question, accounting always the Question
it self to be one; and that will bring you to 11, which is the Number of the
Answers: then five the number remaining, as before, directs you to the same
Figure in that Number, where you find this Answer: You shall have true Friends.

Note also, that if you choose any of the Questions toward the end, you must
(after you have counted all to the bottom) begin at the beginning again. For
Example: Suppose you choose the 49 Question, Who shall overcome in a Duel? and
you touch at 4 in the Figure; you must count as you see the pricks, and there
remain seven: then you turn to the Question before, where you reckon from 49;
and because you can reckon but four of the seven to the bottom, you begin again
at one; so that you find three the number in the Answers, and seven in that
Number, as before, where you have this Answer: They will have no advantage one
of another. And so of the rest.



The TABLE Of QUESTIONS To be Proposed.
1 What success shall a Person have in his Love? 2 Whether the party you
imagine, really loves you? 3 Whether love once separated, shall ever be
reunited. 4 By what means an affection may prove successful. 5 Whether love
will continue, or no? 6 Whether love shall be obtained? 7 Whether a Person
shall have many Friends? 8 From what Persons one may expect kindness and
friendship? 9 Whether he be your real Friend, that you think is so? 10 Wether
you shall Court several Persons? 11 Whether you shall be in favor with
Grandees. 12 Whether you shall be married, or enter into Religious orders, and
so turn Monk or Friar? 13 Whether the Marriage in hand, will be concluded? 14
Of what temper will the Husband prove? 15 Of what humor will the Wife be? 16
What fortune shall a Person have by marriage? 17 Whether the married couple
will have Children? 18 Whether want of Children be the Man's fault or the Woman's
fault? 19 Whether or no a Woman be with Child? 20 Of what she is with Child.
21 Whether she be a Maid or no? 22 Whether a Person win or lose. 23 Whether
you will overthrow your Adversary at Law? 24 At what game a Man will win or
lose. 25 Whether a Man shall gain or lose by merchandising? 26 Whether one
shall recover a debt? 27 Whether the theft shall be discovered? 28 Whether a
Person shall get an Estate? 29 Whether the Secret committed to a Person has
been revealed? 30 Whether one shall have a faithful Servant? 31 Whether news
are true or false? 32 Whether the dream portends good or evil? 33 Of what
reputation a Person is? 34 What the Person, that is absent, thinks of? 35 What
Vices a Person is subject to? 36 What Virtue he excels in? 37 What day will be
lucky or unlucky? 38 What Element will be advantageous or prejudicial to you?
39 What course of life a Person shall lead? 40 Whether the Child shall be short
or long lived. 41 Whether a Man be the true Father of a Child? 42 Whether a
sick Person shall recover or not? 43 Whether a Man shall be in Office or Place?
44 Whether a Person will be prosperous or successless? 45 Whether the change of
ones condition will prove for good? 46 Whether you shall obtain the thing
desired? 47 Whether the year will be barren or fruitful? 48 Whether there shall
be Peace or War? 49 Who shall overcome in a Duel? 50 Whether two Enemies will
be reconciled? 51 Whether a Voyage or journey will prove prosperous. 52 Of what
distemper a Person will die?
The Several Answers to the Questions proposed
Numb. 1.
1 His love will continue till death. 2 Of the small Pox. 3 You will have a
pleasant voyage or journey. 4 That will prove but a counterfeit reconciliation.
5 He that has a good cause shall overcome. 6 There are strong endeavors on
foot to be break the Peace. 7 The year will produce great store of Oil. 8 Some
envious person will cross your desire. 9 This alteration will better your
condition. 10 He will have an unhappy end. 11 He will be in office in his
younger years. 12 Bleeding and purging will be the death of him.
Numb. 2.
1 Thou art entirely beloved. 2 His love will not continue long. 3 Of some
dangerous wound. 4 Thou will make a troublesome journey or voyage. 5 Their
reconciliation will prove their ruin. 6 He that is injured shall be worsted. 7
They endeavor extremely to promote a War. 8 This year Oil will be scarce. 9
Flatter your Confident, and you obtain your desire. 10 This change will impair
your condition. 11 He shall prosper in well-doing. 12 He will be in Office, but
it will be in his declining age.
Numb. 3.
1 They will be more firmly reunited then ever. 2 They have no affection at
all for you. 3 He will prove constant in his Love. 4 Of the Stone. 5 Thy
journey or voyage will prove dangerous. 6 Those that endeavor a reconciliation
manage it not handsomely. 7 They will have no advantage one of another. 8 'Twill
prove a bloody War. 9 This year will not prove very fruitful. 10 All things
cross your desires. 11 This alteration will set you at rest. 12 He will become
miserable by ill-donig.
Numb. 4.
1 You will accomplish your design by dissimulation. 2 They will never be
re-uinted. 3 They love thee for thy beauty. 4 He will be inconstant in his
love. 5 Of the Retention of seed. 6 Thou will run some risque in thy journey or
voyage. 7 Every one will seek his own advantage in this Reconciliation. 8 They
will be both slightly wounded. 9 Those that negotiate the business betray both
parties. 10 This year will not be very barren. 11 All things favor your
wishes. 12 This change will be your destruction.
Numb. 5.
1 That affection will be of long continuance. 2 By a fervent and well-grounded
passion. 3 Their reconcilation will prove cordial. 4 They love you for their
own ends. 5 His love is free and discreet. 6 Of too great an amorous passion. 7
Thou will meet with Thieves. 8 They will never be Friends, unless some great
man interpose. 9 They will both run the hazard of their lives. 10 This Peace
will prove advantageous to us. 11 This year will afford good pastures. 12 The
advice of some Relation obstructs the obtaining of your desire.
Numb. 6.
1 Thou shall accomplish thy design. 2 This affection will soon decay. 3 By
excessive Liberality. 4 Their Reconciliation will not be real. 5 Thou art
entirely beloved. 6 His love is feigned and indiscreet. 7 Of a Pleurisy. 8
Thou will have fair weather in thy journey or voyage. 9 Some secret love will
hinder their reconciliation. 10 The flaxen will disarm the brown-hair'd Man. 11
This Peace will be disadvantageous to us. 12 This year will afford few or no
good pastures.
Numb. 7.
1 Thou will have a good Friend. 2 Thou will never accomplish thy design. 3 A
year will be the outmost date of his love. 4 Through hopes of a Match. 5 Their
love will be more fervent then formerly. 6 Jealousy will destroy their
affection. 7 Of the Plague. 8 You will have bad weather in your journey or
voyage. 9 They will be reconciled in the Passion-week. 10 The brown will wound
the flaxen-hair'd Man. 11 War will be better for us then Peace. 12 This year
will prove fruitful.
Numb. 8.
1 You may expect much from your Father. 2 You will have no true Friends. 3 You
will gain his friendship, but not his love. 4 It will be much, if their love
continue six months. 5 By a sheeps eye, Letters and Caresses. 6 Their
Reconciliation will not last long. 7 There is more Courtship then Love. 8
Jealousy will preserve their affection. 9 Of an Apoplexy. 10 Hasten your
voyage or journey, lest you repent it. 11 A common Enemy will reconcile them.
12 The Challenger will wound the person challenged.
Numb. 9.
1 He is your real Friend. 2 You can expect nothing from your Father. 3 You
will have many Friends. 4 You will neither gain his friendship nor love. 5 The
love of the Lover will be permament. 6 By giving cause of jealousy. 7 They will
agree well for some time. 8 He loves more then you do. 9 Too much caressing
destroys his affection. 10 Of old Age. 11 Delay your journey or voyage for a
time. 12 They will never be such real Friends as formerly.
Numb. 10.
1 One sweetheart will put a period to his desires. 2 He is no real Friend. 3
You may expect much from your Mother. 4 You will never want Friends. 5 You will
obtain the last favor. 6 The Shee-Paramour will continue her affection. 7 By a
sweet violence. 8 They will seemingly agree together, with an tention to
deceive one another. 9 They love you only for your means. 10 His love is
maintained by caressing. 11 He will die by some accident. 12 The waters will
prove contrary to you in your voyage.
Numb. 11.
1 You will obtain his favor. 2 Multiplicity of Friends will take up his
thoughts. 3 His friendship is firm and constant. 4 You can expect nothing from
your Mother. 5 You will have true Friends. 6 You will never gain the last
favor. 7 The love will end in the party loving. 8 By respect and esteem. 9 If
they meet privately, they will agree. 10 Their love extends to many more
besides. 11 A new affection will destroy the old one. 12 He will die a natural
death.
Numb. 12.
1 He will be married without dispute. 2 You will never gain his love. 3 Every
new Moon a new love. 4 His friendship is not to be relied upon. 5 You may
expect much from your Children. 6 You will have pretended Friends. 7 You will
never enjoy her without great difficulty. 8 The female Friend will continue her
love. 9 By a counterfeit coldness. 10 If they discourse together, 'twill be
worse for them. 11 They begin to be weary of your love. 12 The gaining that
persons love, requires much circumspection.
Numb. 13.
1 That marriage will be solemnized. 2 He will never be married. 3 You will
gain her favor by frequent services. 4. So many Looks, so many Loves. 5 He
loves you for his Interest. 6 You can expect nothing from your Children. 7 You
will have Friends that will assist you. 8 You will gain her affection without
much trouble. 9 His love is at an end, and yet he colors it handsomely. 10 By
great confidence. 11 A third person must reconcile them. 12 Too much passion
will destroy your love.
Numb. 14.
1 Your Husband will prove a very honest man. 2 This will never be a Match. 3
This Person will be a Nun. 4 You will win them by flattery. 5 Three Friends,
and one love. 6 He loves without any self ends. 7 You will be assisted by the
friendship and means of your Friends. 8 Your Friends will be over-burthensome
to you. 9 You lose your time, for you will never gain her. 10 Their love
continues, and yet they seem nor to love. 11 By slandring of him upon another
account. 12 They will all lose their labor that endeavor a reconciliation.
Numb. 15.
1 This Wife will be very chaste. 2 Thy Husband will prove a debauched person.
3 The marriage is delayed. 4 This person will not be a Nun. 5 You will never
have them, do what you can. 6 Two affections, during his whole life. 7 He loves
thee better then any other Friend. 8 You will find neither friendship nor
assistance from your relations. 9 You will gain Friends that will acknowledge
your love. 10 You will be caressed, but not really loved. 11 Your love in the
end will prove injurious to you. 12 By the apprehension of an alteration.
Numb. 16.
1 This will prove a very fortunate Match. 2 Your Wife will prove dishonest. 3
Your Husband will love you entirely. 4 Your marriage is crossed by a second
person. 5 He will be speedily married. 6 You will be out of favor. 7 He can
love but for a day. 8 He preferres other Friends before you. 9 You will find
more friendship at the hands of strangers, then of your Nearest relations. 10
Your Friends will prove ungrateful to you. 11 Your care will be sufficiently
rewarded. 12 Your love will end without contention o^ hatred.
Numb. 17.
1 They will have Children. 2 Your marriage will prove unfortunate. 3 Your Wife
will be a good Housewife. 4 Your Husband will not love you at all. 5 The
Irresolution of parents will spoil the Match. 6 It will be long ere he marries.
7 Build not your hope upon the favor of great Men. 8 Two Loves at once. 9 He
has been formerly a closer Friend to you then he is at present. 10 You will
find friendship from those you have obliged. 11 You will have Friends that will
never forsake you. 12 Your hopes are vain; for you will never enjoy her.
Numb. 18.
1 The Husband is Impotent. 2 They will have no Children. 3 Your Husband will
be made a Cuckold. 4 Your Wife will be an ill housewife. 5 Your Husband will
prove a debauched Gamester. 6 A great Estate will break off the Match. 7 This
Woman will be a religious Nun. 8 You spend your time in vain, for you will
never gain her favor. 9 Many Loves at once. 10 He is more your Friend now then
ever. 11 One only Friend will be very helpful to you. 12 Your Friends will
desert you, when you have most need of them.
Numb. 19.
1 This Woman is certainly with Child. 2 This Woman is barren. 3 They will have
none but Boys. 4 This woman will be a Cuck-quean. 5 Your Wife will have a good
report. 6 Your Husband will do his business effectually. 7 Want of Estate
destroys this Match. 8 This Person will not phancie a Religious life. 9 You
will be in favor when you have given over your suit. 10 Too many Friends will
do you an injury. 11 He loves you and confides in you. 12 It will be your
fortune to have many Friends.
Numb. 20.
1 She is with Child of a Boy. 2 This Woman is not with Child. 3 They will
never have Children, because h^ is too active, and she too slow. 4 They will
have none but Girls. 5 They will agree extraordinary well together^ 6 Your Wife
will have a very ill report. 7 Your Husband will always have a Mistress. 8 The
inequality of your conditions will brea^ off the Match. 9 This Person will make
some trial, both of married and religious life. 10 Rely upon the favor of
Grandees. 11 He will hardly be in love as long as he lives. 12 He loves thee,
but confides not in thee.
Numb. 21.
1 She is a Maid, and free from scandal. 2 She is with Child of a Girl. 3
She is with Child, and will be safely delivered. 4 She is too forward, and He
too remiss. 5 Their Children will live. 6 They will always be wrangling. 7 Your
Wife will dote upon you. 8 Your Husband will debauch all your Maydservants. 9
Some vice he is supposed to be guilty of, retards the Match. 10 It will be done
to your Relations, but not to your own satisfaction. 11 The favors you receive
from him will make you envied by others. 12 She will hardly get a true friend,
as long as she lives.
Numb. 22.
1 You will prove a Gainer in all your undertakings. 2 She is no Maid. 3 She
will be brought to bed of a brave Girl. 4 She is with Child, and will hardly
be delivered without going in danger of her life. 5 The heat of his reins makes
him unfruitful. 6 Their Children will not be long-lived. 7 The Husband will
have a Mistress, and the Wife a Gallant. 8 Your Wife will eat you out of house
and home. 9 Your Husband will dote upon you. 10 This Match will be made up by a
faithful friend; in whom you confide. 11 This person will enter into Religious
orders out of spite. 12 You will never be really in favor, but only in
appearance.
Numb. 23.
1 You will overthrow your Adversary at Law. 2 You will be a Loser in all
things. 3 She was a Maid, till twelve years of age. 4 She has had two
Children. 5 This Woman has not been long with Child. 6 The heat of the womb
makes her barren. 7 The first Child she has will be a Boy. 8 They will live
happily together. 9 Your Wife will be very true to your bed. 10 Your Husband
will beat you. 11 This Match will be made up by the mediation of some person or
other. 12 This Person will marry to please his phancie.
Numb. 24
1 You will lose at Dice. 2 You will be overthrown at Law. 3 Your gains will
enrich you. 4 She and her Shee-companion have both lost their Mayden-heads. 5
She will miscarry of a Son. 6 This Woman is farther gone with Child then you
imagine. 7 This Man does not manage his business briskly. 8 The first Child
she has will be a Girl. 9 They will live very uncomfortably together. 10 Your
Wife will be whorish. 11 Your Husband will endeavor as much as in him lies to
please you. 12 The Match will be made up between both parties, without the
assistance of a third person.
Numb. 25.
1 Trade as a Mercer, and you will be a great Gainer. 2 You will win at Dice. 3
You will gain both by principal and interest. 4 Thy Losses will beggar thee. 5
She has deflowered her self. 6 She will miscarry of a Daughter. 7 She
counterfets her self with Child, but is not really so. 8 This Woman is without
life or soul. 9 All the Children begot in marriage will prove the Husbands. 10
They will grow rich. 11 Thy Wife will have Gallants. 12 Thy Husband will always
contradict thee.
Numb. 26.
1 Thou will be paid all thy debts. 2 Thou will prove a loser, if thou dealest
in silks. 3 Thou will win at Whisk. 4 Thou will gain by the principal, but not
by the interest. 5 Thou will have great losses by War. 6 She is a Maid, but no
Virgin. 7 She is with Child of a Son begot by her Gallant. 8 This Woman is
with Child, and will miscarry. 9 This Man was weakened before he was married. 10
All the Children, begot in marriage, will not be the Husbands. 11 They will
spend all they have. 12 Thy Wife will prove a little whorish, yet she will manage
her business with discretion.
Numb. 27.
1 The Theft will de discovered. 2 The Debtor will never pay thee. 3 Thou will
prosper by trading to Sea. 4 Playing at Whisk will undo thee. 5 You will be
overthrown, but have your charges borne. 6 You will receive great losses at
Sea. 7 She lost her Mayden-head. 8 She is with Child of a Daughter begot by
her Gallant. 9 This Woman is big with nothing but a mole, or imperfect birth.
10 This Woman, when a Maid, made use of physic. 11 They will have but one
Child that will live. 12 They will be forced to part.
Numb. 28.
1 You will inherit a plentiful Estate. 2 It will be long ere the theft be
discovered. 3 You will lose all the profit that should accrue to you by that
debt. 4 Trading by Sea will be disadvantageous for you. 5 You will win at
Tick-tack. 6 You will be overthrown, and forced to pay Costs. 7 You will gain
by Horseflesh. 8 I question her being a Maid, and have reason for it. 9 She is
with Child of a Son that will prove vicious. 10 This Woman will be brought to
bed of a Tympany. 11 The Husband is of too cold a constitution. 12 They will
have many Children living.
Numb. 29.
1 This Person has dislos'd your secret. 2 You will never enjoy any
Inheritance. 3 The Theft will never be discovered, 4 You will never gain any
thing but by Law. 5 You will gain by trading in Corn and Wine. 6 You will lose
at Tick-tack, 7 You will be dismissed the Court of your suit, your charges born.
8 You will lose by Horseflesh. 9 She has mischief in her heart. 10 She is
with Child of a Daughter that will prove excellent company. 11 This Woman will
soon be with Child. 12 This Woman is of too hot a temper.
Numb. 30.
1 You will have true and faithful Servants. 2 This Person will never reveal
your secrets. 3 Be submissive to him, and you will enjoy his Estate. 4 Promise
a reward, and you will have what you lost. 5 You run a great hazard of being
made a bankrupt. 6 You will be a loser by trading in corn and wine 7 You will
win at Cribbidge. 8 Your Sentence will be conclusive and advantageous. 9
Trading in horned beasts will prove gainful to you. 10 If she be a Maid, it is
against her will. 11 She is with Child of a Son, that will be a grief to her.
12 This Woman will never be with Child by her Husband.
Numb. 31.
1 The News that is current abroad is true. 2 You will never have any service
from him worth speaking of. 3 She returned no answer, though desired. 4 Be as
submissive as you can, he will never make you his Heir. 5 This Theft was done
but in jest. 6 If you be not careful, you will not find wherewithal to pay your
debts. 7 Traffic by Sea. 8 You will lose at Cribbidge. 9 You will have the
Decretal order of the Court. 10 You will lose by trading in horned beasts. 11
Her Mayden-head is more trouble some to her then her Gown. 12 She is with
Child of a Daughter, that will bring her to shame.
Numb. 32.
1 This Dream presageth nothing but good. 2 The News abroad is false. 3 He is
not fit for your service. 4 This Shee-confident is corrupted by gifts. 5 Your
Brother will deprive you of that Inheritance. 6 He that robbed you, is your
domestic servant. 7 A former Creditor will make you lose your debt. 8 Trade
not to Sea. 9 You will win at Tennis, and Pel-mel. 10 You will have an order of
Court that will be troublesome to execute. 11 You will be a great gainer by
suits at Law. 12 It itch'd, she scratched it, and so lost her Mayden-head.
Numb. 33.
1 It is very probable he will prove honest. 2 This Dream brings no good with
it. 3 The News is partly true. 4 He will be an affectionate Servant. 5 Your
secret is discovered, look to your self. 6 Your Sister will deprive you of that
Estate. 7 Threaten hard, and you will find what you lost. 8 Your debt will be
but half-paid. 9 Dealing as a Lapidarie will prove to your advantage. 10 You
will lose at Tennis, and Pel-mel. 11 You will get an order of Court, but there
will be an Arrest of Judgment. 12 You will be a great Loser by suits at Law.
Numb. 34.
1 Her thoughts are wholly taken up with Love-toys. 2 He is reputed a wicked
Man. 3 This Dream will prove true. 4 The News is partly false. 5 His Service is
more pleasing then profitable. 6 They made him confess more then was desired. 7
One of your Relations will deprive you of that Estate. 8 Shame keeps back the
Thief. 9 You will only be frustrated in your expectation. 10 Trading as a
Lapidarie will undo you. 11 You will win at Gleek. 12 You will be overthrown at
Law, and amerced.
Numb. 35.
1 She is addicted to drunkenness, 2 She studies to deceive some person or
other. 3 He is looked upon as a stout Man. 4 This Dream is but a fable. 5 The
truth is quite contrary to report. 6 His service is not free. 7 Your secret is
ready to be disclosed, if you look not to it. 8 You will lose this Estate by
your folly. 9 The Thief is fled. 10 You most satisfy your self with goods for
that debt. 11 You will grow rich by procuring. 12 You will lose at Gleek.
Numb. 36.
1 She is very discreet. 2 She is apt to be moved to anger. 3 She thinks of
merry-making. 4 He is looked upon as a Fool. 5 This Dream must be interpreted
in the best sense. 6 This news is reported with design. 7 He will continue
your Servant a long time. 8 Cajole your Confident, or he will discover all. 9
Bestow somewhat of yours upon him, and you will enjoy what is his. 10 The Thief
is a Person of quality. 11 If you had not good security, you would lose all. 12
Love will prove your ruin.
Numb. 37.
1 Monday will be a lucky day to him. 2 She is Leacherous. 3 She is very
chaste. 4 See studies how to be revenged. 5 He is held one of the most subtle
Men of the age. 6 This Dream must be interpreted quite contrary. 7 There is
something of truth in it. 8 He will never continue long in your service. 9
Threaten her, or she will reveal your secret. 10 Caresse her, and you will
inherit her Estate. 11 A whole Jubilee will not discover the Thief. 12 Pay your
self with what they profer you.
Numb. 38.
1 The Cause will go for you. 2 You will prove a Loser in all your Dealings. 3
She was a Maid, till twelve years of age. 4 She has had two Children. 5 This
Woman has not long been gone with Child. 6 The heat of her womb makes her
barren. 7 The first Child she has will be a male. 8 They will live very
contentedly together. 9 Your Wife will be very chaste. 10 Your Husband will
beat you. 11 This Match will be made up by the mediation of some person. 12
This Woman will marry to please her own phancie.
Numb. 39.
1 She will spend her days in pleasure. 2 Fire will prove very in injurious to
him. 3 Tuesday will be a prosperous day to him. 4 She is very charitable. 5
She is apt to scandalize persons. 6 She thinks to hook in an Estate. 7 He is
taken to be a careless person. 8 This Dream foretells some great mischief. 9 In
few days you will better understand the business. 10 He will be a careful
Servant, but not to be trusted. 11 He seems to oppose, but see that he do not
fall quite off at last. 12 If you are present at his death, without boubt you
will be his Heir.
Numb. 40.
1 This Child will be long-lived. 2 His life will be full of afflictions. 3 The
water will be always favorable to him. 4 Tuesday will ever be an unlucky day to
him. 5 She is a very understanding Woman. 6 She is extraordinary
vainglorious. 7 She thinks of marrying. 8 He is judged to be a Person that
will be disturbed at a small matter. 9 This Dream threatens your person. 10
These matters are disguised by those that relate them. 11 He will prove a bad
Servant, and will steal from you. 12 She has spoiled all by her tattle,
thinking to conceal it.
Numb. 41.
1 This Child is the Mothers Husbands. 2 This Child will be short-lived. 3 His
life will be full of afflictions. 4 He will run some risque by water. 5 Tuesday
will be a fortunate day to him. 6 She is a Woman of great equity. 7 She is
very jealous. 8 She thinks of making love. 9 This Person is looked upon as a
Cheat. 10 This Dream threatens some Friends of yours. 11 These things are
divulged to surprise persons. 12 This domestique Servant is a mere spy in a
family.
Numb. 42.
1 The party that is sick will recover. 2 This Child is not the Mothers
Husbands. 3 This Child will die in the Cradle. 4 He will lead a very voluptuous
life. 5 The air will never injure him. 6 Wednesday will be an unfortunate day
to him. 7 She is of a sweet and affable disposition. 8 She is very envious. 9
She thinks of nothing. 10 This Man is judged a very knowing person. 11 This
Dream relates to your Estate. 12 You must make as if you believed it, but
nothing will come on it.
Numb. 43.
1 He will succeed his Father in his Offices. 2 The party that is sick will not
recover. 3 This Child is legitimate. 4 This Child will not outlive his
Childhood. 5 His life will be crossed with a thousand discontents. 6 The air is
his most potent Enemy. 7 Thursday will be a prosperous day to him. 8 She
excels in humility. 9 She is very idle. 10 She thinks of performing some
exploit. 11 This person is taken for a very rational Man. 12 This Dream has
diverted you from changing your design.
Numb. 44.
1 He will be very fortunate. 2 He will not succeed his Father in his Offices.
3 He will recover, yet be always sickly. 4 This Child is a Bastard. 5 This
Child will bury both Father and Mother. 6 His life will be very happy. 7 He
will get an Estate by the increase of his Land. 8 Thursday will be an
unprosperous day to him. 9 She excels in fidelity. 10 She is a very
troublesome person. 11 She is studying how to answer a Letter. 12 This Person
is held a good Companion.
Numb. 54.
1 This change will be honorable. 2 He will be very unfortunate. 3 He will have
good Offices. 4 He will recover, but die of a Relapse. 5 This Child is very
suspicious. 6 This Child will not outlive the Father. 7 He will lead a very
contentious life. 8 The Earth will be unfruitful, notwithstanding his
Husbandry. 9 Friday will be a happy day to him. 10 She is a real friend. 11
She is a Thief. 12 She is intent upon her devotion.
Numb. 46.
1 Your desire will be fully accomplished. 2 This alteration will be shameful
to you. 3 He will be fortunate in the Enjoyment of wealth. 4 He will never have
any Office or Charge. 5 The party that is distempered will recover sooner then
is imagined. 6 This Child has many Fathers. 7 This Child will be overlaid by
his Nurse. 8 His life will be very peaceable. 9 He is in danger of burning. 10
Friday will be an unfortunate day to him. 11 She excels in solidity of
judgment. 12 She has her Religion to chose.
Numb. 47.
1 This year will prove very fruitful in all things. 2 You will never obtain
your desire. 3 This alteration will be advantageous to you. 4 Poverty will make
you miserable. 5 He will discharge himself well of his Offices. 6 This Person
that is sick will not recover so soon as is imagined. 7 The Mother knows very
well whose Child this is. 8 This Child will outlive all his Brothers and
Sisters. 9 He will spend his life in litigious suits at Law. 10 The winds will
be mischievous to him. 11 Saturday will be a successful day to him. 12 She is
accomplished with all manner of perfection.
Numb. 48.
1 This Peace will continue. 2 This will prove a very barren year. 3 If you be
industrious, you will obtain your desire. 4 This change will be disadvantageous
to you. 5 He will be fortunate in his Charges and Offices. 6 He will not
discharge himself well of his Offices. 7 This sick person will die, because his
disease is not known. 8 This Child has a better Father then his Mothers
Husband. 9 This Child will go near to die of worms. 10 She will live with her
own relations. 11 He runs the hazard of drowning. 12 Saturday will be an
unsuccessful day to him.
Numb. 49.
1 The great Man will overcome the little one. 2 This peace will not continue
long. 3 This year will be fruitful in Corn and Wine. 4 Desist from your
design; for 't is to no purpose. 5 This will be a profitable change to you. 6
He will have no success with his Charges and Offices. 7 Your Offices will be
very helpful to you. 8 The party diseased will recover, if his distemper be
known. 9 This is Fathers own Son, whatever the world thinks to the contrary. 10
This Child will die of Convulsion-fits. 11 She will lead her life among
strangers. 12 You must have a care of being hurt by a stone.
Numb. 50.
1 These two Enemies will at last be reconciled. 2 The little Man will beat the
great one. 3 This year will not end without War. 4 This will be a scarce year
for Corn and Wine. 5 You will obtain your desire in part. 6 This alteration
will prove disadvantageous to you. 7 He will prosper in the beginning of his
life. 8 His Charge will undo his family. 9 Multiplicity of Medicines will kill
him. 10 His Mothers Husband did not beget him. 11 This Child will live till all
his friends are weary of him. 12 She will never be perfectly in health.
Numb. 51.
1 Your journey or voyage will be prosperous. 2 These two Enemies will never be
reconciled. 3 The young Man will get advantage of the old one. 4 This will
prove a quiet year. 5 This year will produce store of fruits. 6 Your desires
and expectations will be frustrated. 7 This alteration will be shameful to you.
8 He will make an happy end. 9 He will have Offices conferred upon him by way of
gratification. 10 Abstinence will cure him. 11 This Child will not be known but
by means of a Jubilee. 12 This Child will be in danger of death at seven years
of age.
Numb. 52.
1 Of a continued feavor. 2 Your journey or voyage will be unsuccessful. 3
Their reconciliation will not continue long. 4 The old Man will get advantage
of the young one. 5. This peace is not very well settled. 6 This year will be
barren in fruit. 7 You will accomplish your desires, notwithstanding the
obstructions you meet with. 8 This change will make thee disesteem'd. 9 The
beginning of his life will be unhappy. 10 He will purchase Places with money. 11
Bleeding and purging will cure him. 12 This Child's Mother says he is her
Husbands and we must believe it.
A TREATISE Of NOCTURNAL DREAMS and VISIONS, With their Interpretations,
According to the Doctrine of the Ancients.

Published in French By Marck de Vulson Sieur de la Colombiere, and Knight of
the Order of S. Michael; AND Translated into English By J. G. of the Inner
Temple, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook. 1669.

A TREATISE OF Nocturnal Dreams and Visions, AND Of their SIGNIFICATIONS,
According To the Opinion of the Ancients.
DReams and Visions are infused into men for their advantage and instruction.
Wherefore God promises in the sacred Pages, that he will pour out his Spirit
upon all flesh, Joel c. 2.
that their sons and daughters shall prophecy: The old men dream dreams, Act.
c. 2.
and the young men see visions. And both sacred and profane Histories are so
fully furnished with variety of examples concerning the true event of many
Dreams, that it would argue incredulity and ignorance in natural causes, not at
all to credit them. Hippocrates is of opinion, that whilst the body sleeps, the
spirit is awake, and transported unto all places where the body could have
access; and that it sees and knows all things which the body could know and see
when awake, and touches all that it could touch: In short, that it has all
the operations that the body, now asleep, can be capable of when awake.

There are five sorts of Dreams, that have different names according to their
different qualities. The first is a Dream: The second a Vision: The third an
Oracle: The fourth a Fantasy, or vain imagination: The fifth an Apparition.

That is called a Dream, which discovers the truth under a hidden Figure; as
when Joseph interpreted Pharaoh's Dream of the seven lean King that should
devour the seven fat ones; and the same of the ears of Corn, etc.

A Vision is no other then this; when a man really sees awake, that he did
asleep; as it happened to Vespatian, when he saw the Surgeon that drew out
Nero's tooth.

An Oracle is a revelation or advertisement made to us in our sleep, by some
Angel or other Saint, to perform Gods Will according to their information; as
it happened to Joseph the Husband of the holy Virgin, and the three Magi.

The Fantasy or vain imagination happens in that instant when the affections
are so vehement, that they ascend up to the brain, during our sleep, and meet
with the more watchful spirit: then what the thoughts are employed about in the
day, we fancy in the night; so an Inamorato, who in the daytime thinks on his
Mistress, in the night, when asleep, he meets with the same thoughts: -- Nam
men's humana quod optat
Dum vigilat, sperans, per somnum cernit id ipsum.
Cato.
So when a person thinks to meet with any thing, oftentimes it falls out, that
in the nightime he Dreams he has met it. It happens also that he that fasts
all day dreams at night that he is feeding; if he had any thirst in the
daytime, in the night he dreams of drinking, and is very much delighted with
it. And the Miser and Usurer dreams of Bags, nay, will discourse of them in his
sleep.

An Apparition by the Greeks called (...), a Phantasm, and is no other then a
Nocturnal Vision that presents it self to weak Infants and ancient men, who
fancy they see Chimaera's approaching to intimidate or offend them.

Of these five sorts of Dreams, the three former have some appearance of truth,
but the two last are altogether fallacious.

Yet you must observe this of all the Dreams, that those that leave no
impression upon the memory are insignificant: and those which we remember, must
be, if good and true, about daybreak, or at the least after midnight; for till
then all the senses and faculties of the body are busied about digestion; and
the spirit being disturbed by the vapors that arise from the meat, and seat
themselves in the brain, the Dreams are to little or no purpose. Yet
Artemidorus affirms, that he that is sober and undisturbed, may dream at all
times, even in the day, and there may be a certain event of them.

Some Authors make a threefold division of Dreams, viz. into Dreams of Natural,
Animal, and Celestial things. Natural things are those by which Physicians
judge of the humors; dreams of things Animal, are such as owe their being to
the passion and the trouble that the spirit was infested with in the daytime;
and the Celestial are advertisements of things that are Divine; as that of the
Statue which the King of Babylon imagined he saw in his sleep, which is so
accurately portraicted by the Prophet Daniel.

There are but few that have the gift of tru^^ Dreams; and they fewer, that
understand their interpretation, there being much to be observed tha^ is not
vulgarly understood. There are two principa^ kinds of Dreams, viz. Speculative
or Contemplative, which require our consideration, because their event is every
way agreeable to the Dream^ as we read it happened to a Prisoner in the little
The name of a Prison in Paris.
Chastelet at Paris, who dreamt that whilst the^ were putting the halter about
his neck to hang him, that he saw an unknown person that came to his rescue
with a sword, and took off th^^ rope; which the next day happened accordingly:
for the Judge having pronounced sentence of death, and committed him to the
Executioner; he was rescued by some persons that came incognito, employed by
his friends to that purpose.

The second is Allegorical, or significative, because it happens not according
to the Dream, but by a riddle; as when we dream of seeing an Angel, that
signifies revelation, or good news; to see a Serpent that endeavors to do
mischief, signifies envy, and tribulation from envious persons.

Speculative Dreams have an immediate event, but the Allegorical not so soon;
for there is a days time or two, between a Dream, and the Event thereof, so
that sometimes a man may deceive himself in this, viz. whether he must attend
the success according to the Dream, or judge it will fall out contrarily; which
is understood only by learned and prudent Interpreters. Sometimes there are
monstrous Dreams, which ought not to be listed in the number of those that are
speculative; they are such as cannot possibly happen, as when you Dream that
you fly, have horns, go down into hell, these are of the nature of those that
are Allegorical, which carry a different signification.

Dreams are proportioned according to the condition of the party Dreaming: Thus
those of Eminent persons, be they good or bad, will be great, viz. if good,
they signify great benefit; and on the contrary, great misery. If the Party
that Dreams be of a mean condition, the Dreams with their events will be means
also; if poor, their Dreams will be very inconsiderable: for the Rules of
Dreaming are not general, and cannot satisfy all persons one way; but sometimes
according to times and persons, they admit of various interpretations.

They that Dream of acquainting a second person with business that belongs not
to their profession or trade, that happens to themselves; but when they seem to
give any advice touching their own trade or profession, that happens to others;
and he that Dreams he practices what he heard, that is an extraordinary good
sign, and he will prosper in his trade or profession. A Grecian Physician
Dreaming that he did advise another not to marry a wife that was a Roman, it
happened that this Physician espoused a Roman Dame, that brought him much
trouble. Heraclides the Tragoedian being at Rome prepared for a disputation
about the Art of Tragoediography, Dreamed in the night, that he was to maintain
a dispute with the Tragoedians and Judges; and yet notwithstanding on the
morrow he was overcome in the dispute.

Sometimes our Dreams have a true event, though diametrically opposite to our
hope and desire. Amilcar the Carthaginian General, besieging a Town in Sicily,
dreamed he heard a voice, that assured him he should sup in the Town to morrow;
which wrought upon him so effectually, that he did hope and believe he should
take it that day; and to that end having given order to his Soldiers for a
general assault, a dissension arose among the variety of nations that made up
the composition of his Army, so that the Town taking advantage of this
opportunity, sallied out, and attaquing that place where Amilcar then was, took
him Prisoner, and conducted him to supper in their Town; and so his hope was
frustrated, but not the Dream.

The Valiant and Resolute, as also the learned understanding persons in the
affairs of this world, whose spirits are distracted neither with hope or fear,
are not so inclinable to Dreams and Fantasies, as the timorous, ignorant, and
those of the vulgar, who fancy nothing all night but what took up their
thoughts in the daytime.

Now it is convenient to produce examples of all sorts of Dreams that have a
true event. The first sort is called a Dream.

Joseph the Son of Jacob Dreamed that his Brothers sheaves made obeisance to
those he had made: and again he had another Dream; The Sun, Moon and eleven
Stars seemed to worship him; which was true; For being by God's grace and
favor established Governor of all Egypt, He furnished his Brethren with corn
for their sustenance, during the famine, together with his Father and Mother;
and after his discovery of himself, he bestowed on them great possessions, and
gave them the Land of Goshen to dwell in. King Pharaoh's Butler, being
imprisoned, Dreamed in the night, that he saw a vine with three branches that
flourished by degrees, and after it had blossomed the ripe grapes appeared, and
he seemed to have the King's Cup in his hand, and that he pressed the grapes,
and strained out the wine, which overflowed the Cup he presented to the King.
Joseph interpreted this Dream, and said that the three branches were the three
days that the Butler was still to remain a Prisoner; which time expired, King
Pharaoh would be mindful of him, and reestablish him in his Office to serve him
as before: which had a true event.

The King's Baker, Genesis 40.
who was a Prisoner at the same time, Dreamed that he carried three Baskets of
meal upon his head, and that in the uppermost there were all sorts of Viands
that could be praepar'd by the Baker's art, and that the birds eat of it.
Joseph in like manner interpreted this Dream, and said, that the three Baskets
signified three days, at the end whereof King Pharaoh would cause this poor
Baker to be hanged: which had an event suitable to the praediction.

The same King Pharaoh Dreamed that he was standing near a River out of which
there came seven well-favour'd and fat Kine, which were devoured by seven
other meagre and ill-favored to the sight. The same night he Dreamed also and
Phancied that he saw seven full ears of corn which were swallowed up by seven
other dr^^ and withered ears. Joseph interpreted it thus that the seven fat
Kine, Genesis 41.
and the full ears of corn signified seven years plenty in the Kingdom of
Egypt; and the seven meagre Kine and ill-favored ears of corn did denote
seven years of deart and famine, during which time they should consume all
that was gathered up in the seave^ years of plenty. Which fell out so,
according t^ the explication.

These four Examples will be sufficient concerning Dreams that are made under
hidden figures, the truth whereof is manifestly apparent being explained by
art, or divine inspiration.

The second sort, known by the name of (...) Vision, happens frequently. We
read that Vespasian being with the Emperor Nero in the Island o^ Achaia, saw in
a Dream an unknown person who acquainted him that his good fortun^ should
commence, when Nero should have (...) tooth drawn. The first person he met
after h^ was awake, coming out of his Chamber, was (...) Surgeon, that told
him he came just at tha^ time from drawing one of Nero's teeth: shortly after
Nero died, and Galba also; and so consequently Vespasian, having made his
advantage of the dissension between Otho and Vitellius, was created the
succeeding Emperor.

Emionides the Poet, having interred a dread corpse, which he found on the
Seashore; the night after he Dreamed that that same body appeared to him, and
advised him not to venture to Sea; which engaged him to remain on the shore; and
his Associates setting sail in order to a Voyage, unfortunately perished by a
Tempest.

Septimus Severus Phancied that he saw the Emperor Pertinax break his neck by a
fall, and that his horse made toward him, whereon he mounted; which fell out
truly; Severus being chosen Emperor in his place.

Jacob the Patriarch had a Vision in a Dream, of a Ladder, which placed on the
earth, Genesis 28.
the top thereof reached to Heaven, and the Angels did ascend and descend; and
the Lord leaning on the Ladder, promised Jacob and his posterity the place
whereon he slept, and that all the families of the earth should be blessed in
his seed: which happened according to his Vision.

The Emperor Constantine leading the Army which he had raised against
Maxentius, saw in a Dream, a beaming and resplendent Cross, and heard a voice,
which told him, that in that sign he should overcome his Enemies; so that he
caused a Cross adorned with gold and precious stones to be carried on the day
of the battle, and committed the custody of it to the valiantest in his Army;
and under these h^ppy pressages, he totally defeated the Army of Maxentius, who
was killed upon the place.

The third sort of Dreams is called an Oracle; as that which happened to Joseph
the Husband of of the most holy Virgin, who being with child, was divinely
advertised by an Angel, to conduct the Virgin Mary, St. Math. chapter 1.
and her Son Jesus, into Egypt, with all possible diligence, that they might
avoid the cruelty of Herod, who destroyed all the young Children.

The three Magi or Sages of the East, St. Math. chapter 2.
after they had worshipped our Savior Jesus Christ in the Manger, the Angel
appeared to them in a Dream, and acquainted them that they must steer some
other course in their return, and avoid passing by the place where Herod
resided.

As to the Fantasies and Apparitions, a thousand examples may he produced; we
shall all over this Treatise treat very amply both of the one and the other.
And because we endeavor a methodical relation, we will first discourse of
those Dreams that are of things natural, which owe their original to the humors
that are analogous to the four Elements; afterward we shall mention Dreams of
things animal, and consequently of the Celestial.

Of the FIRE.
WHen a man Dreams he sees Fire, that signifies the issue of his choler; and
ordinarily they that Dream of Fire, are active, choleric, and furious. A Man
that Dreams he is burnt by Fire, that prognosticates a violent Fever.

He that Dreams he sees a moderate Fire in his chimney, without smoke, or the
crackling of sparks, it signifies that he which Dreamed is in perfect health,
and that his inclination swayes him to that which is good and rational;
sometimes also it signifies riches: some are of opinion that it denotes a
feast, or rejoicing among relations and friends.

On the contrary, when one Dreams that he sees a great sparkling Fire with much
smoke, that signifies anger, debates, or some bad news, which he that Dreams
will soon be sensible of.

When one Dreams of seeing a Fire extinguished, that signifies indigence,
necessity, ill fortune, and want of money: and if any distempered person Dreams
that the Fire is put out, that praesageth his death.

When one Dreams that he sees a clear, shining, lighted candle upon a table or
cabinet, that is a good sign to the Sick, it denotes recovery and health: and
if he that Dreams be unmarried, it signifies that he will speedily marry, that
he will have success, and prosper in his undertakings, and that he will gain
credit: the same interpretation may be made of a Lanthorn or flaming Torch.

He that Dreams he sees a Candle, Lanthorns or Torch extinguished or darkened;
that signifies unto him sadness, sickness and poverty.

He that Dreams he is in a Ship, and sees a clear light afar off, shall be
assured of a fai^ wind, shall receive no damage by tempests, and shall arrive
happily at the Haven.

When one Dreams in the night, that he holds a burning Light or Torch in his
hand, it is a good sign, and chiefly to those that are young; for it signifies
that they shall enjoy their loves, accomplish their designs, overcome their
Enemies and gain honor and good will from all persons.

To Dream you see a burning Light in the hands of another, signifies that the
mischief don^^ will be discovered, and the party punished, and that there will
be no possibility of excusing o^ concealing it. When the light is extinguished
it signifies the contrary.

When one Dreams that he sees one or more houses burning with a clear pure Fire
that is not violent, nor sparkling, and that those house^ are neither consumed
nor destroyed; that signifies to the necessitous, goods, riches, and
Inheritances; to the rich it praesageth honors, charges and dignity: But if you
spy them burning with a smoaky violent or sparkling Fire, and that they seem
to fall and be consumed; that denotes the contrary, viz. adversity, trouble,
Lawsuits, shame, misfortune and death to the Dreamer. Queen Hecuba, wife to
King Priam, being with child of her Son Paris, Dreamed that she went with a
burning Torch, that would consume the City or Troy; which was a prognostic of
the ruin of her Empire; of her own, and the death of all her relations.

When a man Dreams that his bed is on Fire, and that he perishes; that
signifies damage, sickness or death to his wife; and if the wife Dreams it,
the same may happen to her Husband.

When one Dreams that he sees Tapestry or other movables of a Hall burning,
and that they are comsum'd; that prognosticates damage or death to the Master
of the House.

When one phancies in a Dream that he sees the Cabinet or Cupboard that belongs
to the Mistress if the House burning, that signifies sickness or death to her.

If one Dreams that the Kitchen is one Fire, that denotes death to the Cook,
the men or maidservants, or one of them.

When a man believes the shop is on Fire, and that it is consumed by the Fire,
that signifies loss of Goods and Possessions.

If one Dreams, that he sees the out-windows of the forepart of the house
burning, and that they are consumed, that signifies the death of Brethren; if
they are those of the back-part, it is the death of Sisters, or of one of them.

When one Dreams that the Gates burn and are consumed, that signifies death to
the Mistress of the House, and sometimes to him that Dreams.

If one believes he sees the Bed-posts on Fire without being consumed, that
signifies good fortune to the male-Children, as Euripides the Philosopher
testifies.

To see the top of the House on Fire, and consumed, denotes loss of Goods,
Lawsuits, o^ the Master of the house his Friends.

If one Dreams that he kindles a Fire, and that it burns immediately without
trouble, or a candle or Torch, that signifies that the Children begotten will
be fortunate, and honor their Mother.

If a Woman Dreams that she kindles or lights the Fire, it is a sign she is
with child, and that she will be safely delivered of a fortunate child,
whether it be a Boy or a Girl.

When one Dreams of kindling a Fire with much ado, and that it extinguisheth
presently, it denotes damage and dishonor to the wife, and he that Dreams, who
often proves the cause of it.

He that Dreams he sees a Castle quite burned down and consumed, it signifies
damage, sickness or death to the Master thereof: and he tha^ Dreams a City is
on Fire and consumed, that denotes famine, war or pestilence to the said City.

He that Dreams he sees a man publicly burned, it signifies loss in
merchandising o^ sickness.

He that Dreams he sees his clothes burned and consumed, it signifies
vexation, injury, reproach, overthrowing at Law, and loss of friends.

He that Dreams he sees a stack of corn burned and consumed, it signifies
famine and mortality but if it consumes not, it denotes fertility and great
riches to him that Dreams.

He that Dreams he sees himself burning in the Fire, and suffers pain thereby,
it signifies envy, displeasure, choler, and debates. He that Dreams he holds a
Torch made of straw, and carries it in public, it signifies joy, honor, and
the safe management of Affairs.

He that Dreams he burns his finger, it signifies envy and sin.

Of the AIR.
THey that Dream they see the Air clear and serene, shall be beloved and
esteem' by all persons; and those that are their enemies, and envy them, shall
be reconciled into them.

According to the observation of Physicians; they judge the person to be
sanguine and full of blood, that is accustomed to Dream of the Air. Some
eniment Authors affirm, that to Dream of seeing the Air clear and free from
clouds, it signifies that the theft or thing lost shall be discovered, and that
one shall overcome his Enemies; that he shall overthrow at Law, be respected
and esteemed by all, and that he shall make a successful voyage or journey, if
he be upon any such design: in brief, all good things are denoted by a clear
and serene Air.

But on the contrary, if one Dreams that the Airs is cloudy, dark and troubled,
that signifies sadness, sickness, melancholy, and obstruction of business: in
short, such a Dream signifies the contrary of what is before signified by a
pure and clear Air.

When one Dreams he is in a calm Air, that signifies that his life and manners
shall be good, peaceable, and acceptable to all company; and that the
businesses and voyages or journies he undertakes shall succeed according to his
desire.

If one Dreams he sees a soft shower, without storm, tempest, or great winds,
that signifies to Laborers gain and profit; and quite contrary, to Merchants
it denotes obstruction, loss and spoil of their Merchandises; and the same to
Artisans and Mechanics.

Dreams of great and long continuing rain, hail, tempests, and thunder,
signify afflictions, troubles, dangers, losses and peril: to the poorer sort,
they signify repose; for during the storm they are shut up, and at rest.

When one Dreams of Ice and Snow in winter, that has no signification; for
the spirit represents to the memory the cold of the praeceding day; but if it
be in another season, that denotes a good Harvest to Husbandmen, and that the
earth will abound in all things: To Merchants and other men of employment, it
signifies hindrance in their negotiations and voyages; and to soldiers, that
their designs will be frustrated.

To Dream of hail, signifies sorrow and trouble, Yet it signifies also, that
the most hidden secrets shall be revealed and made known.

To Dream you see a thunderbolt fall near you without a tempest, signifies that
he that Dreams shall be constrained to fly, or quit his country, and dwell
elsewhere; and this is understood particularly of Grandees. If one Dreams that
thunder falls upon his head, or on the houses, that signifies loss of life and
Goods.

Of the Celestial Fire.
TO Dream one sees a moderate, pure and shining Fire in the Heavens, signifies
the menaces of some Prince or great Lord.

To Dream one sees a great Fire in the Heavens, signifies an assault by
Enemies, poverty, desolation and famine; and on what part soever the Fire falls
from Heaven, that denotes that the evil or Enemies will proceed from thence;
and if we Dream that the said Fire flies and descends on all parts, that is
still worse.

To Dream you see burning Lights or Torches, branches and trees on Fire,
descending from Heaven, it signifies Wars, Quarrelling, Sterility, as also
danger to him that Dreams, that he shall be violently hurt in the head, that he
shall be beheaded, or have his brains beaten out by a fortuitous chance, or
some strange accident.

Of the WATER.
THey that Dream they frequently see others, or do often dip themselves in the
Water, according to the Naturalists, are of a phlegmatic constitution, and
subject to defluxions and catarrhes.

To dream that you see River-water clear and calm, praesageth good to all
persons, and principally to Travelers, Lawyers and Judges.

To Dream one sees River-water troubled, signifies that one shall be threatened
by some great Lord, or out of his Masters favor; and that Lawyers shall be in
great trouble, and subject to censure.

To Dream of being in an impetuous River, and not to escape, signifies danger
to the person of him that Dreams, sickness caused by defluxions, and delatory
Lawsuits.

To Dream of swimming in a great River, signifies future peril and danger.

To Dream you see a clear River run by your Chamber, praesageth the arrival of
some rich and liberal person, who will advantage the Dreamers; but if the Water
be troubled, and that it seemed to spoil the movables of the Chamber, then
that signifies to those of the family violence, quarrels, and disorder
occasioned by Enemies.

A rich man that Dreams he sees a rivulet of clear Water run by his house, will
be suddenly chosen into some charge or office, in which he shall receive honor,
joy and profit, and will prove a refuge and Asylum to the oppressed.

To Dream you see a rivulet that is troubled, signifies loss and damage by
Fire, Lawsuits and Enemies.

It is a good sign to dream you see a Pit full of fair Water in a field where
there is none at all; for he that Dreams will be a thriving man, and suddenly
married, if he be not so already, and will have good and obedient Children.

To Dream you see a Pit whose Water overflowes the banks, that praedicts loss
of substance, the death of Wife and Children; and if the Wife have the same
Dream, that denotes her death, or the loss of her substance.

To Dream that you see a little Pond, signifies that you will enjoy the love of
a beautiful woman; and the same if a woman Dreams it; she shall have her
desires accomplished.

To Dream that you are in Boat upon a River, Lake or Pond of clear Water, that
is very good, and signifies joy, prosperity and success in affairs.

If a sick Person Dreams that he sees a River or Fountain of clear running
Water, that praesageth his recovery; but if the water be troubled and muddy, it
signifies the contrary.

If a young Man Dreams he draws Water out of a clear Well, that signifies he
will be speedily married to a fair Maid, that will bring him a portion; if the
Water be troubled, he will be disturbed by her, and suddenly fall sick.

If he seems to give others clear Well-water to drink; by this Mayd's means he
will enrich, or afflict them, if the Water be troubled.

If any one thinks that his River, Pond or Fountain is dried up, that signifies
poverty; or death.

If any one Dreams that he sees Water flow from a place where there is no
possibility it should come, that signifies care; torment and affliction. If he
imagine that he has taken up some of that Water, the mischief will be of a
longer continuance, according to the quantity he has drawn; if it seems to him
that it is dried up and gone, the misfortune will also be at an end.

He that Dreams he drinks warm Water, is in danger of receiving praejudice by
an offended Enemy, and the party will be afflicted more or less according to
the degree of the heat of the Water; for as fresh Water is a good, so hot or
boiling Water is a bad sign.

When one Dreams he sees a Bath, that signifies affliction or grief.

If a person Dreams he goes into a Bath, and that he finds it too hot, he will
be troubled and afflicted by those that belong to his family; which trouble
will be proportionable to the heat of the Water in the Bath, whether more or
less.

If it seems to him that he has only pulled off hi^ clothes, without going into
the Bath, he will have some disturbance, but of no long continuance.

If one Dreams he goes into an extreme col^ Bath, the same signification is to
be given of it as when it is too hot.

But if it be temperate, and as it ought to be it is a good Dream, praesaging
prosperity, pleasure, joy and health.

If one Dreams he has carried Water in a garment, linen cloth, or any other
thing, o^ in a broken Vessel that could not hold Water, that denotes to the
Party loss and damage, and that he will be deceived by those whom he has
entrusted with his Estate and Substance, or else that he will be robbed by his
domestique Servants.

If he Dreams that the Water he has drawn into these things is not spilt, then
he will praeserve his Estate, though with much difficulty^ but if the Water be
spilt, he shall lose it.

If he phancies that he has hid the Vessel and Water under ground, he will
fall to decay, and will be in danger of being made a public spectacle, and of
dying a shameful death.

If one Dreams that he has a glass full of Water given him, that signifies his
speedy marriage, and that he will have Children by his wife. For whatsoever is
of glass, is applicable to the wife; and Water signifies abundance and
fruitfulness.

If the Glass seems to be broken, and the Water unspilt, that signifies the
death of the wife, but the life the Child; and so contrariwise.

If a Minister Dreams he gives his people clear Water to drink, it signifies
that he will teach them the word of God faithfully, and will be Instrumental to
their salvation; if the Water be troubled, he will teach them heretical and
false doctrine.

If any one Dreams that he has spilt Water in his House, that denotes care and
affliction, according to the quantity of the Water.

Of Navigation.
IF any one Dreams that he is walking in a Boat, and recreating himself without
fear, he will have comfort and success in his affairs: but if the Water be
rough and tempestuous, it falls out contrarily.

To Dream of being in a Ship or Boat in danger of oversetting and Shipwreck, it
is a sign of danger; unless the party be a prisoner or captive, in that case
it denotes liberty and freedom.

To Dream one sees a Sea-Haven, signifies that he will have joy, profit and
good news.

To Dream you see an Anchor, signifies assurance, and certain hope.

To Dream one sees the cordage of a Ship, signifies news from Debtors or
Factors.

To see the Sea sky-colour'd, and moderately waving, signifies joy, and
performance of business with facility: but if the Sea be calm, it signifies
obstruction and delatoriness; and when it is tempestuous, it Denotes
tribulation, losses and adversity.

He that Dreams he falls into the water or into the Sea, and that he awakes
starting, that signifies that he either does or will court a married woman, and
will spend his days, substance, honor and fortune with her; and that he cannot
without great difficulty disengage himself from the hands of those that envy
him, and are his Enemies.

Of the EARTH.
If any one Dreams that he has good Lands well enclosed bestowed upon him,
with pleasant pastures, he will have a handsome Wife, according to the seeming
goodness of the Land.

But if the Land seemed spacious and not enclosed, that denotes pleasure; joy
and riches, suitable to the extent of the Land.

If it seemed that the said enclosed Lands had fair gardens, Fountains, Fields,
pleasant groves and Orchards adjoining thereunto, that signifies, he will marry
a discreet, chaste and beautiful Wife, and that she will bear him very handsome
Children.

If he saw the Land sown with wheat, that signifies money and profit with care
and industry.

If he saw it sown with any kind of pulse, that denotes affliction and trouble.

If he saw it sown with Millet, that signifies vast riches to be gained with
ease, and much delight.

If a Monk or Friar Dreams any such thing, then it is taken for the riches and
contentment of the mind.

If you Dream you see the Earth black, that signifies sorrow, melancholy, and
weakness of the brain.

To Dream that you see the Earth quake, signifies that your affairs and life
are in danger of being lost.

To Dream that the whole Earth quakes, signifies an Edict from the King, that
will astonish all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom.

If you Dream that the House shakes, it is an Edict simply against the House:
it presageth also loss of Goods, and suits at Law.

If the walls, doors and top of the House fall by reason of the Earthquake,
that denotes the destruction and death of the chief persons in the House.

If a King or any other Prince Dreams that his Palace or Throne is overturned
and beaten down by an Earthquake, he will suddenly die, or lose his Kingdom.

If any one Dreams that a mountain is fallen upon a Valley, that signifies that
some great Lord will oppress and destroy Good men.

If any sees a Town that he knows, sunk by an Earthquake, that is a prognostic
of famine. War and desolation, by the Indignation of the Prince; but if he
knows not the Town, tha^ signifies that the Nation at enmity with the King
shall be destroyed by the same means.

To Dream you see great Ditches or precipices, and that you fall into them,
signifies that he that Dreams will suffer much injury, hazard his person, and
his goods be in danger by fire.

To Dream of kissing the Earth, signifies sadness and humility.

To Dream of being in a meadow, is a good sign to Husbandmen and shepherds,
and to others it denotes obstruction of business.

To Dream that you are in a fair, straight, level and pleasant way, signifies
joy, prosperity and good success; and a bad way the quite contrary.

Of vegetative, sensitive and rational Creatures.
THere are three sorts of Creatures; the vegetative, sensitive, and rational:
the Dreams of which three we will successively handle one after another.

Under the vegetative Creature is comprised Trees, Plants, Flowers and Fruits,
that receive their nourishment, vigor, growth and maturity from the Earth and
the Sun.

To Dream of holding or smelling odoriferous flowers in their season, signifies
joy, pleasure and consolation.

To Dream of seeing and smelling flowers out of season; if they are white, that
signifies obstruction in business, and bad success in his enterprises; if
yellow, the impediment will not be so considerable; and if they be red, the
difficulty and nuisance will be extreme; and for the most part it signifies
death.

To Dream of seeing and smelling Roses in the season of the year, is a good
sign to all persons, except those that are distempered, and that through fear
conceal themselves; for they are in danger of death or great sickness: and if
the dream be when Roses are out of season, it signifies the contrary.

To Dream that you smell of Marjoram, Hysop, Rosemary, Sage, and other herbs of
the same nature, signifies labor, trouble, sadness and weakness; Physicians
only excepted, to whom such Dreams are propitious.

If any one Dreams that he sees, holds, or smells of Lillies out of their
season, it signifies the hope of the thing desired will be frustrated.

If one Dreams that he sees or smells upon Laurel, the Olive or Palm, if she
be a woman she shall bear Children; if a Maid, she will be suddenly married;
if it be a man, it signifies amity, joy, prosperity, abundance, and good
success in his enterprises.

Of Pot Herbs and those that are Medicinal.
IF any one Dreams that he eats or smells of such Roots as have a strong smell,
as Radishes, Garlic, Onions, Leeks and the like, that signifies a discovery of
hidden secrets, and domestic jarres.

To Dream that one eats Herbs of which Salads are made, as Lettice, Sorrel,
Porslane, and others that may be eaten raw; that signifies trouble and
difficulty in the management of affairs.

Ta Dream of eating medicinal Herbs, as Beets, Mallows, Bourage, and the like,
signifies freedom from trouble, and expedition of business, because they make
the body soluble.

To Dream of eating Coleworts, signifies vexation. The French Navew-gentle and
Cowcumbers denote vain hope. Some are of opinion, that when sick persons Dream
of melons or cowcumbers, that it is a prognostic of recovery, by reason of
their humidity.

Of Corn, and other Grain.
TO Dream that you see Corn eared, and that you gather it, signifies profit
and riches.

To Dream you see stacks of Corn, signifies profit and abundance to the
Dreamer: and on the contrary, to see a small quantity, signifies famine and
necessity.

To Dream of eating white-bread made of wheat, signifies profit to the rich,
and damage to the poor, and on the contrary, to Dream of eating course-bread,
denotes to the poor profit and gain, to the rich losses.

To Dream of eating barly-bread, signifies health and content.

To Dream of eating broth, is a good sign, and signifies profit and gain.

To Dream that one sees a barn stored with corn, signifies, either that you
shall marry a rich wife, overthrow your adversary at Law, that you shall
inherit Land, or grow rich by trading or gifts: it signifies also banqueting
or merry-making.

To Dream of eating pease well boiled, denotes good success and expedition of
business.

To Dream of eating Beans, signifies trouble and dissension.

To Dream of Lentils, signifies corruption; of Rice, denotes abundance or
obstruction. The Millet signifies poverty and indigence.

To Dream you see or eat Mustard Seed, that is a bad sign, unless it be to
Physicians, to whom such dreams are advantageous.

Of Trees, and their Fruit.
TO Dream that one sees a stately Oak, signifies riches, profit and long life.

To Dream you see an Olive Tree with Olives, denotes peace, delight, concord,
liberty, dignity, and fruition of your desires.

To Dream of gathering Olives off of the ground, signifies labor and pains.

To Dream you see a Laurel-tree, is a token of victory and pleasure; and if you
be married, it denotes the inheritance of possessions by your wife.

To Dream you see a Cypress-tree, that denotes death, affliction, and
obstruction in business.

To Dream you see a Pine, Medler or Service-tree, signifies idleness and
remisness.

To Dream you see Apple Trees, and eat sweet Apples, signifies joy, pleasure
and recreation, especially to women and maids; sour Apples denotes contention
and sedition.

To Dream that one sees and eats Almonds, Wall-nuts and Hazle-nuts, signifies
difficulty and trouble.

To Dream that you see Figs in season, signifies joy and pleasure; and out of
season, the contrary.

To Dream you see a Vine, signifies abundance, riches and fertility; for which
we have the example of Astyages, King of the Medes, who dreamed that his
Daughter brought forth a Vine; which was a prognostic of the grandeur, riches
and felicity of Cyrus, who was borne of his Daughter after this Dream.

To Dream of eating ripe Grapes at any time, signifies cheerfulness and profit.

To Dream that one sees or eats Oranges, signifies wounds, grief and vexation;
those that are ripe, signify the same thing.

Peaches, bastard-Peaches, Apricocks their and such kind of Fruit in season,
denotes to him that Dreams he sees or eats them, content, health and pleasure;
but if you seem to eat them out of season, they signify vain hopes, and bad
success in business.

To see or eat ripe Pears, signifies joy or pleasure; if they are sour or
wild, the contrary.

If one Dreams he sees a Mulberry-tree, that signifies fertility, abundance of
goods and Children.

To Dream you see Nut-trees, Almond-trees, and that you eat their Fruit,
signifies riches and content, gained with labor and pains; to dream that you
find Nuts that have been hid, signifies you will find some treasure.

To Dream you see all sorts of trees very green or blossoming, is a sign of
joy, comfort and recreation; but if you dream they are dry, or without leaves,
rooted up, burned on thunderstruck, that denotes annoy, fear, displeasure and
grief.

If one Dreams that he has gathered the Fruit of some Old-tree, that
prognosticates you will be heir to some ancient persons.

If one Dreams that he has gathered the Fruit of a Pomegranate-tree, he shall
be enriched by some rich person; but if the Pome-granates b^ not ripe, that
denotes sickness, or affliction b^ some persons that are wickedly disposed.

If any one Dreams, that the Fruit he hat^ gathered is rotten, that signifies
adversity, or lo^^ of Children.

If one Dreams that he climbs a great Tree, h^ shall be promoted to some honor
or dignity, an^ have the command over other persons.

And when any one Dreams that he is fall^^ from a Tree, and that he has been
scratched b^ Thorns, or otherwise prejudiced, that signifie^ he shall lose his
Offices, and be out of favor wit^ Grandees.

Of the sensitive Creature, under which Birds, creeping things and fourfooted
Beasts are comprised.
TO Dream you see an Eagle in some hig^ place, that is a good sign to those
tha^ undertake some weighty business, and especially to Soldiers.

If one Dreams that an Eagle lights upon hi^ head, it signifies death to the
Dreamer; and th^^ same, if he dreams he is carried into the air by an Eagle.

If a Woman Dreams that she brings forth an Eagle, that foretells that the Child
she go^^ withal will be a great person, and that he will have many under his
command.

If one Dreams he sees a dead Eagle, that signifies death to great Peers, and
profit to the poor.

To Dream you see Birds of prey or faulconry, to the rich it signifies
increase, riches and honor; and to the poor, the quite contrary.

If any one Dreams he sees a Raven, it presages mischief, and chiefly to the
Husband, who will be discontented by his adulterous Wife: and if the woman
dreams, it prognosticates affliction occasioned by the Husband, who will
forsake her to Court others.

To Dream you see a Crow, signifies expedition of business.

To Dream you see a Stare or Starling, signifies some small discontent.

To Dream you see Pigeons, is a good sign, to wit, that you shall have delight
and content at home, and success in affairs abroad.

To Dream you see Cranes or Storks in flocks in the air, that foretells the
approach of Enemies and Thieves. In winter it signifies bad weather.

To Dream you see two Storks together, signifies marriage, and procreation of
good and helpful Children to their parents.

To see a Swan, signifies joy, revealing of secrets, and health to the Dreamer;
but if it sings, it foretells death.

To Dream of a Swallow, signifies that a man shall have a discreet wife; and
according to the opinion of some, good news, and good luck to the house wherein
they build their nests. The Nightingale signifies the same thing.

To Dream of seeing Bees, signifies profit to Country People, and trouble to
the Rich: yet if they dream they make their honey in any part of the House or
Tenement, that signifies dignity, eloquence, and good success in business.

If you Dream that you are stung by a Be, and especially by Wasps, that
signifies vexation and trouble occasioned by envious persons.

To Dream you see many Birds, signifies Assemblies and suits at Law.

To see or hear a Cock crow, signifies joy and prosperity.

To see two Cocks fighting, denotes quarrels and fighting.

To Dream you see a Peacock, is a sign you marry a handsome wife, that you grow
rich, be in great honor, and beloved by the King and Grandees.

To Dream of a Hen and her Chickens, signifies loss and damage.

To Dream that a Capon or Hen crows, signifies sadness and trouble.

To see Patridges, is a sign that a man shall have to do with women that are
malicious, ungrateful, and void of conscience.

Quails signify bad news at Sea, Debates, Quarrels, Pyracy, Ambuscadoes and
Treachery.

All sorts of Grasshoppers, signify impertinent praters, bad Musicians, and
also poor people that steal about the Country.

If a distempered person Dreams it, it foretells no good.

All sorts of Night-birds, as the Owlet, great Owl, Bittor and Bat, are a bad
Omen, and those that dream of such Birds must undertake no business that day.

To Dream of Eggs, signifies gain and profit; but if there be a great number of
them, it denotes care and Lawsuits.

Dreams of things Animal.
TO see Dragon, is a sign you shall see some great Lord, your Master, or a
Magistrate; It signifies also riches and treasures:

To Dream you see a Serpent turning and winding himself, signifies danger and
imprisonment; It denotes also sickness and hatred.

To Dream you see a Serpent, it signifies you will be deceived by your wife.

To Dream that you kill a Serpent, is a sign you will overcome your Enemies
and those that envy you.

To Dream you see Scorpions, Basilisks, Lizards, the Scolopendra, or
Caterpillars, signifies ill luck, and misfortune by secret Enemies.

To Dream of Earthworms, signifies Enemies that endeavor to ruinate and
destroy us.

If any one Dreams he sees and catches large Fish, it signifies gain and
prosit, according to the quantity he takes; if the Fish are small, it signifies
sadness.

To Dream you see Fish of diverse colors, to the sick it signifies poison, and
to those in health injuries, contention and grief.

To Dream you eat great Fish, signifies defluxions, catarrhes and melancholy.

To Dream you see fishing-nets, signifies rain or change of weather.

To see or find dead Fish in the Sea, signifies vain hope.

A Woman with child that dreams she is delivered of a Fish in stead of a
Child, shall (according to the opinion of the Ancients) be deliver^^ of a dead
or short-lived Child.

Frogs signify flatterers, indiscreet and ignoran^ Bablers.

Of four-footed Beasts.
IF you Dream you see a Lion* that signifies discourse with the King, or some
great Captain or other valiant Warrior.

If any one Dreams he combats with a Lion, that signifies a quarrel, and that
he shall engag^ with some resolute Adversary: and if he dream'^ he came off
Victorious, he shall be inevitably so.

If one Dreams that he is carried on the back (...) a Lion, that signifies
protection from the King or some great Prince.

If one Dreams that he is afraid of a Lion, i^ signifies that he shall be
sensible of the King's anger: and if the party that dreams be of the blood
Royal, some danger upon the King's accomp^^ threatens him; but however, he
shall be freed, because the Lion only struck him with fear.

If any one Dreams that he has eaten Lion'^ flesh, the King will enrich him,
and bestow honor and power upon him.

If any one Dreams that he has found the skin, Liver or marrow of a Lion; if
he that dreamed be a King, he will find the treasures of his Enemies; if he be
a vulgar person, he will suddenly grow rich.

If a King Dreams that a Lion is brought to him bound, he will take some great
Enemy of his.

If he Phancies that he has a tame Lioness in his Palace with her young ones,
if signifies that the Queen and his Children will be a great comfort to him,
during his life, and succeed him after his death.

The Dream of Olympia Alexanders Mother. The Queen Olympia being big with
Alexander the Great, Dreamed that King Philip her Husband had sealed up her
womb with a seal engraven with a Lion: which did prognosticate the valor,
magnimity and conquests of the said Alexander.

Of the Leopard. Dreams of Leopards have the same interpretation as those of
Lions; only that they are more subtle and malicious then the Lion, who is
always generous.

Of the Elephant. If one Dreams he sees an Elephant, that, according to
Artemidorus, signifies fear and danger; and according to Albumazar, it
signifies the party to be a rich man; for he says, if any one dreams he is
carried on an Elephant, he shall enjoy the Estate of some great Prince, or
Lord. And on the contrary, Artemidorus says that he was acquainted with a rich
and healthful woman in Italy, that dreamed she rode on an Elephant; and that
she died shortly after.

If one Dreams that he gives an Elephant any thing to eat or drink, it is a
sign he shall wait upon some great Lord, to his advantage.

Of the Bear. If one Dreams that he has seen a Bear, that signifies a rich,
puissant, inexpert, cruel and audacious Enemy.

Of the Wolf. The Wolf signifies an avaritious, cruel and disloyal person; in
so much that if any one dreams he has overcome a Wolf, he will conquer an
Enemy that has the same qualities* and quite contrary, if he has been bitten
by (...) Wolf, he shall receive prejudice by a cruel and disloyal Enemy.

The Wolf also signifies the year.

Of the Fox. If one Dreams that he fights with a Fox, h^ shall be engaged with
a wary crafty adversary.

If one Dreams he has a tame Fox, the interpretation is the same with the
former.

If one Dreams that he has a tame Fox a^ home, he shall love some ill-natured
woman, by whom he will be bewitched; or some domestic that will cajole his
Master by his subtility.

White Wolves, Pole-cats, Weezels and Squirrels, signify the same thing, with
little or (...) difference.

Of the wild Boars. The wild Boar signifies a pitiless and furious Enemy, well
furnished with all things necessary.

If any one Dreams he has hunted or taken (...) wild Boar, he will chase or
take some Enemy that has the same qualities as the wild Boar.

If any one Dreams he has the head of a will Boar brought him newly taken by
hunting, that predicts that he will soon obtain his desire o^ his most
powerful Enemy.

Of Swine. Swine denote idle and lazy persons, who live^ doing nothing, who
during their nasty idleness think of nothing, but how to prey upon other folks
goods, that they may live at ease. They signify also covetous persons, who are
no way useful in their generation wilst they live, and advance their Heirs
after their decease.

Of the Dog. Dogs denote fidelity, courage and affection, when we dream of such
as belong to us; but if we dream of those that belong to strangers, it
signifies infamous Enemies.

To Dream that a Dog barks and tears our garments, that signifies some enemy of
mean condition slanders us, or endeavors to deprive us of our livelihood.

If a King or Prince Dreams that several Dogs are brought him out of diverse
countries, that signifies that he shall list several Soldiers to fight against
his Enemies; for the Indians and Persians have always taken the Dog for an
army, when Kings dream.

Of the Cat. The Cat signifies a cunning Thief; so that if any one dreams he
has encountered a Cat, or that he has killed one, he will commit a Thief to
prison, and prosecute him to death.

If he Phancies that he eat Cats-flesh, he will have the goods of the Thief
that robbed him; if he dreams he has the skin, then he will enjoy all the
Thieves goods.

If any one Dreams he fought with a Cat that scratched him sorely, that
signifies sickness or affliction.

Of the Ape. All sorts of Apes or Monkeys, signify malicious, weak, strange
and secret Enemies.

Of the Heart and fallow Dear. If any one Dreams he has killed a Heart, and that
he had the head, or skin, that signifies he will inherit the Estate of some old
man, or that he shall overcome fugitive, deceitful, timorous and irresolute
Enemies. Fallow Dear have almost the same signification.

Sheep, shee-Goats, Cows and Horses. To Dream you see or have many Sheep,
Weathers, Shee-goats, Cows and Horses, signifies wealth and plenty.

Cows in Scripture signify the years.

The Ram: If any one Dreams that he has been run at by a Ram, it is a sign he
shall be afflicted or checked by his sovereign Prince.

Of the Ass The Ass denotes a good Servant or Slave, that is profitable to
his Master; it signifies also a foolish and ignorant person.

Of the Mule. The Mule signifies malice and foolish imaginations. Artemidorus
says it signifies sickness to him that dreams he saw one.

Of the Ox and the Bull. The Ox signifies a profitable Servant to his Master,
and the subject brought under the yoke of obedience. As for the Bull, he
signifies some great persons; so that if any one Dreams that he received hurt,
prejudice, or good by a Bull, assuredly he will receive it from some great
Lords.

Of the Horse. The Horse is a good sign; insomuch that if any one dreams he
saw, took, or mounted a Horse, that is a happy omen to the Dreamer.

If any one Dreams that he is mounted on a stately Horse, nimble, full of
metal, and well harnessed, he will have a handsome, noble and rich Wife,
provided the Horse be his own; if it belongs to another, he will receive
comfort, Estate and honor by some Woman that is a stranger.

If any one Dreams he is mounted on a Horse or Mare, and that he passed a place
without making his Horse resty by mounting, he shall gain honor, dignity and
fame.

If any one Dreams he rides upon a Horse that has a great and long tail, it is
a sign he will find many friends to assist him in his undertakings.

Some say that it Promises him a noble Woman, by whose means he will be
successful in his affairs proportionably to the greatness of the tail.

And quite contrary, if he thinks his Horses tail is cut, then his Friends,
Servants or Soldiers will fail him when he stands in most need of them.

If his Horse halt, he will meet with obstruction in his designs.

If any one Dreams that another rides his Horse without his consent, it
signifies that some person or other will Gallant his Wife, and be taken in the
fact.

Some Authors are of opinion, that if any one Dreams he is mounted on a nimble,
sprightly, active and well-managed Horse, he will be honored by the vulgar,
and esteemed by Grandees.

If that he Dreams he too violently spurred the Horse, and forced him to what he
did, he shall be advanced to charge and dignity, and shall have honor
proportionable to his endeavors.

In Kings Dreams, the white Horse is applicable to the Queens person, who shall
be beautiful and virtuous.

The Kings Horse being black, signifies a debauched rich Woman.

If any one Dreams that he saw a young generous Mare come into his House well
harnessed; it is a sign he will be suddenly married to a beautiful, young and
rich Gentle-women, that will be delightful and comfortable to him. If it be an
ill-shapen Mare without a saddle, that denotes a shee-Servant or Concubine,
that will bring nothing with her.

Of the Rational Creature, and his parts.
MAn is that Creature, whom the Deity has enriched with his most signal
favors, having endued him with a rational soul, which is a ray of his Divinity;
and this has obliged all Philosophers to give him such excellent titles. Plato
styles him the miracle of miracles; Aristotle, the sociable creature, born for
society; Theophrastus, the Exemplar of the Universe; Cicero, the Divine
Creature; Pliny, the Epitome of the World, and Nature's Minion: and all
unanimously with one consent have called him the little World, as comprehending
within his own being, all that is most beautiful or admirable among the other
Creatures that people the earth: but the names and praises that the sacred
Pages bestow on him, are far beyond the language of humane rhetoric; that he
was framed and made according to God's Image, that he is his Masterpiece, his
living Temple, the Object of his Love and Grace, and his Viceroy constituted
over the whole Frame of Nature. These are elogies that transcend all expression.

And because the subject of his Dreams are more frequently employed about his
own similitude, then any other thing that falls within the compass of his
imagination, we will give you an exact delineation of all his dependencies, and
begin with (...) nativity, in the next place discourse of his education, and
then of his form and parts.

If a Woman Dreams she is delivered of a Child, and yet is not big with Child,
it is a sign she will happily accomplish her designs.

If she be a Maid, it signifies Banqueting, joy, Revelling and Nuptials; and
sometimes fear and grief of the Mother.

If a Man Dreams he is big with Child, that signifies wealth, gain and profit
which will soon fall to him.

When a Man Dreams he sees a Woman brought to bed, that denotes unto him joy
and prosperity.

If a Man Dreams that his Wife is big with Child, and that it really proves so,
it is a sign the Child will live, and that she will have a Son that resembles
the Father.

He that Dreams he comes out of his Mothers womb, will in a short time be freed
from some unlucky business, and raised to preferment.

If any one Dreams he reenters his Mothers womb, if he be in a remote Country,
that denotes a speedy return into his Native Country.

He that Dreams he sees two or three Children born, shall have cause of joy,
and success in his business.

And when you Dream of a monstrous or unnatural birth, as if a Woman, in stead
of a wellshap'd-Child, should he delivered of one that had two heads, four
feet, four hands, or a tail, or some such thing extraordinary, or that she was
delivered of a Cat, Serpent, Basilisk, Rat or other animal; that is a bad
Hiero^^^phick, that betokens no good to the Dreamer; and he ought cordially to
recommend himself to God, that he would preserve him from those misfortunes
that threaten him. If it be a Woman that has such a Dream, many Authors
affirm, and Anselmus Julianus in particular (who is the Author to whom we are
obliged for most of our Interpretations) that she shall have good success and
comfort, shall be rich, and generally beloved, and shall prosper in all her
undertakings.

When one Dreams that he has many small Children, and that they seem to him to
run about the House, and yet notwithstanding he has none, that signifies that
is will be very difficult for him ever to have any, and that he that dreams
will have many cares and obstructions in his affairs.

He that Dreams he sees an Infant wrapped in swadling-cloaths, and sucking the
nource, that signifies a chronical and dangerous distemper, unless his Wife be
with Child: for if so, it signifies that the Child will be short-lived: And if
it be a Woman that dreams, it is a sign that she is, or will shortly be with
Child of a Daughter, unless she be sick, or her Husband dies.

If any one Dreams he has a head bigger then ordinary, and very highly raised,
that signifies dignity and Prelateship, or at least some charge or office where
he shall be obeyed and esteemed; and sometimes it signifies victory over
Enemies, and overthrowing Adversaries at Law: and to Merchants and Banquers,
heaping up of riches, and recovering of treasure; If a sick person dream thus,
it prognosticates a contumacious and violent fever.

To Dream one has a small, light or sharp head, signifies want of spirit,
servitude and disgrace.

To Dream one has the head of a Moore, signifies voyages and journeys to
remote parts, and dispatch of business.

According to the Tradition of the Indians and Persians. To Dream that one is
beheaded, according to the tradition of the Indians and Persians, and that the
head is separated from the body, that signifies liberty to prisoners, health to
the sick, and comfort to those in distress; to Creditors payment of debts. To
Princes and great Personages, it presageth all good fortune, and that their
cares and fears will be turned into joy, and confidence in their Servants and
subjects.

If any one Dreams that a person of his acquaintance beheads him, he will share
with him in his pleasure and honor.

If any one Dreams that a young Child who has not yet attained to the age of
his youth, has cut off his head; if the Dreamer be sick, he will not live
long; if in health, he will get honor. If a Woman with Child Dreams thus, she
will bring forth a male-Child, and her Husband will die suddenly; for he is her
head.

If any one Dreams his head is half cut off, the things abovementioned will be
fulfilled but by halves.

If any one Dreams that his throat is cut with a knife; he will be injured by
some person or other.

If he Dreams he cuts the throat of some of his acquaintance, he will do him
some injury; if he be ignorant of it, it will be done to a stranger.

If any one Dreams that he is beheaded as a Martyr for Religion, that man will
arrive to a great height of honor, and his soul will be happy in Heaven.

According to the Egyptian tradition, if any one dreams he beheads an armed
man, he will be entertained in the service of some great Person, wherein he
will signalize himself.

Of Wounds. If any one Dreams that he has received from one of his
acquaintance some blows with a sword in the foreparts of his body, if blood be
drawn, he that is hurt shall receive some extraordinary kindness from him that
struck; if the blood be not drawn, the advantage and delight shall be the more
inconsiderable.

If any one Dreams that he is wounded with a sword, in such sort that he is in
danger of his life, that is a sign that he will receive several courtesies and
good turns from him that wounded him, according to the proportion, number and
largeness of the wounds.

If any one Dreams that his King or Prince strikes him with his sword, in
anger; that signifies he shall be advanced and honored by his Prince,
according to the extremity of his anger.

If a King or any other Person Dreams that he was struck standing with a sword
or knife, by one of mean condition, he will be in danger of death or servitude.

If a Woman Dreams she is struck with a sword, or that she her self either
out of courage, or in her own defense, struck any one; she will be honored;
and if married, have a male-Child.

Of the complexion of the countenance. To Dream one sees a very handsome head
and face, that signifies joy, content and health.

Also, if a Woman Dreams that she sees a comely man, it prognosticates the
same thing.

To Dream one sees an unknown person of a brown complexion, it is a sign of
glory, honor, good success, and dispatch of business.

If one Dreams he sees a very brown Woman, that signifies a very dangerous
disease.

If you imagine you see a Woman unknown, with long and comely hair, it is a
very good sign, as well for the Woman, as the man that dreams; and it denotes
amity, joy and prosperity.

If a man Dreams his hair is long, like a Woman's, that signifies cowardice and
effoeminacie, and that he that Dreams will be deceived by a Woman.

Of the Hair To Dream one sees a Woman without hair, signifies famine, poverty
and sickness.

To see a Man bald and without hair, signifies the contrary.

To see a fresh, taking, smiling countenance, is a sign of friendship.

To see a meagre pale face, is a sign of annoy, poverty and dearth.

To see hair interwoven together, signifies annoy and grief, and sometimes
injuries and qua^^rels.

To see extraordinary black hair, short an^ curled, signifies sadness and grief.

If any one Dreams that he cannot pass the Comb through his hair while he is
Combing, an^ that he has much ado to untangle them, the denotes Lawsuits and
great trouble.

To see hair well combed, a head well dressed signifies friendship, and
deliverance from a man worst business.

He that Dreams his head is shaved, or his bear^ trimmed, will be in danger of
losing a great pa^^ of his Estate, of being sick, or run the risq^^^ losing his
life by some ignominious death.

To see his hair shed, signifies annoy, and lo^^ of his Estate.

If the King, Prince or great Lord Dreams th^^ he has a comely great head of
hair, he will b^ victorious over his Enemies, will gain much r^putation, and
reduce many Provinces to his Dominion.

If he Dreams his hairs are grown white, hi^ Treasures will be diminished, and
almost total^^ exhausted.

If his hair seems to be longer and blacker the^^ ordinary, his wealth and
honor will increase.

If he thinks that his hair is cut or plucked off, his Estate, and the number
and forces of his State and Army will decrease according to the same proportion.

If any one Dreams that his beard is grown bigger then ordinary, he will grow
richer then he was formerly.

If any one Dreams that his hair is grown more thin then it was formerly, it is
a sign of affliction and poverty.

If it seems a matter of great difficulty to pull off his hair, that denotes he
will do his utmost endeavor to avoid misery.

Of Perfumes and Odors. If one Dreams he perfumes his head with Oils, Essences
or sweet-sented powders, that signifies he that dreams has too great an esteem
of himself, that he will be vainglorious and haughty in his demeanor to his
Associates: If it be a Woman, she will deceive her Husband, and wear the
breeches.

If one Dreams his hair is frizled and decently ordered, so as to be of opinion
that he is very comely; it signifies that he who dreams will be in some danger
of his person either by sickness or other ways.

According to the tradition of the Indians and Persians, those that dream that
their head or the other parts of their body are perfumed with oils, perfumes;
or sweet-sented powders, will live in good repute among their neighbors, and
be acceptable to all persons: and as for my own parti^ular; I rather incline to
this then the precedent opinion.

If any one Dreams he has an ill savor, he will be odious to all people, and
that according to the proportion of the ill sent.

If any one Dreams he is presented with sweet perfumes, he will receive some
welcome news, according to the proportion of the sents in quality and quantity;
and will gain profit, advantage and honor among his acquaintance.

If a person Dreams that he makes odoriserous persumes, and bestows them among
his friends he will be the messenger of good tidings which will prove
advantageous to him, and those with whom he entertains discourse.

Of the Forehead. If any one Dreams he has a large forehead, that signifies
an ingenious spirit; and if it be very high, it is a sign of a solid
judgment: it also denotes power and wealth to him that dreams.

To Dream that you have a brow of brass, copper, marble or iron, that signifies
irreconciliable hatred against your Enemies.

Some Authors are of opinion, that such a Dream is advantageous to Victuallers
and Gabelers.

If any one Dreams his forehead is broken o^ hurt, his wealth will be
discovered, and in danger of losing; that betokens fear and apprehension to him
that dreams.

If one Dreams he has a great and well-flesh'd forehead, that signifies
freedom of speech, strength and constancy.

Of the Nose If any one Dreams his nose is larger then ordinary, he will become
rich and powerful, and will be provident and subtle, and well received among
Grandees; but to dream a man ^s deprived of his nose, signifies the contrary.

To Dream one has two noses, that signifies discord and quarrels.

If any one Dreams that his nose is grown so big, that it is grown deformed and
hideous to the sight; he will live in prosperity and abundance, but never gain
the love of the people.

If any one Dreams his nose is stopped, so as that he has lost his scent; if he
be a King, he is in some imminent danger from him that has the greatest
authority about his person.

If he be a private person that has this dream, he is in danger of being
deceived by his Wife, who will commit adultery with one of his friends or
servants.

If it be a Woman, her Husband will deceive her.

Of the Ears To Dream a Man has many Ears, signifies that he will gain the
love of his Servants and subjects, and will be served and obeyed faithfully by
them.

To Dream that a man picks his Ears, signifies the same thing.

To Dream his Ears are full of come, signifies an Estate will fall to him by
his parents.

To Dream one has Asses-Ears, signifies servitude.

To Dream one has the Ears of a Lion, or of any other cruel Beast, signifies
treachery or deceit from his Enemies and those that envy him.

If one Dreams that his Ears are become comlier, and larger then ordinary, he
will find that he will be in prosperity and gain honor to whom he communicates
his secrets.

If any one Dreams his Ear is hurt or slit, he will be offended by some that
belong to him, or by some friend of his to whom he has entrusted his secrets.

If it seems that his Ear is quite cut off, he shall be utterly deprived of
their friendship.

If any one Dreams his Ears are stopped, if he be a King or Prince, he will
despise the requests and petitions of his subjects, and will endeavor to have
them subscribe to his will, upon all accounts.

If he be a private person that has Dreamed thus, it is a sign he will alter
his resolutions, and that he will deceive those that confide in him; if it be a
Woman, she will be debauched.

Of the Eyes. The Eyes are the windows of the soul; and the Ancients represent by
them, faith, the will, and the light of the understanding.

If any one Dreams he has lost his sight, he will violate his word, or else he
or some of his Children are in danger of death, or he will never more see his
friends again.

If any one Dreams that he is grown blear-eyed, he will commit some heinous
crime, and afterward repent of it; he is also in danger of losing his Estate.

To Dream he has a good and quick sight, it is an extraordinary good dream;
and he, whose it was, shall succeed in his enterprises: but a troubled and weak
sight, signifies want of money, and bad success in business.

Of the Ey-browe and Ey-lids. If any one Dreams his Ey-brows and Ey-lids are
more comely and lage then they use to be, it is a sign he will be honored and
esteemed by all persons; that he will prosper in courtship, and grow rich.

If one Dreams that the hair of his Ey-brows or Ey-lids is shed, it will fall
out contrary.

Of the Mouth. The Mouth is the rampart, house and door wherein all the
internal parts of humane bodies are enclosed.

If therefore any one Dreams that his Mouth is wider then ordinary, his family
will be enriched, and become more opulent then formerly.

If any one Dreams he has a stinking breath, he will be despised by all
people, and hated by his Servants.

If any one Dreams that his Mouth is shut up and closed, in such sort that he
cannot open it, nor eat, he is in danger of a sudden death.

Of the Cheeks. To Dream one has plump cheeks, and of a vermilion tincture, it
is a good sign; and their affairs, that dream so, will prosper.

To have them lean and pale, signifies the contrary.

Of the Lips To Dream that one has red handsome lips; is a sign our Friends
enjoy their health; and to have them dry and chap'd, the contrary.

Of the Beard. If any one Dreams he has a comely great Beard, it is a sign he
shall be pleasant in his discourse, and find out the intricacie of the matter
proposed, and prosper in his undertakings.

If a Maid Dreams she has a Beard, she will be speedily matched to her
content: if she be married, such a dream threatens her with the loss of her
Husband, or that she shall be separated from him, and be constrained to govern
her house singly, as if she were a man: if it be a Woman with Child, she
shall have a Son.

If one Dreams he has lost his Beard, or imagines that somebody has pulled it
up by the roots or shaved it, that betokens loss of Relations, Estate and Honor.

Of the Teeth. The Teeth are taken in Dreams for the nearest relations and best
Friends a Man has; the fore-Teeth are applied to Children, Brethren, and other
near relations: the upper-Teeth signify. the males, and the lower the females.

If therefore any one Dreams he has lost or spoiled one of his Teeth; by that
is to be understood, that some near relation is dead.

But if on the contrary one Dreams that his Teeth are more comely, firm, and
whiter then ordinary, that signifies joy, prosperity, good news, and friendship
among relations.

If a person Dreams one of his Teeth is grown longer then the rest, he will be
in trouble by some of his Relations.

The upper Eye-tooth signifies the Father, and the (...) th^r the Mother.

A^^emidorus says, that the Teeth on the right side signify Men, and those on
the left Women: but it is contrary to the opinion of the Indians, Persians and
Egyptians.

The great Teeth signify Friends or relations a degree removed, and have the
same signification as the rest.

If any one Dreams that one of his great Teeth is loose, or grown black, or
that it pains him, one of his said Friends or relations will be sick, or in
trouble.

If any one Dreams his Teeth are grown more comely, white and firm then usual,
he will reap joy, delight, content, and profit from his said relations and
friends.

If one imagines he is cleansing his Teeth to make them white, he will bestow
money upon his said relations and friends.

If some of the Teeth exceed the rest, so that the Dreamer is hindered from
speaking and eating; that signifies contention among relations, and suits ^t
law for Inheritances.

Of the Neck The Neck signifies power, honor, riches, and Inheritances of what
sort soever.

To Dream that the Neck is become greater and larger then ordinary, and yet so
that it seem not thereby deformed; if it be a King, he will take delight and
pleasure in his Courtisans, will hear good news from his Armies, and have
success in his affairs. If he be a private person, he will be honored for his
good deeds, and grow richer then he was. The slender Neck signifies the
contrary.

If any one Dreams that his Neck is tied, or otherwise squeezed by the hand, it
is a bad sign to the Dreamer, and he will be subjected to him that had his
hand upon his Neck.

To Dream the Neck is awry, so as that the head leans more on one side then on
the other, is a sign of misfortune, shame and loss.

To Dream the Neck is swelled by a humor, or Aposteme, signifies sickness.

To Dream one has three heads upon one Neck, signifies Dominion, Power and
Honor.

If any one Dreams his head is cut off by Robbers and Murderers, that
signifies loss of Children, Relations, Estate or Wife; and the same to the
Wife, the loss of her Husband: but if he dreams he loses his head by Sentence
or Judicial proceedings, it is a sign of his deliverance from all trouble and
mischief: nevertheless this Dream signifies the contrary to Receivers, Coyners,
Farmers and Merchants.

To Dream your throat is cut, and you not dead, signifies hope, and good
success in business.

To Dream that one beheads a Man, signifies assurance of affecting business, or
revenge upon your Enemies.

To cut off the head of a pullet or green-goose, signifies joy and recreation.

To Dream one has the head of a Lion, Wolf or some other cruel Beast, is a
good sign to the Dreamer, and he will accomplish his designs with honor; will
overcome his Enemies, and be feared and honored by those that are related to
him.

To Dream one has his head in his own hands, signifies loss of Wife or
Children. If the Dreamer be not married, it is good luck, and if he thinks he
adornes and dresseth his head, his business will succeed happily.

Of Horns. If any one Dreams he has Horns on his head, it signifies Dominion,
Grandeur and Royalty: nevertheless some Authors say, that to Dream one has the
Horns of an Ox, or of any other furious creature, that denotes anger, pride,
temerity, and violent death by the hand of Justice.

To Dream you see a man with Horns on his head, signifies he is in danger both
of the loss of his person and Estate.

Of the Sholders. If any one Dreams he has large shoulders, and that they are
more brawny then usual; that signifies good luck, strength and prosperity: yet
such a Dream is bad for prisoners; for to them it denounces annoy and grief,
and that they are in danger of enduring much pain in those parts.

To Dream that the shoulders are full of pain, or that there is some nail,
tumor or swelling in them, that signifies trouble and displeasure from
relations.

Of the Breast and Paps. To Dream that your Breast is clear and well, signifes
health and joy.

To have hairy-Brests, and the paps covered with hair, to a man it is a sign
of gain and profit, to a woman loss of her Husband.

If a man Dreams he has Breasts as big as a woman, that denotes effoeminacy and
cowardice, or else trouble and grief occasioned by the sickness of Children.

If a young married woman Dreams that her Breasts are full, and spinning out
with milk; that signifies she is with Child, and that it will be a perfect
birth, and come to good: if she be an ancient woman that Dreams thus, she will
have wherewithal to support her; if she be rich, that signifies she will
bestow some money upon her Children, who will rejoice therewith; if a virgin
dreams thus, she is near her marriage.

If a woman Dreams she has sore Breasts, she is threatened with death.

If she Dreams her Breasts are dried up and lank, and that they are no longer
hard, but hang down, that signifies that her Children will die; and if she have
none, she will grown indigent, and will often shed tears through grief and
affliction.

If a woman Dreams she has many Breasts, that signifies she has as many
Gallants.

If any one Dreams that his friend strikes him over the Breast with a sword; to
those that are old it signifies bad news, but friendship to those that are
young.

To Dream that the Breasts are full of blood, and raw all over, signifies loss
of Children and barrenness.

If any one Dreams that his breast is grown more large and plumper, he is long
lived, and will grow rich according to the proportion of the largeness or
plumpness thereof.

Of the Arms. If any one Dreams that his Arms are grown bigger and stronger
then ordinary, that signifies he will have joy and profit by his Brothers or
his Sons means, and that he will become rich.

If a woman Dreams it, her Husband will increase in estate and authority.

To Dream one has strong Arms, signifies good fortune, deliverance from
sickness or Imprisonment.

To Dream ones Arms or elbows are full of scabs, or other ulcers; that
signifies annoy, sadness, and bad success in business.

If any one Dreams his Arms are broken or grown lean; if he be a King or great
Prince, some overthrow will happen to his Army, or some disaster to his State;
or, as we have said, his Son or Brother will fall into some distemper or
affliction. The same Dream denotes affliction, sickness and poverty to the
Children or Brethren of private persons.

If a woman Dreams so, she is in danger of being a widow, or at least of a
separation from her Husband.

The muscles of the Arms are applied to Servants.

If any one Dreams his Arms are hairy, he will grow richer then formerly.

Some Authors attribute the right Arm to the Father, Son, Brother and Friend;
and the left to the Mother, Daughter, Sister, she-Friend, and the faithful
Maidservants.

To Dream your right Arm is cut off, that signifies the death of the Father,
Son, Brother or Friend of the Dreamer: if it be the left, the same judgment as
is above mentioned shall be given.

To Dream both the Arms are cut off, signifies Imprisonment or sickness.

Of the Hands. The Hands by the Learned are called the Servants of reason, the
instruments of instruments, and the Symbol of humane fidelity.

If any one Dreams his Hands are comelier and stronger then ordinary, he will
be employed in some important affair; which he will bring to an happy issue,
and gain honor and advantage thereby; and his Servants will love and serve him
cheerfully and faithfully.

If any one Dreams that his Hand is cut off, or that it is grown lean and dry,
or that it has been burned, he will lose his most faithful Servant: if he has
no Servant, he will not be able to work, but grow poor. If a woman dreams thus,
she will lose her Husband, her eldest Son, or fall to decay.

If any one Dreams his Hands or Fingers are grown slenderer then ordinary, he
will find that his Servant cheats him, and has no affection for him.

If any one Dreams he works with his right Hand, that is a sign of good
fortune to him and his family; if with the left, that denotes bad luck:
nevertheless, some attribute the Arm and the right Hand to the Father, Son,
Brother and Friend, and the good success that may befall them; and the left Arm
signifies the Mother, the Daughter, the Wife, the Maidservant, the
Manservant, and the Estate already gained.

To Dream the Fingers are cut off, signifies loss of Friends or Domestics.

To Dream one has six or seven Fingers on a Hand, sifnifies friendship, new
acquaintance, good fortune, and Inheritance or Benefits.

To Dream the Hand is hairy, signifies trouble and imprisonment.

To Dream you have clear and white Hands, among the rich it signifies
friendship, and among the poor idleness and necessity.

To Dream one has the Hand-gout; to the youthful it signifies fear and dread,
accompanied with the danger of his person; and to the ancient, it denotes
poverty and languishment.

To Dream one has many Hands, signifies good luck, strength, wealth and
abundance.

Nevertheless this Dream is destructive to highway-men; for they will be under
the arrest of Justice, and punished as malefactors.

To Dream one has handled fire without any hurt or damage, that signifies to
the Dreamer, that those that envy him, and are his adversaries, will be
incapable of prejudicing him according to the custom of the world, and that he
will obtain his desires.

To Dream that you strike another with your Hand, and that you give him a box
on the ear, or a blow with the fist, that signifies peace and love between a
Man and his Wife; and if he that Dreams be unmarried, it is a presage that he
will soon Court some Lady for whom he has a great respect, and that he will
vanquish his Enemies.

If a Woman Dreams that she beats her Husband, that signifies fear; but yet
she is beloved by her Husband: if she dreams she strikes her Gallant, that
signifies she is not secure, and that her Lover will by some accident or other
come to trouble.

If any one Dreams he holds a sword in his Hand, and strikes strangers, that
signifies victory, assurance, and good success in his affairs; if it be with a
stick, it signifies command and profit.

If any one Dreams he has gold-rings on his fingers, that signifies dignity,
good fortune and felicity.

Of the Nails. If any one Dreams that his nails are longer then usually, that
signifies profit; and the contrary, loss and discontent.

If any one Dreams that his Fingers-ends or nails are cut off; that signifies
unto him loss, disgrace, and contention with his relations and friends.

If any one Dreams that his nails are pulled off, he is threatened by misery and
affliction of all sorts; and is also in danger of death.

Of the Belly. If any one Dreams his belly is bigger and fatter then ordinary,
his family and Estate will increase proportionably according to the greatness
of his belly.

If one dreams that his Belly is grown lean and shrunk up, he will be joyfully
delivered from some bad accident.

If any one Dreams that his Belly is swelled, and yet notwithstanding empty, he
will become poor, though he be rich in the esteem of many people in the world.

If any one Dreams he is extraordinary hungry, and that his appetite craves
sustenance, he will be ingenious, laborious, and eager in getting an Estate,
and will grow rich proportionaby to the greatness of his hunger.

If any one Dreams his thirst is quenched when thirsty, and that he has drunk
his fill of water; if the water did appear clear, fresh and acceptable to him;
he will live jovially, and become very wealthy: if the water be troubled,
lukewarm, stinking and dirty, he will end his days in sickness and affliction.

If any one Dreams his belly aches, he will be afflicted in his family, and have
many cares upon him.

Of the Navel. If any one Dreams he has a pain at his navel, if the grief be
great, he will receive bad news of his Father and Mother, who will be in danger
of death; if he has neither Father nor Mother, he will lose his Estate that
came to him by the Father and Mother, in the same proportion as the pain is, or
else will be forced to forsake his native Country.

Of the Privities If any one imagines in a Dream, that he sees those parts
vigorous and well, it signifies that his relations and Friends are in a
prosperous condition, that the Estate and possessions of the Dreamer are
secured, and that they augment and increase with his honor.

If he Dreams that they grow less, and that he is not well in those parts, it
is quite contrary, and sometimes it menaceth the party with infamy and shame.

The same interpretation is also to be given of the secret parts of the Woman.

If any one Dreams that those parts are grown bigger and stronger, he will be
renowned, and raised to dignity, and beget male Children: if it be a Woman's
Dream, she will bring forth Daughters, and will ever have the reputation of a
virtuous Woman.

If a King Dreams thus, he will be long-lived, and have a proper Man to his Son
that will succeed him.

If a Woman sleeping Dreams that she has laid hold of the privities of a man,
she will bring forth a male Child, who will raise his family.

If any one Dreams that part is cut off, his Son shall die, and he himself be in
danger of dying soon after, or of falling into poverty.

If any one Dreams that part is grown long beyond measure, he will have a Son
that will create him all the content imaginable, and will be virtuous and
renowned over the whole world; and the Dreamer will gain honor through his
Wises means.

If his Dream be contrary, he will be reduced to a low condition, being put out
of his Office and Dignity, and his Children will grow sickly and miserable.

If any one Dreams that those parts have been discovered, and seen publicly,
the Law will take hold of him, he will become infamous, and his craft and
mischiefs be detected.

If any one Dreams that part is maimed, he will be overcome by his Enemies, and
his Children will be subject to Chronick diseases.

Of the Thighs. The Thighs represent the Relations: if any one Dreams both
his Thighs are broken, or beaten black and blew, he will die in a foreign
Country alone, without the assistance of his Relations.

If a Maid Dreams so, she will be married to a stranger, and lead her life in
some remote Country, far distant from her Relations.

If she be a Wife, she will become a widow, and lose her Children.

If any one Dreams that his Thighs are grow^ bigger and stronger then usual;
if he be a King, he will have occasion of joy from his domestics, his Army,
Servants and Subjects; for it is not the custom to say to the King, Your
parents, etc. because God has bestowed upon him power and dominion over all
persons indifferently.

If a private person Dreams the like, his Relations will be raised to some
dignity, and it will prove honorable and advantageous to him: if it be a Woman,
she will have comfort by her Children.

If any one Dreams that he has received a wound on the thigh, he will not
accomplish his desires, but be disturbed by his Relations.

To Dream that you see the fair and white Thighs of a Woman, signifies health
and joy.

If a Man Dreams that he has his Thighs well-proportion'd, it signifies a
happy voyage.

Of the Knees. The Knee denotes the labor and travel of Man; therefore if any
one Dreams that he himself, or any other person has hurt his Knee, he will be
disturbed and disquieted in the exercise of his calling, and hindered in his
vocation by malicious and envious Persons.

If any one Dreams that his Knees are cut or dried up, so that he cannot well
walk, he will be reduced to poverty, not being able to work, and constrained to
live in a very low condition.

If it seems that his Knees are grown well, and that he has recovered his
strength, and can walk; his ill fortune and calamity will be altered, and he
will grow rich, and live with content.

If he Dreams by the strength of his Knees he is able to run swiftly, he shall
be happy in all his undertakings.

If she be a Woman, she will be ready and willing to obey her Husband, and be
very careful to govern her family.

If a man Dreams his Knees are weary, that signifies sickness.

If any one Dreams that he is kneeling, that denotes devotion and humility, and
sometimes vexation and trouble in business.

To Dream the Knee is swelled and pains you, that signifies sickness, pain,
loss and bad success, or obstruction in business.

Of the Legs To Dream your Legs are scabby, or itchy, signifies fruitless
perplexity and care.

To Dream your Legs are in good case and perfectly well, signifies joy and good
fortune, that you will be prosperous in your voyage, journey and business.

To Dream that the Legs are swelled or cut off, signifies the loss or damages
of servants and our best friends, who will either fall sick or die.

Of the Feet If any one Dreams he has three or four feet, he is in danger of
being crippled in the Legs or Feet by some defluxion, or some other accident;
for those that are in such a condition use crutches or staves to support them,
or else ly down on a bed that has four Legs; nevertheless this Dream is
advantageous to Merchants, and those that traffic by Sea.

To Dream a man has fire at his Feet, is a bad sign.

To Dream that a Man is nimble-footed, and that he danceth well, signifies joy
and amity.

To Dream the Feet are cut off, signifies pain and damage.

To Dream your Legs are cut off, signifies pain and damage.

To Dream you see the Feet of your little Children, signifies joy and profit,
good health, pleasure and consolation.

To Dream you have a Fistula in your Foot, signifies assistance in business.

To Dream your Feet are dirty and smell rank, signifies tribulation, or a
venereal distemper.

To Dream you are near a River or Fountain, and that you wash your Feet,
signifies humility and good success, and sometimes catarrhes and defluxions.

To Dream you kiss the Feet of another, signifies repentance, easement,
contrition and humility.

To Dream you see a Serpent, or some other mischievous creature, that will bite
your Feet, signifies envy; and if the creature bites shrewdly, that signifies
sadness and discontent.

To Dream that any one does scratch the soles of the Feet, signifies loss by
flattery.

To Dream that any one batheth your Feet with wholesome herbs, or perfumes them
with good scents, signifies honor and joy from servants.

If any one Dreams that his Leg or Foot is out of joint, or broken, it
signifies that your servant will receive loss and damage, or die, or that he
will be retarded in his voyage or journey, and will meet with obstructions.

If any one Dreams that he is grown lame, that denotes infamy and disgrace; or
if he be a prisoner, it foretells the punishment of his faults; or if rich, loss
of his goods by fire.

To Dream that you walk on your Knees for want of Feet, that signifies poverty,
and loss of goods and servants.

To Dream one has a wooden Leg, signifies an alteration of your condition,
from good to bad, or bad to worse.

Of the Back To Dream you see your Back, signifies ill-luck and old age.

To Dream a Man's Back is broken, hurt or scabby, signifies that his Enemies
will get the better of him, and that he will be scoffed at by all persons.

Of the Buttocks. To Dream one sees his own Buttocks, signifies infamy.

To Dream you see the buttocks of a Woman, signifies luxury and carnal pleasure.

To Dream you see your buttocks grown black, signifies shame and damage.

Of the Ribs. The Ribs signify Women; the upper and larger Ribs, women that are
born legitimate, the lower are the female relations and allies.

If any one Dreams that he has his upper Ribs broken or sunk, he will have
some dissension with his wife, which will redound to his disgrace and
displeasure.

If he Dreams his lower Ribs and broken, he will be afflicted by his female
relations and kindred.

If any one Dreams his Ribs are grown larger and stronger then ordinary, he
will take delight in his wife, or receive good success and advantage from him
that has the charge of his Estate and affairs; for the Ribs being as it were
the walls and ramparts of the body and principal inward-parts, they are applied
to those that have the charge of the house; and if they receive any damage,
that is attributed to the same persons.

Of the Hips If any one Dreams his Hips are grown larger and stronger then
usual, he will be very joyful and healthful; and if he marries, will have
lovely Children.

To Dream the same thing of the reins and backbone, signifies altogether the
same thing as the Hips; and farther, that he will take delight and comfort in
his Wife, or his Heirs.

To Dream the Hips are broken, and that you cannot walk, that denotes
affliction, sickness and loss of Children.

If any one Dreams that his Hips are black and blew with whipping, or blows
with a stick or sword, that presageth his death in a short time, or at least
that he will hate his Wife, and have several grievances.

If he Dreams his Hips are cut half through, his hope in his Wife and relations
will be utterly lost.

Of the Flesh in general. If any one Dreams he is increased in Flesh, he will
gain gold and wealth, according to the quantity of his Flesh: if he dreams he
is grown bigger and fatter, he will enjoy riches, and delight in rich and
sumptuous apparel.

On the contrary, if any one Dreams that he is grown lean and thin, if he be
rich, he will grow poor, or at least conceal his wealth, and will seem to be in
a mean condition; if he be poor already, he will die out of poverty and
necessity: if she be a Woman, her Husband, allies and relations will hate her.

If any one Dreams his Flesh is grown spotted, or black like a More, he will
deceive those he trades withal by Lying and craft; if she be a woman that
dreams thus, she will be taken in adultery, and put away or repudiated by her
Husband.

If any one Dreams his Flesh is grown yellow or pale, he will be in danger of
falling into the distemper of a long continuing fever.

If any one Dreams his Flesh is full of Scabs, Tetters, or Corns, he will grow
rich proportionably to the said Scabs.

To Dream the body is full of lice, and the flesh incommodated by their eating
into it, that signifies that the Dreamer will hereafter get both gold and
silver.

If any one Dreams he has eaten the Flesh of a Man or Woman, he will enrich
himself by injuries and reproach.

Of the Intrails. If any one Dreams he has voyded his Intrails at the
Fundament, some of his family will be engaged abroad in some quarrel, which
will cause his damage and affliction.

If any one thinks Dreaming that he has eaten up his Intrails, he will gain by
the death of some of his Domestics; if he dreams he has eaten the intestines
of another, he will enrich himself by the Estate of another.

Of the Liver. If any one Dreams that he is indisposed in his Liver, or that it
is burnt, or dried up, his Estate and wealth will be wasted, and he himself die
suddenly; for the Liver is the source of blood, and the blood in dreams is
taken for gold and riches.

If any one Dreams he has seen or found the Liver of any of his Enemies, and
carried it away, he will overruled those that wish him ill, and be master of
their treasure.

Of the Marrow. The Marrow has the same interpretation as the Liver.

Of the Lungs. If any one Dreams he has found the Marrow, Liver or Lungs of a
Bull, He-goat, Ram, or any other horned-beast, he will enjoy the goods and
Estate of some person of quality, that is in great honor, to whom he shall be
heir; for the horns signify dignity and soveraingntie, whence it is that
horns represent crowns.

If any one Dreams that somebody has plucked out his lungs, or that he is hurt
or ill-dispos'd in that part, his designs will be frustrated, and run the
hazard of some great danger, and lose the most useful and profitable servant in
his family: for the Lungs moderate and refresh the heat of the heart, and
represent servants.

Of the Heart. The Heart in man is the same thing as the Sun in the Firmament,
and gold in the Earth; and therefore is the noblest part of the Microcosme,
first living and last dying; wherein are enclosed, as in a fortress, courage,
resolution and generosity.

If any one Dreams he has the pain of the Heart, it is a sign of some
dangerous distemper approaching, according to the proportion of the pain which
is imagined to be felt in the Heart.

If any one Dreams that he has no Heart, and that he lost it, it is a sign of
sudden death, or that he will utterly fall under the power of his most mortal
Enemies.

To Dream your Heart is more lively, large and vigorous then ordinary, is a
sign of long life, that you will overcome your Enemies, and be prosperous in
your enterprises, and feared by all persons.

The Heart, in the opinion of some, in dreams signifies man, and chiefly the
Husband; so that if a woman dreams she is ill in, or hurt at her Heart, the
evil denounced by that dream will happen to the Husband: If it be a Maid that
dreams thus, the evil will happen to her Father, or Servant, if she has one:
the Lungs have the same signification: the Liver signifies the same: the Gall
signifies a Son or Brother.

Of the Gall If any one Dreams that his Gall is broken in his body, that
signifies that he will be angry with some of his Domestics, and that he will
hurt them; and if he be a married man, he will have some great contest with his
wife; and will also be in danger of losing his money by gaming or Thieves.

Of the Spleen. The Spleen denotes the pleasure and content that is between
friends rejoicing.

If any one Dreams his Spleen is enlarged and very healthful, he will be
invited to some Feast, Comoedy, Ball, Dancing, Walk, or some good Company or
other, which will afford him very much content and diversion.

If on the contrary he imagines his Spleen is oppressed, swelled, or that he is
ill in that part, some business or other of great importance will fall into his
hands, which will bring him great care, vexation and disturbance.

Of the Brain. The Head is the Citadel wherein the Brain is environed, which
is the Dungeon of the faculties of the Soul, and by its wise conduct has
Dominion over all the other parts of Man: so that if any one Dreams his Brain
is well, and freed from all defluxions and ill humors, he will be an able
Counselor to Kings and Princes, will govern himself prudently, and will
perfect his designs with honor and profit: if on the contrary, he imagines his
Brain is ill disposed, and overcharged with humors that cause pains, he will be
unfortunate in his Counsels and enterprises, will pass for an inexpert and
imprudent person, and run into many dangers.

Of Nakedness. To Dream you see a Man naked, signifies fear and terror.

To Dream you see a naked Woman, signifies honor and joy, provided she be
fair, clear-skin'd and handsome.

But if on the contrary you Dream you see a naked Woman that is crooked, old,
wrinkled, or otherwise ill made, and black withal; that signifies shame,
repentance and ill luck; but if a Man dreams he sees such a Woman painted, the
evil will be the less.

If one Dreams he sees a naked Woman painted or in a statue of marble, Gold,
Silver or brass, and that the portraicture or statue be taking and pleasing to
the Ey, that signifies good luck, and success in business.

If a Husband Dreams he sees his Wife naked, it signifies deceit.

If a Wife Dreams she sees her Husband naked, it signifies assurance and
success in her enterprises.

To Dream one sees his Lady of pleasure naked, signifies peril and danger by
the craft and deceit of the Woman.

To Dream one sees his friend or servant naked, signifies discord and falling
out.

To Dream that a Man sees himself naked, signifies sickness or poverty, and
most commonly shame by means of some other person.

If any one Dreams he is naked in a Bath or in the Stews with a person he
phancies, it signifies joy, pleasure and health.

To Dream you see a naked More, or some other black person, signifies sadness,
melancholy and damage.

If a Woman Dreams that she lies stark naked in her Husbands arms, and yet it
is no such thing, that presageth sadness to her by ill news: but when the
Husband has the same dream, it signifies amity, joy and profit.

When a Woman Dreams she is in bed with a More, or else with a deformed
person, whom she scorns and has an aversion for, that predicts sickness or
discontent: if the Husband dreams the same thing, that signifies sickness or
death to his Wife or Mother.

To Dream that a Man is naked in bed with a handsome Woman, signifies deceit;
and with a handsome Man, pain, trouble, loss, damage and deceit.

To Dream one sees or discourses with his Father, Mother, Wife, Brother,
Sister, or some other of his relations and friends, though they are dead, that
signifies it is an advertisement for them to mind their affairs, and to behave
themselves like good people in this world.

Of the Clothes or Garments. If any one Dreams he has a suit, hat, or pair of
new boots on, and that they please him^ that signifies joy, profit, and good
success in business.

If a Gentlewoman Dreams she is dressed in a French-hood, or any other Head-tire
of a Towns-woman, that prognosticates damage and dishonor.

If a Citizen Dreams she has her head or body Dressed like a Gentlewoman or
Lady, that signifies honor, as well to herself as her Husband.

If a Man or Woman Dream they are meanly clothed, it signifies trouble and
sadness.

To Dream one is married, signifies sickness or melancholy.

If a Man Dreams he is wedded to a deformed Woman, that signifies death, or
some great discontent: if to a handsome Woman, that denotes joy and profit.

To Dream one has gloves on his hands, signifies honor.

If any one Dreams his clothes are all filthy with dirt or other ordure, or
that he has bad clothes, tattered, and much worm, that signifies sin, blame
and shame in the world.

To Dream your clothes are embroidred all over with gold or other kind of
embroidery, signifies joy and honor.

To Dream one has a crown of gold upon his head, signifies favor with his
Sovereign Prince, and that he shall be honored and feared by many, and receive
many presents.

To Dream one is adorned with flowers and posies, signifies a short-lived joy
and content.

To Dream one is well booted, or has good shoes on, signifies honor and
profit by Servants.

The contrary signifies damage, disdain and honor.

To Dream one walks in the dirt, or among thorns, signifies sickness.

To Dream one walks in the water of some Torrent, signifies adversity and grief.

To Dream one shall be clothed with scarlet, that denotes dignity, places of
honor, and great authority.

To Dream ones hat is torn or dirty, signifies damage and dishonor.

If one Dreams he has swellings, warts, or pustules in his body, that
signifies he will become rich by the revenue of his Lands, or by the interest
of his money.

If any one Dreams that his flesh is swelled by some aposteme or ulcer, that
must be understood of riches, according to the interpretation of the swelled
parts.

For the head is applied to the Master, the neck to him that Dreams; the teeth,
or at least the jaws, gums and cheeks, signify relations, friends and allies;
the shoulders, to Mistresses or Concubines; the arms, to Brothers, or the most
affectionate relations; the ribs, to Women; the hands, to Servants that have
the chiefest authority in the family; the legs and feet, to the life of him
that dreams, or his chief Servant.

If any one Dreams he is become leprous, meazled, or full of the pox, that
denotes profit and wealth with infamy: if it be a woman that has this dream,
she will be acquainted with some great Lord, or at least with some generous
person, who will bestow a good estate upon her.

Some Authors affirm, that to Dream such a dream, signifies that one shall be
scoffed at and despised by all persons by reason of some woman; but that
however he shall obtain his ends.

If any one Dreams that he receives a blow with a sword by some of his
Acquaintance, he will have reason to be pleased with him; if it be by an
unknown person, he will make peace with his friends, and get advantage thereby.

If any one Dreams that his wound is healed, he will boast of his valor, and
gain honor by it in the opinion of the world.

If any one Dreams he has the plague, his hidden store he will be discovered,
and will run the risque of losing it.

Of Furious and mad Man If any one Dreams he is a Demoniack, or otherwise
possessed by some evil spirit, he will receive benefits from his Prince, and be
long lived.

If one Dreams he has seen the Devil, that he was tormented, or otherwise that
he was much frightened, that signifies that the Dreamer is in danger of being
checked or punished by his Soverain Prince or some Magistrates.

And quite contrarily, if one Dreams he strikes the Devil or some Persons he
believes to be possessed, and that he phancies he overcomes them; it is a sign
that he that dreams thus shall overcome his Enemies, and vanquish them with
glory and satisfaction.

If any one Dreams that he is turned Idiot and mad, and is guilty of public
extravagancies, he shall be long-lived, a favorite to his Prince, and gain
pleasure and profit by the people.

If a Woman Dreams she is become foolish, and is publicly guilty of folly and
impudence, it is a sign she will have a Boy, who in time will grow great: if
she be a Maid, she will be speedily married, and that to an honest Man.

Of Drunkards. To Dream one is Drunk, is increase of Estate, and recovery of
health; but when one dreams that he is drunk without drinking any Wine; it is
an ill omen, and he runs the hazard of being disgraced by some bad action, and
of being punished by Law.

If a Man Dreams he is drunk with Sack, Muscadel, or some other sweet and
pleasant drink; it is a sign he will be beloved by some great Lords, and grow
rich thereby.

If a Man Dreams he is drunk with pure Water, he will boast causelessly of his
wealth, and vaunt of another persons strength.

If any one Dreams he is drunk and vomits, he will run the hazard of losing his
Estate by the violence of his Prince, who will force him to an account of his
means ill gotten; or if he be a Gamester, he will lose all he has formerly won.

If any one Dreams that being drunk, he is very much pained at heart, and in
his Intrails, that is as much as to say, that his Domestics or Servants will
rob him of his money, or destroy his fortune without his knowledge.

If any one Dreams he is grown lean and wasted, he will be disturbed and have
suits at Law, of some other ill business, that will occasion the loss of his
Estate; or else he is in danger of falling sick: nevertheless if a Woman Dreams
that her tongue is grown less and learner then ordinary, that signifies unto
her honor, wisdom, prudence and discretion, by which qualifications she will
be honored and esteemed by all persons.

We have discoursed before in the 43 page of beheading, now we must explain the
other sorts of punishment.

If any one Dreams that by sentence or judgment he was condemned to be hanged,
and that he imagins it was really executed, he will be dignified according to
the height of the Gibbet or Tree whereon he was hanged.

If the Dreamer be sick or afflicted, he will be freed from the disease, and in
the end have joy and contentment.

If any one Dreams he condemned another to be hanged, that signifies he will be
angry with him whom he imagined he condemned; but in a small time after, he
will place him in honor and dignity, which he will abuse.

According to the Interpretation of the Persians and Egyptians, he that
Phancies he is hanged, broken on the wheel, whipped or burned by sentence of
Law, he will be rich, honored and respected for some time; but if he imagines
that he was hanged or burned by a fire that did quite consume him, he will
inevitably perish in the end.

If any one Dreams that being to be hanged he was delivered and came down to
the bottom of the Gibbet, that person will lose his Estate and dignity.

If any one Dreams he has eaten the flesh of a Man hanged, he will be enriched
by some persons, but it shall be by Foul practice and some secret crime.

Of Death and the Grave. If any one Dreams he is dead, he will be subjected to
some great Prince, will grow rich, and long-lived, though not without much envy.

If it seems that he is put into a grave and buried, that presageth he will die
in a mean condition; yet some believe (groundedly upon experience) that to
dream one is dead and buried, he that has such a dream shall recover an
Estate, according to the proportion of the quantity of earth that is laid upon
him.

If a person Dreams he sees one that is dead, and that he believes him to be
alive, that signifies he is saved, and that we must do what he faith; nay
farther, it signifies assurance of the dispatch of business, and Gods blessing,
who takes care to send us visions for our good, and for the salvation of body
and soul.

Of Games.
THe Spirit of Man being more inclined to things that recreate then the
contrary, he dreams oftener of Plays and Pastimes then serious actions.

The Game of Chesse and Tables is the representative of a Field prepared for a
battle; the two Gamesters are the two Generals of the Armies, and the Tables
and Chess-men are the soldiers that make up the two Armies: wherefore if any
one dreams that he plays at Chess with an acquaintance, it is a sign he will
fall out with somebody that he knows; and if he imagines in his dreams that he
wins, he shall be victorious over his Enemies; and on the contrary, if he
dreams he loses, he will be overcome and worsted in the combat.

If the Dreamer imagines that he has taken many Men in play, that foretells he
will take many of his Enemies prisoners.

If a King or General of an Army dreams he has lost his Chesse-board, or that
it is broken, or stolen from him, he will lose his Army either by the Enemies
Assault, or else by plague or famine.

To Dream one plays at Cards or Dice, signifies deceit and craft, and that he
is in danger of losing his Estate by some wicked persons.

To Dream you play at Tennis, signifies travel and pain to gain wealth by
contention and injury.

To Dream you have won at Dice, is a sign that some Inheritance will fall to
you by the death of some of your relations; for Dice are made of dead men's
bones.

Of Plays. To Dream you see a Comoedy, Farce, or some other recreation,
signifies good success in business.

To Dream you see a Tragoedy acted, signifies labor, loss of friends and
estate, with grief and affliction.

To Dream you see persons dance at a Ball, or that you are engaged in a Ball,
signifies joy, pleasure, recreation and inheritance.

To Dream one plays, or sees another play upon a Lute, Violin or other musical
Instrument, signifies good news, concord, and a good correspondencie between
Man and Wife, Master and Servant, Prince and Subjects.

To Dream one plays or sees another play upon the Virginals, Claricords, or
Organs, signifies the death of relations, or funeral-obsequies.

To Dream one danceth at a wedding, signifies sickness.

To Dream one hears Bells ring, signifies an alarm, murmuring, disturbance and
commotions among citizens.

To Dream you play tunes on small Bells, signifies discord and disunion between
subjects and servants.

If any one Dreams he sings, that signifies he will be afflicted and weep.

To Dream you hear singing musically, or playing in consort upon Instruments,
signifies consolation in adversity, and recovery of health to those that are
sick.

To Dream you play, or hear playing on wind. Instruments, as Flutes, Flajolets,
large or small Bagpipes, the Clarion, and other such Instruments, signifies
trouble, contention, and being overthrowin at Law.

To Dream you hear Birds sing, signifies love, joy and delight.

To Dream you hear Hens cackle, or Geese cry, signifies profit, and assurance
of the dispatch of business.

If any one Dreams he plays at any of those plays with which company use to
divert themselves; as at Questions and Commands, Cross Purposes,
Blind-man-buffe, Hot-cockles, Barly-break and many others; it signifies
prosperity, joy, pleasure, health, and concord among Friends and Relations.

Of Running If any one dreams he runs, it is a good sign; especially if he
imagines he runs away, and flies for fear of another, that signifies security;
and when one believes he runs after his Enemy, that denotes victory and profit.

To Dream people run one against another, signifies wrangling and disorder; if
they are little Children, that speaks joy and fair weather; nevertheless if
those Children are armed with sticks or staves, that foretells War and
dissension.

To Dream you see a Hare or Heart running, signifies great wealth gained by
address, and subtilty of spirit.

To see a Horse running, signifies prosperity and accomplishment of desires.

To see an Ass run, signifies misfortune: when a sick body dreams he runs, it
is a very bad sign.

And when a Woman dreams she runs, that foretells disgrace and damage.

Of some other humane Actions.
TO Dream one trades with a stranger in wool, signifies profit; in iron, loss
and misfortune; in silk, satin, velvet, and other fine silks, profit and joy;
in linen cloth, the very same.

If any one Dreams he gathers up gold and silver, that signifies deceit and
loss.

To Dream one carries wood upon his back, or that he is bucking or starching of
linen, blows the fire, turns the spit, and other things of mean concernment,
signifies to the rich servitude, to the poor profit.

To Dream one makes Pies, Cakes, Tarts or Confets; signifies joy and profit.

To Dream one makes tapistry, draws pictures, or dies stuffs, that signifies
joy without profit.

To Dream one comforts the sick, prescribes them remedies and medicines,
signifies profit and felicity.

To Dream one makes Shoes or Slippers; to the Rich that signifies decay and
poverty, to Artists it denotes the contrary.

To Dream one shaves or cuts another hair, that signifies profit to him whose
hair we seem to cut, and to the Dreamer misfortune.

To Dream one manures and cultivates the Earth, it signifies melancholy to
those that are not of such a condition, and to Laborers it signifies gain, and
a plentiful crop.

To Dream you ride with a company of Men, is very lucky and profitable: but
with Women, it signifies misfortune and deceit.

To Dream one is in woods or in meadows, and keeps Beasts; to the rich that
signifies disgrace and loss; and to the poor and peasantry, it signifies profit.

To Dream that one is in a Tavern, and feasting with his companions, signifies
joy and comfort.

To Dream you piss against the wall, and in truth it falls out sometimes that we
do so indeed in such a dream, that signifies assistance of, or assistance in
business.

To Dream you do your business in the fields, signifies joy, profit and health.

To Dream you take birds, signifies pleasure and profit.

To Dream you shoot in a bow, signifies comfort; discharge a gun, profit,
deceit, and grief through anger.

To Dream you read Romances, Comoedies, or other diverting books, signifies joy
and comfort.

To Dream you read serious books, and of some sublime Science, signifies
benediction and wisdom.

To Dream you write letters to your friends, or receive letters from them,
signifies good news.

To Dream you walk in the night, signifies trouble and melancholy.

To Dream you play the Mason, or cause a house to be built, signifies
molestation, loss, sickness, or death.

Of Christian and Heavenly Exercises.
TO Dream one is at Church, and prays to God devoutly, signifies joy and
comfort.

To Dream you make vows and offerings to God, signifies love and dilection.

To Dream that you see God's face, so as he communicated himself to Man, and
that he seems to stretch forth his arms while we invoque him; signifies joy,
comfort, grace, the blessing of God, and good success in business.

To Dream you see some Angel or Saint, signifies consolation, and advertisment
to live well and repent of our sins: this denotes also good news, increase of
honor and authority.

To Dream that you do nothing but talk idly at Church, and are drawn aside by
bad thoughts, signifies envy and sin.

To Dream you see an Apparition or Spirit that seems of a comely aspect, and
attired in white, that signifies joy and consolation: if he be deformed and
black, it signifies deceit, and tentation to sin.

To Dream you see a white Pigeon flying, which is taken in the sacred Scrpture
for the Hieroglyphick of the holy Ghost; signifies consolation, devotion, and
good success in undertakings; provided they be done for the glory of God, and
the good of our neighbor.

To Dream you see an Angel fly ov^r you or your House, signifies joy,
consolation, benediction and good news.

To Dream that one speaks to the Holy Virgin, signifies consolation, recovery
of health, and all good fortune.

Of the Sun.
THe Sun is the most lively image of God among inanimate creatures, and the
holy Writ calls it the Throne or Palace of God; and as God is the principle of
all foecundity, so is the Sun to this inferior World; which has obliged some
to bestow upon it the name of the Earths Husband, and Father of Gold, which is
the most perfect thing that is found and drawn out of the bowels of the Earth,
by reason of that well proportioned temperament, which is known to Philosophers
by the name of temperamentum ad pondus. The Sun has been also called the Ey
and Heart of Heaven, the Spirit and Reason of the material World, the eternal
Animal, the Animated Star, the Ey that never sleeps, the Ey of Justice, Father
of Light and Generation. The Sun represents unity, truth, light, fruitfulness,
soverain Majesty, heat, abundance and riches, because he is (as has been said)
the Father of Gold, and ripens all the Fruits of the Earth.

To Dream you see the Sun come out of the Sea, or rise in our Horizon,
signifies good news, and success in your designs.

To Dream you see the Sun set, signifies the contrary: yet some believe that it
denotes good fortune to the party that Dreams.

If a Woman has such a dream, it signifies she will have a Son.

To Dream you see the Sun, signifies dispatch of business, and revelation of
things secret; to the sick it denounces health, to the prisoner liberty, and a
cure to him that is hurt in the Ey.

To Dream you see the Sun clouded, red or hot, signifies obstruction in
business, death to your Children, or danger to your own person, or sore Eyes;
but such a dream is good to those that will conceal themselves for some crimes,
o^ for fear of their Enemies.

To Dream that the Sun descends upon your House, signifies danger by fire.

To Dream you see the Sunbeams come into your bed, when in bed, that signifies
sickness by a feavor; but to dream she entirely shines all over your Chamber,
signifies gain, profit, felicity and honor: this presageth likewise to married
people, that they will have a Son who will be honorable.

To Dream you see the Sun obscured, or disappear, is a very bad dream, unless
it be to those that have a mind to be unknown by reason of their offenses; for
to others, for the most part, it signifies death, or at the least loss of sight
by some accident, or by some defluxion.

To see the Sun shine about your head, signifies to malefactors grace and
pardon; and to those that are at liberty, it denotes honor and glory among
their acquaintance.

To Dream you enter a house where the Sun shines, signifies the getting an
Estate.

Of the Moon.
IF any one Dreams he sees the Moon shine, that signifies his Wife loves him
extremely, and that she is well; it also denotes the getting of silver: for as
the Sun represents gold, so the Moon does silver; and as gold is taken for the
heart of the world, so is silver for the brain.

To Dream you see the Moon darkened, signifies the death or sickness of ones
Wife, Mother, Sister, Daughter, loss of money, or danger in a voyage or journey,
especially if it be by water; or else it signifies a distemper in the brain or
Eyes.

To Dream you see the Moon darkened, and grow clear and bright again, signifies
profit to the Woman that dreams, and to the Man joy and prosperity: the Moon
first clear and afterward clouded, presageth the contrary.

To Dream you see the Moon in the form of a full and white face, that signifies
to the Virgin speedy marriage; to the married Woman, that she will have a
handsome Daughter: If the Husband dreams it, it signifies that his Wife will
have a Son. Such a dream is prosperous to Goldsmiths, Merchants, Jewellers and
Banquers.

To Dream you see the Moon at full, is a good sign to handsome women of their
being belo^'d by those that view them, but it is bad for such as conceal
themselves, as Thieves and Murderers, for they will be certainly discovered; yet
it signifies death to the sick, or to Mariners.

To Dream the Moon shines about your bed, signifies grace, pardon, and
deliverance by means of some Woman.

Of the Stars.
TO Dream you see the sky serene, and the Stars clear and twinkling, signifies
prosperity and advantage in a voyage or journey, good news and gain by all you
do; and contrarily, to see them dusky and pale color'd, signifies all sorts of
mischief.

To Dream you see the Stars disappear, signifies loss, and great vexation and
cares to those that are rich, and death to those that are poor, such a dream is
only good to those, that have committed some heinous offense, or study to
commit it; for they may do it without any fear.

To Dream you see the Stars fall athwart the top of the House, signifies
sickness, or that the House will be uninhabited, or burned by accident.

If one Dreams he sees the Sars shining into the House, it signifies that the
chief person of the family will be in danger of death.

To Dream you see several happy Comets, or other Stars with streaming tails,
signifies future evils by War, Pestilence and Famine, with are the scourges
wherewith God chastises mortals.

Of the Rainbow.
TO Dream you see the Rainbow in the East, is a good omen to the poor and
sick; for the former will recover their estates, and the later their health:
and if you dream you see it in the West, to the rich it is a good, to the poor
a bad sign.

To Dream you see the Rainbow directly over your head, or near you, signifies
change of fortune, and most commonly the death of the Dreamer, and ruin of his
family.

Of things Infernal.
IF any one Dreams that he sees the Devils, it is a very bad sign; for such a
vision cannot bring along with it any good tidings; to the sick it foretells
death, and to the healthful it signifies melancholy, anger, tumults, and
violent sickness.

And to Dream one sees Hell as it is described, and that he hears the damned
Souls groan and complain through the extremity of their torments; it is an
advertisement that God sends to the Dreamer, to the end he may amend his life,
and that repenting of his sins, he may throw himself upon God's mercy.

If any one Dreams the Devil speaks to him, that signifies tentation, deceit,
treachery, despair, and oftentimes the ruin and death of him that dreams.

To Dream one is carried away by the Devil, it is a worse Dream; yet I find
that no dream delights the Dreamer so much as this; for being awaked, he is
ravished with joy that he is freed from so great an evil, for which he ought to
return God thanks, and beg of him that he would be pleased to send him his good
Angel to guard him, and fight against that wicked Spirit, which stands always
sentinel to surprise us.

To Dream you see a Serpent or seaven-headed Hydra, signifies sin and
temptation.

To Dream you see the Dog Cerberus, whom the Poets feign to be the Porter of
Hell, signifies sin, and arrests by Sergeants.

To Dream you see the damned plunged in the (...) and flames, and suffer great
torture, signifies sadness, repentance, grief, and a melancholique distemper.

To Dream you see the Devil, as he is drawn by Painters and Poets, vizt. black
and hideous, with horns, claws, and a great tail, signifies torment and despair.

To Dream you see Harpies, which are infernal creatures, half-Women and
half-Serpents, or else furies, such as the Poets feign them to be; that
signifies tribulation and pains occasioned by envious persons, and such as seek
our ruin, shame or death by mischief and treachery.

To Dream you are descended into Hell, and returned thence, to those that are
great and rich it signifies misfortune, but it is a good sign to the poor and
weak.

To Dream you see a dead Man that says nothing, signifies that he that dreams
will be subject to the same passions and fortune as the party deceased had when
alive, if he know him.

If any one Dreams that a dead Man takes away his garments, robs him of his
money or food, it is a sign of death to him, or to some of his nearest
relations and friends.

To Dream a Man that is alive and in health is dead, that signifies trouble,
tribulation, and being overthrown at Law.

To Dream you see a Man die a second time that is already dead, signifies the
death of your nearest relations of the same name and Surname.

To Dream you are erecting a Tomb, that signifies marriages, weddings, and
birth of Children; but if the Dreamer imagines that he sees the Tomb fall to
ruin, that signifies sickness and ruin to him that Dreams, and his family.

If any one Dreams he is dead, he will be subject to some great Prince, and
become rich, though he be much envied.

If it seems to him that he is buried and interred, he shall have as much wealth
as he has earth laid over him.

If any one Dreams he is buried alive, he is in danger of being unhappy and
unfortunate during his life.

If any one Dreams he had to do with a dead Woman, he will be loved and
maintained by some great Lady.

To Dream that one goes to the funeral and Internment of any one of his
Relations or Friends, or of some great Lord, is a good sign to the Dreamer,
who undoubtedly will get an Estate by means of his Relations, or else marry a
fortune to his own content.

DREAMS Interpreted ALPHABETICALLY.
A.
To Dream that you
ARe clothed with Silk, signifies honor. Are Drunk, signifies sickness. Are
girt with an old girdle, signifies labor and pains. Are enchanted, signifies
secrets and sorrows. Are kissed by Men of great quality, signifies consolation.
Are stark naked, signifies loss and damage in your Estate. Are turned
Physician, signifies cheerfulness. Are turned into a Tree, signifies sickness.
Are unsettled in your thoughts, signifies joy. Ascend a Ladder, signifies
honor. Ascend a very high mountain, the same thing. Ascend up to Heaven,
signifies grandeur.
B.
To Dream that you
BAthe your self in a clear Fountain, signifies joy. Bathe in stinking water,
signifies shame and false accusation. Bestow a knife upon any one, signifies
injustice and contention. Bestow a ring upon any one, signifies damage. Bite
your nails, signifies wrangling and vexation. Blot or tear your paper,
signifies the well-ordering of business. Bray or pound pepper, signifies
melancholy. Build a Church, or erect an Altar, that some person of your kindred
or family will be made a Priest. Build a House, signifies comfort. Burn a
House, and see it burning, signifies scandals that will be thrown upon you, and
loss of Estate.
C.
To Dream that you
CArry a Bow, signifies desire or torment. Carry a Crown of gold in your hand,
signifies honor and dignity. Carry a Faulcon upon your fist, and walk with it,
signifies honor. Carry hot Bread, signifies accusation. Carry a young Maid,
signifies joy. Catch Seafish, it is a bad sign. Cleanse a Well, or fall into
it, signifies injury. Come out of a Coach, signifies being degraded from great
honor; and disgrace upon a criminal account. Command any one, signifies
trouble. Commit adultery, signifies future debates. Cut barly-bread, signifies
rejoicing. Cut Bacon, signifies the death of some person. Cut your fingers, or
see them cut by another, signifies damage.
D.
To Dream that you
DEscend a Ladder, signifies damage. Destroy any place, signifies deceit.
Discourse with the King, signifies honor, when absent. Discourse with your
Brethren, signifies vexation. Discourse with Jesus Christ, signifies
consolation. Discourse with the Virgin Mary, signifies joy. Discourse with
great Lords, or to go into any place with them, signifies honor. Dispute with
Philosophers, signifies profit and gain. Do good to any one, signifies jollity.
Do the Act of Marriage, signifies danger. Draw out your Teeth, signifies death.
Drink clear water, is a good sign. Drink hot water, signifies sickness. Drink
Milk, is an extraordinary good sign. Drink Sophisticated wine, the same. Drink
stinking water, signifies violent distempers. Drink Vinegar, signifies
sickness. Drink White Wind, signifies health.
E.
To Dream that you
EAt Apples, signifies choler. Eat Bacon of salt-meats, signifies murmuring.
Eat Beans, signifies sickness. Eat Carrion, signifies sadness. Eat Cheese,
signifies profit and gain. Eat Fleas; signifies disquiet. Eat Man's flesh,
signifies labor and trouble. Eat Roots, signifies discord. Eat Rost-meat,
signifies falling into sin. Eat a Salade, signifies evil, or sickness that will
happen. Eat Salt-meat, signifies a disease. Eat Silver, signifies wrath and
anger. Eat Variety of meats, signifies loss. Eat white-Bread, signifies gain.
F.
To Dream that you
FAll in the Dirt, signifies treachery, or disturbance by some person or other.
Fall into the Water, signifies death or danger to your person. Fall into a
clear Fountain, signifies honor and gain. Fall into a Pit or ditch, signifies
the loss of a cause or suit at Law. Fall into a troubled Fountain, signifies
accusation. Fall on the ground, signifies dishonor and scandal. Fall upon a
Bridge, signifies obstruction. Feed, or bring a Lamb to the slaughter,
signifies torment. Feed Oxen, is a good sign. Feel a burning, signifies
danger. Feel a heat, signifies grief. Fell Trees, signifies loss. Fight with
Serpents and Adders, signifies the overthrow of Enemies. Find a Bird's-nest, is
a good sign.
G.
To Dream that you
GAther Apples, signifies vexation from some person or other. Gather black
Grapes, signifies damage. Gather Flowers, signifies mirth and jollity. Gather
white-Grapes, signifies gain. Give any thing to one that is dead, signifies
loss. Give, or take physique, signifies living in poverty. Go a hunting,
signifies some accusation. Go to Mass, signifies honor and joy. Go over a
broken Bridge, signifies fear. Go over a Ditch upon a small plank, signifies
deceit by Lawyers.
H.
To Dream that you
HAndle or chew Gold, signifies anger. Have gray Hairs, signifies gain, profit
and joy. Have a little Beard, suits and controversies at Law. Have a long
Beard, signifies strength or gain. Have long Hairs on your Head, signifies
honor Have a new suit of Clothes, the same. Have new Shoes and Stockins,
signifies comfort. Have old ones, signifies sadness. Have a new Girdle,
signifies honor. Have an old worn Girdle, signifies damage. Have a red Garment
on, signifies blood, (...) bleeding. Have Rods in your hand, signifies jollity.
Have a Staff in your hand, signifies sickness. Have two Heads, signifies
company. Have weak Arms, signifies torment. Have your Arms dried up, is a very
ill sign. Have your Beard shaved, signifies tribulation. Have your Hair cut,
signifies loss. Hear an Ass bray, signifies damage. Hear Beasts, signifies
gain. Hear Bells ring, signifies disgrace and trouble. Hear Birds chirpe, is a
good sign. Hear Clocks strike, signifies infamy. Hear a Cock crow,
signifies prosperity. Hear Dogs bark, and to be disturbed thereat, signifies
the overthrow of Enemies. Hear Hens cackle, or that you catch them, signifies
joy. Hear a Raven croake, signifies sadness. Hear a Shaking, signifies
deceit, which will happen to the Dreamer in the place where he dreams. Hear
the sound of Organs, signifies joy. Hear, or see Thunder, signifies injurious
language by the evil tongues of envious persons. Hear your Wife scold,
signifies great torment.
I.
To Dream that you
IMbarque in a small Vessel, signifies sickness.
K.
To Dream that you
KIll a Man, signifies assuredness of business. Kill your Father, is a bad
sign. Kiss a Person, signifies loss. Kiss a Person deceased, signifies long
life.
L.
To Dream that you
LOok upon your Hands, signifies sickness. Lose your Eyes, signifies the death
of some good Friend. Lose your Keys, signifies anger. Lose your Teeth,
signifies honor. Lose your Teeth, signifies also, the death of some near
relation, or intimate Friend. Lie with a Whore, signifies certainty in dispatch
of business. Lie with your Mother, the same.
M.
To Dream that you
MAke Candles, signifies rejoicing. Make a Breach, signifies molestation. Make
an Ointment, signifies vexation and trouble. Make your Will, is a bad sign.
Manage business of great concernment, signifies obstruction. Marry your
Sisters, signifies danger. Marry a Wife, signifies loss. Marry, signifies
damage, and sometime death.
N. and O. have nothing.

P.
To Dream that you
PLay with a Dog, is a good sign. Pluck the Hair off of your Head, signifies
loss of Friends. Put up prayers and supplications to God, signifies happiness.
Q. has nothing.

R.
To Dream that you
REceive audience of the King, signifies gain. Receive a gift of the King, or
some Prince, signifies great joy. Receive obstruction by an Adversary,
signifies Expedition of business. Ride on a white, gray, or dappled Nag,
signifies prosperity.
S.
To Dream that you
SAil in a Ship, or you see Ships sailing, is a good sign. See an Ass,
signifies malice. See an Ass sitting upon his Crupper, signifies
laboriousness. See the Air serene, is great gain. See the Air cloudy, signifies
expedition of business. See Ants, signifies contention. See Trees, or are
climbing them, signifies future honor. See withered Trees, signifies deceit.
See Trees bearing fruit, signifies gain and profit. See Trees without blossom,
signifies expedition of business. See Silver eaten, signifies great advantage.
See Candles burning, signifies anger or contention. See Candles that are not
lighted, signifies a reward for something you have done. See Ravens flying,
signifies complaint and sadness. See burning Coals, signifies shame and
reproach. See dead Coals, signifies expedition of business. See a Cross
carried along, signifies sadness. See Cream spilt upon you, signifies the
infusion of some grace by the Holy Ghost. See a Raven fly over you, signifies
danger and damage. See white Horses, signifies joy. See black Horses,
signifies sadness. See Horses Pace, signifies mirth. See red or rone-color'd
Horse; signifies prosperity. See Horses of several colors, signifies expedition
of business. See a Gelding, signifies accusation. See a Horse mount, signifies
prosperity. See Dragons, signifies gain. See Fire fall from Heaven, signifies
strange things that will ensue. See armed Men, is a good sign. See Men in
arms come against you, signifies sadness. See armed Men fly, is a sign of
Victory. See your Beard dry, signifies joy. See your Beard pulled up by the
roots, signifies great danger. See the Moon Pale, is joyfulness. See the Moon
fall from the Firmament, signifies sickness. See the Moon decrease, signifies
the death of some Prince, or great Lord. See the Moon died with blood,
signifies travel, or pilgrimage. See the Moon darkened, signifies sadness. See
the new Moon, signifies expedition of business. See two Moons appear, is
increase of honor. See Ships full fraighted with goods, signifies prosperity.
See Ships endangered by a Tempest, signifies peril. See a troubled River,
signifies annoy, and discontent. See a River flow into your House, signifies
plenty of riches. See a River flow out of your House, signifies that your life
is in danger, or some loss that will accrue by injury done to you. See a clear
River glide along, signifies security. See the King or Queen, signifies honor
and joy. See red Roses, signifies joy and recreation. See your self become a
Husbandman, signifies great toil. See your self hurt with iron, signifies
damage. See your self fight with the Devil, signifies gain. See your self
turned Woman, signifies sickness. See your self turned into a Hen, signifies
disquiet. See your self sitting or lying in a Church, signifies change of
apparel. See your self changed into a Tree, signifies joy and profit. See your
self sick, signifies sadness, or imprisonment. See your Picture drawn,
signifies long life. See your self in a Bath, signifies anguish. See your self
thrown into a Fire, signifies sickness, or violent heat occasioned by a fever.
See an Eagle fly over your head, signifies honor. See Birds fighting, signifies
adversity. See Birds fly over your head, signifies prejudice by Enemies. See
black-Birds, signifies tribulation. See a swarm of Flies, signifies Enemies
and unreasonable persons that will scandalize you. See a Lamb or young Kid,
signifies extraordinary comfort. See fire burning, signifies a deluge, or
change of place. See one command, signifies anger and authority. See fat Oxen,
signifies a fruitful year. See lean Oxen, signifies scarcity of provisions,
and famine. See Oxen plowing in the field, signifies gain. See black Oxen,
signifies danger. See Oxen go to water, is a bad sign. See Mayds that are
singing, signifies weeping. See the Beam of a house fall, signifies the death
of some Grandee. See the top of your house burn, signifies the death of your
Lord, Wife, or Friends Wife. See Tapistry or Pictures, signifies treachery,
deceit and cozenage. See a Giant, or a large sized Person, is a good sign. See
the body of our Lord, signifies honor. See Shee-goats or Wolves, signifies that
you will be robbed. See one beheaded, signifies sickness. See the Meat you have
eaten, signifies loss. See a comely countenance, unlike your own, signifies
honor. See a black Face, signifies long life. See a Fountain spring up in your
house, signifies honor and profit. See Fountains, or believe that you are
enchanted, signifies sadness. See Children born, signifies damage. See an Oven
burning hot, signifies change of place. See your deceased Brothers and Sisters,
signifies long life. See a Woman naked, signifies the death of some person. See
your Mother living, signifies joy. See her dead, signifies misfortune. See your
Friends or Relations dead, signifies joy. See Breasts full of milk, signifies
profit. See a Hen with her chickens, signifies damage. See a Hen lay eggs,
signifies gain. See a Bed well furnished, signifies joy. See broken Eggs, is an
ill sign. See it rain, signifies great riches. See live-Fish, is an all sign.
See fishing Nets, signifies rain. See the Sun clear, signifies assuredness
among great Persons, who will accomplish their designs. See the Sun in a
cloud, signifies danger to the said great Persons. See the Stars of Heaven,
signifies loss to the Emperor, or your own Lord. See the Sun and Moon fall
together, is an ill sign. See old Shoes, signifies loss. See your Clothes
burned, is an ill sign. See darkness, signifies sin. See a Flock of Birds,
signifies suits at Law. See your self in black Clothes, signifies joy. See
Persons hanging on a Gibbet, signifies damage and great afflictions. See many
Serpents, signifies that you will be deceived by a Woman. See old Folks, is a
bad sign. Shoot in a Bow, signifies honor. Sing Hymn or Psalm, signifies
hindrance of business. Study the Sciences, signifies cheerfulness.
T.
To Dream that you
TAke away a Maid by force, signifies poisoning. Take away a Woman, signifies
change of place. Take Bees, signifies profit and gain. Take Blood, signifies a
pain in the fundament. Take Hold of ones nose, signifies fornication. Take hold
of the Privy-members, signifies that you have lost the faculty of procreation.
Take a Sparrow-hawke, signifies gain. Take your Clothes to put them on,
signifies loss. Talk with an Enemy, signifies you must have a care of him. Talk
with your son, signifies damage. Tame wild Beasts, the same thing. Taste
sweet things, signifies subtilty. Trade in Swine or Lead, signifies sickness.
Tread grapes, signifies the overthrow of your Enemies.
U.
To Dream that you
UNcover or discover an Altar, signifies joy. Undo a Man, signifies sadness.
W.
To Dream that you
Walk apace, or run, signifies gain. Walk in a Forest, signifies trouble.
Walk in a Garden, signifies joy. Walk upon holy Ground, is a good sign.
Walk upon Thorns, signifies the destruction of Enemies. Walk when your feet
are sore, signifies fasting. Walk with four-footed Beasts, signifies sickness.
Wash your beard, is sadness. Wash your face, signifies repentance of your sin.
Wash your feet, signifies molestation, and disturbance. Wash your Hands,
signifies disquiet an vexation. Wash your Head, signifies deliverance from
danger. Wash your self in the Sea, signifies loss and damage. Wear a Crown of
gold upon your Head, signifies wrangling or contention. Wear or have a
parti-colored Crown, signifies the temperature of the weather. Worship God,
signifies joy. Write on Paper, signifies accusation. Write on, or read in
Paper, signifies News.
X. Y. Z. have nothing.

THis (courteous Reader) is all I can acquaint you with concerning Dreams,
making it my request, that you would not pin your faith upon them so far, as to
create any disturbance within your self thereby. It is said that Dreams, for
the most part, are but fables; and I often find this Proverb true: and when you
understand that meats are the cause that Dreams are good or bad, joyful or sad,
pleasant or disturbing, you will then be satisfied that they fall out as well
by accident as necessity; and consequently, that you ought not wholly to depend
upon them. Those Dreams that may have a true event, proceed from wise and sober
Persons, that are gifted with a settled mind and solid judgment: for they that
are of a contrary temper, can have no Dream that deserves an interpretation, or
that can possibly happen. The Affections and afflictions discompose the mind,
and have more power to make it extravagant Sleeping then waking. Too large a
quantity of Meat or Wine, or the depraved quality infused into them by a
thousand kind of sauces and ingredients which are added thereunto, or
otherwise, not being taken at certain Hours, all these things debilitate and
stupifie the body, disturb the mind, and produce confused and extravagant
Dreams, which are altogether insignificant, and which should rather oblige the
wise Interpreters and Explainers of them to censure such Dreamers, then to
afford them any hope of good success. So that you should judiciously discover
the condition you are in when you Dream, before you give credit thereunto.

A TREATISE OF PHYSIOGNOMIE.

Published in French By the Sieur Marck de Vulson, Knight of the Order of S.
Michael; AND Translated into English By J. G. of the Inner Temple, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook. 1669.

A TREATISE OF PHYSIOGNOMY.
THis Treatise must necessarily prove advantageous and beneficial, not only
because it concerns every individual person, but also because there are few men
of what quality or condition soever, but are interested in things of this
nature. The Divine, Philosopher, Physician both of soul and body, the good
Christian in the regulating of his inclination, the Gentleman that earnestly
desires an honest and agreeable conversation, may gather from hence something
which may prove an additional advantage to him in his profession; in fine,
every person may hereby attain to the knowledge of himself, which is to be
valued above all treasures and riches imaginable. The Divine is here concerned,
because that those extraordinary Agitations that are laid open to his view,
which anticipate reason, do oppose virtue, seduce the will, and consequently
are the chiefest causes of sin. Wherefore the Doctor in Divinity that treats of
our ultimate end, and the means to obtain it, ought necessarily to extend his
knowledge to subjects of this nature. The Philosophers both natural and moral,
are deeply concerned, and bend their minds to this subject. The Natural
Philosopher, who contemplates on the Nature of Man, enters into the discourse
concerning their Actions, without which it is impossible to attain the
knowledge thereof. The Moral Philosopher persuading men to Virtue, and
dissuading them from Vice, demonstrates how out disordered appetite ought to be
curbed by the greatness of our resolution and moderation: And I do here declare
their nature and subtilty, in what sort of people they are most vehement, and
in whom also moderate.

The devout Preacher that perfectly understands by these symptoms the age,
sex, nature and property of those persons with whom he converseth, may beyond
all dispute create strange alterations in the minds of his Auditory. I remember
a Preacher in a famous City, who had so great an influence upon the affections
of his Auditors, that he could at his pleasure draw abundance of tears from
them, and upon the change of his discourse convert their grief into joy. The
reason is this, because that he himself being much addicted to that kind of
passion, and exquisite in the art of moving his Auditory thereunto, he could
persuade to whatsoever his fancy led him. The same benefit may be made by all
Orators, as Ambassadors, Lawyers, Magistrates, Captains, and all others, that
would persuade a multitude: Much might be said of this matter, but I will touch
it briefly elsewhere, as also the remedies suitable to the defects we shall
find or judge of by our art.

And as this Treatise is of great advantage to the Physician of the Soul, it is
no less to the Physician of the Body; for there is no violent affection but
creates some extraordinary alteration in one of the four humors of the Body.
And all Physicians agree in this, that of all extrinsick causes of distempers,
one is, (and that none of the most inconsiderable) the violence of some
extraordinary passion: for although it has unhinged their brains, as well as
the Natural Philosophers, to find out the cause how an operation lodged in the
understanding can alter the body, and move the humors from place to place; yet
they all concenter in this opinion, that they are the product of a certain
natural Sympathy, and the subordination of one part to the other; and that the
Spirits and Humors treat their passions as Lords and Masters. So that the
Physician understanding what passion causes the disease, may very well infer
from thence what humor abounds; and consequently, what is to be purged, what
remedies to be applied, and how it may for the future be prevented.

If all these Professions prae-mentioned have a share in this discourse, the
good Christian indisputably, whose life is a war-fare upon earth, he who makes
it his chief study to extirpate vice and cultivate virtue, he who pretends to
be piloted by reason, and not to be tyrannized over by any preposterous
affection; This person (I say) can better dive into, and meditate upon this
matter; he can soon find out where these Serpents and Basilisks nestle, which
draw out the precious blood of his soul; he can discern where the thorn is
fixed that pierces his heart; in fine, he will find out his domestique enemies
that always disturb his peace, molest him in prosperity, and debase him in
adversity; make him dissolute in pleasure, and desperate in sorrow; furious in
passion, trembling in fear, and languishing in hope. It was under such
temptations as these, that St. Paul did punish his body, 1 Cor. 9.27. Castigo
corpus meum and in servitutem redigo. I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection. These were the members that the Apostle exhorts us to mortify here
upon earth; saying, Mortificate membra vestra quae sunt super terram. Seeing
then how the life of a spiritual man ought to be employed in the expugnation of
these importunate Jebusites, doubtless it is a matter of great concernment for
him to understand the nature of his enemies, their stratagems and daily
incursions, even to the chiefest Citadel of his Soul, I mean the Spirit and
Will.

Nor is the Christian alone concerned in the exact knowledge of his passions,
but also the Gentleman and prudent Politician by prying into the nature and
quality of his affections, and restraining their irregular motions, will be
Master of a most complaisant deportment and presence, and by this means may
gentilely insinuate himself into the friendship of other men. When he travels
into foreign parts, he may discover to what passion the people are most
inclinable: for as I have found by experience, there is no Nation in Europe but
has some extraordinaay affection, as Pride, Anger, Uncleanness, Inconstancy,
Gluttony, Drunkenness, Idleness, or some such passion. It is a matter of great
moment in society, to understand the inclination of the company you associate
with; and that conversation cannot but be agreeable, where the passions of the
parties are moderated. I will say nothing of Magistrates, who may by
Physiognomy understand the disposition and inclination of their Inferiors and
Subjects.

But to close up all, the subject of this Treatise I am upon comprehends the
principal object which the ancient Philosophers ever aimed at, and wherein they
placed the greatest part of their felicity; that was, Nosce teipsum, Know thy
self: which knowledge consists in the exact experience that every man has of
himself in particular, and an universal knowledge of men in general.

The way for a Man to know himself.
IT is very requisite and necessary that he that will take upon him to judge
others, should above all things truly understand his own inclination, and by
what passions his soul is most swayed; for there is no man that enjoys the
benefit of the common air, but is more inclinable to one passion then another.
Now the means to attain to such a knowledge, are these. First, a strict
observation of your natural constitution; for the cholerique are subject to
impetuosity, the melancholique to sadness, the sanguine to pleasure, and the
Phlegmatique to sloth and drunkenness. Then, consider what company you most
fancy, they are the mirror wherein you may take a survey of your own self;
for every individual person affects him that most resembles himself.

Of the Disposition of Nations.
THe Heart being the seat of our passions, the spirits and humors concur,
assist, and incline it to such operations. Hence we may draw an undeniable and
advantageous consequence, that persons are subject to different passions,
according to the disposition of the heart, body, and the humors thereof; and
that the same passions affect diverse persons variously: for, as we see fire
prey upon iron, wood, powder, or towe, in a different manner; for in wood it is
kindled with some difficulty, and not easily extinguished; Tow is suddenly
fired, and as readily put out; but Iron is heated with great difficulty, and
with as great difficulty quenched; Gunpowder is caught at in a moment, and can
never be put out, but consumes: So you will meet with some men that are not
easily provoked to anger, and yet with much facility moved to mirth; and such
for the major part are Phlegmatic: many English men are of this temper. Others
are suddenly passionate, and appeased in a moment: this is usual in the
Sanguine; and there are more French of this humor, then of any other Nation.
Others are with much difficulty offended, and ofterwards will hardly be
reconciled: The Italians and Spaniards are often found of this temper. Some are
all fire, inflamed in a moment, and quit not their endeavors of revenge, till
their hearts are almost consumed with anger. This confirms the old Proverb,
Animi mores corporis temperamentum sequuntur; The disposition of the soul
follows the temperament of the body. And as in diseases of the Body every wise
man understands best his own grief, so in distempers of the mind every one
knows best his own inclination, which the Virtuoso subjugates by his reason.

We may confidently and inoffensively conjecture, by the testimony of approved
Authors, that the People and Nations which inhabit the several parts of this
vast Universe, have strange and opposite dispositions. As the Northern
Inhabitants are usually bigger, stronger, and fitter for labor than the
Southern, whose bodies are weaker, but their spirits more subtle. But you must
understand, that those of the middle Region, who lie between the North and
South, are not subject to extreme heat or cold, and yet able to undergo both.
We will briefly discourse of every one in particular.

Of the Nature and constitution of the Southern People.
AS to their bodies, they are cold and dry, of a small or middle stature, their
eyes black, and like the Northern people, are strong and stout, so that the
weak constitution of these is supplied by the extraordinary indowments of the
mind. They are taxed with cruelty: peruse the History of Africa, Leo Afer, and
the dissentions of the Carthaginians; for to give them their due, all tortures
had their original from them, as Impaling, Exoculations, Excoriation, breaking
upon the Wheel alive (which the French ever detested; but by reason of horrid
treasons committed among them, they borrowed these punishments of their
Neighbors) and to the end that no person should imagine that this cruelty is
the product of their education, which nearly approaches to the nature of the
Americans, who banquet it among the dead carcasses of their enemies, and quaffe
their blood. If any person objects, that the same or like cruelty is committed
by the people of the North; I will entreat him to take it into his
consideration with this difference, which is, that the Northern people are
transported to fury by the heat of their courage, and openly pursue their
revenge, where being provoked; and their passion allayed, they are easily
appeased; but those of the South are not suddenly moved, but being once urged,
they are not without difficulty reconciled. In their exploits of war, they
always ground their hope upon Policies and Stratagems, ^orment their conquered
enemies with great indignity and cruelty, even in cold blood; a brutish and
sordid temper, which partly proceeds from an instinct of fury, that bad
education and the inveterate desire of revenge creates in their nature; but to
speak more properly, augmented by the inequal distribution of humors, and those
humors by the inequality of the Elements: those elements are balanced by a
celestial influence, and the bodies of men transported by those Elements; the
Blood infused into the Body, the Life into the Blood, the Soul into the Life,
and the Understanding into the Soul; which though freed from passion, yet
through her proximity, she cannot but participate of her Neighbors
imperfection; this people having many of their humors exhaled by the heat of
the Sun, melancholy, which is most predominant in them, remains, and like the
sediment or lees of wine, is the more exasperated by their perverse
disposition; men of this constitution are altogether implacable. For, this
people is addicted to study and contemplation (which suits well with their
melancholique humor;) They have afforded excellent Authors and Inventors of
many Noble Sciences, as Natural History, the Mathematics, Religion, the
Influence of the Planets, and other things.

Of the Northern People.
THey are tall of Stature, big, phlegmatique, sanguine white, and
flaxen-hair'd, sociable, of a strong voice, the skin hairy, great eaters and
drinkers, and less inclined to contemplation, by reason of the abundance of
humors which distemper their spirits, and obstruct their faculties. Yet they
have invented, though uninstructed, some famous Arts, as Printing, Artillery,
the casting of Metalls, and other Mechanique Arts; and being the Sons of Mars,
they always loved Arms, the levelling of Mountains, turning the Currents of
Rivers; wholly addicting themselves to Hunting, Husbandry, and other laboring
exercises; so that it may very well be said, that their spirit consists in
their hands; yet are they easy to be wrought upon, fickle and inconstant, not
very religious, yet free from jealousy: their eyes are for the most part gray,
or red, which according to Aristotle denotes a good quality; the red, cruelty
and austerity, as Pliny and Plutarch observe of Silla, Plato and Augustus.

Their blood is full of slender filaments, which signifies strength and
courage. The Southern people have a more fluid blood, like the Hare, which
signifies fear. They are hot and moist, and very ^it for procreation. Of all
Nations, they have ever been most populous, as you may observe in History by
their Colonies. They are apt for generation, but not to carnal concupiscence,
as those of the South: which different qualifications says du Laurens) has by
prudent Nature been ^^stowed upon every Climate, that those who ^re capable of
generation, should not be over-addicted to pleasures, and others that want
inter^al heat and moisture, delight in wantonness, to ^^ir up their desire,
without which they could never continue humane society.

Of the People of the Middle Region.
THose of the North are not Politic, but very valiant; those of the South, on
the contrary, are weak, but Politic; but these of the middle Region, are
adorned with a thousand qualities fit for society; who understanding thoroughly
the limits prescribed to subjection and authority, are able to frustrate the
policies of the Meridional, and to oppose the fury of the Septentrional people.
Vitruvius is of opinion, that a Commander ought to be made choice of among
these people. The Northern do not much fancy the pen, and the Southern hate
the Pike; those of the middle temper affect both the one and the other. They
learn of the Switzers to give downright blows, and of the Spaniard the
Estocado; are temperate, or like Neuters do in some measure participate of
both these two extremes, retaining most of the nature of the neighboring
people. This is sufficient for a general observation of these Nations:
wherefore since all Nations have their vices as well as virtues, let us not
reproach those of the South with their sobriety, nor blame the licentiousness
of drinking in those of the North; they are faculties peculiar to these people,
and that not without reason; for if the Southern people should feed high,
wanting internal heat to procure digestion, they would fall into dangerous
distempers; and the Northern could not possibly live so soberly, by reason of
the continual thirst proceeding from their inward heat: and this should have
been ruminated upon by many Authors, before they had proceeded to their
condemnation.

Farther; if the Graecians, Egyptians, Arabians, or Chaldeans, are accused of
Superstition, Sorcery, Cowardice, or Uncleanness; yet let them not be so far
rejected, as to be altogether despised* for they have also somewhat that may
beget in them an esteem; as Learning, the Arts, Knowledge, Philosophy,
Religion, Precepts for humane Society to walk by, with which they have
furnished the habitable World.

Nor ought we to detract from the industry of the Northern, any more then the
frailty of those of the Middle Region; for every single person among them is
sufficiently stored with good qualities to balance his Vices. Now let us enter
upon the discourse of the practice and custom of those Nations we most
frequently converse with.

Of the French.
THe French entirely affect, and with patience obey their Superiors; and France
is the Country where Monarchy is truly exercised; nay, it is a Crime there to
question the latitude of the Regal authority. They are a Nation valiant in
Arms; but the Cavalry are better then the Infantry: they understand not the
Intrigues of Treachery, chiefly in the general: she is invincible when she is
united, and when she is to engage with Forrainers. Their first impetuousness is
soon calmed, which is the reason she could never keep a strange Country any
continuance of time, and is only able to destroy her self; by this means they
have been conquered by those over whom they have triumphed. The end of their
War has little dependence upon the beginning of it. There are no Men in the
World that have a more gentile behavior, a more manly deportment, a fixed
look, motions and gestures agreeable to the whole body: this comeliness is an
ornament to the virtue of their Grandees, and shrouds the imperfections of the
meaner sort: Let them attire themselves, or salute after what manner they
please, nothing in nature seems better or more gracefully performed. The
Neighboring Nations ridiculously deceive themselves in their endeavors to Ape
them in their Mode; by the same variety of garments and positure, not knowing,
that there are some Men, who by reason of their complaisant and good carriage,
are pleasing in all things the^ undertake, and that others, upon whom Natu^^
has not bestowed the variety of those habits, render themselves unpleasant and
ridiculous, by endeavoring to imitate them: for Virtues* Vices, and all other
secret motions of the mind* may be easily represented; but because our sense
are hid in such deep cells, it is a piece of difficulty to discover whether we
are moved by rea^ affections, or we only suit our selves to the times.

In like manner it is an easy matter to counterfeit Humility, Hatred, Love and
Piety; but those things that are acted no more by the agitation of the mind,
then the outward use and ability of the body, it is impossible for you ever
perfectly to imitate them, it being contrary to Nature. How gentile and active
is the grace of the body in her motions? a pleasant facility in discourse, an
Harangue that proceeds not from the heart, but only sallies out at the Lips?
How all these things being most excellent qualifications in the French
conversation, you cannot without much difficulty do as they do, unless your
Genius naturally inclines you to it. Finally, the World can never return France
what she deserves, for her Hospitality; for she seems to set open a Temple of
Humanity for all strangers, to shelter them in their misfortunes: she respects
not the Country, but the spirit of the Man; nor do they suffer themselves to be
transported with the vulgar error of other Provinces; they do not punish
strangers for the accidental fortune of their education, they being also moved
by the impuls^ of a candid and simple love to virtue; they admire them without
envy, and afford them means (...) enrich themselves, especially men of
excellent ^arts, from what quarter of the world soever they ^ome. And also by
way of retaliation for so great ^ivility, she has that commendation which the
whole Universe bestows upon her, as also the fortune and renown of those she
has advantagiously received as Members of her Body. Nor is there a necessity
here that Forrainers should unlearn the customs of their Native Country, or
constrain themselves to imitate the French, provided they be not proud, savage,
nor barbarous; nay, showing some stranger carriage in your conversation, they
become so curious, that they begin to devote themselves to it, stamping a
greater esteem upon what is Foreign, then that which is Native; nay, sometimes
commending some miscarriage in life or body, provided it be of foreign
extract: for it is often seen, that the discourse of a stranger, through the
mistake of his language, has merited favor, and acquired the opinion of great
knowledge, because it is unintelligible. The populace really reverence those
that are fortunes favorites, not through fear, custom, or instruction: on the
other hand, those that are placed in the highest Sphere of Grandeur, are in the
same manner honored by their inferiors in favor or race; but they cannot
endure pride and arrogance; if you seem to Lord it over them, they blush at
obedience. That affability that attracts men by the artifice of the Aspect, the
sweetness of looks, and familiar discourse, wins the Grandees more affectionate
Servants, then the greatness of their power, wealth, and the blood it self is
more vile in their esteem then honor; the ambition of the Nobility in
particular, frequently redounds to their own or their Countries injury; being
not to be persuaded by penury to embrace merchandising, or any other profitable
vocation. They will imitate the Grandeur of their Ancestors by an irregular
ambition, and think it a dishonor to the Nobleness of their blood, to descend
to a popular way of living: So that the empty name of Nobility, and an
opinionative appearance of living splendidly without business, makes them
patiently bear the greatest anxieties of body and mind, which are coextensive
with their life; and this great courage, though it flatters it self, and seems
to be a degree removed from any thing that is disgraceful, does often through
necessity suffer it self to be transported to sordid actions; either by the
ill-management of domestique affairs, o^ doing some public violence, or
letting themselves loose to act public crimes, only to repulse their poverty.
Merchandise is of less esteem then it deserves, considering the great advantage
that accrews thereby. Other Nations are not of this temper: Nay, in England
they are not of this opinion, that Nobility is hereby dishonored; but in
France, not only the ancient families contemn it, but the Merchants themselves,
when they are inricht, as if ashamed of themselves, prefer their issue to a
more noble employment, and a more elevated degree of honor then that of their
Parents. Now the greatness of the French courage is not more evidently apparent
in any thing, then when they labor underhand for an Office, where the poor;
though never so virtuous, have for a dug time been repulsed; they glory in the
impoverishment of their families, becoming indebted, and impairing their
Estates, provided they raise themselves above their equals, either by a
disadvantagious honor, or a present gain surreptitiously obtained, that may
re-establish their decayed family; and without doubt this unlimited desire of
honor, unless it destroys it self, will in the end tend to the dishonor of
Courts, Tribunals, and Seneschalships of men of low condition, and mean and
abject spirits: For many persons sooner gain vast heaps of wealth by vile and
mechanic Arts, then those that are remarkable for the antiquity of their race,
and that inherit the Estate of their Parents, according to the quality of their
Ancestors. So in the private pursuit after honor, they that are the meanest
both in extract and spirit, oftener carry it then those that are of a more
ancient house, who do not consume their wealth in the purchasing of dignity
with that obstinacy, as those that are upstarts do, who being rich, hasten to
procure that Nobility for their Heirs, which others have by inheritance. Now as
the most generous wine when new, is most frothy; so the Infantry and Young men
of this Nation, being solely addicted to civility, and when they are more
mature, to prudence, is ordinarily accompanied with an indiscreet boiling, and
over-bearing impetuousness; in this age they affect a vain licentiousness,
sometimes of Raillery, sometimes of scoffing at those they are unacquainted
with, and in all things would appear with a boldness and courage that stands in
awe of no person: their spirits are airy, and hurried along with the slightest
rumor that is whispered; now impatient at the tranquillity of peace, and as soon
disturbed with war: they make a ridiculous appearance, and exceed the very
impulse of their natural galliardise in relation to women; they laugh without
cause, and spare no person; their spirits are never at rest, and this discovers
their discontent in their various agitations. yet there are some who in the
beginning of all business palliate themselves with a kind of prudence, that is
not real, which for that reason carries a fairer show and appearance, as if
they were men of mature discretion: they hear one another discourse with a
modest look, seeming to interweave subtilty with courtesy, which is the reason
they call it by the name of coldness; but then also their counterfeit and
dissatisfying virtue, and their impatience is such, that cannot long bear that
sail. Now those that are equally tempered, of which persons France is no ways
destitute, that can rejoice and bridle their mirth by the reins of true
prudence; men of this temper cannot be sufficiently esteemed, because they
represent unto us the lively image of cheerfulness. But this is as it were
fatally linked to the French humor; they are very affable to strangers in their
own Country, but* elsewhere they can scarce demean themselves with that mutual
civility one to another: and is it not almost an incredible thing, that so
affable and courteous a Nation cannot agree among themselves in foreign
Countries? In what place soever the French are, out of their Native Country,
especially if in a despicable condition, and that they stand in need of the
assistance of others, they are most cruelly envious one toward another; they
privately de^^ract one from another, and at length proceed to a public hatred,
and go to Law before foreign Judges, who deride them for their malice, and
sometimes by a few of this temper, judge of all, as if they were altogether
restless, and destitute of that love which commonly unites together the Natives
of the same Country: but they do yet worse, when in the very bowels of France,
for private grudges, which are disallowed by the Magistrates, they use one
another as Gladiators; so that it is in vain for France to be at peace, since
she draws as much noble blood then, as the war it self exhausts. Yet these
mischiefs, and if there be any more in the customs of the French, ought to be
silently passed over, in consideration of the virtue of those who are so well
regulated, either by their maturity of age or wisdom, that they permit not
themselves to swim down the Torrent of the vices of their own Country. In such
may be seen an admirable affability, which is not disguised, nor lies in ambush
to ensnare those with whom they are conversant: they do not give up themselves
to any deceit or secret enmity; they entertain all persons honorably that have
access unto them, or seek their acquaintance, and treat them according to their
merit or quality. When a Stranger is received as an Associate, it is sufficient
if he manifest himself not openly scandalous, or too ill-advis'd; nor should
you, as in other places, observe the customs and modes of other persons, lest
they offend you, but the wit: you must be studious to render your self worthy
the French Conversation, who have a rip^ and refined wit: now there is nothing
in human society more acceptable or delightful, then the generous candor
(worthy a man that is well born of so civilized and polite a conversation.

Of the Qualifications of the English.
ENgland, as if she made up another World in the Ocean, contains all sorts of
humor in the whole Universe; she being heretofore very. Valiant in Military
exploits, has afforded matter for many Fables published in diverse Languages,
as if nothing that was excellent, and could enter into the imagination, but
might b^ attributed to the Inhabitants of Great Britain* It is a most fertile
Isle, which is the reason that the vulgar live free from care; in so much that
being strangers to the customs of other Nations she has not that bashful
modesty which does aggrandize the Nobility, and sweetens the humors of the
people: Nay, their very Manufactures, by reason of so much wealth, and so great
ease, remain rude and imperfect; for those that are to exercise any Art, Trade,
or Vocation, ought according to the usual custom, to be bound Apprentice for
seven years; and when they become Masters, as if they were never to work more,
they take other Apprentices under them, upon whom they bestow some slight
instructions, and then put them in their shops. As for their own part, they
recreate themselves in the Neighboring fields, if it be fair, as well on
ordinary as festival days; and if it be foul weather, they di^ert themselves in
Taverns: Hence it is that their Manufactures are not so well made, as they
might and ought to be, because they are left to their Apprentices, and that
those that employ them press them to hasten their work. Yet there are
industrious Artificers to be found among them, that work so artificially and
exactly, that it is a sufficient testimony they are not dull spirited, but that
they are grown careless through too much ease. The common people are not less
haughty and untractable toward strangers then toward their own Nobility, who
are punished for the plenty of their Country, by their contempt of them; and
for this reason, sometimes hate and detest the fertility of their Land.
Nevertheless, for the generality, they behave themselves with great reverence
toward the Nobility, whom they enclose in a small number, which they call
lords. It is no disparagement to render all the services imaginable to these
Grandees; and they themselves are sufficiently sensible of their own power; and
look not upon others, but as from an high and elevated place. The English are
usually of a grave temper, retired within themselves, as if they were to take
advice: they singularly admire the manners, spirit, inclinations, ^ay, the
common actions of their own Nation, insomuch that they despise all others. But
assure your self, they will not be injurious to you; for they are a very
compassionate people, and cannot endure to see a man suffer. In their
salutations or letters, they never stoop so low as the usual terms of the
civility and courtesy of thi^ age, unless they have had their education in
foreign Countries.

The people are much addicted to maritime affairs, and are good Soldiers, both
by Sea and Land: but gluttony, which is usual, especially among the common
sort, has sometimes destroyed whole armies. They despise all dangers, nay,
death it self, but with more impetuousness then judgment. They are much
addicted to the subtilty of litigiousness and Lawsuits, retaining still as it
were a smack of their first original from the Normans, whence they issued.
They maintain their ancient Laws so strictly, that they make a conscience of
altering or abolishing those that ought to be altered. As for Philosophy, the
Mathematiques, Geometry, and Astrology, there is no opinion in those Sciences,
how prodigious soever it be, but has found one or more Patrons among the
English. As for Religion, the apprehension whereof is most powerful among them,
they hurry themselves herein with so much passion and obstinacy, that they
defend the opinion they have once embraced, be it good or bad, maugre the
infliction of the most rigorous punishments. Now those that are strangers among
them, ought to be careful that they judge not of the whole Nation, by some few
persons only, and those possibly of the vulgar; nor must a man always steer the
same course to fashion himself to such variety of humors; the rude populace
being once warmed with anger or wine, proudly insults over strangers; and then
'twere more then folly to imagine you can resist them with equal force and
arrogance: there is no safety in such pro^^edings, and it is to little purpose
to defend your cause with confidence, before an incensed multitude; and worse,
to make a show of the greatness of your courage: you may better appease them by
a mild and peaceable complaint, and entreaties will allay their fury. This
course must be taken in Cities, and in a rabble; but if you are single with
equal strength, you must in appearance make a show, at least, of the height
of your courage, which cannot put up affronts. But the Magistrates, Nobles, and
Judges, are so favorable to strangers, that they suffer no outrages done to
them to go unpunished, provided the whole multitude be not guilty, whom it is
easy to accuse, but for the most part difficult and inconvenient to punish.
Nay, strangers are so much favored, that sometimes they will execute the
Natives, and only banish strangers who are guilty of the same crime. The
Nobility are also naturally inclinable to a courteous reception of strangers,
and endeavor by an honest ambition to have the reputation of their affability;
so that no person can repent he traveled into England, unless he be altogether
barbarous, brutish, and unworthy the society of Great men. Yet when you meet
with those that Lord it too much in their behavior or insulting Language, it
behooves you also to be high, lest peradventure they entertain mean thoughts of
you through their own greatness, or the submissiveness of your discourse, which
must not run so low a pitch as is usual in Italy or France, for then they will
slight you, being unaccustomed to such kind of civility.

Of the Constitution of the Scots.
THe Temper of the Scots is such, that they are easily inclinable to an affable
and courteous Conversation: As for the stature of their body, they exceed many
Nations, and enjoy all things in common with the French, the fertility of their
Country excepted. There is no people more mindful of their race, in so much
that sometimes they will rather disgrace their family by their poverty, then be
silent of it, and for a small time conceal their parentage and quality, though
it be unseasonable to discover it.

For in a Region more fertile in Men then fruit, there is a necessity that many
should be impoverished, that are descended of a very noble family, who wandering
up and down the World, and conceitedly boasting of the Nobleness of their
Blood, do move the Hearers more to Laughter and Pity, then belief. Nay in
their own Country they are very inhumane one toward another, and proceed with
such animosity, that many times they come to blows in multitudes, and transmit
their mortal hatred to their Heirs. They make no scrupse of revenging murder by
murder, and burning by burning; and that not only by open force, but by
ambushes and fraud. In brief, they count nothing dishonest or misbecoming,
provided thereby they glut their sight with beholding the misery of their
Enemies; and that has been more deplorable formerly, then it is at present;
for though their ancient Kings could not prevent this disorder, yet the most
Serene King of Great Britain, Charles the Second, that now swayes the Scepter,
has brought it to pass, by his wisdom, prudence, justice, and other virtues.
The Scots easily believe whatsoever their hope prompts them to; they are soon
provoked, and as soon appeased. They are better at gaining then keeping;
whether it be that their minds being too large for their fortunes, they let
themselves loose to too great liberality, and take delight in showing their
wealth; or whether being deceived by the Custom of their Country, when they
have gained a sufficient competencie to maintain them in Scotland, they never
more fear poverty; not considering that expense, and the price of commodities,
is proportionable to the quantity of gold and silver in every Country. They
have a strange kind of prodigious success in all their Enterprises, in so much
that no Men can endure more in War, or behave themselves more courageously in
battle. The Muses are never better treated, nor with more tenderness, then when
they fall into the hands of the Scots, they being capable of City-business.
Their industry adapts them to any fortune or course of life whatsoever. As for
those that wander about here and there, and travel without honorable
employments, having no other advantage but what they extort from their own
Nation, and have scraped some means in a strange Country, they are the proudest
beggars in the World.

Of the Manners of the Irish.
THe Irish that are remote from Cities and Civility, being for a long time
accustomed to poverty, endure all sorts of air and food with an admirable
patience. They satisfy their hunger with victuals easily procured, or with beef
half raw; and that which is prodigious in this Nation, is, that the love of
ease, which renders Nations effoeminate, has hardened the Irish, and made them
fit for War. For through Idleness they scarcely understand what belongs to
manuring or sowing the ground; they content themselves with pasturage, and that
which the Earth freely yields them to feed their flocks. They exercise no Art,
nor Trade, judging it a derogation to their nobility, of which they make a
great show: and thus they pass away their days in a villainous idleness, and
had rather resist those many discommodities which proceed from their
barbarousness by patience then laboriousness; and understand so little of
pleasure, that they are insensible of misery. They defend themselves against
the injury of the rain and cold with a single mantle, and being addicted to
hunting, grow as swiftfooted as wild Beasts. If they are weary or benighted,
they are content to make the Earth their bed, where they will take out their
usual nap, and not be wakened by the injury of the weather, though covered all
over with snow, or dropping wet with rain. They are obstinate in their Vices,
hating labor, and therefore incapable of any good thing. Given to theft, and
all sorts of toil that resembles hunting. These are the defects of the Common
people: as for the Grandees, many of them are excellently qualified in mind,
and are sincerely faithful, which they enrich with Virtues worthy Persons of
their quality; and they that live in Cities, and pleasant places, are of a most
affable and sweet disposition: which makes it apparent, that the barbarity of
these savages proceeds not from the quality of the Isle, but of their own
proper nature.

Of the Customs of the Germans.
THe Germans are great Drinkers, as appears by their own confession; and they
incline not to this Vice out of delight only, but believe it a point of
civility and affability; in so much that there are some Princes among them,
with whom you have no shorter nor better way to ingratiate your selves: for the
Germans think they cannot entertain a stranger more nobly, then when they treat
him with a banquet, where they fit a long time eating and drinking: and assure
themselves of the favor of those Guests that refuse not to be drunk with them.
They phancie a clear disposition, and a simplicity of nature; and on the
contrary, hate all those that seem to practice subtilty; whether it be that
they cannot keep their own secrets, by reason of the wine they drink, or
because that their spirits are as it were choked up in their bodies, they
suspect the subtilty of other Persons. The Citizens are made choice of for
Magistrates, and they promote not persons of a refined understanding to the
Tribunal; but use great diligence to discharge themselves of their Office, and
preserve the Laws of their Ancestors. As for the people, they are so obedient
to their Superiors, that even in matters of Religion they refer themselves
wholly unto them, and it seldom falls out other ways. As to Learning, they seem
to be more defirous to teach then learn, and write more then they read; for it
is part of their Creed, that their fame increases by the number of the Books
they publish. They are of a dull temper, but able to undergo labor: so that
others understand better, but the Germans more. Their speech relisheth of the
ancient simplicity, and they set no value upon our modern Learning* They are
great Travelers, and when returned, retain the customs they have learned
abroad, or at least seem to do so. It is very rare for a stranger to reside
long there, or to gain any honor; it is a kind of injurious name, to be called
stranger among them. They understand not what perfidiousness is, no, not they
that are hired Soldiers. They are a simple people that cannot conceal their
hate; free from fraudulence, and all kind of capital crimes. uncleanness is
rare, and secretly carried, not as in other plac^s where they boast of it; for
these Men, like the most continent Women, detest this Vice. Prudence is not
frequently found among them, yet sometimes you may meet with such solid and
mature judgments, that they easily cabinet their own faults within their
breast, and smile at the miscarriages of others. There are also among them high
and lofty souls, in whom the dullness of the Country is moderated by a lively
and active spirit, especially those that have had much Commerce will
Forraingers. They are a valiant warlike Nation, yet not altogether incompatible
with Peace. They wage War slowly, and with great deliberation; but having
entered upon it, it continues long. They are dextrous in handling all sorts of
metals, and industrious in a thousand kind of Arts, as having Invented Printing
and Artillery. They are of a sincere and candid disposition, who being free
from envy, really commend the actions or inventions of other persons, even to
excess; especially in their absence. The Nobility are very studious to conserve
the Grandeur of their Lineage, and believe they degenerate and taint their
blood, if they match with a family inferior to their own.

Of the Low Countries.
THe People of the Low Countries are very like the Germans in their manners, of
whon they also are a part. There is no Nation in the World more industrious in
Mechanique Arts; She has a strange aversion for Idleness, which is the reason
she observes so good a Decorum in the Education of her Children. They are
incapable of deceit, and make their own fidelity the Standard to judge others
by; but once deceived, never more trust the Deceiver. There are always among
them some Eniment persons for Learning and State-Politie; for where the People
are gentile and lively spirited, you meet with few that exceed the ordinary
mediocrity; as on the contrary, among those that are naturally heavy, there are
sometimes found such strong testimonies, and such elevated Souls, that they
subscribe to no other whatsoever. The Chiefest among the Hollanders in that
Government of the Republique which they themselves have set up, do in all
things follow the constitution and inclinations of the People; induced
thereunto, either by a natural propensity, or a cunning piece of prudence; but
those that are under the Subjection of Spain, behave themselves more haughtily;
by reason whereof, this Nation may be said to have as it were a double Nature.
Yet this they have in common among them, they infinitely affect honor, and
there is no shorter Cut to their favor, then to respect and reverence them.
They are very tractable to those that flatter them, and are not very much
grasping at distinctions, because they expect greater from you; But it often
happens that in the twinkling of an eye they change their love into hatred. The
vulgar sort in all the Provinces have a very great esteem of the outward
appearance of liberty, and the fruitless testimonies of the unequality of
Liberty it self; so that they are easily won to you, if you cherish their rude
and rustical jests, conforming your self to them in all things, and associating
with them as equals, though you are their Superiors by many degrees.

Of the Customs of the Italians.
THe Italians have a spirit capable of all things, and are addicted to Vice or
Virtue not through any inconsiderate violence, but with election and judgment;
they are very courteous in their Entertainment, and make use of all gestures of
the body and persuasive expressions, to give you an assurance of their
affection. They are not easily wrought upon to dissolve the bond of friendship;
and when they have contracted it, there is no danger but they will expose
themselves to, rather then violate it: but if they once hate, their enmity is
the more dangerous, because they can craftily conceal it, and yet retain the
remembrance of an injury received deeply engraven in their mind: when offended,
then are they most serviceable to you, to the end that they may the better
prosecute their revenge under the masque of friendship, when occasion is
offered: nay, their hatred is long-lived, and lasts for a continuance, and
oftentimes they are with as much facility provoked, as with difficulty
appeased. Their tempers are attended with a severe and melancholique prudence;
so that it is a hard matter for them to support the chearfulnes and gayety of
others; and being unaccustomed to do or say any thing at random, and without
design, they censure others by their own custom, and by a superfluous kind of
nicety, observe the meanest gestures in the eyes and discourse of others,
thereby judging of their temper; so that their constant agitation with
suspicion and care, is a sufficient Punishment for their fineness: nay farther,
this is observable among them, that they being reputed too vain, their company
is unpleasant; for a man can never enter into an intimacy and freedom of
familiarity with them, because he always thinks they always stand sentinel, and
like vigilant Spies set over the actions of others intend to make an inspection
into them. Poisoning and Incontinencie of all sorts is very common in this
Nation; but above all, they are inhumane in their revenge, and the Highwaymen
among them spare very few that they rob. There is nothing so sublime, but the
Italian will attain to, through the sharpness of his wit; hence it frequently
happens, that many of them raise themselves by their Industry from the lowest
degree of Poverty to the highest dignity of honor and riches: for the obtaining
whereof, they spare no pains, toil, nor submission it self. They have a
spacious soul, capacitated for State-affaires, and sit for all sorts of
fortune. They are great Husbands, that foresee events afar off. They subscribe
to no Nations for Learning; and in general it may be affirmed, that you cannot
find elsewhere greater or more sanctified Virtues, nor more Villainous and
horrid Vices.

Of the Disposition of the Spaniard.
THe Spaniards always and constantly retain the habits and disposition of their
Ancestors; they are robust, and patiently undergo labor; not that laboriousness
that is exercised in Husbandry, nor in Arts or Trades; but that which is proper
in War, as Vigilance, Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Heat, in a word, the observation of
Military Discipline: for they being conceited with what they once have in
expectancie, judge that the chiefest part of Virtue consists in the flighting
evil and danger. They are proud and ambitious, nor are they hurried on to
several designs with violence, and know as well how to overcome, as improve a
victory. They being also opinionative in all sorts of danger, neither the Time
nor Enemy can overcome them; and it is a business of no small difficulty to
stagger their resolution, to which they seem to be suited both by nature and
discourse: but the words with which they magnify themselves and their own
Nation, nay their very countenance, which agrees with their swelling
expressions, are unwelcome to the Hearers; and their conversation is odious to
those that are of an ingenuous temper. They are better in company then single:
They love to be well accoutred, and boast of their Apparel; being very
niggardly in other things, and abstinent in eating and drinking: full of
Rodomontado's, especially to those that either stand in awe of them, or indulge
their humor. Their frugality and sobriety is wonderful, not only in Spain,
where it is extreme hot, but in all parts where they live at their own proper
expense; then a small quantity of bread and a little salad will satisfy them;
but when they are at another man's Table, they feed as if they had a Legion in
their belly, ravenously and gluttonously. Besides, Indigencie is no Allay to
their Pride; for you may find among them some rascally Cobblers, that bear as
much sail, and are bladder'd up more then Persons in the highest degree of
honor among other Nations. Nevertheless many of them have more ostentation then
reality; They for the generality contenting themselves with pitiful pay in some
Garrison, where they miserably pass away their days. They are inwardly close,
and move slowly in all business: are fit to attend upon and execute long-winded
designs. They can suit themselves either to Peace or War, as the times
require, and usually overcome by the Assistance of their silver; by which means
they have triumphed over the most invincible Nations: and it is very customary
with them to make use of the pretext of Religion to promote what they
undertake, or procure reverence to themselves: They Cloak their avarice with
the veil of God's Worship, and yet have such prodigious success in all their
attempts, as if they only fought the Battles of the Almighty. Now that which is
most commendable in this Nation is, that in so great a scarcity of Men, they
yet keep under their Subjection, by their great prudence, so many large
Provinces that are so far distant one from another. There is nothing idle or
impertiment in their discourse, but a conversation agreeable to ingenious
spirits, that are capable of all things. When they begin to treat or enter into
friendship with a person, there is nothing so charming, and you must entertain
them at the same rate; but if they once, through Pride, come to extol
themselves, it lies on your part to give them an equal return. If fortune has
subjected you to their discretion, you must be humble and submissive, and
prodigal in commendation of them and their Country; and as they are liberal in
their promises, so you must not scruple to give them a verbal engagement,
though beyond your ability, to get out of their custody.

Of the Ages of Man.
PHysicians affirm, that there are certain universal Causes, which incline our
bodies to diverse infirmities; in like manner there are general Causes which
lead our minds into diverse passions. First, the Youthful are naturally
Arrogant, Prodigal, Incontinent, Wilful, Active in the accomplishment of their
desires, Mutable, soon satisfied, nay surfeted with pleasure; soon displeased,
but not very malicious; are very credulous, full of hope, follow outward
appearance and vanity more then that which is profitable; soon moved to
compassion: their boasting proceeds from the want of experience; for they will
glory in their strength, and the beauty of body and mind, because they have not
yet made a sufficient essay of what they can attain unto; nor are sensible of
their own imbecility, which is the reason they have a better conceit of
themselves, then in truth they ought to have. Their prodigality is the
offspring of the cofidence of their strength and ability, by which means they
think they shall be greater gainers. Their Incontinencie, Audacity and
Confidence proceeds from the heat abounding in them; and those that are of a
hotter constitution, are more subject to these Affections: they are very
inconstant, and seldom continue in one mind, which partly proceeds (as I
conceive) from the various alterations in their Bodies, which easily work a
change upon their desires; and partly also for want of mature resolution and
solid judgment, because as they usually change their opinions, so do they
alter their determinations.

Old Men are quite contrary, for because they have been deceived, they assure
themselves of nothing; promise nothing, are dubious in all things, take all in
the worst sense, and never represent any thing to themselves, but what is evil;
are suspicious and mistrustful, which are the effects of that fear that
freezeth their heart, and of that experience they have of the Infidelity of
men: are very Avaricious, Contentious, Incensed at every inconsiderable thing,
yet weakly; are Pensive, which I find to proceed from the frost in their blood;
are fasridious and discontented, for Ipsa senectus morbus est, Old age it self
is a perpetual malady; they are obstinate in their opinion, and many of them
blame young men for their want of experience and practice, phancying to
themselves, that wisdom and understanding is found no where but under a
Nightcap, hence arises that spirit of contempt, by which they debase young
men: and as Travelers for the most part discourse of the prodigies they have
heard and seen in foreign parts, so old men relate the things they have seen or
heard in former times.

By these two extremes you may easily judge of the temper of those that are
arrived at their Manhood; who are strangers to the Confidence and Presumption
in young men, and also to the sear and diffidence that is in those that are
Aged: so they marry honesty and profit together.

Before I come to the Constitutions of Men, it will not be improper to give you
a description of the temperature of Women.

Of the disposition of Women.
WOmen are naturally more inclinable to mercy and pity then Men, by reason of
the tenderness of their constitution. Besides, they excel men in piety and
devotion, which I presume is occasioned by that knowledge they have of their
inability to undergo labor, affliction, and bear with injuries offered; and
this is the reason they have recourse to God, by whose goodness they are
protected: nor are they so violently hurried on to incontinency as men are, for
want of heat, as also for that innate modesty that is in them: yet they are
extremely overrul'd by four passions, The reputation of beauty, or some sparks
of Ingenuity; also Envy the Daughter of Pride, for they are immoderately
disturbed at the Beauty, Goodness, or Estate of their Equals: whence arises
another passion, which is very unnatural to them, and pernicious; for Envy is
the Whetstone of their Tongues, which sharpens their Language to Murder the
reputation of their Neighbors. The fourth, which is most notorious to all
persons, is their Inconstancy, according to that Ancient Proverb, Quid levius
pluma? flamen; Quid flamine? ventus:
Quid vento? Mulier; Quid Muliere? nihil.
What Is lighter then a Feather? Sound: then Sound? the wind:
Then wind? a woman: nothing then womankind.


This Inconstancy is a branch of the same root as that in young men, which is
a defect of prudence and judgment in their Determinations: for those that
truly deserve the name of wise, are not overhasty in their Resolves, but
produce them with much considerateness and deliberation; which is the reason
that they weigh well those Circumstances which may obstruct them in their
Affairs. But Women and young Men, generally, are precipitate in their
resolutions, and seldom accomplish them; because they draw conclusions without
judgment, and meet with some Remora in the Execution, which necessarily
forces them to a Retractation. This is the source of that perpetual chat that
is often among Women: for the space of half an Hour would ^ire five men in
discourse, and make them barren of matter; but three Women met together will
never cease, nor yet want a subject to furnish them with prittle-prattle.

Of the Humors.
HAving declared in general the Inclination of the Inhabitants of the
Septentrional, Middle and Meridional Regions, as also the passions of every
Nation in particular, especially those with whom we most converse; and likewise
what Passions are predominant in old Men, young Men, and Women: it is now time
for us to proceed to understand the Constitution of the Melancholique,
Phlegmatique, Cholerique and Sanguine.

Of the Melancholique Constitution.
THe Melancholique are for the major part black, cold, dry, rough-skin'd, with
thin, harsh and curled hair, meagre in body, great eaters, have the joints of
their body outwardly visible; are slow, backward in their resolutions,
Dreamers, Diffident, Suspicious, Ingenious, and generally malicious; persons of
few words, which they put forward with a design to sound those that approach
them; They are Close, Hypocritical, Conceited, Enemies to all Drolleri^ and
Privacie, Retired within themselves, and Lovers of Solitude, not very
accostable or Communicative; affect but few persons, and those coldly too; soon
moved to anger, though upon small grounds; and Covetous, by reason of that
Diffidence which ever accompaines them, fearful that their Estate will decay;
Enemies to those they have offended, as well as those they offend, Vindicative,
Irreconciliable, or at least you must not too much depend upon their
Reconciliation; In a word, they are extraordinary virtuous or vicious.

Of the Phlegmatique Constitution.
THe Phlegmatique are naturally moist, white and soft-skin'd, their joints are
hid, they cannot endure labor, are Timorous, sleep well, and are often provoked
to Leachery; their Eyes running; are indifferently capacitated for Learning,
when they abound not with phlegm, but otherways they are of a dull capacity;
their hair and nails grow much, their mouths always water; if it be white and
fluid, it is a good sign, if viscous, they contrary: are seldom thirsty, drink
very rarely, unless it be at meals; their urine is white, their eyes heavy,
have but little appetite, a slow digestive faculty; where their complexion is
pale without a mixture of red, they are laxe in body; as for the temper of the
mind, they have much of the dullness and slowness, but neither the spirit nor
malice of the Melancholique; that coldness that freezeth their heart, makes
them more distrustful of themselves then others; They are fearful of
undertaking, and losing their designs: and it often happens, through their
ignorance of the means, they are irresolute in their Counsels, timorous in the
Execution of them; are not extraordinary inveterate in their hatred, nor very
fervent in their Love.

Of the Cholerique Constitution.
THe Cholerique are lean, of a pale yellowish complexion; have bitterness in
their mouth, and roughness in the throat; are very thirsty, little spittle,
often troubled with the headache, vomit green or yellow stuff that is very
bitter; their Ordure is hard, almost burnt up; they sleep little, their urine
is clear, almost of the color of fire. As to their mind, they are Dexterous in
all things, Proud, Haughty, Desirous that all persons should obey their
Commands, Enemies to the least disobedience, Impatient in the Execution of
their Enterprises, Rash in their Counsels, little minding the Advice of others,
unless it be to find a person that is of their own temper, and undertakes the
performance of their Wills; Injurious, not very Offensive; but soon pacified,
unless you seem to bear in your memory the offense they have given, otherwise
they study revenge, and mortally hate those they have offended.

Of the Sanguine Complexion.
THose that are Sanguine are generally very strong and courageous, and when the
bloo^ abounds have a tickling or sharp itching all ove^ the body; their mouth
is full of bladders, their urine red: as to the qualifications of their mind,
they are Jovial, Lovers of Recreations, Enemies to sadness and vexation,
avoiding disturbing and thorny businesses and Contests, Desirous of Peace;
freely committing the Management of their Affairs to others, referring
themselves wholly to them, loving those that discharge them without any
occasion of Complaint; are Courteous and Gracious; nor are they soon moved to
injure any person; or if they are constrained to it, it is in words, rather then
otherways, and soon bury in oblivion the injury done to them: Take delight to
please others, and are generally Liberal.

Of Speech.
WOrds do more lively represent the true Idea of the Mind, than any of those
things before mentioned. Diogenes wondered that Men would not buy earthen ware
without trial by the sound whether they were whole o^ cracked, yet were content
to purchase Men by the sight, without a trial of them by discourse; whence
arose that Proverb so frequently used by Socrates, and approved by the
Ancients, Loquere, (...) te videam; Speak, that I may see thee: for ^he
passions do swell so much in the mind, that ^hey must of necessity have some
vent, as Elihu ^aith of himself, Behold, my belly is like new ^^^e? which for
want of vent bursts new Vessels ^su^der.

I have sometimes made inquiry of several persons, what was their opinion
concerning the inclination of some sort of Men; and I found that the best
observation they made of others, ^roceeded from their own manner of speaking.
You may easily observe whether Men's discourse ^end to their own commendation,
whether they ^oast of their Valor in War, of their knowledge, of their natural
parts or estate gained by their own Industry, and conclude, that such persons
are of a proud temper. If their discourse be lasci^ious and obscene, without
doubt the heart af^^cts what the tongue discloseth: if any one talks ^argely of
eating, drinking or feasting, desiring ^one dish now, and shortly after
another; such Persons are for the most part Epicures: if they storm in
outrageous language, they are Chole^^que. So one may easily guess at an
Ambitious, Covetous, Envious, slothful Person, and the like. As for the
Lazy-Companion, he will often entertain you with trivial discourse, as of the
length of they days, that the Clock in his opinion goes false: What shall we
do? says he: he disturbs himself more by thinking what he has to do, then
another at his labor: he is crafty in nothing, but only framing excuses to keep
himself out of Employment: there is no calling he can pitch upon, but what is
dangerous, disadvantageous; he had rather starve with cold, the^ make a fire;
it is a great trouble to him to for sake his Neighbors Chimny-corner; so that
he i^ forced to go home in the dark; he eats and pray half asleep; he will
entertain you with news he knows whether the Hollanders will have peace, as
also all the money expended about the repairs of London Bridge since its first
foundation, what the raising of the Mole to secure the For^ at Tangier will
stand in, and what the gain made by Merchants that trade to the Indies amounts
to. His discourse is often disjoynted by the succession of large Parentheses;
he will talk of monstrous Fish taken by Angling with a line, or of the Elephant
that was sent into England* He will talk much, but do nothing. You may observe,
that he that is Envious usually despises the good deeds of his Equals, makes
great inquiry what condition they are in, yet desires not to hear of their
welfare, without finding many faults, and blaming them in private; if he be as
it were forced to praise, it is very coldly; he makes a bad construction of
whatsoever he has not a hand in. The Ambitious Man likewise will sometimes
detract after the same manner, when he is obstructed in, or frustrated of his
great hopes; and will say, The place he aimed at was too inconsiderable for
him, his rival unworthy, his Adversaries injurious, the Officers corrupted, and
the Court bribed; yet he cares not, he can live at home according to his
phancie: but if he prosper in one, his mind is possessed with a nobler design;
he is never at rest so long as he has any Opposer. If any of his friends come
to bestow a visit on him, he will be sure to conduct them to Whitehal, and
catch at all opportunities of being saluted by, or discoursing with those of
highest quality; he talks ^loud, and never mentions and but the Nobility, and
that very familiarly too; will call for no ^owle but Pheasants and Partridges,
though he be but in a pitiful Alehouse; Is seldom without store of papers in
his pocket, which he shows about, (...) Letters sent to him from great Lords or
Ladies; will talk much of his Native Country, the good Entertainment they give
there, the State^iness of his Appartment, the Expenses at his Sisters wedding;
will ask his Lacquey where he ^eft his Fellow Servants, and yet whisper him in
^he ear and bid him fry him some tripes, or fetch is stockings; will be
concerned as a Party in all ^agnifique entertainments; these pity brouil^ties
are very expensive to him. If his Lacquey ^ath left him for want of sustenance,
he will report that he robbed him of a thousand pound, and all his Jewels, which
does not so much trouble him, as the present of Diamonds from ^y Lady the
Countess; will discourse much of what he lost or won at gaming with my Lord
^^^on, when it is probable he played with Lacqueys; if he goes into a
Victualling-house to ^at a few radishes, he will tell his Hostess he (...)
invited to the Ambassador to dinner: one word of his, will inform you of his
humor. The Covetous Man sings a quite contrary note; his whole discourse is
composed of nothing but the frugality of our Forefathers, blames the
prodigality of our Nation, condemns Balls, Embroiderie, Laces, and cries out,
All is vainty. H^ desires not to be thought rich, and carries, himself closely
in all things. He hates borrowing excessively, because he dreams of Thieves.
(...) you discourse with him about the Philosopher'^ Stone, he straightly
imagines that you design to cheat him. He is very sober is his Family: If h^
goes into the Country, he calls for half a pint o^ Wine; drinks the moietie
himself, and distributes the remainder among his Servants, tha^ they may tope
it away before they venture upon their Journey. He discourses much of sobriety
and also how in times of yore, the wedding garment used to last to their dying
day. No Person complains more of Taxes then he. By these marks, and your
diligent observation, with wha^ we shall acquaint you in our following
discourse, when we come to speak of those tha^ are natural, you will be
sufficiently informed of the rest.

There are some of the wiser sort, who thoug^ they are Ambitious, Jealous,
Envious, an^ slothful, yet are careful not to discover them selves to all
persons: Therefore we must pry into their temper a little more narrowly, to see
if w^^ can discover their hidden passions; and this wi^^ be in the manner or
matter of their discourse.

Of the manner of Discourse.
SOme persons are very talkative, and they are accused as well by the profane,
as sacred pages, of imprudence or folly; which made Solo^on say, Totum spiritum
suum profert stultus, but, Sapiens differt and reservat in posterum; and a
little ^ower, Vidisti hominem velocem ad loquendum? ^ultitia magis speranda
est, quam illius correctio; Have you seen a man full of words? Folly is soon^^
expected, then his amendment; which is the ^eason why fools carry their hearts
in their ^ouths, but the wise their mouths in their ^earts: for fools first
speak, and then consider; ^ut those that are wise consult first with reason,
and then speak with circumspection. By this you may gather the reason why
Bablers should be ^egistred in the Catalogue of Fools; for they conceive folly
in their mind, and immediately bring (...) forth: and you may be satisfied in
this, that whosoever divulgeth all his conceptions, will broach store of Lees
with some good Wine. And ^s most men are better versed in the knowledge of
folly them wisdom; so he that declares whatsoever he knows and understands,
has more froth in him then good liquor: therefore many and quick expressions
proceed from much folly; which passion generally overrules your men, women,
and boasting old men; which made Theocritus say, that Anaximenes had a Torrent
of words, and but one drop of reason; for if you hear them in a prolix
discourse, you will find them as destitute of matter, as profuse in words; the
reason whereof is (in my opinion) want of judgment: whatsoever their fancy
leads them to concerning any subject, they thing those conceptions are new to
others, because they are so (...) them. Thus you may see, that the leaves of
loquacity group up from the root of a shallow understanding.

Of Taciturnity.
SOme men on the contrary speak too little; which kind of silence, though it be
repugnant to the moderation that consists between both these extremes, yet the
wiser sort judge this extreme to be the most secure; for multiplicity of words
prove oftentimes offensive, but silence rarely: Wherefore Philosophers say,
that he that will learn how to speak, must first know how to be silent. Silence
may also sometimes proceed from stupidity, because a man knows not how to raise
an argument, as may be seen i^ Rustical dull fellows, who are unfit for
discourse in civil society. I once was acquainted with a Rhetorician, that was
excellent at the pen, but inexpert in discourse; for the presence of his
auditory did extremely amaze him. Others do it out of prudence and policy,
because that when men in society would conceal their own, or discover the
affection of others, prudence and policy requires some silent intervals; and
the wisest man in the world, if he be tedious and spends much time in his
discourse without pre-meditation, cannot easily hide his passion from discreet
Auditors.

Of Deliberation in Speech.
THere are another sort of men that draw out their speech so deliberately and
slowly, that a Pater noster might be said between every word; and this way of
speaking is very distasteful to the Hearers, and it is most insufferable,
especially to those of a quick apprehension. This may proceed from some defects
in the Organs of the speech, the difficulty of conception, or else from a
certain weak conceit that men have of their own wisdom, which they distill
before others guttatim, as the water drops from an Alembick; for they are of
this persuasion, that if they should be more deliberate in their delivery, they
should forfeit part of their prudence: and really among persons of an ordinary
capacity and dull apprehension, it were well if they were not so prolix; for
oftentimes before they bring their discourse to a period, they forget the
beginning; but with ingenious men, it is an affront to their reason, nor can it
be but very incommodious to them; like a man that has drink given him drop by
drop, when he is extreme thirsty; which could not choose but offend him, though
the liquor were never so good; so a man of a quick wit and ready understanding,
desires present satisfaction; and this is the cause why men of slow speech are
very much against his inclination. Yet for all this, I must confess that this
way of speech agrees very well with some Majestique and grave persons; who are
much admired for their prudence and wisdom; for few words well and
deliberately delivered, are the Insignia of wisdom and gravity.

Of Rash and Precipitate discourse.
SUch persons may very fitly be compared to new Wine, which if it wants vent,
breaks the Cask; they carry their words in their mouths, as a dog does a shaft
in his body; for they disturb and torment themselves, till they cast them out:
in like manner the temerarious have an arrow in their Tongues, and are never at
rest, till they have darted it out: such persons are generally big with their
own conceits, and they must be delivered of them, or else dye in labor. Some of
these men are very ingenious, but of no solid judgment; they excel in
apprehension, but are defective in discretion; if they could check themselves a
little, and moderate their natural promptitude, they would become men of
incomparable parts: but those that are of this constitution, follow for the
most part their natural inclination, and oftentimes deliver many commendable
things promiscuously with those that are very bad and pernicious; because that
as they apprehend all things, and therein surpass the vulgar, so they divulge
their conceptions without judgment, cause, reason, or respect to good or evil,
right or wrong, to that which is of dangerous consequence, or the contrary;
wherefore such men may well be termed cunning, but not wise: they are apt to
despise others, are hot and quick of apprehension, and wedded to their own
opinion. The cause of this is want of judgment, a daring, hot, and precipitate
affection; in fine, they often change their minds, and alter their resolutions.

Of Affectation in Discourse.
SOme have a particular way of speech, they discourse in print, hunt after
Metaphors, New Phrases, and are very industrious to make their words relish of
Ingenuity; and such kind of people leave nothing undiscovered, but belch forth
their sottish, affected and vainglorious manner of speech. They may well be
compared to certain birds that sing charmingly, but have no flesh on their
bodies; they resemble superannuated Courtizans, who shroud their foul diseased
and fleshless carcasses under rich robes. You will scarce find one among a
thousand of them, whose conceptions are attended by solid judgment. These men
trifle away their time, and study inquest of bombast terms; and that which they
conceive not without great pains, they deliver not without much toil; They are
guilty of many misdemeanors, and are often troubled with haesitation: If their
discourse be long-winded, the Epilogue is generally a stranger to the Prologue:
If they write any thing that is to be exposed to public view, you always meet
with some new-coin'd word forged in the Mint of their own Brain, and that
becomes them as well, as the giddy feather in a Fools Cap. This affection owes
its birth to most apparent vainglory, which few or none of their Society will
gainsay: for if you propose this question to any of their acquaintance, and
ask them, what is their opinion of such a Person, he will return you no other
answer but this, that his words have too strong a savor of Presumption and
Arrogance.

This idle way of Discourse was first invented to tickle the ears of females,
that so they might gain reputation among the ignorant, who look upon them as
very Ingenious. Such Disputants, for the major part, condemn all others as
barbarous and ignorant, because they mold not their words according to their
humors; nay they proceed farther, and blame all Authors that use not
affectation in writing, as they do, and do not diligently search after this
effoeminate mode of speaking.

Of Drollerie.
MAny People continually entertain their Company with Drollery or Noise,
persuading themselves they have gained a great Victory, if they can but
discover the defects of other Persons. I have been in the Company of many of
this humor; they make a show of good entertainment, but their Caresses are like
the foldings of the Scorpion, whose tail is very dangerous: such raillerie
proceeds from some persons out of simplicity and folly, which is the reason
sober Men disesteem it: Others use it for diversion only, and mirth is their
sole design: but they that a Man ought to have a special care of, and avoid
their society as dangerous, are those who pretend to defame or render them
^odious they play upon, and that kind of Jesting is very malicious, and
proceeds from vainglory and envy, because they aim at nothing but the contempt
of other persons, or at least endeavor in some measure to make them lose the
good opinion that they had formerly: and this is sufficient for the manner of
discourse, now we proceed to the matter or subject of Discourse.

Of the Subject of Discourse.
I Acquainted you in our entrance into this Treatise, that the things Men most
affect is asually the subject of their discourse: but because some people
govern themselves with more discretion then others, we must take them into a
more strict examination. You will find many that discourse of matters beyond
their sphere, as the Cobbler of Cavalry, the Tailor of Theology, the Farmer of
Physique, and the Cossin-maker of the Philosopher's Stone: in short, a great
number of Men will intermeddle with matters that transcend their capacity, for
want of Exercise, Study, or Practice. I have sometimes heard such kind of
Quacks discourse in Philosophy so soberly, yet with so much obstinacy, that
they have run into the grossest errors that can enter into the Imagination of
Man. I am of opinion that every honest Man that hears them, will place them in
the Predicament of Fools; and you must know, that if any Lord or Gentleman is
so simple as to pin his faith upon the sleeves of such kind of persons, then
they conceit that they can with ease practice those Arts and Sciences which
they judge themselves capable to dispute of; which is never done without
prejudice to many poor people, who are of this belief, that their Lord is
infallible in things of this nature. There are more of these Doctors in
England, then in any other place, that I know of. In the years 1622 and 1623, I
was conversant with a certain Lord, who was one of the highest quality in that
Kingdom, who having heard the discourse of one of your pretended Doctors
concerning Alchimy, he instantly commanded that the Chambers should be made
ready, the Fornaces fitted for so noble an Exercise, and that Alembicks,
Glasse-bottles, Stills, Lamps, Fornaces, Stillatories, Phials, Circulatories,
Pellicans, Crucibles, Vessels, Bellows, Coals and such other Instruments should
be bought forthwith: the design of this Nobleman was no other, then that this
Laboratorie should be a place where all his Inferiors, as well poor as rich,
should have access to disburthen themselves of their misfortunes: but all these
remedies are reduced to one, which is Aqua vitae; into which he sometimes puts
a flower, at other times Cinamone; sometimes pepper, ginger, fennil,
anise-seeds, and many others, and so bestows new names on them according to
the diversity of the seed which he intermixeth with it. The vulgar, who judge
only by outward appearance, and rely upon the authority of other persons,
without examining things by particular discourse or argumentation, are
shamefully deceived in these matters; and so for the future commit the cure of
their bodies to such Ignaro's as do very much injure them. I have met with one,
that had an indifferent stock of discretion, who knowing it was a piece of
greater difficulty to do then say a thing, he did avoid, as much as in him lay,
those that were sick, and prescribed physique to none but those that were in
health; or if to others, he so ordered it, that it was not known. He gave a
Dose of his Chimical preparations to a friends Wife of mine who was with Child,
which wrought with her so violently upward and downward, for the space of four
days, that she was every day given over for a dead Woman. He gave a poor Maid
that was troubled with a Catarrhe, such violent vomitive potions, that she
became impotent ever after. I could recite you a score of such examples. But to
return to the matter in hand, I say therefore that this kind of discourse or
disputation is the effect of much ignorance and arrogance; no wise Man ever
enters upon a dispute he understands not; whence came that common Proverb, Ne
suitor ultra crepidam, let not the Cobbler go beyond his Last: for confirmation
of this, I shall bring no better an argument, then every man's own experience.
There are few (if I mistake not) but what employ themselves in one profession
or other, either in this science, or that kind of practice; e. g. a Printer or
Goldsmith being Master of his Trade, if a person altogether ignorant in his Art
should come to engage in discourse with him and condemn him, because he makes
use of such and such Instruments, of this or that way of working, would not he
smile at him, and take him to be an ignorant Man, that adventures to speak of
what he understands not? So certainly let men be assured, that if they dispute
of a thing they are ignorant in, they must of necessity be accounted
presumptuous. Yet we do not disallow some ingenious Persons to propose their
doubts in matters which they are not exercised in, as Lawyers to dispute in
Divinity, the Physician of Law, the Divine of Physic, and especially with them
that have the repute of Masters in these faculties: this rule admits of an
Exception; for there are some Divines that are very able Physicians, and
Lawyers that are not ignorant in Divinity, Nay Physicians that understand both
these sciences; in such cases those of one profession may be excellent in the
profession of another; but this is very rare, because that he that labors in
the pursuit of diverse sciences, cannot easily excel in any. This is the reason
that those that are illiterate, if discreet, will propose no question above the
reach of their capacity; or if they do, it is in such a way, as if they
intended to learn, rather then argue. But how shall a Man behave himself, if he
fall into the Company of such Disputants, that are neither capable of making
any intricate proposition, nor of returning any grounded or solid answer?
Indisputably it is a vexations thing to associate with such Idiots; yet the best
way I know to deal with them, is to detect their Notorious ignorance by some
palpable absurdity.

Of persons that are inclinable to Contradiction.
SOme men's discourse is continually stufft with contradiction and opposition;
and they have a mind to show themselves able to control and surpass all
others; they think they are victorious, if they can but out-noise their
companions: such society cannot be agreeable to their associates; they are like
a burden upon the shoulders of those which whom they converse: for as every
one applauds his own opinion, and would have it approved; so all men disrelish
those that contradict them, and judge that to be erroneous which they deliver
as an absolute truth. These contradictions are rooted and lodged in an
exceeding vainglorious mind. I think there can be no better way to reform this
sort of people, then to interrupt their discourse, and leave them to the
enjoyment of their own conceits, without any farther trouble. They oftentimes
meet with as good head-pi^^^s as their own, and as ready to contradict them as
they to question. It were well for those of this temper to endeavor to shake
off this kind of ill humor, as well for their own credit, as that by addicting
themselves so frequently to contradictions, they may undertake the defense of
many fooleries and absurdities; and so consequently being too pertinacious, and
destitute of reason withal, they shipwreck their reputation. It is certain,
that among the Nobility and lofty wits, there may happen to be variety of
opinions, and so the judgment of one must run against the stream of the
others; therefore in such Cases, he that is opponent, ought to produce his
reason in such terms, as if he were more desirous of Learning, then Triumphing
and Insulting over his Companion; which he may do with ease, if he be not
contumelious in words, or too vehement or violent in actions.

Of special Matters.
THe manner of discourse contributes much to the discovery of the passions or
inclinations of other persons; but the matter is more effectual: for the
affection a man has to any thing, if vehement, will discover it self. The
ordinary sort of men, according to their usual custom, talk of mean frivolous
things; the vicious, of one kind of vice or other; the wise, of grave and
profound subjects; and if they descend to inferior matters, they pass over
them cursorily, or touch some one ^oint so subtilely, that ex unguibus you may
discover them, as a Lion by his paw. Some men talk much of themselves, and
level at nothing but their own praise, and by degrees steal gently into their
own commendation; or if you applaud them, immediately they are pufft up with an
imaginary delight which they take in themselves: but by the way, it is probable
you may ask me, What if a man commends me or any of my qualifications; how
shall I deport my self? if I own his commendations, I shall be accounted
conceited and proud, if I disown them; it looks as if I did undervalue the
person, and accuse him of flattery. In a Case of this nature, which may often
fall out, it were well to be furnished with a ready retort, as Alphonsus King
of Arragon did reply to an Orator that recited a long Oration in his praise;
The King says, If what you say be truth, I thank God for it; if not, I pray
God give me the grace to deserve it: Or a discreet Person may say, I deserve
not this applause, but your affection puts this gloss upon my actions, the
better to set them off; or else you, out of your good disposition and love to
me only, take more notice of the little good I do, then the great evil I am
guilty of: again, the affection you bear me, constrains you to make the best
interpretation of all my actions. By this means you evade a vain complacencie
in your affairs, that ministers occasion of offense to the censorions; nor
must you be so rude as to deny what your Friend out of civility affirms to be
really true.

Of concealing or revealing Secrets.
AS there are some Persons so close, that they will never discover any thing of
business; so on the contrary there are others so foolish, that they will
disclose their thoughts to any one, especially those that concern themselves.
The former are crafty and subtle at first, because friendship requires some
communication of secrets, especially if he be a singular friend; and this
offense may very well be tolerated in this dangerous age, where profit is
diligently sought after, and friendship despised, or at least men affect one
another more out of interest then for the love of virtue. Wherefore he that is
wise will confide in no man, unless it be in matters publicly to be known, or
that he be a choice friend, of whose friendship you have had long experience;
but if he be vicious (if there can be any friendship between vicious persons)
assure your self that if you acquaint him with half your mind, you have even
publicly discovered the whole: for such persons usually, if they be young Men
or Women, or of no great credit, are litigious, and very indiscreet in their
expressions. Besides, their friendship having no other Basis but their own
Interest, as pleasure or profit; if either of these fail, then be confident
that they will reveal all they know of you: because such imprudent persons as
these imagine, that the friendship being once broken, they are no longer
obliged to keep your secrets, or save your credit; and so in the turning of a
hand, all is discovered. Therefore I take it for a general rule, that a Man is
bound to reserve his secrets of greatest importance within his own breast; or
not to disclose them to any, but him that he knows to be a faithful prudent and
virtuous friend.

There is another sort of Men, who very well deserve the name of Deceivers as
well as friends: for in appearance they pretend friendship, but in effect it is
nothing but flattery and dissimulation: they come to you very seriously, and
tell you some story in private, conjure you not to divulge it upon any terms:
you promise secrecy, and perform it; but this pretended friend himself will
not keep it secret; for as soon as your back is turned he will do as much to
another, it may be two or three more; and so you shall hear that published
openly, which you thought a great secret. This kind of deceit is the Child of
great craft, and a feigned friendship: for true amity admits not of plurality
of persons in the communicating of secrets. I have known many subject to this
passion, but in process of time they have been much troubled at it: sober men
smile at a person that they understand to be such a Revealer of secrets.

Of the Hair.
IF the Hair grow extraordinarily, the body is inclinable to siccity; the
quantity speaks the Man of a hot constitution; and if they are harsh, he is
furious. Full long Hair of white or flaxen colors, soft and fine, signifies
that the Man is naturally timorous. Those, whose Hair in their youth grows
white or gray, it signifies a luxurious, vain, lying, instable, talkative
person. Those, whose Hair is of a moderate growth, both in quantity and color,
it is a sign that they are bent and more inclined to good then evil; loving a
peaceable life, honesty, and are of a good temper. If they are compacted
together, and visible on the forehead, it shows a strong and brutish courage;
if they are wryth'd or turned inward toward the temples, it signifies the
person is hot of constitution: to the Hair that is thin and lank, declares the
Man to be of a cold and weak temper; but when they are very thick, it is a
sign of whoredom. In Children, much Hair denotes future melancholy; short Hair
staring up like bristles, signifies a strong, bold, vain person, very
fallacious, desirous of beauty, and more foolish then wise. Those whose Hair is
but moderately curled, it signifies the person to be of a dull nature, and
ignorant. Those that have store of Hair, are voluptuous, and of good digestion,
vain, and easily induced to be cruel; of a treacherous memory, and unfortunate.
Those that are red Hair'd, are usually Envious, Boasting, Deceitful, Proud and
Reproachful. Those whose Hair is very fair, are complaisant in all things,
amiable and honorable; but a little Vainglorious. Those that are black Hair'd
are studious, secret, faithful and fortunate.

Of the Forehead.
THe high round Forehead, signifies the person Liberal and Jovial, of a good
Intellect, tractable to all, and embellished with many Ornaments and Virtues.
The full and smooth Forehead that is free from wrinkles, signifies that the
person is Litigious, vain, Fallacious, and more fool then wise. He that has a
little Forehead everyway, signifies a simple person, subject to anger, desirous
of those things that are handsome and curious. He that has the corners of his
Temples very round, so that the bones almost appear, and are not hairy; it
signifies the Man is of a good nature and clear understanding; audacious,
desirous of handsome, neat and honorable things. Those whose Forehead is sharp
at the corners of the Temples, so that the bones seem to start out, it
signifies that they are vain and fickle in all things, simple, foolish, and of
a weak capacity. Those that have a large Forehead, change their resolution at
will; and if it be very large, they are foolish, and of little discretion.
Those that have it small and narrow, are Devourers, Indocible, and slovenly
like swine. Those that have it of a moderate length, are Ingenious and Docible,
but somewhat violent.

Of the Ey-brows.
WHen they are very hairy, it discovers the ineptitude of this Persons temper:
those that are thick, and full of hair, joining to the top of the nose, are
ill-natured: when they grow down from the Temples to the root of the nose, heat
and dryness is predominant: and such persons are crafty, subtle, evildoers
and insatiable. The thin and indifferently big, are high spirited; those that
are long, denote the person to be arrogant; and if they are long and very
hairy, such a person aims at great matters. When they grow downward, and
crooked on the side of the nose, the Man is ingenious in all sorts of mischief:
If they are even, as if they were drawn by a line, it is a sign of an evil
spirit, such persons are effoeminate: When the hair grows compacted, it denotes
the Man to be melancholy and witless. The Ey-brows that hang over the Eyes,
signify Envy; those that have none at all, are Malicious.

Of the Ey-lids.
THose that have little hair on their Ey-lids, are Malicious, Vicious and
Cholerique; and when they are more fleshy then ordinary, it is a sign they are
mischievously subtle. When the hair of the Ey-lids turns downward, or is
naturally crooked, or turned inward, it is a sign of Lying and Subtilty. If
the corners of the Eyes seem fleshy, they signify drunkenness; they that often
move their Ey-lids are timorous.

Of the Eyes.
THe full Ey denotes pusillanimity; those that are sunk in the head, malicious
craftiness. When the Eyes have misbecoming motion, so that now they are quick,
and by and by at rest, such persons are full of bad thoughts. Those that move
them but little, with a sharp look, are Thievish and very fraudulent persons.
The steadfast look proceeds from thoughtfulness, and a desire to deceive; those
that have Eyes like Women, are Incontinent and shameless.

When a Person has a Childish look, it is a sign that he will lead a merry
long life; the fair smiling Eye, and countenance, signifies adulation, riot and
detraction: The yellow signifies deceit, as is apparent in Men-bawds and
Murderers. Little Eyes signify the Man to be malicious and cowardly: those
that are extended, fignifie goodness; if they are red and large, drunkenness,
mischief and folly. Eyes hid and sunk into the head, denote malice and
pernicious anger, ill qualities, a tenacious memory, especially, of injuries.
When the Eyes are sometimes closed and sometimes open, such persons have not as
yet been guilty of notorious crimes, but they have them in their thoughts. Eyes
red as coals of fire, signify wickedness and obstinacy. Large Eyes and long
ey-brows, signify shortness of life. Those that have the Eyes and ey-brows
long, are apt to learn, but short lived. When they cast a strong luster
without any blemish, it is a sign of goodness: if they are nimble in their
glances and sharp, it signifies Thest. Great and smiling Eyes, are a sign of a
stupid voluptuous person, that foresees not events. Smiling Eyes sunk in the
head, denote evil thoughts. The heavy Ey signifies studiousness; those that are
blear-eyd are inclinable to love wine: the full Ey signifies flowness: if the
apple of the Ey be black, it is a sign of a slothful dull person. When the
apple of the Ey has perles round about it, it signifies that the Man is
Envious, Talkative, Timorous, and a very Dangerous person. The Ey that is very
black, denotes an earnest desire of heaping up wealth; and if they are not very
black, but appear somewhat yellow, it is a sign of a virtuous courage. The
fair white Ey, signifies timorousness; Eyes full of veins, signifies foolish
persons.

Of the Face.
HE that has a very full Face, is Importunate, a Liar, and Imprudent; the
plump Face, speaks a Man to be provident, and denotes a sharp wit; that which
is large, signifies Idleness; that which is very little, illiberality and
mischievous subtilty: they that have a wryth'd countenance, are of an ill
complexion; the oval visage signifies the person is shameless and injurious.
The Face that sweats much, signifies Gourmandize and Luxury; such persons are
subject to grievous distempers: the Face that in shape resembles a valley,
denotes the Man to be injurious and a Liar; but then it must be rather thin
then plump. Every fat and full Face, denotes the Man to be ignorant and
voluptuous: a little Face is a sign of little wit.

Of the Nose.
THe Nose that stretches out to the mouth, signifies goodness and audacity. If
the Nose-thrils be wide and large, it is a sign the ^esticles are of a great
size; that the person is ^ncontinent, Treacherous, False, Bold, and of dull
capacity. The small, long, and lean feet, ^ive testimony of the Woman's Matrix;
the measure of half the foot being bare, is the pro^ortion of the Woman's womb.
Those that have (...) sharp aquiline Nose, are soon angry, and very
^indicative. The flat nose signifies Impetuosity, Incontinency, and yet
Pusillanimity. When the Nose is large in the middle upwards, it is a sign the
person is addicted to superfluous Romantic stories. The bottle-nose denotes
avariciousness, such persons covet all they see; that which is ^ound and blunt
at the end, denotes magnanimity: The wry-nose signifies hurt by blows. The Nose
that is naturally somewhat flat, denotes Liberality. If a person of small
stature have a great large red Nose, it denotes Excess and Drunkenness; little
nose-thrils are attributed to those that are of a servile cowardly spirit.
Those that are long, signify cheerfulness. The hair of a Man's Nose-thrils
being harsh, denotes the Man to be of a settled and resolute temper: if they
are few, it signfies the person is docible.

Of the Ears.
GReat Ears signify that the party is addicted to passion, and impatient;
being large and upright, it is a sign of superfluity of words, an^ long life;
large and hanging down, signifies ^ches: if they are thin and dry, they denote
I^ constancy: Little Ears signify fraud and mali^nity: The long and narrow,
signify that t^ Party is Envious. Those that are little, short life the round,
show the Man to be indocible. Tho^^ that are fastened very close to the head,
demorstrate goodness of nature. The Ears that a^ sunk and fixed in the head,
signifies Idlenes^ Those that are hairy, signify long life, a quid hearing,
and voluptuousness.

Of the Jaws.
THe Jaws that stand out in the upper part, a^^ a certain sign of Malice;
those that are re^ at top, denote drunkenness; the fleshy, a Ma^artless, and
without spirit; those that are extra^ordinary lean jaw'd, it signifies
malignity an^ Envy; the round, deceit; those that have the^ hairy, are stupid
and brutish.

Of the Mouth.
AN extraordinary wide mouth, signifies great Talker, Impiety, and a Man of
mantial spirit, a Liar, replete with folly and a^^ things disadvantageous. The
mouth that is little, ^gnisies that the Party is fearful, peaceable, and
^^faithful. That which is very wide and round, ^gnifies uncleanness and
cruelty. A long chin, ^gnifies the Party little addicted to anger; yet he (...)
somewhat litigious, and conceited of him ^elf. Those that have a little chin,
are to be ^eatly avoided; for they are very wicked, and ^ies: the round chin
is an effoeminate sign.

Of the Lips.
THose that are thick-lip'd, are foolish and stupid; the nether Lip flagging
and very ^ed, signifies a Woman much addicted to sen^^ality and immodesty; the
soft and smiling, de^ote carnality: Those that are big, stupidity; ^hey are
under the Planet Mars. Those whose ^ips are not red inwardly, are distempered,
or ^^ddenly like to be so. The moist Lips and mouth ^enote malignity and
timorousness: the upper^p that is small and somewhat raised, shows the Party to
be full of tongue, very envious, and gi^en to accusation.

Of the Teeth.
WHen they are long and strong outwardly, it is a sign of a Glutton, subject
to malicious anger; weak, thin and small Teeth, signify shortness of days;
great Teeth in a Man signify Idleness, Vanity, Simplicity, and a goo^ temper;
when they are very dry, they signifi^^ some approaching disease.

Of the Tongue.
THose that stammer, are subject to the flux those that repeat the first
syllable, that denotes approaching melancholy; a white Tongu^ is a sign of
poverty and misery: all stammere^ are rough-hewn and haughty.

Of the Voice.
THose that have a slow and lisping speech are of a good Behavior; The Men
tha^ have a big Voice are injurious and strong; the shrill Voice, signifies
timorousness; the soft scarce heard, denotes Meekness; those that spea^
lispingly and loosely, are very angry, but soo^ appeased; those that have a
harsh Voice, are fools those that are nimble-tongu'd, if their Voice b^
slender, are Mischievous, Importunate, and Lying persons; if the Voice be loud,
such a person is prone to anger, and ill-natured; those that ar^ often moved to
speak, are unclean persons; they that speak through the nose, are Liars, and
given to Envy.

The Judgment of the other parts of the Body.
THose that have a thin long Neck, are fearful and malicious; those that have a
short one, are very deceitful; those that have a bull-neck, are great
Trenchermen; short Arms signify that the party loves dissension, and is
Ignorant, long hands and fingers, denote a Man to be a lover of all Arts; the
largeness of the fingers signify folly and imprudence; the feet that are
overlong, show the person to be a cunning Cheat; those that are much
discolored and short, denote malignity: to have short feet, and the soles of
them contracted, is a bad sign; those that take large steps when they walk,
are magnanimous, and accomplish all their designs. Those that in walking take
little narrow steps, have little courage. Soft fingers are a sign of a docible
person, and those that are hard, the contrary; when the hands are short, and
the fingers strong, it is a very good sign; a large or small hand, with
extraordinary short fingers, they denote a person to be a Coward and a Thief;
slender and bowed hands, a Babbler.

The Nails that are white, large, and somewhat reddish, signify a very solid
judgment: but when they are narrow and very long, it is a sign of Cruelty and
Folly; those that are bent and crooked, signify the Impudence and Capacity of
the person; the nails that are deep set in the flesh cleaving thereunto,
signify excessive cruelty, and extraordinary folly; those that are too short
whitish, or dusky color, declare the person to b^ Malicious; fingers that are
very round, denot^^ Malice, Craft, Avarice and Incontinence; the short and
thick, audacity and cruelty; and where they are very long, such a person is far
from being wise; if there be too great a distance between them, it is a sign
of Inconstancy and Loquacity those that have the paps hanging down, and (...)
soft breast, are immoderately given to wine and excess.

Those that often move their whole body, ar^ Effoeminate; those that have a big
belly, are Indiscreet, Foolish, Haughty and Unchaste; the smalness of the Legs
demonstrates Ignorance, the largeness of them, Boldness; those that walk slowly
and take large steps, are usually successful; those that take little steps, are
Impetuous, Infirm, and go about business with an ill will; those that have
their Toes more closely then ordinary joined together, are fearful; those that
have the Ball of the Foot even without any hollowness, are wary and
mischievous; those that are often hungry, have a cold stomach not able to
digest; they that sweat excessively in their sleep, stand in need of purging;
says Hippocrates, or their nutriment is too hasty; they that are
round-shoulder'd, have short fingers: the lines of the hands not intersected,
and many teeth, such persons are long-lived; a quick pulse, freedom^ of
respiration, promptitude in actions, with much choler, are marquis of vivacity,
and greatness of courage; the largeness of the veins, hair growing upon the
Belly, a dry and harsh skin, is a sign of the heat of the Liver; on the
contrary, those that have large buttocks are remiss, of a cold constitution,
and timorous; those that are naturally corpulent, and big-belly'd, are shorter
lived then those that are lean; those that are hairy in the body, and lean, and
have a redhairy Face, they are of a hotter temper then others, and contrariwise
the contrary: the sanguine live longer then those that are of other
constitutions; the chaste, then those that are incontinent; the sober, then the
Glutton; the Males, then the Females: if you would know whether a Man be
left handed, observe when he walks whether be leans to the left side, for such
persons for the most part are left handed; and so on the contrary. Those that
have a soft skin, are gifted with exquisite reason, and have a more refined wit
then those that have it harsh.

We are now come to the last part, which in the practice of Physiognomie ought
to be the first: for oftentimes it falls out, that a Man knows not what
Countryman he speaks to; either his color is changed by some accident, or by
drinking and discoursing with persons that you have not seen, or he may be poor
or rich, noble or mechanique which things make a great alteration in the
behavior; so that I find a Man cannot so readily judge of the temper by
particular marquis, as when there are many concurrent, which lay open to us a
Man's Inclination to some particular Vice or Virtue.

A Character of the Just-Man.
THe Jus-Man has all the marquis hereafter mentioned; a venerable Ey and Mouth
in shape and form like a virgin's, a piercing look that carries terror in it;
his Eyes casting a luster with an aspect neither wild nor over-humble, but with
a certain pensiveness full of reverence and dignity; His hair is of a dark
color, his voice big loud, inflexible, or else mean between the base and
treble; his Eyes are full, and placed near his head, the ball of the Ey
proportionably round, or the circle that is underneath surrounding the ball of
the Ey narrow and black; but the upper part in those Eyes that are full of the
chrystalline humor, casts a kind of sparkling luster, and nothing seems strange
or joyful in them; or their Eyes water with laughing, their ey-lids looking
downwards; the forehead long, and extended toward both the temples.

Of the Injust.
THe inferior circle of the Apple of the Ey is green, the superior black; his
Eyes a^greenish somewhat dry, or reddish, immovable, large, looking downwards,
when closing of an indifferent size, sparkling; the holes are proportionable,
and they dry; and those parts which are without the eye, as the forehead,
cheeks, ey-brows, and lips move often, or are open and smiling, and looks with
a fixed and menacing countenance.

Of the Honest Man.
HIs Nose is big, well proportioned to the face; or long, extended to the
mouth; or moderately long, large and open; of a comely aspect, breathing
moderately, the breast large and shoulders broad; the paps of his breast of a
moderate size, his eyes hollow, and moving like water in a vessel, having a
staid look, the circles of the Eyes neither too big, nor too little; the Eyes
always open, of a sad color, and full of chrystalline humor; of a pleasant or
sober look, closely shutting the ey-brows, and the forehead supercilious and
depressed.

Of the Good-natured Man.
HIs Forehead is neither full, nor wrinkled; his Ears of a comely square
proportion, the Face neither too big nor too little, the Voice neither shrill,
deep nor small: he laughs but seldom; his Nails large and pale, inclining to
yellowness; his Eyes hollow, fixed, of a leaden color, full, watchful, shining
as if moistened with water; his Feet well-shap'd, joynted and nervous.

Of the Wicked Man.
HE has an ill-look, long and narrow Ears, a little out-mouth'd, his Ey-Teeth
are long, advanced forward, and well fastened; he is ready in discourse,
especially if his voice be slender, or he speaks through the nose, or with
difficulty; his neck awry and knobby, spindle-shank'd; his feet ill made, and
hollow in the soles; his Eyes all the length of the Face, especially the apple
or ball of the Ey, looking as if they moved jointly, glittering like dry
marble, of a black color, staring, as if they would start out of his head; they
close not, are pale, reddish and dry.

Of Poisoners.
THey have dry and goggle-eyes, the circle of the apple of the Ey
disproportioned, rolling, black, with pale or bloody specks.

Of those that have Venomous eyes.
THeir lower lips are small, and swelled toward the Ey-teeth.

Of Murderers.
THeir Ey-brows are tufted, thick, and joined gether; the circles near the
apple of the Ey unsettled, dry, very roling, or pale color'd.

Of the Faithful.
HIs Eyes are of a moderate size, drawing toward a dusky or black color,
large, fixed, and approaching to a leaden color; or heavy, and the ey-brows
closing together, with a supercilious and down-look.

Of the Unfaithful.
HIs Head is very small and ill-proportion'd; he has a weak back, a rough
forehead full of wrinkles and small furrows; high-shoulder'd, hands small and
slander; his eyes hollow, dry, and of a dark color, or dark and foul,
constantly moving and rolling, as if he were discomposed, and has a sharp look.

Of the Prudent.
HE is slender in body, his head rather big then little, extended from the
forepart to the hinder; in his Infancy he is fair-hair'd; his forehead square,
and truly proportioned; his face full, and of a moderate size; a smooth
tongue; his voice neither deep nor shrill; the upper-lip standing out; his neck
leaning to the right side; largechested and broad-shoulder'd; his hands and
fingers long, without any moving gesture in discourse; his eyes large,
high-set, casting a luster, radiant, and full of moisture.

Of the Imprudent.
HE is high foreheaded, breathes like one that has newly run a race; his
fingers are knotty all ill-shap'd: he walks swiftly, is timorous, and if
surpised shrinks himself up together; in his gate he walks in equilibrio,
poysing his body uprightly; he is very big or slender bodied; his skin parched
and color'd, so that it shows him to be of a hot constitution; they have little
Eyes standing outward, sparkling like a Star or Diamond, or are of a dark,
reddish or sanguine color; they are immovable, ruddy, large and downlook'd,
or steady, fixed, and lifting up the ey-lids, languishing, often opening and
closing.

Of the Idiot.
HE has a full plump face and thick lips, speaks not freely, has a straight
neck, his body leaning to the left.

Of the Ingenious.
HE has a soft moist skin, neither very hairy, nor altogether without hair,
neither too thin, mixed with red and white; has a sweet ^^ir in his
countenance, his hair is full and moderate between thick and thin; his Eyes are
^full, comely, and indifferent round; his head ^s of the middle size,
proportionalbe to the neck in bigness; equal and well-shap'd; stooping (...)
little in the shoulders; his thighs and skin are not very fleshy; his voice
clear, and equally proportioned between the Base and Treble; the palms of his
hands are long, his fingers ^lender and sharp at the ends; he is moderate in
weeping and laughting; his countenance is intermixed with joy and galliardize.

Of the Mechanique.
THeir hands and fingers are long; their eyes moist, often opening and
shutting, their hai^ inclining somewhat to a flaxen color.

Of the Pensive.
THeir forehead is wrinkled in part, or all over* they draw their breath softly
and unhead* are wry-neck'd; and slow-paced.

Of those that are apt to Learn.
THeir hair is somewhat near the flaxen-colour, their forehead extended at
length, the ey-brows thin, clear, large, and of the same proportion; the ears
sunk into the head, have a meagr^ look, seldom smiling; their neck leaning to
the right side; are large shouldered, and broad or narrow-chested; their belly
is well proportioned they use the gesture of the hands in discourse; their eyes
are well shaped, of a leaden or black color radiant, large, fixed, dark and
moist; or steady little and moist; exactly proportioned; the forehead extended,
the ey-lids moveable, yet so as i^ they were steady and fixed; the eye having a
tincture of white in it, or closing justly, moist, of a true proportion, or
heavy and moist, with a smooth brow.

Of those that are unapt to Learn.
THeir head is too big, or too little; their face broad, and neck soft.

Of the Constant.
THey seldom laugh; the hair of their ey-brows is black and substantial; their
eyes are dark, moist, and truly proportioned.

Of the Inconstant.
THey have a little forehead, yet broad of the size: a very little nose, long,
thin, and slender at the end; they are flat-mouth'd; their belly and breast is
very hairy; their eyes are little, and of a sad color.

Of the Furious.
HIs head is little, the fore and hinder part hollow; the forehead round and
high; he is bottle-nos'd upwards; is plump-fac'd and cheek'd somewhat
long-visag'd; the paps of his breasts are big and fleshy: the space between his
nave^ and the lower part of the breast, longer then tha^ between the lower part
of the breast and the throat; his arms are brawny, nails crooked and narrow;
his eyes move but slowly.

Of Rude and unciviliz'd Persons.
THeir head is too big, they are flaxen-hair'd, inclining to white; their
forehead plump, their ears round, neither small, nor sunk into the head; their
nose ill-proportion'd to the face; are very out-mouth'd; their lips thick and
round, o^ the under-lip standing out; their neck big, brawny, hard, and as it
were immovable; they are high-shoulder'd; have large and harsh hands, fingers
too long and slender; their legs and heels are large, and their nails overgrown
with flesh.

Of the Foolish.
THey have a large, broad forehead, great erected ears of a flame-colour: their
cheecks fallen, and a sad countenance; their upper-lip is thick, hanging over
the under-lip; they have a nimble tongue, laugh much, and have a sharp and
piercing voice; they have a long neck, and usually bend forward, either in
that, or some other part of the body; their hands are very much bowed
backwards; their shoulders hairy, and their eyes squinting toward the right
side; the ball of their Ey is very full.

Of Epileptique Persons.
THeir Eyes stare, as if they were coming out of their head, are indifferently
large, shining and moist, lifting themselves upwards, especially if they are
twinkling, or one Ey looks up, and the other down; or if they seem to shake in
their motion, like one that fetches his breath quick and harshly.

Of those that have a strong Memory.
ALl the upper parts of the body are small, comely, well-shap'd, proportionable,
well-flesh'd, but not fat; for where they are corpulent, it is a sign the
party is stupid and forgetful.

Of those that have a weak Memory.
THeir upper parts are larger then the lower, as the hands then the feet
proportionably, etc.

Of the Bold and Hardy.
HE has and austere look, a wrinkled brow, long ey-brow, a nose extended even
to the mouth, which is wide, teeth long, thin, sharp and strong, long arms
that reach down to the knees, a large breast, wide shoulders, eyes glittring,
of a greenish or sanguine color, moving to an fro without stirring the ey-lids,
large, dry, casting a pure shining glorious luster.

Of the Rash.
THey are wide and out-mouth'd, short and thick-finger'd; their eyes are
shining, yet squinting, closing with a severe look; their ey-brows are awry;
their ey-lids harsh and thick, or closing directly, moist, of an exact
proportion, and casting a luster, dry, and have a smooth forehead.

Of the Proud.
THeir ey-brows are arched, and often moving upwards; their belly is big,
fleshy and hanging down; they are slow-paced, and often stop in the streets of
their own accord; looking about them on all sides; their eyes are dry and
sadcolour'd.

Of the Timorous.
THey are soft-skin'd, their body is not upright but stooping; their complexion
somewhat pale, their eyes weak, open, and close often; the extremities of their
bodies are feeble; their thighs thin; their hands long and slender; their neck
is also long, their breast weak; their voice sharp and sweet; the hinder part
of their head, hollow; their hair is lank or curled, soft and full, black or
white; they are large foreheaded, full-faced or bony, black, or fair
complexion'd, thin-lip'd and little mouthed; they draw their breath seldom,
faintly and slowly; their body and breast is lean, and without hair; or they
fetch their breath aloud, often, and quickly; they have a trembling low voice,
and an ill colored squinting eye.

Of the Infirm.
THeir ey-brows are thin, far stretched, out, or immovable; they stammer or
lisp in their speech; their neck is slender, their arms and elbows small;
their hands are small, slender and ill-joynted; the paps of their breasts small
and extenuated; their eyes and ey-brows move together.

Of the Courageous.
HE is harsh-hair'd, and straight-bodied; the bones, ribs and extremities of
his body are strong and big; an high, but no large, smooth, nor rough forehead,
yet lean; he is large and strong-shoulder'd; his neck is fast, but not
fullflesh'd; has a moist eye, and look full of terror; a menacing, strong and
loud voice; his respiration is equal; his head somewhat larger then ordinary;
his ears and forehead square, and of a due proportion; his nose suitable to his
forehead; is thin-lip'd and wide-mouthed, the upper and lower lip being both
alike; has long arms, with big and harsh hands.

Of the Covetous.
HIs face, members and eyes are little; his gate as it should be; he is
crook-back'd, has a sharp, piercing voice; his complexion somewhat ruddy; his
speech weak and querulous.

Of the Liberal.
HIs hair falls upon his forehead, his neck is hairy; his fingers and shoulders
are bowed backward, and he is long-arm'd.

Of the Temperate.
HIs hair is neither light, nor thick; he draws his breath moderately; his
forehead is neither smooth, nor wrinkled; his mouth neither wide, nor little;
his neck leans on the right side, the corners of his eyes are short; the ball
of the eye of a mean proportion; but his eyes themselves large, radiant and
moist, having a black circle under a red one.

Of the Intemperate.
HE is wide-mouthed, soft and big-belly'd, hanging down; his eyes are
sad-color'd, looking upwards, when they begin to close, or pleasant and moist,
otherwise, big and reddish, looking upwards.

Of the Luxurious.
HE that is of a pale complexion, and hairy; his hair is straight, thick and
black; has hair on his temples and lips; his chin plump and full; his beard
plays with his nose; the circumference of that space which is between the nose
and the chin is hollow; the veins of the arms are visible, the ey-lids
constantly moving; his hair thin, or head bald; the hair of the ey-lids
shedding; his ears very little, a wide nose, and round near the forehead, or
flat; his hands hairy, his toes closely joined together, the nails very round,
the cheeks gathered up together, and of a sprightly look; the eyes radiant, or
else have a green circle under a black one.

Of the voluptuous Woman.
She is of a pale or brown complexion, slender and lean; straight-bodied, has
little hard breasts; her hair is curled and short; her voice shrill and loud;
she is bold of speech, proud and cruel, very officious, and loves good liquor.

Of the Drunkard.
HE has a little face of a yellow complexion, plump cheeks always ruddy; he
draws his breath nimbly and frequently; his throat is rough, the vertebra
thereof standing out; his ey-lids advanced downwards, reddish, moist, large or
goggle-ey'd, as if they would start out of the head.

Of the Dull person.
HE is naturally hot, his body in good case, his head bigger then ordinary, the
case o^ the eye is upwardly apparent; his body is so fat, and veins so narrow,
that they are scarce visible; the conveyances through which the spirits of the
head move to and fro, are so narrow, that they are soon stopped, and then is the
time for sleep.

Of the Slothful Man.
HE has a broad forehead, his face is of a honey-colour, the lower part of the
nose big, the face large and plump, and has great theeks; he has a drowzy
look; speaks little and deliberately; his body is very hairy, his pace large
and slow, or short and slow; very ^arge eyes, not quick in their motion.

Of the Impudent.
HIs eye is full and radiant, his ey-lids red and large, is high-shoulder'd; he
is not straight bodied, but somewhat stooping; he moves hastily; the tincture
of his body is ruddy of a sanguine color, a fierce countenance; hi^ breast high
chested, and has a bold and impudent look, a ruddy complexion; is coppet
crowned, his hair very red, his ey-brows long hook-nos'd from the forehead
downward the face long or flat; he is loud in his laughter as if he had a
cough, or difficulty of breathing great legs, of a quick pace; his eyes are
fier^ red or big, and one of the bones standing very much outward.

Of the Bashful.
HE is slow in his motion and speech, hi^ voice grave and spirituous, a brisk
no^ sparkling eye, nor very open, nor yet quite closed which shuts leasurely,
very red; the body bowed the ears red, his eyes sad-colour'd and moist of a
just proportion.

Of the Melancholique.
HIs face is wrinkled, forehead lean an^ thin, has a down-look, is of an
humble look, and modest in all his motions, hi^ ey-lids extended, his hair
dark, a sad countenance, the ey-brows joined together, the vertebre of the
throat standing out, his voice wea^ and broken; he draws his breath often,
alou^ and nimbly.

Of the Facetious.
HE has a broad, fleshy and smooth forehead, or wrinkled a little about the
eyes; his look is seemingly drowzy, of a graceful aspect, neither composed, nor
effoeminate; his eyes are moist and shining, slow in their motion; the figure
and symmetry of his face exactly proportionable; has a soft voice, and
pleasant brow.

Of the Dissembler.
HE is plump in those parts that belong to the face; those that are about the
eye, are wrinkled; is of a seeming sleepy, but pleasant aspect; has a low
voice, good gate, and is always in motion; walking sometimes apace, sometimes
softly; his ey-brows bending to the temples; has sparkling, hollow and little
eyes.

Of Liars.
THey have a full face, a nose big in the middle, growing narrow at the top,
smiling about the mouth, of a quick and shrill ^peech, or speaking thorough the
nose; the body is crooked the ey-brows depressed, and looking as it were by
stealth; the eyes are smiling and lively.

Of the Sincere and Upright Person.
HIs face of the middle size, his cheeks are plump, and temples full; his voice
neither deep nor sharp.

Of the Flatterer.
HE has a little face, a serene and extended brow, moving his body to and fro
as he walks, his eyes different, and small.

Of the Envious.
THeir ey-brows are down-cast even to the cheeks, their face flat, their ears
long and narrow, their cheeks thin or full, far distan^ from the eyes, of a
pale complexion; the mouth wide; have long sharp white and strong teeth, a
delicate voice; are sharp and weak of speech; have short arms, and hollow eyes.

Of the Irreligious or Impious.
THeir temples are hollow, their ey-brows joined together and hairy, their
mouth ^ery wide, their teeth long, sharp, white and ^trong; their eyes hollow,
little or great, and ^ill of motion, sparkling as if they were angry, opening
themselves very wide, piercing, and swelled round about.

Of the Merciful.
THey are comely, of a fair complexion, their eyes are plump, and their
nose-thrils a great distance upwards, always weeping; they love Women, and do
procreate children; are very much inclined to love, have ever a tenacious
memory; are ingenious and witty; their ey-brows are directly straight; have a
long or cloudy brow, and the ey-brows cast down.

Of Gamesters.
THey have thick, straight and black hair, a thick beard, hairy temples, a
plump sparkling and clear eye, large, reddish, and looking upwards.

Of the Talkative Person.
HE is well-shap'd, his ears are large and straight, his nose is straight, or
big in the middle, growing narrow at the top; he is long cheekt; his complexion
is of a honey-colour; he breathes as if he had run a race; his chin is long,
his throat rough, his hands slender and bent; his fingers slender and thin, and
his sides swelled.

Of the Heroique Person.
HIs head is well-proportion'd, rather big then little, of an exact roundness,
advanced before and behind; the forehead square, between smooth and wrinkled;
large radiant eyes under a sparkling brow, of a leaden color; a sharp look,
the ears deep percive, and well made, advanced, quick of hearing; his lips
soft, and colored; his mouth rather large then little: his voice and mirth
moderate; his speech grave, his hair inclining to a flaxen color; his
complexion clear and a little ruddy, his hands are always of a big and large
size.

FINIS.
Books newly printed for William Crook, at the Green dragon without
Temple-Barr.
1. PRaxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae. Auct: Fr: Clerk. 1667. Price bound 1
s. 2. A weeks work; showing the whole Duty of a Christian: laying down in
seven particular heads, for the Practice of the seven days in the week: what
prayer is, how to use it profitably; wherein is showed the true nature, power
and effect of Vocal and Mental prayer, etc. 1668. Price bound 18.6 d. 2.
Touchstone-Proofe, and the Touchstone it self tried by the Test and Balance of
the Sanctuary: in answer to a Book entitled, The Touchstone of the Reformed
Gospel. By T. W. 1668. Price 6 d. 4. Articles of peace betwixt France and
Spain. 1668. Price 2 d. 5. Hugonis Grotii Baptizatorum puerorum Institutio
alternis interrogationibus and responsionibus: cui adjicitur Graeca ejusdem
Metaphras. Chr. Wase; quibus accessit praxis in Graecam Metaphrasin cum Graecis
Testimoniis ex sacra pagina, and Indice Locupletissimo. 1668. Price bound 2 s.
6. The complete Measurer: or, a new and exact way of Mensuration, by which may
be measured both superficies and solids in a more plain and easy way than ever
extant: whereby you may find out the content of all superficies and solids in
whole numbers and fractions, by the help o^ Multiplication, without Division:
by Thomas Hammond. 1669. Price bound 1 s. 7. Sir Hen. Blounts Voyage into the
Levant is newly reprinted: the Price bound 1 s.

