AENEAS HIS ERRORS, OR HIS Voyage from Troy into ITALY.

An ESSAY Upon the Third Book of Virgils AEneis.

By John Boys of Hode Court, Esquire

-- per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium: --
Virg. AEn. 1. London, Printed by T. M. for Henry Broom, at the Gun in
Ivy-lain, 1661.

TO THE Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Cornbury, Eldest Son to the Right
Honorable, the Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND.
My Lord,
I Here present your Honor with the fruits (not so well indeed digested and
ripened, as I wish they were) of some few weeks retirement in the Country: the
more then merited reception my late Essay upon this great Author found with
your greater Father, the Right Honorable, the Lord High Chancellor has
encouraged me to continue my Addresses to the same Family, of which, after
himself, your Lordship is the deserving Head.

I hasten, my Lord, with my poor Offering, whilst your Lordship has leisure
to cast your eye upon such a trifle as this; for (doubtless) you are already
in your journey to more weighty employments, for which as well the Example as
the Precepts of your most wise and knowing Father daily prepare and adapt you.

The truth is, that if you look upon the bulk of the Volume, it is no more then
a Pamphlet, and, by consequence, very much beneath the Patronage of so great a
Mecenas: but if you consider the credit and weight of the Author, to wit,
Virgil, then I hope, that your Lordship will not receive it under so mean and
opprobious a qualification; however defaced and mangled by the unskilful hand
of so rude an Artist, as my self.

Great wits have not blushed to undertake and publish one single piece of this
excellent Author, of whom every book indeed is of it self a complete Poem:
Hence we have Mr. Sandys his Essay upon the first; Sir John Denhams upon the
second, and the united studies of Mr. Waller and Mr. Godolphin upon the fourth
of the AEneis: I aspire not to the unequalled Excellencies, and deserved fame
of those worthy Gentlemen; it is the height of my Ambition to merit your
Lordships acceptance, and candid interpretation of this my present address,
and to beget a belief in you, that there is no person more truly devoted to
your Lordships service, and to that of your right Noble Family, then

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most Obedient Servant, John Boys.

AEneas his Errors, or his Voyage from Troy into Italy.
The Argument.
AEneas having given Queen Dido a full relation of the miseries, and final
subversion of the City, and Empire of Troy in the precedent book, pursues in
this the particulars of his Navigation, or Voyage from Asia into Europe, from
Troy into Italy: with those several ranconters, which befell him by the way.

WHen 'twas by heavens decreed that Asia's States,
And Priams race by undeserved fates
Should fall; that lofty Ilium, and that frame
By Neptune raiz'd, should in a Common flame
Expire; urged by the answers of the Gods,
From stranger seats we quit our own abodes
Under Antandros we and Ida fit
Our Fleet for Sea, and when men furnish it,
Uncertain whether we our course should bend,
Or where our labors should a period find.
Summer was scarce advanced, when to resign
Our selves to fates Anchrises did enjoin:
Our ports I weeping leave, and native shore,
And fields, which lately Troy's proud turrets bore:
With my Companions, son, my Gods, forlorn
An Exile I through the vast Deep am born.
A vast and warlike land by Thracians tilled
(Whose Scepter fierce Lycurgus once did weild)
In view does lie; to us (by the same ties
Of leagues and worship) ancient Allies;
Whilst fortune smiled: my course I hither steer,
And on the winding shore a town do rear;
By cross fates guided; and from mine own name,
The name of the AEneadae do frame:
To Venus I, and to those Deities
Offered, who did befriend our enterprise:
To the great King of Gods upon the strand
A white Bull I did slay; there was at hand
A rizing bank, with Cornel twigs beset
And with rough myrtle for rude lances fit:
This place approaching, I endeavored
To pluck the verda^t boughs, therewith to spread
The Altar; but a horrid prodigy
And strange behold: from the first shrub, which I
Tore from the ground drops of black blood distilled
Which with corrupted gore the place defiled:
A shivering through my members shot: my blood
Through terror in my veins congealed stood:
Another twig I then assay, that I
Of things the hidden causes might descry:
The like defluxion thence proceeds: in thought
Perplexed, by prayer the rural Nymphs I sought,
And Father Mars, the Thracians Deity;
That into good they would turn this prodigy;
But, when with greater strength a third assay
Making, with both my knees I struggling lay
Against the earth (shall I be dumb or speak?)
A piteous groan did from beneath me break:
And a voice does arrive my frighted ear:
Why wretched me, AEneas, do thou tear:
Stain not thy pious hands; the Buried spare,
One Troy has caused that we no strangers are:
Nor, from this root distills this purple gore:
Fly bloody coasts, ah, fly this cursed shore:
For I am Polydorus, whom they slew
With showrs of arrows, which here rooting grew:
But, then distracting fear did me surprise:
Me my tongue failed; an end my hair did rise:
Unhappy Priam (when he did distrust
Dardania's strength, when he the City first
Invested saw) to Thracia's Polymnestor, who married Ilione, Priams eldest
daughter.
King, by stealth
This Polydorus, and with him much wealth
Sent to be kept: but, when the fortune he
Of Troy, and our strength did declining see,
The Victors arm's, and Agamemnon's side
He followed; and, all laws rejecting, did
Slay Polydorus, and possess his gold;
Dire thirst of pelf what empire do thou hold
In Mortal breasts? My fear allayed, then I
Told to the Trojan Peers the prodigy,
But chiefly to my Sire: their sense I crave,
Who jointly those cursed shors persuade to leave
With injured friendship; and our sayl's to spread;
With heap'd-up earth the grave then of the Dead
We do repair: and to his Ghost erect
Altars, with Cypress, and black garlands decked:
The Trojan Dames stand round with flowing hair
Bowls of new milk and blood we offer there:
Then in his grave his soul we do compose,
And with a Vale the whole duty close:
When winds and seas were stilled, and gentle gales
Did us invite to hoise our pregnant sail's:
When first we durst to calmed Surges trust,
Filling the strands, our ships to sea we^^ thrust:
^s we the Port, so shores and Citi's seem
Is to forsake: a land, in high esteem
With Neptune, and the Sea-Nymphs Mother, lies
Surrounded with the sea; Apollo this
Floating about all Coasts and Seas did tie
With Gyaros, and high-brow'd Myconie:
And (sixth) made it for Culture fit; against wind
Secure: here we arrived safe harbor find
For our tired selves and ships: and, now on shore,
Apollo's town approaching we adore:
King Anius, King of men, and Phoebus Priest,
With royal wreaths, and sacred Laurel dressed,
Comes forth his friend Anchises to accost,
We join rights hands, and he becomes our host:
I in the ancient temple of that God
Make my address: Grant us a fixed abode;
Grant walls: a stock; a lasting State: maintain
Troy's second tours, with what there does remain
Left by Achilles, and his Greeks: what guide
Have we? where shall we go? or where abide?
O Father give a blessed augurie,
And gently glide into our breasts: but I
Had scarcely done, when all things seemed to shake,
The laurel, porch, the mou^tain seemed to quake;
The very Tripod rung: upon the ground
We prostrate fell: and heard this voice resound:
Stout Dardans, whence you first your birth derive
Thither return, that land shall harbor give:
AEneas house, with those, who thence descend,
Here far and near its Empire shall extend:
Great joy here at amongst the people rose:
What seats they were al asked, which Phoebus chose
For our retreat: My sir, then old Records
Calling to mind, began, ye Trojan Lords
Hear; and whereon your hopes are grounded, know
To sea-girt Crete great Jove his birth does ow:
There Is Ida's mount: thence we our birth derive;
A hundred City's there do dwellings give:
Hence (if I speak aright) to Phrygian shores
Our Grandsire Teucrus first advanced with oar's:
And chose his Empires seat: nor Ilium stood,
Or Troy's tour's then: they in the vales abode:
Hence Mother Cybel, brazen Cymbals hence,
Hence Ida's grove, and silent rites commence:
That Goddess chariot hence yoked Lions drew:
Come on; let us the Gods Commands pursue:
The winds appease; to Cretan.
Gnossian realms contend;
Not far from hence: if Jupiter befriend,
Our fleet in Crete shall in th^^ day's arrive:
Then to the Altars he due rites did give:
A Bull to Neptune; such was Phoebus right;
To storms a black sheep; to fair gales a white:
The present King of Crete.
Idomeneus was bruited to be cast
Out of his native Throne: Cretes coast laid wast:
Houses and towns deserted: we forsake
The ancient name of Delos.
Ortygias port; and all sail winged make:
We vinie Naxus; green Donysa, we
The Cyclads, through the Main which scater'd lie,
Oliarus, white Paros pass, and quit
Those seas, which are with frequent Isles beset.
A shout the eager sailers raise, and cheer
Their willing mates, brave hearts, come, let us steer
For Crete, our native soil: a friendly gale
Blowing a stern fills our distended sail:
And now we coast the The Cretans anciently so called.
Curets shore along
Now I the walls raise of my wished town;
And call it Pergamus: joy'd at the name,
Our men build houses, and a Castle frame:
And now our ships were drawn upon the sands,
Our youth employed in choosing wives and lands:
I dwellings gave: but lo! a mortal year
From the Corruption of the tainted Air,
A lamentable-languishing disease
All living Creatures, trees, and Corn does seize:
Beloved life those either did exhale
Or after them their pined bodies drawle;
The barren fields the soultry Dog Star burns;
Grass drys; the blasted ear no food returns:
My Sire the way to Delos to repeat
And Phoebus bids, his pardon to entreat,
To know when he would to our toils put end,
Our labors ease; where we our course should bend
'Twas night; and sleep all mortals did possess,
Behold my Gods, those sacred Images
Which I with me from 'midst Troys flam's did bear
To me (in sleep dissolved) did appear.
In all proportions by that light displayed,
Which through the window the bright moon convay'd
They thus began; and thus my cares allayed.
What Phoebus to thee (leaving Delos) said,
He here repeats; he us to thee does send:
Troy burnt, thee and thy arms we did attend,
With thee have crossed the swelling waves; the same
Shall to the stars extol thy Nephews fame,
And give thy City rule: great walls prepare
For thy great Heirs: nor toil, nor travel spare:
From hence remove; Apollo to this strand
Bid not approach, or plant in Cretan land.
There is a place, the Greeks Hesperia style,
An ancient land, and strong; a fruitful soil,
The Oenotrians held it; Italy the same
Our moderns call, from their first To wit, Italus.
leaders name:
This is our distin'd seat: hence Dardanus
And Iasius sprung, the root of Troy and us:
Rise, and relate unto thine aged sire
These doubtless truths; then for Italy.
Ausonia steer.
For Jove forbids this Country to possess:
Astonished at this sight, and Gods express,
(Nor was it a dream; their faces, wreathed hair
I knew, and did their voices plainly hear,
Whilst a cold sweat run all my body over)
I start up from my bed; the heavens implore
With hands extended; and a Sacrifice
Offer: this duly done, I do advise
Anchises of all passages, and tell
To him in order what to me befell:
Our twofold I Parents and ambiguous race:
He did confess, with the mistaken place
Then he; son, tried in Trojan fates, this thing
Cassandra unto me alone did sing:
I now recall; these fates to us as due,
Italian kingdoms she did often foreshew,
A name of Italy.
Hesperia often; but, who could e're conceive,
That Trojans to Hesperia should arrive:
Or whom then did Cassandras Council sway?
Better adviz'd let us the Phoebus.
God obey.
Thus he, and his advice all gladly take,
We also do this place forthwith forsake.
And leaving some behind, set sail: and now
We with our hollow keels the Ocean plow.
But, when we were advanced, nor land could see
And rounded were with naught but sea and sky:
Lo! over my head a black storm-crouded cloud
Hung, which the waters did in darkness shro^d.
The sea winds furrow: angry waves swell high
Tossed on the Deep we are, and scattered lie:
Storms intercept the day; mists veil the sky,
Whilst from rent clouds vollies of thunder fly:
Forced from our course in darkened salts we stray
Even The Master of AEneas his Ship.
Po^inure discerns not night from day:
Nor does remember how his Course to steer;
Three days we wander, nor does sun appear:
As many star-lesse Nights; on the fourth we
Land, hills, and smoke in black Curls rizeing see,
Furling our sayls we take our Oars: with these
We dash the foam; and cleave the azure seas:
Escaped the Str^phades me first received,
The Str^phades, (from a Greek name derived)
Are Islands in the Ionian Main: The place,
To which Celoeno, and Harpynian race
Retired, when they by Phineus banished were,
And their first pension did forsake through fear.
Then these no Monster's worse, no greater curse,
No greater plague e're sprung from stygian source
The fowl's have Virgins faces, purging still
Their filthy paunches, armed with talons, ill
And ever pale through hunger.
But, when we, the port entering, near did draw,
Fat Oxen in the Meads we grazing saw,
Goats without keepers: these we did invade;
And of the prey the Gods partakers made.
Then on the shore we tables placing, feast,
But, from the mountains (sooner then expressed)
The Harpyes stoop; snatch, and pollute our meat,
And making hideous cries their wings do beat;
Whilst skreeches 'midst a filthy stench resound:
A shadie and a close retreat we found
Under a hollow rock; again we spread
Our tables, and fire on the Altars laid:
Then from another quarter (where they lay
In ambush) sallying, they invade our prey
With their hooked talons, and defile the same:
Then against the cursed race I war proclaim:
To arms Command; my men obey, and place
Their swords and shields 'midst the aspiring grass*
But, when with usual noise upon the ground
They stoop't, Misenus then a charge did sound:
My men fall on, and a strange fight assay,
With swords to wound the noisome foul, but they
Nor wounds, or hurt upon their plumes receive:
But, nimbly on their wings remounting, leave
Loathsome impressions, and the prey half-eat:
One (hight Celaeno) on a rock did set,
An om'nous Prophetess, and thus declare:
Race of Laomedon, will ye wage war
Your unjust slaughters to maintain? And strive
The guiltless Harpies by rude force to drive
Out of their native Kingdom? now give ear
And these my words in your minds fixed bear;
Which Jove to Phoebus, he to me did show,
I, of the Furies chief, the same to you
Pronounce: you now for Italy are bound,
And shall arrive safe on Italian ground:
But, you shall not with walls your promised town
Invest, before dire hunger, and the wrong
Offerr'd to us, shall force you to devour
Your trenchers: she this having said, did sore
Aloft; and her self in the woods concealed:
But sudden fear my men's cold blood congealed
Their courage fell; whether they are Goddesses,
Fiends, or foul birds, not force must make our peace
But prayers and vows, they cry: then from the shore
Anchises his hands spreading, does implore
The power's above; and with due rites appease:
Adding, just Deity's, that you would please
To interpose, these evils to prevent,
And, reconciled, to save the Innocent:
Then he commands to launch: a lusty breez
Our Canvas swells, on foaming waves we rise:
Now woody Zant amidst the waves we see,
Dulichium, Same, Neritos descry:
From Ith'can rocks, Ulysses his Father.
Laertes realm, we fled
Cursing that soil, which dire Ulysses bred:
Anon its head cloud-crowned Leucas reers:
And Phoebus opens, whom the sayler fears:
Tired we hither steer: we anchor here,
And under a small City sheltered were:
Now, when despaired land we did enjoy,
We promised vows on smoking Altars pay:
On Actian shores we Ilian games revive:
Where our men, naked and anointed, give
Proof of their active strength: we joy that we
Have thus escaped the dreaded enemy;
So many Grecian Citie's past. The Sun
In the mean time his annual course had run*
And Northern blasts made the chaff'd billows rore
A brazen shield (which mighty Abans bore)
I here affixing, this verse underwrote:
These spoils from Conquering Greeks AEneas got:
Then, I bid lanch, and hand their oars: the Deep
To strives they cuff, and the rude billows sweep:
The airie tours of the Phaeacians we
Forth with do hide; and Epires coast pass by:
Then, into the Chaonian port we swim,
And the high City of Buthrotos climb:
Here we a story hear, which did exceed
Our faith, that Helenus (of Priam's seed)
Both Pyrrhus wife and Scepter did enjoy:
And that Hectors wife, who with Helenus Priams son, was carried away captive,
by Pyrrhus, Achilles son, and King of Epirus.
Andromache to one of Troy
Was wedded: I amazed stood: on fire
I was, the man to meet, and to enquire
Into this strange success: the shore and fleet
I leave; and do advance with winged feet:
Before the City, in a Grove, hard by
Feigned Simois the sad Andromache
Paid solemn rites to her dead Hectors dust,
And at his empty grave invoked his Ghost,
Joining to which she had two Altars made,
Whereon her tributary tears she paid.
When me, 'midst Trojan Guards, she did behold
Coming, thereat astonished, stiff and cold
She forthwith grew; and sinking to the ground,
At last her speech a passage hardly found.
Is It a true face, a real man I see?
Or come thou, Goddesse-born, a Ghost to me?
If so, where is Hector, pray? this weeping she
Spoke, and the place filled with her mournful cry
To her (through grief distracted) briefly I
Troubled, and faultring in my speech reply
I live indeed, though me cross fates pursue,
Doubt not, for thou realities do view:
After the loss (alas!) of thy great Hector.
Mate,
What is thy hap? what fortune (of thy state
Worthy) has thee befaln? does Hectors wife
Andromache with Pyrrhus wedded live?
With a soft voice, and a dejected face
She then reply's, O Polyxena, one of Priams daughters, sacrificed by Pyrrhus
at Achilles tomb.
maid, of Priams race,
Before all others happy! who did die
A victime to the cruel enemy
Under Troy's walls; by lot who were not led
A Captive to a Conquering Masters bed:
After Troy burnt, and tossed on the main,
I, (a slave) did the irksome scorn sustain
Of that proud youth, Achilles offspring, who
Menelaus his daughter, betrothed to Pyrrhus, who was slain also by his rival
Orestes at Apollo's altar, as Achilles his father was.
Hermione and Spartan Nuptials now
Hotly pursuing, to my fellow Slave
Helenus, me (a slave) in Marriage gave:
But him Orestes (whom the flames of love
Did burn, and Conscience of past ills did move)
Betrayed, and at his Fathers Altars slew;
Whence by his death this province did accrue
To Helenus; from Trojan Chaon, who
Did all this tract Chaonia name: but show
What happy fates, what God, what friendly gales
Thy ship did hither drive, and fill thy sails?
How does Ascanius? does he live, and breathe?
How does he, pray, resent his Creusa: see the second book.
mothers death?
What? does his Uncle Hector, or his Sire
AEneas him with noble thoughts inspire?
Whilst thus she spoke, and did lament in vain,
Priamides does with a princely train
Arrive: and (with words mingling tears) does own
Us, his old friends: then to the neighboring town
We joyfully advance, where I do see
Of our great Troy a small Epitome:
Our Tour's, and shallow Xanthus I behold:
And Scaean gate in my embraces fold:
The vulgar also the same freedom have,
To them the King like entertainment gave.
Our costly fare is served up in gold;
Of lusty Bacchus we full goblets hold:
Day after day whilst thus we feasting spend,
Our sails are Courted by the gentle wind,
Helenus son of Priam.
Auster our Canvas swells; in these words I
Then to the Helenus.
Prophet do my self apply:
O Trojan-born, the Gods Interpreter,
Inspired by Phoebus, skilled in what e're
The Tripods, laurels, or the stars foreshow,
What by the tongues of birds, or wings we know.
Say, (for all Oracles to us promise
A happy voyage, all the Gods advize
To Italy, and far-sequestred seats
To sail; Celaeno only dreadful threats,
Dire famine breathes) how we should or eschew
Dangers at hand, or toyl's to come subdue:
Here Helenus with grateful sacrifice
Having the Gods prepared, (as was the guize)
Untied the fillets of his sacred head,
And me (with awful reverence smitten) led
Into the Temple, where the learned Priest
From his divine mouth thus my fates expressed,
O Goddesse-born, (for it is more than plain,
That by the heavenly Conduct through ^he Main
Thou do advance, thus it is decreed by Jove,
Who that great wheel of things does wisely move)
Of many Cautions take these few, whereby
Thou stranger Coasts the saflier may descry;
And anchore in Ausonian ports: the rest
The fates and Juno have from me suppressed:
First Italy (which you suppose at-hand)
Is a far-scatter'd, a far-distant land:
And, before you attain the promised shore,
You in Sicilian seas must ply the Oar,
Your keels must the Ausonian brine divide,
Hell you must see, by Circes Isle must glide:
Remember; this to thee a sign shall be:
Thou a white sow with thirty Pigs shall see
White as her self, beleaguering her breast,
Hard by a shadowed stream; here welcome rest
Thou from thy toyls shall find; thy town build here
Nor the devouring of thy trenchers fear.
The fates themselves will best unriddle, and
Apollo, when invoked, will be at hand.
But, that Magna Grecia, the coast of Calabria inhabited by the Greeks: those
he mentions here, are such as after the Trojan war, had planted themselves in
those parts of Italy.
Land there, the Coast of Italy
Washed by our seas, our neighboring Country, fly*
By hostile Greeks those places peopled are:
Narycian Locrians do inhabit there
And from those tracts, the Salentines late held,
Lyctian Idomeneus has them expelled:
There Melibaean Phyloctetes small
Petilia has invested with a wall:
But, when thy fleet shall in safe harbor be,
And on the Altars vows performed by thee,
Spread over thy face a purple veil, least, when
Thou do officiate, foes should intervene,
And holy rites disturb: let this to thee
And thy Descendants still a Custom be:
But, when thou shall Sicilias coast draw near
And the straits of Pelorus shall appear,
Steer to the Larbord, fly the Starbord shore;
The left hand Seas cleave with thy laboring oar.
It is reported ( so great change does wait
Upon times darker footsteps) that this Strait
Was once firm land; and that a mighty force
Did it from the old Continent divorce:
That the Sea, interposing, did divide
The Hesperian from the Sicilian side:
And rushing in with its still-chaffed Brine,
Once neer-allied Plains and towns disjoyn:
Scylla the right, the left Charybdis keeps,
And sucks thrice to the bottom of her Deeps
The toyling flood, as often lifts on high
The ejected waves, and laves th'approached sky.
But, See our notes upon the 6. Book.
Scylla lurking in dark caves display's
Her face, and ships to crushing rocks betray's:
A Virgin to the twist divinely framed:
Her nether parts with shape of Monsters shamed:
Which wolves are in their fore-parts, but behind
Of Dolphins have the Scaly rudders joined:
Better it is to round Pachynus cape,
And thy course that way, (though about) to shape,
Then ugly Scylla in her cave, to see
And rocks resounding with her Monsters cry:
Further, if Helenus have any skill;
Or truth; or know at all Apollo's will,
One thing I recommend, one above all,
Incessantly on Courted Juno call:
Her Deity with vows propitious make,
With sacrifice appease; then thou shall take
Thy journey with assured success: and land
From Sicil's coast safe on the Italian strand.
Where when to Cumoe, and Avernus (placed
Sibylla; see our Notes upon the 6 th. Book.
Midst softly-wisp'ring woods) thou shall have passed,
There thou shall see the frantic Sibylla; see our Notes upon the 6 th. Book.
Prophetess
Sing Destinies in a deep Caves recesse:
Which she to leaves commits: what verse soever
She writes, in order placed she leaves there:
They firmly keep the place to each assigned;
But, when the opened door the intruding wind
Admits, which does the lighter leaves disperce,
She n'ere reorders the disordered verse;
Or cares them to rejoyn: unanswear'd they
And Sibyls Cell detesting go their way:
Nor think time lost, though thou be here delayed
Though thy departure winds and friends persuade,
But with all humbleness Sibylla seek:
To thee the Inspired willingly will speak,
Of Italy the people will declare,
And thee instruct in the ensuing war,
Teach where toward, and teach where to assayl,
And (worshipped,) will supply a favo'ring gale:
Lo! here the sum of what I can advise:
Go; raise our Troy by great deeds to the skies.
Which when the Prophet kindly had expressed,
With costly gifts he does dismiss his Guest:
With Ivory, silver, gold, with vessels made
Of Dodonaean brass, his ship does lade:
A Coat-of-maile studded with gold: a bright
Helmet, with curled plumes, (once the delight
Of Pyrrhus) he bestows: the Anchises.
Father had
His presents likewise; he to these does add
Brave Coursers with their Riders:
Lastly their crazie Fleet he does repair,
And them supplies with all things useful were.
Mean while Anchises bids them to prepare,
That they might ready be when winds blew fair;
To whom in courtly terms the Priest thus spoke
Anchises, whom into her bed to take
Venus has deigned, the Gods especial care,
Twice from Troys ruin's snatched: lo! before thee are
Ausonia's shores; to these thy course direct,
And yet from these thou must thy Course deflect:
For that part of Ausonia far does lie
By Phoebus meant; in thy sons pietye
Go happy man: but why do I thus spend
Both words and time, when friendly gales attend?
Andromache (at parting no less sad)
Ascanius with rich figured vests does lade:
What or the needle could, or loom invent,
Rare pieces, she in these words did present,
Sweet youth, these, wrought by mine own hands, receive
As monuments, with thee to keep alive
Of Hectors wife the memory; of thine
The farewell tokens: thou the very mien
Of my Astyanax, the ey's, the face,
And very gesture have; and now (alas!)
Had he survived, you would equal been in years.
Then with these parting words I mingle tears
Live, and be happy you who settled are,
We must be tossed too and fro: your care
Is at an end: you have no seas to cross,
Or in your quest to be still at a loss,
Catching recoyling shores: you live to see
Xanthus in little; and a Troy, which ye
Your selves have built, I hope more happily,
And which to Greeks may less obnoxious be:
And, if I Tyber and those plains about
Possess, and see those realms for us laid out,
Both Troy's, (designed kindred towns to be,
Neighbors, both boasting the same pedigree,
Alike turmoyl'd) shall leagued be: that care
On those shall rest, who our Descendants are:
Now we near the Ceraunian Mountains ride,
The shortest cut to the Italian side:
The Sun now set, night its black mantle spreads,
And on our mother-earth we take our beds;
We for our bodi's on the shore take care,
Where toyled Nature we with sleep repair:
Night was not yet half spent, when from his bed
A wakened Palinurus nimbly fled:
The winds observed; to every blast gave ear,
Marked all stars gliding in the silent sphere:
Arcturus, and the dripping Hyadae,
The two Bears, with golden Orien he
Contemplat's, then, when he a settled sky
And clear beheld, he gives the sign to weigh:
We go abord; we launch; our sayls we spread;
And now Morn blushed, and twingling stars were fled;
When obscure hills, and humble Italy
We make: Achates Italy does cry;
With joyful Clamours Italy our men
Resound: a mighty bowl Anchises then
(Surrounding with a Garland) fills with wine,
And standing on the Poup, the powers divine
Invokes: Gods, who both seas do rule and land,
Who tempests tame, a favoring gale command.
The wished breezes rise: as we draw near;
Minerva's Temple and the Port appear:
And now our sayls we furl, and anchor cast:
A Haven (Iland-lock'd,) opens to the East,
Which vast rocks wall, with breaking waves made white
And (it invironning) hide from the sight:
Under whose shelter as our selves we drew,
The Temple, lately seen, fled from our view:
Four Coursers here, as white as snow could be,
Ranging the fields without restraint we see,
Anchises then: war do thou, land, presage?
Horse are for war; with Horse we war do wage:
And yet they in the Chariot joined are,
And bit and yoke use patiently to bear;
And blessed peace may speak: then we adore
Arm-shakeing Pallas, on whose friendly shore
We first arrived, having our faces veiled:
Nor to obey the Helenus.
Prophets order failed,
Whilst we the rites, as he had us enjoined,
To Juno do perform: then before the wind
Our sayls we set; and bid those Coasts farewell,
By us suspected, as where Greeks did dwell:
Tarentum's bay from hence salutes our ey's
Against which the Fore-land of Lacinia lye's
Neighboring to this Caulonia's tour's appear,
Then Scylacaeum, whose rocks ships do tear.
Trinacrian AEtna's our next prospect, where
Rocks beaten with loud-roaring seas we hear;
And noises echoed to the neighboring strands;
Where waves, (discolored with Commixed sands
Belch'd-up we see: Anchises then; behold
Charybdis, and those dreadful rocks foretold
By Helenus: bear from the shore, he cries,
And stoutly to your Oars, my Masters, rize
They all obey; and Palinurus now
Bears to the Larbord-sea the yiedling prow:
With oars and sails all to the Larbord ply;
Now on the back of swelling Surges we
To heaven ascend, then, when they sinking fell,
Through yawning waves we do descend to Hell:
Thrice we the hollow rocks heard to resound;
Thrice saw the foam to drenched stars rebound:
The wind now leaves us with the setting sun,
And on the Cyclops Coast (unskilled) we run:
The port, though larg, was safe: but thunder-like
Near AEtna's ruins did a terror strike:
A cloud of smoke it sometimes to the skies
Ejects, which does with glowing embers rise:
Then bals of fire it casts, as if it meant
With strange granads to storm the firmament:
Rocks and torn mountains with dissolved stones
It belcheth up, thence issuing forth with groans
Encelad's body thunder-struct, is said
Under this mighty weight to have been laid:
And that, when e're his wearied side he turns
Imposed AEtna (flames ejecting) burns;
That all Sicilia
Trinacria trembles, whilst a night
Of duskie smoke does intercept the light:
Hid in the woods this night we pass in fear,
Nor the cause of the noise could see: for there
Was neither Stars, or Moon: a general cloud
Did the whole face of heaven in darkness shroud.
Now from the East the Sun began to rise,
And day nights mask had plucked from the skies
When a strange outside of a man appears
From out the woods, his hands who suppliant rears
More then half-starv'd; most wretched in his dress
We look, and lo! an uncouth nastinesse:
A long untrimmed beard, and ragged cloths
With thorns repeec'd; the rest a Greek disclose:
But, when he Trojan arms and habits saw,
He frighted stopped, as if he would withdraw:
Then hastily he to the shore did run,
And thus with tears, and humble prayers begun:
I by the stars, the Gods, the common air
We breath, conjure you me away to bear:
To any Coast let me transplanted be;
It shall suffice: I must confess that I
Amongst those of my Nation arms did bear,
And against Troy served in the passed war:
For which (if my offense so heinous be)
Me tear, and scatter in the unfathomed sea:
And if I perish, 'twill my grief abate,
That I from humane hands receive my fate:
Then falling down he did my knees embrace,
Whilst we exhort him to declare the race
From whence he sprung; his name; and what hard fate
Had him reduced to this sad estate:
Forthwith Anchises his right hand extends,
And, by this Pledge declares that we were friends:
At last confirmed he fearelesse does reply:
From Ithaca, Ulysses fortune I
Did follow; Achaemenides by name,
Poor Adamastus son, (I wish the same
Fortune had still continued) to Troy sent:
Here, when my friends from this dire region went
Through fear they me forgot, and left behind,
In the vast den of Polypheme confined:
A vast and gloomy room it is: the floor
With raw flesh strewed is, and putrid gore:
Of a stupendous height himself: the skies
At every step he knocks: great Deities
Of such a plague, O, ease the earth; address
To him none dares to make, or crave access:
He eats the bloody bowels of the slain:
I saw, when he two of our wretched train
Seizing with his huge paws with force did throw
Against the rock; the house within did flow
With crimson streams: I saw, when he did eat
Limbs spurting gore, and when the living meat
Under his teeth yet trembled: but our Chief,
Brave Ithacus, ever himself, relief
In this destresse found out: for lo! whilst he
With wine and food, ore-gorg'd did snoring lie,
A name of Ulysses.
Stretched in his den; his neck awry, of blood
A stream ejecting, and a mighty flood
Of undigested wine, with gobbits raw,
The Gods imploring, we about him draw:
And his vast eye pierce with a sharpened spear,
Which (single in his forehead) did appear
Like Phoebus setting, or a Grecian shield:
Thus just revenge to our dead friends we yield:
But fly, Oh wretches, fly this cursed shore;
Your cables cut; for here are hundreds more,
As salvage and as big; who do frequent
These strands and rocks; and now the moon it is spent
Lamp has recruited thrice, its horns thrice filled
Since I a hapless life lead in these wild
And desert places: and vast Cyclops see
Advancing, whilst I their approaches fly,
And dreaded yels: a wretched food to me
Berries and Cornels, shrubs and trees supply:
On grass I feed, and herbs which wild do grow:
But, taking from this place my prospect, lo!
Your fleet I saw, the first which did arrive
Upon this coast: to you resolved to give
My self a prisoner: any death let me
Die, so I may these salvage Monsters fly:
He scarce had said, when Polyphemus we
With his huge bulk 'midst his flocks stalking see,
And making to the shore: a dreadful, vast,
And ugly Monster, who his sight had lost:
His hand and footsteps a stripped pine did guide;
His flocks (his sole joy) him accompanied
A pipe ('bout his neck hung) his grief did ease:
But, when he did approach the swelling seas
From his lost eye he washed the flowing blood,
And, his teeth grinding, stalked through the flood
Nor could the waves reach his exalted wast;
The worthy Suppliant then we take; and have
Away: our cables silently we slip;
And the seas surface with stretched oars do sweep
He heard and by our noise his steps did guide,
But, when he found that to lay hold he tryde
In vain; nor could surmount the deeper flood,
Then he his hideous voice extends, so loud,
That the Ocean trembled, Italy did quake,
And hollow AEtna a deep groan did make:
Now from the hills and woods Cyclopean bands
Alarmed fly to the Port, and man the strands:
Whence they in vain pursue with threatening eyes
Whilst their proud heads they lodge in the neighboring skies
A dire assembly; like tall Oaks they stood,
Or spire-like Cypresse-trees, and seemed a wood:
Fear makes us hastily to sea to thrust,
And to any gale our ready sail's to trust:
And though twixt Scylla and Charybdis we
Forbidden were to steer; yet we decree
That course to stand: when from Pelorus strait
A Northern breez does rise, and on us wait:
Pantagia's mouth; the bay of Megara
We pass, and Tapsus level with the Sea:
Thus Achaemenides, (known coasts whilst he
Repeats) our course directs: an Isle does lie
Before the The bay of Siracruse
Sicanian bay; and opposite
To rough Plemmyrium, by our Grandsires hight
Ortygia; Alpheus (as they fame)
Under the Sea through secret channels came,
And mingling, Arethusa, with thy spring
Does to the main, with thine, its waters bring:
The Gods we here invoke: Helorus leave,
The adjoining plains enriching with its wave:
Hence weathering Pachynus rocky cape,
By unmoved Camerine our course we shape:
To the Geloian plains we bid adieu,
And Gelas town: and now we have in view
The mighty walls of high-built Agregas,
For breeds of generous Steeds which did surpass:
Palmie Selinus, now by thee we run,
Then the blind rocks of Lelybaeum shun:
And lastly in the port of Drepannum,
A joylesse port, I to an Anchore come:
Here having passed so many stormy seas,
My Sire (alas!) I lose; the only ease
Of all my cares and toil: dear Father do dress
Thou here forsake me, thus turmoil'd and tossed?
Nor Helenus, nor dire Celaeno, (though
They many ills foretold) did this fore-show.
Here all my travels, all my toils took end,
And hence the Gods me to your coast did send.
Thus whilst to him all do attention give,
He here concludes his ample Narrative,
Of hapless Troy which did the fates contain,
And what himself had suffered on the Main.
FINIS.
Some few hasty Reflections upon the precedent Poem.
IT was not, Reader, the ultimate end of our Poet, in this precedent Poem,
barely to deliver the story of AEneas his Errors, or Perigrination from Troy
into Italy, with those Accidents which befell him therein; which, (although
there were in it, no further scope then that) yet is so trim and well contrived
a Narrative, that it is of it self sufficient to entitle this a most excellent
piece: No: our wise Author had a more covert and mysterious design; and, in
this wel-built fabric of his gives us the full prospect of a well-ordered
Commonwealth, with all the integral parts thereof; which whilst we endeavor
to make out, let not the Reader pass sentence upon us, as guilty of perverting
or violating the sense or meaning of our Author, whose constant manner it is,
to have a more remote drift, then what is perceptible to the eye of every
vulgar Reader.

Wherefore, The Com-wealth.
behold first in the gross or general, our supposed Commonwealth, to wit, a
ship, or Fleet at Sea, between both which the Allegory or Comparison is as
natural, as it is familiar, and therefore needs no further illustration.

Next we come to the parts integral, The four parts thereof
which, as members, complete this whole, or body of our Commonwealth, whereof
the first is the Prince, the second, the Council; the third, the great Minister
of State; and the fourth, the People; Of which briefly in their order, and
according to Virgils method and design.

First, The Prince.
Behold in the accomplished AEneas, the Prince or supreme Magistrate, as the
principal member, or rather head of our Commonwealth: and him we will consider
in these three Princely Attributes or qualifications, which are here given him:
First, in his Piety: secondly, in his Wisdom; and thirdly, in his Valor:

His Piety.
Piety, with the Latins is first taken for that due observance, respect and
devotion, which we pay to God; and secondly for that duty and reverence we give
to our parents; so that pius signifies as well dutiful, as religious; and he
that is truly pious in the one sense, will be so in the other: None was
therefore either more Religious, or Dutiful then Virgils AEneas, our imaginary
Prince. As a pregnant proof of both which take this story, which I casually
light upon the other day in AElian: Var. Hist. l. 3. c. 22. When Troy was
taken, and sacked, (says he) the Greeks pitying the miserable condition of the
subdued Trojans, proclaimed, by sound of trumpet, that it should be lawful for
them, to make choice of any one thing they pleased, and to carry it away with
them: AEneas therefore, neglecting all things else, chose his Household Gods:
The Greeks admiring the Piety of the Man, gave him leave to take any one thing
of his Movables; who slghting the most precious of his Jewels, and other
goods, took his old decrepit Father upon his shoulders. The Enemy admiring at
this second demonstration of Piety, gave him his whole Estate free, with
liberty to go whether he pleased: adding, (...). that the most implacable
enemies ought to show mercy to those, who were religious to the Gods, and
dutiful to their Parents. Hence Virgil introduces him here flying with his
Gods, often praying and Sacrificing to the same; and, to say truth, Religion,
(were there no other end in it, then a politic) ought to be the chief care and
study of the Prince, as being the very Basis of all Government, and the surest
tie of Obedience: whence, it rightly has its denomination, a religando, which
signifies, to bind fast, or to tie.

As for his Wisdom; His Wisdom
that appears, as well in his readiness to ask and follow good Counsel, as in
his abilities in giving the same: Hence Virgil makes him frequently consulting
with the Gods; and good Counselors are indeed as Gods to Princes: often with
Prophets, and Interpreters of Oracles: particularly, with his Father Anchises,
an experienced, and sober old man; with Sibylla (a great prophetess, inspired
by Apollo) that is, a person endued with much wisdom, whereof he was the
supposed Deity; and with Helenus, a knowing and a well-known friend: a person
as honest, as he was intelligent: mark what qualifications ought to be in
Counselors of State, Age, Experience, Wisdom and Integrity: The Age and
Experience of Anchises; the wisdom of Sibylla; and the Integrity of Helenus:
As for his abilities in giving good advise, in directing, governing and
managing his Affairs, that appears in the whole Series and course of his
life: to enumerate particulars herein, would be infinite.

Lastly, for the valor of our AEneas, or Prince, His valor.
that is also twofold: active or passive, of both which there are such clear
and undeniable demonstrations, that we shall not insist long upon this head:
the first appears in his several ranconters, often charges, victories, and
triumphs: the latter in his sufferings, distresses and afflictions; in which no
one ever shared more plentifully, than himself: How was he tossed up and down?
how often in storms and tempests? how often driven from place to place?
disappointed in his designs? Defeated in his attempts? still persecuted by
Juno, his mortal or rather immortal enemy: yet, behold him ever unshaken,
unmoved, undaunted: still constant in the pursuit of his Counsels, till at
last, overcoming the malice both of fortune and his enemies, he accomplish what
he drives at, and what was by the fates laid out for him; and setting foot in
Italy, there lay the foundation of a never-declining Monarchy.

And, now, most gracious Sovereign, it is not that I have wrested this
Character, in delivering things otherwise, then they are represented by our
Author in the precedent Poem, that, I might direct this Application to your
Royal Self: No, should I therefore compare your Majesty with our AEneas, in
those three princely qualifications, above mentioned, none could truly object
to me either force or flattery: As for your Piety therefore, whether in the
first sense, as it relates to God, that appears sufficiently; our eyes see it,
and our hearts re^oyce thereat: Our Church, that is, the Assembly of the
faithful, and our Churches, that is, the consecrated places, where those
Assemblies use to be held, begin now, (under your Royal Protection) to resume
their prestine beauty, and will (we hope) in time, Phaenix-like, rise up more
splendid and glorious, out of their own ashes, that is, those deformed ruins
and rubbish, wherein they lay lately obscured and oppressed: or, in the second,
that is, your AEneas* like reverence to your Royal Father both living and dead:
which manifests it self in your Justice Distributive, which consists in
Punishment and Reward, the two principal wheels, upon which that great engine of
a Commonwealth makes its rotation; the first in taking just revenge upon the
horrid murderers of your Royal Father, our Gracious Sovereign; a parentation
indeed, considering the unparalled heinousness and enormity of the fact, not
in the least severe: the second, in restoring and rewarding his old Servants,
and such as have either acted or suffered for him.

As for our second qualification, AEn. 1
we require in our Prince, and find it in our AEneas, a readiness in taking,
and an ability in giving good Council, the first your Majesty has sufficiently
demonstrated as well in the choice of your Council, and Correspondence all
along with your Parliament, as you have the latter in your prudent management
of affairs, of which we all see the happy effects, and taste the blessed fruits.

But, for your Valor, both Active and Passive; the footsteps and impressions
of them are so fresh and so many, that we should loose our selves in the
enumeration of them, should we but once enter upon them: England, Scotland,
France, Flanders, all the world rings of them: to be short; Quae regio in
terris vestri non plena laboris:


And now at last, after all those strange and multiplied revolutions, we, to our
ineffable joy, see your sacred Majesty, (like another AEneas in his promised
Italy) by the undeniable conduct of the divine providence seated and firmly
fixed in your paternal Throne, never thence to be removed, till such time as
you shall be translated from earth to heaven. -- nam te majoribus ire per Altum
Auspicijs manifesta fides; AEn. 3.
sic fata Deum Rex
Sortitur; volvitque vices; is vertitur ordo:
-- for it is more then plain, That by the heavenly conduct through the main
Thou do advance: thus it is decreed by Jove
Who that great wheel of things does wisely move.


Here then as the same Poet speaks in the person of Anchises concerning his
AEneas in this very book, let us, as prophetically, I hope affirm and conclude,
(changing one word,) concerning your Sacred Majesty. Hic Carolina domus Cunctis
dominabitur ris,
Et nati nato^^m, AEn. 3.
and qui nascentur ab illis:
Great Charles his house, with those who thence descend,
Here far and near its Empire shall extend.


The second part which after the Prince constitutes a Commonwealth, The
Counsel.
is his Council: Here the Poet gives to AEneas as Councillors, Anchises,
Sibylla, Helenus: of whom we have already spoken: we shall not therefore insist
long upon this point: I shall observe in the advice Helenus gives him, (which
according to the nature of his design, was seasonably-prudent) these two
precepts only: first he advises him rather to coast the whole ^sle of Sicily
in his voyage to Italy, then to pass the dangerous straits of Pelorus, now
called the Faro, though by much the nerer way, for fear he fall upon the rocks
of Scylla, or be sucked in by the violent gulf or eddy of Charybdis: to show,
that it is better, and more secure, to proceed. leasurably in affairs of
moment, then to precipitate, and that a professed Statesman, ought rather to
choose the safer then the nearer way: for herein our english proverb takes
place, the furthest way about, is the nearest way home: Secondly he recommends
to him above all things, by prayers and sacrifice, to reconcile and conquer his
implacable enemy Juno: for; as Donatus upon this place: Ostendit Poeta majoris
potentiae inimicos obsequendo potius, quam resistendo posse superari: it is
wisdom rather to gain a potent enemy by obligeing him, then to run the risk of
subduing him by force, the success whereof is uncertain.

The great Minister of State.
Nor has AEneas his Council only, but, as a third Complement of our
Commonwealth, and a necessary instrument of government; behold his Palinurus,
or great Minister of State, cui Princeps incumbit, Sen. de Consol. ad Marcian.
and in quem onus imperij reclinat, as Seneca speaks of the younger Marcellus:
the person our Prince places, at the helm of State, and to whom he intrusts
the chief guidance of that great vessel of the Commonwealth: Now the
Qualifications of such a Minister are chiefly two, Vigilance and Dexterity, or
experience in matters of State: thus Palinurus, whilst others slept: Haud
segnis strato surgit --


There Is his Vigilance; Now for his Dexterity or Experience. -- omnes
Explorat ventos --


But to be a little more particular in Charactizing our great Minister, we will
add a note or two; Virgil then speaks thus of Palinurus, as we have (according
to our manner, that is, imperfectly) rendered him. Night was not yet half spent,
when from his bed
Awakened Palinurus nimbly fled:
The winds observed, to every blast gave ear,
Marked all stars gliding in the silent sphere
Arcturus, and the dripping Hyadae
The two Bears, with golden Orion he Contemplats:


From hence we draw two wholesome precepts, and such, as above all others, must
diligently be observed by our great Minister: First, he is to observe the wind,
and listen to every blast; that is, to hold intelligence in all places; and to
have an ear to all reports, that accordingly as the wind blows, he may trim
the sails of his own ship; and may not be surpised by a sudden Gust; which
may happily overset both him and it: Next, he is to mark the stars, and
accordingly to steer his course; that is, to understand perfectly the Interests
of all neighboring Kingdoms and States, and to know what Influence or Aspect
the affairs of other Princes have in reference to those of his own master.

And should I, Reader, say that our gracious Sovereign is blessed in such a
Minister, in the Right Honorable, the Earl of Clarendon, the present Lord High
Chancellor of England, I should say no more, then what is evident by those
daily dispatches, which pass through his hands, and that weight of affairs
which press, but cannot oppress him: -- Sic Hercule quondam
Sustentante Polum, melius Librata pependit.
Machina, nec dubijs titubavit Signifer astris,
Perpetuaque senex subductus mole parumper,
Obstupuit proprij spectator ponderis Atlas:


Which the excellent Claudian applies to Stilico, the great Minister of State
to the Emperor Honorius, and which I hope without offense to his Lordships
modesty, or violence to the Poets sense, we may thus render in English: Thus,
when great Hercules his shoulders lent
To under-prop the Heavens, the Firmament
Vnmoved hung: Nor did the Zodiac fear
To drop a Star, whilst he sustained the Sphere:
Old Atlas (from his burden freed a while)
Stood; and admired the weight he used to feel:


But for as much as Prince and People, Governor and Governed are Relatives,
the People.
and therefore not Subsistent one without the other, behold our Poet gives his
AEneas a competent number of Subjects, which, he ever calls by the name of
Socij: by which word the Latins understand a Companion, Allie, or Confederate:
in both which senses the people may most properly be called Socij, First: they
are Companions, for they must expect to accompany the Prince in his fortune: if
he be oppressed, they must be enslaved; if he be dethroned, and murdered, their
lives, fortunes, and liberties are all at the mercy of the Usurping Tyrant: We
need not go far for an instance to make good this: the late distractions out
of which we are (by the blessing of God) now happily delivered are a sufficient
proof of our assertion: Next they are Allies or Confederates; now such are
bound to take up arm's for the mutual defense one of the other, and that
Prince that offers an injury to the one, does it to the other; thus the people
are bound to expose their lives, fortunes and all they call theirs in the
defense of the Princes Crown, Dignity, and Estate, for which they in exchange
receive his protection, as well against Foreign invaders, as domestic
oppressors: And this is that Alliance or Society, which ought to intervene
between both parties: and thus are subjects properly styled Socii.

But to draw to a Conclusion: The Conclusion.
whereas our Author, in the whole, exposes his AEneas to many difficulties,
during his Navigation, making him sometimes to mistake his Port; sometimes to
run upon a rock, and sometimes ready to perish in a storm; these (I say) are to
hint to us those many lets, impediments and difficulties that every kind of
Regiment is subject unto, which (as the learned Mr. Hooker observes) in public
proceedings are innumerable and inevitable; and therefore the people ought not
to fall out with their Governors, or cavil at the Government, upon every
perty miscarriage; but soberly to consider, and weigh with themselves the
forementioned difficulties, and not to object that to the Governor, which, is
indeed incident to all humane Affairs; nor could, by the greatest wisdom and
forecast imaginable, be avoided: to judge by success is irrational; for many
times weak Councels take effect, when the best-digested designs are
frustrated, for as much as Chance and Accident have a share in both: I could be
copious upon this subject, and plentiful in instances, but I designed only a
few hasty Reflections, and a running discourse.

The End.
Pray, Reader, amend these few lapses of the Press as follows:
PAge the 1. line the 6. for from read for, p. 2. l. 2. for when, with, p. 6.
l. 16. for were, we. p. 9. l. 1. for Sir. Sire, p. 10. l. 1. for their, three,
l. 9. for Donysor, Donysa. p. 15. l. 12. for shrond shroud. p. 16. l. 4. for
Polinure, Palinure. l. 11. for Straphades, Strophades l. 14. for Harpynian,
Harpyian, p. 41. l. 10. for Clyclops, Cyclops. p. 61. l. 10 for Port Poet.


