THE DESTRUCTION OF TROY, AN ESSAY UPON THE SECOND BOOK OF VIRGILS AENEIS.

Written in the year, 1636.

LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at his shop at the sign of the Princes
Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

THE PREFACE.
THere are so few Translations which deserve praise, that I scarce ever saw any
which deserved pardon; those who travel in that kind, being for the most part
so unhappy, as to rob others, without enriching themselves, pulling down the
fame of good Authors, without raising their own: Neither has any Author been
more hardly dealt withal then this our Master; and the reason is evident, for,
what is most excellent, is most inimitable; And if even the worst Authors are
yet made worse by their Translators, how impossible is it not to do great
injury to the best? And therefore I have not the vanity to think my Copy equal
to the Original, nor (consequently) my self altogether guiltless of what I
accuse others; but if I can do Virgil less injury then others have done, it
will be, in some degree to do him right; and indeed, the hope of doing him more
right, is the only scope of this Essay, by opening this new way of translating
this Author, to those whom youth, leisure, and better fortune makes fitter for
such undertakings.

I conceive it a vulgar error in translating Poets, to affect being Fidus
Interpres; let that care be with them who deal in matters of Fact, or matters
of Faith: but whosoever aims at it in Poetry, as he attempts what is not
required, so he shall never perform what he attempts; for it is not his
business alone to translate Language into Language, but Poesy into Poesy; and
Poesy is of so subtle a spirit, that in pouring out of one Language into
another, it will all evaporate; and if a new spirit be not added in the
transfusion, there will remain nothing but a Caput mortuum, there being certain
Graces and Happinesses peculiar to every Language, which gives life and energy
to the words; and whosoever offers at Verbal Translation, shall have the
misfortune of that young Traveller, who lost his own language abroad, and
brought home no other instead of it; for the grace of the Latin will be lost
by being turned into English words; and the grace of the English, by being
turned into the Latin Phrase. And as speech is the apparel of our thoughts, so
are there certain Garbs and Modes of speaking, which vary with the times; the
fashion of our clothes being not more subject to alteration, then that of our
speech: and this I think Tacitus means, by that which he calls Sermonem temporis
istius auribus accommodatum; the delight of change being as due to the
curiosity of the ear, as of the eye; and therefore if Virgil must needs speak
English, it were fit he should speak not only as a man of this Nation, but as
a man of this age; and if this disguise I have put upon him (I wish I could
give it a better name) sit not naturally and easily on so grave a person, yet
it may become him better then that Fools-Coat wherein the French and Italian
have of late presented him; at least, I hope, it will not make him appear
deformed, by making any part enormously bigger or less then the life, (I having
made it my principal care to follow him, as he made it his to follow Nature in
all his proportions) Neither have I any where offered such violence to his
sense, as to make it seem mine, and not his. Where my expressions are not so
full as his, either our language, or my Art were defective (but I rather
suspect my self;) but where mine are fuller then his, they are but the
impressions which the often reading of him, has left upon my thoughts; so that
if they are not his own conceptions, they are at least the results of them; and
if (being conscious of making him speak worse then he did almost in every line)
I err in endeavoring sometimes to make him speak better; I hope it will be
judged an error on the right hand, and such an one as may deserve pardon, if
not imitation.

ARGUMENT.
THe first Book speaking of Aeneas his voyage by Sea, and how being cast by
tempest upon the coast of Carthage, he was received by Queen Dido, who after
the Feast, desires him to make the relation of the destruction of Troy, which
is the Argument of this Book.

THE DESTRUCTION OF TROY, An Essay on the second BOOK of Virgil's Aeneis.
WHile all with silence and attention wait,
Thus speaks Aeneas from the bed of State.
Madam, when you command us to review
Our Fate, you make our old wounds bleed anew,
And all those sorrows to my sense restore,
Whereof none saw so much, none suffered more,
Not the most cruel of Our conqu'ering Foes
So unconcern'dly can relate our woes,
As not to lend a tear, Then how can I
Repress the horror of my thoughts, which fly
The sad remembrance. Now the expiring night
And the declining Stars to rest invite;
Yet since it is your command, what you, so well
Are pleased to hear, I cannot grieve to tell.
By Fate repelled, and with repulses tired
The Greeks, so many Lives and years expired,
A Fabric like a moving Mountain frame,
Pretending vows for their return; This, Fame
Divulges, then within the beasts vast womb
The choice and flower of all their Troops intomb,
In view the Isle of Tenedos, once high
In fame and wealth, while Troy remained, does lie,
(Now but an unsecure and open Bay)
Thither by stealth the Greeks their Fleet convey,
We gave them gone, and to Mycenae saild,
And Troy revived, her mourning face unvaild;
All through the unguarded Gates with joy resort
To see the slighted Camp, the vacant Port,
Here lay Ulysses, there Achilles, here
The Battles joined, the Grecian Fleet rode there;
But the vast Pile the amazed vulgar views
Till they their Reason in their wonder lose,
And first Tymaete moves, (urged by the Power
Of Fate, or Fraud) to place it in the Tower,
But Capis and the graver sort thought fit,
The Greeks suspected Present to commit
To Seas or Flames, at least to search and bore
The sides, and what that space contains to' explore;
The Uncertain Multitude with both engaged,
Divided stands, till from the Tower, enraged,
Laocoon ran, whom all the crowd attends,
Crying, what desperate Frenzy's this? (oh Friends)
To think them gone? Judge rather their retreat
But a design, their gifts but a deceit,
For our Destrction 'twas contrived no doubt,
Or from within by fraud, or from without
By force; yet know ye not Ulysses shifts?
Their swords less danger carry then their gifts*
(This said) against the Horses side, his spear
He throws, which trembles with enclosed fear,
Whilst from the hollows of his womb proceed
Groans, not his own; And had not Fate decreed
Our Ruin, We had filled with Grecian blood
The Place, Then Troy and Priam's Throne had stood;
Mean while a fettered prisoner to the King
With joyful shouts the Dardan Shepherds bring,
Who to betray us did himself betray,
At once the Taker, and at once the Prey,
Firmly prepared, of one Event secured,
Or of his Death or his Design assured.
The Trojan Youth about the Captive flock,
To wonder, or to pity, or to mock.
Now hear the Grecian fraud, and from this one
Conjecture all the rest.
Disarmed, disordered, casting round his eyes
On all the Troops that guarded him, he cries,
What Land, what Sea, for me what Fate attends?
Caught by my Foes, condemned by my Friends,
Incensed Troy a wretched Captive seeks
To sacrifice, a Fugitive, the Greeks,
To Pity, This Complaint our former Rage,
Converts, we now enquire his Parentage,
What of their Councels, or affairs he knew,
Then fearless', he replies, Great King to you
All truth I shall relate: Nor first can I
My self to be of Grecian Birth deny,
And though my outward state, misfortune has
Deprest thus low, it cannot reach my Faith.
You may by chance have heard the famous name
Of Palimede, who from old Belus came,
Whom, but for voting Peace, The Greeks pursue,
Accused unjustly, then unjustly slew,
Yet mourned his death. My Father was his friend,
And Me to his commands did recommend,
While Laws and Councels did his Throne support,
I but a youth, yet some Esteem and Port
We then did bear, till by Ulysses craft
(Things known I speak) he was of life bereft,
Since in dark sorrow I my days did spend,
Till now disdaining his unworthy end
I could not silence my Complaints, but vowed
Revenge, if ever fate or chance allowed
My wished return to Greece; From hence his hate,
From thence my crimes, and all my ills bear date,
Old guilt fresh malice gives; The peoples ears
He fills with rumors, and their hearts with fears,
And then the Prophet to his party drew.
But why do I these thankless truths pursue?
Or why defer your Rage? on me, for all
The Greeks, let your revenging fury fall.
Ulysses this, the Atridae this desire
At any rate. We straight are set on fire
(Unpracticed in such Mysteries) to enquire
The manner and the cause, Which thus he told
With gestures humble, as his Tale was bold.
Often have the Greeks (the siege detesting) tired
With tedious war a stolen retreat desired,
And would to heaven they'had gone: But still dismayed
By Seas or Skies, unwillingly they stayed,
Chiefly when this stupendous Pile was raised
Strange noises filled the Air, we all amazed
Dispatch Eurypilus to enquire our Fates
Who thus the sentence of the Gods relates,
A Virgins slaughter did the storm appease
When first toward Troy the Grecians took the Seas,
Their safe retreat another Grecians blood
Must purchase; All, at this confounded stood.
Each thinks himself the Man, the fear on all
Of what, the mischief, but on one can fall:
Then Chalcas (by Ulysses first inspired)
Was urged to name whom the angry Gods required,
Yet was I warned (for many were as well
Inspired as he) and did my fate foretell.
Ten days the Prophet in suspense remained,
Would no man's fate pronounce; at last constrained
By Ithacus, he solemnly designed
Me for the Sacrifice; the people joined
In glad consent, and all their common fear
Determine in my fate, the day drew near;
The sacred Rites prepared, my Temples crowned
With holy wreaths, Then I confess I found
The means to my escape, my bonds I brake,
Fled from my Guards, and in a muddy Lake
Amongst the Sedges all the night lay hid,
Till they their Sails had hoist (if so they did)
And now alas no hope remains for me
My home, my father and my sons to see,
Whom, They enraged will kill for my Offense,
And punish for my guilt their Innocence.
Those Gods who know the Truths I now relate,
That faith which yet remains inviolate
By mortal Men, By these I beg, redress
My causless wrongs, and pity such distress.
And now true Pity in exchange he finds
For his false Tears, his Tongue, his hands unbinds.
Then spoke the King, be Ours who ere thou art,
Forget the Greeks. But first the truth impart.
Why did they raise, or to what use intend
This Pile? to'a Warlike, or Religious end?
Skillful in fraud, (his native Art) his hands
Toward heaven he raised, delivered now from bands.
Ye pure Ethereal flames, ye Powers adored
By mortal men, ye Altars, and the sword
I escaped; ye sacred Fillets that involved
My destined head, grant I may stand absolved
From all their Laws and Rites, renounce all name
Of faith or love, their secret thoughts proclaim;
Only O Troy, preserve thy faith to me,
If what I shall relate preserves thee.
From Pallas favor, all our hopes, and all
Counsels, and Actions took Original,
Till Diomed (for such attempts made fit
By dire conjunction with Ulysses wit)
Assails the sacred Tower, the Guards they slay,
Defile with bloody hands, and thence convey
The fatal Image; straight with our success
Our hopes fell back, whilst prodigies express
Her just disdain, her flaming eyes did throw
Flashes of lightning, from each part did flow
A briny sweat, thrice brandishing her spear,
Her Statue from the ground it self did rear;
Then, that we should our Sacrilege restore
And reconveigh their gods from Argos shore,
Chalcas persuades, till then we urge in vain
The fate of Troy. To measure back the Main
They all consent, but to return again,
When re enforced with aids of Gods and men.
Thus Chalcas, then instead of that, this Pile
To Pallas was designed; to reconcile
The offended Power, and expiate our guilt,
To this vast height and monstrous stature built,
Least through your gates received, it might renew
Your vows to her, and her Defense to you.
But if this sacred gift you dis-esteem,
Then cruel Plagues (which heaven divert on them)
Shall fall on Priams State: But if the horse
Your walls ascend, assisted by your force,
A League against Greece all Asia shall contract;
Our Sons then suffering what their Sires would act.
Thus by his fraud and our own faith overcome,
A feined tear destroys us, against whom
Tydides nor Achilles could prevail,
Nor ten years conflict, nor a thousand sail.
This seconded by a most sad Portent
Which credit to the first imposture lent;
Laocoon, Neptunes Priest, upon the day
Devoted to that God, a Bull did slay,
When two prodigious Serpents were descride,
Whose circling strokes the Seas smooth face divide,
Above the deep they raise their scaly Crests,
And stem the flood with their erected breasts,
Their winding tails advance and steer their course,
And against the shore the breaking Billow force.
Now landing, from their brandisht tongues there came
A dreadful hiss, and from their eyes a flame:
Amazed we fly, directly in a line
Laocoon they pursue, and first intwine
(Each preying upon one) his tender sons,
Then him, who armed to their rescue runs,
They seized, and with intangling folds embraced
His neck twice compassing, and twice his wast,
Their poisonous knots he strives to break, and tear,
Whilst slime and blood his sacred wreaths besmear,
Then loudly roars, as when the enraged Bull
From The Altar flies, and from his wounded skull
Shakes the huge Ax; the conquering serpents fly
To cruel Pallas Altar, and there lie
Under her feet, within her shields extent;
We in our fears conclude this fate was sent
Justly on him, who struck the Sacred Oak
With his accursed Lance. Then to invoke
The Goddess, and let in the fatal horse
We all consent:
A spacious breach we make, and Troys proud wall
Built by the gods, by our own hands does fall;
Thus, all their help to their own ruin give,
Some draw with cords, and some the Monster drive
With Rolls and Leavers, thus our works it climbs,
Big with our fate, the youth with Songs and Rhimes,
Some dance, some hale the Rope; at last let down
It enters with a thundering noise the Town.
Oh Troy the seat of gods, in war renowned;
Three times it stuck, as often the clashing sound
Of Arms was heard, yet blinded by the Power
Of Fate, we place it in the sacred Tower.
Cassandra then foretells the event, but she
Finds no belief (such was the Gods decree.)
The Altars with fresh flowers we crown, and wast
In Feasts, that day, which was (alas) our last.
Now by the revolution of the Skies,
Nights sable shadows from the Ocean rise,
Which heaven and earth, and the Greek frauds involved,
The City in secure repose dissolved,
When from the Admirals high Poop appears
A light, by which the Argive Squadron Steers
Their silent course to Iliums well known shore,
When Synon (saved by the Gods partial power)
Opens the horse, and through the unlockt doors
To the free Air the armed freight restores:
Ulysses, Stenelus, Tysander slide
Down by a Rope, Machaon was their guide;
Atrides, Pyrrhus, Thoas, Athamas,
And Epeus who the frauds contriver was,
The Gates they seize, the Guards with sleep and wine
Oppressed, surprise, and then their forces join.
'Twas then, when the first sweets of sleep repair
Our bodies spent with toil, our minds with care
(The Gods best gift) When bathed in tears and blood
Before my face lamenting Hector stood,
Such his aspect when soyld with bloody dust
Dragged by the cords which through his feet were thrust
By his insulting Foe; O how transformed?
How much unlike that Hector, who returned
Clad in Achilles spoils; when he, among
A thousand ships (like Jove) his Lightning flung;
His horrid Beard and knotted Tresses stood
Stiff with his gore, and all his wounds ran blood,
Intranc'd I lay, then (weeping) said, The Joy,
The hope and stay of thy declining Troy;
What Region held thee, whence, so much desired,
Art thou restored to us consumed and tired
With toyls and deaths; but what sad cause confounds
Thy once fair looks, or why appear those wounds?
Regardless of my words, he no reply
Returns, but with a dreadful groan does cry,
Fly from the Flame, O Goddess-born, our walls
The Greeks possess, and Troy confounded falls
From all her glories; if it might have stood
By any Power, by this right hand it should.
What Man could do, by me for Troy was don,
Take here her Relics and her Gods, to run
With them thy fate, with them new Walls expect,
Which, tossed on Seas, thou shall at last erect;
Then brings old Vesta from her sacred Quire,
Her holy Wreaths, and her eternal Fire.
Mean while the Walls with doubtful cries resound
From far (for shady coverts did surround
My Fathers house) approaching still more near
The clash of Arms, and voice of Men we hear*
Rowz'd from my Bed, I speedily ascend
The house's top, and listening there attend,
As flames rolled by the winds conspiring force,
Ore full-eard Corn, or Torrents raging course
Bears down tho'opposing Oaks; the fields destroys
And mocks the Plough-mans toil, th'unlookt for noise
From neighboring hills, the amazed Shepherd hears;
Such my surprise, and such their rage appears.
First fell thy house Ucalegon, then thine
Deiphobus, Sigaan Seas did shine
Bright with Troys flames, the Trumpets dreadful sound,
The louder groans of dying men confound.
Give me my arms I cried, resolved to throw
My self amongst any that opposed the Fo:
Rage, Anger and Despair at once suggest
That of all deaths, to die in Arms was best.
The first I met was Panthus, Phoebus Priest,
Who scaping with his Gods and Relics fled
And toward the shore his little grandchilde led;
Panthus, what hope remains? what force? what place
Made good? but sighing he replies (alas)
Trojans we were, and mighty Ilium was,
But the last period and the fatal hour
Of Troy is come, Our glory and Our Power
Incensed Jove transfers to Grecian hands,
The foe within, the burning Town commands,
And (like a smothered fire) an unseen force
Breaks from the bowels of the fatal Horse,
Insulting Synon flings about the flame,
And thousands more then e're from Argos came
Possess the Gates, the Passes and the Streets,
And these the sword oretakes, and those it meets,
The guard nor fights nor flies, Their fate so near
At once suspends their Courage and their fear.
Thus by the Gods, and by Otrides words
Inspired, I make my way through fire, through swords,
Where Noises, Tumults, Outcries and Alarms
I heard, first Iphitus renownd for Arms
We meet, who knew us (for the Moon did shine)
Then Ripheus, Hippanis and Dymas join
Their force, and young Choraebus Mygdons son,
Who, by the Love of fair Cassandra, won,
Arrived but lately in her fathers Aid
Unhappy, whom the Threats could not dissuade
Of his Prophetique Spouse,
Whom, when I saw, yet daring to maintain
The fight, I said, Brave Spirits (but in vain)
Are you resolved to follow one who dares
Tempt all extremes, The state of Our affairs
You see, The Gods have left us by whose aid
Our Empire stood, nor can the flame be staid,
Then let us fall amidst Our Foes; this one
Relief the vanquished have, to hope for none.
Then re-inforc'd, as in a stormy night
Wolves urged by their raging appetite
Forage for prey, which their neglected young
With greedy jaws expect, ev'en so among
Foes, Fire and Swords, to'assured death we pass,
Darkness our Guide, Despair our Leader was.
Who can relate that Evenings woes and spoils,
Or can his tears proportion to our Toils!
The City, which so long had flourisht, falls,
Death triumphs over the Houses, Temples, Walls,
Nor only on the Trojans fell this doom,
Their hearts at last the vanquished reassume,
And now the Victors fall, on all sides, fears,
Groans and pale Death in all her shapes appears,
Androgeus first with his whole Troop was cast
Upon us with civility misplac't,
Thus greeting us you lose by your delay,
Your share both of the honor and the prey,
Others the spoils of burning Troy convey
Back to those ships, which you but now forsake;
We making no return, his sad mistake
Too late he finds; As when an unseen Snake
A Travelers unwary foot has pressed,
Who trembling starts, when the Snakes azure Crest,
Swollen with his rising Anger, he espies,
So from our view surpised Androgeus flies.
But here an easy victory we meet:
Fear binds their hands, and ignorance their feet,
Whilst Fortune, our first Enterprise, did aid,
Encouraged with success, Choraebus said,
O Friends, we now by better Fates are led,
And the fair Path, they lead us, let us dread.
First change your Arms, and their distinctions bear;
The same, in foes, Deceit and Virtue are.
Then of his Arms, Androgeus he divests,
His Sword, his shield he takes, and plumed Crests,
Then Ripheus, Dymas, and the rest, All glad
Of the occasion, in fresh spoils are clad.
Thus mixed, with Greeks, as if their Fortune still
Followed their swords, we fight, pursue, and kill.
Some re-ascend the Horse, and he, whose sides
Let forth the valiant, now, the Coward, hides.
Some to their safer guard their ships retire,
But vain's that hope, against which the Gods conspire:
Behold the Royal Virgin, The Divine
Cassandra, from Minerva's fatal shrine
Dragged by the hair, casting tow'ards heaven, in vain,
Her Eyes; for Cords, her tender hands, did strain:
Choraebus, at the spectacle enraged
Flies in amidst the foes: we thus engaged,
To second him, amongst the thickest ran,
Here first our ruin from our friends began,
Who from the Temples Battlements, a shower
Of Darts and Arrows, on our heads did power:
They, us for Greeks, and now the Greeks (who knew
Cassandra's rescue) us for Trojans slew.
Then from all parts Ulysses, Ajax, then,
And then the Atridae rally all their men;
As winds, that meet from several Coasts, contest,
Their prisons being broke, The South and West,
And Eurus on his winged Coursers born
Triumphing in their speed, the woods are torn,
And chafing Nereus with his Trident throws
The Billows from their bottom; Then all those
Who in the dark Our fury did escape,
Returning, know our borrowed Arms and shape.
And differing Dialect, Then their numbers swell
And grow upon us, first Choraebus fell
Before Minerva's Altar, next did bleed
Just Ripheus, whom no Trojan did exceed
In virtue, yet the Gods his fate decreed.
Then Hippanis and Dymas wounded by
Their friends: nor thee Panthus thy Piety,
Nor consecrared Mitre, from the same
Ill fate could save; My Countries funeral flame
And Troys cold ashes I attest, and call
To witness for my self, That in their fall
No Foes, no Death, nor Danger I declined,
Did, and deserved no less, my Fate to find.
Now Iphitus with me, and Pelias
Slowly retire, the one retarded was
By feeble Age, the other by a wound,
To Court the Cry directs us, where We found
The Assault so hot, as if 'twere only there,
And all the rest secure from foes or fear,
The Greeks the Gates approached, their Targets cast
Over their heads, some scaling ladders placed
Against the walls, the rest the steps ascend,
And with their shields on their left Arms defend
Arrows and darts, and with their right hold fast
The Battlement; on them the Trojans cast
Stones, Rafters, Pillars, Beams, such Arms as these,
Now hopeless, for their last defense they seize.
The gilded Roofs, the marks of ancient state
They tumble down, and now against the Gate
Of The Inner Court their growing force they bring,
Now was Our last effort to save the King,
Relieve the fainting, and succeed the dead.
A Private Gallery 'twixt th'appartments led,
Not to the Foe yet known, or not observed,
(The way for Hectors hapless wife reserved,
When to the aged King, her little son
She would present) Through this We pass, and run
Up to the highest Battlement, from whence
The Trojans threw their darts without Offense.
A Tower so high, it seemed to reach the sky,
Stood on the roof, from whence we could descry
All Ilium -- both the Camps, the Grecian Fleet;
This, where the Beams upon the Columns meet,
We loosen, which like Thunder from the Cloud
Breaks on their heads, as sudden and as loud.
But others still succeed: mean time, nor stones
Nor any kind of weapons cease.
Before the Gate in gilded Armor, shone
Young Pyrrhus, like a Snake his skin new grown,
Who fed on poisonous herbs, all winter lay
Under the ground, and now reviews the day
Fresh in his new apparel, proud and young,
Rowls up his Back, and brandishes his tongue,
And lifts his scaly breast against the Sun,
With him his Fathers Squire, Automedon
And Periphas who drove his winged steeds,
Enter the Court; whom all the youth succeeds
Of Scyros Isle, who flaming firebrands flung
Up to the roof, Pyrrhus himself among
The foremost with an Ax an entrance hews
Through Beams of solid Oak, then freely views
The Chambers, Galleries, and Rooms of State,
Where Priam and the Ancient Monarchs sat.
At the first Gate an Armed Guard appears;
But The Inner Court with horror, noise and tears
Confusedly filled, The women's shrieks and cries,
The Arched Vaults re-eccho to the skies,
Sad Matrons wandering through the spacious Rooms
Embrace and kiss the Posts, Then Pyrrhus comes
Full of his Father, neither men nor Walls
His force sustain, the torn Port-cullis falls,
Then from the hinge, their strokes the Gates divorce,
And where the way they cannot find, they force*
Not with such rage a Swelling Torrent flows
Above his banks, th'opposing Dams orethrows,
Depopulates the Fields, the Cattle, Sheep,
Shepherds, and folds the foaming Surges sweep.
And now between two sad extremes I stood,
Here Pyrrhus and the Atridae drunk with blood,
There th'hapless Queen amongst an hundred Dames,
And Priam quenching from his wounds those flames
Which his own hands had on the altar laid:
Then they the secret Cabinets invade,
Where stood the Fifty Nuptial Beds, the hopes
Of that great Race, The Golden Posts whose tops
Old hostile spoils adorned, demolisht lay,
Or to the foe, or to the fire a Prey.
Now, Priams fate perhaps you may enquire,
Seeing his Empire lost, his Troy on fire,
And his own Palace by the Greeks possessed,
Arms, long disused, his trembling limbs invest,
Thus on his foes he threw himself alone
Not for their Fate, but to provoke his own,
There stood an Altar open to the view
Of Heaven, near which an aged Laurel grew,
Whose shady arms the household Gods embraced,
Before whose feet the Queen her self had cast
With all her daughters, and the Trojan wives,
As Doves whom an approaching tempest drives
And frights into one flock; But having spied
Old Priam clad in youthful Arms, she cried,
Alas my wretched husband, what pretense
To bear those Arms, and in them what defense?
Such aid such times require not, when again
If Hector were alive, he lived in vain;
Or here We shall a Sanctuary find,
Or as in life, we shall in death be joined.
Then weeping, with kind force held and embraced,
And on the sacred seat the King she placed;
Mean while Polites one of Priams sons
Flying the rage of bloody Pyrrhus, runs
Through Foes and Swords, and ranges all the Court
And empty Galleries amazed and hurt,
Pyrrhus pursues him, now oretakes, now kills,
And his last blood in Priams presence spills.
The King (though him so many deaths enclose)
Nor fear nor grief, but Indignation shows,
The Gods requite thee (if within the care
Of those alone th'affairs of mortals are)
Whose fury on the son but lost had been,
Had not his Parents Eyes his murder seen,
Not That Achilles (whom thou feignst to be
Thy Father) so inhumane was to me,
He blushed, when I the rights of Arms implored;
To me my Hector, me to Troy restored*
This said, His feeble Arm a Javelin flung,
Which on the sounding shield, scarce entering, rung.
Then Pyrrhus; go a messenger to Hell
Of my black deeds, and to my Father tell
The Acts of his degenerate Race. So through
The Sons warm blood, the Trembling King he drew
To The Altar: in his hair one hand he wreathes;
His sword, the other, in his Bosom sheathes.
Thus fell the King, who yet survived the State,
With such a signal and peculiar Fate,
Under so vast a ruin not a Grave,
Nor in such flames a funeral fire to have:
He, whom such Titles sweld, such Power made proud,
To whom the Scepters of all Asia bowed,
On the cold earth lies this neglected King,
A headless Carcass, and a nameless Thing.
FINIS.

