A VOTE FOR Moderate Counsels; AS THE Readyest Way to Heal Our BREACHES, And
bring Happiness to the KING AND PEOPLE.

An ODE, By a Barrister at LAW.

(...)
(...). --
London, Printed for James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf in Fleet Street,
1681.

A VOTE FOR Moderate Counsels, etc.
HAil Sacred Council! Quintesence of Souls!
Strength of the Commonwealth, which Chains the Fates,
And every danger, ere it comes, Controlles;
The Anchor of all Realms and stay of States.
A sure Foundation, which has still withstood,
All open Force, and the far worse Designs,
Of such as Ruin Plot by Undermines.
The Rock which braves Envies impetuous Flood,
On which most Glorious Seats do firmly stand,
Thou the true Bacon Walling in the Land.
Whereon the Politician may Erect,
(If he on Loyal Rules does still reflect)
A Fabric, many stories high with Ease,
And never fear the Storms of Envious Fate*
Which things at highest does Precipitate.
A Fabric which Ambitions self may please,
And show the Grandeur of the Architect.
The golden-Ball, which does so proudly rise,
Like a Celestial Globe, into the Skies,
That second Woolsey' had Thou placed it there,
Had left his Name, as lasting as the Sphere.
II.
GReat Empress, of this Universal Frame!
The Atlas on whose shoulders states are stayed,
Who holdst the Reins, and Wilder Man do tame,
And make those good, that are in Furrs Arrayed,
Those who no God but Mammon e're Obeyed.
To Justice thou, the double use, have taught,
Both of the Balance and the Sword;
Her Laws she takes from thy Diviner Word,
And by that Test she try's who e're are brought.
There never was greater need than now,
In a rank Age where Vices only grow,
To have her Sword kept keen,
That the Luxurious Branches may,
Ever they draw out the Vital Sap, be lopt away.
No matter though they look so fresh and Green.
The Roman Hydra too she must oppose,
And many Labors more sustain,
Than ever Hercules himself could do,
He Is but for Twelve Renowned; for each of those,
She has a Thousand Labors to run through,
Whole Herds of Lions and Worse Foxes to Subdue.
III.
IF ought Succeed while we despise Thy Care,
And on the cast-off Chance alone Depend;
The Bait Success, but draws us in a Snare,
And so betrays our Fortune in the End:
Like the deluded Fish we leap at Flies,
Although a Hook in the gaudy Entrails lies.
When by thy Compass We our Course do Steer,
We make safe way through all the shelves of Fate.
Thou at the Helm, of this great Ship of State,
The safe and well experienced Pilot art.
And do thy Stowage still in safety bear,
Both in the Calms of Peace and storms of War,
Thou art not only Pilot, but the Chart.
Since Inundations threaten us again,
Wee'r swept away, unless we straight Embark,
And thrust this World into thy Sacred Ark:
To all its tops of Power, we Climb in vain,
Although it self do seem some larger Boat,
That has so long and proudly braved the Main,
And does like Delos, on the Ocean Float.
That Xerxes-like, Chains the unruly Deeps,
Lodging the Winds, within her Canvas Sheets.
And does with greater State the Captive Woo,
Then the Venetian-Duke, could ever do.
True Neptune, Thou.
The Tritons do no other Know,
When Thou do shake thy Trident over the Waves,
Making the Watry-Gods thy Slaves.
This very Isle, [which seems to be,
Another Venus, born of the Sea.]
The fairest Mistress, Neptune does embrace,
Who took the Name of Albion, from her face.
This Warlike-Queen, whom in the Ages past,
No Foreign nor Domestic force could quell,
Nor Fires consume enflamed by Rome or Hell,
Would but for thee, be swallowed up at last,
By Seine and Tyber, whose polluted Streams,
If once they mingle with the Purer Thames,
Will never Ebb unto the Ocean more,
But leave their Slime upon the Inland Shore:
And if Corrupted once with Foreign Crimes,
We let in Judgments due unto those Climes:
This more Destructive Flood would leave behind,
Scarce a Deucalion to restore Mankind.
IV.
Thou from Confusion All things have Redeemed,
For all our Sessions without Thee were Vain,
And all those Senates which were most esteemed,
By Thee it was, their Counsels Crowned remain.
For all those Law's had but dead Letters seemed,
Which Solon or Lycurgus did Ordain,
Those Times had been as much with Law perplexed,
A^ now this Modern Age,
Is with its Dark and Mystic Riddles Vexed,
Had Thou not been the Comment to the Text.
Whilst the Poor Client has one drop to bleed,
He but Consults a Horse-Leach for his Sage,
Who stoo's him on, and does his Money take,
Having a Bear to engage him at the Stake,
But does this while no Chain of Concord make.
V.
NOt without Cause the Wiser Ancients did,
Paint Magistrates, (placed to Explain the Laws)
Without their hands; thus Bribery did forbid,
Which from the doing Right too often with-draws,
And with a Veil, the Judges Eyes were hid,
Who should not see the Party, but the Cause.
For those who should the Seats of Justice fill,
Her Deputies (as she does lead the Race)
Should move; and as she bends, should still Incline,
And hand in hand with Her keep Pace and Time.
Whom neither Gold nor Favor can betray,
Although they pave the Malefactors Way.
Or make the servil Judge so base,
For shining Dirt, to sell a cast on's Place.
He that would prove thus Dissolute,
And be the Pander of this Chaster Dame,
No doubt he would his Daughter Prostitute,
He that his Conscience sells, will cast in Fame.
VI.
JUstice, though less than Mercy, is Divine;
This should be still Constrein'd, but Mercy Free.
They both must take their Measures still from Thine;
And make their Course, as they are Steered by Thee:
Though the Luxurious Nation stands in need
Rather of Pruning, than to be Manured,
For where the Soil does only Briars breed,
Those Brambles must no longer be endured,
That would the Soberaign Plant (if suffered) Choke;
Ivy, that would Destroy the Sacred Oak:
(Sacred to Jove, the Druids made it so,
And We unto A God, more great below.
Here did the Royal Forester abide,
Whilst Treason sought in Vain, what Heaven did hide.)
Ivy, Which does with feeble Fibers Climb,
And with gay Treacherous Arms Embrace;
But would draw all the Strength from the Oak, in time:
And when they have drawn the Nation into Ill,
They Have Leaves, to Keep the Issue Running still.
VII.
'TWas Thou, that did in the First Council Sit,
When this Vast Ball of Earth was made,
Thou did prescribe the Rule and Form of it,
From Thee it both its Form and Beauty had.
The Naked thing was by thy Mirror dressed;
Thy Wisdom in the Workman-ships expressed,
And 'Twas thy Wardrope her with Various Dresses clad.
It Is Thou that Teach Monarchs all their parts;
From Thee they Learn the Use of Arms and Arts:
The true Minerva Thou,
Descended from the Brain of Jove.
By Thee alone it is, they Know,
When they should Rule by Fear and when by Love.
When they by peaceful Arts should gain Renown,
When by the Sword they must assure their Place,
Which gains a Prince Subjection from his own,
And makes his Neighbors fear to lose his Grace;
As 'twere the Book of Fate, they read his face:
For all do fear that Prince who dare Attempt,
Whilst want of Courage, brings Him in Contempt;
And gives a Boldness to each saucy Frog,
For to Insult and leap upon their King,
Useing the Royal-Power like a Log,
Crying it down, 'till they have Ingrost the thing,
And when his Subjects once become too bold,
Of the Advantage Foreign-States take hold,
And work their Iron, ere it waxes Cold.
VIII.
MAy none but such, of Councils Number boast,
Whose Lives have long with many Virtues shined!
Rome still Respected the Patricians most,
Nobles are best for Use, if best inclined.
Yet so, as unto others seem not lost
Fair hopes to rise; for else, when hopes resigned,
Industrious Virtue in her Course would tire,
If not expecting Honor for her Hire.
Such as have still been Loyal to the Crown,
And by supporting that, preserved their own.
Wise Men, that Know as well the honest lines,
Which should direct themselves in Wisdoms way,
As they can smell Phanatical Designs,
And find out Hypocrites, even when they Pray*
Yet Men, that will not be driven back by Awe,
But speak their Minds by Reason and by Law.
Useing much Courage Falsehood to Convince
Yet humbly yield to Reason and their Prince.
Who the Successors: Right will not Debate,
So as still to obstruct the way,
By this one stumbling block of State,
Both to the Nations Happiness,
To VVearied Tangiers and the Oceans Peace:
Such Men as These now King and People want,
And only such, may Heaven next time to Caesar grant.
IX.
THat formal Don that undertook to prove
The Ignoramus Bill, an Act of Love,
From his Law-Logick might have drawn
As well this weighty Inference,
The loss of Tangier too, when gone,
Will be to the Merchants of good Consequence.
And since the Duke and that must both be Lost,
Since He the Jonas is, that raised the Storm,
Fling Him o're-Board, that some Officious Whale,
May the kind Office once again perform,
And Spew Him out upon the Affrick-Coast.
With two unhappy things we only part,
That to the Sea, this to the Commonweal,
Thus spoke the Oracle! the Flammins smiled;
As many as did think the Sentence mild:
Others, more Honest, did the Brow Contract,
And hoped they mean not, as they Talk, to Act;
Crying it argued Childish peevishness,
Since both the pieces might not be their own,
To cast away the Good, they might possess,
And in the sullen Mode be pleased with none,
That it did seem, most insolently bold,
And like a Second Giants-War with Heaven;
On God and Natures Law's for to lay hold,
As if to Check their own our Power from them were given.
From those Just Rights which God and Nature give,
If once Tied up, there is none would wish to Live.
X.
THrice happy is that KING, whom Heaven does Grace
With Parliaments whereon He may rely,
Who Honor Him, and do respect his Place;
And like to Aristides can cast by,
All Private Grudge, and public Cares Embrace,
Whom no Ambition, nor base Thoughts can tie,
And that they be not, to betray their Seats,
The Partial Pentioners of Foreign States.
Good Godfathers, that when so e're they please,
Make Us Beg Blessings on our Knees;
And if but once, the untoward Child Offends,
By them He Is punished strait with Goales and Reprimands:
Ungracious Children that pretend the way
Of Duty, Piously to Disobey
That Forty-One and Forty-Eight, resent,
And yet are growing into the same Disease,
Troubling with needless Jealousies the Peace.
And unaware (Full Cry!) are running on the Scent.
Who Arbitrary Power do cry down,
Making the Best of Princes Cheap,
That they themselves may into the Saddle leap,
And have the Loud and Rude Hosannah's of the Town.
Who should They once the Reins of Power Command,
And get (as Heaven forbid!) the Whipping Hand,
Would soon to Ruin Ride, the Asses of the Land.
FINIS.
An Advertisement.
THere have been Newly Published by James Dave, at the Cock and Sugar Loaf,
near St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, several small Treatises, Relating to
the Times, that are generally pronounced worthy the Perusal of all True
Englishmen, Good Protestants, and Loyal Subjects; and bear the Titles
following.

THe Field of Blood: Or, Rebellion Blazoned in all its*Colours, in a Lively
Representation (grounded upon Fact) of Inhability in a Prince, Exorbitant
Ambition in the Nobility, and Licentious Insolence in the Commons.

The Keepers of the English Liberties drawn to the Life, in the Qualifications
of Persons by Them declared capable to Serve in Parliament.

An Answer to a Popish Libel, Entitled, A Vindication of the English Catholic,
discovering the Chief Falsities and Contradictions in the Narrative of Titus
Oats.

A Paradox against Liberty. An Heroic Poem, By the Lords in the Tower.

Sentiments: A Poem to the Earl of Danby.

The Popes Third Breve, threatening to Excommunicate the most Christian King,
together with the French Clergyes Reply upon the Subject of that Breve.

A Seasonable Memento both to King and People, upon This Critical Juncture of
Affairs.

The Nations Interest, with Relation to the Pretensions of his. R. H. Duke of
York, Discussed and Asserted.

The Grand Inquest: Or, A Full and Perfect Answer to several Reasons, by which
it is pretended His Royal Highness the Duke of York may be proved to be a Roman
Catholic.

The Mystery and Method of His Majesty's Happy Restoration, laid Open to
Public View; by John Price, D. D.

A Paradox against Life. An Heroic Poem. By the Lords in the Tower.

The Imposter Exposed, in a Dissection of a Villainous Libel, entitled, A Letter
to a Person of Honor, concerning the Black Box.

A Vote for Moderate Counsels; as the Readiest way to Heal our Breaches, and
bring Happyness to King and People. By a Barrister of Gray's Inn.


