The Vision.
'TWas at an hour when busy Nature lay
Dissolved in slumbers from the noisy Day,
When gloomy Shades and dusky Atoms spread
A darkness over this Universal Bed,
And all the gaudy beams of light were fled;
My fluttering fancy 'midst this silent peace,
Careless of sleep, and unconcerned with ease,
Drew to my wandering thoughts an object near,
Strange in its form, and in appearance rare.
Methought (yet sure it could not be a Dream,
So real all its Imperfections seem)
With Princely Port a stately Monarch came,
Airy was his mien, and Noble was his frame.
A sullen sorrow brooded on his Brow;
He seemed beneath some weighty Fate to bow;
Distrust and Grief upon his-Eyelids rest,
And show the struggling troubles of his Breast.
Upon his Head a nodding Crown he wore,
And in his Hand a yielding Scepter bore;
Forlorn and careless did his strokes appear,
And every motion spoke a Wild Despair.
This mournful Scene did all my passions move,
And challenged both my pity and my love,
And yet I thought him by the ruins made
Above my pity, and beyond my aid;
Long did he in a pensive silence stand,
For sure his thoughts could not his words command:
Too big for Speech --
Till sullen murmurs from his bosom flew,
And thus a draught of his disorders drew.
Almighty Powers! By whose consent alone
Ordained, I did ascend the Rega^ Throne,
Led by your dark Decrees and Conduct there,
I, as your great Vicegerent, did appear
Beneath my Charge, whilst crowding Nations sat
And bowed and did admire my rising Fate,
'Twas then my Laurels fresh and blooming grew,
And a loud fame of all my Glories flew;
My willing Subjects bless and clap the day,
The bravest and the best were all my friends,
Whilst Faction in confusion sneaked away;
At distance grinn'd, but could not reach their ends.
Such Faith unto my promises were shown,
My Word, the took for Oaths were useless grown;
My very Word composed their hopes and fears,
Sacred 'twas held, and all serene appears.
Until my fate reversed did backwards reel,
Blurred all my Fame, and altered Fortunes Wheel;
Ye Gods! Why did ye thus unconstant prove?
Was I the Envy of the Abodes above?
Or was this stately Majesty but given
To be the Cheat and Flattery even of Heaven?
Can never a Saint implore Celestial aid?
Nor yet the Virgin Goddess Interceed?
'Twas for her her Cause engaged I suffering lie;
'Twas to advance her just Divinity:
Yes, I avow the Quarrel and the Cause,
'Twas for my Faith, and to out-cope the Laws.
I Would rather be forsaken and alone,
Than sit a craving Monarch on a Throne:
Let all my cringing Slaves at distance stand,
Fawn on the Invading Foe, and kiss his Hand;
Leave me, their Prince, farsaken and forlorn,
Exposed to all their slights and public scorn:
Let after Ages judge the mighty Test,
Judge the Magnific Grandeur of my breast.
I saw my great forefather yet before
Seal all his Sacred Vows with Martyred gore;
His Royal Issue blanded with disgrace,
Saw all the Efforts they used to Exclude the Race;
And yet these Terrors all I dare invade,
Thus Conscience, thus Religion does persuade.
I Will stand or fall by both those Tenets still,
And be the second Martyr to my Will;
And then he stopped, his fiery Eye Balls move,
And thus with his resisting Fate he strove,
And stood, like Capaneus Defying Jove.
When strait a noise, from whence it came unknown,
Was heard to answer in an angry tone;
Dye then unpitied Prince, for thus thy Fate
Long since, by its Decrees, did antidate:
To such perverseness, what regard is shown,
What Merit coud'st thou plead to mount a Throne?
To thy repeated Wishes Heaven was kind,
And pleased the wild Ambition of thy mind;
It put a Scepter in thy eager Hand,
Yet not to oppose the Genius of the Land;
If Reason could not sway thy Actions here,
Heavens not obliged by Wonders to appear.
See how thy Creatures at a distance stand,
Skulk from thy troubles to a safer Land;
Those who their Beings to thy bounty own,
Forsake their fawning Cheats, and now are gone.
Those who were Friends to thee and to thy Cause,
Bold for their Rights, and for their Countries Cause,
Thou, from thy darker Counsels, did remove.
And want their aid now they refuse their love.
Some more imperfect sounds did reach my Ear,
But sense returned, and day light did appear.
FINIS.

