A LOST SHEEP RETURNED HOME: OR, THE MOTIVES OF THE Conversion to the Catholic
Faith, OF THOMAS VANE, Doctor of Divinity, and lately Chaplain to His Majesty
the King of England, etc.

The third Edition, with Additions.

PSALM. 118.176. I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost; seek thy servant,
for I do not forget thy commandments.

S. Aug. Solil. cap. 33. Gratias tibi ago illuminator and liberator meus,
quoniam illuminasti me, and cognovi te. Sero cognovi te veritas antiqua, sero
te cognovi veritas aeterna.

PRINTED AT PARIS.

M.DC.XLVIII.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY OF HENRIETTE MARIE, QUEEN OF ENGLAND, etc.
MADAM,
To be a nursing Mother to the Church, is the dignity and duty of a QVEENE; to
which attribute seeing you have a right, as well by your virtue as your honor,
I am emboldned to prostrate my self, with this small Treatise, at your Royal
feet. It has pleased God out of his infinite, and by me,
never-to-be-forgotten mercy, to call me to the Communion of the Catholic
Church; for which I have also been called to account, and that in your
Majesty's family; which has moved me (with other considerations) as to publish
this my defense, so to crave your Majesty's Patronage both of it and me. Never
did persecution against Catholics in England rage as now it does; where like
Herod, who as soon as Christ was borne, sent forth men to destroy him; So they,
as soon as one is made a Catholic, or known to be so, seek his destruction.
And as Herod because he would be sure (as he thought) to destroy Christ,
destroyed all the Children that were about his age; So do they pursue the
legal Protestants, as having a little resemblance with Catholics, that so
they may (as they hope) sponge out all the remains and memory of the Catholic
religion.

And as God sent our Savior into the world, and subjected him to all humane
infirmities (except sin) like unto us, that he might be merciful; So has he
humbled your Majesty, even to a lower descent of suffering (considering your
exaltation, from whence it must take its measure) than any other, who like an
invaluable Diamond, were made to be firmly set in the most precious esteem of
mankind; but by the unrelenting malice of monsters have been brought to extreme
degrees of calamity: whose excellence as it is endeared to us all by your
sufferings; so our sufferings (your heart being the more intendred by the sense
of your own) we hope, shall render your Majesty the more propitious to us; who
suffer not only as good subjects to the King, but to God also in the Catholic
religion. Your gracious soul has more antidote in it, then all the world has
poison; which will therefore in your affliction make you like the Sun, which
shows his greatest countenance in his lowest declension; and bring you out of
it, like gold out of the fire, refined, not consumed; which when it does, as
the good thief did our Savior on the Cross; So we beseech you Madam, remember
us when you come into your Kingdom. In the mean time, we will remember you in
our prayers; That your fortune may surmount your greatness, and your virtue
your fortune; That your greatness may be above envy, your goodness above
detraction; That your illustrious example may darken the ages past, and lighten
them to come; that you may live beloved and die lamented; lamented by earth,
but joy'd by heaven; of which you shall be a part as well as a partaker, in
giving the happiness of your presence, and receive as a reward of all your
fufferings a never fading Diadem of glory: So prays,

MADAM, Your Majesty's Most humble, most loyal, and most devoted servant, THO.
VANE.

APPROBATIO DOCTORVM.
NOS infra scripti in Sacra Facultate Parisiensi Doctores Theologi, obtenta
venia, libellum Anglicum, cui titulus est, A lost sheep returned home, or, The
motives of the conversion to the Catholic faith of Thomas Vane, Doctor of
Divinity and lately Chaplain to the King of England: id est, Ovis perditae ad
ovile reditus, seu, Motiva conversionis ad Fidem Catholicam Thomae Vani, S.
Theologiae Doctoris, and Serenissimo Magnae Britaniae Regi nuper a Sacello,
perlegimus and examinavimus: In quo orthodoxa sunt omnia, Christianae scilicet
veritati ac pietati consona, immo sicut argumentis fidei haud parum attulisse
luminis testamur, ita and errantibus a fide non minus allaturum utilitatis
speramus. Authorem, aliunde celebrem and magni nominis, denotat vere Doctum.
Qui re plene cognita, omnia ut stercus arbitratus demisit, quo sibi aliisque
Christum lucrifaceret. Nec credere fas est latitare diu praeclarum hoc
(pusillum licet) opusculum; exui etenim auguramur peregrino and ignoto quo jam
cernitur habitu; and communem reddi tum Gallico tum Latino vestitum sermon.
Ita censemus.

Parisiis 3. Aprilis 1645. H. HOLDEN. I. CALLAGHAN.


The same in English.
WE whose names are underwritten, Doctors of Divinity, of the Faculty of
Paris, having obtained leave, have read and examined an English book bearing
this title, A LOST SHEEP RETURNED HOME, or the motives of the conversion to the
Catholic Faith, of THOMAS VANE Doctor of Divinity, and lately Chaplain to
the King of England. In which all things are orthodoxall; to wit, agreeable to
Christian truth and piety. Yea we testify, that as it has given no little
light to the arguments of faith; so we hope it will bring no less profit to
those that wander from the Faith. It speaks the Author (by other titles
honorable) truly learned; Who fully understanding the matter, has abandoned
all the world, accounting it but dross, that he might purchase Christ both to
himself and others. Nor can we think that this excellent, though little work,
will long lie hid; but believe that besides this foreign and unknown habit
wherein it is now shrouded, it will be rendered more public, apparelled both in
the French and Latin tongue.

Paris April 3. 1645. H. HOLDEN. I. CALLAGHAN.


A Prefatory Address to the Protestant Reader.
I Need not write much by way of Epistle to you, seeing the whole Book is but
an Epistle to the Reader; wherein I declare those Motives which led me to the
Catholic Roman Church, and which (I hope) will have the same influence upon
many others. For I neither think my self so weak, as that I alone should be
seduced, if the Motives be insufficient; nor so strong, they being true, that I
alone should comprehend them, and conquer all opposition either of the
understanding or the will, which might bar obedience thereunto.

All that I desire is, that the Reader will address himself to the reading of
this Book, with the same disposition of mind, that I did to the meditation and
search of the things contained therein, before I wrote it; And that is, to
divest his mind of all prepossessed opinions and worldly interests, in favor
of any other Religion, and dislike of this; That so his Soul may be now, as
the Philosophers say it is, when it comes into the world, like a smooth table
or white paper, wherein there is nothing painted or written; And having read,
understood, and considered, let him make his choice, and I doubt not but he
will (by the assistance of Gods grace, which is never wanting to those, that
are not wanting to themselves,) imprint in his Soul the characters of this
eternal truth. But if he harbor contrary opinions with obstinacy of will, and
a belief of their impossibility of being erroneous, he cannot be a meet judge
in this cause; Seeing according to the rule of Philosophy, INTUS EXISTENS
PROHIBET ALIENUM, That which is within, stops the entrance of that which is
without; Even as he that has the christalline humor of his eye tainted,
cannot see any thing in its own true colors; And such a man's partial
understanding is like a judge that is already bribed on one side. So also if
there ly hid in his heart any sinister and inordinate affection, it will check
the entrance of the true and saving faith, maugre all the most powerful
persuasions that can be used to introduce it; like as a piece of iron or other
matter remaining in a wound, will control the efficacy of any remedy applied
thereunto. Our Savior says of the Jews, How can ye believe, which receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor that is of God only? John 5. 44.
And in the Parable of the Supper (Luke 14.24.) the Master of the feast
professes that none of them that were invited should taste thereof, because
they colored their denyalls with the excuses of farming, marrying, and the
like. By which you may see, that the honors, pleasures, and profits of the
world, and their contraries, poverty, disgrace and pain, are, the one sort
like Syrenes, which (melting our hearts in delight) arrest us here, and divert
us from prosecuting our christian course; and the other, (as the Giants, the
sons of Anak did the Israelites,) fright us from entering into the land of
Canaan, Numb. 12.33.

But if having truly deposed all obstinate prepossessions of judgment and
worldly interests; and so having read this book, you are not yet thereby
persuaded that the Roman Catholic is the only true Religion, wherein
salvation is to be had, and therefore at any peril to be embraced, this must
proceed from want of understanding in you, and capacity of the reasons here
alleged; to which I can apply no cure, but my prayers, saying as S. Paul did
to Timothy, Consider what I say, and our Lord give thee understanding in all
things, 2. Tim. 2.7. To which if you add your own frequent and zealous
prayers also, I assure my self you shall find the same effect which the
servant of the prophet Elisha did, that your eyes shall be opened, and you
shall see, that they that be with us, are more, then they that be with them; 4.
Kings 6.16. you shall understand that the reasons on the Catholic side, are
far more, and more powerful, than the reasons of all other Religions
whatsoever.

And if after the reading of this Treatise, there remain in any ones
judgment, any objection against the sufficiency of any argument and motive
here alleged, or any argument against the Catholic Faith, which is not here
taken away, or any defense of your own religion, whatsoever the religion or
argument of defense be, if you please to seek, you may find those amongst you,
that can (much better than I) clear all your doubts, or if you have a mind,
(being unlearned,) to receive further information from me, or (being learned)
to oppose me, I oblige my self to answer both the one and the other, and that
with due circumstances and respects, aiming at nothing else, but the Glory of
God, and the good of your souls. And to this end, I have in this later Edition
added the discussion of two particular points of controversy more largely then
the rest, though more breefly then they might be, being such as I know most
Protestants do much stumble at, to wit, of the lawfulness of communion in one
kind; And of prayer both public and private in the Latin tongue.

Nor let any of you think (or show that he thinks so by his practice) that to
pursue this quest of the true Religion, and drive it home to its issue, is not
worth his time; or not so much worth it, as the pursuit of pleasure, profit or
other worldly availes; seeing you all well know what our Savior says in the
Gospel, what does it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world and lose
his own soul. Math. 16.26. Suffer not your selves through the seducing of
others, or your own obstinacy, to be undone by your too much confidence,
continuing still in darkness, like that of Egypt, Exodus 10.23. wherein no man
rose from his place; nor say with the Laodiceans, I am rich and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing, etc. Rev. 3.17. But according to the Apostles
direction, Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. And
adjourne not this trial to a future time, seeing the present, is that only
which is in your power. Say not as Felix said to S. Paul, putting him off for
the present, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee; Acts 24.25.
For this is but a suggestion of the devil to retard your return unto God. The
foolish virgins you know, while they delayed their preparations, and too late
went to buy their oil, the bridegroom passed by, and they were excluded: Mat.
25. therefore, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Psalm.
94.8.

Lastly, think upon the difference betwixt this life and the future; that this
is but of the indurance of a few score of years, and that therein, even to the
happiest, misery is their freehold, their inheritance, as Job says, Man borne
of a woman, living but a short time, is filled with many miseries, Job. 14.1.
and that the next life is eternal, either in unutterable felicity or torment,
according as men do here seal up their lives: Which infinity of time, and
extremity of good or evil, without any mixture of the contrary, are two such
circumstances, that their consideration should make a man slight and contemn
all things that concern him for this moment of time, in comparison of those
things which concern the settling of that future estate, which is never to
receive an end or change; and he that does not so, is surely worse than
profane Esau, that neglected his birthright for a mess of pottage, or the
wicked Jews that preferred Barabbas before Christ. O who can comprehend
eternity! Or know what it is to be damned for ever? Yet to reflect often
thereon, me thinks should make a man never to pause, or rest in his mind, till
he had put himself into such a condition as by which he might have just ground
to hope to escape that miserable and endless end.

Now seeing in the opinion of all men, there are but two sorts of things
required in this matter, that is, things to be believed, and things to be done;
and that the things to be done are consequences of the former, it behooves you
in the first place to be assured of the things you ought to believe; seeing, as
our Savior says, Mark 16.16. that He that believes not, shall be damned.
Which words, in reason, cannot be understood of some one, or few, yea or many
points of faith, excluding any one, but of all that our Savior commanded to be
believed, according to his Commission given to his Apostles, saying, Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, or teaching them to keep all things whatsoever
I have commanded you; and according to the exhortation of S. Jude to the Church
in his time, That ye earnestly endeavor for the faith which was once delivered
to the Saints, (Ep. Jude v. 3.) Nor can you be probably assured that you have
the faith once delivered to the Saints, the whole faith which the Apostles
taught all nations, but by examining (according to your ability) the pleas for
it on both sides; seeing it is granted by all, that the Roman Faith was the
true and perfect faith, as the Apostle himself by consequence confesses,
where he says, I thank my God that your faith is published throughout the
whole world, Romans 1.8. And if the Church of Rome have not changed her faith, as
in this Treatise is proved, then you that differ and separate from her, must be
accused of novelty and change, in forsaking her doctrine and communion, which
formerly in your predecessors you held. Your return unto both which, must be
the means, in the first place, to deliver you from eternity of torments, and
advance you to the glorious liberty and felicity of the sons of God: And that
you may do so, shall be the daily prayer and endeavor of

From Paris, August 4. 1648. Your humble servant in Christ Jesus, THO. VANE.

A LOST SHEEP RETURNED HOME. OR, The motives of the Conversion to the Catholic
Faith, OF THOMAS VANE.
CHAP. I.
The introduction; And that the knowledge of the means to arrive unto eternal
life, is not otherwise attaineable, then by Faith grounded on the Word of God.

. 1. SAINT Peter the Prince of the Apostles does thus comfort, encourage and
command us, 1 Pet. 3.14.15. But and if you suffer for righteousness sake,
happy are ye. But be not afraid of their fear, neither be troubled. But
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear.

. 2. This happiness and comfort of suffering for a good cause is remarkably
expressed by our Savior in the fifth of S. Matthew, where the blessings of
other virtues are placed in the future time, that they that mourn shall be
comforted, they that are merciful shall obtain mercy, and so of the rest; but
of the poor in spirit, and of the poor absolutely, (as S. Luke has it, chapter
6.20.) and of those that suffer for righteousness sake, it is affirmed in the
present time, that theirs is the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.10. the other
Beatitudes are but in reversion, but this in present possession.

. 3. And this by the mercy of God I feel in my self; for heaven is more the
joy then the place, and this joy, because God thinks it not fit, as yet, to
call me to it, he has sent to me; so that I can say with S. Paul, Romans 5.3. I
glory in tribulation. The Apostles encouragement to abandon fear, and to
sanctify the Lord, I will by his grace daily put in practice. But my present
undertaking is the Apostles command, to give an answer to every one that asks
me a reason of the hope (and faith from whence the hope springs) that is in
me; and this with the enjoined circumstances of meekness toward men, and the
fear of God.

. 4. And as some men here have asked me a reason; so if I were in England, I
assure my self many more would do so; and having heard of my change do ask
one another, and that with as much wonder and sorrow, as belief thereof. To
these therefore, and to all other both Catholics and Protestants, I give this
ensuing answer for satisfaction. To Catholics, that they may quit all fear
of my recoyling; to Protestants, that they may be invited to follow my example,
which though it be founded in an unworthy person, yet in so glorious an action,
as coming to the bosom of the Catholic Church, they have no reason to
disdain to follow me.

. 5. In this affair it is much more easy to find an entrance then an end.
For, what time since the beginning of Christian Religion, what place, what
thing does not bear witness to the Catholic Faith? Solomon says, Cant. 4.4.
that the neck of the Spouse the Church, is like the Tower of David, builded for
an armory, whereon there hang a thousand shields, a thousand arguments of
defense of the Catholic Doctrines; which the many excellent books of
controversy written both by those of our own and other Nations, do most
abundantly declare. It shall therefore suffice me to say only so much, as may
witness that I did not make this change without sufficient Motives: wherein I
will make choice of a little of much, and say as much as I can in a little.

. 6. Entering then into a serious consideration of the end for which I and all
men were created, to wit, the glory of God, and our own eternal happiness;
and of the knowledge of the means to attain thereunto, I found that by the
consent of all Christians, this was not to be gotten by clear and evident
sight, nor by humane discourse founded on the principles of reason, nor by
reliance upon authority merely humane; but only by Faith grounded on the word
of God, revealing unto men things that are otherwise only known to his infinite
wisdom. Secondly that God revealed all these things to Jesus Christ, and he
to his Apostles, as he says, John 15.15. All things which I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you; and this partly by word of mouth, but
principally by the immediate teaching of the holy Spirit, to the end that they
should deliver them unto mankind, to be received, believed, and obeyed over the
whole world, even to the end thereof; as he says, Math. 28.19. Go teach all
nations. Thirdly that the Apostles did accordingly preach to all nations; as S.
Mark says, Chap. 16.20. They going forth preached everywhere. And planted an
universal Christian company, charging them to keep inviolably, and to deliver
unto their posterity what they had received of them the first messengers of the
Gospel, as S. Paul says to, Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.2. The things that thou have
heard of me amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
may instruct others. Fourthly that though the Apostles and their hearers be
departed out of this life, yet there still remains a means in the world, by
which all men may assuredly know what the Apostles preached, and the primitive
Church received of them, seeing the Church to the worlds end must be built on
the Apostles, and believe nothing as matter of Faith, besides that which was
delivered of them; as S. Paul says; Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner
stone.

CHAP. II.
Of the means to know, which is the Word of God. And that all the Protestants
Arguments to prove that the Scripture (and it only) is the Word of God, are
insufficient; And that the general Tradition of the Catholic Church, is the
only assured proof thereof.

. 1. THese things being supposed, the chief difficulty to my seeming consisted
in this, how we might certainly know now adays, so many ages after the
Apostles death, what, and all necessary points that they taught and preached:
the Protestants said that this was to be found in the Scriptures which were
written by them; but this did not satisfy my doubt; for supposing the
Scriptures to be the word of God, delivered by the Apostles, and others
inspired by him, yet I wanted some sufficient witness or proof to assure me
so much, for of my self I could not find it. The bare word of the Protestants
I saw I had no reason to take, because they confess that they may err, and I
in this matter not being able to discover whether they did err or no, relying
upon a fallible guide must, always remain in uncertainty and fear. I observed
moreover that although in most of their assertions they might upon examination
prove false; yet in saying that the Church might err, and taking themselves
for the Church, they had said most true; finding that they indeed had erred in
this most important Particular of declareing what is the word of God and what
not; the Lutherans affirming much less for the word of God then the
Calvinists, and the Church of England does.

. 2. Now of necessity one of these sorts of Protestants must err, and that
most dangerously; the one by beleiving that to be the word of God which is not,
but the invention of men, and perhaps false and foolish, Praefat. in Epist.
Iac. in Edi^. levens.
as Luther said of S. James his Epistle, or the other by renouncing that which
is indeed the Word of God, and so not believing what God himself has spoken.
Their Authority being by themselves in their evident disagreement thus broken,
I descended to consider the reasons by them alleged to induce men to believe
that the Scriptures are the Word of God, which in general I apprehended to be
insufficient, because they did not lead the Protestants themselves to an
agreement in the quantity thereof. But I further weighed them particularly, the
principal whereof are these.

. 3. First, they say the Scriptures are known to be divine by their own light
shining in them, Call. lib. 1. Inst. cap. 7. Sect. 2. infine.
Even as sweet and bitter are known by the taste, white and black by the
sight: which assertion to me seemed very absurd. I confess indeed much of the
Scripture is but the amplification of the Moral Law, which is a knowledge
engrafted in man by nature, by the light whereof we may see that it is true;
but this proves it not to be the Word of God. For though all truth be from God,
as he is the prime verity, and so may be called in some sense, his Word: yet by
the Word of God in this case is meant, truth revealed by God immediately unto
the penmen thereof: and though we find much thereof to be true, as agreeing
with the engrafted principles of reason, yet this proves not that it was
revealed immediately and extraordinarily, which is the circumstance that makes
it the Word of God, in the sense of those that dispute about it. As for the
historical parts both of the Old and New Testament, the institution of
Sacraments, with the like, they have no affinity with the in-born principles of
reason, and are therefore not known to be so much as true by any light they
carry with them, much less to be extraordinarily revealed by God, and so to be
his Word. Besides, if it could be discerned what were the Word of God, and what
not, by the resplendent light thereof, as easily as the light is known from
darkness, (as some of them say) how could there be so much dissension about
the parts thereof, as it is known there is? the Calvinists seeing more to be
the Word of God then the Lutherans do, and less then the Catholics: and yet
if it show it self by its own light, the Turks may see it, as well as any of
them.

And here I observed that many had blinded themselves with looking on the
light, and could not see so far as to discern between corporal and spiritual
light, but because the Prophet David says, Thy word is a lantern unto my feet
and a light unto my paths, Psalm. 118.105. they conceived the Scripture was as
easily discerned by its own light as the Sun. True it is that every corporal
light that does enlighten the eye of the body must be evident in it self, and
originally clear, but not so every truth that does illustrate men's
understanding. The reason is, because the eye of the body cannot by things seen
infer and conclude things that are hidden, but can only apprehend what does
directly and immediately show it self: but man's understanding apprehends not
only what shows it self, but by things known inferres and breeds in it self
the knowledge of things hidden. Hence though things showing themselves directly
and by their own light, be prime principles of the understanding, and the
means to know other things; yet also things hidden in themselves being
formerly known by the light of authority, may thereby become lights, that is,
means to increase our knowledge of hidden things. So that speaking of
spiritual and intellectual lights, it is false that all lights that enlighten
man's understanding to know other things, are evident in themselves; yea some
secondary principles and lights there are, which must be showed by a superior
light, before they become lights themselves. In which kind is the Scripture,
being a light only to the faithful, because known by the Churches Tradition to
be from the Apostles; by the Apostles authority confirmed by miracles, to be of
God; by Gods supreme verity, who cannot deceive nor be deceived, to be the
truth. Moreover this conceit of theirs does utterly extinguish faith, and
belief of the word of God; for every thing is so far forth the object of
faith, that it is not seen, as S. Paul says, Faith is the argument of things
not seen, Hebr. 11.1. In Evang. Joan. Tract. 40.
and S. Augustine, What is faith but to believe that which thou do not see?
If therefore they do see it, they cannot properly be said to believe it, but to
know it: and if so, what excellency, what virtue, what merit, what pious
affection toward God, to believe that which they see plainly before their
eyes? A bold presumption also it is in them to claim a cleerer degree of
knowledge then the Apostles had, for they did but see through a glass darkely,
1 Corinthians. 13.12. but these men are convicted of the divine truth of the things
they believe, Fran White Orthodoxe p. 107.
by the luster and resplendent verity of the matter of Scripture; which is a
privilege, which whosoever has, equals the blessed Saints in heaven, whose
happiness it is to see what we believe, especially seeing one point of the
Doctrine Protestants pretend to see, is the mystery of the Blessed Trinity,
the true light and resplendent verity whereof, no man can see manifestly out of
the state of Bliss.

. 4. Secondly, they pretend to know the Scriptures, to be the Word of God, by
the Whites Reply, p. 16.30.68. Field Appendix, page 34. Call. Inst l. 1. c. 7.
majesty of the matter, and purity of the Doctrine; but I conceived that
though some mysteries of the Scripture carry a majesty in them in respect of
natural reason, and an elevation above it, as of the B. Trinity; yet other
matters of Scripture seem unto reason ridiculous; as the Serpents talking with
Eve, and Balaams Ass reproving of his master, with many others. Nor could the
purity of the doctrine convince me; seeing we know that many learned and godly
men have written very holily, whose writings are not therefore accounted the
word of God: Besides there are many historical parts of the Scripture which do
not at all touch upon purity, and therefore cannot be discerned by it. Again
they affirm that the Scripture may be known by the style; but I considered
that God has no proper style or phrase of his own, but can at his pleasure al
styles, and that he did use the pens of those whom it pleased him to inspire,
couching his heavenly conceits under their usual language and ability of
expression; whence issues so great difference of styles (as is on all sides
acknowledged amongst sacred Writers) and that God did only guide them in the
truth they wrote, not in the style; for then all their styles in likelihood
should have been alike. Indeed God has an eternal increated manner of
speaking, which is the production of the eternal word, by which the blessed do
discern him from all other speakers, by the evidence of blissful learning,
but no created manner of speaking, (no not his speaking inwardly to the soul)
is so proper to God, as that it can be known to be his speaking by the mere
sound of the voice or by the style, without especial revelation or some
consequent miraculous effect.

. 5. Thirdly, the VVhites Reply, p. 19.
Harmony of the Scriptures is alleged by some as an argument to prove them to
be the Word of God. But though this Harmony appear in diverse things, yet it is
most certain that there are very many seeming contradictions, many of which
are but probably answered by Commentaetors, by assuming some things without
proof, because otherwise they must admit contradictions; some places are not
fully answered, but the Fathers were forced to fly from literal to
allegorical senses, as appears particularly in the four first Chapters of
Genesis, the Genealogy of our Savior, and in the reconciling of the
Chronologies of the Kings. And seeing no man is infallibly sure, that all the
answers used to reconcile the seeming contradictions of Scriptures are true, no
man can be assured by the evidence of the thing, that there is this perfect
harmony in them; nor consequently, that they are thereby known to be the Word
of God. Moreover if we were infallibly assured, that there were this perfect
harmony in the Scriptures, yet this to me seemed not a sufficient proof that
they are the Word of God, because there is no reason forbids me to believe,
that it may not be also found in the writings of some men; yea I make no
question, but it is to be found, and that with less seeming contradiction then
is in the Scripture; yet no man accounts that this proves their writings to be
the Word of God. Neither as I saw, could these pretenses, before mentioned, be
laid hold on by the unlearned multitude, an innumerable company whereof cannot
read at all, and when they hear them read, if they were asked, would say, that
they see not this light, this majesty, style and harmony, which their learned
men talk of, nor do they know what it means, nor that a tittle of it is the
word of God, but only because they are told so; Indeed S. Peter says in the
behalf of the old Testament, 2 Pet. 1.21. That holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. But we are as uncertain by any thing in the
words themselves, that S. Peter said this, as of all the rest, that is
altogether.

. 6. So that I could not find that there was any more then probable arguments
to be drawn from the Scriptures themselves to prove them to be the word of God.
For that which is the word of God, and the rule of faith, must be certain not
only in some parts, but in every part and particle, book, chapter, and line
thereof, which is impossible to be known by the light and evidence of the
sense and doctrine, seeing many places even by Field of the Church lib. 4. cap.
15. VVhites Reply. p. 35
Protestants confessions are dark, obscure, and full of difficulties, and how
can that be known to be the Word of God by the light thereof, when the light
thereof is not known? As useless also to their purpose, is the majesty,
purity, style, harmomony, or any the like; for we believe it to be harmonious,
because it is the Word of God, not to be the Word of God, because it is
harmonious, which we do not infallibly see. So that upon these considerations
I saw no evident certainty out of the Scriptures that they were the Word of
God; but that they are believed to be such without being seen, upon some other
Word of God, more clearly appearing to be the Word of God, and less liable to
corruption then the Scriptures are, assuring us so much, and that is the
Tradition of the Church: according to the saying of S. Augustine, Aug. contra
Epist. fundament. c. 5.
I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church
did move me. To which Hooker, one of the learnedest men that ever the
Protestant party could boast of, agrees, saying, Eccl. Pol. lib. 1. sec. 14 p.
36.
Of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know what books we are bound to
esteem holy, which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to
teach, Ibid. l. 2 sec. 4.102.
for if any one book of Scripture did give testimony to all, yet still that
Scripture which gives credit to the rest, would require another Scripture to
give credit to it: Ibid. p. 103.
neither could we ever come to any pause whereon to rest, unless besides
Scripture there were something else acknowledged. And this something is as he
says, Lib. 2. ca. 4. p. 300.
The Ecclesiastical tradition, an argument whereby may be argued and convinced
what books be Canonical, and what not.

. 8. Lastly, some say, they know the Scripture to be the Word of God, by the
Spirit of God prompting it to their souls. And this of all the rest seemed to
me most absurd. For first, I durst not arrogate this Spirit to my self, nor
could I know it was in any other. His saying, the Spirit told him the Scripture
was the Word of God, did not prove it, nor had I reason to believe he had the
Spirit more than I, without some proof. If a man's testimony in his own case
might thus be admitted, I saw that no Heretic would want it to support his
impiety, by ascribing it to the Spirit, as Epiphanhaer. 21.
Simon Magus did; only this H. Spirit he believed to be his Concubine Helena;
and Protestants ascribe the title of the Spirit to their private fancies. If I
should have said, that I know by the suggestion of Gods Spirit that this or
that part of Scripture, or that none of it was the Word of God, my proof was as
good to him, as his to me. For although the testimony of the Spirit of God be a
sure witness to him that has it, yet it is none to others, unless he can
prove he has it, by some miraculous effect. And without this kind of proof
every prudent man has reason to believe that such a boaster is a lier, and
intends to deceive others (as it is likely of the first Authors of Heresies) or
else that he deceives himself by a strong operation of his fancy, which he
calls the Spirit; because he is told by the doctrine of some Protestants, that
he must feel that he has the Spirit, (as in particular concerning the
assurance of his salvation) desirous then to be in the right way, that which he
would have, he persuades himself he has, because else he finds himself at a
loss, which begets a horror in him. Which to avoid, he flies to this pitiful
refuge, being the best he is instructed to, that he may have some stay for his
belief, and repose for his soul. And this happens commonly, and most strongly
to those that have some zeal, but little wit; on whom therefore the reflection
of their fancy is the stronger, and works upon them, as upon some I have read
and heard of, who by their eager desire to be so, have strongly conceited
themselves to be indeed Kings and Princes, and other kind of great and rich
men, when truly, and in all other men's judgments, they were either madmen or
fools. So that this I perceived was to open a gap to any man's fantastical
pretense whatsoever, who had the impudence to ascribe it to the Spirit of God.

Nor is there any peaceable way to compose the differences amongst men of this
nature; for each one pretending the Spirit, he has no reason to yield to
another, the holy Spirit being an infallible director wheresoever it is; yet
when it is different in different men who pretend to it, as it often falls out,
it is a certain sign that one of them is deceived, and both are deceived in
the opinion of each other; yet neither yielding to other, the contention ends
in the action of Zedekiah against the Prophet Micheas, who gave him a box on
the ear and said. 2 Chronicles. 18.23. Which way passed the Spirit of our Lord from
me, that it should speak to thee. And so it has fallen out amongst those that
derive their knowledge this way, that they end their differences by blows and
conquests, not by Councels and miracles. Plut.
And as the sons of Pyrrhus asking him who should succeed him in his
Kingdom, he answered, he that has the sharpest sword: so if it be demanded
amongst them, who has the Spirit of God, and consequently the true Religion;
It must be answered, He that has the most strength of arms to maintain it.
But S. Peter did otherwise, who provoked by Simon Magus, proved that he had the
Spirit of God, by raising up a child from death, Egesippus.
which the other with all his Magic could not do: who also challenging S.
Peter to fly from the Capitol to Mount Aventine, while he was doing so, by the
prayer of S. Peter, he came tumbling down and brake his leg, whereof he soon
after died. If men that boast of the Spirit cannot this way prove it, the
saying of S. Augustine, is appliable unto them, Tract. 45. in Joan.
There are innumerable who do not only boast that they are Videntes or
Prophets, but will seem to be illuminated, or enlightened by Christ, but indeed
are Heretics.

. 5. Yet most certain it is, that no man can believe the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, but by the Spirit of God inclining him thereunto; for as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is the gift of God. But there are two kinds of
inspiration of the Spirit of God; one immediate without the concourse of any
external ground of assurance; the other mediate, moving the heart to adhere to
an external ground of assurance, making it to apprehend divinely of the
authority thereof: they that challenge the first are Enthusiasts, and run into
all the forementioned absurdities; they that take the latter way, must besides
their inward persuasion, have an external ground of belief; and then what is
there so high and sufficient, as the testimony of Universal Tradition?
Agreeable whereunto Hooker says, Eccles. Pol lib. 2. sect. 7.8.
The outward letter sealed with the inward witness of the Spirit, is not a
sufficient warrant, for every particular man to judge and approve the Scripture
to be Canonical, the Gospel it self to be the Gospel of Christ: lib. 3.
sect. 3.
but the authority of Gods Church, (as he says) is necessarily required
thereunto.

. 9. And though it were true, that we might know the Scripture to be the word
of God, without the testimony of the Church, yet it does no where appear that
the Scripture is the whole word of God, and contains all that the Apostles
left unto the Church for their direction; so that my first Quere would still be
unsatisfied, to wit, how we should know the whole word of God, which the
Apostles taught? For even that word which is written does tell us that all is
not written; and therefore does S. Paul exhort us to keep both the written and
unwritten, Stand fast (says he) and keep the traditions which you have
learned; whether by word or by our Epistle, 2 These. 2.15. It is manifest that
the first Church of God from the creation until Moses, which was about the
space of two thousand years, had no word of God, but that which was unwritten,
which we call Tradition; the Church of the Jews had Scripture, but with it
Tradition, as the prayer of Elias concerning rain, Jam. 5.15. The contention
of the Archangel S. Michael and the Devil about the body of Moses, Jude v. 9.
with others; and of the Scripture both Old and New, many books are lost, as
many Parables and Verses of Solomon, 3 King. 3.32. with many other books; and
S. Paul wrote an Epistle to the Laodiceans, Col. 4.16. and another to the
Corinthians, which are not extant, 1 Cor. 5.9. And seeing we have not the whole
Canon of the Scripture, how can we be sure that that part which we have,
contains all that we are bound to believe and do? we do not read that the
Apostles were sent to write, but to preach: and S. John denies that he had
expressed in writing all that he had to say, Having more things to write unto
you (says he) I would not by paper and ink, for I hope that I shall be with
you and speak mouth to mouth that your joy may be full. Now that these things
that the Apostles did not write, but teach by word of mouth, were matters also
of weight, and belonging to Faith, S. Paul assures us in these words, Night and
day more abundantly praying, that we may see your face, and may accomplish
those things that want of your faith, 1 These. 3.10. By which it is evident,
that the Apostles besides their writings, did preach other things which were
wanting to their faith.

. 10. Nor did the Apostles surely intend to write all points of faith; for if
they had, it is probable that they all together, or some one of them, would
have done it purposely, punctually and methodically; and declared so much unto
the world. But we know the contrary, to wit, that they did not write all, by
their own confession; and that which they did write was but accidental and
upon particular occasions, as Hooker affirms, Eccles. Pol. l. 1. sect. 15. p.
37.
The several Books of Scripture are written upon several occasions, and
particular purpose; which occasions if they had not happened, it is most likely
that they had not written that which they did. For instance, the Epistles of S.
Peter, James, John and Jude, were written against certain Heretics, who,
misunderstanding S. Paul, did thereupon teach, That faith only without works
sufficed to salvation; of which very point S. Augustine says, Because this
opinion was then begun, De fide and operibus c. 14.
other Apostolical Epistles of Peter, John, James, Jude, do chiefly direct
their intentions against it, that they might strongly confirm, Faith without
works to profit nothing. S. John also did preach the Gospel till his last age
(which was very long) without writing any Scripture, and took occasion to write
(as S. Jerome affirms) by reason of the heresy of the Ebionites, De
Scriptoribus Eccles.
which then brake out. The like might be showed of all the rest. And lastly
(which is worth the observation) all the Epistles are written to such persons
only as were already converted to the Christian Faith; therefore they were
written not so much to instruct, Tom. 2. l. de Eccles. fol. 43.
as to confirm, as Zuinglius also confesses.

. 11. By all which it is evident, so far as we can see, that the Apostles and
Evangelists did write their books, not by any command from Christ, but upon
some accidental occasion moving them thereunto. Wherein one and the same
matter is often repeated, as in S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans and to the
Galatians; and also in all the Evangelists; and many other things are omitted,
as a world of works which our Savior did, as S. John testifies, 2. John
21.25. and which the Apostles did also (the small book of their Acts being too
little to express all their actions) and also the things which S. Paul
ordained in the Church of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.34. by which it is
manifest that they neither intended any complete Ecclesiastical history, nor
body of divinity containing all matters of faith and practice. So that it did
neither appear to me that the Scripture contained all the doctrine of salvation
that the Apostles taught, nor yet any of it; because I could not see by the
directions that Protestants gave me, whether the Scripture were the Word of God
or no.

CHAP. III.
Of the insufficiency of the Protestants means to find out the true sense of
the Scriptures: And of the absurdity of their assertion, that all points
necessary to salvation are clear and manifest.

. 1. AS to know the letter of the Scripture, so to know the meaning thereof, I
found a matter of great difficulty; agreeable to S. Peter, who says, speaking
of S. Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16. In which are certain things hard to be
understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the
Scriptures, to their own damnation: But Falke Con. Rhe^. Test. in 2 Pet. cap.
3. Morton Apol. part 1. lib. 1. cap. 19. Whitaker contro^. 2. q. 5. c. 7. p.
513.
Protestants, to avoid their dependence on the Church for the interpretation
thereof, say, that all things necessity to salvation are easy to be
understood, even by the most unlearned Reader. But they never yet expressed
what points were necessary to salvation and what not, nor have given any rule
by by which it might be found out, but have left themselves the liberty of
adding to, or substracting from that title, what and whenever they pleased.
And who sees not that, with this device, they may exclude (if they please)
almost all the points of Christian belief and practice?

. 2. Wonderful confusion I found herein; for here the understanding of the
most unlearned Reader is made the size of things necessary to salvation: and if
it be a measure unto all men, then the most learned Clerk is bound to believe
no more than the most unlearned peasant that can but read; and the most
unlearned need not the help of the learned for the understanding of things
necessary, but can find them out by his own reading. So that you must take the
arrantest dunce in their Church that can read, and after he has diligently
perused the Bible, and prayed for understanding therein, that which he
understands, must be accounted necessary to salvation, and no more. Surely me
thinks they are to blame, that have not for the greater credit and cleernesse
of their cause, made this trial upon some silly fellow, and from his mouth
have set down their points necessary to salvation. But by this it appears that
they are willing to draw the matters necessary to salvation, for their great
ease, into a very narrow compass, and make the same measure serve the silliest
clown and the greatest Clerk, which is uncomly. And (coming closer to the
matter) I have known some affirm, (which I believe is the opinion of very many)
that to believe in Jesus Christ, without any distinct belief of his divine and
humane nature, and that he died for the sins of the world, and that a man
must repent before he die, is all that is necessarily required either for
belief or practice of any man. As for those that cannot read, which are I
believe the greatest number, or very little inferior, they deal most unkindly
with them, not providing a certain means whereby they may be brought up to
read, which they that can read think all are bound to, with references to the
Scriptures, by the commandment of Christ, and whereby they are to find out the
things necessary to salvation; but leave them (if at all) to be saved by the
cruel blind Popery (as they please to call it) of an implicit faith.

. 3. I then considered that there was much ambiguity in these words, [necessary
to salvation] there being diverse kinds of necessity that have place in matters
of Religion. First there is an absolute necessity, and a conditional
necessity; Absolute necessity is that which admits no excuse of impossibility,
nor any exception of place, time, or person; as in regard of those that are of
age capable of knowledge: The belief of Christ mediator betwixt God and man:
and to this kind of necessity there are some that would restrain all things to
be believed, leaving themselves the liberty of all matters else to believe what
they please: but with as much reason they may restrain this necessity to the
believing only, that there is a God, and so renounce their Christianity.
Conditional necessity is that which obliges not, but in case of possibility,
and receives exception of time, place and person: Thus there are many points
necessary to be believed, if a man be in place where he may be instructed in
them, and has time to receive instruction, which are not necessary for a man
liveing in the wilderness, or so ready to be attached by death, as he has no
leisure to be instructed, or apprehension to receive it; as that Christ was
borne of a Virgin, and crucified under Pontius Pilate. And many things are
necessary for Pastors to believe, which are not for common people; as that the
persons of the Trinity are the same in essence, but distinct in subsistence;
that in Christ there are two natures, and but one person, with many the like:
And in matter of practice, there are many things necessary in case of
possibility, and opportunity of time, and place, which are not necessary, if
the convenience to accomplish them be wanting: as the assistance at Church
service, and participation of the Eucharist.

Secondly, there is a necessity of means; and a necessity of precept; Necessity
of means is in those things to which God has obliged us, if we will attain
the end; as of the Sacraments, to which God has given power to confer grace;
and of the Commandments, whose necessity is imposed upon us, if we will enter
into life; and of repentance of sins, which is a means necessary to obtain
their remission. Necessity of Precept is that which only obliges in regard that
it is commanded, contributing otherwise no real advancement to our salvation;
as the celebrating the Lords day, and other such like observations; the
omission whereof could be no hindrance to salvation, but in respect of
disobedience and breach of the Commandment.

Thirdly there is a necessity of special belief, and a necessity of general
belief: Necessity of special belief is of those points which all faithful (if
they be not prevented by death) are obliged to believe with faith express,
distinct, and determinate, which the Schoolmen call explicit faith; as the
twelve Articles of the Creed. Necessity of general belief is of those things
which every particular man is not bound to believe with a distinct and
explicit faith; as that Baptism given by Heretics, is true Baptism; and that
Heretics which have received Baptism, must not be baptized again when they
return to the Church, with many such like; in which it will suffice the
unlearned multitude to believe them implicitly, that is, to adhere to the
Church that does believe them, and by a general belief embrace them, by
believing as the Church does, and referring themselves to her, prepared always
to believe them explicitly when they shall be declared to them, and themselves
are capable to apprehend them.

Lastly, there is a Necessity of act, and a Necessity of approbation: Necessity
of act is of those things which every particular person is obliged actually to
perform; as to profess the name of Christ, to forgive offenses committed
against him, with the like. Necessity of approbation is of those things which
every man is not bound actually to perform, but only not to contradict them,
nor to condemn those that do them, nor the Church that allows them, nor to
separate themselves from her upon this occasion; as the choice to live in
virginity and single life, with the like.

. 4. Now according to these several kinds of Necessity, I accounted it meet to
hold for necessary to salvation, all those things that the Fathers have holden
necessary in that degree, and according to those kinds of necessity, as they
have holden them. And this I did not perceive to be a matter of such ease to
find out, as Protestants did under their title of necessary to salvation
affirm. I found innumerable places of Scripture were obscure and hard to be
understood; and that their distinction of things necessary to salvation was
more obscure and uncertain than any thing; having no limits or determination,
but like the Gladius Delphicus, was fitted for all turns, but indeed served
none, but to cozen themselves; who, presented with a point of belief or
practice which they did not like, would wave it with saying, it was not
necessary to salvation, Therefore as S. Philip asked the Eunuch, whether he
understood what he read; who said, how can I, without some body to interpret
it? So I answered my self, and had reason to believe that others could not
truly answer better for themselves.

An interpreter then was necessary who might judge of the true meaning of the
Scripture, against the corruption of heretics, who all take their protection
from thence; and which should determine all emergent controversies, which were
needful for the preservation of peace and unity. And in bestowing of this
Office I observed that the Protestants voices were divided; Har. Confess. p. 5.
some gave it to the Scripture it self, saying that it must interpret it
self, and be the Judge of all controversies. VVhites way to the Church, p. 6.27.
Others that the Spirit of God does interpret to every private man, both which
I apprehended absurd and unreasonable. The former, because nothing (if it speak
obscurely) can interpret it self, but that which has a living voice, which
the Scripture not having, cannot possibly interpret it self. As for the
assertion of some, that the obscure places are interpreted by plain places
speaking to the same purpose, it is false; there being no such plain places in
many cases to be found, which they themselves prove by their disagreement about
the sense of many places. Therefore to allay the unreasonablenesse of this
assertion, they add, that it is Scripture diligently read by us, and one place
conferred with another, all circumstances weighed, and much prayer used; which
is in effect, that (not the Scripture it self, but) they interpret the
Scripture by the aforesaid means.

. 6. But all these ways of study, and conference, skill in the tongues, or the
like, are but humane endeavors, and subject to error, yea though much fervor
of prayer be mixed therewith; and such as the means are, such of necessity
must be the interpretation and determination; but the means are uncertain,
doubtful and fallible, therefore such must be the interpretation; and if it be
uncertain, it may be false; and whether it be so or no, Protestants have no
way to discover, but by the Spirit, as he instructs every particular man; whose
insufficiency I found in my former consideration of the means to know the
Scripture to be the Word of God. And if it cannot assure me of the letter of
Gods Word, no more can it of the meaning; considering that I can neither know
whether another have the Spirit, nor yet whether I have it my self or no,
without some miraculous revelation: for all other proofs of having the
direction of the Spirit, are but humane, and so subject to deceit, but
miracles we are sure are from God, because they exceed all humane and created
power.

. 7. And seeing Protestants ground their salvation upon faith only, which as
they say, does only justify; and faith upon Scripture only, which according
to them, contains all things necessary to be believed; and the Scripture and
sense thereof upon the private Spirit only, by which they expound the
Scripture; it follows, that the private Spirit is the sole or principal
ground to them of the sense of Scripture; the Scriptures sense the like ground
of their faith; and this their faith the like ground of their salvation;
therefore no Protestant can have greater certainty of his faith or salvation,
then he has of this private Spirit, whereof seeing he has none, either from
Scripture, Church, Counsels, Fathers, common sense or experience, it must
needs follow that he has certainty of nothing: and that this relying upon the
private Spirit must needs plunge him into infinite and abominable errors.

CHAP. IV.
Of the vanity and impiety of those, who affirm, that each man's particular
reason is the last Judge and Interpreter of Scripture, and his guide in all
things, which he is bound to believe and know. And that the Catholic Church is
the sole Judge.

. 1. FInally, Chillingworth the last reformer and calciner of the Protestant
Religion, seeing the weakness of all the former pretenses, has boldly and
roundly reduced all to one only principle, and that is of natural reason:
affirming that our belief of the Scripture to be the Word of God; and also our
belief of the Scripture in every particular part thereof, depends upon each
man's reason and discourse, beyond which, or different from which, he is not
bound to believe a title. Yet he does not say that this way is infallible; but
because all ways else are fallible (as he supposes) and this the only way God
has given us to be guided by, we must be herewith contented, and God also must
be contented herewith in us, and give salvation to those that believe and do
according to their best understanding. And this opinion I observed had got a
large possession in the minds of Protestants, especially of the Clergy and
Gentry, whose ingenuous education gave them the highest claim to the exercise
of reason: who were therefore very glad to embrace such a principle of
Religion, as of which they accounted themselves the chiefest Masters.

. 2. This conceit seemed to me no less absurd, and much more insolent than
any of the other; for the other did seem at least to ascribe our knowledge of
the Scripture and sense thereof to God, either speaking in the Scripture, or by
his Spirit speaking to their souls, or concurring with their humane
endeavors; though in conclusion they drew it to the determination of their
own fancies. But this man more impiously hardy than all that went before him,
does directly and in plain terms attribute all the assurance we have of the
Word of God (the director to salvation) unto our selves, and that too, as we
are mere men. And this resolving of faith not into Authority, but into reason,
and that not as preparing or inducing us to believe (which Catholics allow)
but as the maine ground and strongest pillar of our faith, and the dependence
of faith upon reason, as the Conclusion on the premises, is a doctrine
incredibly pernicious, and the source of monstrous impieties. And for this
purpose he builds much upon this Page 36. n. 8.
Axiom, we cannot possibly by natural means be more certain of the
conclusion, than of the weaker of the premises, as a river will not rise higher
than the fountain from whence it flows: Hence in the same place he inferres,
that the certainty of Christian faith can be but moral and humane, and not
absolutely infallible.

Therefore as an instance to the same purpose, he says, Page 116.
We have as great reason to believe there was such a man as Henry the eight
King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. And in
larger explication of this his doctrine he says, If upon reasons seeming to my
understanding very good, I have made choice of a guide or rule for my
directions in matters of faith; when afterward I discover that this guide or
rule leads me to believe one or more points, which in the best judgment that I
can frame, I have stronger reason to reject, than I had to accept my former
rule, I may and ought to forsake that rule as false and erroneous; otherwise I
should be convinced not to follow reason, but some settled resolution to hold
fast whatsoever I had once apprehended. From which wild and vast principle does
follow, that if the Scripture (for example) propound things seeming more
contrary to any man's reason and opinion, than the inducements which first moved
him to believe Scripture, were in his opinion strong and convincing, he must
reject the Scripture as an erroneus rule, and adhere to his own reason and
discourse, as his last and safest guide. Especially considering that (according
to him) the motives for which we believe the Scripture are but probable, and by
consequence subject to falsehood; which in all reason must give place to reasons
seeming demonstrative and convincing; as there will not want many such, against
the highest mysteries of Christian faith, if once we profess our assent to
them, must be resolved into natural discourse; For, for what reason do the
Socinians, and such like deny the mysteries of the blessed Trinity, the Diety
of our blessed Savior, and diverse other points, but only because they seem
repugnant unto reason? And in these horrible opinions do these reasonably
unreasonable men fall by just consequence from their own principles.

For if (as they say) there be no Christian Church assisted with Infallibility,
fit to teach any man even such Articles as they count fundamental, and
necessary to salvation, but that in every particular, even one may, and must
follow the direction of his own reason, be he never so unlearned; what will
follow but an unhappy liberty, yea, necessity for men to reject the highest and
most divine mysteries of Christian faith, unless they can compose all
repugnancies after an intelligible manner (as he speaks) even to every ignorant
and simple person, which is impossible; or else say that it is reasonable for
men to believe contradictions at the same time, which (as he says) is very
unreasonable. For doubtless in true Philosophy, the objections which may be
made against the mystery of the Blessed Trinity and the Incarnation of God, are
much more difficult, than any that can be brought against Transubstantiation;
he then that will follow these new principles, must, if he deny the one, deny
the other also; which as yet the greatest part of Protestants will not do; in
time perhaps they may: or which is much better, observing the impiety of this
opinion, confess both.

. 3. This I conceive was the reason why S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.23. that the
Apostles did preach foolishness in the opinion of the Grecians, namely because
they sought wisdom; and what was that wisdom but humane, the dictates of
natural reason? which the mysteries of the Gospel exceeding, they counted
them foolishness: but to those that were called, it was the power of God, and
the wisdom of God. By which it appears that the wisdom of God, and the
wisdom of the Grecians which was humane wisdom, the light of natural reason
and discourse, were very different; wherein the Apostle gives (as it is meet
these wise men should do) the pre-eminence to God; for that which seems foolish
in God, is wiser than whatsoever is in men; and so the mysteries of faith,
which seem so contrary to humane reason, have more wisdom in them, than their
reasons have that oppose them; who do therefore but prove themselves cum
ratione insanire, to be mad with reason. This doctrine also of giving reason
the tribunal in matters of faith, and that, as it is in every particular man,
is an inlet for every man to be of a several Religion, by differing from
others in what points soever, according to the direction of his own reason; yea
possibly to be of no Christian Religion at all. For what makes the Jew to
continue such, but only because he sees no reason to believe the New Testament?
and if a Christian should chance to be endued with the same reason that a Jew
is, he must then become a Jew: or if of a Heathen, he must become a Heathen.
And for the ignorant and unlearned people, to whom this is a rule as well as to
others, what pitiful absurd Religions, or none at all, will be amongst them,
who have so small abilities of reason, as the world knows they have?

. 4. Though reason be in its own nature the same, and as it proceeds from God,
the author thereof, in whose mind the universal idaea thereof is placed; yet
as it exercises it self in several men (since the ruin thereof in Adams
fall) it is of several dimensions, according to their natural constitution,
moral education, and industry; whence it must needs follow that according to
the different latitude of men's understandings; they must embrace more or less
of divine truths, and so be every one of a larger or stricter belief, and of as
many several Religions as they are of different degrees of understanding. Yet
notwithstanding this admirable variety of Religion, charitable Chillingworth
does not doubt, but that God (considering humane frailty, and the power of
education, which instills in us many false apprehensions, and that hereby
excellent judgments are corrupted) will not condemn men for such errors, as
by reason of the former circumstances, were unavoidable, but conceives that
they are in a Religion, whatsoever it be, in which they may attain salvation.
So that by consequence any man may be saved, following but the direction of his
own reason, although that reason direct him to deny not only one point, but
even all the Christian faith; thus Jew, Turk, or Heathen, may by this platform
be saved.

. 5. And truly if a man do not believe upon this one (and virtually all)
reason, to wit, that the Church is to be believed, he according to my reason,
should be a Heathen rather than any thing else; because their Religion arises
only from the principles of reason implanted in man by Gods Commissary, Nature;
wherein all men, whose understandings are not by accident eclipsed, do agree;
as that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, that we must do as we would
be done unto, with the like: but all other Religions depend upon testimony, as
the Jews and Turks and their testimony far inferior to that of the
Christians; so that if I were not a Catholic, according to the direction of
my reason, I ought to be a Heathen. But if I will be a Christian, I ought to
be such a one, as will according to our Saviors command) deny himself; Math.
16.24. And a man's understanding is a chief part of himself, even the chiefest
according to most men's account, as we may perceive, in that they do more
abhor to be counted fools, which is a defect contrary to the understanding,
than to be counted vicious, which is a defect contrary to the will: yet this
must be denied; and is by all good Christians, who submit to that, which (as
the Apostle says) brings into captivity all understandings to the obedience of
Christ. 2 Cor. 10.5.

. 6. Besides, whatsoever Religion any of them that are guided by this principle
is of for the present, no man is sure nor he himself, that he shall hold it to
morrow; for if his reason (howsoever deluded with false apparitions) guide him
to the belief of any thing contrary to that which he now holds, he is
presently obliged to follow it, though it be to the denial of his whole
present faith; and to change his purpose in matters of Religion, as often as he
does his apparel; and so float in a giddy irresolution and inconstancy, led by
the ignis fatuus the foolish fire of his own reason, until at last he sink
into the depth of Atheism and damnation. Now how suitable this doctrine is to
the peace and tranquillity of Commonwealths, and Kingdoms, (wherein every man
is left to his own liberty in the choice and change of Religion) though it be
to Arrianisme, to the Heresy of the Macedonians, Manicheans, or to any the
most blasphemous, absurd or turbulent, and that with impunity (as he
challenges) they that sit at the helm of government can best determine.

7. Lastly, if any of these forementioned ways of Protestants, for the
knowledge of the Word of God, the guide to eternal life, were sufficient, what
need were there of preaching, and instructing of the people, at least of them
that can read? but let them take the Bible, and let nature work, which in the
cooperation of their own wise fancies, will hatch a goodly Religion no doubt,
borne like Minerva of the brain of Jupiter, and be as comely as a Chymera of
many several shapes tackt together; and to them instead of the ancient
heathens houshold-Gods, which every one must adore as his private God within
himself: O sacras gentes quibus haec nascuntur in ipsis Numina!

Who prove the truth of this saying in themselves, that,

He that is Schoolmasters to himself, is Scholar to a fool.

8. Observing thus the weakness and absurdity of all the Protestants alleged,
in proof that the Scripture, is the Word of God, and easy to be understood, at
least in all things necessary to salvation; and that it is to be interpreted by
it self, or by the Spirit to every particular man; so making way for as much
variety in Religion, as there may be diversity of opinion; I saw that although
some probable arguments may be drawn from the Scriptures to prove them to be of
God, yet there was no other infallible way to know what is the true Word of
God, first taught by the Apostles and their hearers, but by the testimony of
some sure, certain, and agreeing witnesses, and what is the meaning of this
Word of God, in case there should be any important difference about it, thereby
to give a period to all controversies, but by some society of men renowned for
their wisdom: And this I conceived in common prudence a far better way than
for a man to rely upon himself. But though this were a better way than those
of the Protestants, yet if this society of men were not in these matters free
from error, although it is more likely they should tell truth than the
Protestants, yet I could not have an immovable foundation for my says, but it
would be subject to wavering and inconstancy; and so there could be no prudent
setlednesse in Religion, nor any well built hope of the end thereof, eternal
life.

I saw then that it was needful that there should be a faithful witness a
wise judge, and so wise and faithful, that he should not be subject to
falsehood or error; otherwise it seemed to me, that God had not contrived a
competent way to his own glory or man's salvation; which to be wanting in, is
neither suitable to his wisdom nor his goodness. I therefore concluded that
there was some society of men who must instruct us in the premises; and that
this society in reason ought to be infallible; and that none could with any
color pretend to be this society, but that which we call the Catholic
Church, which all Christians profess to believe, according to the Creed of the
Apostles. But before I could proceed any further, I was cast upon the
examination of the sense of the words Church, and Catholic, finding therein
much difference amongst the pretenders to these titles.

CHAP. V.
Of the meaning of these words Church and Catholic; and that neither of them
belong to Protestants.

. 1. THere were seven Cities that strove for the body of Homer; And very many
societies of Christians there are, that lay claim to the body of Christ, which
is his Church. And as when Telesius a young Grecian (having won the prize in
the Pythian games) was to be led in triumph, there arose such a dispute between
the several Nations there present, every one being covetous to have him for
their own, that one drawing one way, another another, instead of receiving the
honor that was prepared for him, he was torn in pieces, even by those who
seemed most ambitious to honor him: So happens it to the Church; all those
that bear the name of Christians avow, that to her only appertains the
victory over hell, and that whosoever will have part in the prize and glory of
this triumph, must serve under her Ensign: but when they come to debate about
the body of this society, then every Sect (desirous to draw her to themselves)
they rend and tear her in pieces; and instead of embracing the Church, which
consists in unity, they embrace Schism and Division, which is the death and
ruin of the Church.

. 2. The Protestants do sometimes give a strict definition of a Church, sometimes
a large; sometimes they restrain her to the number of the predestinate only,
sometimes they enlarge her so far, that they embrace within her compass
(because they will be sure not to leave out themselves) all the variety of
Christians whatsoever. But by all the former they exclude the visibility of the
Church, which is an inseparable companion thereof, as I shall show hereafter;
for the predistinate are not known to any body, nor ordinary unto themselves.
But those that are so presumptuous (as very many are) to assume unto themselves
the assurance of their predestination, do easily lay hold on this tenure, which
they do the more boldly, by how much it is more difficult for another to
disprove; but as it is not easy for another to disprove, so it is as hard for
them to prove; and concludes nothing therefore in the behalf of the Churches
description in general, or of their share in particular. Beside, the word
Ecclesia, Church, is derived from a verb, which signifies to call, not to
predestinate: And the Church is a society, but the predestinate are a
multitude; and there is this difference between a society and a multitude,
that a society has a certain form and virtue whereby they communicate
together, which the other without this association have not.

Now predestinaton, as it is mere predestination, establishes nothing in the
predestinate, nor is it made in them, but in God only; and by consequence does
not make them actual parts of the society called the Church. It is not the
union of predestination, but of vocation that builds men into a Church. By the
later definition of a Church, they deny the very being of Heresy and Schism;
for if the whole Mass of Christians be the Church, notwithstanding the errors
in faith which some of them hold, or separation in communion which they make,
then there are none that can be called Heretics or Schismatiques; or else
(which is equally absurd) all Heretics and Schismatiques are of the Church;
and this destroys the holiness of the Church in doctrine, which is another
inseparable ornament thereof. Others, which are some of the subdivisions of
sects amongst the Protestants, as Brownists, Anabaptists, and the like say
(each sect for it self) that that is the Church, excluding all others from
that title, even their fellow Protestants; but this excludes the universality
of the Church, another inseparable companion thereof, at least after the
Apostles had propagated it. But the Church (having in it the property of heat,
which (as Philosophers say) is to gather together things that are of the same
nature, and separate things that are of different natures) includes all that
are of the same faith, and admits no other.

. 3. I therefore conceived (according to the judgment of the most learned) the
Church to be a society of those that God has called to salvation by the
profession of the true faith, the sincere adminstration of the Sacraments, and
the adherence to lawful Pastors: Which description of the Church is so fitted
and proportioned to her that it resembles the nest of the Halcion, which (as
Plutarch says) is of such a just and exact size for the measure of her body,
that it can serve for no other bird either greater or less.

Then for the meaning of the word Catholic, the Protestants say that that
Church is Catholic, which holds the true faith, which though it be not
spread universally over the world, yet it ought to be so, say they, and
therefore it is Catholic. By which they leave men in a labyrinth of finding
out the true faith in all the particulars thereof, which, (as they say) must
guide a man to the Church that is truly Catholic, which being the object of
the understanding, is much more difficult to find out, than that which is the
object of the sense, as is its being Catholic. And therefore it seemed to me
as proposterous as to set the cart before the horse, to prove a Church,
Catholic, because it is true; whereas it should be proved true, because it is
Catholic. Beside the name Catholic is not a name of belief only, but of
communion also; else antiquity would not have refused that title to those which
were not separated from the belief, but only from the communion of the Church;
S. Aug. Ep. 50.
nor would they have affirmed that out of the Catholic Church the faith and
Sacraments may he had, but not salvation. So that Catholic imports thus much,
both the vast extension of doctrine to persons and places different, and the
union of all those places and persons in Communion. Therefore allbeit the
Protestants should hold the same belief that the ancient Church did, yet if
they did not communicate with the same ancient Church, which by succession of
Pastors and People is derived down to this present time, I could not see how
they could with justice assume to themselves the title of Catholics.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Infallibility of the Church.

. 1. NOw that the Catholic Church (which society of Christians soever it be,
of which we shall deliberate hereafter) is the only faithful and true witness
of the matter of Gods Word, to tell us what it is and what is not it; the only
true interpreter of the meaning of Gods word, and the last and final judge of
all controversies that may arise in matters of Religion; and that she is not
only true, but that she cannot be otherwise seeing she is infallible, I was
persuaded to believe by many reasons. In the alleging of which, I will avoid
the accusation of Protestants, of the circular disputation of Catholics,
saying, they believe the Scripture, because the Church says it is so, and the
Church, because the Scripture bids them do so.

First, then without dependence on the Scripture, I conceived the Catholic
Church to be infallible in her Traditions, in that which she declares to us
concerning the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles, and that even in the very
nature of her testimony and tradition: For Tradition being a full report of
what was evident to sense, namely what doctrines the Apostles taught, what
Scripture they wrote, it is impossible it should be false. Worlds of men cannot
be universally deceived in matters evident to sense, as are the things men
hear and see, and not being so, it is impossible they should either
negligently suffer it, or maliciously agree to deceive others, being so many in
number, so distant in place, so different in affections, conditions and
interests. Wherefore it is impossible, that what is delivered by full
Catholic Tradition from the Apostles, should be by the deliverers first
devised, as Tertullian says; Tert. de praesc. cap. 28.
That which is found one and the same amongst many, is not an error, but a
Tradition. Yet supposing universal Tradition as it is merely humane, be in its
nature fallible, yet the Tradition of the Catholic Church, is by God himself
preserved from error; which is thus demonstrated. God being infinitely good,
and ardently desiring the salvation of mankind, cannot permit the means which
should convey the Apostles doctrine to posterity, by the belief whereof men
must be saved, to be poisoned with damnable error; to the destruction of their
salvation: now the only means to convey this doctrine, is the Tradition of
the Catholic Church; Tert. de Praes. cap. 21.
as Tertullian says, what the Apostles taught, I will prescribe ought no other
ways to be proved than by those Churches which the Apostles founded. All other
means, as I have showed you before, are insufficient, and if this Tradition of
the Church should be insufficient also, by reason of its liablenesse unto
error; then were there no certainty at all of the truth of Christian Religion,
no not so much as that there was such a man as Jesus Christ; but all men would
be left to grope in the wandering uncertainty of their own imaginations, which
for God to suffer, cannot fall under any prudent man's belief.

. 2. Secondly, that which binds men to believe a thing to be Gods Word, God
cannot suffer to delude men into error, whereby for their devotion unto his
truth, they may fall into damnation; now Catholic Tradition from the Apostles
is that which binds men to believe the same to be the Word of God, and that
because it is thereby sufficiently proposed, the World affording no higher nor
surer proposal; so that either this must be infallible, or else God has left
us to the guidance of our own weak understandings (the weakness of which
conceit I showed even now) and all Christians to that confusion, which all
different opinions (yet reputed the Word of God by them that hold them) may
produce.

. 3. Thirdly, God being the Prime Verity, he cannot so much as connive at
falsehood, whereby he becomes accessory of deceiving them, who simply, readily,
and religiously believe what they have just reason to think to be his Word: but
there is most just and sufficient reason to believe that the doctrine delivered
by full and perpetual Tradition, from hand to hand, even from the Apostles, is
undoubtedly their doctrine, and the Word of God; therefore he cannot suffer
Catholic Tradition to be falsified. Nor can (as I conceive) any prudent man
imagine that God having sent his Son into the world, to teach men the way to
heaven, every moment of whose life was made notable, by doing or suffering
something to that end, should suffer the efficacy and power thereof to be
extinguished, by permitting damnable errors in the whole Church, and that soon
after his departure, (as some Protestants say) and not to recover light for
twelve or fourteen hundred years together; especially considering there was no
possible means for any man to know the contrary; there was no society of men
that taught otherwise, and if at any time there started up any, they were
condemned of error by all their fellow- Christians, and in process of time
melted from the face of the earth: The Scripture (if that were the means, as
Protestants pretend) not being printed, the invention of Printing not being in
the world till about two hundred years ago; and the Bibles that were written
being but few, by reason of the great labor of writing them; and those that
were, not purchaseable but by few, because of their price, nor legible but by
fewer, because they were not printed, but written; and lastly, not to be known
to be the Word of God (as I have showed before) but by the testimony of those
men, who (they say) were corrupted; who having corrupted the doctrine, might
with much more ease have extinguished, or corrupted the Text, and made them
speak what they pleased, it being known to far fewer than the doctrine was; it
being difficult to obtain, uncertain whether it were right, and very obscure
in its meaning; so that if they had been guilty of changing the Apostles
doctrine, they could easily have razed out all those places which Protestants
urge against them, and so have prevented the strange and notable discovery that
the Protestants think they have made of their errors. And if they say that God
by his providence preserved the Scripture both from extinction and corruption;
may not we much more reasonably say, (having warrant for it out of the
Scripture also, whereas they have no warrant for the preservation of the Text)
that God by the same providence did, and will always preserve his Church from
corruption, which is a thing much more easily known than the Scripture, and
consisting of a living multitude can express it self more plainly: This
infallibility in the mouth and Tradition of the Church, the Prophet assures,
Esa. 59.21. My Spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have put into
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from hence forth for ever. And therefore
S. Augustine says, Aug. Ep. 118.
that to dispute against the whole Church is insolent madness.

. 4. To know divine and supernatural truth by the light and luster of the
doctrine, belongs to the Church triumphant; Inward assurance without an
external infallible ground, is proper to Prophets and Apostles, the first
publishers of Religion: and seeing that God does not now instruct either of
these ways (as I have showed) but by an external infallible ground, and this
being the Tradition of the Church, it follows, that he must preserve it from
error, and likewise render the Church it self always conspicuous that it may
be discerned by sensible marks, of which we shall speak anon. And he is also
bound by his providence, to assist men in the finding out of this Church, when
they apply their best diligence thereunto, that so they be not deceived.

And whereas some of the more learned Protestants say, that though they have no
infallible ground, besides the teaching of the Spirit, yet they are not taught
immediately by prophetical manner, because they are also taught by an external
probable, though not infallible motive; to wit, the Churches tradition; I
conceive that except they assign an external infallible means besides Gods
inward teaching, they cannot avoid the challenging of immediate revelation. For
whosoever knows things assuredly by the inward teaching of the Spirit, without
an external infallible motive, unto which he does adhere is assured
prophetically, though he have some external probable motives to direct his
belief. S. Peter had some come conjecturall signs of Simon Magus his
preversenesse and incorrigible malice, yet seeing he knew it assuredly, we
believe he knew it by the light of prophecy, because beside inward assurance he
had no external infallible ground. If one see a man give alms publicly,
though he see probable signs and tokens that he does it out of vain glory,
yet cannot he be sure thereof, but by the light of immediate revelation,
because the other tokens are not grounds sufficient to make him certain. For if
a man be sure, and have no certain ground of this assurance out of his own
heart, it is clear, that he is assured immediately, and only by Gods inward
inspiration. Wherefore Protestants, if they will disclaim immediate revelation
in deed, and not in words only, they must either grant Tradition to be
infallible, or else assign some external infallible ground besides Tradition,
whereby they are taught what Scriptures the Apostles delivered.

Lastly, I was persuaded of the Churches infallibility in her Traditions and
Doctrines, because she is endowed with the power of miracles; which wheresoere
they are (which I shall hereafter examine) do both prove, that that society of
Christians is the true Church, and that that Church is infallible in all that
she proposes as the Word of God. And the reason is, because God (who is truth
it self) cannot set his hand and seal, that is miracles, and works proper to
himself, to warrant and authorize a falsehood invented by men. Against which
Field lib. 3. cap 15. Whites Reply p 216.
Protestants object and say, that miracles are only probable, and not
sufficient testimonies of divine doctrine; alleging Bellarmine who says, we
cannot know evidently that miracles are true, for if we did, we should know
evidently that our faith is true, and so it should not be faith. To which may
be answered, that such evidence as does exclude the necessity of pious
affection, and reverence to Gods Word, evidence that (considering the
imperfection of humane understanding) may enforce men to believe, cannot stand
with true faith. If we know by Mathematical or Metaphysicall evidence, that
the miracles done in the Church were true, this evidence would compel men to
believe, and to overcome the natural obscurity and seeming impossibility of
the Catholic Doctrine; therefore as Bellarmine says, we cannot be
Mathematically and altogether infallibly sure by the light of nature, that
miracles are true. Notwithstanding it cannot be denied in reason, what our
Savior affirms, that miracles are a sufficient testimony binding men to
believe, the very works that I do, do bear witness of me, that the Father has
sent me, Joh. 5.36. and consequently that we may know them to be true by
Physical evidence, as we are sure of things we see with our eyes, and handle
with our hands; as S. John says, 1 Epist. 1.1. what we have seen with our
eyes, what we have beheld, and our hands have handled of the word of life. Or
we may be as sure of Miracles, as we are of such things as being once evident
to the world, are by the worlds full report declared unto us; which is a moral
infallibility. So that if we have not a Metaphysicall or Mathematical
infallibility of the truth of Miracles, yet we have a Physical and moral
infallibility, as much as we have of any thing we either hear or see.

Nor does this Physical evidence take away the merit of faith, because this
evidence not being altogether and in the highest degree infallible in it self
(for our senses may sometimes be deceived) it is not sufficient to conquer the
natural obscurity, darkness, and seeming falsehood of things to be believed,
upon the testimony of those miracles. For the mystery of the Trinity, of the
Incarnation, Real presence, and the like, seem as far above the reach of
reason as any Miracle can seem evident to sense; hence when faith is proposed
by Miracles, there arises a conflict betwixt the seeming evidence of the
Miracles, and the seeming falsehood and darkness of Catholic Doctrine;
against which obscurity a man cannot get the victory by the sole evidence of
miracles, except he be inwardly assisted by the light of Gods Spirit, moving
him by pious affection to cleave to the Doctrine, which is by so clear
testimony proved to be his Word. Even as a man shut up in a chamber, with two
lights, whereof the one makes the wall seem white, the other blew, cannot be
firmly assured what color it is until daylight enter, and obscuring both
those lights, discover the truth: so a man looking upon Christian Doctrines, by
the light of miracles done to prove them, will be moved to judge them to be
truth; but looking upon them through the evidence of their seeming
impossibilities unto reason, they will seem false: nor will he be able firmly
to resolve for the side of faith, until the light of divine grace enter into
his heart, making him prefer, through pious reverence to God, the so-proposed
authority of his Word, before the seeming impossibility to man's reason.

CHAP. VII.
That Catholic Tradition is the only firm foundation and motive to induce us
to believe, that the Apostles received their doctrine from Jesus Christ, and
Jesus Christ from God the Father; And what are the means, by which this
doctrine is derived down to us.

. 1. AS Catholic Tradition is infallible in it self, so is it most necessary
for us, there being no other certain testimony to any prudent man, no firm
ground or motive to believe, that the Primitive Church received her doctrine
from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from God; nor no way to
bring it down from those times to these, but only the Tradition of the Church.
For we may observe three properties of the doctrine of faith; to be true, to be
revealed of God, to be preached and delivered by the Apostles. The highest
ground by which a man is persuaded that his faith is true, is the authority of
God speaking and revealing it; the highest proof by which a man is assured that
his faith is revealed, is the authority of Christ and his Apostles, who
delivered the same, as descending from God; but the highest ground that moves
a man to believe that his faith was preached by the Apostles, is the perpetual
Tradition of the Church succeeding the Apostles unto this day, assuring him so
much; according to the saying of De praescr. c. 21. and 37.
Tertullian, who makes this ladder of belief in this sort; what I believe, I
received from the present Church, the present from the Primitive, the Primitive
Church from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from God, and God
the prime verity, from no other fountain different from his own infallible
knowledge: So that he that cleaves not to the present Church, firmly
believing the Tradition thereof, as being come down by succession, is not so
much as on the lowest step of the ladder that leads unto God, the revealer of
saving truth; successive Tradition unwritten being the last and final ground
whereon we believe that the points of our belief came from the Apostles, which
may be proved by these arguments.

. 2. First, if the maine points of faith be to be believed to come from the
Apostles because they are written in Scriptures, and the Scriptures are
believed to be the Word of God, upon the report of universal Tradition, then
our belief that the things which we believe come from the Apostles, and from
God, rests upon the Tradition of the Church; but it is most certain that the
Scriptures cannot be proved to have been delivered unto the Church by the
Apostles, but by the perpetual Tradition unwritten conserved in the Church
succeeding the Apostles; all the other ways by which the Protestants endeavor
to prove the Scripture to be the word of God being vain and insufficient, as I
have proved before.

Secondly, common and unlearned people, which comprehend the greatest part of
Christians, may have true faith, yet they cannot have it grounded on the
Scripture, for they can neither understand, nor read it; or if read it, yet but
in a vulgar language, of the truth of whose translation they are not assured,
therefore must rely upon the testimony of the present Church, that that which
they believe is the Word of God.

Thirdly, if all the maine and substantial points of Christian faith must be
believed, before we can securely read and truly understand the holy Scripture,
than they are believed not upon Scripture, but upon Tradition going before
Scripture; and that it is so is manifest, because true faith is not built, but
upon Scripture truly understood according to the right sense thereof, nor can
we understand the Scripture aright, unless we first know the main Articles of
Faith, which all are bound expressly to believe, by which as by a rule, we must
regulate our selves in the interpretation of the Scripture; otherwise without
being settled in the rule of faith by Tradition, men are apt to fall into
grievous errors, even against the main articles of the faith, as of the Blessed
Trinity, and Incarnation of the Son of God, as experience does sufficiently
testify; so that reading and interpreting Scripture, does not make men
Christians, but supposes them to be made so by Tradition; at least for the
main points, such as every one is bound expressly to know.

Fourthly they to whom the Apostles wrote and delivered the Scripture, were
already converted to Christianity; and instructed in all necessary points of
faith, and in the common practices of Christianity; and so, by what they knew
by Tradition, could easily interpret what was written, but otherwise might
easily have failed in the mainest points, as some forsaking Tradition did; for
example the Arrians, who were confuted by the Catholics, not by bare
Scripture, for of that the Arrians had plenty, but as it was interpreted by
Tradition; Therefore none can be supposed to understand the Scripture aright,
and so to know the true word and will of God, but by being such as they were,
to whom the Apostles delivered the Scripture; that is, first instructed by
Tradition: Otherwise they may easily err in some chief articles of Faith, any
of which to err in, is damnable. And I would feign know, whether any
understanding Protestant does believe, that if a Bible were given to a heathen,
or to one borne amongst themselves (supposing he had not been trained up by
Catechism and other traditionall instruction) whether I say he could out of
that extract, as points clearly expressed therein, the thirty nine Articles of
the Church of England, or the book called the Harmony of Confessions, which is
the profession of the faith of most of the Protestants of the world?

Lastly, we cannot with modesty say, that we are more able to understand
Scripture, than were our forefathers, the ancient Doctors of the Church; but
they thought themselves unable to interpret Scripture, by conference of places,
or such like humane means, without the light of Christian Doctrine beforehand
known, and firmly believed upon the Tradition of the Church, witness Ruf.
Eccl. hist. l. 2. c 9.
S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and Orig. tract. in Mat. 29. c. 23.
Origin, who thus writes, In our understanding of Scriptures, we must not
depart from the first Ecclesiastical Tradition, nor believe otherwise but as
the Church of God has by succession delivered to us; therefore no man is able
to interpret Scripture, without the light and assistance of Christian faith,
aforehand received by the voice of the Church, delivering what she received
from her ancestors. Dangerously and high boldness then it is, for men of this
age, so to presume on their own interpretations of Scripture, gotten by humane
means, as to make them overbalance a thousand Luther de capt. Babil. Tom. 2.
Wittenberg. p. 344.
Cyprians, Augustines, Churches and Traditions.

. 3. From all which I observed, that the Protestants do not well understand
that place of Scripture, so frequently urged by them against Tradition, where
S. Paul says to Timothy, Thou have known the holy Scriptures from thy
childhood, which are able to instruct thee, or make thee wise unto salvation;
Inferring from hence, that the Scriptures are able to make all men wise unto
salvation; whereas this was spoken with relation to Timothy only, and to such
as agree with him in the cause, for which this saying is true in him, that is,
such as were aforehand instructed by Tradition, and did firmly believe all
substantial Doctrines of faith, and know the necessary practices of Christian
Discipline, even as what God said to Abraham, I am thy protector, and thy
exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. is not appliable to all men absolutely, but
only to all men that were of the same qualification, that is, faithful and
devout, as he was. Moreover the Apostle in that place speaks only of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, for the New was not written in the infancy of
Timothy, nor some of it at this very time that these words were written; and
these Scriptures he affirms also to instruct Timothy, not by themselves alone,
but by faith, which is in Christ Jesus, that is, joined with the doctrine of
the Christian faith, which Timothy had heard, and believed on the voice of
Tradition.

And the following words of the Apostle are with equal confidence insisted on,
All Scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach, etc. is very unprofitable
for their purpose, seeing that profitable can by no means be stretched to
signify sufficient, as they would have it, and that for every man, but
particularly for him that is HOMO DEI, a man of God, that is, one already
instructed by Tradition, in all the main points of Christian faith and godly
life, such an one as Timothy was. Thus indeed the Scriptures may be granted
sufficient, joined with Tradition, but not alone. And whereas there are some
places of the Fathers alleged by Protestants to prove the Scriptures to be
clear in all substantial points, they are to be understood as the Apostles
words are, with reference to such men who have been before instructed by
Tradition; even as they that hear Aristotle explicate himself by word of mouth,
may easily understand his books of nature, which are very hard to be understood
of them that never heard his explication, either from his own mouth, or by
Tradition from his Scholars.

4. Whereas some Protestants say, that the difficult places of Scripture are
unfolded VVootton trial of the Romish, etc. p. 88. l. ^9.
by Scripture, and the rules of Logic, Field p. 281. lin. 20.
and by other things beside Scripture evident in the light of nature, it seems
to me very incongruous: First, because the rule of faith must be for the
capacity of the unlearned as well as the learned; and unlearned men cannot be
sure of the infolded sense of the Scripture by Logical deductions. Secondly,
the Scripture it self sends us to supply her wants, not to the rules of Logic,
but unto Tradition, saying, Hold the Traditions which ye have received by word
or our Epistle, 2 These. 2.15. It sends us to the Church, the pillar and
ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. which whosoever does not hear, is as a Heathen
and a Publican, Matthew. 18.17. It did the same to the Jews, who had the
Scriptures also, saying, Remember the old days, think upon every generation:
ask thy father and he will declare unto thee, the elders and they will tell
thee, Deuteronomy. 32.7. The same do the Fathers, as I shall show hereafter.

5. And whereas it is further objected, that the Fathers disputed negatively
from the Scripture, against Heretics, thus; Doctrine is not clearly delivered
in Scripture, therefore it is not to be received as a matter of Faith; we must
know that the Fathers proceeded upon this supposition that was known to all,
and granted by the Heretics themselves, namely that the Doctrines they
disputed against, were not the Traditions of the Church: and in this case they
required the testimony of Scripture. Yea more, the Fathers did not only
require places of Scripture from the Heretics, by way of deduction and
Logical inference (for to such all ancient Heretics and Protestants now
pretend, wherewith they delude ignorant people) but they required of them to
show their Doctrine in Scripture, says Irenaeus, expressly and in terms; and
to prove it, not by texts Aug. de unitat. Eccles. cap. 5.
which require sharpness of wit in the Auditors to judge, who does more
probably interpret them, not by places which require an interpreter, one to
make Logical inferences upon the text, but by places plain, manifest, clear,
which leave no place to contrary exposition, and that no Sophistry can wrest
them to other sense; to the end that controversies which concern the salvation
of souls, be defined by Gods formal Word, and not by deductions from it by
rules of Logic. And even by this way of the Fathers arguing negatively from
the Scripture, the Protestant Religion is quite overthrown; for seeing nothing
is to be reputed a matter of faith, which is not formally and expressly to be
proved by the Word of God, either written, or unwritten, and delivered by full
Ecclesiastical Tradition; and seeing the Protestants do not, nor can pretend
to this Tradition, nor yet can prove their tenets by Scripture in express and
evident terms, but such as themselves confess to receive probable solutions,
it must hence necessarily follow that their doctrines are false, without
foundation, and to be rejected by every Christian.

. 6. Lastly whereas Protestants object that the Pharisees are reproved by
Christ for the observation of Traditions, it is altogether impertinent; for the
Scripture does not say that their Traditions were derived by succession from
Moses the first deliverer of their law, nor did the Pharisees pretend to it,
but they were Traditions of their own, whereof some were frivolous and
superstitious, some impious, some pious,: The frivolous and superstitious were
their washing of hands, pots, dishes, and the like, supposing that otherwise
they might have some spiritual impurity in them; which our Savior confutes
saying, There is nothing without a man entering into him which can defile him.
Mark 7.15. The impious were such, as whereby they violated the commandments of
God, under the pretense of observing their Traditions, as when they allowed a
man under pretense of giving something to the Church to neglect his duty to his
parents; Mar. 7.11. Neither of these kinds is the Catholic Church guilty of.
Of their pious, we have an example in their paying Tithes of mint, a very small
herb, which was a Tradition of their own not commanded in their law, yet this
our Savior approves and binds them to it, saying, this you ought to have done,
Luc. 11.42. And it is worth the observation, that the thing most of all
objected against our Savior, was the written word and Tradition of God by
Moses about keeping the Sabbath day (as appears in all the Evangelists) from
which precept, not by Tradition unwritten, but by logical inferences of their
own, they concluded that our Savior brake the Sabbath by healing or doing
some small labor thereon. So that the Pharisaicall Traditions were not
pretended to be doctrines unwritten, derived from the first deliverer of their
religion, but doctrines concluded from the Scripture, by the rules of Logic
and reason (as they conceived) according to the present manner of the
Protestants.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Church is infallible in whatsoever she proposes, as the Word of God
written or unwritten, whether of great or small consequence. That to doubt of
any one point, is to destroy the foundation of faith. And that Protestants
distinction between points fundamental and non-fundamentall, is ridiculous and
deceiptfull.

. 1. HAving thus found out that the Church was she, from whom I was to receive
assurance what is the word of God; and that otherwise it was impossible for me
to know it, and that she could not mistake nor err in her directions, I
conceived then, that I was bound to believe all that she propounded to me as
the word of God, whether it were written or not written (writing being no
testimony of the truth of any thing, seeing it may be false as well as
speaking) and that to doubt of any thing, was to call all into question, and to
dissolve the whole nature of divine faith. For to believe has a threefold
signification in speech; first it is taken for knowledge; as where our Savior
says, Thomas because thou have seen me thou believe, John 20.29. to wit,
that I am risen: now he that sees one, knows so much. Secondly, for opinion;
which is an assent begot by probable reason, so men delivering their opinions,
use to say, I believe thus, or thus. Thirdly and most properly, for an assent
unto such things as do not appear, but are assented unto by a firm reliance on
the truth of him that reports them, as S. Paul says, Faith is the argument of
things not seen, Heb, 11.1.

And this reliance on an Author, such as cannot deceive or be deceived (at
least in those things which he propounds unto us to be believed) must beget in
us an equal belief of things that have humane possibility or probability on
their side, and of things that are clean against it; the matter propounded
makes no matter, nor yet the manner of propounding; it is the Author, and our
apprehension of him that controles all opposition. By this do we believe the
inexplicable mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation of God, the Mother-hood
and yet Virginity of the B. Virgin Mother, with many others, with as much ease,
as we believe that Noah had three sons, or that S. Peter had neither silver nor
gold: and by this do we believe the latter with as much strength and firmness
as the former. For he that believes a thing because such an one says it, who
he believes cannot lie, must believe all that he says, and that with the same
firmness, because the reason of his belief still remains, namely, the
inerrability of the speaker. But if he apply his belief according to the
probability of the thing spoken, and no further, then he does not believe,
because of the truth of the speaker, but of the thing spoken, which he must
gather from probabilities of reason, wherein he does not believe the thing for
the truth sake of the speakers testimony, but for the likelihood thereof, which
he finds by the measure of his own understanding; which is not to believe the
other, but himself; and the other no more than he would do the arrantest liar
in the world, yea the Devil himself, that is, so far as he by his reason
conceives that he speaks the truth. Which reason of his, if it be infallible,
he does not believe the thing properly, but he knows it; if it be but
probable, he believes it not properly, but has an opinion of it; and no more
assurance than of other humane reports, whose authors have no security from
error; which as they may be true, so they may also be false. And thus to
believe, is not to believe by divine and infallible faith, but by humane and
fallible; and so it cancells divine supernatural faith, the first in order of
the three theological virtues, without which no man can be saved.

. 3. So that all the place that reason has in the government of our faith is
this, to lead us to believe that testimony which cannot deceive us, and for the
particular objects of belief, to take them upon trust of that testimony,
without checking at them whatsoever they be; and though they be bones to
Philosophy, yet make them milk to faith; and not as Heretics do, make us
demand a reason of every particular point of faith, which if it square not to
their apprehensions, they cashiere: This is not faith, but fancy. For, to rely
upon a humane basis such as reason is, will not support such a mighty statue as
divine faith: And, to use Chillingworths own similitude, Water will not rise
higher then the fountain from whence it springs: if therefore particular reason
be the governor of our faith, which reason is a humane and fallible thing, it
cannot rise to, nor support a divine faith: But divine faith is that which God
requires of us in the business of Religion, and that which is not such, is
none. And it is convenient, that as God ordained man to a supernatural end,
namely the blissful vision of himself, which is a thing far above all
excellencies of nature; so he should bring him to this bliss, by believing
things above the reach of reason, which in man is his nature; and to beget this
faith by Miracles, his own acts, which are above the power of nature; and by
the testimony of those that do those supernatural acts; to whom, if he have
given his deeds, it cannot be doubted but he has given his word, of any part
whereof to make any doubt, is to call the credit of all into question; the
house of Faith being like some artificial buildings, whereof if you pull out
one pin, you loosen the whole frame: So if a man disbelieve any one point
delivered him by the Catholic Church, he unjoynts the whole frame of faith,
and virtually denies it all; and that because they have all the same height of
proof, to wit, the testimony of the Church; which if she can lie in one thing,
she may (for ought we know) in another, and so in all, and thus bring a man to
doubt of all, and then to deny all: And that those men that do deny some one
point of Catholic Tradition (though unwritten) do not deny all, is not for
that they have any faith, but out of secular ends, and deceiptfull reason.

4. Indeed some Protestants grant that if Tradition be universal, and
perfectly Catholic, it does oblige to the belief thereof, but not otherwise;
by which universal Tradition they mean, such as never any one gainsaid. But
if such only are to be called Catholic Traditions, there is scarce any thing
left for Christians to believe, (and indeed to that pass have many brought
it;) for some have denied the distinction of Persons in the Trinity, others the
Divinity of our Savior, others his humanity, others the Deity of the Holy
Ghost, and a hundred more: now if no Tradition be to be called Catholic, but
such as was never denied by any one, or some number of Christians, then a man
may deny the forementioned, and many other points and Articles of faith,
because their Tradition has not been so universal, but that some have denied
it; yea some books of the Scripture it self were not universally received, till
about four hundred years after Christ.

By Catholic or universal Tradition then must be understood, that which the
Catholic Church has always taught, not which all Christians, for then we
must look for Tradition in the mouths of Heretics, whose property it is to
deny some Tradition or other, under pretense that it is opposite to Scripture.
And if any have taught contrary, the Catholic Church has condemned them for
Heretics, which is a sufficient proof that until such Heretical Spirits
opposed some one or more Traditions of the Church, they were universally
believed. As for example, the Doctrine of Christ's consubstantiality, or being
of the same substance with the Father, no reasonable man will deny, but that it
was generally believed in the Church, before the days of the Arch-heretique
Arrius, and that the Council of Nice condemning of him, was a sufficient proof
that the doctrine he opposed was the universal Tradition of the Church, by
force whereof he was overthrown, and not by Scripture only, there being no
place of Scripture so plain, but he would give some answer to it, and likewise
allege plenty of Scripture in the proof of his own Heresy, while he took upon
him to interpret it himself, (forfaking the traditionall sense thereof) and
would receive no answer to it. And if Arrius his denial of that point of
Faith, will make it universal for place, or the doctrine it self new, and so
universal for time; (as some in other instances do allege) because it was
then first declared by reason of that opposition, then it may be lawful under
the same pretense for men to deny all the Traditions of the Church, all the
decrees of General Counsels of the Church, and to revive all the Heresies
that were in the Church.

. 5. Moreover to attribute conditional infallibility to the Church, and not
absolute in all that she delivers ( Chillingworth page 118. Pet. Martyr loc.
Com. clas. 4. c 4. sect. 21. Confess. Helvet. c. 17.
as some Protestants do) making her infallible only while she follows the
Scripture and Universal Tradition, is to give her no more privilege than to a
child or fool, who are also infallible while they affirm nothing, but what is
agreeable to Scripture and universal Tradition. But if we know not Scripture
nor Tradition but by the Churches direction, how shall we know in her
exposition of Scripture, and deciding of controversies, that she does err,
unless we know it from her also? seeing her authority in the one is as good as
in the other, and by those reasons that we may deny the truth of the one, we
may deny the other. And if she say, she have expounded Scripture truly, and
decided controversies aright, by the rule of Scripture and Tradition, who shall
gainesay her? Can any man be so foolish as to think his word is of more credit
than the whole Churches? Or that his reason is better then hers? Or that if she
may err from her rule, he may not do so also? And if their infallibilities be
both of the same strength, who in his right mind would not believe millions
affirming the same thing, rather than one, or some few affirming the contrary?
If there were a rule so plain and clear that all men understood it, and none
could pervert it, then there were no need of a judge or directer; but if the
rule be obscure, or liable to misinterpretation, as all words are, let them be
expressed never so plainly, then it is meet that there should not only be a
Judge, but that this Judge should be infallible, seeing the business concerns
the salvation of mankind, and not be subject to the petty after-examinations of
proud and discontented people, as if one or more of them did know the meaning
of the rule better than the Judge, when that Judge is the universal Church.
And that which these men affirm in this matter amounts to this wise Maxim;
That the Church is infallible, while she is infallible: and so is the Devil.

. 6. Frivolous then and without foundation, is that late started distinction of
points fundamental and not fundamental, and the assertion built thereon; That
the Church may err in the one and not in the other; and so by consequence we
are not bound to believe her in all things. Indeed in regard of the material
object or thing to be believed, some points are fundamental, others not; that
is, some points are to be believed explicitly and distinctly, others not: and
more points are to be believed explicitly, by some than by others, as I have
showed before, speaking of points necessary to salvation. But in regard of the
formal object and motive for which we believe, namely, the truth of God
revealing it by his Church, there is no distinction of points of faith, we
being equally bound to believe all that is sufficiently proposed unto us, as
revealed by God, whether the matter be great or small: and whether the points
be fundamental in their matter or no, yet they are proposed unto us by the
same authority; therefore we are bound equally, with the same firmness of
faith, to believe every one as any one. For example, the Creed of the Apostles
contains diverse fundamental points, as the Diety, Trinity of Persons,
Incarnation, Passion and Resurrection of our Savior; it contains also some
points for their matter and nature in themselves not fundamental, as under
what judge he suffered, that he was buried, and the circumstance of time when
he rose again, to wit, the third day; Now whosoever knows these to be
contained in the Apostles Creed, is bound to believe them as firmly as the
other, and the denial of any one of them, is a fundamental and damnable
error, a giving of God the lie. For the nature of faith does not arise from
the greatness or smalnesse of the thing believed, for then there should be as
many different faiths, as there are points to be believed, but from the motive
for which a man believes, which is Gods revelation testified by the Church,
which being alike for all objects, it is manifest, that they that in things
equally revealed by God, do grant one thing and deny another, do forsake the
very formal motive of faith, Gods revelation, and so have no true divine faith
at all.

. 7. Moreover if the Churches infallibility be tied to a certain matter in
Religion, then it is meet we should know that first, that so we may accordingly
apply our belief, if it be fundamental, then without doubt to embrace it, if
not, to exercise our liberty, and believe it so far as we see cause; but then
we must know the matter wherein she is infallible, distinctly and particularly,
as also infallibly, or else we may mistake, and believe, when we need not, and
disbelieve when we ought not. Now from whence shall we have this knowledge? God
has no where revealed it; and it ought to have been revealed together with the
Commission given to the Church to teach, or else she might have deceived us
before the caution came; but the Church it self has told us no such matter;
we have no such Tradition; therefore we must have this most fundamental point
of all the rest, which is, to know what is fundamental and what not, either by
inspiration, or by the strength of reason, both which are ridiculous; or by
some authority coequall to the Churches, and yet not hers, which is most
absurd. And in this business, the Protestants seemed unto me, to deal as
obscurely and deceiptfully, as did once Richard the second King of England, who
in a return to peace betwixt him and his subjects, granted pardon to all,
except fifteen, but would not declare what their names were; but if at any time
he had a mind, out of some new displeasure, to cut off any man, he would say,
he was one of the fifteen, whom he excepted from the benefit of his pardon: In
like manner the Protestants say, we will believe the Church in all points, but
those that are not fundamental, not expressing what they are; and when they
have a wanton disposition to deny their belief to something that the Church
has declared, they shelter their denial under the protection of this
unlimited distinction, and say, it is a point not fundamental. And if on the
other side they find it for their advantage to close with other Churches, they
say, they are all one Church with them, because forsooth they agree, in they
know not what, that is, in their inexplicable fundamentalls.

8. But Chillingworth has undertaken to give us, though not a catalogue, yet a
description, (as he supposes) by which we may discern between fundamentalls,
and not fundamentalls, or circumstantialls, as he calls them. page 137. sect.
20.
The former being such as are revealed by God, and commanded to be preached to
all, and believed by all. The later such, as though God has revealed them, yet
the Pastors of the Church are not bound under pain of damnation, particularly
to teach them unto all, and the people may securely be ignorant of them. And
this is even the same obscurity in more words; for what is to be preached to
all, and believed by all, and what the Pastors may forbear to preach, and the
people may be ignorant of (especially seeing the same degree of ignorance is
not secure to all people alike, but receives infinite variety, according to
their means of knowledge) is as undeterminable, as what is fundamental and
what not. But suppose the Pastors do preach more than they are bound to preach
and reveal that truth, which if it had not been revealed, the people might
safely have been ignorant of, may they be ignorant or unbelieving now it is
revealed to them? If they be, then they deny that very authority upon which
they believed the most fundamental points, which is the ground of all belief,
and by consequence deny the whole faith: From whence we may see, that the
Pastors teaching is not to be stinted by the things the people ought
necessarily to believe; but the peoples necessity of believing ought to be
enlarged according to the measure of the Pastors preaching. The Church is not
confined to the teaching of fundamentalls only for the matter, but whatsoever
she teaches is fundamental for the form, and motive of belief. The
circumstantialls are (as he confesses) revealed by God to the Church; and if
the Church reveal them to the people, the people must either believe them, or
deny to believe God. And though common people, and others also, may safely be
ignorant, before they have been instructed, yet they may not be so after; nor
has God confined the Pastors instructing of the people to any certain matter,
to fundamentalls only; for Christ bids his Apostles teach all nations, to
observe all things, whatsoever he commanded them. Matthew. 28.20. And though
common people may safely be ignorant of many things, yet they must not be
unbelieving of any thing; but by an implicit faith at the least, believe all
that the Church believes, by adhering, and resigning themselves to her, being
prepared to believe explicitly what and when she shall declare it to them:
Which faith is originally and fundamentally built upon the Word of God, not as
written, but as delivered by the Tradition of the Church, successively from the
Apostles; upon the authority whereof, we believe that both Scriptures and all
other Articles of faith were delivered to them by the Apostles; to the
Apostles, by Christ; to Christ, by God, the fountain of all truth.

CHAP. IX.
That there is and ever shall be a visible Church upon earth; And that this
Church is one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic.

1. NOw considering all that has been said before, the sum whereof is this;
That we have no means to know certainly the doctrines of the Apostles; but
only the Tradition of the Church, and that that Tradition is, and ought to be
infallible; hence I conceived, that this consequence was necessary, that there
should be, and is always, a visible Church in the world, to whose Traditions
men might cleave; and that this Church is one, universal, Apostolical, Holy.

First there is always a true Church of Christ in the world; for if there be
no means for men to know that Scriptures, and all other Articles came from
Christ and his Apostles, and so consequently from God, but the Tradition of the
Church, then there must needs be in all ages a Church, receiving and delivering
these Traditions, else men in some age since Christ, should have been destitute
of the ordinary means of salvation, because they had no means to know
assuredly the doctrines of Christianity, without assured faith whereof, no man
can be saved. And although a false Church may deliver the true Word of God, as
it is contained in the Scripture and the Creed, yea even a Jew or Heathen may
do so, for this is but casual; yet none but a true Church can deliver the Word
of God, with assurance to the receiver that the text is incorrupt, thereby
binding him to the belief thereof; Now it is necessary that men have the true
Scripture, not only casually, but they must be sure the Text thereof be
incorrupt; therefore there must be a true unerring Church, whose authority is
so aut hentique, that it is a sufficient warrant for men to believe the
doctrine she delivers, to come from the Apostles.

Secondly, this Church must be always visible, and conspicuous; For the
Traditions of the Church, must ever be famous, and most notoriously known in
the world, that a Christian may truly say with S. Augustine, De utilit Cred. c.
14.
I believe nothing but the consent of Nations, and Countries, and most
celebrious fame. Now if the Church were at any time invisible, or very secret
and hidden, then could not her Traditions be famously known, nor could men that
were willing to submit themselves to her directions, know where to find her,
out of whose communion they cannot attain salvation.

Thirdly, this Church is Apostolical, that is, derived from the Apostolical
Sea, by the succession of Bishops and Pastors; for else how can we be assured
that we have the Apostles doctrine? It must be one generation that must
certify another; and if there should be any interruption, in that time, all
might be lost and changed. And how could the Tradition of Christian Doctrine be
notoriously Apostolical, if the Church, delivering the same, has not a
manifest and conspicuous pedigree and derivation from the Apostles? Which is a
convincing argument used by S. Augustine; Epist. 48. circa med.
How do we trust out of the divine writings, that we have manifestly received
Christ, if we have not also from thence manifestly received his Church? The
Church that has a lineall succession of Bishops from the Apostles, famous and
illustrious, whereof not one has been opposite in Religion to his immediate
predecessor, proves evidently that this Church has the Doctrine of the
Apostles. For as in the rank of three hundred stones ranged in order, if no two
stones be found in that line of different color, then if the first be white,
the second is white, and so the rest unto the last; even so if there be a
succession of three hundred Bishops all of the same Religion, if the first have
the Religion of the Apostles and S. Peter, the second has, and so the rest
even unto the last.

Fourthly, this Church is one, that is, all the Pastors and Preachers deliver,
and consequently all her Disciples and children believe one and the same Faith.
For if the Preachers and Pastors of the Church disagree about matters which
they preach as necessary points of Faith, they lose all their credit and
authority; for who will believe witnesses on their own words, if they disagree
in their testimony?

Fifthly, I infer, that this Church is universal, spread over all Nations,
that she may be said to be every where, morally speaking (that is, according to
common humane account, by which a thing diffused over a great part of the
world, and famously known, is said to be every where; In this manner, the
Apostle said, that the faith of the Romans, was renowned in the whole world.)
Romans 1.12. that so the whole world may take notice of her, as of a worthy and
credible witness of Christian Tradition, howsoever her outward glory and
splendor, peace and tranquillity, in some places and at some times be more or
less eclipsed, and she be not always in all places at once. And the reason
of this perpetual visible universality is, because the Tradition of the Church
is the sole ordinary means of faith toward the Word of God. This Tradition
therefore must be so delivered, as that it may be known to all men, seeing God
will have all men (without exception of any nation) to be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2.4. which they cannot do, unless the
Church be so diffused in the world, that all known nations may take notice of
her. And Gods will that all men should be saved, though it be but an antecedent
will, as Schoolmen call it, yet it infers two things, which some
Protestants deny; first the salvation of all men; secondly the means of their
salvation. In respect of the means, the will of God is absolute, that all men
in some sort or other have sufficient means of salvation. In respect of the
end, to wit, the salvation of all men, the will of God is not absolute, but as
Schoolmen say, virtually conditional; that is, God has a will that all men
be saved, as much as lies in him, if the course of his providence be not
intercepted, and men will cooperate with his grace. And the reason why some
Nations hear not the Gospel and Word of God, is not the defect of his Church,
but the want of working in the natural causes, to discover such Countries;
which defect God will not ever miraculously supply. But if the Church were
invisible to the world, and hoarded up her Religion to her self, either not
daring, or not willing to profess and preach the same unto others; Nations may
be known, and yet the Word of God not known to them. If therefore this Church
should be hidden for a long time, men's souls should perish, not through defect
in the natural causes, but only through the hiddennesse, obscurity, and
wretchedness of the supernatural means, to wit, of the Church; not endewed
with so much zeal and courage, as to profess her Religion, and to propagate it
in the world, which cannot be; Therefore it is impossible that the true Church
should not be ever universal, and famously known.

Sixthly, this Church is holy, both in life and Doctrine. Holy for life,
shining in all admirable sanctity, the rays whereof do overcome the hearts of
the beholders; such as the Holy Apostles gave example of, as of poverty,
chastity, obedience, charity in undergoing all forms of labor, and danger for
the safety of souls; patience invincible in the rough handling of themselves
by wonderful fastings, and all kind of austerities; fortitude heroical in
suffering martyrdom, not only with patience, but with joy, though given them
in all the most hideous shapes, that man's imagination steeled with malice,
could invent. And although this kind of sanctity does not shine in all the
members of the Church, but in the more eminent professors, and principally in
the Pastors, yet if this kind of sanctity together with Miracles were wanting,
she could not be so sufficient a witness to Infidells, who ordinarily are not
won to the affection, and admiration of Christianity, but by beholding such
wonders of power, and sanctity in the Professors thereof. Holy she is also for
doctrine, in regard her traditions are divine and holy, without commixture of
error; for if the Church could deliver any one, or few errors, intermingled
with many truths, her Traditions even of the truth were questionable, and could
not be believed upon her word: Even as if we admit in Scripture, any error in
smaller matters, we cannot be sure of its infallibility in matters of greatest
moment; as he that shall say, Gods written word is false, or uncertain, when
it tells him, that S. Paul left his cloak at Troas, may also say with as much
reason, that it is false or uncertain, when it tells him that Christ was borne
of the Virgin Mary: Even so he that grants that some part of Traditions or the
Word of God unwritten, may be false, inferrs by consequence, that every part
thereof may be so; and that because we have no antecedent ground or touchstone
to try Traditions by, but they must be believed for their own sakes, being
therein more fundamental than the Scripures, which are not known to be
Apostolical, but by Tradition; whereas perpetual Tradition is known to come
from the Apostles by its own light; for what can be more evident, then that
that is from the Apostles, which is delivered as Apostolical by perpetual
succession of Priests and people, affirming and believing the same.

. 2. But against this truth, that if the Church may err in one thing, neither
we, nor she can be sure that she speaks truth in any thing, Chillingworth
makes these (in my judgment) impertinent interrogations: A Judge may possibly
err in Judgment, can he therefore never have assurance that he has judged
right? A travayler may possibly mistake his way, must I therefore be doubtful
whether I am in the right way from my hall to my chamber? page 117. sect. 106.
In which he weakly falls into comparison betwixt matters which are the object
of the sense, or of the understanding, and of faith; which in this case have no
proportion betwixt them. For the doctrines of faith, (as they are of faith,
being altogether, and all equally, without the reach of our knowledge) we have
no way to attain to, but by the help of others, whom we must absolutely
believe; and if we know that they may deliver that which is false to us, we
can never be sure that any thing they deliver to us, is not false, unless we
had some superior rule to try and examine their Traditions by, which certainly
we have not. Nor can the Church it self, if she may err in the delivery of
one thing, be sure that she does not err in every thing, because she has no
infallible rule to examine her doctrines by, out of her self; who if she be
assisted by the Holy Ghost cannot err in any thing, if not, for ought she
knows, she does in all things. Now that the Church is assisted by God, and
that man's reason cannot be the highest judge, to whom the last appeal is made
in matters of faith, which descend from God, I have showed before. As for a
humane Judge, as he may err through ignorance, wilfulness, or negligence,
which to conceive of the Church, is absurd, yea blasphemous, she having Christ
for her Head, and the Holy Ghost for her Spirit; so he cannot be more certain
of the truth of his judgment, than his reason can make him, which will not
reach to an absolute infallibility. And as a travayler may mistake his way in
one journey, so he may in another, if he have no more certainty nor better
guide of the one way, than of the other; which is the Churches case in
propounding and believing matters of faith, revealed to her by God, which, like
the Circumference from the Center, are all equally distant from our knowledge,
and the Church has an equal Prerogative of infallibility by the guidance of
the Holy Ghost in all, who therefore can err in nothing, or in all things,
which she says she so receives, and delivers. Yet Chillingworth says, that
his consequences are as like the other, as an egg to an egg, or milk to milk;
but more truly, they are as like as an egg to an oyster, or milk to ink.

. 3. And lest any Protestant, who honors the Scriptures much with his lips,
though he be far removed with his heart, should think that I am injurious to
the Scripture, in saying that Tradition is more fundamental, than Scripture it
self, I desire him to take notice, that Tradition and Scripture, according to
different comparisons, are equal and superior the one to the other. Compare
them in respect of certainty of truth, they are equal, both being the Word of
God, the one written, the other unwritten, and so both infinitely certain.
Compare them in respect of depth, of sublimity, and variety of doctrine the
Scripture is far superior to Tradition, Tradition being plain and easy
doctrine, concerning the common, capital, and practical Articles of
Christianity, whereas the Scripture is full of high and hidden senses, and
furnished with great variety of examples, discourses, and all manner of
learning. Compare them in respect of antiquity, and evidence of being the
Apostles, the Scripture is inferior to Tradition, in time and knowledge, and
cannot be proved directly to be the Apostles, and therefore Gods, but by
Tradition. As Philosophy is more perfect than Logic, and Rhetoric than
Grammar, in respect of high and excellent knowledge; yet Logic is more prime,
original, and fundamental than Philosophy, Grammar than Rhetorique, without
the rules and principles whereof they cannot be learned: Even so Tradition is
more prime and original than Scripture, though Scripture in respect of depth,
and sublimity of discourse, be more excellent then Tradition.

CHAP. X.
That the Roman is that one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church

THese premises considered, I looked round about to see amongst all the
societies of the world professing the name of Christ, to which of them the
title and dignity of the Church, might most justly be applied; and I found that
the Roman Church, that is the multitude of Christians spread over the face of
the known world, adhering to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is the One,
Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. The vulgar objection against the title
of Catholic Roman, that is, say they, universal, and yet but particular,
seemed very childish; the one title being applied in regard of the doctrine,
and the extent thereof, which is universal; the other of the discipline, and
the fountain, and head thereof, which is particular, from the Bishop of Rome.
For the word Catholic is taken three ways, to wit, formally, causally, and
participatively. Formally, the universal Church only, that is to say, the
society of all the true particular Churches, united in one selfsame Communion,
is called Catholic. Causally, the Roman Church is called Catholic, for as
much as she infuseth universality into all the whole body of the Catholic
Church. For to constitute universality there must be two things, one that may
be instead of matter thereto, to wit, the multitude; and the other instead of
form thereto, to wit, unity; for a multitude without unity, do not properly
make universality; Take away unity from the multitude (says S. Augustine) and
it is a tumult, De verb. Dom. sceundum Luc. Sermon. 26.
but bring in unity, and it is a people. Therefore the Roman Church (which as
the center and beginning of the Ecclesiastical Communion, infuseth unity,
which is the form of universality, into the Catholic Church) may be called
Catholic causally, though in her own being, she be particular: Even as the
chief Captain of an army, on whom all the inferior Captains, Officers, and
common Soldiers have their dependency, and with whom they hold correspondency,
is called The General, though he be but one particular man, because it is he,
that (by the relation that all others have to him) gives unity to the whole
body of the Army. And thirdly, particular Churches are called Catholic,
participatively, because they agree and participate in doctrine and Communion
with the Catholic Church.

2. Now I was induced to believe, that the Roman Church, is the only true
Catholic Church; by these ensuing reasons. First God being the Prime Verity,
revealing truth, cannot suffer the knowledge of saving doctrine to be
impossible, but it is impossible, if it be hidden; or if a false means of
knowledge thereof, be so dressed with the marks of the true, as that the true
become undiscernable from it: And if the Roman be not the true Catholic
Church and Tradition, then the true Catholic Church and Tradition is hidden,
and a false Church has the marks of the true so clearly, that no other can
with any color pretend to be Catholic rather than it; that is, to have
doctrine delivered from the Apostles by whole worlds of Christian Fathers, to
whole worlds of Christian children. Hence either there is no means left
assuredly to know the saving truth, or else it must be inward teaching by
immediate revelation, without any external infallible means; or the
Scripture, known to be the Word of God, and truly interpreted, by the light and
evidence of the things, or by the force of natural reason, the vanity and
falsehood whereof I have already showed: for knowledge of supernatural truth,
by the light and luster of the doctrine, is proper to the Church triumphant,
inward assurance without an external infallible ground is proper unto Prophets
and the first publishers of Religion. Hence it may be concluded, that if God be
the Prime Verity, teaching Christian Religion darkely, without making men see
the light of things believed; and mediatly, by some external infallible
means, upon which inward assurance must rely, then he must ever conserve the
Catholic Church and Tradition visible and conspicuous, that the same may be
by sensible marks discerned.

And if any object, that the senses of men in this search may be deceived,
through natural invincible fallibility of their organs, and so be no ground of
faith, that is altogether infallible; I answer, that evidence had by sense,
being but the private sense of one man, is not ordinarily fallible; but when
the same is also public and general, that is, when a whole world of men
concur with him, then his evidence is altogether infallible. Besides, seeing
God will not teach men immediately, but will have them cleave to an external
infallible means, and to find out this means by the sensible evidence of the
thing, he is in a manner bound by the perfection of his veracity to assist men's
senses with his providence, that therein they be not deceived, when they use
such diligence, as men ordinarily use, that they be not deceived by their
senses. Now what greater evidence can one have, that he is not deceived in this
matter of sense, that the Roman doctrine is the Catholic, that is, doctrine
delivered from the Apostles, by worlds of Christian Ancestors, unanimous
amongst themselves in all matters of faith: what greater assurance (I say) can
one have, that herein he sees aright, than a whole world of men professing to
see the same that he does? And surely this was the meaning of God by the
Prophet Esaias, when speaking of the Church of Christ, he calls it a direct way,
so that fools cannot err therein, Esa. 35.8. which cannot be, but by following
a world of Ancestors going before them in the same Tract. Otherwise it is not
only possible for fools, but even for them that seem to be wisest to err, yea
in this case it is impossible to be otherwise.

And if it be further objected, that I believe the Catholic Church, is an
Article of Faith, and Faith is the argument of things not seen. I answer, an
Article of Faith may be visible according to the substance of the thing, and
yet invisible according to the manner it is believed in the Creed. The third
Article, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried,
according to the substance of the thing, was evident to sense, and seen of the
Jews, and is now believed of their posterity; but according to the manner that
it is believed in the Creed, to wit, that herein the Word of God by his
Prophets was fulfilled, and that it was done for the salvation of man; in this
manner this visible Article is invisible, and so it is believed in the Creed.
In like manner that there is in the world a Catholic Church, and that the
Roman is this Catholic Church, Pagans, Jews, and Heretics, (if they shut
not their eyes against the light) do clearly behold; but that herein the Word
of God, concerning the perpetual amplitude of his Church, is accomplished,
that this is an effect of Gods varacity, to the end that the means to learn
saving truth may not be hidden, this is a thing invisible; and according to
this notion the Catholic Church is proposed in the Creed. Secondly,
propositions of Faith must be invisible according to the Predicate or thing
believed, but not always according to the Subject, or thing whereof we believe
some other thing. The things the Apostles believed of Christ, to wit, that he
was the Son of God, the Savior of the world, were things invisible; but the
subject and person of whom they did believe these things, was visible to them;
yea God did of purpose by his Prophets foretell certain tokens, whereby that
subject might by sense be seen and discerned from all other, that might pretend
the name of Christ; or else his coming into the world to teach the truth, had
been to little purpose. In this sort the Predicate or thing believed in this
Article, the Holy Catholic Church, to wit, Holy, is invisible, but the
Subject, to wit, the Catholic Church, which we affirm and believe to be holy
in her doctrine, is visible and conspicuous to all. Yea God has of purpose
foretold signs and tokens, whereby she may by sense be clearly discerned from
all other that may pretend to the title of Catholic. For, were not this
subject, the Holy Catholic Church, which we believe to be holy and infallible
in her teaching, visible and discernable from all other that pretend to that
title, of what use were it to believe that there is such an infallible teaching
Church in the world, hidden we know not where, like a Candle under a Bushel,
or a needle in a bottle of hey?

3. Secondly, if there must be always in the world (as was proved before) one,
holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, that is, a Church delivering doctrines
uniformly, thereby making them credible; universally, thereby making them
famously known to mankind; holily, so making them certain, and such, as that on
them we may securely rely; Apostolically, so making them flow in the channel of
a never-interrupted succession of Bisbops from the Apostles; then this Church
must be either the Roman, or the Protestant, or some other opposite to both.
Protestants cannot say a Church opposite to both, for then they should be
condemned in their own judgment, and be bound to conform themselves to that
Church, which can be no other but the Grecian; a Church holding as many
doctrines which the Protestants dislike, as the Church of Rome; as might easily
be proved if need were. It is further manifest, that the Protestants are not
this One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, since their revolt and
separation from the Church of Rome; because in that very act of separation they
did extinguish all these titles; for they changed the doctrines they once held,
they forsook the body whereof they were Members, brake off from the stock of
that tree whereof they were branches; neither in their departure did they join
themselves with any other Church different from the Roman, professing the
particular Protestant doctrines; so that they made a new Church of their own
not agreeing in all points of faith, with any that went before; neither have
they which have come after them (as there are very many Sects risen out of the
first Protestant) agreed with them. And therefore there is none, or the Roman
is the One, Holy Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

. 4. Thirdly the Protestants had the Holy Scripture from the Holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church, otherwise they cannot be sure that they are the true
Scriptures of the Apostles; because the testimony and Tradition of any other
Church is fallible, and may deceive them; And if it may, for ought they know it
has, seeing they lived not in the Apostles days, thereby to make themselves
certain thereof; and so they will be altogether uncertain of that which they
make the only object of their faith. Luther cont. Anab. To. 7. German. Ien fol.
169. whitaker de Eccles. l. 3. p. 369.
Now it is most certain that they had the Scriptures from the Roman Church,
acknowledged by Luther himself, and also by Doctor Whitaker; only they took
the wicked boldness to cancel some parts thereof; therefore, they must either
acknowledge, that they are not sure that the Scripture is the Word of God, or
that the Church of Rome, from whom they received it, is the true Church. And if
the true Church has delivered the true Text of Scripture, then has she also,
together with the true Text, delivered the true Apostolical sense; because the
Apostles themselves did not deliver to her the bare Text, but with it the true
sense, to be delivered perpetually to posterity; not by making a large and
entire comment of all difficult places, but by delivering with the Text the
sense also, about the maine and principal points; So that they who by
Tradition receive from the Apostles the true Text, must together with it
receive the true sense. Now principal Chemnit. exam. Cont. Trid. p. 1. fol. 74.
Doctor Bancroft in the Survey, p. 379.
Protestants affirm the former, saying, No man doubts, but the Primitive
Church received from the Apostles, and Apostolical men, not only the Text of
Scripture, but also the right and native sense; Which is agreeable to the
Doctrine of the Vincentius Lyrinens. cap. 2.
Fathers, that from the Apostles, together with the Text, descends the line of
Apostolical interpretation, squared according to the Ecclesiastical and
Catholic sense. Whereupon Aug. de util. cred. c. 14.
S. Augustine affirms the later, that they that deliver the Text of Christ's
Gospel, must also deliver the Exposition, saying, that he would sooner refuse
to believe Christ, than learn any thing concerning him, but of those by whom he
was brought to believe Christ. For they that can deliver by uniform Tradition a
false sense, may also deliver a false Text, as received from the Apostles;
their freedom from, or liablenesse to error in both being equal. If therefore
the Church of Rome have delivered the true Text, then she has also delivered
and preserved the true sense, or else we are sure of neither; and so she only
is the true, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church; or else there is none.

. 5. Fourthly, it is granted by Protestants, that the Roman Church was once
the true Church, and it cannot be proved that she has changed her doctrine
since the Apostles time, therefore she is still the same true Church. And that
she has not changed her Doctrine is thus proved; the Doctrines that have
continued for diverse ages in the Christian Church, and no time of their
beginning can be assigned, must needs be Doctrines descending from the
Apostles, and unchanged; and such are the Doctrines of the Church of Rome. Than
the Doctrines of the Roman Church which Protestants reject, have been
universally received for many hundreds of years, is by many learned Protestants
confessed. Perkins says, Expos. of the Creed, p. 307. and 400.
during the space of nine hundred years, the Popish Heresy has spread it
self over the whole world, and for many hundred years an universal Apostasy
overspread the whole face of the earth, so that our Protestant Church was not
then visible to the world. Fulk says, Treatise ag. Stapleton, and Martial. p.
25.
the Pope has blinded the world these many hundred years, some say 900. some
1000. some 1200. And On the Revelat. p 64.
Napier says, The Antichristian and Papisticall reign began about the year
three hundred and sixteen after Christ, (which is now above 1300. years ago)
reigning universally without debateable contradiction, Gods true Church abiding
certainly hidden and latent. Secondly, Protestants cannot tell the time when
the Church of Rome began to change and swerve from the Apostolical doctrine,
therefore doubtless she has never changed her faith. Now that doctrines
universally received, although they be not written, are Doctrines derived from
the Apostles, is affirmed by De Baptis. lib. 5. c. 23.
S. Augustine, and allowed by D. sense p. 351. 352.
D. Whitguift, Archbishop of Canterbury, who in his book against Puritanes,
citing diverse Protestants, as concurring in opinion with him, says, whatsoever
opinions are not known to have begun since the Apostles time, the same are not
new or secundary, but received their original from the Apostles. But because
this principle of Christian divinity brings in (as Cartwright the Puritan there
alleged speaks) all Popery in the judgment of all men, I will further
demonstrate it, though of it self it be clear enough.

Christ by his Spirit being still present with his Church, cannot permit errors
in Faith so to creep into the Church, as that by the very principles of
Christianity they become unreformable; but if errors so creep into the Church,
as that their beginning cannot be known, and their progress become
universal, then do they so enter and prevail, that by the principles of
Christianity, they are past reformation; and that because whosoever undertakes
to reform them, is to be condemned as an Heretic; for he that will undertake
to reform Doctrines universally received by the Church, opposes himself
against the whole Church, and is therefore by a known and received Principle
of Christianity and Christ's own precept, to be accounted as a Heathen and a
Publican, Mat. 18.17. Epist. 118.
And as S. Augustine says, To dispute against the whole Church is insolent
madness: For, the Church by Christ is appointed the Judge and corrector of all
others, as our Savior says, Tell the Church, and therefore is not to be
judged nor corrected by any; he that has the high presumption to do so,
presently pulls on himself the censure of a Heathen. And justly too, for (like
the Giants amongst the Poets who waged war against the Gods) he does not only
oppose the present Church, but the Church of all ages, even the Apostles
themselves; and who is sufficient for these things? And he begins a new course
of Christianity, seeking to overthrow that Doctrine which is universally
received, and cannot be proved by any Tradition of Ancestors to be otherwise
planted in the world, than by the Apostles themselves, through the power of
innumerable miracles. Wherefore these Doctrines, if they be errors, are errors,
whose reformation no man by the principles of Christianity ought to attempt.
And seeing it is impossible there should be any such errors, the Principle of
S. Augustine stands firm, That Doctrines received universally in the Church
without any known beginning, are truly Apostolical, and of this kind are the
Roman Doctrines, from which Protestants have revolted.

But some Protestants object, that the errors of the Pharisees were universally
received in the Jewish Church, yet reformed by our Savior. To which may be
answered that Protestants (out of their desire to make Catholics seem like
the Pharisees) make themselves seem, as if they did not any whit understand the
Gospel. For the Traditions of the Pharisees were not universal Traditions,
but certain practices of piety invented by themselves, and deducted by their
skill from Scripture, whereby they would seem singularly religions, and not as
other men. Secondly, Christ Jesus proving himself to be true God, might
reform errors universally received; and the Church of the Jews falling, erect
a new Church of Christians as he did; which is not lawful for any one else to
do. For Christian Religion must continue to the worlds end, by virtue of the
first Tradition thereof, and must never be interrupted without extraordinary
and prophetical beginning, by immediate revelation and Miracles; If therefore
errors be delivered by the full consent of Christian Tradition, they are
irreformable. Again some Protestants say, that one may oppose the whole Church,
and confute her errors by Scripture, and not be as an Heathen or Heretic; for
not every one that opposes the Church is to be accounted an Heathen, Whites
Reply, p. 136.
but only such as inordinately and without just cause oppose it. And who I pray
shall judge of the justness of the cause? By this doctrine, every man is made
an examiner and judge of the whole Church, and hellish confusion brought in
thereby. For if against the sentence of perpetual universal Tradition, a
private man may, without the guilt of heresy, pretend Scripture, and stand
obstinately therein, and though the Church do give seeming and appearing
answers (as some of them confess) to his Scripture, yet condemn her answers,
saying they are sophistical, (as some of them do) what can be more disorderly?
or what is Heretical obstinacy, if this be not? Wherefore S. Augustine says
absolutely, Epist. 48.
it is impossible men should have just cause, to depart from, and impugn the
whole Christian Church. And why? but because it is a ruled case in
Christianity, he that hears not the Church is an Heretic.

Yet notwithstanding this, the Protestants do charge the Church of Rome, DE
FACTO, to have fallen into errors, and to have changed her faith; and that
because points of doctrine undefined, (about which Doctors have disputed, and
held different opinions) have been afterward defined by the Church, so that it
was not lawful for any after that, to make doubt thereof; the Church by this
means has held in later ages, that to be DE FIDE, a matter of faith, which
the former ages did not, and so (say they) has changed the faith, and believes
and delivers more than she received from the Apostles. But this I found to be
no change of faith, but only a declaration of some point explicitly, which was
implicitly and involvedly believed before. For all the Articles of faith were
immediately rerevealed by Christ to his Apostles, and by them again delivered
to their posterity; so that since, there have been no new and particular
revelations, but the first being laid up in the treasury of the Church, (for
which cause S. Paul calls it a depositum, a stock, or pawn,) other truths have
been deduced from thence, as occasion has required. For when any one
endeavors to corrupt the doctrine delivered by the Apostles, the Church calls
her Pastors and Doctors to examine the matter, and being infallibly assisted by
the Spirit of truth (which our Savior promised should be with his Apostles to
the end of the world, that is, with the Church their Successor, which was to
continue to the worlds end) she declares what is true, and what is false; as
agreeing with, or disagreeing from that doctrine which she has received from
her Forefathers the Prophets and Apostles, upon whom she is built; as S. Paul
says, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. For
as in a building there is not the least stone which rests not upon the
foundation; so in the doctrine of the Catholic Church, there is not the least
point which is not grounded on, or contained in that which was delivered by the
Apostles.

For example, in the principles of every Science are contained diverse truths,
which may be drawn out of them, by many several conclusions, one following
another; These conclusions were truths in themselves before, though they did
not so appear to us, till we saw the connection they had with the premises, and
how they were contained in them; And by the many several conclusions so drawn,
the truth of those principles does more show it self, but does not receive any
change in it self thereby: even so in the prime principles of our faith,
revealed immediately by God, and delivered to the Church, are contained al
truths, that any way belong to our faith; but it was not necessary that the
Church should manifest all these, at their first meeting in Council, but only
so much in every several Council, as should concern the present occasion of
their meeting; which is some particular heresy, or heresies then sprung up,
and so more according to the successive growth of heresies; which when she
has done, she cannot be charged with creating of a new faith, or altering of
the old; but she does only, out of old grounds and premises draw such
conclusions, as may serve to destroy new heresies, and show them to be contrary
to the ancient faith. In this manner the Church has grown and increased in
knowledge by degrees, and shall still do so to the end of the world. And as the
sun spreads the rays of his light more and more betwixt morning and noon, and
his beams display themselves in a valley, or some room of a house, where they
did not before, without any change of light in the sun himself; So may the
Church spread the light of her faith, showing such or such a point to be a
divine truth; which before was not known to be so; or which though it were a
divine truth in it self, yet it was not so to us, for want of sufficient
proposal, that is, of the Churches; wherein the Church resembles our Blessed
Savior, her Lord and Spouse; who though he never received the least increase
of grace and knowledge, from the first moment of his being conceived, yet the
Scripture says, He grew in wisdom and age, and in favor with God and men,
Luc. 2.52. to wit, because he showed it more and more, in his words and actions.

This also further appears by the method which Catholic Fathers and Doctors
observe in and out of Counsels, in proving and defining points of faith;
namely by having recourse to the authority of Gods Word, contained both in
Scripture and Tradition, and to the belief and practice of the Church; in
searching whereof, the Holy Church joins humane industry with Gods grace and
assistance. For when any question or doubt of faith arises, particular Doctors
severally dispute and write thereof; then if further cause require, the Holy
Church assembles her Pastors and Doctors together in a general Council, to
examine and discuss the matter more fully, as in that first Council of the
Apostles whereof the Scripture says, The Apostles and Elders assembled
together, to consider of this word, Acts 15.6. The Pastors being thus come
together, and having the presence of our Savior, and his Holy Spirit
(according to his promise) amongst them, out of Scripture and Traditions,
joining therewith the consent of holy Fathers and Doctors of foregoing times,
she does infallibly resolve and determine the matter; not as new, but as
ancient, orthodox, and derived from her forefathers; making that which was ever
in it self a divine truth, so to appear to us, that now we may no more make
question thereof. So that from hence it appears, that the Church makes no new
Articles of faith, such as then may be said to have their beginning, but only
explications and collections out of the old, which were delivered to the
Apostles, and by them to us.

And though the Church do thus grow in the knowledge of points of faith, yet
this is no newness of faith, but a maintenance of the old, with a kind of
increase, by way of explicating that which was involved, clearing that which
was obscure, defining that which was undefined, and obliging men to believe
more firmly and explicitly, that which before they were not bound so to believe.

That is only to be called a new faith, which is contrary to that which was
held before, or has no connection with it; and when we cease to believe that
which we believed before; this indeed is change of faith, the other is but
increase. And if this increase of faith by the declaration of Counsels, may be
called a change and innovation of faith, there is no Heretic but may
challenge antiquity to himself, and put novelty on the score of the Church.
For he may say such a thing, for example, that the Son is of the same
substance with the Father, was not held de fide, a matter of faith, before the
Council of Nice, therefore it is new. That Baptism administered by Heretics
is good baptism, was not held as a matter of faith before the days of S.
Cyprian, therefore it is new. And the Heretic may say, that he believes only
that which was believed before such or such a Council (which he please, for
the case is alike in all) and therefore he believes the ancient Faith: By which
way of arguing, he may renounce the decrees of all Counsels, as Novelties, and
maintain many Heresies, as the ancient Faith. Yea by this absurdity a man may
deny diverse Books of the Scripture, as the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second
Epistle of S. Peter, the Epistle of S. James, of S. Jude, and the Apocalypse,
with some others, because they were not admitted for Canonical, until 300. or
400. years after they were written. Yet when they were declared to be
Canonical, there was no change of faith in the Church thereby: for the
believing of these Books was involved in this revealed Article, I believe in
God; and the believing of them to be Canonical, was involved in this revealed
Article, I believe the holy Catholic Church: only hereby was an increase of
the material object of our faith to us, not in it self; we being bound upon
the declaration of the Church, to believe that thing firmly and without
dispute, which before perhaps we were not so obliged to do.

6. A fifth argument moving me to believe that the Roman Church is the
Catholic, was this: That doctrine which has been delivered by Tradition, as
the doctrine of our Ancestors, without any opposition made by any known
Catholic Fathers and Doctors: and if any did oppose the doctrine, he was
censured of Novelty, and after admonition (if he persisted therein) was
condemned of Heresy, such doctrine is derived from the Apostles and unchanged,
and such is the doctrine of the Roman Church.

It Is true indeed, that diverse points of the Roman doctrine have been opposed,
as by Arrius, Pelagius, Berengarius, Waldo, Wickliffe, Husse, and many others,
but these were not accounted orthodox Fathers, but were taxed of Novelty and
innovation, and for such are delivered to us, by Tradition and history of the
times wherein they lived. And it cannot be prudenty imagined; that if the
Church of Rome had (like these men) attempted to change the doctrine of the
Apostles, there should be no Tradition of it, no historical narration of it,
but that all the good and true Catholics should be asleep, to this great
business of defending the flock from Wolves; or (which is more absurd) should
against their knowledge, and conscience suffer damnable errors to steal in, to
the destruction of themselves, and all the world that should succeed them. Now
the opposition of the Church in the forementioned manner, is so far from
obscuring the Churches doctrine, that it makes it far more famous, and
illustrious, and apparently Apostolical; even as the sun struggling with a
misty morning, breaking through it, appears more beautifully glorious, and
unconquerable. And this Doctor Field a learned Protestant confesses, when a
doctrine is in any age constantly delivered as a matter of faith, Field of the
Church, l. 4. c. 14
and as received from ancestors, in such sort as the contradictors thereof were
in the beginning noted for novelty, and if they persisted in contradiction, in
the end charged with heresy, it is impossible but such a doctrine should come
by succession from the Apostles.

But Protestants think it sufficient, that they find (as they say) the Roman
doctrine contradicted in the writings of orthodox Fathers, though their
opposition was not noted by antiquity, nor by the fame of Tradition delivered
to posterity. But this answer leaves no means to common people to know
certainly the perpetual Tradition of Gods Church, which is the guide of their
faith, but by reading and examining the Fathers, which to them is impossible.
Besides if that some few obscure and hard passages out of the Fathers, may
suffice to call the Tradition of the Church into question, then there is
nothing so clearly and unanimously delivered by Tradition, but may fall under a
new examination; seeing nothing is or can be writ so plainly, especially where
there is very much also written, but that some obscure and oblique passages may
be raked out, to make show of a contradiction; and if this counterpart may have
the title of antiquity set over it, what Heresy will want its defense out of
the Fathers? What Tradition was more constantly delivered by the Christian
Fathers and Doctors, than our Saviors Consubstantiality with his Father? Yet
the new Arrians (as we may see in Bellarmine) bring diverse testimonies out of
the ancient Fathers, Lib. 2. de Christ. c. 19.
to prove, that in this point they contradicted themselves and one another. In
like manner, do the Protestants now bring some obscure places out of the
Fathers, in the defense of their heresies, which yet in a true sense do import
no such thing, but being a little obscure, they more easily wrest them to their
corrupted meaning. But on the contrary, the Fathers are abundant and clear, in
those places which maintain the Catholic doctrines, and none of the Fathers
of those times did accuse other of error in those points, which if they had
thought them so, there is no doubt they would. For we cannot imagine, the true
believers of those times less vigilant than of these; and we see now, that no
man can broach an error against faith, but presently he has abundant
opposition, and further questioning, if the cause require.

Therefore it is apparent, that Protestants when they allege the Fathers, as
contradicting themselves, and one another in the Catholic Doctrines of those
times, either mis-alledge their words, or mistake their meaning. For, if those
contradictions were real, why did not antiquity note them, as it noted their
differences about smaller disputable matters. S. Hierome and Epiphanius took
pains to note the errors of Origin; yet amongst them all they did not note any,
which the Church of Rome now holds, though his writings be full thereof. If the
sentences of the Fathers be true in the sense that Protestants allege them,
why did not some charge them for maintaining the contrary Roman Doctrines, a
thousand times more frequently mentioned in their writings? And on the other
side, if the Roman Doctrines were true, why did not some tax them for
maintaining of Protestantisme? doubtless they would if they had understood
them in the sense that Protestants now do. It is manifest therefore that they
that lived in those times (who were therefore better able to understand their
meanings, than the Protestants that are sprung up so many hundred years after)
did not conceive that the Fathers maintained the Protestant doctrines in their
writings; for if they had, they would quickly have been reproved seeing the
current of Christian Religion even of those times, was agreeable to the present
Roman; for as Napier On the Revelat. p. 191. also Cent. Mag. cent. 2. c. 4.
col. 55.
Napier says, during even the second and third ages, the true temple of God
and light of the Gospel was obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself. And
according to Treatise of Antichrist, lib. 2. c. 2. p. 25.
Downeham, the general defection of the visible Church foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
began to work in the Apostles time.

. 7. On the contrary, we find in the writings of the Orthodox Fathers, that
the Doctrines which Protestants now hold, were condemned as heretical in those
persons that then held them, and they were not therein opposed by any other
Orthodox Fathers. For example, the Protestants hold that the Church may err,
so did the Donatists, for which they are frequently reproved by * S. Augustine.
Passim. cont. Donat.
Protestants deny unwritten Traditions, and urge Scripture only, so did the
Arrians, and are condemned for it by Epiphan. Her. 75. Aug. cont. Maximin. l.
1. c. 2. and ult.
S. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine. Protestants teach that Priests may marry; so
did Vigilantius, and for it is condemned by Cont. Vigilant. c. 1.
S. Hierome. Protestants deny prayer for the dead; so did Arrius, for which he
is condemned by Aug. haer. 53. Epiphan. har. 75.
S. Augustine and S. Epiphanius. Protestants deny invocations of Saints; so did
Vigilantius, for which he is condemned by S. Hier. cont. Vigil. c. 3.
Hierome. Protestants deny reverence to Images; so did Xenaias, for which he is
rereproved by Hist. lib. 16. c. 27.
Nicephorus in these words, Xenaias first (O audacious soul, and impudent
mouth) vomited forth that speech, that the Images of Christ and those who have
pleased him, are not to be worshipped. Protestants deny the real presence; so
did the Capernaites, who were, says In Psalm. 54. and 55.
S. Augustine, the first Heretics that denied the real presence, and that
Judas was the first suborner and maintainer of this heresy. Protestants deny
confession of sins to a Priest; so did the Novatian Heretics, for which
they are reproved by Lib. de poenit. c. 7.
S. Ambrose. So did the Montanists, and are reproved by Saint Hieron. Epist. ad
Marcell. 54.
Hierome. Protestants say that a man is justified by faith only; so did the
Pseudo-Apostles, for which they are condemned by S. De fide and oper. c. 14.
Augustine. I might increase this Catalogue by the addition of many other, and
make the new Protestant Religion appear but a frippery of old Heresies: but
these shall suffice. From all which it appears, that the Fathers held the same
faith with the present Roman Church, and that there was no opposition of
Fathers against Fathers, nor of any one Father against himself, at least in
matters of faith; but that they all held the unity of the faith; that they that
held the contrary were by them condemned of Heresy; that in bringing any
places out of the Fathers to confirm their Heresies, they did misinterpret
them, as the Protestants now do; that therefore the Doctrine of the Roman
Church is Apostolical and unchanged; and therefore she is the true Church.

CHAP. XI.
That the true Church may be known by evident marks; and that such marks
agree only to the Roman Church. And first of Universality, the first mark of
the Church.

. 1. IN further pursuit of the true Church, I addressed my self, by the marks
thereof to find it out. For I accounted it vain to try by the Scripture,
whether the particular doctrines of Protestants, were the doctrines of the
Apostles, unless I could find their Church to be the true Church, by the marks
of the true Church set down in Scripture. For either the Scripure can clear all
controversies, or it canntot; if it cannot, there will be no end of
controversy amongst them that rely only on Scripture; if it can, then surely
it can clear this most important one, which is the true Church, by the marks
thereof; and if so, it is fit that that should be determined in the first
place, on which all the rest depends, Ep. dedic.
as Doctor Field acknowledges. And whereas some Protestants make the truth of
the doctrine to be the only mark of the Church, it is preposterous, being the
declaration of a thing obscure, or pretended to be so, by a thing more obscure;
in as much as to know the truth of the doctrine in all the particular
instances, is harder than to know the society of the Church. And it is
necessary to know the truth of doctrine in all the particulars, before we can
thereby know the true Church, because if she err in any one point of faith,
she thereby falls from the title of the true Church. Now who is he that can
boast to know the integrity of the doctrine of the Church, in all the
particular controversies, against every society that holds the contrary, by
infallible proofs of Scripture, and invincible answers to all their objections?
If any could do this, who knows not that ignorant and unlearned people (of
whose salvation notwithstanding God has the same care, as of the learned, and
to whom the marks of the Church should be equally common, since they are
equally obliged to obey her) are not capable of this examination? Cont. Ep.
Fund. c. 4.
For the rest of the people (says S. Augustine) it is not the quickness of
understanding, but the simplicity of belief that secure them.

Therefore it is manifest, that they must have other marks to know the Church
by, than that of her Doctrine; namely, marks proportionable to their capacity;
to wit, external and sensible marks, as eminency, antiquity, perpetuity, with
the like; even as children and ignorant people must have external and sensible
marks, and other than the essential form of a man, to know and discern a man
from other living creatures. Else how could S. Paul say, God has made in the
Church Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, to the end we
should be no more little children, blown about with every wind of doctrine,
Ephesians. chap. 4. ver. 11. if he had not given us other marks to know the Church
than the purity of the Doctrine? Besides purity of Doctrine being the
essential form of the Church, cannot be a mark of it, because they are
commonly repugnant and incompatible conditions. For the mark does commonly
demonstrate the thing to the sense, and the essential form does show it to the
understanding; the mark designs the thing in existence, the essential form
designs it in essence; the mark shows where the thing is, the essential form
teaches what it is; the mark is sooner known than the thing; and contrariwise
the thing is sooner known than the essential form of the thing; 1 Phys. c. 1.
for the thing defined (as Aristotle says) is known before the definition. A
Mark then must have three conditions; The first is to be more known then the
thing, since it is that, which makes the thing to be known. The second, that
the thing be never found without it. The third, that it be never found without
the thing, either alone, if it be a total mark, or with its fellows, if it be
a mark in part. According to these conditions, I found diverse Marks set down in
Scripture appliable only to the Church of Rome.

. 2. Of which the first is to be Catholic, that is, universal; which was
foretold by the Prophet Esaias, saying, All Nations shall flow unto it, Esaias
2.2. And by the Psalmist, that it should have the Heathen for its inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for its possession, Psalm. 2.2. And by our
Savior saying, This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world
for a witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come And that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his Name amongst all Nations,
beginning at Jerusalem, Mat. 24.14. Luc. 24.47. Therefore to distinguish
Christ's true Church from all Heretical Sects, the Apostles in their Creed, and
the ancient Fathers in their Writings, have given her the Surname of
Catholic; a name ever insisted upon by the Fathers against Heretics, no
less than now.

And that the Roman Church is this Catholic Church dispersed over the whole
world, is manifest to all those that have either read the histories of the
world, or have been eyewitnesses of the several Countries thereof; wherein
though the public profession thereof be Heretical, Mahometicall, or
Heathenish, yet even there has the Roman Catholic Church both Fathers and
children, Pastors and people. And like the Sea, what she loses in one place,
she wins in another; what she has lost by the falling away of the Protestants
in Europe, she has gained with increase, by the propagation of her faith in
the East and West Indies, where whole Kingdoms are converted thereunto; as a
Protestant Author confesses, saying, Simon Lythus in respons. altera ad
alteram Gretseri Apologiam. p. 333.
The Jesuits within the compass of a few years, not content with the bounds
of Europe, have filled Asia, Africa, and America with their Idols. And thus
she was Catholic, by Napier a Protestant Writers confession forementioned,
and others, for 12. or 1300. years ago, and ever since.

And whereas Protestants say that this universality is no true mark of the
Church, because it is appliable to Turks and Pagans, it is doubtless a very
poor objection; for the marks of the Church are not given her by God, to
distinguish her from all sorts of Religions, but only from those that are
contained equivocally under the same next kind, and may be supposed and taken
for Churches; that is to say, from other Christian societies, to wit, from
Heretical and Shismaticall Sects, which challenge by false marks the title of
the true Church: To which purpose S. Augustine says, disputing with the
Donatists, Thou ask of a stranger whether he be a Pagan or a Christian, he
answers thee, a Christian; thou ask him whether he be a catechumene, Aug de
Pastor c. 13.
or one of the faithful; he answers thee, one of the faithful; thou ask
him of what communion he is, he answers thee, a Christian Catholic.

Besides, the Roman Church has this form of universality, beyond all
Religions of the world, even Turks or Heathens; That there is no place of the
known world where there are not Roman Catholics, propagating their Religion,
by converting the people of the land, whosoever they are; which is manifestly
wanting to all other Religions, and is therefore in this regard also more
universally spread over the face of the earth than any other. Others say that
this universal spreading of the Church is antidated by Roman Catholics with
application to themselves, for that it was not to take beginning, but from the
time of Luther, because some places of Scripture which speak of the largeness
of the Church, say it shall be in the later days. But it is manifest, that by
later days, is meant all the space of time from Chirst to the end of the
world; as S. Peter (interpreting a prophecy of Joel, which says, that it
shall come to pass in the last days, that God will power his Spirit upon all
flesh, Acts 2.17. by which is intended the amplitude of the Church) applies it
to that present time when the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles. Nor can
any reasonable man imagine that it can sort with the goodness of God, and his
tender love to mankind, to suffer the light of his truth (in the not spreading
of his Church) to be eclipsed for 14. or 1500. years, seeing that according to
the opinion of some learned men, grounded upon fair probabilities, the world is
likely to last but 2000. years after Christ. Howsoever this universality of
the Protestant Religion is but begun, it is not perfected; for the Roman Church
is yet actually exceeding larger; and Protestants that allow this for a mark of
the true Church, and now begin hopefully to apply it to themselves, are bound
to be of the Roman, till they see their expectation satisfied, in the
Protestant Churches exceeding her in latitude; which I dare boldly say will not
be as long as they live, and therefore they ought to die in the Roman Faith.

3. But if we examine the matter a little more strictly, we shall find, that
the Protestants plea for universality will be cut very short, when we consider,
that though they make themselves all of one Church, when they would vie for
multitude with the Roman Church; yet compared with one another, we shall find
that they are very many Churches; not distinguished by nation only, but by
doctrine and points of faith; and that there are many Churches in one Nation,
as in England for example, and will be many more, if the desired Independency
be advanced. Now it is not sufficient that the Protestant Religion in general
be enlarged, but it must be the true Protestant Religion, which every
particular Sect thinking it self to be of, and denying it (the most of them) to
the rest, the universality of the Religion will be mightily abated. Indeed when
they muster their strengths together, and make boast of their greatness, then
they rake all into the title of Protestantisme, who have revolted from the
Roman Church and count them on their side; as if the definition of a Protestant
were, one that is opposite to the Church of Rome; So that if there were a
thousand sorts of Heretics in the world, they would in this case account them
but one Church. But the word Catholic being a note of Communion, (as I have
showed already;) as the Roman Church calls none a Catholic that does not
communicate with her; so cannot the Protestant Church of Engl. count any to be
of her Religion, thereby (by enlarging of her bounds) to prove her self
Catholic, unless they will communicate with her, which the Grecian Churches
will not, the Lutheran Churhes will not, many of the Sects within the Kingdom
will not, as Presbyterians, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists,
Erastians, Socinians, Arminians, Seekers, Adamites, Shakers, Independents, with
many others; These I say will not communicate with the Protestant Church of
England, nor will they communicate each with other, but have, at least most
frequently, their Congregations (as they call them) separate and apart; so that
these are all to be accounted several Churches and Religions, and no one is
further universal, than the communion thereof does spread; which is so little a
way, that none of them is (nay though they were al united together, would they
be) able to stand in competition with the Roman Church; under whose Communion
are many entire Kingdoms, and in all known parts of the world an infinity of
people, even in Asia, Africa, and America, where the name of Protestant, much
more any particular Sect thereof, is altogether unknown. Besides, all the
Christian Churches, which are now separated from the Roman, were once united to
her, both in faith and communion, and then either she was the Catholic
Church, or there was none in the world, which is impossible; therefore they
that departed from her, departing from the Catholic Church, became
Schismatiques, and departing from the faith they received from her, become
Heretics.

4 Lastly, the very possession of the name Catholic is a proof, that it does
belong to her, seeing no sort of Christians else can usurp it from her. For
howsoever some, when being so hard pressed, that they cannot claim the title
of true Chritian, unless they assume the name of Catholic, do then arrogate
it to themselves, and say, that they are Catholics; yet in ordinary speech if
you speak of a Catholic, every one understands thereby a Roman Catholic; all
other Sects voluntarily taking to themselves the name of some men for their
founder, as of Luther, Calvin, whom they call their Reformers, or of some
place, as the Albigenses: or from some accident of their pretended reformation,
as Protestants; by which the legal Protestants delight to style themselves,
with this addition, of the Church of England, renouncing therein (as they
suppose) Luther and Calvin, as ashamed, or seeming to scorn to derive
themselves from any one man; as though the Church of England in this matter,
namely, in opposition to the whole Church, both present and precedent, were of
more consideration then one single man; Moreover, certain enough it is, that
the Reformation of the Church of England began by one man, and he no God
neither (except it were such an one as Jupiter was, who transformed himself
into a beast for the love of women) before it filled the whole Kingdom, and
arrived at that high pitch of perfection, that some suppose. And who that man
was, is well enough known, and what godly motives he had; which they must
confess, or else, that their Church is like Melchizedek, without Father or
Mother; or like a Mushrump, started up in a night, no man knows how.

On the contrary, the true believer will own no name, but that of the
Catholic Faith, which was first devised by the Apostles in the Creed, and
which the successors of the Apostles in that Faith have always worn; As the
Ancient Father Pacianus ad. Symp. Ep. 1.
S. Pacianus says, in an Epistle to Sympronianus a Novatian Heretic,
Christian is my name, Catholic is my Surname; that names me, this marks me
out; by that I am manifested, by this I am distinguished. And Saint Cyrill.
Hieros. Catech. 15.
Cyrill of Jerusalem expounding the Creed; For this cause (says he) thy faith
has given thee this Article to hold undoubtedly, and in the holy Catholic
Church, to the end, thou should fly the polluted Conventicles of Heretics.
And a little after, "when thou come into a Town, inquire, not simply where
the Temple of our Lord is, for the Heresies of impious persons, do likewise
call their dens, the Temples of the Lord; neither ask simply where the Church
is, but where is the Catholic Church? For that name is the proper name of
this holy Church. And on the contrary, Hieron. cont. Lucifer. c. 9.
S. Hierome says, If in any part thou hear of men denominated from any but
from Christ, as Marcionites, Valentinians, etc. know that it is not the Church
of Christ, but the Synagogve of Antichrist. And Lib. deutilitat. cred. cap. 7.
S. Augustine fully, Although there be many heresies of Christians, and that
all would be called Catholics; yet there is always one Church, if you cast
your eyes upon the extent of the whole world, more abundant in multitude, and
also as those that know themselves to be of it, more sincere in truth, than all
the rest: but of the truth, that is another dispute. That which suffices for
the question is, that there is one Church, to which different Heresies impose
different names, whereas they are all called by their particular names that
they dare not disavow: from whence it appears in the judgment of any not
pre-occupate with favor, to whom the name of Catholic, whereof they are all
ambitious, ought to be attributed. And again, De vera relig. cap. 6.
We must hold the Christian Religion, and the communion of that Church, which
is called Catholic, both by her own and by strangers: for whether Heretics
and Schismatiques will or will not, when they speak not with their own, but
with strangers, they call the Catholics no otherwise than Catholics. As for
the Protestants, it is certain, that neither by others, nor yet by themselves
in ordinary speaking, are they called Catholics. No nor yet in their most
solemn and serious speaking; as appears by the several Acts both of the King
of England, and of the Houses of Parliament, wherein both sides publish to the
world (and yet in a sense different from one another) that they will maintain
the Protestant Religion. But the Roman Church has always possessed the name
of Catholic, and therefore she is such.

CHAP. XII.
Of the second Mark of the Church, viz. Antiquity both of persons and doctrines,

1. THe second mark of the Church is Antiquity; as God says by the Prophet
Jeremy, Stand in the ways and see, and inquire of the old paths, which is the
good way, and walk therein, Ier. 6.16. And our Savior says, Mat. 13. that the
good seed was sown first, and afterward the tares. And even in nature truth is
before falsehood. And this Antiquity I found applyable in the highest degree to
the Roman Religion; for though some heresies are very ancient, as is intimated,
in that the tares were sown soon after the good seed, yet the truth is more
ancient, and so is the Church of Rome. This antiquity of hers, for the greatest
part of time, is confessed by Protestants, Perkins, (whom I alleged before)
grants it for 900. years; Napier goes higher, and says it reigned universally
and without any debateable contradiction 12. hundred and 60. years. And seeing
this reign of the Catholic Religion, which Protestants call Popery, was then
universal, it is apparent that it did not then begin; for such an universal
possession could not be got on the sudden, as they may perceive by the
Protestant Religion, which is not improved to near that universality in above
a hundred years; so that in all probability (even according to the opinion of
Protestants) the beginning thereof must be in, or near the Apostles times.

Now whether we take the Roman Church for the society of Christians that
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for their head, or whether we take it for
Fathers and Doctors holding the doctrines of the present Church of Rome, in
both respects it will appear that the Church of Rome is most ancient and
Apostolical. The former is proved by the testimony of S. Iren. cont. Val. lib.
3. c. 3.
Irenaeus, who calls the Roman Church, the greatest and antientest Church
founded at Rome by the two most glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul. And of S.
Augustine, Aug. Epist. 162.
who says, In the Roman Church has always flourished the Principality of the
Apostolic Seat: This word [alwaies] including all the time upward, from that
present, to S. Peter. So that by this it is manifest, that there was a Roman
Church, even from S. Peter's time, who was the first Bishop and Pope thereof.
Which S. Augustine confirms in another place saying, Number the Priests even
from the Sea of Peter, De Baptis. cont. Don. lib. 2. c. 1.
etc. that is the rock which the gates of hell do not overcome. Nor do the
Protestants deny the antiquity of the Church of Rome, but only some of them
deny S. Peter to have been Bishop there, or indeed ever to have been there in
person; which I count a fancy not worth the confuting, and they may with as
much truth, and more reason, deny King William the Conqueror to have been King
of England, or so much as to have been in England, seeing there is much more,
and more noble testimony of that, than of this.

The main thing that they deny is the Antiquity of the doctrine of the Church
of Rome; for they say the Primitive Fathers taught the Protestant Doctrine and
not that which the Church of Rome now teaches; Which I found to be false, by
the examination of particulars; all which if I should here set down, I should
swell this intended little Treatise into a huge Volume. It shall suffice me
therefore to give a scant map of the Churches doctrine in the Primitive times,
and the testimony of some Fathers of the first five hundred years, of every
several age some, in the proof of some of the present Catholic doctrines,
most strongly opposed by Protestants; referring him that is desirous of larger
proof, to the painful volumes of Coccius and Gualterus. Noting first two
things by the way: The former, that it is not necessary that Catholics should
give this proof; For it is sufficient that they are in possession of this
faith, and that they all say they received it from their Ancestors, and they
from theirs, and so upward to the first beginning of Christian Religion; and
that the Protestant cannot by any sufficient testimony of Fathers or histories
prove the contrary; a thing which the Protestants no doubt would highly boast
of, if they were able to perform it in their own behalf. The latter is, that
many Protestants do confess, that the ancient Fathers did hold many points of
belief of the present Roman Church; Whitguift Archbishop of Canterbury says,
(and that without exception of the very first times) Defense against Cartwright
p. 472. 473.
almost all the Bishops and Writers of the Greek Church, and Latin also, for
the most part, were spotted with the doctrines of free will, of merit, of
invocation of Saints, and such like. And the like is affirmed by many others,
in many other points; as is largely showed by the book entitled, The
Protestants Apology for the Roman Church. Against which the Protestants have
nothing to say, but that which is worse than nothing, to wit, that they were
the spots and blemishes of the Fathers. And who I pray are they that undertake
to correct Magnificat (as we say) and like Goliath to defy the whole host of
Israel? But they say, that a dwarf standing upon a Giants shoulders, may see
further than the Giant can; and so they by perusing the Fathers, may see
further than the Fathers could; Further perhaps they may, in some cases, but
never contrary; they cannot by their help see that to be black, which they saw
to be white; that to be false, which they saw to be true.

2. Let us then take a view of the Roman Doctrines, as they were held in the
days of S. Augustine, and the four first general Counsels, which were held
between the years 315. and 457. to which first four Counsels some
Protestants seem to give much honor, and to subscribe to their Decrees, but
they do but seem. In those times the Church believed the true and real
presence, and the eating with the mouth of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament,
as Zuinglius, the Prince of the Sacramentarians, acknowledges in these words:
lib. de vera and falsa relig. cap. de Eucharist.
From the time of S. Augustine the opinion of corporal flesh had already get
the mastery. And in this quality she Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Ho^. 24
adored the Eucharist with outward gestures and adoration, as the true and
proper body of Christ. The Church then believed the Body of Christ to be in the
Sacrament, Cyril. Alex. ep. ad Caesar. Pat.
even besides the time that it was in use; and for this cause kept it after
Consecration for Cypr. de laps.
domestical Communions, Eusebius. hist. l. 7.
to give to sick, Amb. de obit. Sayr.
to carry upon the Sea, Eusebius. hist. l. 5.
to send into far Provinces. She then believed Paulin. in vita Ambr. Tertul. ad
ux^c. 55. Basil. Ep. ad Caes. Pat.
that Communion under both kinds was not necessary for the sufficiency of
participation, but that all the body and all the blood was taken in either
kind: And for this cause, in domestical Communions, in Communions for
children, for sick persons, by Sea, and at the hour of death, it was
distributed under one kind only.

In those times the Church believed Cyp. ad Coecil. ep. 63
that the Eucharist was a true, full, and entire Sacrifice, not only
Eucharisticall, but Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 4.
propitiatory, and offered it as well for the living Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 41.
as the dead. The faithful and devout people of the Church in those times made
pilgrimages to Basil. in 40. Martyr.
the bodies of the Martyrs, Ambr. de vid.
prayed to the Martyrs to pray to God for them, Aug. in Psa. 63. and 88.
celebrated their Feasts, Hier. ad Marcell. Ep. 17.
reverenced their Relics in all honorable forms. And when they had received
help from God, by the intercession of the said Martyrs, Theod. de Grac. aff. l.
8.
they hung up in the Temples, and upon the Altars erected to their memory,
Images of those parts of their bodies that had been healed. The Church of those
times held Basil. de sanct. Spir.
the Apostolical Traditions to be equal to the Apostolical Writings; and
held for Apostolical Traditions all that the Church of Rome now imbraceth
under that title. She also offered prayers for the Tertul. de Mon. Aug. de
verb. Ap.
dead, both public and private, to the end to procure for them ease and rest,
and held this custom as a thing Aug. de cura pro mort.
necessary for the refreshing of their souls. The Church then held the Hier.
ad Marcel. Ep. 54.
fast of the forty days of Lent for a custom, not free but necessary, and of
Apostolical Tradition. And out of the time of Pentecost, fasted all the
Fridaies of the years, in memory of the death of Christ, except Christmasse day
fell on a Friday, Epiph. in compend.
which she excepted as an Apostolical Tradition. That Church held Epiph. cont.
Apostol. Haeres. 51.
marriage after the vow of Virginity to be a sin, and reputed Chrysostom. ad
Theod. Hier. cont. Iov. lib. 1.
those that married together after their vows, not only for Adulterers, but
also for incestuous persons.

That Church held the Cyp. Cacil. Ep 63.
mingling of water with Wine in the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, for a thing
necessary, and of divine and Apostolical Tradition. She held Aug. de pecc.
orig. cap. 40.
Exorcismes, Exsufflations and renuntiations, which are made in Baptism, for
sacred Ceremonies and of Apostolical Tradition. She, besides Baptism and the
Eucharist, held Aug. cont. Petil lib. 3. cap. 4.
Confirmation, Aug. de nupt. and conc c. 17.
Marriage, Amb. de poenit. c. 7.
Penance, Leo 1. Epist.
or auricular Confession, Aug. cont. Parm. l. 2. c. 13.
Orders, and Extreme Unction, for true and proper Sacraments: which are the
seven Sacraments which the Church of Rome now acknowledges. That Church in the
Ceremonies of Baptism used Cyp. Epist. 70.
Oil, Conc. Carth. 3. c. 5
Salt, Gr. Naz. de Bapt.
Wax-lights, Aug. Ep. 101.
Exorcismes, the Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 6. cap. 8.
sign of the Cross, Amb. de Sacra. l. 1.
word Ephata, and other things that accompany it; none of them without reason
and excellent signification. She also held Aug. de an. and ejus orig. l. 3. c 15
Baptism for infants of absolute necessity, and for this cause permitted
Tertul. de Bapt.
Laymen to baptize in the danger of death. That Church used Holy Water,
consecrated by certain words and ceremonies, and made use of it both for Basil.
de S. Spirit. c. 17.
Baptism, and Epiph. har. 30.
against Enchantments, and to make Theod. hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 3.
Exorcismes, and conjurations against evil spirits. That Church held diverse
degrees in the Ecclesiastical Regiment, to wit, Council. Lacd c. 24. Conc.
Carth. 4. c. 2.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, the Acolyte, Exorcist, Reader and the
Porter; consecrated and blessed them, with diverse forms and ceremonies. And in
the Episcopal Order, acknowledged diverse seats of Jurisdiction of positive
right, to wit, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs, and Hieron. ad Damas. Ep. 57.
Council. Chal. Ep. ad Leon.
one super-eminent by divine Law, which was the Pope; without whom nothing
could be decided appertaining to the universal Church; and the want of whose
presence either by himself or his Legates, or his Confirmation, made all
Counsels (pretended to be universal) unlawful.

In that Church their service was said throughout the Hier. praef. in Paralip.
East in Greek, and throughout the Aug. Ep. 57. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 13.
West as well in Africa as Europe, in Latin: although that in none of the
Provinces (except in Italy, and in the Cities where the Roman Colonies
resided) the Latin tongue was understood by the common people. She also
observed the distinction of Aug. Ep. 118. and Psa 63. and 83.
Feasts, and ordinary days, the distinction of Hier. ad Helis. Ep. 3. Theod.
hist. Ec. l. 2. c. 27
Ecclesiastical and Lay habits, the Optat. l. 1. p. 19.
reverence of sacred vessels, the custom of Theod. hist. l. 5. c. 8. Isod de
Diu. Off. l. 1. c. 4.
shaving and Greg. Naz. de pac. or. 1.
unction for the collation of Orders, the ceremony of the Cyrill. Hier. Cac.
Mart. 5.
Priest washing his hands at the Altar before the consecration of the
mysteries; Council. Lacd. c. 13.
pronounced a part of the Service at the Altar with a low voice; made Aug. de.
Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
processions with the Relics of Martyrs, Hier. cont. Vigil.
kissed them, Hier. cont. Vigil.
carried them in clothes of silk, and vessels of gold, Hier. c. Vi.
took and esteemed the dust from under their Reliquaries, accompanied the dead
to their sepulchers with Greg. Naz. in lul. Orat. 3.
Wax Tapers in sign of joy for the certainty of their future resurrection. The
Church of those days had the pictures of Christ and his Saints, both Eusebius.
de. vita Constable. l. 3.
out of Churches Paulin. Ep. 12. Basil. in Martyr. Barlaam.
and in them, and upon the very Prudent. in S. Cassian.
Altars of Martyrs; not to adore them with God-like Worship, but by them to
reverence the Soldiers and Champions of Christ. The faithful then used the
Tert. de Coron. milit.
sign of the Cross in all their conversations, Cyril. co^t. Iul. l. 6.
painted it on the portall of all the houses of the faithful, Hier. in vit.
Hill.
gave their blessing to the people with their hand by the sign of the Cross,
Athan. cont. Idol.
employed it to drive away evil spirits, Paul. Ep. 11.
proposed in Jerusalem the very Cross to be adored on Good Friday. In brief,
that Church used either directly or proportionably, the very same Ceremonies,
that the Roman Church uses at this day. And finally that Church held, Tert. de
Praescript. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 4. c. 32.
that to the Catholic Church only belongs the keeping of the Apostolical
Traditions, the authority of the interpretation of Scripture, and the decision
of controversies of faith; and that out of the succession Cyp de unit. Eccles.
Conc. Car. 4. c. 1.
of her Communion, of Hier. cont. Lucif. Aug. de util. cred. c. 8.
her Doctrine, c and her Ministry, there was neither Church nor salvation. Cyp.
ad Pup. Ep. 63 ad Mag. Ep. 76. Hier. ad Tit. c. 3.
And let the indifferent Reader now judge, whether by this face we may know the
Roman, or the Protestant Church.

3. But because there is between two or three hundred years, from the time of
the first general Council, to the Apostles, and that some Protestants say,
that as Mephibosheth in his infancy fell from his nurses lap, whereby he became
lame, and halted all his life after: So the Church in the most primitive times
fell from the true faith, whereby she has ever since gone awry: we will still
go on in the quest of the Roman Churches Antiquity even to the times of the
Apostles, alleging some one (amongst many) of every age of the first five
hundred years, (to make the proof the fuller) in confirmation of some Roman
doctrines that are most mainly gainsaid by Protestants; Wherein will appear
that false and vain challenge of Bishop Jewel, renewed by D. Whitaker, who to
the glorious Martyr Campian writes thus. Resp. ad. Rat. Camp.
Attend Campian, the speech of Jewel was most true and constant, when
provoking you to the antiquity of the first six hundred years, he offered that
if you could show by any one clear and plain saying, out of any one Father or
Council, he would grant you the victory: it is the offer of us all the same do
we all promise, and we will all, perform it. Indeed in the first three, of the
first six hundred years, the Church was almost under continual persecution,
and so the writers of those times were few, and much of that which they wrote
did perish in those great ship-wracks of persecution; and the matters that they
wrote of, most commonly, were of another quality than concerns our present
differences, the Heresies of those days being for the most part different from
the present; and much of their writings being spent in Apologies for themselves
against the Heathen. Yet all these advantages of the Protestants are too narrow
to cover their design; For in those ages (to retort the former boast of the
Protestants) there is not one single proof, out of any one Father (rightly
interpreted) for any one point of doctrine, held by Protestants opposite to the
Roman Catholic; and for the Roman Catholic there is abundance. In the
alleging whereof, I will begin at the bottom, and so go upward, in some of
which testimonies there shall be intermingling the interpretation of some
Scriptures to the same purpose, whereby I will include the testimony of
Scripture also, as it is interpreted by these Fathers, who were doubtless
better expositers than John Calvin, or any of his followers.

And first of the Real and corporal presence of our Savior in the Holy
Eucahrist, and of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. In the fifth age or hundred
of years, S. Augustine expounding the title of the Psalm, in which it is
written, And he was carried in his own hands, says, Aug. Conc. 1. in Ps. 33.
Brethren who can understand how this could be done in man? for who is carried
in his own hands? a man may be carried in the hands of another. How this may be
understood in David himself, according to the letter, we find not; but in
Christ we find. For Christ was carried in his own hands, when commending his
own body, he said, This is my Body, for he carried that body in his hands. Nor
have the Protestants more reason to deny this place to intend the true, real,
natural body and person of our Savior, because Turtullian says, it is a
figure of his body; than the Manichees and other Heretics had to deny a real
body to our Savior, when he lived upon earth, because the Scripture says, He
took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men,
Philip. 2.7. From which place they inferred, that he was not a man really and
indeed, but had only the form and likeness of a man. And if they would 'not
stand to the judgment of the Church for the sense and meaning of these words,
who could convince them? For they drew all other places to the sense of this,
and would not suffer this to yeald unto them, though they were never so many,
or never so plain.

In the fourth age, S. Ambrose says Lib. 4. de Sacram c. 5.
Before it be consecrated it is but bread, but when the words of consecration
come, it is the body of Christ. To conclude, hear him saying, Take and eat of
it all, for this i^ my body: and before the words of Christ, the chalice is
full of wine and water; when the words of Christ have wrought there it is made
blood which redeemed the people. Therefore mark in how great matters the word
of Christ is potent to convert all things. Moreover our very Lord Jesus
testifies unto us that we receive his body and blood, what ought we to doubt
of his fidelity and testimony. And again he says, Lib. de iis qui misteriis
initiantur. c. 9.
Perhaps you may say, I see another thing, how do you affirm to me that I
shall receive the body of Christ. This yet remains to us to prove. How great
examples therefore do we use, to prove that it is not this which nature has
formed, but which benediction has consecrated, and that there is greater force
of benediction than of nature, because by the benediction the nature it self
is changed. Moses held a Rod, he cast it down, and it is made a Serpent etc.
which if humane benediction were so powerful that it converted nature, what
say we of the divine consecration it self, where the very words of our Lord
and Savior do work.

In the third age, S. Cyprian tells us plainly, if the former be not plain
enough for Transubstantiation; that, Sermon. de Coena Dom. prope init.
That bread which the Lord did give to his disciples, being changed not in
shape but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh; and as in
the person of Christ his humanity was seen, his divinity lay hid; so in the
visible Sacrament, the divine essence does infuse it self after an expressible
manner.

In the second age we find S. Iraeneus speaking thus; Lib. 4. c. 32. in fine.
But giving council unto his diciples to offer unto God the first fruits of
his creatures, not as to one that wanted, but that they might be neither
unfruitful nor ungrateful, he took that which is bread of the creature, and
he gave thanks, saying, this is my body. And the cup in like manner, which is
of that creature, which is according to us, he confesses his blood, and taught
a new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church receiving from the
Apostles, offers to God through all the world, to him that makes the first
fruits of his gifts in the new Testament nourishments to us; of which in the
twelve Prophets: Malachy 1.10.11. has thus fore-signified, I have no will to
you says the Lord Omnipotent, and I will not receive a sacrifice of your hands;
for from the rising of the sun unto the going down, my name is glorified
amongst the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered to my Name, and a
pure sacrifice, because my name is great amongst the Gentiles, says the Lord
Almighty. Manifestly signifying by these words that the former people ceased to
offer to God, but in every place sacrifice is offered to God, and this pure,
but his name is glorified in the nations.

Nor can this be meant of the Sacrifice of all Christians in general, but only
of the Priests, (because as by the Chapter it does appear) God speaks of
rejecting the Priests of the old law and their Sacrifice, and choosing a new
priesthood, whom he calls the sons of Levi, Mal. 3.3. by which figuratively
is meant, the Priests of the new Law, and so do the Ministers of England
frequently style themselves, the Tribe of Levi. Besides Protestants confess
that their Whitaker. cont. Dur. l. 8. p. 572.
prayers and best actions are impure and sinful, it cannot therefore be meant
of such Sacrifices, for this is a pure sacrifice and proper, which none but
Priests can offer, and is therefore according to the exposition of S. Irenaeus,
the Sacrifice of the Body and blood of Christ, the purest sacrifice that can be
imagined. In this age also Justin Martyr says, In Apol. 2. ad Anton. Imperat
prope finem.
* For we do not take those things as common bread, and common drink, but as
Jesus Christ our Savior made flesh by the word of God, had both flesh and
blood for our Salvation; so the bread and wine being made the Eucharist by the
prayer of the word proceeding from him, by which our flesh and blood are
nourished by change, we are taught, that it is the flesh and blood of the same
Jesus Christ incarnate.

Lastly in the first age, S. Ignatius, Martyr and Disciple of S. John the
Evangelist, speaking of the error of the Saturnians says, Epist. ad Smynium,
ut citatur a Theodoreto* Dial. 3.
They do not admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not confess the
Eucharist to be the flesh of the Savior, which suffered for our sins, which
the Father by his ^ounty raised. And S. Andrew the Apostle says, lib. pass. S.
Andreae, apud Suriu^.
I daily sacrifice an immaculate Lamb to the omnipotent God: which when it is
truly sacrificed, and the flesh thereof truly eaten of the people, does
continue whole and alive.

Concerning the honor and Invocations of Saints, in the fifth age S. Augustine
says, Sermon. 17. de verbis Apost. prope init.
It is an injury to pray for a Martyr, to whose prayers we ought to be
commended. And accordingly he did commend himself in these words, Meditat. c.
40.
Holy and immaculate Virgin Mary, Mother of God, and Mother of our Lord Jesus
Christ, vouchsafe to intercede for me to him whose Temple thou have deserved to
be made. Holy Michael, holy Gabriel, holy Raphael, holy Quires of Angels and
Archangells, of Patriarchs and Prophets, of Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, Priests, Levites, Monks, Virgins, and all the just, both by him who
has chosen you, and in whose contemplation you rejoice, I presume to ask, that
you would deign to beseech God for me a sinner, that I may deserve to be
delivered from the jaw of the Devil and from eternal death. And again he
says, Lib. de loquutionibus in Genesis prope finem.
Jacob blessing his Nephews the sons of Joseph, among other things he says,
and my name shall be invoked in these, and the name of my Fathers. Whence it is
to be noted, that not only hearing, but also invocation is sometimes said, which
are not things pertaining unto God (only) but unto men.

In the fourth age we find S. Gregory Nazianzene speaking thus to S. Basil the
great In Orat. 20. quae est in laudem Basilii Magni.
But thou holy and heavenly head, I pray thee behold us from heaven, and either
with thy prayers stop the provocation of the flesh, which God has given us for
instruction; or truly persuade, that we may bear (it) with a valiant mind: and
direct all our life to that which is most availeable; and after that we shall
pass out of this life, receive us also there in thy Tabernacles. And S.
Hierome against Vigilantius says, Cont. Vigilant. c. 3. initio.
Thou say in thy book, that while we live we may pray for one another, but
after we shall be dead, the prayer of no man is to be heard for another,
especially seeing the Martyrs regarding the revenge of their blood, shall not
be able to obtain; to which he answers, 'If the Apostles and Martyrs being yet
in the body can pray for others, when as yet they ought to be solicitors for
themselves, how much more after crowns, victories and triumphs? And a little
after he answers to the objection of their being dead, saying, To conclude, the
Saints are not said to be dead, but asleep.

In the third age Origin gives us this example, Initio sui Lamenti.
I will begin to prostrate my self on my knees, and to beseech all the Saints,
that they help me, who dare not beg of God, by reason of the abundance of (my)
sin. O Saints of God I beseech you with tears and weeping full of grief, that
you fall down to his mercies for me miserable wretch; And after; woe is me,
Father Abraham pray for me, that I be not estranged from thy bosom, which I
have greatly desired, not condignely truly, by reason of my great sin.

In the second age, Justin Martyr speaks thus, Apol. 2. ad Anton. Pium Imper.
non long ab initio.
Moreover we do worship and adore him (to wit God;) and the Son who came from
him, and taught us these things, and the Army of others that followed, and of
the good Angels assimilated, and the prophetical Spirit, reverencing in word
and truth, and fairly delivering it as we are taught, to all that will learn.

And in the first age, in the Liturgy of S. James the less, Ante Med.
we have these words, e Let us make commemoration of the most holy, immaculate,
most glorious, our blessed Lady, Mother of God, and always Virgin Mary, and of
all Saints and just ones, that we may all obtain mercy by their prayers and
intercessions.

. 5. Thirdly, for the use and veneration of holy Relics and Images, and
chiefly of the holy Cross, hear what S. Augustine says in the fifth age,
Tract. 118. in Joan. fine
What is the sign of Christ which all have known, but the Cross of Christ?
which sign unless it be applied, whether to the foreheads of believers, or to
the water wherewith they are regenerated, or to the oil wherewith they are
anointed with the chrisme: or to the Sacrifice wherewith they are nourished,
nothing of them is rightly performed.

In the fourth age we shall find Athanasius speaking thus, and expressing the
manner of Catholics worship of Images; ad Antiochum Principem.
Let it be far from us, that we Christians adore images as Gods, as the Greeks
do; we declare only our affection, and the care of our love toward the figure
of the person expressed by his image: therefore oftentimes we burn as
unprofitable the wood which ere while was an image, if the figure be worn out.
Therefore as Jacob when he was to die, adored the top of Joseph's rod, not
honoring the rod it self, but him who held the rod; So we Christians do no
otherwise adore images, but even as moreover when we kiss our Fathers and
children, we declare the desire of our mind. Even as the Jew also did adore in
times past, the Tables of the law, and the two golden Cherubins, and certain
other Images, not worshipping the nature of the stone, or gould, but our Lord
who commanded them to be made.

Homil. 8. in diversos Evangelii locos.
In the third age * Origin says thus: To conclude, * in Ezekiel the Prophet,
chapter 9. v. 4. when the Angel who was sent had slain all, and the slaughter had
begun from the Saints, they only are kept safe, whom the letter TAU, that is,
the picture of the Cross had signed. Let us rejoice therefore most dear
brethren, and let us lift up holy hands to heaven in the form of a Cross: when
the devils shall see us so armed they shall be vanquished. And note I pray by
the way, that some English Bibles do leave out the letter TAU, in this place
of Ezekiel, but how justly let any indifferent reader judge.

In the second age, hear S. Justin Martyr speaking of the parts of dead
beasts, thus arguing, Ad quaest. 28. Gentilium.
How, is it not most absurd, to account these things clean, by reason of the
profit which is reaped of them, and that the Greeks do detest the bodies and
sepulchers of holy Martyrs, which have power both to defend men from the snares
of the Devils, and to cure diseases which cannot be cured by the art of the
Physician.

In the first age, S. Ignatius speaks thus: Epist. ad Phil. ante med.
For the Prince of the world rejoices when one shall deny the Cross: For he
knows the confession of the Cross to be his overthrow: For that is a trophie
against his power, which when he shall see, he trembles, and hearing, he fears.

. 6. Fourthly, concerning Confession and Priestly Absolution, in the fifth age
S. Augustine thus exhorts, Homil. 49. ante med.
Do penance such as is done in the Church. Let no man say to himself, I do
secretly, I do to God, God knows (who pardons me) that I do in my heart. Is it
therefore without cause said, what you shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in
heaven? Mat. 18.18. Are therefore the keys given to the Church of God, to no
purpose? Do we frustrate the Gospel of God? do we frustrate the words of
Christ?

In the fourth age, S. Basil the great speaks thus, Suis regulis brevioribus
interr. 288.
Men ought necessarily to open sins to them who are entrusted with the
dispensation of the mysteries of God. For truly we see, that even those
ancients did follow this order in penance, after which manner it is written in
the Gospel, that they did confess their sins to John, Mat. 3.6. and in the
Acts chapter 18. v. 18. to the Apostles themselves, by whom also all were baptized.

In the third age, S. Cyprian beseeches them saying, Sermon. de lapsis.
Let every one confess his fault I entreat you brethren, while as yet he that
has offended is in this life, while his confession can be admitted, while
satisfaction, and remission given by the Priests, is grateful to the Lord.

In the second age Tertullian speaking against men's concealing part of their
sins in Confession, thus reproves them, lib. de poenit. c. 10.
The hiding of a sin does promise plainly a great profit of bashfulnesse: To
wit surely, if we shall steal any thing from humane knowledge, we shall then
also hide it from God. The esteem of men and the knowledge of God are they so
compared? Is it better to lie hid damned, than to be openly absolved? It is a
miserable thing so to come to Confession.

And in the first age S. Clement advises thus, Clem. To. Epist. 1
If peradventure envy or infidelity, or some of these evils which we have
remembered above, shall privily steal into any bodies hearts, he that has a
care of his soul, let him not be ashamed to confess these things, to him that
has authority, that he may be cured by him, by the Word of God, and wholesome
Counsel, whereby he may, by found faith and good works avoid the pains of
eternal fire, and attain to the everlasting rewards of life.

Now concerning Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, in the fifth age S. Augustine
says, De civit. Dei l. 20. c. 24. and l. 21. c. ^3.
Neither could it be truly said of some Matthew. 22.32. That they are not
forgiven neither in this life, nor in the life to come, unless there were some
who though they are not forgiven in this life, yet should be in the life to
come. And again, Sermon 41. de Sanct. prope initium.
'There are many who not rightly understanding this reading, are deceived with
false security, whilst they believe that if they build capital sins upon the
foundation, Christ, those sins may be purged by transitory fire, and they
afterward come to life everlasting. This understanding, etc. is to be
corrected, because they deceive themselves, who so flatter themselves, for with
that transitory fire whereof the Apostle said, 1. Cor. 3.15. He shall be saved,
yet so as by fire, not capital but little sins are purged. And concerning
Prayers for the dead, he says, Sermon. 32. de verb. Apost.
It is not to be doubted, that the dead are helped by the prayers of the
Church, and the saving Sacrifice, and by alms which are given for their
souls, that God would deal more mercifully with them, than their sins have
deserved.

In the fourth age S. Ambrose in his interpretation of the forementioned place
of S. Paul, says, Amb. in 1 Cor. 3.
But whereas S. Paul says, yet so as by fire, he shows indeed that he shall
be saved, but yet shall suffer the punishment of fire, that being purged by
fire, he may be saved, and not be tormented for ever, as the Infidells are with
everlasting fire. And S. Hierome says, there are some, In Comment. in cap 11.
Prover.
who may be absolved after death of lighter sins, of which they die guilty,
either being punished with pains, or by the prayers and alms of their friends,
and the celebration of Masses.

In the third age we shall find S. Cyprian speaking thus, Epist. 52. ad Anton.
post. med.
It is one thing to stay for pardon, another to attain to glory; one thing
being cast into prison, not to go out thence until he do pay the uttermost
farthing, Mat. 5.27. another thing presently to receive the reward of faith and
virtue: one thing being afflicted with long pain for sins, to be mended and
purged long with fire, another thing to have purged all sins by suffering: to
conclude, it is one thing to depend upon the sentence of the Judge in the day
of Judgment, another thing to be presently crowned of the Lord.

In the second age, Tertullian in agreement with the rest, says, lib. de anima
cap. 58.
In sum, seeing we understand that Prison, which the Gospel does demonstrate,
to be places below, and the last farthing we interpret every small fault,
there to be punished by the delay of the Resurrection; no man will doubt, but
that the soul does recompense something in the places below, saving the
fullness of the Resurrection by the flesh also. And in his book De corona
militis, he says, cap. 3.
'we make yearly oblations, for the dead. And a little after, cap. 4.
If you require a Law of Scripture, for these and other the like Disciplines,
you shall find none. Tradition is showed thee for the Author, custom the
confirmer, and faith the observer.

And in the first age S. Clement speaking of S. Peter, reports thus of him,
Clem. To. Ep. 1. de S. Petre prope fin.
His daily preaching amongst other divine commandments, was this etc. every
one as far as he understands and is able, to love God with all his heart, and
his neighbor as himself, to relieve the poor, to cloth the naked, to visit
the sick, to give drink to the thirsty, to bury the dead, and diligently to
perform their funerals, and to pray and give alms for them.

. 8. Concerning Traditions in the fifth age, S. Augustine says, Lib. 4. de
bapt. con. Donat. c. 24.
That which the whole Church does hold, and is not instituted by Counsels, but
is always retained, is rightly believed not to be delivered, but by
Apostolic authority. And S. Chrysostom, In 1 These. 2. In 1 These. hom. 4.
It is manifest, that the Apostles did not deliver all things by Epistle, but
many things without writing. And as well these as those are worthy of the same
credit; wherefore let us esteem the Tradition of the Church to be believed. It
is a Tradition, seek no further.

In the fourth age, S. Basil speaks thus, Lib. de Spirit. sancto c. 27.
The opinions which are kept and preached in the Church, we have partly out of
written Doctrine, partly we have received by the Tradition of the Apostles,
brought to us in a mystery. Both which have the same power to piety, and no man
contradicted these, who has but mean experience of Ecclesiastical rights.

In the third age, Here Is. 61.
we must use Traditions (says S. Epiphanius) for all things cannot be received
from divine Scripture, wherefore the holy Apostles have delivered some things
by Tradition, even as the holy Apostle says. As I have delivered to you, and
elsewhere, so I teach, and have delivered in Churches.

In the second age, S. Irenaeus thus expostulateth; lib. 3. c. 4.
But what if the Apostles neither had left Scriptures unto us, ought we not to
follow the order of Tradition, which they delivered to them, to whom they
committed the Churches?

And in the first age S. Dennys tells us, that Areopag. c. 1. Eccles. Hierar.
those first leaders of our Priestly Office, delivered to us those chief and
supersubstantiall things, partly in writings, partly in unwritten institutions.

I could give plenty of proofs in all other particulars; But as the cluster of
grapes (which was brought out of Canaan to the Israelites) was a testimony of
the fruit the Land brought forth, Numb. 13.23. So this small parcel of
antiquity taken out of their great store, is proof sufficient that the most
ancient Church, even in all the first ages, and the Scripture it self in the
judgment of those Fathers, did teach the same Doctrines that the Roman Church
now does, and has had a perpetual and uninterrupted succession in those
Doctrines, and her Pastors; and is therefore the self-same Church with the
Apostles. A thing foretold by Daniel, who calls it a Kingdom which shall never
be dissolved, Dan. 7.14. And in which the Maxim of wise Gamaliel is verified;
if this counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it, Act. 5.38, 39.

9. But among the Protestant Churches I found no such thing; neither Antiquity
in their Doctrine, (but contrariwise their Doctrine condemned by Antiquity, as
I have showed before) nor yet in the body of their Professors. And though they
allege some places of the Fathers in proof of their Doctrines, yet they
corrupt the meaning, as may easily appear to those, that divesting themselves
of all interest, can and will indifferently examine the places; who shall find
that they make not for them. Nor indeed can they, for my former alleged
reason; namely, that if Antiquity had understood them so, to wit, in the
Protestant sense, some or other would either have reproved them for so
frequently elsewhere affirming the Roman Doctrines (as Protestants confess they
did, as I have showed) or for affirming those Protestant doctrines, which were
contradictory to them; which seeing they did not, it is manifest they believed
no such contradictions in their writings, but understood those places which
Protestants allege as Catholics now do, as making nothing to the
Protestants purpose. But for their Catholic doctrines, it is manifest that
they cannot be interpreted to comply with the Protestant Religion; for if they
could, why do the most learned Protestants accuse them of Popery? It is a rule
of De doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 25. 26.
S. Augustine in the interpretation of Scripture, which is also as proper for
the Fathers, and agreeable to reason, that where there are many clear places on
the one side, and some few obscure places on the other, the obscure must give
place to the clear, and be reduced to an agreement with them in meaning; which
rule if it be observed, it will easily appear whether the Fathers were of the
Roman or the Protestant Church.

As for the Antiquity of the body of the Professors of the Protestant religion,
it whom the ancient Apostolical Church has her resurrection, which like
Epimenid^ (they say) fell asleep when she was young and waked not till she was
old, no man knowing what was become of her in the mean while, I could not
indeed find i^ more ancient than some very old men somewhat above sixscore
years; old Pa^ that died in England but few years ago, might have been
grandfather to the Religion, or at least elder brother to the Father thereof
Martin Luther, who in the year 1517. (like a prodigious Comet) began to appear,
and ingendring with the devil, blasted the beauty of the Spouse of Christ, and
filled the Christian world with Heresy and blood. And in the year 1529. Luther
and his Disciples received the name of Protestants, from their Protestation and
Appeal from the decree of the Diet of Spira; in which title, the nation of
England (I think) does more triumph, than any of Luthers offspring.

And whereas they do pretend, some of them, to have always had a Being before
that time, it will fitly be examined in the next mark of the Church, which is,
visibility. For the maxim of law will hold good in this case, IDEM EST, NON
ESSE, ET NON APPARERE, it is all one, not to be, and not to appear. For the
present, seeing no more of them than yet we do; we may speak to them in the
words of Tertullian Tertul. de praescript. 17.
QUI ESTIS VOS, UNDE ET QUANDO VENISTIS? who are you, from whence and when came
you? for either they are as young as Luthers Apostasy, or else older than
Christ and his Apostles, even Jews, and so old, that the mark is quite worn
out of their mouth.

CHAP. XIII.
Of visibility, the third mark of the Church; And of the vanity of Protestants
supposition, that the true Church is sometimes invisible. That Protestant
Churches have not always been visible.

. 1. The third mark we will seek the true Church by, is Visibility; which was
foretold by the Prophet Esaias 2.2. and Micah 4.1. It shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations
shall flow unto it. Also Ezekiel. 37.28. The nations shall know that I am the
sanctifier of Israel, when my sanctification shall be in the middle of them for
ever. And S. Augustine resembles it, (according to the saying of our Savior
Matthew. 5.14.) A city placed on a hill that cannot be hid. And he has placed his
tabernacle in the sun, Psalm. 18.6. that is in open view etc. his tabernacle,
his Church, is placed in the Sun, not in the night, but in the day. Tom. 9. in
Epist. Jo. Tract. 2. And further says of the Church, that Cont. Petil. l. 2.
c. 104.
she has this most certain mark, that she cannot be hid; she is then known to
all Nations: the sect of Donatus is unknown to many Nations, that then cannot
be she.

To the children of the Church it is appointed by Christ, that for the redress
of their grievances, they tell the Church, Mat. 81.17. which were a delusion
unless the Church were always visible: who did also forewarn us against all
obscure congregations, saying, If therefore they shall say unto you, behold he
is in the desert, go you not forth, behold he is in secret places, believe it
not, Mat. 24.26. Now according to these assurances, I found, that the Roman
Church was always and eminently visible, but the Protestant never eminent, and
for the most part, not visible at all. Concerning the visibility of the Church
of Rome, it is proved before, by those testimonies which show the antiquity,
and perpetual continuance thereof, which cannot be proved but with the
granting of her visibility. Nor have I found the Protestants denying it, the
thing being so visible, that it leaves no place for objections. But they think
to wipe out this mark, by saying, that it is not necessary to a true Church to
be always visible: but others disliking that assertion, by reason of the
absurdity thereof, do affirm, (to counterpoize the Roman) that the Protestant
Church has been always visible.

. 2. And first, they that hold that the Church has been invisible, and that
therefore visibility is not a certain mark of the Church, endeavor to prove it
by the example of the Church of the Jews in the days of Elias, 3 King.
19.10.18. who complained that the Prophets were slain, and he only was left
alive, and God answered, that there were left seven thousand that had not bowed
the knee to Baal. To which objection I found the answer of Catholics very
true, namely, that this complaint of Elias was uttered with relation to the
Kingdom of Israel only, wherein Elias then was, and was persecuted by King
Ahab; but in the Kingdom of Judah, the Church did flourish, and was
sufficiently known to him, and all men, under the reigns of Asa and Joshaphat 3
Kings 22.41. who reigned in Judah when Achab reigned in Israel. As what time
the number of true believers was so great, 2 Chronicles. 17.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
that the men of war only, did amount to many hundred thousands.

And whereas M. Meade makes reply to this answer, saying, that the Church was
invisible, in the Kingdom of Judah also, in the days of Manasses because it
is said, 2 Chronicles. 33. that Manasses set up Idolatry, committed all impiety, and
caused Judah and Jerusalem to err; I answer, that this comes short of a proof;
for though the Kings example in all cases, though never so bad, have a mighty
influence on the people, yet this proves not but that the Kingdom, or an
eminent part, or at least a visible part both of Priests and people, was still
untainted; even as it was in the days of the persecution of Antiochus against
the Jews, who set up the Abomination of desolation, the Idol of Olympic
Jupiter, in the Temple, and compelled men to worship it. Besides, if it were as
he would have it, the case is much different between a very short time of the
invisibility of the Church of the Jews, (for we read in the same Chapter, that
Manasses quickly repented, and amended all) and the invisibility of the
Protestant Church, which by their own confessions was above a thousand years.
Also the comparison between the Church of the Jews and Christians is not
equal: the New Testament being established in better promises, Heb. 8.6. and
therefore that may be incident to the one, which is not to the other. Moreover
if there had been this total eclipse, it had relation but to the Nation of the
Jews only, besides which were many other faithful people, in all ages, as
appears by the examples of Melchizedek, Job, etc. in the Old Testament; and in
the New of Cornelius, and the Eunuch to the Queen of Candace, amongst which the
Church might be visible, though amongst the Jews invisible.

3. Others I have heard say, that by Catholics own confession, in the days of
Antichrist, the Church shall be invisible; But I never have read any Catholic
that said so, yet on the contrary, I have found Protestants affirm Bullinger.
in Apoc. 20. Fulk against Rhe^. in These. 2. sect. 5.
the visibility of the Church, and that universally even all the days of
Antichrist, which makes against themselves if they account the Pope Antichrist
(as most of them do) and themselves the Church. Yet Doctor White, contrary to
his brethren, says, that F. VVhites Reply, p. 61. lin. 15. and 26.
in time of persecution, the true Church may be reputed an impious Sect by the
multitude, and so not be known by the notion of true and holy, nor can her
truth be discerned by sense and common reason. To which I answer: that as there
are four properties of Church-doctrine, so there are four notions of the
Church. The first is to be Mistress of saving truth; and according to this
notion, the Church is invisible to the natural understanding both of men and
Angels; for God only and his Blessed see our Religion to be the truth. The
second is to be Mistress of Doctrine truly revealed by secret inspiration:
according to this notion (ordinarily speaking) the Church is invisible to
almost all men that are, or ever were, the Apostles and Prophets only excepted.
The third, to be Mistress of the Doctrine which Christ and his Apostles by
their preaching and miracles planted in the world: according to this notion,
the Church was visible to the first and Primitive times; but now is not. The
fourth is to be Mistress of Catholic doctrine; that is, of Doctrine
delivered and received by full Tradition and profession, all the adversaries
thereof (that are under the title of Christian) being divided amongst
themselves, and notorious changers; and according to this notion the Church is
ever visible and sensible to all men, even to her enemies. Otherwise there is
no ordinary means left for men to know what the Apostles taught, nor
consequently what God by inspiration revealed to them. And if she and the light
of truth she carries with her, should be hidden and lost, we must begin again
anew, from a second fountain of immediate revelation from God, and build upon
the new planting thereof with Miracles in the world, by some new Apostles. And
if this be absurd; then there must ever be in the world a Church visible, whose
Traditions are famously Catholic, and consequently showing themselves to be
the Apostles, to all men that will not be obstinate.

And that the Church shall be universally visible even in the days of
Antichrist, may be gathered out of the Scripture, Rev. 20.8. For she shall then
be every where persecuted, which could not be, unless she were visible, and
conspicuous even to the wicked. And even during the first 300. years after
Christ, wherein the Church endured incomparably more universal and raging
persecutions than ever were, yet the Magd. cent. 1, 2, 3. Fulke cont. Stapleton
de success. Eccl. p. 246.
Century-writers, and sundry others do take certain and particular notice of
the Catholic Bishops and Pastors, by name, in those very ages; of their
administration of the Word and Sacraments, and their open impugning of
Heresies. And surely our Lord himself had been (which is blasphemy to think of
him, who is the eternal wisdom of the Father) the most imprudent of all
Lawmakers, to have a Law so obscure, and exposed to so many suppositions,
depravations, and false expositions, whereto the malice of the Heretics of
all ages has subjected it, without leaving a depository to keep it, and a
judge to interpret it, or to leave it to such a keeper, and such a judge as
should be invisible.

. 4. Other Protestants I have observed, who though they confess the
invisibility of their Church, yet profess the being thereof, and assign the
place for it, to be in the Roman Church, mixed like a great deal of ore with a
very little pure gold, so that it was not discernable. But this assignation of
their Church seemed to me very unreasonable; for either those Protestants did
profess their own faith, or they did not; if they did, then doubtless they
were visible, and the Roman Church would soon have taken notice of them, as she
did in all ages of such (though it were but one man) that differed from her. If
they did not make profession of their faith, what wretched sons of fear were
they, that to preserve their temporal security durst not publicly avow their
own Religion; but comply in all things with a Religion (in their opinion) false
and impious, and dissemblingly do all the external acts thereof, and this, all
their lives, for many generations successively.

This was not the part of a true Church, or of any true member thereof; who
will surely die, rather than deny his Savior; as he does, who believing
himself to be of the true Religion, makes profession of that which he deemes
to be false. Nor did they fulfill the Prophecy of Esaias concerning the true
Church, which says, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, which shall never hold
their peace day nor night, Esaias 62.6. But Doctor Field has a new fancy of his
own, which I never observed in any but himself, who says to this purpose,
that before the separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome, the
Church of Rome it self was the Protestant Church, and that the Papists were
but a faction of the Court of Rome; an assertion so grossly false, that all the
world is a witness against it, yea even (I think) all other Protestants
themselves, and needs no confutation.

. 5. Others taking all these Pleas for insufficient, do affirm that their
Church was in being, and in sight also in all ages, but that through the injury
of later times no testimony thereof is now remaining, but that all their
records through the violence of the Pope and his Clergy, have been utterly
suppressed: Of which vain conceit there is no proof at all; and if the
assertion without proof will serve their turn, it may serve also for any other
Religion, Christian, or not Christian, who if they please, may say the same
thing, but are never like to be believed by any man of common understanding.
Besides it thwarteth all experience, as appears by the example of Husse and
Wickliffe whose writings are yet extant, of Charlemaines pretended Book against
Images, and Bertrams concerning the Sacrament. Also by the decrees of
Catholic Counsels, and the large writings of Catholic Doctors, reciting
and condemning all opinions contrary to the Roman faith. Lastly by the
Ecclesiastical Historiographers of every age, who make this the argument of
their writings; yea even from them, the Protestant * Centurists of Magdeburg,
Cent. Madg. Osiand. Ep. Illyricus Catol. Whitaker. cont. Duraeum page 276. and.
469.
and others, do recite the opinions mentioned and condemned in every age by the
Church of Rome; of which some were the very same, that have since been revived
by Protestants; So that the Church of Rome has been so far from extinguishing
their records; that she has been the chief recorder of them and their
doctrines.

. 6. The last and most valiant attempt of Protestants, is to affirm that as
the Church must be allwaies visible, so theirs has been in persons distinct
from the Roman Church; and thereby invite us to A Protestants book so entitled.
look beyond Luther. Which barren endeavor of theirs has been like Peter's
fishing all night, and catching nothing. For they whom the Protestants claim
for their predecessors, were neither of their Religion, nor yet always
visible, there happening huge gaps betwixt them, nor can the Protestants by any
art or industry bring both ends together. First they were not of the same
Religion; for to be of the same Religion or Church with another imports an
agreement in all points of faith; for the truth of doctrine being of the
essence of the Church, whosoever erres in any little thereof, he cease to
participate of the soul of the Church, which is the Spirit of truth, and is
but a dead member, one equivocally and in name, but not in truth. We see that
the Arrians, Macedonians, and many other Heretics, were accounted, (and are
so by many Protestants) not of the Catholic Church, for one single error
against faith: now the Protestants disagreeing in many points, not only from
one another at this present, but from all that went before them, and that in
points which they believe to be revealed in the Scripture, their only rule; are
neither one Church amongst themselves at this present, nor any one of them one,
with any society that has gone before.

In particular, the Grecians whom they court to their faction, are no
Protestants; for they hold damnable errors in the judgment of Protestants; to
wit; Invocation of Saints; Adoration of Images; Transubstantiation; Communion
in one kind for the sick, with many others. So that Protestants are in great
penury of professors of their Religion before Luther; that are forced to call
the Grecians in, as Protestants in essence; for they may even as well name the
Pope himself. As for John Husse and his followers, who brake out about the
year 1400. and are claimed to be Predecessors in the Protestant Religion, it is
certain that they were no Protestants, but held such Doctrines that if they
were now in England, they should suffer as Papists. For they held p. 216.
seven Sacraments, p. 209.
Transubstantiation, p. 217. art. 7, 8.
the Popes primacy, and the Luther in Colloq. Ger. c. de Missa.
Mass it self, as Fox in his Acts and Monuments acknowledges.

No greater title have they to Wickliffe, who appeared about the year 1370. in
whom some Protestants say their visibility was maintained; for he did visibly
maintain Popery, as Wiclerus de blasphemia c. 17.
holy water; the Idem de Eucharist. c. 9.
worship of Relics, and Images; the Idem in Ser. de assumpt. Mariae.
intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary; Idem de apostosia. c. 18.
the Rites and ceremonies of the Mass, all the Idem in postil. sup. c. 15.
Marci.
7. Sacraments, with all the points of Catholic doctrine now in question.
Moreover he held errors in the condemnation whereof both Catholics and
Protestants do agree, as that Acts and Mon. p. 96. a. art. 4.
if a Bishop or Priest be in mortal sin, he does not order, consecrate, or
baptize. Idem p. 96 fine.
That Ecclesiastical Ministers should not have temporal possessions. He
Osiand. Epit. hist. Eccl. p. 459 art. 43.
condemned lawful oaths with the Anabaptists, and held many other pernicious
doctrines. Let any man then judge whether this man and his followers were
Protestants or no.

Then they ascend higher, and claim on Waldo a merchant of Lions, who brake out
of the Sheepfold about the year 1220. with his followers, as men in whom the
Protestant Church was visible; But these men were no more of kin to them, than
the former: For they held the In Ep. 244. p. 450.
real presence in the B. Sacrament, for which they are reproved by Calvin, who
therefore understood them in the Catholic sense, not in the Protestant. And
the most essential Doctrine of the Waldenses was their extolling of the merit
of Illiri^us Catolog. Test. p. 1498.
voluntary poverty, affirming all Ministers to be damned that had rents and
possessions, and that the Church perished under Pope Silvester, and the
Emperor Constantine, through the poison of temporal goods, which Clergymen
began then to enjoy (as they said) against the Law of God. Surely Protestants
do not account this an Article of their faith. Moreover the Waldenses held Idem
Catol Test. p. 1502.
these Anabaptisticall Errors: That children are not to be baptized; That there
is no difference between a Bishop and a Priest; a Priest and a Lay man; That
the Apostles were Laymen; and that every Layman that is virtuous is a Priest,
may preach and administer Sacraments; That a woman pronouncing the words of
consecration in the vulgar tongue does consecrate, yea transubstantiate bread
into the body of Christ; That it is a mortal sin to swear in any case; That
Magistrates being in mortal sin do lose in their office, and no man is to obey
them: with many other absurdities too tedious to be recited.

The like may be said of the Albigenses; and also of Beringarius, who broached
his Heresy about the year 1048. who was a Protestant but only in the point
against Transubstantiation, which he also recanted, and died a Catholic. And
what do any of these, or all these together avail the Protestants? every one
of them extending but to some part of time between this and the Primitive
Church, and is also but the example of some one or other private man, in whom
the revolt first began, who was first a Catholic, and beginning afterward to
hold some one or few points of the Protestant faith, continued in all other
matters of controversy a Catholic.

By all which it appears, that none of these were Protestants, and that
therefore in them the visibility of the Protestant Church is not maintained:
And that if it were, yet seeing they lived at several times, ununited by a
line of time one to another, (but jumping over several ages, against the Law
of nature, which non facit saltum) and that therefore in the between-spaces,
there was an invisibility of the Protestant Church; the main question of their
Churches perpetual visibility is yet unsatisfied: Especially when we consider
that for about a thousand years, which was the time betwixt Beringarius and
the Apostles, the Protestants pretend to no predecessors. As for the most
Primitive Fathers, whom they affirm to maintain the Protestant Doctrine, I have
in brief showed it to be false already, and they that will search shall more
largely find it so. Also they all died members of the Roman Church. So that the
Protestants have not in them (to wit the Fathers) a visible Church, distinct
from the Roman, nor was the Roman theirs. From whence it is manifest, that
there is not any one Protestant Church in the world, that can show her
visibility in any Kingdom, city, poor country village, or particular person
from the Apostles time to Luther; the truth whereof M. Wotton is not ashamed to
confess, where he says ( in his answer to a Popish Pamphlet p. 11.) You will
say; show us where the faith and religion you profess were held? Nay prove you
they were held no where, etc. and what if it could not be showed? yet we know
by the Articles of our Creed, that there has been always a Church, in which
we say, this Religion we now profess must of necessity be held, and with us it
is no inconvenience to have the true Church hid. This stands you upon to
disprove, which when you attempt to do by any particular records, you shall have
particular answer. Than which saying, what more ridiculous? To presume that
their Church was always visible (in the land of Vtopia sure, where no man ever
saw it) because it is the true Church, whereas they should prove it the true
Church, because it has been always visible; the knowledge of her visibility
being much more easy than of her truth, which is the main thing in
controversy. And to require of Catholics proof, that they were not visible,
by particular records, is extreme foolish; records being memorialls of things
that were, not of things that were not.

. 7. All which considerations, shaking the confidence of many Protestants in
the visibility of their Church before Luther, after they have thus fluttered up
and down, finding (like the Dove out of the Arc) no rest for the sole of their
foot, they at last fly to the Scriptures, and think to perch upon that; under
whose obscurity, and their corruption of them, while they will admit none to
interpret them but themselves, they frame what sense they please, as any body
else may do, and with great confidence, but little judgment (as all Heretics
do) assure themselves thereof. But if they will allow the Fathers for good
interpreters, as none but those that are puffed up with the Spirit of Pride,
will refuse to do; then we find (as I showed before) that even Christ and his
Apostles were of the Roman, not the Protestant Religion, and the first Founders
and publishers thereof.

But Doctor White (in his Reply. p. 105.) concludes thus, that this
notwithstanding if Protestants be able to demonstrate by Scripture, that they
maintain the same faith and religion which the Apostles taught, this alone is
sufficient to prove them to be the true Church. But they that cannot by the
marks of the Church set down in Scripture, clear themselves to be the true
Church, do most fondly appeal to Scripture to show the truth of their
particular points. For what more vain, than to appeal from Scripture, setting
things down clearly, unto Scripture, teaching matters obscurely, or not so
clearly? Now no particular point of doctrine, is in holy Scripture so
manifestly set down, as is the Church and the marks whereby we may know her.
No matters about which the Scripture is more copious and perspicuous than about
the visibility, perpetuity, amplitude the Church was to enjoy; so that as S.
Augustine says, the Scriptures are more clear about the Church, than even
about Christ, in Psalm. 30. Conc. 2. and ( De unitat. Eccles. c. 5.) that the
Scripture in this point is so clear, that by no shift of false interpretation
it can be avoided, the impudence of any forehead that will stand against this
evidence, is confounded. Tract. 1. in 1. Ep. Joan.
That it is a prodigious blindness not to see which is the true Church. For
Aug. l. 1. cont. Crescon. c. 33. and l. 13. cont. Faust. cap. 13.
God would have his Church to be described in Scripture without any ambiguity,
as clear as the beams of the Sun, that the controversy about the true Church
being clearly decided, when questions about particular Doctrines that are
obscure, arise; we may fly to her, and rest in her judgment; and that this
visibility is a manifest sign whereby even the rude and ignorant may discern
the true Church from the false. What vanity then is it for Protestants, not
being able to clear by Scripture the cleerest of all points, to appeal to her
for the clearing of other points, by less evident places?

CHAP. XIV.
Of the fourth mark of the true Church (viz.) a lawful succession and ordinary
vocation and mission of Pastors; And that it is ridiculous to affirm, that
Catholics and Protestants are the same Church.

. 1. A Fourth mark of the Church is personal succession of Pastors, and their
mission by ordinary callings; which is always to be found in the true Church,
as is foretold by the Prophet Esaias, chapter 59. v. 2. My spirit which is upon thee,
and the words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, from henceforth for ever. And the Apostle says of our Savior, Ephesians.
4.11.12. that he appointed Pastors and Teachers in the Church, to the
consummation of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all meet in the unity of the faith. And this charge
is not to be undertaken by usurpation, but by lawful calling and mission; as
the Apostle says, Heb. 5.4. No man takes to himself this honor, but he that
is called of God, as Aron was, to wit visibly, and by peculiar consecration.
And again, How shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15. And our
Savior says, who so enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but climeth
another way, is a thief, John 10.5. And God in the old Testament reproves those
that went without mission, saying, J have not sent these Prophets, yet they
ran, Jeremy 23.21. I have not sent them, says the Lord, yet they prophecy
fasly in my name, Jer. 27.15. And this is a note of the Church so pertinent,
that S. Augustine (Lib. cont. Epist. Fundament. c. 4.) says, the succession of
Priests, from the very Seat of Peter the Apostle, to whom the Lord committed his
sheep to be fed, even to the present Bishopric, does hold me in the Church.
And Optatus Milevitanus reckons all the Roman Bishops from S. Peter to
Syricius, who then was Pope, to show that the Church was not then with the
Donatists, who by like succeson could not ascend up to the Apostles; and then (
lib. 2. cont. Parmenianum) he adds, Show you the original of your chair, who
challenge the holy Church to your selves.

Now that this mark is found upon the Church of Rome, I know no man that
denies. But the Bishops (where they are) and Ministers of Protestant Churches,
cannot thus derive themselves from the Apostles. The Roman Church indeed made
Luther Priest, and gave him Commission to preach her Doctrine, but to preach
against her Religion, who gave him order? That Commission (seeing he had it not
from any Church) he had either from himself, minting a Religion out of his own
brain, colored with abused Scripture, which he then proudly pretended to know
better than all the Christian world beside; Tom 7. Wittenberg. fo. 228
or from the Devil, with whom he conferred, and to whose arguments he yielded,
as himself confesses.

Also the succession of the English Bishops and Ministers was interrupted upon
their pretended Reformation; the lawful Bishops being turned out, and others
preferred to their place, by the temporal authority of the Kingdom in chief;
which had no power to choose or consecrate Bishops, and ordain Priests. Or if
they were at first consecrated by lawful Bishops of the Church of Rome, as for
their credit they pretend, yet they had not thereby Commission to preach their
new Doctrine differing from the Church of Rome, nor howsoever is their
succession lawful; for in a lawful succession, it is required that the former
Bishops be dead, or lawfully deposed; but these conditions were not observed in
Enland, the Catholic Bishops being violently cast out, by the Authority of Q.
Elizabeth, assuming to her self the title of head of the Church, a thing never
arrogated by any temporal Prince of the world, until her Father King Henry
the eight gave the example.

But it is worth the observation, that the Bishops and Ministers of England, to
maintain the lawfulness of their succession, do affirm, that they were
consecrated by Catholic Bishops, their predecessors, which while they do not
prove, it shows the interruption of their succession, and while they affirm,
it shows that they believe their succession and calling insufficient, unless
they derive it from the Church of Rome; thereby acknowledging the Church of
Rome the true Church, which they in their Doctrine and dependence have
forsaken; and there can be no reason to forsake the true Church upon what
pretense soever. For the errors of the Church of Rome are but supposed, and
their Reformation, neither is but supposed, they being infallibily sure of
nothing, since they hold their Church may err, and so for ought ought they
certainly know, it did, in accu- and forsaking the Church of Rome, and in their
own imaginary amendment, and instead of Christ have chosen Barrabas. And what
can be more inconsiderate, than to forsake the true Church (by their own
confession) upon pretenses, of whose truth they are (by their own confession
also) uncertain. For he that confesses he may err, in that wherein he may err
(being an object of the understanding, not of the sense) cannot be sure that he
does not err. And so they are altogether at a loss, and a ground, not
infallibly, no nor prudently sure of the least tittle they affirm. They cannot
be infallibly sure, because they may err, as themselves confess; they cannot
be prudently sure, seeing there is a hundred voices and judgments of men for
the Roman Church, to one for any Protestant Church: They had therefore done
much more wisely, to have followed the admonition of S. Paul to Timothy,
DEPOSITUM CUSTODI, keep that which is committed to thy charge, 1. Tim. 6.20.
and what is that, says Vincentius Lirinensis? He answers, ( Comomnit.
advers. haer. c. 27.) It is that which thou art trusted with, not that which is
found out by thee: that which thou have received, not which thou have devised:
a thing not of wit, (that is of thine own fancy) but of learning, (that is,
which thou have learnt:) not of private usurpation, but of public Tradition:
a thing brought to thee, not brought forth by thee; wherein thou ought to
be, not the Author, but the keeper; not a Master, but a Scholar; not a leader,
but a follower.

. 2. As for their assertion, who say, that Roman Catholics and Protestants
are all one Church, it is both false and foolish. False it is, because the
differing in any one point of faith proposed by the Church, makes one party not
to be of the true Church; and it is certain, that the Church of Rome and
England differ in many. Does not the Church of England account the four grand
Heretics, who were condemned in the first four General Counsels, to be out
of the Church, and not one with her that condemned them? and they held each of
them but some one, or very few points different from the Church of Rome. So
that either they must confess themselves also, not to be one with the Roman
Church, or else that all Hretiques are of it, which is absurd; and contrary to
the mind of De fide and Symbolo. c. 10.
S. Augustine, who says, that neither Heretics nor Schismatiques are of the
Church.

If Protestants say, that they that were condemned in those Counsels did
indeed hold Heresies, and so were not the Church, but their own are truths and
amendments of the Doctrine of the Church; I answer, so did those Heretics
also say, yea and prove it by Scriptures and Fathers, in their own sense, and
did believe their Doctrines to be the pure Word of God, as confidently as any
Protestants in the world do theirs; who cannot say more for themselves than
they did, and they were (some of them) as numerous and as learned, as
Protestants are; nor was there more authority against them than against the
Protestants; which is, The Catholic Roman Church, guided by the Spirit of
God, and the Word of God written and unwritten. Moreover they were the parties
accused, so are the Protestants, it is not fit therefore that they should be
the Judges.

If they say, that they also accuse the Church of Rome of errors, and therefore
it is not fit that she should be Judge; I answer, some body must, if ever we
will have an end of controversy, and then whether the whole society of
Christians, or some one or few men, (for so all Heresies began, and so did the
Protestant Religion in one Luther) let any indifferent man judge. Moreover, God
has made the Church the Judge, saying, tell the Church, and that is the Church
of Rome, as those Protestants must grant, who say, they are one with it, and
that it was the Church, when they revolted from her.

And to consider the matter, according to reason, seen in the practice of all
societies and bodies, whether Ecclesiasticalll or Civil; if any one or few
members break the law and rule of the whole, who shall judge whether it be well
or ill done? Surely either the head, or the head and whole representative body
together. And this was the proceeding against Luther and the Protestants in a
General Council, by which they were condemned, and cast out of the Church.
Which judgment if it be not sufficient; but that the condemned party
(justifying himself by his own bare affirmation, or interpretation of the Law,
according to his own particular fancy, contrary to the whole body, whereof he
is or was a member) may be admitted, what Heretic or Rebel will ever be
found guilty? or will not in despite of all mankind, be accounted a true
Christian, and loyal subject, and the soundest member of the whole body?
Secondly, it is both poor, and absurd for Protestants to seek for shelter and
countenance, under that Church which they have abandoned, disgraced, and
cruelly wounded, (though to their own destruction;) thereby also abusively
persuading many people to keep still in the Protestant Church, while they think
they are of the Roman, they being (as their new Masters teach them) both but
one Church.

. 3. But Catholics, whose consent it is very fit should be taken in this
matter, acknowledge no such union of Churches, betwixt themselves and
Protestants; for Catholics do not allow their Ordination, and Consecration
of Bishops, and Priests for good, which appears, in that if a Priest of the
Roman Church revolt to the Protestant party, he is allowed by them to be a
lawful Priest, but not so if a Protestant Minister return to the Roman
Church. Also some Protestants grant, that Roman Catholics may be saved in
their Religion, but Catholics do not grant the like to Protestants; which
they would do surely, if they thought they were all one Church. Besides, the
denying to communicate with each other, is a proof, that, in the opinion of
both, they are not all one Church.

And whereas Protestants magnify their own charity, in this kind conceit of
theirs, and accuse Catholics of the want thereof, it is very idle; for the
controversy about the means of salvation, and the Church wherein it is to be
had, is not to be determined by the judgment of charity, but of discretion.
Catholics judge no particular man to be damned, because they know not the
operations of God upon his soul in his latest minutes; but they judge that all
men out of the Roman Catholic Church are out of the road of salvation,
because they are assured thereof by the word of God. And if to grant the
possibility of salvation to others, be such a testimony of charity, as they
conceive; then surely Origin was of all men most charitable, who held that at
the last, even the devils themselves should be saved, and yet I find no man
agreeing with him in this charitable opinion. But the truth is, (as I conceive)
that Protestants are thus kind to Catholics for their own ends; which are, to
provoke Catholics to show the same favor to them, that so they may have the
better security in their way, by the concurrent opinions of others: and also
for fear, lest by denying salvation to the Church of Rome, they cut off the
hope thereof from themselves, who acknowledge no lawful ministry, by
consequence no Church, and by consequence no salvation, but that which they
derive from the Church of Rome. Which seeing they do indeed want, they are
neither united with her, nor can justly hope for salvation without her.

CHAP. XV.
Of the fifth Mark of the true Church (viz.) Unity in doctrine; And of horrible
dissentions among Protestants.

. 1. A Fifth Mark of the Church is unity in doctrine: of which it is said by S.
Paul, I beseech you that all speak one thing, be ye knit together in one mind,
and one judgment; 1. Cor. 1.10. endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. Continue in one Spirit and one mind, Philip.
1.27. of one accord and one judgment, Philip 2.2. Thus in the first times were
the multitude of them that believed of one heart and one soul, Acts 4.32. Thus
our Savior prays (and no doubt was heard) that they may be one: John 17.11.
and the effect of that prayer, we see in the Church of Rome, and no where else.
Thus also the Holy Ghost describes the Church of Christ, saying, my dove is
one, Cant. 6.8. And the want of this unity is so improper to God, that he is
therefore termed, the God, not of dissension, but of peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. And
it is such an assured means to shorten continuance, that the Scripture says,
if you bite and devour one another, take heed that you be not consumed one of
another, Galat. 5.15. and that a kingdom divided against it self shall perish,
Luc. 11.17. And by the want of this mark of unity, did the ancient Fathers
discover the Heretics of their times. S. Crysostome says, ( Op. imperfect.
in Math. Hom. 20.) All infidells that are under the devil, are not united nor
hold the same things, but are dispersed by diverse opinions; one says so, and
another so, etc. in the same manner are the falsehoods of Heretics, who never
hold the same things, but have so many opinions, as there are persons. To the
same purpose speaks Jrenaeus, Tertullian, and others, ( Iren. l. 1. c. 5.
Tertull. de praesc. advers. haer. 42.)

And this unity I found apparently in the Church of Rome; and the contrary as
apparent amongst Protestants. Thus the ancient writers do wonderfully agree in
all matters of faith; so also do all the decrees of all lawful Counsels and
Popes; though they were men living in several ages, in several countries, and
wrote in several languages: And now also all Catholics in the world,
howsoever otherwise divided by country, language, particular interest, civil
dissentions, or war, yet agree exactly in all points of faith. And this because
they have a certain compass to steer by, to wit the general Tradition of
the Church, and the decrees of General Counsels, who they have reason to
believe, do preserve that which was delivered by the Apostles; and if any
doubt arise about the sense of Scripture, are better able to interpret it than
any other persons; to which therefore they do modestly and wisely submit their
judgments. But no such agreement was ever found, or ever can be found amongst
Protestants, or any sort of Heretics. S. Irenaeus (lib. 1. cap. 21.) says of
Simon Magus his Heresy, that it was divided into several sects. S. Augustine
of the Donatists, (lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 6.) that in his time it was cut into
small threads. And particularly the same is happened to Protestants, who soon
after their separation from the Church of Rome, were divided amongst
themselves, and have ever since so continued, multiplying daily in their
divisions; insomuch that even in the one Kingdom of England, and even in the
one City of London, there are very many: And in many particular houses there
are some different Sects of Religion, each pretending to be the true
Protestant, and denying that title to the other.

Nor is there any means to reconcile their differences, but they are rather
likely to grow more, and greater, as we see at this day. For no Sect will
acknowledge another its superior in matter of Religion, nor stand to its
judgment, except it be by force; no not any one particular person thinks
himself obliged to submit to the whole world; therefore they use to say, that
they will not pin their faith upon another man's sleeve,; but all pretend to be
guided by the Word of God, which each one will interpret for himself, and
accuse all others of error so far as they dissent from him. And though Sects
and Heresies do first arise out of the Catholic Church, as the Apostle says,
There must be Heresies; 1 Cor. 11.19. yet the Church does not lose her unity
hereby; because she having a certain Touchstone whereby to try them, namely,
the judgment of the Church; if they will not submit to that, they are
excommunicated, and by judicial sentence cut off from that body, from which
they first cut themselves by mis-belief; as the Apostle says, an heretical
man after the first and second admonition avoid, Tit. 3.10. whereby they
preserve the rest of the body entire, and at unity within it self. So that the
Heresies do not arise from the Doctrine of the Church, but from the malice of
the Devil.

But amongst Protestants the liberty of reading and interpreting Scripture, and
the examining and judging the Preachers Doctrine thereby, being given to every
silly soul, (as Doctor Bilson says, True difference, part. 2. p. 353.
The people (are) discerners and judges of that which is taught, as with good
reason they ought; for it was upon this ground that they first separated from
the Church of Rome, undertaking to be judges of her Doctrine; and if the
present Clergy should not continue this liberty to the people against
themselves, who are no more infallible than the other, nor can pretend to it;
they would play very foul play with the people, and (instead of giving them
liberty of conscience, which they promised, only translate them from one Tyrant
over their consciences (so they called the Church of Rome) to another the
Church of England) there must needs arise varieties of Sects in Religion,
according to the various conceit and apprehension of people, even out of the
very nature of this their Doctrine, which is the groundwork for all the rest;
and is the most exercised in those who are most conversant in the reading of
Scriptures, to wit, the Puritans and Sectaries.

And in the many differences that are amongst them, they call no General
Counsels, nor indeed can they, by way of authority, no Sect acknowledging it
self subject to another Jurisdiction, if it be under another temporal
Governor; but constitutes a Church by it self absolute, and independent. And
in the variety of Sects in any one Kingdom or Government, neither party
believing it self justly subject to another in matter of conscience; But
supposing themselves always in the truth, they think they are bound to
maintain that truth, with the hazard of their lives, and to oppose their
lawful Sovereigns in the defense thereof; and whenever they have power they
put it in execution, and turn Rebels for Gods sake; As we see many have done
heretofore, and the English are (many of them) now in the accursed act. Nor can
the men, under whose conduct the people do this, hope for more calm obedience
from them, longer than by force they are subdued to it, unless they give them
that in possession, which now they have in hope, and for which they have all
been united in their service, to wit, Liberty of Conscience to every particular
person, to be of what Religion soever he shall make to himself out of the
Bible, free, and independent on the jurisdiction of any other.

And with very good reason, for seeing they have all shaken off Christ's yoke,
why should any man put a yoke upon another man's conscience, and oblige him to
believe, or do, or suffer that which is against his Word of God? Thus, as their
Religion is divisible according to their several senses of the Scripture, so
Kingdoms are divisible according to their Religions: So that there must still
be division, either in Religion, or in War for the defense thereof. Yea so
accurately does Heresy teach to run division, that it is merely by accident
that any two Protestants are of the same Religion in any one point; for seeing
they do not oblige themselves to agree in any one Principle, but only the
letter of the Scripture, and refer the interpretation to themselves, (as
Chillingworth (Preface fine) says, Let all men believe the Scripture, and that
only, and endeavor to believe it in the true sense, and require no more of
others,) it is but by the constitution of their brains, and the grain of their
fancy running the same way, that brings any two of them to an union in the
same belief, concerning any point of Religion; which constitution, as it was
accidental in their generation, so it is daily changeable by age, education,
and many other occurrences; and so also as uncertain for the future, as
accidental at the present.

Thus all tends, to division amongst them, through the nature of their
doctrines and the method of knowing and preserving them. And this division of
theirs in doctrine and opinion, is the reason, why when I mention the belief of
Protestants, I usually say, some Protestants, because they are not all of a
mind, scarce in any one point, wherein they differ from Catholics. And some
of them are so silly as to think, that if they themselves do not believe such
a point, no Protestant else does, supposing all Protestancy included in their
own breasts; which indeed is nothing so: only they have reason, according to
their principles, to believe (as they do) that that which every particular man
holds, is the true Protestancy, and ought to be a rule to all the world beside.

. 2. The Catholic Roman Church has in it the propriety of heat, and does
congregare homogenea, gather together things of the same kind, and disgregare
heterogenea, separate things that are of different natures; casting out of her
Communion all sorts of Heretics. And on the contrary the Protestant Religion
has the property of cold, which is congregare heterogenea, to gather together
things of different natures, enfoulding under her name a miscellane of
Religions, freezing them altogether, and withal making them so brittle, that
every chance breaks them into smaller sects and sub-divisions, which in the
end will be the destruction of the whole, as it has been of all foregoing
heresies.

And this truth Sir Edwin Sandys, a learned Protestant (In his Relation of
Religion of the Western parts) confesses, saying, The Papists have the Pope,
as a common father, adviser, and conductor, to reconcile their jarres, to
decide their differences, to draw their Religion by consent of Counsels unto
unity, etc. whereas on the other side, Protestants are like severed or rather
scattered troops, each drawing adverse way, without any means to pacify
their quarrels, no Patriarch one or more, to have a common superintendency or
care of their Churches, for correspondency and unity: no ordinary way to
assemble a general Council on their part, the only hope remaining ever to
assuage their contentions. Of which seeing there is no hope, the sword must be
the Umpire. Which if it should in England prevail on the Puritan or
Roundheads side, as they now style them, (which God forbid) I think I may
without rashness say, that it falls out by the just judgment of God, that
they that cast out the Catholic Religion and Catholic Bishops their
predecessors, upon pretense of the Reformation of Errors, which they discovered
(as they said) by the pure word of God, are upon the same pretenses cast out
themselves, and are forced to say with Adonibezek in the first of the book of
Judges, As I have done, so God has rewarded me. So true a rule it is, that he
that practices disobedience to his superiors, teaches it to his inferiors.

. 3. But the Protestants say that they do not differ from one another in
fundamentalls, no not from the Catholics, so much at unity with all the world
do they profess to be. The impertinency of their distinction of fundamentalls
and unfundamentalls I have before discovered; and little reason have they to
use it in this case. For to my apprehension all their differences are in
fundamentalls, yea all that they believe they account fundamental: For the
Church of England says in her sixth Article, That whatsoever is not read in
Scripture, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any ma that it
should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary
to salvation: and as nothing but what may be proved by the Scripture, is by her
accounted necessary to salvation, which is the same with fundamental; so I
suppose that all that can be proved by the Scripture is necessary to salvation,
even in their own opinion; for I think they will not say, but that it is
necessary and fundamental to believe God, in all that he says, whether the
matter be great or small; now Protestants professing to believe nothing
necessarily, but what may be proved by the Scripture, and their differences
being in the things which they believe, it follows, that their differences are
in things, which are proved by Scripture, that are the pure Word of God, and
the meaning of the Holy Ghost, (as they use to speak) and therefore must needs
be (in the several opinions of them that hold them) fundamental, and
necessary to salvation.

To instance in some particulars of their disagreement; (for to speak of all,
were to enter into a Labyrinth) First concerning Scripture it self, I think
they will grant it is a fundamental point, I am sure, their learned Hooker
does so, ( Eccles. Pol. lib. 1. sect. 14.) who says, Of things necessary the
very chief is to know what books we are bound to esteem holy, and as sure I am
that in this there is great disagreement; for the Lutherans) do deny (besides
those books of the Old Testament which the Calvinists also deny) Ch^mnit. exam.
conc. Trid. part. 1. page 55. also Enchyrid. p. 63.
the second Epistle of S. Peter, the second and third Epistle of S. John, the
Epistle to the Hebrews, of S. James, of S. Jude, and the Revelation; all which
the Calvinists and the Church of England do undoubtedly believe to be the Word
of God. And if they disagree about their prime Principle, how can agreement be
expected in the things that they derive from thence? Secondly concerning their
translation of Scriptures, in the truth whereof consists the truth of Gods
Word, to those that understand it not, but as it is translated; very great are
the disagreements, and bitter the reprehensions between Luther and Zuinglius,
between Calvin and Molineus, between Beza and Castalio, between legal
Protestants, and Puritans of England, each party condemning the others
translation. I will instance chiefly in the English.

The Ministers of Lincoln Diocese, in a book delivered to King James, being an
abridgement of their grievances, say ( page 11.13.14.) that the English
translation of the Bible is, a translation that takes away from the text, that
adds to the text, and that sometimes, to the changing or obscuring the meaning
of the holy Ghost. And Broughton the great Linguist, in his Advertisement of
Corruptions, tells the Bishops, that their public translations of Scripture
into English, is such, as that it perverts the text of the old Testament in 848
places, and that it causes millions of millions to reject the new Testament,
and to run into eternal flames. And yet the translators of the Bible, and the
Bishops were of another mind; or else surely they would not have commended it
to the use of the people. And what a woeful condition were the people in, who
must be guided by such a Bible, in which either there was certain falsehood, or
they were not certain that it was the truth.

Secondly the Real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist by
consubstantiation, and to the bodily mouth of the receiver, is affirmed by the
Lutherans, but denied by the Calvinists. Thirdly that Christ descended into
Hell, which is an article of the Creed, is affirmed by Hill in a Treatise of
that subject, by Nowell, and by many Protestants, but is denied by Carleil, in
a book written to that purpose, and commonly by all Puritans. Fourthly
Evangelicall Counsels are affirmed by Hooker, (Eccles. Pol. l. 3. sect. 8. p.
140.) but are denied by Perkins (Reformed Cath. p. 241.) and most of the Church
of England. Fifthly concerning the head of the Church, or the supreme governor
in causes Ecclesiastical (which one would think a fundamental matter) the
Church of England holds that the King, or Queen (when the Kingdom is governed
by a Woman) is the head thereof; but the Church of Helvetia says, Harmony of
Consess p. 308. and forward.
we acknowledge no other head of the Church but Christ, and that he has no
deputy on earth; and many there are in England of the same opinion, who are not
afraid to say so now, though it be by law a capital offense. Sixthly the
government of the Church by Bishops, one would think were a fundamental point,
for it is affirmed to be jure divino, by divine law, by many Protestants in
England; and particularly Bishop Hall wrote a book (a few years since) to that
purpose; and yet this is denied by a great party in England, as the Bishops by
woeful experience do know.

A hundred other differences might be named, in the maintenance whereof books
have been written one against another, one side holding with the Catholics;
so that there is scarce any point of Catholic doctrine, but is maintained by
some or other Protestants, and amongst them all, almost the whole Catholic
doctrine: If therefore they differ from the Church of Rome, they differ from
one another. And that their differences are not light, but about most important
matters (in their own opinions, being about matters (as they conceive) revealed
in the word of God, to which all men are bound to adhere,) even their persuit
of those differences does plainly demonstrate; which stretches to the Luth.
con. art. Louan. These. 27.
condemning of one another for Heretics, Osiander ^pit. Eccl. hist. cont. 16
par. altera p. 805.
and banishing each other from their several territories, Hospi. hist.
Sacrament. par. alt fol. 393. 395. 397. 398.
forbidding the reading of each others books, imprisoning of their persons; and
finally breaking into open Arms one against another: and are not al these
tragical particulars (to our infinite grief) now acted on the stage of England?
and the chief pretense is Religion. And surely they are guilty of extreme
folly, that will fight, to the fundamental overthrow of themselves and
families (and for ought they know, of the whole Kingdom) for matters which
they hold not-fundamentall.

. 4. But the Protestants think to wipe off this stain of disagreement by
retorting it upon the Catholics, accusing them of as great disagreement, as
is amongst themselves, which when I considered, I found altogether impertinent.
For amongst Catholics there are two sorts of points, some defined by the
Church in a General Council, and so infallibly certain; others not defined;
In the former they all exactly agree, in the later each man follows the
direction of his particular reason. Like to this, there are amongst Protestants
certain Articles (as they call them) which are agreed upon in each several
dominion of Protestants, which are set down in their Harmony of confessions;
concerning which, first it is to be noted, that there is great disagreement in
general betwixt their Churches, they never meeting all together in any one
Council to determine any one thing; so that they are not united in any one
point by consent. Then in particular dominions the decrees that they publish
are not firmly believed by all under those dominions, but are accounted as
directions only, not obligations; Therefore in England many both of the people
and Clergy also, do deny, some one, some another particular, according to
their pleasure; and yet the General Church of Protestants, and the particular
of England, does suffer men, teaching and professing contrary doctrines, as
points of faith, to abide in her communion, and pass under the name of
Protestants. And seeing that of contrary doctrines one side must needs be
false, while the Protestant Church permits both sides to be preached, as matter
of faith, and the Word of God, she knowingly suffers the profession of false
doctrine, and so is the mother of falsehood, as much as truth, and therefore
cannot be the true Church.

The Church of Rome does not so, but if any preach or profess contrary to that
which is decreed, she shuts them out of her Communion, and disinherits them of
the title of Catholic. As for other points, which are without the compass of
her decrees (wherein there is a mighty latitude according to the extent of men's
reasons) she permits every man to hold, as his particular understanding shall
direct him. The Puritanes will have all governed by the written word of God;
The Chillingworthians will have all guided by particular reason, and both sorts
differ amongst themselves. The Church of Rome more wisely in matters of faith
and Religion is directed by the Word of God, either written, or unwritten, and
therein her children never differ; or if they do, are renounced; In School
points and things undefined her children are guided by their particular reason;
and herein they do and may differ, yet without disunion, as well as in points
of Philosophy: For, School points are not points of Religion properly;
religion being derived a RELIGANDO, from binding; but in School points men are
not bound to the belief of either side, but have free liberty to hold, or
change, as they think they have cause, until it be otherwise determined by a
Council. And this may be done, without the just imputation of division, as S.
Augustine (De Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 1. c. 18. and l. 2. c. 4.) says, Diverse
men be of diverse judgments, without breach of peace, until a general
Council allow some one part for pure and clear. Thus does he excuse S.
Cyprians disagreement and error concerning the baptizing of such as were
baptized by Heretics, saying, that himself durst not have condemned the
same, unless I had been strengthened with the most agreeable authority of the
Catholic Church, to which Cyprian himself no doubt would have yielded, if at
that time the truth of the question had been made clear and manifest by a
general Council. Which some refusing to do, after that that opinion of
Cyprians was by a Council condemned; to show the difference of holding against
a point defined, and not defined, Vincentius Lyrinensis chap. 9. thus breaks
out, O admirable change, the authors of one self opinion, are called
Catholics, and the followers of it heretics!

Secondly there is in doctrines a difference between the conclusion or point of
faith it self, and the reason or manner thereof; in the former of these, unity
is required, and is performed most axactly amongst Catholics; but in the
later (which concerns but the reason of that conclusion, which reason is for
the most part reduced to some Scholasticall subtilty) learned men have in all
ages, and may (without breach of unity) maintain their difference. For
although all men be bound to the decreed point of faith, yet they are not so,
to the reason and manner thereof, unless the same also be defined by the
Church.

And hereby are answered all the objections of Protestants concerning the
disagreement of Catholics, as of the Thomists and Scotists concerning the
Conception of our Blessed Lady; of the Dominicans and Jesuits about the
concurrence of Grace and Freewill, with such like, in which the Church has not
yet interposed her Decree. And some Protestants affirm (out of their profound
political insight) that she never will; and that because (forsooth) she dares
not; out of fear to displease so mighty a party, as each opinion has. And yet
they know, that the Church was not afraid to decree against the opinions of
Luther and his brood, notwithstanding she lost some Kings, and much people
thereby; but the loss was not only hers, but theirs much more; she lost some
incurable members, but they lost themselves. And doubtless when she sees it
meet to determine any of the controversies amongst the learned, she will do
it without any fear, but of God.

In the mean time we see that their differences of opinions breed no more
disturbance in the Church, nor rancor amongst themselves, than their different
colors and shapes of apparel. Brotherly charity is not violated amongst
them: they will all go to the same Church, they will communicate together, and
confess to one another; nor is there any of them but if he be asked, will say,
that he will stand to a General Council in any of the points of difference
amongst them, and submit his judgment to hers. But Protestants have no
Counsels, nor any authority to call a Council out of the extent of their
temporal dominions; the Articles of Religion which they have agreed upon
apart, are very different one from another, as may be seen in their Harmony of
Confessions; nor in the same Dominion will they stand to any determination of
Convocation, Synod, or Assembly, further than it decrees according to the Word
of God, of which every one will be a judge for himfelfe. And in the mean time
they violate brotherly charity, make schisms and separations one from another,
refuse to go to Church, or communicate together, and in defense of their
differences, wage war one against another. So that their Harmony of Confessions
may more truly be called the confusion of Confessions; and their Churches, the
tumults of Religion.

The greatest unity they have is not in believing, but in not believing;
(though therein they are not exact, as I have showed before:) their faith (as
they call it) being for the most part negative, consisting in denying what
Catholics affirm; as denying and not believing the infallibility of the
Church, the Real Corporal presence, seven Sacraments, Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, with many other, abating their positive
faith almost to nothing: now not-believing is not believing; and their
profession and union in the most, is not of faith, but of infidelity. And for
their positive belief, I think it consists in two Articles only, That there is
a God, and that Jesus Christ died for the sins of the world; and whosoever
affirms more than this, it will be no hard matter to find some other
Protestants that will deny it: what union then is there amongst them, but that
which was betwixt Symeon and Levi, to be brethren in evil? and in writing the
Articles of their Religion, as Draco did his laws, in blood? For what nation
is there, where the Protestant Religion has settled her foot, where they did
not in the settling thereof fill their hands with blood? And by Rebellion and
unutterable cruelties propagate (as they thought) the Gospel of peace? The
Kingdom of England only excepted, where the change was made by the Princes.
Which change not having gone far enough from the Catholic Roman Religion, the
people, having got the sword into their hands, do now attempt (according to
the pattern of all their fellow Protestants) to make a second Reformation, with
such witty Rebellion and cruelty (the only things wherein they did ever
exercise any wit) that as no posterity will be able to imitate, so no posterity
will keep it silent; but blazon it throughout the world, to their eternal
infamy; when the Religion, their Idol, to whom they sacrifice all this humane
blood shall be sunk (from whence it came) to hell.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the sixth Mark of the true Church (viz.) Miracles; And that there are no
true Miracles among Protestants.

. 1. ANother mark of the Church is Miracles; of which our Savior says, John
14.10. He that believes in me, the works that I do he shall do, and greater;
of which words, the marginall notes of the English Bibles printed Anno 1576.
say, This is referred to the whole Body of the Church, in whom this virtue does
shine for ever. And again Christ says, Mar. 16.17.18. These signs shall
follow them that believe; in my name they shall cast out devils, they shall
speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any
deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they
shall recover. In so much that S. Augustine (Cont. Ep. Fund. c. 4.) reckons
this (amongst many things forementioned) that holds him in the Churches bosom,
saying, The consent of people and nations retains me: the authority begun by
Miracles, nourished by hope, increased by charity, confirmed by antiquity,
retains me: the succession of Prelates since the Sea of Peter (to whom our
Lord consigned the feeding of his sheep after his resurrection) to the present
Bishops Sea, retains me; and finally the very name of Catholic retains me,
which not without cause, this Church alone, amongst so many and so great
heresies, has so maintained; as when a stranger asks where they assemble to
communicate in the Catholic Church, there is no heretic that dares show him
his own Temple, or his own house.

. 2. Now concerning Miracles, the Protestants say that they are ceased, and it
is true; to wit, amongst them, since they ceased to be members of the true
Church; and is therefore a sign that they have ceased to be so. For this
promise has no limitation of time, but is to continue for ever in the Church.
Nor do they prove the contrary by Scripture; and if they cannot prove it by
Scripture, according to their own principles, they are not to be believed.

And whereas some do allege Fathers and Schoolmen to prove that Miracles are
ceased, they ought to distinguish, and to know that there are two manners of
being of Miracles, to wit, ordinary and extraordinary; concerning which three
things are affirmed. First that in the Primitive Church Miracles were absolutely
necessary for the planting of the Gospel in the world; John. 5.36. Acts
4.29.30. and then the gift of Miracles was ordinarily annexed to the ministry
of preaching; so that most Christians commonly had that gift in one kind or
other, 1 Cor. 12.28. Acts 8.17. Secondly that since the planting of the Gospel
by 12. fishermen, which was the Miracle of Miracles, no further Miracle is
absolutely necessary for men to whom this is known; and therefore the gift of
miracles is ceased to be ordinarily annexed to the office of preaching, or
common almost to all Christians, as before it was. Thirdly notwithstanding
this; in all ages there were, are, and ever shall be some special places and
persons extraordinarily endued with the gift of Miracles, for the comfort of
Christians, and conversion of remote nations, to whom the same of the first
miraculous planting of our Religion is not come: And of Miracles of this kind
Aug. de. civit lib. 22. c. 8. Greg. Dial.
the writings of the Fathers and all Christian histories are full, in so much
that S. Augustine having mentioned many Miracles says, what shall I do? I am
not able to remember all that I know, and doubtless sundry of ours, when they
read these, will grieve that I have omitted so many, which likewise they know
as well as I. And concludes, that it would require many books to set down the
Miracles of healing done only at the monument of S. Stephen.

Beda hist. l. 1. c. 26.
Many Miracles also were done by S. Augustine the Monk; who being sent from
Pope Gregory above a thousand years ago, converted the Kingdom of England the
third time to the Roman Catholic faith. Yea, many Miracles were done in
several ages and several places by Roman Catholics, by the confession of
Protestant writers themselves; In so much that the Centurists of Magdeburg do
make report thereof in their 13. Chapter of every several Century, for
thirteen hundred years after Christ, out of the credible writers of those
several times. In particular, Antonius 3. part. Hi^. tit. 23. 24.
S. Francis, S. Dominick, and other holy men about their times did abound in
Miracles; also S. Katherine of Sienna, and S. Bernard, who being a Roman
Catholic is yet acknowledged by De Eccles. p. 369. post. med.
Whitaker for a true Saint. So did Hackluit Navigat. vol. 2. part. 2. p. 88.
and Hartwell of the Kingdom of Congo, in the Epist.
S. Xaverius in his conversion of the Indies of late years; and many other
Romish Priests, in the conversion of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa; and the
same so credible, that they are published to the world by Protestants
themselves.

I will instance in some few, that have been done in confirmation of some
particular points of the Roman Faith. Concerning Prayers to Saints, S.
Augustine (de civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8.) says, that a devout woman called
Palladia, being diseased, did in the presence of him and others, pray to S.
Stephen, at his monument, and was presently made whole. Concerning Images,
Eusebius (l. 7. c. 14.) reports, that the woman mentioned in the Gospel, whom
our Savior cured of a bloody flux by the touch of the hem of his garment,
erected the Image of our Savior, at the foot whereof there sprang up an herb,
which when it grew so high, as to touch the bottom of the garment of the
Image, had power to cure all diseases: De passione imaginis Christi in Berito,
alleged in the 2 Council of Nice, Act. 4.
Athanasius also, and De gloria Martyr. l. 1. c. 22.
Gregorius Turonensis make mention, that upon violence offered by the Jews to
the Image of Christ, blood did miraculously issue from thence. The Miracles
done by the sign of the Cross, by report of the Fathers are almost infinite;
in so much as Couell the Protestant in his Answer to Burgess (page 138.)
says, No man can deny, but that God after the death of his Son, manifested his
power to the amazement of the world, in this contemptible sign, being the
instrument of many Miracles.

Concerning the neglect of Confession, we read diverse Miracles in S. Bedes
History, (l. 5. c. 14.) S. Francis and S. Dominick, preached against the
Albigenses, who (denied Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Confession, Extreme
Unction, the Popes authority, Indulgences, Images, Ceremonies, Traditions, with
many other, and are by the Protestants claimed for their Predecessors in the
Protestant Faith;) and wrought many Miracles, whereof one of S. Francis is most
notable to this purpose, and is recorded by Matthew Paris (an approved Author
amongst Protestants, who thus relates it, ( page 319.) The fifteenth day before
his death there appeared wounds in his hands freshly bleeding, such as appeared
in the Savior of the world hanging on the Cross. Also his right side appeared
so open and bloody, that the inward parts of his heart were to be discerned,
whereupon there repaired to him great store of people; amongst whom the
Cardinals themselves demanded of him what this sight imported? to whom he
said, This sight is therefore showed in me to them, to whom I preached the
mystery of the Cross, that you may believe in him, who for the salvation of
the world suffered upon the Cross these wounds that you see; and that ye may
know me to be the servant of him whom I preached, etc. And to the end, that you
may without doubt persevere in this constancy of faith, these wounds which you
see in me so open and bloody, shall immediately after I am dead be whole, and
close like to my other flesh. Afterward he yielded up his soul to his
Creator, without all anguish or pain of body; and being dead there remained no
marks of his foresaid wounds.

Lastly, for confirmation of the Real Presence, it is reported, that in a town
called Knobloch, in the year 1510. one Paul Form a Sacrilegious person, went
secretly into the Church by night, brake the Pyx, and stole from thence two
consecrated Hosts, one of which he sold to a Jew, who in disdainful malice
said, If thou be the God of Christians manifest thy self; and thereupon
pierced the Sacrament with his dagger, whereupon blood did miraculously flow
forth. This Miracle was so public and evident, that 38. were thereupon
apprehended, and burned in the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and all other Jews
banished out of the said Territory. And this is reported for credible, not
only by Surius in Chron. Pontanus l. 5. rerum memorab.
Catholic, but by Joan. Manlius loc. Com p. 87. Osiander Epit. cent. 16. c.
14. p. 28. fine.
Protestant writers.

If I should undertake to set down all the Miracles that have been done in the
Catholic Church, I might say, as S. John did of our Saviors doings, that if
they were all written, the whole world could not contain the books, Ioh. 21.25.
To all which Protestants answer, as the Blasphemous Jews did to our Savior,
that they were done by the Devil. To whom Catholics cannot give that answer
our Savior did, If I, by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children
cast them out? Mat. 12.27. For your children cast out none. And truly I believe
that they that do thus accuse the Miracles done by so many holy Catholic men
and women, would have done the same to our Savior, if they had lived in his
days. For Miracles being the last and highest proof of other things, can have
no proof for themselves, but the evidence of sense, to them that see them, and
their testimony and report to others.

But if (as Protestants say) the Miracles of Catholics were done by the
Devil, how were they Miracles? For the Devil can do none, though he can do
wonders; and if they were Miracles, how were they done by the Devil? Now that
they were Miracles, many Protestants do grant, and therefore Chillingworth
their Paragon does also confess, that they are done by God; whence any
reasonable man would infer, that his next word would be, the profession of
himself, a Roman Catholic, in which Church God works Miracles, the last and
highest motive of belief. But instead hereof (O the accursed power of the
devil) he belcheth forth the most blasphemous speech against God, that ever
struck the tender sense of a pious ear: and says In the preface of his book,
fine.
that it seems most strange to him that God in his justice should permit some
true Miracles to be wrought to delude them who have forged so many to delude
the world. As if God, the Father of truth, would set his seal, which is
Miracles, to confirm falsehood, to delude the souls of men into sin, and so
change titles with the Devil, and be the father of lies, and deceiver of
mankind: Than which, what can be imagined more hellish? More true and pious was
the saying of Nicodemus, and appliable to our workers of Miracles; we know that
thou art a teacher come from God, for no man could do these miracles that thou
do, except God were with him, John 3.2.

But we may take up the complaint of the Prophet Esaias; who has believed our
report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Esaias 53.1. Protestants
will not believe these things; and in matter of proof Catholics can go no
further; our Savior himself did not; so that now nothing remains, but for God
to touch their hearts with his grace, and to move them to believe that which
they have most reason to think to be his word: which God of his great mercy
grant. And if they consider it, they shall find it the most unreasonable thing
in the world to deny Miracles in the Roman Church, for that there are and shall
be Miracles in the world no prudent man (I suppose) will deny, at least for the
conversion of the people; Yea we read of many Miracles done in the Church of
the Jews, amongst those that were of the true faith, and therefore were not
intended for conversion, but for confirmation, or to some other end; And why
may it not be so in the Church of the Christians? Now Protestants or any other
Christians do not so much as pretend to Miracles, therefore they that are, are
amongst Roman Catholics. Indeed I have read of Calvin that for the credit of
his new doctrine, he would make show to the people of doing a Miracle; and
hired one that was sick to counterfeit himself dead, who when Calvin should
speak certain words, was to rise up, as it were from the dead; but he not
stirring nor answering at his cue, they looked, and found him dead indeed;
Capcavil. in chronicis Pontificum Leodiensium
But on the other side, the son of Calvin being bit by a mad dog, and his
father not able to cure him, he was sent to S. Hubert in Ardenne, where the
body of that Saint is kept with great veneration, and frequent Miracles wrought
thereby, and there was he made perfectly whole, and thereupon abjured the
Religion, wherein his father brought him up, and became a Roman Catholic.

. 3. Now for the Miracles that are said to be done in the Roman Church, we have
as high humane Testimony as can be imagined; So that Protestants may with as
much reason deny all humane story, as that there were Henry's and Edwards Kings
of England, whom they never saw; yea they may as justly deny or doubt of the
truth of their own names, which they do not know, but by report, and men's
calling them so, and the poor record of a Church-book; but Miracles have much
more famous Records, and more people that believe them. And can they prudently
imagine all Christians (but themselves) so stupid and foolish to believe these
things without sufficient proof? who in all other matters, they must (without
the help of modesty) acknowledge more wise and learned then themselves. What did
Christ and his Apostles do more, than the Roman Church has since done? and
what can Protestants say more against her, than the unbelieving Jews or
Gentiles might say against them? And because some feigned Miracles are
sometimes discovered, from thence to charge all with the same accusation, as it
is unjust, so it is absurd, and destroies all humane faith; they may as well
deny all that is, or has been done in the world, whereof they have not been
eyewitnesses, because some of those reports have been false. Therefore as they
believe Catholics, when they say some were feigned; so in justice they ought
to believe them, when they say others are not so. Otherwise by the same way of
reasoning, they may say that the Miracles of Moses were not true, because the
Magitians were counterfeit; or that the new Testament is not the word of God,
because there were many Gospells and Epistles counterfeited under the names of
the Apostles. And surely Catholics would never endeavor to discover feigned
Miracles, if they were not sure that some were true, but rather by one act
condemn all that have been since the Apostles, that are, or shall be, for false
and counterfeit, as Protestants in effect do, when they say, that Miracles are
ceased.

Moreover to affirm that Miracles are Antichristian, as some Protestants do,
is improper; first because it is yet in question betwixt us, whether Antichrist
be come or no, which Protestants have not proved, nor never will with reference
to the Pope. Secondly it is granted on both sides, that Antichrist shall do no
Miracles properly, but only some signs and wonders; not exceeding the power of
nature and the devils art; whereof one is to cause fire to come down from
heaven, Apoc. 13.13. which never any Pope did; but the Miracles done in the
Church do exceed all created power. And lastly many Miracles were done in the
Roman Church before the time or times, (for they agree not in their reckoning)
that Protestants say Antichrist did first appear; as at the relics of
Chrysostom. in lib. cont. Gentiles.
Babylas, Nazian. in Cyprian.
Cyprian, Ieron. in vita Hilar.
Hilarion, and many others. So that all Catholics may say with Richardus de
Sancto Victore (not with doubt or fear of being deceived, but with assurance
to the contrary) Lib. 1. de Trinit. c. 2.
O Lord if it be error that we believe, we are deceived by thee, for thou have
confirmed these things to us with signs and wonders, which could not be done
but by thee.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the seventh Mark of the true Church, (viz.) Conversion of Kingdoms and
Monarchs.

. 1. ANother Mark of the true Church, is, the conversion of Kingdoms and
Nations from Heathenisme, to the faith of Christ: As the Prophet Esaias says,
Kings shall be thy nursing-Fathers, and Queens thy Mothers, Esaias 49.23. thou
shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings, Esaias 60.61.
Their Kings shall minister to thee, and thy gates shall be continually open,
that men may bring to thee the riches of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may
be brought, etc. Esaias. 60.10, 11. And the English Bible printed Anno, 1576.
upon the 49. of Esaias, verse. 23. says, The meaning is, that Kings shall be
converted to the Gospel, and bestow their power and authority for the
preservation of the Church. And this Mark I found on the Roman Catholic, but
not upon the Protestant Church.

The first three hundred years after Christ, being a time of great persecution,
there were few or no Kings converted to Christianity; and from Constantine to
Boniface the third, which was almost 300. years more, there were few Kings
converted, except the Emperors of the East and West; and they were converted
to the Roman Catholic, not to the Protstant Faith, as Napier (in his Treatise
on the Rev. p. 145.) confesses, saying, After the year of God 300. the
Emperor Constantine subdued all Christian Churches to Pope Sylvester, from
which time till these our days, the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the
outward and visible Church. Now since the year 600. these Prophesies have been
accomplishing, and they have been done by the Roman Church, not by the
Protestant Churches; which were (until Luthers days) under hatches, and
invisible, by their own confession before mentioned.

And if we look upon the conversion of Kings and Nations in these later times
since their ignis fatuus (which they call the glorious light of the Gospel)
has appeared, we shall find it performed not by Protestants but by Roman
Catholics, in the remote and divided parts of the Joan. Petrus Maffeus hist.
Indicarum. 16.
East and Jos. Acosta de nature. novi orbis.
West Indies, and of Hartwell of Congo, Epist. to Reader.
Africa, as by sufficient testimony appears. In so much that Simon Lythus a
Protestant before alleged, says, The Jesuits within the space of a few years
have filled Asia, Africa, and America with their Idols. And whereas it is
objected that the Goths were converted to the Christian Religion by the
Arrians; first Cap. 22. de not. Eccl.
Bellarmine proves it to be false; secondly if it were true, yet it is of no
moment to prove the power of any other Religion but the Roman Catholic, for
the converting of nations, and the fulfilling of the large Prophesies of the
Scripture therein; seeing they that are pretended to be converted by the
Arrians, were but the lesser part of the Goths, most of them having been
Catholics before. Thirdly this example does rather make for the Roman faith,
in that of all the world converted to Christian Religion, there is but one poor
half example of conversion (and that false too) wrought by any other Religion.
Which when it is observed, that this pretended conversion was wrought by
Arrians, who (even in the opinion of most Protestants) were Heretics, it will
turn to the shame and reproach of Protestants, who pretending to be the true
Religion, cannot show so much.

As for their affirming of converting some to their faith, who before were
Catholics, it is impertinent, for so any Heretics, that ever were, and had
the unhappy success (as some have had) of drawing any King or Kingdom to
their Heresy, might say, that they converted them; so that by the mark thus
placed, the true Church could not be discerned from the false. That therefore
which does distinguish them, is the Conversion of Heathen, which has been
performed throughout the world, by Roman Catholics only. And that which the
Protestants have done is no more than what other Heretics have done before
them, and what is the practice of all Novellists, of whom Tertullian affirms,
( Praescript. cap. 42.) That their employment is not to convert Heathens, but
to pervert them, who are already converted. And how barren their attempts have
been in the other and true way of Conversion from Heathenisme, is by their
own Phil. Nicol. Com. de Regno Christi. l. 1. p. 395. Richer. inter Epist.
Calv. Epist. 237.
Authors, to their shame, confessed.

And doubtless it must needs seem a prodigious thing, that Protestants or any
other Heretics should have so little zeal or meet with so ill success in the
converting of the world to Christ, if they alone be the true Christians; or
that the Prophesies of dilating the Church of Christ, should be performed by
the endeavor of Catholics, and yet they not be the true Christians; or that
the Roman Catholic doctrine should be false, and yet it alone have the vigor
and efficacy to convert souls, which the Prophet David Psalm. 18. ascribes to
the doctrine and law of God. As for the Protestants, it is not to any
reasonable man probable, that they shall ever convert any Nation, or so much as
any one single person, except some poor wretch or other whom fear or gain will
drive or draw to any thing, seeing they have not means amongst them
proportionable to such an end; wanting both Miracles, and also that admirable
sanctity of life with which many Catholics, especially those who have
converted Nations, have been endowed; For what prudent Heathen will believe the
stories of the Creation, of Adams fall by eating of an Apple, of Gods
Incarnation and death, of his Mothers Virginity, with the rest, being so
disproportioned to corrupted humane reason, unless they be proved unto him by
some visible acts, which are in his judgment, as high above nature, as are the
points proposed him to believe? such are Miracles, above the power of nature;
and high Sanctity, above the reach of flesh and blood. Or who can blame them if
they do not without these signs believe? seeing our Savior says of the
Jews, If I had not done works in them, which no other man has done, they
should not have sin, John 15.24. Which works seeing ehe Protestants cannot
show, there is no hope left to them ever to convert a Nation; but if they do,
they may also convert me to them again.

CHAH. XVIII.
Of the eighth and ninth Marks of the true Church (viz.) sanctity of doctrine
and life.

. 1. ANother Mark of the true Church is holiness of doctrine; of which our
Savior says Math. 7.13.14. Strait is the gate and narrow is the way which
leads to life: and wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to
destruction. Now it is evident by the known doctrine of the Roman Catholic
Church, that the way through which she directs her children, is very strait
and narrow. She injoyns Confession of sins not only to God, but to his
Priest: also; not only Contrition and sorrow for sin, but also Satisfaction
by doing of Penance, and restitution of real damages done to our neighbors.
She obliges to set times of fasting and prayer, and magnifies the merit of
good works; propounding also and commending the sublimer acts of voluntary
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and the excercising of other great acts of
austerity for the subduing of sin in the flesh, and to express our love to
Christ who suffered so much for us: And to this end has set forth a world of
books of admirable devotion, and direction of every moment of a man's life to
holiness, and height of purity.

On the contrary look upon the Protestants and we find a wide gate of liberty
set open, through which every one naturally delights to pass. They deny
Confession, Purgatory, or any Satisfaction for the temporal punishment due to
sin, after it is remitted by Contrition; as also all merit of works, whereby
they make all fasting, prayers, mortifications, and good works useless, and
quench the fear of committing sin; for out of doubt, next to the pure love of
God, and fear to Hell, the fear of temporal punishment, and the Confession of
our sins to men, are the greatest restrainers of vice. They teach that
chastity is not in our power, cooperating with Gods grace; Luther to. 5. wit.
Sermon. de matrim. fol. 119.
that it is not in our power to be without a woman, etc. it is not in their
power that it should be stayed or omitted; but is as necessary as to eat,
drink, purge, etc.

Now what a flood-gate of liberty does this set open to young men and maids,
yea to all single persons, who have not every day the opportunity of Marriage;
as also to all married people in the absence or infirmity one of another? For
who (if he be taught that he cannot abstain) will strive to reach at an
impossibility?

Again, they teach that the Commandments are impossible to be kept; and this
ordinarily slackens all endeavors to that end. That men are justified by faith
only; which ushers in the neglect of all good works. That men have not free
will, no not by the grace of God; and this makes all exhortations to virtue,
and disswasions from vice fruitless in them. And that all that are saved are
assured thereof in this life, than which, what greater temptation to
presumption and the boldness of sinning? And if there be any in whom these
principles do not take this effect, it is not because the doctrines do not
afford it, but because they are restrained by some other motives.

Therefore Sir Edwin Sandys (in his Relation sect. 48.) says, Let the
Protestants look with the eye of charity upon them of the Papacy, as well as of
severity, and they shall find some excellent orders of government, some
singular helps for the increase of godliness and devotion, for the conquering
of sin, for the profiting in virtue: and contrariwise in themselves, looking
with a more single and less indulgent eye, they shall find there is no such
absolute perfection in their Doctrine and Reformation: yea to speak more truly
and fully, they shall find nothing but imperfection.

. 2. Another Mark of the true Church is holiness of life; to which purpose our
Savior says, A good tree brings forth good fruit: and again, Beware of false
Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves, by their fruits you shall know them, Mat. 7.15, 16, 17. Accordingly I
found the sanctity of the lives of Roman Catholics to be highly extolled,
especially of those who were the Converters of Nations, or Founders of
Religious Orders; and that by Protestants themselves. Of S. Augustine and his
companions who converted England the last time to the Roman Faith, it is thus
recorded, Holinshead Chron. part. 1 p. 100. Stows Annalls, p 64.
After they were received into Canterbury they began to follow the trade of
life which the Apostles used, exercising themselves in continual prayer,
watching and preaching, despising all wordly things, living in all points
according to the Doctrine which they set forth.

The like honorable testimony is afforded to the several Converters of Nations
to the Roman Faith; which for brevities sake I pass over: Only I will mention
the approved Sanctity of S. Xaverius, who in the last age converted sundry
Nations of the East Indians, expressed by Hackluit in his book of Navigations
(2. vol. 2. par. p. 81.) in this manner That godly Professor, and painful
Doctor of the Indian Nation in matters concerning Religion, Francis Xaverius
after great labors, injuries, and calamities suffered with much patience,
departed, endued with all spiritual blessings, out of this life, Anno 1552.
after that many thousands were by him brought to the knowledge of Christ. In
like manner concerning the first Authors of the several Orders of Religion, S.
Benedict, S. Dominick, S. Francis, and others, their sanctity of life was most
eminent, and is testified by good authority, and confessed by Cent. Mag. cent
13. ^ol. ^1 79 also (...) p. 117.
Protestants themselves.

And since I have had the happiness (...) come amongst them, I may say of the
Clergy in general, as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, that the one half
of the goodness I find amongst them, was not told me. How many rare and
excellent men are there, both Secular and Religious, full of admired Sanctity?
who as our Savior faith of himself, make it their meat and drink to do the
will of him that sent them; who despising all worldly honor, wealth, and
pleasure, exercise a more noble and virtuous ambition, in aspiring to a high
place in the Kingdom of heaven, by the service and love of the King thereof,
exercising that service in the lowest and humblest undertakings of the body,
and that love in the strongest and highest raptures and languishments of the
soul, unexpressible in themselves, and unknown to all, but those that have
them. Such powerful influence has the soul of Catholic Relegion on the
members of the body thereof, that it invites great plenty in all ages, and of
all conditions, Emperors, Kings, Princes, and all sorts of Nobility and
Gentry, to divest themselves of all worldly interest, to renounce the world
with as much eagerness, as others embrace it, to take up the Cross of Christ,
to serve him in Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. And even the weak sex of
woman, whose natural delicacy, tenderness, and infirmities, may seem to carry
with them a Patent of exemption from extraordinary severities and
mortifications of themselves, yet such is the omnipotency of Catholic
Religion, that even these do equal, if not excel the men, in the tough
exercise of denying themselves, of taking up their Cross and imitating of
Christ; invited hereunto more by pure love of God, and gratitude for his doing
and suffering for them, than for the expectation of reward.

And though perhaps there are some Clergy and Religious people, that do not
make good that title with their deeds, yet they are but few in comparison of
the other, and no impeachment to them, or to the Religion, more than Judas was
to the rest of the Apostles. The common people are also generally more devout
toward God, less injurious to their neighbors, as Protestants acknowledge,
who speaking of them in former times, when Gods worship (as they said) was
darkened with man's Traditions and superstitions, Cent. Mag. cent. 7. c. 7. col.
181.
yet the study to serve God, and to live Godly and justly, was not wanting to
the miserable common people, etc. they were so attentive to their prayers, as
they bestowed almost the whole daytherin, etc. they did exhibit to the
magistrate due obedience, they were most studious of amity, concord, and
society, so as they would easily remit injuries: all of them were careful to
spend their time in honest vocation and labor; to the poor and strangers they
were most courteous and liberal, and in their judgments and contracts most
true. And the like is affirmed of Roman Catholics of later times by Luther
(in Dominic. 26. post Trin.) and by Stubbs in his Motive to good works, page 43.

. 3. Now concerning the want of sanctity in the Protestants, both Clergy and
Laity, I will say nothing in particular of these present times, and of ancient
times I can say nothing, they being but a novice Religion. They are extreme
apt to blazon one another faults, as is manifest by the bitter invectives that
past betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists, and at this present in the Kingdom
of England betwixt the Presbyterians and Independents, Malignants and well
affected, and the Cavaliers and Roundheads, as they call each other. I confess
there are many amongst them stored with moral goodness, especially in the
Kingdom of England, and especially amongst the legal Protestants; but the
devotion and zeal is amongst the Puritanes, which has eaten up almost all
moral honesty among them. I will only instance in the want of sanctity of some
of them who are the Converters of the world (as they say) to the purity of the
Gospel; whose unhallowed actions, if they could be objected against the
Apostles, the first publishers of the Catholic Religion, it might (without a
second objection) breed a stand in those infidells that were approaching to the
belief thereof.

Luther, the Lucifer and morning star of the Protestant Religion, does thus
proclaim his own lustfulnesse, ( To. 5. Wit. Ser. de. matrim. fol. 119. a.
versus finem) As it is not in my power to be no man, so it is not in my power
to be without a woman. And ( Tom. 1. Epist. fol. 334 ad. Phil.) I am burned
with the great flames of my untamed lust; I, who ought to be fervent in Spirit,
am fervent in the flesh, in lust, sloth etc. with much more to this purpose.
And to make himself more famously impious, he married a vowed Nun, adding to
lust, Sacrilege, both in himself and her. He is also by his fellow
Protestants charged with Zuinglius to 2. in Res. ad confess. Lutheri fol. 878.
a. ante med. Oecolam. pad. in resp. ad confess. Lutheri.
arrogance, insolency, and pride, for which (say they) God withdrew his true
Spirit from him; which he exercised against persons of the highest quality,
particularly against Henry the eighth King of England, and said, in l. cont.
Angliae Regem.
The divine Majesty is on my side, so that I do not care though a thousand
Augustines, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Henricane Churches stood against
me. And in his defense of his Translation of the new Testament, he says, If
thy Papist will prattle concerning this word (alone) which he added to the text,
where it is said that we are justified by faith) presently answer, Doctor
Martin Luther will have it so, and says, a Papist and an ass are the same. So
I will, so I command, my will be a law. For we will not be the scholars of
the Papists, but the Masters and Judges. And Sleydan his dear Scholar (l. 3.
fol. 29. b. initio. and l. 2. fol. 22. a.) does report, that he himself
acknowledged his profession not to be of life or manners, but of doctrine;
wishing that he were removed from the office of preaching, because his manners
and life did not answer his profession; In so much that it gained the place of
a Proverb amongst the Protestants of those days; to express their riot and
intemperance, by saying, Morgensterne in ^ra. de Eccl. p. 225.
HODIE LUTHERANICE VIVEMUS, to day we will live like Lutherans. His impudent
railing, his foul, filthy, and Bedlam-like expressions have bred a stench
through all his writings; and it is no wonder: for who would look for better
language, or beter life from one who was such a darling of the devil, Luther
in Conc. Dom. Reminis. fo. 19. apud Cochleum Idem in Colloq. Germ. fo. 275. 281.
that he knew him very well (as he to his great credit confesses) that he had
eat more than one measure of salt with him, and that the devil slept with him
oftener than his wife Katherine.

Concerning Calvin, that admired Apostle of Protestants, it is affirmed by
Conradus Schlusselburg (in Theol. Calvinistar. l. 2. fol. 72.) a man of
eminence in the Protestant Church, and certainly a great enemy to the Church of
Rome, that God in the rod of his fury visiting Calvin, did horribly punish him
before the fearful hour of his unhappy death; for he so struck this Heretic
with his mighty hand, that being in despair, and calling upon the Devil, he
gave up his wicked soul, swearing, cursing, and blaspheming. He died of the
disease of lice and worms, increasing in a most loathsome ulcer about his privy
parts, so as none present could endure the stench. These things are declared
concerning his lasciviousness, his sundry abominable vices, and Sodomiticall
lusts; for which he was by the Magistrate, under whom he lived, branded on the
shoulder with a hot burning iron; unto which I yet see not any sound and clear
refutation made. Thus far he.

Of Beza also another Father of the Protestant Religion, many foul and impious
things are recorded; his odious conspiracies and seditious books are mentioned
by Bolseck in his book of Beza's life, and by Bancroft in his Survey, page 127.
54. 59. 219. 220. By whom also he is taxed of insolency, pride, and impudence,
in being too bold with the ancient Fathers. Lastly, he wrote Faius de vita and
obitu Beza p. 19.
many lascivious Poems (and that after he was turned Protestant) and one
Epigram amongst the rest most infamous; wherein debating with himself, whether
he should prefer his lust with Candida his wench, or Andebertus his boy; in
conclusion he prefers the later, and of two evil doings, both of which he
ought to have avoided, he does deliberately choose one, and that the most foul
and unnatural. These things and much more to this purpose are recorded of
these, and others the supposed Apostles, converters of the world, and restorers
of the purity of Evangelicall Doctrine, of whom we may say, as Joseph's brethren
did to Jacob of his Coat all smeered with blood, VIDE UTRUM TUNICA FILII TUI
SIT, AN NON, See whether it be thy sons coat or no, Genesis 37.32. Judge whether
these be the lives of the Sons of God, sent to control the world, to reform
and lead out of error the misguided sons of men. Surely any prudent man will
believe, that either God never intended the change they have made, or if he did
he would have chosen other kind of men than these: such as Moses and the
Prophets, who gave the Law unto the Jews; and Christ and his Apostles who
brought the Gospel to the Gentiles.

As for the common multitude, Luther (to the credit of his Doctrine) confesses,
( Postill. super. Evang. Dominicae 1. Advent.) that the world grows daily
worse, men are now more revengefull, covetous, licentious, then they were ever
before in the Papacy. And again he says, ( Domin. 26. post Trin.) before (when
we were seduced by the Pope) every man did willingly follow good works; and now
every one neither says, nor knows any thing, but how to get all things to
himself by exactions, pillage, theft, lying, usury, etc. And of those that have
changed from the Catholic Roman to the Protestant Religion, it is confessed
by Luther (in Sermon. convivial. Germ. fol. 55.) and Musculus, (Loc. Com. cap. de
Decal. in explanat. 3. praecepti p. 62. circa med.) That they have changed
their lives into worse: Which made Paulus Eberus, a Protestant writer of note
complain, saying, (in praefat. Comment. Philip. in Ep. ad Cor.) which evils
seeing every one does behold with his proper eyes, he doubts (not without
cause) whether our Evangelicall congregation be the true Church. Which also
with the other reasons forementioned has made me not at all to doubt thereof,
but to believe assuredly, that it is not the true Church.

. 3. As for the recriminattion of the Protestants, and charging the lives of
some Popes, and many of the Clergy and Religious, with great impiety, as it is
not denied, so far forth as it is true, so it is in it self impertinent; for
what Church pretends to have every particular person, though of the highest
rank, blameless? Let them look upon the heads of their own Churches, whosoever
they be that they count so, and see whether by their own members they are
accounted spotless; particularly the first head of the Church of England, King
Henry the eight. And upon their own Clergy, of whom not I, but Doctor King,
Bishop of London, (in Jonam. Lecture 45.) says, that scarce the tenth man of
the Ministry is morally honest. But howsoever the successors may fail, yet it
is a matter highly suspicious, yea altogether convincing, that they that
pretend to be the first revealers or revivers of the forsaken truth of God, if
they be not of godly lives are counterfeit Messengers and false Prophets. And
the Protestants have no reason to make an inventory of the faults of
Catholics, for so many hundred years as they confess Catholics have
possessed the Church, and that throughout the world, and compare it with their
own faults, whose Church is little above one hundred year old, and possessing
but some corners of the world.

Nor is the sanctity of the Church (I confess) to be measured exactly by the
zealous complaints against sin on either side; for zealous complaint is
hyperbolicall, even in holy Scripture. But it is manifest that the Protestant
Religion has not that sanctity of life in it that the Catholic has, when
neither the founders thereof had any at all, nor the followers any more, but
much less, than when they were Catholics. In fine, compare the lives of
Roman Catholics and Protestants both Clergy and Laity, and of the same
Nation, (for that some Nations perhaps are addicted to vice in general more
than others, and every Nation to some one or few particular vices more than
another,) the best to the best, and the major part to the major part, we shall
find (so have I done) and I have heard even Protestants themselves confess,
that they are exceedingly overballanced by the Catholics.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the tenth and last (here mentioned) Mark of the Church, (viz.) That the
true Church has never been separated from any society of Christians more
ancient then her self.

. 1. THe last Mark of the Church which I will mention is, her never going forth
out of any visible society of Christians, elder than her self; of which going
out, as a note of error and falsehood, the Apostles say, They went forth from
us, 1 John 2.19. Certain that went forth from us, Acts 15.14. Out of your
selves shall arise men speaking perverse things, Acts 20.30. These are they
that separate themselves, Jude verse. 19. Certain it is, that the true Church is
most ancient, as truth it self is elder than falsehood, if therefore there have
risen in the Church men of indifferent judgments or affections from the true
Church, they have presently made a separation, gone out of the Church, wherein
they were, and erected a new Church to themselves; As S. Augustine says, (
Tract. 3. in Ep. Joan. de Sym. ad cateth. l. 1. c. 5.) All Heretics went out
from us, that is, they go out of the Church; and again, The Church Catholic
fighting against all Heresies may be opposed, but she cannot be overthrown:
all heresies are come out from her, as unprofitable branches out from the Vine,
but she remains in her vine, in her root, in her charity. A vain thing
therefore it is for Protestants to charge the Church of Rome with departing
from the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the Apostles, unless they can prove
that she departed from some former Church that held other doctrine than she
does. But certain it is, that this cannot be proved, seeing she was planted by
the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and never separated her self from any
precedent Church.

It is true indeed that there were Churches elder than she in time, as she is a
particular Church, as the Church of Jerusalem, where the Gospel was first
preached, and of Antioch, where S. Peter was first Bishop, with other Churches
in Asia, but these all agreed in the unity of Faith, and were all subject to
the Church of Rome, after it was planted, in union under the head thereof S.
Peter and his successors, as I shall show by and by. And the Church of Rome did
never separate from any of these, but many of these from her, in the Heresy of
Arius and others, as Protestants will not deny. If then she did never separate
from any elder Church, so that men might say here is a Church, and there is the
Church of Rome, once the same with her, and now separated from her, she must
still be the first and true Church, or there is none upon earth.

But certain it is on the contrary side, that all the former Churches, which
Protestants themselves will call Heretics, as Arrians, Macedonians,
Nestorians, Entychians, Donatists, with many others, did separate from the
Church of Rome, and she can tell when, and why; and no less certain is it,
that all that are now called Protestants, and all the pedigree of their
forefathers, Waldo, Wickliffe, Husse, Luther, Calvin, and all the Kingdoms
wherein their followers are, were once, and first of the Roman Catholic
Church, and have forsaken her Communion and departed from her, and have not
joined to any other Church more ancient, and subsistent apart from her, by
which she was condemned of novelty and separation, nor are they able to show
any such Church; therefore the Roman must needs be the true Church: Or else
(which is a most absurd and impossible imagination) the true Church has been
utterly extinguished, and revived again; and that not by the service of such
men, as proved their calling by miracles or sanctity of life (as Roman
Catholics have done, to all the nations they have converted) but were men
notable only for their wickedness.

And these amongst many others which might be added, and of which much more
might be said, are those infallible Marks that prove the Church of Rome, and
those that communicate with her to be the one, true, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church. That Church of whose infallible and never-erring Judgment,
the Scripture assures us, calling it, The ground and pillar of truth; which
has the Spirit of God to lead it into all truth; which is built upon a rock,
against which the gates of hell shall not prevail; wherein Christ placed
Apostles, Prophets, Doctors and Pastors, to the consummation and full perfection
of the whole body, that in the mean time we be not carried away with every
blast of doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.15. John 16.13. Mat. 16.18. Ephesians. 4.11.12. That
Church which whatsoever it says, God commands us to do, and he that will not,
is an heathen and a Publican; which whatsoever she shall bind on earth, is
bound in heaven, and whatsoever she shall loose one earth, is loosed in
heaven; which is the spouse of Christ, his body, his lot, Kingdom and
inheritance given him in this world, Math. 23.3. and 18.17.18. Of which S.
Cyprian (Epist. 55.) says, To S. Peter's chair and the principal Church
infidelity or false faith cannot have access. And S. Hierome, ( Apol. advers.
Ruff. l. 3. c. 4.) That the Roman faith commanded by the Apostles cannot be
changed. And S. Gregory Nazianzen, (Carm. de vita sua) 'Old Rome from ancient
times has the right faith, and always keeps it, as it becomes the city
which overrules the world. Which being so, what remains to every man, but
laying aside endless dispute about particulars, to cast himself into the arms
of this Holy mother Church, and wholly rely upon her infallible judgment,
wherein Christ Jesus her husband has promised, and has reason to preserve
her. And to submit themselves to the visible head thereof the Pope of Rome, of
whose authority, as I did my self particularly enquire, and was moved thereby,
so I will briefly propound it to others.

CHAP. XX.
That the Pope is the head of the Church.

. 1. THe Protestants do usually blaspheme the Pope and Sea of Rome with the
title of Antichrist, of the Whore of Babylon, of the Mother of Abominations, of
the Beast with seven heads and ten horns, and many other like courteous
compellations; and it is the maine design of some of the Clergy to persuade
the people into a belief that he is Antichrist; which conceit when it has
once strongly seized them, as it does, yet by very weak and silly arguments,
they care not to enquire any further, but conclude from thence (and that
justly, if it were true, that neither he nor his adherents, are either Head or
members of the Church. But the contrary I found most evident by the testimony
of all antiquity. First that our Savior appointed S. Peter his Vicar and Head
of his Church here on earth; and after him, his successors in the Sea of Rome,
nor do we read either in Scriptures, Counsels, Fathers or histories, that any
other of the Apostles but Peter, was thought, or pretended by any, to be the
chiefest over the rest, and over the whole Church; and that it is necessary
that some one be Head, both reason and authority do convince.

Nor is it a denial of Christ to be the Head, while we say, that S. Peter was,
and the Pope is so. For Christ we confess is the Head originally and
immediately, the Pope derivatively from and by him; Christ is the principal,
the Pope but his deputy, and representer; and these two headships do not
contradict (as some Protestants imagine) but are subordinate the one to the
other. And with as much reason they may deny a King to be head of his Kingdom,
because the Scripture says, Psalm. 46.8. God is King over all the earth, as
deny the Pope to be head of the Church, because Christ is so. S. Basil
(Concione de poenit.) shows us the difference of their headships: Though Peter
be a rock (says he) he is not a rock, as Christ is; for Christ is the true
immovable rock of himself, Peter is immovable by Christ the rock, for Jesus
does communicate and impart his dignities not voiding himself of them; but
holding them to himself, bestows them also on others: He is the light, and
yet you are the lights; He is the Priest, and yet he makes Priests; He is the
Rock, and he made a rock. Therefore our Savior says to Peter, ( Math.
16.18.19.) Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And, I will give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.

Nor is it contrary to this (as Protestants imagine) to say (as the Fathers
sometimes do) that the Church was built upon the confession of Peter, these
two expositions not excluding, but including one another. For they intend that
the Church was built causally on the confession of Peter, and formally on the
ministry of the Person of Peter; that is to say the confession of Peter was the
cause wherefore Christ chose him, to constitute him the foundation of the
ministry of the Church: and that the person of S. Peter was that, on which our
Lord did properly build his Church; as S. Hilary (in Mat. c. 16.) says, The
confession of S. Peter has received a worthy reward. So that to say, the
Church is built upon the confession of Peter, is not to deny that it is built
on the person of Peter, but it is to express the cause wherefore it is built
upon him; as when S. Hierome (ad Pammach. advers. error. Joan. Hierosol. Ep.
91.) said, that Peter walked not on the waters, but faith; it is not to deny
that S. Peter walked truly on the water; but it is to express that the cause
that made him walk there, was not the natural activity of his body, but the
faith that he had given to the words of Christ. So that these two propositions
are both true, Peter's faith walked on the water; and Peter's person walked on
the water; so likewise these, the Church is built on the faith of Peter, and
the Church is built on the person of Peter: the confession of Peter's faith
being the cause why Christ built his Church upon Peter's person.

Again our Savior said to Peter, Simon son of Jonas love thou me more
than these? He says unto him, yea Lord thou know that I love thee. He said
unto him feed my lambs, John 21.15. And thus the second and the third time.
Which speed was directed to Peter alone, as appears by these words [more than
these] whereby he is separated from the rest; and by these words is given to
him the Ecclesiastical power to feed, and also to govern, as the word in the
original does signify; and that not some alone, but all the whole flock of
Christ. Of which the Fathers give abundant testimony: S. Aug. says ( Sermon. 5.
in fest. Pet. and Pauli.) speaking of S. Peter, that he only amongst the
Apostles deserved to hear, verily I say unto thee thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build my Church, worthy truly, who to the people, who were to be
builded in the house of God, might be a stone for their foundation, a pillar
for their stay, a key to open the gates of the Kingdom of heaven. And again,
( Quaestion. vet. and. nov. Test. q. 7^.) 'Our Savior when he commands to pay
for himself and Peter, seems to have paid for all; because as in our Savior
were all the causes of superiority; so after him all are contained in Peter;
for he ordained him the head of them, that he might be the head of our Lords
flock. S. Gregory also ( lib. 4. Ep. 32.) says, 'It is clear to all that know
the Gospel, that by our Lords mouth, the care of the whole Church is committed
to Holy Peter, the Prince of all the Apostles, for to him it is said, Peter
love thou me? feed my sheep; and further he applies the places of Scripture
spoken to S. Peter above mentioned, to this end. And S. Chrysostom (Hom. 87.
in Joan. 21.) says, that Peter was the mouth of the Apostles, and the Prince
and top of the company, and therefore Paul went to see him above others. As for
S. Paul's reproving of S. Peter, it was for an error of conversation not of
doctrine, as Tertullian says, nor does it any way diminish his Primacy, but
only shows, that an inferior may reprove his superior, if the matter require
it, and the manner be not unseemly; which no man will deny: Therefore this
instance is nothing to the purpose, being thus also answered by S. Augustine.
lib. 2. de. Bapt. c. 1.

. 2. And as Christ ordained S. Peter to be the supreme Pastor and Head of the
Church, so it was his will, that that office should continue in S. Peter's
successors in the Sea of Rome. That there should be one chief Pastor always
in the Church for the government thereof, and deciding of controversies, Gods
practice in the Church of the Jews (Numb. 20.28. Exodus 18.15. etc. Deuteronomy. 17.8.
etc.) gives us reason to believe; who appointed the High Priests therein to
succeed one another, to this end. That the office of a Pastor is always
needful, our Savior implies in calling his people, his sheep; and sheep
without a shepherd are like to be but il provided for: and as they are always
sheep, so they ought always to have a shepherd; which office in ordinary being
given to S. Peter first, ought to continue out of the necessity of the cause
thereof, so long as the sheep continue, which will be to the end of the world:
Which S. Peter not being now able to do in person; reason requires that it
should be done by his Successors. The Apostle 1 Cor. 12.21. compares the Church
to a body, and says, The head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you;
which cannot be understood of Christ our head, for he may truly say to us all,
that he has no need of us; it must therefore be meant of some Head here on
earth, which must continue as long as the Church continues a body, and that is
to the worlds end.

And that the successors of S. Peter are this Head, S. Chrysostom doubts not
to affirm who demanding why Christ shed his blood, De Saterdot. l. 2. initio
Leo Sermon. 2. de Annivers. assump sua ad Pontific.
answers, It was to gain that flock, the care whereof he committed to Peter
and to Peter's successors. And S. Leo, Peter continues and lives in his
Successors. And that his successors are the Bishops of Rome is out of doubt;
none but they ever assuming it to themselves, or having it granted by others.
For the Bishop of Antioch succeeded not S. Peter in the government of the whole
Church, but of that diocese; for succession to any in his whole right, is not
but to him that leaves his place either by natural death, deposition or
voluntary resignation; now S. Peter living and ruling left the Church of
Antioch, and placed his Sea at Rome, where he also died; so that he that
succeeds him in that Sea, must succeed him both as he was Bishop thereof, and
likewise as he was Head of the whole Church: as for the Bishop of Antioch he
did never either possess, or pretend to higher than the third place amongst
the Patriarchs. (Cone. Nic. Can. 6.)

Gelasius (In decret. cum 70. Episcopis) affirms that the Roman Church is
preferred before other Churches, not by any constitutions of Counsels, but she
obtained Primacy by the Evangelicall voice of our Lord; saying, thou art (...)
upon this rock I will build m^ (...) And S. Hierome in his 59. Epistle (...) to
Pope Dam^sus says, To (...) she (...) require from the Priest the (...)
^^^tion, and from the Pastor (...) I speak with the successor of the (...)
sho^^ etc. I following none but Christ in (...) joined in Communion to your
holyn sse, that is to the chair of Peter; upon that, rock I know the Church to
be builded 3. whosoever out of this house eats the lamb, is profane,
whosoever shall not be in the Ark of Noe shall perish in the deluge. And S.
Aug. writing to Pope Innocentius ( Epist 92.) says, we think that by the
Authority of your Holiness: derived from the authority of Holy Scriptures,
they will more easily yield, who believe such perverse and pernicious: things.
Wherein he derives the Popes authority from the Scriptures. And S Bernard
writing to Pope Eugenius says thus, Thou alone art not only the Pastor of
sheep, De consider. l. 3 cap. 8. and. Epist. 190. ad Innoc. PP.
but also of Pastors. Thou demandest how I prove this?

Out of the word of our Lord. For to whom, I do not say Bishops, but also of
the Apostles, were all the sheep so absolutely and indeterminately committed?
Peter if thou love me feed my sheep: which? the people of this or that city,
country, or Kingdom? He says, my sheep. To whom, is it not plain, that he
did not assign some, but all? Nothing is excepted where nothing is
distinguished, etc. To conclude, James (who seemed a pillar for the Church) was
content with Jerusalem only, yielding the universality to Peter. And with the
Fathers apart, do concur the Fathers united in Council, by whom in many
Counsels this truth has been declared, as in the Council of Sess. 14. c. 7.
Trent, the Council of Florence, Sess. ult.
the Council of Respons. Synod de authoritat. Conc. general.
Basil, the Council of Part. 2. Act. 3.
Ephesus, the Council of Sub. Innoc. 3. e. 5.
Lateran, the second Council of Act. 2.
Nice, the Council of Conc. Chal. Act. 1. and. Act. 3. tom. 2. p. 252 edit.
Venet.
Chalcedon, as is easy to show at large if need required.

. 3. As for the attempt of the Bishop of Constantinople against the Pope, it
was not for the Primacy and headship of the Church Catholic, but only of the
Churches of the East; And the title of universal Bishop which he claimed, was
not with intent of superiority over the Pope, but over the other Patriarchs,
who were all of the Eastern Empire, and in association with the Pope for those
parts, yet with subjection to the Pope, acknowledging him the root and stock of
the universality; even as Menas Patriarch of Constantinople in the time of this
contention acknowledges, saying, Council. Constant. sub. Men. Act. 4.
we will in all things follow and obey the sea Apostolic. And as the Emperor
and Patriarch both acknowledge; as S. Gregory ( lib. 7. indict. 2. ep. 93.)
reports in these words; Who is it that doubts but that the Church of
Constantinople is subject to the Sea Apostolic, which the most religious Lord
the Emperor, and our brother Bishop of the same city continually protest. And
if it were true (as Protestants imagine) that the Bishop of Constantinople
contended with the Pope for the absolute Primacy over the Christian world, this
does no more prove his right, than Perkin Warbecks pretention in the days of
King Henry the seventh, did prove his right to the crown of England. And
certain it is that neither the one, nor the other did obtain that which he
aspired to, but were rejected by the voice of mankind, which is an argument
that their claim was unjust.

. 4. Another great objection of Protestants against the Popes Primacy, is
fetched from S. Gregory, who was Pope himself; and is this, That he that
entitled himself universal Bishop, exalted himself like Lucifer above his
brethren, and was a forerunner of Antichrist. To the understanding of which
words, I found that the word universal has two meanings,; the one proper,
literal and grammatical, whereby it signifies Only Bishops excluding all
others; the other transferred and Metaphorical, whereby it signifies the
supreme over all Bishops: and S. Gregory censured this title in the first
sense; because that from hence it would have ensued, that there had been but
one Bishop only, and that all the rest had been but his Deputies and not true
Bishops, and true Officers of Christ; as he says, ( l. 7. ind. 2. Ep. 96.) If
there be one that is universal Bishop, all the rest are no more Bishops. Now
S. Gregory maintained that all Bishops were true Bishops, Ministers and
officers of Christ, although concerning jurisdiction, they were subordinate the
one to the other. He therefore that usurps that title wholely to himself,
exalts himself (with relation to the Episcopal order) above his brethren,
denying him the essence and propriety of Bishops, and officers of Christ, and
makes them only Commissioners to him, as if they had the original of that
office from him; and not from God.

And in this sense S. Gregory withstood the title of universal Bishop, and not
to deny (in case of jurisdiction) the superiority of one Bishop over another,
and the Bishop of Rome over all: For that he maintains ( Lib. 7. ind. 2. Ep.
62.) saying, If there be any crime found in Bishops, I know no Bishop but is
subject to the Sea Apostolic. He also adds for explication of the matter in
hand, ( Lib. 4. ind. 13. Ep. 32.) that The care of the Church has been
committed to the holy Apostle, and Prince of all the Apostles, S. Peter; the
care and Principality has been committed to him, and yet he is not called
universal Apostle. In which words he ascribes the Primacy and headship of the
Church to S. Peter, and yet denies the universality: it must therefore needs be,
that the word universal in S. Gregory's sense, in this case, is not the denial
of the Primacy of Jurisdiction over the whole Church, but of his being the only
Apostle, as if there were none but he, and such as should derive their
authority originally from him, and not from God. And with application to the
Pope, it is the denial of his being the only Bishop, as if there were no
Bishop in the world but he, or such as he should constitute his deputies, as
from himself, and not by command from God, and as the Officers of God.

Moreover the Histories of all ages beat record, that the Bishop of Rome has
exercised authority over all other Bishops in the world, even in all Foreign
Nations, (both before S. Gregory and after, and even in his person, and
therefore he cannot mean the universal Government, when he reproves the title
of universal Bishop;) as by creating them himself; by confirming them, created
by others; by deposing them, by restoring them, being deposed by others; by
appointing them his Vicars, by final deciding their controversies; by
accepting their Appeals; by making Laws over all the Church; by dispensing
with them; by inflicting his censures; by being President in General
Counsels; by calling of Counsels, so far as concerned the Ecclesiastical
authority, which is the chiefest; though the Emperors concurred therein in
regard of temporal authority, and of that only, to make them obligatory to the
secular tribunal, and executory by the Ministry of the Officers of the
Emperor; as witnesses the sixth General Council, ( Act 18.) speaking of the
first General Council of Nice, which says, The most sacred Constantine and
the Praiseworthy Sylvester called the famous Council of Nice: which may also
be proved of all the rest. And by the saying of Athanasius (ad solit.) That an
Emperor presiding in Ecclesiastical judgments is the Abomination of
Desolation, foretold by Daniel. And of Osius the Bishop of Cordua, in an
Epistle of his to Constantius the Emperor; Go not about to meddle in
Ecclesiastical affairs; and command not us in such matters, but rather learn
of us; God has committed the Empire to thee, and the government of the Church
to us. And by the Protestation of the Emperor Constantine, Pogonat sent to
Rome for the holding of the sixth General Council, I will not sit as Emperor
amongst them, I will not speak imperiously, In Epist. Greg. 2. ad Leon. Imp.
Ep. 1.
but as one of them, and what the Prelates shall ordain, I will execute.

All which do undoubtedly prove the Pope of Rome both by divine and humane Law,
and by the right of prescription in all ages, to be the supreme Pastor and Head
of the Church. And all the objections urged by Calvin, and all other invaders
of this Sea, are but like water furiously beating against a Rock, broken into
drops, and forced creepingly to recoile, and to foame and cry through shame and
indignation at their vain and impossible attempts: impossible indeed, unless
they have more force then the gates of hell, for they shall never prevail
against this Rock.

CHAP. XXI.
That English Protestants do much mistake Catholic Doctrine, being abused by
the malice or ignorance of many of their Ministers; And that upon their own
grounds they are obliged to inform themselves more exactly of the truth.

. 1. AFter all these foregoing considerations, for my more explicit
satisfaction, I descended to the examination of all the particular Doctrines in
controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and the Protestants; whom I found in
all things to be exceedingly over-weighed both by Scripture, Counsels,
Fathers, and reason. Of which I will say no more than I have done, but only to
show in some few particulars, how our poor English people are abused by their
ordinary Preachers, and made to believe monstrous things of the Doctrine and
practice of the Church of Rome, who for the most part stating the question
false, and laying to the Catholics charge the things that they do not teach,
raise an error out of their own fancy, and then fight against it most
courageously, under the title of Popery. And every young Minister is so valiant
herein, that he thinks he baffles the most learned Cardinal Bellarmine, as
Goliath thought he could have done David; and in this case for the most part the
most ignorant and imprudent are the forwardest. And this I add to rectify the
opinions of the less learned, and to reconcile them so far to the Catholic
doctrines, as to believe they are not so monstrous as they are vulgarly
imagined.

First then they tell the people that the Papists (as they call them) are
Idolaters, in that they worship Images, stocks, and stones, little painted
babies and puppets, with many such like titles, wherewith they make themselves
merry; and then allege all the places of the Scripture, or Fathers, wherein
the Idolatry of the Heathen is reproved. Now it is most certain that this is an
unjust charge against Catholics; first because the worship of Images and
Idols is not all one, seeing the words are of different signification, as is
manifest by those places where it is said, Let us make man after our Image, (
Genesis 1.26.) And a man ought not to cover his head, because he is the image and
glory of God. (1 Cor. 11.7.) with many the like; wherein if they say that Image
and Idol were all one, they must say also that when God made Adam, he made to
himself an Idol. Secondly Catholics do not worship Images, as God, which
the Heathen and Jews, when they had committed Idolatry, did, as appears by
Elias who says unto them, 3. Kings 18.21. If the Lord be God, follow him, if
Baal be God, follow him; clearly intimating thereby, that they that followed
Baal, followed and worshipped him as God. Thirdly it is only the worship of
Images for God, which is by God forbidden, as appears, Exodus 20.23. where it is
said, you shall not make to your selves Gods of silver and Gods of gold, and
Lev. 26.1. you shall make no Idols and graven Images, etc. to bow down
thereto, for I am the Lord, and my glory I will not give to another, neither my
praise to graven images, Esaias 24.8.

By which places (as by all other) is forbidden that kind of bowing, honor,
and worship which is due to God only, because it is said, I am the Lord,
therefore Images are not; and my praise and my glory I will not give to another,
that is, that praise and glory which is due to me only; for otherwise (seeing
man is another thing from God) it would be unlawful to give any kind of
praise, or bow down to men, which no body I think will affirm. This and this
only, is properly Idolatry; namely, to worship a creature, believing it to be
God, and giving to it the divine incommunicable attributes, and in that
imagination to exercise devotion to it; which is far from the belief or
practice of Catholics. But that holy creatures, as Saints and Angels are to
be worshipped, with such worship as we give to persons of several qualities
here on earth, as bowing and kneeling; or such as we give to all whose help we
desire, as praying; and these (in the absence of the parties) by and through
their Images; and that the Images themselves are to be reverently handled for
their sakes, whom they represent, no rational man can deny.

. 2. And whereas many Protestants stumble at the word worship, and think that
it imports a thing that is to be done to God only, they are therein mistaken;
worship signifying any kind of reverence and respect either of body or mind;
and is communicable to all creatures according to their dignity: therefore in
the English Phrase we call all eminent Gentlemen, worshipful, that is, men
that deserve reverence or worship; and all men do worship others, when they put
off their hats, or bow their bodies to them. And whereas they say, it is but
civil worship which they give to men, it is impertinent; for civil and
religious worship do not differ in the outward act or expression, but in the
object that is worshipped; that being civil worship which is given to a civil
person or thing, which is religious worship, being directed to a holy person or
thing. Now Saints, being holy persons, their Images or other things that belong
to them may be said to be holy; first because they have relation to them; as
the Scripture says, put off thy shoes from thy feet; for the place where thou
stand is holy ground, Exodus 3.5. which was in regard of the presence of the
Angels by whom the Law was delivered, Gal. 3.19. Secondly because Images are
dedicated to honor God withal, by and through them whom they represent, of
which the Scripture says, whatsoever shall once be consecrated, shall be most
holy to the Lord, Levit. 27.28. for which cause all the Vestments and Vtensils
of the Temples were called holy; therefore the reverence and respect done to
Images is and ought to be holy or religious worship; for whatsoever is holy, is
religiously honorable or worshipful, and that so far, and in that sense that
it is holy; and so are Images of religious persons.

The Council of Trent (Sess. 25. decret. de Sanct. Imag.) has expressed the
doctrine of the Catholic Church herein, in these words, The Image of Christ,
of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints are to be had and retained,
especially in Churches; and due honor and worship is to be imparted to them;
not for that any Divinity is to be believed to be in them, or virtue for which
they are worshipped; or that any thing is to be begged of them, or that hope is
to be put in them, as in times past the Pagans did, who put their trust in
Idols; but because the honor which is exhibited to them, is referred to the
first pattern, which they resemble. So that by the Images which we kiss, and
before whom we uncover our heads and kneel, we adore Christ and his Saints,
whose likeness they bear. Whatsoever is more than this, are but
School-points, which no man is bound to believe further than his particular
reason guides him.

But howsoever the belief is (say the Protestants) yet the practice is
otherwise, and some ignorant people do pray to Images believing them to be
very God, and so seek succor from them, as from God; and it is better (say
they) that the worship of Images should be abolished, than that it should be
the occasion of Idolatry. Their affirmation as it is not to be believed,
considering the plentiful means of instruction in all places, and the
easiness of the thing to be apprehended, so their inference is false; for
(passing by their preferring their own judgment herein, before all the world
of Catholics, which objection lies against them in all that they say, and is
a great one) I answer, the good use of a thing is not to be taken away because
of the abuse, especially when the good use is very abundant, and the abuse very
rare, and easily amended by instruction; otherwise all good things must be
abolished, because by some or other they are abused. These men that argue thus,
will not say that wine is to be destroyed, because some men are drunk therewith;
or the use of swords forbidden, because some men commit murder with them;
espetially, that the reading of the Bible should is be prohibited, because some
men pervert it (as the Apostle says) to their own damnation. The use of Jmages
then (notwithstanding this objection) is lawful, and unfit to be abolished.

Nor truly can any man, whose natural understanding is not corrupted by his
corrupting of Scripture, boggle at it. It is a Principle in nature, gathered
out of Aristotle, IDEM EST MOTUS IN IMAGINEM ET EXEMPLAR, that the image may
and ought to stand for the person whose image it is, and is by imagination to
be taken as if it were the person, and what we do to the Image, is done by
imagination to the person. And this is expressed by the Prophet David saying,
Adore his footstool, (which the Protestants of England falsely translate at his
footstool) because he is holy, Psalm. 98.5. God appointed that the Tabernacle
should be taken by imagination for his house, the Mercy-seat for his Throne,
and the Ark for his footstool, and so he imagined there present, as sitting
with his feet on the Ark; and this ordination being supposed, the Prophet
says, Adore his footstool; yet taking of the Ark, as a place where God is
present, (...) but a positive ordinance (whereas Images by the law of nature
stand for those whose images they are) yet this positive ordinance supposed,
the law of nature also binds men to worship and adore it, with reference to
God, imagined to sit thereon.

This ever has been and is the opinion and practice of all the world, except
it be of those who under the show of grace have extinguished the light of
nature, and yet even these in their humane practices do the same things; as if
Christ and his Saints were the only men that after death or in absence were
incapable of honor. It is well known that the Kings and Queens of England are
honored by uncovering of the head in all places, where they are but supposed
to be present; and when they are dead, until their funerals are solemnized,
there is the same respect exhibited to their Images as to themselves. And what
Puritan lover is there that will not in the ardour of his affection, kiss,
lay in his bosom, and talk to, not only the picture (which does more
immediately and directly represent a person, than any thing else) but even the
handkercher, glove, or letter, which are but relics of her whom he desires in
marriage? And is it less Idolatry to do these things to mortal men than to
immortal Saints, though there be as much difference observed in the degree of
honor, as there is between the dignity of the persons? Surely if they consider
it duly, they will find that they must either leave their religion in this
point, or their manners and civility in all points, seeing either both or
neither are Idolatry.

. 3. Secondly they teach the people, and the people ordinarily believe, that
Catholics think to be saved by their good works, and that without being
beholding to Christ; For they make an opposition between these two assertions;
we are saved by Christ's merits; And we are saved by our own merits: Hence they
believe that Catholics are the proudest and most ungrateful to God of all
people in the world. But this doctrine is misliked amongst them, because it is
misunderstood.

For Catholics hold that no work is meritorious with God of its own nature;
but to make the same meritorious many graces are required. First the grace of
adoption in Baptism, whereby souls are supernaturally beautified by
participation of the divine nature, whence a triple dignity redounds to works:
One from God the Father, who in respect of adoption, regards good works, as the
works of his children: Another from God the holy Ghost dwelling in us, by whom
good works are honored, as by the principal author of them; so that he rather
then we, does the works: Thirdly they receive dignity from God the Son,
whose members we are made by grace, which grace he by his merits purchased for
us, so that the works we do, are reputed not so much ours, or his; as the work
of a particular member is attributed principally to the head. Secondly there is
required grace prevenient whereby God stirs up men's hearts to pious works;
and grace adjuvant to assist us in the performancee of the works, making our
free will produce works that are supernatural; and above the reach of mere
man. Thirdly there is required the grace of merciful indulgence, in not using
us in the rigor of his justice; for God might require the good works we do,
as his own by many titles: as by the title of justice, being the works of his
servants and bondmen; by the title of religion, as being the works of his
creatures; by the title of gratitude, as being the works of persons infinitely
obliged to him; by which titles if God did exact upon works with uttermost
rigor, no goodness would be left in them to be offered for meriting of
heaven; But his infinite benignity remitting this rigor, moved thereunto
through the merits of Christ, is content that we make use of our good works
for the purchasing of glory, and does not exact them as wholely due by all his
titles. The fourth is the favor of Gods liberal promise, by which he obliges
himself to reward the good works of his children according to the measure of
their goodness, without which the most excellent works of Saints could not
establish an obligation on him. And finally there is required the grace of
perseverance, without which no man is crowned.

And so far are Catholics from boasting or trusting in their merits, that the
Council of Trent (Sess. 6. Can. 16.) faith, God forbid that a Christian should
either boast or trust in himself, and not in our Lord, whose goodness is so
great toward all men, as that those things which are his gifts, he will have
to be our merits. To be worthy of a thing, to deserve or merit it, signify all
one; and that by our works we deserve and are worthy of heaven, is the frequent
phrase of Scripture: The workman is worthy of his hire, says our Savior;
Luke 10.7. And S. Paul, That you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God;
for which also ye suffer, 2. These. 1.5. And again, That you may walk worthy of
God, in all things pleasing, fructifying in all Good works, Colos. 1.10. And
our Savior, They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy, Revel. 3.4.
And again, Come ye blessed of my Father possess the kingdom etc. for I was
hungry and ye gave me meat etc. Math. 25.34. alleging these as the cause why
God received them into everlasting habitations; with plenty of other places to
this purpose.

As for the most frequently objected place of Luc. 17.10. when you have done
all those things that are commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants, we
have done that which was our duty to do; According to S. Ambrose (lib. 8. in
Luc.) Christ commands hereby to acknowledge what we are of our selves, to wit,
unprofitable, not what we are by his grace, for that is profitable; according
to the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.21. If any man therefore shall cleanse himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and profitable to our
Lord, prepared to every good work; according to S. Augustine, (Sermon. 3. de
verb. Dom.) we may be said to be unprofitable servants, because in doing all
that is commanded, we do but our duty, we are Gods servants and slaves, and owe
him all, nor could we look for reward had he not voluntarily covenanted with
us. And to this base and poor condition of ours, for the preservation of our
humility, Christ in these words sends back our thoughts: which hinders not, but
that (supposing Gods bountiful promise and covenant) we may through his grace
truly merit and expect reward; himself saying, Mat. 20.14. Did thou not
covenant with me for a penny? take that which is thine own, and go thy way. S.
Chrysostom observes, that Christ says not, you are unprofitable servants, but
bids them to say, they are; willing us thereby, after our good deeds, to think
humbly, lest they be corrupted with pride; for that otherwise they only that
work evil are by God accounted unprofitable, but they that do good,
profitable, as our Savior says, Mat. 25.21. well done good and faithful
servant, because thou have been faithful over a few things. (...) place thee
over many things; enter (...) the joy of thy Master. And the (...) servant cast
ye into utter darkness (...) if all Protestants be unprofitable (...) they must
expect the sequel there (...) darkness, that is damnation.

. 4. Thirdly many Protestant Ministers teach, and the people ordinarily
believe, that Catholics hold that there is nothing required to the remission
of sins, but only to confess them to a Priest, and the business is done.
Whereas indeed they teach, that not only Confession to a Priest, but also
Contrition and sorrow for their sins, (which is all that Protestants
require,) as also Satisfaction for the temporal punishment due to sin, is
requisite, and so make it a matter of far greater pain than the Protestants
do, who reproach it for the easiness thereof. Now all these parts of Penance
are plainly expressed in Scripture; our Savior says to the Priests, whose
sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins ye shall retain,
they are retained, Joh. 20.23. and S. James bids us confess our sins one to
another, Jam. 5.16. and if to another, to whom but to him that has power to
forgive?

The Jews did object against our Savior, as Protestants do now against
Priests, saying, who can forgive sins, but God only? Mark 2.7. which error of
theirs to confute, he miraculously cured the man sick of the Palsy, That ye
may know the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, as our Savior
faith to them; which had been no crossing of their erroneous conceit, as the
word [But] does intimate it was, unless he had pardoned him, as man, with
Commission from God, and not as God immediate; for otherwise he should have
said, why, I am God, and so I pardon him, but he did it as man, doubtless with
delegation from God; as another Evangelist expresses it, saying, that the
multitude glorified God, which had given such power to men, Mat. 9.8.

Nor need the simplest Protestants wonder that men should forgive sins,
seeing Catholics teach that they do it not by their own power, but by power
given them from God; to whom it belongs originally and by his own power to
forgive sins, and to them but derivatively and ministerially from him. So it is
said, that God only does wondrous things, Psalm. 72.18. and yet we read in
Scripture of many men that wrought Miracles, 3 Kings 8.39. So it is said, that
God only knows the hearts of men, 4 Kings 5.16. and yet we read of others that
knew the secrets of the heart. Nor can this forgiveness of sins (the power
whereof God has given to men) be interpreted of power only to declare
forgiveness (as Protestants would have it) for this a child, or an Infidel
may do as well as any other; they may tell them that if they repent God will
forgive them; nor needed such a power as this only, be ushered by Christ, by
breathing on them and saying, Receive the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20.22. nor by these
words, As my Father sent me, so I send you; for surely his Father sent him to
do more than barely to declare and tell them they were forgiven if they
repented; and our Savior should have changed the form of his words, and not
have said, whose sins ye remit they are remitted; but whose sins ye remit,
they were remitted before by God.

And that this power should be given only to the Apostles, if it be taken for
absolute power of forgiveness, (as some: Protestants affirm) is unreasonable;
For seeing the reason and use of it, which is to reconcile God and man
together, after man's offending him by sin, will remain to the worlds end,
therefore to the worlds end is committed to them the Ministry of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. 19.20. For this power of forgiving sins, was not
given to the Apostles as a particular privilege wherewith to dignifie their
persons above other Priests, but for the use and benefit of Christ's Church,
which will always in this world stand in need thereof, and therefore does he
in their Successors always continue the power.

. 5. As for Satisfaction, which Protestants are taught to believe is needless;
it is plain in Scripture; as first, that after the sin is pardoned, which is
in regard of our reconciliation to God, and freedom from eternal punishment,
yet there remains a lyablenesse to temporal punishment; as appears in David,
whom after he had repented; and God pardoned his sins, yet he punished one
sin with the death of his child, another with three days pestilence, 2 King.
12.13.14. and 24.10, 12, 13. Nor can this punishment be only for admonition and
not of justice, seeing the Text says it was, because he had made the enemies
of God to blaspheme. Moses and Aaron died both in Gods favor, yet were
punished with death before they entered into the land of Canaan, for their
offense at Meribah; now where death is the punishment, it cannot be intended
for their admonition and amendment in time to come, but as a scourge for their
offenses. And the Psalmist says plainly, Thou forgavest their sins and did
punish their inventions; Psalm. 98.8. If he forgave them, why did he punish
them? If he did punish them, how did he forgive them? He forgave the eternal
punishment, and inflicted the temporal. Also the Apostle says, whom ye
forgive any thing, I forgive also; for if I forgave any thing, to whom I
forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it, in the person of Christ: 2. Cor. 2.10.
Which words cannot concern the remission of the fault, seeing that was
pardoned before by the parties great sorrow, mentioned in the 7. verse, but
must be meant of the temporal punishment, which was imposed in the name of
Christ. This truth Calvin does not deny, nor Beza upon this place, who says,
that the abatement of this rigor was afterward called Indulgence.

And wherefore (I wonder) do Protestants when they would divert some present or
near approaching danger, fast, and pray, and preach, and give alms, (when yet
by their contrition they think their sins forgiven,) if they did not hope by
these means to prevent or remove their temporal evils, which in their
prayers they confess to be inflicted for their sins? Thus does the force of
reason drive them to the practice of that, which out of opposition to the
Church of Rome, in their doctrine they contradict. And though Christ's
satisfaction was sufficient for all the punishment due to our sins, yet if he
has appointed that we shall also satisfy, as knowing it in his wisdom a
thing most meet, who shall gainsay it? His prayers also and his obedience was
sufficient to obtain heaven for us, shall we therefore neither pray nor obey?
You will say we shall, because we are commanded; so also are we commanded to
satisfy, as the Prophet Daniel says, Redeem, thy sins with alms, and thine
iniquities with mercy toward the poor, Dan. 4.24. which Text to avoid, the
Protestants do corrupt. Now to redeem sins is the same in effect as to
satisfy for them, for how is any thing redeemed, but by satisfying the price
of its redemption? Why then should Protestants (under the pretense of
magnifying the operation of Christ's satisfaction, without our concurrence,
which Catholics yet acknowledge to proceed from him) disobey him, and leave
him thereby the less satisfied with us? But this was Luthers most acceptable
way to flesh and blood, to cast all the burden on Christ, and leave nothing to
themselves, but the pleasing liberty of sin, which though it should infinitely
extend it self, needs no other cure amongst them, but only their barren faith.

. 6. Again, Protestants are taught to believe that to entreat Gods favor by
the merits of Saints (as Catholics do) is a great derogation from the merits
of Christ. But why? Catholics do not deny, but that the merits of Christ are
of infinite value, and there is motive enough in them for God to bestow all
favor on us; yet seeing the Saints have merited of God, it is lawful also to
entreat him by those merits; and what he does sometimes do and not by Miracle,
it is lawful at any time to entreat him to do: Now he did bless the house of
Potiphar for Joseph's sake, therefore doubtless it was lawful for Potiphar to
entreat God to bless him for Joseph's sake; and if so, then much more for the
sake of Saints in heaven, who are more in Gods favor, then Joseph could be
here in this life. Thus Moses desires God to assuage his wrath against the
Israelites, saying, Remember Abraham Isaac, and Israel thy servants; Exodus
32.13. and for what should he remember them but for the good works and service
they had done? and for that to spare their children.

Calvin's shift in answer to this and the like places is trifling, when he says
that God is only entreated to remember his Covenant with the Patriarchs,
whereby he promised to bless their posterity; for there is mention not only of
Gods Covenant, but of the righteousness and merits of the Saints. Solomon
prays thus, Psalm. 131.1. Lord remember David and all his meekness, his
afflictions, as the Protestants read it, which is all one for our present
purpose, both being meritorious; and a little after he says, For thy servant
David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed; where God is invocated by
the merits of David, who was dead and gone: and God likewise for David's sake
did hear and prosper Abia, as the Scripture says, For David's sake did our Lord
his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, that he might raise up his son after him,
and establish Jerusalem, because David had done right in the eyes of the Lord,
3. Kings 15.4.5. Much more is found in Scripture to this purpose. Nor can it be
a derogation from the merits of Christ, whose value, as it is infinite in it
self, so it gives all the tincture to all the merits of all Saints; like the
Elixer, which turns all into gold, that it touches; And like the radiant Sun
enkindles all other celestial fires; yea so far is it from being a dishonor
to him, that it adds to him a great increase of honor; by being able to raise
his servants to such a pitch of excellency, that they can merit favors both
for themselves and others.

. 7. Again Protestants are taught to believe that it is an arrogant thing to
think that a man may do more than he is commanded, (as Catholics teach)
whereas they think he cannot do so much. Yet what more plain in Scriptures?
What more evident in reason? That we are commanded to give alms is true, but
the proportion is not expressed; let a man give so much daily, as that he may
justly think he has discharged his duty, and sins not, though he give no
more; and then may he give more, and so do more then he is commanded. Suppose a
man bound to fast and pray in such or such a measure, which when he has done,
he has discharged the duty of a Christian; yet when this is done, he may take
some of the time wherein he may lawfully feed and recreate himself, and bestow
this also in fasting and prayer; does not he in this do more, than he is
commanded? I think no impartial man will say the contrary: Else there were no
compass or latitude of goodness wherein men might move, excelling one another
in degrees, yet the lowest void of sin: Else he that were not most good must
be evil; there would be no medium betwixt sin and excellency; And men that
were desirous to please God would abound in scruples that could never be
satisfied; it being impossible in every man's condition, to find out that
indivisible point of prayer, fasting, alms, and the like, beyond or short of
which, he must be guilty of sin.

Our Savior says, There are Eunuchs, who have made themselves Eunuchs for the
Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 19.12. and 21. and this is more than any man is bound
to, for he may marry if he will, and yet go to heaven. He says again, If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven. No man can reasonably suppose this to be a
command, for then all men were bound to obey it; and if not, than he that
obeyes it, does more than he is commanded. And to think that this was a
personal command to this man only (as many do) is ridiculous; our Savior had
spoke of the Commandments before, which when the young man said he had
observed, Christ gives him this counsel of perfection; and the Apostles
immediately after affirmed, that they had observed it, in leaving all things to
follow him. Concerning Virgins (says the Appostle) I have no command, but I
give counsel, 1 Cor. 7.25. plainly distinguishing betwixt counsel and
command; betwixt that we must do, and what we may do; betwixt well and better,
He that marries does well, but he that marries not, does better, 1 Cor. 7.38.
and he that does well, does not sin, does not break a Commandment; but he that
does better, does more than not sin, does more than he is commanded. And though
it be harder indeed to do all that is commanded, than in some degrees to do
more than is commanded; yet the highest degrees of acts of perfection and
things uncommanded, are harder than the highest of things commanded; yet
neither impossible by the grace of God, as the Apostle says, I am able to do
all things through him that enableth me, Phil. 4.13. So that the doctrine of
doing more than is commanded, is not so fraught with pride, as Protestants
imagine.

Catholics say, that God does not require of us all the good that he inables
us to do, as is proved; and this is the ground of works of supererogation, and
doing more than is commanded: Protestants say that God requires of us all that
he enables us to do, yea and more, commanding things impossible, and then
punishes us for not doing them, which is most tyrannical. Now if God do not
require all, but only thus much, to do well; then the doing better than well,
is a stock which God of his great bounty gives us to improve for our selves in
a higher measure, and to offer him liberalities, beyond the bond of duty. And
what pride is it for man to acknowledge this sweet providence of his creator,
and to praise his merciful indulgence in not exacting so much as he might, but
giving him a way and means to show his voluntary and unexacted love to him?
Especially believing that this divine favor (not to exact the uttermost of
man's performance, and consequently man's ability to present to God more perfect
and excellent service than he requires) is given through the merits of Christ.

. 8. But above all, the Real presence is the prodigy of opinions in the
conceit of Protestants; whose playnnesse in Scripture notwithstanding leaves
not where to add to it with cleerer proof; as appears by Christ's words of
institution, This is my body, so often repeated, Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luc.
22.19. They fight against it therefore with arguments drawn from the power of
nature, and think, because it exceeds the power of nature, therefore it cannot
be. To whom it may be said, as our Savior said to the Jews, who thought that
men's bodies in heaven were like their bodies here on earth, ye err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22.29. And why then do
Protestants believe, that God was in the form of a man, a thing as impossible
in nature, as for God and man together to be under the form of bread or wine.
And because they would make sure work if they could, the former objection being
in the opinion of many of them insufficient, they say that it does not only
exceed the power of nature, but of God also, in that it implies a
contradiction; but this the most learned of them have never been able to prove,
nor never will, I hope they will all take Luthers judgment herein, whom they
will not deny to be learned enough to discern a contradiction, Tom. Wittemb.
1557. defens. verb. Coenae fol. 388
and he says, what Scripture have they to prove that these two Propositions be
directly contrary? Christ sits in heaven, and Christ is in the Supper. The
contradiction is in their carnal imagination, not in faith, or the word of God.

They also fright the people from this belief, by presenting to them the
uncomlinesse and inconveniences that may ensue; which objections are but raked
out of the ashes of the old Heathen and Heretics, who made the like against
Gods taking our flesh upon him, as that it was undecent that God should lie in
a woman's womb nine months, that he should be circumcised, whipped and spit upon,
and finally suffer a most shameful and painful death. But seeing Protestants
do believe, that Christ, when he was on earth, was subject to all humane
infirmities except sin, why should his liablenesse to such infirmities make
them forbear to believe that he is in the Sacrament? But to acquit them of that
trouble, they may take notice, that Christ's body in the Sacrament is not
subject to those inconveniences that it was before his death, because it is now
a glorified body, and not subject to suffer any thing; For as the Sun shining
on a dunghill is not defiled therewith, and as the Deity it self is every
where, and yet suffers no infection from the foulness of any place; So the
body of Christ being immortal and impassible, cannot be defiled or hurt with
the touch or impression of any unclean or hurtful thing, more than a man can
hurt or defile a Spirit; for of that nature are all glorified bodies, as the
Apostle says, It is sown a natural body; it shall rise a spiritual body. 1.
Cor. 15.44. So that in this respect, Protestants have more reason to believe
the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, than that he once had a
real body conversant here on earth.

But some of them again do acknowledge (as they say themselves) the Real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and therein seem to be Catholics;
and please themselves in seeming to be so, and think we can desire no more; but
they do but cozen both themselves and us; for when their Presence is sifted, we
find no reality in it. They say that Christ is really present in the Sacrament,
but not corporally or bodily: by which bodily they mean, either that his body
it self is not there, or that it is not there with the circumstances and
accidents of a body, as quantity and the like. If they mean the former, to wit,
that he is really there, and yet his body is not there, I would feign know how
this may be; For a body to be really in any thing, must fignifie to be bodily
or in body there, or nothing. Therefore to say that Christ is really there, who
is a body, and yet not there bodily, is the contradiction they speak of, and is
in their real presence, not in the Catholics; For it is as much as if they
should say, his body is there, and it is not there. If by not bodily they mean
not with the accidents of his body, as quantity, figure and the like, and that
so Christ is not bodily in the Sacrament, but spiritually, that is, after the
nature of a Spirit, then they agree with Catholics, who say the same, and in
this sense he may be, and is both corporally and spiritually present in the
Sacrament. Now if by really they mean in regard of his Deity, which is every
where, this is true, but is not the true meaning of really; for he is no more
there in this sense, than he is every where else, and so their confession of a
real presence imports nothing distinctly, and is but a delusion. For Christ
being a man as well as God, and the body of a man as well as the Godhead
concurring to the making of his person, he that is whole Christ and
unseparated, cannot be said to be any where really, unless he be there also
bodily; and if his body be there, his body is by us received, and that not only
spiritually, that is, under the conditions of a Spirit, or spiritually, by
receiving the grace of his holy Spirit into our Spirits, and souls; but also
corporally, in regard of himself, who is a body, and in regard of us, who
receive his body into our bodies; and this not by faith, but with faith; that
is, not by an imaginary conceit that he is there, or that the benefits of his
passion are conveyed to the receiver that thinks so, which is the Protestant
says in this case; but with faith, that is, faith and charity also abiding in
our souls, without which though we do receive him truly and really, yet we do
not receive him worthily and profitably.

But according to the Protestant way of receiving, it is impossible to receive
him unworthily, which is contrary to the Scripture, and the common belief of
all Christians; for according to them, none receive him, but they that receive
him worthily, faith being the means with them, which makes them receive him
both really and worthily, which who so wants, does not receive at all: so that
every one that receives him really, receives worthily, and the rest receive
nothing but bread and wine, and so do not receive Christ unworthily, but only
bread and wine at the most unworthily; and how this should, make them properly
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, which they do not receive, and liable
to damnation thereby, as the Apostle says it does, is beyond the reach of my
apprehension.

Others coming yet nearer, say, that they believe the real and corporal
presence, but they do not believe Transubstantiation; they believe that Christ
is truly there, but the manner (they say) is unknown and unexpressible. But
they ought to know that men ought firmly to believe the manner of a mystery
revealed, when the same belongs to the substance of the mystery, so that
rejecting the manner, we reject also the substance of the mystery. Now the
mystery in substance is, that the body of Christ is present in the Sacrament,
in such sort that the Priest (the Minister thereof,) showing what seems bread,
may truly say thereof in the person of Christ, this is my body. This supposed
as the substance of the mystery, I infer that two Catholic doctrines
concerning the manner thereof, belong to the substance of this mystery, and
cannot be called in question without danger of misbelief. First the real
presence of the whole body of Christ under the form of bread. Secondly that
this is done by Transubstantiation, because it cannot be done otherwise. Even
as he that believes the mystery of the Incarnation, the substance whereof is,
that in Jesus Christ the nature of God and the nature of man were so united,
that God is truly man, and man God; he must necessarily believe that this union
is not metaphorical and in affection only, but true and real: Secondly that
this union is substantial, not accidental; Thirdly that this union of natures
is not by making one nature of both (as Eutyches taught) but hypostaticall,
whereby the nature of God and man is united in one person. This mystery is
high, subtle, and incomprehensible to flagging reason, yet must be believed
seeing it belongs to the substance of the mystery, which could not be true, if
it were not thus: so it is in the real presence.

As for the novelty of the word, which some object, they have little reason to
do so, knowing it is some hundreds of years older than the name Protestant, and
for the thing, it is as ancient as our Saviors celebrating his last supper.
And had not the Catholic doctrine been opposed by Heretics, perhaps the
word had not yet been in use: no more had consubstantiall, used in the Nicene
Creed, had not Arrius denied the Son to be consubstantiall, or of the same
substance with the Father. For the Church does, and may make fit words to
explicate the truth of her doctrine, as occasion requires; wherein she does not
change the doctrine, but expresses it more plainly or significantly.

(CHAP. XXII.)
Of Communion in one kind.

. 1. I Will instance in two particulars more, because I know that Protestants
do mightily check at them; the former is Communion in one kind; the later,
Prayer in an unknown tongue. Concerning the former, Protestants are by their
Ministers instructed to believe, that in this matter, Catholics are
sacrilegious against God, and injurious to men, robbing the Church of the
precious blood of Christ, and giving the people a lame and half Sacrament,
instead of one whole and entire. But to rectify their understandings, they may
be pleased to take notice, that the Catholic Church does not count it in it
self unlawful to receive in both kinds, nor yet does she hold it necessary,
but in its own nature indifferent; and so by consequence determinable to one
or both kinds, according to the differences of persons, times, and places, as
she in her wisdom shall think fit. But Protestants think it absolutely
necessary for the Laity to receive in both kinds, first because it was so
instituted, secondly because it was (as they think) so commanded. These being
the two hinges of this their opinion, we must here a while arrest our
considerations; wherein I shall show, that there is no precept of receiving
under both kinds, and that the institution has not the force of a precept.

. 2. To begin with the institution, we must know, that for a man to be bound to
use any institution of God, two things are required. First that the end of the
institution be necessary, and that it be necessary for every particular person
to endeavor the attaining thereof: whence all men hold, that though the
propagation of mankind by marriage, be an institution of God, necessary for the
continuation of the world; yet while there are enough that comply with that
duty, to which mankind is in general bound, every particular person is not
obliged to marry. Secondly that if every particular person be bound to
endeavor to attain the end of an institution, that also the whole thing
instituted be necessary for the attaining of that end; for if there be variety
of means ordained, sufficient for the attaining of that end, a man is not
bound to use all that which is instituted, but it is sufficient to use so much
thereof, as will lead a man to that end. Whence all men again hold, that
although God created and instituted variety of meats and drinks, for the
maintenance of man's corporal life, yet no man is bound to use them all, but
he discharges his duty sufficiently, if he use so much of any of them, as will
suffice to arrive at that end, for which they were instituted, to wit, the
maintainanee of his corporal life: so that if a man can live of two or three
sorts of meat, he is not bound to use ten or twenty; and if he can live of meat
without drink, he may without offense choose whether he will ever drink or no.

To apply this to our present purpose, it is apparent enough that by the force
of divine institution only, no man is bound to use Communion under both kinds.
For though the end why Christ did institute the Sacrament in both kinds be
necessary, and all must endeavor the attaining thereunto, to wit, maintenance
and increase in grace, which is the life of the soul; yet there are other
means of Gods institution also, by which we may attain to this end. Whence it
is, that learned Divines hold, that though the Sacrament of the Eucharist be
necessary NECESSETATE PRAECEPTI, by the necessity of precept, yet it is not
necessary, NECESSITATE MEDII, as they speak, that is, the use thereof is not
such a necessary means, for the maintenance of spiritual life, but that a man
wanting means of sacred communion, may by other means preserve himself in
the state of Grace.

And though we should suppose that actual Communion were a necessary means to
preserve spiritual life, yet Communion in one kind is abundantly sufficient
thereunto, as I shall presently show; and if so, by force of the institution
there is no more required. For we must know, that there is a great difference
between an institution and a precept; the precept of both kinds (if Christ gave
any) does bind, whether both kinds be necessary for the maintenance of man's
soul in grace or no; but the institution of both kinds does not bind to the
use, further than the thing instituted is necessary to the maintenance of the
said spiritual life; to which seeing one kind is sufficient, the institution
of both kinds, does not oblige us to the use of both.

. 3. Now that Communion in one kind is sufficient, (Transubstantiation being
supposed) easily appears; in that the Sacrament in the sole form of bread,
(seeing it contains the author and fountain of life, whole and entire,
according to body, soul, blood, and his infinite person,) is abundantly
sufficient for the refection of the soul, yea no less than Communion under
both kinds. For this one kind contains in it no less than is contained in
both, that is, whole Christ, God and man. His body is there by force of these
words, This is my body, and by concomitance there is the blood, the soul, the
divinity, for there is the person of Christ alive, which implies all these
particulars, it being impossible he should be there otherwise, as S. Paul
says, Christ rising again from the dead, now dies no more, death shall have
no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. And to the receivers of Christ; by eating
only, he promises the end of the Sacrament, which is life; He that eats me,
he shall live by me: John 6.58.59. and to the sole reception of him under the
form of bread; He that eats this bread shall live for ever. And this surely
he would not have said, if receiving in both kinds had been necessary.

. 4. But because Protestants deny Transubstantiation, I will, without that
supposition, prove, that to receive in one kind is sufficient. First because
that in one kind is contained the whole substance, essence, and parts of the
Sacrament; and secondly because it is not against any divine precept. As for
the institution, I have proved already, that it has not the force of a precept.

First in one kind alone is contained the whole substance and essence of the
Sacrament; which are these four; matter; word, signification, causality. First
there is the element or matter of the Sacrament, which is consecrated bread and
manducation thereof: secondly, there is the word or form of speech, showing the
divine and supernatural purpose, whereto the element is consecrated, This is
my body; and these two make a Sacrament, according to S. Aug: Accedit verbum ad
elementum, and fit Sacramentum. Thirdly there is a sign or signification
therein, and that threefold: first of spiritual food, for the nourishment of
the soul; secondly of union and conjunctions between Christ and his Church,
and between the faithful one with another, even as in the bread there is a
mixture of flower and water, and in the flower of many grains together.
Thirdly the death and passion of Christ is hereby signified; For as by the wine
we have a motive to remember his blood, shed and separated from his body; so by
the bread we may conceive his body deprived of blood, by the effusion thereof
upon the cross: whereupon Christ, as S. Paul testifies, 1. Cor. 11.24.25. did
after the consecration of each kind, particularly recommend the memory of his
passion; as knowing, thas in each of them alone, was a sufficient memorial
thereof. Lastly there is causality, that is, a working in the soul the
spiritual effects it signifies; as our Savior says, He that eats this
bread shall live for ever, Joh. 6.59.

And if any object, that though there be all the essential parts of the
Sacrament in one kind, yet there are not all the integrall parts: I answer,
that bread and wine are not two integrall parts of the Sacrament, more than the
several particles of the bread and wine are integrall parts; and as the
Sacrament is sufficient, whether it be in a greater or less quantity of bread
or wine, so is it, whether it be in bread only, or wine only; for our Savior
instituted the whole Sacrament both in bread, and in wine, as two distinct
entire matters thereof, not as integrall parts thereof, and gave us leave to
use or both, or either; as shall appear, in that he has not obliged us by any
precept to the use of both. And thus it appears, that the Sacrament in one
kind is full, entire, and complete in substance, and that by participation
thereof, prepared consciences do receive the benefits of Christ's death, and
passion.

Neither does it hereupon follow, that because the Sacrament is essentially and
entirely contained under either kind, therefore the Priest receiving underboth,
receives two Sacraments, for being received both at once, they make but one,
as being ordained to one refection, signifying one thing, and producing one
effect; Even as six or seven dishes of meat set upon a table do make but one
dinner, whereas part thereof being served one day, and part another, would make
two. And the reason why Priests receive under both kinds is, because they offer
up a Sacrifice, representing the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, which
were not perfectly represented, but by both kinds, wherefore also in this sort
was it prefigured in the Sacrifice of Melchizedek, offering bread and wine. It
being thus proved that whole Christ, and the true essence and parts of the
Sacrament are under either kind, it follows, that in distributing it in one
kind only, there is no irreverence offered to the Sacrament, it not being given
(as Protestants think) half or maimed, but essentially and entirely whole:
nor is any injury done to the people, by depriving them of any grace meet to
salvation, seeing the very fountain of grace is no less received under either
kind, than under both. Nor is it the opinion of the greater part of Catholic
Divines, that more grace is obtained by communicating in both kinds, than in
one; yet if it were, this advantage might be easily balanced by other means;
as by the more frequent receiving in one kind, and by our obedience to the
Church. Now by the premises it is evident, that whether we respect the
institution of the Sacrament, or the nature thereof, no obligation or necessity
arises of receiving in both kinds. The only question therefore remaining is,
whether we be bound thereunto by any express Precept of our Savior, or his
Apostles.

Protestants believe we are, and for proof thereof allege these places:
Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man; and drink his blood, you shall not
have life in you, Joh. 6.54. And, taking the Chalice he gave thanks, and gave
to them, saying, drink ye all of this, Mat. 26.27. Also, In like manner the
Chalice after he had supped, saying, this Chalice is the New Testament in my
blood, this do ye, as often as ye shall drink, in remembrance of me, 1 Cor.
11.25. But none of these places rightly understood, nor any other, do prove,
what the Protestants pretend to. Particularly to the first of these places I
answer, that seeing the Protestants do generally interpret this Chapter of S.
John, not of receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist, but only of believing
in Christ, it is no objection for them; but because most Catholic Divines do
interpret it of the Blessed Sacrament, it is an objection against us; to which
therefore I further answer: First, that all words of Scripture, that in their
form seem to import a Precept, do not so indeed; as where our Savior says to
his Apostles, that they ought to wash one another feet, Joh. 13.14. yet no man
ever held it for a matter of necessity. But supposing for the present that it
include a Precept, I further answer, that as we distinguish in the Sacrament,
the substance and the manner, the substance being to receive Christ, the manner
to receive him in both kinds, by formal eating and drinking; So the same
distinction is to be made in our Saviors Precept about this Sacrament. For
howsoever his words may sound of the manner of receiving in both kinds, yet his
intention is to command no more than the substance, to wit, that we really
receive his body and blood, which may be done under one kind.

The truth whereof will appear if we consider, first the occasion of the words
objected, which was the incredulity of the Capernaites, whose doubt was not
whether the Sacrament was to be given in one or both kinds, but (as Protestants
still doubt) whether he could give us his flesh to eat. Secondly the manner of
his speech, which was not by making mention of any kind at all in the said
words, but only of the things themselves; for he does not say, unless you eat
the bread and drink the wine, you have no life, but, unless you eat the flesh
and drink the blood; both which are equally contained under either bread or
wine; So that if a man receive the form of bread only, or of wine only, he
does therein both eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ. And in other
places of this Chapter, where he makes mention of one kind, it is of bread
only, and not at all of wine: so that this place is of no force, for the form
of wine, unless the body and blood of Christ be separated, and that receiving
the form of bread, we receive the body only, and of wine the blood only, which
must suppose Christ still dead, which is most impious and impossible.

. 5. And if any think, that because it is said, unless you drink, therefore
Christ must be received under a form that may be drunk as well as eaten, or
else it is not drinking his blood, but eating his blood, as well as his body; I
answer, it is called eating and drinking, not so much in regard of the action,
as the subject; so that flesh being the usual subject of eating, when the
Sacrament is called flesh, the action is called eating; and blood being the
usual subject of drinking, when there is mention of receiving the blood, the
action is called drinking; and we are not bound to receive him in a drinkable
form, because we are bid, to drink his blood, but we may be said to drink,
because we receive that which is in its nature drinkable, to wit, blood, which
we do, when we receive the body. And if this will not serve the turn, they may
further argue against us, that if we swallow the Host whole, we do not eat it,
eating implying, chewing, more or less, and so do not fulfill the precept of
eating the flesh. And we may argue in like manner against them, that if they do
not take wine enough to make a draught, they do not drink, but only taste or
sip thereof, and therein also do not fulfill that which they think they are
here commanded. But as a Protestant (I suppose if the bread and wine should be
so mixed together in a cup, that both might be drunk together, or else eaten
with a spoon, or in the manner of a moist piece of past, or swallowed like a
pill,) will believe that he receives in both kinds, and fulfills this (in his
opinion) Precept of drinking the blood; So the body and blood being joined
together in either kind, to us that believe Transubstantiation, we receive
both, when we receive either kind, which act of receiving with relation to the
flesh may be called eating, to the blood, drinking, yea though it should be
taken in such a manner, as strictly speaking, should be neither eating nor
drinking.

I add moreover, (with relation to them that do not believe
Transubstantiation,) that the conjunctive particle [And] does frequently
signify disjunctively, that is, [Or:] For example, the Apostle says, ( Acts
3.6.) Silver and gold have I none, where it is manifest that the sense is,
silver or gold I have none; for if he had had either, he had had no excuse of
want, for his not giving of alms. So also S. Paul speaks of this very
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.29. 27. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks judgment to himself; which he interprets in the same Chapter,
saying, Whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink the cup of our Lord
unworthily. In like manner those words, Except ye eat the flesh, and drink the
blood, if they be taken for eating and drinking under the several forms of
bread and wine, are to be understood disjunctively, thus, Except ye eat the
flesh, or drink the blood of the son of man, you shall not have life in you.
Which disjunctive sense is proved to be the sense intended in this place,
because else Christ should contradict himself; for he promises in this same
Chapter life eternal to eating only, He that eats me, the same shall live by
me, and, he that eats this bread shall live for ever; now if he require unto
life eternal, eating and drinking both, under distinct forms and kinds, it is
manifest he should contradict himself: and because this is impossible, we must
necessarily interpret this place, with relation to the several forms of bread
and wine, disjunctively, thus, unless you eat or drink.

The second text urged for Communion in both kinds, is, Drinks ye all of this,
Mat. 26.27. which being rightly understood, will appear to be spoken, neither
to all mankind, as to Jews, Turks, Infidells; as Protestants also acknowledge,
nor yet to all the faithful, but to all the Apostles, and to them all only:
Which is manifest out of the Text it self; for what one Evangelist says was
commanded to all, another relates to have been answerably performed by all,
They drank all thereof, Mark 14.23. But the second All is restrained to all the
Apostles, what reason then is there to extend the former words further then to
all the Apostles? And the reason why Christ said, drink ye all of this, and
did not say, eat ye all of this, was not, as Protestants vainly imagine,
because Christ foresaw that some would deny the use of the Chalice to the
Communicants, but that the first to whom our Savior gave the cup, and so the
rest until the last, were to know, that they were not to drink all, but were
to leave so much, as might suffice for them or him that was to drink after,
without new filling and consecration. Which form of words, he used most
plainly a little before the supper of the Pasche: for as S. Luke says, Luke
22.17. Taking the chalice he gave thanks, and said, take it, and divide it
amongst you; whereas breaking the bread himself, and giving to every one his
part, and not the whole to be divided amongst them, there was no such necessity
of the said words.

. 6. As for the words of our Savior, do this in remembrance of me, they do
no ways infer a precept of receiving in both kinds. First because our Savior
said these words absolutely only of the Sacrament in the form of bread, but in
the form of wine only conditionally, do this, as often as ye shall drink, in
remembrance of me; not commanding them to drink, but in case they did drink,
(which was lawful and usual in those times, but not so now, as I shall show
by and by,) that then they should do it in memory of Christ. So that this
precept, do this, being the only precept given by Christ to his Church
concerning this matter, and given absolutely of the form of bread,
conditionally of the form of wine, there is no color to accuse the Church of
doing against Christ's precept, by communion under one kind only. S. Augustine
says ( Epist. 1 18.) that, Our Lord did not appoint in what order the
Sacrament of the Eucharist was to be taken afterward, but left authority unto
the Apostles to make such appointments, by whom he was to dispose and order his
Churches. But suppose Christ had spoken these imperative words, do this, after
the giving of the cup, yet are they to be understood with restriction to those
things that belong to the essence and substance of this action; for if we
extend it further, to the accidentary circumstances thereof, in which Christ
did then institute and give the Sacrament, many absurdities will follow. For by
this rule we must always celebrate the Eucharist after supper, and in
unleavened bread, the receivers must take it into their hands, and the Priest
must wash the feet of those to whom he administers it, with the like. Now
seeing to bind men to these circumstances of our Saviors action, is (in all
men's judgments) very absurd, we must not extend the precept, do this, to the
said, or the like circumstances, but acknowledge that the precept includes only
the doing of that which pertaines to the substance of the Sacrament, of which
kind, communion in both kinds cannot be, it being also a circumstance, the
substance thereof being entire in one only kind, as has been proved. So that
the Protestants wrangling thus for the cup, do but fulfill in themselves
(though in a different sense) the prophecy of Isaiah, ERIT CLAMOR IN PLATEIS
SUPER VINO; there shall be crying for wine in the streets, Isay 24.11.

Thus it appears, that Communion in both kinds is not of the essence or
integrity of the Sacrament, nor necessary by any divine precept; from whence it
follows, that as a thing indifferent, it may be permitted, or restrained,
according as the wisdom of the Church shall think fit. For the precinct of
humane power streacheth to things indifferent, and only to them. Things
absolutely commanded, man cannot forbid; things absolutely forbidden, man
cannot command; and therefore the territory of humane legislative power, must
be in things indifferent, or else there is none at all; which is against
Scripture, reason, and the most general belief and practice of mankind. The
Apostles practiced this power upon the Gentiles, by imposing upon them a new
law of abstinence for a time, from things offered to Idols, and blood, and
that which is strangled; Acts 15.29. which yet Christ himself never imposed,
but left it indifferent; whereas after the Apostles decree, it became
necessary; wherefore it is said, that S. Paul walked through Syria and Cilicia
confirming the Churches, commanding them to keep the precepts of the Apostles
and Elders, Acts 15.41.

. 7. Now the reasons moving the Church to restrain communion to one kind, were
many and weighty. First to prevent thereby the occasion of error; for whereas
in the primitive Church, the use of one or both kinds was indifferently
practiced, as is apparent by testimonies of antiquity, yea by the example of
the Apostles, Acts 2.42. and our Savior himself Luke 26.30. yet. when as the
Manichean heretics rose, see Aug. lib. de haer. c. 46. Leo Sermon. 4. de
Quadrag.
who abstained from wine as a thing in it self unlawful to be drunk, and by
consequence abstained from it also in the Sacrament; holy Bishops did hereupon
much commend the use of the chalice. But this error being extinguished, and
another arising Aeneas Silvius hist. Bohem. capt. 3.5.
against the integrity of Christ under either kind, as also avouching the
absolute necessity of both, the Church of God hereupon began more universally
to practice communion under one kind; and withal, in declaration of the truth,
and for prevention of Schism, did absolutely decree the lawfulness thereof,
with prohibition to the contrary. So in more ancient times when the Ebionites
taught unleavened bread to be necessary in consecration of the Eucharist, the
Church commanded the consecration thereof to be made in leavened bread; And
when the heretic Nestorius denied our Blessed Lady to be the mother of God,
and only to be called the mother of Christ, the Church condemned him, and
commanded that she should be called Mother of God. And the Church has ever
found this the most effectual means, for the confutation and extirpation of
heresy, namely, by contrary decrees and practice to declare and publish the
truth.

A second reason moving the Church to forbid the use of the cup, was the
deserved reverence due to this highest Sacrament; in consideration whereof, the
Holy Fathers did appoint most diligent care to be used, lest any little
particle of the Host, or drop of the Chalice should fall to the ground. Now the
multitude of Christians in laterages being very great, and the negligence of
many in sacred things as great, through the coldness of their zeal and
devotion, it could not morally be possible, but that frequent spilling of the
blood would happen, if the Chalice were to be given ordinarily to the people,
Aeneas Silvius Ep. 13. de errore Bohem. and Narrat. de Bohem. ad Conc. Basil.
of which profanation there has been over frequent experience.

(CHAP. XXIII.)
Of the Liturgy and private prayers for the ignorant in an unknown tongue.

. 1. PRayer in an unknown tongue has two branches, one concerning public
prayer in a tongue, which the people that are present do not understand; the
other private prayer, in a tongue, which the party praying does not understand;
both which Protestants think absurd in reason, and contrary to Scripture; but
Catholics believe truly that they are neither. For maintenance whereof, let
us consider the meaning of S. Paul (1 Cor. chapter 14.) the place by them
violently, but impertinently objected against us.

We must then know, that as the gift of tongues was given to the Apostles by
the Holy Spirit, when he in the shape of tongues desended upon them; so the
same gift, with diverse others, was continued amongst the Christians for some
time after. This gift, amongst the other, they did exercise in their public
Church-meetings, where they assembled for the benefit and edification of the
hearers, speaking some extemporary prayer, or other holy discourse, both for
matter and language, as the Spirit gave them utterance, with great affection
and elevation of the mind toward God. Yea the language many times was such, as
no man present understood, as is intimated verse 2. for he that speaks in an
unknown tongue, etc. no man understands him; no nor many times did the speaker
understand himself; for the gift of tongues, and the gift of interpretation of
tongues were two distinct gifts, as we see in the 12. chapter and did not always
meet together, as we may gather from the 13. verse of this chapter, where the
Apostle exhorts him that speaks in an unknown tongue, to pray that he may
interpret, which was a sign that ordinarily they could not; and by verse 14.
where he says, If I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding
is unfruitful; now this must be meant of a tongue, which he himself did not
understand, otherwise his own understanding could not be unfruitful. And thus
also does S. Augustine (de Genes. ad lit. lib. 12. cap. 8.9.) and other Fathers
interpret S. Paul.

By this it is manifest that the Apostle does not here reprove the practice of
the Church of Rome, in her Latin Liturgy directly, seeing this here reproved,
and that are extremely different. Therefore ours can be only so far reprovable,
as it agrees with the other in the reasons for which it was reproved, which are
want of interpretation, and thereby want of edification to the auditors, and of
sufficient warrant to the unlearned, through want of understanding of what was
said, to say thereto Amen. Now seeing ours does not agree with that, in any of
these, it is therefore irreproveable. Yet if it should agree with that in any
of these, it should not notwithstanding be unlawful; because they differ in
the maine and principal part, the end; for these Church-meetings were intended
for the instruction and edification of the auditors, therefore it was fit the
exercises thereof should be in a tongue which they that were to be instructed,
understood, but the public Liturgy of the Church was instituted for the
service and praise of God, and therefore may be, without unlawfulness, in any
tongue that he understands, to whom it is dedicated.

The truth of all this will appear, if we consider the differences between that
case and ours. The languages then spoken were utterly unknown many times to
any man there present, even to the speaker himself, but the Liturgy of the
Church is in a language or languages known to very many, as the Latin in the
Latin Church to all Scholars, to most Gentlemen, and youths bred in Grammar
Schools, and in some countries to most Mechanics; it cannot therefore
absolutely be said to be an unknown tongue. And though it cannot be proved
unlawful to have the Liturgy in a tongue absolutely unknown, yet where the
Latin tongue has been unknown to all or most of the better sort, the Church
has dispensed with the use thereof; as appears by the dispensation of Pope
Paul 5. to turn the Liturgy of the Mass into the vulgar language of China,
and to use the same until the Latin tongue grew more known and familiar in that
country. Moreover the prayers and other spiritual excercises which S. Paul
speaks against, were extemporall, made in public meetings, according to the
present inspired devotion of the speaker; So that the unlearned hearer, or he
that supplied his place, the Clark, except he understood the language, and
consequently the matter, could not prudently say Amen to it, seeing he knew not
whether the thing that was spoken, were good and lawful or no. But the
Liturgy and Service of the Church has set offices for every day, approved by
the Church, and therefore from hence a man may be confidently assured that it
is good and lawful, and therefore he may boldly say Amen. Besides there are
means applied to the ignorant multitude, by which they are, or may be (if they
use diligence therein) made to understand the public Prayers of the Church;
namely Sermons, Exhortations, Catechismes, private instructions, Manualls and
Primers in vulgar languages, where the Prayers used in the Church are found: So
that the ordinary and common passages of the public Service may be, and are
easily understood even by women and children, and they may understandingly say
Amen. Therefore as the Apostle did allow of an unknown tongue in the exercises
of the Corinthians, provided there were some to interpret it; so the Service in
Latin is very allowable even under this notion, while there are the aforesaid
means used for the interpretation thereof.

And the Congregation is edified, as the Apostle appoints it should be, by the
things that are done and said in the Church, while the people have but a
general understanding of the several passages thereof. And if they were in a
vulgar language, the difference for matter of understanding would be but in a
little more or less; for that every woman, boy, and girl in a Church, should
be able to understand word by word the Liturgy thereof, be it in what language
it will, is morally impossible; seeing there are great store of words in every
tongue in common use amongst the better sort, which common people do not
understand. And suppose this might be avoided in those parts of the Liturgy,
which are composed by the Church, by making choice of the most vulgar words
that might be found, yet it is impossible to be so in that which makes the
greatest part of the Liturgy, to wit, the Scripture. And if yet all the words
of the Scripture could be bowed to their understanding, for the Grammatical
signification thereof, yet without all paradventure, the sense, (which is the
chief thing to be understood, and for which only the language does serve, by
reason of the innumerable figurative speeches therein) is altogether
impossible. For example let any unlearned Englishman say, whether these
following places in English, for so much as concerns the full sense thereof,
be not all one to him, as if they were in Hebrew. I will set them down
according to the English Protestant translation, and their number of the
Psalms. Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe, Psalm. 60.8.
Also this, Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of
a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, Psalm. 68. v. 13.
And this in the same Psalm, v. 30. Rebuke the company of spearemen; or as it
is in the margent, the beasts of the reeds, the multitude of the bulls with the
calves of the people etc. Also this as it is in the Service book; Or ever your
pots be made hot with thorns, so let indignation vex him even as a thing that
is raw, Psalm. 58.8. Therefore when Protestants read these and the like
unintelligible places of Scripture to the unlearned people, without
interpreting them, their end in reading being only the instruction of the
people, they truly fall into that error, of which they untruely accuse us, of
speaking in the Church without the edification of the people. So have many of
them alone in their Sermons also, speaking Latin, or some other more unknown
tongue, without interpreting it.

Moreover, the end of the Church meetings here spoken of by the Apostle, was to
instruct the ignorant, and convert the infidels, as may be gathered out of the
23. and 24. verses. But the drift of the Church in appointing Liturgies, and
set forms of public prayer, and readings in the Mass, was not for the
peoples instruction, though that as I have showed be not neglected, but for
other reasons: as first, that by this public service, a continual daily
tribute or homage of prayer and thanksgiving might be publicly offered and
paid unto God by his Priests: Secondly, that Christians by their personal
assistance at this public Service, might profess and exercise exterior acts
of religion common with the whole Church, represented by the Synaxis or
ecclesiastical meeting of every Christian Parish. Finally, that every
Christian by his presence yielding consent unto the public prayers, praises
and thanksgiving of the Church, might participate of the graces, benefits, and
fruits, which the Church does ordinarily obtain by her Liturgies and public
oblations. Now for these ends there is no need that every one should understand
word by word the prayers that are said in the public Liturgy, but it
suffices that the Church in general, and in particular, Pastors and
Ecclesiastical persons dedicated to the Ministeries of the Church, have
particular notice of all the prayers that are said, and that all may be taught,
and instructed in particular, if they desire it, and will be diligent therein.

But Protestants are more easily lead into this error, of believing, that the
Church Service must be said in the vulgar tongue, because they conceive the
principal intent thereof with us, is, as it is with them, for the instruction
of the people. For with them they do not usually read the Church Prayers,
unless there be company to hear, not is there any receiving of their
Communion, unless there be a number of the people to communicate; But in the
Catholic Church it is not so; for with us the Office of the Church is said,
though there should be no people present, for it is the Priests Office, and not
the peoples; and the daily Sacrifice is offered, though there be no people
present; these are done to the service and honor of God, and for the benefit
of the people too, (though not for their instruction,) and they are bound to be
present at Mass only upon Sundaies and other Holydaies, yet may be present at
any other time, and are present more frequently and numerously than the
Protestants are at their Service or Sermons: and for the substance of things
done or said, understand much more. And all women and children in their answers
to the Priest are as ready, (if not more) than ever they were in the use of the
Liturgy of England. And while they understand the general purport of that
which is said, though they cannot apply every Latin word to its proper
signification in the vulgar, yet I suppose their understandings are more
edified, then theirs that know the signification of most of the words, but not
a jot of the inward sense and meaning thereof, as happens to the unlearned
Protestants, while they hear most parts of the Scripture read in the vulgar
tongue.

Moreover most certain it is, that the present custom of the Roman Church, to
have their Liturgy in a tongue not vulgar, is agreeable to the custom of the
Church in all ages, and also of all Churches now in the world, bearing the name
of Christian, (though opposite to the Roman) only those of the pretended
Reformation excepted: which constant concurrence is a great sign that the same
is very conform unto reason, and not any where forbidden in the Word of God.
The Scripture was not read in any language but Greek over all the Churches of
the East, as S. Jerome (praefat. in Paralip.) witnesses. Also the Greek
Liturgy of S. Basil was used in all the Churches of the East, yet the Grecian
was the vulgar language of all the countries of the East, as is apparent by
many testimonies, particularly of the Basil. de Spiritu Sancto. c. 19.
Capadocians, d Hieron. in Pro^m. 2. lib. com. ad Galat. and Act. Apost. c. 1.
v. 10, 11.
Mesapotamians, d Galathians, Theodoret. in histor SS. Patrum hist. 13.
Lycaonians, Hieron de Script. Eccles. in Anton.
Egyptians, Syrians: yea that all these Countries, and most of the Orient, had
their proper language distinct from the Greek, is manifest out of Acts 2. where
diverse nations of the East being assembled in Jerusalem at Pentecoste, and
hearing the Apostles speak with tongues, said, How hear we every man in our own
tongue wherein we were born? Acts 2.8. No less manifest is it, that the Latin
Liturgy was common anciently to all those of the Western parts, yea even in
Africa, as appears by testimonies of S. Augustine (Epist. 57 de doct. Christ.
l. 2. c. 13. in Psalm. 123. and in Exposit. Ep. ad Romans and Ep. 173.) Yet was
not the Latin the vulgar language of all the nations of the West, but every one
had his own distinct, as now they have, and particularly in England the
British language was then in use. Nor yet was the Latin language vulgarly known
in all these nations, though understood by the beteer sort, as it is at this
day; and in all likelihood more generally known now, than then, in as much as
the study of Arts and Sciences, and communion in Religion, are fitter means to
spread a language, than the sword of a Conqueror. So that it is manifest that
the Christian Church did never judge it requisite, that the public Liturgy
should be turned into the mother tongue of every nation, nor necessary that it
should be presently understood word by word by every one of the vulgar
assistants; neither does the end of the public Service require it: As for
those Sects that use no Liturgy at all, but in their Church-meetings do only
make an extemporall prayer before and after Sermon, (as the custom is now for
the most part in England) that the people may pray with them, they do as they
ought in using the vulgar tongue; and Catholics (if they used such exercise)
no doubt would do it in like manner.

. 2. As for the comfort and more plentiful edification of the understanding
which some few want, in that they do not so perfectly understand all the
particulars of divine Service, it may by other means abundantly be supplied,
without turning the public Liturgy into innumerable vulgar languages, which
would bring great confusion into the Christian Church. For first the Church
could not be able to judge of the Liturgy of every country, when differences
arose about the translation thereof; and so diverse errors and heresies might
creep into particular countries, and the whole Church never able to take notice
thereof. Secondly, particular countries could not be certain that they had the
parts of the Scripture used in the Liturgy truly translated; for they can have
no other assured proof thereof, than the Churches approbation; nor can she
approve what she her self does not understand. Thirdly, if there were as many
translations of the Liturgy, as there be several languages in the world, it
could not be avoided, but that some would in many places be ridiculous,
incongruous, and full of mistaking, to the great prejudice of souls, especially
in languages that have no great extent, nor many learned men that naturally
speak them. Fourthly, the Liturgy must of necessity be often changed, together
with the language, which does much alter in every age, as is very well known.
Fifthly, in the same country, by reason of different dialects, some provinces
understand not one another; and in the Island of Japonia (as some write) there
is one language for men, another for women; one language for Gentlemen, another
for rusticks: into what language then should the Liturgy of Japonia be
translated? So that it is clear, that the inconveniences of divine Service
translated in all vulgar languages are insuperable, the commodity is but to the
most ignorant part, and that but in part, and to be recompensed by other means,
and is so, by prayer books, and other instructions in abundance in the vulgar
tongue; In so much that I dare boldly say, (for I have been an eyewitness)
that in the cities of Paris and Rome there is five times as much preaching, and
ten times as much catechizing of youth and ignorant people, as is in London; so
that blindness and ignorance to Catholics, is ignorantly and blindly
objected. Lastly we cannot imagine that if S. Paul had intended, that which the
Protestants labor to enforce out of the abovenamed chapter to the
Corinthians, that both he and his fellow Apostles would have practiced the
contrary at the writing thereof, and all their lives after; for we do not find
that they or any after them did use any Liturgy, but in one of the learned
languages, which though they were vulgar to some people in those times, yet but
to a small part, in comparison of all the nations of the world, amongst whom
they celebrated Mass.

. 3. As for private prayer, the Catholic Church permits all men, whether out
of the Churches, or in them, to pray in what language they please; yea the
Pater, the Ave, and the Creed, are commanded by diverse Counsels to be learned
in the vulgar tongue; and diverse books of prayers in the vulgar tongue are
published and used in all Catholic Countries. Yet those Catholics that do
pray or sing Psalms in Latin, which they do not understand, either by choice
or obligation, are not to be condemned. For either they understand the prayer
in the whole mass thereof, as the PATER NOSTER, for example, though they know
not perhaps whether PATER signify our, and NOSTER, father, or the contrary,
yet saying this prayer with due devotion, and knowing that it is our Lords
prayer, which they can very well repeat in their mother tongue, no man I
suppose can be so absurd to think this prayer is not acceptable to God, though
the pious thoughts be not measured geometrically to the words. Or else they
understand only more generally, that such or such a prayer or Psalm, for
example, MISERERE, is a Psalm full of penitent affections, and this they say
with much inward sorrow and contrition for their sins; and who can deny that
this pious affection is pleasing to God, though the thoughts and words do not
mathematically correspond the one to the other, I am sure the Apostle approved
the like, saying in the 17. verse of the forementioned chapter, Thou verily
give thanks well; And to conclude, he does absolutely allow it, in the 28.
verse saying, But if there be no interpreter let him keep silence in the
Church, and let him speak to God and himself. And in this matter, as well as
the rest, the Protestants also may keep silence, unless they could speak more
to the purpose.

. 4. These points and all other I examined with diligence, and found that
Protestants ordinarily did not truly apprehend many of the Catholic
doctrines, nor justly oppose any of them. But I have only touched these few
particulars, to let the unlearned Protestant Reader see, that the Catholic
doctrines are not such monstrous things, as they ordinarily conceive them, but
rather that it is monstrous in them not to believe them. And to awaken the
further diligence of all Protestants to search into the truth of all points, so
far as they are able either by themselves or others, (if they will not at the
first cast themselves upon the infallibility of the Church, which I conceive I
have sufficiently proved in the former part of this Treatise, and is the
shortest and surest way) and to read the Books of Catholics set forth to
this purpose; and not to exercise an implicit faith to the Protestant
Religion, and even against the rule of it, to their hurt, seeing they will not
yet do it to the Catholic Religion, to their advantage: In which Catholic
books they shall find all the Pleas for Protestancy, all their objections
against Catholic doctrine answered, with that learning and solidity, with
that cleernesse and fulness, that were not faith also required (which is the
gift of God only) to the apprehension of those things, which the Church
teaches, it were impossible (in my judgment) impossible (I say) that any
reasonable man should continue (in his judgment) a Protestant.

Yet many there are I fear, who though they be in belief and judgment
Catholics, yet in outward profession are Protestants. Who like the inferior
spheres, which are moved one way by the PRIMUM MOBILE, and a contrary way by
their own peculiar motion; So they are moved to believe the Catholic
verities by the influence of God upon their souls, but to remain in the
Protestant Communion by the private instigations of flesh and blood; Who
wanting the seasoning of Charity, do warp and shrink from that, to which their
judgment has joined them; Whose faith like bullion though it be good metal
in it self, yet wanting the stamp of of Catholic Communion and obedience, is
not current in the Kingdom of heaven, nor will serve in their journey to
defray them thither. But they (according to the condition of all weak minds)
accounting the Present evil (as loss of goods, friends, and the like) the
most intolerable, desire to avoid that, and put to adventure the ensuing: And
so while they sail through the troublesome Sea of this life, unskilful of
steerage in a storm, do strike and split their souls upon the flats of fear,
and rocks of presumption: forgetful of that dreadful threatening of our
Savior, He that shall deny me before men, shall be denied before the Angels
of God, Luc. 12.9.

Now to the diligence of examination before mentioned, for those that are not
yet convinced in their judgments, a Protestant is bound by Chillingworths own
rule; who (though he say that for as much as there is no infallible guide, and
that therefore a man must follow the choice of his own reason in what he does
believe, and that God will be contented with that, be it more or less, true or
false, being as much as he can attain to, yet) adds withal, that a man must
employ his uttermost endeavors to the finding out of the truth. And who is it
amongst the Protestants that has done that? Who has spent all his spare time,
much less, who has spared all the time he could to this enquiry? I think no
Protestants conscience can acquit him in this case; and if not, he must not
think to quiet himself by saying, that to the best of his understanding the
Protestant Religion seems true, if he have not employed all his endeavors to
find whether it be so or no; which cannot be, unless (with King Philip of
Macedon he keep one ear for the party accused) he equally hear both sides.

Wherefore devesting themselves of all prejudice and prepossessed opinions,
like white paper, wherein there is nothing written, let them address
themselves with all their spare time, yea they ought to make spare time, rather
than to want it, to a sad and serious consideration of the great business of
Religion, the truth whereof who so gains, though with the loss of all
temporal felicity, does highly improve his estate; considering that, as our
Savior says, what will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose
his own soul? Math. 16.16. And let no man defer this most important affair,
and put it off to the later end of his life, (which how soon it will happen,
the youngest know not;) as if the Kingdom of heaven were like a market,
cheapest at the later end of the day; or that because nature has placed the
seat of his memory in the hindermost part of his head, therefore he may defer
the remembrance of God, and of coming to him by the path of true Religion, to
the hindermost part of his life. But as God himself says, while it is called
to day, harden not your hearts, Psalm. 94.8. lest his delay pull upon himself
the forsaking of God, and steel his forehead to the perpetual refusal of his
merciful invitation; and so he (and especially the City of London, which has
been purpled with the blood of so many martyrs) hear the complaint and curse of
our Savior sounding in his ear, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee; how often would I have
gathered thy children as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and
you would not behold your habitation shall be left unto you desolate, Math.
23.37.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the foolish, deceitful and absurd proceedings and behavior of Protestants
in matter of Religion; And of the vanity and injustice of their pretext of
conscience for their separation from the Roman Church.

. 1. HE that will apply himself to this inquest as I have done, shall find,
that the objections of Protestants against Catholic Doctrines are very weak
and slight, they are but paper-pellets, and make more noise than hurt; the
works also that they raise for their own defense are as weak, and easily
dismantled. I found that their objections were answered again and again, which
a later writer would take no notice of, but retrive the first arguments and
urge them as fresh, as if they had never been urged before, or at least had
never been answered; forgetting to make reply to the Catholic Answers, which
was indeed because they could not do it. And in their writings I found much
abuse of all Authors, even from the Bible it self to the Authors of latest
times, either misalledging the words, ^or misconstruing the meaning, or urging
that for their purpose, which was indeed to no purpose.

. 2. Particularly for their mistranslating of Scripture, (wherein they
grievously accuse one another, as I showed before) I will allege two or three
places (of a great many) for a taste, wherein their unfaithfulness is apparent;
as first that notable depravation of their Master Luther, which I have
mentioned before, in adding the word [only] where the Apostle says, that a man
is justified by faith without the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. Also where the
Apostle says, give diligence by good works to make your calling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. the English Bibles leave out these words, by good works, and
yet Beza in his notes upon the place, acknowledges these words to be in almost
all the ancient Greek Copies. Also in the same Chapter and fifteenth Verse,
these words are read according to the original, I will do my diligence also,
you to have often after my decease, that you may have a remembrance of these
things: showing thereby that he would pray for them after he was dead; as S.
Chrysostom expounds it, saying, Rejoice ever (you blessed Apostles) in our
Lord, without intermission pray for us, fulfill your promises; for o Blessed
Peter thou cryest out speaking thus, I will do my diligence after my coming to
make mention of you, 2 Pet. 1.10. Now the English Bibles read this place thus,
Moreover I will endeavor, that you may be able after my decease, to have these
things always in remembrance, corrupting the sense, and making it signify
only that he would endeavor that they should remember those things, when he
was dead; whereas he says, that he would endeavor after he was dead, that
they should remember those things; and thereby it proves that he prayed for
them after be was dead; a Doctrine which many Protestants will not allow. Also
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. v. 27. where the Apostle
says, whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, the English translates it
thus, whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
putting and for or, thereby making the Apostle speak of the receiving of the
bread and wine unworthily in an united sense, whereas he speaks of them in a
divided sense.

Thus in very many places do they deal with the Scripture, like the Elephant
when he goes to drink, who troubles the clear water with his feet, because he
will not see the deformity of his face; So they trouble and defile the sense of
Scripture either in words or exposition, because they would not see the
deformity of their Errors. Many falsifications also and corruptions of
Catholic Authors, by the Protestant writers, I have met with; as where they
speaking something by way of supposition, they allege them as if they speak it
positively and absolutely; where they bring the objections of Heretics, they
allege them as speaking the words in their own names; where they relate with
reprehension the sayings of wicked men, they allege them as saying those words
themselves; which is, as if they should charge S. Matthew himself with the
words of the Pharisees against our Savior, Behold a glutton and a drinker of
wine. Math. 11.19. But I will not be particular in this matter, because many
that have been guilty in this case, have been called to a strict account by
their Catholic answerers.

And when they are pressed by Catholics with plain and direct proofs, O
what serpentine wriglings and windings, to escape the assaulters, do they
make! O what perverse, ridiculous, and contradictory answers and evasions do
some of them make! in which they do at once show both much wit, and much
folly; for fools could not speak as they do, and wise men would not. In so
much that Answer to a Jesuits challenge, chapt. of limb Patrum
Bishop Usher Primat of Armagh, a very learned man, to avoid the confession of
Christ's descent into hell, according to the Article of the Creed, in the plain
sense thereof, does so turn it and wind it, that he makes the sense of the
words, He descended into hell to be, He ascended into heaven: to such pitiful
refuges does the weakness of a bad cause drive them. And thus they that have
the most learning amongst them, being by unhappy accident bred up in an
erroneous Religion, and thereby presuming it to be true, do bend all the
endeavors of their learning to the maintenance of their errors, and the
obscuring of the truth; which learning, if it were directed to the right end,
might by just title claim a place in the first file of desert: even like a
torch which turned downward, is extinguished with that wax, which held upward
would make it bright and glorious. But though their learning were a hundred
times doubled, yet as Aarons serpent devoured the Magicians serpents, Exodus
7.12. so the wisdom of God, which is in his Church, will confound the
sensual wisdom of all her opposers; seeing there is no wisdom, nor prudence,
nor council against God, Prove. 21.30.

. 3. I further observed that the arguments of Protestants for themselves were
very fallacious; most frequently in that which the Logicians call FALLACIA
CONSEqUENCIA, which is when the consequence is not justly inferred; for
example, they argue thus; the Sacrament is called a figure of Christ's body,
therefore it is not his true and real body; which is a false Consequence, for
it may be both; even as Christ is called a figure of the substance of his
father, Heb. 1.3. and yet is also the same substance. Christ says, come unto
me, therefore we may go to no body else, which is false; for we may go to him
and others also. The Apostle says, that we are Justified by faith, therefore
say they not by works; whereas we are justified by both. We must confess our
sins to God, therefore not to a Priest; whereas we must do both, Christ is
the head of the Church, therefore the Pope is not; whereas both are in several
capacities. The like might be said in many others; by which kind of arguing,
unlearned people are exceedingly deluded, and think that while one thing must
be done, that must be done only; the vein of that word (only) invented by
Luther in the matter of justification by faith running through the whole body
of their Religion.

. 4. Moreover I found this contradiction amongst the Patrons of Protestancy;
that some of them reject the Fathers, and accuse them of being infected with
the errors which prevailed in their times; and what were their errors? even all
that they taught contrary to their Protestant doctrines; so making themselves
the rule to judge the Fathers by, and not the Fathers (which any wise man would
think more fit) a rule to themselves; who no doubt knew the Scriptures also,
and what was agreeable or contrary to them better than they: Protestants being
herein like carpenters who wear their rule at their backs, casting behind them
and neglecting those that should guide their belief. But other Protestants
ashamed of this insolency, pretend for the credit of their cause, that the
Fathers are altogether on their side; and then with much labor hunt out some
obscure passages, most liable to be wrested, and triumph therein, as if they
had found a demonstration, which when they are sifted, either they make nothing
for them or else quite against them: who in this case are like to a man ready
to be drowned, who to save himself will catch hold on a naked sword, with
which he cuts his fingers; So Protestants sunk into the despair of their
cause, think to save themselves by that which serves but to increase their
overthrow.

They pretend also to answer many plaes of the Fathers alleged by Catholics,
and to give their words a Protestant meaning, and thereby run the Fathers into
manifest contradiction of themselves; in regard that the Fathers have but some
oblique passages which seem (and but seem) to make for them, (as whoever spoke
so exactly, nay who can possibly speak so exactly, as that his words may not be
made to seem different from his meaning?) but they have whole Books, Sermons,
Tractates, and a world of dispersed places, of purpose, in the maintenance of
Catholic truths. And though they say that the Fathers taught Protestant
doctrine, and they give a Protestant sense (though very incongruous) to many of
the places of the Fathers alleged by Catholics, yet they dare not use those
words and Phrases of the Fathers, as of the* Mass, the Altar, the Sacrifice,
concerning real presence, prayers to Saints and for the dead, merits,
satisfaction, and Purgatory, with the like, in their prayers, Sermons, and
books which if they speak Protestant Doctrine, in the true sense of the
Fathers, (as they say they do) why do they not with the sense, make use of the
words and speeches also? I can conceive no other reason, but for fear the
peoples understandings (not so fraught with prejudice, nor acquainted with
their uncouth evasions,) should carry them to the direct meaning thereof, and
so either in those things become Popish themselves, or accuse their teachers of
Popery.

. 5. Another fraud I have observed amongst the Canonical Protestants, which is,
that when they dispute against Catholics, they have recourse to the Scripture,
and will be tried by that only; but when they dispute against the Puritanes and
other Sects amongst them, who deal with them at their own weapon of Scripture
only, then they have recourse to the Fathers, and the Tradition of the Church,
and use the same arguments against Sectaries, that Catholics do against them;
and particularly in the points of baptizing of Infants, against the
Anabaptists; and the keeping of the first day of the week holy, against the
Sabbatarians, who would have Saturday; for either of which there is not any
command in Scripture. And shall Tradition serve them in those cases, and not in
others? Or shall Scripture with them prove all other points, and not those? And
this shift is such a one, as S. Augustine (in Psalm. 80.) witnesses to be common
to Foxes and Heretics. For as Foxes have two holes to save themselves by,
one, when they are driven from the other; so Heretics (whom the Scripture
figures out by Foxes, when the Spouse says, Let us take the young Foxes that
destroy the vines, Cant. 2.15.) have a double passage to save themselves by;
the one, when they are assaulted by the other; so that he that will catch them,
must set his nets before both issues, and besiege both passages, as the
excellent Catholic Writers have done, and have left them neither Tradition
nor Scripture whereby to escape.

For although the Scripture do not teach all in direct and particular terms
that Caliques do, yet it teaches nothing that Protestants do, in the things
they differ from Catholics. And in general the Scripture teaches all that
Catholics do, by referring us to Tradition. And this is sufficient; for it is
not required, that all that we believe or do, be expressly set down in
Scripture, it is enough, that there be no Scripture against it, for what is not
forbidden is lawful; as the Apostle says, where there is no law, there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. If then there be no law of Scripture against it, it
is lawful; especially if it be warranted by the Tradition of the Church, to
which the Scripture referres us, and is to us more evident to come from God,
than the Scripture is, which we do not know to do so, but by the Churches
testimony.

So that I found the Protestants were like to the Giant Procustus, mentioned by
Plutarch, who having a great iron bed fit for himself, all strangers that he
took he laid therein, and if they were too long for the bed, he cut off so
much of their legs, if too short, he stretched them out till they came even;
So the Protestants having built a Religion after the model of their own
fancy, do examine Scriptures, Counsels, Fathers, and all authority by it,
whereof some they cut off, as being too long, in affirming more than they do;
and others being too short for their purpose, they miserably serve, tenter, and
rack, till they come to the length they desire. And had I the wicked ambition
by impiety to make my self famous, I believe, I could conjure up new opinions,
which (laying aside the authority of the Church) I could varnish with as much
reason and Scripture, as any they profess; Whose attempts have had no better
success then Achelous had in fighting with Hercules, who took upon him
several shapes, hopeing in one or other to overcome him; but was by Hercules
beaten through all his shapes, and forced at last to take his own proper
shape, and yield: So Protestants fighting against Catholics, are by them
beaten through all their changes, and forms, and shifts through which they
wander, and are forced at last to take the true form of Protestancy, which is
obstinatly to deny the plain and manifest truth; But I heartily pray that it
would please God to bring them to the true form, which they ought to have,
which is of Roman Catholic; until which they will (like the blinded
Sodomites) perpetually roll, wander and grope in the darkness of uncertainty,
and instability, till eternal darkness seize upon them. For by embarquing
themselves in such an enterprise as is the boarding of the Ship of Peter, they
are like to arrive at no other port, but ruin and destruction.

. 6. Moreover I found this proceeding of the Protestants to be most
uneasonable, and full of pride, in that they being but few in number,
especially in their beginning, yea but one, one infinitely audacious, Luther,
once a child of the Roman Church, should presume to correct or reform the
whole Christian world; a thing which no man would admit in the private regiment
of his own family, that a son or servant should presume to find fault with,
and change the customs of the house against the consent of the Father, Master,
and all the rest, and assume to himself alone to be judge of the cause.

One earnestly desiring Lycurgus to establish a popular State in Lacedemon,
that the basest might have as great authority as the highest, answered, Begin
to do so first in thine own house; which he refused, and thereby saw the
injustice of his own demand: So these men that will not admit within
themselves, either in matters Ecclesiastical or civil, that they whose duty
it is to obey, should command, they whose duty it is to learn, should teach,
withwhat face can they defend the practice thereof in the Church, which is the
house of God; of which our predecessors were guilty in the first attempt, and
this present generation in the continuance of their Rebellion? Nor let them
think that their having of the Bible in the Mother Tongue will save them, as if
it were like the Palladium to the Trojans, a thing dropped down from heaven, no
man knows how, with this condition annexed, that while they kept it in their
city they should never perish; while in the mean time they extremely pollute it
with two things, their interpretation and their conversation; whereas the
Church of Rome has not only the word, but the meaning of God also, as the
Apostle says, we have the sense of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. both proved by
never-erring authority.

And lastly weighing all the Protestants arguments with all impartiality, or if
there were any inclination of the balance, it was to their side, with whose
doctrines I had been from my childhood seasoned, and had been a teacher of
others for the space of near twenty years, and to whom to receive contrary
impressions, I knew must prove extremely prejudicial; who therefore addressed my
self to this enquiry, with the disposition of a jealous husband, seeking that
which I was most loath to find; yet all this notwithstanding, I found that all
their pleas and pretenses, and their answers to Catholics were weak,
slight, false or impertinent; and (like to a certain fish called Sleve,
mentioned by Plutarch, which has a body like a sword, but wants a heart,) they
had (at least in the opinion of some) a show of strength and sharpness, but
inwardly had no power, Spirit, or vigor. And that all their specious shows of
purity, Reformation, and Evangelicall truth, were but like a shallow brook or
plash of water, wherein we may discern the Sun, or moon and stars, with the
whole face of heaven, as if it were as deep as heaven is high, when if we but
sound it with our little finger, we pierce it through even to the earth: So
their pretenses of the pure Word of God, heavenly truth, and nothing but the
truth, (as if like Prometheus they had fetched it themselves from heaven) being
fathomed, I found no deeper than the shallow conceits of private heads; And
that like Micol they had sent away David, and laid an Image in his place, 1
Kings 19. they had renounced the true and living Word of God, which is the true
sense thereof, and laid an image of their own fancy, dressed in the same letter,
in the room thereof; and so were (though not of Saints and Images which they
ought, yet) worshippers of their own imaginations, which they ought not, as
being a high Idolatry.

. 8. These, these are the motives, which have inclined me to believe that the
Church of England and all other Protestant Churches, are guilty both of Heresy
and Schism; two sins of highest nature, the one against God, the other
against our neighbor, the one against faith, the other against charity, by
denying their belief to doctrines revealed by God the supreme Author, and
proposed by the Catholic Church, the supreme witness of divine truth; and by
rending the seamlesse coat of Christ, separating from the Communion of his
Church, and that (as some of their most learned say,) for things not
fundamental; and what can be more imprudent, than for an unfundamentall error
to commit a fundamental sin? And such it is to separate from the true
Church, as the learned amongst them confess the Church of Rome to be.

And as the pretended errors for which they did separate, (they confess) were
not fundamental, so for ought they know (for they confess that the judgment
of their Church may err) they were no errors at all; and so again, for ought
they know, they have not reformed, but deformed themselves; and are gone out of
Gods blessing (as we say) into the warm Sun. What madesse it is to make, or
continue a separation from a true Church, so acknowledged by all Christians,
upon pretenses not accounted true by any but themselves, and nor certainly
known to be true, so much as by themselves. And as S. Augustine (de unit.
Eccles. c. 3.) argues against the Donatists; If both sides were true they had
no cause to separate, and to fly from those whom they had in possession: If
both false, there was no cause of separation, that they should fly from those
who were no more faulty than themselves. If our doctrines are true and theirs
false, there was no cause of their separation, because they ought rather to
have amended themselves and continued in unity: and if ours are false and
theirs true, there was no cause of their separation, because they ought not to
have forsaken the innocent world, to whom either they would not, or they could
not demonstrate their truth. Nor can it excuse them to say, that such or such
things are against their conscience; for as much as they ought to regulate
their consciences by the Word of God in the mouth of the Church, not of
themselves, (otherwise contentious and self-willed Spirits will never want this
plea, to separate from the Church, and so to serve God with their
Will Worship,) and not to demand of the Church, that she make her conscience
stoop to a compliance with theirs, which is insolent and unreasonable.

It Is true that he that does any thing against his conscience sins, so also if
he do not that which he is commanded, he sins; therefore to reconcile this
conflict of conscience, men may and must (though it go against the grain of
their private judgment) submit themselves by an implicit faith to the Church,
by believing her to be wiser than themselves, and so believing what she says
to be true. Otherwise this conscience would be a plea for all disobedience and
impiety; when wicked men might say, that they could not be persuaded in their
conscience, that the things they were commanded to believe or do, were good,
but rather the contrary were so, and therefore they would do them. Thus
erroneous men may think it lawful to commit murder or adultery, as all Rebels
do the one, and Familists and Adamites the other. And we see that Protestants
(who make conscience their Plea against the Church of Rome, and a ground of
Separation) will not admit this from others that are under their command.

The legal Protestants of England would not permit any man, under pretense of
conscience, to refuse the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, but thought all men
bound to submit their beliefes therein to them. And now the Reformers of the
reformed, who heretofore complained of it as an Egyptian burden, to have any
thing imposed on them against their conscience, make no scruple to impose upon
other men's consciences, in their oaths, Protestations and Covenants of
conspiracy and Rebellion against their lawful Prince, and of believing a
Religion not only now in Being, but whatsoever hereafter shall be by them
contrived; nor will they suffer any man's tenderness of conscience, to be a
ground for the separation of his obedience. So that the separation of all
Protestants from the Church of Rome under pretense of conscience, as it has no
ground of truth, so has it not either of prudence or justice.

. 9. And if the Protestants, especially the Chilling worthians, will be (as
they pretend) the servants of reason, and follow her whither she shall guide
them, I cannot see how they can avoid coming to the Catholic Roman Church.
For seeing that (according to them) there is no infallible certainty of the
truth of any point of Faith, (for if there be so, it is in their fundamentalls;
yet seeing they have no infallible knowledge what those fundamentalls are, they
must needs slide back again to their former universal uncertainty:) all the
assurance they have in matter of religion, can be but probable: Now Aristotle
the great Master of reason, gives this rule of probability; That (says he) is
probable, which seems so to all, or to the most, or to the most wise; and
amongst them, to all, or to the most, or to the most famous and eminent; which
rule is so consonant to reason, as I think no reasonable creature will deny it.
Nor can any Protestant (except pride and ignorance shut the door of his
confession) deny that this rule of probability, amongst all sorts of Christians
is applyable only to the Roman Catholic Church; there having been infinitely
more, and more wise and learned people of her Communion, than of any other; yea
many times there have been, when she has enfolded all Christians in her
arms, and not one to be found out of her Communion, her doctrines then (in
reason) are to be received as most probable.

And (as some Philosophers say) natural bodies do neglect the laws and rules
of of their particular motions, to serve and follow the laws of universal
nature; of which one is, That there must be no Vacuum, or place utterly empty;
which law to observe, we see that heavy bodies will rise upward, which
otherwise would fall downward: So the particular rules of reason, in particular
men, (if they will show themselves the dutiful children of reason) must give
place to this general and universal rule of reason implanted in mankind; and
when they are inclined one way to an opinion, by their own private and
domestique reason, they must suspend that inclination, and conquer the
provocations thereof, and readily yield unto the fundamental and universal
law of reason; which is, that in matters of whose truth there is no infallible
certainty, that is most likely to be true, and has the most reason on its
side, wherein the most, and the most reasonable of reasonable creatures do
agree Which if they do, they shall not run upon the rock of believing
contradictions, (as some of them imagine;) but shall find themselves obliged by
the train of their own principles, to become Roman Catholics.

These considerations, together with the great assistance of Gods grace, have
caused me to forsake the Communion of all Protestant Churches, who, like those
mentioned in S. John, say they are Jews, the true Church, and are not, but are
the Synagogue of Satan, Revel. 2.9. And not to content my self to be a
Catholic in opinion only, keeping it private to my self, to save my
temporal interest; nor with the two Tribes and half, forbear to enter into
the land of Canaan, but stay on the other side of Jordan, tempted thereunto by
the pleasantness of the land; but, disdaining to match my love so low, as of
this creeping world, with the renouncing of all I possessed, or that my hopes
could reach at, to the pulling on my self the displeasure of my friends and
kindred, the reproach and hatred of the Protestant party, to the abandoning of
my self, my wife and children, to all the calamities (which are all) that
beggary, and perpetual banishment could throw upon us; lanching forth into the
deep of this wide world, without rudder, anchor, sails or tackling, to humble
our selves at the feet of our Holy Mother the Church of Rome, which is the one,
true, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church; and will be so, and will be
accounted so, when these, like their predecessors, revolters from the Church of
Rome, shall be no more; And to choose to perish for want (if it be the will of
God) in communion with the Catholic Church, rather than to have the Empire of
the world stoop under my command, and be a Protestant: And to say, as
Themistocles did to his wife and children, though in a different sense,
PERIISSEMUS NISI PERIISSEMUS, we had perished, if we had not perished, if we
had not perished temporally, we had perished eternally: nor would I sell the
inward peace and consolation I here find, though at such a rate as would undo
the world to buy it; for he that purchases worldly prosperity with the loss
of the true faith, out-buyes it, and will prove a bankrupt; with which the
tendries of the whole world being counterpoized, prove too light: as our
Savior says, What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose
his own soul? Math. 16.20.

And all this, because they that are out of the true Church are out-lawes
against: God, are without Christ, and without God in the world, as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 2.12. and because (as all antiquity testifies) that Council.
Cart. 4. c. 1.
out of the Catholic Church there is no salvation. Aug. Ep. 152.
That whosoever is not in the Catholic Church cannot have life. Aug. de Sym,
ad Catech. lib. 4.
That he shall not have God for his Father, who will not have the Church for
his Mother. Cyp. de unit Eccl,
That Christ is not with those that assemble out of the Church. Ibidem.
That though they should be slain for the confession of Christ, this spot is
not washed away even with blood. Ibidem.
That he cannot be a Martyr that is not in the Church. Aug de gest. cum.
Emerito.
That out of the Catholic Church one may have Faith, Sacraments, and in sum
every thing except salvation. Prosp. promis. and praedic. Dei par. 4. c. 5.
That he that communicates not with the Catholic Church is an Heretic and
Antichrist. Fulgent. de fide ad Pet. c. 19.
That no Heretic nor Schismatique, that is not restored to the Catholic
Church before the end of his life, can be saved.

And this Catholic Church is the Roman Church, because the Bishop of Rome is
the head thereof, appointed so by God, and received by the Christian world in
all ages (as I have proved before) and that not only for a time, but at this
time, and for ever. And this being the Rock on which the Church is built,
surely it shall never be removed, nor he, that like the wiseman, builds
thereon; as our Savior says, the rain fell, the floods came, the winds blew;
and rushed upon the house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a rock:
Matthew. 7.25, 26, 27. On the other side all other Churches are built upon the
sandy foundation of humane invention, and must expect the fate of the fools
house, on which the the rain fell, the floods came, the winds blew, and rushed
thereon, and it fell, and the ruin thereof was great,

CHAP. XXIII.
The Conclusion; wherein is represented on the one side the splendour and
orderly composure of the Roman Catholic Church: And on the other side the
deformity and confusion of Protestant Congregations.

. 1. NOw for a Conclusion, let me invite the Reader to stand (as it were) upon
mount Nebo, as Moses did, and take a view of the Land of Canaan, the Roman
Catholic Church, on the one side, and the wilderness of the Protestant
Churches on the other.

Here amongst Catholics, you shall see a Church like the cloud that appeared
to Elisha, as big as a man's hand, which by and by spread over the face of the
earth; a Church which has incircled in her arms (at least in their
predecessors) all that ever wore the name of Christians; which has stretched
her dominions, as far as the Sun his beams, and wheresoever he has bestowed
his corporal, she has bestowed her spiritual light.

There amongst Protestants, you shall see Churches that have got possession
only of the most obscure places, and that by patches, like a poor man's land;
and those too usurped by fraud, and violence from the just owners thereof; not
purchased, but stolen.

Here you shall see a Church that has continued without interruption since the
first planting thereof; that has kept perpetual Term without Vacation; that
in all the rough tempests of this worlds persecution, has still rid out the
storm: and though by the tyranny of heathen and heretics millions of her
children did fall, it was but like the morning deaw, watering thereby the seeds
of grace, which themselves had sown; and when they calmly bled, it was but
oil to the Apostles lamps, whose bright flames may yet serve to light
posterity to heaven. And as the enemies of the city of Rome were wont to weep
to see it on fire, because it would afterward be fairer built; so the devil
(though he caused it, yet) did mourn to see the Church of Rome on fire in her
Martyrs, which was ever repaired by a greater increase of converts, who
constantly kept the faith, till they lost themselves in keeping it, like Naboth
who kept his possession, with the loss of his blood.

There you shall see Churches like Castor and Pollux rising and setting by
turns, sometimes alive, sometimes dead; with such huge great gaps between the
times of their subsisting, that for any succor they could have from them,
millions of souls might in the interim have dropped into hell. And as the
Moabites when they saw the waters look ruddy, thought they had been mingled
with blood, when it was but the reflection of the morning sun beams on them; so
when they suffered any thing, they called it persecution for their obedience to
God, when it was indeed but the effect of justice on them, for their Rebellion
against Gods deputies Ecclesiastical and civil, the high Priest and the
Prince: and instead of giving them increase, as persecution has always done
to the Church, it did (with the aid of their inward discords) utterly
extingnish them. Who have had none, but have made many Martyrs; reviving even
in these later and present times, the ancient copies of cruelty against
Catholics; blindly believing that by killing Gods servants, they do God
service: Whose meek spirits have paid as large a tribute of patience unto
heaven and sufferance to the world, as any that went before them; and have
proved in themselves, the truth of the Spouses saying in the Canticles; chapter 5.
v. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, being blanched with the whiteness of
innocence, and guled with the blood of martyrdom, the fury of whose malice and
persecution has pursued many even through the gates of death, adding
profanation to their cruelty, by disturbing the dead bodies, and silent urnes
of Saints departed. A poor revenge and foolish, which does more express their
hatred, than satisfy it; and shows that their malice does more afflict their
own minds before it is executed, than it can do their enemies bodies in the
execution: So eager, so importunate is sin, ever to its own shame.

. 2. Here you shall see a Church that has always been in view; whom neither
fear nor coyness has made to hide her head, and whose admired beauty has
invited all men to her chaste embraces, and like Medusaes head has turned them
to stones of this living building, by the admiration of her surpassing beauty.

There you shall see Churches, such (which is very strange) as were never seen,
or very seldom; keeping such unkind and retired state, that men (like Diogenes
who went about Athens with a candle and a lantern at noone day, to seek an
honest man) must do so about the world to find them out, and in the mean time
perish for want of spiritual aid: who never had any beauty, riches, or rarity
amongst them, but only Giges his ring, whereby they did for the most part walk
invisible. The English Proverb says, that where God has his Church, the
devil has his Chapel; and so he has always had in Heretics, who in
regard of place have been mingled with Catholics; but that the devil should
have all the Church, and God not so much as the Chapel, (as they pretend) is
most incredible.

. 3. Here you shall see a Church like the city of Jerusalem, that is at unity
within it self; and like the walls of Byzantium, so closely united, that they
seem to be all but one entire stone. And as God spoke of old, By the mouth of
his Prophets, Luc. 1.70. intimating, that though they were many Prophets, yet
they had all but one mouth, in regard of the unity and agreement of their
sayings; so speaks he now by the mouth of the Priests in the Catholic
Church: A body having Christ for the head, from whom (as the Apostle says) the
whole body being fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplies, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love; Whose powerful
union, like the Bundle of Arrows presented by the Emperor Saladine to his
sons, as the Emblem of united strength, cannot be broken by the assault of
any force; which like the floating Islands, or the stone Tyrrhenus, being
unbroken, floats still aloft, and keeps her head above the main; when others
like clods of earth rent from the Jland, or broken in pieces of that stone,
sink to the bottom and perish.

There you shall see Churches stand like the stones in some high ways to
measure their length, a mile asunder from each other; And as the Cameleon
changes it self into all colors except white; So they wander through all the
forms of opinions that fancy can imagine, saving only truth; Which need no
external disasters to try their strength, no foreign enemies to attempt their
destruction; For like the Serpents teeth sown by Cadmus, or the
eternally-hating brethren Eteocles and Polynices, they with mutual cruelties
destroy each other. Here a Church that for the admirable effects of her unity,
deserves the name of that precious stone, which for the rarity thereof is
called Unity. There such, as for the variety and deformity wherewith they are
possessed, may be termed Legion.

. 4. Here you shall see a Church that religiously triumphs over all Christian
Kings and Kingdoms of the world, making them the Trophies of her spiritual
victories and conversions; whose powerful influence has cast a charm upon
the fierce and lionly natures of barbarous Princes; and has not only made the
Lion and the lamb to live together, (as was foretold by the Prophet) but has
turned the Lions into Lambs. Alexander the great being asked if he would run
at the Olympic games, said, I could be content, so I might run with Kings;
Here then may be exercised a virtuous ambition, and truly worthy of the majesty
of the most excellent King of England, who if he will honor the Church and
himself to run this way, shall run with almost all Kings of the Christian
world, both his own and other Kings predecessors, and that at the true
Olympic exercises, the exercises of heaven.

There you shall see Churches that never had the power to invite a King or
nation to their Communion, but such as were born to it; or at first compelled to
it, by the violence of some prevailing faction; or moved to it, by oblique and
self-reflecting ends. Barren and in jurious Churches, that live not by their
own labor, and the gains they make thereof, but boast only of that which they
have ravished from others; and convert not from Heathenism, but nearer to it.

. 5. Here you shall see a Church working wonders far above the power of all
created Beings; commanding (by the rich dowry of her husband and Savior)
heaven, earth and hell, and all the frame of the creation; making them bow
their fixed and stubborn natures, and meekly yield to the dreadful command of
man, propt by omnipotent Divinity. In which the miracle of miracles,
Transubstantiation, is most frequently wrought, even millions of times a day,
and sufficiently proved to be so, by the frequent effusion of blood that it
has made (like murdered bodies many times bleeding afresh in the presence of
the murderers) to confute the incredulity of Jews and Heretics; which if it
do not so, to those that do not see it (having credible testimony thereof) as
well as to those that see it, shall one day, with the rest of his most precious
soul-healing balm, be required at their unhappy hands, when he shall come
incircled with flames, and armed with dreadful thunder, to throw down
vengeance on the impious and unbelievers; who shall remedilesly feel that which
heretofore they would not believe, that he that believes not shall be damned,
Mark. 16.16.

There you shall see Churches that do wonders indeed, but they are wondrous
evils; the fowlest in all the stock and brood of villainy; too many to be
repeated, but not to be forgiven; for that therefore I will always pray.
Churches that are so poor in proof of their Doctrine, that they neither come
near the Church of Christ, nor yet do so much as the accursed Antichrist; for
he shall do some wonders, but they do none: Or at least it is but one only
Miracle that they do, and that is, that being (as they say) the true pure
Church of God, they do no Miracle. And one Miracle I beseech God to do amongst
them, (and especially in the once-every-way happy, and the now-every-way
miserable Kingdom of England;) that is, once more to convert them to his true
faith, and Catholic Roman Church, where it is only to be had; that they may
see and submit, before it be too late, to him whom they have pierced; and may
(as Christ admonishes the Church of Ephesus) remember from whence they are
fallen, repent and do their first works, (Rev. 2.5.) before all hope, to see the
Kingdom flourish, be withered; and that by their falling from bad to worse;
there remain nothing but a fearful expectation of seeing it overrun, and
possessed by some barbarous Nation, as the Greek Churches are by the Turks,
(for their Heresies most likely, and Schism from the Church of Rome,) or else,
that they will become such themselves.

. 6. Here you may see a Church that is the worlds SANCTUM SANCTORUM, most holy
place, gilded with the lives of innumerable (both men and women) persons of
matchless sanctity, shining through the vailes of their coarse cloth, and
neglected flesh; yea in the feebler Sex, God making his power (as he says to
S. Paul) perfect through weakness. People so charitable to others, that they
will forgive every one, but themselves; and so severe to themselves, that they
had rather lose the reward of their well-doing, than the punishment of their
evil. Whose fasting and prayers, like empty-bellied instruments send up
harmonious music to heaven, and exceed the Spheres. Who suffer no mutiny of
passions against reason, or of reason against God. Who disdain to stoop to the
lure of sense, or to serve it in any thing beyond the margent of necessity; but
ascending up to the mount Tabor of heavenly contemplation, do there abide with
Christ, and are transfigured with the beauty of holiness; on whose hearts is
written (that which was on the breast plate of Aaron) Holiness to the Lord.
These are those noble Worthies of God, who like Vriah one of David's Worthies,
are ashamed to enjoy the pleasures and delicacies of this life, while they
consider that their great General wanted them; but like him spend all their
time in suffering evil, and doing good; and are therein like to arched roofs,
whereon the more weight is laid, the firmer and stronger they are. And are
(many of them) so extasied with heavenly raptures, that their unbodied souls
leave them forgetful of all things that may tend to their temporal
preservation. Having such strong impressions of the presence of God, that
wheresoever they are, or whatsoever doing, they so behave themselves, as if
with S. Hierome, they heard the sound of the Archangells trump summoning them
to judgment: Which high degrees of holiness they underprop with the basis of
humility; and (like the weightiest ears of corn) bow down their heads the
lowest to the earth; and stand like figures in Arithmetique, where the last in
place is greatest in account. So that this alone may persuade infidells that
God was made man, while they see men thus made Gods. Into their secrets O Lord
let my soul come, let my glory be joined to their assemblies.

There you shall see Churches calculated only for the meridian of flesh and
blood; whose Apocryphal Priesthood cannot beget Canonical, much less
super-canonicall virtues; whose Priests (like anticks which we see carved on
the sides of sumptuous buildings, seem with their bowed shoulders to bear up
the house, when they are indeed borne up by it: so they pretend to be the only
Pillars of the house of God, but indeed have no share therein, but what they
derive from this Church of Rome; Thou bear not the root, but the root thee,
Romans 11.18. And what remains of the perfume of goodness yet amongst the
people, (bating the disposition of nature) is but the relics of the Roman
scent, perhaps not yet utterly faded.

. 7. Lastly look upon the Roman Catholic Church, and you shall see a thing so
complete and perfect in all her dimensions, as if it had been (as indeed it
was) molded on a heavenly frame, many members built up into one body, and that
body united under one head, maintaining most sweet and admirable
correspondence, having in it self all fit means for the spiritual
conservation both of the individuum, and species, of the particular body, and
of the kind: For birth here is Baptism; Confirmation for strength and
advancement in the state of grace: The sacred Eucharist for our daily stock of
spiritual improvement and increase. And so our spiritual sicknesses and
wounds, which we receive in our Christian warfare, here are Physicians with the
balm of Gilead, the good Samaritanes with wine and oil to power into our
wounds, the holy Priests after the order of Melchisedeck with the Sacrament of
Penance to cure all our maladies. And thereceipts for these cures contrived
with wondrous art; for as bodily evils are cured either with things of the
same quality or the contrary, so here. For wounds given by the world, here is a
cure by giving the world away in alms. For wounds received from the flesh, a
cure by mortifying the flesh with fasting and other austerities. A cure for the
fiery darts of the devil, by the darts of prayers shot up to heaven. And when
we depart this life (for this warfare must not always last) here is precious
oil to embalme our souls with grace; which like the oil to the ancient Roman
wrastlers, makes us nimble and agile in our latest wrastlings with the devil,
that we may slip out of his hands, and be presented, rendering a sweet smelling
savor unto God. And that this holy Church may continue in succession, until
her royal Bridegroom call her up to his own throne, here is Holy Sacramental
Matrimony, both to represent that union, and by grace to increase it. And that
this multitude may not beget confusion, here are holy Orders, by virtue
whereof, they that are ordained do govern this society, as spiritual
Magistrates, and conduct it, as spiritual Captains, through the wilderness
of this world, to the land of Canaan, the heavenly Jerusalem, which is above.
Here is the true Communion of Saints both of those in heaven, in earth, and
under the earth, by the participations of each others Prayers, Merits, and
Satisfactions. Here is, as in all well-governed Commonwealths, Justice both
commutative, and distributive: Commutative betwixt God and Christ, who paid a
ransom for us, and purchased an estate for us, and we take possession upon the
conditions required: distributive in rendering rewards and punishments according
to the geometrical proportion of men's merits or offenses.

. 8. Here are the Arcana imperii, high and mysterious things, such as are
worthy the wisdom and contrivance of God. Things to be believed, by the
world, thought incredible; things done by God, and to be done by us, by the
world thought impossible, things to be suffered, by the world thought
intolerable: and they are believed, done, and suffered, which could not be
effected, but by a power omnipotent. And because they are so difficult, none
but God could subdue mortals to the belief and practice of them; and
therefore, even because they are such, they prove him only to be their author.
For who can imagine that Confession, a thing so much against the bias of flesh
and blood, or the belief of Transubstantiation, a thing so far above the reach
of humane reason, could have got such possession in the souls of Christian
mankind, and that without any external violence, had not the finger of God
writ it on men's hearts. In doctrines of this Church, that will admit the use of
reason for their proportionablenesse, no things seem more reasonable; and where
they are above reason nothing can be more sublime, and befitting God the Author
of this Religion, and Christ Jesus the husband of this Church. God, who is the
God of reason, (of which that small portion which man is Master of, which yet
ennobles him above all bodily creatures, is but a ray from the splendour of his
all-seeing sun-light, a spark from his celestial fire) works all things
according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11. which counsel implies
prudence, and reason in his actions; according to the type of that eternal law
whereby he works himself, and commands all his creatures to work. And by this
character the doctrines and the discipline of the Catholic Church proclaim
him for their Author; and are not therefore to be disgraced (as they are by
Protestants) by the ill-sensed name of policy; giving to the virtue of highest
wisdom, the superscription of deceitful cunning. And the knowledge of those
things, which in the government of this noblest Kingdom of Christ surmount the
reach of present reason, are reserved for a reward of our humble belief, in the
life to come; when our faith shall be happily turned into sight; and we shall
clearly see, and be fully and eternally satisfied, with the reason of al those
things, which now our short understandings have not line enough to fathom.
Excellent things are spoken of thee thou city of God, Psalm. 86.3. And as it is
written of Alexander the Great, that his body was of such an excellent
composition, that it sent forth sweet vapors that perfumed all his clothes;
and our Savior we know had such abundant virtue flowing from him, that it
cured such as touched him; such is the body of the Church, of so rare, so holy,
and so rational a composure, that virtue goes out of her, and sanctifies; and
wisdom, and makes reasonable all her garments, all her utensils, and
whatsoever appertains to her, the smell of thy garment is like the smell of
Frankincense, Cant. 4.11.

And if any third party that were neither of the Roman, nor of any Protestant
Church, should observe the admirable frame of this Church, both in regard of
the doctrine and discipline, he would surely say, as the Apostle to the
Corinthians, (1 Cor. 14.25.) God is truly in you; and with the Patriarch Jacob,
How dreadful is this place? this is no other than the house of God, and this
is the gate of heaven; Genesis 28.17. and as in the Canticles 6.10. this is she
that goes forth like the springing morn, fair as the moon, choice as the sun,
terrible as an army in battle array.

But looking on the Churches of Protestants or any sort of Heretics, he
should see a body without a head; or (which is as monstrous) an hydra, a beast
with many heads, and that possibly may have as many more, if Kingdoms should
be lessened and increased: having a law without a Judge; but every one that is
a party, claiming that power, in his own cause. Where they have no assurance
that their law is incorrupt, but by the testimony of those they account their
adversaries, and the greatest liars and seducers of the world. Who have amongst
them no faith but opinion, no charity, but humanity, no hope fitly tempered
with fear, but bold presumption and pretended assurance; for which, they that
are the most confident, have the least cause of any men in the world. Where
there is no beauty, comeliness, or order worthy the Bride of Christ, not yet
of the design or owning of any generous, or wise and prudent man. But as some
Philosophers hold that the world was made by the accidental concourse of
Atoms; So they seem to be made by chance, and by chance to come together, not
being united by any internal form, but only in a political opposition of her,
who is their Mother and Mistress.

The Senate of Rome having chosen three men to go on an Embassy, whereof the
one had his head full of cuts and gashes, the other was a fool, and the third
had the Gout; Cato laughing said, that the Sen^^ had sent an Ambassador, which
had neither head, heart, nor feet; And even such imperfect things are all
heretical and deformed Churches, which want faith for their head, charity for
their heart, firmness and perseverance for their feet. Holding such monstrous
and absurd opinions, that they make up a bundle of Heathenisme, Turcisme,
Heresy, and contradictions to common-sense. Can then any indifferent and
prudent man, who knows that God made the world with wisdom, in number, weight
and measure, can he think that they are the Church of God, the dear Spouse of
Christ, for whose sake he descended from his heavenly Throne, and took and lost
humane life? Or will he not rather say, that they are mad? 1 Cor. 14.26. Who
are framed neither in number, weight, nor measure; their societies and Churches
being (or being possible to be, according to their principles) as many as their
persons; their opinions vain and foolish; and their government confused and
misshapen, seeming rather a chaos than a creation. In sum there is nothing
that can be said for a true Catholic Church, but may be truly said for the
Roman; and there is nothing that the Protestant Churches have said, or can say
for themselves, but have been, or may be said by Heretics; and are said by
those who subdivide and separate from them; which pretenses if they be good in
them against the Church of Rome, they are good in others against them; which
yet they will not admit. So that the Church of Rome is the true Church, or
there never was any true Church; and all Protestants are Heretics, or there
never were any that deserved that name.

. 9. What remains then for all Protestants of what sort or title soever, but
to listen to the voice which says, Go out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Revel. 18.4.
To redeem their souls from forfeiture, that have been thus long morgag'd to
eternal death: and with the Prodigal son to return home to the Catholic
Church, their mother, and thereby to God their Father, in whose house there is
plenty of celestial Manna, while they perish for want of food, or become
fellow commoners with the hogs, and feed upon husks and draught: and thereby
to give joy both to earth and heaven in their conversion; seeing that as the
elements never rest contentedly but in their proper place^ so they will find no
rest, but in the bosom of the true Church, which is the proper place of every
Christian. To listen to the voice which cries, Return, return o Sunamite,
return, return, Cant 6.13. And the Spirit and the Bride say, come: And let him
that hears say, come: and let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life freely; Revel. 22.17. by coming to Mount
Sion, and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels: to the general assembly and Church of the
first borne which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, Heb. 12.22.23.24. before he come to them as a terrible Judge,
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8. And that they may all do so, especially the Kingdom
of England, and most especially the most excellent King thereof; Strike, o
strike their and his soul, (O Lord) with thy omnipotent grace, whose
magnetique virtue may draw his Royal heart to thee, and make him a glorious
and happy instrument of drawing others, till they all meet in the unity of the
faith; so to continue, until their mortality shall put on immortality, and his
temporal crown of thorns be exchanged for an eternal crown of glory, Amen.

FINIS.
S. Ambr. Ep. 31. ad Valent. Imp. Non erubesco cum toto orb longaevo converti,
verum certe est, quia nulla aetas ad perdiscendum sera est. Erubescat senectus,
quae emendare se non potest. Non annorum canities est laudanda, sed morum.
Nullus pudor est ad meliora transire.


A Table of the Contents of the several Chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. THe Introduction; And that the knowledge of the means to arrive unto
eternal life, is not otherwise attaineable then by faith, grounded on the Word
of God. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the means to know which is the Word of God; And
that all the arguments employed by Protestants to prove that the Scripture (and
it only) is the Word of God, are insufficient; And that the General Tradition
of the Catholic Church, is the only assured proof thereof. p. 6. Chap. 3. Of
the insufficiency of means used by Protestants to find out the true sense of
Scripture. The absurdity of that assertion of theirs, That all points necessary
to salvation are clear and manifest. p. 26. Chap. 4. Of the vanity and impiety
of those, who affirm that each man's particular reason is the last Judge and
interpreter of Scripture, and his guide in all things which he is obliged to
believe and know. And that the Catholic Church is the only Judge. p. 36.
Chap. 5. Of the meaning of those words Church and Catholic, and that neither
of them belong to Protestants. p. 49. Chap. 6. Of the Infallibility of the
Church. p. 54. Chap. 7. That Catholic Tradition is the only firm foundation
and motive to induce us to believe, that the Apostles received their Doctrine
from Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ from God the Father. And what are the means
by which this Doctrine is derived down to us. p. 66. Chap. 8. That the Church
is infallible in whatsoever she proposes as the Word of God written, or
unwritten, whether of great or small consequence. That to doubt of any one
point is to destroy the foundation of Faith. And that Protestants distinction
between points fundamental and non-fundamentall is ridiculous and deceitful.
p. 78. Chap' 9. That there is and ever shall be a visible Church upon earth.
And that this Church is one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic. p. 94. Chap. 10.
That the Roman is that one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. p. 105.
Chap. 11. That the true Church may be known by evident marks, and that such
marks agree only to the Roman Church. And first of Universality, the first mark
of the Church. p. 137. Chap. 12. Of the second mark of the Church, viz.
Antiquity, both of persons and Doctrine. p. 151. Chap. 13. Of Visibility, the
third mark of the Church. And of the vanity of Protestants supposition, that
the true Church is sometimes invisible. That Protestant Churches have not
always been visible. p. 188. Chap. 14. Of the fourth mark of the true Church,
viz. a lawful succession, and ordinary vocation and mission of Pastors. And
that it is ridiculous to affirm that Catholics and Protestants are the same
Church. p. 208. Chap. 15. Of the fifth Mark of the true Church, viz. Unity in
Doctrine, and of the horrible dissentions among Pretestants. p. 216. Chap. 16.
Of the sixth Mark of the true Church, viz. Miracles. And that there are no true
Miracles among Protestants. p. 240. Chap. 17. Of the seventh Mark of the true
Church, viz. Conversion of Kingdoms and Monarchs. p. 254 Chap. 18. Of the
eighth and ninth Marks of the true Church, viz. Sanctity of Doctrine and life.
p. 260. Chap. 19. Of the tenth and last (here mentioned) Mark of the Church,
viz. That the true Church has never been separated from any society of
Christians more ancient then her felf. p. 276. Chap. 20. That the Pope is the
head of the Church. p. 281. Chap. 21. That English Protestants do much mistake
Catholic Doctrine, being abused by the malice or ignorance of many of their
Ministers. And that upon their own grounds they are obliged to inform
themselves more exactly of the truth. p. 297. (Chap. 22.) Of Communion in one
kind. (p. 331.) (Chap. 23.) Of the Liturgy and private prayers for the
ignorant in an unknown tongue. (p. 351.) Chap. 22. Of the foolish, deceitful
and absurd proceedings and behavior of Protestants in matter of Religion. And
of the vanity and injustice of their pretext of conscience, for their
separation from the Roman Church. p. 336 Chap. 23. The Conclusion; wherein is
represented on the one side the splendour and orderly composure of the Roman
Catholic Church: And on the other side, the deformity and confusion of
Protestant Congregations. p. 362.
The faults made by the Printer, I desire the Reader thus to correct.
Page 21. line 1. dele. 5. p. 37. l. 2. r. tittle. p. 47. l. 25 r. faith. p.
61. l. 18. dele come. p. 71. l 19. r. dangerous. p. 85. l. 14. and 15. r.
ununiversall. p. 140. l. 24. r. Psalm: 2.8. p. 147 l. 3. r. became. and l. 17.
r. man. p. 165. l. 9. r. intermingled. p. 168. l. 11. r. unexpressible. p. 188.
l. 23. r. to a City. p. 199. l. 9. r. tittle. p. 201. l. 21. r. one. p. 208. l.
22. r. all meet. p. 210. l. 4. dele ought, and r. accusing. p. 221. l. 13. r.
call. p. 261. l. 17. r. of hell. and l. 25. r. in our. p. 276. l. 23. r.
different. p. 290. l. 2. r. say of. and l. 12. r. pillar of. p. 293. l. 8. r.
denying them. p. 292. l. 18. r. Bishop, p. 307. l. 12. r. as his. p. 341. l.
15. r. consequentiae. p. (358.) l. 12. r. done in. p. 358. l. 14. r. to this.
p. 367. l. 15. dele in. p. 368. l. 5. r. Union

Postscript. The French Printer to the English Reader.
WHilst this piece (so generally and deservedly liked and applauded both in the
English Original, and in the French Version) was reprinting here at Paris, the
learned Author (returning hither from Rome in the very nick of time) has
thought fit to add a Preface and two new Chapters to it, the first, Of
Communion in one kind; the other, Of praying in an unknown tongue; both no
less requisite, then abundantly satisfactory; So that I make no question, but
the contentment and benefit you will receive thereby, will easily reconcile you
as well to the misnumbring of some Chapters and pages, occasioned by the
Addition, as to some other Errata's, for which my ignorance in your language
craves the benefit of a pardon.

Adieu.

