P. VIRGILIUS MARO.

THE WORKS OF PUBLIUS VIRGILIUS MARO.
Translated by JOHN OGILBY.

Will: Marshall sculpsit. 1649.


THE WORKS OF PUBLIUS VIRGILIVS MARO.

Translated by JOHN OGILBY.

Claud. de bell. Get. and in Alethium. Respice judicium quam grave Musa subis!
Nec tua securum te, Maro, fama vehit.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Crook. 1649.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, My very good Lord, WILLIAM Marquisse and Earl of
Hartford, Vicount Beauchamp, and Lord Seymour.
My Lord,
IT has been the custom of the most knowing men, to dedicate their Labors to
Persons of that quality, from whom with justice they might expect both
protection and honor. Our Nation has not been unfruitful of such, with some
difference of degrees, though at present under a cloud: and it cannot be
thought flattery while I make my humble address to your Lordship, my ambition
enjoys the best; since You are not only descended from Sceptered Ancestors,
(from whose influence I may derive a modest security) but endowed with those
abilities of Judgment and Science, to know, and place an exemplary value upon
Dedications of this nature. So that I may take up that of the famous Lyrick in
my just application to your Lordship:

Maecenas atavis edite Regibus, O and praesidium, and dulce decus meum. And
that it might not be thought a stain to so great a Patron, I have presurned
(which is the second part of my bold undertaking) to wait on your Honor with
no less then the Prince of Latin Poets; though in relation to my self, I call
it but the shadow, and cold resemblance of Virgil. And although this
Translation (for it is hard to render weight for weight, and measure for
measure) may relish more of Thrace then Greece, having been bred in phlegmatic
Regions, and among people returning to their ancient barbarity; And that our
English Wool may seem but an unworthy habit for that Muse, which from her
conception was adorned with all the gold and spoils of Italy, the most
glorious Mistress of the world: Yet if your Lordship shall be pleased to smile
upon the dress she now wears, it may live to be be received (when time shall
ripen more ornament of Sculpture and Annotations) with none of the meanest
attempts of this nature; And the Translator though unworthy, encouraged by Your
gracious acceptance, shall most gratefully acknowledge himself,

My Lord, The most humble Honourer of Your Name and Virtue, JOHN OGILBY.

Virgil's BVCOLICKS.
The first Eclog.
Tityrus.
THE ARGUMENT.
Sad Mclibaeus banished declares
Those miseries attend on civil Wars,
But happy Tityrus, the safe defense
People enjoy, under a settled Prince.
Tityrus. Melibaeus. Melibaeus. UNder the spreading Beech at ease from cares,
Thou Tityrus playst on slender reeds soft airs:
We, must our Land and pleasant fields forsake,
Our country fly: thou in cool shades do make
The woods fair Amaryllis to resound.

Tityrus. This peace from God we (Melibaeus) found,
(For he shall ever be my God) a soft
Lamb from our folds shall bathe his altars often:
He grants my herds to range, and what I will,
Thou see I play upon a rural quill.

Melibaeus. I envy not, but wonder the art so blessed
Since all with Sequestrations are oppressed:
Lo! I undone, away my Goats must drive,
And scarce I lead, O Tityrus! this alive.
For among thick hazels th'hope of all my flock,
Ah! she has left upon a naked rock.
Often this mischance (had we not senseless been)
By Thunder-strucken oaks I had forseen,
And on the hollow elm, by th'ominous crow:
But who this God may be, pray let us know.

Tityrus. That city they call Rome, I did account
Fondly like this of ours, where Swains are wont
Yearly with care, to wean their tender lambs;
So I conceived whelps equal to their dams,
And judged that Kids were as their mothers, tall:
So used I great things to compare with small.
But she, 'bove other cities lifts her head,
As over the shrubs the lofty Cedars spread.

Melibaeus. What to see Rome did so thy journey haste?

Tityrus. Freedom, which looked on me, though mean, at last:
When first my downy chin the razor shaved,
She looked at last, and with her smile she saved.
When me first Amaryllis did possess,
And Galatea left; for I Will confess,
Whilst me that Galatea did enjoy,
My freedom lost, no stock I did employ.
Although my folds then many offerings spared,
And for the ungrateful city, I prepared
The richest cheese I could, yet never brought
My right hand home again with money fraught.

Milebaeus. I muse why Amaryllis Gods implored,
For whom she keeps her tree with apples stored.
Tityrus was absent, Tityrus the Pines,
For thee the fountains call, and tender Vines.

Tityrus. What should I do? thraldom I must not leave,
Nor could elsewhere, Gods so propitious have.
And here that shepherd first I saw, for whom
Twice six days annually our altars fume:
He answering first my suit said: Shepherds, now
Your cattle feed, and let your oxen plow.

Melibaeus. O happy man! since large enough for thee
Thou fields injoyst, though all thy pastures be
With stones, with plashie Fens, and rushes spread.
Not thy big femals, in strange commons fed
Shall suffer, nor sick cattle taint their bloods.
O happy man! here by the well-known floods,
And sacred fountains, thou fresh air shall take;
Then quick-sets, which our neighboring limits make,
Whose sallow flower Hyblaean Bees invade,
Often with soft murmurs shall to sleep persuade.
Then shall the Woodman under high rocks chant;
Nor thy delight, sad Stock-doves, shall thou want,
Nor turtles cease to groan from elmy bows.

Tityrus. In empty skies, first nimble Dear shall browse,
The Ocean leave his naked fish on shore;
The confines wandered of both lands before,
Parthians drink Arar, Germans Tygris taste,
That his Idaea shall forsake our breast.

Melibaeus. But we must go to thirsty Lybian Realms,
To Scythia or Oaxes chalkie streams,
And from the world divided, Britany.
Shall ever I again my Country see,
And my poor house, which I with turf did rear;
My seats admiring after many a year?
Shall th impious Soldier have this new plowed fields?
Barbarians reap this corn? What discord yields,
See Wretched Citizens, See, for whom we plow:
Set Pears, Melibaeus, and plant Vineyards now.
Farewell my Goats, farewell once happy flock.
I stretched on verdant banks you on a rock
No more shall see hang on the shrubby top:
Nor Verses sing, nor fed by me to crop
Sharp sallows, and the spreading Cythisus.

Tityrus. But here this night you may repose with us
In this green bower; here are ripe Apples, we
Soft Chestnuts have, and store of curds there be:
The Villages do smoke, and from the tall
Mountains far off, now larger shadows fall.

The second Eclog.
Alexis.
THE ARGUMENT.
Coridon means how learned men are bent
To honor those of place and high descent:
But often they like to Alexis prove,
And nothing but disdin return for love.
POor Coridon for fair Alexis burns,
Joy of his Lord, nor hopes for love-returns.
But yet he daily came, where a cool shade
The spreading tops of the tall Beeches made:
And there in these unpolished lines alone
In vain to Woods, and Mountains makes his moan.
Cruel Alexis does my Verse disdain,
And without pity me with scorn has slain.
The cattle now in cooling shades abide,
And speckled Lizarrds in the bushes hide;
And Thestylis, for Reapers, tired with heat,
With strong herbs Betony does, and Garlic beat:
Whilst I am seeking where thou may be found
Amongst the shrubs the Grasshoppers resound.
Were it not better that I should have born
Proud Amaryllis wrath, and haughty scorn?
Were it not better for Menalcas smart,
Though he is brown, and thou so beauteous art?
Sweet youth, in beauty not such trust repose,
White Blossoms fall, when Blackberries are chose.
Scorned me, Alexis not desires to know,
How rich in flocks, and how my pailes oreflow:
My thousand lambs Sicilian mountains haunt,
Summer, nor Winter, milk I do not want.
Lung those notes which once Amphyon did,
Calling his Herds to Aracynthus meade:
Nor am I so deformed, late I beheld
My self in the calm sea, with winds unswel'd:
And were thou Judge, I should not Daphnis fear,
If any shadow true resemblance bear.
O that with me thou in these homely parts
And humble cotes would stay, and shoot swift Hearts;
There with a green wand drive the flocks of Goats,
Then in the grove we will imitate Pans notes.
Pan taught us join first many quills with wax,
Pan minds our sheep and masters of the flocks.
Nor shall thou ere repent this Pipe to use,
For which Amyntas nothing would refuse.
Composed with seven differing reeds I have
A Pipe, which once to me Dametas gave;
And dying said, this thee now second knows,
At which Amyntas fond, his envy shows.
Besides two K^ds I have, I lately found
As they were straying in a dangerous ground:
Their skins with white already dapled be,
Two Yews they suck; these I preserve for thee.
Which Thestylis would fain have got; and shall,
Since you our presents not regard at all.
Sweet youth draw near; for thee whole baskets full
The beauteous Nymphs of unstained Lillyes cull,
For thee fair Nais gathers Violets,
Tulips Narcissus, and sweet Poppy gets,
Blossoms of Annis joins, has intermixed
Cassia, with other pleasant flowers betwixt,
Soft Cowslips with bright Marigolds are decked,
I shall the tender wooll-skin'd Peach select,
And Chestnuts which my Amaryllis loved,
Damsons I Will add; this fruit shall be approved,
And you O Laurels cull, thou Myrtle next,
Because so placed your smell is best commix'd.
Coridon's rude, nor does Alexis grace
His gifts, nor to thee gives Iolas place.
What would thou wretch! I have let tempests spoil
My flowrs, and boars my crystal fountains soil.
Whom fly'st thou fond! the Gods have dwelt in bowers;
So Paris lived, let Pallas keep her towers;
But let cool Groves 'bove all things please us best.
Stern Lions, Wolves, Wolves have the Goat in quest,
The wanton Goat fresh Cythisus invites,
Thou me, each one persues his own delights.
Behold they now unyoak the weary Steer,
And the Sun setting, larger shades appear;
Still love burns me, there is no mean in love,
Ah Corydon, what madness does thee move?
On the green Elm hangs my half-pruned Vine,
But rather now, some needful task design,
Prepare soft twigs, the limber Bullrush wind,
And if Alexis scorn, some other find.
The third Eclog.
Palaemon.
THE ARGUMENT.
These Swains present, how virtue and the arts
Still emulation breed in men of parts.
But grave Palaemon does their passions calm,
Both praising, yet to neither gives the Palm.
Menalcas. Dametas. Palaemon. Menalcas. ARe these, Dametas, Melibaeus sheep?

Dametas. No: Damon's, for he gave them me to keep.

Menalcas. Still hapless flocks, whilst that Neaera he
Courts, fondly jealous better she loves me.
For twice this stranger hourly drains the Dams,
Robbing the Ewes of strength, of milk the Lambs.

Dametas. Henceforth such crimes more sparingly object,
We know what you did, if we would detect,
And how the He-Goats vexed lookd on the while,
And in what place; but the easy Nymphs did smile.

Menalcas. Sure 'twas when I in Mycon's ground was took
Pruning his Vines with an unwelcome hook.

Dametas. Or when you Daphnis Bow and arrows brake,
At the old Beech, which thou so ill did take
To see bestowd upon the boy from thee.
For could thou not do mischief, thou would die.

Menalcas. What will not Masters, when the servants dare
So bold attempts as these? when thou did snare
Poor Damons Goat, vilde Swain, did I not mark,
Though all the while at thee his Dog did bark?
And when I cride, Hold thief, where does he rush?
Swain, count thy Goats, thou skulk'st behind a bush.

Dametas. Vanquished in singing why should he refuse,
To pay the Goat, won by my Pipe, and Muse!
That Goat (if you must know) was mine, no less
Damon who could not pay it, did confess.

Menaclas. Thou him in singing? had thou ever yet
A Pipe with wax conjoined, did thou not sit
In high ways, thou lewd Piper, and there use,
On hissing quils to spoil a wretched Muse?

Dametas. The skill that either has, let us now try;
I Will lay this Heifer (lest thou should deny)
Twice she to milking comes, and at her teats
Two Calves she feeds; then say, what are thy beats.

Menalcas. I dare not from my flock a wager lay;
I have a sire and step-dame, twice a day
Both tell the sheep; the Goats another counts.
What you shall grant, thy Heifer far surmounts,
(Since thou art pleased to rant) beech Cups I will
Stake down, carved by divine Alcymidons skill.
On which with a smooth turn soft Vines he shapes,
And with pale Ivy clothes the spreading Grapes.
Amidst two signs, Conon-who's the other then?
He with his Art describes Earth's Globe to men;
What time the Plow-men, and the Reapers have,
Which yet my lips never touched, but clean I save.

Dametas. Also for us two Cups Alcymidon made,
The handles round with bright Acanthus laid,
Orpheus amid'st, and following woods they have,
Which yet my lips never touched, but clean I save.
But if that well my Heifer thou do weigh,
In thy Cups praise so much thou would not say.

Menalcas. Thou shall not escape, I Will meet where thou dare please,
Call when you will; let him be Judge of these
That next we meet; Palaemon see before,
I Will make thee that thou never shall challenge more.

Dametas. Say what thou have, in me is no delay,
Nor shun I any; friend Palaemon stay,
No trifle's laid, thy best attention fit.

Palaemon. Begin, since now on the soft grass we sit,
Now every field, all trees now fruitful are,
Now flourish Groves, the season is most fair.
Dametas first, Menalcas next rehearse,
For still the Muses love alternate verse.

Dametas. With Jove begin, all things are full of Jove,
He Swains regards, and does my Verses love.

Menalcas. And Phoebus me, and I have for him still
His own fresh bay, and blushing daffadill.

Dametas. Me Galatea would with Apples win,
Then flies to shades, but strives first to be seen.

Menalcas. My flame Amyntas courts me often alone,
Nor to our dogs is Delia better known.

Dametas. Gifts for my love I have, and by my search
I know the place where her swift Pigeons perch.

Menalcas. Such as I had, red Apples half a score
The youth I sent, to morrow I le send more.

Dametas. What words to us did Galatea say,
You winds a part unto the Gods convey.

Menalcas. That thou not scorn'st me, am I better yet;
If whilst thou hunt'st wild Boars I keep the net?

Dametas. Phyllis Iolas send, my birthday it is,
Thy self come, when for fruit I sacrifice.

Menalcas. Her I loved best, for tears she parting shed,
And long farewell, farewell, fair Iolas said.

Dametas. Stern Wolves the Stals, winds trees, ripe fruit the showers,
Me Amaryllis ruins, if she lowrs.

Menalcas. Soft dew the corn, low shrubs the weaned kids,
Small sallow Goats, but me Amyntas feeds.

Dametas. Pollio, though she be rustic, loves our muse:
A Calfe you Muses, for your reader choose.

Menalcas. Pollio makes verses, let a Bull be fed
That strikes with bornes, with feet the sand does spread.

Dametas. To joys like thine, who loves thee Pollio come,
For him flows honey, thorns bear Amomum.

Menalcas. Who hates not Bavius, may love Maevius notes,
The same may Foxes join, and milk he Goats.

Dametas. Fly, who cull flowers and earth-born strawberies,
For in the grass a cold Snake hidden lies.

Menalcas. Lead home the Ewes, least heat their milk detain,
And you as lately press the teat in vain.

Dametas. How poor my Bull is in a fertile field?
One love, the herd, and the herds Lord has killed.

Menalcas. Sure love is not the cause, see how they show!
Nor what eye witch't my tender Lambs I know.

Dametas. Say, (and my great Apollo be) what shore
The Sky extends three fathomes, and no more.

Menalcas. Say in what Land, the names of Princes sign
The springing flowrs, and Phyllis shall be thine.

Palamon. It Is not in us this difference to compose,
You both deserve the praise, and each, who knows
Or fears sweet love, or has the bitter tried.
Swains shut your Springs, the Meads are satisfi'de.

The fourth Eclog.
Pollio.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here Sibill is appli'de to Pollio's son,
Her Prophesies his Gnethliacon,
But Christ's birth he by happy error sings.
The Prince of Poets crowns the King of Kings.
SIcilian Muses, sing we one note higher,
All like not tamarisk nor the humble brier:
If Woods we sing, Woods worthy Consuls be,
Last times are come, Cumea's Prophecy,
And times great order now again is borne,
The maid returns, Saturnian Realms return:
Now from high Heaven springs a new Progeny:
To the infant chaste Lucina favoring be,
Who ending iron ages, through all Lands
Shall golden plant: thy Phoebus now commands.
Thou child being Consul, Pollio shall possess
This Fame of the Age, great months themselves address;
If any prints of our old vice remained,
By thee they r void, and fear shall leave the Land.
He a Gods life shall take, with Gods shall see
Mixed Heroes, and himself their object be.
Rule with paternal power the appeased earth,
Which shall to thee (sweet child) undrest, bring forth,
Berries, wild Ivy, and shall pay first fruits
Of mixed Acanthus, with Egyptian roots
The Goats themselves shall home full udders bear,
Nor shall the herds the mighty Lions fear.
Flowers shall thy cradle sprout, the Serpent shall
And the deceitful herb of venom, fall;
In each place Roses of Assyria grow.
As soon as thou the Heroes fame shall know,
And thy Sires acts, virtue thy self attain,
The fields shall mellow wax with golden grain:
The blushing Grape shall hang on thorns unset,
And boystrous Oak, with dewy honey sweat.
Some steps of ancient fraud shall yet be found,
Thetis to tempt with ships, and to surround
Cities with walls, bids earth in furrows tear,
A second Typhis, a new Argo bear
Choice Heroes, and another war, employ
Again a great Achilles sent to Troy.
Here when full years shall make thee perfect man,
The Saylor shall forsake the Ocean,
Nor Navigable Pines shall trafick ware:
But each part of the world shall all things bear.
Nor Earth feel harrows, nor the Vine the hook,
Nor shall his Steers, the rustic tiller yoke;
Nor Wool with various colors shall deceive,
But in the medows Rams shall skarlet have,
And changing sometimes golden fleeces wear,
And feeding Lambs, shall native purple bear.
The Fates conspiring with eternal dome
Said to their Spindle, Let such ages come.
Attempt great honors, for the time draws near,
Dear race of Gods, great stock of Jupiter,
Behold! the world shakes on its pondrous axe,
See, earth and heavens immense and The Ocean tracts,
How all things at the approaching age rejoice!
Oh that my life would last so long, and voice,
As would suffice thy actions to rehearse:
Not Orpheus then shall vanquish me in Verse,
Nor Linus, though their parents present be;
Phoebus got this, and that Calliope.
Should Pan with me strive by Arcadias dome,
Although a God, Pan should be overcome.
Begin sweet child, with smiles thy mother know,
Who ten long months did with thy burden go.
Sweet child begin, cheered by no parents look,
To 's board no God, to her bed no goddess took.
The fifth Eclog.
Daphnis.
THE ARGUMENT.
Since Kings as common Fathers cherish all,
Subjects like children should lament their fall;
But learned men of grief should have more sense,
When violent death seizes a gracious Prince.
Menalcas. Mopsus. Menalcas. MAy we not Mopsus (both being skillful, met,
Thou on small Pipes to play, I verse repeat)
Here amongst Elms commix'd with hazels sit?

Mopsus. Thou eldest art, whom me to obey is fit.
Whether to trembling shades light Zephyrs wave
We go, or take some Grot; See, how you Cave
Has from wild spreading Vines a Canopie.

Menalcas. In our hills only Amyntas strive with thee.

Mopsus. What if t'excell Phoebus in song he aims?

Menalcas. Say Mopsus, if thou have, or Phyllis flames,
Or Alcons praise, or Codrus brawles begin:
And Tityrus shall thy feeding Kids keep in.

Mopsus. I le try those strains on the green Beech I wrote,
And with alternate change did warbling note.
Then boldly bid Amyntas strive with me.

Menalcas. As the bright Olive stains the sallow tree,
As blushing Roses humble Lavender,
So thee before Amyntas we prefer.
Dear Swain, no more, here is the caves descent.

Mopsus. The Nymphs lost Daphnis funeral did lament,
Witness you Hazels, Nymphs, and purling streams;
When the sad mother raiz'd the mangled limbs
Of her dear son, Gods, stars, she cruel calls.
Not any then oh Daphnis! from their stalls
The Cattle drove to cooling Springs, the flood
No herd did taste, nor touched sweet grass for food.
Rough hills, and Groves, with echoes did resound
Daphnis thy death, and Lybian Lions gron'de:
Daphnis Armenian Tigers first conjoined
In's Chariot, and to Bacchus rites designed:
Did trembling Spears with gentle leaves combine.
As Vines the woods adorn, as Grapes the Vine,
As Males the herds, as Corn the fertile field:
Thou thine did grace: when thou to Fates did yield,
Both Pales and Apollo left our plain.
In furrows where we often sowed largest grain,
Sad darnell, and wild Oats o'respread, and where
Purple Narcissus, and soft Violets were,
The Thistle and rough prickling brambles spring.
Swains strew fresh boughs, shades to your Fountains bring,
Such honors Daphnis for himself did doom,
His Monument rear, and this write on his Tomb.
I Daphnis known in woods unto the Sky,
Kept a fair Flock, and yet more fair was I.

Menalcas. O divine Poet! such thy Verse to me,
As to the tired, in grass sweet slumbers be,
Cool streams in heat the thirsty so rejoice;
Thou, both the Pipe do match, and Masters voice.
O happy Swain! thou shall his second be,
Our song what ere it is, I shall to thee
Begin, and to the Stars thy Daphnis bear:
Daphnis loved us, Daphnis to heaven we will rear.

Mopsus. What gift more welcome unto us? the Swain
Was worthy to be sung, and every strain
Stymichon lately did to us approve.

Menalcas. Fair Daphnis wonders at strange courts above,
Who clouds, and stars beneath his feet beheld,
Joy ravished Pan, the woods, and every field,
The Shepherds, and the virgin Dryades.
No Wolf laid wait for sheep, no nets to seize
By craft the Dear, good Daphnis peace did love.
The unshorn hills glad echoes raise above
The highest Stars, Rocks in a cheerful Ode,
And shrubs Menalcas sound, the God, the God.
Be good and blessed to thine; four Altars see,
For Daphnis two, and Phoebus two for thee.
Two Bowls with new milk frothing yearly we,
And with the fat of Olives, two decree.
Rejoicing feasts with plenteous Bacchus made,
If cold, with lusty fire, if hot, in shade.
Arrissian Wine, brisk Nectar I shall bring.
To me Dametas shall, and Aegon sing,
And Satyr like Alphisiboeus Dance.
These shall be ever thine; and when w'advance
Our rites to Nymphs, fields purge with th'annuall rite.
Whilst Boars on hills, whilst fish in streams delight,
Grasshoppers dew, and Thyme the bees repast,
So long thy honor, name, and praise shall last.
As Swains to Bacchus, and to Ceres pay
Their yearly vows, so they to thee shall pray.

Mopsus. Now for such Verse, what present shall I find?
Not murmurs of the approaching Southern wind,
Nor waves more please, when they the shores assail;
Nor water gliding through a stony vale.

Menalcas. This slender Pipe we give, our love returns,
This Corydon for fair Alexis burns.
To this I sung, These Melibaeus sheep.

Mopsus. Take thou this book which hardly I could keep,
From dear Antigines who well deserved,
Which is with brass (Menalcas) neatly carved.

The sixth Eclog.
Silenus.
THE ARGUMENT.
Those Sects which promise sensual delights,
Soonest infect, and gain most Proselytes;
But often those Tenets which are held divine,
Rise from full bellies, and heads charged with Wine.
FIrst our Thalia chanted rural strains
In Verse, nor she to dwell in woods disdains.
Phoebus, when I did sing of Kings, and war,
Said, Tityrus. And nip'd me by the ear;
Shepherds should feed their flocks, and tune soft lays.
Now I (for thou O Varus, and thy praise
Others shall strive to sing, and wars rehearse)
On slender Reeds shall tune an humble verse.
I chant not things forbid; if struck with love
Any shall read, the shrubs, and every Grove
Shall sing thee Varus; what can more engage
Phoebus, then thy name on the title page?
Say Muses; Chromis, Mnasylus, beheld
Stretched in a Cave Sylenus sleeping, swelled
With last nights Bacchus, as his usual guise;
Far off, fallen from his head his garland lies,
On a worn handle, his great bottle hung. --
They went (for when the old man should have sung
He mocked their hopes) and with his own Chaplets bound.
With them joined Aegle, whom she timorous found:
Aegle the fairest Nymph; this fraud he spies,
VVhil'sts she with Mulberies his temples dies,
And smiling said, why bind you me? let go;
It is enough that you have seen me so,
My promised Verses take, they now are done;
Her otherwise Il' please, then thus begun.
Then thou might see wild beasts, and fauns advance
Sporting in troops, and the tall Oaks to dance.
Nor so in Phoebus, joy Parnassus spires,
Nor Ismare, Rodophe, Orpheus so admires.
For he sung how collected seeds did come
Of Earth, Air, Sea, through the huge vacuum,
And glittering fire: how all things first commenced
From these, and the worlds tender Orb condensed:
Then Earth grevv hard, and Nereus did exclude,
And by degrees the forms of things indu'd.
That a new Sun did shine, the Lands admire,
And showrs to fall from Clouds now mounted higher:
When first the sprouting vvoods began to appear,
And beasts in unknown hills, grazed here and there;
Next Saturn's reign, and stones that Pyrrha flung,
Caucasus foul, Prometheus theft, he sung:
Adds Hylas lost, where Sailors near the Spring
Call Hylas, Hylas, till the shores did ring.
And with a white Bulls love did please the Queen
Pasiphae, happy, if no herds had been.
Poor Virgin, why did thou to folly yield?
And Pretides launs, with fained lowings filled;
Yet such foul lust, not any of the herd:
Persu'd, although their necks the yoke had feared.
And often had horns sought in their tender brow.
Ah miserable, in vvoods thou wander'st now,
His snowie side upon soft Daffadils laid,
Chevving the Cud, under an oken shade:
Or woe's some other in the ample drove.
Shut Nymphs, Dictaean Nymphs, shut close your Grove,
If any tracts as he shall wandering pass
By chance we find, or took with verdant grass,
Or following Cattle, other Heifers call,
And they entice him to Gortinas stall.
Next, her pleased with Hesperian fruit he shows,
Then Phaeton's sisters, whom sour moss enclose,
And from the Earth the lofty Aldar brings.
And Gallus wandering by Permessus springs.
How him a Muse led to the Aonian top,
And how to the man, Phoebus whole Quire stood up.
In divine Verse how Linus these expressed;
His hair with flovvres, and bitter Apium dressed.
These Pipes the Muses give thee, take, behold!
These ancient Hesiods vvear, with which, he could
Singing, wild ashes from the Mountains move:
With these thou may describe Apollo's Grove:
Lest Phoebus should in any woods more pride.
What shall I say of Scylla? whose white side,
(As Fame reports) with barking Monsters bound,
Vexing Dulichian ships; ah! in that sound
She trembling Sailors with her Sea-hounds tears.
And Tereus limbs transformed, he next declares,
Philomels bankets, and what gifts she brought,
And with what speed, she wretched, deserts sought,
And with what wings once over her Court she flew,
He sung all these, which blessed Eurotas knevv
From Phoebus once: and bids the Laurel sing.
And to the stars the Vales with echoe ring.
Till night bid house their flocks, their numbers tell,
And from unwilling skies the evening fell.
The seventh Eclog.
Melibaeus.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Vulgar like the worst, and make their choice
Not from best Language, but the loudest voice:
And often those men get fame, and win the prize,
Who guard with boldness weak abilities.
Corydon. Thyrsis. AS Daphnis sat under a murmuring Oak,
Thyrsis, and Corydon drove on the flock.
Sheep Thyrsis, Corydon milch Goats did bring:
Arcadians both, in youth both flourishing,
Both matched to sing, to answer both prepared.
Here whilst soft myrtle me from cold did guard,
The Goat chief of the flock strai'd; and I spide
Daphnis, when he beheld me, straight he cride,
Melibe, here, safe is thy Goat, and Kids;
Rest in this shade, if no affair forbids,
The herds themselves to drink here, pass the Meads,
Green Mincius here with soft reeds Couches spreads,
Now from the sacred Oak the svvarms resound.
What should I do? no maid was to be found,
That carefully my new weaned Lambs should watch:
When Corydon and Thyrsis sung their match.
Yet for the sport my business I laid by,
Then, both in Verse strove for the victory;
The Muse their parts alternate did divide,
These Corydon sung, and Thyrsis thus replide.
Corydon. You Fountain- Nymphs, our love, or grant me Verse,
As once to Codrus, who did strains rehearse
Like Phoebus; but, if such can not be mine,
This Pipe shall hang upon the sacred Pine.

Thyrsis. Your rising Poet crown Arcadian Svvaines
With Ivy, and let spite burst Codrus veins,
Or if he will praise too much, let beries arm
My brows, lest an ill tongue your Poet harm.

Corydon. A Boars head Delia, Mycon does impart
To thee, and large horns of a long-lived heart.
Thy Statue shall be in fine Marble placed,
If this thou grant, with purple buskins graced.

Thyrisis. Priapus, only Cream and Cakes expect
Yearly, thou our poor Orchards do protect,
We for a time, thee but in Marble mould:
But if our flocks increase, thou shall be gold.

Corydon. Galate me does more then Thyme delight,
Bright Ivy not so fair, nor Swans more white,
When the fed Cattle first to stals repair;
Come, if thou have of Corydon a care.

Thyrsis. I bitterer to thee then Sardan grass,
More rough then broom shall seem, then Owse more base,
If this day shows not longer then whole years,
Go, if you' have any shame, go home, fed steers.

Corydon. You mossie Springs, and grass more soft then sleep,
And verdant boughs, which you with shadows keep,
In summer save my flocks, great heat comes now,
And pregnant Crapes swell on the glad some bough.

Thyrsis. A hearth, fat Pyne, nor ample fire we lack,
With daily smoke, our Chimney pieces black:
The cold of Boreas here we fear no more,
Then Wolves our Cattle, or fierce streams the shore.

Corydon. Here Junipers and downie Chestnuts be,
And tempting Apples under every tree.
All things now smile, but if Alexis fly
Our Mountains, thou shall see the rivers dry.

Thyrsis. In scorched fields the air infected herbage kills,
Bacchus his viney shade denies the hills:
When Phyllis comes all shall wax green again,
And Jove descend in joyful showers of rain.

Corydon. Alcides Poplar, Bacchus Vines does grace,
Fair Venus Myrtle, and Apollo Baies,
Phyllis loves hazels, if she these allow,
Myrtle and Laurel both to hazels bow.

Thyrsis. The Ash in woods, in Orchards Pines are fair,
Poplar in streams, Firrs in high Mountains are;
But if fair Lycida often thou visit me,
The lofty Ash and Pine shall bow to thee.

Melibaeus. These I record, and Thyrsis vanquished, thus
From that time Corydon, Corydon for us.

The eight Eclog.
Pharmaceutria.
THE ARGUMENT.
Nothing can ease the pangs of cruel love,
Though a base object do the fancy move,
And when they feel the power of Cupids Dart,
They will not stick to use the blackest Art.
Damou. Alphesibus. ALphesibe, and Damons Muse we sing,
At whose contention young steers wondering
Forgot to feed, Lynces their verse amaze,
And in his course the flowing River stays.
Alphesibe and Damons Muse we sing.
Whether thou pass by great Tymavus Spring,
Or cut Illyrian waves. Shall once the day
Appear, when I thy victories shall display?
It shall; and I thy praise through earth rehearse,
Fit onl y for a Sophoclean verse.
These sprung from thee, in thee must end. Take lays
Begun by thy Commands; among conquering bays
Suffer this Ivy round thy brows to spread.
Scarce nights cold shadows from the sky were fled;
When dew the herds delight, had pearl'd the Mead,
On a smooth Olive, leaning, Damon said.
Damon. Lucifer rise, usher the joyful day,
Whilst I complain, me Nisa does betray
With fained love, and yet at my last hour,
The Gods (who knew I gained not) I implore,
And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains.
Menalus never wanted murmuring Groves,
And whispering pines, it always heard the loves
Of passionate shepherds, and great Pan who still,
Suffered not Svvaines to have an idle quill.
And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains.
Mopsus has Nisa: Then all love may speed,
And now winged Griphins may with horses breed;
And timorous Deer in follovving times be found,
Fearless to water with the cruel hound.
Mopsus new torches cut, now thou art wed,
Strevv nuts, for thy sake Hesper goes to bed.
And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains.
Oh nobly matched, whilst thou did all despise,
My Pipes and Goats not pleasing in thy eyes,
My hairie eye brows, and my unshorne beard,
Nor think that any God for mortals cared.
And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains.
I, thee a little one, with thy mother found
Once gathering mellovv apples in our ground;
I was your guide, at twelve years from my birth,
And then could slender boughs reach from the earth,
Soon as I saw, as soon I perished,
Alas, how great an error me misled!
And now my Pipe begin Menalean strains.
Now Love I know, Ismarus him has fed,
Or Rodophe, or farthest Afrique bred,
Among wild forsaken Rocks, those places could
Produce no offspring of our stock, or blood.
And now my pipes begin Menalean strains.
Dire Love a mother taught, her hand to imbrue
In her sons blood, thou a stern mother too;
Has she more rage, or the boy less desert?
He Is stubborn, and thou cruel mother art.
And now my pipes begin Menalean strains.
Let wolves now naturally avoid our flocks,
And golden Apples grow on stubborn Oaks;
From the base Eldar sprout the daffadill,
And Amber from lovv Tamarisk distill;
Owls strive with Swans, let Tityrus Orpheus be,
Orpheus in woods, Arion on the sea:
And now my pipes begin Menalean strains.
Let all parts now be sea, farewell you woods,
From aerie hills, I Will leap into the floods,
T'accept a dying man's last present daine.
Leave pipes, leave off now, the Menalcan strain.
Thus Damon: what Alphesibe answered, you
Muses relate! all cannot all things do.
Bring water, with fost wreaths the Altars dress,
Rich Gumms, and juicy vervain sacrifice,
That I my love with Magic may disarme
Of his disdain; there only wants a Charm.
My Verse bring from the Town, bring Daphnis home.
Charms can command the Moon down from the sky;
Circes Charms changed Ulysses company:
A frozen Snake being charm d, burst in the meads.
I walk around with these three several threads,
Bout th Altars thrice I shall thy Image bear;
Od numbers to the God delightful are.
Bring from the Town my verse, bring Daphnis home.
Knots Amaryllis tie, of colors three,
Then say these chains I knit, for Venus be.
Bring from the Town my verse, bring Daphnis home.
As with one fire this clay does harder prove,
This wax more soft. So Daphnis with our love,
Break Cakes, fire Laurel with a sacred blaze,
Daphnis burns me, for him I Will burn this bays.
Bring from the Town my verse, bring Daphnis home.
So Daphnis as a wearied Heifer loves,
Seeking a steer in woods, and shadie Groves,
She near a stream laid on green siege does mourn,
And when night calls, regards not to return.
So Daphnis loves, and I his cure not mind:
He once a pledge his garments left behind.
Which now in th'entrance, Earth, I give to thee,
This pledge for Daphnis is engaged to me.
Bring from the town my verse, bring Daphnis home.
Moeris for me these herbs in Pontus chose,
And curious drugs, for there great plenty grows.
I many times with these have Maeris spide,
Changed to a wolf, and in the woods to hide.
Bring from the town, my verse, bring Daphnis home.
Bear th'ashes Amaryllis forth, and them
Cast over thy head, into a running stream,
Nor look back. These for Daphnis I prepared,
For he does neither Gods, nor Charms regard.
Bring from the town, my verse, my Daphnis home.
See the ashes, of themselves on the Altars blaze,
Whilst I to bear them out did make delays.
I know not what it means; oh may it thrive;
And Hylax barks at door! Do we believe,
Or those who love, dreams to themselves still feign?
Now Charms forbear, Daphnis comes home again.
The ninth Eclog.
THE ARGUMENT
Best Princes Peace affect, and more delight
Their Subjects to preserve, then their own right;
But those who follow War no power can awe,
Swords make oppression just, and madness Law.
Lycidas. Moeris. Lycidas. MOEris, where go? to Town the common way?

Moeris. We Lycidas live to hear a stranger say
(Which we never thought) who now the fields does own,
These Lands are mine; you rustic Swains be gone.
Vanquished and sad, since chance swaies all things, we
Send him these Kids; may they unluckie be.

Lycidas. Truly I heard, where the hill begins to bend,
And with a gentle stooping to descend,
Toward the brook, where the old torn Beech does stand,
Menalcas by his song had all regained.

Moeris. Thou heardst, and so it was famed; but our verse proves
Against martial arms, as the Chaonian Doves
When the Eagle comes; If from the holl^^ tree,
The ominous Crow had not premonish'd me,
To cut off new debates, nor more to strive,
I, nor Menalcas had not been alive.

Lycidas. Alas! can any man so impious be?
Menalcas, all our Joys are lost with thee.
Who shall the Nymphs record? who with sweet flowrs,
Strew earth, and Springs surround with shadie bowrs?
Or who such verse I had from thee shall write,
When thou courtd st, Amaryllis our delight?
Tityrus, till I come, nor long I Will stay,
Feed thou my Goats, and having fed convey
To watering, and whilst they driving are,
Look how you meet the Goat, he will strike, beware.

Moeris. He sung to Varus this unpollish'd strain,
Varus thy name (if Mantua ours remain,
Mantua, (to sad Cremona, ah too nigh.)
Harmonious Swans shall carry to the sky.

Lycidas. So from the Cyrnean yewes thy bees retreat,
So Cythisus extends the Cowes full teat:
Begin if thou have ought; the muses me
A Poet made, and I can versifie;
And me a Poet too the Shepherds deem,
But I want confidence to credit them.
I Have naught worth Varus yet, or Cinnas choice,
But like a goose among Swans I make a noise.

Moeris. And so do I, and to my self rehearse,
(Could I remember) no unworthy verse.
Come hither Galate, what sport is there
Amongst the streams? the purple spring is here:
The Earth adorns the banks with every flower,
And silver Poplar hides this pleasant bower,
And tender vine-twigs weave into a shade.
Come hither, let wild floods the shores invade.

Lycidas. What wa'st I heard thee sing, the last fair night?
I have the tune, could I the words recite.

Moeris. O Daphnis why observ'st thou ancient signs,
Dionean Coesars star, behold, now shines:
The star, which fields with fruit, and gladness fills,
And coulors vines upon the sunnie hills.
Daphnis set pears, thy race shall fruit enjoy,
Age all things wastes: the mind too; I a boy
With song have often tired the summers sun,
Now all those strains are lost, and my voice gone;
A wolf saw Moeris first. Menalcas yet
At large to thee shall all those lines repeat.

Moeris. Thou by delays our longings do increase,
Through every field is spread a silent peace;
The air is still, the middle path is here;
And see now Bianors tomb begins t appear.
Here where the Shepherds have their bavins tide,
Moeris let us sing, and lay thy Kids aside:
Timely we will reach the town, and if we fear
The night should gather rain, ere we come there,
Singing lets go, the way shall better please:
That I may sing, thee of thy load Ile' ease.

Lycidas. Shepherd, no more, let us do what next remains,
When our chief comes we will fancy better strains.

The tenth Eclog.
Gallus.
THE ARGUMENT.
Both wise and valiant men often feel the flames
Of cruel love, and follow Wanton dames;
Yet scornful Ladies still this curse pursues,
To slight the better, and the worse to choose.
THis my last work, O Arethusa speed.
For Gallus, which Lycoris self might read,
Strains must be sung: who Gallus will deny?
So gliding under floods of Sicilie,
May not with thee, salt Doris mix her stream.
Begin, let Gallus sad love be our theme,
Whilst flat no'sd Goats shall crop the tender buds;
To deaf we sing not, answered by the woods.
In what woods were you Naiades, what Grove,
When Gallus perished, by unworthy love?
Parnassus tops, Pindus have not delaid,
Nor for you Aganippes fountain staid.
Laurels for him, and tamarisk tears did pay,
And Menalus whilst by a Rock he lay,
With cold Lycaus Clifts did him lament.
That sheep stand round us we do not repent;
Nor divine Poet do thou flocks contemn:
The fair Adonis fed sheep near the stream.
The shepherds come, and the dull herds-men haste,
And fat Menalcas flies from winter maste.
All ask whence sprung this love; Apollo came,
And said, what madness Gallus does inflame?
Thy dear Lycoris wanders through the snowes,
And through rough ways after another goes.
Sylvanus comes adorned with rural boughs,
Lillies, and fennel dangling on his brows.
Pan comes, Arcadia's God, whom we have spide,
With Synople, and blushing berries did;
Betwixt extremes is there no mean? he says,
Love has regard to no such things as these.
Not love with tears, nor grass with streams, nor bees
With thyme are satisfi'de, nor Goats with trees.
Pensive he said, O you Arcadians chant
About our hills, for you no cunning want.
Oh! then my ashes shall find peaceful rest,
When by your quill my passions are expressed.
I would with you a shepherds life were mine,
To follow sheep, or prune the swelling vine:
Then Phyllis, or Amyntas were mine own,
Or some love (though I grant, Amyntas brown,
Dark are the violets, so the bilberrie)
Would among soft vines and sallowes rest with me.
Phyllis should wreath me flowers, Amyn^as sing.
Lycoris, here are meads, here the cool spring,
Thou far from home. (I wish it were not so)
See without me, cold Rhine, and Alpine snow:
May thee no bleak winds, nor rough tempests meet,
Ah may no sharp ice wound thy tender feet.
I Will go and play in a Chalcidick strain,
My notes on reeds, of a Sicilian Swain.
Rather in Deserts I resolve to live,
And in the dens of savage beasts to grieve;
There on the tender barks to carve my love,
And as they grow so shall my hopes improve.
Mean while commixed with the Nymphs, I Will view
Menalus, or the cruel boar pursue:
Nor shall I be with hardest frosts withstood,
To set with dogs, round the Parthenian wood.
Through murmuring Groves, and rocks me thinks I go,
Pleased to shoot arrows, from a Parthian bow.
As if this were a medicine for our love,
Or by man's sufferings, Cupid milder prove,
Verses displease now, Muses in disgrace,
And now again, you shadie Groves give place.
Nor can our troubles work him to a change,
Should we drink Hebrus, in midwinter range
Amongst huge frosts, and Scythian snow; should we,
When on high elms the parched vines dying be.
The southern flocks, under hot Cancer move,
Love conquers all, let us give place to love.
Let this suffice your Poet to have said,
Whilst he a basket of fine bulrush made:
Muses, you shall great things for Gallus do,
Whose love to me as much does hourly grow,
As the green Alder shoots in the spring.
Let us arise; shades often hurt those who sing;
Juniper shades are to our fruit a foe,
The Evening comes, go home, my fed Kids, go.
THE FIRST BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS.
THE ARGUMENT.
What times are best to sow, what natures are
Of differing grounds; what industry and care.
What hurts the corn, the Plowmans several Rules:
Who musters up innumerable tools.
Who first the world with the art of tillage blessed.
Summer and winter Swains must take no rest.
Plowmen must learn the stars; which frost and snow,
Fair and foul weather, rain and winds foreshew,
Clashing of Nobles, tumults, and of late
Popular fury, and great Caesar's fate.
WHat makes rich grounds (Mecaenas:) in what signs
It Is best to plow, and marry elms with vines:
What care of sheep; with Cattle what agrees:
And how much skill belongs to frugall bees;
Now I shall sing. You glorious Lights, who bear
In your swift motion round the sliding year:
Bacchus, blessed Ceres, if from you we gain
For poor Chaonian acorns, golden grain;
And wine to enrich our watery cups: and you
Fauns, who to Swains your bounty still allow:
Together Fauns, and virgin Dryades come;
Your gifts I sing: and Neptune, thou to whom
Earth trident-struck, brought forth a generous steed:
And woods protector, thou, whose snowie breed
Three hundred graze on Caeas fertile grounds,
Pan, the flocks guardian, leaving native bounds
And Lycian groves, if Maenalus thou prize,
With Pallas come, who the Olive did devise:
And thou Inventor of the crooked Plow
Silvanus, bearing a soft Cypres bough.
All Gods our fields protect; and those who feed
The tender grain, still cherishing our seed,
And who from skies on corn, send plentious rain;
Thou Caesar, whom what seat shall entertain
In Heaven's unknown: whether thou take the care
Of Realms, and Cities, or the world declare
Thee Lord of fruit, to whom the seasons bow,
And with thy mothers myrtle wreath thy brow;
Or rule vast waves, alone thy Deity
Seamen adore, and farthest Thule obey:
Or Thetys with the Ocean purchased thee:
Or to slow months a new sign added be,
Whom Libra, and Erigone may embrace,
Whilst burning Scorpio shrinks to give thee place:
And does his ampler part in heaven forsake.
What ere thou wilt be (let not the Stygian Lake
Accept thee Lord, nor have thou such desire:
Although the Greeks Elyzium fields admire,
Nor for her mother car d, sought Proserpine.)
Grant a free course, and aid my bold design;
Pity the Ignorance of Swains, with me,
And to b^ invoked with prayers accustomed be.
When the warm spring dissolves the mountains snowes,
And the fat soil with West-winds softer grows,
Then let my steers at plow to groan begin,
And by the furrow my worn Coulter shine.
The greedy Husbandman likes best that mold,
Has felt two summers, and two winters cold.
That man's great harvest does his Garners burst.
But ere thou break the unknown fallow, first
Observe the winds, and mark heavens various face,
Old custom, and the nature of the place:
What every soil will bear, and what refuse:
This corn, that vines, more kindly does produce;
Here, plants best thrive, and there rank herbage grows,
See not how Safron Tmolus still bestows?
India sends Ivorie, sweet Sabea Gummes:
From the naked Chalybs, steel; from Pontus comes
The Bever stone, from Epire Mares for race;
For nature has imposed on every place
Eternal Laws, since first Deucalion hurled
Stones to repair the populated world;
Whence men a hard race, sprung. Therefore go on,
And thy rich soil with the first warming sun
Let thy strong Oxen turn, when Phoebus makes
Long days, and humid clods with ardor bakes.
If poor thy soil, before Arcturus rise,
To break a shallow furrow will suffice.
Here lest the corn should harm from weeds receive,
There, lest small moisture barren akers leave.
And let thy furrow lie each year untilled,
And to grow hard with rest thy worne-out field:
Or where in season thou did barely sow,
And pleasant pulse, with dangling cods did mow,
Where brittle stalks of woeful Lupins stood,
Or slender Veches like a whispering wood.
The field, flax, otes, and sleepy Poppie, burns,
But easy is the labor made by turns.
Nor a dry soil with rich marle spare to feed,
And uncleans'd ashes on poor grounds to spread.
So with changed seed, Swains rest give to the fields,
And Land left fallow no less profit yields;
From burning sterile plains often plenty comes,
And brittle stubble crackling fire consumes.
Whether from this new force, and nourishment
The Earth receives; or else all venom spent
By fire: and forth superfluous moisture sweat:
Or many dark hid breathings lax'd by heat,
By which, fresh sap the springing corn sustaines,
Or more condensed it binds the gaping veins.
Lest soaking showrs, or Sols more potent beam,
Or Boreas piercing cold should wither them;
And much he helps his field, who barren mould
Breaks, harrowes then; nor Ceres does behold
That Husbandman from the high heaven in vain,
And who the gleab athwhart runs ore again,
Turning his plow, and crossing breaks the soil,
Making the field obedient with his toil.
Swains pray for winters fair, and summers wet;
Winter dust, joys the earth, and glads the wheat:
Not Maesia then shall harvests boast like these,
Nor Phrygian hills admire their own increase.
What shall I say of those have sowed their land?
Then straight goes on, casts heaps of barren sand,
And streams to's corn in flowing rivers turns:
And when scorched fields with dying herbage burns,
From rising ground conducts a crystal lake;
Which among smoth rocks does gentle murmurs make,
And bubling forth refresh the parched field.
Or those lest too large ears the stalk should yield,
The rank corn, and soft stem eat down again,
When first it hides the earth; and those who draine,
With thirsty sand the plashes in their ground,
Most when in doubtful months the floods abound,
Whence slimie mud has covered all the vale,
Making the ditches a hot steam exhale.
But yet (for all men's toil and oxens pains,
Skillful in tillage) the Strymonian Cranes,
Geese, and shade harm, or bitter Succorie.
Nor was Jove pleased tillage should easy be:
And first commands with art to plough the soil,
On mortal hearts imposing care, and toil;
Nor lets dull sloth benumb men where he reigns.
Before Jove's time, no plowman tild the plains,
None marked out limits, or a mere set forth;
But all in common: then the liberal earth
Without compulsion brought each kind of grain,
He first black Serpents armed with deadly bane,
Commands stern Wolves to prey, the Sea to swell,
From leaves shakes honey, and did fire conceal:
To wine then rivers gave a stricter bound,
That several arts by labor might be found,
And men in furrows seek the grain that fell,
And hidden fire from veins of flint compel.
Then Alder-boats first swomme, then Mariners
Gave names, and told the number of the stars:
The Kids, the Pleiades, and the Northern Bear.
Then birds they catch with Lime, and beasts in snare,
And with their dogs, the mighty woods beset.
This strikes broad rivers with his casting net;
At sea his humid lines another draws:
Then force of ir'n, and blades of grating sawes;
(For first they wedges to soft wood did use)
Then came strange arts, fierce labor all subdues.
Enforced by bold Necessity, and Want,
First, Ceres mortals taught the earth to plant:
When mast, and acorns sacred groves suppli d,
And Dodon's forest nourishment denide.
Then was more sweat for corn; lest mildews spoil
The grain, and thistles overrun the soil:
The crop then fails, destructive weeds appear,
Briers and burs suppress the golden ear:
Then hapless Darnell, and wilde-oats command,
Unless with rakes thou daily break thy land:
Fright birds with noise, and cut the shadie bows
Of thy dark ground, and call for rain with vows.
Thou shall in vain see others store increase,
When shaken oaks thy hunger must appease.
The hardy Plowmans tools we next must know;
Which wanting, we can neither reap nor sow.
A heavy plow of crooked oak; a share;
And with flow wheels the Elusine mothers carre;
Sledges and flailes, rakes, ponderous enough,
Fine osier baskets, country housholdstuffe,
Hurdles, and last, Jaccus mystic Van;
All which, if the art a careful husbandman,
Remember to provide, if the divne
Glory of tillage, thou intendest thine.
Soon in the woods with mighty labor bow
An Elm, and form it to a crooked Plow.
To this a Tceme beneath of eight foot cut;
To th'double back two ears, and Dentals put:
Of lofty Beech your Plowtaile: but the yoke,
Let that be from the gentle Tyle tree took,
Which from behind should the deep turnings guide,
And oak with hanging in the chimney tried.
Here many ancient rules I could declare,
Unless thou shun'st, and scorn'st so mean a care.
With a great rowler first, thy Barn flore lay,
Smoothed with the hand, confirmed with binding clay,
Lest grass spring up, or it should dustie grow,
Then many mischiefs chance; for often below
The little Mouse her store has and abode:
And the blind Mole her bed; in holes the toade
Is found; much vermin from the earth are borne,
The Weezel plunders the great heap of corn,
And the Ant fearing age and want to come.
Observe when first the nut begins to bloome,
Gracing the woods, bending the fragrant tree:
If they exceed, such thy increase shall be,
And with great heat a mighty harvest found;
But if with swelling leaves the shades abound,
Then thou shall thrash a chassie stalk in vain,
I have seen many to anoint their grain
With Nyter first, then lees of oyse to spread,
That husks deceitful should have larger seed:
Then with soft fire they swell the hastened grain,
Seed long picked I have seen, and culd with pain,
And yet degenerate; unless yearly we
The largest choose. All things by destiny
So hasten to grow worse and backward goes,
As one against the stream his Vessel rows,
Who if by chance his arm a little slack,
The Boat in the swift channel hurries back;
They observations from the stars should make,
Mark rising Kids, and note the glittering Snake,
As those who homewards through rough Pontus trade,
And straights of narrow Hellespont assaid.
When Libra in just balances shall weigh
Darkness with Light, and shadows with the day,
Then exercise your steers, and barely sow,
Till too extreme the cruel winter grow.
Flax, Poppie then, cover with earth and plough
Whilst the Clouds hang, and thirsty grounds allow.
Beans sow in spring; then clave grass rich earth takes,
And Millet then your annual care awakes;
When Taurus golden horns open the year,
And Syrius leaves to other stars the Sphere.
But if for wheat and stronger corn thy ground
Thou exercise, and but a crop propound;
First, let the Eastern Pleiades go down,
And the bright star of Ariadnes Crown:
Commit dew-seed to furrows then, and here
Trust earth with hope of the ensuing year.
Would thou thy ground should vetch, and Fessels bear,
Nor shall despise Egyptian Lentils care;
Boots fall no obscure sign will show;
Begin, and sowing to mid-winter sow.
Wherefore the golden Sun in equal lines
The great orb governs, through the worlds twelve signs.
Five Zones the heavens infold, one still is beat
With scorching beams, torrid with mighty heat:
On either hand the extremes extend their track,
Bound still with cruel ice, with tempests black:
Between the midst, and these, two more there are,
Which seats the Gods for mortals did prepare:
Through both of these a passage does divide,
Through which the signs in oblique order glide.
As to Ryphaean hills the world ascends,
So to the South of Lybia down it bends:
To us the Pole is elevated still,
But Ghosts see them beneath, and dismal hell:
Here in huge bendings glides the winding Snake,
And like a river does Meanders make:
Through both the Bears incireling them about,
Who to be dipped in The Oceans billows, doubt.
Here, (as they say) either is lasting night,
And gloomy shade for ever hindering light:
Or else from us to them Aurora speeds
Ushering the day: and when with panting steeds
The Orient breathes on us; there purple night
Ascending adds, late Tapers to the light.
Hence from no doubtful signs we Seasons know,
What time is best to Reap, and when to Sow,
And when the faithless Sea we may again
Row with tuff Oars, when venture to the Main
An armed Fleet, or fell the lofty Pines.
Nor vain we mark, setting, and rising signs,
Which in four Seasons th'equal year divide.
But if cold showrs force Swains within to bide,
Much work asks haste, which against the weather's fair
Is to be done: to whet the blunted share,
And of a tree to make a hollow bark,
To measure Corn, or else their Sheep to mark;
These sharpen Forks and Stakes, the tender Vine
Others infold with bonds of Amarine:
And some with Rubean twigs, neat baskets bind,
Now dry their corn at fire, and then they grind.
Some works on Holidayes are to be done:
To draw out water, no Religion
Nor Law forbids us; nor to hedge our Corn,
And Snares to lay for Birds, to burn the Thorn,
To wash the bleating Flocks in curing Floods.
The driver of the slow Ass, often loads
His back with Oil, or Fruit, returning fetch
From Town a Handmill, or black mass of Pitch.
The Moon grants several days should be employed
Luckie for several works: the fifth, avoid:
Hell, and the Furies then were borne; and Earth
Gave mighty Typhon, and the Giants birth
Which covenanting Brethren thrice assay
To pull down Heaven, Pelion on Ossa lay;
On Ossa green Olympus to have thrown;
Thrice Jove with thunder cast those mountains down.
The seventeenth day is best to plant the Vine,
Oxen to break, threads to the Web to join:
The ninth is best for flight, and Bad for thieves.
Cold night to many works perfection gives;
Or at Sun rise, when fall the early dewes:
Night, to mow Stubble, or dry Meadows, choose:
For suppling moisture wants not in the night.
Some by late fires will watch, and VVinter light,
Sharpning a stake, mean while his task, though long
His dear wife shortens with a pleasing Song;
Running her sounding Shuttle through her Frame.
Or she decots sweet Must with gentle flame;
And scums with leaves froth from the boiling Pot.
But blushing Ceres best at noon is cut;
Amidst the heat, the dry corn thrashes best;
Plow and sow, naked, Winter is for rest:
Then Husbandmen enjoy what they did gain,
And with glad seasts each other entertain:
The Geniall time invites, and frees from care.
As wealthy ships, when mor'd within the Bar,
The Saylors on the Sterns fresh Garlands set.
But you may Mast, and Laurel berries get.
With Oil and bleeding Myrtle then, and snare
Cranes by the feet, and nets for Bucks prepare,
Course timorous Hares, shoot fallow Dear, or swing
With hempen whip, the Balearian sling,
When Snow lies deep, when Ice the river bars.
What shall I say of the Autumnall Stars,
When lesser heat gives day a swifter wing;
Which must be watched; so must the floury Spring.
Often I have seen, when corn from golden lands
Ready to house, just when the strawie bands
Should bind the sheaves; in war the winds contend,
And from the root the yellow harvest rend,
The tempest with so black a whirlwinde flew,
And the light straw, and flying stubble blue.
Often from the sky a mighty deluge powers,
And black storms muster with condensed showrs,
Clouds from sea gather, the arched skies resound,
And Oxens labor the rich corn is drown d.
Then dikes are filled, and swelling waters raise
Loud murmurs, and, seas rore in stormy baies.
Then in the hideous night, Jupiter takes
In's hand bright lightning, which discharging, shakes
The mighty earth; beasts fly, and mortal hearts
Base fear dejects. He, with his blazing darts
Down Athes, Rhodope, or Ceraunia throws:
South winds arise, blacker the tempest grows;
Now woods complain with wind, and now the shore.
This fearing know heaven stars, and signs, before:
Where Melancholy Saturn does retire,
And through what Orb wanders Cylenian fire.
But first the gods adore; to Ceres yield
Rites yearly, working in the gladsome field,
When the soft Spring rough Winter shall succeed
Then wine grows mellow and Lambs begin to feed,
Then sleep is pleasant, shades spread mountains ore.
Let all the jocund Swains Ceres adore,
Nor one presume sickles to thrust in corn,
Till Oken wreathes, for her, his brows adorn,
Dance Country Measures, and like Verses sing.
What most sure signs may to our knowledge bring
Drowth, rain, and wind, which ushers in the cold,
Jove has decreed; what new Moons should unfold.
When South winds rest, what Swains so often perceive
When nearer to their stalls their herds they leave.
Then straight with rising gusts the Ocean swells,
And a loud Fragor heard in lofty hills:
Or afar off shores sound with raging seas,
And mighty murmurs in the woods increase.
From tallest ships then bellows scarce refrain,
When Cormorants with clamor from the maine
Fly to the shore, and when the Sea-foul sports
On the dry Strand, and from the Fen resorts;
And mounting bove the lofty clouds the Herne.
Often before winds thou shall the stars discern,
Shoot swiftly through the sky, and in the night
To leave behind a train of blazing light,
And often chaff to fly, and falling leaves
With floting feathers, sport on bounding waves.
But when it thunders from the cruel North,
And when the East and Western winds draw forth:
All dikes are filled, the Sailor at th'Alarms
Strikes his wet sail, no storm the wise man harms?
From which the soaring Crane to Valleys flies;
Or else the Cow viewing the open skies,
At her wide nostrils the perception takes.
Or chattering Swallows fly about the Lakes;
Or in the mud Frogs sing their old complaint.
Often through straight paths to secret roofs the Ant
Conveies her Eggs; deep drinks the mighty bow:
And from their food in a great flight, the Crow
Makes his retreat, and sounds his fanning wings.
Various Sea-foul, with those haunt pleasant Springs,
And Asian Medows of Cayster use,
Busy, their shoulders bathe, with sprinkling dews.
Now under water thou may see them dive,
And in their sportfull washing vainly strive;
The wicked Crow, aloud then rain demands,
And all alone stalks proudly on dry sands.
Nor at Nocturnall wheels the Maidens be
Of storms nnskilfull when they shining see
The oil to sparkle in the shining Lamp,
And the hard snuff to make the light grow damp.
Nor less may thou from storms fair weather learn,
And long before by surest signs discern:
For then no star an obtuse beam displays,
Nor is the Moon estranged from Phoebus rays,
Nor fine wool fleeces driven through the sky;
Nor to warm Sun's ashore with spread wings lie
Halcyon's beloved of Thetis: nor loose straw,
Foul Swine remenber in their mouths to draw.
But Clouds sink lower, and to Vales retreat:
And from high roofes observing Phoebus set,
The Owl in vain, late notes does exercise.
Nisus appears, high in the Crystal skies,
And Scylla punishes for the purple hair.
Where ere she flying cuts the yielding air,
Nisus behold! her stern foe through the skies,
Sounding, persues: where through the Heaven he flies,
On swift wings shuning through the Clouds she bends,
Then often the Crow her watery throat extends.
Redoubling notes often in their towrie nest:
(With what unwonted joy I have not guest)
Sport amongst the leaves, the storm past, glad to see
Their ancient buildings, and fair Progeny.
Nor think I Heaven on them such Knowledge states,
Nor that their Prudence is above the Fates.
But when a tempest, and the fleeting rack
Has changed their course, and the moist air grows black
With Southern winds, which thicken in the skies
Thin vapors, and the grosser, rarifies;
Their thoughts are chang d, the motions of their mind
Inconstant are, like Clouds before the wind:
Hence it is that birds chaunt forth melodious notes,
The beasts are glad, and Crows stretch joyful throtes.
If the swift Sun whose horses never swerve,
And Moons in order following thou observe:
Th'insuing day shall never thee deceive,
Nor nights fair promises of hope bereave.
When first the Moon renewing flame adorns;
If a gross air, obscure her blunted horns,
Great showers, for sea, and Husbandmen prepare:
But if her face a Virgin blush declare,
It shall be wind against wind she blusheth still.
If the fourth day her Orb with silver fill,
(For that by long experience has been tried)
Nor with blunt horns through Crystal Heaven shall glide:
That day, and all that follow, you shall find
To the months end, free, both from rain and wind.
To Milecert, Glaucus, Panapaea now
Sailors preserved, from danger, pay their vow.
Also true signs the Sun at rising shows,
And when he does in Thetis lap repose,
For the most certain on the Sun attend:
Both in the morn, and when the stars ascend.
When rising he with many spots grows pale.
Drowned in a Cloud, and half his Orb does veil:
Then storms expect, then Southwinds rise from sea,
To trees, and corn, and Cattle, enemy.
Or when amongst thick Clouds before the day
Many refracted beams themselves dlsplay;
Or when forsaking Tythons saffron bed,
Much paleness has Auroras cheek ore-spread.
Ah! then but ill, the vines defend their grapes,
Such horrid hail on house tops rattling leaps.
This to remember it will profit thee:
When he high Heaven forsakes, (for often we see
Strange colors wandering in his visage, joined)
The duskie threatens rain, the fiery wind.
But if the spots red slashes shall unfold,
All vexed with rain, and wind thou shall behold.
That night shall none persuade me to the sea,
Nor yet advise, that I my anchor weigh.
But when he gives, or takes the day again,
His Orb be clear, thou fear a shower in vain.
Then thou may see soft gales to move the woods;
What Vesper next, (whence winds drive empty clouds)
What Auster plots, the Sun does signify,
And who so bold to give the Sun the lie.
Clandestine tumults, he does often foreshew,
And open war, from secret plots to grow:
He pitying Rome at Caesar's funerals spread
A mourning veil, ore his illustrious head.
The impious age then feared eternal night,
Though in that time Earth and vast Amphytrite,
Fierce Dogs, and cruel foul strange signs did yield;
We, smoking AEtna in the Cyclopian field
Often saw to rage, and from broke tunnels came
Huge liquid stones, and mighty globes of flame.
Germany heard from heaven a sound of arms,
And the Alps trembled at unused alarms:
A mighty voice in silent groves was heard,
And ghastly spirits, wondrous pale, appeared
Before it was night: and beasts (o wondrous) spoke;
Swift rivers stand, and yauning earth did quake:
Brass in the Temples sweat: sad Ivorie weeps,
High woods, Eridanus, King of rivers, sweeps;
And on the plains with hostile billows falls,
Bearing with him the cattle and their stalls.
Nor then sad entrails threatenings ceast to show,
Nor through the channels putrid blood to flow;
And then the populous Cities did resound
With howling wolves, which walked their nightly round,
Nor from clear skies ever more lightning came,
Nor such dire Comets oftener seen to flame.
Again, Phillipi, Roman Squadrons saw
With equal arms, for dreadful battle draw.
Twice with our blood the Gods did not disdain
To enrich Aemus, and the Aemathian pliane.
Time comes, by Swians, when turning up their ground
Eaten with rust, large Javelins shall be found:
Or boisterous rakes, from empty helms strike fire,
And shall huge bones dig'd from their tombs admire.
Great Vesta, Romulus, and our native Gods,
Who lofty Rome preserve, and Tuscan floods.
Ah for the Prince, at length your selves engage,
That he again repair this ruined Age.
Long since enough we with our bloods did pay
For sacrelegious perjuries of Troy.
Caesar, long since Heavens court envi'de us thee,
Grieved thou should pleased with mortal triumphs be.
Wrong was turned right, and war through all the world,
So many shapes of wickedness had hurled.
To the scorned Plow, no man does honor yield,
Swains pressed to arms, waste lies the uncultur'd field:
And crooked Sythes to swords transformed are.
Euphrates here, there Germany makes war:
The neighboring Towns in Civil arms engage,
And impious Mars through all the world does rage.
As when the Chariots starting from the bar
Straight through the listed Champaine hurried are:
The Charioteer is borne away, in vain
Checking their speed; who now contemn the reine.
THE SECOND BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS.
THE ARGUMENT.
How trees by nature grow, some from the root,
Some from the seed, some of themselves do sprout,
As many ways of Art experience grants.
The Gardner graffs, inoculates, transplants,
What fruitful trees in several Countries are;
But none with happy Italy compare.
How to discern the goodness of each ground,
Where choicest Olives and best Vines are found,
What safty in the harmless Country lies:
What dangers from rebellious Cities rise.
THus much of tillage, and the Planets sway,
I Will thee now Bacchus, and wild plants display,
And the slow Olives race; father, draw near,
(All things are full of thy great bounty here)
Thou pregnant fields deck'st with Autumnall vine,
Till foming presses overflow with wine;
O Father come, and lay thy buskins by
With me in Must then stain thy naked thigh.
Trees in their growth of different natures are,
Some spring themselves, unforced by humane care,
As in the fields where winding rivers flow,
The gentle Broom, Poplar, and Sallow grow,
And Willowes with fresh branches flourishing.
Some from their seed being set, as Chestnuts spring,
And Joves great Aesculus which all groves excelled,
And Oaks which Grecians still oraculous held.
In mighty Groves some spring from their own root,
So Cheries, Elms, Parnassian Laurel, shoot:
Which small in great shade of their mother rise.
These ways first nature gave: by these all trees
In Orchards, woods, and sacred Forests grow:
Others there are, which use and custom show.
Here, from the tender Parent, this man gets
The sprouting twigs, and in a furrow sets.
There in the earth, another covers stocks
Of ancient trees, pales, posts, and cloven blocks;
Some trees require their boughs be set archwise,
And make their own soil, living nurseries.
Some need no root, nor does the Gardner doubt,
That sprigs set in the ground shall timely sprout.
And wondrous to be told, the Olive root
From a dry stick, cut at the end will shoot.
And often without impairing, we may see
The boughs of one, changed to another tree,
And Pears from grafted Apples for to spread,
And stony Cornell, with ripe plums wax red.
Therefore O Husbandmen, the best means try
T'improve wild fruit, lest waste your Orchards lie.
To plant the vine in Ismare we are glad,
And that Taburnus verdant Olives clad.
Help, O Mecaenass and this work review,
My glory and my chief fame, springs from you;
Swell thou my sail, now venturing to the main,
Nor all things would I in my verse contain;
Had I hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
A voice of steel; help me to coast along;
The task is easy; nor I Will thee detain
With dull descriptions, nor fables vain.
Those trees which of themselves are fostered,
Unfruitful be, but strong, and fair they spread:
Because they draw their nature from the soil;
But these, if any sow, or shall with toil
Transplant, and then in cultured orchards set;
Their wilder disposition they forget:
With often pruning then not slowly will
Answerthy labor, and obey thy skill;
So those which spring sroom roots like profit yield,
If you transplant them to the open field,
These, boughs before aad parent-branches shade,
Which stops their growth, and makes the body fade.
Plants which from seed arise of slow growth are,
And shades for our posterity prepare;
Apples grow wild, and loose their former taste,
And Vines harsh clusters bear for birds to waste,
All labor ask, and covering in rich soil;
And must be conquered, with much art and toil.
The Olive from trunks, vines prosper best from stocks,
And Paphian Myrtle springs from solid oaks;
Tall Ash, and Hazel, best from Sciens takes,
And Poplar which Herculean Garlands makes:
So Joves Chaonian oak, and high Palms grow,
And Fir which must the Sailors fortune know,
Arbuts from Nuts, the sterile Plane tree bears
Best Apples, Chestnuts, Beech; blossoms of Pears.
The wild Ash silvers with a snowie flower,
And under Elms rough Swine the mast devour.
TO inoculate, and graffe, are several arts:
For where the bud shoots from the tender parts,
And breaks the geutle Filme, just, where they bind;
They make an orifice in the knottie rind;
Imprisoning there, the sprig of the other tree;
And with moist bark they teach them to agree.
Or else the knotless trunk they cut again,
And with a wedge deep wound the solid grain.
After the slip so valued, there enclose,
Nor longs the time, when sprouts with fruitful boughs
A mighty tree to heaven, at leaves unknown
Admiring, and strange Apples not her own.
Nor of one kind strong Elins, and Sallowes be,
The Lotus, nor the Id^an Cypres tree;
Nor in one manner the rich Olive comes,
Orchites, and Radies, and sour Pausian plums,
Alciuous apples, nor such branches bear
Wardens, Crustumians, and the Syrian pear;
Nor the same Vintages our clusters grant,
Which Lesbos has, from the Methymnean plant,
Thasians there are, and silver Mareots, these
Fat grounds affect, and those the lighter please;
And Pscithian grapes best dride; Legeos strong,
Which soon will try your feet, and tie your tongue;
Purple, and early grapes there are. What verse
You Rhetick Vineyards shall your praise rehearse?
But yet contend not with Falernian vine,
There are Aminian grapes, a most sound wine;
Tmolus to this, and King Phanaeus give,
And less Argitis homage; none will strive
With this to fill the Press, with cheering juice,
Nor last so many years, and fit for use:
Nor Rhodian gracing Feasts, and rites, shall escape,
Nor the Bumaste, that so swelling grape;
Their names, and kinds innumerable are,
Nor for their catologue we need not care,
Which who would know, as soon may count the sands,
The western winds, raise on the Lybian strands,
Or when East-windes at sea more violent rore,
Reckon Aeonian waves, which roll to shore.
All grounds not all things bear; the Alder tree
Grows in thick Fens, with Sallows brooks agree,
Ash craggie Mountains, shores sweet Myrtle fills,
And lastly Bacchus loves the sunnie hills:
The Yew best prospers in the North, and cold.
The conquered worlds remotest Swains behold,
Where Arabs painted Gelonie are found;
Each Land shows several plants; the Indian ground
Bears Ebonie, Sabea, Frankincense.
What shall I say to thee sweet wood? from whence
Balsame destills, and beries ever green
Of bright Acanthus? How shall I begin
Of trees in Aethiopia, white with woll?
Where from the leaves the Natives fleeces cull:
Or of those groves in utmost India bred,
Near the worlds border, whose aspiring head,
No arrow could by Archers skill surmount;
And yet good Bowmen we those men account.
Media brings wholesome apples of harsh juice,
Against step-dames poison nothing more in use:
When banefull herbs they mix with deadly charms,
This helps, and vital spirits against venom arms.
This mighty tree, Laurel resembles well,
But that it casts abroad another smell;
No winds offend the leaves, the flowers endure:
With this, their tainted breaths the Medians cure,
And it to old men's Tysicks medcine yields.
But Median groves, nor all those plentious fields,
Nor India, Ganges Hermes full of gold,
May strive with Italy, nor Bactrians bold,
Nor great Panchaia, rich with Frankincense.
This place no Bulls whose nostrils fire dispense
Have til'd, to set the teeth of Dragons there,
Nor did it crops of Spears, and Helmets bear.
But lushious fruit, and rich wine fill the Press,
And Olive plants, and joyful herds possess.
Here warlick Steeds trot proudly through the fields,
This snowie flocks, and Bulls prime offerings yields;
Which bathed Clitumnus in thy sacred floods,
Romes tryumphs draw, to Temples of the Gods.
A lasting Spring, and summer all the year;
Our flocks twice teeme, our plants twice apples bear,
This no fierce Tigers, nor stern Lions breeds,
Nor Symplers here deceived with poisonous weeds.
Nor scaly Dragon quarters in this soil,
Wreathing himself to a prodigeous pile.
To these so many famous Cities add,
works of great care, with art, cost, labor, made;
So many seats cut from the quarries side,
Under whose ancient walls sweet rivers glide.
What shall I say of both those Seas which lave
Our Coasts? or of those many Lakes we have?
Or speak of thee great Laris, and thy waves
Benacus, which so like the Ocean raves?
Or Ports, or Lucrine Sluices shall I sing?
Whose raging floods with mighty murmur ring.
Where Julian streams thunder in troubled seas,
And Tyrrhen waters fill the Avernian bays.
Here we have silver rivers, brazen Mines,
And with much gold this happy Country shines;
Here a bold race, the valiant Marsians are,
Stout Sabels. and Ligurii used to war;
The long spear'd Volscii, Decii, Marii, hence,
And the Camilli draw their old descents.
This the bold Scipios and thee Caesar bore;
Who Conqueror now in utmost Asias shore,
Driv'st from the Roman Towers, the unwarlick Bands
Of India. Hail great Saturnian Lands,
Parent of fruit, and men of noble parts:
To undertake thy ancient fame, and Arts,
Boldly I Will open now, the sacred Spring,
And through Rome's seats, Ascraean verses sing,
Now several kinds of ground we must declare,
Their color, strength, and what they willing bear;
And first your harder soil, and barren hills,
Where stone and thin clay, mixed in shrubbie fields,
Fresh Groves of living Olives, these rejoice;
And by wild Olives of that Land make choice:
And where sour Beries through the Country spread.
But a rich ground, with pleasant moisture fed,
Where store of grass, and verdant champains be,
Such as in wanton vales we use to see;
Where Rivers from the lofty Rock descend,
With fruitful mud, and to the Southward bend,
Nourishing Fern, which so much hurts the Plow:
Here, for thee Bacchus strongest wine shall grow
To swell the Press; this the rich Grape shall bear,
Such as in Gold for offerings we prepare;
When the swollen Tuskans on their Cornets play,
And we on Altars smoking entrals lay.
But if thou herds, and Steers delight to keep;
Or Goats that burn the corn, or fleecy sheep;
Seek pleasant Groves, and rich Tarentum's Coast,
And plains which woeful Mantua has lost.
Where silver Swans near flourie Rivers plant,
Where Crystal Springs, nor grass the Cattle want.
How much thy herds eat in the longest day,
So much cold dews in the short night repay.
Black grounds which under heavy Plowes are rich,
A brittle soil (for tillage makes it such)
Is best for corn; upon no ground appears
More Carrs returning home with weary Steers;
Or where the angry Swain cuts down a wood,
And fruitless Groves which many years had stood,
And by the roots, Birds ancient seats o rethrew,
Who to the skies their nests forsaken, flew.
But a rough Champaine soon improves with toil;
For hungry grounds, and a rough stony soil,
Scarce bees with Cassia, and sweet dew supply.
In whose dark hollow Rocks, foul Serpents lie:
No Land they say with better choice is stored
Of food for Snakes nor better nests afford.
That Earth exhales thin Clouds, and flying mists;
And moisture drinks, repaying when it lists;
Which always her own verdant Liverie wears,
Nor hurts with coomings, and foul rust the shares,
Where Elms with joyful vine are interwove,
Where Olives grow; that soil you may approve,
Both for your Cattle, and the heavy Plow.
For they such plains never wealthy Capua sow:
And those which border nigh Vesuvius heights;
And Clanius who, often poor Acerra frights.
I Will teach thee now moulds differing to discern;
That what is too thick, or looser thou may learn.
Since one, corn best affects, the other Vines;
To Ceres ^^^ick, to Bacchus thin inclines.
First with great diligence let a place be found;
There let a pit be made, deep in the ground;
This done, cast in the thrown-out mould again,
And with thy feet tread the whole surface plain.
If there want Earth, it is loose; that most inclines
Cattle to feed, and cherish prospering Vines.
But if to its bounds, 'twill not be brought again,
And the pit filled, some earth shall yet remain,
That soil is thick: plough with thy sturdy yoke,
There the hard glebe, let that tough soil be broke.
Land that is salt, and which we bitter find,
Is bad for fruit, to tillage not inclined;
All plants shall here degenerate, and the vine
Loses the name, and this shall be the sign.
From smokie roofes, an Osier basket take,
And such a strainer as for wine they make:
There Earth with streams drawn from a Crystal Spout
Commix; and all the water will run out,
And in great drops shall through the strainer flow,
But soon the taste will clear distinction show;
And straight thou may with bitterness epsy,
The tasters mouth displeased, be drawn awrie.
And lastly we thus rich soil understand,
It will not moulder kneading in your hand;
But to your fingers it will cling like pitch.
Moist ground has weeds, and that which is too rich.
Ah! Let not mine too fertile prove, nor bear
Upon a heavy stalk a ponderous ear.
Mould that is sad, that, silently by weight
It self betrays; and so we find what is light.
Black, and all colors, straight our eyes discern.
But cursed cold, is wondrous hard to learn.
Yet sometimes pitchy Firr, and fatal Yew,
Or winding Ivy will sad tokens show.
This known with care, thy earth plough long before,
And raise the ridges of thy Furrows more:
And let thy turned up Gleab stern Boreas face,
Before thou set the vines rejoicing race.
Brittle is best, which wind and frost endure;
And rustic Swains with turning often manure.
But those men who no care, or labor fly,
Choose places fit both for a Nursery,
And where they may transplanted after grow:
Lest they their mother sudden changed not know.
Also Heavens quarters on they bark the score,
That they may coast it, as it was before:
Which Southern heat sustains, which viewd the Pole,
Such strength has custom in each tender soul.
First know, if hills or dales best please the grape,
Would thou the plenty of rich vineyards reap.
Sow the vale thick, then will thy press abound;
But if it hilly be, and rising ground,
Set thin thy ranks, nor less in every tract,
Range ordered vines the walks drawn out exact.
As when a mighty battel's to be fought;
Up to the front the ordered files are brought,
Troops hide the fields; and ready for alarms,
All the vast Champain shines, with glittering arms;
Before in horrid fight the battle joins,
And doutbfull Mars, to neither part inclines.
So let thy ranks in even number grow.
Not that vain fancy should be fed with show;
But else the earth grants not equal nourishment;
Nor can their branches have their full extent.
Perhaps how deep to furrow thou would know.
In shallow trenches I my vines dare sow.
But the huge Aesculus, that mighty tree
Must in earths bosom deeply fixed be:
How much to Heaven her spreading branches shoot,
So much toward hell extend her fixed root.
Therefore not her, showrs with huge tempests mixed,
Nor cruel winter harms, but remains fixed,
And many years and ages she indures,
Of short-lived man; whom her own strength secures.
Tall branches guard her, and huge bows displaid
Protect her round with her own mighty shade.
Nor make thy vineyard where the Sun declines;
Nor plant rough hazels among the tender vines,
Nor pull the lofty branches, nor impair
The sprouting bows; for great must be thy care:
Nor rustie pruners harm, the hopeful seed,
Nor let wild Olives in thy vineyard breed.
Among careless Swains often happens fire: which first
Under the sappie rind is closely nursed:
Then by degrees to the high branches flies
And spreading sends loud fragor to the skies:
A victor straight from bough to bough aspires;
And the Crown seized, involveth all with fires.
To Heaven black clouds and pitchy mists are sent,
And dismal vapors scale the firmament.
But more if from the North atempest rise;
And in the groves wind makes the flame increase.
This happens, then their stocks decatd, no more
Sprout fresh again, nor flourish as before:
Nor from the earth like nourishment receives:
But cursed wild Olives grow, with bitter leaves.
Let none how ever skillful, thee advise
To turn hard grounds, when Northern winds arise.
Winter binds earth with frost, nor grants the seed
To take firm root, nor tender plants to feed.
Then set thy vines, when the white bird appears
In blushing spring, which the long Serpent fears:
Or in first Autums cold, before the sun
Has cooled his steeds in winter, summer don.
Spring clothes the woods with leaves, and groves attires,
Earth swells with spring, and genitall seed requires.
In fruitful showrs the Almighty from above
Descends in the lap, of his delighted love:
And great, he with the mighty body joined,
Both propagates, and fosters every kind.
Harmonious birds then sing in every grove,
And cattle taste the sweet delights of love.
Earth blessed, now teems: soft winds dissolve the Meads,
With cheering warmth through all sweet moisture spreads.
To the new sun, the tender herbage dare
Open their leaves, nor vines rough Auster fear:
Nor thundering Boreas ushering dreadful showrs;
But all things bud with blossom, leaf and flowers.
Sure I believe, when first the world was made,
So shone the day; and such bright conduct had.
That was the Spring; the Spring made all things fair,
And blustering Eurus did cold tempests spare.
Then cattle breed: in unplow'd fields began
First to appear, that iron race of man:
VVilde beasts possessed the wood, and Heaven the stars.
Nor tender creatures could endure such cares;
If not those breathings were twixt heat, and cold,
And Heavens indulgence did the earth uphold.
What ever plant thou in the earth do set,
First dung it well, and deeply cover it.
Let shells, and limestones guard it with a paile:
That streams may glide betwixt, and may exhale
A gentle vapor, that may cheer the plant.
Some stones, and potshcards use to lay upon it:
Which a defense against rising tempests yield,
And when hot Syrius chops the parched field.
Thy plants being set, next often draw the mold
About the roots; to break the clods be bold:
And with a thwarting Plow turn cross thy ground:
And let thy laboring steers thy vines surround.
Then take smooth reeds, and wands, and sticks prepare,
With ashen poles, and stakes that pointed are.
Supported thus, the winds they will contemn,
And boldly climb the high Elms tallest stem.
But whilst in tender Infancy they are,
Sprouting new leaves, the gentle offspring spare:
Nor when the verdant branches do arise,
And with loose reins are posting to the skies:
Use not thy sharper knife, but gently pull
The ambitious bows, and haughty branches cull.
But when grown strong th'imbrace the blms high top,
Then shave their locks, and dangling tresses crop:
Before they feared the knife; more rigorous now
Use thy commands, upon the stubborn bough.
And from all cattle strongly them immare,
Whilst the soft bows disturbance not endure.
TO whom Cowes, and Goats, and Sheep more harm have done,
Then freezing winter, and the scorching Sun:
Cold not so much, nor white congealing frosts,
Nor vexing beams, which beat on sandy coasts,
As cattle harm, when with a venomed tooth
They wound the branches, in their tender youth.
Only for this crime we on Altars pay,
Bacchus a Goat, and act the ancient play.
Then from great villages Athenians have
And where the highways meet the prise is placed.
They to soft meads, heightened with wine, advance:
And joyfully among oyled bottels dance.
The Asonian race, and those from Troy did spring,
Dissolved with laughter rustic verses sing:
In Visards of rough bark conceal their face,
And with glad numbers thee great Bacchus grace:
Hanging soft pictures on thy lofty pine.
Then vineyards swell, pregnant with cheering wine,
The shadie Groves, and the deep vales oreflow,
Where e're the God shows his illustrious brow.
To Bacchus then, let us due praises sing
In ancient verse; wafers, and Javelins bring.
A sacred Goat to the Altars draw by th'horne;
On Hazell spits then the fat entrails turn.
But other toils in dressing vines are found,
And nere enough: three or four times thy ground
Turn yearly, and with forks reverst, the clods
Constantly break: and cleanse from leaves the woods.
Labor returns in circle to the Swain,
And years revolve in their own steps again.
But when thy vineyard her last leaves removes,
And cold North-winds dispoyle the glorious Groves;
Then the industrious Husbandman takes care
T'extend his labour-to the ensuing year;
To lop the vine which hitherto escapes,
And with old Saturns hook, he pruning shapes.
First dig thy ground, and shreads and refuse burn,
And under roofs the poles, and stakes return.
Gather your vintage last; vines twice have shade,
And twice the corn thick briers, and weeds invade.
Both toils are painful: a large Farm commend:
A little, till. Thorns that to woods extend,
And reeds, which clog the banks, to cut prepare:
And on wild Sallow take especial care.
The vines are bound, pruners no more they want,
And round the empty walls the Gardners chant.
Yet still must labor be, and toil in dust,
And grapes being ripe, a tempest they mistrust.
On the other side; Olives you may neglect,
They need no care, nor crooked Sythes expect,
Nor the tenacious Rake: once set, they rise
Shooting luxurious branches to the skies.
Those grounds supply, turned with the crooked Plow
Moisture enough, and large increase allow.
The Emblem of Peace, thus the rich Olive grows.
So Apples when they feel extending boughs,
And growing strength, sudden the stars invade,
By their own virtue, scorning humane aid.
Nor less with fruit are laden every bush.
And wilder Forests with red beries blush,
There shrubs are cut, and Firr in tall woods breed
Nocturnall fires, and Torches thence proceed.
And shall men doubt to plant and careful be?
Why urge I these? Broom and the Sallow tree.
Or feed the sheep, or else the shepherd shade
Yield honey, or for corn are hedges made.
What pleasure is t to view Cytorus, rich
With waving Box, and groves of Marick pitch.
How am I pleased to see those fields that are,
Glorious undrest, nor used to humane care!
Those barren trees high Caucasus do crown,
Which storms often tears, and often tumble down,
Are of great use: There Pines for Masts are feld,
And Cypres, and tall Cedars towers to build:
Here coverings for their Cars, and spoaks for wheels,
Husbandmen get, and ships find crooked keeles.
Sallowes have boughs, the tall Elms leavie are,
Myrtle for Spears, and Cornell fit for war,
And Yewes are bent into Ityrian bows:
Smooth Tile and Box the skillful Turner knows
How to complete, and with his tools to trim,
And down the Poe in rough streams Alders swim.
In rugged bark the bees conceal their stocks,
And hoard in hollow wombs of ancient oaks.
Can Bacchus blessing like to these dispense?
'Twas Bacchus first proud quarrels did commence.
He in cold death did those hot Centaurs tame,
Hylaeus, Rhetus, Polus, overcame:
As threatening Lapiths he a Goblet threw.
Oh happy Swains if their own good they knew,
To whom just Earth remote from cruel wars
From her full breasts soft nourishment prepares:
Although from high roofes through proud Arches come
No floods of Clients early from each room;
Nor Marble pillars seek which bright shells grace,
Gold-woven vestments, nor Chorinthian brass;
Nor white wool stained in the Assyrian juice,
Nor simple oil corrupt with Cassias use:
But rest secure, a fraudless life in peace,
Variously rich in their large Farms at ease;
Tempe's cool shades, dark Caves, and purling streams,
Lowings of Cattle, under trees soft dreams,
Nor lack they woods, and dens, where wild beasts haunt,
Youth in toil patient. and inured to want.
Their Gods and parents sacred; Justice took,
Through those her last steps when she Earth forsook.
Let the sweet Muses most of me approve,
Whose Priest I am, struck with almighty Love.
They shall to me Heavens starrie tracts make known;
And strange Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
Thence Earthquakes are, why the swollen Ocean beats
Over his banks, and then again retreats:
Why Winter Suns have so to touch the maine,
And what delays the tardie night restrain.
But if these gifts of Nature I not find,
And a cold blood beleaguereth my mind.
Then I Will delight in vales, nere pleasant floods,
And unrenown'd, haunt rivers, hills, and woods;
Thy banks sweet Sperchius, and Taygeta, where
The Grecian virgins stately feasts prepare.
How shall I be to Haemus vale convaid,
And crown my temples with a mighty shade?
Happy is he that hidden causes knows,
And bold all shapes of danger dares oppose:
Trampling beneath his feet the cruel Fates,
Whom Death, nor swallowing Acheron amates.
And he is blessed who knows our Country Gods;
Pan, old Sylvanus, and the Nymphs aboads:
He fears not Scepters, nor aspiring States,
Nor treacherous brethren stirring up debates:
Nor Dacians Covenant, at Isters streams:
Nor Romes affairs, and nigh destroyed Realms,
Or poor men pities, or the rich envies.
What nourishment the bounteous field supplies,
What trees allow, he takes: nor ever saw
Mad Parliaments, Acts of Commons, nor sword-Law;
Some vex the Sea, and some to war resorts,
Attend on Kings, and wait in Princes Courts.
This would his Country, and his God betray
To drink in Jems, and on proud scarlet lie.
This hides his wealth, and broods on hidden gold,
This loves to plead, and that to be extold
Through all the seats of Commons, and the sires.
To bathe in's brothers blood this man desires.
Some banished, must their native seats exchange,
And Countries, under other Climates range.
The Husbandman turns up his fruitful plains;
Whence he, his children, and poor house sustains,
His herds, and laboring steers: no rest is found,
Either his trees with blushing fruit abound,
His folds with Lambs, or else his stacks with corn:
Or plenty loads his field, or cracks his barn.
In winter he Sycanian Olives mils,
And the fat swine, with mast and akorns fills.
All sorts of fruit in plentious Autumn falls,
And milder vines grow ripe on sunnie walls.
Whilst 'bout his neck his pretty Children cling,
His chaste house modest: home his heifers bring
Extended teats: in meads his fat Kids rest,
And with their horns in wanton sport contest.
He keeps the festive days on grass laid down,
And friends about the fire the Goblets crown.
Bacchus implored, then for his Hinds sticks fast
A prize; at which, they nimble Javelins cast;
Stripping their hardened limbs for rustic strife.
Of old this was the ancient Sabins life,
Rhemus, and Romulus, and Tuscans fierce:
And Rome great mistress of the Universe,
Who seven proud hills then did with walls surround,
Before Dictaean Jupiter was crowned,
Or Sounding Trumpers heard, or any made
Ring on hard anviles the imposed blade.
But we have past now through a spacious plain,
And now is high time our smoking steeds t'unrein.
THE THIRD BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS.
THE ARGUMENT.
How to choose Cattle, and best ways to breed.
To train a Horse, for labor, war, or speed.
The power of Love: whose fire consumes the Males,
Makes Bulls to fight, and Mares court Western gales.
Of Sheep and Goats: of milk what profit's made,
Of hair and wool, which drive a mighty trade.
Of Dogs for hunting, or a watchful Guard,
Serpents and Flies from Beasts must be debarred.
With what diseases Cattle are annoyd,
How rots and murrains have whole Realms destroyed.
GReat Pales, and the Amphrisian Swain renowned,
Lycaean streams, and woods, I Will now resound.
All things that took up idle minds are shown;
For who has not cruel Eurystheus known?
And bloody altars fierce Busiris reard,
Or not of Hylas, or of Delos heard?
Of swift Hypodame and Pelops famed
For's ivorie shoulders, who proud horses tamed:
To raise my self a way must now be found,
That through all Nations I may be renowned.
First to my Country (if I live) I will
Conveigh the Muses from the Aeonian hill;
And Idumean palms to Mantua bear:
Then in green fields a Marble temple rear,
Where ^^e great Mincius slowly winding glides,
And borders with a tender reed his sides.
Amidst the fane, shall Caesar's statue be,
Who shall in purple me triumphing see,
Driving a hundred Chariots to the floods,
Leaving Alpheus, and Molorchian woods:
All Greece shall strive with whirlbats and the race,
And offering Olive leaves, my brows shall grace.
How it delights to see the solemn train,
March to the Temples and the bullocks slain!
Or as the scene, with fronts rever'st shall shift,
And painted Brittans purple hangings lift.
There, I Will in gold and ivorie draw the alarmes
Of India, and conquering Caesar's arms;
And huge Nile swelling both with waves, and war.
On brazen beams I Will navall trophies rear.
Next conquered Asia and Niphates show,
And Parthians flying, bold to use their bow.
In Parian Marble, and respiring brass,
Shall stand the statues of the Dardan race;
And all their titles, who from high Jove came;
Old Tros, and Phoebus, who did Ilium frame.
Let cursed Envy at the Furies shake,
And tremble at the dreadful Stygian Lake,
And at Ixions twisted Serpents groan,
His racking wheel, and never resting stone.
Mean while let us seek Groves, where Sylvane Gods,
Their dwellings have, and search untracted woods,
Your hard commands Maecenas to pursue.
Our muse no lofty flight takes, wanting you.
Ah quickly come, nor make delay at all,
For now Cytheron with loud voice does call.
Horse-taming Epire, and Tagetian hounds,
And woods the clamor echoing resounds;
Next I shall Caesar's mighty wars proclaim,
And through as many years extend his fame:
As has been since bright Phoebus did adorn
The world with light, till thou great Prince were borne.
Who ere Olympic games admiring steeds,
Or for the Plow his sturdie bullocks, breeds,
To choose well bodied femals must have care;
Of the best shape the sowr-look'd heifers are,
Her head great, thick her neck and to her thigh
Down from her chin, her dewlaps dangling lie.
Longsided, all parts large, whom great feet bears,
And under crooked horns her brisly ears.
Those best I like whom spots of white adorn,
Or shun the yoke, often butting with the horn,
The whole Cow fair and visag'd like the male
Sweeping the ground with her long bushie tail.
The fourth year past, Lucina they implore,
And after ten taste joys of love no more.
Their strength to plow, or procreate then fails:
Whilst wanton youth thy herds boast, free thy males,
Thy flocks whilst they are young to Venus bring,
That from the old new progenies may spring.
The best days first from mortal wretches fly,
Disease, sad age, labor, and death supply:
But always there are some, which rather you
Would wish to change; then still your breed renew;
Lest thou for lost things seek, begin before,
And let a yearly race supply thy store.
Nor choosing horse from the like precepts swerve,
Those thou intend'st must their great stock preserve,
They at the first thy special care require:
For the fair issue of the generous sire,
Walks proudly round about the spacious field;
Whilst his soft thighs in supple flexures yield.
First dares the way, and threatening rivers, take;
And ore an unknown bridge, at full speed make;
Nor fears vain founds, one has a lofty neck,
A hand some head, short belly, and broad back:
Luxuriant swellings on his valiant breast,
White, sorrill, worst; Bay, or bright gray is best.
But when from far a sound of arms he hears,
He knows no stand, he shakes, and pricks his ears,
And fierce to charge, fire from his nostrils flies;
And his thick maine on his right shoulder lies.
His backbone broad, he beats the earth, and proof
With thundering strokes makes off his solid hoof.
Such was swift Cylarus, whom bold Pollux tamed,
Mars and Achilles Chariot horses, famed
Among Grecian Poets; Saturn changed, had such
A flowing a maine, and at his wives approach
Flying high Pelion, thunders with his neighs.
But when diseases shall his body craze,
And struck in years his sinews weaker are;
Keep him at home, his age not sordid spare.
Aged they coldly Venus entertain,
And the ungrateful work prolong in vain;
And if to join loves battle they engage,
Like fire in straw, they vainly spend their rage.
Therefore their years and courage chiefly learn,
Next, other qualities, and breed discern.
Beat, how they grieve, how joyful when they win.
When through the fields they fly, have thou not seen
How they swift Charriots hurrie to the bar?
Twixt hope and fear men's hearts distracted are;
They ply the whip, and bending give the reine,
The burning axe flies thundering through the plain;
Now low they are, now up they seem to rise,
And easy air dividing, scale the skies:
Nor the lest breathing use, nor make delays,
But a dark cloud of duskie sand they raise,
With faom, and followers breath bedewed they are,
So love they praise, of conquest so much care.
First Erycthonius Chariot-horses joined,
And on swift wheels triumphing dared the wind.
Lapithes first the art of riding found,
And horsemen taught to insult ore trampled ground,
Armed cap-a-pe, and thick proud steps to use,
Both task's alike; and skillful riders choose
One young as well as swift, and fierce for fight.
Though he has often put the foe to flight;
And Epire, or Mycene his Country call,
Or boast from Neptune his original.
This being known, take thou especial care,
To feed them high when they must serve the Marc,
Whom for the Stud a Lord they have decreed,
They give sweet grass, clear streams, and strongest bread,
Lest strength they want, loves task to undergo,
And their Si^es f^iling a poor offspring show.
But carefully they make the female lean;
And when known lust provokes to Venus, then
They keep from food, and drive them from the streams,
And often chase and tire in Phoebus beams,
When with thrash'd corn the beaten barneflore's groan;
And the light chafe by Western winds is blown.
These Arts they use, lest that the field of love,
By too much wanton rankness barren prove,
And oily fatness make the furrows thin,
But greedy take the seed, and keep it in.
The Sires care past, now is the Dams begun,
When near their time, with rekcon'd monchts they' ave gone,
To draw a laden carr let no man force,
Or to leap ditches, or in speedy course
Run through the meads, or in swift floods to swim,
But feed in large groves, near some pleasant stream,
Where banks with moss, and verdant grass araid,
Sheltered with caves, and with a rockie shade.
A Fly about the Groves of Silarus haunts,
And high Alburnus, green with stately plants,
Asylus called by Romans, but the same
The Greeks style Aestron by an ancient name;
Loud-sounding, fierce, from which affrighted, fly
The herds, and with loud bellowing shake the sky,
And Groves, and thirsty Tangerus banks. Heavens queen
This Monster sent to wreak her deadly spleen
On Io then transformed into a Cow.
This (for it is worst when hotter it does grow)
Beat from thy herds, and feed the pregnant Mares,
When Phoebus drives, or night brings on the stars.
But when they have teemed, on the offspring place all care,
Which straight they name, and mark what breed they are,
Which to increase their stock they most allow,
Or sacred Altars serve, or draw the Plow,
Or those thou would to Country uses frame.
Instruct them young, and with much custom tame,
Whilst pliant are their joints, and soft their mind.
And first about their necks loose collors bind,
Made with soft twigs, Next, when the freeborn are
To service used, them in fit couples pair,
And let them join their equal steps with Art,
And often use to draw an empty cart;
To print a small tract in the dusty road.
Then groans the be chen axe with ponderous load:
Next a brass teeme, with mighty wheels he draws.
Mean while the unbroken steers, not only grass,
And fennie rushes, must with Sallow feed,
But bring him corn thy self; nor let thy breed
Their snowie milk pailes, as the old custom fill,
But the full teat, give their dear offspring still.
If thou in war, and cruel arms do pride,
Or near Alphoeus streams delight'st to ride,
And drive swift Chariots through the sacred Grove;
First make thy horse, armed men and arms to love;
Make him shrill Trumpets suffer, and to hear
The groaning wheels, nor lashing whips to fear;
And at the applauses and his masters voice,
And sounding of his clap't neck, to rejoice.
This from the mothers teat he must endure,
And to soft headstals him you must inure.
Whilst weak, and trembling, sturdie age unknown:
The third year spent, the fourth now drawing on,
Let him begin to ride the ring, and all
His Aires to learn, Curvet, and Caprioll.
Let his swift thighs alternate flexures bend;
Then with the winds in nimble course contend,
And with loose reins fly through the open strands,
Scarce leaving any print upon the sands.
As from the Northern shores when Boreas fierce
Does Scythian storms, and aerie clouds disperse.
When with loud blasts, the waving Chaimpaine crowned
With rank corn shakes, and the tall woods resound.
Huge billows charge the shore with all their force,
winds fly, and Sea and Land scowre in their course.
This at the games of Elis swiftly flies
Through the great lists, sweating to gain the prise,
From's mouth flows bloody some, or else allots
His soft neck for the Belgic Chariots.
Then let the large limbed grow, nor feeding spare
When they are broke; before, they stubborn are;
When taken up, their haughty souls disdain
The gentlest stroke, nor will endure the reine.
No art more keeps their strength then to remove
Venus, and cruel shafts of blinded Love;
Whether in herds thou do, or horses pride.
Far of the bulls alone are feeding ti de
Behind a mountain, or beyond some flood,
Or at full stalls, shut up with plenteous food,
The female in their sights, consume their strength,
Who burning, mind nor food, nor groves at length.
She with her sweet inticements often provokes
Proud rivals, till their fury turn to strokes.
In pleasant groves the beauteous Heifer feeds;
But they join battle, and in warlick deeds
Gain many wounds; their bodies bathed in gore,
Closing their horns most dreadfully they rore.
The mighty woods, and heavens vast Court resound.
Nor more these warriors pasture in one ground;
Exiled to coasts unknown, the vanquished goes,
Moning his shame, and the proud Conqueror's blows.
That unrevenged from him his love was took,
And looking back his native Realm forsook.
Then he improves his strength with all his care,
Amongst hard rocks all night his lodgings are:
There he rough leaves, and brisly Carix eats,
And striving with his horns, his anger whets
Against a tree; his blows the wind excite,
Raising the sand a Prologue to the fight.
Strength once regained, he does to battle go,
And sudden charge his forgetful foe.
As when amid'st the Sea billows grow white;
Rolling from the ocean, gather to a height,
And now at Land, against rocks it strangely rores;
Nor less then Mountains break upon the shores,
The deep waves boil, whirled with a foming tide,
And working casts up sand on every side.
All men on earth, and beasts, both wild and tame,
Sea Monsters, gaudy foul, rush to this flame:
The same love works in all; with love engaged.
The Lyoness mindelesse of her whelps, enraged
VVanders the fields, nor foul Bears oftener take
So many lives, nor greater slaughter make;
Nor cruel Tigers, nor the raging Boar:
Ah'tis ill wandering then, dry Lybias shore.
See thou how horses will all over shake,
When in their nostril's the known sent they take?
Nor they with curbs, nor stripes can be debarred,
Nor Rocks, nor Rivers can their course retard;
Though down they sweep whole Mountains with their waves.
The Sabell Boar whetting his tusks, then raves
Rubbing against a tree, and tears the ground,
Hardening his shoulders against the ensuing wound.
How was that young man took, when fierce desire
In his hot blood kindled so great a fire!
For he when all the elements, did fight,
Through Seas turned Mountains swomme in hideous night,
When at him heavens Artillery thundered round,
And broken billows against the Rocks resound:
Nor could his woeful parents him recall,
Nor she whose Fate attends his funeral.
But the Mares fury above all is fam'de;
For Venus with such rage their minds inflam'de.
When Glaucus Chariot Mares with fury stirred.
Did with revenging teeth devour their Lord.
Beyond high Gargarus, loud Ascanius stream,
Over hills, and deepest floods, Love carries them,
And straight with hidden fire their marrow burns:
But most in the Spring, when heat of blood returns.
Then all to courting Zephire turn their face,
And placed on Rocks, lascivious gales embrace,
And often they pregnant prove without a mate,
Big with the winds and (wondrous to relate)
Then over hills and dales are carried on;
Not to thee Eurus, nor the rising Sun,
To Boreas, nor whence Auster does arise,
And with black showrs in mourning clothes the skies.
Hence comes that poison which the Shepherds call
Hippomanes, and from their groine does fall.
The woeful bane often cruel stepdames use,
And with a charm among powerful drugs infuse.
But time irreparable hasts away.
Whilst we with love transported waste the day.
Thus much for herds; Next be your care to keep
The shaggie Goat, and drive the fleecie sheep:
From this expect your glory, rustic Swains:
Nor am I ignorant how great a pains
It is low things with glorious words to praise,
And slender arguments to such honor raise.
But me, love of Parnassus does invite
To hills untracted, there is my delight;
Where no old path is to Castalia found.
And now great Pales thee I shall resound.
First in warm Coats preserve thy flocks, and feed
Till fresh spring give new livories to the Mead:
Let straw and litter keep their lodgings warm,
Lest cruel cold, the gentle offspring harm,
Breeding the scab and rot; but Arbuts bring
To wanton Goats, and water from the spring.
Then free from winds against the winter sun
Place thou their stalls, where Phoebus warms at noon.
When cold Aquarius shall no more appear,
Sprinkling chill dewes on the concluding year.
And to keep Goats take thou no smaller care,
Nor less shall be thy gain, then if they were
In rich Milesian fleeces clothed, and sold,
Blushing in Tyrrian purple for much gold.
These still will breed, hence store of milk you get:
The more the paile fomes with the drained teat,
The more sweet streams from the pressed udder spin.
Besides they cut the beards and hoarie chin
Of the Cyniphian Goats, and brisly hairs,
Useful for Camps, and woeful Mariners.
But they in woods and high Lycaeus rove,
Feeding on briers, and bramble beries love.
Then home return, leading their own fair strain,
And scarce with full teats over the thresh^ld gain.
But careful keep from them cold winds and snow:
Because they less the want of mortals know.
And bring sweet food, for them green branches cut,
Nor from the hay stack all long winter-shut.
But when the spring the Western winds invokes;
To Groves and Meads invite then both thy flocks.
At the first dawn, in cold grounds let them feed,
Whilst day is young, and pearled is the mead.
When dew to cattle deer, on soft grass lies,
And the fourth hour heat musters from the skies;
And amongst shrubs the murmuring Grasshopper sings;
Command thy flocks then to the Lakes or Springs:
Or let them taste sweet streams in pipes conveid;
And when grown hot, to seek some cooling shade;
Or Joves great Oak, preserved long from harms
By ancient rites, stretching his mighty arms.
Or where dark Groves are with thick branches made
Awful, and sacred with a horrid shade.
To water then, and feed again, prepare
At Sunset, when sweet Vesper cooles the air,
When the bright Moon relieves the thirsty ground,
Halcyans on shores, and birds on trees resound.
Why should I thee of Lybian shepherds tell?
Their pastures, and how scatteringly they dwell?
Often night and day, for a whole month they feed,
And unhous'd Cattle through vast deserts lead.
In open field the Lybian Shepherd lies,
With him his stock, his house, and Deities,
His arms, his Spartan Dog, and Cretan bow.
So does the armed Roman Soldier show
Laden in's march; then stands in well pitched tents,
Before the foe could have intelligence.
But Scythians who Maeotick Lakes command,
And stormy Ister rouling golden sand,
Where Rhodope does to the poole extend,
There in close stals the Cattle they defend.
The fields no grass, the trees no leaves do boast:
But snowie mountains, and a horrid frost
Hides all the earth, at least seven Cubits high,
Still cold, North winds blowing eternally.
Nor can the Sun those gloomie shades displace;
Nor when his horse mount the Meridian race,
Nor when he cools them in the Western maine.
There, icy setters straight swift rivers chain.
Wheels shod with iron the strong-back'd water bears,
And where ships sailed, now safe go laden Cars.
It breaks hard brass, clothes freez upon their backs,
And wine once liquid, suffers now the axe:
And mighty lakes transformed to ice; soon hard
Grow drops of water on their uncomb'd beard.
Mean while all heaven is dark with snow, sheep die,
And under mighty drifts fair Cattle lie;
Whole herds of Deer, new Mountains there infold;
That scarce you may their lofty crests behold.
Nor these with nets they snare, nor seiz with hounds;
Nor are they frighted when the arrow sounds;
But as they struggle under hills in vain,
Kill with their Swords, whilst they aloud complain,
Then bear them home, triumphing with a cry.
These under ground, in Caves securely lie.
Whole Elms, and loads of mighty Oak are laid
Upon the hearth, when the huge fire is made.
They spend the night in sport; strong Ale they quaffe,
And wanting Wine carouse sharp Cervice off.
People so fierce nigh Hyperborean hills
Under cold stars of th Artick Region dwells;
Still beaten with the sharp Ryphaean blasts,
Their body clothed with Sable Furs of beasts.
But if thou wool esteem, from thorns thy sheep,
From burs and briers preserve: from rank grass keep.
And with soft fleeces snowie flocks elect;
But him (although the Ram be white) reject
Whose mouth is always moist, with a black tongue,
Lest he should change the colors of the young.
But choose another through the spacious plain,
With a white fleece (if it may credit gain),
Arcadian Pan, thee Luna to the grove,
Calling enticed; nor did thou scorn his love.
Is milk thy care, then Lotus, Cythesus bring?
And in their coats store of salt herbage fling.
This makes them drink which more the reat extends,
And with a quicker taste the milk commends.
Some from the Dams hinders the tender Kids.
And with hard muzzels from the pap forbids.
What they at morning milk, they press at night,
What they at evening gain, when day grows light
The Swains to Market bring, or sprinkled over
With salt, they keep it for their winter store.
Nor of thy Dogs have thou less care; but feed
Fleet Spartan whelps, and thy Mollossian breed
With store of whay; commanding such a guard,
Against thieves by night, or wolves thou art prepared:
Nor shall the fierce Iberian thee afright.
Thou the wild timorous Ass shall put to flight.
Often hunt the Hare and Deer with full-mouthed hounds,
And thrust forth Boars sheltered in wood-land grounds:
And from high Mountains with loud shouts beset
Sometimes huge Stags, and drive them to thy net.
Next learn to burn sweet Cedar in their rooms,
And smoke out Serpents with Galbanian gums.
For ost amongst the planks a Viper lies,
Deadly to touch, and light affrighted flies.
Or else a Snake in sheltring roofs does use,
Which will on Cattle cruel bane infuse
Hid in the ground: take thou a stake, or stone,
And as he swells, and hisseth, knock him down.
But if he threaten, yet thou may be sure,
He will by flight his Coward head secure.
His armed ribs being bruised, and harnes'd train,
Scarce rallying up his broken rear again.
In the Calabrian Groves there haunts a snake,
Wreathing a haughty Crest, and scaly back,
And mingled spots on his long belly show.
Who whilst the rivers from the Mountains flow;
Earth with the Spring dew'd, and the showrie South,
He lives in fens, glutting his greedy mouth
With fish, and croaking frogs; but when earth gapes,
And Lakes are drained with heat, to Land he scapes:
Rouling his flaming eyes; Then far and wide
Rages with thirst, with heat much terrifi'de.
Then let not me under heavens Canopie
Sweet slumber seize, nor on the grass to lie
Near murmuring Groves, when he has cast his skin,
And rouling shines in want on youth again;
Leaving in's nest his eggs, or else the young,
And dares at Phoebus shake his triple tongue.
The signs and causes now of each disease,
I Will thee inform: foul scabs thy flock will seize
When chilling showers invade life's strongest hold;
And horrid frosts wax grim with bitter cold.
Or when foul sweat sticks to them lately shorn,
And with rough briers their naked bodies torn.
For wiser Shepherds the whole flock will take,
And deeply plunge them in some cleansing Lake:
Far in to drench his fleece the Ram is thrown,
Who with the gentle stream comes gliding down.
Or when they are shorn, the lees of oil apply,
Or silver spume, commix'd with Mercuris,
Idean pitch, and store of oily tar,
Scylla, Bitumen and black Hellebor.
And no endeavor shall find more success,
Then if the skillful Swain an orifice
With a sharp Lance shall open on the head;
Corruption lives, and is by covering fed.
Whilst the idle Swain neglects to dress the sore,
And from the Gods does better things implore.
When in the Bleater's marrow aches breed,
And putrid fevors on his spirits feed;
It will be good to avert the raging pain,
By opening in his foot, the beating vein.
So the Bisaltians were accustomed,
And the most fierce Gelonians, when they fled
To Rhodope, or Getan wilds; to quaffe,
Mixed with thick milk, the blood of horses off.
If thou see any to the cool shades draw,
And sweet grass nibble, as they had no maw,
Or lag behind, or grazing to lie down,
And ere they fould, to march away alone,
Straight kill the guilty, ere the dire disease
Infect the flock, and careless vulgar seize.
Nor oftener is the floods disturbed with wind
Then sheep with rots, nor does the sickness find
One to destroy; but suddenly does fall
On root and branch, stock and original.
If any the Alps and Norick Castles knows,
Placed on high hills, and where Tymavus flows;
Deserted Realms, now he may see of Swains,
And every where Groves, and forsaken plains.
Here, once the air infected did beget
A plague, which raged through the Autumnall heat:
All kind of Cattle, and of wild beasts di'de;
The grass was tainted, rivers putrifi'de;
Nor was one way for death, but when the flame
With burning thirst through feav'rous bodies came,
Cold Rheums again abound; and the disease
Their feeble limbs consumed by degrees.
Often sacrifices, at the Altars placed
With snowie wreaths, and flowery Garlands graced;
E're Sacrificers could dispatch, fall dead:
Or if before the Priest one slaughtered,
The bowels on the Altars will not burn;
Nor the Diviner answers can return.
And scarce their knives with blood are sprinkled over,
And the top-sand be stained with watery gore.
Then the fat Calf in richest pasture falls;
And his sweet life gives up at plenteous stals.
Hence Dogs run mad, and sickly Boars perplex't
With a short cough; and with swollen jaws are vexed.
The Conquering steed, mindeless of war or food,
Unhappie falls, and leaves the cooling flood,
And with his feet the hard ground often beats.
His ears now hang, and faint with troubled sweats
Which near their death grows cold; their skins are dry,
And to be handled roughly do comply.
To burning eyes short breathings grant no rest.
Sometimes they groan; and deeply from their breast
Fetch a sad sigh; blood from their nostrils flows,
And in lank jaws their tongue now rougher grows.
To drench them with a horn of wine be sure:
For to them dying this the only cure.
Sometimes it kills; for thus refreshed, they burn.
(God bless good men, on bad this error turn)
With greater rage; and as cold death draws near,
With cruel teeth they their own members tear.
The smoking Ox is taken at the Plow,
And from his mouth blood mix't with foam does flow,
Groaning his last; whilst the sad Plowman here
Unyoaks (mourning his brothers death.) The steer,
And midst his work the Plow leaves in the field.
Nor shady groves, nor soft meads pleasure yield;
Nor streams which through the vales from mountains glide,
And are more clear then crystal purisi de.
His sides grown lank, darkness his eyes over spread,
And to the ground falls, on his drooping head.
What availes toil or profit? what to turn
The Unwilling gleab? These not with rich wine burn,
Nor surfets at high banquets taint their blood;
But leaves, and simple herbage are their food.
They drink pure fountains, and the running streams,
Nor vexing care disturbs their healthy dreams;
Then only in those Realms as fame has taught,
The Cattle were for Juno's offering sought.
And unmatched steers her Chariot did convey
To the high places where they honors pay.
The Earth they dig themselves, and set the corn,
Nor from the mountains with their own neck scorn
To draw the groaning Car. No woolf did plot
By stratagem to take some wealthy coat:
Nor walks nocturnall rounds about the sheep,
A cruel sickness him at home did keep.
And now the nimble Buck and timorous Do,
Amongst the Dogs, about the houses go.
And then the Oceans numerous race, and all
Those kinds that boast from thence original,
Washed with the floods, as shipwrack'd bodies come
To shore, and Sea-calves up fresh rivers swoom.
No lurking hole the viper now availes,
Nor dreadful Serpents with erected scales.
Nor safety from sweet air could birds receive,
But falling, in the Clouds their spirits leave.
All Arts now harm, the wise Physicians fail.
Chyron, Melampus, know not what they aile,
Pale Tisiphon rages, sent from Stygian shades,
In open light, and fear and sickness leads;
Her greedy jaws by day raised high from ground.
The Rivers, hills, and sandy banks resound
With bleating flocks, and loud complaining steers.
And carcasses in mighty heaps she rears,
Whole flocks she kills; with gore the stalls are drowned:
Till they had learned to lay them in the ground.
Their skins unusefull, water could not rense
Their bowels, nor the fire their entrails cleanse,
Nor shear, for the disease; their fleeces full
Of filthiness, Nor touch the tainted wool:
And those durst wear the loathsome garments, get
Inflamed Carbuncles, a clamie sweat
Seiseth their noisome limbs, and in few hours
The infected bodies sacred fire devours.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS.
THE ARGUMENT.
How for the Bees fit stations to contrive.
Of what, and how, to build the stately hive.
In settling Realms, they often divided are;
And for their Kings contend in mighty war.
Their Diet, Customs, Laws and Chastity:
Their toil and rest, they winds and rain foresee.
Their stocks, their age, and Loyalty to Kings
What their invention to perfection brings.
What cures against Diseases to afford,
And how the whole Nation lost, may be restored.
I Will to Aetheriall honey next proceed,
Heavens choicest gift, this too, (Maecenas) read.
Wonders admired, to thee of lowly things,
In order their whole stocks, magnanimous Kings,
Wars, labors, manners, Nations I Will recite,
Slight is the theme, but not the glory slight;
If pleased powers grant, and called Apollo hear.
First, for thy bees seek a fit station, where
No winds approach, (for them each gale forbids
To bring home food. Nor sheep and wanton Kids
Tread down the grass, or heifers shake the dewes
VVandring the plains; and tender herbage bruise
Thence speckled Lizards with pide shoulders drive
Woodpecks, and other birds from the rich hive,
And Progne who a bloody hand did smeare.
For all things these devast, in their mouths bear
The winged Be, sweet food to cruel nests.
Let Springs be near, and Lakes green moss invests;
And a pure river gliding through the mead,
Where Palm their gates, and branching Olive shade.
That when new Kings shall forth their Colonies bring,
And youth drawn out sport in the wanton spring;
The neighboring banks may them from heat invite,
And willing trees with courteous boughs delight,
Amidst; whether the water stand or runs,
Lay twigs a cross, and cast in mighty stones,
That they on many bridges safe may stand,
And to the warming sun their wings expand.
When stormy Eurus has them tardy found,
And scattered, or endangered to have drowned.
Let verdant Cassia round about them dwell;
And Betonie which gives so large a smell:
And of sweet-breathing Succorie store be set,
And let them drink the dewes of Violet.
Whether of hollow bark thou do contrive,
Or else with limber twigs compose the hive:
Make straight the gate: for cold congeales the wax,
And heat by melting does again relax:
Both which extremes the Bees alike do fear.
Nor they in vain those breathing cranies smear
Of their low roofs with wax, indevouring still,
The edges with balm, and pleasant flowrs to fill.
And for this use a glue they gather, which
Excels all bird-lime and Idaean pitch.
Often in deep Caves, (if fame a truth report)
Low underneath, they vault their waxen Court;
And often discovered in a hollow Rock,
Or in the belly of an aged Oak.
But thou their rooms with clay well-tempered, seel;
And with leaves cover, that no cold they feel.
About their Court let no Yewes grow, nor bake
The fiery crab, nor trust too deep a Lake:
Or where bad smells, or hollow Rocks resound,
And angry echoes of the voice rebound.
Next when bright Sol makes winter to retreat
Behind the Earth, and opens Heaven with heat,
Straight they draw out, and wander Groves and woods,
Reap purple flowers, and taste the crystal floods.
By what instinct I know not, then they fly
To their own Courts, and their dear progeny.
Next with great Art, their waxen Cells contrive,
And the elaborated honey stive.
But when thou see a troup aspiring, fly;
Drawn from their winter quarters through the sky;
And curious have with admiration spide
A sable Cloud through crystal Spears to glide;
Then to sweet springs, and pleasant shades they go,
Here oderous flowers, and beaten Milfoyle strew,
With honey- Suckles make a brazen sound,
And beat the Cymbals of the Goddess round:
They on charmed boughs will stay, or else retreat,
As is the custom to their parents seat.
But if they draw to battle, (often between
Two Kings great discord, and sad wars have been)
And straight thou may foresee the vulgar rage:
Wild for mad war; for those who not engage,
The martial note provokes, heard is the alarm,
Like dreadful Trumpets when they sound to arm.
They list proud troops in haste, their Spears they whet,
Their light shields furnish, and their arms they fit,
Guarding their King thick to the Court they go,
And with loud clamor challenge out the foe.
Then when'tis fair, the open field they take,
They join their battle, and they joining make
A noise scales heaven, and in close order all
Strongly imbodied charge, then headlong fall.
Not thicker hail does in a tempest pour,
Nor shaken Oaks more plenteous akorns shower.
The Kings amid'st the bands in armor shine,
And mighty souls in narrow breasts confine,
Both resolute not to yield, till these or they
Are to proud Conquerors fore'd to give the day:
These huge commotions, and so mighty war,
Sudden with thrown-up dust appeased are.
But when both Princes you from battle call,
Who seems the worst, lest he a prodigal
Should waste the stock; command him to be slain,
And let the best in the empty palace reign.
One shines with gold, whom glorious colors grace,
Two sorts there are: the best, his noble face
Has blushing cheeks, with sloth the other pale
His sagging belly after him does traile.
As their two Kings, such their two Nations are;
For one s deformed, as when a traveller
Through clouds of dust, extremely thirsty gets
And from's dry mouth a sulleid water spits.
The other shines with gold, and glory graced;
And equal spots upon their bodies placed.
This Progeny is best, from these you may
Sweet honey at the certain time conveigh,
Not only sweet, but also shall be fine,
And which shall qualify your sharpest wine.
But when they wander, sporting through the skies,
Forsake their hives, and cooling roofes despise,
Let not their straggling minds seek idle things:
Nor hard's the task; but cut their Princes wings,
They staying at home, none dares to scale heavens arch,
Or with spread ensigns from their camp to march.
Them, let sweet gardens with fresh flowers invite,
And old Priapus, who the thieves does fright,
And spoiling birds from thence with his awful look,
All safe preserving with his sallow hook.
Set thyme about their roofs, and Pines remove
From lofty hills if thou such labors love
Weary thy hand with toil, and pleasant bowres
Plant round, and dew the earth with friendly showrs.
And did not I, now to my Port draw near;
And striking sail my prow to shore did steer;
How to adorn fair gardens I would sing,
And Pestum, where there is a double spring.
Why Succorie in pleasant streams delights,
And verdant parseley swelling banks invites;
And Cucumers grow plump along the grass,
Nor would I Daffadils long in growth, orepasse;
Or soft Acanthus, winding Ivie's store,
And Myrtle so enamored on the shore.
I call to mind near high Oebalius towrs,
Where slow Galesus waters Ceres bowrs,
I saw an old Corycian, who enjoyed
Few akers, not for pasturage employed,
Nor was it fit for corn or vineyard found.
Yet he, among thorns, choice herbs and lillies round
His garden Vervaine did, and Poppie find,
That wealthiest Kings he equaled in his mind:
And late at night returning home well stored,
He with unpurchas'd banquets lades his board.
He in the spring did first sweet Roses pull;
And could in Autumn apples soonest cull;
When stones with cold the cruel winter cleaves,
And bridles up with ice the flowing waves.
His soft Acanthus now he gently twinde,
Chiding the tardy spring, and lingering wind.
Therefore huge swarms, his bees first pregnant brought,
And his full combs rivers of honey fraught,
His Pines and barren Lindons fruitful were;
As many blossoms as his tree did bear,
So many apples it in Autumn graced:
And he the lofty Elms in order placed.
Wardens, and Thorn, which now a damson made,
And Planes which to Carousers are a shade;
But these excluded by a narrow straight,
I leave to others after to relate.
Now I Will declare those gifts which were conferred
On bees by Jove himself, for what reward
They followed tinkling brass, and Curets sound,
And fed the King of heaven under ground.
In common only they maintain their race,
And like a City ranged their houses place;
And understrictest Laws they aged grow,
Their native Country, and fixed mansions know,
Mindful of winter, labor in the Spring,
And to the public store their profit bring.
For some provide, and by a compact made
Labor abroad; others within are stayed
To lay Narcissus tears, and yielding gum
As the first groundwork, of the honey comb:
And after they tenacious honey spread.
Others the Nations hope, young Colonies breed.
A second part the purest honey stives;
Until the liquid Nectar crack the hives.
There are by lot attend the gates, t'informe
Approaching showrs, and to foretell a storm.
To ease the laden, or imbattel'd drive
The Drones, a slothful cattle from the hive.
Work heats; of thyme the fragrant honey smells.
As when the Cyclops the soft mass compels,
Hasting for Jove huge thunderbolts to make:
Some with the bellows air return, and take;
Others in water dip the hissing over;
Aetnean Caves with beaten anvils rore:
They with much strength, their arms in order raise,
And turn with tongues the mass a thousand ways.
So (if I may great things compare with small)
Bees to their work for love of profit fall,
Each has his task, the aged Rulers are,
And frame Dedalian roofs, and combs repair;
But those that youthful be, and in their prime,
Late in the night return, laden with thyme,
On every bush, and tree about they spread;
And are with Cassia and rich Saffron fed,
Or purple Daffadils, and Lindors tall.
All rest at once; at once they labor all.
Early they take the field, at night again
When Vesper them from feeding does constrain;
Homeward they draw; and strength decaid restore,
And with soft murmurs throng about the door.
When they repose, all night they silent are,
And pleasant sleep does wearied limbs repair;
Nor from their hives they stir, when rain is nigh,
Nor trust their persons to a stormy sky.
But safe they water nere their Cities wall;
And often with Pebles journeys make, but small,
As a light boat balanced on raging seas,
With which through vacant air themselves they peise.
It Is strange that Bees such customs should maintain,
Venus to scorn: in wanton lust disdain
To waste their strength; and without throws they breed;
But cull from leaves, and various flowers their seed.
Their Kings and petty Princes they proclaim,
Then Palaces and waxen Kingdoms frame,
But often their wings are torn on Rocks abroad,
And free they spend their lives beneath their load,
So love they flowrs, and to make honey pride.
Though soon the term of their short life does glide,
(For the seventh summer a full period gives)
Yet their immortal race for ever lives.
Their noble house for many years remains,
And records keep of ancient Princes reigns.
Next not rich Egypt, nor great Lydia,
Parthians or Medians, more their Prince obey,
Whilst their King lives, they all agree in one,
But dead, the public faith is overthrown.
They make the Common wealth a spoil, and rend
Their Waxen Realms, his life did all defend.
They honor him, and with a martial sound
Circle about, and strongly guard him round.
Bear on their back, twix'd him and death they stood,
And purchased noble funerals with their blood.
From these examples some there are maintain,
That Bees derive from a celestial strain,
And heavenly race; they say the Deity
Is mixed through earth, the Sea, and lofty sky,
Hence men and beasts, both wild, and tame derive;
And what so ere by breathing air survive.
To this they after are dissolved, and then
Returned assume first Principles again:
Nor is there place for death; their spirits fly
To the great stars, and plant the lofty sky.
But if their narrow Courts thou mean to spoil,
And seiz the treasure of the honey pile,
Water with silence in their chambers spout,
And with your hand extended smoke them out.
Twice they swarm yearly, twice a large increase
Their harvest brings; first when the Pleiades
Her sacred brow above the earth does shoot,
And spurns the scorned Ocean with her foot;
Or when that star from watery signs retires,
And sad in stormy waves conceases her fires.
But when incensed their anger knows no mean,
For if you hurt them; they inspire a bane;
And in the body fixed their Javelins leave;
And where they give the wound, their death receive.
But fear thou cruel winter, and would spare
Pitying their broken minds, and sad affair;
Who doubts to cut them wax, and to persume
With thyme? for often base Lizards spoil the coomb,
And the blind Beetle wastes the precious hoard,
^^nd Drones free-quartered at another board.
Or cruel Wasps charge with unequal^ arms,
Or the Moths eating generation harms,
Or else Minerva's hateful Spider sets
About their Palace gates, intangling nets.
How much by fortune they exhausted are,
So much they strive their ruins to repair
Of their fallen Nation, and they fill the Exchange
Adorning with the choicest flowrs their grange.
But if (since Bees know our calamities)
Their bodies languish in a sad disease,
Which thou by signs to manifest may know,
Their looks are changed, and their dejected brow
Paleness deforms* when they to shades descend,
In order woeful funerals they attend.
Or else they mourn lingering about the door,
Or in their chambers privately deplore;
Till they with hunger, and stiff cold grow numb.
Then sadder notes are heard, a doleful hum.
As when rough Auster murmurs through the woods,
Or as loud waves rore with incensed floods,
Or dreadful flames rage pent in furnaces.
To burn Galbanian odor I Will advise,
And bring the mourners honey in a cane,
T'intice the wretches to known food again.
Juice of Oke-apples mixed with Roses dride;
And richest wine, with fire well purifi'de,
To these Cecropian thyme, and Centaurie join,
And grapes which dangle on the Psythian vine.
There is a flower, which grows in meadow ground:
Swains call Amello, easy to be found:
Which golden, like a mighty grove does sprout:
But the thick leaves, that shade it round about
Are clad in purple; which the Altars often
Imbraceth with sweet wreathes, and garlands soft:
Sharp in the taste; wise Shepherds gather them
In flowrie vales, near Mellas sacred stream.
The root of these they mix with Bacchus blood,
And at their gates leave plenty of this food.
But should the whole stock fail, not one remain,
From whom they should derive their house again;
The Arcadians rare invention we must here
Remember, who with blood of a slain steer
Often Bees restored. I will recount it all
And tell the story from the original.
Where happy people plant Canopus soil,
And dwell near spreading streams of flowing Nile,
And through their Country painted vessels rows,
And where the stream from the tan'd Indian flows,
Which borders nigh the quiver'd Persian land,
And verdant Egypt mailes with fruitful sand;
Then spreading does in seven large channels part,
These Nations all are confident in this art.
First take a little place, for that use chose,
Then tile it, and with narrow walls enclose,
And let there be four windows next designed,
With oblique lights, made from each several wind.
Then take a steer; graced with a branching top,
Of two year old; his breath and nostrils stop;
And whilst he struggles, him with beating kill,
That the sound hide his dissolved bowels fill.
Thus dead they leave it shut and under lay
Green branches, thyme and freshest Cassia.
This must be done, when Zephire calms the main,
Before the Meads blush with new flowrs again,
Ere her high nest the chattering Swallow makes.
Whilst in young bones the cherished humor takes,
Then moving Creatures, (wondrous to behold,)
First without feet, then sounding wings unfold;
Then boldly by degrees to heaven they tower,
And sallie forth, thick as a summer shower;
Or as a cloud of arrows in their flight,
When the bold Parthians are engaged in fight.
What God o Muse! this strange art did invent,
From whence had man this new experiment.
When Aristhaeus left sweet Tempe's coast,
His Bees by famine and diseases lost,
Sad, standing at the sacred fountains head,
Complaining much he to his mother said.
Mother, Cyrene, who commands these floods,
Why me, the noble offspring of the Gods
(If Phoebus is my Sire as you declare)
Bor'st thou the scorn of Fate? where is your care?
Thou gav'st me hope, that I in heaven should reign;
But now those honors mortal life sustain
Of corn, and herds, got by such toil, and care,
I now must loose, though you my Mother are.
Go, and my fertile groves thy self annoy,
And burn my stalls; with fire my corn destroy.
Hew down, and spoil my vinyards; if to thee,
So grievous are those honors granted me.
Under the streams soft bed his Mother heard,
Whilst round her Nymphs Milesian wool did card,
Staind with rich green. Drimo and Xantho, fair
Philodoce and Ligea, their bright hair
Upon their snowie necks disheveled lay,
Spio, Nisaee, Cymodoce and Thalia,
Lycorias, Cydipe; a virgin one,
The other had pangs of Lucina known:
Clio, and Beroe, both to the Ocean borne,
Whom gold, and curious mantles did adorn.
Ephyre, and Ophis, Asian Diope,
And Arethusa swift her arms laid by.
Amongst these Climene did vain cares relate
Of Vulcan, those sweet thefts and Mars deceit,
Gods many loves, from Chaos did rehearse
Whilst they their soft webs ply, pleased with the verse.
Aristaeus grief, then pierced his mothers ear;
All on their crystal seats amazed were.
But Arethusa first her golden head
Advancing from a swelling billow, said,
Dear sister, not in vain we troubled are,
With such a sad complaint; thy chiefest care
Poor Aristaeus, at his fathers streams
Stands weeping, and thy cruelty condemns:
Then said his mother, struck with sudden fear,
Have, have, and show him in, he may repair
To the Gods Court; then bids the waves divide,
To make her Son a passage: on each side
Billows like Mountains stand; then she receives
Him twixt the flood; and leads beneath the waves.
He wondering goes, through Courts, and crystal Realms;
Loud groves, and Caves, which water over-whelms;
And with tumultuous waves astonished found
All the great rivers, gliding under ground
Through diverse ways, whence Phasis, Lycus spread,
And where deep Inepeus shows his head,
And where old Tyber, and sweet Aniens flows,
Where murmuring Hypanis, and Lycus rose,
Golden Eridanus, with a double horn,
Faced like a Bull: through fertile fields of corn
Then whom none swifter of the Oceans sons
Down to the purple Adriatic runs.
When he to chambers arched with pumice drew,
And that Cyrene his vain sorrow knew,
To wash his hands, his sisters from the spring
Draw crystal water, and fringed towels bring,
Tables they load with meat, and full Cups placed,
Then with Pancheian fire the Altar graced.
Here spoke his mother, Let rich wine be paid
Unto the sea; next to the Ocean prayed,
Founder of things, and to the nymphs, who woods
Preserve a hundred, and as many floods.
Now thrice on fire she casts the flowing wine,
As often with flame the lofty seelings shine.
Pleased with the Omen then she thus began.
Green Proteus dwells in the Carpathian maine,
Prophet to Neptune, through broad seas he glides;
And in his Chariot with Sea-horses rides.
Now gone to Emathia and his native shore:
We Sea Nymphs, and old Nereus him adore.
For the great Prophet all things does foresee,
What is, what was, and what shall after be:
This Neptune gave him, whose great herd he breeds,
And nuge Sea-Calves beneath the water feeds.
But him thou first must bind, ere heel'le declare
Cause of thy loss, and prosper thy affair.
Unless you force him, no advice he grants,
And is inexorable to all complaints.
Handle him roughly then, and bind him fast,
And all his slights shall useless prove at last.
I Will bring thee (when at noon the Sun invades
The scorched grass, and beasts retire to shades;)
To the old man's Cave; whom sudden thou may seize,
As he in soft repose shall take his ease.
But when the have bound him, and with chains subdude,
With various transformations he will delude;
A savage Boar, fierce Tiger, scaly Snake,
And a huge Lion with a shaggie neck;
Or to escape shall thunder like a flame;
Or glide from thee in a swift crystal stream:
How much the more he changes to all shapes,
So much more careful (son) prevent escapes;
Till his first form returns, which thou did spy,
When he in pleasant slumber closed his eye.
This said she with a heavenly odor strews,
Her son all over, and Ambrosian dews:
Her comely tresses breathe celestial air,
And did his body with new strength repair.
There is a Cave, worn in a mountains side,
Where stormy winds often forced the swelling tide,
Which cuts it self into a land-lockd bay,
Where once strest Mariners in safety lay.
Proteus in this lies guarded with a vast
Fence-work of Rock; here she the young man placed
Sheltered with darkness, from discovering light:
But she to thin air vanished from his sight.
And now hot Syrius through dry India hurled,
Raged from the sky, and all the middle world
The Sun inflamed; grass burns, and to the mud
The scortching beams boil the exhausted flood,
When Proteus came to his accustomd place,
About him the vast Oceans watery race,
Who sporting, off the brackish water shake,
Then stretched along the shore, sound sleep they take.
He as a herdman in the mountains, when
Vesper invites Cattle to house again;
And bleating Lambs, the cruel wolves provoke,
Sits on a cliffe, and numbers all his flock.
He since so fair the opportunity shows,
Scarce grants the old man his weary limbs compose,
But rusheth with a shout and bound him laid.
Who not unmindfull of his arts to evade,
Transforms himself into all monsters dire:
Now he is a beast, a flood, and straight a fire.
But when no slight prevailed, he vanquished
Himself assumes, and with a man's voice said.
O most undanted youth, by whose commands
Found'st thou our Court? what seek'st thou at our hands?
But he repli'de: Proteus, thou know, thou know;
Nor of beguiling thee may any boast.
Desist; I seek, commanded here by Fate,
How to repair my now decayed state.
The Prophet then rouling his fiery eyes
With flaming beams, enraged, thus replies,
And Destiny declares: No common God
Displeased, on thee has laid his heavy rod;
A great plague is begun; this punishment,
(And less then thou deserv st) has Orpheus sent.
For he incensed (if Fates not interpose)
For his lost wife, will yet procure more woes.
Who whilst she swiftly by the river side
From thee pursuing fled, unhappy Bride
Saw not the mighty Snake, which lurking was
Under the bank and hid in spreading grass.
Alone the Dryades on mountains wept,
The Rhodopeian towrs her funerals kept,
Lofty Pangaea, and bold Rhesus coast,
Getes, Hebrus, and Actian Orythia most.
He on his well-tun'de instrument, alone
His hapless love, thee his sweet wife did moan;
And by himself thee on forsaken shores,
Early and late, thee in his song deplores;
He Taenarus, and woeful gates of Dis;
And horrid groves where dreadful darkness is,
And Manes past, to the stern King repairs,
And courts not used to bend to humane prayers.
He with his song, charmed from the dismal Coasts,
Of Eribus pale souls, and liveless Ghosts,
Men, women, and magnanimous Heroes, here
Boys, virgins, young men laid upon the beer
Before their Parents face: whom hellish mud
And horrid reeds of th Acherontick flood,
With slow fens of the innavigable sound
Binds in, and Styx nine times incircles round.
Hells court, and gates of death amazed were;
The furies now not twist their snakie hair,
Then silenced were loud Cerberus triple jaws,
Ixions restles wheel stood at a pause:
All these he past; then back returns, with fair
Eurydice, to the Aetheriall air,
She following him (for so hells Queen enjoined)
When fond thoughts seized the incautelous lovers mind:
The fault was small, if fiends to pardon knew;
He made a stand; as to the light he drew,
Forgetful, love prevailing over his mind,
On his Eurydice to look back, inclined;
His labor lost, hels Tyrant promise brake,
And thrice a sound rose from the Avernian Lake.
But she Dear Orpheus said, what thee could move
To ruin both? why was so much thy love?
Behold I am recal'd by destinies,
Eternal sleep closes my failing eyes;
And now farewell; black night surroundeth me,
Stretching weak hands, alas, not thine, to thee.
This said; she sudden vanished from his eyes,
And like smoke mixed with wind, dispersed, flies,
Nor saw him catch in vain the yielding air,
Earnest his mighty sorrow to declare.
Nor would hels churlish Feriman again
Transport him over the Acherontick fen.
What can he do? twice having lost his love,
Or with what suit infernal spirits move?
She sailing in the Stygian boat grows cold.
Whilst seven long months delaying periods told
Under a Rock, (as fame reports) he kept;
And at forsaken Strymons billows wept.
Mourning in dismal Caves, Tigers, once fierce,
Grow mild, and stubborn Oaks move at his Verse.
As among the Poplar shade in doleful strains
Robbed of her young, sad Philomel complains;
Whom scarce yet fleg'd, some rustic having found
Took from the nest: but she does woes resound
Perched on a tree; and the whole night laments,
Filling all places with her sad complaints.
No love, nor other bed, could him entice:
Alone he goes, through Hyperborean ice,
And Tanais snow, wandering through bitter coasts,
For ever wedded to Rhiphaean frosts:
Pluto's vain gift Eurydice he mourned.
The Thracian Dames because their beds he scorned,
Him at their Bacchanalian orgies tore,
And strew the young man's limbs about the shore.
His head then from his Ivorie shoulders torn,
Was down the channel of swift Hebrus born,
And whilst his dying tongue could move at all;
Eurydice, Eurydice, did call:
And all the banks resound Euridice.
This Proteus said, and lept into the Sea,
And where he lept did make the fomie wave
Under his body, with huge strokes to rave.
Then thus Cyrene spoke, to ease his care.
My dearest son, now lay aside all fear,
Since the whole cause is known of thy mischance,
The Nymphs with whom in groves she used to dance,
Have sent this sad destruction on thy Bees,
Then humbly them appease with sacrifice,
And there the yielding Dryades adore;
They will forgive, if thou with vows implore.
But first know how thou shall thy offering make.
Four of thy large, and best-fed bullocks take,
Which now on tops of green Lycaeus use;
As many of thy unbroke heifers choose,
Then with great care for these four Altars raise
In the high Temples of the Goddesses:
And from their throats let forth the sacred blood,
Then leave their bodies in a shadie wood;
And when the ninth Aurora brings the day,
To Orpheus Ghost Lethaean Poppie pay,
And a black sheep: then view the grove again
Pleasing Eurydice with a fat Calf slain.
He the Commands of's mother straight obeyed,
Went to the temple, and four Altars made:
And four of's largest bullocks forth he took;
As many comely heisers never broke.
And when the ninth day bright Aurora showed,
He worships Orpheus, and the wood review d.
A wonder not to be believed! he sees
From the dissolved entrails swarms of Bees
Which from the broken ribs, resounding fly,
And in a thick cloud sallie to the sky.
On a tall trees top-branch they cluster now,
As grapes hang dangling on the gentle bow.
Thus tillage, beasts, and trees, have been my theme,
Whilst mighty Caesar at Euphrates stream
Thunders with war, and Conqueror Laws ordains
For willing Realms, and heaven with valor gains.
To me sweet Capua breeding then imparts,
Pleased with the study of contemned arts:
There a bold youth, I chanted rural aires,
And Tityrus sung in cool shade free from cares.
THE FIRST BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
JUNO a storm procures; the Trojans tossed,
By Neptune's favor gain the Lybian coast:
Venus Complaint. The King of Gods relates
To her Romes greatness, and ensuing fates.
Hermes to Lybia sent. Venus appears,
And in a mortal form Aeneas chears.
He visits Carthage, and lost ships regains.
Dido the weary Trojans entertains.
But whilst glad guests, full cups and banquets move,
She takes a fatal draught, and drinks long love.
I, That on small reeds once played rural strains,
And leaving woods, enforced the neighboring plains
To satisfy the greedy Villager,
A grateful work for swains; now horrid war,
Arms and the man I sing who first did come,
Driven by fate, from Troy to Latium.
And Tyrrhen shores; Much toff'd by Land and Sea
By wrath of Gods, and lasting enmity
Of cruel Juno, suffering much by Wars
Whiles he a City builds, and Gods transfers
To Latium whence, Latin Originalls
The Alban fathers, and Romes lofty walls.
Say Muse the cause, what God profaned, or why
Heaven's Queen incensed, one famed for piety
Did to such royles, dangers so great compel?
What I can in heavenly minds such passions dwell?
There was an ancient City. Carthage, south
From Italy, opposing Tybers mouth,
By Tyrians held: rich, fierce in War, which place
Juno was said more than all lands to grace,
Samos neglected, here her arms and here
Her Chariot was, that this earths sway should bear
(If Fates permit) she fosters and intends.
But she had heard that from Troys stock descends
A Progeny, should Tyrian Towr's deface:
Hence of vast rule, in War a haughty race
Must come from Lybias fall: so fates foretold.
This fearing. Juno minding Wars of old
She for dear Argos first against Troy did wage;
Her cruel grief and causes of her rage
Were still awake, deep Paris choice remained
Fixed in her breast, the affront of form disdained;
And the loathed stock: rapt Ganimed highly graced.
With these more vexed, on all shores Trojans cast,
Relics of Greeks and stern Aeacides
She far from Latium drove; round the vast Seas
They wandered long enforced by various chance
Such labor 'twas Romes Empire to advance.
Scarce out of Sicilies view, their sails they raise
Glad, for the maine, and plough the foming Seas.
When Juno thus, who nourished in her breast,
The eternal wound; vanquished shall I desist?
Nor yet this Trojan Prince from Latium turn
Because the fates deny? could Pallas burn
The Argive Fleet, and sink them in the Sea
For one man's crime, Ajas impiety?
She cast Jove's winged lightning from a cloud,
D'spers'd their Ships, with winds the Ocean plowd;
Him breathing flame, his breast quite through struck
With whirle-winds snatched, and on a sharp rock stuck.
But I heavens Queen, sister, and wife to Jove,
So many years War with one nation move:
And who will now Saturnias power obey,
Or suppliant on our altars honors lay?
Such things revolving, fired with discontent
She to the Land of storms Aeolia went,
Coasts big with tempests, Aeolus here confines
In vast caves struggling gusts, and thundering winds
In prison chains: they scorning their restraint,
Round their dark dungeon roar with loud complaint.
In a high tower, here sceptered Aeolus swayes,
Softens their fury, and their rage allaies,
Else in their rapid course with them they would bear,
Sea, Land, high Heaven, and sweep them through the air.
This fearing, them Jove in a cave imures.
And under weight of mighty hills secures,
Then did a King by firm decree ordain,
Who knows to check, or when to give the reine.
To whom thus Juno then was suppliant.
Aeolus (for Heavens great King to thee did grant,
With wind the floods to incense, or to appease)
A race my foe now sail the Tyrrhen Seas,
Bearing to Latium, conquered Gods and Troy.
Raise thou a storm, and their crazde Fleet destroy,
Or through the waves their scattered bodies send.
Twice seven most beauteous Nymphs on us attend,
The fairest Deiopeia I will join
To thee in wed-lock, dedicate her thine:
Still to remain for such especial grace,
And make thee father of a beauteous race.
When Aeolus thus. It Is thy part to injoyne
Commands, O'Queen, but to obey is mine.
Thou in this realm and throne did me invest,
By thy means I with Jove and God, do feast:
Thou madst the storms and tempests me to fear.
This said, the hollow mountain with his spear
He pierced ith side, winds as in mutinous bands
Force their own way, and thunder through the strands.
They take the Sea, Eurus, and Notus raves,
And stormy Africus from deepest caves
The whole Ocean vexed, tumbling vast waves to shore,
Cries of men follow, shrowds and tackling tore:
When from the Trojans sight, swift clouds restrain
Heaven, and the day black night broods on the maine;
It thunders, air with frequent lightning shone;
And all things menace quick destruction.
Straight are Aeneas limbs dissolved with sear,
He groans, and to the Stars his hands does rear.
Then said, most happy you, whose funerals
Your Parents saw under the Trojan walls.
Why was not I by thee, O Diomed slain,
Most valiant Greeian on the Dardan plain?
Why lost I not this life by that hand, where
Hector the stout, fell by Achilles spear?
Where great Sarpedon, where so many bold
Heroes, shields, helmes, in Symois streams are rould.
Then from the North a clamoring gust did rise
Smote cross their sails, and waves advanced to skies.
Their oars are broke, about then comes the ship,
And nigh ore-set, her sails in water dip,
A Mountain breaking ore her weather side,
Scoures all the deck: these a huge billow ride;
Between the floods to them a yauning wave
The bottom shows, the sands with breaches rave.
By South-winds drove on hidden Rocks three came,
Rocks far from shore Italians altars name,
Whose craggie shoulders range above the Sea;
Eurus on sholes (a woeful sight) forced three,
Bilg'd on the bancks, and stuck in beds of sands.
One, true Orontes bore, and Lycian bands,
In his own view, a huge Sea from the North
Breaks over her stern, the Master tumbled forth.
Pitched on his head: but she thrice hurried round
With a swift eddie in the Ocean drowned.
Some few appear swimming on raging floods
With arms of men oars, plancks, and Trojan goods.
Ileoneus stout Ship now the tempest tore,
Now bold Achates, next that Abas bore,
Then old Alethes, through ripped sides each takes
In hostile waves, and founderd are with leaks.
When Neptune th Ocean mixed with horrid sound
And the raised storm perceived, from deeps profound
Whole floods turned up: much moved from Sea did raise
His favoring brows, and from high waves survaies:
Driven through the Sea Aeneas Fleet he spies,
With waves distressed, and fury of the skies:
Nor Iunos fraud nor spleen to him was hid.
Then Eurus Zephyre hailing, thus he chid.
Have you such confidence of your high birth
Without our License, Winds thus heaven and earth
To mix, and dare you raise such hills as these?
Which I -- but floods enraged it is best to 'appease.
Nor shall I thus such crimes hereafter spare.
Hasten your flight, these to your King declare.
Not the Seas power, and mighty trident fell
TO his lot, but mine; let him in huge rocks dwell
Eurus thy house, in those courts Aeolus may
Command, and in the winds close prison sway.
Sooner then said he calmes the raging sea,
Scatters thick clouds restores again the day.
The Ships Symothe did with Tryton raise
And Neptune from sharp rocks with his Trident weighs
Opening vast Syrts, he calmes the raging tides,
And with light wheels over the surface glides.
As often when a great people mutiny
Ignoble vulgar rage; stones, firebrands fly,
Fury finds arms; but if they chance to see
A grave man meriting for piety,
All silent listening stand; he soon alaies
With words the tumult, and their passion swaies.
Thus ceast all fragor of the Sea, which when
The father saw, carried through skies serene
He his blessed Chariot drives, and turns his horse.
To the next shores the Trojans bend their course,
And weary to the Lybian confines glide.
There was a place, far in, an Isle whose side
Stretched made a port, which broke all storms from Sea,
And cuts it self into a land-lock'd bay.
On each side mighty clifts, and two rocks were
Threatening the sky, under whose tops a fair
And quiet Sea; a trembling wood displaid
Above, and dark groves gave a horrid shade.
A cave was opposite with rocks over grown,
Within sweet springs, and seats of living stone,
The Nymphs aboads: strest Ship within this sound
Cable nere held, nor sharp flook'd anchor bound.
Hither Aeneas with seven vessels bore,
The rest now lost, much longing for the shore
The Trojans make no little haste to land,
And rest their Sea-sick bodies on the Sand.
Then first Achates sparks strikes out of flint
And feeds the fire with leaves, dry nourishment
He next about the catching flame supplide.
They wearied out, such as they had provide:
Corn with salt water tainted, what they find,
They dry with fire, and with a stone they grind.
Mean while Aeneas climbs the rock, the whole coast
To Seaward views, if Anteus weather tossed,
Capys or any sail he might discern,
Or Caicus arms upon his lofty stern:
But none appeared. When on the shore three Deer,
Feeding he spide, the whole heard following near,
And the long troop fed in the vales below.
Aeneas stands takes his swift shafts, and bow,
Faithful Achates charge those weapons were,
And first slew those who tallest heads did bear
With branching crests, the vulgar then, and drove
The whole heard with shooting to the leavie grove:
Nor left till victor seven fat bucks he laid
Dead on the ground, which his Ships number made.
Returning then, these with his friends he shared:
Wine good Acestes had in casks prepared,
In Sicily, and gave his parting guests,
The Prince divides: and chears their troubled breasts.
Dear friends (for we have many sorrows past)
You worse have felt, God these will end at last,
You Scillas rage, and cliffes resounding wide
Have past, and the Cyclopian rocks have tried.
Courage recall, banish sad fear; delight
It may hereafter these things to recite,
How through strange chances, through such dangers we
To Latium bend, where blessed seats destiny
Fore-shews, where we Troys Realms may readvance:
Live, and preserve yourselves for better chance.
This said with weighty cares oppressed, he feignes
Hope in his face, within deep grief restraines.
They take the quarrie and prepare the feast;
They straight unlace the Deer, and the humbles dressed,
Some pieces cut, which trembling spitted were,
On shore some boylers place, and fire prepare,
Strength they recruit with food, through the grass spread
They with fat venison, and old wine are fed.
Hunger alaid, and boards removed, much they
Of lost friends talk, 'twixt hope and fear much say,
If dead, and quite despaired of, or alive,
Most the good Prince does for Orontes grieve,
And Lycas and Amicus cruel fates,
Cloanthus, Gyas much compassionates.
When Jove from his aetheriall height survaies
The fixed earth and navigable Seas,
Shores, and spread nations, on heavens spire he stands
And fixed his eyes upon the Lybian strands.
To him revolving in his breast such cares,
Sad, having drowned her sparkling eyes in tears
Spak Venus. Thou, who by eternal Law
Rul'st men and Gods, and do with thunder awe.
How could my son so highly thee displease?
Or Trojans? who, suffering such miseries,
In quest of Latium, loose the Universe.
Hence Romans should arise in after years,
Hence Lords should come from Teucers blood renevv'd,
Who sea, and land should hold in servitude
Thou once did grant, what changes thy decree?
In Troys destruction this did comfort me,
And sad, I fate with fate did counterpoise:
Yet the like chance, the wretches still anoyes.
What end great King grants thou to all their woes?
Safe could Anteuor escape through Grecian foes,
Pierce the Ilyrick straights, and inmost Realms
Of the Lyburni, pass Timavus streams:
Which like a Sea breaks nine ways from a hill,
And with loud waves does the vast champaine fill.
Yet here at length he did Patavium frame,
Built Trojan seats, and gave to them a name,
Then fixed the Teucrian arms, and now at ease
Injoyes the blessing of a happy peace.
But we, thy race, heirs to thy starry throne,
Our ships being lost, are by the wrath of one
Strangely oppressed, and drove from Latiums shore,
This virtues pay? thus do thou Realms restore?
The father of the Gods, and King of men,
Smiling on her with such a look, as when
He clouds disperceth, and serenes the skies,
Kissing his daughter, gently thus replies.
Fear not my Cytherea, fates decree
For thine stand fixed, thou promised walls shall see
Of strong Lavinium, and with high stars range
Great sold Aeneas, my decrees not change.
And since thou have so much desire to know
These things, the book of fate I Will open now:
He shall great Wars in Latium wage, subject
Proud nations, Laws impose, and walls erect,
Three vvinters spent, and Rutilie ore-come
Three springs shall see him crowned in Latium.
But young Ascanius, now Iulus, late
Called Ilus, whilst great, Ilium held her State,
Shall reign full thirty years, with months complete,
And from Lavinium shall transfer his seat;
Then shall with mighty power long Alba rear.
Here Hectors race must rule three hundred year;
Till IIlia, Queen and Priests shall bring forth
Pregnant by Mars, at once a double birth.
Then Romulus proud in's woolfe nurse yellow skin
Shall gather men, and Martial walls begin,
And from his own name style the Roman race.
To them no bounds of things, or times, or place,
Power grant I without end; stern June, here
Who now earth, Seas, and skies, wearies with fear,
Shall better counsels take, with us embrace
The Romans Lords of all, and the gownd race.
Thus pleased: times come with sliding lusters, when
Assaracus house shall make the high Mycene
And Phthia tame, and ore proud Argos reign,
Then Trojan Casar springs of a fair strain,
With Ses to bound his power, with Stars his fame,
Julius, from great Julus, comes that name.
He heaped with Eastern spoils shall be instald
In heaven by thee, and shall with vows be called.
Fierce times then milder grow, wars laid aside:
Old Faith, and Vesta, Romulus shall provide
With Remus Laws, suries dire gates shall bar
With steel and brass, within sits impious war
On cruel arms, bound with a hundred chains,
And horrid with a bloody mouth complains.
This said from heaven he Maias offspring sends,
That Carthage Lands, and new towers might as friends
Trojans receive, lest Dido should deny
Not knowing fates; he glides through ample sky,
On fanning wings, and straight touched Lybian shores;
His charge performed; mild grow the barbarous Moors
A God commanding first the Queen expressed,
Calm thoughts to Trojans, and a bounteous breast.
But many cares that night the Prince revolves,
And with the dawne to search strange coasts resolves,
On what shores driven by winds, by whom possessed
(For Lands he saw until'd) if man or beast.
Which done to tell his friends, the Fleet did lie
Under a hollow clift: from any eye,
Obscured by trees, which gave a horrid shade:
Only Achates his companion made.
In his hand shaking two broad pointed Spears.
When his fair mother in the grove appears;
A Virgins face, and dress, so Virgins be
Of Sparta armed, or such Harpalice
Who horses tired, and Hebrus could out-goe.
For the huntresse as the use, a handsome bow
Wore at her back her hair exposed to winds,
Bare kneed, a knot her flowing garment binds.
And first she said, young men declare if ye
Did this way any of my sisters see,
With quivers guirt, they spotted linx-skins wear,
Or chacing of the foaming boar did hear.
Thus Venus said, then Venus son replide.
None of thy sisters we, nor heard or spide:
But who art thou, thy looks not mortal be,
Nor humane voice, some Goddess certainly,
Or Phoebus sister, or a Nymph you are.
Be blessed what e're; and say, to ease our care
In what strange clime, on what coast we are thrown,
We wander here, the place and men unknown,
Drove by vast floods and winds, by this hand shall
Before thy altars many offerings fall.
Then Venus said, too great such honors are
For me, a quiver Tyrian Virgins bear,
And to their calves bind purple buskins neat.
Carthage thou see, Tyrians Agenors seat;
But Lybick coasts, nations by war unbroke.
Dido reigns here, who Tyrian realms forsook
Flying her brother: long the injuries are,
And circumstance, but things thus briefly were.
Sychaeus was her Lord, his wealth beyond
All Tire, and she of him extremely fond.
To whom her father did espouse a maid
With solemn rites, but Tire Pigmalion swaide,
Her brother who in wickedness exceeds
All those whom fury stirs to impious deeds.
He blind with love of gold, Sychaeus too
Secure, in secret at the altars slew:
Sure of her love, he hides the fact, much feignes
And a sick Lover with vain hope detains.
To her in sleep, her Lord unburied now
Appears, raising a wondrous ghastly brow:
The altars shows, and's breast run through with steel,
Did all close mischief of her house reveal;
Persuades her leave the Land, with speed to fly,
Where hidden treasure should her want supply
In gold and silver a nuge mass, declared.
Dido thus moved, both flight, and friends prepared:
Those who did hate or fear the Tyrant, meet;
And suddenly they seize a ready Fleet
And lade with gold greedy Pigmalions coin
Transport: A woman chief of the design,
Came to these parts where now huge walls, and new
Towers of aspiring Carthage, thou may view:
Called Byrsa from the bargain, so much ground
Bought, as a Buis hide might incompas't round.
But who are you? whence come? or whether go?
To her inquiring, he surcharged with woe
From a full breast drew these. Should I recall
O Goddess things from their original,
And would you hear the annals of our woes?
Vesper would first day in Olympus close.
We from old Troy (by chance if to your ear
Troys name has come) through diverse Seas did steer,
A storm now drove us on the Lybian shore.
I am Aeneas, who from enemies bore
My Gods with me aboard, my fame above
The stars is known, and sprung from mighty Jove,
A race I seek, and native Italy:
I twice ten ships launched to the Phrygian Sea,
What course my goddess mother did ordain,
And fates, I have observed; scarce seven remain,
By waves and tempests crazed: unknown, and poor
Driven from Europe, and the Asian shore,
I wander Lybick, wilds. Here Venus brake
Off his sad tale, and interrupting spoke.
Who ere thou art, I judge that thou surviv'st
Dear to the Gods, at Carthage who ariv'st.
Therefore go on, to the Queens Court repair;
For I, thy friends and fleet returned, declare,
And with changed Northern winds to safety brought,
Else me in vain fond Parents augurie taught.
Lo! twice six Swans in a glad company
Jove's bird pursued through the Aetherial sky
In Heavens broad tracks: now earth in a long train
They seem to take or taken to disdain;
As they return with sounding wings they sport,
And Heaven surrounding, in a song consort.
Just so, I say, thy friends and fleet have gained
The Port, or with full sayls the Bay obtained.
Therefore go on (she said) as leads the way,
And turning did her rosy neck display,
When her Ambrosian hair a heavenly sweet
Breaths from her head, robes flow beneath her feet,
Her Gate a Godesse shows. He when he knew
His Mother, thus, her flying did pursue.
Why cruel too do thou so often deceive
Thy son with feigned shapes? may we not give
Right hands? hear real stories, and reply?
Thus blaming her, he to the walls drew nigh.
But Venus them in obscure air did shroud.
The Goddess vaild them in a mighty cloud;
Lest any touch, ^est any them discern,
Or move delay, or cause of coming learn.
She flies to Paphos, visits her own seat:
Where in her fane a hundred altars sweat
With Eastern Gums, and with fresh Garlands smoke.
Then they the path, which most invited took.
Now they ascend a hill, which much the town
Ore tops, and looks on adverse Bulwarks down.
The Prince admires the Pile, once cotages,
Admires the Port, the paved streets and noise.
The Trojans work, some lay foundations
For walls, and towers, others roll mighty stones,
These draw out grounds, and with a trench enclose;
Laws, Magistrates, a holy Senate chose.
Some make a Port, and these a great work drew
For Theaters, from rocks vast Pillars hew,
High ornaments the future Sceans t'adorne,
As Bees through flowrie meads i'th'sunny morn
Work in the spring, when hopeful youth they train,
Or when they stive their sweet, and liquid gain,
And with the purest Nectar stretch the Hive,
Or ease the laden, or imbatteld drive
The Drones, a sloathfull cattle from the Cells.
Work heats, of thyme the fragrant honey smells.
Blessed men whose walls now rise, Aeneas said,
And their high towers admiring, then survaid:
Wrapped in a cloud (most wondrous) he walks in
With people mixed, and was of no man seen.
Amidst the town was a sweet shadie Grove,
Where first with winds, and waves, the Paente drove
An omen dig'd, which royal Juno sent:
A horse his head, which showed they eminent
Should be in war, and still in wealth abound:
Here Juno's Fane did Tyrian Dido found,
Wealthy with presents, and the Goddess grace:
Brass Portals mount, with steps, and beams of brass,
And the joined hinges rung with brazen Gates.
First in this grove new objects mitigates
His fear; here safety first Aeneas dares
To hope, and better trust to sad affairs.
Waighting the Queen, whilst there he all did see,
Whilst he admires, what the towns chance might be,
The artists emulous hand, and works so rare,
He savv in order all the Trojan War.
War famous now through the whole Universe:
Atrides, Priam, and Achilles fierce
To both: he weeping then Achates said,
What Realms has not our vvoe replenished?
Lo! Priam here, revvard here virtue finds;
Troy tears, and humane sufferings pitying minds,
Fear not he said this same may help our need,
Then did his fancy on vain Pictures feed,
Much grieved his face with a large stream he drovvn'd,
When he beheld how Trey beleaguerd round,
Here Grecians fly, and Hector presses on,
Achilles charges there, and Trojans run.
Near this he Rhesus snowie tents survaid
Weeping, his men in their first sleep betrayed,
Bloody Tydides with great slaughter wastes,
And to his camp the fiery horses hasts,
Ere they drank Xanthus, on Troys Pastures grazed.
Poor Troilus disarmed, here flies amazed;
Too weak for thee Achilles back-wards flung
Dragged with his horse, by the empty Chariot hung,
Holding the reins, earth soyles his neck and hair,
Scribbling the dust with his inverted spear.
When the Ilian dames with flowing tresses went
To unpleas'd Pallas fane, and robes present,
Beating their breasts, sad in the humblest guise:
But the angry Goddess fixed on earth her eyes.
Achilles round Troys walls dragged Hector thrice,
And gold for his pale corpse he made the price.
Then a deep sigh he from his breast did send.
When he the corpse, spoils, chariot of his friend,
And Priam saw, when unarmed hands he rears.
He knows himself mixed with the Grecian Peers,
Knew Eastern squadrons, and black Memnons arms;
Penthiselea raging midst alarms
Her crescent sheelded Amasons brought on,
Her naked breast guirt with a golden zone,
Amidst the thickest bands she charge then,
And the bold virgin dares encounter men.
Whilst on these things the Dardan Prince did look,
And much admiring with the object took;
Then with a guard, Queen Dido, the most fair,
To she high Temple did in state repair.
Such on Eurotas banks, or Cynthus meades,
Shows bright Diana, when she dances, leads
A thousand mountain Nymphs on every side,
Her golden quiver at her shoulders tide.
Walking she all the Goddesses excels,
Whilst joy Latonas silent besome svvels:
Such Dido was, so cheerfully she went
Hastening the works, and future government,
In Juno's porch, the temples mid-arch, round
Guarded with arms on high she sat enthroned;
A woman gave men Laws, and tasks assigns
In equal portion, or by lot injoynes.
When straight Aeneas did with throngs behold
Anteus, Sergestus, and Cloanthus bold;
And other Trojans, which the black storm bore
And waves dispersed unto a distant shore.
Both were amazed, and both at once admire,
'Twixt joy and fear, to join right hands desire:
But troubled with the unknown chance they shroud,
Listening Spectators in a hollow clowd.
What fortune happened to his friends, and where
They lest their Fleet, what chance had brought them there,
For to beg quarter, from each ship were sent
Choice men; who clamouring to the Temple went.
After admission, and free audience had,
Undiscompos'd bold Ileonus said.
Great Queen whom Jove did grant new seats to build,
Pleased that proud Nations to thy sway should yield.
We tempest-beaten Trojans, thee desire
To save our Navy from consuming fire.
And nearer view our cause; the pious spare.
Nor brought we to the Libick confines war,
Nor come to drive rich preys: vanquished long since
We lost such courage, and such insolence.
There is a place the Greeks Hesperia stilc,
An ancient warlike Land, a fertile soil,
B' Aenotrians tild'; Posterity they fame
Since called it Italy, for their Princes name,
Hither we steered,
When straight Oryon with a storm did rise,
And us with furious Auster did surprise,
And on the rocks with conquering billows bore;
A few of us swom hither to your shore.
What a strange Nation's this? what barbarous land
Such customs use? the hospitable strand
We are denyd, by force prohibited
Upon the margents of your coasts to tread.
Aeneas was our King, for piety,
Justice, and prowess, non more great then he.
Which man if fates preserve, if yet he breath,
If cruel shades receive him not in death?
You need not fear, nor shall you e're repent
That you did us in courtesy prevent.
We have in Cicilie, Cities, Arms, and Lands,
Where great Acestes, sprung from Troy, commands.
That we draw up our Navy condescend,
To rigg them new, tackling, and oars to mend.
That if our King, and friends be found, then we
May steer our course with joy for Italy,
And Latium seek. But if no help be found,
And thou best Trojan Princei'th' tempest drowned;
Nor of Ascanius hope; Sicanian roads,
Whence we sailed hither, and prepared aboads,
Old King Acestes, we at last shall find.
I leoneus said; the Trojans with one mind
Gave full applause.
Then Dido brief and modestly declares.
O Trojans fear not, and seclude your cares:
To settle our new State we find so hard,
That we our consines are enforced to guard.
Of Trojans who? of Troy who ignorant are!
Those Worthies, Valor, fury of that War?
Tyrians are not so dull, nor yet the Suns
Chariot so distant from our City runs.
Seek you great Italy, Saturnian lands,
Or Erix shores, the King Acestes strands:
I Will safe disinisse you, and supply your want.
Will you alike with us, this City plant?
This town I build is yours; your ships forsake,
'Twixt Tyrians, Trojans, I Will no difference make.
Would the same wind had hither brought your Prince,
But I will issue forth Commands from hence,
That he be sought through all the Lybian coast,
Should he in Deserts be, or Cities lost.
Achates, and the King, with these words fired
Long since, to break the gloomy clowd desired.
Then bold Achates to Aeneas said,
Great Goddess son, what doubts may now dissuade:
Thy friends, and ships, all safe thou see, but one
Which in our sight, the raging Seas did drown:
All suits thy mothers words. Scarce these he said,
When suddenly the circumsused shade
Purged to thin air, and forth Aeneas stood,
His garb, his face, and person like a God.
Venus had trimmed his hair, youths beauty dies
His cheeks, she breathed glad honors on his eyes.
So Ivory graced by art, so Silver would,
Or Parian marble show, set in pure gold.
And sudden unexpected did appear;
Then to the Queen. I, whom you seek am here,
Trojan Aeneas escaped the Lybick Seas.
O thou alone, pitying our miseries!
Who us Greek relics, spent, by various fates
Of land and sea, thou joyn'st associates
To thee, and thine: we, nor all Dardans strain
Through great earth scattered can require again,
The Gods (if there be any Providence,
Or Justice, will the pious recompense)
Sure must reward thee. O! what age of worth,
What so great Parents, such as thee brought forth?
Whiles convex'd hills have shadows, to the maine
Whilst rivers run, whilst poles the stars sustain,
Thy honor; name, and same, shall last, what land
So-ever me invites. Then his right hand
I lioneus takes, his left Sergestus meets,
Bold Gyas, stout Cloanthus; all he greets.
At the first sight Dido was much dismayed,
And wondering at so strange a story, said;
What dangerous fate pursued thee Goddess son,
What forced thee, on these Barbarous shores to run?
Art thou Aeneas whom fair Venus bare
Near Symois streams, Dardan Anchises heir?
Teucer I call to mind expelled his land
To Sidon came, did Belus aid demand
New Realms to gain: my father then subdued
Cyprus, and conqueror held in servitude.
Since then I understood the Trojan fate,
Thy name, and every Grecian Potentate.
He though a foe your valor did commend,
And said himself, did from your stock descend.
Therefore bold Trojans to our Court advance;
We in such dangers tossed, and various chance
At length our selves did in this country plant,
I know t'help others, taught by my own want.
Then she Aeneas to the Court conveys,
And the Gods honors on the altars pays,
Next to the shores twenty fat beeves she sends,
With them a hundred swine to feast his friends;
And with the ews as many fatned lambs,
With wine, Lyaeus joy,
But all within with royal pomp was graced.
And midst the Hall a stately feast they placed.
Wrought carpets with proud scarlet did infold
Huge silver tables, where was engraved in gold
Her Grandsires acts in a long series stood
Drawn from so many Princes of the blood.
The King (for love paternall never sleeps)
Sent down in have Achates to the ships,
To tell this to Ascanius, then repair
With him to Court, who was his fathers care.
To bring gifts saved from Troy the long robe which
Was purl'd with gold, and with imbroideric rich,
A vail, the edge with bright Acanthus wrought;
Fair Hellens dress, which, she from Argos brought
To Troy, and fatal marriages set forth;
Her mother Laedas gift of wondrous worth.
The Scepter too which once Ilion bore,
Priams first daughter, the Pearl-chain she wore
And Coronet, with gold and jemmes inchac'd.
For these Achates to the Fleet did haste.
But Venus now new arts, new counsels took;
That Cupid should like young Ascanius look,
And in the furious Queen he might inspire
The flames of love, and pierce her bones with fire.
Double tongued Tyrians, doubtful house she fears:
Fierce Juno frights, with night increast her cares.
Therefore to winged love she briefly said,
Dear son, my strength dear son, my chiefest aid,
Who only sleights great Jave's Typhoan fire,
I fly to thee, suppliant thy aid require.
Thou know thy brother my Aeneas has
Felt on all Lands and Seas firce Juno's wrath,
And of our sorrow had as great a sense.
Him Dido courts, and stays with blandishments.
Junonian entertainments I suspect,
Nor she so great occasion will neglect.
Therefore I plot first to deceive, and bind
The Queen with flames, lest some power change her mind,
That she with me Aeneas love involve.
Which to effect, know this is my resolve.
The Royal boy for Carthage does prepare
By his dear Father called: my greatest care
Brings gifts preserved from Troyes flame and the deep.
In high Cytherum him I Will cast asleep,
And in Idalium's sacred mansions lay;
Left he appearing should our plot betray.
Assume his form only one nights short space;
Use art, a boy put on a boys known face,
That when glad Dido hugs thee at her lap
At royal feasts, crowned with the cheering grape.
When she embracing, shall sweet kisses give,
Inspire hid flame, with deadly bane deceive.
His mother love obeys, his wings he leaves
And joyfully Ascanius garb receives,
But V^nus through Julus limbs distills
Sweet sleep, and bears to the Idalian hills,
And in soft Marjerom the boy she laid.
Whose flowers embraced him with a pleasant shade.
But Cuptd then his mothers will obeyed,
Bore gifts to Carthage, and Achates led.
When he came in, the Queen was placed in state
On golden beds, and in the midst she sat.
Aeneas, and the Trojan Captains met,
And raised high, they on spread scarlet set.
The servants water bring and served up bread,
In chargers; some neat fringed towels spread.
And fifty Dames to serve the bill of fare,
Had charge within, and Inscence to prepare.
A hundred more, with youth of like age, graced
Tables with dishes, and the goblets placed.
Through joyful halls in throngs the Tyrians pressed,
Commanded on imbrodered couches rest.
Aeneas gifts th'admire, Julus praised,
At th'Gods bright looks, and feigned words amazed:
The robe, and curious yaile, they much commend.
But Dido destined to a woeful end,
Could not be satisfied, burning at the sight
The Boy and presents equally delight.
Aeneas neck when he embracing held
And the great love of a wrong Father filled,
He Courts the Queen; she strange affection shows,
Fixing her eyes, lays in her lap; nor knows
What God betrayed a wretch; but Cupid is
Mindful of Venus, blotting by degrees
Sychaeus out, and tries with lively love
Fixed thoughts, and resolutions to remove.
After the feast was ended, all took down,
They mighty goblets place, and Bacchus crown.
The ample Palace rung with noyses mixed,
And shining lamps to golden roofes were fixed:
Bright torches vanquish the dark night with fires.
Here, rich with jems, and gold, the Queen requires
A bowl with wine, which Belus used, and all
From Belus sprung, then silence through the hall.
O Jove (for thou giv'st laws to every guest)
To Tyrian, Trojans let this day be blessed,
And still observed by our posterity:
Glad Bacchus and good Juno, present be,
You favoring Tyrians keep this feast, she said.
And flowing honor on the table paid.
Then having gently kissed the swelling cup
Gav't Bitias, he the full gold soon turns up,
And drenched himself in the overflowing draught.
Next other Peers: What greatest Atlas taught
On's golden harp, long hair'd Iopas plays,
Sols labors, and the moons, inconstant ways,
Whence man and beasts, whence showers, and lightning sprung,
Wet kids, Arturus, Northern bears, he sung.
Why winters suns haste so to touch the maine,
And what delays the tardie might restrain.
Tyrians, and Trojans, praise with one consent.
But the slow night, unhappy Dido spent
In various discourse; and long love quast:
Often asks of Priam, and of Hector often,
Now in what arms, Aurora's offspring came,
Of Diomeds horse, now of Achilles same.
My guest from first original relate
Greeks trecheries (she said) and your own fate,
And wanderings since, for now seven years has tossed
You on all shores, and drove to every coast.
THE SECOND BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
APollo's priest the Trojan horse assailes.
Sinons false story, with seigned tears, prevails.
Laocoon and his sons by serpents slame.
The horse drawn in, the Greeks return again.
The City taken by their stratageme.
Aeneas rises from a troubled dream,
And gathers aid; resistance makes in vain;
The Palace burnt, Polites, Priam slain.
Through sword, and fire, Veuus her son convaies.
Glad Omens raise Anchises from delays.
Creusa lost, Aeneas from Troys sack,
Ascends mount I Would, his father on his back.
ALl silent, and with deep attention sat:
Then thus the Prince spoke from his bed of State.
Unheard Of griefs great Queen, you bid renew:
How Troys unhappy Realm the Greeks o're-threw;
Whose sad destruction I my self have seen,
And in her loss have no small sharer been.
Which of the Dolops, Myrmidons, or fierce
Ulysses soldier, such things to rehearse
Could tears refrain? and now the dewie night
^s almost spent, rest setting stars invite:
But if that you desire our chance to know,
And brief would hear, Troys final overthrow:
Though at the thought such horror I within
My wounded soul concerve yet, I Will begin.
Broken by war now many sliding years,
And forced by fate; at length the Grecian Peers
A horse frame like a mountain, by divine
Minerva's art, the sides with wrought fur join.
They for return feign vows; wide spreads that fame,
Here secretly by lot, in the dark frame,
Choice men th'inclose, and full the Caverns large,
And the huge belly, with armed Soldiers charge.
In sight lay Tenedos, the I Will well known
By fame, and rich whilst Priam held the Crown:
Now but a bay, to Ships a faithless rode.
Here they arrived, in desert shores abode.
We thought them gone, and for Mycene steered:
Therefore all Troy from her long grief was cleared,
Gates opend, to behold Greek Camps they joyd,
To visit coasts forsook, and places void.
Here Dolops, fierce Achilles there abode,
Here they joined battle, there the Navy rode.
Some wonder at chaste Pallas gift, accursed,
And the huge horse admire. Thymetes first
Bids draw't within the wall, place in the fane,
Either by fraud, or such Troys fates ordain.
But Capys, and the graver heads, advise
Those gifts suspected, and Greek treacheries
To drown in the Sea, and in the flames consume,
Or vast caves pierce, and try the hollow womb.
The inconstant route, in sides divided be.
Laocoon first, with a great company
From a high tower ran chafing: then from far.
What madness this? think you Greek presents are
Without deceit? believe the foe is gone?
O wretched men, is thus Ulysses known.
Either in this enclosed Graecians hide,
Or against our walls this Engine they provide
To view our houses, and the town to force:
Some deceit lurks, Dardans trust not this Horse,
What ere it is, Greeks bringing gifts I fear.
This said, with huge strength he a mighty spear
At the beasts side, and crooked belly flung:
Trembling it fixed, the mighty Caverns rung,
The Bulk being struck, and hollow, grown within.
Had fate so pleased, had we not senseless been,
He had Argolick dens with steel constrained:
Now Troy had stood, and Priams high Towers remained.
Behold! mean while the Dardan Sheep-heards bring
One bound with mighty clamours to the King.
Who unknown, fieely yields, this plot to lay,
That he the town might to the Greeks betray.
Bold, and prepared for both, or to procure
His ends, or most assured death endure.
From all parts joined, the youthful Trojans flock,
Glad to behold, by turns the captive mock.
Receive Greeks treacheries now; and from one crime
Learn all.
For as amidst, troubled, disarmed he stands,
And casts his eyes round on the Phrygian bands.
Ah what land now, or what sea entertaines
A wretch (he said) for poor me what remains?
Who have no place in Greece, Trojans incensed
Expect with blood, now to be recompensed.
With which complaint our minds are changed, all rage
Comprest, we bid him tell his Parentage.
What news: how they might trust him captive made,
Then casting off all fear at length he said.
All truths what ere, to thee great King will I
Confess, nor that I am a Greek deny;
This first: though cruel fortune Synon has
Made wretched thus, she cannot false of faith.
If you have heard of Palamedes name,
From Belus sprung, his glory great by fame,
Whom innocent, falsely the Greeks accused
And by strange law, because he war refused
Condemned to die, and him now dead lament.
Hither at first, me my poor father sent
In arms with him companion, near of blood.
Whilst safe he was at home, and his realms stood
By counsel; we, bore also name, and state.
But afterward by sly Ulysses hate,
I speak things known, he to the pale shades went,
Grieved, I my life in woe, and darkness spent;
And mourned alone loss of my injured friend.
Nor soolish held my tongue, what chance attend,
If native Greece I ere touch conqueror,
I vowed revenge; with words, sharp malice stir.
Hence my first woes; hence Ithac^s gave out
New crimes to fright, spreads amongst the vulgar rout
Ambiguous words, conscious plots new designs:
Nor rests till Chalcas in his project joins --
Why trivial things recount I thus in vain?
Wherefore delay? if all the Grecian strain
You in one listesteem? enough is told?
Now let me suffer, this Ulysses would,
This with much treasure would Atrides buy.
Then we grow earnest, to know how or why:
Of such plots ignorant, and Pelasgian art.
Who trembling thus proceeds with feigned heart.
To raise their siege the Graecians often desired,
And Troy forsake by flight, with long war tired.
(And would they had) whom ready, storms at Sea
Did often shut in, and rough winds terrify.
But more since we with ample beams did form
This horse, all heaven did thunder with a storm.
Perplexed, to th'Oracle, Euryphilus
We sent, who these sad answers brought to us.
The winds you first appeased with virgin blood,
When first for Trojan shores, you Grecians stood:
With blood you must, and a Greek sacrifice
Gain your return. When through the Camp this flies,
Amazed through their bones shot trembling fear,
Whom Phoebus meant, for whom such fates prepare.
Ulysses here, with great stir, midst the bands
From Prophet Calchas, asks the Gods Commands.
Th'artists dire plot, many did to me
Foretell, and wisely did the event foresee.
Silent ten days, he cunning did refuse
Any to name, and the sad Victime choose:
At last, forced by Ulysses clamors, he
Breaks silence, and to th'altars destins me.
They all assent, what each himself did fear,
Turned to the ruin of one wretch, they bear.
Now came the fatal day, rites are designed,
Salt fruit they bring, my brows with garlands bind.
I grant, I broke my bonds, fcapt death by flight,
And hid with reeds, in a foul lake all night
I lay: till they set sail, if so they would.
No hope is left my Country to behold,
Sweet Children, or dear father now, which may
For my escape be called, sad mulcts to pay,
And my crime expiat with their own death.
You by the gods, by sacred truth, by faith
Inviolate, I pray (if any be
Amongst mortals yet) pity my misery,
Pity a wretch so great injustice bears.
We grant both life, and pity, to his tears.
And Priam first his mannacles to ease
And chains Commands; and courteously said these.
Who ere thou art, forget the Graecians gone:
Thou shall be ours; but now these truths make known,
Why placed they this huge horse? who authors are?
What would they? sacred is it, or work of war?
Then skilled in arts, and Grecian treacheries,
His hands unbound he raises to the skies.
Eternal fires, you powers from violence free,
Altars, dire swords I escaped, my witness be,
And the Gods wreaths, which me your offering crowned:
Now from our sacred oath I am unbound,
Now I may hate the Greeks, and all things hid
Disclose; nor has our Countries laws forbid.
If thou keep promise, if thou Troy prove true,
If truths, if great things I repay to you.
The Greeks chief hopes, and confidence was laid
Since first this war begun, in Pallas aid.
But since that impious Diomed conjoined
With Ithacus, who all cursed plots designed,
Fatal Palladium from the sacred fane
Entering they snatched, the high towers warders flaine,
Took the blessed image, and with bloody hand
Rudely the virgin fillets then profaned,
The Grecian hopes ran backward, and declind.
Broken their strength a verse the Goddess mind.
Nor gave she fignes by doubtful prodigies:
Scarce placed within our camp, her burning eyes
Shine with bright flames; and from her body flows
Salt sweat, and wondrous, thrice from ground she rose,
Bearing her target, and her trembling spear.
Calchas cries straight, to Sea they must repair,
Nor Grecian arms, should conquer Troy, unless
The Omens, and the Power return to Greece,
Which they with them to Sea in vast keels brought.
Native Micene now with fair winds is sought.
Arms, Gods, and friends, prepared; remeasuring Seas
Soon they return: thus Calchas ordered these.
This, being advised, they for Palladium left,
For th'injur'd Power, to expiate the theft.
This mighty frame, Calchas bid rear so high,
And ribd with oak commands to touch the sky,
Lest it within your ports, or walls attain,
Lest her old love, it should your Nation gain.
But if Minerva's gift you violate,
Great woes (which may the Gods on them translate)
The Phrygians shall, and Priams Realms attend.
But by your hands if this your feats ascend,
Asia against Greece, shall mighty wars maintain,
And for our offspring, shall those fates remain.
Thus perjured Sinons craft, belief prepares,
And vanquished those, with fraud, and feigned tears,
Whom neither Diomed, Achilles, nor
A thousand Ships could tame, nor ten years war.
But now a chance fell out of greater dread,
And their distracted minds astonished.
In stead of Neptunes priest the annual due
A bull Laocoon at the Altar slew.
Behold from Tenidos, two huge Serpents came,
(I shake to mention) through calm Seas they swam,
And took the deep: to shore at once they bend,
Their breasts erected, bloody necks extend
Above the floods, their sterns divide the maine,
Winding long backs, with a voluminous train.
The fomie brine resounds, to shore they came,
Their burning eyes speckled with blood, and flame,
And bissing mouths lick with a brandished tongue.
Pale at the sight we fly: they march along,
Laocom seek; and first the slonder wast
Of his two Sons the winding Snakes embraced,
And on the childrens wretched members fed.
Next him, for aid with weapons furnished
They seized; bind with huge spires: and now twice could
About his waste, twicescaly backs infold
His neck, above his head tall creasts they rear.
With both his hands he strives those knots to tear,
And with foul blood; and gore his garlands dies,
And to the Stars at once raised horrid cries.
So rores a hurt Bull, having Altars fled,
And the uncertain axe shook from his head.
But the two Serpents to the high Fane went,
And crawling to stern Pallas temple bent:
Under the Goddess feet, and targe hide.
Then through our trembling breasts strange terrors glide,
The Trojans say, Laocoon had his due,
Who at the sacred Oak his javlin threw,
And at the side did cast an impious spear.
All cry to sacred seats the image bear,
And on the Goddess call.
We break our Rampires, and our Walls divide,
All ply the work, cords to the neck are tide,
Wheels to the feet, the fatal frame aspires,
Pregnant with arms, boys, virgins, round in Quires
Chaunt sacred hymns, and touch the ropes with joy.
It goes, and inennacing it enters Troy.
O Country, Troy, where Gods once masions found;
And, O you Dardan walls, in war renound!
Four times in th'entrance of the gates it hung;
Four times within the clash of harness rung:
Yet we, blind, senseless, draw with all our power
The unhappy monster, to the sacred tower.
Cassandra then, these future fates foretold,
Whom Trojans never believed, so Phoebus would.
Poor we to whom that day must be the last,
Each where, with festive bows, the temples graced.
But now the heavens were turned; night rose from Seas,
Shading earth, skies, and Grecian treacheries.
Trojans dispearc'd lay silent on the walls,
And deep sleep on their weary bodies falls.
And now in Ships prepared the Argive band
From Tenedos sail, and steer the well-known strand,
Following by friendly silence of the Moon
The Admiralls light: Synon forewarnd, as soon
(Saved by ill fates) frees, from a door of Pines
The Greeks enclosed; whom now the horse resignes
To the fresh air: glad, from the hollow oak,
Tisandrus, Sthenelus, fierce Ulysses broke,
Athamas, Thoas, Pyrrhus, Machaon,
And Menelaus, by long ropes slide down,
With Epeus, who the engine did design.
Th'invade the town, buried in sleep, and wine,
The watch was slain, and they by open gates
Receive their friends, and join to their known mates.
It was the time, first sleep the weary soul
Possessed, and heavens best gift on mortals stole.
Behold! most sadly Hector then appears
To me in sleep, shedding abundant tears:
Dragged at a chariot, black with bloody dust
As e'rst, and through his swollen feet reins were thrust.
Ah! how much changed, how from that Hector, whom
Achilles spoils once graced, returning home.
Or darting Phrygian fire, on the Argive Fleet.
Squallid his beard, his hair with blood concrete,
Bearing those wounds, those many, never Troys wall,
He had received, weeping I seem to call
The man, and thus sad speeches did commence.
O Dardan light! O Troys chief confidence!
Why such delays? O Hector from what coast
Come thou desired? that thee, so many lost,
After such labors, of the town, and men,
Weary we view: what sad chance thy serene
Looks has defiled? or why those wounds view I?
But he to vain demands made no reply.
But fetching deep from's breast a heavy groan
Ah fly, he said, from fire escape Venus son.
Troys high towers sink, the walls the Graecians have.
Enough for her, and Priam, could strength fave
Ilium, this hand had saved her; and now she
Her sacred things, and Gods commends to thee,
Take these companions of thy fates, with these
Build a great City, having past the Seas.
This said, he wreaths, and mighty Vesta brought,
And fires eternal from her sacred vault.
Mean while with various cries the walls resound,
And more and more (although in shady ground
My fathers house remote obscurely lay)
Loud noise draws near, and clashing arms dismay.
I shake off sleep, and mount the battlement
With speedy steps, and stood with ears intent.
As when with rough winds, fire, in standing corn,
Or mountain floods, with a rapt torrent borne,
Drounds the ranck^orn and meads, toils of the ox,
Woods headlong sweeps: amazed, on lofty rocks,
The shepherd ignorant, receives the sound.
Then faith was manifest, and Greeks treason found.
Deiphobus ample frames now overturns
By Vulcans rage and next Ucaligon's burns,
With fire now shine the broad Sigean Baies,
The trumpets sound, men higher clamors raise.
Mad I take arms, armed void of counsel, then
To aid the tower, with friends to gather men
My bosom burns: rage, fury, judgment charms;
And we conceive it brave to dye in arms.
Panthus, behold! escaped the enemies,
Apollo's priest, Panthus Otriades,
Bearing things sacred, vanquished gods, he led
His Nephew, and toth' shore distracted fled.
How stand things Panthus? what fort do we hold?
Scarce said. with a deep sigh thus much he told.
The last days come, Troys unavoided date;
Trojans we were, Troy was, and the high state
Of Troy has been: Jove, cruel, all to Greece
Transfers, and Greeks the burning town possess.
That horse within the walls, that mighty frame
Powers forth armed men, bold Synon stirs the flame
Insulting others open gates possess,
So many thousands never came from Greece.
Some on both sides the narrow passes guard,
And drawn swords shining stand, to kill prepared.
The watches of the out-workes they invade,
Who in disorder weak resistance made.
With Panthus words, and aid of Gods I pass
Through flames, through arms, where sad Erynnis was.
Where sorrow calls, and clamours heaven ascend.
Ripheus, old Iphitus, companions joynd,
By Moonlight brought, Dymas, and Hypanis,
Throng to our side, and young Migdonidis,
Who in those days by chance to Ilium came,
Whom with fond love, Cassandra did inflame.
The hapless son brought Troy and Priam aid,
But prophesies of the inspired maid
Did not regard.
Yet when I saw a fight they durst maintain,
Bold youth, I said, your valor is in vain,
To save the burning town, if you desire
To meet your certain death, bravely t'expire;
You see the chance; those kept this Realm, our Gods
Their altars have forsook, and blessed abodes;
Then let us encounter death, fall bravely on,
Vanquished men's safety is to hope for none.
Our youth being thus enraged, as in dark night
Wolves ravening hunt, spurred by fierce appetite,
Their whelps being left, wait with dry jaws; so we
Through weapons rush, rush through the enemy
To certain death, and through the City made,
Black night surrounding with a hollow shade.
Who can the cruel funerals of that night
Declare? with equal tears those woes recite?
The Old City falls, potent so many years:
In every street, flaughter in heaps appears,
Bodies in houses, sacred temples, thrown.
Nor did the Trojans suffer death alone,
The vanquished their courages recall,
And now the Grecian conquerors do fall:
In all parts cruel grief, in all parts fear,
And various shapes of death was every where.
Androgeus first of all, the Greeks came up
To us, and followed with a mighty troop,
He unadvised for his friends did take,
And first with courteous language freely spoke.
Have sirs, O sloathfull, what delays you thus
Whilst others ransack, burning Pergamus,
March you but now, from the tall fleet? (this said)
And straight (for we but doubtful answers made)
Perceives himself engaged, amidst his foes,
And with the word astonished backward goes,
As one who on a Serpent amongst sharp briers
Treads unawares, and frighted straight retires
From his raised wrath, and purple swelling head;
So at the sight Androgeus frighted fled.
We fiercely charge, and round about them drew;
Amazed, and ignorant of the place orethrew:
And fortune did, this our first service aid.
Here heightened with success Chorabus said,
O friends, where our first fortune way has shown
For safety take, as she directs let us on.
Let us change shields, in Graeoian armor go;
Who fraud or valor questions in a foe?
These shall give arms, thus saying he assumes
Androgeus glittering shield and crested plumes;
And fits an Argive sword unto his thigh.
This Ripheus. Dymas, all the company:
Each armed himself in recent spoilcs with joy,
Then mixed with Greeks, wanting our Deity,
And through nights gloomy shades, often on we fell,
And many a Grecian soul we sent to hell.
Some fly to the Ships, and swift to safe shores bend,
Others with base fear struck, again ascend
The mighty horse, and in the known bulk hide.
Ah, who may hope if by the Gods denied!
Cassandra lo! the Priamaenian maid,
From Pallas temple dragged, her hair displaid,
To heaven her bright eyes raising then in vain;
Her eyes, for cords her tender hands restrain.
Enraged Choraebus not enduring this
Willing to die, leaps midst his enemies,
All after rush, amongst thickest squadrons went.
Here first by darts from the high temple sent,
Our own destroy us, and sad slaughters make,
By change of Arms and Grecian helms mistake
The Graectans gather, stirred with grief and rage,
And for the rescued Virgin all engage.
Then both the Atrides, and his men drew up
Fierce Ajax and the stern Dolopian troop.
So advers winds, contest with all their force;
West, South, and Eurus, on his Eastern horse:
The woods resound, and fomie Nereus raves,
And with his trydent stirs up dreadful waves.
Those we by stratagem had overthrown,
And by nights help chased round about the town,
Appear, and first they knew our feigned arms,
The difference of our language, and alarms.
We are ore-powr'd; and first at Pallas fane
Chorebus was, by Peneleus slain.
Next Ripheus fell, most faithful to his trust:
Nor in all Troy was known a man more just:
Though by the Gods otherwise looked upon.
Hypanis, Dymas, were by friends orethrowne,
Nor Phoebus Myter could deliver thee
Panthus from death, nor thy great piety.
Troyes ashes witness, and last flames of mine,
If in your fall I danger did decline,
Or Graectan force: death, had my fate been full,
This hand did merit. Thence with us we pull
Iphitus, Pelias, I phitus age detained,
Pelias a wound he from Ulysses gained.
Hence clamor calls to Priams Palace, there
A huge fight was, as if no war elsewhere,
Nor in the whole town other funerals.
So untamed Mars, Greeks rushing to the walls
We saw strong gates with testudes they assail,
High pillars climb, and walls with sadders scale;
Shields their left hands protect, oppose defense
Against darts, their right hands seize the battlements.
Dardans resist; down roofes, and towers they cast
And with such arms, since they behold their last,
Prepare to save themselves in deaths extremes:
High honors of old Princes, golden beams
They tumble down; others with drawn swords stood
To keep the gates, and with strong guards make good.
Courage restored, we to the Palace made,
To join our force, and give the vanquished aid.
There was a porch with private gates, a way
Well known in Court, behind the pillars lay;
Often by which, whilst Ilium did remain
Hapless Andromache, without a train
Old Priam used to visit, and did bring
Her son Astyanax, to delight the King.
Straight I this way the battlements ascend,
From whence in vain their darts the Trojans spend.
There was a tower erected wondrous high,
And with proud Bulworks seemed to kiss the sky,
From whence all Troy accustomed to see
The Camp, and Navy of the enemy.
This with my sword I loosed, and on that part
Wherre jutting beams did from their mortisse start,
We gave a shove; when sudden from that hight
Thundering it fell, and on the Greeks did light:
But fresh men Charge, nor stones, nor any kind
Of weapons ceast mean while.
Pyrrhus just at the entrance in the pass
Triumphs in arms, and shines in glittering brass.
So in the Spring a sterved Snake comes forth,
Whom swollen, cold Winter drove beneath the earth;
Now having cast his skin, he fresh appears
With skining youth, and proud his bosom rears
In towrie windings to the cheering South,
His triple stings, brandishing in his mouth.
With him huge Periphas, Automedon
Achilles Charioteere, and Squire comes on;
These seconded by all the Scyrian bands,
Who on the roofes cast fire, and flaming brands.
Through strong gates first, he with an ax did pass,
And from the hinges tore down beams of brass,
Then hews huge pillars, cleaving knotty oak,
And a large breach with a wide passage broke.
The house within appears, long halls unfold,
Prtams bedchamber, and the Kings of old;
The entrance they might see, armed soldiers guard,
Within mixed tumults, and loud skreeks are heard,
The arched seelings howl with female cries,
And c'amours to the golden stars arise.
Then fearful Matrons through vast buildings mixed
The posts embracing held, and kisses six'd.
With His fathers strength, Pyrrhus maintains the fight,
Nor guards nor rampires, can resist his might:
Gates with his battering Ram are overthrown,
And from their hinges Jaumes are tumbled down.
They force their way: the first they meet they kill,
And royal Courts the basest soldiers fill.
A soaming river not so fiercely goes,
When breaking forth, his bancks he overthrowes:
And on the plains with hostile billows falls,
Bearing with him, both carrell and then stalls.
I saw how slaughtering Pyrrhus was enraged:
To enter how the Atrides were engaged:
The Queen, a hundred Ladies, Priam viewed,
And fires he hallowed, with his own blood imbrew'd.
He fifty Daughters did with marriage grace,
Such hopes there was of his illustrious race.
Beams rich with gold, and spoils fall by their ire,
And Greeks posses what is not possessed by fire.
But here you may inquire of Priams fates,
When Troy he saw was taken, and his gates
Torn down, through all the Court the foe to rage:
Arms long unworn, the old man, trembling with age
Girds on in vain; a useless sword he takes,
And desperate, where the foe was thickest, makes.
Amidst the court, under heavens canopie
An Altar stood, an ancient Laurel nigh
Embraced the Gods with a declining shade:
Hither in vain, the Queen and Daughters fled.
But when in youthful arms she Priam spide.
Oh! my most wretched husband (straight she cride:)
What counsel thee to put on arms did move?
Into what danger do thou run dear love?
These times no such defenders will allow,
No, if my Hector should be present now.
Draw near: this altar may protect us all,
Or here in death we will together fall.
Then she her husband by the hand did bring,
And placed in sacred seats the aged King.
Behold! Polytes one of Priams sons
Having escaped from slaughtering Pyrrhus runs
Wounded to seek some sheltring place, he flies
Through arms, through foes, courts, and long galleries,
Whom raging Pyrrhus did with arms pursue:
Now takes and strikes him with his javeline through.
At last as in his parents sight he stood,
He fell and powers his soul out with much blood.
Here Priam though beset with death, abstained
Neither from language, nor his wrath restrained.
The Gods for this, who such a bold act dared,
If any power in heaven such things reguard,
They Will recompense, and due rewards bequeath
To thee, who forced me see my dear sons death,
And with his blood the Parents face defild.
Achilles, whom thou father false have stild
Was no such foe to me, he blushed when I
Implored the law of arms, nor did deny
Hectors pale corpse should have a native tomb,
And me again sent with a convoy home.
This said, the old man, a feeble javlin threw,
Which could not pierce his sounding target through:
But on the bosse did hang the harmless spear,
Then Pyrrhus said: this news my father bear,
My cruel deeds remember to relate;
And how that I his son degenerate.
For thou shall die; as soon as this he said,
Through his sons blood, he dragging him convai'd
Trembling to th'altars: then his hair he wreathes
In his left hand, his right his sword unsheathes,
Which to the hilts he buries in his side.
So finished Priams fates, and thus he did,
Seeing Ilium burn, whose proud Commands did sway
So many potent Realms in Asia.
Now on the strand his sacred body lies
Headless without a name or obsequies.
Amazed, then first strange fear surrounded me,
I on my father thought, when I did see
The equal aged King give up his life
With a sad wound, and my neglected wife,
My rifled house, and poor Iulus chance.
Round I behold, what force I could advance;
All weary had forsook me, and leapt down,
Or in the flames, their wretched bodies thrown.
Now by my self; in Vesta's porch I found
Helen concealed, silent, on sacred ground
Close hid she lay: a light those burnings vast
Me wandering gave, as round my eyes I cast.
She for Troys fall expects the Trojans sword,
Greek censures, wrath, of her forsaken Lord.
Common Erynnis both to Greece and Troy,
Obscure, and hated did at Altars lie.
My mind inflames, rage my revenge did call.
To give her punishments for my countries fall.
Shall safely she behold her native soil?
A Queen in Sparta triumph in our spoil?
Her husband, court, children and parents see?
Shall Trojan Dames, Phrygtans her servants be?
Priam by th'sword fall? flames destroy his seat?
So often with blood the Dardan confines sweat?
Not so. Although no memorable name
Have female punishments, or such conquests fame;
Yet I Will be praised to punish, nay to kill
So cursed a wretch; I Will satisfy my will
Flames to revenge, and my friends ashes please.
With rage I was transported saying these.
When my blessed mother did to me appear,
Never before in night she shind more clear.
Goddess confessed; such, and so great, as she
Is seen to those above; and wringing me
Fast by the hand, from rosy lips she said,
Dear Son, what rage has such distemper made?
Why rav'st thou thus? and where are our respects?
Nor look thou first, where bedrid thou neglects
Anchises now? lives thy Creusa yet?
And young. Ascanius? which the Greeks beset
On all sides round: did not I aid afford,
Flames had devoured them, or the enemies sword.
Nor Helens beauty blame, nor Paris hate,
The Gods, the Gods incensed overthrow this seat,
And from her deep foundations ruin Troy.
Behold (for all these clouds which thus anoy
Thy mortal sight, and thus thick mists display
I shall remove, nor fear thou to obey
Thy mothers will, nor her Commands resist.)
Here where fallen heaps, stones torn from stones thou leest
Lie mixed with ashes thus, and waving smoke,
Neptune the walls with his great trident shook,
And the whole City turns up from her seats.
Here cruel Juno guards the Scaean gates;
And raging from the Fleet her favorites calls,
Guirt with a sword.
On high towers placed thou may Trytonia spy,
In a bright cloud, the cruel Gorgon by.
With strength, and courage, Jove the Greeks supplies,
And against Troys arms excites the Deities.
Fly son, thy Labors finish, I Will be near,
And safe thee to thy fathers thresholds bear.
Then she her self in nights dark shades concealed,
And cruel shapes, great Deities revealed
Themselves a verse to Troy.
And now all Ilium seems in flames to burn.
Neptunian Troys foundations over-turn.
As an old ash has lostie mountains crowned,
With frequent axes hewed, with steel cut round
By striving swains: she threatening nods, and now
She shakes her tresses with a trembling brow,
Till vanquished with wounds she gives a groan,
And from the mountain torn, lies overthrown.
Thence led by her, I pass through foes, and fire.
Weapons give place, and horrid flames retire.
But when to our paternall seats I came,
Our ancient house, my father, my first aim,
First sought to carry to the mountains, he
Refused to live, and would no exile be
Ilium destroyed: you in whose youthful veins,
He said, fresh blood flows, solid strength remains,
Take you your flight.
If heaven would spare my life, these seats for me
Had been preserved; it is too much, I see
One fall, once to outlive this City took:
Thus let, O thus the bedrid be forsook.
I shall find death pitied by foes, who shall
My spoils seek; Loss of Sepulcher is small.
Hated by heaven, useless I live, since when
The Father of the Gods, and King of men
With thunder struck, with lightning blasted me.
Thus he discoursed, and fixed remaind: whilst we
Are drowned in tears, my wife, Ascanius,
With all the house, lest his delays, might us
With him destroy, tempting, to urgent fate.
Yet he denies, fixed in one posture sat.
I arm again, and wretched wish to die.
What avails counsel, what can chance supply.
Think you dear Sir, I Will stir, you left behind;
Can such strange words fall from a fathers mind?
If nothing heaven of such a town will leave,
And you and yours you will to Troyes ruins give,
That death is near, from Priams slaughter now
Pyrrhus will come, who at the altar slew
The father, and the Son before the Sire.
For this blessed mother, me through sword and fire
Did bring? To see my foe within my house,
My father, wife, and young Ascanius
Behold in one another blood ly dead.
Arm, arm, the last hour calls the vanquished.
Let me return and seek the enemy,
Nor shall we now all unrevenged die.
Here I gird on my sword, my target brace
To my left arm, ready to leave the place.
Lo! then my wife, clings fast unto my knee,
Just in the Porch, and shows my son to me.
Go thou to die, take us through all alarms,
But if expert thou'st confidence in arms,
First guard this house, Ascanius now contains,
Where father, wife, once called thine, remains.
At this the house rung with a woeful cry;
When straight appears a wondrous prodigy.
Betwixt our hands, in the sad parents sight,
Lo! from Julus crown a flaming light
Was seen to rise, and harmless fire did spread
With a soft touch, and round his temples fed.
We frighted haste to shake the flagrant hair,
Water to quench the sacred flame prepare.
But to the stars Anchises lift his eyes,
His voice and hands advancing to the skies.
Almighty Jove, if any prayer move thee,
Look down, if we deserve for piety:
Confirm this sign, O father, and grant aid.
Scarce the old man thus, when straight it thundered
On the left hand, gliding through shades, from skies
A star shoots blazing, and with much light flies,
Which we beheld o'r the high roofs to move,
And our course marking to the Idean grove
Concealed it self, then in a furrow broke
And shining made those parts with sulphur, smoke.
My father now persuaded left his bed,
Adores the sacred star, Gods worshipped;
Haste, now I follow whether you shall please,
O save our house, and race, you Deities,
This is your Omen, Troy is yours; O Son,
I yield, and go now thy companion.
Then from the walls, we hear the crackling flame
Louder to sound, and near the burnings came.
Dear father on my neck your self sustain,
Lay here your weight, such labor is no pain:
What ever chance, one common danger we
Shall equal share, to both one safety be.
I shall Ascanius my companion choose,
Dear wife observe my steps, but distance use,
And you my servants list to my commands.
Near Troy a tomb, an ancient temple stands,
Of slighted Ceres, an old Cypres nigh,
Which long your grandsires kept religiously,
By several ways, to this let us repair.
OurGods, and sacred things, dear father bear:
For me unfit to touch, returned from blood
And so great battles, till the living flood
Cleanse me again.
Then over my shoulder and my neck I ti'd
Above my vest a yellow lions hide.
I take the load, Ascanius did embrace
My hand, and followed with unequal pace.
My wife behind, we past through parts obscure:
I who before durst showers of darts endure
And adverse ranks of thickest Greeks; now fear,
Each breath of wind, the smallest noise I hear;
Alike both for my son and burden dread.
I reach the gates, long ways are vanquished,
When sound of trampling feet our ears invades,
My father spies them through the gloomy shades,
And cries aloud, O son, fly, they draw near,
Their shining arms, and glittering shields appear.
Nor can I give account what God unkind
Trembling, amazed, did here distract my mind,
Whilst uncouth ways I choose, lest the known coast,
Ah, by sad fate I my Creusa lost.
Whether she did, did stray, and tired gave ore
Her journey, but I saw her face no more;
Nor looked behind, nor mist her till we come
To sacred seats, and ancient Ceres tomb:
Here we all met, one only thus bereaved,
Who me, her father, and her son deceived,
What God or man did not my frenzy call
In question, what worse chance, since Iliums fall?
My son, my father, and our Gods I did
Leave with my friends, and in a valley hid.
Troy I revisit, gird on shining arms
All dangers to renew, through all alarms
Ilium to search, again past danger try.
The walls I first, then gloomy gates draw nigh;
Obscured with night, back step by step I went
With wary pace, and eyes as vigilant.
Horror each where, nay filence strikes a fear.
Thence home, hoping by chance to find her there.
Through all the roofes, the cruel Greeks I had,
And eating fire rolled to the tops with wind:
Then flames ascend, fire towreth in the air.
To Priams seats, and palace I repair.
There Phoenix, dyre Ulysses, guard the spoils
In Juno's temple and forsaken isles.
From all parts hither Dardan treasure came,
Saved from Gods tables, temples sunk in flame:
Goblets of gold, rich robes in heaps are laid;
Youth, fearful matrons, orderly arrayed
Stand round about.
Bold, also I the streets with clamor fill,
And call through shades, ingeminating still
Again in vain, again Creusa. Hear
To me in quest, thus raging every where
Appears her shade, and sad similitude:
And her known form a larger shape indu'd.
Amazed, struck dumb, erected was my hair.
When thus she spoke with words appeasing care.
Why so much pleases thee a task so vain?
O my dear Lord, since thus the Gods ordain.
Neither must thou transport me from these strands;
The King of high Olympus countermands.
Thou shall long exile plow vast seas, before
Hesperia's found, where through a fertile shore
The Lydian Tybers gentle waters glide.
Glad things wait there, a Realm, a royal Bride.
Spare for thy loved Creusa tears; for I
Dolops proud seats, nor Myrmidons shall see,
Or go a slave to Grecian Dames commands,
Allied to Dardan and blessed Venus.
The Gods great mother stays me on these strands.
Farewell and love our only son. Me then
Weeping and much prepared to speak again,
She left, in thin air vanished; thrice I assaid
To Embrace her neck, three times the fleeting shade
In vain I with extended arms assail,
Which like a swift dream flies, or nimble gale.
Then I revisit night thus spent my mates,
Where was huge troops of new associates,
Men, women, youth numbers admiring found,
And woeful vulgar to sad exile bound,
From all parts met, ready with aid, and mind,
To sail what lands soever I designed.
When the day star from high brow'd Ida rise
Ushering the morn, our gates the enemies
Kept with strong guards: no hope left, I retire
And take the hills, bearing my aged sire.
THE THIRD BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Torn myrtle bleeds; slain Polydor complains,
Not from a tree, blood flows, but from his veins
His rites performed they leave the Thracian sh
To Delos soil, Apollo they implore.
Phoebus mistook, they plant in Creet: from thence
Admonished by a dream, and pestilence
They launch again, a storm at Sea. the seats
Of Ravenous Harpies. dire Celaenos threats.
Helenus; Priams son, in Epire reigns
TO Andromache matched, and Trojans entertaines.
He shows what coasts of Latium they must steer.
Aetna, the Cyclops, Polypheme appear.
To sad Dyrachium next Aeneas bends,
Thence drove to Lybia, where his story ends.
AFter the Gods had pleased the Asian State
And Priams guiltless line t'exterminate,
Proud Ilium fallen, Troy smoking on the ground:
To strange shores, diverse exiles we are bound
By auguries of the Gods, and Ships provide
Near to Antandrous, under Phrygian I Would,
Not knowing where to plant, what course to run;
We gather men: scarce was the Spring begun,
When to set sail to Fates, my sire commands.
Weeping I leave the Port, and native strands,
Fields where Troy was, exiled am born through seas
With friends, my son, Lars and great Deities.
Far off the Thracians plow a warlike land
And vast, which once Lycurgus did command:
Troys ancient friends, joined with associat gods,
Whilst fortune smiled: here I our first abodes
Brought by cross fates, on winding shores did build:
Which I Aeneades by my own name styled.
To my blessed mother, and Gods favoring
Our enterprise, and to heavens mighty King,
Upon those shores a snowy bull I slew.
By chance a hill was nigh where Cornel grew,
Whose top rough myrtle with thick prickles bore:
I went, and from the earth green branches tore,
That I with verdant bows might th'altars dress,
A prodigy no language can express
I saw: From the first plant which up I tore,
The roots being broke; drops gushed of purple gore,
And stained the earth with blood: cold fear my knees
Did shake, my veins congealed with terror freese.
Again I plucked another tender bow,
That better I might hidden causes know,
And this rind also a black blood did sweat.
Amazed I humbly rural nymphs entreat,
And powerful Murs, who rules the Getick field,
To bless the sign: the Omen prosperous yield.
On a third after my whole strength I true,
And with my knees on the earth did struggling lie.
Shall I be dumb or speak? a groan I hear
Sound from beneath, and these words piere'd my ear.
Why tear'st thou me Aeneas? spare the dead;
Profane not pious hands: Troy has not bred
Me strange to thee; from no root flows this gore.
Fly cruel coasts, ah fly this treacherous shore.
I Am Polydore, this iron crop of spears
Hides me here slain, and cruel javelins bears.
Then was my mind perplexed with doubtful scar,
Amazed struck dumb, crected was my hair.
This Polydorus with vast sums of gold
Unhappy Priam secretly of old
Sent to the King of Thrace: but when he found
Trojan arms fail, and Troy beleaguered round,
The Dardan fortune, and her power declined,
With conquering arms, and Agamemnon joined.
Breaks laws, kills him, and wealth with blood did gain.
Dire thirst of gold, what do not thou constrain
In mortal breasts! When lessened was my fear,
I to my father, and prime men declare
The prodigy, and their advises crave.
All vote as one, those impious shores to leave,
And with full sails from tainted friendship fly.
We Polydore interre, his monument high
With earth erect, to Ghosts sad altars placed
With mourning garlands and black Cypress graced.
Round Ilium dames with flowing tresses stood:
Cups flowing with warm milk, and sacred blood
We as the custom offer, and we lay
The soul intomb, then loud, last rites we pay.
Whence, when we first might trust the sea again,
Soft Southern breezes calling to the main,
The waves appeased, we launch, and fill the strands,
The Port forsake, Cities retrcit and lands.
A sacred Isle is placed amidst the seas
Pleasing the mother of Neriades
And the Aegaean Neptune most: this land,
The heavenly Archer wandering to each strand,
With lofty Mycon then and Gyaros binds,
Made firm to dwell in, and contemn the winds.
Here landing, a safe Port, and pleasant shore
W'injoy'd, Apollo's City we adore.
King Anias, Phoebus priest, and King of men
Crowned with blessed wreathes, and Laurel met us then,
And straight his ancient friend Anchises knew.
We join right hands, and to the Palace drew.
In his old temple Phoebus I implore.
He would safe dwellings to the tirde restore;
A stock, a lasting City grant unto
The poor remains of Troy: all that the foe
And fierce Achilles rage has sparde: what way,
Now must we seek? whom follow? or where lay
The next foundations? Father now impart
One blessed Omen, and revive our heart.
Scarce said, when suddenly the temple shakes,
Apollo's Laurel, the whole mountain quakes;
Within the Tripos rung: prostrate to ground
We fall, when to our ears approch'd this sound.
That land, bold Dardans, did your sires maintain,
The same with joy shall cherish you again:
Seek your old mother; there the Trojans shall
For endless generations govern all.
Thus Phoebus, then with joy, they all demand,
And noise confused, where was that happy land,
Apol'o to the wanderers had designed.
My father then, calling old things to mind.
O Peers (he said) your hopes now understand:
Creete placed amid'st the Sea, is great Jove's land;
Mount Ida there, from thence we sprung; this Isle
A hundred Cities has, a most rich soil;
Hence our great sire, (has not my memory faild)
First Teucrus to the Rhetian Kingdoms saild,
And sought a Realm; Ilium as yet unbuilt,
And Pergam towers, they in low valleys dwelt.
Hence Cybele, the Choribants, the hill
Ida: with silence at the altars still.
The Goddess Chariot with joined Lions drawn.
Therefore where heaven Commands, let us go on,
Appease the winds, for Gnossian Kingdoms steer,
Nor long's the course, if so please Jupiter,
O^r ships in three days may reach Creete. This said
He deserved honors on the altars paid:
A bull to Neptune, such was Phoebus right
To storms a black sheep to fair winds a white.
Fame flies that driven from his fathers seat,
Idomeneus left deserted Creet,
Lands and Courts, vacant of an enemy.
We leave Ortygian Ports through Seas we fly,
And green Denysa, Naxus viny head,
Olearus, and white Parus, Cyclads spread
Through seas, and floods, thick set with Isles we steered.
The Sailors raise their cry, and their Mates cheered.
Now let us to Creet, our Gransires country sail;
When at our stern attends a rising g^le.
And then to the ancient Curets shores we run.
The wished for Cities, walls I there begun;
Stil'de Pergamus; our men pleased with the name,
I call to serve the gods, and high towers frame.
And now our Fleet was drawn high on the sands,
While in the choosing of new wives, and lands
Our young men were employed, to whom I soon
Gave laws, and several habitation.
When on the sudden a most sad disease,
By heavens corrupted influence did seize
The trees, and corn, 'twas a destructive year.
They die, or at the best, faint bodies bear;
Hot Syrius scorcheth then the barren fields;
The grass is burnt, nor food the parched earth yields;
To th'Oracle my father then would have
Us go, and put to Sea, there pardon crave:
What end our toils should have, where his command
Bids them they should address, for what course stand.
'T was night, when sleep profound did mortals seize,
Gods sacred forms, and Phrygian deities
Which I from Troy, and through the burning town
Had brought, appeared before me then laid down
To take my rest, clear by much light displayed,
Which through the windows the full Moon convaid.
Then thus they spoke, with these did ease my care.
What Phoebus at Ortygia would declare,
Lo! here he sings, and us to thee did send.
We through Troys flame, did thee, thy arms attend,
We in ships measured the rough seas with thee:
And to the stars shall raise thy Progeny;
And give thy city rule; great walls prepare
For greater things; long flight, nor labor spare:
Change seats, Apalla not advised these lands,
Nor thee to plant in Creet tho God commands.
There is a place the Greeks Hesperia style,
Aenotrians till, a rich and potent soil,
An ancient land, posterity, (they same,)
Since called it Italy, from their Captains name:
These are our proper seats hence Dardan first,
Old Jasius sprung this place our grandsires must.
Rise, let thy aged father understand
These truths, Corytus seek, Ausonia's strand:
For Jove Dictean fields denies to thee.
Such visions, speaking Gods astenish me,
Nor was it sleep, their visages I knew,
Their veiled hairs, and present faces view.
Cold sweat then flows through all my limbs, I rise,
My hands, and voice, extending to the skies,
And did due offerings pay; which done to old
Anchises every circumstance I told.
He knows the double stock, the doubtful race,
Sees his new error of the ancient place.
Then said, Dear son, busies in Troys affair,
Cassandra only did such fates declare,
Now I recall, these Kingdoms she foretold
Due to our race, and often Hesperia would,
Often Italy name, but who could understand,
Trojans must come to the Ausonian strand?
Or whom could then divine Cassandra move?
Phoebus obey, best things advised, approve.
This said, all glad perform what was enjoined.
This seat we leave, a few being left behind,
Set sail, in hollow keeles through vast Seas bore.
After we took the main, nor any more
Countries appear; every where sea, and skies;
With night and tempest big a clowd did rise:
The water horrid with the darkness grows;
Winds roll huge waves, and mighty seas arose.
We through vast gulphs are tossed, storms hide the day,
And heaven is to the hurnid night a prey:
Flames breaking often from the gaping clouds.
Drove from our course, we wander through dark floods:
Nor Palinurus knows in such a sky
Or day, or night, or what course now to ply;
Three days uncertain, with blind mists we err,
As many nights wander without a star.
The fourth day we did rising land behold,
And far-off hills, which wandering clouds infold.
Sails struck, with ores the lusty Seamen sweep
The foaming waves, and brush the azure deep.
Escaped the floods, first me the Strophades
Received, Isles midst the great Ionean Seas
Greeks call the Strophades, which Celaeno took,
And other Harpies, after they forsook
Phineas barred gates, and former boards through fear.
No monsters are like these, nor more severe,
A plague, or wrath of God, ere rose from Styx;
The foul are Virgin-fac'd a loathsome flix
Works on them still, hooked claws, and always pale
With hunger vexed.
This having reached, we for the harbor stand,
When we beheld fat herds about the strand,
And shaggie goats, no heardsman, on we fall
Straight with our swords, the Gods, and Jove we call
To share the prey: then tables we prepare
On winding shores; and highly feasted were.
When from the hills, did dreadful Harpies rise,
And swift they shake their wings, with hideous cries;
Our meat they seize, and with foul tallons rend,
And with a putrid breath dire skreeches send.
Far more with-drawne, under Arched rocks shut in
With trees, and with a horrid shade, again
Tables we spread, Altars with fire supplide.
Again from lurking holes, on the other side,
Loud troops with pounc'd feet, round our dishes swarm,
And spoil our meat then, that my friends should arm
I gave command, and fight with that dire race.
They did as I required, and in the grass
They leave their swords, and hide their glittering shields,
That when they sounding flew through ample fields;
Misenus with his trumpet might a sign
Give from a hill: they charge, strange battles join,
And horrid sea-fowle with their steel attempt,
But no stroke hurts their plumes, their backs exempt
From wounds, they with swift flight to heaven are born
And with foul prints forsake their prey half torn.
Celaeno pearch'd alone on a high rock,
Unhappy Prophetess, thus silence broke.
For slaughtered cattle, and slain bullocks, are
These fights, O Trojans? or prepare ye war
Us innocent Harpies from our realms t'expell?
If so, hear this, these words remember well;
What Jove Apollo, Phoebus me foretold,
I greatest of the furies now unfold.
Your quest is Italy, Italy you shall sail,
Enter her Ports, with the implored gale.
But ere you shall surround your town with walls
Dire famine for our unjust funerals
Shall make you eat your trenchers: these she said,
And to the woods she flies on wings displaid.
Then sudden fear does my companions seize,
Cold blood benumbs, their courage falls, not peace
Seek they with arms now, but with vows and prayer,
Whether they Goddesses or foul birds are.
But from the shore my sire extends his hands,
Great powers implores, and sacred rites commands.
You gods forbid these threats, you Deities
Avert such chance; to save the pious please.
And order gave to loose our cables then,
And clear our trembling anchorage again.
Pregnant our sails, we fly through fomie seas,
What course the South winds, and our master please.
Woody Zacynthus now from sea arose,
Dulichium, Same, high clift Neritos,
Ithacus rocks, Laertian realms we fled,
And curse the shore cruel Ulysses bred.
Leucates cloud-crown'd mountains next arise,
And Phoebus which the Sayler terrifies.
Here tired we came, to the small City have,
Our ships possess the shores, and anchors cast,
Then we unhop'd-for land at length enjoy,
We purge to Jove, Altars with vows employ,
And Troys games celebrate on the Actian soil.
Naked my friends wrestle in flowing oil.
To escape so many Grecian Cities we
Rejoice, and thus to have steered through the enemy.
Mean while the Sun had his great circle run,
And North winds vexed the Seas, Winter begun.
A brazen shield which Abas wore I fix
Upon a pillar, and this verse annex.
These arms from conquering Greeks Aeneas bore.
I bid them quit the Port, fit to their ore,
Striving they cuffe the billows, brush the tide.
Pheacus airie turrets soon we hide,
By Epire, to Chaonian Harbors bend,
Buthrotus lofty City we ascend.
Here fame incredible did my ears invade,
That Helenus Priams son in Epire swaide,
By Pyrrhus wife those realms he did obtain:
Andromache marched in her own stock again.
Amazed my bosom burns, with strong desire
To see the man, and the strange chance inquire.
I do forsake the Navy, shores, and bay.
Andromache, then solemn rites did pay
To Hectors dust; with gifts his ghost implores
Within a Grove nigh to false Sinois shores;
Before the city, made of sods she reares
Two altars at his tomb; her cause of tears.
Seeing me advance; when Trojan arms she spide,
Distracted, and with wonder terrifide;
Her limbs grew stiff; heat flies, she sounding falls;
And scarce at last thus she her speech recalls.
This a true face? come thou thy self to me?
O Goddess son, liv'st thou? if dead thou be,
Where Is Hector? at these words she wept; her cry
Fills all the place; to her distempers, I
In brief with faltring voice short answers give.
Through all extremes escaped behold! I live;
Doubt not, for truth you see.
What chance attends thee left of such a Lord,
Can any worthy fate one smile afford?
Is Hectors wife turned into Pyrrhus bride?
With looks dejected softly she replide.
O happiest virgin of King Priam's race,
Who on the enemies tomb, and in the face
Of Troy, did suffer death, by no chance led
Captive to touch a conquering masters bed.
We from our countries flames through all Seas borne,
Felt the proud youth Achilles offsprings scorn,
Both slaves: who after with Hermione falls
In love, and Lacedemon nuptials.
And me his slave to his slave Helenus joined.
But him Orestes, raging in his mind,
Inflamed with love of 's lost bride did pursue,
Surprised, and at his fathers altars slew.
Thus Pyrrhus dead, part of his Kingdom yields
To Helenus, who styled these Chaon fields,
From Trojan Chaon, all Chaonia named,
And Ilian towers has on these risings framed.
What wind? what fare transports thee to this land?
What God thee ignorant brought to touch our strand?
Lives young Ascanius? draws he vital air?
Whom Troy to thee.
Of his lost Country has he any care?
How does his fathers, or his uncles name
Hector, his soul to manly acts inflame?
This she said weeping and spent floods in vain.
When from the City with a stately train
The Hero Helenus, Priams son appears.
He knows his own, and to his Palace steers
Our course with joy; while his wet eyes afford
A liberal tear to wait upon each word.
Now I acknowledge little Troy, and small
Pergamus like the great one; and did call
The river by the name of Xanthus wave,
And to the Scean gate embraces gave.
In their associate City Trojans rest.
The King receives at ample ports his guest:
Amidst large halls Bacchus in bowls they taste,
Cups they present, in gold our banquets placed.
One day succeeds another, gentle gales
Invite to sea, soft Auster swells our sails.
When I the Prophet move, this suit prefer.
O Trojan born, the Gods interpreter,
Thou Phoebus, tripods, laurel, thou the stars,
Birds language know, swift wings thy augurers:
Declare (our course all Oracles have said
Shall prosperous be, this heavenly powers persuade
Latium to seek, attempt prepared seats:
Only Selaeno sings, now dreadful threats,
Dire rage sad hunger) how we shall eschew
Dangers so near, and toils so great subdue.
Here with slain steeres, Helenus as the guise
Implores the Gods, from sacred brows unties
His wreath, and by the hand, O Phoebus, me
Leads to thy floores, struck with thy Deity:
From lips inspired the priest then prophesies.
O Goddess son (for thou must sail through seas,
This do the greater auguries design,
And King of Gods, that does all fates injoyne
By a fixed law) from much take briefly these;
Safer to search more hospitable seas.
From Helenus knowledge fate the rest has hid,
Saturnian Juno has my tongue forbid.
First, Italy which thou conceiv'st is near,
And fond prepar'st those neighboring coasts to steer,
Long ways unknown divide, far distant shores;
In the Cicilian waves first try thy oars,
Ausonia's briny flood; thy Fleet must go
By Circes Isle, and cut those Seas below,
Before safe lands to plant in thou shall find;
And this the Omen, fix it in thy mind.
When at an obscure stream solicitous thou
Under wild oaks, shall find a mighty sow,
Pregnant, her farrow thirty, laid to rest:
A white sow, a white issue at her breast:
There ends thy toil, thy City there erect.
Nor let thy eating trenchers thee deject:
Fate shall find means, Phoebus implored will aid.
But these coasts, these adjacent shores evade,
This Italy fly-wash'd with our swelling tide,
For in those Cities wicked Greeks reside,
Naritius here has Locrian walls prepared,
Idomeneus his armed squadrons guard
Salentine fields: there Melibaeus, small
Petilia joined to Philoctetes wall.
But when they ships transported reach the bay,
And there arrived, vows you on Altars pay,
With purple vailes, your covered hair attire:
Lest in heavens honors, midst the sacred fire,
Some hostile face, seen, should disturb the sign.
This pious use impose, on thee, and thine;
In this thy chaste posterity instruct.
But when to Cicilies shores fair winds conduct,
Opening Pelorus narrow straights, then fly
The star-board seas, and strands: long courses ply
Through lar-board deeps, shave thou the left hand shore.
Those coasts (they say) by a vast ruin tore,
(Such change works length of time) asunder start,
And countries which before conjoined now part:
With violent waves Pontus Hesperia forced
From Cicilie; Cities, and Towns divorced
Shores, interwash since with a narrow tide.
Scylla the right. Charybdis the left side
Inexorable guards Thrice she does drink
Vast floods, which down to hels dark bottom sink,
Then belched again, lasheth the sky with waves.
But Scylla keeps her den, and lurking caves;
Engaging ships in rockie mouths that gape,
A female with fair breasts, a virgins shape
She is above the waste; beneath a Whale,
And to her wolvish womb, a Dolphins tail,
Better for thee to seek Pachynas strand,
And with long steerage to Cicilia stand,
Then once fierce Scylla in vast caves descry,
Or Rocks resounding with her blew dogs cry.
Besides, if Helenus any prudence has,
Phoebus with truth inspire, if any faith,
One special charge I press. O Goddess son
Again, again, repeat, it must be done.
Great Juno move with prayers, and her adore:
The powerful Goddess with free vows implore,
With humble gifts subdue: victor at last
Then steer Italian shores, Sicilia past.
When thou have reached to Cuma, and have found
Lakes sacred, heard in woods Avernus sound;
In a deep rock the Prophetess does sit
Foretelling Fates and does to leaves commit
The characters, and names, what verse she puts
In those she counts, and in her cavern shuts:
Firm they remain, and keep their place designed;
Which, the door opening, then a whisking wind
Disorders, and the thin leaves does dispierce.
She not collects again the scattered verse,
Or cares to join, or place; not hearing fate
They vexed depart, and Sybils mansions hate.
But let not such delays disturb thy mind,
Though thy friends call to Sea, and a fair wind
Invites with swelling sails, yet first repair
To her, and Oracles beseech with prayer.
Oh let her as she please our fate declare,
She shall to thee, Italy, future war,
Those labors how to bear, or wave, display:
And honored she shall grant a prosperous way.
These are the things, nor more may I advise;
Go, raise great Troy by valor of the skies.
After these hopeful words the Prophet said,
By his commands they to the Fleet convei'd
Ivorie, and gold, and with a mighty mass
Of silver load our keels, and Dodon brass.
A coat of maile with gold most richly wrought,
A stately helm with flowing plumes they brought,
And Pyrrhus arms, my fathers gifts, who then
Recrutes the oars, and armeth all our men
And horse and riders adds.
In the mean time Anchises bad prepare
Our Fleet for Sea against the wind blew fair.
Whom Phoebus Prophet with much honor calls.
Anchises graced with Venus nuptials,
Twice saved from ruined Troy, thou art heavens care now,
See thy own Italy, and possess it too,
But thou must steer much wide of this; behold!
Where those parts are, Apollo did unfold,
Blessed with a pious son, farewell, I stay
Too long, and coming winds with talk delay.
No less Andromache sad, departing brought
Vests hid in gold, with rich imbroyderie wrought.
TO Ascanius (worthy him) a Phrygian cloak,
And loading him with wealthy gifts thus spoke.
Take these remembrances my own hand wove,
The witness of Andromache's long love.
Keep these last last gifts of thine: to me, O thou
Sole Image left, of my Astyanax now:
Such eyes such hands, thy face the same appears,
Who now had been with thee of equal years.
Then with abortive tears. I thus at last;
Live happy you, your miseties are past.
Us fate from fate commands you rest obtain,
Nor must you plow vast billows of the maine,
Or seek still flying shores of Italy.
Zanthus effiges, Pergamus you see,
Which your selves built, a better fate have these
I wish and not so obvious unto Greece.
If ere I enter Tyber, fields adjoined
To Tyber view and walls to us designed:
Then seats allide, nations one blood with us,
Having one fate, one father Dardanus,
Latium and Epire both one Tro: shall be,
And to our sons we shall these laws decree.
From thence by neighboring Ceraunia we
By sea short courses steer to Italy.
Mean while Sun set, dark mountains shades invest:
We near the Sea on earths loved bosom rest,
Our oars being shipped, dispierc'd along the shores
Reposed, deep sleep our wearied limbs restores.
Night drove by th'houres scarce reached the middle skies,
When careful Palinurus did arise,
Explores all gales, the winds tries with his ears:
And notes each star which glide in filent spears.
He the wet Kids, Arcturus did behold
The Triones and Orion armed with gold.
After he saw serene, and settled skies,
He from his stern the signal gave; we rise,
Our course we stand, and our furld cnnvasse spread.
Blushing Aurora rose, the stars now fled.
When obscure hills from far, low Italy we
Descry: Achates first cries Italy,
With a glad shout, Italy hail out men.
A Goblet crowned, my sire Anchises then
Fills with rich wine, and calls the Deities,
Placed on the lofty stern.
Lords of the tempests, Gods of earth and seas,
Propitious breath, bless with fair winds the way.
The wished gale rose: then opens straight the bay,
The Temple, and Minerva's towers appear,
My mates strike sail, their prowes to shore they steer.
Bow-bent the Port lay to the Eastern flood,
Dashed with the brine, high cliffes opposing stood
Amongst towering Rocks, this douhle guarded lies
In bays obscure, from shore the temple flies.
Here our first sign, four horses I beheld
Grasing about, whose whiteness snow excelled.
My sire, then said, fair soil, thou war do bear,
These are for battle, horses threaten war,
But yet in Chariots they accustomed join,
With curbing reins of peace a hopeful sign.
And here we armed Pallas did implore,
Who first received us joyful on this shore.
In Phrygian vailes we at the Aitars stand
Of Argive Juno; Helenus command
With care perform, and her due honors pay.
Our vows in order finished, no delay
But to haled bowlings, yards and canvasse yields.
Greek seats we fly, and leave suspected fields.
Herculian Tarents bay, if fame be true,
We saw, opposed divine Lacinia view.
Cauloni towers, wrack Scylacaeum rose,
Then far from sea, Sicilian Aeina shows:
Huge groaning of the waves, beat rocks from far
We hear: and broken thunderings at the bar.
Sholes rage, the sands with billows mix: at this
Anchises said, here sure Charybdis is,
Those Rocks sung Helenus, and horrid shores.
Haste, helm alec, and stoutly ply your oars.
They do as bid, first Palmurus stood
Steering his prow unto the lar-board flood.
With winds and ores that course the whole Fleet lay.
Heaven we advance to in the crooked bay,
Then sink to hell with a descending wave.
Three groans the cliffes, and rocky caverns gave,
Thrice breaking foam, we saw the Planets wet.
We weary, whilst the winds with Phoebus set,
By unknown shores of the Cyclopians glide.
The Port within was safe from storms, and wide.
But Aetna with torn ruins thunders near,
Black clouds he throws often through the Hemisphere.
Smoke, blazing sparks, in pitchy whirle-winds rise,
And globes of flame exalted kiss the skies.
Often rocks, torn bowels of the mountain vent,
And liquid stones belcht to the firmament
Break thick with groans, heats from the deep aspire.
Fame is Enceladus halse burnt with fire
This hill deprest, above huge Aetna laid,
These flames he breaths, through tunnells broke convei'd,
And when he weary turns, all Sicilie
With murmr shakes, and smoke involves the sky.
That night woods sheltered us; huge monsters there
We heard, nor causes of those founds appear.
For no star shone, nor were the Poles alowd
Aetheriall light, all heaven was in a clowd,
The Moon in nights tempestious vapors hid.
Aurora from the East now rising, did
Remove moist shadows, and the day began.
When from the woods a strange and unknown man
Sudden appeared; pinde, spent, wretchedly poor,
Raising his hands came suppliant to the shore.
We view him direly foul, o're-grown his beard:
His coat thorns pined, the rest a Greek appeared,
Who native arms against Troy had borne. When he
The Trojan habits, and our arms did see
Something affrighted at the first he staid,
And fixed remaind, then to the shore he made
With tears and prayers. Now by the stars I pray,
And by the Gods, by heavens life-breathing day,
O Trojans take, bear me to any strand,
I know my self one of the Grecian band,
Let this suffice, and sought Troys Gods by war.
For which, if so great our offenses are,
Strew me amongst the waves, drowned in vast seas,
If by men's hands I fall, my death shall please.
Upon his knees he then embracing hung
On mine: to tell his name, from what race sprung,
And to declare his fortunes we demand,
As a firm pledge to save his life, his hand
Me sire Anchises freely gave the man:
Who shaking fear of thus at length began.
From Ithaca, Ach'menides my name;
Hapless Ulisses friend, to Troy I came
With my poor sire: Ah had my fate fixed there.
But my companions struck with horrid fear
In the black Cyclops den, forsook their mate,
And fled the dire abode: the monsters seat
A vast, and mighty Cave, within all over
Was darkened with corrupted food and gore,
And he so tall his head might knock the skies,
From earth you Gods avert such plagues as these.
His visage stern, a churlish voice; his food
Bowels of wretched men, and putrid blood.
I saw his huge hand seize two of our men,
He lying on his back stretched midst his den,
And broke on rocks; filth drowned the sprinkled flore;
I saw him eat limbs flowing with black gore,
The warm flesh trembling in his teeth. But thus
Ulysses takes it not, or Ithacus
Forgetful, did, dangers so great decline.
But when full gorged he lay buried in wine,
His neck awry, stretched in his spacious den,
Gobets with bloody wine, mixed gore again
Belching in sleep; we the great Gods implore,
And took our chance, surrounding him, we bore
With a sharp lance his eye, which mighty did
Lie single, in his frowning forehead hid,
Like Phoebus lamp, or an Argolick shield:
So glad revenge to our friends shade we yield.
But fly, O wretches fly these dangerous coasts,
Your cables cut.
Like Polyphenee, who in his Cave does keep
The woollie flocks, and milks th'imprisond sheep,
A hundred cruel Cyclops wander more
These lofty hills, and haunt this winding shore.
Thrice Phoebe's horns their light replenished,
Whilst I my life in wild beasts deserts sed
In dens and caves, vast Cyclops viewed from high
Trembling to hear their sounding feet, and cry:
Shrubs, berries was my wretched food, the fruit
Of stony cornell, and the herbs torn root.
Surveying round, I saw you first arrive
Resolved who e're you were, my self to give
Your prisoner; it is enough their rage to fly,
And if by men no matter how I die.
Scarce said, when we discover from above
Amongst his flocks, where Polypheme did move
Like to a walking hill, known shores to find,
A horrid monster, huge, deformed, and blind.
To ease his steps a mighty Pine he bore
In his right hand his fleecy sheep before,
His pipe, his comfort, and the only check
To rising sorrow, hung about his neck.
Ater he touched the deeps, and reached the flood,
From his lost eyes, he washed the flowing blood;
Groaning he grindes his teeth, stalks through the tides,
Whilst the deep waves scarce touch his lofty sides.
We trembling fly; aboard the suppliant put,
So meriting, and silent, cables cut,
And brush with striving over the deeps profound.
He hears and turns unto our voices sound.
But when no power was given to use his force,
Nor could Ionian billows match in course;
He raised a huge cry, Pontus, all the sea
Trembles, it shakes far frighted Italy.
Aetna aloud from winding cavernes rores:
But the Cyclopian race rush to the shores,
And called from woods and mountains, fill the strand.
We saw in vain the Aetnean brothers stand
With a sour look, high heads to heaven they bear,
A horrid council, ayrie oaks so rear
Their lofty tops, or spiry Cypress stood,
Such as Diana's grove, or Joves high wood.
Drove with sharp fear cables in have we clear,
And with hoist sails and prosperous winds did steer,
But nigh deaths jaws Helenus showed a way
Which betwixt Scylla and Charybdis lay,
That course we stood, with turned sails this pursue.
When from Pelorus straits the North wind blew;
Pantagias mouth's of living stone I clear
Megaras bays I pass, by Tapsus steer.
Hapless Ulysses friend Ach'menides,
Named all these coasts remeasuring back those seas.
In the Sicanian bay stretched, lies an I Will
Against rough Plemmyrium, which our grandsires style
Ortygia: Alpheus here they fame
Under the sea by obscure channels came:
Now Arethusa mingling with thy wave.
To th'Isles great gods we rites commanded gave,
Fennie Elorus fertile fields we lost,
And shave Pachinus high clift rocky coast:
Camerina ever fixed by fates commands
Farre-off appears, and the Geloian strands,
And mighty Gela stild so from the flood.
Far off high Agragas strong bulworks showed,
Which once bred generous horse; with prosperous wind
Palmie Selinis thee I left behind:
By Lilybeis rocks, and sholes I bore;
To Drepanum thence, on that unhappy shore
I landed, where with many tempests tossed,
Anchises th'ease of all my cares I lost.
There my dear father weary, me forsook,
Alas in vain from so great dangers took.
Not Helenus, who such horiors did unfold
This less declared, nor dire Celoeno told;
Here was his travells bounds, this his last toil.
From whence, the Gods did guide me to your soil.
Aeneas having to their listening ear
Told these sad fortunes, closed his story here.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
DIdo complains; her sister gives advise
To cherish love, and offer sacrifice
To favoring Gods. Juno craves peace; her ends
Venus perceives, and smiling condescends.
Aeneas, and the Queen to hunt prepare.
A tempest. Juno thunders through the air.
To one cave Dido and the Trojan came.
Stolen love through Lybia spread by impious fame.
Jarbas vexed his father Jove implores.
Hermes commands Aeneas from those shores.
Eliza on the Trojan sword expires,
Quenching loves flame in her own funeral fires.
BUt long since Dido struck with great desire.
Feeds a sad wound, and wastes in hidden fire.
His valor, his high birth run in her mind:
His face, and language, deep impression find,
Nor does her care grant rest. Soon as the morn
Did with Phaebean flames the world adorn;
And from high heaven dismissed the gloomie shade,
To her loved sister thus, she troubled, said.
Dear Anne, what dreams disturbed my troubled mind?
What stranger's this our Court has entertained?
What noble looks? how valiant? armed? sure he
(Nor vain's the faith) sprung from some Deity.
Fear shows degenerate minds. Ah by what fates
Has he been tossed, what fierce wars he relates?
Were I not full resolved, fixed in my mind,
No more in wedlock bonds to be conjoined,
Since my first love by death deceived me:
Could I with maeriage, and those rites agree;
I might perchance give place to this one crime.
For (I confess) since poor Sychaeus time,
By fratricide our Gods dispierc'd; I find
This only bends my thoughts, and wavering mind,
I feel some Kindlings now of former love.
But first earth swallow me, or mighty Jove
Shall to the shades with dreadful thunder smite,
Pale shades of Erebus and deepest night,
Ere shame I violate thee, or wrong thy rites,
Who was my first love took all loves delights
With him to's grave, there let him keep it still.
This said, a flood of tears her bosom fill.
More dear to me then day, shall grief thy flower
Of youth (said Anne) and solitude devour?
Children unknown, and Venus sweet reward?
Has dust a sense, or souls entombed regard?
Grant, though no Lybian could your love obtain,
Though you at Tire Jarbas did disdain,
Though glorious men of Africa could not move,
Will you declare hostility to love.
Have thou forgot whose fields thou plantst? here are
Getulian seats, Nations untamed by war;
Numidians fierce, inhospitable sands,
Wild Barceans: there, vast drowth deserted strands.
What shall I say of war from Tire may rise
Thy brother threats?
Sure prosperous Juno, favoring Deities,
Here with a storm the Trojan Navy cast;
What City may thou see, what Kingdoms vast
By such a Marriage, by the power of Troy
What glories may the Punick realms enjoy.
First to the Gods with sacrifices pray,
And then thy guest with courtesy delay,
Whilst Winter and Orion vex the sea;
His Navy crazed, and skies tempestuous be.
Thus she with love did her pierced soul inflame,
Gave hopes to wavering thoughts, and banished shame.
First in the temples, at the Altars, they
Implore; and choice sheep as the custom slay.
To Ceres, Phoebus, Bacchus; before all
To Juno, mistress of rites conjugall.
Holding a cup, most beauteous Dido now
Betwix the horns powers of a snowie cow:
Or walks before the Gods, and th'altars plyes
Whole days with gifts, inspects the sacrifice,
Beasts panting bowels hot consulted are.
Ah ignorant Priests, what availes temples, prayer,
To ease th'inrag'd! whilst soft fire wastes her veins,
And in her breast, a silent wound remains.
Unhappy Dido burns, and furious roves
Through the whole town, as in the Cretan groves
Th'incautelous hind, by an armed shepherd shot:
He leaves the winged steel, and knows it not.
She through Dictean woods, and forest flies,
Whilst in her side the deadly arrow lies.
Now with Aeneas to the walls she walks,
Boasts Tyrian wealth, of her new kingdom talks,
Begins to speak, and stops words half expressed:
And day declining she prepares to feast.
The Trojan war she longs to hear once more:
And on the tellers lips, hangs as before.
And when departed Phoebus paler light
Has day subdued, rest setting stars invite,
Alone she mourns, then on his couch she lies,
And him though absent, thinks she hears and sees;
Or for the father does his son embrace,
If so she might her raging love displace.
Now towers not rise, nor Tyrians use their arms,
The harbor stops, strong piles against all alarms
Are at a stand, works interrupted lie,
Huge Walls and Rampires equalling the sky.
When Joves dear wife perceived how great a bane
Had seized the Queen, nor fame could her restrain,
In these words Juno did to Venus say.
You, and your son, bore gallant spoils away,
A mighty conquest got, and lasting fame,
When two Gods fraud, one woman over-came.
I find thou fearst those walls we now erect:
And seats of lofty Carthage do suspect.
But to what end, why such debates? firm peace
Rather conclude, and lasting marriages
Let us prepare; thou have obtained thy aims,
Fond Dido burns, her bones are pierced with flames.
Let us in common with like auspice sway
These men, let her a Trojan Lord obey,
And Tyrian dowries I Will permit to thee.
Venus (for she perceived the fallacy,
To keep the Roman sway from Lybia's stand)
Replide; who fondly would such things with-stand?
Or rather would with thee in strife contend?
If to thy promise fortune condescend.
Of fates I doubtful am: if Jove will grant
Trojans and Tyrians in one town should plant,
Nations commix'd in firm leagues be conjoined:
Thou art his wife, try to persuade his mind.
Go. I Will assist. Great Juno then begun,
Leave that to us; but how it shall be done,
And by what means I briefly shall declare.
Aeneas end the hapless Queen prepare
To hunt in Groves, when Titan next displayes
The morn, the world discovering with his rays:
On them commix'd with hail a storm I Will power
(whilst nets surround the woods, horse thickets scour)
And I all heaven to thunder shall excite;
Their troops shall fly, hid in opacious night;
The Trojan, and the Queen shall take one cave,
I will be present, if thy aid I have
In wedlock firm I Will dedicate her thine.
There, Hymen them in private shall combine.
These fair proposalls Venus not denide,
Smiling when she her cunning drift espide.
Meanwhile the morning from the Sea arose:
When through the gate, a troup of prime youth goes
With nets, toils, spears, and full-mouthed hounds suppl^^^
And forth Massilians bravely mounted ride,
At the Court gates the Trojan nobles staid,
Whilst in her chamber the fair Queen delaid:
In trapping rich with gold and purple, fit,
Her proud horse stands, and champs the foming bit.
With a great troop, she guarded comes at last;
Her Tyrian habit a rich border graced,
Her quiver gold, gold did her hair infold,
The button of her purple vest was gold.
Then all the Phrygian Lords in order went,
Sprightly Ascanius: but most eminent
For person, and for honor, last marched up,
Aeneas, and to them conjoyns his troop.
So Phoebus shows, when Lycia he forsakes,
And progress to his native Delos makes;
Revells begins; when dancing in a round,
'Bout th'Altars Crets, and Driopos resound.
He walks on Cynthus tops, soft bows infold
His flowing hair, and bind with purest gold;
His quiver rung; such was Aneas grace,
Such honor shines, in his majestic face.
After they come to the high mountains fide,
And unfrrquented woods, behold! they spide
Wild goats affrighted, running ore the clifts:
On the other hand, swift Dear put to their shifts,
In a thick heard the open champaigne take,
And lost in dusty flight the hills forsake.
But young Ascanius in the valleys prides
In his fierce horse, now these, now them out-rides:
Wishing a Boar with those dull herds would blend,
Or a fierce Lion from the hills descend.
Meanwhile high heaven with murmurs loud contends,
And straight a shower, commixt with hail descends.
The Trojan Nobles, and the Phrygian train,
With young Ascanius, scattered through the plain,
Seek several shelters, floods from mountains rave.
The Trojan Prince and Dido take one cave.
First earth and marrying Juno gave the sign:
Fire air both conscious of the Contract shine,
And Nymphs sit howling on the high-browd hills.
This the first day of death, and first of ils
The cause; for neither form, nor fame did move,
Nor Dido judges this unlawful love;
She styles it wedlock, gives her crime that name.
Through Lybist's ample Cities, straight flies Fame.
Fame is an evil, none more swift, which gains
By motion strength, in flying force obtaines,
Small first by fear, to heaven advanced now shrowds,
Stalking on earth her head amongst the clouds.
To Coeus, and Enceladus, the earth
Vexed by the wrath of Gods (they tell) brought forth
This sister last: swift footed, quick she flies,
A huge foul Monster, in each feather lies
A watching eye concealed, (and strange) she bears
As many tongues loud mouths, and listening ears.
A watch by day, on battlements she lights,
Or lofty towers, and mighty towns affrights.
Falsehoods, and lies, of as the truth she tells,
And Nations then with various rumors swells.
Things feigned and real, glad alike she sung.
Aeneas from the blood of Trojans sprung,
To marry him fair Dido condescends,
And the long Winter in vast riot spends
Careless of rule, took with foul lust: such things
From every mouth the cruel Goddess flings,
And swift to King Iabrbas Courts she came
And with these tidings did his soul inflame.
This Joves, and ravished Garamantis son
Had built within his vast dominion
A hundred temples to his fathers name,
As many altars, and the Vigil flame,
The Gods eternal watch he hallowed,
The soil with blood of cattle daily fed,
And with fresh Garlands flowrie porches dressed,
With the harsh rumor next, his soul oppressed,
He at the Altars among the Gods (they say)
Suppliant to Jove with rear'd-up hands did pray.
Great Jupiter, to whom the Moors being plac d
On wrought beds feasting now rich Bacchus taste.
See this oh father? or in vain our hearts
Quake at thy thunder, and when lightning darts
From broken clouds with noise, is fond our fear?
Wandering our coasts a woman purchased here
A little seat, to whom we gave rich lands;
To whom our laws; and This our match withstands,
And in her Kingdom Lord Aeneas states.
That Paris now, with his effeminate mates,
In his Maeonian hat, and perfumed hair,
Injoyes the prise: we to thy Temple bear
Offerings, and have in vain thy name extold.
Thus praying he the Altar fast did hold.
The all-potent heard: then views the royal frame,
And lovers mindless now of better fame.
And such things then to Mercury enjoined;
Fly son with speed, and call the western wind,
And to the Trojan Prince on swift wings glide,
Who now resolves at Carthage to abide,
And promised seats neglects: this message bear
With speed to him, and cut the yielding air.
For him fair Venus no such promise gave,
And therefore twice from Grecian arms did save;
But one that should command Italian Realms
Groaning with war, pregnant with Diadems,
A race must spring from Teucers noble line,
That shall their Laws to the whole world injoyne.
If him no glory of such acts inflame,
Neither will strive to raise his own great fame,
Will he his son the Roman towers envy?
What strange hope stays him with the enemy?
Forgets he Latium and those promised Lands?
Let him set sail; in brief bear these commands.
This said, he his great fathers will obeys.
And first on's feet his golden shoos he ties,
Which winged bore him over Sea and Land,
Swift as the fleeting clouds; then takes his wand
With which from hell he calls up dismals Ghosts,
And others sends to sad infernal coasts;
Gives, and takes sleep, and seals up dying eyes:
With this drives winds, and through loud tempests flies.
At last rough Atlas clifts, and rockie side,
Who on his shoulders heaven supports, he spide.
Atlas pine-bearing head, black clouds still bind,
Snow hides his shoulders beat with showrs and wind,
His horrid beard with crusted ice is froze,
And from the old man's chin a river flows.
Here first with wings dispsaid, Cyllenius stood;
From thence then swiftly glides unto the flood,
Like to a bird which haunts the deeps, and nigh
The fishie Rocks, does with low pinions fly.
So the Cyllenian race twixt earth and skies
Cutting the air, to sandy Lybia flies;
And from his mothers father took his flight.
As his winged feet did on a Cotage light;
He saw Aeneas towrs and roofs prepared,
A sword he wore with shining Jasperstard,
Loose on his shoulders a rich mantle played
Of scarlet die, which wealthy Dido made,
The thread with fine gold mixed. Who thus did say,
Thou now uxorious do foundations lay
Of lofty Carthage, do fair seats prepare,
Of Realms unmindfull, and thy own affair:
The King of Gods who rules both earth and sky,
To thee from high Heaven sends this embassy,
And gave command with speed I should convey:
What Plot? what hope makes thee in Lybia stay?
If thee no glory of such great acts move,
And thy own fame thou striv'st not to improve,
Hopeful Ascanius, fair Julus view
T'whom Italy and Roman lands are due.
From sight, this said, abruptly Hermes fled,
And to thin air a far off vanished.
At this Aeneas is struck dumb with fear,
Amazed he stood, erected was his hair
Earnest to fly, and leave those pleasant lands,
Admonish't strictly by the Gods commands.
Alas what shall he do? or which way move?
Or how begin to Dido mad with love?
His swift thoughts he divides; this course he tries,
Then that, and rapt, through all invention flies.
At last as best on this opinion falls.
Sergestus he, Mnestheus, Cloanthus calls:
Bids private rig the fleet, tackling prepare,
Gather their men, and a feigned cause declare.
Himself mean while would beauteous Dido move,
Since she suspected not in mighty love
So great a breach, and times of best access
Would choose to speak, and make his best address.
With joy they execute what he propounds.
But she (who can deceive a Lover*) sounds
The guile: at first perceives their future aim,
All things suspecting: the same impious Fame
The furious told, to sail they had designed.
Through the whole town she rages, vexed in mind,
Like Thyas, when the sacred things are stirred,
And dire trienials raised, Bacchus being neard,
When with loud shouts nightly Cytheron calls:
Then in such words she on Aeneas falls.
Could thou perfidious use such subtle art?
Such wickedness? and secretly depart?
Could not our love, nor our conjoined right hands,
Nor perishing Dido stay thee in our lands?
But thou will sail under the winter star?
Prepare to sea, when North winds frequent are?
Faithless, if no strange country thou should gain,
Unknown seats find, did ancient Troy remain
Through swelling seas would thou to Troy now stand?
Or fly'st thou me? by these tears, this right hand,
(Since nothing else remains to woeful me)
Our marriage, our prepared solemnity.
If I have well deserved, or ought was mine,
Pity a falling house, change this design
If prayers have power: for thee I gain the hate
Of all my Tyrians, and the Lybick state;
For thee alone extinguished is my shame,
And what I climbed the stars by, former fame.
For whose sake leave thou dying me O guest?
That name does after husband only rest.
Why live I? till my brother raze my wall?
Or captive I to wronged Iarbas fall?
If I had proved before thy flight, by thee
Had offspring, could a young Aeneas see
Sport in thy Palace, with thy face, and look,
I should not seem so captive, or forsook.
She said; but he fixed by commands of Jove
His eyes, and in his heart conceals his love.
Then briefly said, those many favors I
From you received, great Queen, L'le not deny,
Nor shall I Dido's memory disdain,
Whilst I draw breath, or life these limbs sustain;
But for my cause I Will plead; that I did plot
From hence to steal in secret, feign it not:
I thee to be my wife did never take,
Nor did I ever any promise make.
If Fates gave leave to order my affairs
At my own will; and to compose my cares;
The Trojan towers I would again erect,
And the poor remnant of my friends protect:
Then Priams courts should stand, another Troy
By this hand reared, the vanquished should enjoy.
But Phoebus now bids us for Latium stand,
And Lycean lots for Italy command.
This is my love, and this my Country is.
If Carthage towrs thee a Phaenissian please,
And the fair prospect of thy City like;
Why should it trouble you that Trojans seek
New seats in Latium, and Ausouia gain?
And why not we in foreign Kingdoms reign?
Often as the nights moist shadow canopies
The earth; as often as radiant stars arise;
My fathers Ghost, me warning, frights in dreams,
Ascanius loss of the Hesperian Realms,
And destined fields, my dear sons injury.
Jove sent the Gods Ambassador to me,
Both our heads witness, through the aetherial sky
He brought commands; I saw the Deity
Enter these walls; distinct his voice did hear.
With plaints to grieve thee and my self forbear.
Against my will I Latium seek.
She turning, views him, having these things said,
Rouling her eye each where, and round survaid
With silent look: incensed, then thus begun.
Thou art not Dardans race, or Venus son,
But thee perfideous Caucasus has bred
On cruel rocks, and Hyrcan tigers fed.
Why feign I? or why stay for greater woes?
Turns he his eyes? sighs at our grief or shows
Vanquished a tear a lover pitying?
What shall I say? great Juno, nor heaven's King
View these with equal eyes: true faith is lost.
In want him received, drove on our coast,
And fond, with him part of my Kingdom shared,
His friends preserved from death, his fleet repaired.
Ah how am I transported with fond love!
Now Phoebus, Lycian lots, and now from Jove
A strict command the Gods interpreter bears:
Yes, heavenly powrs regards these things, such cares
Disturb their quiet well, ^ make no suit
To stay thee here, nor shall with words refute:
Go, sail for Latium, Realms seek through the Seas:
I hope if there be any Deities)
That thou among rocks cruel like thee shall fall,
Where often thou Dido by her name shall call;
And absent I will follow thee with fire:
And when my soul shall in cold death expire,
I Will haunt thee, and thy tortures I shall know,
By fame, conve^'d me to the shades below.
Then midst her speech breaks off, and sick, the light
Avoids away she flings, with draws from sight,
Forsaking him perplexed in mighty fear;
As many things to peak he did prepare.
Her maids support her sounding then and led
T'her marble chamber, laid upon her bed.
But good Aeneas though he strove to swage
With comfort, grief, with words t'avert her rage,
Often sighing shook with mighty love, yet he
Reviews his fleet, obeys the Deity.
Then Trojans labor, from all shores they come,
Tall ships are launched, and well calk'd bottoms swoom,
And from the woods branc'hd oak and oars unhew'd,
Studious of flight they bring.
Each where thou might have rushing Trojans viewed,
As when large heaps of corn pillaged by ants
They lay in hoards, remembering winters wants,
The black band march, the prey through grass is borne
In narrow tracts; others the fuller corn
With shoulders joined sustain, others the slow
Compel, chastize, all parts with labor glow.
What could thou think, O Dido, at this sight?
Or what sighs send, when from a turrets height
Thou saw the shores wax hot, the sea to move,
Commix'd with mighty murmurs? Impious love,
What can not thou compel in mortal breasts?
Again to tears, again to try requests
She is enforced, and suppliant love obeyed,
Lest dying she should leave ought unassaid.
Anne, see not how they hasten to the Port
On all sides? how their sayls the winds do court?
And the glad Seamen crown their sterns? If I
Had such woes feared, (sister) the misery
I might have borne: thou must for woeful me
This one thing do, the false man still loved thee:
To thee he made his greatest counsels known,
And thou the times of best accession
To move his pity know. Dear sister go,
And suppliant, thus petition the proud foe.
I did not swear at Aulis to destroy
The Dardan race, or sent one ship to Troy,
Nor yet defaced his fathers sepulcher.
Why against my suit stops he his cruel ear?
To a sad lover let him be thus kind;
Then he may sail before a prosperous wind,
Nor I the old contract he has broken crave,
Nor that he kingdoms in fair Latium wave.
Some rest I ask for love, a short reprieve,
Whilst my own fortune teach me how to grieve.
This last request to thy dear sister grant,
And at my death thou shall no riches want.
This said, to and again sad Anna bears
Her deep complaints: but he is not moved with tears,
Nor can be wrought upon by all her woes,
A God has stopped his ear, and Fates oppose.
As Northern winds striving to overthrow
Some ancient Oak, now here, now there they blow:
Huge gusts resound: her bows and curled locks
Strew thick the earth; whilst she stands fixed among Rocks:
How much to heaven her head advancing shoots,
So much to hell descend her fixed roots.
So daily she the Trojan Prince invades
Now with these reasons, now with those persuades,
And storms his valiant breast with mighty cares:
Yet his resolves are six'd, in vain her tears.
Unhappy Dido terrifide by Fates,
Then wished to die: to look on heaven she hates.
But this provoked her more to leave the day:
As gifts on incense-burning Altars lay,
The sacred milk grew black (to mention strange)
And wine infused, to putrid gore did change.
This she to none, not to her sister told,
Besides there was a temple to her old
Husband of stone, which much she did respect,
And had with boughs and snowie fleeces decked.
Here, she supposed she heard Sychaeus call
When gloomie night upon the earth did fall:
And often from thence the Owl extends her throat
With death-presaging, and a direful note.
Many predictions her before did fright:
Cruel Aeneas troubles her each night,
And raving always seems to walk alone,
Still wandering far, without companion,
And seeking Tyrians in a wilderness.
So Pentheus saw troops of Eumenides,
Two sons beheld, as many Thebes espies,
Or like Orestes acted, when he flies
His mother, who black snakes and torches bore,
Whilst the revenging furies guard the door.
Struck with the rage, vanquished with sorrow, now
Resolved to die; the time, and manner how
Contrived; to her sad sister thus she went,
She clears her brow, and coversher intent.
Sister, I have the means, rejoice with me,
Which may gain him, or me from passion free.
There is a place in utmost Ethyop, nere
The setting sun, the Oceans confines, where
Great Atlas shoulders bears heavens starry frame.
From hence a Priestesse, a Massilian came,
Who kept the Hesperian temple, did allow
The Dragon food, and saved the sacred bough
By sprinkling honey, drousie Poppy: she
Can keep all minds she please from sorrow free,
Or send to pains, swift streams stop in their ways,
Call back the stars, and nightly spirits raise;
Under her feet earth seems with groans to rend,
And from the mountain stubborn Oaks descend.
Witness the Gods (sister) and thy dear head,
Unwilling I to magic arts am lead.
In the back court, a pile in secret rear,
The arms, and garments from my chamber bear
The impious left; above those, place the bed
Where I was lost, All be abolished
Of the false man, the Priestess bids: This said,
She silent was, paleness her lips invade.
Nor Anne did think her funerals designed
By this, or that such rage possessed her mind:
Or feared worse things then when Sychaeus died,
Therefore did her commands.
But Dido in the inward court did raise
A mighty pile, where she in order lays
Whole loads of cloven Ash, set torches round,
Which she with wreaths, and funeral branches crowned;
His picture, clothes, and sword which he forgot,
Laid on the bed, too mindful of her plot.
Altars stand round; the Priestess with long hair
Unto three hundred Gods thunders her prayer;
Hell, Chaos, and the triple Hecate,
Virgin Diana, who has aspects three:
Then sprinkling dews feigned from Avernus brought,
Drugs cut with brazen fythes by moonlight sought,
And did with juice of deadly poison brew
The Hippomanes, on a colts foreheae grew,
The love snatched from the Damme.
She with a cake erecting pious hands,
Before the Altars, on foot naked stands:
With garments tucked she dying invocates
The Gods, and Planets, conscious of her Fates,
If any power regards lovers cares,
Those just and mindful, she implores with prayers.
'Twas night when weary limbs sweet sleep possessed
Through all the world; woods, raging seas, at rest:
The stars had midnight told, and silence deep
Commands the sields; beasts, gaudie birds asleep
Which haunt the crystal fountains, or delight
In wood land Countries, under quiet night
Forget their labor, and their cares appease:
But slamber could not hapless Dido seize.
Her eyes never closed, or night her woes asswag'd:
Cares double, and again love rising raged
With a great flood of wrath when she revolves
Thus with her self. Lo! what are my resolves?
Shall I old suitors court I did disdain?
Suppliant implore Numidian loves again?
Those I so often despised? shall I submit
To Trojan Laws, and follow now their fleet?
Because that for my help they prove so kind,
And my great favors bear so well in mind.
But grant I willing were, who'de give me leave,
And me now scorned in their proud ships receive?
Ah wretched woman have thou yet not known,
That perjured off spring of Laomedon?
Shall I alone with haughty Seamen go?
Or raise the Tyrians to pursue the foe?
And those who scarce I could persuade from Tire,
Shall again to try the Sea desire?
Nay, rather as thou have deserved, die;
And with a sword conclude thy misery.
Won by my tears, thou sister, first with woe
Did load the furious, and let in the foe.
And why like wild beasts, faultless might not we
Live without marriage from such troubles free?
My promise to Sychaeus I not kept.
With grief oppressed, thus she complaining, wept.
But now Aeneas shipped, resolved to weigh,
All things prepared, in quiet slumber lay.
To whom the God in the same form presents.
Himself again, with these admonishments.
In all like Hermes, both in voice, and face,
His yellow hair, and comely youthful grace.
Oh Goddess son, canist thou now sleep so sound?
Perceiv'st thou not what dangers thee surround?
Do thou not hear how the fair gales invite?
But she is contriving now some strange deceit,
Resolved to die, rage does her blood incense:
Fly'st thou not then whilst thou have power from hence?
Thou shall behold the sea to foam with oars,
And fires and torches flaming on the shores,
If thee Aurora here delaying find:
Fly; still inconstant is a woman's mind.
Then mixed with gloomie night, thus having said.
Aeneas at the vision much dismayed
Starts from his sleep, and straight gives this command:
Rise quickly, sirs, and to your tackling stand:
With speed unfurl your sails, yours oars now ply:
To hasten flight, a God sent from the sky
Bids Cables cut, and suddenly depart.
Blessed power, we follow thee, who e're thou art;
And joyfully obey thy will again;
Be pleased to aid, and prosperous stars ordain.
This said, he drew his sword, with shining steel
The hausers cut, all the like spirit feel.
The shores forsook, the Navy hides the deep,
They roll the foam, and azure billows sweep.
And now Aurora with fresh beams had spread
The earth, leaving Tythonius saffron bed.
The Queen from a high tower, as dawn appeared,
Saw how with sails a-trip to sea they steered,
The Strands, and vacant Coasts without an oar.
Then beating often her beauteous breast, she tore
Her golden hair, and said, Jove, shall he go?
And shall this stranger mock our Kingdom so?
Shall not the City arm and follow them?
What, will none launch our Fleet into the stream?
Go, haste, bring fire, sail, row; what shall I say?
Or where am I? What folly I betray!
Do impious deeds now touch thee hapless queen?
E're thou gav'st up thy Crown, this should have been:
Behold his faith, and promise, who (they say)
Did from the foe his native Gods convey:
And has on's back his aged father borne.
What, could not I him limb from limb have torn?
And scattered in the sea? his friends and boy
At once with my revenging sword destroy?
Then served the son up for the fathers dish?
But chance of war is doubtful; it is my wish.
Whom should I dying fear? I should have thrown
Fire on their feet, and burnt their floating town,
And the whole race, father and son destroy,
And last above them fall my self with joy.
O Sun, whose eye views all the worlds affairs;
And thou great Juno conscious of these cares:
Nocturnall Hecate, who often do raise
Loud cries through Cities, in cross meeting ways,
Revenging Furies, and you Gods that are
Dying Eliza's, hearken to my prayer:
Show your deserved wrath: if he must gain
His port, that impious man those coasts attain;
If Fate decree, and fixed the periods are;
Let him be vex't with a bold peoples war.
Exilde, forced from his sons embrace; may he
Seek aid, and his own friends sad funerals see.
Nor when dishonored peace he makes with them,
Let him loved life enjoy, or Diadem:
But die before his day, the sand his grave:
And with my blood this last request I crave.
O Tyrians, strive this Nation to supplant
With restless wars this to my ashes grant:
Never join leagues, contract no amities,
And from our bones let some revenger rise,
Who Trojans may pursue with fire, and sword,
Ah, may when ever time shall strength afford,
Shores shores oppose, seas seas, our stocks debate
With arms against arms maintain, I imprecate.
This said, her faucie each where did revolve,
How best she might her loathed life dissolve.
To Barce then Sychaeus nurse, she said,
In native dust her own long since was laid.
Dear nurse, my sister call, and bid her bring
The cattle, the appointed offering,
Let her with river-water sprinkle now,
And bind thy temples with a sacred bough.
Those rites which I to Stygian Jove prepare,
I mean to finish, and conclude my care.
Fire must consume the Dardan monument.
This said, with an old woman's pace she went.
But the fierce Queen shook with an Enterprise
So horrible, rouling her bloody eyes,
Her cheeks were sported, pale with thought of death,
The inner court by violence enters,
And furious mounts the lofty pile: then draws
The Dardan sword, not left for such a cause.
After the Ilian garments she survaide,
And the known bed, with tears, and thoughts delaid
A while she stops; then spoke her last. To me
Sweet spoils, whilst God was pleased, and destiny;
Receive this soul, and free from cares: I have
Lived, and performed that course my fortune gave,
And now the earth must my great shade seclude.
I a far City built, my own walls viewed;
Punished my brother, pleased my husbands Ghost;
Blessed, too much blessed, if never on our coast
Troys keels had touched. This said, she kissed the bed,
Shall we die unrevenged? but die she said:
Thus, thus it pleases to the shades to go.
These flames at Sea may to the Dardan show,
And let our death sad Omens him afford.
This said, they saw her fallen upon the sword;
Sprinkled her hands with blood, the weapon fomes.
Then from the lofty Palace clamor comes:
Fame wanders the distracted City round:
The roofs with lamentations, groans, resound,
And female shreeks: loud sorrows pierce the sky.
No otherwise then if the enemy,
All Carthage seized, or ancient Tire; the frames
Of men, and Gods, involved in raging flames.
Her sister pale, dismayed, with trembling pace
Beating her breast, disfiguring her face,
Rushed in, and called the dying by her name;
For this, O sister? was this fraud your aim?
For this the pile, fire, Altars? ah! lost me,
What shall I do? scorn'st thou my company?
Dying, thou should have called me to these Fates,
One sword, grief, hour, had finished both our dates.
Built I this pile, and to our Gods did make
My prayer that cruel, thee I should forsake?
Me, and thy self, dear sister, and thy town,
Both Peers, and people, thou have overthrown.
Some water bring, that I may bathe the wound;
And if that any breath be wandering found
My lips shall gather it. Thus having said,
She mounts the pile, her dying sister laid
With sweet embraces closely to her breast,
And groaning dries the black blood with her vest.
To raise her heavy eyes again she tried,
And fails, the deep wound bubbling in herside.
Thrice leaning on her arms assaid to rise,
Thrice turning on her bed, with wandering eyes
Heavens light she sought, and finding groans again;
Then royal Juno pitying her long pain
And tedious death, Iris from heaven commands
To free her soul, and ease lif's struggling bands.
Since she di'de not by death deserved, nor Fates,
But sudden rage her day anticipates,
Nor Proserpine did yet her bright hair take,
Nor doomb'd her head unto the Stygian Lake.
From heaven then dewie rose-wing'd Iris flew;
She against the sun a thousand colors drew,
Placed on her head, Sacred to Dis, from thee
This charged I bear; Be from thy body free.
This said, she cuts her hair, all heat expires,
And with it life into the air retires.
VIRGIL'S AENEIS THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Dido's ascending flames sad Trojans see.
Storms drive Aeneas back to Sicilie.
Anchises rites renewed. The annual games.
Iris from Juno stirs the Trojan dames
To burn the fleet. Aeneas prays; a shower
Prevents the mischief, quenching all but four.
Trojans set sail. Venus of Neptune craves
Safe passage for their Navy through his waves.
The God assents Somnus with Stygian boughs
Besprinkles watchful Palinurus brows.
Ore board he falls, the loss Aeneas spies,
And weeping at the helm his place supplies.
Mean while his course resolved Aeneas sails,
And the dark waves divides with northern gales,
Viewing unhappy Dido's walls, which shone
With flames, the cause such fire had raised, unknown;
But what a woman might in sorrow drowned,
Struck deep with grief and burning love was found;
And by sad auguries Trojans understand.
As they possessed the deep; nor any land
Now more in ken: seas every where, and skies;
Freighted with night and tempest did arise
A black cloud, waves grew horrid with the shade;
Then from the high stern Palinurus said,
Ah! what huge storms surround the hemisphere?
Or, sather Neptune, what do thou prepare?
Here bids them ply tough oars, stand to their tack,
Then turns her side to wind-ward, and thus spoke.
Great Prince, if Jove should promise, with this wind
I should despair Italian coasts to find;
Gusts rising shift, the black west grows more loud:
And the whole heaven condensed into one cloud:
In vain we strive, nor make we any way;
Therefore since fortune conquers, let us obey,
Where she calls, sail: kind shores of Erix are
And the Sycanian ports from hence not far,
If rightly stars observed I bear in mind.
Then said the Prince: I saw long since the wind
Grew scarce, and you in vain strove: Roomer stand:
To ease our weary fleet not any land
More grateful is, or I could wish for more
Then the Dardanian Acestes shore,
Whose lap infolds my fathers bones. This said,
Fair Zephyre swells their sails, the port they made,
With a swift current in the Navy stands,
And joyful sails at last to well-known sands.
Acestes wondered from a mountains height
To see them come, then hasts to the friendly fleet.
A Libyan Bears skin rough with darts he wore;
whom the Ilian Dame to flood Crinisus bore;
He mindful ofs old stock, congratulates
Them now returned, and cheers with rural cates,
The tir'de inviting to a friendly feast.
When the next morn had chased stars from the East
Aeueas having warned from all parts round
His friends to meet; spoke from a rising ground.
Ye Trojans sprung from the high blood of Gods;
A year has finished monthly periods.
Since we interred the dust of my divine
Father, and made the funeral altars shine:
The day draws nigh (I guess) which I must still
Lament and honor ( Gods, such is your will)
An exile in Getulian Syrts were I,
Or in Mycene took in the Grecian sea;
Yet annual vows and solemn rites I Would pay,
And heaped up offerings on his Altars lay.
Now we are present at my fathers dust,
Nor without heavenly providence, I trust,
Arrived all safe within a friendly shore,
Glad honors celebrate, and winds implore:
These rites he bid should annually be paid
In temples dedicate, our City laid.
Trojan Acestes will two beeves bestow
On every ship; your Country Gods allow,
And those Acestes honors at the feast.
And if the ninth Aurora from the East
Brings a clear day, does earth with beams disclose,
I Will for the swiftest ship a prize propose,
For him runs best, who bold strong nerves excite,
Good at the dart, or shoots the nimble Flight,
Or dare in fight a cruel Cestus trust;
Come all, due Palms receive, and honors just;
Give your applause, your temples crowned with boughs.
This said, his mothers myrtle shades his brows.
This Helymus, this old Acestes did,
Ascanius this, the youth all followed.
Midst a great troop from thence, Aeneas went
With many thousands, to the monument,
And poured two bowls of rich wine on the flore,
Two of new milk, and two of sacred gore,
Strewing the place with purple flowrs, then said:
Hail my blessed father, hail paternall shade,
And dust preserved in vain; heaven would not grant
Latium with thee, and promised fields to plant,
Nor (what ere) Lydian Tyber to be sought.
This said, a huge snake from the secret vault
With seven vast gyres, seven mighty fouldings glides,
And gently wreathed the tomb, by the Altar slides,
His back with green was freckled, and a bright
Purple, with gold, cast from his scales a light.
As in the clouds the mighty bow displayes
A thousand various hues, against Phoebus rays.
Aeneas wonders, his long train he roules
Amongst the Goblets, and the standing bowls;
Then feeds, and having tasted, harmeless went,
Leaving the Altars to the monument.
This made him more his fathers rites renew,
And solemn sacrifice, suspecting now
That either this one of his servants was,
Or else the sacred Genius of the place:
Five sheep he then did kill, as many swine,
With black-back'd steers, and as the use, pours wine
From bowls, and great Anchises soul implores,
And Ghosts remitted from the Stygian shores.
Then all his friends of their own plenty paid
Glad offerings, and slain Steers the Altars lade;
Some spits prepare, and boylers plant of brass,
They entrails roast, dispersed upon the grass.
The expected day was present, with the dawn,
Phaetous bright Steeds the ninth morn fair had drawn;
Glad troops from all parts fill the shore, by fame
Brought thither, and renowned Acestes name.
Some Trojans come to see, others to play.
Amidst the Cirque, in view the prises lay,
Wreaths, sacred tripods, palm the victors prize,
With arms, a garment of rich scarlet lies.
Gold, silver talents, and appointed games,
A trumpet from amidst the heap proclaims.
First from the Fleet four chosen galleys try
Their ponderous oars, striving for victory.
In the swift Pristis stout-oar'd Mnesteus came,
Mnesteus who gave the Mnemnian house a name,
Gyas in huge Chymera, a vast Hull,
The Cities work, which lusty Trojans pull
with triple oars, on threefold banks. Next came
Sergestus who gave Sergius stock a name
In The Centaur: Scylla bold Cloanthus drives,
Whence Romes Cluentian family derives.
Against the foming shores a high Rock stood,
Which often was drowned, beat with the swelling flood,
When storms involve the stars, and seen again
When a soft calm does overspread the maine,
To sea-fowle a most grateful station now.
The Prince here fixed the goal, an oken bough,
The Saylors mark, by which they understood
To turn, and bend long courses to the flood.
They draw for place, in the high sterns behold
The Captains shine, in scarlet clad and gold.
The rest with Poplar crowned, their shoulders bare
Glitter with oil, fixed on their banks they were:
Their arms stretched forth with oars, the sign th'expect,
Whilst their insulting hearts are countercheck t.
With trembling fear, and raised with love of praise.
Thence as the trumpet sounds without delays
All start, the sea-mens shouts the heavens ascend,
And with long strokes they fomie billows rend.
All plow the waves, the gaping Ocean feels
Their wounding oars, and force of thundering keels.
In Chariot games more swift not Chariots are
Borne through the Champaign, when they leave the bar.
Nor Charioteers bending their bodies strain
More at a loose, shaking the flowing maine.
With loud applauses, shouts from parties then
Favoring their friends, the woods resound again,
Including shores tumble the voice about,
And the struck hills echo at every shout.
First Gyas swiftly through the billows glides
With clamours great. Cloanthus next divides
The waves with better oars, his pine a slug
Lost way: next Pristis and the Centaure tug
Who shall get foremost, with an equal oar.
Now Pristis, now great Centaure is before,
And now together, they their fore-decks join,
Whilst their long keels plow up the shallow brine.
At last the Rock drew near, the goal they make,
When Gyas first a Conqueror bespake
Menaetes at the helm. Why do thou steer
The starboard thus: love thou the shore: lie here:
Bind Larboard cliffs; let them stand off (he said.)
But still Menaetes of hid Rocks afraid
Bore to the sea. Where go thou? Gyas here
Again cass loud; these clifts, Menaetes steer.
And close behind him, lo! Cloanthus spies
Shaving the Larboard rocks, and inward plies
Betwixt the sounding tops, and Gyas ship.
And suddenly the foremost did outstrip,
The goal being left behind, to safe seas came.
But then great grief the young man's bones inflame:
Nor tears are wanting; slow Menaetes, then
Honor forgot, and safety of his men,
From the high stern he tumbles in the flood;
And at the helm, pilate and master stood
Cheering his mates; to shore the rudder bends.
At length the old man from the deep ascends,
Menaetes clogged with garments, dropping wet
Seeks a high cliffe, and on the dry Rock set.
The Trojans shout to see him fall and swim,
And vomiting salt water, laugh at him.
Sergestus, Mnestheus, now the two last, were
Hopeful to beat retarded Gyas here,
Sergestus first drew nigh the Rock, nor more
Then his ships length ahead, part was before,
Part emulous Pristis pressed with fore-decks near.
When Mnesteus midst his ship his men did cheer,
Now now rise to your oars Hectorian mates,
Whom at Troys fall I chose associates;
That force showed in Getulian syrts again
Make good, and as before in the Ionian maine,
Or Malea's following streams; Mnesteus desires
Not to be first, nor victory requires.
Though O Let them thou please great Neptune gain,
But to be last, this vanquish, such a stain,
Such shame forbid. Then their whole strength they use,
And with vast strokes they shake the brazen prowes,
The seas are past, and short breath shakes their sides,
Drowth clams their mouths, sweat down in rivers glides.
Fortune her self the man wished honor brought:
For whilst too near the rocks Sergestus sought
An inner course, a fatal space betwixt,
Unhappy on the cliffes he running fixed;
The crags being struck, and oars contending rung
In the sharp Rock, and the struck foreship hung;
The sailors rise, staid with a mighty cry;
Ir'n-headed staves, sharp pointed poles apply,
And gather in the sea their broken oars.
But Mnesteus glad, proud with success, implores
The winds, and with a band of rowers stood
Through the safe seas, and glides to the open flood.
O'th sudden so a frighted Dove does rise,
Whose loved nest, in some dark pumice lies:
And striking the house top with timorous wings,
Amazed into the field at random springs;
Till with a slide, to calmer air she comes,
And cuts it without motion of her plumes.
So Mnesteus through the frowning billows glides,
So Pristis last the flying waves divides:
And with a violent course her way she makes.
Sergestus first on the steep rock forsakes,
Who struggling in the shallows, aid implores
In vain: learning to row with broken oars.
Gyas in vast Chymera next ore-tooke,
And past, since she her Master had forsook.
Cloanthus only left to be subdued,
To him he bears, with his whole strength pursued.
These their new glory, honors got despise,
Unless they keep it, and to gain the prize
Would sell their lives; success feeds them; they may
Because they think they can obtain the day.
And for the Goal with equal prows they would stood;
But that Cloanthus prayed unto the flood,
With rear'd-up hands, and Gods called with a vow.
You powers who rule the sea, whose waves I plow,
Joyful I Will place a white bull on this coast
Before your Altars, and fat offerings cast
In your salt waves, and purest wine I Will pay;
This said, all heard him from the deepest sea:
Neriades, Panopaea, Forcus band,
Him old Portunus shoves with his great hand:
Swifter then tempest, or winged shaft, he glides
To shore, and in the harbors bosom hides.
Aeneas (as the use) all summond; there
Cloanthus with a herald did declare
Victor, and with fresh laurel vails his brows:
And to the ships three steers with wine allows,
And a great silver talent; then presents
The Captains with especial ornaments.
A vest of gold he to Cloanthus gave,
Edged with rich purple in a double wave;
The royal boy in leafy Ida wove,
Fierce, panting seems, as with his dart he drove
Fleet deer in chase, whom Joves swift Eagle bears
From thence aloft, trust in his hooked sears.
In vain the old Guardians hands to heaven did rear,
And dogs their mouths spend, raging in the air.
But who by virtue second place did hold,
He gave a curious male, wrought thick with gold,
(Which he a Conqueror from Demolius bore
Under high Ilium, on swift Simois shore)
Both for defense and grace in arms; scarce this
With shoulders joined, Phegeus, and Saguris
His servants bore: Demolius in times past
In these arms swiftly straggling Trojans chased.
Two brazen Caldrons to the third was brought,
And two fair Cups with silver richly wrought.
And now all proud with honors thus assigned;
Their temples they with rosy Garlands bind.
When from the dire rock scarce with much art cleared,
Sergestus his scorned ship, unhonour'd steered:
His oars being broke, weak with one single rank.
Such in the way a Serpent on a bank,
Ore whom oblique, swift brazen wheels have gone:
Or passenger left half-dead, hurt with a stone:
Flying in vain, he long contortions wrests,
Part fierce, with burning eyes, and hissing crests,
Rising aloft, part main'd a wound withholds,
Tangling in knots his own coile him infolds.
With such a rowing his slow ship made way,
Yet sailed, she with full sails possessed the bay.
The Prince the promised gift Sergestus gave,
Glad he his ship and friends so well did save,
Pholoe a Cretan borne, who skill professed
In Pallas art, two twins hung at her breast.
Pious Aeneas, this sport finished, led
To a green plain, which woods encompassed
With trending hills, the vale a Theater crowned.
The Hero here, with many thousands round
About him placed, did his high Chair ascend:
Here those who would in the swift race contend
He with rewards invites, and prises fixed.
Trojans, Sicanians come, from all parts mixed.
Nisus, Euryalus first.
Euryalus most fair and youthful was,
Whom Nisus dearly loved; next him took place
Royal Diores, Priam's famous stem,
Salius and Patron next, conjoined with them:
From Epire this, Arcadia that descends,
Helymus, Panopes, old Acostes friends,
Sicilian youths in woods accustomed, came.
And many more buried in obscure fame.
To them thus spoke the Prince; Hear, and regard
None shall depart from hence without reward;
Two pollish'd Gnossian spears I shall afford,
And with a silver hilt a two edged sword:
This honor each shall have, and I allow
The first three shall with olives bind their brow.
I to the first a brave horse furnished yield:
The next an Amasonian quiver, filled
With Thracian shafts, the belt a golden one
Fast with a button of a polished stone.
This Grecian helmet shall the third content,
Thus having said they to their station went.
The signal heard, the bar forsook; they came
Like a swift shower, and at the goal they aim.
First Nisus gains the start of all by far,
Not swifter winds, nor wings of lightning are;
Next him, but at great distance followed next,
Salius, and after him a space betwixt,
Euryalus was third.
Helymus Euryalus pursues, next whom
Diores hasts, now side by side did come;
Strikes foot by foot, and had there been more space,
Had got before, or doubtful left the race:
Now to the end they came, and tired drew near,
When Nisus in the blood of a slain steer
Which wet the verdant grass, unluckie slides.
Here as the young man, now a victor prides,
Tripping, his steps could not recall again;
But fell in sacred gore, and mud unclean.
Yet not unmindfull of Euryalus love,
Rising, he gave to Salius a shove,
And tumbling with him, on the hard sand laid,
Euryalus got first by Nisus aid,
Out-stripping all with shouts and joyful cries.
Helymus next, Diores the third prise.
Here Salius makes the Theater to ring
Moving the Fathers with loud clamouring
To grant those honors he is bereaved on thus.
Beauty, sweat tears defend Euryalus:
Virtue with beauty joined more grateful is;
Diores helps aloud, who the last prise,
If Salius got the first, had won in vain.
Then spoke Aeneas, Firm your gifts remain;
None shall remove the palm, but I may yet
My hapless friends mischance compassionate.
Then a huge lions hide he Salius gave
Rich-fur'd, with golden claws. If vanquished have
These things, said Nisus, and such pity be
On them that fall, what gift's reserved for me,
Who with applause had the prime honor got,
Had I not met with Salius spightfull lot?
This saying, he his limbs and face defiled
With foul mud showed; The best of Princes smiled,
Bids the shield give him Didymaon wrought,
Which he from Neptun's sacred pillar brought.
The brave youth this fair present satisfies.
After the course was done, disposed each prise,
Now come the stout whose bosoms courage fill,
And for the prize now show their strength and skill,
This said, two honors for the fight are placed,
A Bull the victors, gold, and garlands graced,
A sword and helm to cheer him got the worst.
Straight from the throng then mighty Dares burst:
And his vast limbs with great applause were shown.
He often with Paris did contend alone.
He huge sized Butes at great Hectors tomb,
Who from Amycus of Bebricia come
Did overthrow, and with his conquering hands,
Measured his length upon the yellow sands.
Such Dares for the fight, his head raised high
Shows his broad shoulders, and alternatly
Swings his extended arms, and beats the winds.
His match is sought, none that great concourse finds
Dares take the Cestus, or himself present.
To bear the palm from all he confident
Before Aeneas stood; nor more delayed,
His left hand holding the bulls horn, then said.
Great Goddess son, if no man dare resist,
Why stand I here, command I be dismissed,
And grant the prise. Trojans with one consent
Cried he the man should promised gifts present.
Here old Acestes chides Entellus, as
Near placed they sat, on beds of verdant grass;
Entellus, valiant'st Hero once in vain,
If thou let him untride, such honor gain:
VVher's now thy God and Master Erix name
In slight regard? and where is now thy fame
Through Sicilie spread? and spoils hung on thy walls?
Then he: Not love of praise and glory fails
VVeaken'd by fear; but me cold blood restrains,
Benumbed with age, and weakeness in my veins.
Had I that youth which he with insolence
Does triumph in, from me long parted since,
Gifts should not draw me, nor would I regard
A goodly steer, nor stand upon reward.
Two mighty bats he casts in, this being said,
With which the cruel Erix often had played,
And tried the hard skins. All were astonished,
Seven huge bull hides, sow'de stiff, with ir'n and lead.
Dares was most dismayed, and long denies,
The mighty weight great Anchisiades,
And immense fouldings, here, and there did roll:
While in such words the old man spoke his soul.
Had any seen those clubs Alcides bore!
And cruel battle fought upon this shore!
These arms thou see, which blood and brains yet smear,
Thy cosen Erix in times past did bear;
With these cop'd Hercules; I with these did fight
Whilst blood gave better strength; before the spite
Of envious age had silvered thus my brows.
If Trojan Dares shall my arms refuse,
If so Aeneas and the King shall please,
We Will match our arms, for thee I Will these release;
Fear not, lay by thy Trojan arms. This said,
His thick lined vest he from his shoulders laid,
His huge limbs, bones, and brawnie muscles showed;
Then midst the place a mighty man he stood.
When Prince Aeneas equal clubs commands,
And weapons matched he puts into their hands.
Each stood prepared, themselves then raising high,
Boldly they lift their arms unto the sky:
Far back they draw their tall heads from the stroke,
They join in fight, and blows with blows provoke.
One trusting youth, best traversed his ground,
The other in strength and sife advantage found:
But with stiff knees Entellus earnest slides,
Whilst short thick breathings shake his ample sides.
Many blows past, yet neither had the best,
Redoubled strokes ring on their spacious breast,
And hollow sides, about their ears and brows
A swift hand flies, and cheeks resound with blows.
Unmoved yet old Entellus stood, his skill
And watchful eye, warding his body still.
As at a fenced City Dares lies,
Or a high tower by leagure to surprise:
This entrance, that, strives by his art to gain,
And with often storming seeks to get in vain.
Entellus rai'sd his arm, and high did rise
To make a stroke; the coming blow he spies,
And with his nimble body did prevent;
Upon the air the old man's strength is spent,
And heavy, he with a huge weight comes down.
In Erymanthus so, or Ida's Crown,
Torn from the roots, tumbles a hollow Pine.
Trojans applauding rise, Sicilians join,
Clamor scales heaven; Acestes first runs forth
To raise his equal aged friend from earth.
But the Hero this retards not, nor affrights,
He fiercer now comes on, rage strength excites,
And shame with conscious virtue force revives.
Then Dares headlong every where he drives
With both his hands redoubling blows, nor stops
Nor stays. As in a storm the houses tops
Rattle with hail, so thick he strokes bestows,
And falls on Dares, with a shower of blows.
Aeneas here forbids then to engage
Further, unwilling that Entellus rage
Proceed, so ends the fight, and thence conveyed
Spent Dares, and with words appeasing, said.
Hapless, what folly did thy mind bereave?
Do thou not more then humane strength perceive?
Yield to the God; then brought him off, this said.
But Dares with weak knees tossing his head,
His teeth all bloody, and gore vomiting,
His faithful equals to the navy bring:
The helm and sword appointed they receive,
The bull, the prize unto Entellus leave.
Proud of the palm, the Conqueror raised with joy,
Then said, know Goddess Son, and you of Troy,
By this, what strength I in my youth might have,
And from what death you rescued Dares save.
This said, as he against the bull did stand,
Now his by fight, his bat poised in his hand,
Rising, betwixt the horns he takes him full,
And beats into his battered brain his skull.
Dead he falls down, trembling on the earth he lay;
And thus much adds, Erix to thee I pay
This better gift then Dares life, and part
A victor here, both with my arms, and art.
Forthwith Aeneas those would exercise
The nimble shaft invites, and placed the prize.
Brought from Serestus ship with a great throng
A mast he fixed, to it a pidgeon hung,
This as a mark to aim at he made fast,
And in a brazen helm the lots were cast.
All being met; first place with great applause
The bold Hyrtacides Hippocoon draws.
Then Mnesteus conqueror in the navall game,
Crowned with fresh olives up glad Mnesteus came.
Eurytion third; thy brother most renowned
Pandarus, who did once the peace confound,
And first his arrow among the Grecians shot.
Acestes last drew from the helm his lot,
And bold in youthful games will yet contend.
Then with great strength their hooked bows they bend;
Each for himself, and forth their arrow drew;
First through the sky from his loud bowstring flew
Hyrtacides shaft, and cutting swift air past,
Then fixed it self upon the adverse mast.
It shook; the frighted bird flutters her wings,
And every part with loud applauses rings.
After bold Mnestheus stands, his bow he bent,
Taking his aim, his eye with the arrow went;
Though he was not so happy with the shot
To hit the pigeon, yet he broke the knot,
By which her feet to the high mast were tide;
She down the wind in a dark cloud did glide.
Then swift Eurytion did his shaft prepare,
And ready, calls his brother in his prayer;
As with spread wings thence the glad pigeon flew
Through vacant air, in gloomy clouds he slew.
Breathless she fell, life in aetherial spears
Forsook, and falling the fixed arrow bears.
Acestes yet remained, the palm being got;
Yet through the ample sky his arrow shot,
Boasting his art, and sounding bow; straight, here
A future prodigy, and great signs appear,
Such after-chance declared, and omens late
Which dreadful prophets did prognosticate.
For flying through moist clouds, the arrow fires,
And chalks the way with flames, then spent expires
Amongst the winds; as often through the air
A meteor shoots, and stars with blazing hair.
All are amazed: Trojans, Sicilians join
In prayers; but great Aeneas liked the sign,
And did Acestes joyfully embrace,
Then loading him with mighty gifts, thus says;
Best father take (for so would heavens great King
By these strange signs we, thee prime honors bring)
This cup inchac'd with figures thou must have,
Which Thracian Cisseus old Anchises gave:
The mighty gift my Sire he did present,
Both of his love the pledge and monument,
And with fresh laurel binds his brows. This said,
Then over all Acestes conqueror made;
Nor good Eurytion did such grace envy.
Though he the Dove brought from the losty sky.
Next he rewards him, broke the cord, and last
Who fixed his winged arrow in the mast.
But Prince Aeneas, scarce this sport being done,
Epytides, tutor, and companion
TO Ascanius, calls, and speak in's trusty ear;
If Julus, and the young troops ready were,
The horses trained, he with the band should come,
And show himself, armed at his grandsires tomb;
Then straight commands the thronged in People, here
To make an open field, the Place to clear.
The boys march up, before their Parents show
On gallant steeds, whom Trojans as they go
And the Trinacrian youth, with shouts admired.
All as the use, bright helm'd, and brave attired,
And with steel points two cornel javelins bore,
Light quivers, some, and chains of gold they wore
About their necks, that rich and curious be.
Three troops marched on, lead up by captains three:
Twice six youth march in a divided band,
Bravely drawn up, whom equal chiefs command.
Young Priam named from's grandsire first in Place
Lead up his youth, Polites thy fair race,
Latium t'augment a Thracian courser bore
With white spots dapled, and white feet before,
Who lofty in his forehead showed a star.
Next Atys, whence the Latin Atii are,
Young Atys whom Ascanius loved; and last
Ascanius who in beauty all surpast,
Rid a brave horse, which Dido did present
Of her dear love the pledge and monument.
Each other youth was mounted on a Steed
Of old Acestes, pure Trinacrian breed.
The Trojans full of joy, did entertain
With acclamation this ambitious train,
Who by their faces their old Parents knew.
When these they had seen, delighted with the show,
Epytides gave the sign, to them prepared,
And makes his loud switch ring; no sooner heard,
They ran together, in three squadrons, then
Divide, and open at the word again,
Their courses change, and cruel javelins bear,
They countermarch, the front becomes the rear;
Alternate orbs with wheeling they include,
Now armed they seem to fight, and now subdu'de
They make retreat, then cheered they turn the lance,
And peace concluding equally advance.
As once the Labyrinth in high Crete (fame says)
A thousand turnings had, with doubtful ways,
Which did no sign unto the followers leave,
But with perpetual errors did deceive.
So youthful Trojans wheet, and in that sort,
They flight and battle interweave with sport:
As Dolphins who the swelling waves divide
In Lybick seas, and wanton in the tide.
Ascanius when long Alba he did frame
Did first appoint this custom, and this game,
And the ancient Latins taught to celebrate:
What he and Trojan youth did, the Alban state
Their offspring showed this greatest Rome from hence
Received, and kept those honors ever since,
The game, Troys youthful troops the Trojan names,
Thus finished he his blessed fathers games.
Here first inconstant fortune changed her brow,
Whilst they with various rites performed their vow,
From heaven Saturnian Juno Iris sent
To the Ilian Fleet: winds breathing as she went:
Revolving much, nor was her ancient spleen
Yet satisfied; the Virgin swift unseen,
Straight through the bow of thousand colors flies,
The shores she views, and mighty concourse spies,
The port forsook, all from the Navy gone:
But far off Trojan dames she saw alone,
Who mourned Anchises, and the deeps survaid,
And weeping ah so many floods (they said)
And shoals must yet the weary pass, all pray
For seats, toyld with the troubles of the sea.
Skilful in mischief, in amongst these she pressed,
And lays aside her goddess form and vest,
And straight old Beroe, Dorycles wife became,
Who once had children, honor and great fame,
And thus she did midst Ilian dames declare.
O wretches! whom no Grecian in this war
Vouchsafed to kill at home, unfortunate,
For what sad end are you preserved by fate?
Since Troys destruction now seven years are past,
Whilst we by seas, dire rocks, and countries vast,
Rai^ing new Stars, are born through floods: whilst we
Involved with waves, seek flying Italy.
Fraternal Erix, kind Acestes strands
To plant in, build a city, who withstands?
O country, and our Gods preserved in vain,
Shall no place Troy be styled? shall we again
Hectorian streams, nor Xanthus, Symois see?
Come, this unhappy Navy burn with me.
In sleep to me Cassandra did appear,
She brought me fire, and said, Your Troy seek here,
This is your seat; now is the time to act,
Neptunes four altars see; let us not protract:
The God himself courage, and brands, affords.
Then cruel fire she snatched (using these words)
And far off bran dishing she casts the flames,
Raised and astonished are the Ilian dames.
Here one, called Pyrgo, who by age took place,
Nurse to so many of great Priams race;
Said, This not Beroe, Dorycles wife, nor this
A Rhetian dame; here divine beauty is:
Mark her bright eyes, and breath; behold her face,
Her voices accent, and her stately grace.
I now left Beroe sick, much grieved that she
Should only from such offering absent be,
Nor could to Anchises bring due sacrifice.
Such things she said.
But they the Fleet behold with cruel eyes,
Doubtful 'twixt woeful love of present seats
They stood, or lands to them designed by fates:
When with spread wings to heaven the Goddess glides,
And the great bow under the clouds divides.
Enraged and wondering then the Ilian dames
With great noise snatch from private harths the flames;
Some altars spoil, and boughs, leaves, firebrarnds threw;
Amongst painted sterns, banks, oars, with loose reins flew,
Vulcan enraged. When to Anchises tomb
And to the theater Eumelus did come
From the fire'd navy, and such tidings told,
Then they in clouds black rising smoke behold.
And first Ascanius, sprightly as he did
His troop lead, to the camp disturbed rid;
Nor by his fearful tutors could be staid;
What new rage? whither now? what mean ye? said.
Ah wretched women, you your own hopes burn,
Not the enemies camp; to your Ascanius turn:
And at their feet his empty helm he cast,
Which personating war, his forehead graced.
Aeneas hastes; with him the Trojan bands;
But they amazed, fled, scattered through the strands,
To woods, and hollow rocks: their minds restored
They know their own; their enterprise abhorred,
And Juno now is shaken from their breast;
But not those untamed fires could be suppressed,
Tow, smothering lives under the sappy oak;
The vessels catching, vomit gloomy smoke;
The cruel plague seized the whole Fleet at length,
Against rivers power, and all the Hero's strength.
Pious Aeneas then his garments rends,
And to the Gods for aid his hands extends.
All-potent Jove, if all the Trojans be
Not in thy hate, if ancient Piety
Humane affairs regards; these flames destroy;
O father, save the poor remains of Troy;
Or if deservd, with thunder strike me dead,
And now orewhelm with thy right hand. Scarce said,
When a black tempest raged; a mighty rain
Fell without mean: the mountains, all the plain
With thunder shook; condensing Auster sent
A most black storm through the whole firmament.
The decks are filled; Oak once half burnt, grows moist
Until the flame was quenchd; four only lost,
Saved from that plague. But Prince Aeneas here
Shook with the bitter chance, now here, now there,
Great cares revolving in his breast; if he
Mindlesse of fates, should plant in Sicilie,
Or take Italian shore. Old Nautes said,
Whom Pallas with much art had famous made,
Then to the Prince: What ere the mighty ire
Of gods portend, or what the fates require,
We must endure. Comforting, he begun
Thus to Aeneas: O thou Goddess son,
Let us obey the fates; whatever chance,
All fortunes vanquished are by sufferance.
Trojan Acestes of a race divine,
Unto thy counsels an associate join.
Let him receive thy lost ships companies:
And those now tired with thy great enterprise.
The weary matrons, and old men select,
The weak, and those whom dangers now deject;
Here let them plant, and here a city frame,
And from Acestes give the walls a name.
He with these words of his old friend was cheerd,
Yet in his breast still many cares appeared.
When nights black chariot had possessed the pole,
From thence he saw descend Anchises soul,
And pouring forth such voices, did appear;
O son, then life, whilst life remained, more dear!
O son, bosied in Trojun fates! I am
By Joves command sent hither; who from flame.
Preserved thy ships, and pitied from the sky.
Old Nautes counsel take, for Italy;
And bold youth choose; a race thou must overcome
Cruel by use of war in Latium.
But first to Pluto's dismal courts repair,
And deep Avernus, where my dwellings are.
I am not with sad shades, in implous hell,
But with the blessed in glad Elysium dwell.
Chaste Sybil shall conduct thee to the place,
With much blood of black sheep: there all thy race,
And new seats thou shall know; and now farewell,
Moist night has reached her vertick parallel;
The cruel East blows me with panting steeds,
He through thin air like smoke thus saying, speeds.
Aeneas then: Where hastes thou? to what place?
Whom do thou fly? why driven from our embrace?
This said, he ashes stirs, and covered fire,
The Trojan lar; and in old Vestas quire,
Suppliant with holy bread, and full cups bends.
Acestes raising first, and next his friends.
Both his dear fathers will, and Joves command
Declares: and what shall now resolved stand.
Nor more advice, these did Acestes grant.
They place the matrons; willing People plant:
A city gave souls ignorant of great fame;
Ships half-consum'd repair, new bancks they frame:
Oars, cables fit, but few their numbers are,
But of most lively courages in war.
Mean while Aeneas plows their city walls,
Houses allots, this Troy, that Ilium calls:
Acestes joys in his new realms; and draws
A Forum out, gives Conscript fathers laws.
On Erix top, a fane nigh heaven was reared
To Venus, and a sacred grove prepared,
And a Priest added to Anchises tomb;
And now the ninth day of their feast was come;
Altars they grace: when soft gales calm the main,
And breathing Auster calls to Sea again.
Through trending shores complainings loud ascend;
Both day and night they with embraces spend;
Those Women now, To whom before the Sea
Seemed rough, nor could endure the Deity,
Would fly, and every danger now contemn;
With kind words good Aeneas comforts them,
And weeping recommends to Acestes care.
To storms a lamb, three calvs to Erix are
Offered, and then loose cables he commands,
And on the prow, crowned with cut Olive stands,
Holding a bowl, and in the swelling brine
He entrals casts, and powrs forth liquid Wine;
Fair gales attend his stern; the sailers sweep
The curled waves, and brush the azure deep.
But Venus mean while exercised in cares,
To Neptune spoke, and such complaints declares.
Juno's sad wrath, and unappeased breast.
Makes me descend to thee with this request:
Whom neither time nor Piety can move,
Nor fates can quiet, nor commands of Jove.
Was It not enough with fierce spleen to destroy
The Phrygian city? poor remains of Troy,
To force through miseries; but bones and dust
She persecutes; can such a rage be just?
Thou know what storms on Lybian seas did rise
By her commands, commixing waves and skies,
And with Aeolian gusts what hills she raised,
Thus daring in thy realms.
Ah shame! behold, the Trojan Dames she drove
To fire their Fleet; and their ships lost, did move
Their friends to leave them on strange shores. I crave
Those yet remain may through their billows have
Safe pass: Laurentian Tyber touch: if I
Those walls require, granted by destiny.
The deep seas Tamer then; O Erycine
Trust to our Realms, from whence thou draw'st thy line.
I also have deserved; who did withstand
Heaven and seas rage so often: nor less by land
My care of thy Aeneas, witnessed
Symois, Xanthus, when the Trojans fled
Trembling before Achilles to their walls.
Who many thousands sent to funerals.
Full rivers groaned, nor Xanthus to the Seas
Could find his course; from strong Aeasides
I in a hollow cloud brought off thy son
Weaker in strength and Gods; destruction
Wishing that perjured Troy these hands did rear.
My mind is still the same; then banish fear;
He shall in safety touch the Avernid^ coast:
One only shall he miss in the Ocean lost;
One life for many must be paid.
At this the goddess sad care intermits;
The God his steeds conjoyns, and foamy bits
Adds to the fierce, and with ejected rein,
His azure chariot hurries over the main.
Billows give place, under his loud axe lie
Waves levelled now, and storms forsake the sky;
Then varied shapes, and mighty whales appear,
Old Glaucus troops, Inons, Palamon, there
The active Tritons, Forcus finny train,
Upon the left hand of th'appeased main,
Thetis, Thalia, Spio, Panope,
Melite, Nise and Cymodoce.
Here Prince Aeneas flattering joys did find
At last to raise his long dejected mind.
Then cheerful to the sailors gave command.
To rear the top masts, to their tackling stand.
All pull at once; larboard and starboard hale:
Unfurl the shetes, and hoyst the lofty sail,
The wished gale drives them: Palinure preceds,
And being admiral, the squadron leads.
All steer as he commands. And now moist night
Had almost touched mid heavens vertick height.
The sailor on hard benches amongst his oars,
His weary limbs with quiet rest restores.
When from aetheriall stars, soft Somnus glides,
Removes the airy darkness, shades divides,
With a sad dream (poor Palinure) to thee,
Upon the high stern sat the deity,
Like Phorbas, and with these words did appear;
Palinure, the sea it self thy ship will steer;
A soft gale breaths, there is a time to rest:
Lie down, steal sleep for eyes with toil oppressed,
And I thy charge shall for a while supply,
Palinure then said, scarce lifting up his eye;
Would thou I should a quiet sea believe,
To this inconstant monster credit give?
Should I Aeneas to false Auster leave,
And serene skies, that me so often deceive?
This said, he fixed unto the rudder lies,
Holds fast, and on the stars he held his eyes.
The God, behold, in Lethe steeped, a bough
Sleepy with Stygian strength, shakes over his brow,
And wandering eyes of him resisting closed.
Scarce were his nerves in quiet slumber loosed,
Leaning, that part being loose on which he stood,
He with the helm, falls in the briny flood,
And often in vain to his companions cries.
With wings the God mounts the aetherial skies.
Fearlesse, the ship not slower, a safe course sails,
Nor in in his promise father Neptune fails.
Near Sirens rocks, once dangerous, now they stood,
White with the bones of men, beat with the flood
Hoarse waves resound; but when the Prince perceived
The ship to wander, of her guide bereaved,
Through nightly waves he did the helm attend,
Much sighing the misfortune of his friend:
O Palinure, trusting fair feas and sky,
Thou naked on some coast unknown must lie.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT
At Sybils cave Aeneas asks his fates;
Inspired, she answers through a hundred gates.
Misenus rites; the golden bough is found.
Hells dismal passage, and the Stygian sound.
Rude Charon pleased; a sop loud Cerberus takes.
Sad souls hemmed in with nine infernal lakes.
Dido is seen; Deiphobus appears.
Hell and Elysium. Every thousand years
Souls Lethe drink, and bodies reassume.
Anchises shows his son those Lords of Rome
Must spring from him; their character relates;
And after lets him forth at ivory gates.
THus he said weeping, and with full sail stands,
Gliding at last to the Euboick strands.
They turn from Sea their prows, their ships they moare,
And the tall Navy guards the winding shore.
The glad vouth leaped on land, straight some desire
To force from flint the hidden seeds of fire.
Some tear the shelters of wild beasts, the woods,
Whilst others look about for fresher floods.
But good Aeneas sought high towrs which have
Phoebus their Lord, dread Sibills woundrous cave,
Secrets remote; on whom the God bestows
An ample mind, and future things foreshews,
To Dians grows and golden roofs they came,
Daedalus flying Minos realms, (they fame)
To swift wings trusting boldly, through the skies
A way untracted to the cold North flies,
At last on Chalcis tower he stands, where he
First lighting, Phoebus, gave his wings to thee;
And a large Temple built; whose porch presents
Androgeus death, Athenian punishments,
(A woeful thing) leven children, the demands
Annually paid, with lots the sad urne stands.
Crete that survayes the Sea was opposite;
A bulls dire love, Pasiphaes stolen delight,
The mixed race Minotaure, his Monstrous son,
The monument of her foul lust was done.
The structure, and the Labyrinth here was seen;
But Daedalus pitying th'inamor'd Qneen.
The art and windings of that house betraies,
Showing the clew; thou Icarus in these
Should a great part (had grief permitted) shared;
To draw thy chance in gold he twice prepar d,
Twice fell the fathers hands, Soon the whole frame,
They had surva^d; but that Achates came
And did the priestesse of great Phoebus bring
Deiphobe, who thus bespake the King;
This is no time such sights to entertain;
Then bids seven steers from untouched herds be slain,
And as the custom equal sheep be paid.
Having said there, the rites were not delaid,
And bids the Twojaus to the Temple come.
A cave was cut from a rocks vaster womb,
Whence through a hundred gates, a hundred ways,
Sybil as many prophesies convayes.
As he drew near, the Virgin cries; Be bold
To ask thy fate; The god the god behold
This said, her color changed; nor had her face
And comely tresses, the same form or grace:
But her swollen bosom pants, a mighty rage
Does all the faculties of her soul engage:
Nor humane voice, greater she seems to be
Inspired with the approaching Deity.
Trojan Aeneas, then aloud she said,
Have thou not made thy vows? have thou not praid?
Nor vast gates of the fatal house till then
Shall open. Here she silent was again;
And through the Trojans bones shot trembling fear;
Whilst from his soul the King powrs forth his prayer.
O Phoebus, thou that strov'st still to protect
Unhappy Troy, and did the shaft direct,
And Paris hand to wound Aeacides:
I, led by thee, strange lands and many seas
To the remote Massylian shores have past,
And realms extended unto deserts vast.
We Italies flying coasts at length have took,
But by our own sad fortune not forsook.
And all you Gods and Goddesses that were
Foes to Troy's glory, now that nation spare,
And you blessed Prophetess humbly I entreat,
(I seek but realms are due to me by fate).
That we in Latium may find new abodes,
And habitations for our wand ring gods;
I then to Phoebus and Diana shall
A temple build of marble; where I Will call
On solemn days, on great Apollo's name,
And in our realm Chapels for thee I Will frame,
In which the fates and fortunes of our race
Which pleased you now foretell, shall have their place;
And there, blessed maid, I Will consecrate choice men.
Commit not unto leaves thy verses then,
Lest they to wanton winds a sport be made:
But sing thy self, I pray. He ends, this said.
But in the cave she furious takes no rest,
Striving to shake the great God from her breast;
Who tires her more, her raging mouth he frames,
And by constraining her fierce bosom tames.
The hundred gates themselves now open fling,
And through the air Sibylla's answer bring.
Thou escaped from dangers of the sea, far more
Remain at land; the Trojans shall the shore
Of Latium find; thy breast from such cares free,
And soon repent: Wars, horrid wars I see,
And Tyber swelled with blood, nor shall thou miss
Greek camps, a Xanthus and a Symois,
A new Achilles of a Goddess come,
And you shall Juno find in Latium.
What people, what Italian seats in want,
Shall thou not sue to as a suppliant?
A wife shall cause again the Trojan woe,
And foreign marriage.
Yet dangers fear not, but on bolder go,
What course thy fortune grants, thy first supplies
Which thou least thinks, from a Greek seat shall rise.
These horrid circumstances from her cell,
Cumean Sibyl bellowing did foretell,
With dark phrase clouding truth: then Phoebus shakes
His reins, and her chafed heart more fury takes.
When she grew calm and her wild rage alaid;
Aeneas spoke; Not any toil, O Maid,
To me an new unlooked for shape presents,
I foresee all, and cast their worst events.
One boon I crave (since to infernal realms
This way conducts and Acherons dismal streams)
That I my dearest father may behold.
Open the way, inchaunted gates unfold;
Him I from thousand weapons through the flame
Brought on my shoulders, through an host I came,
He me accompanied through all the maine
And weak did threatening seas and skies ^^^taine
Above the strength, and temper of his age.
Us at thy gates to attend, he did engage.
O pity then the father and the son
Blessed Maid, for all things can by thee be done.
Nor Hecate placed thee ore those groves in vain.
If Orpheus could Eurydice regaine,
Helped by his Thracian lyres sweet harmony;
Could Pollux by alternate dying free
His brother and return? why should I name
Theseus, Alcides? that from Jove I came?
Such things he prayed, and by the altars hung.
Then she replyde; Trojan Aeneas, sprung
From blood of Gods: to hel's an easy way,
Black Pluto's gates stand open night: And day
But to return, and the bright air to view,
This is the work, the labor of a few,
Whom Jove esteems, or virtue has raised high,
And sprung from Gods Woods in the middle lie,
And round, Cocytus motes with a black lake.
If so great love, if such desires thee take,
Twice to swim Styx, black hell twice to survay,
And to strange toils the art pleased to give such way,
Hear thy first task. A golden bough does lie,
With shining leaves hid in a shady tree;
Sacred t'infernall Juno this is said;
This the whole woods, and obscure valleys shade:
To visit parts below all are restrained
Until the bough with golden leaves is gained,
Which to fair Proserpine must presented be.
This plucked, another golden from the tree
Sprouts with like metal; with your eye search round,
And break it gently off, when it is found.
If fates call thee, it will with ease be gained,
Else not by ^y violence constrained:
Nor shall by thee with hardest steel be got,
But now thy dead friend, ah thou know it not,
The whole fleet with his corpse contaminates,
Whilst thou consulting at our threshold waits;
Him first in quiet shade intombe; then bring.
Black sheep, an expiating offering;
Dark reasms deny de the living thou may then
Behold. This said, she silent was again.
Aeneas with fixed eyes, and sad looks went,
And leaves the cave musing the sad event;
Faithful Achates his companion goes
With equal steps, dividing equal woes;
Betwixt themselves many conjectures, whom
She meant was dead, what corpse they should intombe.
When as they go, they saw Misenus left
On the dry shore, by a sad death bereft.
Misenus, none more excellent was found,
T inflame to battle by his trumpets sound;
Great Hectors friend, who with him fights achieved,
Whom, when Achilles had of life deprived,
This valiant Hero to Aeneas joynd,
Who nothing was in feats of War behind,
But sounding his shrill trumpet toward the seas
And fondly challenging the deities;
Him, emulous Triton (if it credit have)
Among the rocks, drowned in a foamy wave.
Groaning with great complaints, about they stand;
Pious Aeneas chief: Sybils command
Weeping they haste, and with heaped wood the while
Up to high heaven they rear his funeral pile,
He visits an old wood, where wild beasts dwell,
Elms ring with axes, and tall Cedars fell,
They trunks of ash, and oak with wedges rive,
And down the hills, woods of wild ashes drive.
Amidst the works, Aeneas foremost cheered
His friends, and girded with like arms appeared.
When with a sad heart to himself he said,
Viewing the mighty wood, and thus he praid;
O that the golden bough it self would show,
In this huge grove, since all has proved too true
Of thee Misenus, which the Priestesse said.
Scarce spoke: when from the skies two pigeons made
Their flight to him, and to the green earth drew.
His mothers doves soon the great Hero knew:
And joyful praid; If through those tracts above
Lies any way, direct me to the grove,
Where the rich bough the fertile soil does shade:
Blessed mother help, still reay to my aid.
These having spoke, on cheerfully he went,
Their flight observing, and what course they bent.
But feeding they, no farther distance flew,
Then they which follow with clear sight may view.
Thence to Avernus noisome gulf they fly
A nimble course, and cut the liquid sky:
On seats descride, two boughs they pearch'd, whence rays
Through branches of discolored gold displays.
As in the woods often times a tree will show,
Fresh in cold winter, green with mislletoe;
And a new leaf not from her own sap shoots,
Embracing the smooth bole with blushing fruits.
So from the shady elm the branches shinde,
The spangles crackling with the gentle wind,
The Unwilling branch straight down Aeneas tore,
And to the Prophetess Sybilla bore.
Nor less mean while Trojans Misenus mourn,
And his sad dust with funeral rites adorn.
First a huge pile with sappy pine erect,
And cloven oak, with sable branches decked:
About the sides they mournful cypress place,
And with his shining arms the structure grace.
Some water warm, the flowing Caldron swims
Ore flames; they bathe, and 'noint, his frigid limbs.
Then with a groan him on the biere they lay:
Above his purple vest, known weeds display.
Part, a sad work, take up the ponderous hearse,
And as the ancient use, faces reverse
Held to the torch; full bowls of oil they turn,
And gifts of frankincense congested burn.
After the ashes fell, and flames decline,
The relics, and dry sparks they quench in wine,
In brass the bones then Chorineus urns,
About his mates twice with pure water turns,
And he from boughs of happy olive spread
Light dews: and they being purged, the last words said.
But good Aeneas a huge tomb did raise,
On which his arms, his oar, and trumpet lays,
Under a mighty hill which now they call
From him Misenus, and for ever shall.
This, done he did Sybils commands dispatch.
There was a deep cave with a mighty breach,
With black lakes moted, and a horrid grove,
Ore which not safely swiftest wings could move,
Such were the vapors from those fowl jaws came;
This place the Graecians did Avernus name.
Here first he four black bullocks did design
The Priest upon the forehead pouring wine,
Hair plucked betwixt the horns, on sacred flame
Lays the prime gift, calling on Hecats name,
Powerful in heaven, and hell: with knives some stood
Prepared, and saved in bouls the reeking blood,
A black fleeced lamb pious Aeneas slew,
The furies mother, and great sisters dew,
A barren Cow, thee Proserpine they bring,
Then rear night altars to the Stygian King:
And bulls firm entrals on the flames did pile,
And pour on scorching bowels purest oil.
When with the dawn behold! and rising sun,
Beneath their feet earth groans, the cliffs begun
Of the high woods to move, dogs in the shade
Howl as the Goddess her approaches made.
Far, O far off from hence, be all profane,
(The Priestesse cries) and from the Grove abstain;
And thou Aeneas draw thy sword, and go,
Now courage needs, now thy great valor show.
This said, in the open cave the Furious leaps,
As fast he follows with undaunted steps.
You Gods who souls command, and silent ghosts,
Phlegeton, Chaos, nights vast dismal coasts.
Grant I declare things heard, by your aid show
What earth and darkness long has hid below.
Obscured through shades, and woeful night they past
Through Pluto's empty courts, and kingdoms waste.
As through dark woods, when a new moon displaid
Pale beams, and Jove the sky hides with a shade,
And black night color did from things compel.
Just at the door, before the gates of hell,
Sorrow reposed, with her revenging Rage,
Pale sicknesses and discontented age,
Fear, with dire Famine, and base Poverty,
Labor and death, shapes terrible to see.
Then sleep allied to Death, and fond joys are
Placed on the other side, with deadly War,
On iron beds, Furies and Discord sit,
Their viperous hair with bloody fillets knit.
Here a dark elm, did ancient boughs display,
The seat (as they report) where vain dreams lay,
And stuck (...) every leaf: then a huge brood
Of various monsters, biform'd Scylla stood,
And Centaitrs in the porch; with hundred hands
Briareus and the Lernian Hydra stands,
Chymera hissing loud, and armed with fire,
The triple shade, Gorgons and Harpyes dire.
Aeneas draws, then struck with sudden fear,
Opposing the sharp point to them drew near.
But that his learned companion him persuades,
They were but fleeting forms, and empty shades,
In vain he had attempted ghosts to wound.
Hence led the way to the Acherontick sound;
With a vast gulf here whirlpits vexed with mud,
Boiling casts sands up from the Stygian flood.
Charon the horrid ferry-man these deeps
With dreadiul squallidnesse, and river keeps.
His untrim'd cheeks were rough with hoary hair,
Knotty his beard, his fiery eyes did stare,
Tye'd on his shoulders hung a sordid coat;
He trims his sails, drives with a pole his boat,
And in his rusty bark wafts Passengers;
The God was youthful still, though struck in years.
Here all the scattered throngs rush to these coasts,
Men, Women came, and valiant Hero's Ghosts,
Deprived of life; boys, virgins, young men, here
Before their Parents laid upon the bier.
As in first cold of autumn from the trees
The leaves fall thick, or to the shore from seas
The birds repair in flocks, when early frosts
Drive them from water unto warmer coasts.
They stand, and first for passages implore,
Their hands lift up, longing for the other shore;
But the grim wafter these, now them receives,
But others far off on the sand he leaves.
Aeneas wondering at the tumult, said
Wherefore this concourse to the streams, O maid?
Say what these souls require, why those the shores.
Forsake, and other billows roll with oars.
Brief, th'aged Priestesse thus to him replies.
Anchises son, sure stock of deities,
Thou Styx, Cocytus view'st, by this to swear
And to deceive the power, the Gods do fear.
All those sad troops thou see, are not interred;
That Charon; those he wafts are sepulcher'd.
Until their bones in quiet rest, before,
None pass these hoarce waves to the horrid shore.
A hundred years to wander here they'are bound,
Permitted then to pass the Stygian sound.
The Prince at this no further did advance,
And full of thoughts, pitying their sad mischance,
Leucaspes and Orontes there he spies,
The Lycian chief, sad, wanting obsequies;
Whom the black south over set with tempest, when
They sailed to Troy, waves swallowing ship and men.
Lo! Palinure the master next appeared,
Whom whilst by stars from Lybia he steered,
Fell midst the waves, and tumbles with the stern,
Him when he could in so much shade discern,
O Palinure, first said what deity
Snatched thee from us and drowned amid'st the Sea,
Speak; for to me still Phoebus words proved true,
But only in my hopes concerning you.
He said, thou safe to Latium through the seas,
Should pass; behold! Are these his promises?
Great Trojan Prince, Phoebus deceived not thee,
Said Palinure, nor has the God drowned me;
For the torn rudder grasping with much force,
As to my charge I stuck, and steered my course,
With it I fell, by the rough seas I swear,
Nor for my self conceived I so much fear,
But that the Master wanting at the helm,
Such swelling waves thy ship might overwhelme.
Three stormy nights rough south winds carried me
Through the vast waves; the fourth dawne, Italy
Raised on a swelling wave I saw, and swam
Softly to shore, and to firm footing came,
When cruel men on me with weapons set,
Grasping rough bancks, laden with garments wet,
Who ignorantly took me for a prey;
The waves possess me now, and in the sea
The winds often roll my body to the shore;
But by heavens pleasant light I thee implore,
Py thy dear Father, and thy hopeful heir
Take me from hence great Prince, or else interre
(For thou have power) and seek m'in Velins bay.
Or if thy mother Venus show the way,
(For I believe without some aiding God
Thou come not now, to fail this dreadful flood)
Then help a wretch, and me transport with thee,
That I at last in death may quiet be.
This said, then Sybill thus her self expressed,
Whence Palinurus, comes this strange request?
Would thou unburied, Styx, the furies Lake,
Behold, and without leave these shores forsake?
Desist to hope that fates will hear thy prayer;
But take this comfort to appease thy care.
The neighboring Cities shall thy bones interre,
And moved by omens, build thy sepulcher;
Then to thy tomb pay yearly rites, and shall
The place for ever Palinurus call.
These words appeased his cares, and grief ore-came,
Proud of a country that should bear his name.
Then on they went, and to the stream drew nigh.
As Charon these from Stygian waves did spy
Bending through silent groves, to his fad strands:
Thus rudely first begins, and threatening stands.
Who ere thus armed approachest to our streams,
Your business tell: this is the place of dreams,
Of shades, and drousie night; depart, nor can
My Stygian boat transport a living man.
Nor pleased it me to waft ore Stygian seas,
Theseus, Perithous, nor great Hercules,
Though sprung from Gods, men never vanquished.
From our Kings Throne, in chains Alcides led
Hels porter trembling, the other did combine
To take from Plutoe's bed chaste Proserpine.
Then Sybill said, give not such way to rage,
Here are no stratagems nor arms t'ingage
A violence; let hels Porter ever lie
In's kennell, and pale Shadows terrify;
Still in her Uncles Court the Queen may be.
Aeneas famed for arms and piety,
To see his father, through dark shades descends.
If thee no shape of such affection bends,
Behold this bough (which hidden in her vest
She shows) then swelling rage forsakes his breast:
Nor more he said, but the strange gift admires,
The fatal bough not seen in many years.
Then turns his sable vessel toward the strand,
Thence drives those Ghosts sat waiting on the sand,
Opens his hatches, and receives his freight.
The crazed boat groans with great Aeneas weight,
And leakie drunck much water; safe at last
He with the Priestesse and Aeneas past,
And free from foul mud, amongst black rushes lands.
From triple jaws great Cerberus through those strdans
Still barks, and huge in a vast kennell lies.
When she his neck dreadful with serpents spies,
She casts to him a soporiferous bit:
He opens his three mouths to swallow it,
Then being laid, stretched forth his long back lies
Measuring his kennell with his mighty sise.
Aeneas past, whilst Cerberus sleeps, and leaves
The shores of irrenavigable waves.
Then they heard voices, and a mighty cry
Of Infants weeping, which in th'entrance lie;
Whom from sweet life a woeful death did call
From the loved teate, with timelesse funeral;
Next, those who falsely were condemned to die,
And did not without Lot or judgment lie.
Minos being placed, a silent council calls,
And lives examines of the criminals.
Next after these, those wretched Ghosts recide,
Who nating life, have by their own hands did,
And lost their souls: who now to live again
Would not hard toil and poverty disdain;
Them fates deny, and the most dreadful sound
Binds in, and Stix nine times incircles round.
Not far from hence they to large champaigns came,
The fields of sorrow called, such was the name;
Here those whom cruel love with grief devours,
Did haunt close walks, concealed in myrtle bowres,
Nor in their death relinquish they their woes;
There Phedra, Procris, and Euryphile goes,
Showing those wounds her son had made, he saw
Pasiphae, Evadne, Laodomia,
Coeneus with them, now woman, once a man,
Whom fates restored to her own sex again.
Amongst these, Dido wandered the great wood,
With a fresh wound, whom, as Troys Hero stood,
And drawing nigh, through obscure shades he knew:
Such in her prime, the rising moon we view,
Or seem at least to see, through clouds displaid:
Pouring forth tears, then with sweet love he said;
Ah hapless Dido, truth that news did tell
Which said you are dead, and by thy own hand fell.
I was the cause; now by the stars I vow,
By Gods, and faith, if any is below,
Unwillingly best Queen, I left thy lands,
But was enforced by the gods commands:
Who now compel me through these shades to pass,
Through deepest night, and this most dismal place.
Nor my departure could I ere suppose
Could thee, alas, engage in so much woes.
O stay, and part not thus. whom fly'st thou? me?
We nere shall meet again, so fates decree.
These to her vexed and frowning he declares
Her to appease, but forces his own tears:
Fixed on the earth her eyes averse she held,
Nor was to change no more with words compeld,
Then if hard flint, or Parian Rocks had stood:
Then flies displeased, and seeks some shady wood;
To her first Lord Sichaeus she repaires,
Who answers all her love, and meets her cares.
Aeneas no less stricken with these woes,
Follows with tears, lamenting as he goes.
Thence on they pass, to fields remote they went,
And Groves where souls renowned in war frequent;
Valiant Parthenopus and Tydeus here
With pale Adrastus shade, did first appear;
Those much above lamented, in a train,
He all those Dardans saw in battle slain;
Glaucus, and Medon, Thersilocus he moans,
Polybetes Ceres Priest, Antenors sons,
Idaeus in's chariot armed; thick souls frequent
Now on each hand, nor is it sufficient
To see him once, to tarry they desire,
And walk with him, his coming they inquire.
But the Greek Captains, Agamemnon's bands,
Viewing the man's bright arms through shadie strands,
Shake with huge fear: part, as in times past, fly
To seek their ships, part raise a feeble cry,
And the raised clamor in the utterance dies.
Here Priams son Deiphobus he spies,
Wounded all ore; his mangled face appears,
His face and hands, his head dispoil'd of ears,
With a dishonored wound his ravished nose;
Him pale, and dire wounds hiding, scarce he knows;
At last with known voice spoke: O valiant
Deiphobus, of Teucers high descent,
Whom could such cruel punishments delight?
Who had the power? that last and woeful night,
I heard that thou with Grecian slaughter tired,
Upon a heap of confused corpse expired.
An empty tomb I on the Rhetian coast
Have reared, and thrice aloud implored thy Ghost;
There are thy arms and name; but thee not found,
I could not bury friend in native ground.
Then he: Nothing dear friend did thou neglect;
All rites are paid, my tomb thou did erect:
But my own fates, cursed Helen me bereft,
Drowned in these woes, and she these monuments left.
For as thou know, we past with false delight
Never to be forgot, that last sad night,
When through great Troy the fatal horse did come,
And pregnant with an army in his womb;
She feigned a dance, and Phrygian dames in wild
Orgies she led, amidst a huge torch held,
And calls the Grecians from a battlement.
Tird with my cares, and drowsy, then I went
To my unhappy bed, where in calm rest
I slept as with the charms of death possessed.
Mean while my dear wife took my arms away,
And from my head did my good sword convay,
Opens the gates, lets Menelaus in,
Hoping by this great act his love to win,
And past offenses to extinguish thus.
They rush in (to be brief) with Ithacus
Plotter of mischief; heaven such Greeks repay,
If for revenge with pious lips I pray.
But tell what chance thee living hither sent,
Driven by storms, or by the gods consent?
Or by what fortune brought, that thou resorts
To these dark places, sad and dismal courts.
By this the morn in her bright chariot ran
Betwixt the poles to heavens Meridian,
And the whole time granted they had thus delaid;
But Sybil them advis d, and briefly said:
Night hastes, O Prince, and hours in weeping glide,
This is the place where the two ways divide;
the right, which to great Pluto's Palace bends,
TO Elizum leads; the left, to hell descends,
Where wicked men receive their punishment.
Deiphabus said, great Priestesse be content,
I shall depart, and fill in shades the list.
But go you on and better fates assist.
This said, he takes his leave. On his left side,
Aeneas then under a Rock espide
A mighty fort surrounded with three walls,
Where Phlegeton with a swift current falls
Of flaming waves: rolling huge stones along,
The gates on adamatine pillars hung;
No strength of men, of steel, nor gods, has power
This to destroy, high stands the brazen tower.
Girt in a bloody robe Tisiphone keeps
The entrance night and day, and never sleeps.
Hence cruel lashes sound and groaning pains,
Clashing of steel, and rattling of huge chains.
Amazed Aeneas stands, and frighted said,
What dreadful sights are these, declare O maid.
What are these tortures? whence these hideous cries?
Renowned Trojan, Sybill then replies,
In this dire place none but the guilty are:
When Hecate left these dark groves to my care,
She showed me all their pains, and lead each way.
Stern Gnossian Radamanth these realms does sway,
Hears and corrects their crimes, forcing to tell
What they amongst mortals vainly did conceal,
Sins which at late death unrepented were.
Then fierce Tisiphone makes the guilty fear,
Shaking her whip from her left hand extends
Her twisted snakes, and calls the cruel friends:
On groaning hinges then the enchanted gates
Are opened straight; see thou what porter waits
In th'entrance there, what monster keeps the door?
Hydra with fifty ugly jaws: one more
Cruel then this by far, within does dwell,
Whence two steep ways lead headlong down to hell:
So far it does beneath earths surface lie,
As tall Olympus thrusts into the sky.
Here young Titanians are, earths ancien race,
Struck down with thunder to the lowest place.
There saw I both the ^^lodies, those vast
Giants, who strove heavens fabrics to have razed,
And Jove to have thrust from heavens high Monarchy.
And saw Salmonius in great tortures lie,
Whilst he heavens fire, and thunder imitates,
Brandishing flames, and through the Grecian states,
Borne on four steeds, proudly through Elis drives
With fond pretense to heavens prerogatives:
Who did in imitable fire and rain,
With brass, and speed of horn hoof'd horses, feign.
Then through the clouds from Jove almighty came
A dart, he sends no brands, nor earthy flame,
And headlong him with enraged whitlwinds queld.
The All bearing earths son Tityus, I beheld
There, whose vast corpse did nine whole acres fill,
And a huge vulture with a hooked bill
His bowels and immortal liver searched,
Fresh food for pains, and on's breast tiering peach'd,
To his renewing veins allows no ease.
What need I mention both the Lapithes,
A black stone seems now falling on their heads;
Golden frames shine with high and geniall beds,
Before them cates, with kingly luxuries;
But not far off the greatest fury lies,
Forbids to eat, and rising from the ground,
Swings her black torch, and makes a thundering sound,
Here those who living, did their brothers hate,
Murdered their sires, to clients used deceit,
Or who alone brooding on riches lie,
Lending to none, the greatest company;
Who slain for lust, who impious arms persu'd,
Nor feared the trust of Princes to delude.
Here meet their dooms: Seek not these woes to sound,
Nor by what way fate did their souls confound.
These roll huge stones, and stretched on wheels do lie.
There Theseus sits, and shall eternally.
Aloud through shades sad Phlegyas warning cries,
Admonished, justice learn, nor Gods despise.
This to a potent Prince his country sold,
And laws enacted, and repealed for gold;
This beds his daughter, and no incest spared;
All dared strange crimes, and thrived in what they dared.
Had I a hundred mouths, as many tongues,
A voice of iron, to these had brazen lungs;
Their crimes and tortures never could be displaid.
When Phoebus aged Priestesse thus had said,
Go on, she bids, and finish your intents,
I see the Cyclops forged battlements
And ports which stand with obvious arches; there
To place the present, we commanded were.
Then through dark ways they went with equal pace,
The mid path taking, and approach the place:
Aeneas came to th'porch, and purged with clear
Water, the golden bough he fixed there.
These rites performed, the Goddess gift being placed,
In joyful places they arrived at last,
And came to groves where happy souls do rest
In pleasant greens, the dwellings of the blessed.
Here larger skies did cloth with purple rays
The field, which their own Sun and Stars obeys.
Some in green meads their time in wrestling spend.
Some gallantly on the bright sand contend,
Some graceful footing with a song present.
In a long robe the Thracian Poet went,
On seven sweet strings he descants sacred lays,
His hand now strikes, his ivory quill now plays.
Here Teucers old line, a fair race appears,
'Most valiant Heroes, borne in be ter years,
Ilus, Asaracus, and who built Troy's spires,
Their arms and empty chariots he admires,
Their spears stuck down, their horses through the ground
Carelessly fed; and what delight they found
In arms, or chariots, or brave steeds alive,
That pleasure under earth did still survive.
Others he saw on each side banqueting,
And in a solemn dance glad Paeans sing,
Shaded with odorous Laurel, by whose woods
Eridanus rising, rowls his swelling floods.
And here were those did for their country die,
With Priests who in their lives vowed chastity;
And sacred Poets who pleased Phoebus best,
Or by invented arts man's life assist,
And others in their memories renowned,
Their temples all with snowie garlands bound.
To those about her thus Sybilla says,
But to Musaeus first, who midst them was,
And taller by the head then all the rest;
Say blessed souls, and thou of Poets best,
Where is Anchises seat^ to him we come,
And the great streams of Erebus have swom.
To whom the Hero in few words again:
We have no certain places, we remain
On beds of grass, and walk in shadie woods
And meadows ever fresh with crystal floods.
But if you please t'ascend this rising brow,
I shall the most convenient passage show.
This said, he went before, and a fair plain
Discovering there, thence they descend again.
But old Anchises sought with mighty care
Souls which in pleasant vales confined were,
Which soon must view the aetherial skies; where he
Numbered his own renowned progeny,
Their manners, power, their riches, and their doom.
When toward him he saw Aeneas come,
Through pleasant greens, joyful, his hands did raise,
And bathing of his cheeks with tears, thus says.
Thou come at last, and thy great love to me
Has vanquished the hard journey; I may see
Thee now dear son, and change discourses here;
Thus I forethought, and judged the time drew near:
Nor has my care deceived me; from what coast
Through vast seas come thou, with what perils tossed,
That now I meet thee here? my mind misgave
Lest thou in Lybia some mischance might have.
But he: Dear father thy, thy woeful shade
Appearing often, this journey did persuade:
Our fleet hides Tyrrhen shores; grant, grant that we
May join right hands, nor our embraces flee.
Large floods then drowned his cheeks; thrice he assaid
T'infold his neck, three times the fleeting shade
In vain he with extended arms assails.
Which like a swift dream flies, or nimble gales.
When in a winding vale Aeneas fees
A secret grove, and far off murmuring trees
And pleasant seats, which Lethe warer'd; here
People in numerous nations did appear:
And as in meads, the bees, in the bright spring
Sit on the various flowers, incircleing
Bright lilleys, and all the fields resound with noise.
Aeneas being ignorant, asks the cause,
Struck with the sight, what were those streams, wherefore
Such multitudes of men had filled the shore;
Anchises then: Those souls to whom fates owe
New bodies, where the streams of Lethe flow,
Drink secure draughts, and long oblivion.
These I desired to thee should be foreshown,
And these our stock to number: whence the more
Thou may rejoice finding the Ausonian shore.
O sir, must such pure souls aetherial air
Review again, and to dull flesh repair.
Why have the wretches such a strange delight
To visit day. I shall the cause recite,
Nor will I hold thee in sulpence, dear son;
Then thus Anchises orderly went on.
At first the heaven, and earth, the liquid plain,
The moons bright globe, and stars Titanian,
A spirit fed within, spread through the whole,
And with the huge heap mixed infused a soul.
Hence man, and beasts, and birds derive their strain,
And monsters floating in the marbled main.
These seeds have fiery vigor and a birth
Of heavenly race; but clogged with heavy earth,
Which their dull limbs and dying members drowned:
Hence fears, and hopes, sorrows, and joy abound;
Shut in dark flesh their natures they forget;
But when their latest light and life is set,
Not all woes leave them, nor all tortures quite
Forsake the wretches there; and it is but right;
Things strangely grown by custom into crimes,
They must be punished for their misspent times,
And tortures feel; some in the winds are hung,
Others to cleanse their spotted sins are flung
In a vast gulf, or purged in fire they are:
We all have our own tortures: then repare
TO Elysium and some few blessed seats obtain,
Till length of time purg their contracted stain,
And leave a fire clens'd from all earthly sense,
A pure aetherial intelligence.
When thousand years have filled their period,
All these God calls in troops to Lethes flood,
To th and that they forgetful of what is past,
May reascend, and bodies take at last.
Anchises then his son and her (this said)
Amongst busy troops, and noysfull throngs convaid,
Then takes a hill from whence they might discern
Them march in order, and their faces learn.
Now comes thy glory, and the Dardan race,
Nephews which shall in Latium have great place.
Illustrious souls, to whom our name must be.
In brief, I Will show thee thy own destiny.
See thou that youth, who leans upon his lance?
Next lots shall him t'aetheriall air advance:
Sylvius, and Alban name, thy posthume race,
Sprung from Italian blood shall next take place:
To thee then old, thy wife Lavinia brings
Him forth in woods, a King, and sire of Kings,
From whom our race shall in long Alba reign.
Next Procus glory of the Dardan strain,
Numitor, ^apys, Sylvius named from thee
Aeneas matched in arms and piety,
If he at any time rule Alba. View
Now thore brave youths, and what great strength they show;
These shall with civick wreaths their temples bound,
Nomentum, Gabii, Fidena found;
These Collatine towrs famous for chastity
Shall raise amongst hills, and proud Pometii,
And Inous city, Bola, Cora frame,
Thus called hereafter, now without a name.
Then Martial Romulus shall himself conjoyn
Companion to his grandsire from the line
Of great Assaracus, whom Ilia bare.
Behold a double crown impails his hair;
Jove this shall honor as himself (dear son)
He shall to Rome give earths dominion,
Her fame to heaven advance, enclosing then
Seven hills with walls, happy with valiant men.
As Berecinthia crowned with turrets rides
Through Phrygian cities, joyful: by her sides,
Her race of Gods a hundred she embraced,
All heavens inhabitants supreamly placed.
But here bend both thine eyes, this offspring see,
Thy Roman Caesar Julius Progeny
Must heavens great axe next scale: this, this, the Prince
That was so often promised thee long since!
Augustus Caesar, sprung of Gods, once more
To Latium shall the golden age restore,
Where Saturn reigned, and stretch his proud command
Past Garamant and Inde: there lies a land
Beyond the year and Sun, where Atlas bears
Heavens axeltree adorned with shining stars;
The Caspian and Meotick lands, when he
Draws nigh, heavens oracles shall terrify,
And Nile shall tremble in his seven fold streams;
Nor did Alcides know so many realms,
Though the swift stag and boar he did subdue,
And with his shafts in Lerna Hydra slew;
Nor conquering Bacchus who joined tigers bent,
With viney reins, from Nisa's steep descent.
Doubt we to raise our glory then, shall we
Despair to plant our selves in Italy.
What Is he far off graced with the olive bough
Presenting offerings? his white chin I know;
A Roman King, whose laws first settled Rome,
And from small Curets, a poor soil shall come
To great command; next Tullus who shall break
His countries peace, and sloathful People make
Who knew no triumphs, active in the Wan.
Next him comes Ancus, one more haughty far,
And swollen with popular breath; would thou behold
The Tar quine Princes, and the mighty should,
Revengeful Brutus, who the fasces had,
Sharp axes, and was first a Consul made.
Who th'haplesse sire shall cause his son to die,
Raising new war, for specious liberty:
How ere posterity the fact shall doom,
Him love of fame, and's country did overcome.
The Decii, Drusii, stern Torquates see;
Camillus full of gold and victory.
But these behold, whose like arms shine so bright,
Concording souls, now hid in shady night:
Ah when they live, what wars shall they maintain,
Opposing each! what fights, what numbers slain!
From the steep Alps, and the Meotick towers.
The sire descends, the son brings Eastern powers.
Do not brave youth in such a war contend,
Nor with such force your countries bowels rend.
But thou my blood who draw'st from heaven thy race,
First pity, and thy arms lay down.
Famed with Greek slaughters he a Conqueror shall
From Corinth proudly to the Capitol
His chariot drive; Argos, Micene, deface,
And shall revenge on great Achilles race,
Old Troy, and temples which profaned be.
Who could forget great Cato Gracchi, thee
Cossus, or the thunderboults in War
Those Scipio's, who the Lybian conquerours were:
Temperate Fabricius, or Serranus thee
Holding the Plow! where will the F^bii me
Ttansport! thou Maximus the only man
Who by delays Romes fortune must regaine,
Others I grant shall mould respiring brass,
And cut in marble a most lively face;
Some better plead, and some Astronomers,
Describe heavens motion and the rising stars:
Be thou ambitious how to govern best,
In these arts, Roman, thou must be professed.
That we a peace well grounded may enjoy,
Subjects to spare, and Rebels to destroy.
Anchises said, they wondering all the while,
Marcellus view, glorious in wealthy spoil;
This conqueror does in virtue all overcome,
And shall in mightiest tumults calm great Rome,
The Punie wast, and Gauls most rebel swarms,
And thrice to Romulus dedicate their arms.
Aeneas here (for he a youth beheld
March in bright arms, whose personage excelled
But with sad looks, and a dejected face)
Said, who is this? with him keeps equal pace,
Is he his son, or one of of his great stock?
How like himself! what noise! what suitors flock!
But black night with sad clouds, involves his head.
Then with abortive tears Anchises said,
Know not, dear son, great sorrows of thy own:
This to the world by fates shall be but shown,
Then snatched away; Romes stock too great had seemed,
Should the Gods grant a gift so much esteemed.
What groans from Mars his camp afflict great Rome,
Tyber, when gliding by his new made tomb,
What funerals will thou see! nor any shall
Like him who sprung from Troys original
Raise Latium's hope: and never Roman earth
Shall boast her self to foster such a birth.
Ah piety, ancient faith, th'unconquer'd hand,
None shall him armed with any power withstand:
Whether on foot he comes, to charge his foe,
Or from his foamie steed makes blood to flow.
O youth to be lamented, thou shall be
Marcellus, if thou break'st thy destiny.
Handfuls of Lillys bring, and purple flowers,
That I may strew this noble soul of ours,
And heap with gifts. Thns through all parts they went
And saw the vast aeriall continent.
Then with his son alone Anchises came,
And fires his mind with love of future fame;
After to him he did the War relate,
Laurentian people, and Latinus state,
And how all toils should be eschew'd or borne.
There are two gates of sleep, the one is horn,
From whence with passage free true visions fly:
The other fair, shines with bright Ivory;
This to the skies in sleep false Manes bears.
These, whilst to's son and Sybill he declares,
Anchises lets him forth at Ivory gates.
He straight to's Fleet went, and reviews his mates,
And to Caieta came, where then abode
His navy, and at anchor fafely road.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAny strange signs and prodigies declare,
A foreign Prince must wed the Ausonian heir.
Aenas enters Latium: threatened wants
Turned to a jest; the promised Land he plants,
And Embasies to King Latinus sends.
A peace is made. Vexed Juno stirs the Fiends,
And calls Alectos aid, since heaven denies.
A tame dear kill d, has bloody obsequies.
The Queen and Turnus spurred by hellish charms,
From long peace Latium roused to impious arms.
Against th old Kings advice, all straight engage:
Janus gates opened, the fierce vulgar rage.
The Martial list. Camilla in the rear.
AVirgin marched, armed with a Myrtle spear.
ANd thou Aeneas nurse Caietae, have
Given to our shoares a name by death, shall last;
The place thy honor keeps, sealed with thy name,
Great Latium has thy bones (if that be fame,)
But good Aeneas, Funeral rites being paid,
Her Tomb high reared and swelling Seas alaid,
Hoysts sail, and leaves the port; fresh gales arise
With night, nor the bright Moon his course denies,
But with a trembling splendour guilds the flood.
By the next lands Circaean coasts they stood.
In unpast groves, there Sols rich daughter calls
With usual songs, burning in sumptuous halls
Sweet smelling cedar, with nocturnall flame,
Running neat shutles through a curious frame.
Hence before night, is heard the raging sound
Of Lions chaff'd, refusing to be bound;
And bristled Boars; hence, Bears in collars storm,
And shapes of huge Wolves houle; whose humane form
The cruel Godesse Circe there invests
With fierce aspects, and changed to salvage Beasts:
Lest pious Trojans were transformed to such
Entering the Port, lest they dire shores should touch,
With fair Winds Neptune swelled their sails, and bore
With prosperous flight, beyond that dangerous shore.
And now the Sea blushed with the morning beam,
Aurora shining from her golden team,
When the winds fell, a sudden calm again,
And oars now strugled in the azure maine.
And here Aeneas spies a mighty wood,
Through which ran Tyber, with a pleasant flood
And nimble edies, bright with golden sand
Into the Sea, about, and ore the strand;
Much foul did haunt, and in the channel throng;
Then flying through groves, high heaven pleased with a song.
Here he commands to bend, and steer those lands,
And glad he for the shady River stands.
Now Erato, what Kings, what times those were,
What was old Latium, when the stranger, there
First with his Fleet arrived, I shall recite,
And what first made such quarrels, bring to light.
Help Goddess, help, I horrid wars shall sing,
Armies, and Kings, rage did to funerals bring,
The Tyrrhen troops, and all the Ausonian land
Mustered in arms, great tasks I take in hand.
And bold attempts. Glad fields, and cities blessed
Now aged Latinus in long peace, possessed.
Whom, on the Nymph Marica as they fame
Faunus begot, Faunus from Picus came,
Picus O Saturn thee did father call,
Of the high blood thou the original.
But to Latinus, heaven no son had left,
For he was in his prime by fates bereft;
One daughter was to enjoy this vast estate,
Now ripe for Marriage, and a Princely Mate.
From all Ausonia, and great Latium went
Many to win her, Turnus by descent
From a high stock, and most for beauty famed
A suter was, whom the great Queen inflamed
With much affection, strove to her to join,
But threatening prodigies hindered the design.
A sacred Laurel, midst the Court did rear
A lofty top, long kept by pious fear,
Found by Latinus when he built that feate;
Which then to Phoebus he did consecrate,
And gave from this the Laurentines a name.
When swarms of Bees (a wondrous story) came
With a great murmur, and a sudden flight
Through the clear skies, then on the branches light,
Cling to the Bows, and hang upon the tree.
Straight cries the Augure a strange man we see,
From those parts coming now, and foreign powers
To Take these coasts, and rule our lofty Towers.
Besides, when chaste Livinia did bear
To Altars Virgin flames, her father there;
Her fair long tresses seemed to catch the fire,
And crackling flames to burn her rich attire,
Her royal dress, and crown with jewels bright:
Then smoke involveth with a pitchy light,
And through the high roofs conquering Vulcan rould;
But this, the wondrous prodigy foretold,
That she in fame, and fortune should transcend;
Yet to the Nation did great War portend.
But troubled with these signs, Latinus moves
His inspired Father, in the Albunean groves
Asks Faunus Oracles, where the sacred floods
Sulphur exhales, in thick resounding woods.
From hence Italians, all Oenotria, sought
Answers to doubts; when gifts the priest had brought,
Here he reposed on skins of slaughtered sheep,
And under silent night prepares to sleep.
When many wondrous fleeting forms he sees,
Strange voices hears, and talks with Deities,
Confers with Acheron, and the deeps below.
Here King Latinus Oracles to know,
Then did a hundred choice sheep sacrifice,
And on their skins, and spreading fleeces lies:
When the thick grove gave answer to this fence.
Match not thy child to any Latin Prince,
Dear offspring, nor those rites prepared grant:
A foreign son mustcome, our name shall plant
Amongst the Stars; from him a progeny.
Beneath their feet shall all things governed see,
Which Phoebus does from Sea to Sea behold.
These answers which in silent night were told,
And Counsels, King Latinus not concealed:
But to Ausonian Cities 'twas revealed
By flying fame, when first the Trojan bands
Did moare their Fleet, on high and verdant strands,
Aeneas his prime chiefes, and the young Prince
Reposed, under a spreading trees defense,
Then feasts prepare on grass, and cut their meat,
(So Jove foretold) on cakes of purest wheat:
And did with jucy fruit their biscuit swell.
Their victuals spent, as hunger did compel,
They on the hard bread fall with violence brake,
And with bold teeth assault the fatal cake.
Nor spared their wheaten plates thus squared, to invade:
We eat our trenchers too Ascanius said.
Nor saying more: this heard, an end affords
To all their toil, his father took the words,
Amazed at the accomplished prophecy.
And straight he said, hail lands are due to me
By fates, and hail you faithful Trojan Gods,
This seat is yours, and here are your abodes.
Such secrets I recall my Sire did leave.
Dear son, when unknown shores shall thee receive,
And hunger shall enforce trenchers to eat:
There expect rest, remember there to seat,
And there build walls, and roofs with bulwarks plant,
This is the famine, and remaining want
Last ruin threats,
Glad let us then, with early dawne prepare
To search these coasts, and what the people are,
And several ways discover from the shore,
Now pay Jove boules, my father now implore,
On tables place Anchises wine: his brows
(Thus having said) he wreaths with Olive bows.
The genius of the place, the first of Gods
Tellus adores, with Nymphs, and unknown floods,
Nights rising stars, Idean Jupiter,
And to the Phrygian Mother made his prayer,
And parents which in heaven, and hell abode,
Thrice from above thundered the all-potent God,
He brandished lightning in his hand did hold,
Which in the sky sparkled with beams of gold.
Here, through the Trojans spread a sudden fame,
The day was come, their promised walls to frame,
Joyful they feast, and at the mighty sign,
They goblets place, and crown the flowing wine.
When the next day the world with beams displayed,
To search the Country several ways they made:
And here the fountains of Numicus swell,
Hence Tyber flows, and there bold Latins dwell.
Aeneas then a hundred prime men calls,
To bear his Embassy to the Royal walls.
With Kingly presents, they with olives crowned,
Should for the Trojans terms of peace propound.
Without delay they haste what was enjoined:
Whilst he slight works to a mean trench designed,
Erects a Fort, and camp-wise did begin
His first aboads, and fenced with bulwarks in.
Now going on, they to the walls draw nigh,
When Latin roofes, and lofty Towers they spy,
And gallant youth before the City just,
Riding brave horse, and chariots tamed in dust,
Or cast light Javelins, or stiff bows to bend,
And in the race, or Tilting to contend.
When one with speed brought to the Royal ear,
That great men in strange weeds, attending were,
He commands straight to the presence they be shown,
And takes his place then, in his Grandsires throne,
Raised on a hundred pillars midst the Town,
Stood Picus Court, and Palace of renown,
Awful with groves, and mysteries profound.
Here Kings first Scepters had, and first were crowned,
This was to them their Temple, and their Court,
Here they at sacred festivals resort,
And fathers, when a Ram was offered, sat
As was the custom, at long boards in state.
Cut in old Cedar the Effigies there,
Of ancient Italus, Sabinus were,
Who first set Vines, his hook still in his hand;
Old Saturn and by fronted Janus stand
In the entrance, with some of the ancient strain,
Who bold in Wars were for their Country slain.
Then many arms on sacred pillars fixed,
With captive chariots, battle axes mixed,
Helms, and huge bars of gates, the posts adorn,
With darts, and shields, and prowes from Galleys torn.
Horse-taming Picus, a short garment wore,
A little shield, an augure staff he bore:
Whose love, when slighted Circe could not gain,
She with her charming wand, and hellish bane
Changed to a bird, and spots his colored wings.
In such a Temple, in the old Throne of Kings,
Latinus sat, and calls the Trojans in,
And thus with pleasant language did begin.
Say Trojans (for your City we have known
And stock, your voyage has to us been shown)
What is your sure, what cause enforced you come
Through many swelling waves to Latinum?
Mist you your course, or by some tempest tossed,
(For many so in the deep seas are lost)
That thus you have entered, anchored in our road.
Nor scorn our friendship; know from Saturns blood
We Latins sprung, who without Laws, or tie,
Justice afford, like the old deity.
Now I recall, but time obscureth fame,
That old Aruncus said, Dardanus came
To Phrygian Idas cities, from that place
To Thracian Samos, now called Samothrace:
Whom now from Tyrrhen Coryths city gone,
Heavens starry court has in a golden throne,
And fills the number of the deities.
He said; then Iloneus thus replies:
Great King, from honored Faunus sprung; not tossed
By waves and tempests came we to your coast,
Nor mist our course, we by advice were brought,
And have with willing mind thy city sought,
Driven from our realms, which once Sol looking down
From high Olympus, saw of most renown.
From Jove we sprung, the Dardan nation are
Proud of their mighty grandsire Jupiter;
The King himself derived from Joves high race,
Trojan Aeneas sent us to this place.
How great a storm cruel Mycene hurled
On Trojan fields, and by what fates, each world
Of Europe, Asia, strove: if any man
Dwell in far lands, beyond the Ocean,
These he has heard, or who so ere resides
Where hot Sols lines stretched out, four zones divides,
Through vast Seas from so great a deluge bore
A small seat for our gods, a harmless shore,
Water and air, common to all, we crave.
Nor shall we be your realms disgrace, nor have
Your glory light, nor shall forget your grant,
Nor Latium irk Troy in her lap did plant.
I. by Aeneas fates, and right hand swear,
If any tried his faith or force in war,
Us many Realms, (nor slight us that we bring
These wreaths, and speak like men petitioning)
And many Nations to themselves would join:
But fate did us unto your shore design:
Hence Dardan sprung, and here returns again;
Us Phoebus did with great commands constrain
Tiber to seek, and blessed Numicus spring,
Besides small gifts of former wealth, our King
Presents to thee, from burning Troy convaid.
In this gold cup Anchises Offerings made:
When Priam Laws established, this, he bore,
And he this sacred Crown, and Scepter wore,
And robes, the art of Trojan dames.
At Ileoneus speech Latinus bent
A steadfast look, and fixed his eyes intent
Upon the earth: the King not much approved
Wrought purple, not with Priams Crown was moved;
As in his daughrers match he was delaid,
Fortunes revolving which old Faunus said:
This was the son, fate told from foreign strands
Was called with equal auspice to these lands,
Whose progeny in valor should excel,
And by their prowess, the whole world compel.
Then joyful said, you Gods assist our tasks,
And your own sign; take Trojan what thou asks.
Nor I despise your gifts: rich fields enjoy
Whilst I am King, and what you brought from Troy.
Aeneas, if such love he us intend,
If to join leagues he hasts, and be styled friend,
Let him approach, nor fear our amity;
T'imbrace your King, of peace shall the earnest be.
And to your Prince from us bear this reply:
I have a child, paternall lots deny
And many prodigies from heaven debar
To match at home: a son must come from far:
This they foretell remains for Italy,
Whose stock shall raise our name unto the sky.
This I believe is he, the fates require,
And if my mind prompt rightly, I desire.
This said, he chosen horses did command,
Fair steeds three hundred, in high stables stand,
And bids they should be to the Trojans led,
Whom gallant trappings graced with skarlet spread:
Gold portalls hung, gold did their breast infold,
And with their teeth, they champ'd the burnished gold.
The King a Chariot sent, which four steeds drew
Of heavenly race, fire from their nostrills flew,
Of the same kind, who were of Circes breed,
Stole by a Mare, leapt with a heavenly steed.
With these gifts, and the answers of the King,
The Trojans bravely mounted peace did bring.
But then behold! from Argos did repair
Joves cruel wife, and flying cuts the air.
The Trojan Fleet, and glad Aeneas, she
Saw through the sky, as far as Sicily;
Sees how they houses build, and leave the flood,
Now trusting land, with sharp grief fixed she stood;
Shaking her head, thus forth her woes did power:
Ah hateful race, and Troys fate cross to our:
In Dardan fields, why did they not expire?
Or captives took, why did not Iliums fire
Consume these men? midst arms, through flames they past.
My power I fear weary lies down at last,
And I with hatred satisfied, rest.
I bold, these fugitives with waves distressed,
My self and all the floods against them bent,
And fury of the winds, and waters spent.
How helped my Syrts, Scylla, Carybdis vast?
Since now through Tybers wished streams they have past,
Free from the Sea, and us; could Mars destroy
The mighty Lapithes? could heavens King annoy
At Dians suit, so much old Calidon?
What were those great offenses they had done?
But I, great wife to Jove unhappy I,
Left nothing unassay'd, did all ways try.
Aeneas, I am vanquished by thee:
But if my own power not sufficient be,
Undaunted, aids I Will seek where ere they dwell;
Will heaven not grant my suit, I Will raise up hell;
Grant, spite of us he must in Latium seat,
And that Lavinia shall be his by fate:
Yet we may work delay in such great things,
And may destroy the subjects of both Kings.
Let son and father join such rates being paid,
Trojan and Rutile blood shall dowre thee Maid,
Bellona give thee, nor alone a brand
Shall pregnant Cisseis bear to waste the land:
A Paris, and such births she shall enjoy,
And funeral Fires again for rising Troy.
This said, she dreadful to the earth descends,
And from the infernal shades, and seats of fiends
Woeful Alecto calls, who breeds sad war,
Rage, Treachery, and all crimes that are.
Pluto himself does this foul Monster hate,
And her own sisters do abhominate:
So often she is changed, and forms so dreadful takes,
And foul still pregnant with so many Snakes.
Whom Juno with such words exciting said,
Virgin nights daughter help, and now give aid,
Lest our unquestioned name, and honor fall,
Lest by these marriages the Trojans shall
Latium enjoy, and great Ausonia share.
Thou loving brothers can provoke to War,
Houses destroy with hate, both sword and flames
Bring to their roofes; thou have a thousand names,
As many nocent arts; then quickly shake
Thy pregnant breasts, and peace confirmed, break;
Lay grounds for cruel war, make with thy charms
Their wild youth rage, require, and take up arms.
Big with foul poison thence the hag resorts
To Latium, and Latinus lofty courts,
And silent to Amatus chamber went,
Who boiled with female care and discontent,
'Bout Turnus match, and Trojans coming there.
At her Alecto from her snaky hair
A serpent cast, and fixed it in her side:
By which enraged, she might the whole house divide.
It amongst her weeds did on her bosom roull,
And her then raging with a viperous soul
Unfelt, inspired: The snake's a chain of gold,
A fillet now her tresses to infold;
And each were glides. When first this pestilence
Had with a strong infection seized each sense,
And filled her blood with fire: not yet the flame
Her soft mind caught, nor through her bosom came.
But as kind mothers use to speak she says,
Mourning her child, and Phrygian marriages.
Sir, will you give Lavinia to the exild
Trojan? thy self not pitying, nor thy child,
Nor me, whom the false pyrate will forsake,
And next fair wind to sea the virgin take.
The Phrygian Swain so entered Greece, and bore
Laedean Helen to the Trojan shore.
Where Is sacred faith? and care thou had of thine?
The hand with Turnus thou so often did join?
If that a son must come from foraign lands,
Thou fix on that; and this thy sire commands:
Sure I believe all countries foraign are
Which we not rule, and so the gods declare.
And if you Turnus lineage view, he springs
From Inachus and Acrisius Grecian Kings.
When she had found persuasion was in vain,
And saw him fixed, then wrought the viperous bane,
Shoots through het bowels, spread through all her breast,
Then troops of fiends the hapless queen possessed,
And through the town distracted she did rove,
So flies a top with strokes resounding, drove;
Which boys in huge rings earnest at their sports
Through winding entries, and large vacant courts
With scourges force; amazed the childish troup
And smooth-chin'd band, admire the spinning top,
That lives with strokes, so giddily she went
Through the whole town, and people discontent.
Then flies to the woods like a wild Bacchanal,
And more enraged, on greater plots does fall.
For she in shady hills her daughter hid,
That so she might the Trojan banes forbid.
And Bacchus cries, The virgin's only thine,
Who bears for thee javelins adorned with vine,
For thee they dance, and save their sacred hair.
Fame flies, the matrons all distempered are
Like rage moves all, they leave their own to find
New roofs, their tresses flowing in the wind.
Others made heaven with hideous cries resound,
Girded with skins, with viney javelins bound,
Bearing a flaming pine, amidst the flings,
And Turnus and her daughters hymen sings,
Rolling her bloody eyes loud she exclaims,
With dreadful looks; Io! you Latin dames,
If any love in your chaste bosoms yet
Remains for me, the most unfortunate;
If any care of mothers power excites;
Bound tresses loose, with me act Bacchus rites.
Thus through vast woods and wilds Alecto brings
Amata, raging with infernal stings.
After she saw enough her fury burned,
Latinus counsel, his whole house oreturn'd:
Straight the sad goddess thence on black wings came
Unto bold Turnus walls, whose seat they fame
Danae built with her Acrisian race,
Drove there by storms: from birds of old the place
Ardea styled, Ardeas name now great.
It chanced, then Turnus in his lofty seat
Amidst the silent night, soft quiet took.
Alecto leaves her shape, and furies look,
And is transformed to an old woman now,
Plowing deep furrows in her wrinkled brow;
Binds her white hair, then olive branches ties,
And she old Calybe Junos Vestal is,
And straight herself presenting thus began.
Tamely will thou, Turnus, such wrongs sustain?
Thy crown transferred to the Dardan Colonie?
The King, the match and dowre thou should enjoy,
Denies, and now a foraign heir has chose.
Scorned, go, thy self t'ingratefull toil expose;
Tyrrhens destroy, yes, and Latinus guard.
Great Juno bid, this News should be declared
To thee in silent night: Arise with speed,
Arm the bold youth, and through the gates proceed;
March where the Trojan captains in the sweet
Tyber now ride, and burn their painted fleet.
A god bids this: and if the King withstands
Thy marriages, nor yields to thy demands,
Let him in arms then Turnus valor try.
Here the Prince smiling, thus did make reply.
Not as thou think, the news has escaped my ear,
Of ships has entered Tyber streams; such fear
Thou need'st not fain, nor royal Juno will
Unmindfull be of us.
But thee, O mother, fond age doting still,
Troubles in vain with care, and terror brings,
Deluding with false fear of arms and Kings.
Take for the Temple and the Statues care,
Let men t'whom it belongs, make peace and war.
At this Alecto raged: but whilst he spoke
A sudden trembling all his body shook,
His eyes grew stiff, such shapes she did unfold,
Hissing with snakes, her flameing eyes she rolled;
Repulsing him, who lingering did prepare
To speak: two serpents darting from her hair.
Then lashing him, from dire lips thus she stormed:
Lo! I whom doting age has ill informed,
Of kings and arms deluding with false fear,
I from the furies seat am present here,
And in this hand bring war and death.
This said, at him a blazing torch she cast,
And gloomy fire fixed in his bosom fast.
Great fear does vanquish sleep, through all his limbs
A salt sweat flows, in brine his body swims.
Arm, arm, he cries; for arms the bed room sought,
Love of steel raged, and wars cursed madness wrought.
Ire swells; As when fired bavins are applide
With mighty noise to a full cauldrons side.
Seas rage within, the boiling liquor steams,
And fuming high, bubbles with frothy streams,
Nor self-contain'd, to heaven black vapors rose.
He to the King and the prime Nobles shows,
Peace thus being broke, that arms should be prepared
To drive the foe from thence, and Latium guard,
Trojans and Latins both he could invade:
Then calls the gods with vows and prayers. This said,
Rutilians strive each other to engage,
This taken with his noble personage,
His royal pedigree another charms,
Him youth inticeth, and great deeds in arms.
Whilst Turnus his Rutilians did inflame,
The hag on Stygian wings amongst Trojans came,
Where fair Ascanius did with course and snares
Pursue wild beasts, there she new art prepares.
Here th'hellish Virgin cast a sudden rage
Amongst the dogs, did with known scent engage
More hot to chase: hence sprung the woeful jar,
And first incensed the rustic soul, for war
There was a fair large Deer with stately crests,
Whom Tyrrhens sons took from the mothers breast,
And Tyrrhens fed, the royal cattle were,
And those large fields entrusted to his care.
This same, their sister Sylvia with great care
Adorned his crest, and binds with garlands fair,
Did comb and bath him in the crystal ford:
He used to hand, and to his masters board
VVandred in woods, and would return, although
Late in the night, and his own dwelling know.
This wandering far Ascanius fierce hounds chac't,
When he by chance the pleasant river past,
And hot on verdant banks prepared to rest.
Then love of praise inflamed Ascanius breast,
That from his bow he lets the arrow fly;
Nor to his hand wanted a deity.
The sounding shaft did through his bowels come.
But the Deer wounded flies to his own home,
Entering he groans, and bloody, with sad voice
Imploring aid, fills all the house with noise.
Beating her breasts, first Sylvia complains,
And calls aloud to aid, the sturdy swains:
They (for in silent groves Alecto hides)
Suddenly came; this a burnt stake provides,
That a huge knotty club; what each man finds
Rage makes a weapon, Tyrrhus calls his hinds
As he by chance did cleave in four an oak,
And threatening mainly, a sharp axe he took,
But the foul hag watching her time to harm,
Ascends, and sounds the pastoral alarm
From a high roof, and her infernal voice
Sends through a winding-horn: at the dire noise
The woods did tremble, and the groves profound
Thundered, and Trivias lake far off the sound,
And sulphur Nar, and Velins fountains hear,
And mothers grasp their children struck with fear.
But then fierce Rusticks swift, where the alarms
The trumpet sounded, rush with snatch'd-up arms
From all parts, and Trojuns to Ascanius aid
From open camps like a full torrent made,
In order draw; No rustic fight they make
With knotty clubs, and a burnt pointed stake.
But fierce with steel they charge, the dusky field
With drawn swords dreadful, arms a splendour yield
Struck with the sun, and easts to heaven a light
As when with rising winds the waves grow white,
Seas by degrees advance, then higher rise,
At last rolled from their bottom, kiss the skies.
And here young Almon, Tyrrhus eldest son,
Was in the front by a swift shaft orethrown:
For in his throat it stuck, and stopped his breath,
Imprisoning th'aiery soul with blood in death.
There many were, with old Galesus slain,
Whilst he for peace opposed himself in vain;
The justest man which all Ausonia yields,
And once the richest both in stock and fields;
Five bleating flocks, five herds he did command,
And with a hundred plowes turns up his land.
Now whilst the field with equal fortune stood,
Alecto promise kept, when she in blood
Had both imbrued, and had first slaughters made,
She leaving earth, to heaven her self convaide,
Proud with success, to Juno these declares.
Pehold division ripened for sad wars!
Now let them friendship join and leagues conclude,
Since Trojans I with Tyrrhen blood imbrude.
And to the act I Will add this, if you please;
The bordering towns to war with rumors raise,
To love dire Mars them I Will inflame with charms,
All parts shall aid, I Will strew the fields with arms.
Then Juno said, Of jealousies and fears
There are enough, firm stand the grounds of wars:
Now they have fought, what weapons they have gained
By chance at first, with foreign blood is stained.
Let Venus great stock and Latinus join
Such Nuptials, and such marriages design.
But thee, great Jove who rules high heaven, denies
Foldly to wander through celestial skies:
Retire; what new emergencies betide
Shall be my care. Saturnia thus replide,
But she displaid her hissing wings with snakes,
Stooping to hell, and heavens bright sphere forsakes.
There is a place 'midst Italy, which stands
Under high mountains, famed through many lands;
Which sacred vales, and a thick grove surrounds,
And on each side with a dark shadow bounds,
And in the midst a foming torrent groans,
Rattling with mighty edies through the stones.
Here the dire cave, and Plutos gates were shown,
And the huge gulf of gaping Acheron
Opens foul jaws: hither Alecto flies,
And hated, eased at once both earth and skies.
No less mean while Saturnia perfects war
To Court the shepherds fly, and stain friends bear,
Young Almond and Galesus foul with gore:
The gods they call, and the old King implore.
Turnus arrived amidst these loud debates,
And terrors of the fight ingeminates:
That Trojans there should plant, the Phrygian race
Should mix with them, he thrust forth in disgrace.
Then they, whose mothers Bachanalian rage
Orgies to lead through deserts did engage;
(Great was the Queens example) gathered are
From every part, and weary Mars for war.
Against the gods, and fate, and omens, all
For impious war with strange perverseness call;
And clamouring round Latinus court they stood.
But he like a fixed rock against the flood,
Like a fixed rock, which when a breaking wave
Tumbles against him and loud billows rave,
Stands by his weight; the fomy clifts in vain
Thunder, and back bruised weeds are rolled again,
But when no power mad counsels could prevent,
And the whole affair with cruel Juno went;
Then did the king the gods, and heaven attest,
Ah we are lost by fates, by storms distressed!
Wretches, your impious blood shall punished be
For this; and Turnus, sad rewards for thee
Remains; when thou shall late the gods request,
I soon shall reach my haven, and find rest,
Though glorious funerals want. Nor more he spoke,
But straight retires, and did the helm forsake.
There was an ancient use in Latium,
Which Alban towns held sacred, and now Rome
Greatest in power, observes; when they prepare
Against Getae, Hircans, Arabs cruel war,
Or march to India and the Eastern main,
Or enfigns from the Parthians to regain.
There are two gates of war, that name they bear,
To dire Mars sacred, with religious fear;
A hundred brazen doors, which lasting bands
Of steel enclosed; in th entrance Janus stands.
Here when the Senate have a war decreed,
The Consul glorious in his regal weed
And Sabine robe, opens the groaning gates
Proclaiming it; and all the youth then waits,
And doleful notes on brazen rrumpets sound.
Then to the King against Trojans they propound
War to denounce, and open Janus gates;
He shuns the task, and foul engagement hates,
And hides himself. Then Juno from the sky
Descending, made the unwilling gates to fly
Open by force, and the huge brazen bars
Saturnia breaks, and turns the hinge of wars.
Ausonia raised now burns, roused from long peace;
Some in the fields foot-squadrons exercise,
Some break proud steeds, and use them to alarms;
Wrapped in a dusty cloud, all mad take arms.
This scoures his shield, his axe whets, oils his spear,
Proud to bear ensigns, and loud trumpets hear.
Five mighty towns to make arms, anvils lay,
Tyber, Ardea potent Atina,
Towrie Antemna, Crustumere the great:
Helms of high proof they work, and shields complete
With sallow wrought; these shining breast-plates cast,
Or with fine silver smooth-wrought Greves inchac't.
Farewell all love, and honor of the plow!
Their fathers swords again they furbush now:
The trumpets sound, proclaimed is the war;
These fit their casks, those neighing steeds prepare,
This braced his shield, his golden mail that tried,
And girds his trusty sword unto his side.
Open your springs you Muses, raise my verse!
What Kings provoked to wars, what armies fierce
Supplied the field, with what men Latium famed
Did flourish then, and with what arms inflamed,
It Is, you can tell for you did register;
Only a slender fame did touch our ear.
First proud Mezentius from the Tyrrhen lands
The gods contemnor marched, with armed bands:
And Lausus next, his son, then whom more fair
Was none, unless Laurentian Turnus were.
Horse-taming Lausus wild beasts vanquished,
A thousand men from Agelina led;
Worthy in better times his realms to have swaid,
And not Mezentius for his sire to have had.
With conquering steeds, in's chariot next to these
Came Aventine, thy son bold Hercules.
Upon his shield his fathers arms he takes,
A hundred serpents, Hydra girt with snakes,
Whom Rhea bore in Aventina's wood
Private, a woman proving by a god,
After Alcides to the Laurent plain
A conqueror came, when Geryon he had slain,
And Spanish bulls washed in the Tyrrhen wave.
In war these piles and cruel weapons have,
They fight with Tucks and with Sabellian spears;
Himself on foot a Lions huge skin wears,
Rough hair, and white teeth, dreadful on his head,
Thus horrid, he the palace entered,
The Herculean mantle flowing on his back.
Two brothers then Tyburtian walls forsake,
Whose brother Tybert gave the place a name,
From Greece fierce Coras and Catillus came.
Before the ranks amidst thick arms they bend,
As cloud-born Centaurs from the hills descend,
When snowie Othrys they or Omole
Forsake; then to their flight the woods give way,
And all the bows with mighty fragor yield.
Nor was he wanting did Preneste build,
The race of Vulcan. who among cattle reigned,
Found on the hearths; all times this truth maintained.
Rusticks a legion, Coeculus commands
From high Preneste, and cold Anio's strands
Whom Gabii, and rough Hernicis bred,
With rivers clear those rich Anagnia fed,
Old Amasens: not all bore arms, or ring
With shields and chariots: A great number sling
Bullets of lead, and some two javelins bear,
And on their heads did yellow bonnets wear
Of a wolfs skin with their left foot they did
March naked, a raw brogue the other hid.
Well horst Messapus, Neptunes offspring, whom
Nor fire or sword had power to overcome,
People in ease, uncustom'd to alarms
Invites to war, soon taught to use their arms.
These the just Falscians and Fescennian bands,
Those held Soractes towers, Flavinian strands.
Mount Cymins lake and Capen groves; who sing
Marching harm onious numbers of their King
As midst the clouds when silver swans retire
From their repast; they in a joyful quire
Tune their long pipes; then all the Asian coast
And floods far off resound.
Nor think the brazen bands in that great host
Confusion had: like thick clouds through the sky
Of cackling fowl from sea to land they fly.
Lo! ancient Sabine blood, Clausus commands
Great troops; himself great as his mighty bands.
From him the race, and Claudian family come,
After the Sabines shared a part in Rome.
Great Amiterna, old Quirites, and
Oliv'd Mutisca, all the Eretian band,
Who Nomentum, those rosey Veline till,
Tetricah, rough with rocks, Severus hill:
Those plant Casperia, Folurus, and them
Drink Hymel, Faber, and the Tybers stream.
Cold Nursia, Hortine troops and Latins came,
Those Allia parts, with an unhappy name.
As many waves from Lybick seas are rolled,
When stern Orion winter storms infold,
Or as thick corn parched in the summer stands:
In Hermus, or in Lycias golden strands,
So shields resound, earth trembling as they came.
Atrides son, foe to the Trojan name,
Halesus strait his chariot horses joins,
A thousand fierce men brought: those blessed with vines,
Massica plow, Arunciau fathers train
From the high hills, Sidicina near the main.
Those who left Cales, and who till the stream
Of dry Vulturnus, Saticulus with them
And Oscian bands; these fight with javelins long,
Put as their custom, fit with a soft thong;
These Faulchions have, and leather shields protect.
Nor thee, Oebalus, must our Muse neglect:
Whom Nymph Sebetide to Telon bore,
Now old he held the Telebonian shore:
The son, not with his fathers realms content,
To his subjection the Sarrastians bent;
And those whom Sarnus waters, forct to vield,
Them Rufus, Batulus hold, and Celen field,
And those fruit-bearing 'Bellas rampires view,
Who darts in the Teutonick manner threw.
Their heads are armed with Cork-trees torn from vines,
They shine in brazen arms, a brass sword shines:
With thee to war from hilly Nursia came
O Vfens blessed in arms, and great in fame,
A cruel race, with huntings used to toil
In woods; Aequicola a barren soil
These armed plow and always love to drive
Fresh prey and plunder, and by rapine live.
Next came a priest of the Marubian race,
His helm green bows, of happy olive grace,
From King Archippus sent, Vmbro most bold,
The vip rs blood, and hissing serpents could
By chaims, or with his hand to sleep engage,
Their bitings cure, and by his art assuage:
But for the Dardan spear no help he found,
Nor could a sleepy medicine ease the wound,
Nor all those herbs in Marsian mountains be.
Thee Angits grove, Fucinus clear waves thee,
Thee crystal lakes have wept
To war the fair race of Hippolitus went,
Virbius, whom his mother Aritia sent
To Aegeias groves, in the Hymetian strand,
Where altars fat of pleased Diana stand.
After his stepdames art, Hippolitus killed,
Paternal punishments with blood fulfilled;
Torn by mad steeds: T'etherial stars (they fame)
And heavens supernal air again he came
Restored by physic, and Diana's love;
This much incensing the all-potent Jove,
A mortal from infernal shades should rise,
Phoebus son, who so great skill did devise
With thun er sent to Styx. But Trivia
Hypolitus did to fecret seats to convay,
And to Aegerian groves confined alone,
In Italian woods he finished life unnkown,
Where by a changed name he was Virbius stild.
From Trivias fane, groves sacred, are exiled
All horses, since the youth and's chariot they
Frighted orethrew to monsters of the sea.
No less his son did horses exercise,
And to the wars he in his chariot flies.
Among the first most beauteous Turnus led,
Marching in arms, and taller by the head:
From his high crests three bushy horse-maines came,
Chimera there, breathing Aetnean flame;
Then louder roars, with fire more fiercely glowes,
When in hot fight blood in abundance flows.
His polished shield, Io with gold adorns,
A cow now clothed with hair, and dressed with horns:
Argus who kept the maid, and Inachus stood,
Where with rare art his urn poures forth a flood.
A cloud of foot did follow, the whole strands
Shield-bearing squadrons hide; the Argive bands,
The Arunci, Rutilii, ancient Sicanie,
Sacrans, and shields of painted Labici:
Those plow thy shores, O Tyber, people tills
Sacred Numicus, sow Rutilian hills,
Circaeus tops, who Anxurs fields, where Jove
Commands, and glad Feronias verdant grove:
Where black fend Satyr lies, cold Vfens did
Glide through deep vales, and in the ocean hid.
Volscean Camilla marched with these: she leads
Regiments of horse; the Warrioresse precedes
Bands bright in arms, her female fingers are
Not used to Pallas arts: to cruel war
The maid inured; or in her swift course borne
T'outstrip the winds, and fly ore standing corn,
Nor bruise the tender ear, she was so fleet
Through sea to run, nor dip her nimble feet.
From fields and houses, youth and matrons haste;
How she with purple regal honor graced
On her straight shoulders, marching, they behold
Amazed: how th'button knit her hair with gold;
Then how she did her Lycian quiver bears,
And tipped with steel her pastoral myrtle spear.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Aeneas is admonished by a dream
To seek Evanders aid, up Tybers stream.
Arcadians solemnizing annual feasts,
Aeneas and the Trojans make their guests.
Cacus strange story, and Herculian rites.
The King Aeneas to his court invites.
Fair Venus with sweet love her husband charms,
And for her son obtains Vulcanian arms.
Evander Pallas sends to Aeneas aid.
A league the Hetrurians and the Trojans made.
Venus presents the arms; a golden field
With Roman victories charged, adorned the shield.
AS Turnus had with warlike ensigns crowned
Laurentian towers, and made shril trumpets sound;
As he the horse had raised, and forced to arms,
Straight all disturbed, great Latium in alarms
Together take an oath, the fierce youth rave.
Mesaphus, Vfens the prime conduct have;
With them Mezentius, who the gods disdains,
Each where they press, and fields deprive of swains.
Venalus is sent to Diomede the great
For aid, and to declare the Trojans seat
In Latium: Aeneas who does bring
His conquered gods, says, fates decree him King:
That many people to the Trojans join,
His name in Italy spreads: what his design,
If fortune grant to him the hoped event
By war, to Diomed is more evident
Then can Latinus or King Turnus find.
Thus Latium stood: Aeneas in his mind
All these revolved, tossed with a flood of care,
When his swift thoughts divide now here, now there,
And carried diverse ways, through all things run.
As waters trembling light, struck by the sun
Or image of the radiant moon, against brass,
Now raised to heaven, flies wide through every place,
And to the seelings of high roofs is hurled.
'Twas night, when weary creatures through the world
Both beasts and birds, soft slumber did relaxe;
When prince Aeneas under heavens cold axe
Upon the shore, his bosom freight with cares
Or the sad war, late for repose prepares.
The genius of the place old Tyber rose
From the glad stream amongst the pop'lar boughs:
Of finest canvase was his azure weed,
And his head covered with a shady reed.
And thus his cares asswag'd. O race of gods
Whem Troy has brought from foes, to our abodes:
Thou shall for ever Pergamus protect,
Laurentian soil and Latin fields expect:
Here are sure houses, here thy certain seats,
Nor fear wars menacings; all the rage and threats
Of gods give place.
(Nor think a dream vain fictions coyns) for thou
Under wild oaks shall find a mighty sow,
Pregnant, her farrow thirty, laid to rest,
A white sow, a white issue, at her breast.
There Is certain quiet, there thy city build;
Ascanius shall thrice ten years circles filled
There great named Alba raise: I speak things sure.
Now by what means thou conqueror may procure
A present aid, list, brief I shall declare.
The Arcadians here a race from Pallas are,
Who to these coasts led by Evander came,
And on these hills their city chose to frame,
From Pallas Pallanteum styled the place.
These war continual with the Latin race.
With these associate, leagues conjoyn with them.
I by my banks shall guide thee up the stream,
That thou with ores may stem the floods. Arise
O goddess son, with prayers bring sacrifice
To Juno with the dawn; her wrath allay
With humble vows: Victor, me honor pay.
I am whom thou beholdst, whose full stream glides
Washing these banks, and fertile lands divides:
Blue Tyber, heavens delight: large walls for me,
And here a head to lofty seats must be.
This said, the river dives into the deep,
And from Aeneas flies both night and sleep.
He rose, and viewes the bright Suns Eastern beams;
Then in his hollow palms takes from the streams
Water, the use: thus praying to the skies.
Laurentian nymphs, nymphs where these floods arise.
O Tyber, father, with thy blessed wave
At last receive me, and from dangers save!
And wheresoere, thou pitying of our woes
Shall glide; most fair, where ere thy water flows,
Still I shall honor, always presents bring.
Horned flood, of the Hesperian rivers king,
Oh now assist and give us present aid!
Two vessels from the fleet he chose, this said,
And tackling fits; his mates did oars provide:
When he behold! the wondrous omen spide;
A white sow, with as white a farrow laid,
And through the wood on a green bank survaid.
To thee, to thee great Juno this he slew,
And with her issue altars did imbrue.
Tyber did all that night his swelling flood
Appease; his flowing waves in silence stood,
And his streams levels like a gentle lake,
That with their oars no struggling they should make.
They haste their course, up with the tide they drove,
The waves admire, and th'unfrequented grove
Wonders, when glittering shields far off they spide
And painted galleys through the stream to glide.
They haste both night and day, long reaches made,
And hid with trees, cut through a pleasant shade.
Now the bright Sun had reached the middle sky,
When they far off did scattered houses spy,
And slender battlements with a little tower,
But now to heaven advanced by Roman power;
Then but a poor state King Evander had.
Sraight prores they turn, and to the city made:
By chance, the Arcadian solemn rites that day
To great Alcides and the gods did pay
Before the Town, Pallas his son was there,
All the prime youth, and the poor Senate bear
Incense, and altars smoke with lukewarm blood.
As they tall ships saw through the Opacus wood
To haste with silent oars; frighted, they rise,
And at the sight, forsook the sacrifice.
Bold Pallas all forbids to quit the board,
And hastens to them with a ready sword:
Then from a bank far off -- Sirs, what cause made
Ye tempt strange shores? or whither bound? he said:
What race? whence come you? bring ye peace or war?
Then did Aenaeas from his stern declare,
And in his hand the peaceful olive shows:
Trojans, and arms thou see to Latins foes,
Who us exiled enforce with cruel war.
We seek Evander; him inform, here are
Troy's prime Commanders, who his aid entreat.
Pallas amazed, struck with a name so great;
Who e're, come forth, these to the King declare,
And to our countries gods a guest repair!
Then he receives him with a strict embrace,
The grove they enter, and forsake the place.
When to the King Aeneas friendly said.
O best of Greeks! to whom me fortune made
A suitor now, and olive boughs to bear:
Nor thee, though a Greek Captain, did I fear,
From both Atrides though thou draw'st thy line;
But me, thy own worth, th'Oracles divine,
And ancient Kin, thy fame through all coasts spread,
Sent me to thee; and fates the willing led.
Our Grandsire Dardan, who built Ilium
(As the Greeks say) did from Electra come;
He sailed to Troy; she was great Atlas strain,
Whose shoulders the actherial orbs sustain:
Mercury thy father is, whom Maia fair
Conceiving, on Cylenes cold tops bare.
But Atlas Maia, (if we credit fame)
That Atlas got, supports heavens starry frame,
So from one blood the stocks of both divide.
This trusting, I no messenger employed,
Nor tried thee first by art, but my self came,
And life adventuring, here now suppliant am.
The same Rutilians which with cruel wars
Press thee, when we are expelled think naught debars,
But all Hesperia shall their yoke obey,
Or whatsoere is washed by either Sea.
Let us join leagues; we have stout men of war,
And valiant youth that long experienced are.
Aeneas thus, whilst he all ore survaid
The Trojan, then Evander briefly said.
Bold Dardan know, how I accept thy choice,
And meet thy love! how I thy fathers voice
And face recall, and have in memory
When Priam went Hesione to see,
And Salamina view his sisters court,
They did to cold Arcadian shores resort.
Then budding youth had first my cheeks attired
With a soft down; I Trojan Chiefs admired,
With wonder youthful Priam me possessed:
But most Anchises, taller then the rest,
With great affection did my mind excite
To know the man, and join right hand to right;
Joyful I led him round our battlements:
He a fair quiver, Lycian shafts presents
And a rich cloak to me, taking his leave,
With golden reins, which since I Pallas gave
Therefore I grant thy suit, and leagues conjoine;
And when the morn with purple light shall shine,
I will dismiss you both with aid and gold.
Mean while (since friends you're here) these annuals hold,
A sin now to neglect; and keep our feast,
Making your selves to friends a welcome guest.
Then he commands to bring full bowls, and meat,
And placed the Trojans on a grassie seat;
But to a bed a Lions rough skin graced
He brought their Prince, and in a chair he placed.
The Priest, and chosen youth then altars spread
With beasts fat entrails, served with purest bread,
And rich wine fill: The Trojans and their Chief
Feast with rich offerings, and huge chines of beef.
Hunger appeased, and feasted to the height,
Evander said: On us this solemn rite
By superstition, nor by ignorance came
To be imposed. From dangers saved, we do
Yearly these honors (noble guest) renew.
First on that hanging Rock with torn clifts look,
And far-off scattered heaps, that house forsook
Stands on the hill, whose tops such ruins have,
'Twas there the monster Cacus had his cave,
And in those vast recesses his dire face
Always he hid, the sun nere pierced that place;
Steeming with slaughters fresh on his proud door
Pale heads of men hung in their loathsome gore.
Vulcan the monsters father, fire still flies
Black from his mouth, he of a dreadful size.
But time brought aid, and one of mighty fame.
For the revenger great Alcides came,
Proud with the triple Gerions death, and spoil:
The conqueror drove his cattle to this soil,
His herds possessed the vale and rivers side.
But furious Cacus, lest he ought untride
Of wickedness or villainy should leave,
Four stately oxen from their stalls did drive,
As many well-shap'd heifers; these he hales,
Lest tracts should be discovered by the tails,
Into his den, and in the dark rock hid,
Nor any footstep to the cave did lead.
But when great Hercules removed his herd,
Leaving those grounds, and to be gone prepared;
Departing, loud they bellow, clamor fills
The neighboring woods, they mourning leave the hills:
One cow makes answer, and from hidden caves
Aloud complains, and Cacus hope deceives.
But here great rage Alcides did provoke;
He arms, and takes a ponderous knotty oak,
And to the top of the high mountain flies.
Now first we saw fear Cacus to surprise,
And his look changed; he, then East-winds more fleet
Hastes to his cave, for terror winged his feet;
Shuts himself up, and down a huge stone flung
With broken chains, which Vulcans art had hung
With steel, and the strong gates guards with a bar.
Soon Herc'les came, and raging every where
Sought entrance, gnashing of his teeth he turns
Now here, now there: thrice, whilst with rage he burns,
Aventine sought, thrice did in vain assail
The marble door, as often rests in the vale.
A rising sharp rock with torn clifts there was
Behind the cave, a fit and lofty place
Where birds of prey might build: this as it stood
To the left hand, and leaning to the flood,
He on the right hand shoves, and at the last
Tears from the root, then down it headlong casts.
At which great crack the lofty skies did thunder.
The aftrighted streams retire, banks fly asunder:
Then the huge cave, and Cacus courts appear,
The dismal caverns all discovered were.
As when the ground torn with an earthquake, shows
Infernal seats, and does sad realms disclose
Hateful to deities, and all hell in sight,
Then pale ghosts tremble at the sent-in light.
Now he surpised with unexpected day,
Shut up in's cave, Alcides did assay
With weapons from above, all arms he tries,
And him with trees and mighty milstones plies.
He (when he could not from the danger break)
Vomits huge smoke, and (wonderful to speak)
Darkens the place with mist, blinding the sight,
And mixed with fire, thickens black shades of night.
Nor did Alcides hold, but in he broke
Amidst the flame, and rushed through waving smoke;
The den with vapor steem'd: he Cacus took,
In darkness belching fire, and in the lock
He whirls him round, thrown down, he on him lies
Grasping his throat and squeezing out his eyes.
The dark house straight with open doors displaid,
Back were the cattle, and base stealth convaid;
Out by the feet the ugly corpse he drew,
On's dreadful eyes enough they could not view,
The monsters hairy breast, and horrid brow,
And fire within his mouth extinguished now.
These rites, this day, posterity maintain
Ere since, which first Potitius did ordain;
And Hercules priests Penarians did seat
This altar in these groves, which always great
Is styled by us, and great shall still remain.
Therefore, brave Youth, in such high praise ordain
Boughs for your hair, your right hands cups extend,
Implore the common god, wine freely spend.
Mixt-colour'd Poplar with Herculean shade.
His tresses veiled and bound with leaves; this said,
A sacred bowl fills his right hand; straight all
Glad power on Tables, and the gods do call.
Mean while the night falls from heavens spangled arch,
When all the priests and first Potitius march,
Girt as they use with skins, and torches bear.
Feasts they renew, and second course prepare,
Tables they load, the Salii then dance round
About the altars to sweet music, crowned
With poplar boughs: here young men, there the old,
Who far-ram'd Hercules brave deeds extolled,
And his twelve labors sung. How first he takes
His step-dames monsters, kills her double snakes:
How Troy, Ochalia, famous towns had been
By him orethrown: what toyls by Juno's spleen
And King Euristheus he did undergo.
Thou cloud-born Hyleus, Pholus did orethrow,
Thou the dire Cretian monsters did subdue,
And at Nemea the huge Lion slew.
At thee shook Stygian lakes, hells porter then
On gnawn bones lying in his bloody den,
No form, not huge Typhaeus could confound,
Though armed, nor Flydra though his heads charge round.
Hail Joves true race, an honor to the skies,
T'us be propitious and thy sacrifice.
Such things they sang: but Ca us cause in higher
Notes they resound, and how he breathed out fire:
The groves did ring, the hills with echo stormed.
Thence, all divine solemnities performed,
Homewards they all unto the city bent,
And King Evander with the foremost went,
With whom Aenaeas and his son did walk:
And going, ease the way with various talk.
Aeueas taken with those parts, admires,
His quick eyes viewing all things round, inquires,
And glad would hear records of former men.
Evander, rounder of Rome's Palace then.
Nymphs, native Fauns, these groves inhabited;
Men, trunks of trees produced, and hard oak bred,
Who nor for law, tillage nor oxen care,
Nor knew to gather riches, nor to spare:
But these fierce hunting, and wild fruit relieved.
When from Olympus Saturn first arrived,
Who from Joves arms and his lost kingdom fled,
He the fierce Nation in high mountains bred
Reduced, and gave them Laws: this Latium styled,
Because these shores in safety him concealed.
They said the golden age was when he reigned,
Since in such peace his kingdom he maintained.
Then baser ages by degrees succeed,
Which rage of war, and love of riches breed:
Ausonian bands then, and Sycanians came,
And often Saturnian fields have lost their name:
Thence Kings, and Tyber giant like, whence we
Have Tyber called this stream of Italy;
The true old name of Albula is lost.
Forced through all feas, expulst my native coast,
All-conquering fate, and fortunes powerful hand
Have placed me here, and the severe command
Of my blessed mother the Nymph Carmens sent,
And great Apollo's strict admonishment.
Scarce said, he shows an altar as they came,
And the Carmental gates, a Roman name,
Which ancient honor Nymphs did dedicate
To Carmens, skilful of ensuing fate,
Who first declared the Trojans should be great,
And Pallanteum a renowned seat.
Next, a huge grove which valiant Romulus chose
For sanctuary, he Lupercal shows
To Pan was under cold rocks consecrate,
After the manner of the Athenian state.
Then to Argiletums sacred grove he led,
And told the place where his guest Argus died.
Tarpeia and the Capitol he showed,
Now golden, then dark with a horrid wood.
Dread of the place, then did the shepherds move,
And often they trembled at the rock and grove.
This wood (he said) this mountains leavy brow
A god inhabited, but uncertain who.
Arcadians, here, think Jove himself they spide,
Shaking his shiel, and on the winds to ride.
These two dismantled towns thou do behold,
Are but sad relics of the men of old:
This, father Janus, that, Saturnus framed;
Janiculum this, that was Saturnius named.
With these discourses, near the Court they drew
Of poor Evander, where they cattle view
Lowing in the Roman change, and lofty streets.
As to the gates they came he said, These seats
Alcides entered, here he kept his court:
Sir, wealth despise, and now thy self deport
As did the god, with homely fare content.
This said, he strait with great Aeneas went
Under low roofs, and him on couches placed
Softened with leaves, and with a Bears skin graced.
Night fell, and with black wings the earth did hide;
But Venus mind not vainly terrifide
With Laurent threats, and with sad stirs dismayed,
To Vulcan in his golden bed she said,
And with sweet language divine love inspires.
Whilst the Greek Kings with war and hostile fires
Razed destined Troy, and her high towers distressed;
No aid nor arms did I for them request
Made by thy art or power; nor thee, dear love,
Would I to exercise vain labors move.
Though much I owe to Priams high descent,
And often Aeneas hard toyls might lament.
Now by Joves will Rutilian shores they plant.
O my blessed power! I come a suppliant,
A mother for a son craves arms. Dear Love,
Thetis, Aurora thee with tears could move:
Behold what realms conspire, what cities join
Council, by war to ruin me and mine.
The Goddess here round with her snowyarms
In soft embraces him consulting warms.
Straight he takes fire, and through his marrow came
Accustomed heat, and did his blood inflame.
So from a fiery breach crupted flies
Shining with flame, bright thunder through the skies.
Glad, straight she finds her plot, and beauty take.
When bound with lasting love, thus Vulcan spoke:
What needs such far-fetched stories, goddess? where
's Your confidence of me? had you such care,
The Trojans then I might with arms supplide;
Nor Jove, nor fate, that Troy should stand denide,
And Priam ten years more to have remained.
If you resolve, and have a war ordained,
I promise both my art, my power, and care,
What iron and soft Electrum can prepare,
What fire and bellows may. Leave to persuade,
Nor doubt thy power with us. Thus having said,
He wished embraces gave, and to sweet rest
Prepares, reposing in the goddess breast.
Then when he wakened, after his first sleep
At midnight: As a woman who does keep
Her self by spinning and Minerva's hire,
Stirs up the ashes and the sleeping fire.
Night adding to her work; long tasks she plies,
And at her lamp her servants exercise,
That chaste she might preserve her husbands bed,
And her small children to supply with bread.
No drowsier at that hour Vulcan arose
From his soft bed, and to his forge he goes.
Near to Sycanian coasts an Island lifts
High shoulders up, and tall with smoky clifts:
Eat with Cyclopen flames, a Cave lies under,
And huge Aetnean vaults, which always thunder,
Where mighty strokes on anvils did resound,
And bars of massy steel roar under ground
In water quenched, by forges breathing flame.
This Vulcans seat, Vulcania the lands name.
Hither the god descended from the sky,
Where sparkling heats in vast caves Cyclops ply.
Brontes, Steropes, naked Piracmon stand,
A thunderbolt half wrought they had in hand:
Of such, great store from heaven to earth are thrown
By angry Jove, the rest as yet not done.
Three parts of hail, three of a watery cloud,
As much of fire, and three of wind allowed;
Their work with flashe, noise, and fear they mixed,
And dreadful wrath, persuing flame betwixt.
Here haste they Mars his chariot, and swift spokes,
With which he men and mighty towns provokes:
These the dread shield of angry Pallas mould,
And wrought her arms with Dragons scales and gold;
The goddess crest with twisted snakes they deck,
And Gorgons head dissected from her neck.
Cyclops, he said, take all these things away,
Set by your tasks, and list to what I say.
Arms for a bold man must be made; impart
Now all your strength, and show your greatest art,
Break off delays. Nor more he said. They hot
All ply the work, and equal tasks by lot
Receive; straight brass and gold in rivers flows,
In a vast furnace hard steel liquid grows.
A mighty shield they frame, one should withstand
The warlike store of all the Ausonian land.
Rounded with mighty orbs, seven orbs they make;
Some with the bellows air retain and take,
Others in water dip the hissing ore;
The hollow vaults with beating anvils rore:
They with much strength their arms in order raise,
And turn with tongs the mass a thousand ways.
Whilst in Aeolian Caverns Vulcan sweats,
Hastening the work: blessed morn, from humble seats
Evander raised, and chirping birds did call
Up with sweet notes under his Palace wall.
The old man rose, puts on his coat, and tide
His Tyrrhen sandals on, then to his side
Girds a Tegean sword, next ore he flung
A Panthers skin, which from his left side hung;
From the high floor his double guard descend,
And on their masters steps the dogs attend.
TO Aeneas chamber went; for he had not
Promised assistance, nor his word forgot.
And full as early prince Aeneas rose,
Pallas with that, with this Achates goes.
Met, they salute; and in the hall being placed,
Desired conference they enjoyd at last.
And first the King began.
Great Trojan prince, Thou safe, I never shall
Confess Troy vanquished, nor her kingdoms fall.
Our aids are small for one so much renowned;
Here are we with the Tusscan river bound,
There Rutils stop us, and often storm our wall.
But I great nations and rich kingdoms shall
Draw to thy help; unlookt for chance presents
Thee succor, and thou come by fates consents.
Not far from hence built on an ancient rock,
Stands Agelina, where the Lydian stock
Once famed in war, Hetrurian mountains plants.
This flourishing many years, all former grants
At last Mizentius by his proud commands
Infringed, and garrisoned with cruel bands.
His murders I forbear and tyrannies,
The gods return the like on him and his!
For he dead bodies to the living joined,
Puts face to face, and hand in hand combined:
Strange torture! when foul gore and blood imbrues
Their sad embrace, and with long death persues.
At last the weary subjects take up arms,
And him, then raging, they with fierce alarms
In's court besieged, his counselors they slew,
And wildfire on his lofty palace threw.
He scapes'mongst slaughters to Rutilian strands,
To seek protection from kind Turnus hands.
Now all Hetruria up in cruel rage,
To bring their King to justice they engage.
Over their armies I Will make thee the head,
Now sounding shores are with the Navy spread,
Ready to fail; but their old priest withstands,
Opening the fates. You choice Meonian bands
Flower of the ancients, whom just griefs engage
Against Mizentius with deserved rage:
No 'Italian must so great a nation sway,
Seck foreign Chiefs. This did the Hetrurians stay,
Affrighted by the gods admonishments.
Tarchons ambassador to me presents
The scepter, crown, ensigns to my commands,
And would possess me of the Tyrrhen lands.
But feeble age with cold blood me retracts
From such a task, too weak for valiant acts.
I would my son prefer, but that his line
By's mother comes from them: Thee fates design
By blood, and years; the gods this meant for thee.
Go, most bold Chief of Troy and Italy.
To thee I Will Pallas join, my hope, and care,
Thou being his master to inure to war
And Mars hard toils; thy prowess used to see
From's youth he may admire, and honor thee.
Two hundred chosen horse well mounted all,
I shall bestow, as many Pallas shall.
Scarce said, the Trojan Anchisiades
And good Achates stand, with fixed eyes;
Who, many sad things troubled, then divine.
When from high heaven fair Venus gave a sign.
For from a cloud with mighty fragor brake
A flash of lightning, all things seemed to shake;
From heaven a Tyrrhen trumpet sounds alarms,
And often they hear the rattling noise of arms,
And armor saw shine through a gilded cloud
Amongst bright spears, and struck to thunder loud.
Others admire; but Troy's great Hero, these
Perceives to be his mother's promises.
Then said, O king, what these strange portents are
Seek not to know, for me the gods declare.
This my blessed mother told, if war should rise,
She would Vulcanian arms bring through the skies
For my defense.
Ah what great slaughters Latium wait on thee,
On Turnus how will I revenged be!
When Tybers waves, shields, helms, and men involve,
Let them now arm, and to break peace resolve.
This said, down from his lofty throne he came,
And on Herculean altars stirs the flame,
And joyful did the last days rites renew,
And chosen sheep, he as the custom, slew.
The same, Evander and the Trojans did.
Thence he his fleet and friends revisited,
And from their number chose the valiantest
Who in the war should follow him; the rest
Go with the stream, and down the river fell,
That the glad news they might Ascanius tell.
Trojans are horsed, for Tyrrhen countries bent,
A matchless one to Aeneas they present,
Caparison'd with a mighty Lions skin,
Which covering him, with golden claws did shine.
Straight nimble fame through the small city flew,
That troops of horse to Tyrrhen kingdoms drew:
Matrons their vows redouble with their fears,
And wars dire visage greater now appears.
Evander then on them departing lays
Weeping, his hands, and thus embracing says --
O Jove! would thou my former youth renew,
When at Preneste I the Van orethrew,
And heaps of shields to ashes did compel,
And with this hand King Herelus sent to hell.
Three souls his mother gave him at his birth,
(Strange to be told) thrice he must fall to earth,
Thrice was to die: yet I not suffering harm,
Took all those lives, and did as often disarm.
I then dear son not from thy'mbrace would be
Deprived, nor should Mizentius over me
Thus much insult, nor often so near our gate
Slaughter our men, and town depopulate.
But oh you gods, and greatest Jove, now bring
Comfort, and pity the Arcadian King;
And hear a fathers prayer, if power you have
My Pallas to preserve, if fates will save!
If! may see him, and we meet again,
Then life I crave, all labor I Will disdain;
But him if fortune with sad chance persues,
O now my woeful life now let me lose!
Whilst doubtful cares, and hopes uncertain be,
Whilst the sole comfort of my age, I thee
Dear son infold with strict embraces here,
Before a sadder message wound my ear.
His father these at his last farewell said,
Whom fallen, his servants to his court convaid.
Now through the open gates the horsemen bent,
Aeneas first with good Achates went,
Then other Chiefs, Pallas amidst the bands
In warlike habit and bright arms commands.
As on the ocean Lucifer reflects,
Whom Venus before other stars respects,
Raising his sacred head, all darkness flies.
The fearful matrons crown the walls, their eyes
The dusky cloud and glittering band pursue.
The troops through nearest ways and thickets drew:
A clamor rose, drawn up in rank and file,
With trampling hoofs they shake the beaten soil.
There are large groves, near Coeris frigid wave,
Sacred of old, which hollow mountains have
With gloomy fur beset, and closed with wood.
The ancient Greeks unto Sylvanus, god
Of fields and herds, this grove and least did grant,
Who first did in the Latin confines plant.
Not far from this, safely encamped lay
Tarchon and Tyrrhens, all the army they,
Saw from a height possess a spacious plain.
Here bends Aeneas and his warlike train,
And weary, for themselves and horse provide.
But Venus through the crystal spears did glide,
Fair goddess, bearing gifts, in secret she
Her son in winding vales far off did see.
And thus to him her self discovering said,
Behold the promised gift my husband made:
Dear son, now fear not proud Laurentian spite,
Nor to encounter Turnus in the fight.
Venus thus laid, having her son embraced,
Against an oak the shining armor placed.
Proud of so great an honor, each where he
Rolled his quick eye, nor satisfied could be,
Trying on several pieces, he admires
The dreadful plumed helm, ejecting fires,
And fatal sword, bloody habergion,
Mighty and stiff with brass; such, when the sun
Gilds a dark cloud with rays, which far off shine.
Then his soft greaves, gold, and Electrum join,
And the rare workmanship on's spear and shield,
Which Latian acts and Roman triumphs held.
Vulcan, who well could future things foresee,
Had engraved there all Ascanius progeny,
And wars in order as they have been fought.
Laid in a verdant cave, Mars wolf he wrought,
Fast on her teats the double offspring sticks,
Whom sporting, their kind foster-mother licks;
She bending her smooth neck, delights the young
By turns, and shapes their bodies with her tongue,
Not far from this, Rome and the Sabine dames
Raped from the Theater, and Circensian games;
Whence to the Romans a new war arose.
Here he old Tatius and stern Cures shows;
After those Kings armed, reconciled stand
Before Joves altar, goblets in their hand,
And to confirm the league, a swine they slew.
Not far from thence, four horses Metius drew
In sunder (but thou Alban should have stood
Unto thy promise) Tullus through the wood
The traitors bowels with long dragging tore,
And dew'd the sprinkled briers with his gore.
Porsenna next, Tarquine to re-inthrone
Commands, and with strict siege begirt the town.
Romans for liberty their lives contemn.
Thou Would think at once he frowned, and threatened them;
Because the bridge the valiant Cocles broke,
And Cleia escaped from bonds, the river took.
Upon the top of the Tarpeian tower
Manlius the Captain stood, with all his power
The Temple and the Capitol to watch,
And new built courts, rough with Romulean thatch;
And here the silver goose through ports of gold
Flying, the Gauls to be in th'entrauce told.
Gauls through the shrubs did to the tower ascend,
Whom the dark shade and gloomy night defend.
Their beards were golden, golden was their hair,
They in branched cassocks shine, with gold their fair
Necks be adorned; each shook two Alpine spears,
And for defense a mighty target bears.
Here dancing Salii, naked Luperci
With woolly crowns those shields fell from the sky.
Drawn in soft litters, here chaste matrons are
Rites bearing through the city. Hence not far
Hels courts and Pluto's gates he did design,
And for crimes, tortures: and thee Catiline
Hung on a rock, fearing the furies jaws:
The blessed withdrawn, where Cato gives the Laws.
The deep seas golden image he ingraves
Among these, but th'azure fom'd with silver waves.
About the ring bright silver Dolphins glide,
Brush with their sterns the deep, and waves divide.
Amidst thou mighst behold the brazen fleet,
The Actian war, and all Leucates sweat,
Ready to charge, prepared for the fight:
Thou mighst have viewed with gold the billows bright.
With him his Gods, the Peers and People came,
Who standing on the stern, a double flame
Darts from his brows, his fathers star appears.
Agrippa there, with winds, heaven favoring, steers
His squadron up, and brings his ensigns on,
His brows decked with a naval garland shon.
Antonius here with strange and differing bands
Both from the red sea and the Eastern strands,
Forces of Egypt, and the Bactrians led,
The Egyptian Queen (shameless) him followed.
At once all charge, and with their laboring ores
The whole sea fomes, plowed up with thundering prores,
They take the deep, thou would suppose again
That floating Cyclades swam upon the main,
Or mountains did with mighty mountains meet,
They with such force charge in the towrie fleet:
Wildfire they cast, swift steel, and darts are spread,
And Neptunes fields grow with fresh slaughter red.
With Egypts trumpets in the midst, the Queen
Calls up her fleet, approaching snakes not seen.
The barking Anubis, all the monstrous brood
Of gods, against Neptune, Venus, Pallas stood
Opposed in arms: Mars through the battle raved.
From heaven sad furies he in steel ingrav'd;
And proud of her torn garments, Discord goes;
Bellona with a bloody whip persues;
His bow Actian Apollo from above
These viewing, bent: all with that terror drove,
Egyptians, Indians, and Arabians fly,
The Queen her self, with winds implored, to ply
Her sails appeared, and with loosed bolings went.
Her midst the slaughters, the Ignipotent
Made pale with future death, through waves to fly;
Opposed to this did huge-limb'd Nilus lie,
Spreading his garment, calls into his breast,
To sheltring waves inviting the distressed.
But to Rome Caesar with three triumphs rode,
And on our gods immortal vows bestowed;
Him ample fanes three hundred joyful greet,
And loud applause did ring through every street,
In all the Temples quires of Dames resound,
Slain Steers before the altars strew the ground.
He in bright porches of great Phoebus sits,
And gifts of nations to proud pillars fits.
Of conquered people, a long train proceeds;
These, various all, in language, arms, and weeds.
Here Vulcan framed Africans, Nomades,
Lelegs, Cures, and dart-arm'd Gelones.
Euphrates now glides softer, and Morine
Furthest of Nations, double-horned Rhine:
Daae Araxes, who a bridge does scorn.
Wondering how Vulcan did the shield adorn;
And ignorant he glories in the frame,
Then straight claps on his offsprings fate and fame.
THE NINTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Iris commands bold Turnus to invade
The Trojans, whilst Aeneas gathers aid.
He draws the Army forth: attempts to burn
The fleet, which escape, and into Sea-Nymphs turn.
Euryalus and Nisus venture through
The enemies camp by night and many slew.
Their woeful deaths. Italians with the dawn
To storm the town are from their quarters drawn.
The Trojans sally forth; in whose retreat
Turnus engaged is shut within their gate.
Many brave men he kills, then on he goes
Single against whole regiments of foes:
At last leaps ore the wall the river swam,
And off with all his arms in safety came.
WHilst thus affairs in several places went,
Juno to valiant Turnus Iris sent.
Then in the sacred grove by chance he sat,
Was to his sire Pilumnus consecrate.
To whom she thus from rosy lips began.
What no god dares vouchsafe to any man,
(Turnus) behold, at length time freely sends!
Aeneas having left his fleet and friends,
Is to Evanders palace gone: nay more,
Past to the confines of the Tuscane shore;
There arms the Rusticks and the Lydian force.
What doubtst thou? now is the time; raise chariots, horse;
Break all delay, their troubled camp invade.
Thus saying, to heaven she mounts on wings displaid,
And through the great bow midst the clouds she flies.
He knows her, and his hands raised to the skies,
Then with such words persues her as she went.
Iris, heavens glory, who to me has sent
Thee from above? from whence this sudden light?
I see heaven open, and behold the bright
Stars wander round the poles: the signs obeyed,
Who ere thou art, commands to arms. This said,
From crystal streams he water takes, then plies
The Gods with prayers, and loads with vows the skies.
And now they took the field with all their force,
Bravely appointed both in arms and horse.
The Van Messapus, Tyrrheus offspring had
Charge of the Rear, Turnus the Battle led;
And by the shoulders armed he taller shows.
As in seven channels silent Ganges flows
With gentle waves; or when the fat-stream'd Nile
Hides in himself, and leaves the fertile soil.
The Trojan camp a sudden cloud espies
Thick with black dust, and a dark smoke to rise.
Caicus first from high works calls aloud,
What body (sirs) advances in that cloud?
Arm, arm, stand to your arms; ascend the wall:
The foe draws nigh. Then, with great clamor all
The Trojans fill the works and bulwarks manned.
For the most warlike Prince gave this command
At his departing; Whatsoever chance,
Not to give battle, nor to field advance,
But keep their trenches, and their walls maintain.
Therefore though shame or danger do constrain,
They kept their gates obeyng that command;
And armed, on towers the foe expecting stand.
Turnus out-stripping the slow Regiments,
With twenty chosen horse, himself presents
Before the Town, on a brave Thracian born;
His golden helmet crimson plumes adorn.
Then thus he said; Who first will charge the foe?
And as he spoke, did his swift javelin throw
Signal to the fight; and bravely first rides out.
They all obey, and follow with a showt:
Admiring Trojans to such cowardice yield;
That men should fear to fight in open field,
And lie encamped. Vexed he the walls survaies,
And secks to enter by obscurest ways.
As a sly wolf near a full sheep-coat lies,
Suffering both wind and weathers injuries,
Growling till midnight, whilst the tender Lambs
Exercise bleating safe beneath their dams:
He sharp against the absent raves; long want the cause
Of greedy hunger, and blood-thirsty jaws.
So Turnus anger burns, those warlike frames
Viewing, and sorrrw his hard bones inflames,
How to get in, and by what means to train
The Trojans forth, and draw to the open plain
The Fleet which lay close by the Trenches side,
Round with the stream and buswarks fortifide,
He charged, and of his proud mates fire demands;
And fierce, a flaming pine now fills his hands.
Straight they fall on; his presence courage bred;
With black brands all the youth are furnished,
They spoil the hearths; now pitchy vapors rise,
And Vulcan mixed with smoke, ascends the skies.
What god, O Muse, could make such flames retire?
And save the Trojan fleet from cruel fire?
Though old the fact, yet lasting is the fame.
When first Aenaeas did in Ida frame
His fleet, and rig'd to sail the mighty seas.
Cybele mother of the Deities
Bespake great Jove. Dear son, thy ear incline
To thy loved mothers suit, since heaven is thine.
I many years did love a piney wood,
There I had rites, there my high temple stood,
Dark with black fir-trees, and a maple shade.
These, when the Dardan prince his navy made,
I freely gave. Now fear me much molests.
To ease sad care, thy mother this requests:
Let them no voyage craze, nor storm orerhrow;
This grant, because they on our hills did grow.
Then spoke her son, who rules the worlds bright fires,
Mother, why tempt'st thou fate? what is thy desire?
Shall ships by mortals built, immortal be?
And shall Aeneas safe all dangers see?
Is such power given to any deity?
But when their voyage ends, they anchor'dly
On Latian shores: What ships escape the main,
And set the Dardan on the Ausonian plain;
Their mortal form I Will change; of the great sea
Goddesses make, as Doto, Galate,
Who foaming Pontus with their breasts divide.
This by the Stygian streams he ratifide,
Banks full of sulphur, and the horrid lakes,
Then with his nod he all Olympus shakes.
The promised day was come, times due by fate
Were full; when much incensed by Turnus hate
Cybele saved from fire the sacred pines.
Here in their eyes a wondrous light first shines,
And from the East a cloud was seen to fly.
Idaeans dance: words dreadful from the sky
Amazed the Trojans, and Rutilian bands:
Fear not, O Trojans, neither arm your hands
To save my fleet: Turnus shall burn the sea,
Before these sacred vessels. Go, be free,
And Sea-nymphs go; Cybele bids. They tore
Their anchorge then, and sudden launched from shore,
And with their beaks like Dolphins duck (most strange)
Dive to the bottom, and to Virgins change.
As many brazen prowes at shore did ride,
So many beauties to the Ocean glide.
All wonder fierce Messapus is dismayed,
His horse disordered, and swift Tyber staid
Murmuring hoarse things, his foot from sea retreats.
But not bold Turnus confidence abates:
He cheers, now chides, then thus his men upbraids;
This th'eatens them, Jove now withdraws all aids.
Nor dare they Rutile sword nor fire abide;
And now the Ocean is to them denide;
No hope of flight, that part of help is lost,
We have the land, such thousands in our host
Of Latium armed; nor me those oracles daunt,
If for themselves the Phrygians any vaunt;
Enough for Venus fate, rich Italy
That they have touched; and there are fates for me,
This wicked nation to cut off with steel,
Robbed of my wife; nor do the Atrid's feel
Alone this grief, nor may Greece only arm.
It might suffice once to have fallen, to harm:
Once was enough, all women then to hate.
Whom these slight works, and this entrenched gate
Grant small delays t'assured funerals.
Have they not seen in flames the Trojan walls
To lie, which Neptune which his hands did rear?
But valiant youth, who will with me appear
To force the trench, and trembling can ps t'invade.
Vulcanian arms, a thousand ships for aid
We need not have: let all the Hetrurians come.
Nor the dull theft of the Palladium
They shall not fear, the high towrs warder's slain;
Nor shall a horse dark belly us contain.
Their walls by day I will with fire surround,
I Will make them know not Argives they have found,
Young Greeks, whom Hector did ten years prevent.
But since the best part of the day is spent;
What now remains, all things being carried right,
But to refresh, and then expect to fight?
Mean while to guard the ports, and fire prepare,
To round the walls, was bold Messapus care.
Twice seven Rutilian Captains chosen, then
To keep the works; each led a thousand men,
Who did with crests of gold, and purple shine.
They scout, and watch by turns: on grass, rich wine
Freely they drink, at fires full goblets they
Exhausted turn, the watch consume with play
The restless night.
All which the Trojans from their towers descride,
And struck with fear, from port to port they ride,
And armed, they bridges and strong bulworks join;
Mnestheus, Serestus, hastening the design,
Whom Prince Aeneas, should there danger fall,
Prime Leaders made, and gave the charge of all.
The squadrons watch, the danger they divide,
And take their turns, Each man his place supplide.
The gate was Nisus charge, Hyrtacus son;
Whom th'huntresse Ida sent companion
With great Aeneas, one most fierce in war,
Who well could shoot, as well could cast his spear.
Euryalus joynd; for comeliness and grace
None was his equal amongst the Trojan race,
Nor better arms became; now first was seen
Soft down to spread upon his youthful chin.
One wa their love, at once they charged in war;
And now to guard the port, their common care.
When Nisus said; Does God our mind inspire,
Or makes each man a god of's own desire?
What ere it is, I cannot to rest incline,
My genius prompts me to some great design.
See thou the Rutils how secure they lie,
Buried in sleep, and wine? few lights we spy,
All silent are. Therefore receive my mind
And resolution that I have designed.
The Peers and People would recall the Prince,
And want now Spies to bring intelligence.
If what I ask, they shall confer on thee,
(Fame of th'exploit enough shall honor me)
Under that brow I think I have espide
A pass, that will to Palanteum guide.
Euryalus struck with mighty love of praise,
Then to his earnest friend thus briefly says.
In so great danger do thou me decline,
Alone thy self engage in this design?
Have I with thee so ill my self behaved,
Serving our King, when seas and tempests raved?
Here is a soul, that values not to live;
And life, to purchase so much fame, would give.
Of thee I never harbored such a thought,
O my dear friend, said Nisus then; Nor ought.
No, as I hope great Jove will safely me
Or other favoring gods, bring back to thee.
But if (for such attempts great dangers wait)
That I miscarry by mischance or fate,
Thee I Would have live; of life thou worthier art,
That to my ransomed corpse thou might impart
Accustomed earth; which if my chance denies,
Yet grant my shade a tomb and obsequies:
Lest to thy mother I the cause should be
Of so much grief, who only followed thee,
Nor great Acestes walls could her detain.
But he. Thou weak excuses fram'st in vain,
I fully am resolved; come, let us dispatch.
This having said, strait he relieves the watch:
All things in order, Sentinels being placed,
He to Ascanius did with Nisus haste.
Now through the world all creatures sleep possessed,
Easing their cares, their hearts from labor rest.
Prime Trojan Captains, and choice youth repairs
To hold a Council of their State affairs,
What they should do; whom to Aeneas send.
Amidst the camp they on long javelins leaned,
Bearing their shields. Nisus, Euryalus, crave
Without delay, they might admittance have:
Demurres in great affairs most dangerous are.
The Prince bids Nisus first their minds declare.
With thoughts unbiased hear you Trojan Peers,
Neither prejudge the matter by our years.
In wine and sleep Rutilians buried lie;
For we our selves now did a way descrie,
Parts near the gate, which next the ocean lies.
Their fires wax dim, black smok ascends the skies.
If now our fortune you will to us permit,
Aeneas sought, at King Evanders seat,
With mighty slaughter and huge spoil you may
Shortly behold: nor can we miss our way;
We daily hunting in dark vales below,
Have seen the town, and the whole river know.
Then old Alethes said, You deities
In whose protection always Ilium lies;
Not us t'extirp you utterly intend,
When to our youth you such true valor send.
Thus having said, he with a strict embrace
Infolds them both, whilst tears bedew his face.
To you for such attempts, what can we give?
What shall I judge a worthy donative?
Heaven and your merits first, shall grant the best;
Pious Aeneas next, shall pay the rest:
Nor yet Ascanius in his flourishing state
Such your deservings ever shall forget.
Nisus, but I ( Ascanius then replies)
Whose only safety in my father lies,
Thee by Asaracus deities desire,
And Trojan Gods, and Vesta's sacred fire;
Whatere my fortune or my counsels are,
I cast my self and them upon your care.
Recall my father, let me see his face,
And woe shall vanish in his dear embrace.
Two silver bowls I Will give, richly ingrav'd,
Which from Arisba's sack my father saved:
Two triphos, two great talents of pure gold,
And Dido's gift, a cup of ancient mould.
But if we Latium win, and these realms sway,
If it shall chance we conquerours share the prey.
Have thou brave Turnus horse and arms beheld
In which he prides? his bloody plumes and shield
Shall not be shared; now Nisus, they are thine:
Besides, my father shall twelve Ladies join,
As many captive Lords complete in arms,
With all Latina's manours, parks, and farms.
But thee, whose age mine in a nearer space
Persues, brave youth. I take in full embrace:
Thou in all fortunes my companion be;
My deeds shall seek no glory wanting thee;
In peace or war, my actions and advice
Thou most shall sway. Euryalus replies,
For any bold employment no time shall
Prove me unfit, what chance soever fall.
But above all, one thing of thee I crave;
I of King Priams stock a mother have,
Whom (best of Parents!) Troy could not recall
From following me, nor King Acestes wall.
Her, unacquainted with the dangers, I
Now unsaluted leave: Night testify,
And thy right hand, her tears I could not brook.
But thee, I pray, now help her, thus forsook:
Assure me this, and I shall bolder go
Against all chance. Then from the Trojans flow
Rivers of tears: the Prince most grief expressed,
And now his fathers love affects his breast.
And thus he said --
Worthy this great design, I all things grant:
For she shall be my mother, only want
Creusas name: nor is her honor small,
That she bore thee, whatever chance befall.
Now by this head, by which my father swore,
What was my grant, if fortune thee restore
To us in safety, I Will thy friends afford.
Weeping he said; and straight casts off his sword,
Which with admired art Lycaon made,
And with an ivory sheath adorned the blade.
A lions skin Mnestheus on Nisus pressed,
And good Alethes changed with him his crest.
Now armed they march: as to the gates they bend,
Both young and old with vows and prayers attend.
And fair Ascanius, who above his age
In manly care and courage did engage,
Many commands charged them to's father bear,
Which vanished and flew in empty air.
They pass the trench; through gloomy night they go
To the enemies camp, with a great overthrow:
Buried in wine and sleep the guards they spy,
And all along the shore their wagons lie;
Men amongst arms, wheels, reins and goblets laid,
Spread on the grass: When thus bold Nisus said.
Now let us use our arms, the occasion calls,
This is the path: But thou, lest any falls
Upon our rear, watch, and behind survay;
These I Will destroy, and make thee open way.
This said, he silent to proud Rhamnes went,
Who then by chance slept in his lofty tent,
And with loud snoring did his bosom move,
A King, and Prophet, Turnus most did love.
But by his skill he could not death evade:
Three of his train he slew amongst weapons laid,
And Rhemus squire: his charioteer he found
Amongst the horse, and pined him to the ground;
Then heads their Lord, and weltring in his blood
Forsakes the panting corpse; a purple flood
Besmears the earth, and bed. Next Lamyrus slew
With Lamus, and sprightly Serranus, who
Most beauteous was; he all that night had played,
And vanquished now in wine and sleep is laid.
Happy if he had equaliz'd his play
Unto that night, and gam'd it out till day.
As when a hungry Lion fierce invades
A flock of sheep, (dire famine much persuades)
He the poor innocent beast struck dumb with fears,
Growling with bloody jaws, devours and tears.
Slaughter no less Euryalus did inflame,
And many then he slew without a name.
Fadus, Hebesus Abaris he killed,
And Rhetus, who awake all this beheld,
He frighted, under a huge charger hid:
In open breast up to the hilts he did
Sheath his bright sword, then drew it stained with blood;
Dying, his soul he vomits with a flood
Of wine and gore commix'd. Then on he went
And to Messapus quarters, raging, bent:
Where now their fires almost consumed he spied,
Their horses feeding, as the manner, tied.
Then Nisus briefly said, Let us be gone,
(Seeing him drawn with love of slaughter on;)
For th'envious dawn appears: let this suffice,
Our way is made now through the enemies.
Nor arms of beaten silver they did mind,
Rich hangings, massy plates they leave behind.
Rhamnes rich trappings, and his girts of gold,
(Which Cedicus sent to Remulus of old;
When with that present he a league conjoined;
This dying, to his nephew he assigned.
After by war Rutilians made their prize.)
Euryalus seized, and on his shoulder ties,
Claps on Messapus helm, with plumes displaid;
Then left the camp, and through them safe way made.
Mean while, some horse came from Latinus seat,
Whilst the whole Legion stood, drawn up complete,
To bring King Turnus some advertisement,
Three hundred shield-men under Volscens sent.
And now the approach the camp, the trench drew nigh,
When far off these they on the left hand spy:
Euryalus helm through shades of gloomy night
Did him betray, reflecting back the light.
Not vainly seen, cries Volscens from the band,
Stand, Who goes there? why armed? your business? stand.
They answer not again, but hasten flight
Amongst the woods, and trust themselves to night.
The horse beset the paths, all parts surround,
And with a guard the several passes crowned.
There was a wood shady with sable oak,
Which thick briers did and thorns with brambles choke,
Where a small path led through an obscure way;
The tangling boughs, and burden of his prey
Euryalus stopped, and fear his feet intraps:
Nisus went on, and from the foe escapes,
Past Alban lakes, which are from Alba named,
Where king Latinus his high stables framed.
As for his friend, in vain he looking staid,
Ah poor Euryalus, where art thou? he said;
How shall I find thee out? Then through the maze
Of the dark wood returns, and thousand ways
Seeks his own steps, and roves through silent briers.
Noise, horse, and sounding trumpets straight he hears,
And sudden the huge clamor understands,
And saw Euryalus, whom all the bands
With disadvantage of the night and lane
Had round beset, much striving, but in vain.
What shall he do? what arms, what forces try
To rescue him? should he, resolved to die
Charge midst his foes, and for brave death advance?
Then straight, as he his arm raised with his lance,
To the high moon, he prayed: Assist me now
Great goddess, glory of the stars, and thou,
Great Queen of all the groves and forests, aid.
If ere for me my father presents paid
At thy blessed altars; or if ever I
From my own hunting did with gifts supply,
Or graced thy shield, or sacred pillars decked:
Grant that I rout this troop, my spear direct.
This said, with his whole strength a lance he cast,
Through shady night the flying javelin past,
And piercing Sulmons back, the staff there broke,
Yet through his bowels glides the knotty oak.
From's breast a warm stream vomiting, he fell,
And short breath panting, makes his bosom swell.
All look about: he takes another spear,
Cheered with success, and poised it at his ear.
Whilst they are amazed, through Tagus brows and arms
Singing it flew, and in his hot brain warms.
Fierce Volscens raged, nor any he espide
Which threw the spear, nor knew which way to ride.
But thou, for both shall with warm blood afford
Me satisfaction, first. This said, his sword
He drew, and at Euryalus raging flies.
But then aloud affrighted Nisus cries,
Nor longer could conceal, nor such grief bear.
At me, me; I, who did the fact am here;
At me convert your steel, Rutilians bold,
The fraud is mine; he neither durst, nor could;
This heaven, these conscious stars shall witness such:
He only loved his hapless friend too much.
Such things he said; but the drawn sword his chest,
With violence pierced, and tore his snowie breast.
Dead he sinks down; blood through his fair limbs sprung,
And his neck falling, on his shoulders hung:
As when a purple flowr cut by the plow
Langueshing dies; or heads of Poppie bow
Their weary necks, oppressed with showrs that fall.
But in bold Nisus charged, Volscens through all
Alone he seeks, only at Volscens made;
Though round about, him enemies invade,
Wheeling his sword, no slower he rushed on,
Till in the mouth of the Rutilian
He buried it, and dying kills his foe:
Then wounded on his friend himself did throw,
And there at last in quiet death did rest.
You, if my verse have power, be ever blessed,
No age shall you forget whilst Trojans shall
Plant the fixd Rock, of the high Capitol,
Or Roman Fathers shall the Empire sway.
But the Rutilian conquerours share the prey,
And weeping to the Camp dead Volscens bear.
Nor was less grief, Rhamnes found slaughterd there,
So many in one massackre, prime men
Serranus, Numa; mighty concourse then
Visit the corpse, some not quite dead; they flore
Fresh slaughter warmed, and full streams fresh with gore,
Messapus spoils they know and glittering caske,
And reins recovered by so hard a task.
And here Aurora with new light had spread
The earth, leaving Tithonius saffron bed;
Now when the Sun had showed the world again,
Armed Turnus forth did his armed soldiers train,
And all the Iron rancks in order sets;
Each man his wrath with various rumors whets,
When Nisus and Euryalus heads they bring,
Fixed on tall spears, and with loud clamouring
(A woeful sight) came on
The valiant Trojans the left hand made good,
The right side was secured with the flood.
They mighty trenches manned with all their powers,
And sad they stood upon their lofty towers,
When well known heads they saw, to increase the more
Their swelling grief, flowing with purple-gore.
Whilst through the fearful town flew swift-wing'd fame,
And gliding to Euryalus mother came,
Which from the wretch did straight all heat compel;
Her yarn she tumbles down, her spindle fell:
Out then with female cries, tearing her hair
Distract she runs, and did to the works repair:
Danger of men and weapons she defies,
Where thus with loud complaints she fills the skies.
Thus view I thee, Euryalus? art thou he
That should support my age? thus leavst thou me?
Nor to thy mother grant'st one complement,
Before thou wast to such great dangers sent?
Ah thou art left to dogs and birds a prey
In a strange land; nor does thy mother pay
Thee funeral rites, nor close thine eyes, nor lave
Thy wounds, nor cover with the vest I have
Working both night and day hastened for thee,
Which task in my old age did comfort me.
Where shall I seek thee? in what coast remains
Thy mangled limbs? what land thy corpse contains?
This the returns for all my love, dear son?
For this have I by land and sea thus gone?
Kill me, Rutilians, if you pity have,
Dart all at me, and give me first a grave!
Or thou great Jove thy self in mercy show,
O father! this my body, hateful now,
Unto the Stygian shade with thunder send,
Since else my woeful life I cannot end.
This pierced their souls, a sad groan past through all:
Their courages in war undaunted, fall.
Idaeus and sad Actor, by command
Of Ilioneus, whilst she thus complained,
Moved with Ascanius tears, lead her away
By either arm, and to her house convay.
But now from far loud trumpets terrify,
Followed with shouts, which echo from the sky.
The Volsceans haste, and straight a Testude form,
Trenches to fill prepare, and works to storm;
Some entrance seek, and strive to scale the wall
Where men stood thinnest, and the guards but small.
Trojans on them all sorts of weapons throw,
And with sharp-pointed spears repel the foe,
Trained by long war a city to defend,
Huge rocks and mighty milstones down they lend
To break their fence-work, under which they slight
All chances, and in danger take delight.
Which now not serves; for where they thickest drew,
On them a mighty heap the Trojans threw,
Which beat the Rutils down, their shield-work broke.
Nor more the hardy Volsceans undertook
T'assault with engines, but by open force
To drive them from their works:
On the other side dreadful Mizentius came,
Brandishing fire, and casts in pitchy flame.
Messapus that brave horsman, Neptunes race,
Past trenches, and did scaling ladders place.
O thou Caliope, inspire my verse
Slaughters to sing, and funerals to rehearse
Which Turnus made! whom, each man sent to hell.
With me that wars great circumstances tell,
For this you know, and to relate have power.
With transomes vast in prospect was a tower,
A place of strength, against which the Italians join
Their force: this to orethrow, their chief design.
With stones the Trojans in great flocks defend,
And from their loop-holes deadly weapons send.
A brand Prince Turnus cast, and blazing flame
Fixed to the work; which, with the wind, the frame
Suddenly seized, on burning posts fast stuck.
Amazed, within all shake; and whilst they flock
Contriving to escape, and make retreit
Where was no fire; the tower with mighty weight
Suddenly fell, heaven thunders with the sound.
Half dead with the vast load, they come to ground,
With their own weapons hurt; that cruel steel
Did guard their breasts, they in their bosoms feel.
Hardly escaped Lycas and Helenor,
Helenor the eldest, whom Lycimnia bore,
Bondslave to the Maeoanian King did rear,
And sent to Troy unlawful arms to bear,
With a white shield, and sword inglorious yet.
He, when he saw himself with troops beset,
And Latin bands on every side he found,
Like a wild beast which hunters do surround,
Runs on the weapons, and resolved to die
Leaps through the toils upon the enemy.
So charged the desperate youth upon his foes,
And where he saw the thickest squadron, goes.
Lycas much swifter through the enemies
And through their arms to the high bulwark flies;
Then strives the tops of the tall works to reach,
Endeavoring his friends right hands to catch.
Whom Turnus follows with as swift a course,
And thus bespeaks: Fond, could thou hope our force
Thus to escape? This said, him hanging caught,
And down with great part of the bulwark brought.
A silver swan, or hare Joves eagle bear;
So through the sky, trust in his hooked sears,
Or Marses wolf takes from the flock a lamb,
Sought with much bleating of the mourning damme.
They shout, they storm, to fill the trenches haste,
And fireworks to the lofty bulwarks cast.
Ilioneus with a stone, part of a hill,
Firing the gates, did bold Lucetius kill.
Lyger, Emathion; Asylas did orethrow
Chorinaeus; This the dart used, that the bow.
Caeneus, Ortygius. Turnus Caenaeus slew,
Dioxe, and Ideas, as they did maintain
Their towers, Privernus was by Capys slain.
This first a slight wound got from Themella's lance;
But he his hand did to the wound advance
Fondly to bind it, when a shaft did glide
On nimble wings, and pined it to his side;
The breathing places of his soul it found,
And panting lungs pierced with a deadly wound.
In arms complete stood Arcens gallant son,
Of Spanish dye a rich coat he had on:
A most fair youth, whom Arcens sent to have
Breeding in Atars his grove near Symeths wave,
Where pleased Palicus smoking altar stands.
Mizentius laying by his arms, commands
A sounding sling; then thrice about his head
He whirls it round, and with the moulten lead
He piere'd his temples through, and from his stand
He lays hun weltring on a bed of sand.
Then first in war Ascanius (as they fame)
A swift-wing'd arrow at the foe did aim:
Before accustomed wild beasts to pursue,
And stout Numanus with his own hand slew,
Styled Rhemulus, who lately did espouse
Turnus young sister, joined to the royal house.
Boasting things fit and unfit to relate;
Before the bands, puffed up with his new state,
He struts, and on with mighty clamor came.
Again, twice captived Phrygians, is it not shame
To be besieged, and keep out death with walls?
Behold, who seek by war our nuptials!
What god, or folly, caused you Latium steer?
Here Is no Atrides, no Ulysses here.
We a hard race, use infants to the stream,
In cruel ice and water harden them.
Our children hunting use, in woods resort
To break wild horse, and shooting is their sport.
Youth in toil patient, and inured to want,
They plow the field; or armed, proud cities daunt.
We spend our age in war, and goad our steers
With our turned javelins: and when struck in years,
Our courage fails not, nor our strength decays;
We crush gray hairs with helms, and still fresh preyes
Delight to take, and live by spoils of war.
You clothed in purple, and in scarlet are,
Are pleased with sloth, in wanton dances pride;
Your coats have hanging sleeves, your myters tide:
True female Phrygians; men you are not: Go
To Dyndimus, whose well-set tunes you know,
Where lutes and harps of Bericynthian I Would
Invites; and let Men war; lay arms aside.
Boasting such things, words of so dire extent
Ascanius not endured: his bow he bent
With a horse nerve; stretching his arms, prepares
Before Jove standing supplyant thus, with prayers,
Great Jupiter, grant my bold enterprise,
I Will to thy fanes bring solemn sacrifice;
And at thy Altars place a snowie steer,
Who lofry crests does like his mother bear;
And buts with horns, his feet the sand does spread.
Jove heard and from the left-side thundered
Through the clear sky; then sounds the deadly bow,
As soon through Rhemulus head the shaft did go,
And the winged steel did through both temples glide;
Go, now, and valor with proud words deride,
Twice captived Phrygians you these answers send,
Ascanius said. Trojans with shouts attend
And loud applause, to heaven their hope advance.
Then bright-hair'd Phoebus from the sky by chance
The City and Ausonian bands survaid
Flac'd in a cloud, and to Ascanius said.
Go with new prowess boy; so climb the stars,
From Gods sprung, Gods to get; it is just all wars
Under Assaracus house by fate should seize;
Nor Troy shall thee contain. As he said these,
He cuts the breathing air, from heaven descends,
And in old Butes form t'Ascanius bends.
Trojan Anchises Squire he was before,
And faithful kept a guard still at his door,
Whom then to wait on's Son, Aeneas sent.
In all points like the old man, Apollo went,
Such his white hair, complexion, and his voice,
And dreadful arms, rattling with mighty noise:
Who thus to fierce Ascanius then began.
Trojan enough! Numanus thou have slain,
To thee Apollo grants thy first desire,
Nor envies equal arms; from fight retire.
Having thus said, from mortal eves he fled,
And far from thence, to thin air vanished.
The God, and heavenly shafts, the Trojans knew,
And saw his sounding quive as he flew.
Straight from the fight Ascanius they convey,
And Phoebus power and his command obey.
But they returue again to charge the foes,
And against all dangers do their lives expose.
Then clamor rounds the walls from tower to tower,
They bend their bows, and clouds of arrows pour.
The earth is strewed with arms, with mighty blows
Helms and Shields rattle: a huge fight arose;
As from moist, Kids when boisterous storms assail
The yieldihg earth, and showrs commix'd with hail
Swell to a flood, the sky with rough winds loud
Drives wintry night, and tears a hollow cloud.
Pandarus and Bitias, both Alcanors seed,
Whom Nymph Hiera in loves wood did breed,
Youths like their contreys fur, and mountains tall,
Open a gate, which to the charge did fall
Of their own chief; these bold in arms did go,
And bravely challenged to the walls their foe;
Within, themselves on either hand they place;
And armed with steel, bright crests their heads did grace.
Such as sky-kissing oaks by twins that grow
Near crystal streams, or pleasant banks of Poe,
Or nigh fair Athesis, to heaven they spread,
And unlop'd boughs shake with a stately head.
Ausonians rush, seeing the open gate,
Bold Quercens then, and fair Equicolus straight
With Martial Haemon charge, and Tmarus stout,
Or with whole squadrons these would face about,
Or in the entrance of the gate expire.
The quarrel heats, and more increased their ire.
There Trojans gather with a mighty shout,
Fight hand to hand, dare sally further out.
A Messenger, whilst valiant Turnus fought
Bravely against other parts, these tidings brought,
Foes fleshed with slaughter open gates afford.
He leaves all business then, with anger stirred
To Dardan gates, and the proud brothers goes.
Antiphates first, (for he did first oppose)
( Sarpedons natural son by a Theban dame)
He with his spear 'orethrew; the javelin came
Through yielding air, and through his intrals glides,
He from the wound a purple river bleeds,
And in his lungs warm grows the sixed steel.
Then he did Merops, Erymanthus kill.
Next, Bitias with fierce eyes, and raging heart,
Not with a spear (he yields not to a dart)
With a huge Phalarick he did assail,
Like lightning sent; neither his trusty mail,
Strengthened with gold, nor two bull hides defend.
The mighty falls, the earth a groan did send:
Above his huge shield rung: As in times past
On the Euboick shores of Baia placed,
A stone pile sinks: which erst with mighty walls
Stood in the Sea, now with a ruin falls,
And in the shoales torn from foundations lies.
Waves mixed with waves, and the deep sands arise;
Then high Phrochyta trembles at the sound,
And the hard bed where Jove Typhaeus bound.
Here bloody Mars, the Ausonians courage stirs,
And in their bosoms strikes his sharpest spurs:
But to the Trojans sends base fear, and flight.
Each where they charge, occasion given to fight,
The God of War inflames their minds.
As Pandarus beheld his brother slain,
And what sad fortune might for him remain,
He straight with mighty strength claps to the gates
With his broad shoulders: many of his mates
Then he shut out, and in hard conflict leaves,
But many others rushing in, receivs:
Who fond then saw not; urnus in the troop
Boldly break in, and willingly shut up,
Like a huge Tiger amongst tame cattle found.
His eyes seem fierce, his dreadful arms resound:
And on his crest tremble his bloody plumes,
Whilst from his thundering shield, bright lightning comes.
They know his hated face, and Giant size,
Which much th'amaz'd Trojans terrines.
Then up to him straight mighty Pandarus made
And raging for his brothers slaughter said.
This not the royal portion from the Queen
Which you expect, nor are you now within
Ardea, nor your native Country (Prince.)
This the foes camp; nor shall thou 'scape from hence.
Then Turnus smiling, calmly did reply,
If you're so stout, come and your prowess try;
For thou shall tell to Priam underground,
That here a new Achilles thou have found.
He said, whilst Pandarus boldly did advance,
And cast at him a rough and knottie lance;
The air receivs the wound, Juno being there
Turns it, and in the gate she fixed the spear.
But this good sword which in my right hand I
Command with so much strength, thou shall not fly.
Our weapons are not like, nor shall the wound.
Then with his sword raising himself from ground,
He with a mighty blow his forehead cleaves,
And on his downy cheeks a huge gash leaves.
Shook with his mighty weight earth did resound,
He stretched his dying limbs upon the ground;
His arms besmeared with brain, his cloven head
On both sides hung, over each shoulder spread.
The Trojans fly, routed with trembling fear;
And if the Conqueror straight had took that care
To Have broke the bars, and let his soldiers in,
To th'war, and nation, that day last had been.
But fury, and mad love of slaughter, him
Drove raging against the foe
And first he Gyges maimed, and Phalaris slew,
And spears from flyers snatched, at them he threw.
For Juno did both strength and courage yield.
Halys he kills, runs Phegeus through his shield.
Alcander, Halias, Noemon, Prytanus slew,
Whilst hot in fight, of this they nothing knew.
And Lynceus, as he charged, and others calls,
With his bright sword surpised them on the walls:
Whose head and healmet cut off at one blow,
Tumbles far off. Amycus, then a foe
To savage beasts; none better could anoint
Weapons then he, with poison arm the point.
Clitius and Creteus next, the Muses friend,
Creteus that loved the Muses, verses penned;
Pleased with the Lyre, he numbers set to strings,
And still of horse, and arms, and battles sings.
At last the Trojan leaders at the fame
Of this great slaughter, in to rescue came;
And up with Mnestheus bold Serestus bends,
They saw the foe, and their amazed friends.
When Mnestheus said, Where fly you? where do you go?
What other strength or bulwarks do you know?
Shall one man, sirs, and round enclosed with walls,
Escape, and make so many funerals,
And such great numbers of prime men destroy?
Base cowards! Of your selves, and hapless Troy
Have you no pity? blush you not with shame
For your old gods, and great Aeneas fame?
With words like these encouraged, boldly then
In a thick body they drew up again.
But Turnus by degrees retreats from them,
Toth' river and those parts lay near the stream.
At which more fierce the Trojans with a shout
Press boldly on, and gather round about:
As when a troop a Lion has beset
With cruel spears, he makes a brave retreit,
Although forbid by valor and by rage,
Nor can, though willing, against such power engage.
So unresolved, bold Turnus did retire,
Whilst in his bosom boyls a flood of ire.
Yet twice, where foes were thickest, on he falls,
And twice he drove that party from the walls.
When from the Camp, in a full body made
Against one, the whole army drew; nor longer aid
To Oppose such forces, Juno durst supply.
For Jove had sent bright Iris from the sky,
Who to Saturnia carried strict commands
That Turnus should escape the Trojan bands.
Therefore his shield and strength too weak he found,
Orewhelm'd with darts, with showers of arrows drowned;
His hollow cask which armed his temples, groans,
And solid brass gives way to battering stones:
His plumes are beaten off, nor does his targe
Sustain the blows, nor thundering Mnestheus charge;
Whilst thick their javelins a whole army throws,
No intermission: then a salt sweat flows
Ore all his limbs, and a black river glides,
And faint short-breathing shakes his ample sides.
At last with all his arms a leap he gave
Into the stream, which on his silver wave
Received him, and on yielding billows bore
From slaughter cleans'd, to's friends on the other shore.
THE TENTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jove calls a Council, and declares the fates:
Venus complains: Juno recriminates.
Aeneas, Tarchon, and the Tyrrhens joined,
Their men aboard, they sail with prosperous wind.
The martial List. Ships turned to Nymphs appear,
And sad Aeneas with their counsel cheer.
Landed, they fight; the Plain huge slaughter fills.
Aeneas, Lausus; Turnus, Pallas kills.
Shaped like Aeneas, a fantastic shade
Turnus provokes, and thence to sea convaide.
Mizentius, to revenge his son, again
Entering the fight, is by Aeneas slain.
MEan while heavens mighty courts are open, when
The father of the gods, and king of men
A counsel calls: from starry thrones, all lands
He views, the Dardan camps, and Latian bands.
And thus, all placed, he said: You deities,
Wherefore so often change you your decrees?
And why in sharp debates ars you thus hot?
Latium to war with Troy, granted not.
Why this unlawful strife? what jealousies made
Or these, or them take arms, to fight persuade?
Just time of war (nor hasten it) shall come,
When cruel Carthage to the towers of Rome
Through open Alps shall great destruction send.
Then may they all things spoil, with hate contend;
But now desist, and make a happy peace.
Jove brief; but beauteous Venus answered these
At large. --
Father, of men and gods eternal king,
(For to none else may we petitions bring)
Thou see how Rutils boast, and Turnus rides
Triumphing through the bands, who bold now prides
In wars success; nor Trojans walls defend,
But they within their gates and works contend,
With blood their trenches flow, and now their Prince
Aeneas absent, wants intelligence.
Must we be still besieged? must we again
The walls of rising Troy against foes maintain?
More armies yet? shall once more Diomed
Against the Dardans his Aeolians lead?
Then I new wounds, as I suppose, must feel,
And I thy race, be pierced with mortal steel.
If Trojans, without leave, for Latium made,
Let them be punished, neither grant them aid:
But if they all those Oracles obey
Which Gods and Manes gave, who thy decree
Can alter then? or why new fates ordain?
Of our fired Navy why should I complain?
Nor of the King of tempests, and those loud
Storms which he raised, nor Iris from a cloud.
And now the fiends (which only were untride
Of all the world) she raises to her side,
And straight Alecto sent from Stygian waves:
Who now through all the Ausonian Cities raves.
Nor am I moved for realms; whilst fortune stood
We hoped; let them now conquer thou think good.
If no land thy stern wife grants them t'injoy;
By smokie ruins of consumed Troy,
Father, I thee beseech; from arms detain
Ascanius safe, preserved, let him remain.
Aeneas may be tossed through unknown seas,
And whatsoever course fortune shall please
He may pursue; Let me but save the boy,
Ah let not cruel war the child destroy.
Mine lorty Paphos, mine Amathus is,
Cytherum and Idalian Palaces;
Let him unexercis'd in cruel strife
Of dreadful war, there finish quiet life;
Command aspiring Carthage then to lay
Huge taxes on subdued Ausonia,
And Tyrian Towrs that nothing shall debar.
What helped it us to 'scape from cruel war?
To fly through Grecian fire, and to exhaust
All dangers of the sea and countries vast,
Whilst Trojans for new Troy and Latium stand.
We'had better built, on ashes of our land,
Dwelt where Troy stood. Xanthus and Simois grant,
And that again we Il^um may replant.
Highly incensed then Royal Juno spoke;
Why make thou me deep silence thus to break,
And in this place our hidden grief declare?
What God or man Aeneas forced to war?
Or to the king Latinus made a foe?
Fate him to Italy sent; then be it so.
Drove by Cassandra's rage, have we enjoined
Him to set sail, and venture iife to wind?
Or trust a boy with conduct in the war?
Or Tyrrhen faith, or realms in peace to stir?
What power of mine betrayed him, or what god?
Where Is Juno here, or Iris from a cloud?
It is unjust Italians should surround
Troy with a leaguer, and on native ground
Turnus should stand, the great Pilumnus heir,
Whom bright Venilia the blessed goddess bare.
Shall Trojans thus with fire and sword pursue,
Take spoils, and lawless others land subdue;
Match where they please, rob husbands of their bride;
Make show of peace, and yet for war provide?
Thou could from Grecian troops thy son regain;
Place empty clouds, and shadows for the man:
Thou could to Nymphs the Trojan Navy change:
But if we help the Rutils, this seems strange.
Aeneas absent, wants intelligence;
And absent let him: thou for thy defense
Idalium, high Cytherum have: why then
Tempst thou seats big with war and valiant men?
Did we declining Phrygia's realm destroy?
Or they who moved the Greeks to war with Troy?
What did to arms Europe and Asia stir,
And to break peace by rape? The Adulterer
Did he take Sparta by our conduct led?
Did I give arms, or war with foul lust fed?
Thou should have then been careful; now complaints
Are but in vain falsely thou me attainst.
Thus Juno pleads, and all the gods a noise
With votes divided made; as when winds rise,
And stopped by woods, a sudden mutmur send,
Which does a storm to marmers portend.
Then mighty Jove began who governs all,
Silence imposd through the Olympic Hall.
Earth to the Center shook, Heaven at a stand,
The winds were laid, seas smooth as champaign land;
Careful attend my words; and bear in mind.
Since these two nations cannot be conjoined,
And your divisions never will have end:
What hope or fortune does on each attend?
Twixt Trojans, Rutils, I Will no difference make.
This Siege by fate, if Latins undertake,
Or else by Troys ill conduct or advice:
Let each the chance of his own enterprise
And danger bear: Jove's the same King to all,
The fates will make their way whatever fall.
This by his brothers streams he ratifide,
Which round about the infernal kingdom glide,
Banks full of sulphur, and the horrid lakes,
And with his nod he all Olymus shakes.
Then from his golden throne great Jove did rise,
Attended to his Court by deities.
Mean while the Rutils with great clamor came,
Close to the gates, and hemmed the walls with flame;
But in their trenches kept the Trojan band,
No hope to 'scape, sad on high towrs they stand;
To man their works but slender guards they place,
Iasius, Thymetes, bold Hicetons race,
With Castor, the Assaraci and Tybris stood,
With them two brothers of Sarpedons blood,
Who them accompaned from the Lycian shore.
Acmon with all his strength a huge stone bore,
A mountains greatest part, who in the wars
No less then is father, or his brother dares;
Some Javelins cast, and others stones did throw;
And these did wildfire hurl, or use their bow,
Behold Ascanius, Venus chiefest care,
Amidst the thickest, with his Temples bare.
So shines a jewel set in purest gold,
Made to adorn the head, or neck infold,
Such luster ivory does to box impart;
Or to Orician brazill wrought by art.
His snowie neck, his flowing hair receives:
And purest gold his tresses interweaves.
Aiming thy shafts, and poisoning darts, the bold,
Nations did thee, brave Ismarus, behold,
In Lybia born, where men plow fertile lands,
And rich Pactolus rowls his golden sands.
And Mnestheus present was, whose late success,
When from the walls he Turnus did repress,
Him honor gave; and Capys of great fame,
From whom Campania does derive her name.
Whilst thus they were engaged in cruel fight;
Aeneas sails through the dark seas by night.
As soon as he to the Etrurian army came,
He'acquaints the General with his stock and name,
What aids he needs, and what he has declares:
And what great force Mizentius prepares:
And shows how fury Turnus does incense,
In humane greatness what small confidence
Is to be placed; and humbly help did beg.
Straight Tarchon forces joins, and makes a League;
Then freed by fate the Lydyans haste aboard,
Under the conduct of a foreign Lord.
Aeneas ship the Admiral, sail before,
And in her prow two Phrygian Lions bore.
Ida above which Trojans much old take;
In this Aeneas did his voyage make,
And various chance of war did ruminate;
But on his left hand youthful Pallus sat,
And learns the stars by which through night they stand
Their course, his suffering then by sea and land.
You Muses, now open your sacred spring,
And raise my notes, that I inspired may sing
What bands Aeneas brought from Tuscan shore,
Who manned his ships which him to the ocean bore.
In The brazen Tiger Massicus first stands,
From Clusus he a thousand youth commands;
Who Cosas left, these darts and javelins throw,
And bear light quivers with a deadly bow;
Fierce Abas next, with complete armed bands,
On's stern in gold shining Apollo stands.
His mother Populonia did present
Six hundred expert; and three, Ilva sent.
The I Will for inexhausted mines preferred.
Asylas, gods interpreter, was third,
Whom smoking entrails, and the stars obeyed;
He tongues of birds, presaging thunder swayed;
A thousand he did with sharp spears convey,
Whom Latian Pisa that they should obey
Gave strict command; and joined in covenant,
Who in the Ceres dwell, and those who plant
By Minio's streams, them from old Pyrgians were,
And from Gravisca of intemperate air.
Cycnus that bold Lygurian, neither you
Cupavo I Will orepasse, who led but few:
A swans bright plume did from his crest advance,
Of his transformed sire the cognizance.
Love was your only crime: for, as it is said,
Whilst Cycnus mourning in his sisters shade
For his dear Phaeton, in the poplar grove,
And with his sweet Muse comforts his sad love,
His hoary hair into soft feathers grew,
Then mounting to the stars he singing flew.
His son accompanied with equal bands,
Rows the great Centaure; she through billows stands
Threatening the waves, tall like a mighty hill,
And the deep ocean plowes with her long keel.
Ornus a band raised from his fathers shore,
Prophetic Manto him to Tyber bore,
Who gave to Mantua walls, and's mothers name:
Mantua high-stock'd, but not from one race came:
A triple kind, four tribes in each of them;
But this the head, and strength of the Tusoan stem.
Hence came five hundred, which Mizentius deeds
Armed against himself, whom Mincius crowned with reeds
Brought down from ancient Benachus, the brine
They boldly plow in a most warlike pine.
A hundred oars with bold Auletes come,
Who sweep the waves, and make the billows foam.
This mighty Triton bore, frighting the tides
With his shrill trump, his face and hairy sides
Above presents a man, a whale the rest,
And fomy waves resound beneath his breast.
In thrice ten ships as many Leaders go
Troy to relieve; and the salt ocean plow.
Now day had heaven forsaken, and the bright
Moons black chariot scales Olympus height.
The Prince, (for no rest grants his troubled mind)
Sits at the helm, and swells the sails with wind.
But then, behold! amidst his voyage, bends
To him a train of Nymphs, his ancient friends;
Whom blessed Cybelle bid to rule the seas,
And had from ships transformed to goddesses.
They swam together, and the waves divide;
As many ships did once at anchor ride:
They knew their King, and round about him dance.
Cymodocea, of best utterance,
Seized with her right his stern, her left hand laves
(Raising her self from sea) the silent waves,
And thus she spoke: Sleepst thou, O goddess son?
Awake, great Prince, and clap more canvase on.
We are those pines which once crowned sacred I Would,
Thy Fleet, now changed to Nymphs: when terrifide
With Turnus, threatening sword and fire then we
Our cables broke, and through the sea sought thee:
Cybelle pitying us, this form did give,
Sea-Nymphs to be, and under waves to live.
Put young Ascanius is beleaguered round
With arms, and Latins ever warlike found;
And now the Arcadian horse join with the bold
Hetrurians, and allotted quarters hold:
To send a party, 's Turnus main design
To keep the pass; lest both their forces join.
Rise, and command thy friends with early dawn,
To arm themselves, and brace thy target on
Which Vulcan gave thee, and th'unconquer'd shield
Did with pure gold on the large border gild.
Next day, if thou conceive my words not vain,
Thou shall behold huge heaps of Rutils slain.
This said, she takes her leave, and as she dives
Her skillful hand, the lusty vessel drives.
Swift as a dart through billows flies the ship,
Or winged shafts that nimble winds outstrip.
So the whole fleet divide the briney seas,
This, much amazed great Anchisiades,
But yet the omen did his spirits raise:
Then freely viewing heavens mighty unequal, prays,
Mother of gods, thou who in Dyndimus prid'st,
And towre-crown'd cities, and with lions rid'st:
O guide me in the fight! Dear goddess, be
Near with protection, and blessed augurie!
Whilst thus he prayed, Aurora with new light
Led on the day, and darkness put to flight.
First he commands that they should all appear,
Refresh their spirits, and for fight prepare.
And now his Dardan city he beheld,
Then from the stern he shows his glittering shield,
At which a Trojan shout mounts to the stars;
And hope thus added, more their fury spurs.
Then thick they javelins cast: Cranes, not so loud
Extend their voices from a gloomy cloud
When they with clamor cut the yielding sky,
And from a threatened tempest sounding fly.
But the Rutilian King, and all the bold
Ausonian chiefs with wonder did behold,
Till they to shore saw the tall Navy stood,
And winged vessels hide the ample flood.
His crest now burns, flames from his plumes aspire,
And Turnus golden helm did shine with fire.
As in moist night, a blazing Comet streams
With bloody omens red, and Syrius beams
Brings to sad mortals sicknesses and thirst,
And heaven in mourning hangs, with influence cursed.
But nothing daunts bold Turnus confidence
To march to shore, and drive th'adventurers thence;
And thus, with words did sleeping valor rouse.
You have obtained what long you sought with vows,
And now you have it in your power to fight;
Then let your wives and fortunes you excite!
Your fathers facts and fame to memory call;
Let Us sudden charge, and on them bravely fall,
Whilst now they landing reel, with staggering feet.
Fortune assists the bold.
This said, he casts what forces out to lead,
And whom to trust with walls beleaguered.
Me while Aeneas laders for his men
Placed from the lofty ships: but many then
Observed when waves retreated from the shores,
Then leap to land; but others trust their ores.
Tarchon supposing he a coast had found
Where was no shoal, nor broke waves did resound,
But a calm water with a swelling tide.
Thither he turns, and to his men thus cryde.
Now lusty youth, now to your tackling stand;
Drive in the ship, and strike that enemy land;
And let the keel in its own furrow sit;
To gain that landing, I Will my vessel split.
This said, at once all stoutly ply their ores,
And brought their foaming ships to Latin shores,
Until their fleet safe on dry ground did stand,
And without harm the whole navy came to land.
But thy ship Tarchon did not save her self,
For whilst it hung upon a spightful shelf,
Beaten with billows, it was bilg'd at last,
And all her Soldiers in the Ocean cast;
Whilst Plancks and broken ores did hinder them,
And drew their sliding feet back with the stream.
Nor Turnus used delay, but all his bands
Against Trojans draws, and on the shore he stands,
They sound a charge; and first Aeneas sets
On rustic bands, and a good sign, defeats
A Latin squadron, and bold Thero slew,
Who at Aeneas desperately flew;
Quite through his golden mail, and brazen targe,
His sword in's bosom found a passage large.
Then Lycas ripped from's mothers belly killed,
Sacred to thee O Phoebus, though a child,
He steel escaped: not far from thence orethrows
Stern Cysseus and huge Gyas, dealing blows
With knottie clubs; nor could Alcides arms
Nor mighty size, nor could in those alarms
Their father help, who Hercules did aid
In all th'adventures which on earth he made.
Behold! whilst Pharon vainly boasts, he cast
A spear, which in's clamouring mouth stuck fast:
And nex'd unhappy Cydon, whilst he seeks
His new love Clytius, fair with downie cheeks
Aeneas slew, and of that love now freed
Youth to him made; thou had lamented died,
But that thy brothers up against him drew,
Seven, Phorcus offspring, who seven javelins threw:
Some harmless, on his shield and helm resound,
Some Venus broke, not suffering to wound.
Then did Aeneas true Achates call,
And said, bring me those darts (nor this hand shall
Spend one against the Rutilie in vain)
Drawn from Greek bodies on the Dardan plain.
This said, he snatched a javelin strong and large,
Which well aimed, pierced through Meons brazen targe,
And through his breast and breast plate passage made.
Alcanor his bold brother giving aid,
Bringing his dying brother of, by chance,
Through th'arm sustained him flies the winged lance,
And sticking in the wound with blood was did:
His hand, with slack nerves hanging by his side.
From's brothers body Numitor, a lance
Having pulled forth, to Aeneas did advance;
But him it must not wound, the spear past by,
And fixed it self in great Achates thigh.
Here youthful Lausus up a squadron brings,
And a rough javelin at bold Driophes flings;
Under his chin, in's throat fast stuck the lance;
Bereaving him of speech and life at once.
Down on his face he tumbles on the earth;
And a deep sea of purple vomits forth.
Three Thracians next, of Boreas high descent,
And three of Ida's sons, from Ismar sent
By several ways he slew: Hales brings on
Aruncian bands; next charge great Neptune's son
Well horsed Messapus: these get ground, now they,
They fought in th'entrance of Ausonia:
At warring tempests meet, in th'ample skies,
With equal strength, and equal courages;
Nor winds, nor clouds, nor seas give place; in doubt
The battle stands, resolved to fight it out.
So came the Trojans and the Latins on,
Set foot to foot and close up man to man.
But on the other side, where streams had born
Down rolling stones, and shrubs from bancks had torn,
Pallas beheld, the Arcadian horse unskil'd
To fight with foot, to shrink, and leave the field,
Whom disadvantage of the ground compels
To quit their horse, having no succor else
In that extreme; these he entreats and prays,
And now with sharp words did their courage raise.
Where do you fly? by th'acts which you have done,
By great Evanders name, and victories won,
And my adventures for my Countries praise:
Trust not to flight, but charge the enemies;
And where they thickest stand, there venture through;
Your Prince, your Country, this requires of you.
No Gods oppose, mortal against mortal stands,
You have more courage; and as many hands;
Before the Oceans waves opposed be,
No land is left, are you for Troy by sea?
This said, he charged amongst the thickest foes,
Whom Lagus by stern fates did first oppose;
Who whilst he lifts at him a mighty stone,
Was with his spear run through the shoulder bone;
Then back again he drew the fastened lance,
Whom Hisbon could not, though he did advance,
Relieve: for Pallas whilst he rushed betwixt
Him in his rage, with the same javelin fixed,
And gave him his companions cruel death;
For he his sword in's swelling lungs did sheath,
Next Sthelenus and Anchemelus he killed,
Who boldly his step-mothers bed defiled.
Then Thymber and Larides were orethrown
In Rutile fields, these twins, so like, that none
Though well acquainted, could a difference make;
Whose Parents often rejoiced at the mistake.
But Pallas now a sad distinction made,
Lops Thymbers head off with the Evandrian blade,
And thy right hand for thee (Larides) felt;
The half-dead fingers trembling, sought the hilt;
Moved with this speech and valor of the man,
Vexed and ashamde, on the Arcadians ran,
And here the valiant Pallas Rhetus slew,
As in his chariot passing by he flew;
(This only stay there was of Ilus chance,
For he at Ilus aimed his mighty lance.)
And Rhetus hits, as cowardly he shuns
Bold Teuthrus thee, and from thy brother runs
With his deaths wound he from his chariot reels,
And beats Rutilian Plains with dying heels;
As when a swain in woods makes many fires,
When gales in spring, blow fresh, to his desires:
Straight the main body's seized; all meet again,
And Vulcans bands triumphing spread the Plain;
Whilst victor he the conquering flames survaid:
So Pallas friends conjoined to bring him aid.
But stout Halesus bends against all alarms,
And puts himself in posture with his arms.
Demodocus, Ladon, Pharetes did dispatch,
Lops Strymons hands, which at his throat did catch:
Then with a stone of the head takes Thoas full,
And beats into his brains his battered scull.
Halesus was in woods by's father hid,
Foreseeing fate: but when the old man died,
Him destiny with cruel hands did seize,
And by the Evandrian sword did sacrifice,
Whom Pallas charged, thus having made his prayer.
O father Tyber! grant, this brandished spear
May through Halesus bosom make its way!
And to thy oak his arms and spoils I Will pay.
The god inclined; whilst he did Imaon save,
His open breast to Arcadian lance he gave.
But Lausus powrfull in the war, kept all
His men undaunted, at this Captains fall.
First Abas slew, who first maintained the fight,
The Arcadians and Hetrurians put to flight,
And you O! Trojans, escaped the Grecian bands.
They charge with equal Chiefs, and like commands;
Double their fronts, so thick the iron grove
They could not use their arms, nor weapons move.
Here Pallas charges: Lausus did engage
Another party there; nor of their age
Much difference was, and both most gallant men:
But fortune had denide they should again
Their native country see; for whom commands
Olympus starry palaces, withstands
That they should meet, in single fight oppose;
On them their fates attend by greater foes.
Mean while his sister Turnus did advise
Lausus to help: he through the battle flies
On winged wheels; and there where he espide
His men engaged, he spoke; Stand all aside,
And let me only now with Pallas join,
The honor of his death must needs be mine:
I would his father were spectator here!
This said, the field at his command they clear.
But Pallas, when the Rutils had retired,
Then Turnus proud commands the youth admired;
And viewing his huge body, was amazed:
Yet with a cruel eye upon him gazed;
And saying thus, against the Tyrant came:
I shall obtain his spoils and mighty fame,
Or noble death; each will my father please.
Then briefly said, Forbear such threats as these.
And with the word, drew to the open plains.
Cold fear the Arcadians blood drives from their veins.
Turnus from's chariot lights, on foot to fight:
And as a Lion comes who from a height
Has seen a Bull, for battle to prepare;
So in his march the King himself did bear.
When Pallas saw he could him with his sance
Reach, as he pleased; then first he did advance,
If fortune pleased, would him, though weaker, aid:
Then thus to Hercules in high heaven he praid.
Oh, by my fathers hospitable board,
Which thou a stranger honour'dst once; afford
Assistance now to this great enterprise!
Let Turnus me behold with dying eyes,
Breathing his last, a Conqueror to seize
His bloody arms! This heard great Hercules;
And pouring vain tears forth, he gave a groan,
Then Jove with comfort thus bespake his son,
Each has his fate; Short and irreparable time
Man's life enjoyes: But by brave deeds to clime
To honors height, this they by valor gain.
How many sons of Gods at Troy were slain?
Sarpedon there, my progeny, did fall;
And Turnus fates for him already call,
And he to his appointed date must yield.
This said, his eye turns from the Ausonian field.
But Pallas with huge strength his javelin threw,
And's glittering sword straight from his scabberd drew;
It through ethereal orbs resounding flies,
Where the high coverings of his shoulder lies;
Then through the skirts of's shield a passage found,
And gave to mighty Turnus a small wound.
Here Turnus having poised a spear of oak,
Pointed with steel, aiming at Pallas, spoke:
See if our javelin will not better pass.
This said, his shield plated with steel and brass,
So thick with bull-hides lined, trembling, it pressed;
And through his corslet pierced his ample breast.
He from the wound in vain the warm spear drew,
Whilst the same way, blood and his soul, pursue.
Falling on's wound, his arms above resound,
And dying, bites with bloody mouth the ground.
Then Turnus standing ore,
Arcadians, tell Evander these he said;
I Pallas send such as he merited:
Whatere the honor is of obsequie
And joy at funerals, shall my bounty be;
Aeneas entertainment shall be paid
Back with no small reward. Thus having said,
And treading with his left foot on the dead,
He seized his belt richly embroidered,
Wrought with a crime; in one nights nuptials slain
So many youths, blood, bridal chambers stain.
And with pure gold skillful Eurytion wrought,
Which spoils now Turnus boasts proud to have got;
Men not foreseeing chanee, and future fates,
And to observe a mean in prosperous States.
The time shall come, when Turnus will in vain
Wish, with a Kingdoms price, Pallas unslain,
And with those spoils he shall abhor the day.
With groans and tears his servants Pallas lay
Upon a shield, and round about him mourn,
Great grief and glory to thy sire return,
This thy first day in war, and this thy last,
But yet thou heaps of slain Rutilians sawst.
Not of so great misfortune only fame,
But certain tidings to Aeneas came;
Which told his army in great danger stands,
And now or never aid his shrinking bands.
Whoere he meets, he levels with his sword,
And steel to him a passage did afford.
Seeking thee Turnus with new slaughter proud:
Pallas, Evander, favors they allowed
To him a Stranger, and those aids he brought
Present themselves, to his revengeful thought.
Four gallant youths, which were at Sulmon bred,
As many which cold Vfens nonrished,
Living he took: for shades an offering dire,
Whose captive blood should due the funeral fire.
At Mago then a dreadful spear he threw,
Who stooping, 'ore him, the swift javelin flew;
He suppliant then, grasping his knees, begun.
By thy sires Manes, and thy hopeful son,
This life, both for a son and father save.
I have a Palace, where I talents have
Of hoarded silver, and huge sums of gold,
Coind and uncoin'd. This victory cannot withhold.
Nor one man's life so great a difference make.
This said: Then thus to him Aeneas spoke.
The gold and silver which thou mention'st, spare
To help thy children; Turnus in this War
Has barred all quarter since he Pallas slew,
This to my father, and my son is due.
Then, whilst he mercy craves, he seized his crest
And ran to th'hilts his sword within his breast.
Hard by was Phoebus pressed, Aemonius son
With all his robes, Surplice and Mytre on,
Known by his glorious arms, and glittering shield,
Him first he charged, and drives through all the field.
Then of him fallen a sacrifice he made,
And standing ore, hides with his mighty shade.
Serestus takes his curious arms to be
A lasting trophie, father Mars to thee.
Ceculus, Vulcans son, and Vmbro, who
Came from the Martian fields, the fight renew,
Whom the Prince meets: as Anxure did advance,
He lops off both his shield and arm at once.
For he devin'd t'himself some great success,
And vain Enthusiasmes, believed no less;
With his fantastic spirit he mounts the stars,
Promising t'himself long life and hoarie hairs.
Well armed Tarquitus then came boldly on,
Whom the nymph Dryope bore, old Faunus son,
Toward him Aeneas raging did advance,
And through his shield and corslet drives his lance.
Whilst he did many ways beg life in vain,
And used persuasions quarter to obtain,
Cuts off his head the warm trunck down did roll;
Then standing ore him, from a bitter soul
Thus much he said. Thou so much feared lie there,
Nor shall thy woeful mother thee interre:
Or in thy fathers tomb thy body lay;
Thou shall be left for birds and beasts a prey,
Or waves shall roll thee in the ocean drowned,
And greedy fish shall lick thy bleeding wound.
Anthaeus and Lycas next he followed,
Who the prime squadrons of bold Turnus led.
Stout Numa did, and bright-hair'd Camers chase,
Sprung from great Volscens, who the richest was
Of Italy, and ruled Amyclean lands.
As bold Aegean with a hundred hands
Did belch from fifty mouths devouring flame,
When armed against Joves thunderbolts he came;
As many swords did shake, and sounding shields.
So raged Aeneas conquering through the fields:
His sword now warm, behold he next proceeds
Dreadful against Nyphaeus chariot steeds;
But they far off, as him they saw draw near,
Raging extremely, turn, being struck with fear,
And rushing back, their Captain overthrew,
And to the shore they with the chariot flew.
But mean while Lucagus with white horse rides,
In the open plain his brother Lyger guides
The winged chariot, and the reins commands,
His drawn sword Leucagus brandished in his hands,
Nor them Aeneas suffers to advance,
But against them boldly he presents his lance.
To whom then Lyger said,
These are not Diomedes horse, nor do thou see
Achilles chariot, nor Greek enemy:
Now, in this field thou life and war shall end.
Thus vapouring Lyger did with words contend.
But the bold Trojan studied no reply,
He throws his javelin at the enemy:
When Leucagus bending, having cast his spear,
His left foot out, did for the fight prepare.
Under his shield Aeneas javelin found
Way to his left thigh with a mighty wound:
He from his chariot tumbles down half dead,
When in stern language thus Aeneas said:
Sir, your slow horse have not your chariot lost,
Nor were they frighted from the enemies host;
But you your self your chariot have forsook,
And strait he seized the horses, as he spoke.
His brother then disarmed, himself submits,
And craving quarter, he his office quits.
Now for thy self and thy great parents sake,
Brave Prince, O spare my life, and pity take!
Aeneas said, You were more malepert:
Die; for thy brother thou shall not desert.
Then he the closet of his soul displaid
With his bright sword. The Dardan Hero made
Such slaughters then, and like a whirlwind raves,
Or some huge deluge with orewhelming waves.
Ascanius and his bands besieged in vain,
Break through their ports, and sally to the plain.
Mean while to Juno thus bespake great Jove:
My dearest sister, and my most dear Love;
As thou believ st, (nor does thy judgment err)
Venus upholds the Trojans in this war;
And not great strength, and lively courages.
To whom then Juno modestly replies:
Great Sir, why do you thus disquiet me
Oppressed with woe, fearing thy sad decree?
Had I that power by love, which once was mine,
And should be still; at least thou would incline
That I in safety from the fight should bring
Turnus to's fathers court. But now, great King,
Let him be slain, and if thou think it good,
Let cruel Trojans shed his royal blood,
Though he from us derive his stock and name,
Who from Pilumnus the fourth of spring came,
And often thy altars heaped with sacrifice.
To whom Olympus mighty King replies:
If thou delays from speedy death would have,
And for a time the hapless young man save;
And if thou think it lies within my power,
Turnus by flight save from the fatal hour.
This I may grant: but if in your request
Concealed you drive a further interest,
So the whole fortune of the war again
To bring about; thou foster'st hope in vain.
Then Juno weeping, said: You may connive
At what you dare not grant; and he may live.
But now his woeful destiny draws near,
Or else I am transported with vain fear:
Oh that false terror still would me delude!
And thou, who may, would better things conclude.
Thus having said, from lofty heaven she flies,
Girded with clouds, winds driving through the skies;
And to the Ausonian camp and Trojans made.
Then she an aerie cloud, a hoslow shade
Formed like Aeneas, which (most strange) she dressed
In Dardan arms, and shield; a flowing crest
Puts on his honored head; then made it talk,
Speak without lungs, and like Aeneas walk.
Such shapes they say, that dead men's spirits have,
Or those in dreams our drowsy sense deceive.
But the insulting shadow takes the Van,
Calling aloud, and challenged out the man.
Turnus advanced, and's sounding javelin threw;
The Shade retreats, and suddenly withdrew.
As soon as Turnus did himself persuade
Aeneas fled, swollen with vain hope, he said:
What, fly'st thou Trojan, and thy bride do leave?
The land thou sought'st by sea, this hand shall give.
Thus brandishing his sword, he eased his mind;
Nor thought his hope did fleet before the wind.
Behind a rock, by chance, in a calm bay
With ready ladders a tall vessel lay,
Which king Osinius brought to Clusine shore;
Hither it self the fleeting shadow bore,
And takes the hold; nor slower were Turnus steps,
All stay he conquers, ore high bridges leaps.
No sooner shipped. Juno the cable cuts,
And to the sea the floating vessel puts.
But through the fight mean while Aeneas goes
Turnus to find and many overthrows.
Nor longer the fantastic shadow lies
Hid under deck, but vanishing, it flies
Up to the stars, and with dark clouds conjoined:
Whilst Turnus drives to sea before the wind,
And both his hands did to high heaven advance,
For safety thanklesse, ignorant of the chance:
O Jove, he said, deserve I this from thee?
And is it thy will thus, thus to punish me?
Ah whether must I go? from whence came I?
Where shall I land? or whither do I fly?
Shall I Laurentian towrs behold again?
View my own camp, where all those gallant men
Which did my fortune and my arms attend,
Ah, I have left, to meet a woeful end!
I hear their dying groans; now now I view
My routed army fly: what shall I do!
Oh that the earth would gape and swallow me:
Or rather gentle winds, more favoring be,
(For your assistance Turnus now invokes)
Ah drive this vessel on obdurate rocks;
Split on the sands where friends shall never see
My corpse, nor blasted fame shall follow me.
This said, his mind on no resolve could place;
Whether he should for this so vile disgrace
Upon himself a punishment afford.
And desperate in his bowels sheath his sword;
Or leap into the sea, and swim to shore,
And against the Trojans arm himself once more.
Thrice he attempted both; great Juno thrice
His rashness staid with soberer advice.
The ship cuts billows, and with favoring tides
To the old city of his father glides.
Jove did mean while Mizentius soul enlarge,
That with fresh power the conquerours he should charge.
Against whom the Tyrrhens join; all against one man
With deadly hate and cruel weapons ran.
He as a rock amongst vast billows stood,
Scorning loud winds, and raging of the flood;
And fixed remaining, all the force defies
Mustered from threatening seas, and thundering skies.
Hebrus, Dolicaons son, he overthrew,
Latagus with him, and Palmus as he flew;
But with a stone, no small part of a hill,
Dashing in s face, he Latagus did kill.
Palmus comes ore maimed with his wounded knee,
And gave his arms, bold Lausus, unto thee.
Next Thrygian Eavns, Mimas was orethrown,
Of Paris age, and his companion,
Whom, the same night the Queen gave Paris birth,
Pregnant with fire, Theano did bring forth
To old Amycus: he at home was slain,
But Mimas fell in the Laurentian Plain.
He as a hunted bore from mountains bends,
Whom, long, pine bearing Vesulus defends,
And many years Laurentian marshes bred,
Where he with mast and bul-rushes was fed,
After he finds himself amidst their nets,
He stands, and foaming, up his bristles sets,
Against his rage the boldest dare not go,
But with safe showts at distance javelins throw.
So stood Mizentius against his Subjects rage,
Yet none so hardy durst their King engage;
Put out of reach at him they cast their spears
With mighty shouts; he not the proudest fears,
But angry raungeth through the spacious field,
Bearing a grove of javelins on his shield.
Acron a Greek, but in Corytus bred,
Drawn to this war, left his new-marriage bed:
Him when he saw amongst the squadrons, dressed
In wedding garments, and a purple vest;
As a starved lion who does often invade
Some lofty stall, (for hunger will persuade)
If he a nimble goat epsy by chance,
Or else a dear a tall crest to advance,
Gaping he raves, and bristles up his main,
And growling lies devouring of the slain?
Then baths his mouth with blood.
So fierce Mizentius raged amongst thickest foes,
And most unhappy Acron overthrows.
Breathing his last, beating the earth, he lies,
And the strong javelin with his blood he dies.
Yet scorns Orodes flying to orethrow,
And through his back to give the deadly blow;
But runs and meets him; he by prowess can
More then by art, and charges man to man;
Then on him down setting his foot and spear,
Said great Orodes, once so feared, lies here:
His Soldiers raise a shout. But dying, he
Who e're thou art, said, I revenged shall be;
Nor shall thou long triumph, thy fate draws nigh,
And thou with me, in the same field shall lie.
With a grim smile Mizentius then replies,
Thou first shall die: who rules both earth and skies,
Let him dispose of me. Thus saying, he then
His javelin draws from the dead corpse again:
A hard and iron rest sealed up his sight,
And closed his eye in everlasting night.
Caedicus, Alcathous; and Sacrator slew
Hydaspes; Rapo, Parthens overthrew,
And valiant Orses; but Messapus sped
Clonius and Ericates he left dead;
This tangled in the trappings of his steed;
On foot makes the other sure: next did proceed
Lycius against him who Valerus did kill,
Though he was cunning at his Grandsires skill.
Salius, Autronius; Neacles, Salius slew,
Who used the dart, and well a long bow drew.
Now bloody Mars enraged on both sides falls,
Matching their grief with equal funerals;
Victors and those are worsted, both come on,
And both retreat: flight is to neither known.
The Gods in loves High court pity their rage,
That thus poor mortals should themselves engage.
Here Venus sits, there cruel Juno stands,
And pale Tisiphone raves amidst the bands.
But here Mizentius a huge javeline shakes,
And to the field highly incensed makes.
So tall Oryon through the swelling tides
Marches on foot, the waves scarce reach his sides;
Or when he stalks more proudly on dry land,
Bringing from hills an old ash in his hand;
Whilst his proud head amongst the clouds he hides:
So in his mighty arms Mizentius prides.
Aeneas having spi'de him through the bands,
Marches against him: He undaunted stands,
Waiting the approach of his magnanimous foe;
And having took the measure of his throw:
This hand which is my God, and this my spear
Which now I poise, grant your assistance here.
That cruel Pirates spoils and arms I now
For thee a trophie, dearest Lausus vow.
This said, at him he cast his sounding lance.
But the swift spear did from his target glance,
And far from thence through noble Anthor run;
This was great Hercules companion,
Who sent from Argos with Evander staid,
And his abode now in Ausonia made.
Thus hurt he falls, and hapless views the skies,
Remembering his dear Argos as he dies.
His javelin then valiant Aeneas threw,
Which through his brazen quilted target flew,
Where three bull-hides tan'd did their force conjoyn,
And fast it stuck, in bold Mizentius groyn.
Whose strength now fails: soon as Aeneas saw
The Tyrrhens blood, straight he his sword did draw,
And whilst he was astonish d, rusheth on,
This Lausus viewing, fetched a heavy groan
For his dear father, and salt tears he sheds:
Here thy sad death, and most renowned deeds,
If ancient stories have related truth,
I shall not silence, O most noble youth.
Mizentius hurt, began some ground to yield,
Drawing the hostil weapon from his shield;
Lausus steps in and brought his father aid,
And took the blow which fierce Aeneas made
On his own shield; receives him with delays;
At which a shout his glad companions raise:
Whilst the hurt father from the fight withdrew,
Defended by his son, Iavelins they threw,
And against the foe their lances thick discharge:
Aeneas raged protected with his targe.
As when a shower descends of hail and rain,
Straight all the husbandmen forsake the Plain;
Under dry roofs himself the traveler saves,
Or shelters under bancks, or rockie caves,
Until the storm is over: that when the Sun
Returns, he may perfect the work begun.
So was Aeneas overwhelmed with darts,
Bearing the tempest thundering from all parts:
And Lausus he rebukes; now menaceth
The bold youth thus; why hastenst thou thy death?
And do so much above thy strength assay?
Thy Piety, fond youth, does thee betray.
But he no less rashly himself engaged;
At which the Dardan Prince extremely raged;
And now ^is thread of life the fates had span;
In him to th'hilts his sword Aeneas ran,
And through the threatners shield, and arms it passed,
And coat, his mother with pure gold had graced:
I lood drowned his breast, his soul her Progress makes
Down to pale shades, and the cold corpse forsakes.
But when his face great Anehisiades,
And cheeks now wonderfully pale espies,
He stretched his hand, then sighed with grief oppressed,
And now his fathers love affects his breast,
Saying poor youth, what fame for thee is due?
What worthy gift shall I bestow on you?
Take thy loved arms (if those thou do regard)
And with thy Royal Parents be interred,
This comfort have in thy sad funeral,
That thou by great Aeneas hand did fall.
Then checks his lingering friends, himself before
Raising him up, his hair defiled with gore.
Mean while his father at the crystal streams
Of Tyber cleans'd his wound, and eased his limbs
Against a tree, on which his helm he hung,
And on the grass his pondrous armor flung;
A choice guard round: panting, his neck did rest,
Which bowing, with his beard covered his breast;
Then asks for Lausus, and often sends to find,
And call him off, since 'twas his fathers mind.
But the dead youth, his friends in sorrow drowned
Bore on a shield, slain by a mighty wound;
Far off the cry his soul presaging knew,
Then on his silver hair roll dust he threw,
And both his hands at once to heaven he heaves,
Then thus complaining to the body cleaves.
Dear son, was life to me so sweet that thou
Whom: begot, for me should suffer now,
Must I thy father draw this vital breath,
Saved by thy wounds, and live by thy sad death?
O let me now to woeful exile go,
Since I behold this wound, this fatal blow.
Oh son, my acts have blasted thy renown,
Expuls'd by malice from my throne and crown;
'Twas I should suffer in this hateful strife,
And many deaths pay for this wicked life;
Yet still I live, view heaven, converse with man;
But I Will forsake them all. Then he began,
Thus saying, to raise his feeble thigh from ground,
And though it failed him with so great a wound,
Undaunted he, commands his horse provide.
This was his comfort, this his only pride,
On this through all his fights did Conqueror go,
To whom he spoke, declaring thus his woe;
Of long life (Phoebus) we have had the proof,
(If any time to mortals were enough,)
Either we must Aeneas head this day,
And bloody spoils in triumph bear away,
Revenging Lausus: or if fates deny
Assistance, we will both together die.
For sure most valiant Steed thou wilt not admit
A Trojan rider, nor a strangers bit.
Thus having spoke, up sad Mizentius gets,
And soon himself in comely manner seats;
Then both his hands did with sharp javelins load;
On his bright helm whole mains of horses fload.
And straight he marches up; whilst mighty shame,
Grief and distraction, did his soul inflame,
Love provokes rage; and loss of honor, all.
Then thrice aloud, did for Aeneas call.
The Trojan knew the voice, and thus he prayed,
So may great Jove and Phoebus now persuade
That thou begin the fight.
And praying, with a dreadful spear marched on.
But he, why have thou robbed me of my son
Most cruel man, and terrifiest me thus?
Since no way else thou had to ruin us:
Nor fear we death, nor any God regard.
Leave of thy prayers, to die I come prepared;
But first these legacies I Will on thee bestow.
This said, he cast a javelin at the foe,
Another after, then another flings;
And swiftly wheels about in mighty rings.
Aeneas shield receives them; thrice he goes
About him standing, and sharp lances throws.
Three times the Trojan turning where he stood,
Bore on his brazen shield a mighty wood.
Vexed with delay, and plucking from his targe
So many spears, and with the dangerous charge,
Plotting all means, at last he did advance,
And through his horses head he sent his lance;
Who rising then, beats with his feet the skies,
And tumbling backward, on his rider lies
Oppressing much his arm extended out.
Trojans and Latins send to heaven a shout.
In, leaps Aeneas, and his bright sword drew,
And thus he said; Where Is proud Mizentius now,
And that fierce courage made him once so bold?
But he, as soon as heaven he did behold,
And coming to himself recoverd breath;
Why triumph'st thou, proud foe, and threatenst death?
May I not die? Therefore I fought with thee,
Nor made my son such articles for me.
One thing (if vanquished foes gain suits) I crave
A burial: I know my people have
Me in disdain; their fury, oh prevent,
And grant my son and me one monument.
This said, his throat receive the expected blow,
And on his arms his soul in blood did flow.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Mizentius trophey. Pallas funerals.
Cessation made. The King a council calls.
Diomed's answer Venulus relates.
Drances, and Turnus, loud in hot debates.
Aeneas gives the City an alarm.
The King his Council leaves, and Latins arm.
Camilla's story. Troops of horse maintain
A doubtful fight: the bold Virago slain.
The Trojans, flying Rutilie pursue.
Turnus informed straight from his ambush drew.
Aeneas takes the passage, then marched down
To the open plain, and lies before the town.
MEan while Aurora from the sea ascends,
Aeneas (although care t'interre his friends
The time required, much for their death dismayed)
Early his vows to heaven a conqueror paid.
A mighty oak, deprived of bows, he plac d
Upon a hill, and with bright armor grac d;
The spoils of King Mizentius to be
A trophie, mighty God of war, to thee.
His plumes bedewd with blood, and broken lance,
And breast plate twelve times pierced he did advance.
Then to his friends triumphing, (for a guard
They made about him) he himself declared.
Most valiant Trojans, the great work is done;
What now remains, but that all fear we shun?
The proud Kings spoils, here, our first offering, stands;
Mizentius now serves under our commands.
Next for Latinus walls let us prepare,
And boldly arm, nor doubt the chance of war.
Lest for their stay, any plead ignorance;
When first the Gods shall please, we will advance
Our standard, and our army forth shall lead.
Nor for base fear let none excuses plead.
Mean while let us bear our friends unto the grave;
The only honor which the dead can have.
Go, those brave souls with solemn rites attend,
Whose blood for us has purchased this land:
Put first on Pallas mournful obsequies wait,
And bear him to his fathers woeful seat:
Whom from sweet life a cruel death did call
(Wanting no valor) to sad funeral.
Weeping he said, and to the hearse he bends,
Where old Acetes Pallas corpse attends;
Who when Evanders squire, much honor won,
But not so happy waiting on his son.
Round him his servants, and the Trojans were,
And Ilian dames, sad with disheveled hair.
But when Aeneas entered, a huge cry,
Beating their breasts, they raise unto the sky,
And the whole court with loud complaining filled.
Soon as he had dear Pallas corpse beheld,
And the wide wound upon his lovely breast,
With many tears, his grief he thus expressed.
Brave youth, when better fortune came, did she
For very spite, deprive us straight of thee:
Lest thou should see our conquest, and return
Unto thy fathers Court in triumph born.
I to Evander no such promise made
At my departure when with mighty aid
He me dismissed; and fearful, did foresh ew
We should encounter with a dangerous foe.
But now perhaps glad hope his mind does raise,
And vows he makes with frequent sacrifice,
Whilst to the dead, who is not indebted now
To any God, vain honor we allow.
These are the promised triumphs thou shall see
Performed by us, thy sons sad obsequie.
Thus I discharge my trust But no base wound
Shall by Evander on his corpse be found,
Nor shall he wish his life at honors cost.
What strength has Latium and Ascanius lost?
This said, to raise the sad corpse he commands,
And sends a thousand chosen from the bands,
Who should attend his last solemnity,
And with Evanders tears their sorrow Vie,
And to a mourning father comfort be,
Though small, yet grateful in great misery.
Some busy, joining verdant Arbuts were;
And deck with oken leaves the stately Bier:
Then the sad hearse, with boughs and branches shade,
Where, on green rushes the brave youth they laid.
Such the pase Daffadill or Violet
Plucked by a Virgins hand: whose beauty yet
And form remains; though from the stalk now rent
Their mother earth affords no nourishment.
The Prince, two robes of gold and purple brought,
Which with her own hand beauteous Dido wrought,
And to Aeneas did present of old,
And mixed the curious web with purest gold.
Which for a hearse-cloth on the corpse he laid,
Then with a vail his comely hair did shade,
And with Laurentian spoils did him adorn,
Bids what he won, in order to be born,
And horse and arms were taken from the foe;
Then those to shades a sacrifice must go,
Quenching the cruel flame with lukewarm blood,
Their hands behind them bound, prepared stood.
Next bids prime Captains hostile arms to bear,
And names of slaughtered foes upon their spear.
They old Acetes led, with grief oppressed,
Tearing his hair, beating his woeful breast;
Who falling down on the earth extended lay:
They chariots stained with Rutile gore convay.
Ethon his horse in mourning next took place,
And weeping with great tears blubbered his face.
This bore his lance, and that his shining crest,
For Turnus being Couquerour, spoiled the rest.
The Trojans follow, and the Tyrrhen Peers,
And sad Arcadians trailing of their spears.
Next all the mourners marched in order on;
Then spoke Aeneas with a heavy groan;
Now we must others mourn in battle fell,
Dear Pallas now eternally farewell,
For evermore adieu. Nor more he said,
But to the walls of the high City made.
When from Latinus some were sent to treat,
With olive veiled, a breathing space to get,
That he would please, the bodies of the slain,
Which now in heaps lay scattered on the plain,
They might interre: for with the vanquished
Should no contention be, nor with the dead;
And those once styled his friends, he now would spare.
Their suits, which not to be rejected were,
Aeneas grants, and did their fears assuage.
Sirs, what strange fortune forced you to engage
In such a war, and us your friends to shun?
Seek you a peace for those in fight orethrown?
I Would rather grant it unto them remain.
Nor had I come, but that the fates ordain
These seats for me, nor had with you made war.
Your King left us, for Turnus did declare.
'T were fitter, Turnus should in single fight
Try't out himself; if he would put to flight
The Trojan bands, and give the war an end,
Let him with me then hand to hand contend;
And let whom God, and's right hand favor, live.
Go, and your hapless friends due funerals give,
Aeneas said; whilst they stood all amazed,
And with deep silence on each other gazed.
Old Drances then, who bore eternal spleen
Against valiant Turnus did at last begin.
O Trojan, great by fame, greater by wars,
How shall I match thy honor with the stars?
Shall I thy power, or justice first admire?
Humbly our King shall know of thy desire:
If fortune aid us, we shall him persuade
To peace: let who so will then Turnus aid.
To build your promised city we shall joy,
And bear upon our backs the stones of Troy.
All with one voice approve the words he said,
And a cessation for twelve days is made.
Trojans and Lutines wander here and there
Through woods and mountains, and no danger fear.
Now mighty Ashes with the axe resound,
And Pines that kissed the stars, tumble to ground;
Whole Oaks they cleave, sweet Cedar is orethrown,
And with wild Ash huge cars continual groan.
And now swift fame this sad disaster tells;
Evanders court the doleful rumor fills,
Which said but now, Pallas the victory won.
Swift to the gates amazed Arcadians run,
And as the ancient custom torches bear:
With a long train of light the ways appear,
And all the field with funeral tapers shine.
Whilst to these mourners the sad Trojans join;
Whom, when the matrons did behold draw nigh,
They through the City raised a woeful cry;
When no persuasions could Evander stay,
But in he comes, and falling down, he lay
Fixed on the hearse, weeping and groaning there,
And long, ere thus his grief he could declare.
Dear Pallas, thou have not kept thy word with me,
That thou in fight would not so ventrous be.
I knew how much new glory would inflame,
And in first service the desire of fame.
Woeful first fruits! too hard such rudiments are
In thy first lesson, which thou learnst in war.
No God did hear my prayer, nor mind my vow;
And thou blessed wife, in death most happy now,
That did not live to see this sight; whilst I
Now do survive my own sad destiny,
And a most wretched father must remain.
I should have died, and Rutils me have slain
For joining with the Trojans; and for me,
Not Pallas, should have been this obsequie.
Nor will I blame the Trojans, nor shall rue
Th association which I made with you
This chance belonged to my gray hairs. But since
Untimely death has took my son from hence;
I joy that thousand Volsceans fell before
Him leading Trojans to the Au onian shore.
Nor other rites, dear Pallas, shall thou have
Then what Aeneas and bold Phrygians gave;
What Tarchon and their Captains did ordain,
Who honoring bear, trophies of those thou have flain:
For thee a huge one, Turnus, we had seen,
If he of equal strength and age had been.
But I the Trojans keep too long from war.
Farewell; and to your King this message bear,
That I loathed life prolong, Pallas being gone;
His valor must a father, and a son,
Revenge on Turnus; this remains for him
Whose worth has placed in Fortunes best esteem.
Nor joys of life I wish for but to stay
Till I these tidings to my son convay.
Mean while Aurora cleers the darkened air,
And brought to wretched mortals toil and care.
Aeneas then, and Tarchon on the shores
Huge piles erect; and as their ancestors,
Here their dead friends they brought, then kindle fire,
And to high heaven clouds of thick smoke aspire.
Thrice round about the burning pi^es they go
Gilded in shining arms; th^ee fires or woe
Mounted on mourning horses they surround,
A doleful cry they raise, l^ud trumpets sound;
Arms, and the earth is watered with their tears,
And lamentations scale the highest spears,
Some in the fire the Latin spoils do burn,
Helms, swords, and reins, and wheels from chariots torn;
Some their friends shields, well known in all alarms,
Cast after them, and their unhappy arms.
Whole herds of cattle and of swine were killed,
And flocks of sheep brought in from every field.
Their burning friends they view through all the strand,
And round about the half-burnt piles they stand;
Nor could be taken off, till dewie night
Adorned high heaven with constellations bright.
No less on the other side, the Latins rear
Innumerable piles, many interre,
Many are to the neighboring confines born,
And to the city some again return.
The rest, confused heaps of slaughtered men,
They burn uncounted, and unhonour'd; then
The spacious fields with frequent fires are bright.
When the third day from heaven drove gloomy night,
Mourning they sweep the ashes from the hearth,
And mingled bones yet warm, they load with earth.
Now in the Court, and rich Latinus seat,
Were loudest cries, and lamentations great:
Here mothers sisters there the woeful nurle,
Children deprived of parents, weeping curse
The cruel war, and Turnus hapless suit,
That he alone the quarrel should dispute,
Who hopes to gain all Latium with the bride,
Fierce Drances urged, nor could it be denide,
That Turnus had been challenged to the fight.
These warm debates their Votes made opposite.
But he stands shaded with the Queens great name,
And lasting trophies of's deserved fame.
Amidst these tumults and commotions great,
Behold then sad, from Diomed's Royal seat
Ambassadors answers brought; they nothing could
With so much toil, expense, nor gifts, nor gold,
No suit availed, they must seek elsewhere aid,
Or with the Trojans must a Peace be made.
Latinus faints under a load of care;
Heaven anger, and their slaughtered friends declare,
Aeneas came by Fates authority.
Then his great council, all prime nobles, he
Summond before him at his Royal Court:
And through full streets to th'Pallace they resort;
Then first his place old King Latinus took
Holding his Scepter with a heavy look,
And bids his Lords returned from Diomed, say
What they had brought, and his whole answer lay
In order open: silence then being made,
Obeying his command, thus Venulus said.
My Lords, Tydides seat we saw, and past
All dangers of the tedious way at last,
And kissed that hand the Trojans overcame.
He Argyripa built, and gave a name
From his own stock, now in Apulian Plains,
A Conqueror he in settled peace remains.
After admittance, we to audience came;
Gifts we present, our country tell, and name,
Who raised this war, what business brought us there;
He full of honor did himself declare.
Blessed Nation of the old Ausonian race,
Of Saturns realm, what chance disturbs your peace?
And to a war so dangerous does persuade?
Whoever did sacred Trojan fields invade
(Those I Will omit, who under her high wall
Perished by war, or Simois drowned) we all
Scattered throughout the world, had punishment:
Such as would make Priam, himself relent.
Euboick rocks, and Pallas cruel star,
And vengefull Caphareus witness are,
We from that war were driven from coast to coast;
Menelaus was to Hercules pillars tossed:
And Ithacus, Aetnean Cyclops viewed.
Why should I mention Pyrrhus realms subdu'de?
Idomeneus, or his Kingdom lost?
Or Locrians dwelling on the Lybick coast?
Then the great General of the Grecian bands
By his false wife was murdered as he lands.
Over Asia now, th'Adulterer does reign.
The Gods with-stand my native soil again,
My house, and Calydon that I should see;
And still most dreadful Prodigies follow me.
My friends have wings, and soar unto the sky,
And changed to birds 'bout rivers margents fly.
Oh! what sad troubles my companions found,
Whose doleful notes made woods and rocks resound,
Which since that time should have been feared by me.
When I enraged, assailed a Deity,
And on fair Venus hand did leave a scar;
Seek not my aid, not mine in such a war.
Troy's fallen, nor more against Trojans will I fight:
Nor to remember ancient woes delight.
Those gifts you me present; to Aeneas bear;
We often have fought, and changed a dangerous spear.
Experience trust; armed how would he advance?
With what a whirlwind would he throw his lance?
If two like him Idaean realms had bred,
Priam, the Inachian seats had conquered;
And Greece of her changed fortune had complained.
Whatever us at Troys strong walls detained,
Hector, and he, our victory withheld,
Whilst ten long years their lingering periods filled;
Both bold, most expert both in war; but he,
Was most of all preferred for Piety.
Make Peace then as you can, but still beware
How you provoke such valiant men to war.
Now best of Kings his answer you have heard,
What he concerning this great war declared.
Scarce these were said, when a great mumur rose
Of votes divided: as when water flows
Delayed by rocks, and floods imprisoned rore,
Whilst thundering waves sound against the neighboring shore.
When all were settled, and their noise allai'd,
Having the Gods besought, Latinus said.
I won d, and better we had thought of all
Before, rather then now a council call,
When round about our walls the enemy lies.
Against men undaunted, sprung from Deities,
We have engaged; whom nothing could debar:
Nor being vanquished will desist from war.
What hope you had from Diomed, lay that by:
For and although but small, you must rely
Upon your selves. You see how things now stand,
We Are lost your strength is all in your own hand:
I none accuse, what force we could, we brought;
And with the power of the whole realm 'twas fought.
Now in my doubtful mind what councels are
I shall unfold, and briefly will declare.
I have some ancient forest lands, which lie
Nere Tyber west, bordring on Sicanie,
Which the Aruncians and Rutilians plow;
Their worst is pasturage, and their best the sow.
Let all that tract, and high-hils stored with pine,
The Trojans have, and let us leagues conjoyn,
And them associates in our Kingdom call;
There let them dwell, and build their Cities wall.
But if some other shore they would rather plant,
And leave our coast, let s twenty vessels grant
Built of Italian oak, or more provide,
All our materials near the rivers side.
But first let our Commissioners be chose,
Empowered with these Concessions, to ompose
A settled Peace, and olive boughs to wear:
And let them Presents gold and ivory bear;
The nations honor, gown and chair be sent;
Consult, and help in this great exigent.
Then the same Drances vexed with Turnus State,
With squinting envy spurred, and bitter hate,
Rich, and most eloquent, but cold in war,
Yet in debates a most grave Counselor,
And one t'apppease sedition excellent;
Who from his mother sprung of high descent;
But in obscurity his fathers name;
He rose, and with these words stirs up the flame.
Renowned King, the matter now you state
Is not obscure, nor needs a long debate;
For all confess to see what woes must fall
Upon this realm yet dare not speak at all.
Let him free-voting grant and threats forbear,
By whose contrivements, and cross counsels are
(I Will speak my mind though now he threaten death)
So many valiant Chiefs deprived of breath.
And now the whole City drowned in sorrow lies,
Whilst he provokes the Trojans, and then flies,
Out-braving the air: unto those gifts, which thou
Intendst upon the Trojans to allow,
Present one more, this one (Renowned Prince,)
Nor be o recome by any violence:
That thou a sire, thy daughter should not give
A worthy son, that we in Peace might live.
But if our hearts have so much fear possessed,
Let s sue to him, and gain by our request
The King his just prerogatives, and law
That we enjoy. Ah! whither will thou draw
This wretched people to their ruining,
O thou of Latiums woe the source and spring!
In war's no safety: All crave peace from thee
Turnus, and the only pledge of amity,
I, whom thou calst a foe, nor do I care,
Behold! petition first: Thy nation spare;
Worsted, give ore; slaughter too much we'have seen,
And our large country has devasted been.
But if that honor, and thy strength excite,
And if the royal dowre thy soul invite,
Something attempt, to meet the foe provide:
Yes, Turnus so may gain the royal bride.
We, poor unburied souls, multitudes lie
About the field, and have no obsequie.
But thou, if thou have honor, if thou have
The prowess which thy ancestors did boast,
Behold who dares thee forth!
Vexed with these words, a deep groan passage made
From Turnus breast, and highly moved, he said:
Drances thou have still full regiments of words,
When war craves deed; Thou first of summoned Lords
Appear'st; but speeches will not serve these courts:
Which safe thou utter st, whilst our walls and ports
Keep out the foe, nor trenches flow with blood.
With flashy eloquence then thunder loud,
And charge thou me of flight, when thou do send
So many Trojans to untimely end;
Graced with such trophies, now thy valor try,
Nor far off need we seek the enemy.
Behold, eachwhere about the walls they throng!
Come, charge; why stay we thus? Thy fluent tongue,
And flying feet, in those thy martial strength
Has always been
Was I repulsed, base man? turned I my face?
Will any lay on me so high disgrace?
Who Tyber saw with Trojan blood to swell;
How with Evanders house his whole stock fell,
When from the field disarmed the Arcadians ran,
Pandar and Bitias found me no such man,
When I shut in with hostile works and walls
To hell did send so many funerals.
In war no safety! Tell the Trojan so,
And thy own party: Use all cunning too
Vain fears to raise, and the twice vanquished race,
Their power extol, but Latin arms disgrace,
At Phrygian forces now Greek Princes shake;
Now Diomed and fierce Achilles quake,
From the Adriatic, Aufidus retreats,
And when the timorous feins to dread our threats,
On us lays scandals by pretended fear:
Nor shall thou lose that soul of thine forbear
To tremble thus) by this hand; let it rest
With thee, and dwell within that narrow breast.
Now Sir to you, and your command, great Prince;
If in our arms you have no confidence;
If so we are deserted, lost, oreborn
By one defeat, nor fortune will return:
With unarmed hands for peace let us entreat.
But oh! were any ancient valor yet,
He seems to me the happiest of all,
In that last fight, and the most noble soul,
Who would not live to see such things brought forth,
But rather died, and dying bit the earth.
Yet we have wealth, and yet unbroken bands;
And we have aid through all th Ausonian lands:
Nor can the Trojans blood-lesse victory boast,
They have their funerals, and as many lost.
Why then at first so poorly lose we ground,
And tremble, ere we hear the trumpet sound?
The various work of time and many days,
Often affairs from worse to better raise,
Fortune reviewing those she has cast down,
Sporting restores again unto their crown.
Will not Aetolians give their aid to us?
Messapus will, and rich Tolumnius
And prime Commanders many more will send;
Nor small fame on Laurentian Lords attend,
Camilla of the noble Volscean line,
Leads troops of horse who all in armor shine.
If me to fight the Trojan does command,
And I alone the common good withstand;
So far from me victory not took her flight
I should refuse for such a prize to fight.
I Will meet him, had he great Achilles charms,
And let him have like him Vulcanian arms.
To you great King this life I Turnus now
Second to none of my great fathers, vow,
Aeneas calls me forth; that he may call
Is my desire nor Drances rather shall,
Whether it be the wrath of deities,
Appease by death or glory win the prize.
Whilst these hard questions thus debared were
With differing votes; the Trojan Prince drew near,
Which to the Court a speedy messenger brought,
And with strange terror the whole city fraught.
All are distracted, but the vulgar rage,
Whom no small Provocations did engage.
Arm, arm they cry, the youth are mad for Arms,
The old men silent mourn; here, there alarms
With factious tumults mixed ascend the sky.
As when by chance a flock of sea-fowl fly
To lofty groves, or when loud swans do go
Sounding through murmuring lakes, to pleasant Poe.
On this occasion, Sirs, then Turnus says,
Call counsels: yes, and Peace thus sitting praise
Whilst they the town invade. Nor more he spoke,
But straight the hall and lofty Courts forsook.
Volusus draw forth now, thy Voscean force,
And dear Messapus, let thy Rutile horse,
Joined with thy brothers, march to the open plain.
Let some make good the gates, and towrs maintain,
Those in my conduct forth with me shall go.
Straight to the walls the towns whole forces flow.
The king his council and design forsook,
And vex't with stirs, for better times did look,
Blaming himself, that he did not declare,
The Trojan Prince his son, and make his heir.
Some trench the gates; these Pallisado round;
For war, loud trumpets bloody signals sound.
Women and children to the walls are sent,
All must assist in this great exigent.
When bearing gifts, the sad Queen with a train
Of matrons went to Pallas lofty fane;
Next her the virgin fair Lavinia goes,
Those eyes dejected had procured such woes.
The matrons enter, and the quire perfume,
And with sad voices from high portals come.
Pallas, armed virgin, Patroness of war,
O break thy self the Phrygian Pirates spear.
Most warlike maid, tumble him to the ground,
And near our gates give him his deadly wound.
Whilst Turnus for the battle arms in haste,
And rough with brazen scales, straight on he braced
Rut ilian arms, and golden cuishes tide,
His head unarmed, a sword girds to his side,
Shining in gold; then quits the lofty towers,
And in his hope the enemy devoures.
So when a horse flies out in broken reins,
And stables left, enjoyes the open plains;
Either through meads he seeks a stud of mares,
Or to accustomed watering repairs;
Wanton, his head erected, loud he neighs,
His mane upon his neck and shoulder plays.
Camilla meets him with her Volscean force,
And bravely in the gates leaps from her horse.
Then all the squadrons imitate the maid;
And quit their steeds. Bold Turnus, then she said,
If any confidence of the valiant be,
To charge the foe, I dare; and promise thee,
Alone the Tyrrhen horsemen to defy:
Grant that I first may charge the enemy,
Let your force guard the walls. Then Turnus said,
Fixing his eye upon the valiant maid,
Bold Virgin, glory of Ausonia,
These great obligements how shall I repay?
But now, since all the danger of the war
Thy soul contemns, with me the honor share.
Aenaeas (as fame tells, and scouts inform)
Through th'plains light horse has sent to give th'alarm,
Whilst from the rocks and mountains he comes down
With the main body to assault the town.
An ambush in the woods I have designed,
And in the pass, the hedges strongly lined:
Messapus shall, and Tyburt march with thee,
And to thy care shall the whole conduct be.
Messapus and the other Leaders, so
Encouraged, they march against the so.
There is a winding vale, for feats of war
And ambush fit; the dark sides sheltred are
With a thick wood, where leads a narrow path
Through a strait pass, and dangerous entrance has.
Above the valley, in the mountains heights,
Lay unfrequented plains, and safe retreats;
If on the right, or left thou would come on,
Or guard the top, and huge stones tumble down.
Mean while Diana from superior seats
Swift Opis calls, one of her virgin mates
And sacred train; and thus her grief declares.
The maid Camilla goes to cruel wars,
And with our arms she girds her self in vain;
More dear to us then any of our train;
Nor new acquaintance takes me with her love,
Which does the mind with sudden sweetness move.
Metabus drove from's realm by force and hate;
When he Privernus left, his ancient seat,
Scaping through fierce alarms of cruel war,
With him the infant did companion bear;
And from her mothers name, the change but small,
Casmilla, did the child Camilla call;
Her in his lap; he seeks the highest parts
Of desert woods, oppressed with cruel darts
Which from each side came from the Volscean ranks,
When Amasenus had oreflown his banks,
And with a huge shower swelling hindered him,
He careful of his charge, prepared to swim;
Delaid with her dear love, all means revolves,
And suddenly at last on this resolves.
The warrior then in his strong hand did bear
Of solid oak a huge and knotty spear:
His daughter swaddling up in cork-tree rinds,
Fast to the middle of his lance he binds;
Then poising it in's large hand, thus he praid:
Great Queen of forests, blessed Latonian maid,
To thee the father does this handmaid vow,
Bearing thy arms through skies; a suppliant now
To escape the foe. Goddess, receive thy own,
Which to the inconstant winds is left alone.
Thus having said, with mighty strength he flung
The sounding spear, the swelling billows rung;
And poor Camilla the winged javelin bore
Ore the swift stream safe to the other shore.
But Metabus, as the enemy drew near,
Swam ore the river, pulling with the spear
The maid 'Diana's Votresse from the shore.
Nor dwelt he in walled towns or cities more,
Displeased with vulgar rage and popular strife;
But in high mountains led a shepherds life,
Where in dark caves and groves the child he fed,
And with the milk of wild mares fostered,
Draining betwixt her pretty lips the teat.
When she her tender feet to ground could set,
He loads her hand with a sharp spear, and tide
A bow and quiver to the virgins side;
For golden hair, for a long courtly gown,
A Tigers spoils hung flowing from her crown.
From her soft hand now childish darts she slings,
And skilful round her head whirls smooth-thong'd slings;
Kills a fair Swan, or a Strymonian Crane.
Her many Tyrrhen matrons wished in vain
For their own sons: but to Diana she
For ever vowed unstained virginity,
And the eternal love of arms did swear.
Would she had not engaged in such a war,
Nor with the Trojans strove, who dear to me
The number fills of my chaste company.
But now since she draws nigh a cruel end;
Glide from high heaven, and to Ausonia bend,
Where a sad fight begins, with signs of woe.
Take thou this vengerul arrow and this bow:
Who ever with a wound shall violate
Her sacred person, give with this his fate;
Let him be Trojan, or Italian, he
In blood shall be accountable to me.
Her corpse unspoil d, wrapped in a cloud I Will bear,
And with her royal ancestors interre.
This said, through skies swift Opis thundered loud,
Borne with a whirlwind in a dusky cloud.
Mean while to the walls drew nigh the Trojan force,
Hetrurian Chiefs and all the troops of horse
In order were drawn up: through all the plains
Proud hories neigh, and strive with curbing reins;
Here, there they turn, dreadful are th'iron fields
With spears, the champaign shines with glittering shields:
Messapus, Coras, and his brother brings
Swift Latins, and the maid Camilla's wings
Appear against them, and far off the bands
Shake their proud javelins, raising high their hands
With threatening points: th'advance of men at arms
And neithing steeds, make dreadful the alarms.
And now marched up in distance of their lance
They make a stand; then with a stout advance
Spurring their steeds, at once from all sides power
Darts thick as hail, heaven darkened with the shower.
And now Tyrrhenus and Aconteus first,
Each other charged, and their huge javelins burst
With a loud crack; full breast to breast they met;
As lightning bold Aconteus fell from's seat,
Or stone which from some thundering engine flies,
And leaves his life behind him in the skies.
The bands are broke, and flying Latins cast
Their shields behind them, and to th'City have.
Trojans pursue, Asylas follows hot,
And now draw nigh the gates, the Latins shout,
And turn their ready horse: then through the Plains
The Trojans fly and slack their curbing reins.
As when the sea moved with alternate tides,
Hasts to the shore; over rocks now proudly rides
A foming wave, a swelling billow beats
Against highest bancks, then swift again retreats,
Loose stones with him in much disorder sweeps,
And shores forsaking, sinks into the deeps.
Twice Tuscans drive the Rutiles from the fields,
And twice they save their flying backs with shields.
But the third time they charged with all their might,
Break through and through, and man to man they fight.
Then dying groans, then in a crimson sea,
Helms, Shields, and slaughtered men commixed be,
And over all were half dead horses rolled:
And a most cruel fight you might behold.
Orsylocus cast at Remulus horse a spear,
(Who durst not meet) and fixed beneath his ear.
The horse then raged, vex't with the grievous wound,
And rising, cast his rider to the ground.
Great sold Iola, Catillus orethrew,
And huge in arms and size, Herminius slew.
His head and shoulders naked, golden hair
He wore for arms, nor so did danger fear:
Through his broad shoulders the swift javelin flew,
And in his body did it self imbrue.
The fields wax red: such funerals they bequeath,
Seeking by wounds an honorable death:
But midst these slaughters the Amazon delights
Quiver'd Camilla, one breast seared for fights.
Now thick she javelins casts; and now she takes
In her strong hand a mighty battle axe.
Her golden bow Dianas arms resound,
Hanging behind; if flying she gave ground
At any time; as much she gal'd the foe,
With deadly shafts from her reversed bow.
Larina, Tulla, and Tarpeia, were
Her chosen guard, who brazen axes bear,
Italian maids; the bold Camilla these
Chose to attend on her, in war or peace.
So armed, the Thracian Amazons come on
Warring about the streams of Thermidon;
Such guard Hyppolyte, or with martial pride
About Penthisilea's chariot ride;
Then female shouts resound through all the fields,
And virgin troops triumph with crescent shields.
Whom first or last did thou orethrow bold maid?
How many in the earth by thee lay dead?
Eumenius, Clytius offspring first she slew,
And his bare bosom with a spear thrust through;
Casting a stream of blood, the purple ground
Dying he bites, and turns upon his wound,
Then Lyris, Pegasus one, his horse being slain;
As stooping down to recollect his reine;
The Other, whilst he stretched his hand to aid,
Tumbles with him, slain by the valiant maid.
Amastrus next, was by her lance orethrown,
Tereas, Harpalicus, Chromis, Demophon.
As many javelins as the Virgin threw,
So many valiant Phrygians she slew.
Ornitus in strange arms far of she spide,
The hunter rode on an Apulian Steed,
Over his huge shoulders a bull-hide was cast,
And gaping with huge jaws upon his crest
With silver teeth, a Wolfs head he did bear,
His hand was armed with a rough knotty spear.
Amidst the battle he a squadron lead,
And wheeling taller shows by all the head.
Him (and 'twas easy whilst he turn d) she laid
Dead on the ground, and like a foe thus said.
Thought thou in woods wild beasts thou did pursue?
The time draws nigh when female arms shall you
Better inform: and this great honor bear
Thy Fathers ghost, thou felst, b'a Virgins spear.
Orsilochus and Butes men of might,
Next fell by her; strong Butes she did smite
Betwixt his Cask and Maile through the neck bone,
Whilst his left hand hung with his larget down.
Orsilochus did with a large turn delude,
Then wheeling the persewer she priued,
Raising her self high with her mighty Ax,
His Cask and Scull whilst he for quarter speaks,
She cleaves at once his brains on's face did run.
Struck at this sight was Aunus valiant son,
In Aponine bred who whilst the fates gave leave,
Was not the worst Lygnrian to deceive;
He, when to shun the fight no way was seen
Not knowing how t'escape the following Queen,
Tried what his art could do, and thus began.
What ^ame is it that a woman charge a man,
And worst him better mounted? dare thou fight
With me on foot? if so, then quickly light,
And know to whom vain glory grants the fame.
Straight the bold maid whom anger did inflame,
Gives to the next her horse, and in the field,
Stands with a naked sword and silver shield.
But the young man thinking his Plot had took,
Swift as the winds the place and her forsook.
And his reins turning, his swift courser rides,
Dying his rowels in his bloody sides.
Then spoke the Queen, puffed up with pride in vain,
Conceiv'st thou thus to 'scape from me again?
Tricks shall not thee to thy false father bear;
This said, on foot she cuts the yielding air,
Out-strips his horse, and straight his reins did seize,
Then with his blood her anger did appease;
As easy from a rock a Falcon flies,
After a dove, soaring in lofty skies,
And trussing up, does in his pounces bear,
Then blood and plumes fall scattered through the air.
Whilst the great sire of men and deities
Regardlesse viewed not this from starry skies,
But stirs up Tyrrhen, Tarchon to engage
In cruel fight, and urged with no small rage,
Amongst slaughter he, and slaughtring squadrons rides,
And by their names, his soldiers cheers and chides;
And those which shrunck, to turn again commands.
And said, whence is this fear, base Tyrrhen bands?
What breeds this terror? shall a woman beat
Our straggling troops, and our whole power defeat?
For what these arms? why march you with vain spears?
You Are bold at Venus, and nocturnall wars,
Or when for Bacchus sports, loud cornets sound,
Or boards with banquets, and full goblins crowned.
Th'is all your care, and when the Priest approves
Entrals and offerings call to sacred groves.
This said, amongst the thick'st he spurs his horse;
And from his Steed pulls Venulus by force,
And desperate raging, grasping of the foe
Carries away, laid on his Saddle bow
Showts heaven ascend the fact the Latins view,
But through the plains the fiery Tarchon flew,
Bearing both arms, and man, his javelins point
Breaks of then in his arms he seeks a joint,
To give the deadly wound; he strong, his hands
Keeps from his throat, and strength with strength withstands.
So with a Serpent a swift eagle flies,
Wreathd in her feet, and tallons through the skies,
The wounded Snake winding himself defends,
Brisling his scales a hssing tongue extends,
She with her beak and pounces tears, and eats,
And the soft Air with spreading pinions beats:
Triumphing so bold Tarchon did convey,
From the Tyburtine troops the woeful prey,
Their chiefs example and success enlarged,
The ^useane courage that again they charged,
When subtle Arun's one condemnd by fate
Did with much cunning on Camilla weight:
And to dispatch her, safest means he tried
Where ere the Virgin through the troops did ride,
Thither by stealth his speedy course he makes,
Now this way he attempts now that way takes;
And round about her ^archeth every where,
Then cruel shakes at her his deadly Spear.
Chloreus Cybeles priest did then by chance,
Shining far of in Phrygian arms advance,
And rid a ^oming Steed, whom skins infold
Plume wise commixd, with orazen Scales and gold,
In Tyrian purple oravely he did show,
And Cretan shafts sent from a Lycian bow,
Which golden hung at's back; golden his crest,
His swollen train rustled, and his Scarlet Vest
With burnished gold drawn in a knot he ties:
His Coat was wrought, rich cuishes on his thighs,
The Queen that she the Temple might adorn
With Trojan Arms, or would her self have worn
The golden spoil, this man of all the foes
She singles out, t'incounter him she goes,
And careless through whole squadrons made her way,
Inflamed with female love, spoil, and prey.
Taking th occasion Arune threw his spear,
And to the powers above thus made his Prayer.
Phoebus who swayst Soracte, best of Gods,
Whom first we'adore: to whom we burn whole loads
Of scorching pines, and then pass through the fire
With much devotion: grant almighty Sire,
That our Arms may abolish this disgrace;
Nor I desire the Virgins spoils to place
A Trophy, nor at any prey I aim;
My other actions shall preserve my name,
That I may give this Plague her deadly wound,
Then pleased I will return home unrenown'd.
Apollo heard, and partly grants his prayer,
The other part flies with the fleeting air,
He grants by him Camilla should be slain
But not to see his native Land again,
That the swift winds did carry from his ear;
Then through the clouds resounds the flying spear,
The squadrons look about, and all begin
To cast their eyes upon the Volscean Queen;
But she did nothing the great sound regard,
Nor coming through the sky the Lance she heard,
Till in her naked breast the Javlin stood,
And thirsty takes a draught of virgins blood.
Trembling with fear her Ladies all rush in
To keep supported up the falling Queen.
But Aruns frighted, did not now forbear
Basely to fly, his joy commixd with fear,
Nor longer now would trust unto his Lance,
Nor durst against the Virgins spear advance.
And as a Woolf, when he some shepherd kills,
Or mighty steer, flies to the lofty hills
Before that hostile weapons him distress,
And conscious of so bold a wickedness,
Cowring, betwixt his legs his tail he casts,
And struck with terror to the Forest hasts.
So from their eyes affrighted Aruns bends,
Hasting his flight and mingles with his friends.
To pull the savlin out she dying tryde,
But fast the steel sticks in her wounded side.
Pale, she sincks down and cold death seals her eyes,
And from her cheeks her rosy color flies,
Breathing her last: to Acca then she spoke,
One most she love'd who always did partake
Her cares, and councels, the most trusty maid
Attended her; and thus she groaning, said.
Sister, I once had strength, but now I fall,
By a sad wound, and darkness covers all;
To Turnus have and these my last words tell,
That he fall on, the Trojans to repel,
Adieu. This said, no more her reins she guides,
And though unwilling, to the ground she slides;
Then by degrees benumbed with cold she dies,
Her yielding neck now bends, her head now lies
Prisoner to death, leaving her arms diseased,
And life to shades flies with a groan displeased.
The golden stars then mighty clammors smite,
Camilla slain, afresh begins the fight,
And a hot charge with all the Trojan force,
The Tyrrhen Captains, and the Arcadian horse,
But Opis sent by Trivia, undismaid,
Placed on a rising hill the fight survaid,
Amongst cries of raging youth as far of she
Camilla punished by sad death did see;
She sighed and weeping said; ah Virgin such
A punishment for thee, was too too much.
Because thou Trojans boldly have assaild;
Nor has Diana's service thee availed,
Or quiver at thy shoulders to have borne:
Nor will thy Queen forsake thee this a scorn
In death, nor shall thou without honor die,
Nor unrevenged, through earth thy fame shall fly,
For who slew thee redeserv'd death shall come.
Under the hill did stand a mighty Tomb,
For the ancient Latin King Dercennus made,
Which high with earth an aged ^^ke did shade;
Hither the beauteous Goddess swiftly flies;
And Aruns from the Sepulcher espies.
As him in bright arms swollen with pride she saw,
Why said she do thou shun us? hither draw,
Come, and Camilla's Legacy receive:
Diana's shafts shall thee of life bereave;
The Thracian from her golden quiver drew
An Arrow, and enraged bends her bow,
And so much strength to draw the tree she set,
Until the crooked ends together met.
To th iron head her left hand she did bring,
Her right unto her bosom brought the string;
Aruns at once did hear the air resound,
And in his breast the feathered weapon round.
He, now expiring, as he groaning sends
His last breath forth, neglected by his friends
In dust of foreign fields forsaken lies;
And winged Opis mounts unto the skies.
Their Lady slain, Camilla's troops first fled,
Rutilians next, Atinas followed;
The officers desert their soldiers, all
Now fly, and swift ran to the cities wall.
Nor any could the Trojan charge withstand,
By arms or strength death bearing in their hand.
Their bows unbent hung at their weary backs,
And iron-hoof'd steeds the ground beneath them shakes.
Then black and troubled clouds of dust appear,
Darkning the sun, and to the walls drew near.
Beating their breasts, the matrons female cries
Send from the towers, and clamours raise to skies;
Who first through open gates did entrance make,
In, the foes troup with them commixed, brake:
Nor could the wretches woeful death avoid,
But are at home just at their doors destroid,
And under their own battlements their fates
Receive by steel; when others shut the gates,
And durst not open to receive within
Their calling friends: sad slaughters now begin
Of those the pass kept, and maintained the fight.
Some shut out, in their weeping parents sight,
Into the trench are tumbled headlong down;
Others with loose reins desperately ride on,
And tilt against the gates and massy bars.
The matrons, in such danger of the wars,
Moved with Camilla, and their countries love,
Logs, blocks and stones do tumble from above,
And these in stead of better weapons use,
To save their country death they not refuse.
Turnus mean while sad news heard in the groves,
And him with mighty sorrow Acca moves.
Volsceans were scattered, and Camilla slain,
Favored by Mars, they did the battle gain,
Who now pursue and drove them to the gates;
For so had Jove decreed and cruel fates.
He from the hills then rose, with fury struck,
And the rough groves, and dangerous pass forsook.
Scarce out of sight into the Plains he drew,
But Prince Aeneas marching he might view
Down to the open Champaign, and at last
The danger of the hill and forest past.
So both now marched unto the Royal seat,
Nor was the distance 'twixt the armies great.
At once from far Aeneas viewed the lands
Smoking with dust, and the Laurentian bands;
And Turnus fierce in arms, Aeneas saw,
Heard his horse neigh, and squadrons nearer draw.
Straight they in fight had joined, and battle gave,
Had not bright Phoebus in the Western wave
Washed his tired Steeds, night vanquishing the day;
Entrenched before the town both Armies lay.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Turnus resolved by fight to end the wars,
Straight challenges Aeneas; he prepares
To meet. The Tim^ and Place appointed, both
To observe articles, take a solemn Oath.
Iuturna sent th'agreement to disturb.
Nor could the Trojan Prince his Army curb.
Aeneas hurt: Turnus encouraged, then
Enters the fight, and slaughters many men.
Venus her offspring cures. Enraged he goes
To seek bold Turnus, amongst thickest foes;
But missing him, attempts the Town to gain;
Amata's woeful death and Turnus stain.
WHen Turnus saw the valiant Latins tired
With bad success, his promise now required,
Himself now looked upon he rages more,
And courage takes. As on the Lybian shore,
A wounded Lion by the Hunters chased,
Bold makes a stand, and charge them at last.
Breaking the spear, he shakes his curled main,
And roaring, does with bloody mouth complain.
Such rage as this inflames bold Turnus breast,
Who thus to The King his troubled mind expressed.
There shall be no delay in Turnus sword;
Will the perfidions Trojans keep their word,
And stand to their engagement? I will fight;
Perform great King for leagues the sacred rite.
Either this Asian fugitive by me
Shall perish, (let the Latins sit and see)
And I this common mischief shall destroy,
Or he victorious over me, enjoy
The fair Lavinia for his Royal bride.
To whom the King undiscompos'd repli'de.
Most valiant Prince; the more thy virtues be,
So much more careful it behooves me
Council to take, and weigh each chance with care.
Thine Daunus realms, and many cities are
By wars success and thy great valor thine;
By wealth and power I have enough for mine.
In Latium other Virgins may be found,
Who for their high extraction are renowned.
Let me unfold these sayings which are hard,
Without formalities, and my words regard;
That I to no Italian Prince should wed
My daughter, men and gods all prophes'ed.
Took with thy love, with thy alliance took,
And with my sad wives tears, all bonds I broke,
The promised bride detained, took impious arms;
Since you have seen what miseries, wars, what harms
Insu'd, and thy own danger; we orethrown
In two great battles, scarce defend the town;
And swollen with Latin blood, yet Tyber boyls,
Our bones make white the fields in mighty piles.
How is our mind with various counsels tossed?
What weakness changes it? were Turnus lost,
I should make peace; why rather then all strife
Remove not I, and yet preserve thy life?
What will thy own Rutilians think? what may
The other Princes of Ausonia say?
If (heaven forbid it) I should ruin thee,
Seeking our daughter and affinity,
View wars events, and thy old father spare,
Who now at home for thee lies plunged in care.
But words could nothing Turnus wrath assuage,
The medicine makes him worse, and more to rage,
Soon as he could, thus he began to say.
What care you take for me, great Prince; I pray
For me lay by: sire is sold cheap for fame,
Nor we dear father feeble javelins aim
And from those wounds I deal blood will appear.
Nor shall his goddess mother then be near,
Him flying with a femall cloud to save.
Nor with vain shadows shall our eyes deceive.
But the Queen weeping, with wars chance dismayed,
Orewhelmed with grief, thus did her son dissuade,
Dear Turnus by these tears, if any love
Of sad Amata thy kind bosom move,
(Thou my sole comfort, and my ages prop,
Who art our glory, and our Kingdoms hope,
On whom our falling house does only rest)
O challenge not the Dardan I request.
Whatever chance attends thee in that fight,
I must bear part, and shall this hated light
Forsake at once, nor captive will I see
That fugitive my son in law to be.
Lavinia heard her mothers speech; whilst tears
Drowned her fair cheeks, on which a blush appears
Like new born flame, and over clear beauty flows;
So Indian-ivory stained with crimson shows,
Or lilies amongst Province-roses placed:
So sweet a color the bright virgin graced,
When moved with love Turnus beheld the maid,
And more incensed, thus to Amata said.
My dearest mother, follow not with tears
So sad an omen, him, who now prepares
For strife of cruel Mars: the fatal hour
Of death to stay is not in Turnus power.
Idmon our Herald, go, this message bear
Not pleasing to the Phrygian Princes care.
Soon as the blushing chariot of the morn,
With roses shall days infant brows adorn,
Let him not draw his Trojans to the field,
Let both the armies to cessation yield.
With our own blood this war we shall decide,
There let him strive to gain the royal bride.
This said, he went to see his horse; their plight,
And fiery metal gave him much delight,
Which, Orythia gave Pilumus, who exceed
The snow in whiteness, and the wind in speed,
The grooms attend; they clap their necks, and rein
Their well born heads and comb the flowing main.
Next on he tried a suit of armor, which
Was bright with gold, with Orycalcus rich:
Then puts his sword on, and his target braced,
And fits his crest with bloody feathers graced.
Vulcan the sword for's father Daunus made,
And hot in Stygian waters cooled the blade.
Then to a stately hall he did advance,
Where against a pillar stood a mighty lance,
Aruncian Actors spoil: this down he took,
And speaking thus, with mighty violence shook.
O never failing when I made my prayer,
The time draws nigh, thou once were Actors spear,
And now art mine: O grant I may orethrow
Th'effeminate Phrygian, and this hand the foe
Dispoyl of arms with dust his tresses soil
Cnrl'd with hot irons, and moist with myrrh and oil.
Thus moved with rage, through all his face did rise
Sparkles of flame, fire shines in his bright eyes.
As when a bull roars dreadful'y for fight,
And does his fury with his horns excite;
Charging a tree, out-braves the wind with blows,
And sand praeludium to the combat strows.
Then raged Aeneas in Vulcanian arms,
And whets his wrath, preparing for alarms,
Glad thus to end the war; his son and friends
To comfort them, he shows what fate intends.
Then he commands some to the King should bear
Th'accepted challenge, and should peace declare.
Scarce had the morning crowned with golden rays
The hills, when Phoebus steeds forsook the seas,
And from their fiery nostrils blew the light:
When near the city wall, lists for the fight,
Trojans and Rutiles measuring did prepare.
Hearths in the midst, and flowery altars were
To common gods. Some water, fire, defign'd,
With linen veiled, Vervaine their brows did bind.
Ausonian squadrons, and the piled troop,
March from the town, and Trojans all drew up,
And Tyrrhen squadrons have with various arms,
Standing imbattel'd, ready for alarms.
Amidst the chiefs in scarlet shine and gold,
Assaracus offspring, Mnestheus, and the bold;
Asylas, with Messapus next took place;
Messapus bravely mounted Neptunes race,
The signals heard; all clear the appointed fields,
On earth they fix their spears, and rest their shields.
Feeble old men, and fearful women haste
With the unarmed vulgar, where, well placed
The fight they might behold; on towers some get,
Or houses tops, on battlements these sit.
But Juno looking from a hill, whose name
Is Alban now, (then without style or fame)
Did the whole army of the Latins view,
The Trojans, and the royal city too.
When thus the goddess to a goddess said,
Who Turnus sister was, whom floods obeyed;
Which gift Jove gave, king of the starry sky,
In recompense of her virginity.
Nymph, glory of the floods whom most I love
Of all those Latin dames aspired to Jove
's Ungrateful bed, and placed in heaven with me.
Lest us thou blame, thy sad condition see.
Whilst fortune pleased, and fate to Latium gave
Success, I Turnus and thy walls did save.
Now cruel fates attend the youth, and I
Behold his day, and woeful chance draw nigh;
Nor I this peace, nor combatants will view:
If ought thou dare, now for a brother do;
Perhaps some better fortune may arise.
Scarce said, when tears pour from Juturna's eyes,
Beating her snowy breast. Then Juno said,
This is no time to weep; thy brother aid,
And save, if now thou can; raise war again,
And break the peace I Will the bold act maintain.
Advising thus, she left her much distressed,
And deep the wounding sorrow pierced her breast.
Mean while both Kings draw forth in solemn state,
Latinus in a gallant chariot sat,
Twelve golden rays impail'd his shining brows,
Declaring Sol his grandsire; Turnus goes
With white steeds drawn, and shakes two mighty spears,
Aeneas, Romes original, appears
Bright in celestial arms: with him did come
Ascanius the next great hope of Rome
The priest in white did fleecie sheep design,
And the fat offspring of the brisled swine,
And cattle to the flaming altars brought:
They to the rising sun, their hands well fraught
With salt fruit, turn their eyes; beasts for divine
Uses they take, and on their foreheads sign;
And with full bowls and offerings th'altars lade,
Then with a drawn sword Prince Aeneas prayed.
Witness O sun, this Farth confirm the same,
For which I through so many troubles came.
Great Jove, and Juno, who will now declare
For us I crave; and thou great God of war
Who still in dreadful battles governst all.
The sacred springs and fountains, you I call,
And mighty powers which in high heaven reside,
And gods which on the azure billows glide;
If Turnus fortune shall the victory get,
We shall return to King Evanders seat,
Nor my Ascanius, nor the Trojan bands
Bear arms against you, nor invade these lands.
But if my valor to me conquest give.
(Which may the Gods connrm, and I believe!)
Latins shall not the Trojan power obey,
I seek not rule, together they shall sway
With equal law, and leagues eternal make;
I Will join our gods, and let Latinus take
The power himself: for me the Trojans shall
A city build, which I le Lavinium call.
Aeneas said, then thus Latinus prays,
And looking up, to heaven his hands did raise;
By the same earth, and sea, and stars I vow,
The sun, and moon, and Janus double brow,
And deepest gates of hell: Great Jove, hear these,
Who with thy thunder do establish peace.
Altars and fires I touch, and powers invoke,
Never by us shall this our league be broke;
Whatever chance do fall, no day shall tell
That I was drawn to break one article.
First shall the earth be with a deluge drowned,
Or heaven shall sink into the Strgian sound:
And as this scepter (he a scepter bore)
Never shall sprout with verdant branches more;
Which long cut down, no sap from earth recei es,
And has to the axe bequeathed both boughs and leaves:
Which once a tree, now gold and art adorn,
And is by princes of the Latins born.
Thus they confirm the leagues in open view
Of all the chiefs, and sacred cattle slew.
Then from the beasts alive hot entrails pull,
And load the altars with huge chargers full.
But to the Rutiles now the fight appears
Unequal, who are moved with various fears;
And more when they him not so cheerful saw,
With heavy pace near to the altar draw,
And cast down looks, who whilst heavens aid he seeks
Had lost the manly color in his cheeks.
This observation as Juturna viewd
To spread, and seize the giddy multitude,
Camerta's form she takes, whose grandsire won
And rathers valor, honor for the son;
And he himself most valiant; in she goes
Amidst the bands, and thus strange rumor sowes.
For all these forces, is it not a shame
One man t'expose? what, have we not the same
Number and strength? Behold, before us stand
Trojans, Arcadians, and the fatal band
Those fierce Hetrurians, who hate Turnus so:
We Are two for one, if we should charge the foe.
He raised by fame, shall with the gods survive
T'whom he is devoted, and for ever live.
Our country lost, we must proud lords obey,
Who now sit still, and help to him deny.
Thus being incensed, the murmur louder grew,
And more and more now through the army flew.
Latins, Laurentians, who did late suppose
An end of war, and rest from former woes,
Are all for arms, the peace they much detest,
And Turnus fortune does their minds molest.
To these another did Juturna join,
Which moved far more; from heaven she gave a sign,
Then which could nothing more their souls inrage,
Or sooner make the Italians to engage.
For Joves fair bird, cutting the arched skies,
As at a loud-wing'd troop of fowl he slies;
Then stooping down, he from the water bears
A silver swan, trust in his hooked fears.
The Italians, courage raise; for the whole flight
With loud cries face about, (a wondrous sight)
They cloud the heaven with wings, and through the sky
In a full body charge the enemy;
Vanquished by force, tired with his load, he threw
His prey in the stream, and to the clouds withdrew.
The omen then, Rutilians did salute,
And arms prepared with a mighty shout.
And first the Augur bold Tolumnius said,
For this with vows so often I have praid.
You gods, I take your sign; and led by me
Now draw vour swords out, valiant Rutilie.
Those whom this stranger did with war infest,
(As harmless fowl) and has their realms oppressed,
Shall drive him hence, and force him to the main,
Then with one mind array your selves again,
And save your King in danger to be lost.
This said, his spear against the foe he cast,
The well-aim'd javelin sounding cuts the skies;
At once, huge shouts, at once the squadrons rise,
Desire of tumult now inflames their blood.
But the sent spear, where nine bold brethren stood,
Which by a Tyrrhen dame true to his bed
Were to Gilipus an Arcadian bred,
One in the midst where his rich belt did sit,
Close to his side just where the button knit.
As the brave youth in shining arms did stand,
Went through his ribs, and stretched him on the sand,
But the bold brothers in a body make,
And stirred with rage, some draw their swords, some take
Their spears in haste, and mad, advance; a band
Of Laurentines draw forth these to withstand.
Trojans, Arcadians, Agelinians move,
To try it out with steel they all approve.
Altars are spoiled, and storms of javelins pour,
And from the sky descends an iron shoure.
They seize the cups and hearths; Latinus flies,
The peace being broke with injured deities.
Some mount their horses, others straight prepare
Their chariors, and with dtawn swords ready are.
Messapus at this peace much discontent,
Did charge a King in royal ornament,
Tyrrhen Aulestes: who, as he withdrew
Backward, himself on th'alter overthrew,
(...) On's head and shoulder pitched; but with his lance
Messapus fiercely did to him advance;
And whilst he quarter cried, with his huge spear
Slew as he sat above; then said, Lie there,
To the great gods a better sacrifice,
The Italians rush, and spoil him ere he dies.
Chorineus from the altar snatched a brand,
With which, Ebusus charging boldly, gained
A blow on's face, that set his beard on fire,
Which burning smelt: he, as he did retire,
With his left hand persuing of his blow,
Did seize the hair of his amazed foe;
And wrestling with him, brought him to the ground,
Then with his stiff sword gave the deadly wound.
Podalirius, the shepherd Alsus slew,
As before the squadrons and first ranks he flew,
And following with a drawn sword, overtakes;
But his deaths wound bequeathed him with an axe,
The mighty blow clove to the chin his head,
And all his arms with blood besprinkeled:
A hard and iron sleep closes his sight,
And sealed his eyes up in eternal night.
But prince Aeneas naked hands extends,
His head yet bare, and calls aloud his friends;
Where rush you thus? what sudden rage is this?
O stay your wrath! the peace concluded is,
All are agreed; it is I must end this war:
Let me then fight and lay aside your fear;
A lasting peace I with this hand shall bind,
These offerings me, and Turnus have designed.
Whilst these he said, behold with mighty sound
A winged arrow gave the King a wound.
By what hand shot, or whirlwind sent, unknown,
What god or chance did Rutils so renown.
But Turnus, when he saw Aeneas turn,
His Captains troubled, straight with hope did burn;
Calls for his steeds, then arms, and from the plains
Leaps in his chariot, and strait takes his reins,
And many valiant soldier overthrowes,
And ore them dying with his horses goes;
Or with his chariot wheels whole squadrons tears,
And at them flying casts their taken spears.
So near cold Hebrus bloody Mars proceeds,
Whilst his shield rattles, to his fiery steeds
Giving the reins, then winds they fly more fleet,
And farthest Thrace groans with their thundering feet:
With him pale fear, and cruel anger rode,
And treachery accompanies the god.
Fierce Turnus so, his horse drives through the plain,
Smoking with sweat, insulting ore the slain:
From their swift heels a sanguine dew he spreads,
And sand with streams of blood commixed, treads;
And now he Sthenelus, Thamaris, Polus slew;
These hand to hand, him afar off orethrew.
Glaucus and Lades, both in Lycia born,
Whom Imbrasus their father did adorn
With arms of equal proof, either to fight,
Or mounted, to outstrip the winds in flight.
In the other wing, Eumedes fierce came on
With new supplies, old Dolons warlike son;
His grandsires name, and fathers strength he had,
Who in times past, when he a spy was made
To view the Grecian camp; bold, for his hire
Achilles horse and chariot did require.
For this, Tydides gave him other pay,
Nor bore he ere Pelides steeds a way.
As afar off bold Turnus him did view
Through th'ample sky, at him his javelin threw;
Then stops his horse, and from his chariot leaps,
Whom falling down half dead on's neck he steps,
Pulls his sword from him, and the shining blade
He colored in his throat, and thus he said.
Trojan behold that land rhou striv'st to gain;
And stretched out thus, measure the Hesperian plain.
To those dare fight with us, we always yield
Rewards like these; and thus they cities build.
Next Butes with his spear He overthrew,
Bold Cloris, Sabiris, and Dares slew,
Thersilocus, Thymetes next did speed,
As he was tumbling from his warlike steed.
And as Edonian Boreas, when aloud
He thunders raging on the Aegean flood,
To shore the billows follow; through the sky,
Which way winds blow, the fleeting clouds do fly.
So Turnus, wheresoere he way does make,
The troops give place, the bands to flight betake;
He with his own force on like a whirlwind comes,
The wanton winds shaking his waving plumes.
Phegeus withstands him; though his fury burns,
He stops his chariot, and his horses turns;
Their foamie mouths he checked, and whilst he hung
Drawn by their mains, at him his spear he flung;
Which pierced quite through his double mail, and found
Passage to raze his body with a wound:
But he defended with his target, made
Still at the foe, and from his sword craves aid;
When hurried with the wheel, and flying axe,
He was at last orethrown, whom Turnus takes
Betwixt his helm and gorge, and smote off's head,
And left upon the sand his body dead.
Whi^st conquering Turnus made such slaughters thus;
Mnestheus, Achates, sad Ascanius,
Aeneas bleeding to the camp attend:
Each other step on a long spear he leaned;
To draw the broken arrow he assayes,
Struggling with pain, and tries the easiest ways;
They lance the wound, and where it lay concealed
Cut deep; that they again might take the field.
Japix, whom Phoebus loved most was there,
Who once to him did such affection bear,
That his own arts on him he did bestow,
The spirit of Prophecy, with his harp and bow.
That he might long defer the fatal hour
Of his old father, he the use and power
Of Simples learned, and to himself imparts,
By study knowledge of despised arts.
Aeneas chafing leaned upon a spear,
With sad Julus, and great concourse there,
Nor is he moved nor troubled at their tears.
Then old Japix many things prepares,
His vest girt back in the Paeonian guise,
And Phoebus powerful herbs in vain applies,
Vainly he labors to draw forth the steel,
Tries with his Probe, and does with pincers feel;
No way will hit, no aid Apollo yields.
Now horror, more and more raged in the fields,
Danger draws near, dust hides the heaven from view;
Horse charge, and 'midst the camp thick javelins flew;
A woeful noise did now ascend the sky,
Of valiant youth, who in fierce battle die.
Here Venus troubled at her sons deep wound,
Brought Dittanie, in Craetan Ida found,
The stalk has sprowting leaves, and on the crown
A purple slower, not to wild goats unknown,
When their rough backs the winged shaft has gal'd:
This Venus brought, in clouds her beauty veiled;
To this she did fresh streams in gold infuse,
In secret, and with sweet Ambrosian dewes,
She odoriferous Panax did compound,
With which the old man not knowing, bathed the wound.
Then from his body, straight all anguish fled,
And now the wound no more, though mighty, bled,
The steel now uncompel'd follows the hand,
And strength returns unto its old command.
Bring arms, why stay you? first lapix cries:
Inflaming courage against the enemies,
This is no work of man nor did this art,
My master Phoebus unto me impart,
Nor have I drawn the steel, which deep did lurk,
A greater God sends thee to greater work.
Then for the fight Aeneas earnest, ties
His golden cuishes to his manly thighs,
Hating delays, brandished his spear; this done
Buckles his shield, and claps his corslet on,
And then his son embracing, thus arrai'd,
He through his beaver, sweetly kissing said;
Valor, true honor, learn (my boy) from me,
Fortune from others; this right hand shall be
In war thy shield, and shall with realms endow;
To riper years attained, remember thou
Thy friends example; let thy fathers fame,
And uncle Hector, to brave acts inflame.
Thus having said, through open ports he makes,
And mighty he a mighty javelin shakes.
Anteus and Mnestheus straight a body make,
And all the bands draw forth, the camp forsake,
Then mighty clouds of dust obscure the field,
And thundering feet makes the shook earth to yield.
Turnus beheld them, as the troops did draw
Forth from the works, and the Ausonians saw,
Straight through their bodies runs cold trembling fear,
But before all his sister first did hear,
She knew the sound, and frighted fled amain.
He hasts, leading his black band through the plain.
As when a mighty storm flies to the shore,
Through the deep sea, suspected long before
By skillful swains, who fear it will annoy,
Their plants their standing corn and all destroy,
The wind as Herbingers bring the sound to land,
So charged Aeneas with his Trojan band.
And close together they in bodies drew.
Tymbraeus, stout Osiris overthrew,
Mnestheus, Archetius, and Achates sped
Bold Epulon, Gyas left Vfens dead:
Tosumnius the Augurer, he slew,
Who against the Trojans first his javelin threw;
Clamor scales heaven, now Rutilians yield
And swift turn dusty shoulders through the field.
Aeneas scorns to fight with any here,
Who charge on foot, or horse, or cast a spear;
He Turnus seeks alone through dusty mists,
And only him demands unto the lists.
Juturna that Virago struck with fear,
Tumbles Metiscus, Turnus chariotteer
Out of his seat, and snatched from him the reins,
And leaves forsaken, fallen upon the Plains.
Acting his part, she gu^^^s the foaming bits,
In voice, arms, shape, like to Metusius sits.
As when a swallow flies through spacious Courts
Of some rich lord, and in vast hals resorts,
Food seeking for her young, portches she rounds,
And now about the crystal fountains sounds.
Thus mounted through the foe Iuturna makes,
And with her thundering wheels all overtakes:
Then here her brother, and now there she shows,
Nor lets him fight, but far from thence she goes.
Aeneas so, turns here, now there he flies,
And Turnus traced through scattered enemies;
Calling as often as him he had in sight:
And spurs adds to his winged horses slight.
As often Juturna thence her chariot guides;
What shall she do, tossed with such various tides?
Aeneas as he many plots prepares,
At him Messapus (for he had two spears)
Cast one of them, and sent with mighty force.
Aeneas guards himself, and stops his course,
Bending his knee; through's crest the javelin comes,
And from his cask, quite sweeps away his plumes.
Then for the treachery, his rage grew hot;
When he perceived his flying chariot,
Jove, and the altars he to witness calls,
Of broken leagues, then on the slaughter falls,
No difference makes, with all he does engage,
And gives full reins to his late curbed rage.
What God can tell those slaughters? who in verse
The funerals of the captains can rehearse,
Which fell by Turnus on the Ausonian Plain,
Or count those numbers by Aeneas slain?
Could Jove be pleased to see such wars as these
'Twixt nations that must join in lasting peace!
Aeneas Sacro slew, (this fight first staid
The flying Trojans,) nor he long delaid:
Through's breast, where fate did easiest way afford,
Among his short ribs he sheaths his naked sword.
Turnus, Amicus, fallen from's Courser, met
On foot, on's brother next Diores set;
To this advancing, death he did afford
With his long spear, that slaughters with his sword;
Their heads cut off, he to his chariot bore,
And hung them up, bloody with purple gore.
He ^alo, Tanais and Cethegus slew,
Three at one charge, and stern Onytes too
Of the Echion name, whom dame Peridia bore,
Brother from Lycia sent, and Phoebus shore;
And young Menaetes who in vain denide
To go to wars: near fishy Lernas side
He had his craft, and house, wealth was unknown,
Whose father ^il'd a country not his own.
As fires are kindled in contrary ways,
Amongst dry woods, and sprigs of crackling bays,
Or when with rapid course from mountains steep
Sound foamy streams, and hurry to the deep,
And both alike make devastations large.
So stout Aeneas and bold Turnus charge;
Their rage now boyls, and breasts unconquered bleed;
With their whole strength, to slaughter they proceed.
Muranus here, (boasting the ancient name
Of Grandsires who from Latin Princes came;)
He with a stone orethrew, and on the Plains
Measured his length: whom fallen, and lost his reins,
The wheels ran ore: thick blows swift heels afford,
Of horses now unmindfull of their lord.
Turnus meets Ilus mainly raging now,
And casts his javelin at his golden brow:
Quite through the helm it fixed in his brain.
Nor could thy valor thee protection gain,
Bold Grecian Creteus, from fierce Turnus ods;
Nor from Aeneas charge, could his own Gods
Cupentus save: his breast to th sword must yield,
Nor to the wretch availed his brazen shield.
Thee Aeolus, Laurentian fields saw dead,
And the large Champaigne thy broad shoulders spread,
Whom not the Argive squadrons could destroy,
Nor stern Achilles who subverted Troy,
Here was thy place for death, from Ida come,
Laurentian fields thy body must intombe.
Latins and Trojans, now are all engaged;
Mnestheus, Serestus and Messapus raged.
Well mounted, on bravely Asylas brings
Up Tuscane bands, and the Arcadian wings,
They battle join and strive with all their might;
No reserve left, there was a cruel fight.
The most fair mother of Aeneas here
Puts in his mind to th'wals he should draw near,
And straight with his Army to the city go,
Which sudden should the Latins overthrow.
He, as he Turnus sought through all the bands,
Bending each way, saw how Laurentum stands,
From so much troubles safe, in quiet rest:
A shape of greater war inflames his breast.
Mnestheus, Sergestus and Serestus stout,
Placed on a mount he calls, where round about
Trojans might flock, nor shields or spears they laid
Aside, whilst thus from rising ground he said,
What I command obey; this Jove decrees;
Nor slow move for the sudden enterprise.
This town and city, cause of all this war,
Unless they yield, and say they vanquished are,
I will destroy, and level with the ground
Their smoking spires; till Turnus will be found,
Must I expect? whilst he is pleased to fight
Vanquished again, must I attending wait?
Of all our woes this is the head and spring.
Sue then for peace with slames, and fire-bands bring.
This said, they cheerful into order fall,
And in a body draw unto the wall.
Straight scaling ladders were, and fire prepared:
Some to the gates advance, and kill the guard:
Others, all heaven with shafts and javelins cloud;
Aeneas first, raising his hand, allowd
Latinus blames: calls heaven to witness then,
He is compelled to take up arms again,
They by hostility Peace had broken twice.
Then amongst the People factious stirs arise;
Some for the Trojans bid open the gate,
And that they should march through the city straight,
And to the outworks they their King do call;
Others bring arms, and will defend the wall.
As when a swain finds in a hollow rock,
A swarm of bees, and fills the place with smoke:
Disturbed they fly about their waxen seat,
And with a mighty noise their anger whet;
Smoke scales their roofs, within sad murmurs rise,
And pitchy fumes advance unto the skies.
When to the fainting Latins chanced a woe,
Which the whole city did with grief oreflow.
As the Queen saw the foe draw near the wall,
The gates beset, fire on the roofs to fall;
Nor Turnus nigh, the city to maintain.
Hopeless, she thought in fight the Prince was slain.
Struck dead with woe, I am the cause, she cries,
I, I the spring of all these miseries.
Thus raving she, her bitter grief expressed,
And desperate, she rends her purple vest:
Then on a beam, a knot for base death knit.
Soon as the woeful Latins heard of it;
(But first Lavinia tore her golden hair
And rosy cheeks) they all in uprore were:
And the whole palace rung with dismal cries.
Hence the sad fame through the whole city flies;
Their hearts now failed; amazed Latinus went,
And regal weeds, at his wives fortune, rent;
Then for his ruined town oppressed with woes,
Foul dust upon his silver hair he throws;
Himself much blaming, cause he did refuse,
And for his son did not Aeneas choose.
Mean while the warrior Turnus did a few
Poor straglers to the farthest plains pursue;
And by degrees now slower, and slower he rides,
And less and less in his swift horses prides.
Hither to him the wind strange terror bears,
With clamours mixed; and to his listening ears
The cities confused noise and cries had blown.
Ah what misfortune now disturbs the town!
Why from Laurentum come such sounds! This said,
Distracted in his mind a while he staid.
His sister, who Metiscus shape had got,
His charioteer, and drove his chariot,
To him then spoke: The Trojans there pursue
Where victory opens now a way to you:
Others there are that will defend the town.
Aeneas drives the Italians up and down,
Thundering in arms; let us like slaughters make
Amongst the Trojans, nor the field forsake,
Since thou in strength and valor equal art.
Then Turnus said --
Sister, long since I knew thee, when by charms
Thou brok'st the league, and tookst thy selt up arms.
Now Goddess, thou deceiv'st in vain: but who
From heaven to suffer thus commanded you?
Came thou to see thy brothers cruel death?
What safety else can fortune now bequeath?
Did not these eyes behold Muranus, when
He called to me aloud, and called again?
Then whom to me (alas) was dearer none:
The brave man fell, by a great wound orethrown.
And hapless Vfens died, lest he should see
Our foul disgrace; his arms and body be
The Trojans prize. Shall I here tamely stay
Till they destroy the town? Is that the way?
Nor shall this arm Drances confute? shall I
Retreat, and shall this land see Turnus fly?
Is death so hard? You spirits, that dwell below,
Oh send me aid; since heaven's declared my foe!
To you my spotlesle soul not knowing to offend,
Worthy my predecessors shall descend.
Scarce said; when Sages through the foe did come,
His horse behold all over in a foam:
In's head an arrow sticking, post he came
Requiring aid of Turnus by his name.
Great Prince, in thee is our last hopes, allow
Some aid to us; Aeneas thunders now
In arms about our gates, and threatens, he
Will now destroy the towers of Italy;
And ready with destruction firebrarnds fly
About the roofs. The Latins fix their eye
Only on thee; all is lost, if thou not aid.
Nor will Latinus longer be delaid
Whom to call son, or with which side t'agree.
Besides the Queen most, faithful still to thee,
Is dead; and frighted with her own sad fates
Has made her self away; only the gates
Are by Messapus, and Atinas manned;
Round these, on every side thick squadrons stand,
An iron crop glisters with swords and shields,
Whilst thou do drive here in forsaken fields.
Turnus amazed, with various objects stood
Silent a while; great shame then boyls his blood,
Grief with distraction mixed, and love did call,
Stirred up by rage, and loss of honor, all.
Soon as his mind he recollected had,
The walls (much grieved) with burning eyes survaid,
And the great town did from the wheels behold,
When he might see amongst the bulwarks rolled
And the dry timber up a mighty flame
With smoke toward heaven: then to a tower it came
Wrought with huge beams, which he himself had made,
And had with wheels and lofty arches laid.
Fate calls now, sister, there is no delay:
What God and hard chance bids, we must obey.
I Will meet Aeneas; deaths worst form I Will face;
Nor longer shall thou see my great disgrace:
Grant ere the fight I may to fury yield.
This said, from's chariot leaps into the field,
And rushed through foes, his sister sad forsakes,
And swift he through the middle squadron makes.
As a huge stone drove by a tempests power
From a hills top, or carried by a shower;
Or sliding years which time has freed from thence,
The mighty rock rolled down with violence
Bounds from the earth; and tumbling headlong then
With it sweeps woods, and flocks, whole herds, and men:
So through the broken squadrons Turnus goes
To the city walls: and where the sad earth flows
With streams of blood, where javelins cloud the skies,
Waving his hand, with a loud voice he cries.
No more in fight Rutilians Latins join,
What ere the fortune is, it must be mine.
I with my sword firm peace shall make. This said,
They all retreat, and a fair space they made.
But when Aeneas heard of Turnus name,
Straight from the walls and lofty towrs he came.
And breaks off all delays, quits all designs,
And joyful now in thundering arms he shines.
So mighty Ahos, or tall E rix show,
Or ancient Apenninus, when with snow
Above the stars his lofty head is crowned,
And does with tempest beaten oaks resound.
Rutilians, Trojans, and the Italians, all
Who did maintain, and those who stormed the wall,
Fixed there their eyes, and from the fight withdraw.
Latinus was amazed, when he saw
Such mighty men, born in far distant land,
Resolved to try it out, now hand to hand.
Soon as the field with open lists appears,
With a swift course far off they cast their spears;
They charge then with their targets, and the ground
Does with a groan return the brazen sound.
Then with their swords blow after blow lay on,
Fortune and valor are conjoined in one.
So in great Syla or Taburnus height
Two bulls with horns begin a cruel fight;
Their frighted Lords retreit: the cattle stand
Silent with fear, who shall the steers command,
Whom the whole herd shall follow; whilst the foes
Gore one another, dealing cruel blows:
In streams of blood their necks and shoulders dround,
And with their bellowing all the woods resound.
So with their shields they at each other fly,
Whilst mighty fragor sills the ample sky.
With equal beam Jove holds the balances,
And in each scale the various fate he lays
Of both the Princes; who shall honor have,
And whom deaths weight shall sink down to the grave.
Here Turnus did his arm and sword advance,
Then makes a blow, suspecting no mischance.
A shout the Trojans and the Latins made,
Both sides are raised; but the perfidious blade
Breaks in the stroke, and on the earth it lies.
Flight now must aid; more swift then winds he flies,
When a strange hilt he in his hand did find.
Fame is, when he did mount his horses joy'nd
In the first fight, and was for battle hot,
He seized Metiscus sword, his own forgot:
And that served long, while straggling Trojans fled.
But when it came to arms by Vulean made,
The mortal sword like ice broke in his hand,
The pieces shining on the yellow sand.
Therefore amazed he flies through the open plain,
Now here, now there; and wheels about again.
For each side Trojans with a guard surround,
There did a fen there lofty bulwarks bound.
Nor slower Aeneas after him, though he
Sometimes complained of his wounded knee.
And swiftly at the heels he follows him;
As when a Deer enclosed with some stream,
Or struck with terror, when the arrow sounds,
The hantsman near with a full cry of hounds;
But he a thousand waves tries for escapes,
Frighted with nets and banks: Fierce Vmber gapes
Ready to seen, and now so nigh does get
He bites, but cozened with an empty bit;
Then clamours rise, the banks and lakes reply,
And all the heavens thunder with the cry.
He flying, then upbraids Rutilian bands,
Calls each by name, and his own sword demands.
Aeneas threatens death to any one
Dares give him aid, and to destroy the town:
This vows to do; at which they shake, dismayed.
Too and again they full five courses had:
For no mean prize they strove, or sporting strife,
But they for blood contend, and Turnus life.
Sacred to Faunus, here an Olive stood,
On which those escaped the danger of the flood,
To the Larentian God did pay their vows,
And promised vests hang on the sacred boughs.
Trojans without respect cut down this tree,
That a clear list might for the Champions be.
Here stuck Aeneas spear with violence cast,
And in the yielding root was fixed fast,
The Dardan pulls, that he with this the foe
Might overtake, because he was too slow.
Then Turnus frighted prays, O Faunus hear,
And pity, and dear earth detain the spear,
If always I your honors have maintained,
Which now with war the Trojans have profaned.
Nor with vain vows he called the deities aid;
For whilst Aeneas struggling, was delaid
In the soft stump, nor could the root constrain:
Juturna, in Metiscus form again,
Runs in and helps her brother to his sword.
Venus with fury at the bold nymph stird,
Then comes, and from the deep root pulls the lance.
Now brave in arms and cheered they both advance,
This to his sword, that trusting to his spear,
And for the strife of panting Mars prepare.
Mean while heavens mighty King to Juno said,
As from a bright cloud they the fight survaid,
What now remains dear wife, when ends our ods?
Aeneas thou know, must sit amongst the Gods,
And Fates to him have starry seats alow'd,
What plot thus stays thee in a gloomy cloud?
What! shall a mortal wound a God: or thou
(For to Juturna thy power did allow
To bring the sword for Daunus sons defense)
To give fresh courage to the vanquished Prince.
Give ore at last, to our entreaties bend,
Nor let such eating grief thee silent spend,
Nor with such care so often trouble me;
Time was, when thou could vex by Land, and Sea
The Trojan race; and kindle cruel wars:
Houses destroy, and Hymen mix with jars.
More I forbid t'attempt: such things Jove spoke,
When Juno said, with a submissive look.
Because great Jove thy mind to me was known,
Unwilling I have Turnus left alone.
Nor should thou see me solitary sit
In a cold cloud, and suffer things unfit:
But girt with flames, our squadrons to excite,
And draw the Trojans to unhappy fight.
I must confess, pitying, I did persuade
Woeful Juturna to her brothers aid:
And greater things I for his life would do,
But not to use a dart, or bend a bow.
This by th'inexorable Stygian floods
I swear, that only oath which ties the Gods;
And now I go, and leave the woeful fight,
But one thing I request, which yet no right
Or Fate denies: for the Majesty of thine,
When with blessed Hymen, they shall leagues conjoyne,
(And may it be,) and Laws of peace proclaim,
Let not the Latins change their ancient name,
Nor let them be called Trojans I beseech,
Nor yet to change their habit, nor their speech;
Let it be Latium, and for ever be
The Alban fathers in great Italy;
Let Romans. by their valor conquer all.
T'roy's tain: and with her let the name now fall:
The king of men and Gods, then smiling says.
Thou art Joves sister, Saturns second race;
Why in thy breast rowlst thou such floods of rage?
Lay by that spleen, so vainly did engage;
I am overcome, and thou thy suit shall gain.
They shall their customs, and their speech retain;
And keep their ancient name. The Trojan race,
Mixed with so great a body shall give place.
I Will add their sacred rites, and I shall make
Latins and Trojans, both one tongue to speak.
A race mixed from the Ausonians thou shall see
Excelling men, and gods in piety:
Nor any nation more in war or peace
Shall hononr thee. These words did Juno please,
And satisfide, her mind being changed, she flies
From the dark cloud and leaves the troubled skies.
This done; Jove with himself contrives to call
Iuturna, from her hapless brothers fall.
Two hellish hags there be, the Dirae height.
Which to Megaera, were by dismal Night
Born at a birth, and armed with serpents stings:
Who gave them power to use resounding wings.
These at Jove's throne, and cruel court appear;
These stir in mortals jealousy and fear,
When the Gods king, sickness and death prepares,
Or wicked cities terrifies with wars.
Jove one of these, sending from heaven, injoyns
To meet Iuturna with ill boading signs.
She to the earth in a swift whirlwind flies;
So glides a Parthian arrow through the skies,
With poison armed, or by Sydonian art
Sounding through the air, with deadly bane, a dart:
Unknown it comes, swift through the gloomy shade;
So hasts Nights daughter, and to earth she made.
After she saw the Trojans, and did look
On Turnus bands; a small birds form she took,
Which, or on tombs or roofs forsaken hants,
And late in shady night her sorrow chants.
Thus changed the hag at Turnus face did charge,
And with her flapping wings she beats his targe.
Here sudden numbnesse seized his limbs with fear;
Amazed, struck dumb, erected was his hair.
But afar off, as near the Dirae drew
Her sounding wings, woeful Juturna knew,
Tearing her flowing hair, her face infests
With her own nails, and beats her panting breasts,
How can thy sister, Turnus, aid thee now?
Or what is left for me poor wretch, to do?
How shall I save thy life? which way shall I
Oppose my self against this prodigy?
Fright me no more, foul hag; now I shall go;
The sounding of your deadly wings I know:
Nor proud commands of Jove deceived me,
And this he gives for my virginity.
Why did he me immortal make? and why
Took he from me the happiness to die?
Then I might give a period to this woe,
And to the shades with my dear brother go.
But I immortal am; yet wanting thee,
Nothing that is mine, shall pleasant be to me.
That earth would gape and swallow me! that now
A Goddess might descend to shades below!
This said, her head with a green vail she hides,
And with a groan beneath the river glides.
Aeneas stands, and a huge javelin shook,
A mighty tree; and like a foe thus spoke;
What stays thee now OTurnus? it is not flight
Must end our quarrel, but a cruel fight.
Transform thy self into all shapes, and try
What ere thou can by strength or art apply.
Desire with wings to the high stars to glide:
And in earths hollow womb thy self to hide.
Shaking his head, thy proud threats fear not me,
The Gods, (he said) Jove is my enemy.
Thus having said, a ponderous stone he found,
An ancient mighty one, which for a bound
By chance just on the neighboring limits lay,
And for the meers all strife did take away;
Scarce twice six men, this to their necks could rear,
Such men as now the earth grown old does bear.
The Hero running, with huge strength did throw
Raising himself, this stone against the foe:
Nor himself running nor yet going, knew;
Or lifting, how his hand the huge-stone threw.
His knees did tremble, and a cold blood flows
Through all his nerves; the stone with violence goes
Through empty air; but it fell short, nor went
Half way to give the blow, where it was sent.
As when in quiet night, sleep seiles our eye,
In vain we seem some earnest flight to try,
But in the midst we faint, our voice does fail,
Nor speech, nor words, nor our known strength prevail;
So Turnus, what so ere his valor tries,
Success the cruel Goddess him denies.
Troubled, the Town and Rutils struck with fear
Standing he viewed; and trembles at the spear.
Where shall he fly, how escape the enemy,
No Chariot, no Juturna can he see.
Aeneas aiming, did himself advance,
And at him mazed, he throws his fatal lance,
A stone shot from a batterer not so loud
Thundered, or lightning from a broken cloud.
Like a black whirlwind he the javelin threw,
Bearing sad death; which through his armor flew,
And through seven foldings of his shield it past,
And sounding, in his groyn it fixed at last.
The mighty Turnus wounded, sinks upon
His double knee; Rutilians gave a groan,
And all the hills the voice re-ecchoe round,
And the tall groves reply the mournfuil sound.
He suppliant then, did hands and eyes advance,
And said, I have deserved it, use thy chance;
But have thou sense of a sad Parents woe?
And such thy father was; then pity show
To aged Daunus; or if rather thou
Would take my life, my corpse to friends allow.
Thou haft overcome; the Ausonians me have seen
Mercy to crave; Lavinia is thine;
Here end debate. Then fierce Aeneas stands
Survaying him allo're, and staid his hands,
And at this language more and more did melt;
When on his shoulder he perceived the belt
Which Pallas's was, the golden buckles shone,
Whom Turnus by a deep wound had orethrown,
And on his back the hostile ensign had.
After those spoils with grief he had survaid,
Incensed with deadly rage, shall thou said he,
Graced with my dear friends spoils escape from me?
Thus Pallas, Paellas thee an offering makes:
And on thy wicked blood revenge now takes.
Thus having said, with indignation stirred,
He in his bosom sheaths to th'hilt his sword.
Straight numbing cold on all his body seized,
And with a groan, life flies to shades displeased.
FINIS.

