An Imaginary Idea. or Type; of Subterraneous ffire: houses; whose Breath
holes; as it were, the Vulcanian Mountains only are:


An Imaginary Idea, or Type of Subterraneous ffire mixed with water, and of the
protrusion of waters, -- through Subterraneous Aquaeducts, out of the Sea; and
into the water houses of mountains and the Concoction of Subterrestrial waters;
through ffire-ducts


THE VULCANO'S: OR, Burning and Fire-vomiting MOUNTAINS, Famous in the World:
With their REMARKABLES. Collected for the most part out of KIRCHER'S
Subterraneous World; And exposed to more general view in English, upon the
Relation of the late Wonderful and Prodigious Eruptions of AETNA. Thereby to
occasion greater admirations of the Wonders of Nature (and of the God of
Nature) in the mighty Element of Fire.

Res semper aliquid apportat novi. None sadlier knows the unresisted Ire,
Then Thou, Poor London! of the all-raging Fire.
But these occasioned kindlings are but Blazes,
To the mighty Burnings, which fierce Nature raises.
If then a Town, or Hills blaze be so dire;
What will be the last, and universal Fire?
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by J. Darby, for John Allen; and are to be sold by him, at the
White Horse in Wentworth Street near Bell Lane; And by Benjamin Billingsly at
the Printing-Press in Broad-street near Gresham-Colledg, 1669.

The Epistle to the READER.
HEre are presented to thee in English, the most wonderful, most prodigious,
and even miraculous Operations of Nature, in the Geocosm, or Terrestrial World.
It Is confessed, it is not an exact, or compiled History; But rather a scattered
Collection of Historical Relations by others, of most remarkable passages.
Which so came to pass: First, upon so fair an occasion given, by the late
incredible Eruptions of Aetna, and past all belief: Had they not been confirmed
by so honorable a Testimony, past all mistrust. And yet there were not wanting
some such Persons, so unknowing and faithless; as to question, notwithstanding
at first, all for a Rodamontado, or Isle of Pines, etc. Therefore, secondly
also, by reason of so general and universal Ignorance of these Matters found
among our Countrymen; as sufficiently appeared at the first coming forth of
that wonderful Relation. As if some such strange thing had happened, as never
before in the World; at least never so great, so prodigious and portentous.
That therefore men might, be more generally acquainted with the Wonders of
Nature, (in this particular also of Fire) has this been undertaken. And then
because there had yet been none in English of the Subject, for the general
information of men, or of such as were desirious to know fuller of these
matters. And yet there is a method sufficient for an exact History. Nor is
there any thing Material, or Remarkable; that is not, in brief, at least taken
notice of. Lastly, The Subject and Argument so admirable and curious, may
excuse other defects. For that not so much the Philosophy of these Matters,
(yet there is a sprinkling of that too, as occasionally it occurred in our
Author) as the mighty Effects and Things themselves are here intended for the
English Reader. It Is therefore an Historical Narration of the Worlds Volcano's,
and their Wonders and Remarkables. But for the grand Literado's, and such as
are past their English Tongue let them be satisfied, that it was never
calculated for men of their Degree and Elevation. So not to weary thee with
Complements of a long Epistle, or to hang out Invitations of greater pretenses,
then realities; we leave thee to what entertainment the Book it self will
afford. And if thou findst any occasion, not to repent, of so much time and
labor as the perusal; By so much the farther will the Author be from repenting
of his pains, or thinking his labor lost, that is, for no good or benefit to
his Countrymen, in Englishing so wonderful things. He presumes to say; Read,
and admire, and take the pleasure thereof.

Farewell.
The Explication of the Schemes, out of Kircher.
I.
THE Central Fire A, through certain Fire-ducts, or Channels, diffuses round
about, every where, far and near fiery exhalations and spirits. These driven
into the Water-houses, it partly disposes into hot Baths; partly attenuates or
rarifies into vapors; which dashing, as it were, against the Arches or Vaults
of Concavous Dens, and condensed by the coldness of the place, and lastly
dissolved into Waters, generate Fountains and Rivers; and then partly derived
into fit Matrices and Receptacles, fruitful of other kind of Juyces, of several
Minerals, contract fast together, and harden into Metallic Bodies; or else are
ordered for a new Conception, and fructifying of combustible Matter, to
nourish, and still feed and maintain the Fire. You see there also, how the Sea,
by the Winds and pressure of the Air, or motion of the aestuating Tides,
ejaculate and cast forth the Waters, through Subterraneous, or underground
Burrows, into the highest Water-houses of the Mountains. You see also the Sea
and the Plains in the utmost surface of the Earth, to take place next to the
Subterraneous World; and the Air next to them, as the Scheme teaches: Yet you
are not to imagine, that the Fires and Waters, etc. are really thus disposed in
Nature underground. For whoever has seen them? But this only was to signify,
according to the best imagination of the Author, that they are after some
well-ordered and artificial, or organized way or other, contrived by Nature;
and that the Underground World is a well framed House, with distinct Rooms,
Cellars, and Storehouses, by great Art and Wisdom fitted together; and not, as
many think, a confused and jumbled heap or Chaos of things, as it were, of
Stones, Bricks, Wood, and other Materials, as the rubbish of a decayed House,
or an House not yet made.

And to the perpetuation of these hidden and unsearchable operations of Nature,
there is a constant circulation and return round thereof. The Constellations,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, cause the reciprocal slowings and Tides of the Sea to and
fro. By the impetuousness of the Seas rage and Tides, an immense bulk of
Waters, being, through hid and occult passages at the bottom of the Ocean,
protruded or thrust forcibly into the intimate bowels of the Earth, excites and
stirs up also Subterraneous Fire by the impetuousness of Winds, and restores it
with new conveyance of Nutriment. The Subterraneous Fire not knowing how to be
idle, being enkindled by the reciprocation, or return to and fro, of the Tides,
as it were by certain Bellows; and raging, does, by these, and those, and the
other Fibers, or Veins of occult passages, which are replenished with Metallic
and Mineral Juyces, carry, whiles it passes by, an huge plenty of vapors with
it self; which protruded, partly through the Terrestrial Conveyances of the
Mountains, partly through the bottom of the Ocean, into the uttermost Surface;
and there dilated and spread wider, do again, with their blasts, solicit and
provoke the Air, the Ocean, and Seas. And what is again insinuated through the
Orifices of the Oceans bottom, does convey new Provanr to the Subterraneous
Fire, to nourish and conserve it; and by this means also does supply new matter
to provoke and stir up the Sea again; (as but now was declared) You see
therefore the manner and way of the Circulation of Nature. You see how Water,
Fire; Fire, Water; mutually, as it were, cherish one another; and by a certain
unanimous consent, conspire to the Conservation of the Geocosm, or Terrestrial
World. For if Subterraneous Fire should emit no vapors for matters of Winds;
The Sea, as it were torpid, and void of motion, would go into a putridness, to
the ruin of the whole Globe. And consequently destitute of the aid of Winds,
could neither also succor Subterraneous Fire, with necessary nutriment. Whence
the Fire extinct, being the life of the Macrocosm, as spiritous blood is of the
Microcosm, Universal Nature must necessarily perish. Lest therefore Nature,
undergoing so great a detriment, should fail; Hereupon God most good and great,
by provident Nature, the Handmaid of the Supreme Work-master, would have both
Elements be in a perpetual Motion, for admirable ends, elsewhere shown. For the
Water sliding through the secret passages under ground, supplies moisture; and
together therewith carries a mixture of Terrestrial portions to the
Fire-houses, for their food. And these again swelling with hot Spirits, carried
upwards, and elevated through wonted Fire-ducts, do with their heat cherish the
Water-houses, and other kind of Receptacles, whether of Air, or several Juyces
of Minerals and Earths, (for there are Storehouses of all under ground) and do
animate them for the Generation both of Minerals, and also of Vegetables, to be
promoted, or furthered by exhalations. And so in an everlasting, and
circulatory motion, all things which are beheld in Nature, do exist and abide.
And so Subterraneous Fire, together with Water, are the Effectors and
Generators, we may say, of all things, etc.

II.
This Scheme expresses the Nests of Heat only, or, which is all one, the
Fire-houses, variously distributed through the Universal Bowels of the Earth,
by the admirable Workmanship of God; lest any where should be wanting what
would be so greatly necessary to the Conversation of the Geocosm. But let none
persuade himself, as if the Fires were constituted, as here represented; and
the Fire-houses forthwith disposed in that order. In no wise this. We would
only hereby show, that the bowels of the Earth are full of Aestuaries, that
is, places overflown, and raging with Fire, which we call Underground
Fire-houses, or Conservatories; whether after such, or any other manner
disposed. From the Center therefore we have deduced the Fire, through all the
Paths (to be supposed) of the Terrestrial World; even to the very Vulcanian
Mountains themselves, in the Exterior Surface. The Central Fire is signed with
the letter A. The rest are the Aestuaries, or Fire-houses, signed with B. The
Fire-ducts, C. But the least Channels, are Fissures, or clests of the Earth,
which the Fiery Spirits pass, and make their way through.

A. The Central Fire.

B. The Fire-houses.

C. The Fire-ducts.

Fissures of the Earth, the rest.

The TABLE.
CHAP. I. Of Subterraneous Fire-houses; That is, Abysses, or deep Storehouses
of Fire: or, if you will, Aestuaries (that is, places overslown and raging
with; or, as it were, Creeks of Fire) underground. CHAP. II. Of the Volcano's
or Ignovomous, that is, Fire-vomiting Mountains in General. CHAP. III. Of the
Manifold Volcano's of Italy in Particular. CHAP. IV. Of the Remakables of
Volcano's, and their Eruptions in General. CHAP. V. Of the Remarkables of the
Volcano's of Italy, and their notorious Eruptions in particular, etc. Viz. Of
the Phlegraean Plains, or Volcano's Court. Of the Mountain Vesuvius, etc.
CHAP. VI. Of the Prodigious and Wonderful Aetna in Special; and of the
Vulcanian Islands adjoining. Aetna's Crater or Fire-Cup. A Chronicle of Aetna's
Fires, etc. Of the Volcanello's; Strombolo, and Volcano, etc. A sad story of a
Spanish Priest, etc. A foolish Story of Sir Thomas Gresham.

The VULCANO'S: OR, Mountains vomiting Fire, famous in the World; with their
Remarkables.
CHAP. I. Of Subterraneous Abysses, and Conservatories, or Storehouses of
Fire; the Original Cause and Sourse of all fiery Eruptions, and Vulcano's.
THAT there are Subterraneous Conservatories, and Treasuries of Fire (even as
well, as there are of Water, and Air, etc.) and vast Abysses, and bottomless
Gulphs in the Bowels and very Entrals of the Earth, stored therewith, no sober
Philosopher From what Signs Subterraneous Fire is gathered.
can deny; If he do but consider the prodigious Vulcano's, or fire-belching
Mountains; the eruptions of sulphurous fires not only out of the Earth, but
also out of the very Sea; the multitude and variety of hot Baths every where
occurring. And that they have their sourse and birthplace, not in the Air, not
in the Water; nay, nor as the Vulgar persuade themselves, not at the bottom of
the Mountains; but in the very in-most privy-Chambers, and retiring places of
the Earth, is as reasonable to think; And there Vulcan, as it were, to have his
Elaboratories, Shops, and Forges in the profoundest Bowels of Nature.

For how else could there be every where such a quantity of Minerals,
brimstone, and sulphurous unctuous matters, without any fire and subterraneous
burnings of fire-engendring, and all concocting nature; which by no means can
be conceived to be enkindled, from the conflicts of air and moisture, in those
most dark and deep Regions of the Earth, so remote from all influence of the
Sun.

Therefore subterraneous fire was necessary to the internal Economy, The
necessity of Subterraneous Fire.
or constitution of, as it were, the organized parts of the earth, and
distribution of Life and heat, as we may so say, to all the exterior members.
Plato acknowledges hidden treasuries of ever-flowing flames, and most huge
Rivers of fires, as well as of waters. Yea and Aristotle himself affirms most
ample sourses, as of water, so of spirit and fire. Also Pliny, Vitruvius,
Cicero, have noted this Arcanum of nature; for in the bowels of the earth, are
observed hidden Fire is no where wanting.
operations of heat; and the greatest parts of the world are upheld and
sustained by heat underneath. We see fire struck forth from the conflict and
attrition of stones; and the reeking earth to smoke upon every new digging,
especially if deep; And also hot and warm waters drawn out of Wells
continually, and that chiefly in winter; for that a great force of heat is
contained and pent up within the Caverns of the earth. All the Poetic Fables
of Vulcan, Vesta, Vables of Poets allude to Subterraneous Fire.
the Cyclops, seem to allude to this subterraneous fire.

This is the sense of Lucretius singing thus;

-- The Earth contains within it is Womb,
First Seeds, whence the Sea, and flowing Rivers come
In constant course: Sources of Fire it has,
For burning Soyls we see in many a place.
But above all, Aetna's impetuous Cell,
Rages with flames from the lowest pit of Hell.
And Manilius,
But with all parts the Fires mingled are,
Quick Lightning, in the teeming Clouds of the Air,
They gender; Pierce the Earth; whence Aetna's Mountains,
Dare Heaven: Also make Baths hot, in Fountains.
To this end the whole Earth is Cavernous, and the Terrene Globe The whole
Earth is Cavernous.
contains vast spaces within its own bowels, arched Caves and Vaults, immense
Tracts, and impenetrable Abysses. For, as Seneca relates of the Fields of
Puteolum, There are vast Caves, hugh Recesses, and vacuities; Stones on
Mountains hanging here and there: Also cragged Gapings without bottom, which
have often received them, as they fell in, and buried the mighty Ruin in the
deep. For the whole Earth is not solid; but every where gaping, and hollowed
with empty rooms and spaces, and hidden burrows, as it were, whereto subscribes
Pliny, Aelian, Lucretius, and other writers of Natural things. For the Fire and
Water sweetly conspire together in mutual The Wedlock of Fire and water within
the Earth.
service, with an inviolable friendship and wedlock, for the good of the whole
in their several and distinct private-lodgings, as we may so say, and hidden
receptacles; spreading themselves far and wide to a vast largeness, and
capacity; which two Associates, and Agents of Nature, with pains work and bring
about such variety of things we see, of Minerals, Juyces, Marles, Glebes, and
other soyls, with ebullitions, and bublings up of Fountains also. As Manilius
but now sang to us.

Since this fire thus shut up in the Caverns of the Earth, agitating
Subterraneous fire seeks passages for vent.
it self, when it finds passage, it never leaves penetrating unto some vent,
for many hundred Miles, even under the Sea, and unpassable and far fetched
windings and turnings of the Earth. And acquiring continually greater power, it
turns the Earth, and even the very Stones and Mountains, it finds in its way,
into easy fuel and nutriment: That except it were restrained by the
encompassing of the Ocean, and the command of the Omnipotent Deity, it would
attract and suck in the universal bulk, of all elementary Nature, into an
unquenchable combustion, and Conflagration.

And there is need of such vast quantities of fires, for the uses of the
Universe; And it is reasonable to think that the Divine Providence The need and
use thereof.
has made a very great provision of fire in the belly of Nature, whence by
long Chimnyes or Funnels, as it were, it might diffuse an infinite heat and
fervor for the use of things necessary; and the emolument of the Earth, Men,
and Beasts. Just as it has constituted the vast Sea in such a manner so as to
distribute an indeficient plenty of Waters, through the veins and channels of
the whole body of the Earth. And as it has appointed the Waters their bounds,
so it has so attempted and distributed these fires, in the hidden courses and
apartments of subterrestrial Nature, that they might neither be suffocated by
the infinuating and inflowing Waters of the Ocean, nor transgress their
prescribed Limits and Confines: For otherwise, if they should be unlimitted
Eruptions, they would soon turn all into Ruins.

Which shall at length come to pass, in that fullness of time, when The last
general Conflagration of the World.
all the Reins of unruly Nature shall be broke loose, and the Cataracts, or
Flood gates as it were, of subterraneous fire flung open; by the command of the
Divine Power, not only the Earth, but even the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat, to the ruin and destruction of the whole World. That even as in the
universal Flood, the windows of Heaven, and Gulphs of the Abysses being opened,
he destroyed the World by an Inundation of Waters, even so also, in the last
times, he might destroy the same by a Deluge of Fires: which who could deny to
be, if he should behold the perpetual boiling fires in the Earth; the vast
burning of Provinces; Lastly, the manifest provision and preparation of so much
Combustible matter, and Sulphur together, which is vomited forth, even at one
Gaping and Eructation; without confessing it a certain and infallible Specimen
and Example, and evident token of preparation to the total and final
Conflagration prescribed by the Divine Wisdom.

The Prodigious Vulcano's therefore and Fire-vomitting Mountains visible in the
external surface of the Earth, do sufficiently demonstrate it full of invisible
and underground fires. For wherever there is a Vulcan, there also is a
Conservatory, or Storehouse under, as certain, as where there is a Chimney or
smoke, there is fire; And argue deeper treasuries and storehouses of fire, in
the very heart and inward bowels of the Earth. In so much that from hence the
Holy Father's have not incongruously placed the greatest of all the Hell in the
Center of the Earth, according to some.
Fire-conservative Abysses in the Center of the Earth, for an eternal Jakes and
Prison, destined for the punishment of the Damned; and some others for
Purgatory (according to the received belief of Papists.)

Now flame is but flowing, or fluid fire, and the streaming efflux of
sulphurous principles, or particles, etc. which from these burst forth in
excessive raging streams, from the mouth of these Ignivomous (or
fire-vomitting) Mountains, and Vulcano's; which are wonders of Nature, not
unworthy generally to be known, and taken notice of, of all men. And which we
now come to ennumerate, with their remarkable Phaenomena's, and Eruptions.

CHAP. II. Of Vulcano's ingeneral; What, and where; In Asia, Africa, America,
and Europe.
AS Nature has constituted various Storehouses of Waters, in the highest
Mountains; so it has distributed various Receptacles of fire, within the bowels
of the highest Mountains also; for the complete fructifying of Nature with this
primigenial heat as it were, and radical moisture together, as before has been
shown. For the fire cannot subsist without the water, nor the water without the
The Fire and Waters mutual need and use.
fire. It Is certain, if only the moist, or only the fiery element, should
domineer, all would be laid wast, and nothing fructify, etc. The Water would
stagnete and freeze without some kindly resolving heat, and afford no warm and
friendly vapors, and fruitful exhalations. And the fire cannot live, without a
moist and humid nutriment, And need of air, and breath, as it were.
or last any time without a free and an asswaging fomentation, and breathing of
the Air, and as it were ventilation.

These Vulcano's therefore are nothing but the vent-holes, or breath-pipes of
Nature, to give vent to the superfluous choking Vulcano's are Breathing-Holes
of Nature.
fumes and smoaky vapors, which fly upwards, and make way and free passage for
the vehemence of the within-conceived burning; and for the attraction and free
entrance of the friendly cherishing Air, to revive and ventilate those
suffocating flames, lest they should continually shake the foundations of the
Ground with intolerable commotions and Earthquakes. For Earthquakes are the
proper effects Earthquakes proper Effects of Sub erraneous fire.
of subterrestrial cumbustions. And so the fire is both exonerated of its
superfluous clogg of fumes and dregs of dross, through those open and
wide-mouthed Gulphs and Orifices, as it were through certain Jakes or common
shoars; and also cherished and refreshed with the all-reviving Air; so serving
as breath pipes both for expiration and inspiration to the whole body of
Nature, or the Universe.

Of this sort of Vent-holes, Chimneys, or Funnels, there are such a multitude
and variety, that there is hardly any Region in the world without them.

Asia, every where, in its several Regions, abounds with these vomiting
(...)ano's of (...), etc.
Mountains of fire. Persia has diverse Vulcano's. And in the Island Armuzia: The
Island Zeilan, remarkable by the name of Adam; In Persia itself, many
sulphurous Craters, or Cups, very terrible to Travelers; with Susis in Media,
and Cophantus in the Region of the Bactrians, sormidable to beholders.

In the Moguls Empire, in the Kingdom of Ingoston, Tibet, Camboi, every where
these kind of Mountains; and in the most vast Kingdom of China. But especially
the Molucco-and- Philippine-Islands, and the universal Archipelago of St
Lazarus, so abounds with these Vulcanian places, that there is scarce an Island
without them, either in the Crater's (or deep mouthed Cups) and hellish
ditches, if not upon the Mountains themselves. Also in the Bandan's, whereof
the Mountain Gourapi most eminent; in both the Java's, within the entrails of
most high Mountains. The Mountain Balalvanus in Sumatra: The inaccessible
Mountain in the Island Terenate. In the Maurician Islands, the Mountain Tola.
In Tandaia, nigh the Promontory of the Holy Ghost, are found some also; as also
in the Island Marindica. Moreover in Jappan, no small number, near the City
Firandus; and a famous one over against the City Tanaxuma, in one of the Seven
Sisters (Islands so called) and several other circumjacent Islands every where;
which through subterraneous Burrows or Channels have occult commerce with St.
Lazarus Islands, in the Archipelago, even to new Guiny, and those called
Solomon's Islands; and from thence to other Islands of the Pacifick, commonly
called the South Sea. For in new Guiny, as also in the Southern Land are
observed such Mountains, to the great astonishment of Mariners. And the like
are seen in the vast Southern Ocean, or South Sea; In the Indian Ocean every
where, Desert and Rockey Mountains discover their smoking Chimneys; even in the
shores of Northren Tartary toward Muscovy, are frequent Vulcanello's; and in
all the Ocean and Islands almost, etc. which we leave, and come to Africa.

Where Fight famous Vulcano's are observed; Two in Monomotopa; The Vulcanian
Mountains of Africa.
Four in Angola, Congus, and Guiny; One in Lybia, and One in Ab^ssia; besides
innumerable Craters and sulphurous Dens, every where obvious; some whereof
having consumed their combustible matter, have ceased; again to re-inkindle
when they shall have ripened and concocted again their recruited matter and
fuel. The Atlantic Sea so abounds with subterraneous Fires, that Plato's Land,
called Atlantis, seems to have been swallowed up from no other cause; but the
outrages of these fues and earthquakes thence arising. And to this very day
some Tracts are every where infested with flames and fires breaking forth from
their underground storehouses; the violence and rage whereof, both Columbus
and Vespuccius, at their great peril had experience of. The Terzera's can
scarce be inhabited for the vehemence of fires. The Canary Islands, and in them
the Pico, or Pike, a Mountain of immense Altitude, equal to Taenariff, belches
forth flames to this very day; as also the Plains of the circumjacent Islands
stuffed with brimstone and sulphurous-unctuous matter. The Islands of St.
Helen, and of the Ascension, to have stam'd heretofore, both the burnt Rocks of
Mountains, and the Cinders, and plenty of Mineral and Stone-coals burnt and
chark'd as it were, do sussiciently show.

Yet no part of the world more famous than America, which you Of America.
may call Vulcan's Kingdom. In the Andes alone, which they call the Cordillera,
from a Coneatenation of Mountains, in the Kingdom of Chile, are fifteen
Vulcano's. To these you may adjoyn the Vulcano's out of the Southern part of
the Magellanick Sea, commonly called Terra del Fuego. In Peru not fewer then in
Chile; six of inaccessible height; and three in the continued tops of the
Andes, besides innumerable Vulcanian Ditches, Pits, and Jakes. In Carappa, a
Province of Popayan, is a Mountain raging with smoke and flames, chiefly in
serene weather. The City Paraquipa, ninety leagues distant from Lima, has a
Mountain near it, casting forth continually such sulphurous fires, that the
People are greatly afraid, lest sometime at length the Eruptions should utterly
destroy the whole Region. At the valley of Peru, called Mulahallo, fifteen
leagues distant from the City Quito, is another Vulcan, continually belching
sorth flames far and near, and threatening the People.

In the Northern America, are observed five, partly in new Spain, viz. Three,
formidable for their belching flames, partly in new Granada, partly in the very
heart and midst of Califormia, and the more inland Mexican Kingdom. In
Nicaragua, one; Another near Aquapulcus; three near the Continent of
Califormia; And in the (American) Mediterranean Sea two others; and innumerable
others it is like, not yet discovered, through all the Terr-aqueous Globe.

In Europe five chief ones are noted, viz. Aetna in Scicily, by the The
Vulcan's of Europe.
Monuments of all Writers, whether Poets or Historians most famous. Strongylus,
(and some other of the Liparitan Islands, not very remote from Scicily;
especially that notorious by the name of Vulcano, to which is adjoined another
called Vulcanello) said all to have burnt heretofore, called the Vulcano's, or
Vulcanian Islands. The Mountain Hecla in Izland, in the surthest North; and
Chimaera in Greece: besides many others in each particular Country; at least
Fire-wells, Pits, and Orifices, etc. Among all which Italy throughout Italy
abounds with subterraneous fires.
all Ages is the most notorious for such underground Harths and Aestuaries; of
which more particularly by its self. And indeed Italy is most fitly seated of
all Countries of Europe for such vast Combustions, and Eruptions of fire.

Neither are Germany, France, Spain, and other Countries, wholly Of Germany,
etc.
distitute of theirs; where, though there be none answerable to the other, yet
both the frequent sulphurous Craters, and deep burning Ditches and Pits,
vomitting forth smoke and flames; and also the innumerable multiude of hot
Baths and Wells every where, do betray some store and workhouses of
subterraneous fire, creeping between their Conservatories and Abysses of water.
In Misnia, in Germany, the Mountain Carbo, ever and anon rages with sum and
fire, etc.

Neither are the furthest Tracts of the North too cold and frozen for them.
Four whereof Authors reckon in the Region of the Toward the Northern Pole
Tynsei in Tartary. In Lapland high Mountains are observed to belch forth
flames like Aetna. In Izland, the famous Hecla. And lest Nature might seem to
have lest the furthest Regions of the North cursed with the Everlasting
inclemency of Cold and Ice, it has constituted an huge Vulcanian Mountain, in
the Island called Groenland, next to the Pole; And others in the Neighboring,
whether Islands, or Continents, situated about the Pole, which they continue,
even unto the Creeks and Bays of the Southern Land called Del Fuego: So that
many think that the Tracts of the Northern Pole inaccessible by reason of the
multitude of these fire-spewing Mountains.

CHAP. III. Of the Vulcano's of Italy, Scicily, and Neighboring Islands.
ITaly, and the adjacent Island, have in all times afforded prodigious Heats,
Combustions, Aestuaries, hot Baths, Conflagrations, Italy abounds with
Subterraneous Fires.
and Eruptions of burning flames, and all the mighty Arguments, and wondrous
Products and effects of Subterraneous fires. In so much that we want not
History to report to us, That heretofore it all burnt from Cuma and Visuvius in
Campania, or Terra di Lavoro, even to Histria, not far from Venice; and
therefore to have been called by the most ancient Inhabitants thereof, The
burnt Country. And indeed Italy is every way disposed for such vast
Combustions; As, with straitness and narrowness of situation, whereby it is
continually dashed and struck with the beating of waters and waves, between two
Seas; with subterraneous passages and cavernous hollow windings and turnings,
easily penetrable and passable to fires and winds. And lastly, with plenty of
sulphurous materials, wherewith the whole luxuriously abounds. In so much that
it burns, in certain places, above ground on the surface of the Earth. For in
all the Southern parts of Italy, from the utmost Coasts of Sicily, to the very
Confines of Tuscany; in some places, are seen perpetual burnings, as in Aetna.
In other, Conflagrations by times, as in the Vulcanello's, or Liparitan
Islands; and over against Naples, as in Ischia, Prochyta, Pythacusa; and also
in the Mountains of the Continent, Vesuvius, Misenum, the Puteoli, and Cuma,
which often burn, and in certain places, show great Aestuaries, with abounding
fires, fumes, vapors, baths; winding labyrinths, also every where obvious; as
Kircher with greatest diligence observed; and gapes with burrow'd
breathing-holes, which when they send forth a blast, presently, not without
terror of standers-by, are perceived more inward crackings, as it were, of
burning and blazing fires, and sounds of waters; as in the Phlegraean Hills,
which surround the Vulcanian The Phlegraean Plains.
Plains, commonly called Sulphatara (or Land of Sulphur) is to be seen and
heard. Also the Sybell's Den at Cuma, not far distant; and most mighty horrid
Gapings and Recesses, impenetrable, and not to be entered, for their raging
heat, give further assurances. All Campania, every where on it is Plains,
carries ancient footsteps All Campania obnoxious to Fires.
of the same Conflagrations. The ground every where parched like Cinders, and
Pumis-stones; and a dust, which they call the Puteolan, like Powder; And
extinct Coals included in living Rocks.

From Puteoli pass to Campagna di Roma, which is full of sulphurous Campagna di
Roma springs with Sulphur.
Crater's, through the Minturnan Marshes to Sulmo; whence a continued Mine of
Sulphur, through the Roman Plain exerts it self, in diverse places, but chiefly,
in a certain Lake of unsearchable profundity, four miles distant from the City
Tivoli, as also the most famous of the sixteen swimming Islands thereabouts,
The swimming Islands of Tivo
which they call the Barchettae (or little Barks.) Out of which, the
sulphurous River of Tyber has its origin; and seems to have been famous
heretofore, for hot Bath's. Hence a burrow of subterraneous sire, bends back to
the Round Mountain; And thence into diverse branches. One part whereof tends to
the Stiglian Bath's, and Burrows of Subterraneous Fire, dispersed into various
branches.
the Lake in the middle Wood, horrible with stench of Brimstone, and for the
spectacle of Waters boiling and bubling up in the form of a Column; and at
length through the neighbor Mountains, where are also hidden pits of Serpents,
full of Aestuaries, and smoking Funnels, or Chimneys; and even to the very
hundred Cells: All which places, lavish with sulphurous Bitumen and unctuous
materials; and so terminate in the Sea. The other branch, toward the Mountain
Rosea, between which and Roncilion, new sulphurean Fire-Cups break forth, which
have their occult communications with the Mountain Viterbo, and with the
Village Vico; and are famous for sulphurean boiling Springs. And indeed the
Mountain Viterbo seems yet to cherish a great force of fire under most profound
Dens; which it diffuses at its Roots, on the Morthern-side, toward Viterbium,
into all the Plain, which is full of a most sulphurous Gas; The Glebes every
where parched, and covered with Pumice-stones, and has innumerable hot
Fountains; among which Bullicamum is most famous for its intolerable fervor.
This has a great commerce with another neighbor Lake, between Viterbium, and
the Mountain Flasco, where Water breaking forth from the bottom of the Lake,
does mightily tumultuate; And, which is wonderful Two near Fountains one most
hot, the other most cold.
to relate, here are beheld two Fountains together, distant scarce one pace,
whereof one dances and leaps with most hot and boiling, the other with most
cold and freezing water. Hence a burrow of subterraneous fire through whole
Tuscany, diffusing it self into innumerable branches, scarce leaves any place
free, from sulphurous Cups, and Mineral waters. Since Tuscany, on that side
looking toward the Tuscan Sea, even to the Island Ilva, the whole Country
every where, bubbles with hot waters, or luxuriously abounds with sulphurous
Mines of Iron, or Brass; under which are indeed memorable, the stinking Ditches
and Pools of Volterra, stuffed with servid and bubling Waters; And the Mines of
the best Sulphur at Castro.

On the other part toward the East, a Burrow of Fire, extended far and wide,
chiefly exerts it self, under the Mountain, called Vivo, where it causes the
famous Baths of St. Cossian, and St. Philip; and hence stretches it self
toward those called the Avignion Baths, even to the Mountain Politiano; where
a plentiful quantity of Mineral Waters, with the grievousest stench, bubbles
up. And hence on one side, even to the Apennine, which is also replenished with
Aestuaries (or raging Gulphs;) on the other; to Siena, in Tuscany, and the
neighboring parts adjoining to the Sea; And even to the Confines of Genoa, and
the fields of Luca, which abound with so many Metals, so many sulphurous Wells
and Fountains of hot and fervid Water, as perhaps all Italy has not the like.
Yet most of Breathing Orifices of Subterraneous Fire at Petra Mala.
all the Breathing-holes of subterraneous fire, burst out in the Apennine
Hills, at Petra Mala, and neighboring places, where the Air sparkles and
glitters by night, and it is thick with darkness and smoke for a long time; as
it were from some flaming furnace underneath; and heats the waters that are
cast in, and burns stubble. Now this Fountain seems to have continual veins,
even to the Porretan waters in the Bononion fields; Hills whereof, every where,
sparkle and lighten by night. And hence seems to be poured into the fields of
Modena, where liquor of Bitumen, and Sulphur, and Fire rages, after a wonderful
manner; And hence continues the burnings of its fuel, even to Histria, of the
Venetians. For that these Mountains of Padua, as ancient Historians testify,
did heretofore burn about the Baths of Albano, in the Paduan fields, both the
bubling Tracts of Hills and Ashes, and the external surface of Pumice-stones;
as also burnt and cindred Coals, and the fervor of stones, which make the very
waters, running between, hot, do sufficiently show.

Which things seeing they are so, it may be truly, a certain Argument to us,
that all Italy universally is stored with continual matter of Sulphur; a Burrow
of which, as it does any where, more or less, far and wide stretch forth its
branches; so it extends them under the Sea also, to adjacent Islands, and
according to the singular and peculiar temper of mixture, and the virtue of the
heat, which it has under a different Tract of Veins, produces various effects,
and causes mavelous burnings, and Eruptions, at certain times.

We conclude therefore, says Kircher, That Italy, the Nurse of Italy
heretofore in great part burnt.
Burnings and Combustions, as it is all over stuffed with subterraneous fires;
which burn, in some places perpetually, in others by fits; so heretofore it had
so great increases of Sulphur, such a coacervation and vast treasury of fires,
that if it suffered not a total conflagration; yet at least to have burnt in a
very great part, as Berosus witnesses. Nor is it less credible, according to
these principles, of nature, standing, that even again and again, it shall burn
with vast Conflagrations, till the very final Destruction and Consumation of
the whole Universe.

Lastly, Those of Aetna in Sicily, and Strongylus, Vulcano, etc. Underground.
Commerce of Fires, between Italy, Sicily, etc.
of the Lipparitan Islands; have no doubt their Submarine and Subterrane
Communications with the Italian, Vesuvian, etc. also. The Soil of Sicily
springs with often and eternal fires; and the whole Island cavernous, producing
Sulphur and Bitumen abundantly; whereby exceeding fertile, of old, and even to
this very day.

CHAP. IV. Of the Remarkables of Vulcano's, and their most prodigious
Phaenomena's, bitberto observed, in particular; With particular Relations, etc.
THus all the World over are found Eruptions of Fire by Natures Of Asia, and
the Eastern Islands, etc.
own kindling, as if she kept House underground, and made several Hills her
ignivomous and evacuating Chimneys.

In Ocmuzio, an Island of the Persian Gulf, all things are full of fires,
whence it is said to have burnt seven whole years continually. It yet belches
forth daily, out of the Saline Mountains, which it abounds with, globes of
flames, whereby the most famous Mart of the whole East, is almost quite laid
wast.

In Media, Susis, at the white Tower, breaks forth with fire, out of fifteen
Chymney-holes, with such a vehement noise and sound, that the People round
about are persuaded the Gates of Hell to be there.

In Japon, above other Islands, Vulcan seems to have forged a number of his
Shops and Workhouses, vomiting forth fire and smoke, night and day. And as it
is seventy miles distant from the famous City Firandus; so by night they
illuminate the whole Region, like so many blazing Torches, to the admiration of
Beholders.

In the Island Java, the Mountain not far from the City Panacura, having not
burnt for many years; (for some places burn always, some by fits;) In the year
1586, raged with such a violent Eruption, that ten thousand persons are said to
have perished, in the subjacent fields: and three whole days, darting forth
mighty stones into the said City, with fumes caused such a darkness, as hid the
Sun, and turned day into night.

The Mountain Pico in the Island Timor, of such an height, that a flamy Spire
or Pyramid was seen for three hundred miles in the Sea. This in the year 1638,
had its very foundations shaken, by an horrible Earthquake; and was wholly
swallowed up, together with the Island, leaving nothing behind it, but an huge
mighty Lake. So the Annals of the Jesuits Society relate.

The Mountain Gounapi, in one of the Bandan Islands, in the year 1586, after
continual burnings of seventeen years, at length burst asunder, sent forth such
a quantity of stones, cinders, ashes, and sulphureous-Bituminous Pumice-stones,
that the Sea almost covered therewith, all seemed to burn, with the destruction
of all Fish, and living Creatures.

In the Island Ternat, one of the Malacca's, there is an high and steep
Mountain climbing up into the Clouds, whose lower parts are beset with thick
Woods and Forests, and upper parts peeled and made bare with continual
burnings. On the very top it has a Cup or deep Mouth, with a vast gaping, made
round into many circles, from greater to lesser, like an Amphitheater, or
stage, one below another. This, at the time of the Aequinoctials, chiefly by
the blast of the Northern winds, raging with smoke and flames, reduces all the
neighbor places round about, overwhelmed with ashes and cinders, into
desolation.

The Maurican Islands seem wholly to burn, whence frequent Earthquakes; and
casts forth out of Caverns, and the very top of the Mountain Thola, such
quantity of flames, ashes, and stones, as big as great Trees, that it seems a
kind of Hell.

The Atlantic Sea, west of Africa, so abounds with subterraneous Of Africa,
etc.
Fires, that Plato's Laud, called Atlantis, seems to have perished from no
other cause, but as swallowed up with the fierceness of these Fires; and the
frequency of Earthquakes following thereupon. And to this very day certain
Tracts of Seas are abundantly infested with shines and fires, issuing out of
their storehouses; whose rage both Columbus and Vespuccius, to their great
hazard, tried.

Near Hesperius, a Mountain in Ethiopia, the fields in the night all glitter
with Light. As also a certain piece of ground does the like in Babylonia; and
some places in Italy were noted before, for some such like thing.

Pliny, after reckoning up of the most notorious, concludes with the burning of
the high and vast Mountain Theonochema, or Chariot of the Godds, in Africa, as
the most famous example of this kind above all others; at least in those days.
And ends, saying, In so many places, with so many fires, does Universal Nature
burn and roast the Earth. And this great Naturalist, who perished, in prying
too curiously into these dangerous prodigies of Nature, considering how full
fraught the World is with this Element, and how propagative it is of it self,
says, It is the greatest Miracle that an universal Conflagration of the World
has not happened already, Truly it exceeds all Miracles, that there has been
any day, wherein all things have not burnt. Those be his words.

Some of the Vulcano's in the Andes, in the Kingdom of Chile, were so
big-belly'd, as it were, with fires, that in the year 1645, Of America, etc.
they brought forth so great Calamities, to that Kingdom; that no Pen is able
to express, whole Cities every where being both swallowed up, and overturned.

The City Paraquipa, ninety Leagues distant from Lima, has a neighboring
Vulcanian Mountain, continually darting forth fires, in so much that the People
are sorely afraid, lest sometime it should burst asunder, and destroy the whole
Country.

The Vulcano's of Guatimalla, are more terrible. In the year, 1586, almost all
the City of Guatimalla, fell with an Earthquake. This Vulcano had then, for six
months together, day and night, cast from the top, and vomited, as it were,
great floods of Fire. As is also observeable of the Vulcano of Quito, which
cast such abundance of ashes, that in many Leagues compass thereabouts, it
darkened the light of day.

In Nicaragua, in North America, thirty five Leagues from the City Leon, an
high Mountain vomits forth flames in such abundance, as to be seen for ten
miles distance, and more. And another not far from Aquapulcus of the same
fierceness.

Of these Vulcano's, some vomit out of their mouths smoke and ashes, or both:
some fires, and there are some which never cast, either smoke, flames, or
ashes; but in the bottom are seen to burn with a quick fire never dying. This
imposed upon a greedy Priest, and made him think it was nothing else, but heaps
of Gold, melted in the fire, which he thought to have fetched up by letting
down an Iron Kettle with Chains; But his device was not fire-proof, his Kettle
and Chain melting so soon as they approached near the bottom.

But the greatest wonder of all is that some of these Vulcano's have for some
hundreds, nay for some thousands of years, cast out continually smoke, fire,
and ashes.

For the European, to begin with the more Northern. And here first, who knows
not the notorious Mountain Hecla, (and also Of Europe, etc.
Hegla and of the Holy Cross) in Izland, by the Relation of all Geographers,
most remarkable, for mighty burnings. Mountains so terrible for Thunder,
flamings out of fire, casting abroad stones, ashes, stink, and smoke; that the
more fanciful conceit, that Hell is begun there aforehand: which were more
plausible, if the Apparitions that are seen there, were as true, as they are
said to be frequent. And which seems a Miracle of Nature, its highest Top or
Pike, is white, with perpetual Snow; and its Roots and sides blazing with
unquenchable burnings. And the multitude of hidden Gulphs and Whirl-pits suffer
none to come near, for many furlongs. And by the Eructuation of stones, and
ashes, reduces all the circumjacent Plain into barrenness; together with a
formidable noise, and crackling. Which while the Inhabitants hear, they
superstitiously believe, the Souls of the wicked, to be tormented there, with a
miserable howling.

And even in Groenland, perpetually frozen with extremest cold, next to the
very North Pole, there is an huge Vulcanian Mountain, at whose Roots, is a
Monastery of the Order of Preachers, called St. Thomas's, The Wonders of St.
Thomas Monastery in Groenland, etc.
built of Tophas-stone, from the casting out of the Mountains. Concerning
which, Bartholomew Zenet, a Venetian, a diligent Inspector and searcher into
these things, I know not by what accident cast on these Coasts, relates many
wonderful things. Here, says he, is seen St. Thomas's Monastery of the
Dominicans. And not far distant an Ignivomous Mountain; at the foot whereof, a
fiery Eountain breaks forth; With the Water of this Fountain, derived by Pipes,
not only all the Cells of the Moncks are made hot, like Stoves; but also their
Meat dressed; yea, and their very Bread baked. The Mountain vonsits forth the
Tophaz or Pumice-stone, which the whole Monstery is built of. For those
Tophaz's soaked through with that hot Water, are cemented together, as it were,
with clammy Bitumen. Here are also most pleasant Gardens, watered with boiling
Water, in which are Flowers and Fruits of all kinds. And this Water, when it
has run through the Gardens, falls into a neighbor Gulf, or Port; whereby it
happens, that it never is frozen; and therefore the Fish, and innumerable Birds
and Fowl frequent there; wherewith the Inhabitants live in full plenty. So he
writes, who saw and discovered the Coast, the King of Danes chief Admiral,
Nicholas Zenet, a Venetian.

Now it is most likely that the Vulcan's of Izland, and Groenland, have
communication together, by hidden Burrows and Channels; and are perpetually
employed by secret Aestuaries, to allay the vehemence of the Cold, and
abundance of Ice. Whence also is drawn the Reason, why in some Northern
Islands, and the Shores of Norway, Finmark, Biarmia, Lapland, in one part the
Sea is easily frozen with Ice; in another part, not at all, by no force of
cold, or snows. Also in some shores most abundant Pastures, together with
Trees, and most fruitful fields are found: In others, as in Nova Zemblia,
neither Grass, nor Trees, nor any thing profitable for the nutriment of Man, to
be met with.

There was also some Vulcanian Hill, Crater, or Pit, which burnt for sixteen
years in Scotland, and consumed a large quantity of ground. Even as now some
Coal-Mines about Newcastle are said to have continued burning for several years
of late, and it is likely do so still.

In Germany, was violent Eruptions formerly. Who in these latter Ages, has
ever heard, or read of such a Fire, issuing out of the Earth, as Tacitus
describes? which burnt a whole Territory; against which Water was unavaileable;
which could never be extinguished, but with Stones, Clothes, Linen, and
Woollen, and other dry Materials cast thereon. Tacitus words run thus.

The City of the Inhonians in Germany, confederate with us (says he) was
afflicted with a sudden disaster. For fires issuing out of the Earth, burned
Towns, Fields, Villages every where, and spread even to the Walls of a Colony
newly built; and could not be extinguished, neither by Rain, nor River-water,
nor any other liquor that could be employed, until for want of remedy, and
anger of such a distraction, certain Peasants cast stones afar off into it;
then the slame somewhat slacking, drawing near, they put it out with blows of
Clubs and otherwise, as if it had been a wild beast. Last of all, they threw in
clothes from their backs, which the more worn, and fouler, the better they
quenched the fires. We have omitted the high Mountains in Lapland also, which
Olaus relates, belch forth hideous slames, like Aetna's.

In Greece the Mountain Nymphaeus stings out fire also, and pitchy bituminous
matter; the fury whereof is enkindled by rain and water: As also the fire of
those Ignivomous Mountains of Lycia, and Pamphylia, in Asia minor, (not
mentioned before) viz. The monstrous Mountain Chimaera heretofore famous for
often belching forth Fires. It Is Fire is the more inkindled with Water, but
quenched with Earth, or Hay. As also the Hephaestian Mountains, near Chimaera;
whose Earth, touched with a lighted Torch or Brand, suddenly takes fire; so
that the stones burn in the very waters, and the fire is fed and nourished by
Rains, and Waters. And if with a kindled, or burning brand, furrows be made in
the Earth; Streams or Rivers, as it were, of Fire, will run along after: As
Pliny writes.

In the Mediterranean, in the Archipelago, the Island Santorin, has had
formidable Fires and Earthquakes, as in the year 1650, from the relation of Fa.
Fr. Riccard of the Jesuits society, who was present, and an eye witness; and
with his own mouth related the whole event, to Kircher, at Rome, afterward;
and by the following Testimony, would have it known to posterity.

The Relation of Fa. Fr. Riccard, concerning Subterraneous Fires, which brake
forth from the bottom of the Sea, in the year 1650. near the Island Santorin,
in the Archipelago.
ALthough some reprove Pliny of lies, in that he relates certain stupendous
things, above humane capacity: yet daily experience teaches us, that in many
things he spoke true; chiesly in the History of many Islands, which in
succession as time arose and started up from the bottom of the Sea; and amongst
others Thera, in the 135. Olympiad, (which was about the year of the world
3200.) It was also called Calista, and Phylothera; But now Santorin, from St.
Irene, the famous Virgin and Martyr, worshipped there. For Baronius himself, in
his Ecclesiastic Annals of the year 726. seems to give credit to Pliny. For
thus he speaks. A vapor was seen to bubble forth out of a Chimny of Fire,
between the Islands Thera and Therasia, (or Santorin) from the very bottom of
the Sea, for some days; whereby the burning of the fiery heat, by little and
little being condensed, and dilated or spread, it all showed like a fiery
flaming smoke. Moreover, with the vastness of its earthy substance, it conveyed
hugeous Rocky-Pumice-stones, and certain great heaps, through all Asia, and
Lesbos, and Abydus, and the Maretime Coasts of Macedonia; so that the whole
surface of the Sea was filled with these Pumices. But in the middle of so great
a Fire, there was an Island made, from the heaping and congestion of Earth
together, and joined to the Island called the Sacred, which never existed
before. The like we understood happened in the year 1457, from certain Verses
ingraved on Marble, for the perpetual Memory of the thing: which near the Gate
of the Castle Scarus of the said Island, run to this purpose.

Viz. 1547.

Magnanimous Francis, the Heroes undoubted Offspring,
Thou see with thine eyes, what Calamities and Wonders;
By joining five times eleven unto two; on the seventh of the Calends of
December,
With a vast murmur, vast Terasia groaned,
And plucked assunder mighty Camena's stones;
From the Sea's bottom, an huge Rock appears,
A Monster great, and most Memorable for ever.
Further it appears, that there was another Island next to this, formed in the
year 1570. not without great Terror of those of Santorin. Since the Burning
lasted for a year, as some ancient folk, who saw it with their Eyes, do yet
testify. But in the middle of this smaller Island, which is now called Little
Camena, to this very day is beheld an huge and profound ditch, which being
narrow toward the bottom, by little and little inlarges it self round, like a
funnel; out of which, as out of a Chimney, bursted forth those mighty Stones
and Rocks, which co-mixed with the Cinders and Ashes, built that Bulk or heap,
appearing aloft.

But that those Subterraneous Fires, which are fed with plenty of Bitumen and
Sulphur, and sometimes break forth with greatest violence, are never extinct,
is evident, from most hot Waters, which are found at the Sea-shoar, in the
furthest South part of the Island, and which the Inhabitants use, as the most
healthfullest Baths, to expel diseases sprung from Cold.

But if ever those Fires, pent up in the bowels of the Earth, exercised their
force, it was most of all then, when in the year 1650 on the 24th of September,
even to the ninth of October, they shook that Island with so mighty and so
frequent Earthquakes; that the people, viz. of Santorin, fearing nothing but
immediate ruin, were on their knees night and day before the Altars. But it
cannot be spoke nor expressed what a fear invaded all; when those victorious
flames, breaking open all obstacles, strove to make themselves a way through
the midst of the Waters of the Ocean, about four miles from Santorin Eastward:
For that forsooth the Sea, swelled thirty cubits upwards, suddenly; and
extending it self wide, through the Neighboring Lands, overturned every thing
it met in its way; In so much that the very Port of Candy which yet is 80 miles
distant, it broke in pieces, with its sudden assault, and impetuousness, both
the Galleys and Ships. But the Air, infected with those ill-smelling and
Sulphurous vapors, began to be darkened, and put on innumerable forms and
appearances. Hence brandishing of fiery Lances and flammivomous Swords; thence
darting forth bright and glittering Arrows. Here, as it were, terrible Serpents
and Dragons flying; and there hideous Thunderclaps, Lightenings, and
Thunderbolts, were stirred up.

And yet we could scarce see: for the eyes of all beholders were so hurt, with
those sharp pricking and Sulphurous Smoaks and Vapors, that almost all became
blind for three days; so as not only to see nothing, but were also seized with
so great and so grievous a pain, that they wept continually, and bewailed their
most miserable lot. But when they returned to their free eyesight, they saw all
their Silver and Golden, both Vessels and Garments, and all Pictures, drawn
over with a yellow color. And such a great multitude of Pumice-stones that
fiery Gulf vomitted forth, that it covered the whole surface of the Sea, so
that scarce any one could pass in a Vessel. It is most certain, that they were
conveyed even to Smyrna, and Constantinople; and all Shoars and Coasts filled
therewith. Now the force of this burning was greatest the two first months:
Forasmuch as the Neighbour-Sea seemed even to bubble like a boiling Pot; And
night and day huge Globes and flakes of Flames, and most thick heaps of furled
pitchy Smoke mounted up.

Which if at any time, by an adverse wind, were carried to the next places,
brought, besides a most grievous stink, destruction both to Birds, Beasts, yea
and to very Men themselves. As it happened the ninth of October, and fourth of
November, that fifty Husbandmen choked with the smoke and stench, most
miserably perished; besides an innumerable multitude of Birds, Sheep, Oxen and
Asses. The same happened to nine Mariners, who passing by night that way, in
their Vessel, after three days, were found all half burnt, and were buried in
the Island Nio, sixty miles distant from Santorine.

But the other four Months, although that Hellish Hearth or Furnace, remitted
much of its vigor and fierce heat, and could scarce lift it self above the
waves: yet nevertheless it seemed both to cast out Pumice-stones, and even to
labor and strive toward the formation of a New Island: which although it does
not yet appear above Water, yet in a calm Sea, a shallow Ford is observed,
which the Water swims over, scarce eight cubits high. But now if it be asked,
Whether yet these Fires are quite allayed? It Is answered, That they seem
sometimes to revive: Since it is diligently observed, that the Sea boyls and
rages there very often, and sends up smoke with the waves; And especially this
year 1656, the 11th day of June, and three days following.

Even the Geographick Dictionaries also record, that both this Santorine, and
the other little Island by, to have arose out of the Sea of late years; the one
an hundred years since, and the other fifty. And that the Sea is exceeding deep
thereabouts; and huge and fearful Noises to be there heard.

Italy, Sicily, together with the neighboring Islands of the Mediterranean,
corresponding with them, etc. are most notorious; But of them, and their
Remarkables, and particular Relations by themselves, in the next Chapter.

In the Atlantic Ocean, Westward; the Azores or Tercera's, can scarce be
inhabited for the vehemence of Fires, and Earthquakes together therewith; Which
about twenty years since, so shook the universal Island of St. Michael, and
made so great ravagings, that it almost wholly sunk in an Abyss or bottomless
Gulf.

For on June the 26th, in the year 1638, formidable Earthquakes began to make
the universal Island shake and quake, for the space of eight days; so that the
Cities, Towns and Castles being deserted, Men were forced to dwell in the open
Fields; chiefly those of Vargen, where the Earthquakes raged more dangerously
than in other places. After which Earthquakes, succeeded the following Prodigy.
Six miles distant from the Pick (commonly called the Pick of Camerine) is a
place called Ferreira, where Fishermen with their Boats were wont to fish,
especially in the Summertime. For there in a days time, they caught such a
multitude of Fish of all kinds, as no Boat returned laden with less than ten
thousand Fish. In this tract therefore of the Ocean, on Saturday in the month
of July, in the year 1638, Fire broke forth with such an unexpressible
violence, notwithstanding the depth of the said place of the Ocean, found often
heretofore by the Fishers to be an 120 foot deep; that indeed the very Ocean
would not suffice to extinguish so great a burning. The space which the boiling
fire took up, was as great as would serve for the sowing of two Bushels of
Wheat; breaking forth with so great violence, that notwithstanding the said
profundity of the Ocean, it reached as high as the Clouds; being elevated into
the supreme Region of the Air; carrying with it the very Water, Sand, Earth,
Stones, and other mighty heaps, just like Featherbeds flying up into the Air.
Which afar off appeared a sad spectacle to Beholders; But the melted matter
returning down into the Sea again, resembled a kind of Pultis or Frumenty.
Moreover, it is to be ascribed to the benignity of the Divine Providence, that
at that time the Wind was terrestrial, rushing forth from the parts of the
Island, against the rage of the outrageous Fire; without which, the whole
Island had without doubt been burnt, and perished with this formidable
combustion. Then presently after it cast forth stones of such vast bigness, of
the height of three Lances, or piked Staves; that you would say, not Stones,
but entire Mountains were cast out. And this was added to the horror; That the
stony Mountains which were cast forth on high, falling back again, and meeting
and dashing against others, thrown out aloft, at a good distance, out of the
bowels of the Sea, broke into a thousand pieces with a terrible noise and
rattling; which afterward being took up into your hands, mouldred into a black
Sand.

Moreover, out of the various and vast multitude of rejected Offalls, and the
collection and heaping together of innumerable stones, a new Island arose, and
that even in the midst of the most deep Ocean. In the beginning indeed, little,
of five Acres only; but daily increasing, grew to such a bigness, that four
days after it took up the length of five miles. And so great a multitude of
Fish perished with this burning, as scarce eight Ships of Indian Burden could
contain; which being dispersed far and wide, up and down the Island, lest they
should cause some Contagion by their putrisaction, they were collected together
by the Inhabitants all about, and buried in most deep-dugg ditches for eighteen
miles round about. But the scent of Sulphur was smelt for the space of twenty
four miles. This from the Relation of the Fathers of the Society.

These visible instances of particular Burnings of the Earth, are notable
presumptions, that there are laid in the hidden Mines of Providence, such a
provision of combustible matter, as will serve for an Universal Conflagration
of the Earth, when the day of Vengeance shall make use of these Treasuries of
Wrath.

We might add further Arguments of Subterraneous Fires, and the Fuel thereof;
from Earthquakes, and hot Fountains; Of which there are some in Peru, as Acosta
reports, that are so hot, that a Man cannot endure his hand so long, as the
repeating of an Ave-Marie. There be infinite numbers of these in the Province
of Charchas. He makes mention also, in the same place, of several Springs and
Fountains that run with Pitch and Rosin. Which yet seems nothing so strange, as
those Baths Fallopius speaks of, in the Territories of Parma, whose Water
catches Fire at a distance; But these are something from our present design,
and therefore pass them by.

CHAP. V. Of the Remarkables of the Italian Vulcano's, and their prodigious
Eruptions in particular; with particular Relations.
HOw Italy of all Lands, especially Continents, has been most notorious for
Vulcanian Eruptions and Combustions, has already been observed. It remains
therefore, now only to take notice of the most remarkable; which are those
about Putzol, with the Phlegraean Plain, now called Sulfatara; and the
Vesuvian; All within the Kingdom of Naples, (which has near communication and
commerce with the Aetnaean in Sicily) namely in Terra di Lavoro; which Land was
anciently called Campania Foelix, from the wonderful fertility thereof. So
exceeding fruitful in Wines and Wheat, that it is called by Florus, the Land of
Strife between Bachus and Ceres, and deservedly: For in this noble Region, one
may see large and beautiful Fields, overshaded with rich Vines, thick and
delightful Woods, sweet Fountains, and most wholesome Springs of running Waters,
as well for health, as delight and pleasure; and in a word whatsoever a
covetous mind can possibly aim at, or a carnal covet. And yet all this
Campania, as before was showed, is, or has been, obnoxious to Fires; and
abounds with sulphurous and combustible Earth and Materials; which no doubt
tend to its fructification. To begin with the Phlegraean fields. Concerning
which,

Hear first, what Mr. Sandys, in his Travels, says.

Vulcan's Court described.
The Court of Vulcan, called the Phlegraean fields heretofore; for that
Hercules here overthrew the Giants, for their inhumanity and insolences;
assisted with Lightning from Heaven:

The Earth with imbowell'd Flames, yet fuming glows;
And Water with Fire, Sulphur mixed, upthrows.
Whereupon grew the Fable of their warring with the Godds. But hear we
Petronius describing it:

A place deep sunk in yawning Cliffs, 'twixt great
Dicharchea and Parthenope, repleat
With black Cocytus waves: For Winds that strain
To rush forth there, a deadly heat contain.
The Earth fruits in Autumn bears not, nor glad Field
Once puts on Green; or sprouting branches yield
Their Vernal Songs. But Chaos and ragg'd Stone,
Smircht with black Pumice, there rejoice, o'regrown
With mournful Cypress. Dis his head here raises,
Covered with Ashes pale, and Funeral blazes.
A naked Level it is, in form of an Oval, twelve hundred forty and six foot
long, a thousand broad, and environed with high cliffie hills, that fume on
each side, and have their Sulphurous savor transported by the Winds, to places
far distant. You would think, and no doubt think truly, that the hungry Fire
had made this Valley with continual feeding; which breaks out in a number of
places. And strange it seems to a stranger, that men dare walk up and down
with so great a security: The Earth as hot, as sufferable, being hollow
underneath; where the Fire and Water make a horrible rumbling, conjoyning
together, as if one were fuel to the other: here and there bubling up, as if in
a Caldron over a Furnace; And sprouting aloft into the Air, at such time as the
Sea is enraged with tempests. In some places; of the color of Water, which is
mingled with Soot; in others, as if with Lime, according to the complexion of
the several Minerals. The flames do many times shift places, abandoning the
old, and making new Eruptions, (the mouths of the vents environed with yellow
cinders) arising with so strong a vapor, that Stones thrown in, are forthwith
ejected. Yet for all these terrors, it is hourly trod upon both by men and
horses: and resorted unto by the diseased in May, June and July, who receive
the fume at their mouths, ears, nostrils, and such other parts of their bodies,
as are ill affected; which heateth, but hurts not: that being only sovereign
that evaporateth from Brimstone: It mollifieth the sinews, sharpneth the sight,
asswageth the pains of the head and stomach, makes the barren pregnant, cures
violent fevers, itches, ulcers, etc. From January to October, the Husbandmen
hereabout do stir their Glebe at such time as much smoke does arise, and that
they know that it proceeds from Sulphur: which does add to the soil a
marvelous fertility. From hence they exact yearly three thousand pounds weight.
Another kind of Sulphur is gotten here, not taken from the Fire; but found in
the Earth: of especial use for the dying of Hair, and familiarly experimented
by Women. White Salt-Armoniack is here found also. At the foot of this Mountain
that regards the East, are Minerals of Allome, and the best of the World. In
the top of the Mountain are certain little veins of a white matter like Salt;
much used by Skinners: whereof a Water is made, that forthwith puts out all
characters that are written in Paper. The flower of Brass is here found every
where, excellent, and transparent; with white and red Niter. This place is said
by the Roman Catholics to be disquieted with Devils: and that the fire
underneath, is a part of Purgatory, where departed souls have a temporal
punishment. The Friars that dwell hard by in the Monastery of Saint January,
report that they often do hear fearful shreeks and groanings. They tell also a
late story of a certain youth of Apulia, a Student in Naples; who desperate in
his fortunes, advised with the Devil, and was persuaded by him to make him a
Deed of Gift of himself, and to write it in his own Blood; in doing whereof he
should in short time recover his losses. Believing the Deluder, according to
appointment he came unto this place, with that execrable Writing: when
afflighted with the multitudes of Devils that appeared unto him, he fled to the
aforesaid Monastery, and aquainted the Prior with all that happened, He
communicated it to the Bishop, (now or late living) who informed the Pope
thereof: by whose command he was cast into Prison, and after condemned to the
Galleys. Possible it is that this may be true; but Damianus the reporter of
that which follows, (though a Cardinal) might have had the Whetstone, if he
had not alleged his Author: who tells of a number of hideous Birds, which
accustomed to arise from hence on a sudden in the evening of the Sabbath; And
to be seen until the dawning of the day, stalking on the tops of the hills,
stretching out their wings, and pruning their feathers; never observed to feed,
nor to be taken by the art of the Fowler: when upon the croaking of the Raven
that chased them, they threw themselves into these filthy waters: Said to be
damned souls, tormented all the week long, and suffered to refresh themselves
on the Sabbath, in honor of our Savior's Resurrection. This he reports from
the mouth of the Archbishop Umbertus. But if this be Hell, what a desperate end
made that unhappy German, who nor long since slipped into these Fornaces? or what
had his poor Horse committed that fell in with him, that he should be damned;
at least retained in Purgatory? The matter that does nourish these Subterranean
Fires, is Sulphur and Bitumen. But there it is fed by the latter, where the
flame does mix with the water, which is not by water to be extinguished:
approved by the composition of those Ignes Admirabiles, or Admirable Waters.

Nigh hereunto are the ruins of a magnificent Amphitheater, environing in an
Oval, a Court, an hundred threescore and twelve feet long, and fourscore and
eight over: thrown down by an Earthquake not many ages since; which here happen
no, seldom, by the violence of enflamed and suppressed vapors. Dedicated it
was to Vulcan; and not without cause, he seeming in these parts to have such a
Sovereignty. A latter relation and account we have of these -- Plains by
Kercher, which we will give you also; and is as follows.

A Description of the Phlegraean Plain, in the Fields of Putzol, or Puteoli,
near Naples, by Athanas. Kircher, his own Observation, An. 1638.
In the Year 1638. passing by Naples, I could not let slip the opportunity of
inquiring and looking into these sulphurous Plains, so much celebrated in all
Ages: Which the Ancients called the Phlegraean Plains. Having therefore got
through a subterraneous passage, which they commonly call the Grotte (which we
have elsewhere described) Arched, and made hollow, or vaulted between the
Mountain Pausilippus; not far from Putzol, between the Jaws of the Mountains, a
Plain stretched forth far and wide, presents it self to view. A Plain
altogether formidable and full of horror; in length they lay 1200 foot, in
breadth a 1000. Pliny writes, that they were called the Phlegraean Plains, from
their flames and burning; (for so the word signifies.) But Cornel. Strabo calls
it, Vulcan's open Market place (public Theater or Court.) For in manner of a
huge Theater, as it were, it sends forth perpetual fires; and begets much
Sulphur and combustible and inflamable matter, and therefore called Sulfatara.
A place where also some fable the Giants to have been overcome by Hercules.
Little Hills are beheld there to burn and slame in the very bottom; for they
always exhale forth great smokes every where, with a sulphurous stench
through many holes, which are carried by the Winds through all the neighboring
Regions, even unto Naples also. This whole Plain is surrounded with Hills, or
high and steep Rocks; whereof the top or Pick, once very high, being at length
devoured by perpetual fires, is concluded from the very form of the place, to
have sunk into a most profound Vale. Therefore that which was once the top, is
now a deep ditch, or hole, in a plain Vale. And what were the coasts or sides
of the Mountain heretofore, are now the tops of Cliffs and Rocks. And these,
heretofore indeed, as Dion Cassius witnesleth, vomited forth sires and flames
in greater quantity. The neighbor Mountains also did continually burn, and
cast forth thick fumes and fiery Waters, as it were, out of Furnaces. But now
the very Plains, no otherwise then the Phlegraean Hills, being exhausted with
perpetual flames, are cavernous, with an infinite number of holes, and are
every where yellowish with a sulphurous matter and color. The soil also, when
it is touched by such as walk thereupon, sounds and rattles like a Drum, as it
were, by reason of the concavities; and you may feel, as it were, not without
astonishment, boiling waters under your feet, and thick and fired fumes, to
hiss and flow hither and thither, with a great crackling noise, through Pipes
and Subterraneous Caverns, made by the force of the hot Exhalations. Which
force, how great it is, you may try, by stopping any hole, with a heavy stone,
or so; for then you shall see the violent force of the smoke presently to belch
it forth again.

Yet an huge Laky-ditch in the same Plain did wonderfully affect An horrible
stinking Ditch and Pond.
me: For it is found full of boiling waters, and ready to fright one with their
blackness. You would say, it was a Kettle or Caldron boiling with Pitch and
Rosin. Which forthwith changes place; and the waters growing hard on the brim
of the Caldron, is made narrower or wider, as the force and impetuousness of
the Exhalation is greater or lesser.

That also is wonderful; That that swallowing Gulf, casts forth waters on
high, eight or ten foot above a man's height, in the fashion A mavelous force
of jetting or dartingforth Waters.
of a Pyramid, and those fat and clayie, and almost of a sulphurous color.
Which even the Inhabitants of Putzol do confess; who affirm, that these
boiling waters are shot forth on high, to sixteen, or even twenty four palm
height sometimes. And this especially when the Sea rages; but not so likewise
when it is calm. A most clear sign certainly, that these mavelous effects of
the exalted liquor, proceed from no where else, but from the Sea: For the Sea
being tossed with the storms of winds, whilst through subterraneous passages it
sollicites, as it were, the Steward or dispenser of this melted liquid matter;
it is no wonder, that a Liquor, not knowing how to contain it self in its own
narrow bounds, should be darted forth on high, beyond its limits, constituted
thereunto by nature. By so much indeed the more violently, by how much the
impetuous afflux of the Sea thrusts it forth with greater violence. Yea, and
the diverse color of the waters at that time; compounded of the various mixture
of the Seawater, with the various mixture of the Mineral Juices; Namely, of
those waters, which, from the more profound boiling Springs of the Earth, the
subterraneous winds, agitated by the ragings of the Sea, and growing stronger
and stronger amidst the slames, belch forth; does plainly teach. But the Sea
being still calm, none of these things are perceived; but the waters are only
beheld sat, or oily; and filthy with a black coaly soot, together with a
certain effervency or boiling.

What shall I say of the Mountains and Rocks, with which this Vulcanian Plain
is encompassed and guarded. There are beheld in these conveyances or passages,
as it were, of Chimneys, not a few breathing-holes, some of which belch forth a
perpetual wind, with a formidable sound, and crackling noise; and with such a
force, that if you cast a stone thereinto, it being struck back presently, you
shall receive it cast forth again with great force. Some dart forth smoke mixed
with flames. You would think your self almost in the midst of Hell; where all
things appear horrid, sad and lamentable, with a most formidable face of
things. Also you are almost struck even breathless, with the stench of Sulphur,
Bitumen, Napthe, and other Earths, Clayes, Marles, and Minerals. And yet
although the place be so horrid; yet those who labor in making of Sulphur,
Niter, Vitriol, etc. reap much profit thereby.

Further; We must not omit here Mr. Sandys's relation of a most memorable both
Earthquake and Burning, which happened not far from these Plains, near unto the
City Putzol, in the year 1538. with the new-formed Mountain. For the famous
Lake Lucrinus, near Putzol, extended formerly (it seems indeed to have been
joined with it on one side) to the deadly sulphurous Lake Avernus, supposed
the entrance into Hell by ignorant Antiquity; where they offered infernal
sacrifice to Pluto and the Manes, there said to give Answers; is now no other
than a little sedgy plash, choked up by the horrible and astonishing cruption
of the new Mountain; whereof as often as I think, I am easy to credit whatsoever
is wonderful.

For who here knows not, or who elsewhere will believe, that a Mountain should
atise (partly out of a Lake, and partly out of the Sea) in one day and a night,
unto such an height, as to contend in altitude with the high Mountains
adjoining? In the year of our Lord 1538, on the 29th of September, when for
certain days foregoing, the Country hereabout was so vexed with perpetual
Earthquakes, as no one house was left so entire, as not to expect an immediate
ruin; After that the Sea had retired two hundred paces from the thoar (leaving
abundance of Fish, and Springs of fresh water rising in the bottom) this
Mountain visibly ascended about the second hour of the night, with an hideous
roaring, horribly vomiting stones, and such store of cinders, as overwhelmed
all the buildings hereabout, and the salubrious Baths of Tripergula for so many
ages celebrated; consumed the Vines to Ashes, killing Bird: and Beasts: The
fearful inhabitants of Putzol flying through the dark with their wives and
children, naked, defiled, crying out, and detesting their calamities. Manifold
mischiefs had they suffered by the Barbarous, yet none like this which Nature
inslicted. But hear we it described by Borgius.

What gloomy fumes days glorious Eye obscure?
The pitchy Lake effus'd through Sulphury Caves,
Higher than Aetna's Fire, throws flaming waves:
Has Phleg'ton broke into Avern; with groans
Whirling the horrid floods, and rumbling stones?
The Baian waves resound; fresh streams ascend;
And several ways their speedy currents bend.
Misenus lets his Trumpet fall, scarce heard,
Sick Prochyta a second ruin feared.
Loud roarings from Earths smoking womb arise,
And fill with fearful groans the darkened Skies.
A sad sour face does menace from the West;
Whence sharper plagues the Latian Towns infest.
Then furious Winds to Skies huge stones eject;
Which, like a Compass turned about, erect
A round Amphitheatral. Floods of Stone,
From belching Gulf, in Millions straight forth thrown.
Nor can what they then suffered be ever forgotten, having such a testimony
still in view as is this strange Mountain; advancing his top a mile above his
basis. The stones hereof are so light and pory, that they will not sink when
thrown into the water. The cause of this accident is ascribed unto the
neighborhood of the Sea and hollowness of the soil: whereby easily engendered
exhallations, being hurried about with a most violent motion, do inflame that
dry and bituminous matter; casting it upward, and making way for their fiery
expirations. To those also is the retiring of the Sea to be attributed: who
struggling to break forth, do ratify and so raise the Earth, which thereby also
as it were made thirsty, sucks the water through crannies into her spungy and
hot intrails: increasing the vapors, not decreasing the fire; by reason of the
Bitumen. Perhaps Delos and Rhodes, unseen in the first Ages, were made apparent
by such means: however, diverse of the Vulcanello's or Liperitan Islands were
without peradventure; All of them having slam'd, and being now more in number
than observed by the Ancients. This new Mountain, when newly raised, had a
number of issues, at some of them smoking, and sometimes flaming: at others
disgorging rivolets of hot waters; keeping within a terrible rumbling: and many
miserably perished, that ventured to descend into the hollowness above. But
that hollow on the top, is at this present an Orchard; And the Mountain
thorow-out is bereft of his terrors.

Of Vesuvius, a Vulcanian Mountain, in the Kingdom of Naples likewise, now
called Monte di Somma.
The most noted Vulcano of the Mountain Vesuvius, is also in this happy Country
of Campania, a little further removed from Naples; whose ragings and eruptions
have been wonderfully remarkable in all Ages: And yet notwithstanding all its
fires and burnings, its Hills are full of Vines and Olives; and all its Fields
about, of wonderful fruitfulness; save only the Top alone, where it has a
great Plain bare, and bearing no manner of fruit at all. The face of the Earth
like Cinders or Ashes, and old ruinated and wasted Rocks; undoubted signs of
its ancient and often Burnings.

Vesuvius then is a Mountain of Campania Foelix, about eight miles from Naples;
which also has received great injuries and prejadices by its Cinders and
violent burling forth of Stones, flung even to its Walls and Edifices. This
Mountain has vast Fountains of Fire; And heretofore was on every side high,
before the inward parts were consumed with fires. It utters usually smoke by
day; but by night flames. Its manner is to send forth a loud sound or roaring
noise, and bellowing first; and then to belch forth an huge force of Cinders,
with the manifest danger of passers by. But if a more vehement Wind ply upon
it, the Ashes or Cinders are raised so high, and drove so far in length, that
it is certain, they have sometimes been carried, as Procopius testifies, even as
far as Constantinople it self; and All at length so affrighted, that they ran
to their prayers for many years, to avert the wrath of God. Thus Coel. Rhodigin.

Mr. Sand's Relation runs thus:

This Mountain has a double top; that toward the North does end in a plain:
the other toward the South aspireth more high, which when hid in clouds,
prognosticates rain to the Neopolitans. In the top there is a large deep
hollow, without danger to be descended into, in form of an Amphitheatre; in the
midst a pit which leads into the entrails of the Earth, from whence the
Mountain in times past did breath sorth terrible flames; the mouth whereof is
almost choked with broken Rocks and Trees that are fallen therein. Next to
this; the matter thrown up is ruddy, light, and soft: more removed, black and
ponderous: the uttermost brow that declineth like the seats in a Theater,
flourishing with Trees and excellent Pastorage. The midst of the Hill is shaded
with Chesnut-trees, and others, bearing sundry fruits. The lower parts
admirably clothed with Veins, that afford the best Greek-Wines of the World:
which has given to the Mountain the name of Di Sommo, in regard of their
excellency; affording to the Owners the yearly revenue of three hundred
thousand Ducats. So now it has lost the name of Vesuvius, with the cause why
it was given, which signifies a Spark, as Veseus a Conflagration.

But never any thing appeared so horrible, as that which happened in the first
or third years Reign of the Emperor Titus, eighty years after Christ. For then
it disgorg'd such boiling waves and slouds of Fire, as consumed the
neighboring Cities; And then also it was that Pliny the second, that great
searcher of Nature, and famous Author of the Natural History, and then Admiral
of the Roman Navy, desirous to discover the Reason, was suffocated in his too
near approaches, and research after so great a Mystery of Nature; As witnesses
his Nephew, in an Epistle to Cornel. Tacitus. Not indeed wilfully, and on set
purpose, as it is said, (but I think falsely) of the other grand Philosopher,
that he threw himself into the contrary Element, because he could not
understand the strange Mystery thereof. At that time not only issued forth such
store of Smoke, that the very Sun seemed to be in the Eclipse; but also huge
Stones; and of Ashes such plenty, that Rome, Africa and Syria, were even
covered: And besides Beasts. Fish and Fowl, it overwhelmed with Pumice-stones,
two adjoining Cities, Herculanum and Pompeios, with the people sitting in the
Theater. There were heard dismal noises all about the Province, and Giants of
incredible bigness seen to stalk up and down the top and edges of the Mountain
(or rather in peoples extravagant fancies;) which extraordinary Accident was
adjudged either a cause or presage of the future Pestilence, which raged in
Rome and Italy long after. Hieronymus Borgius touching the horrible roarings
and thundrings of this Mountain, thus sets it forth in suitable Verse;

Then remote Africa suffered the dire heat
Of twofold Rage, with showrs of Dust repleat:
Scorcht Egypt, Memphis, Nilus felt, amazed,
The woeful Tempest in Campania raised.
Not Asia, Syria, nor the Towers that stand
In Neptune's surges; Cyprus, Creet, (Joves Land
The scattered Cyclads; nor the Muses seat,
(Minerva's Town) that vast Plague escaped: Such (...),
Such vapors break forth from full jaws, then shone;
When Earth-born, horrible Orimedon
Hot, vomits ire, beneath Vesuvius thrown.
Dion affirms in a manner as much. But Bodin, the censurer of all Historians,
does deride it. Notwithstanding Cassiodorus writes as great matters of a later
Conflagration; whereupon Theodoricus (first King of the Goths in Italy) did
remit his Tribute to the damnisied Campanians. Marcellinus further observes,
that the Ashes thereof transported in the Air, obscured all Europe: and that
the Constantinopolitans being wonderfully affrighted therewith, (insomuch as
the Emperor Leo forsook the City) in memorial of the same, did yearly celebrate
the 12 th of November. It also burnt in the sixth year of Constantine the
fourth; which was about the year of Christ 640: and at such times as
Bellisarius took Naples; (which was about the year 540) and groaned, but
elected no Cinders: and again when the Saracens invaded Africa, sometime after,
etc.

Plautina writes that it flamed in the year 685; prognosticating the death of
Pope Benedict the second, with ensuing slaughters, rapines, and deaths of
Princes. During the Papacy of two other Benedicts, the 8th and the 9th, it is
said to have done the like. The later, the last flaming thereof, which was in
the year 1024; (yet often since it has been wonderfully feared;) excepting of
late years again. And although it has made sundry dreadful devastations; yet
the fruitful Ashes thrown about, did seem to repair the forego^ (...) with a
quick and mavelous fertility. At the foot of the (...) there are diverse ve^s,
out of which exceeding cold winds do (...) (...); such as by Venteducts from
the vast Caves above (...), they le^ (...) their Rooms at their pleasure, to
qualify the (...) (...). It seems Records of History reach beyond the Be^
(...) (...) (...) (...) of this Mountain. For Spartacus the (...), and
Ringleader of the fugitive Bondslaves (which was about the year of the Word
3880, and before Christ about 70.) no less a terror unto Rome, than Hannibal,
did make this Mountain the seat of his War; where besieged by Clodius, he by a
strange straragem, with bonds made of Vines, descended into the bottom of the
Hill, (being long before it first began to flame) and finding out a private
passage, issued suddenly upon the unsuspecting Romans; seized on their Tents;
and pursuing his Victory, overran all Campania.

Since, The year 1610 has been memorable, for the burning flames of the
Mountain Vesuvium; the which being renewed on the month of February, brought a
very large wasting; but a great affrightment to the Neapolitans; who, solemn
supplications being proclaimed, went in Procession with the Head of Januarius,
their Patron, and Defender of their City, carried about; whereby the silly
people were made to believe, the destruction hanging over their heads to have
been turned away; even as they are to this day.

Also in the year 1631 was a new Eruption; Earthquakes and Roarings as usually)
preceding. And again in a flame in 1635, with an Earthquake in Messina; as
likewise again in 1638. And indeed not quite appeased and extinct all that
time, most likely. The same year 1634, or 35, (but this occasionlly by the by)
even England shook, and trembled about London; a Marsh there boiling with black
waters, etc. Also at Witteberg it rained Brimstone; And in the month of May
1644, a great Wood, belonging to the Dukedom of Norimberg, of eight thousand
Acres of Land, burned in a flame; with diverse other like Prodigies. Petav. Hist.

Lastly, in 1660, Vesuvius again brake forth with Combustions.

There remains nothing more to add, but Kircher's particular relation and
account thereof; who in the year 1638, ventured up to observe its nature and
workings; As he had done Aetna and Strumboli before in the same year, when all
those Mountains were outrageous with most devouring Eruptions. Where, observing
things past all belief in all of them, could do so much with him, that from
thence he took occasion and beginning of happily setting upon that glorious
work of his Subterrantous World; since accomplished.

Of an exact Search and Enquiry made into the Mountain Vesuvius, by Kircher, in
the year 1638.
Having a very earnest desire, a long time, to understand the Miracles of
Subterraneous Nature, it happened that at the same time, by command of my
Superiors, I undertook a voyage into Sicily and Malta, in attendance on the
most excellent Prince Frederick, Land-grave of Hassia, at that time chief
Admiral, now a most worthy Cardinal, whose Confessor I was. Entering therefore
into Sicily, I found such a Theater of Nature, displaying her self under
wonderful variety of things, as I had with so many desires wished for. Since
what ever thing occurs, in the whole body of the Earth that is wonderful,
rare, unusual, and worthy of Admiration, I found contracted here, as it were,
in an Epitomie, by a certain industry of wise and sagacious Nature.

Being inflamed therefore with an huge desire of searching out all things
particularly. Above all things, first I ascended Aetna, the fountain of all
other Prodigious Effects in Sicily; that I might by my own experience, and with
my own eyes, find out the wonderful things, which Historians of all ages have
writ thereof. Then with utmost diligence I searched the Aeolian or Hophaestian,
that is, the Laparitan Islands, now called the Vulcanello's, or Vulcanian
Islands. And above all the rest; Strongylus (now Stromboli) and Vulcano. I
searched out also the Sicilian Straits, called Faro di Messina, no less
dangerous for the incredible Reciprocations of its Ragings, than infamous for
Shipwracks; with the wonderful motions of Scylla and Charybdis, and
vicissitudes of their Ebollitions. And whatsoever things stupendous did occur,
were presently committed to Table-Books; and after return home, seriously
weighed and deliberated by solid and exact Reason, etc.

But in return home, with some certain private persons, we were by wonderful
and unusual storms and ragings of the Sea, to the danger of our lives, forced
upon the Shoars of Calabria, or Terra di Otranto; At the time of those horrible
Earthquakes, and strivings of Nature, then outrageous in those places; to the
greatest peril of our lives. But had thereby opportunity of learning many
Secrets of Nature. After the happening of all which, I had then a desire, being
in those parts, to visit the famous Vesuvius also.

The Relation of which wonderful Earthquakes, now mentioned; we, according to
our present method reserve to another place afterward; passing them by here,
to give first his particular account of Vesuvius, (though last with him) which
is our present Argument.

The RELATION.
After therefore so great dangers sustained by Sea and Land; After having
diligently searched out the incredible power of Nature working in subterraneous
burrows and passages, I had a great desire to know whether Vesuvius also had
not some secret commerce and correspondence with Strongylus and Aetna, in so
powerful a war and strife of Nature, as I had every where experience of
before. I went therefore unto Porticus, (the Porch or Entrance) a Town
situated at the foot of the Mountain. Hence hiring an honest Countryman, for
a true and skillful companion, and guide of the ways; (not without indeed an
ample reward) I ascended the Mountain at midnight, through difficult, rough,
uneven, and steep passages. At whose crator or mouth, when I had arrived, I saw
what is horrible to be expressed, I saw it all over of a light fire, with an
horrible combustion, and stench of Sulphur and burning Bitumen. Here forthwith
being astonished at the unusual sight of the thing; Methoughts I beheld the
habitation of Hell; wherein nothing else seemed to be much wanting, besides the
horrid fantasms and apparitions of Devils. There were perceived horrible
bellowings and roarings of the Mountain; An unexpressible stink; Smoaks mixed
with darkish globes of Fires; which both the bottom and sides of the Mountain
continually belched forth out of Eleven several places; and made me in like
manner, ever and anon, belch, and as it were, vomit back again, at it. O the
depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How incomprehensible
are thy ways! If thou show thy power against the wickedness of mankind in
so formidable and portentous Prodigies and Omens of Nature; What shall it be in
that last day, wherein the Earth shall be drowned with the Ire of thy Fury, and
the Elements melt with fervent heat? Morning therefore waxing light, that I
might search out the Constitution of the whole Interiours of the Mountain, with
all the diligence I could, I chose a safe and secure place to set my feet sure
upon; which was an huge Rock, of a plain surface; to which there lay open an
Avenue, by a descent of the Mountain very far; And so I went down unto it. Here
taking sorth my Pantometer, (or universal Measurer) I set upon the dimensions
of the Mountain; and found by a Geometrical Computation, the compass of the
Crater to contain almost three hundred paces, but the depth eight hundred. The
Mountain all up and down everywhere, cragged and broken. No gradual declining
for any passage to the inward parts; but descended in its compass or circuit,
after the manner of a Cylinder, made hollow directly and straight. And although
the Bottom seemed to the eye to be contained in a more narrow circumference;
yet according to Optic Accounts and Laws, That happened from the exceeding
great distance, and prosundity, from the innermost surface of the Crater or
mouth. In the Center of the Bottom, Nature seemed to have constituted, as it
were, her Harth of Fire: And to say truth, a Shop or Workhouse to make a
Vulcanian Kitchen; boiling with an everlasting gushing forth, and streamings of
Smoke and slames; and employed in decocting of Sulphur, Bitumen, and melting
and burning other kinds of Minerals; and by a certain secret endeavor and
enterprise, preparing for deadly ruins and slaughters afterward to be
committed. Since the vapors included within; as they know not how to be
contained: so they did discuse, or scatter the burden that lay upon them, with
so great force and violence, accompanied with horrible cracklings and noises,
that the Mountain seemed to be tossed with an Earthquake or trembling. Which
whenever it happened, the supreme and softer parts of the Mountain, which
clung together of Ashes, Cinders, Rains, and other Refuses of Minerals; being
shook in pieces, and loosened by the trembling; and so falling like Hills, into
the bottom of the Hellish Gulf; did from that various reslexion of the sound,
stir up that crackling noise: So great and fearful a one, as that any, even of
the stoutest and most undaunted heart, would scarce venture to suffer. The
matter which was continually belched forth from the center of the Mountain,
made as it were, a new Mountain, endued with wonderful variety of furrows, or
hollow channels; which the various ebullition of the melted Minerals, flowing
into all parts of the circumference; of a greenish color now; from Brass;
presently of a yellow color, from Sulphur, Arsenick, and Sandarack: Now red;
from Cinnabar, Minium or Red Lead, and Vermilion; then black; from Vicriol mixed
with Water; or of an Ashy color, from the very Cinders; did as it were, by the
ingonious Pencil of Nature, form. This little Mountain, after the last burning
of the Mountain, which happened in the year 1631, (at which time proceeded
great Earthquakes, as well as Noises and Roarings and Tremblings; as is its
custom) has grown so big, that we may thence very reasonably conjecture that
it is hereafter likely to rise unto the same height, which it once obtained of
old; unless it be destroyed by some new burning supervening: Which has
happened in this very same year I now write these things, in the year 1660. For
that the Mountain outrageous with a new and horrible burning, has so cast down
its top, and Crator; that it appears now much lower at this day, then what I a
little before described it to be. And consequently, as it is found of greater
circumference; so of lesser profundity. Having taken a view of all these things
duly; and returning to Naples; the next day I betook my self into the Island
Aenaria, which they call Ischia; of much note, and celebrated with great fame
by ancient writers. And thence into the Phlegraean Plain, of Putzol Fields,
Vulcan's Marketplace or Theater; (of which before.) And whatsoever, either the
Ancients or Moderns, have related wonderful of those places, I found to be
most true.

It is also taken notice of in History, that there was an Eruption and great
Burning, near Carignole in Terra di Lavoro, which laid three Acres of Ground,
all in mere Ashes and Cinders. Tuscany also has a burning Mountain in the
Apennine; and another in the Fields of Bononia. There are also Laky Ditches,
Pits, and Dens, between Pistorium and Petra Mala, belching forth perpetual
Globes of Flames, especially by night. There are noted also in the Fields of
Mutina, two famous places full of Burnings, etc. But these with the rest of
Italy, have been barely enumerated before; of which we have nothing further
remarkable to add.

And so we are at last come to the main Fountain and Springhead, in a manner,
as we may say, of all the subterraneous Fire, of these Parts, with their
manifold desolating Eruptions, Aetna, now Monti Gibello.

CHAP. VI. Of the Remarkables of the grand Volcano Aetna, in especial: and its
most remarkable Eruptions: together with the Vulcanian Islands adjoining.
NOtwithstanding the horrid face of things, by reason of the frequent,
prodigious, and mischievous Eruptions and Devastations of Aetna:
Notwithstanding it continually sends forth dreadful flames of Fire; to the
astonishment of all Beholders; and that its Soil springs abundantly with often
and eternal Burnings: Yet those subterraneous fountains of Fire, that
continually feed and supply these Vulcano's; and the abundance of fat, oily,
sulphurous, and inflammable matter and fuel, or nourishment, wherewith the
whole Country thereabouts, and all the Island over, is so richly stored and
manured with, by Natures own bountiful hand, (everywhere plentiously producing
Sulphur, Bitumen, and other rich and fat Earths and Marles, etc.) make Sicily
one of the most fertile Islands in the World.

For the Soil is incredibly fruitful in the best Wine, in Oil, Honey, Saffron;
Minerals also of Gold, Silver, and Allom; together with plenty of Salt and
Sugar. There are also Gems of Agats and Emeralds. Quarries of Porphyre, and
Serpentine. It yields also great store of the richest Silks, which grow
plentifully about Messina, the chief City. Variety of most excellent and
delicious fruits, both for taste and color; with such abundance of all sorts
of Grain, that it was called in old times, Horreum Romani Populi, or the
Granary of the Roman Empire; whence also Cicero called it, The City of Romes
Soul; and does now furnish some parts of Italy, Spain, and Barbary, besides
Malta, and the adjacent Isles, with that which she can spare of her
superfluities. Nay, Tully does not only call it, the Granary and Storehouse of
the City of Rome, in regard of Corn; bat adds, that it was accounted for a
well-furnish'd Treasury; as being able of it self, without charge of the State,
to cloth, maintain and furnish the greatest Army, with Leather, Corn, and
Apparel. And if Diodorus Siculus may be credited in it, he tells us, that about
Leontium, now Lentini, and some other places, Wheat did grow of it self without
any labor of the Husbandman. At this day, in some parts of the Isle, the soil
is so exceeding fruitful, that it yields unto the Husbandman an hundred
measures of Corn for one. And certainly the Corn of this Country must needs
yield a wonderful increase, the King of Spain receiving an hundred thousand
Crowns yearly for the Custom of Wheat. In this Country also is the Hill Hybla,
so famous for Bees and Honey. But too much of the Country. We return to its
greatest Wonder of all Ages, and indeed a vernaculous kind of Portent thereof,
the horrible Mount Aetna.

It is a mavelous Hill, of fearful and stupendous Fires and Flames; as it
were, the very Mouth of Hell; distant Eastwards, ten miles from the City
Catania, situated at the foot thereof; From which it ascends by degrees, to so
many miles height. Others reckon it fifteen miles from Catania: but indeed
scarce ten English miles. And yet its full height in a direct descent,
according to its Axis, is computed by exact Geometricians 30 miles; (as Kircher
has it) except the Printer has added a Cipher too much: as must needs be. This
ancient City was built, as some say, in the year of the World 3469, eighty nine
years after Rome; and near 500 before Christ. But others in the year 4462,
about 500 years after Christ. (The first, without all doubt, by most Authentic
Authors, the truer account:) and receives both loss, and (if Strabo may be
believed) advantage, from its nearness to Aetna. For the ejected flames have
heretofore committed horrible wastes, which gave Amphinomus, and Anapius, two
Brethren, an occasion to become famous for their Piety; who rescued their
Parents engaged by the Fire, and bear them away on their shoulders: whereof
Ausonius;

Who will forget Catania? of high fame,
For Piety of Brothers, sindg'd in Flame.
Yet it was never known, in all this time, to have been wholly ruined or
destroyed, by the terrible threatenings of so troublesome and dangerous a
Neighbor; that spares none in his violent raging fits and Convulsions: Yet has
been shrewdly in danger sometimes, and much havock'd and spoiled in some parts
thereof; whereby it may appear, that this last and present Eruption (so
prodigious and fearful) has not been the greatest; as it has not been the
first by some hundreds. Several Towns and Cities lay round about it; All or
most now buried in Ashes and Ruins, by the late excessive burning and
conflagration; even as many have been so in former times.

It was here in this Insernal Mountain, where the Poets fable that Jupiter with
his Thunderbolts struck down the Rebel-Giants, the Cyclops's, condemned to be
Vulcan, the Godd of Fires Hammerers; whom they feign, forges here his Father
Jupiter's Thunderbolts, and the Arms of the Heroes; and laid this Mountain upon
Enceladus the grand Conspirator's back, there said to have been buried; and his
hot breath to have fired the Mountain, lying on his face: As Virgil poetizes;

Enceladus with Thunders struck, they tell,
Under the weight of this huge Burden fell.
Above him was the mighty Aetna laid,
Who now breaths Fires, through broken Trunks conveyed;
And as he weary turns, a Thunder-Crack
Sicily shakes; and Heaven is hung with Black.
Though Naturalists interpret the Giants, to be hot Spirits included in the
Earth, which finding no passage out, sometimes burst open most high Mountains,
and rush out with violence; and even shoot forth, as it were, their darts
against Heaven. The Poet, therefore feigned these Giants to have assaul ed the
Godds in the Phlegraean-Plains: but to be struck down, some into Aetna others
into the Vulcanian Islands; and others into Hell. And as the grosser Heathen
supposed it to be Vulcans Shop, and the Cyclops's; so the gross Papists there,
take it for the place of Purgatory; All alike unfallible.

And here some report, or rather fable, that Empedocles affecting Divine
Honor, departing from his company secretly by night, leapt in at the mouth of
this Mountain, that he might be reputed an Immortal God; as Horrace witnesses.

Empedocles to be a Godd desires,
And casts himself into the Aetnaean Fires.
But that his Iron Slippers, or Brazen Shoes, which the Fire had thrown up
again with its belching flames, to have discovered the matter. But wiser men
more rightly relate him, to have perished only; as a curious and ventrous
Observator; going about to search out this Fiery Lake, and thereby to have
fallen into some pit, or ditch, and consumed in the Burning.

The barren top of the Mountain is encompassed with a Bank of Ashes, Cinders,
and Pumices, etc. of the height of a Wall. In the middle is also a round Hill,
of the same matter and color; wherein be two great Holes, fashioned like unto
Cups, which be called Craters; Out of these do rise sometimes sundry great
flames of fire; sometimes horrible smoke; sometimes are blown out burning
stones, in infinite number. Moreover, Before the said Fire appears, there is
heard within the ground, terrible noise and roaring. And also (which is more
marvel) though it continually burns, nay when the smoke and fire is most
abundant and fervent; yet round about the top of the said Hill and uppermost
parts, where the Fire is greater and continual, are seen perpetual and most
deep Snows, and hoary Frosts. And from all Antiquity has this Mountain burnt
after an horrible manner; and oftentimes affects the Neighboring Regions with
incomperable and unvaluable loss; though yet not a more fertile Region in the
whole World, as was before described, etc. The Cinders and Ashes of Aetna, as
Pliny testifies, fall down an hundred and fifty miles distant from thence. Mr.
Sandys makes such a following Description of it.

Aetna (now Mount Gibel) called by Pindar, the Caelestial Column, is the
highest Mountain of Sicily; for a great space leisurely rising; in so much as
the top is ten miles distant from the uttermost Basis. It appears Eastward
with two Shoulders, having an eminent Head in the middle. The lower parts are
luxuriously fruitful; the middle woody and shaded; the upper rocky, steep, and
almost covered with Snow: yet smoking in the midst, like many conjoyning
chimneys; and vomiting intermitted flames; though not but by night to be
discerned: As if Heat and Cold had left their contentions, and embraced one
another. This burning Beacon, does show her Fire by night, and her Smoke by
day, a wonderful way off: yet heretofore discerned far further; In that the
matter perhaps is diminished by so long an expense; My self (says he) have
seen both plainly unto Malta. And the Mountain it self is to be discovered an
hundred and fifty miles off by the Saylors. Those that have been at the Top do
report, That there is there, a large Plain of Cinders and Ashes; environed with
a Brow of the same; And in the midst an Hill of like substance; out of which
bursteth a continual Wind, that keeps an horrible rumbling; evaporating
flames and smoke; which hangs about it like a great long Cloud, and often
hurling forth Stones and Cinders. Wherefore the story of Empedocles the
Sicilian Philosopher's throwing himself down headlong thereinto, is by some
called into question. For it is impossible to be approached, by reason of the
violent Wind, the suffocating Smoke, and the consuming Fervor: (yet he might
approach too near, and perish:) This Mountain has flamed in times past so
abundantly, That by reason of the smoke, the Air involved with burning Sands,
and thick Vapors; The Inhabitants hereabout could not see one another (if we
may give credit to Cicero) for two days together. The extraordinary eruption
thereof has been, and is to this day, reputed ominous. For so the most famous
Conflagrations, in former times, happened hard before the Servile War in Sicily;
which was not pacisi'd and ended, but by the slaughter of three score and ten
thousand of the Slaves, (who had taken up Arms against Rome) by the Praetors;
at which time it raged so violently, that Africa was thereof an astonished
Witness. This was about the Year of the World 3900. not long before Christ. And
so shortly after the death of Julius Caesar, when not only the Cities
thereabout were damnified thereby, but diverse in Calabria also; and portended
those Proscriptions and bloody Wars, which did after follow. But these great
Eruptions of Fire, are not now so ordinary as they have been formerly; The
matter which gave Fuel to it, being wasted by continual Burnings: So that the
flames which issue hence, are hardly visible, but by night; though the smoke
show it self the most part of the day: Yet even at this day, once in three or
four years, it falls in great flakes, on the Country below, and Vales
adjoining; to the terror of the Inhabitants, the destruction of their Vintage,
and great loss of the Country. But that, they say, is recompensed by the
plenty of the following Years; The Ashes thereof (according to Strabo) so
batling and enriching of the Soil, that both the Vines, and Cornfields are much
bettered by it, and prosper above admiration. For indeed we find by experience,
that Turf of the Ground, burnt to Ashes; and so spread on Land, and ploughed
into it, does yield a very great improvement, even to barren Soyls. Howbeit at
this day, much Ground about it lies wast, by means of the ejected Pumice.

Besides, the Country hereabouts is daily forraged by Thieves, who lurk in a
Wood of eight miles compass, that neighbors upon Catania.

But Virgil's admirable Description may serve for all.

Aetna here thunders with an horrid noise,
Sometimes black Clouds evapoureth to Skies,
Fuming with pitchy curls, and sparkling Fires,
Tosseth up Globes of flames; To Stars aspires:
Now belching Rocks; The Mountain's Entrals torn:
And groaning, hurls out liquid Stones thence born
Through the Air in showers; and from its bottom gloes,
Like boiling Furnace; --
The reason of these Fires, is the abundance of Sulphur and Brimstone,
contained in the Bosom of the H^ll, inkindled by Subterraneous Heats, Spirits,
and Fires; with the free ventilation of the Sulphurous, and easily inflamable
Air, and agitating Winds, through these open Vulcanian Vents and Funnels; with
innumerable Chinks, Trunks, Pipes, and Caverns, with other conveyances through
the Earth, etc. Also through the Chinks and Chaps of the Earth, there is
continual more fuel added to the Fire; the very Water adding to the force of
it. As we see the Water cast on Coals in the Smiths Forge, does make them burn
more ardently: And besides, prepares the matter with due moisture to be fit
Fuel for new Fires, etc. And Sicily is an Island all over Cavernous and
Fistulous, and pervious to the penetrating Winds, and underground Fires, and
inflamable Spirits; and within abounding with Sulphur, Bitumen, and other fit
Fuel and Materials, etc. And so is most convenient both for inward Combustions,
and outward Ventilations, and thereby for the extremest Inflammations and
Burnings. But the Original Sourse and Fountain, or first and principal cause of
all these, are by some later accounted to be, the Subterraneous Abysses, and
Storehouses of Fire and Heat, which Nature has provided and furnished her self
with under ground; in her inward parts, for the necessary uses and occasions of
her exterior, etc. As was at the beginning observed. The reason of this flame
is thus set down by Ovid.

A Rozen Mould these fiery flames begin,
And Clayte Brimstone aids that Fire within:
Yet when the slimy Soil, consumed, shall
Yield no more food to feed the Fire withal,
And Nature shall restrain her nourishment,
The flame shall cease, hating all famishment.
But more fully by Lucretius.

Hollow the Mountain is throughout; alone
Supported well-nigh with huge Caves of Stone.
No Cave but is with Wind and Air repleat;
For agitated Air does Wind beget,
Which heats the imprisoning Rocks, when hot it grows.
The Earth chaft by his fury; and from those
Strikes forth fire and swift flame: It self on high,
It mounts, and out at upright Jaws does fly:
And Fire sheds far off; far off dead Coals
Transports: and fumes in misty darkness rowls.
Ejecting Stones withal of wondrous size;
All which from strength of struggling Winds arise.
Besides; against the Mountains Roots, the Main
Breaks her swollen Waves, and swallows them again.
From whence unto the Summit of the Ascent
The undermining Caves have their extent:
Through which the Billows breath; and flames out-thrust
With forced Stones, and dark'ning showrs of dust.
Besides, as was said before, Aetna is full of Sulphur and Bitumen, apt to be
kindled; And so is all Sicily, the principal Reason that it is so fertile.

But after all this, we will give you Kircher's later, and more particular
Relation, and Description, both of it and its Causes; and of its most noted
Eruptions, etc.

A Description of Aetna by Kircher. Wherein, as in a certain Prototype, the
Reasons of Subterraneous Fires, and their never failing food, are demonstrated,
as we use to say, to the Eye.
When I surveyed Sicily, in the year 1638. before all things, I thought fit to
examine the Mountain Aetna, most of all celebrated by the Monuments of all
Writers. A great Prototype, I say, of all burning Grounds; and that the most
famous type, of almost whatsoever kind of ragings, by Sea or Land, outrageous.
And with this one only spectacle of Nature alone, Sicily is (and ever was)
admirable. Seeing you can scarce find an Author either of the Ancients, or
Moderns, whom the violence of its ferocious nature, has not drawn into
admiration and astonishment. Yet because they have only beheld afar off the
genuine Causes of so great effects: We coming a little nearer to the matter,
from those things which in these last times, have been oberved with my own
eyes, intending to prosecute its Nature and Constitution, we will endeavor to
demonstrate opportunely the cause of so strange and exotic effects. Its
height; top and bigness.


Aetna therefore, is one only Mountain, rearing up on high its Top or Spire,
unto thirty miles, according to the Axis (or direct line through the Center, or
midst) as by Maurolicus and Clavius attested, who searched out its altitude, by
a Geometrical account and computation. But it takes up sixty, or as others say,
an hundred miles space, with its roots, spread wide round about; fruitful with
fat Fields, Vineyards, Fountains, Pastures, lying round about. And Woods of
Pines and Beech; and full of Forests of most high Fir-trees. But at the utmost
top is broken and cragged, with unstable Cinders, and Pumice stones; and
cleaves open with The largeness and horrid face of its Crater.
a most vast Crater, or deep mouthed Cup of twelve miles in compass, which in a
steep descent streightens it self narrower, even to the bottom of Hell, as it
were. A most horrible Praecipice to see to, most formidable with flames, fumes,
both from the very bottom, and from the sides of the Mountain; with an
horrendous roaring and bellowing, not unlike bursting forth of Thunders. That
the very imagination and thoughts of the fire and ruins, so nigh at hand,
could not, but presently at the first reincounter, amaze and afright any man;
although the most audacious and fearless; and make him start therefrom, as it
were from a certain infernal Gulf of Hell.

And I doubt not but those burnings which are here seen in all Ages, have by
the constant rejectings forth of Ashes, much augmented this vast Mountain;
which on every part, both the ghastly fight of steep deseents of Cliffs; and
the Cindry, and Pumicestone-like face of burnt Rocks; as also the appearance of
huge Dens, (one whereof you may see capable to contain thirty thousand men
easily) formidable with burnt Pumice-stones, as also with resuses and
recrements of various melted Mineral Matter, does abundantly show. You may see
in many places, paths of huge Torrents, Paths or tracts of fiery floods or
rivers.
from the said matter, called Sciarra, which have left, as it were, certain
footsteps and tracks of great havocks, and destructions, from the fiery flux
or flowing of the melted Metal. In the very top, Snows, and Ashes or Cinders;
as if they had meditated Snow and Ashes co ver its top
an Eternal Wedlock, are seen to overwhelm all things with a sad and doleful
countenance. Verily, by so much more dangerous to incautelous Visiters; by how
much certain profound devouring-Gulphs, covered over with Snow and Ashes, and
stretched forth all along, descending into the inmost Abysses, without bottom
or end; are more frequent. Which as they have swallowed up very many,
unadvisedly coming near to view without a guide; so have, by their ruin, left
an example to others; not rashly to venture upon those places, which by such
occult Artifices and Machines, and hidden deceipts, cheat Mortals out of their
lives. Even as Fa. Matthew Taveran, a curious searcher out, as of all natural
things, so of this Mountain also; tried and experienced with great peril of his
life. And to be short, All the matter of the upper part of the Mountain, (...)
to be nothing else but a confused heap, and hanging of it self (...), or
Cinders, Pumices, and Stones, which they call burnt Coal-stones. Which seeing
it is on every hand exposed, and easily The new generating of Combustible
matter.
penetrable, both to Mineral Spirits within; and also without, to Snows, Rains,
Hails, and Winds. It ought certainly, not to seem wonderful to any, that this
adust and burnt matter, as it is impregnated, with new and new provision
always from Heaven; so it should conceive, in succession of time, new
Generations and increases, so as to burn again afresh; and without end, again
and again flame with new Conflagrations. As Virgil testifies;

Whatever furious matter feeds the Fire,
As soon as burnt, goes out: has spent all'ts Ire,
Wherewith to rage: Cinders and Seedless ground
Lie fallow: which course often it suffers round:
And thus exhausted by a thousand fires,
Renews it former strength; new flames respires.
For whereas, in the utmost bottom of this Hellish Gulf, the fire is at no
time extinguished, but always sends forth some marks and tokens of it self,
either boiling heat, or smoke, or flame, as I have often in the examination of
the Mountain observed: Yet outwardly it begins to grow fierce and terrible, but
only at certain intervals of time, more or less, according to the plenty of the
combustible matter heaped up together. And by how much the longer it has
ceased; as if the matter was more ripened, vegetated and grown, for burning; by
so much it bursts forth with greater violence; and together with the very
flame, sends forth huge heaps of Sands; and as Lucretius asserts, Prodigious
Stones of wondrous weight hurls forth.

A Description of the Aetnaean Crater, or (deep and wide-mouthed) Fire-Cup.
The Crater, or Fire-Cup of Mount Aetna, is found by different Observations to
be of a different largeness and capacity. There are some, who say, they have
observed it to be two miles, and eighty paces wide. Others thirty miles.
Others, lastly, four hundred miles. (No question here must be some mistake in
the Printer, adding too many Ciphers to the numbering Figures.) But it cannot be
that in an Orifice, exposed to so great tumultuations, and continually agitated
and tossed, with so many assaults, fits, and convulsions of ferocious, and
rageing Nature; it should not be found, ever and anon; sometimes larger,
sometimes streighter; according to the condition of the Times. Which I my self
also with greatest admiration have tried; not in Aetna only, but also in the
Liparitan Mountains; yea and in Vesuvius too; since the Mountain, even at the
least more vehement eructation, is much shook; and from its shaking, heaps off
more diseasy and slippery matter being gathered together, and accruing to the
Mountain, fall down always with the Mountains more violent jogging, and
convulsion, as it were; which heaps, as they are now big, with a new birth; so
they give new food and nutriment to the Fires. And so from this fall of the
Mountainous parts; its necessary that the Crater be made wider; whence it comes
to pass, that the interior parts of the Mountain rise up and swell, increasing
by little and little; and the empty places of the diminished, or lessened
Crater are filled up. Whence of necessity likewise, the Crater of the Mountain
must be rendered streighter too. Yea Histories relate, that the matter heaped up
within, from the salls, have thereupon grown to such an excrescency, that for
the course of many years, it sent forth neither smoke nor fire; And the
devouring Gulf to have yielded access and admission, to the more curious, very
far, without all hurt and danger; till the fuel of new copious matter, and now
ripe and mature again to conceive fire; assaulting and setting, as it were,
again upon the Mountain; and being re-kindled, having shook off its Yoke, by so
much the more power powerfully waxed fierce with horrendous burnings; by how
much its supply of combustible matter was greater and more ready. And this lot
all the Vulcanian Mountains undergo; which sometimes making respits, grow unto
an immense greatness, by the coacervation of matter falling in; sometimes by
occult Machinations, and contrivances of Subterraneous Fires, the Fuel and
Sustenance of the prepared matter being kindled; That which was in so many
years exceedingly grown, is shook asunder by horrible Tempests of burnings, and
vomits it out even from the lowest An horendous spectacle of the Aetnean Gulf,
or Whirlpit.
Hell of the Mountain; even as at this day is apparent. Which spectacle is so
formidable, that there is none so stout-heartrd, that can look into it without
fear; and, as we say, his Hairs standing an end, and his head turning round
with giddiness. The devouring Gulf is so deep, that it exceeds all eyesight;
and fearful with Rocks, rising up out of the sides like Pyramides. And whereas
the sides by a direct and perpendicular guidance and conduct of the Rocks
verge, or bend and incline downwards, in a Parallel (and equal) descent: Yet
according to the Laws of Optics, they seem by reason of their too much
distance, to meet in the Center; which has imposed on many Observators, deluded
by this Optic Mockery, to think, the interior sides of the Mountain to be
drawn close and straight, into a Conick Surface, and outside. In the bottom
(wonderful to be spoke!) the Mountain always from continual eructation of
Mineral matter, undermines and attempts, I know not what, toward the
constituting and erecting a new Fabric of a Mountain; And accordingly I
remember, I always observed (as it were) a certain Laky Pit, glistring with
melted Metal. The sides up and down, by fit and correspondent passages, vomit
forth perpetual Smoke in A perpetual Eructation of Smoke.
abundance of places; which by night we understood to be an enkindled flame.
This voraginous Gulf is never without roarings and bellowings; which now and
then it utters so horrendous, that they Sounds and formidable crackling noises.
make the very Mountain it self to quake and tremble. In a word whosoever
desires to behold the power of the only Great and Good God, let him betake
himself to these kind of Mountains; and he will be so astonished and stupefied
with the ineffable effects of the Miracles of Nature, that he will be
constrained ever and anon to pronounce, from the most intimate and inmost
affection of his heart; O the depth of the Riches and Wisdom of God! How
incomprehensible are thy Judgments, and how unsearchable thy ways, by which
thou have constituted the World!

The Mountain is so high, that from thence all Sicily may be surveyed at once;
Yea, and your sight helped with an opportune and seasonable time, may reach
even unto Africa. But if by any Tempest the Mountain be troubled and disturbed;
then you would think, that there was an end of the lives of all conversant
there: All things are so involved with horrendous Storms and Whirlwinds,
together with thick Snows and Cinders.

I said a little before, that out of the sides of the Mountain great plenty of
Smoke mixed with Fires, was discovered in very many places, Eruptions of Fires
in many places.
which Aestuaries or raging places, if in time they be overwhelmed, either with
the concussion and shaking of the Mountain, or any other accident; Then the
raving fury and madness, as it were, of the Mountain growing on, it has been
found to prepare and get its exit and way out, even from other places, through
the outmost surface of the Mountain; which when it comes to pass, it effects
such horrid clefts and openings, and such wide-mouthed divulsions, with such
formidable passages of the Subterraneous Vaults and Storehouses; which
astonished with admiration we beheld, even to this very day, sometimes to have
been. I saw a Cavern, An huge Cave or Den.
which would easily contain an Army of thirty thousand me; as a little before
we hinted.

There is there also a most dark and Caliginous Den, which they call, La Grotta
della Palomba, of such profundity, as well as capacity; that the Inhabitants of
the Mountain think, that therein is a passage made by some Submarine path to
the Liparitan Islands. But that from these and the like Caverns, and
underground Vaults, siery Floods and Rivers have issued forth; The Channel
hard by, sill'd and slust with Pumice and adust stones, which the Sicilians
call Sciarra's, does abundantly instruct us. Which Torrents indeed of liquid
and melted Fire, Histories deliver to have slown and run The length and breadth
of the fiery Torrents.
down sometimes to eighteen miles in length; and sometimes, now one, then two,
three, or four miles space in breadth. So that hereupon none can sufficiently
admire, from whence such an incredible sertileness of melted matter should take
its original; where, and in what places it should have shops, and fusory or
melting fornaces, of so great capacity, hidden and laid up underneath, to the
liquefaction and melting of so many Minerals and Metals.

But as these inaccessible works of God, are most remote from all The
wonderful works of God.
Sense; so they can never be enough penetrated and pried into by any humane
Understanding; And it remains only to wonder and admire at, what cannot be
conceived of the incomprehensible Majesty of the Divine Works. For if you
undertake an account or computation of the melted matter, according to the
calculation of diverse times; you would find it to grow to such an extravagant
heap, that it would sar exceed twenty Aetna's, in its bulk. But that we may
more clearly confirm our Account and Reckoning according to Reason, I will
subjoyn here a brief Chronicle, of the more famous and celebrated Fires and
Eruptions; wherewith the Mountain siercely raging with horrendous destructions
and slaughters, has at all times exerted and discovered its Burnings.

A Chronicle of the Eruptions, and Burnings of Aetna.
1. In the time when the Janigenae, or posterity of Janus, going In the time of
the Janigenae about the year 600.
about to seek new Colonies, first entered Sicily, (which was about the year of
the World 2600; almost as many years before Christ, as since; and almost as far
as any Writings or Records;) there was so great a burning of the Mountain, as
Berosus delivers it; that the new Planters, leaving the Island for sear of the
Desolation, went to seek new Colonies and Seats in Italy; by no means in the
least thinking that a commodious station, which the horrible fierceness of
Nature had rendered so formidable, with so many, and so great, and so deadly and
tragical slaughters and destructions; so that hence, upon this occasion, seems
to be introduced the Fable of Proserpina's Rape. (And hence perhaps may be
concluded, that this Mountain has from the Creation, been used to vomit forth
Flames, and may do so to the Worlds end; though Ovid divines otherwise.)

Aetna, which flames of Sulphur now does raise;
Shall not still burn; nor has it burnt always.
2. The Janigenae sometime after followed the Sicanians; who were drove away
from these Eastern parts to the Western, by new Tempests and Whirlwinds of the
Aetnaean Burnings.

3. In the time of the Argonauts, (about the year 2714, and In the time of the
Argonauts. year 2714.
above a thousand before Christ) which when the most ancient Orpheus had seen,
sang thus.

But now arrived at th'Lilyboean Strait,
We feel fierce Seas; On high Fires reach our sight,
Of hot Enceladus, threatening dangers great.
4. In the time of Aeneas's expedition, who repulsed from the Of Aeneas his
Expedition, the year, 2768
shore of Sicily by the Cyclopses; and greatly terrified by the burning of the
Mountain, left that deadly station. Virg.

And to unknown Cyclopian Coasts we run;
The Port was great and calm, with sheltring shoars;
But near, from horrid Ruins, Aetna roars, etc.
5. Under the Dominian of the Greeks in Sicily, viz. from the From about 3180,
til toward 3600.
second Olympiad even to the 88th; viz. from about 3180, till toward 3600, as
Thucidides testifies, who lived in this time; The Mountain was all on fire,
with three huge Burnings. A little after which time, the Mountain raging anew,
is said to have drawn even Pythagoras himself into highest admiration. Also in
the time of Hero, when Histories deliver, that even Empedocles, an observer of
the Mountain, then perished.

6. In the time of the Roman Consuls; (for about 450 years) In the time of the
Roman Consuls, from about 3440 to ^^^^.
Four remarkable Burnings to have happened, is collected out of various
Authors; Diodorus, Polybius, and others. Whereof, that before the Servile Wars,
about 3830, was prodigious; The Mountain belching forth into vast Fires, and
spread it self far and wide. Of which before.

It seems also to have reached Catania it self, when the two pious Brethren,
before mentioned, rescuing their Father, perished all in the Flames.

7. In the time of Julius Caesar, (about fifty years before Christ) Of Julius
Casar. 3900.
Diodorus delivers, that Aetna did again rage most violently; And which they
will have, pertended the death of Caesar. For it is reported to have been so
great, that the Sea with its servour and boiling heat, burnt even the very
Ships, as far as the Vulcanello's; Ad the Fish being extinct, and decocted or
boiled. And so within twenty years that the Mountain burnt four times.

8. In the time of Caius Caligula, forty nine years after Christ, the Of C.
Caligula Caesar, in the year of Christ 49.
Mountain did again rage so, that Caligula abiding at that time in Sicily, and
possessed with the terror of the impendent mischiefs, betook himself to safer
stations there. Yet they relate, that Hadrian Caesar, in the greatness of his
mind, to have ascended the Mountain very far, whilst yet it raged, to consider
more nearly so great Miracles.

9. About the Martyrdom of St. Agatha, the famous Martyr of About the Martyrdom
of St. Agatha.
Catania by whose merits and intercession (as they there fondly imagine) it was
effected, that the Mountain, although growing fierce, yet durst not touch or
meddle with Catania. And so ever since have reposed great confidence in her,
and her Relics; which in this late fiery inundation, the Religious carried in
procession, with multitudes of people, whipping and mortifying themselves, with
all signs of penance. But enraged Vulcan would not be scarr'd away nor appeased
so. And yet'tis like they will be fondly made to believe still, that it is by
her virtue and merits that the City is preserved: For which (no doubt) she
shall not lack her Festival Honors, and Public Solemnities.

10. In the time of Charles the Great, in the year 812; who also In the year
812.
much terrified with the fierceness of the Mountain, is said to have sought
safer places.

11. From the year 1160, to 1169, all Sicily was shaken with In the year 1160
huge Earthquakes, and the Mountain Aetna foming mightily, overthrew all the
circumjacent places with incredible desolation; with the ruin of the Cathedral
Church of Catania; In which also the Abbot John with his Monks was overwhelmed,
and perished: (St. Agatha was to blame sure, and too too unkind.)

12. In the year 1284, a fearful burning happened about the In the year 1284.
death of Charles King of Sicily and Arragon.

13. In the year 1329, even till 1333, the Mountain raged after an horrible
manner; In the time of the King Arragon. In the year 1329.


14. In the year 1408, under King Martin. 1408


15. In the year 1444, even to 47, again and again. 1444


16. In the year 1536, even to 37, it sent forth a fiery flood, and 1536.
Rivers of Flames; bringing desolation to the bordering places.

17. In the year 1554, raging more than ordinary, it battered 1554
Catania it self, its Suburbs and Fields, grievously. But St. Agatha forsooth,
still came to help in time of need, and defended it still.

18. In the year 1633, even to 39, the burning raged by so much 1633
the more formidable, by how much it lasted the longer time; which seeing many
have described, I will not insist in reciting it.

19. In the year 1650, raging afresh on the Northern and Eastern 1650
side, and bursting asunder the Mountains, it vomited forth such a quantity of
Fires, that it almost brought Brontium into utmost hazard and destruction, with
its fiery Torrents.

20. Lastly, this present year 1669, the most horrible of this 1669
Age, for its mighty devastations, sorely threatening even Catania it self. And
all respects considered, perhaps not inferior to any former Ages; according to
the late public Relation, universally known; For its fiery Torrent was as vast
for length and breadth, as any of old; and approached the very Walls of the
City, ruining many Houses near thereunto. And which is remarkable, by the huge
quantities of congealed matter, has formed a convenient Port over against the
Castle, seventy foot deep in water, able to contain many Ships.

Corallary I.
From these things it plainly appears, that the Mountain, its matter being
consumed, takes respit; sometimes for a greater, sometimes for a lesser space;
till at length increased by new provision of combustible matter, it breaks
forth, and acts those Catastrophe's, which with admiration we read of. And yet
it is so far from being diminished by so great an eructation of matter, that it
seems rather to be augmented. Since indeed the Citizens of Catania dug for
Pumicestones, and opening the Earth the depth of an hundred Palms, found
Streets paved with Marbles, and various footsteps of Antiquities; which plainly
teach, that Cities built here of old time, have been overwhelmed with the
castings off, or rejectaneous offalls and offcasts, not without the great
increase of the Mountain. They found besides, very many Bridges of Pumices,
which were made, and consisted only out of the mere flux or flowing of the
fiery Torrents; the Earthy softer substances being eat away. And of late, not
far from the City, an Image of our Lady, was under Earth (as they say)
accidentally found. Whose reputed Miracles have got her already much fame. From
the ruins, no doubt, of some Religious Place, etc. Flame also now and then
appears in the exalted or higher raised Earth; anon disappears: which are clear
and conspicuous signs and tokens of the Earths being raised. Yet Aelian tells
us, that as well Aetna, as Parnasses and Olympus, did appear to be less and
less to such as sailed at Sea. The height thereof sinking, as it seemed. And
thereupon supposes the decay thereof, and of the World. But an Answer is at
hand to this; That it might then perhaps decrease in magnitude. For it may be
sometimes, in some Ages, augmented; and sometimes diminished: But in the whole
rather augmented. Or else; It was but a mere fancy and opinion. But these are
known things. This one thing only has, after a wonderful manner, tortured the
wits of Philosophers hitherto; In that they apprehend not whence the
unsatiableness and greedy devouring of the perpetual fire should be supplied
with new and new food always. And how the Pumices, Cinders and Ashes, and the
other refuses of burnt matter, should in succession of time be converted into
new materials, fit for fires. Which knot, that it may be untied;

You may remember that before (elsewhere) we showed; how that to the
conservation of Nature in its perpetual and constant course, there was a
necessity of an everlasting circulation and return round of things. In the
Heavens, the Elements; the Air, Water, Earth, and its several sorts, soils, and
Minerals, etc. even with the very Fire also, and its materials and nutriment.
As appears in the perpetual wheeling round of the Planets and Stars, by a
constant and inviolable Law of Nature, so many thousands of years. The
perpetual motion and mutation of the Elements; always unvariable in the
greatest variety of things. The perpetual circulation of waters, both within,
and about the Earth. All Rivers come from the Sea, and return to the Sea again;
as Solomon, the Wise, has confirmed to us. The Sun dries up the vapors of the
Sea; the vapors are received into rain, and return back to the Earth and Sea
again. Elegantly expressed by Ovid;

The Earth resolved is turned into streams;
Water to Air; the purer Air to slames.
From whence they back return; The fiery flakes
Are turned to Air; The Air thickened takes
The Liquid form of Water; That Earth makes.
Or, as Dubartas has it;

The purest humor in the Sea, the Sun
Exhales in the Air; which there resolved, anon
Return to Water, and descend again,
By sundry ways into his Mother Main.
Many therefore wondering whilst they behold Aetna burning so many thousand
years, how the Mountain should not be consumed by so long and lasting Burnings,
Nor the Fire ever extinct. But

Bursting wide open its Furnace Mouth, still streams
With melted stones; still spues out Globes of Flames.
And by a thousand Fires, as Virgil expressed it before,

It spending still the fuel which it burns;
Yet still to former strength afresh returns.
These certainly, if they understood the circling operations of Nature, would
not so strangely admire; when as food is never at any time wanting thereto, to
perpetuate the Burnings. The Fires burn the Mountain, and convert the
Miscellany, or mixture of combustible matter into Ashes. Out of the Ashes mixed
with Water, a new food and nourishment of everlasting Fire is generated;

Omnia continuo rapidos virtuntur in orbs;
Natura motus perpetuante suos.
Which may be englished out of our Incomparable Cowly, altering a word from his
extravagant allusion to drinking.

Nothing in Nature's constant found;
But an Eternal course goes round.
This premised; I take for granted, First, That a great plenty of Salt lies hid
in the Ashes: which even from hence is proved; That Salt is no ways more
easily got, than from a Lixive or Lee of things reduced into Ashes. By this
means Nitre, Salt, Allom, in some more moist places, breaking or springing out
of the walls and sides, as also in the dunging-places of Pigeons and other
Animals, first vegitated and quickened with Urine, is dug forth in most
plentiful store and abundance.

I suppose for granted, Secondly, That out of the humid Sea, tinctured and
seasoned with a fat saltishness and mixture of other Mineral things; an huge
quantity of Exhalations, together with the spirits, and insensible corpuseles
of the said things, are extracted by virtue of the Sun. Which being both
extrinsecally resolved into Rain, Hail, Snows, settle about the top of the
highest Mountains; and also intrinsecally derived through subterraneous
passages of the Sea, do fertilize the matter of the Fire-houses under ground,
with new provant.

These things supposed, I say, That the Fire perpetually powerful, and waxing
strong in its Storehouses, is also by occult fibers and veins of the Sea
insinuating and entering underneath, perpetually augmented; whilst that it
replenishes and recruits the matter consumed away with fire, (as are the Ashes,
and the most porous stones of Pumices) with a Sulphurous Soot, and Bituminous
Spirits; And in some measure prepares and disposes it for an enkindling and
inflammation. But when by the melting of the Hail and Snow; both with the
fervent heat of the Sun, and also with the heat of so near Fire lurking within;
and by the coming on of Rain, the Dust and Ashes be soaked through with a most
plentiful bewetting; From hence a certain mixed matter is propagated, which
insinuated more deeply within the porous recesles and spaces of the
Pumice-stones; And then Sulphurous and Bituminous Spirits, which but now
lately lodged there, intervening to their help; at length ends (presently, as
soon as it is waxen ripe) in a new food and nourishment of the Fire. And that
this is so; I found by an irrefragable experiment, in the brinks and edges of
the Valleys of Aetna, Vesuvius, and Strongylus, burnt up with Fire; in most of
the Cindry and Ashy walls and sides of which I found an immense quantity of
Salt, Allom, and Niere springing forth; In some also, a slowing and gushing
forth of Bitumen, Napththe, and the like fat oily liquors, together her with a
most copious quantity of Sulphur. Which have their original from no where else;
but partly out of the Cinders of combust and burnt things; from which must
necessarily be begot a new offspring and succession of Salt and Nitre; Partly
from the Sulphurous corpuseles or spirits; which while they continually exhale
from the lowest Gulf of the Mountain, are condensed into Sulphur in the more
cold climate of the Mountain. And so that mixed matter is generated, cut of
Salt, Nitre. 'Allom, Bitumen' and Sulphur, which insinuated (as has been said)
into the pores of the Calx or Calcined Lime, or Ashes of the burnt and adust
Pumice, and Stones, it administers that perpetual and everlasting fuel and food
of Fire, which we have hitherto inquired after. For this, corrupted by the
Fire, as it prepares new burnings; so the fat and sulphurous matter being
burnt up, which lurked and lay dormant within the Pumices, undergo some
respits, or truces, as it were; Till the capacity of the Pumices, and the
remaining Calx, or Calcined Ashes, be replenished again, as was said, with the
like new birth of combustible matter. But now what happens in the exterior and
outmost surface of Aetna; It Is certain, the same is effected in all other
slammivomous Mountains. Nature carrying it self after the same manner always.
Yea, he that shall more narrowly and thoroughly dive into these things, he
cannot be ignorant, that the process of Nature, which we have expressed in the
exterior surface of the Mountain; but that it keeps the same course and
tenor, or order, in its intimate and inmost Fire-houses, or Receptacles.

Corallary II.
Hence it follows, That the food and fuel of Subterraneous Fire, follows the
Motion of the Sea, raging with a perpetual reciprocation of Flux and Reflux.
For from the concitation and commotion of the Tide, The Sea being thrust
through occult passages and Burrows, at its bottom; as has already been
inculcated; and joining its fat and humid, to the hot and dry, lodging under
Sulphurous Glebes, in the intimate bosoms of the Earth; restores that which is
consumed away, with an uncessant conception and birth of a new generation. But
in the external surface, by vapors attracted from the Sea, and which are
fruitful, and even big with the said new Geniture (or Generation) of the Sea,
it lies within the porous Hives or Cells of the now burnt matter, through the
Snows, Hails, Rains, mixed with the Dust and Ashes, a new Geniture or
Conception; which in its time, the matter being now mature and ripe, may at
length break forth into great Burnings. You see therefore the wonderful and
indeficient Circulation of Nature in its operations.

Corallary III.
From these things it follows, that the formal cause of the Burnings The formal
cause of its burnings. The material; The instrumental cause.
of this Mountain, is the Fire it self. The material; Sulphur, and Salt, Nitre,
Bitumen, and the like matters apt to cherish Fires, propagated by a perpetual
motion from the intimate dark recesses of the Earth, and also from the
incumbent Sea plying thereon. The Instrumental; the Gavernous nature of the
place; and the whole Body or Bulk of the Mountain wholly full of Burrows, and
hanging together aloft, and poised of it self, and perpetually burdened, and
oppressed with Sulphurous Smoke and Soot. Lastly, the efficient The efficient.
cause, are Winds and Blasts, which flowing out of the most inward Caverns at
this kind of vent or issue, and as it were at their proper gorges and open
jaws, exuscitate with certain Bellows, as we may so say, the dorment Fires, to
enkindle the matter, whatsoever shall be found next. Since all Sicily is wholly
bored through with innumerable Caverns and Burrows, as was before mentioned.
Else where we have abundantly demonstrated, the wounderful Ragings and Tides of
the Sicilian Straight, and the alterations of its flux and reslux; and also the
insatiable force of the devouring gulf of Seylla and Charybdis; and how that it
depends on the said Mountain; being disposed after a wonderful way and manner,
in Subterraneous Shops, and workhouses, throughout the universal Islands. Of
which thing, this may be a clear Testimony; that Charybdis tumultuating after
an unusual manner, Aetna also withal rages at the same time; being together
with it, stirred up with the Spirit of Sedition and tumult; and the sulphurous
dens recieving into themselves the more vehement winds and blasts, thereby the
combustible matter, agitated and puffed, no otherwise then as with Smith's
Bellows, burst forth violently into huge Globes of Flames.

But other winds blowing, Aetna seems to take respit; for that the The Mountain
ejects Fires according to the Winds.
orifices of the passages are placed in a contrary way to the current waves and
floods of the Sea; and hindered by the neighbor Mountain. But at the East and
South winds blowing, according to the constitution of the channels, now Flames,
sometimes Smoke, now and then Embers, Sparkles, and Flakes. But sometimes, the
Fuel being augmented in it self, it wonderfully rages with burnings, with a
formidable stream and flood of Fire and Brimstone; which now and then it is
wont to belch forth, out of the inmost shops of the aestuaries of fire under
ground; with an huge destruction and ruin of the subjected Villages, Fields,
Cities, and Cattle. The forerunners of which, are groanings of the Caverns,
from intercepted and shut-up Spirits; Roarings of the Sea, joined with
trembling of the Earth; By all which coming so thick together, Nature, as it
were, overpress'd, and impatient of bonds, breaks open all Prison Doors and
Bars, and rushes any way it can get out; and like a burning River or Flood,
consumes, not only Fields, with the mighty rouling stream wherewith it is
poured down, but also entire Villages; overturns neighboring Towns and Cities;
and every where leaving footsteps full of horror; devours Woods, Rocks and
Mountains; and nothing is able to stand in its way. Of which things the
Monuments of Historians are full.

We conclude therefore, the matter of Subterraneous Fire to be not only
Sulphur, Bitumen, Pit-Coals: but also Allom, Salt, Nitre, Coaly Earth, and
Calcanthum or Vitriol, and such kind of Metals. For Sulphur and Bitumen do not
make the Fire so impetuous, as that Fire, which subverts Mountains, buries
Cities in Ashes, and the ejectments of Pumices; and by an incredible violence,
belches out stony and Rocky Mountains, out of the very Mountains; as has
plainly appeared from what has preceded. But some other thing must needs be
adjoined thereto; to perform this effect, which we go about to explain.

I say therefore that the universal matter of Subterraneous Fire, What thing
that may be which causes so great Ruins of the Mountain.
ought to be sharp and thick or gross, as Sulphurous and Bituminous matter
are; whereto is joined, with a great and necessary alliance of Commerce,
Saltpeter; which having its substance replenished with most tumid spirits, and
joined to Sulphur, and enkindled; whilst it finds no exit or vent, it exercises
that force upon the subterraneous obstacles, that lie in its way; which a
little before we have expounded, (especially if crude Antimony, and Mercurial
Spirits be superadded;) as sufficiently appears from the mighty efficacy of
Warlike Guns and Cannons.

Furthermore, the combustible materials, they are not found but in
Subterraneous Dens; of which sort, are diverse kinds of Stones, various species
of terrestrial Glebes, Metallic Mixtures and Miscellanies of the other
Minerals; And besides these, Salt, Allom, Saltpeter, Salt-Ammoniack, and
whatsoever is there found, even to the very Water it self. And even Mountains,
and huge vast Stones are turned into matter and nutriment of the Fire; Then
forthwith the matter generated only burns; and this being consumed away, the
Fire is extinguished; and changing its station, invades another near unto it;
as comes to pass in Bituminous Earths. Then afterward the consumed matter,
conceiving new Seeds, springs again; and a good while after is enkindled; which
indeed if it be by a sudden generation born again in great plenty, as in Aetna,
Strumbolo, the Phlegraean Plains, then they will burn with an everlasting Fire.

But the Generation of such kind of matters is made after this manner: The Sea
replenished with fatness and unctuosity, while it enters the hidden Rooms and
Chambers of the Earth, by and by nourishes anew the substantial parts of the
Mountain extenuated with the Fire; and replenishes their substance, that has
lost its marrow and strength, with a new fatness; and if a way lie open into
Sulphurous Vaults and Houses under ground, the water being driven in, will be
turned into the nutriment of Sulphur; If into Bituminous places, into the
nutriment of Bitumen; if into Aluminous veins, of Allom; And so of the rest,
the same reason. And thus the Substances destroyed by the Fire, are repaired
almost after the same way, that Iron is renewed again in the Island Elva, the
Mines for several years lying idle and fallow, as it were; and as stones, which
they call Travertine, in the Fields of Tivoli.

But how the said matters should conceive fire, was abovesaid. As how indeed;
scarcely from the Sun; not from Thunder and Lightnings; not from any other
efficient: but from the very subterraneous fire it self, making its way unto
them through hidden passages of the Rocks, which it burns. Or, if they be not
immediately touched by actual Fire; then certainly from the Marine waves and
billows, intruded by the force and impetuousness of the Winds, through the
Submarine gutters and chinks at the bottom of the Sea. For that it cannot be
that from the vehement dashing of the billows in strait and narrow places, and
the agitation of the spirits of combustible matter thereby, and the attrition
or striking of the sat and Sulphurous Air, that they should not presently
conceive Fire.

Of the Liparitan or Vulcanian Islands adjoining, commonly called the
Vulcanello's.
West of Sicily in the Tuscan Sea; but South and within sight of Messina, an
hundred and fifty miles distant from Aetna, are the Aeolian Islands, so called
from Aeolus King thereof. He taught at first the use of the Sail; and by
observing the Fire and Smoke that ascended from these Islands, (for heretofore
they all of them slamed) prognosticated of Storms to come. And thence the
occasion of the Fable of Aeolus's being Godd and King of the Winds, for us
admirable skill and invention that way. Of these anciently there were Seven
only; (But now are Eleven; it is like made since out of the excessive burnings
of the other; as it is said of the little one called Vulcanello) almost of an
equal magnitude. Yet Liparis is the greatest, (being ten miles in circuit) as
also the most famous, to which the others were subject. (And hence they are now
called the Liparitan, and Vulcanian Islands, or Vulcanello's) Its fruitful and
abounding with Bitumen, Sulphur, and Alumne; having hot Baths much frequented
by the diseased. The Fire here went out about an Age ago; having (as is to be
supposed) consumed the matter that fed it. But at this day Strombolo only
burns; and that with ragings not inferior to the Aetnaean or Vesuvian. Yet
Volcano smokes continually, from Subterraneous Fires. They are said heretofore
to have burnt wholly, together with the Mountains, and Sea, as Strabo witnesses.

Volcano, formerly called Hiera, is a little Island, burning in the midst of
the Sea; where Antiquity placed Vulcans Shop, or Forge; Because of the Fires
seen by night, and abundance of smoke by day. And therefore received its name
from its nature; consecrated formerly to Vulcan, and called his Mansion. It is
said but first to have appeared above water, about the time that Scipio
Africanus dyed. A barren Island, stony, and uninhabited. It had three Tunnels,
wherewith it evaporated Fire; But now has but one out of which it smoaketh
continually, and casts out stones with an horrible roaring. It was heretofore
all on Fire, and the Sea round about, for some days together, which Pliny
reports, as a known truth, and an instance near at hand. And has not ceased to
be on a flame since, as it were a Mountain of flames only, in the midst of the
Sea. For even in the year of our Lord 1444, on the 5th of February, it flamed
so abundantly, and flung forth fire and stones, with such an hideous noise;
that not only the rest of the Islands; but also Sicily trembled thereat.
Perhaps the last blaze. For now flame it does not: but retains the rest of
its terrors.

But now Strombolo is the most notorious at this day. Here the Inhabitants
formerly were wont from the Smoke, to predict what Winds would blow. Where
Aeolus also, the first so skilled therein, was King, etc. as before. It was
formerly called Strongyle, (corrupted at last into Stromboli) from the
rotundity thereof. For it seem no other than an high round Mountain in the Sea;
out of the top whereof issues continnally a flame like a burning Beacon; and
exceeding clearly; so that by night especially it is to be discerned a
wonderful way. A place so full of horror to the Neighbouring-Islanders; (And
yet in those parts where the Rage of the Fire offends not, it is of a very
fruitful Soil, and apt for Tillage) and many others of the Ignoranter Romish
Catholics, conceive it (and such like places) to be the Jaws of Hell it self;
and that within the damned Souls are tormented. To which purpose the good
Catholics (who are excellent at pious frauds and tales) have, or rather have
raised, a pretty Story of Sir Thomas Gresham, London's most glorious
Benefactor; which we shall by and by transcribe out of Mr. Sandys's Travels
verbatim; True it is he was full of pious and charitable good works and bublick
Benefactures in his latter days. But upon such an occasion, as this Story
pretends; we have not the least reason to believe: For surely all our Histories
and Memories could never have been wholly silent thereof; and of a thing so
publicly attested before the King, etc. But to return to the business again.

Kircher, in the said often mentioned year 1638, thought good also to examine
among others of these Islands, those two chief ones, Volcano, and Stromboli.
And Stromboli indeed for the fierceness and outrages of its Fires, which it
continually vomited, was guarded from all access. But Volcano making Truces and
Intervals with the Aestuaries, discovered nothing else besides Smoke: Yet it
has an Island adjoining, called Volcanello, annexed to Volcano, which they
relate to have been generated of the rejected refuses and offalls of the
Mountain, which it belched forth out of the last burning thereof; (perhaps that
in the year 1444, a little before mentioned) All the Island springs and abounds
with Sulphur, Nitre, Bitumen; Yea and the very bottom of the Sea is burrow'd
through with innumerable Caverns and Tunnels or Trunks; which both the
Vortices, or Whirlpools, and also the frequency of Winds bursting forth, and
puffing the Sea after a wonderful manner, do show. And this made our Author, as
himself acknowledges, that he could in no wise dissent from those, who say,
There are Submarine Mines and Burrows under the Sea; which correspond with
Aetna; and thence, by continued passages and conveyances, through the concavous
spaces of the Back of Appenine, with Vesuvius; which he, a present and
Eyewitness, found most true in the said year 1638. when in his return home
from these Travels, he was driven on the Coasts of Terra di Lavoro, in the
Kingdom of Naples, which he found almost reduced unto utter ruin and
desolation, at the same time, by most horrible Earthquakes; wherein he very
narrowly escaped himself with his life; and accordingly has writ very sensibly
and feelingly thereof; too large for this place. But on a certain day more
curiously viewing Stromboli at this time, about sixty miles distant, he
observed it to be more than ordinarily furious: For it appeared wholly
overwhelmed with Fire, in so great plenty, that it seemed to belch out flamy
Mountains; (A most horrendous spectacle!) And then heard I know not what kind
of dull murmur from the Mountain so far off, which time after time seemed to
grow toward them through Subterraneous Burrows, till it reached the
subterraneous place, on which they stood; and there uttered such horrendous
Thunderings within the Earth, with so formidable Earthquakes, that none of the
company were able to stand on their feet. After the Violence was over, getting
up again, not without ineffable consternation, they beheld the Subversion and
lamentable Catastrophe of the most famous Town St. Euphemia, three miles off,
(which happened in that time;) and the City wholly swallowed up. For, seeking
for the Town, they found in stead thereof, (wonderful to be spoke!) nothing but
a most putrid Lake sprung up in its place. They could find no Men, nor
Inhabitants: Thence passing on their Journey, they found nothing else for two
hundred miles, but the Carkases of Cities, horrid Ruins of Castles, Men
straggling up and down in the open Fields, and through fear, as it were,
withering away. Then passing by Naples, he could not after all this, leave out
Vesuvius out of the way of his Observations; what that did also; Of which
before in its place. And this was a leading us to another Chapter, concerning
Earthquakes, as the proper effects and products of Subterraneous Fires also;
and always preceding, and concomitant with these Vulcanian Eruptions; But that
we found a Chapter was not sufficient for so great a Subject; and that we had
already transgressed and exceeded the intended and prescribed bounds of This.

FINIS.
A fuller Relation of the Spanish Priests Error and attempt, about getting Gold
out of one of these flaming Mountains in the West Indies.
THE most famous Vulcano's in the West Indies, are the Guatamala, discernable
at vast distance on the South Sea. A Spanish Priest out of Avarice would needs
sound this Mountain, supposing the bottom to be full of Gold. This Priest was
called Mossen, born at Antequera, who came to the Indies with Pirarow at the
time of Ferdinand Cortez's Conquest. He had a Sister living with him who had a
fair Daughter, whom the Captain married to Lazart d' Almadia, Clark of the
Ship, promising 1000 Ducats in Marriage. But the Clark being jealous of his
Captain, left his Wife in Spain; and the Captain being come on Shore, with
grief for his Mistress absence, died; to whom by his last Will he ratified the
1000 Ducats. Mean while the Clark took command of the Vessel, and arrived in
New Hispaniola, where the Priest was very welcome, Priests being there very
acceptable; and was accommodated in the Town of Sanda, where he lived in great
esteem for sincerity and devotion; so in few years he grew very wealthy. But
not content with this, upon suggestion that the slaming Mountain, not far
thence, was a Mine of Gold, he thought to get inestimable riches out of it: for
this purpose he caused a strong Iron Chain to be made, to the measure of the
height of the Mountain, which he had taken by Artizans; then by strength of Men
began to cut a way for portage of his necessaries, which could not be done but
at great expense, a man's labor there being worth two Crowns a day;
nevertheless Avarice made him pass it easily. But this beginning was a mean
matter, for he must continue the Laborers; being yet not advanced far, by
reason of the height of the Mountain, and firmness of the Rock, which he must
cut through: nor though many looked upon the Enterprise as extravagant and
inconsiderate, yet the Priest every day got nearer to the mouth of the Furnace
with expense of time, labor and difficulty. After four months space the
pondrous Chains and Caldrons, with great cost and pain were drawn up. The good
man boasted, He donbted not now to come shortly to his ends, and that he had a
Revelation of it in his sleep.

At length all these Iron Engines were set in order, and the workmen, to the
number of fifty began to let down a Caldron well fastened to a strong Iron
Chain, with other Engines secured, and the Priest himself set his hand to the
work: But as they thought to draw up the Caldron full of rich melted metal,
the strength of the fire consumed all, and they hardly escaped without burning
their hands and feet, so violent a heat burst out upon them. The Priest half
mad cried out, The Devil had broken his Chain; with a thousand Curses, ready to
throw himself headlong into the Precipice, covered over with Soot and Cindars,
and frying with heat, fright, and toil, that he looked like a right Fury,
running like a mad man to and fro; the rest in little better condition, the
greatest part being saur'd and consumed with labor and the violence of heat
which had even melted them. The good man at last was brought to his Lodging in
extreme torment, where they laid him to bed in so much grief and discomfort
that he was the pity of the World. Walking in the night he was surprised with
such a rage, that he gave himself several stabs in the throat with his knife;
and in the morning his Sister coming to visit him, found him steeped in blood
and ghastly, half dead, whereupon she cried out for help, and friends came
immediately in, and a Surgeon applied the Country Balsom so fortunately to
his wounds, that he was well within few days; nevertheless for extreme grief
and sullenness, he could eat nothing; At last he languished to death, having
consumed all he had gotten, besides what his Sister had also, and other
Friends, whom he quite ruined. The poor woman lived a while after, but
miserably. Her Son-in-Law making some Voyages betwixt the Indies and Spain in
the best sort he could; who afterward had other strange misfortunes upon his
Wifes account, esteemed the Daughter of that Unfortunate Priest. Thus do
greatest disappointments procure the greatest desperations.

London, (if the Story were true) accidentally beholding to flaming Mount
Strombolo.
If all the pious Tales of Catholics were true, London was eternally beholding
to the good Devils of Strombolo, for frighting Sir Thomas Gresham into such
Public good Deeds; But why he should begin to practice them at least eighteen
years after the death of King Henry; and how many before had passed we know
not, and that not till the days of Reformation, (for he laid the first Stone
of the Royal Exchange in the seventh year of Queen Eliz. Or why neither
Catholic nor Protestant Historians should so much as mention, much less record
for truth, so remarkable a Transaction, concerning so glorious and Renowned a
Founder, no tolerable account or reason can be given. However take the Story as
it runs in Sands's Travels, thus.

A pretty devised Story and Catholic pious Tale concerning the occasian of Sir
Tho. Gresham's devout Life, and pious and charitable Inclinations and good
Deeds, and the converting his great acquired Riches, to such worthy and public
uses, Viz. From the sound of an horrid Voice, out of the mouth of one of these
Hellish Volcano's, the Prodigious Mount Strombolo.
It was told me at Naples by a Countryman of ours, and an old Pensioner of the
Popes, who was a youth in the days of King Henry, That it was then generally
bruited throughout England, That Mr. Gresham a Merchant, setting sail from
Palermo (in Sicily) where there then dwelt one Antonio, called The Rich, who at
one time had two Kingdoms morgaged unto him by the King of Spain, being crossed
by contrary winds, was constrained to anchor under the Lee of this Island
Strombolo. Now about mid day, when for certain hours it accustomedly forbears
to flame, he ascended the Mountain, with eight of the Sailers, and approaching
as near the vent as they durst, among other Noises, they heard a Voice cry
aloud; Dispatch, Dispatch, The Rich Antonio is a coming. Terrified herewith
they descended; and anon the Mountain again evaporated fire. But from so dismal
a place they made all the haste that they could; when the wind still thwarting
their Course, and desiring much to know more of this matter, they returned to
Palermo, and forthwith enquiring of Antonio, It was told them that he was dead;
and computing the time, did find it to agree with the very Instant that the
Voice was heard by them. Gresham reported this at his return, to the King, and
the Mariners being called before him, confirmed by Oath the Narration. In
Gresham himself, as this Gentleman said, (for I no otherwise report it) it
wrought so deep an impression, that he gave over all Traffic; distributing his
Goods, part to his Kinsfolks, and the rest to good and public uses; retaining
only a competency for himself; and so spent the rest of his Life in a solitary
devotion.

A very ill contrived Story, attended with no probable circumstances. It Is like
indeed it might be generally bruited, as the Gentleman says (among the Vulgar,
by some that would have had it so) but never could obtain general credit, among
the wiser at least, and more knowing, much less ever to be recorded, because so
easily consutable.

ERRATA.
Candid Reader,

IF thou would make true sense of what thou read, thou must needs first
correct, at least these grosser Errata's, which quite and clean pervert it.

Page 5. line 11. For Stagnete, read Stagnate. P. 7. l. 7. Blot out Canary
Islands, And add to that Section, of that Chapter, thus much further:
Historians of these times write also, That even Teneriff in the Canary Islands,
now and then smokes out of the top of its crown; and to have sometimes
heretofore burnt, and vomited I lames, The Sulphurous Stones testify, which
in great plenty are brought into Spain. It abounds also with hot Ba hs, and
Bituminous l ountains, which are manifest tokens of Subrerraneous Fires in
those AtlanticklSeas lurking underneath.

Page 8. l. 4. for Vulcano's, read Vulcanello's. P. 9. l. 1. for Island, read
Islands. P. 10. l. 29. f. Mothern, r. Northern. P. 23. l. 20. f. Fire, Sulphur,
r.. Fired Sulphur. P. 29. l. 33. f. rarifie. r. rarifie. P. 32. l. 9. f. Shone,
2. shown. P. 33. l. 3d from the bottom, f. could, r. they could. P. 36. l. 20
f. discuse, r. discuss. P. 47 l. 23, and 24. No doubt in stead of 30. and 400
miles, it should be 3 and 4 miles; though so in our Author. P. 48. l. 6 from
bottom; f Rocks verge, r. Rocks; verge, etc. P. 57. l. 3. from bottom; f. lies,
r. lay's. P 58. l. 14 from bottom; f. Islands, r. Island. P. 62. l. 14. from
bottom; f. Memories, r. Memoires. Besides many lesser faults, which are left to
thy own discretion in reading.


