BY Anonymus In Praise of the ensuing Design.

IF you would know what thing is Wit,
Open the Book, and read in it,
(...) every Line you will find it writ.
^Tis all but one substantial Jest,
^ach part agrees so with the rest,
that none can say this Line's the best.
^hus in Man the Parts agree,
(...) such a different Unity
(...) make up one en^^^e Diversity.
A Voyage Round the World: OR, A Pocket-Library*

Divided into several Volumes.

The First of which contains the Rare Adventures OF DON KAINOPHILUS, From his
Cradle to his 15 th. Year.

The like DISCOVERIES in such a Method never made by any Rambler before.

The whole WORK intermixed with ESSAYS, HISTORICAL, MORAL and DIVINE; and all
other kinds of Learning.

Done into English by a Lover of Travels.

Recommended by the WITS of both Universities.

-- All may have
(If they dare try) a glorious Life or Grave. Herb. Chapter Por.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Newcome. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

A Poetical Explanation OF THE FRONTISPIECE.
AFter his first Rambles, which I need not to tell ye,
And his kicking and sprawling in his own Mothers Belly.
1.
First mark how the Bantling to all outward appearing
When he first came to Life was as dead as a Herring,
Then he is born in a Coach, (for a Cart was not handy)
Where an old Woman fetched him again wi'good Brandy
2.
Here with Cock-horse and Boots his Nurse is forthcoming,
Of his future Achievements the prosperous Omen;
The prophetical Shipton presenting the Baby
With a Staff that is his own, and a Sword too it may be.
3.
From the fine Town of Grafham, the best in the Shire on it,
Thrice famous and glorious if you ever did hear on it;
Here he Rambles to London, where his Fathers intent is
(He might ask his Sons leave though) to chain him a Prentice.
4.
Here he flys for the same, (what would come on it I told him)
Nor the Man nor the Master together cou'^ (...) him:
Here observe the wise Child in his Iuvent^e Rambles,
Addressing himself for Bread and Cheese to the Brambles.
5.
Here finding the Commons were unkind to a Stranger,
He like Whittington turned, and took wit in his Anger;
Where he vamps about Town for Caesar, and Strada,
The Horn-book, Morocco, John Bunnyan, Granada.
6.
But now for the Ramble of Rambles contriving,
For he is out of his Time, and he Rambles a Wiveing:
Nine Lasses run squeaking, tho there nothing to fear is,
Let 'em go where they will now he had caught his dear Iris
7.
Here he is for New England departing, half-dying,
From his the other self Iris, all sobbing and crying,
He takes his fair leave, nor did sneakingly dodge her,
With a dear Well-beloved Sirnam'd Mr. Roger.
8.
Behold here at Deal how boistrous the Sea is,
But he comforts the Rower with Caesarem vehis.
Hold up thy Head John! tho with danger surrounded!
Who e're heard of a King or a Bookseller drounded?
9.
Here he kecks for it, but O! how the Seamen did it tickle,
While he all over-flows the Cabin and Biticle:
Whilst Tritons and Dolphins swum dancingly by 'em,
Who by his sweet quavering mistook him for Arion.
10.
Next behold the poor Ship how it is tossed in a Blanket,
Tho afraid more than hurt, good Fortune be thanked!
Where the Author assures ye, if his Notes don't deceive him,
The Seamen were at Prayers, have ^e Faith to believe him
11.
Here the the other Ship's lost, and a fatal Embargo,
Is laid by ^ing Neptun on the Bookseller's Cargo.
Here he is (...) out of's Wits by a Vessel of Sally. O!
What had poor Iris done, had he gone to the Serallio?
12.
Lo! here in his Dream he lies sleeping and snoreing,
Like his Namesake the Tinker, that rambled before him,
Surrounding the World in spite of the Journal,
As the Sun has two Motions, the annual and diurnal.
13.
From the Deck now he is vanished, whom but just now you saw there,
There he stands on the Globe, the self same Mr. Author.
The Other whispers him Tales you may know for the buying,
But where there is such whispering, for ever 'ware Lying!
14.
When long the wide Ocean he had been tumbled and tossed on,
Here he comes to the peaceable Haven of Boston;
Where his Lice run away, and what more you would admire, is
He got clean without help of his housewifely Iris.
15.
Here he Rambles to the Wigwams a horseback, do you mind him,
So goodly with the Flower of Boston behind him;
But his Honesty guards him from amorous Treason,
And if Iris be jealous, I Am sure she has no Reason.
16.
His Complements here with a King are exceeding,
You must know that both of 'em stood much on their breeding.
Here he kissed the fair Queen with a sober affection,
Each of 'em admiring each others Complexion.
17.
Here the best of the Parish are treating the Author
With so glorious a Dinner, 'twou'd make your mouth water;
Where he handles his Arms as well as the sternest,
And made 'em to know that his Guts were in earnest.
18.
Here all his American Rambles completing,
Upon Governours-Island a whole Hog he is eating;
And a lusty Hog 'twas, tho perhaps 'twou'd not show so
To the 13 Hands high of our learned Virtuouso In the History of Oxfordshire,
by Dr. Plot.
.
19.
Here he walks on the Ice with the Gang to the Seaside,
By his side joggs the Boatswain, and the Whistle by his side
Nor think this dull Ramble does the Frontispi^ce cumber,
For it needs must come in too, to make up the number.
20.
Merry Boston adieu! part you must, tho it is pity,
But he is made for mankind, and all the World is his City!
See how on the Shore they hoop and they hollow,
Not for Joy that he is gone, but for Grief they cannot follow.
21.
For Rotterdam Hoa! if with Wind and with Weather
It been't washed away before he get thither:
Here he Rambles with Firkins, and Doublets, and Trouses
And Kettles and Pots to the tops of the Houses.
22.
Here to Cullen he comes, as at Cullen the Trade is,
Saluring the Kings, and the Princess and St. Ursula and the eleven thousand
Virgins.
Ladys;
But among the three Kings of the fair one he is a follower,
For like will to like -- quoth the Devil to the Collier.
23.
Here he brings home a Ship full of Kindness and Kisses,
Penelope take thine own faithful Ulysses;
And behold him, which the Cream of his hope and desire is,
Casting Anchor in the arms of his beautiful Iris.
24.
When the Earth he had viewed, and described to a wonder,
When he would Rambled all over't, here at last he creeps under;
Lie still where thou art John! for the quiet of the Nation,
Nor can thou speak more without flat Conjuration.
Panegyric Verses, By the WITS of both Universities.
A POEM In Praise of Rambling,
By J. H. Master of Arts, Fellow of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford
ONe Night when sumes of charming Bottle
Had fermentation raised in Noddle;
When various troops of airy Notions
Danced in my Brain Morisco-motions;
Judgment that used to guide the rudder,
Was quite amazed in the horrid pudder;
So that the Ship was steered by chance
As Chaos was by Atom's dance;
My Soul (as all wise Men aver)
Was Here and There and every Where;
A Shuttlecock which you might then see
Tossed by the Battledore of Fancy,
-- And spinning wildly her' and ther'
Danced Jiggs and Galliards in the Air.
Thus while my thoughts were on the Ramble,
I scribbled down this long preamble;
And sustian fancy easily ambling,
Did thus descant in Praise of Rambling:
"Nothing in the World is steady found, [ Cowley.
"But an eternal Dance goes round.
And jarring seeds of Nature be
Still constant in inconstancy,
The Sun (as all Men know his course is)
Rides round the World with Coach and Horses,
And like a wicked Fornicator,
Leav's his true Bed the warm Equator,
And let old Jove say what he can Sir,
Rambles to Capricorn and (...).
The fixed Stars too (though Erra Pater)
Swears they never moved, nor will hereafter,
Yet have been found by Optic Engines
To Have rambled backward a whole Sign since.
Then for the Planets (Heavens save em!)
No mortal Man knows where to have 'em;
They move by' Excentric's Epicicles,
And outchange threescore Madam Fickles.
Nay more, the rambling roguey Gypsies
Amaze the World by dire Eclipses,
Cause Battles, Famines, Death, Diseases,
And what e're Mischief Gadbury pleases:
But though these rove and live at random,
Ye'r Comets still go much beyond 'em.
A Comet is a rambling Blade
That scours through Heaven in Masquerade*
Sometimes in antic dress he appears,
And frights the Angels from their Spheres;
Sometimes stuck round with Links and Torches
To sublunary Worlds he marches,
And slyly entering of a sudden,
Scares silly Boors from eating Pudden;
Then before Flamstead with his Glasses
Can tell ye wher' abouts his place is,
Whip, Sir, he is gone! to the Anti-poles,
Where deeper Heads Some of the Roy all Society
think his abode is*
Within the bound of Heavens high Wall
Is kept a constant Carnival,
And there e're since the Worlds Creation
Rambling has been the Recreation:
Thus what is the Harmony of the Spears,
(Which deafesn every Mortals Ears)
But Music made in Serenading,
And thrumm'd Guittors in Masquerading.
Then as for Thunder, pray what is it else,
But noise of Rival Angels Pistols?
When one in dark does to other justle,
And shakes the Welkin in the Bustle?
So when the Stars (that serve for Torches
To guide the Gods in rambling Marches)
Grow dim and twinkle (as you know
Our earthly Flambeau's often do)
The cunning Link-boy whirls it round him
To make the Light be more abounding,
Or knocks it full against some Planet,
For want of Post or Porters Bannet;
Hence a vast Sphere of fiery drops,
Fly all about as thick as Hops;
And some of these which downward go
Do pass for Mete^rs here below;
Cheat Rusticks ignorant and fearful,
And make 'em think they see a Star fall:
Thus far for Heaven, pray, now let us see
What Rambles in this World there be:
And first, our Modern Virtuosi,
Who with new Problems daily pose ye;
Say, that this very earthly Ball,
Towns, Cities, Rivers, Men and all,
Runs round the World with all us in it,
And rambles sixty Miles a minute.
The Elements their places change,
And into Foreign Regions range,
They ramble so confusedly round,
They Are no where Simple to be found:
Fire does from highest Concave go,
And lurks in Flints and Stones below;
Air enters Earths vast hollow Caverns,
And there like Bullies drunk in Taverns,
Roars, Swaggers, Scours, --
And here the Author was most graciously pleased to Ramble to somewhat else.



Another POEM In Praise of Rambling.
By R. G. Master of Arts, late of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge.
O! That some Rambling Muse would now assist,
And with her powerful Rage inflame my Breast,
That my loose Lines, like uncurb'd streams might flow
In Commendation of your Book and You;
Your Book and You which shall together run
Like coupled Beagles, or the Light and Sun;
Your Book that noble part of you which shall
In Age to come survive your Funeral,
And be preserved with pleasure and renown
Whilst there is a Rambling Peddler in the (...)
Gypsies shall cant the Glorys of your Pe^,
And sing your Praises in the Bouzing-Ke^
Figg for those lazy sedentary Men
Who never stir beyond their notsome De^,
Who never drew other Air into their Nose
Than what the Wind from their own Chimney blows;
Who by dull Reading think they Knowledge gain,
And know no more than what their Maps explain,
Thence they presume in Coffee-house they are able
To paint the Siege* of Buda on a Table,
There stands the Town, and there the brave Bassaw,
His Janissaries to the breach does draw;
Here the Imperial Forces lie, and there
Valiant Lorrain and Saxony appear:
Here 'twas the English fought so wondrous well,
And there the Citys brave Commander fell;
And so exactly will they state the Case,
As if they would seen the Action and the Place.
When (God knows) all that they of either know
Is merely what they to the Gazet owe.
Give me the MAN that without let or stay
Over all the World eternally does stray,
Terra del Fogo or Incognita.
Who without fear or wit his Journey takes,
Through Fenns and Boggs, rough Seas and burning Lakes,
Mountains and Deserts, frigid, torrid Zones,
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, like famous Captain Jones;
Leaving unsearcht no corner, nook or crevise,
Out-acts, out-rambles Quixote, Guy or Bevis;
And by his own Authority can tell
Tales far more strange and more incredible,
And has the Knack, when all his Labor's done,
To cram 'em in a Book and make 'em known;
Fearless Assays to show himself in Print,
For a stupendous bold Itinerant.
Wherefore did Nature first create Mankind?
Or for what other task were we designed,
If not to Ramble up and down to view
Her mighty Works, and wonder at 'em too?
Hence 'twas when Adam like a stupid drone
Thought to inhabit Paradise alone,
An Angel straight a flaming Whip applied,
to lash the Lazy Humor from his Hide;
From his loved Ease the idle Wight he drove,
And forced him wildly round the World to rove;
His strapping Bride and he abroad did trudge it,
Like stroling TINKER with his Dog and Budget;
And his renowned SON who bravely durst
Sin on when he had seen his Father Cursed,
(An everlasting Vagabond was grown)
And Rambled up and down to make it known;
Published his Deeds in every place he came,
As you my FRIEND are doing now the same.
What were those celebrated Names of old,
Of which loud Fame has such strange Storys told?
Nay, what is Madam Fame her very self
But a mere Gypsy, and a Rambling Elf?
Caesar and Pompey, Alexander too,
What were they all but Rambling Sparks like you?
The first whereof has the same Measures took,
And of his Gallick Rambles made a Book;
Nay, what was the stern Thunderer on high
But an Erratick, Rambling Deity?
Through each Caelestial Chamber did he strole,
And Ransackt every Corner, every Hole,
Rambling to quench his Flames from place to place,
And stockt his Heaven with a Bastard-race,
Rumag'd Alcoves, and all their Beds defiled,
'Till all the immortal Females were with Child.
What was his SON the great Alcides too,
But a mere Rambler, like the wandering Jew?
About the World the mighty Lubbard strol'd,
In dull compliance to the heavenly Scold,
'Till Rambling in the dark his way he lost,
And almost knocked his Brains out against a Post:
Which now to make amends and raise his Fame,
Posterity has honored with his Name.
Nothing in Nature's fixed and steadfast found,
But all things run an endless Circuit round.
Heaven and Earth, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars,
What are they else but Rambling Travelers?
And that bright Cup which does so gaily shine,
Did use to Ramble at their Feasts divine;
'Till Jove did it in that high place bestow,
To light poor drunken Ramblers here below.
Then On brave This POEM was directed to me in a Letter whilst I was Rambling
through Holland in the Year 1686.
John, to end thy great intents,
Encouraged by such glorious Precedents;
That Unborn Ages may thy Works applaud,
And spread thy Praises like thy Books abroad;
'Till all Mankind by thy Example won,
(Like Staring-Kine, when with the Gad-fly stung*)
Around the World from Post to Pillar run,
And by this strange Fantastic Reformation,
RAMBLING become the only thing in Fashion.
A RAMBLER. Anagram
(by the Author.) RARE BLAMe.
THy stubborn Anagram, Friend! scorns to submit
To all the little Rules of Sense and Wit:
^pregnable while to it self it is true,
^e must divide before we can subdue.
^onsence in Gobbets will the Reader choke,
which easily slips down when chaw'd and broke;
^or let false Critics thy false spelling Blam,
^ut know it is all for the sake of thy Rare Anagram.
Rare is thy Fortune, Rare shall be thy Fame,
^ho nibbling Envy thee unjustly Blame;
^et them that Blame thee, mend thee if they dare;
(...) not -- ingeniously confess -- it is Rare.
But if some Faults the rest seem to disgrace,
^As there is a Mole we know, in Venus' Face,)
^l Flesh must own, that even those faults are Rare,
^or any Flesh alive can Blame 'em there.
Those of thy Trade who now employ themselves
^h' honest, noble Art of Dusting Shelves;
^ho they mock thee Ay Right Mr. Poet: (Let him Laugh that Wins.)
and flout thee, not a Pin for their Blame do thou care,
^r thou gerst Money by it, -- and sure that is wondrous Rare.
TO My much Esteemed Friend, John Evander, AUTHOR of this BOOK, ENTITLED, A
Voyage round the WORLD
WElcome! dear Friend to me and England too
Welcome! as ever I have been to you!
It is said of Ulysses, Quo^ mores hominum multorum vid^ and urbes, Horat. de
Art Po^tica.
Ulisses like at last returned again;
Though more than he, thou Manners know and Men,
Although but Two-Years thou, he rambled Ten.
What Is the small Mediterranean he was tossed on,
To the main Sea? what is Ithaca to Boston?
There needs it is true no Bush for such rare Wine,
There needs no Band for a good Face, (like thine)
Yet will I throw my little Venture in,
My Drop into thy goodly Kilderkin;
And if my Verse Eternity can give,
(As sure old Songs make Robin Hood to live)
(...) strain my Muse and Conscience e're we part;
(...) let thy Rambles have their due desert.
Ca'ndish and Drake, rub off! avauat! be gone!
^ greater Traveller now is approaching on:
(...) for one way at once did well it is true,
(...) his Inventions far more strange and new,
(...) once he forward goes and backwards too!
^hilst his dull Body's for New England bound,
^is Soul (in Dreams) tro^s all the World around;
(...) Cunning Men and Conjurers use this Trade,
^ho still as Stocks have Sea and Land surveyed;
^or think he writes more than he saw, tho he
^se Authors to refresh his Memory;
(...) Trav'llers have you know Authority.
(...) Fame and thee as who dares doubt, speak true,
^o mortal Wight could ever him out do;
^o wandering Christian; No, nor wandering Jew,
^esputius, Madoc, Cortes, Captain Smith,
^ithgow, or whom Achates traveled with,
^hoever round the Earths vast Circle ran,
^oryat or Cabot, Hanno or Magellan;
^y Horse or Foot, or Ship, how e're they have gone,
^hether Dutch Vander, or Castilian Don,
^one sure, none over-went thee yet, Friend John!
And see how on the Black'nd shore attends
^hy looseing Bark a shole of weeping Friends:
Weeping, or what is far worse, the sad surprise,
And Grief for thy Departure froze their Eyes.
He that can cry or roar finds some relief,
But nothing kills like the dry silent grief.
But who can tell the mutual Sighs and Tears!
Husbandly, manly Groans, and gentle Wifely Fears,
Twixt thee and Iris at that fatal Tide
Which did the Knot of Heaven it self divide?
Oh! that I were an Husband (for an hour)
^or who can else describe Loves mighty power:
How sweet his Moments flow! how free from strife,
When blessed like thee Evander in a Wife.
But yet if dearer still, Friends still must part,
They go -- but leave behind each others Heart.
No^ all the Love that Rambling could inspire,
Not all his vigorous warmth and youthful Fire,
Could thaw Evander's Soul when she was gone,
How should the Wax but freez without the Sun?
So Orpheus when his Lady downward fell,
When his sweet Spouse was left behind (not well,)
So screecht and on his Harp he played by turns,
So Orpheus then, so now Evander mourns.
Now Neptune's foaming surges rave and boil,
While thou great Friend forsak'st our greater Isle;
Here may it stand, (just in the self-same place)
Here may it stand' till thou have run thy race;
With Blessings you forsake't, although it be
Ungrateful Isle! unkind, untrue to thee.
A Place there is where vast Sea Monsters keep,
In the blew Bosom of the dreadful Deep;
Where watery Waves and boisterous Billows fight,
'Till they (almost) strike fire in a Tempestuous Night;
Where surly Nereus s^owls and Neptune frowns,
In Sailors English and plain Prose The Downs.
Here did the Furies and the Fates combine
To ruin all our Hopes, dear Friend, and thine;
For had thou perished there without strange Grace,
America had never seen thy Face.
Now Tempests terrible around thee roll,
And would have daunted any's but thy Soul.
The bois^erous surges toss thy Bark on high,
And with another Argo mawl the Sky.
Eternal Rambler! whither art thou driven?
Since Earth's not wide enough, thou wilt travel Heaven.
^f thou below so many Lands explore,
Sure thou wilt above discover many more,
Secrets to all but one unknown before:
Surveyed at first by Mahomet on the back
Of his good trusty Palfrey -- Alborack.
And when Dear Friend! so near to bliss you be,
Remember Iris! and Remember me!
Some hope --
Their earthly Learning they in Heaven shall share,
But sure Friendship and Love will ^nter there.
But ah! thou empty teazing Name! Farewell,
That charms the Ship, and down it sinks to Hell:
And will thou then thy third last Ramble make,
To the dark confines of the Stygean Lake?
Ben't Earth and Heaven enough, that thou must go
To view the Kingdoms of the World below;
Both of thy Pockets and thy self take care,
For sholes of Booksellers will scrape acquaint ance^ there;
And who dares think this Ramble thy disgrace,
Since good Aeneas first surveyed the place;
But 'twas the Bough of Gold by which he fell,
Gold which now opens Heaven, as then it opened Hell.
It Is true, for 'twas a Poet writ his Life,
And called him honest too, and said he loved his Wife.
Come up for shame! sure thou so long do stay,
Thou call'st at Purgatory by the way;
Where for some little Lie in way of Trade,
There Is an Embargo on thy Vessel laid.
He hears! He hears! the shortest cut he came,
For see! the Mast peeps up at Amsterdam:
The Keys with crowds of Jews and Dutchmen swell,
And all together ask, What News from Hell?
Ah boorish Land! our Rambler thou have crossed,
And by his Absence who knows what thou'st lost.
Fixed on thy unfixt shores he might have deigned to stand,
Nor needed Rambling from a Rambling Land.
He Is gone! He Is gone! all thy entreaties fail,
Nor can thy Tears, nor can thy Prayers prevail.
To Collen next and the three Kings he comes,
To kiss their Hands, or Arms, or Nails, or Thumbs.
These Eastern Monarchs ever will be brave,
For see what vast Serallio's here they have!
Where Urs'la reigns with her miraculous aids,
The Eleven (would you think it?) thousand Maids.
But Britain sure was rude and savage then,
And Maid; (as Stags from Hunters) run from men.
Through Woods, through Brakes, through Fields they took their way,
Nor even for good Company would they stay.
Nor think, Dear Friend, I ramble now from you,
My Subject Rambles, and I but pursue.
And here where all the World invoke the aids
Of the three Rambling Kings and Rambling Maids,
I doubt Evander with the rest did stray,
And beg a little help as well as they,
Beg a small Miracle his Letters to convey:
For in my Dream I saw methought
A nimble Virgin spring aloft,
And with gay expanded Wings,
Dressed in all her Trav'ling Things,
Riding-hood of Beaten-gold,
Muff of Cloud to keep out cold;
On Cowl-staff of a Falling-star,
I saw him mount and shine from far;
Like Robin-red-breast claps her Wings,
Then coughs, then crows, then thus she sings:
But what she said, I dare not tell,
Because the World's an Infidel.
Forgive, Dear Friend, this little Ecstasy!
Ah! who can be composed that thinks of thee?
Who can Pindaric's lofty flights refuse,
When thou do lash the fiery someing Muse;
I Will rein her in, and try if we can be
As grave, as sober, and as wise as thee.
Go on! and into what e're Country hurld,
My Muse shall lackey after round the World.
We'll chase the All-surrounding Sun about,
And mend the Maps, where Bleau and Janson's out.
Terra Incognita shall fly before us,
And all the Savages behind adore us.
On Hills of Ice, as high as Tenariff,
Wintering, we'll moor our Weather-beaten Skiff;
Through Nassau's Streights we'll row unknown of old,
And Nova Zembla (in Prose-Authors) cold,
There find the Passages, and through 'em trade,
For sure for common things nor thee nor I were made;
We'lt cross the back of Jesso (if we can)
And third and sound the Streights of Anian,
And Ramble round, and round, and round, and then,
Ramble like Drake, 'till we come home again.
L. L. Studient
in Oxford.
THE AUTHORS NAME When Anagramatized is Hid unto None.
The Explanation.
LEt other Ramblers hide their Heads in holes,
And stock Alsatia with still spawning sholes;
Room for the Man that still his Face has shown:
Owls love the Night! The Sun's hid unto none.
What tho the Clouds appear, and Winds are huffing,
What tho the Apollo's Candle wants some snuffing;
Yet soon in greater splendour he will be shown,
Though Veyl'd to some, He Is quite hid unto none.
Can he be said to fly, who but retires
To warm the Vnder-World with equal Fires;
Our Sun must to the Antipodes be shown,
Or else were not indeed Hid unto none.
Come then bright Sun! quick let thy Moments pass,
And twist thy Glories in a Burning-Glass,
I say Print it John! let thy Works be shown,
And all will say thy worth's -- Hid unto none.
A. Y. Bachelor of Arts.

AN EPITAPH, Made upon a (New) Report that DON KAINOPHILUS was not cast away at
Sea, (as was confidently affirmed) but was still on his RAMBLES.
HEre Lies -- (I^lye, for he still stands and goes)
A Traveller, Reader! once like thee
With Eyes and Nose,
Ten Fingers and ten Toes;
And as he is, so must thou be.
In Love up to the Ears
He Rambled hence away;
But O Proph^tick Fears!
E're this Time hundred Years,
In spite of all our Smiles and Tears,
He Will be as high in Clay.
E. L. Student
in Oxford.
The melodious HUMBLE-BEE, to the ingenious and laborious Author of these
Mellifluous Rambles.
A PINDARIC.
FRom the soft Elisian Groves,
The stingless Hive of deathless Loves;
Where rich Hony-Fountains flow,
And everlasting Roses grow;
Where amidst the Jessmine Trees,
With a whispering gentle Breez
Zephyr strokes the Velvet Leaves,
Softly he strokes, nor of one sweet bereaves:
I come, drawn by thy Fames melodious sound,
Which like the Brass-pan Music rattles all around,
Above, and under ground.
Buz! Buz! Buz! in thy Ear I will go,
Like Nakir and Damilca^ I Will whisk about thy Head:
I Will Watch thee and Ward thee from Friend and from Foe
And fly the Rounds about thy Truckle-bed.
Nor ask of me
Dear Brother Be
Whence all this kindness comes?
It Is Sympathy! it is Sympathy!
In gathering Honey both agree,
And both pick up whatever sweets we see,
I with my Trunk, and thou with thy laborious Thumbs.
The MAYOR and ALDERMEN of EUTAXIA, (A Place lately discovered, in the same
Latitude with New-Atlantis and Vtopia,)
To the Ingenious Author.
IF all the World thou girdled have about,
Amongst 'em all, why, Friend! were we left out?
Is It -- cause thy Conscience nothing lets thee write,
But the Observations of thy proper sight?
No -- for had all but these been thrown aside,
Sure half thy fragrant Flowers had hung their Heads and died.
Or did the envious Man upon the Ball,
Neglecting us, pretend he had told thee all?
Had Fame forgot our just Rewards to tell,
For such as have, like Thee, deserved so well?
What! not one Syllable of us did hear?
Nor of the towering Castle in the Air?
Nor of the Schools, nor of the Stadt-house there?
Did thou not hear, or did thou not approve
Our wise, our natural way of making Love?
-- Nor yet, (...)! shall even thy slights prevail!
We'll do our Duty, tho in thine thou ^ail:
We'll dedicate thee in our Vatican,
And own thy Merit makes thee more than Man.
An EPITAPH designed for the Tombstone of Don Kainophilus in Tonsa Chancel, the
Place allotted for his last Ramble According as it is described in the
Frontispiece, where you will find his last Ramble a Grave, and the Author
creeping into it.
.
HEre Reader! weep as if the Case were thine!
Here Reader lies a second Saladine:
More than one Shirt it is true some Mortals have,
But few or none possess more than one Grave.
Of all the Earth his rambling Footsteps pressed,
Whether awake or in his Dreams unrest,
He has now but just enough to cover over his breast.
Weep then his Kindred and his Wife by turns!
Weep 'till you have filled a hundred thousand Vrns*
For here another Alexander lies,
When no more Worlds could see! he rambl^d here, and dies.
V. S. Bachelor of Arts.

To the READER.
Instead of the ERRATA.
The Author has his Faults, the Prin^er too,
All Men whilst here do err, and so do You.
Introduction.
Do You laugh Mr. Reader? why e'ne much good may't do ye; I know what you are
going to say, as well as if I were in the Belly of ye: but don't think I Will
humor ye so much as to name your Objections, for I intend to answer 'em
without ever troubling the World with knowing what they are.

Be it therefore known to all men by these presents, that I Don John Hard-name
(you will hear more on it if you have patience to read further) Citizen and, etc.
of London, being now arrived to the precise 30th. Year of my Life, that time
when the gaities of Fancy being workt off, the Judgment begins to Burnish, and
a Man comes to years of Discretion, if ever he will be so: -- Wandering one
Evening through a Cypress Grove -- (I will not be positive, it might be Hazle, but
the other sounds better) revolving in my rambling Brain the Varietyes of Human
Affairs, happened in the Drove of Thoughts, that swarmed up and down my Noddle
to reflect on my own self (Sir, Your Humble Servant) and what strange
checquered Fortunes had filled the Lines of my Horoscope; I followed my self in
my busy Imagination from my Cradle to my Grave, in all my Rises and Falls, my
Ups and Downs, and here is and there is and every where is, and upon the (...)
sincerely protest unto thee, O judicious, gentle, courteous Reader, that after
the severest Investigation both of History and Experience, I c^n no where find
my Parallel, and am apt now to believe what I thought too much my Friends have
sometimes bin pleased to Complement me with, that I was indeed an Original.

My Name is (or shall be) KAINOPHILVS, my Birthplace of Abode and Fortunes, --
you are n't like to know, unless you will read this Book and almost a dozen more,
for it is impossible to comprize such great things in a little compass, and though
the World has heard of Homer in a Nutshel, yet no Man alive ever saw Tostatus
on a Silver penny. But in short, if ever Fernand, Mendez, unto, had strange
luck, who actually Rambled over 999 Kingdoms, 50 Empires, 66 Commonwealths,
was 100 times Cast away, 40 times Stripped, 50 times Whipped, 21 times sold for a
Slave* 50 times Condemned to Death, and a 1000 times Killed, Murdered, and
stark cold and dead -- in the Imagination I say of his Enemies; I say again, if
he deserved Recommendation and Admiration, making the World stare again with his
Super-gorgonick wonders, if Modesty would give me leave, I could say -- much
more, do I so. Who have, --

But again I will not forestall ye, though really the matter presses, and my
pregnant Brain labors with so many painful pangs to be obstetricated, that I
verily fear I shall burst before I come to disgorge it through my fruitful Quill,
to avoid which I Will Ramble on as fast as I can scamper through this Porch, which
yet I must tell ye, if it were a Mile long, wond'n't be bigger than the House at
the endon't.

To the point -- from this Cypress Grove I was telling you of, I Rambled into
my Life, from my Life into a brown Studdy. What, thought I wi' my self very
soberly, if I should oblige this World now, this ungrateful World with a
History of this strange Life of mine: -- Hanged -- it dos n't deserve it. Yet I
may do it for my own sake, not theirs: But then they will envy me, virtue must
expect no other: But they will Laugh at me, why cannot I laugh at them again? But
they will frown and scowl, and look ugly, Pish, pish, -- i will fit them for that,
if I don't, -- may I be posted in stead of my Book: -- Besides there may be
some certain Perquisites, Considerations, and so forth, sometimes the World has
bin just to things of Value, Coriats works, Tom Thumb, seven Champions,
Pilgrims Progress, -- some good, some bad, some take, some not, and mine has a
chance for it.

It is Decreed, nor shall thy Frowns O Critic
Prevent my Work --
So to it I went Hammer and Tongs, as the Vulgar say, and after long and
laborious licking, out came this Beautiful Birth, that is just a hop, stride and
jump before you, none I'lle assure ye of the short-lived, unlaboured pieces,
which like the Ephemeris (Ah poor Ephemeris) is got in Morning, born at Noon,
and dead by Night; but a thing, ay, and such a thing as has a quod nec Iovis
ira nec ignis writ in the Forehead on it: -- As neither shall be destroyed by
Lightning, Tobacco-pipes, nor Thundered at with Sulphurious blasts beneath; But
labored and polished the works of sweating thoughts, and many a drudging hour,
though it is confessed a pleasant Drudgery.

Comprehending or inveloping within its Spacious Circumference, no less than
all the visible and intellectual World. All parts of this little Universe,
Rambled over in a Moment: Reader, even by thee, if thou have a Soul like mine.

Do but look on the Title Page, here is that will challenge all Little Britain
and Duck-Lane: Nay, take in the Toppers of Pauls-Church-Yard too, one and all,
though they were as high as the Steeple, and as big as the Cupilo, -- I Will be
tried by themselves, though they seldom commend Copies or Authors none of their
own, -- I say again, I Will be tried by themselves, and their own Confession (so
bold and Conscious of it self, true Merit is as well as Innocence) whether e're
a one of 'em all ever Printed such a Book in their Lives.

Indeed I cannot better or fuller describe it, than telling you in two words,
it is every thing. For as the Lives and Actions of great Princes contain one way
or other, the greatest part of the History of the times and Ages they live in,
so the Reader will find in the Life of one Traveller, my individual self, Don
Kaino^hilus, alias Evander, the whole Description of, I scorn to say one
Country, one Age, or one World; but of all the Habitable and Uninhabitable
Creation; Terra incognita described as plain as Ireland in Petty's Surrey,
^very Foot, Perch and Inch on it; Virtue and Vice, Wit and Folly, all the
Humors, Religions, Customs, Whims and Connundrums of Mankind: Directions how
to ^ear himself in every part and Stage of Life, from the Sucking-Bottle and
Clouts, to the last hot suppings and burying in Woollen. And whereas it has bin
the fatal ^^happiness, or rather Crime of most other Ramblers, Real or Feigned,
who have committed their Observations and Adventures to Writing, to encourage
Vice by their Examples, even while they pretend to reprove it in their words,
or ore tenus, as the Learned, this incomparable Author (whom for decorum's sake
I nominate in the third Person) is conscious to himself of nothing through these
whole 24 Orbs of his Life; but a most Milky purity, and Babe-like Innocence.

You, that after the vile Customs of the Age, behave not your selves as you
ought toward the Spouses of your Youth, who render not what they ought to
have, all that Respect, Tenderness, Complaisance and Kindness -- Look ye what
here is? Look and learn, see the pattern of Conjugal Affection, and the very
Warming-pan of Duty and Love: Evander, the Faithful Evander, frying and burning
for his well-beloved Iris in the midst of boystrous billows of the surging
Waves, as high as Tenariffa's cloudy Hill, all covered with Eternal Snow and
Winter, and then (O catch me, gentle Reader, or I shall break my Neck, as well
as thou thy sides if I fall on thee) then sowcing down like a voracious Hawk
upon his trembling Patridge, Tearing, Worrying, Devouring her for Love; but I
say no more.

And then for Discretion, to avoid Dangers, and all that, but it were endless to
run through all, let it suffice thou have here little less than an exact pattern
of Heroic Virtue in all Circumstances, and on all occasions, Prentice, Master,
Traveller, Courtyer, Sailor, in a Shop, out on it, and in again, Author,
Bookseller, Printer, and what not, in all Offices and places, from Scavenger up
to High-Constable, and so onwards. And if this been't a Treasure, let the World
show a better.

As for the pretty little Virtues of Comity and Vrbanity, this furnishes you to
a miracle, for have you a mind to divert either your self or Friend with the
most pleasant and agreeable entertainment, a Man's Iaws must be made of Iron,
and fastn'd as close to one another, as if 'twere done with the Pins of a
Shop-window, if what is here enclosed, don't now and then wrench 'em asunder,
and discover not only the Teeth in his Head, but the very grin of his Soul; and
such an Intellectual Tehe, as will force the very Heart to be -- it self for
Joy, and the Blood flow out at such an immoderate rate, as 't would be almost
impossible to hold fast any thing else. Though of the other side he 'll meet with
passages, that though they may not spoil, will yet temper his Mirth, and as the
Egyptians had (and they were cunning old Fellows) a Deaths-head in the midst of
his Dainties.

In a Word, here is for all Capacities, as well as all Sexes and Ages: Here Is a
help to Discourse, the like never known, Witty Songs, Riddles, Posies and
Anagrams: Here Is of the other side, Heroic, Pindaric, and all the High-flyers
that can be named. Here Is Hieroglyphics and Cabalistical Treasures, as
Unintelligible, as inestimable, such unheard of Curiosities as Gaffarell and
Paracelsus never dreamt of nor would have don't (though sometimes good Wits jump)
they are so rare and extraordinary, though they had lived this thousand years: I
protest Gentlemen, I blush like a Bathsheba in this unwelcom Employment, and am
Villanously put to it thus, to commend the work of my own proper fist and
knuckles. But it is for your sakes, not my own, Modesty is injurious where it
makes Merit rest in silent unobserved shades, and cheats the Public. Who would
buy Mackarel if no body cried it, though 't were as sweet as a Nut: Could you
know all the good things in this Book, without my telling it you, and so buy
it, and be happy, I Would dye before I Would give it all this Commendation, though not a
dram too much, upon my Honor.

One thing more, and then we'll go and drink a dish of Coffee together. I would
not have you think that all this is but a Story, a Whimwham, or a what d' ye
call 'em? It Is no Tale of a Budget in the Air, and a strolling Christian
Tinker; No, the Author values his Reputation more, and so he tells you, it is as
true real matter of Fact: in brief; There Is more truth in it than you think of,
or are like to know.

I had forgot one Word, stay a little longer, and then some may snotter and
snuffle at the many Collections they will find in these my Labors, they will call
me Owl, Iay, Cuckoo, Magpy, and a hundred Beasts of Birds besides, for
borrowing so many Feathers and gaudy plumes; -- but they might, I Will tell them,
learn more Civility from an ingenious Person, who has prefixed an ingenious
Poem to these my Works; and styleth me rather a Be, nay, a mellifluous Be, or
Brother to one who gathers Sweets and Dainties wherever he comes, without ever
hurting the pretty Pinks, or tarnishing the fragrant Roses, and how ungrateful
were that rustic Boor, and foolish withal, who would refuse the delicate
present this his little industrious Tenant would make him forsooth, because he
had stolen it from other folks Gardens, and not gathered it only out of his own,
or as the Spider spins his Thread drawn from his own Bowels: -- No, the Author
thanks ye for that kindness, this were the way to write his Guts out, before he
has Rambled to the end of his four and twenty Globes.

It has been said of Accomplished Persons, that they have Read Men as well as
Books; and why is there not as great a Commendation belongs to those who have
Traveled Books as well as Men, and brought thence the Gold and precious
Je^els, leaving 'em still, as the Be the Flower, to return turn to the
Metaphor already used, not a jot the worse for wearing. For the gay Feathers I
have taken, they may as well call one of the Indian Princes Atabalipa and
Montezuma, an Owl, Jay, or Magpy, who borrow Feathers indeed from the Birds to
Adorn themselves in their most Royal Robes. -- But alas, the Art is all --
materiam superabat opus -- It Is the placing 'em, and ordering 'em in such
delicate Lights and Shades, that only makes 'em so inimitably Beautiful and
Lovely, even so -- but I Will spare the the other Leg of the Comparison -- and let
the Reader never trust me more if I desire him to go with me any further than
to this next Style, and then we will part, for I scorn to use him like a Quaker,
with his false-bottomed Sermons, who Concludes 40 times over, but will never
have done. I say I Have but one little tiney savor to beg, and then -- and that
is -- that he would maturely Weigh, Swallow, Chew the Cud, and soundly digest this
following first Book, before he throw it out again, for should he make too much
have, and too greedily read it over, as it is to be feared the pleasantness and
rarity on it, will tempt him to be Ravenous, why then 'twill only cause
Crudities in the Maw of his Soul, and the next Volume coming upon him before he
has concocted this, and turned it into Life, Blood, and Nourishment, they will
only one confound another, and either nauseate or choke him.

Not a Syllable more, but READER, Your ever Devoted, Obsequious, Obliged,
Rambling Humble Servant: Yours to the Antipodes, and back again, KAINOPHILUS.

The Impartial Character OF A Rambler.
By the Author of the BOOK.
He Is a thing wholly consisting of Extremes -- A Head, Fingers and Toes; for
what his industrious Toes do tread, his ready Fingers do write, his running
Head dictating. But to describe him more exactly, He is is made up of a large
Head and Ears, some Brains, and most immoderate Tongue, Toes and Fingers; a
very Carrier or Foot-post will draw him from any Company that has not been
abroad, (excepting always his dear Iris, for she is ever new) merely because
he is a sort of a Traveller: But a Dutch Post ravishes him, and the mere
Superscription of a Letter (tho there is never a Bill in it) from Boston, Italy,
or France, sets him up like a Top, Colen or Germany makes him spin -- (and
without Whipping too, there is the wonder) and at seeing the word Universe,
America, Flanders, or the Holy Land, tho but on the Title of a Book, he is ready
to break Doublet, let fall Breeches, (in a civil way) and overflow the room
with all those Wonderments have surpised him in these flourishing Countries.
If he has no Latin or Greek, he makes it up with abundant scraps of Italian,
Spanish, French and Dutch, and tho he has little more knowledge in any of 'em
than Comestato? Parlez vous? or How vare ye Min-heer? and can hardly buy a
Sallat in one Language, or a Herring in the other; yet when he comes home, he
passes with himself and other like him, for a monstrous learned Creature, a
Native of every Country under Heaven, whereas indeed he is a mere Babylonian,
he confounds all Languages, but speaks none, and is so careful to jumble
together the Gibberish of other Countries, that he almost forgets his own
Mother Tongue, as the Roman Orator did his Name, only the Writing the History
of his Travels makes him remember it again. All his Discourse is shaped into a
Traveling Garb, and is the same with his Manners and Haviour, looking as if
'twas contrived to make Mourners merry. He Is all the strange shapes round the
Maps put together -- one Leg a Hungarian, the other a Pole; one piece of him a
Turk, and the next a Tartar or Moscov^^e; but if you look* on his Face, you would
swear he is a Laplander -- so much has Traveling, Wind, Sun and Rain
discoulour'd it and altered it: However chaste his Body may be, his Mind is
extremely prolifick; his thoughts are a perfect Seraglio, and he, like a great
Turk, begets thousands of little Infants -- Remarks, Fancys, Fantasticks,
Crochets and Whirligigs, on his wandering Intellect, and when once begot, they
must be bred -- so out he turns 'em into the wide World to shift for
themselves, after he has put a few black and white Rags about 'em to cover
their Nakedness: But to look upon 'em when they once get abroad -- to see how
hugely they favor their Father: Do but view 'em all over, and -- Here Is that
will cure your Corns, Gout, Chollick, and what you please; or as the most
excellent Saffold -- 'Twill cure every cureable Disease: (You have heard of the
Monkey that cured the Cardinal:) Und^^ the College, and break Apothecarys
Shall, as easily as one of their Glasses. There^ no Man who for his sake would
n't neglect any thing but Business, that is to say, would not be glad of his
Company, when he has nothing else to do: -- He Will as^ you how you do; where you
have been; what News; how is it; if you have Traveled; and above all, (when
Published) How you like his Rambles; han't they a fine Frontispiece -- Ay, a
very fine one; there is Art -- there is Thought -- well -- and then for the
Uerses before it, I say Coriat's Book was but a Horn-book to it -- they no more
deserve to be compared together than Pilgrims Progress and Burton's
Wonderments; and so he would Ramble on to the End of the Chapter, did not you
out of Civility give him a gentle tweak by the Nose, or kick on the Shins, and
ask him whether he knew what he was talking of? Yet as good let him alone, for
if you get him out of this Impertinency, he will ramble into a thousand more,
rather than want the Humanity of vexing you -- but then such courteous ones
they will be (for he is the very Pink of Courtesy) that ye cannot for your Teeth
find in your Heart to be angry with him. If he chances to be Shipwrackt, he
cannot be angry with the Sea or Winds; Nay, is rather pleased with 'em, for
giving him opportunity to describe a Storm more lively, and tell the World what
direful Dangers he escaped, when he swum ashore like a Caesar, with his Sword
in one hand, and his Commentaries in the other. He Is averse to nothing that has
Motion in it, and for a Lowse, he dearly loves such a painful Fellow-Traveller,
who Rambles over his Microcosm, or lesser World, as he the greater -- nibling
and sucking here and there, whenever he finds any thing agreeable to his
Palate. He Is generally for Foot- service, and thinks that much more brave than
the Horse, scorning to ride upon four Hoofs, when Nature has given him ten Toes
to support him. But if he should be forced into such Circumstances, by the
surbating his Feet, he envies those happier Criminals who have their Legs tied
under their Horses belly, and thinks the most commodious way of riding is with
his Face toward the Ta^l, for then he cannot see any danger 'till he is past it.
Other People are for walking with a Horse in their Hands, he is of the contrary,
for riding with his Staff in his Hand, or rather Walking with a Horse between
his Legs, for his Feet still move at the same rate as if they touched the
ground, and were employed in their own natural motion.

What Is other Men's Recreation is his business, and yet he makes rather a
pleasure of a Toil, than a Toil of a pleasure; for though he Ramble with all his
might, (as when he rides every part of him works) yet the more pain, the more
content; and the Fatigues he meets with in all, give such an odd sort of a
pleasure, as a Boar has when scrubbing his brawny Back against a Tree, or an
Irish man scratching where it itches. I told you he Rambles with all his might,
and it is true enough, for he sets his Heart upon it, and there is not one
particle of his Body, nor immaterial Snip of his Soul, but Rambles as fast as
his Legs, nay, some much faster.

To begin with his Brains, (for he has Brains) some think they rambled from him
in his Infancy, and dropping then out of his Nose, his Nurse, good Woman, being
feeding him with Pap, opportunely caught 'em in the Spoon, and because the
little Bantling should n't be upbraided for want of 'em, when he came to age,
put 'em in again, with the addition of a little of the gravy of her old gums,
though in the wrong place; which he, poor Innocent being ignorant of, as how
should he be otherwise, swallowed down amongst the Pap, and ever since has worn
his Brains in his Guts, instead of Gutts in his Brains: -- But this is but the
effect of Envy, that speaks well of no Body -- any more than another foul
Calumny of the same Batch, that they Rambled to the other End of the World upon
new Discoveries, where being surprised by the Cannibals, they got 'em out of
his Ears with a Skewer, as folks pick Marrow-bones, and eat 'em as a rare
Dainty with Pepper and Vinegar -- others that being close pursued, and
conscious they were the most precious things he had about him; he 'ene sneez'd
'em out of his Nose, (as the Bever bites off his more valuable Movables when
in the same circumstances) and left 'em for a Bait to catch the Gudgeons with,
upon a fair Cabbidge-leaf, just in the High^ way -- But it is certain from his
own Mouth, 'twas another sort of substance, though much of the same consistence,
which fell from him in his flight from these Obstreperous and Carnivorous
Anthropophagi; and the Truth is, the only Ramble his Brains ever made, were
into his Pen, as he was nibling it to get out these excellent works.

For his Eyes, if they they did not ramble in his Mothers Belly, because there
perhaps the modest Fool might keep 'em shut, it is certain they fell a gadding
as soon as 'ere they came abroad, and will never lie still more till many a
fair Year after he is buried, if they do then. Let those who have no further to
Ramble than the Playhouse, admire the fair full Eye, the tip, the twinkle, the
ogle, or what you please to call it, but he gives you his Honor upon it, (which
will pass for a Pot of Ale at any blind Alehouse in Christendom) that of all
the Eyes in the World he envies those that squint, because they can look nine
ways at once, and he heartily wishes his Eyes were Diametrically retrograde to
each other, for he had much rather look all round about than just before him:
The truth is, his own Eyes, as they are, do him no inconsiderable Service, of
which you will know more when I tell you what Rambles they and their
Fellow-Travellers his Fingers have had together.

His Nose Rambles -- not to an Hospital, but a Kitchen, which smoaks in every
Country, and his Table is covered in every Hamlet from hence to the Antipodes;
so generous is his Stomach that he scorns the queasie morose temper of those
who never eat unless they are sure they are Welcome, and the Meat clean
dressed; whereas he would not refuse a Dinner, tho with an old Usurer, who gave him
as many Curses for every bit he eat, as there have been drops of Water in the
Thames running by Greenwich this 700 Years; nor stand out at an Invitation, tho
made by the Hottomtots on the Cape of Good-Hope to one of their T --
d-Puddings, and no other Claret to make it go down, but the Indians Delight,
the gravy of half a dozen fat Toads, mellowing in a Jar for half a Year before
the Feast.

To let alone therefore the Rambling of his Tongue, (which all the World knows
has such a way with it) his Teeth and Pallat are of all Nations and Religions
as well as that. He can Feast very conformably on a good decent Mince Pie, or
Canonical Pot of Plumb-Porridge; he can edify on a brotherly Capon, and think
Sack-posset a very comfortable and enlarging Dispensation; he can Fast and
Mortify on Sturgeon, Turbet, Mullet, or Shellfish with e're a portly Friar of
'em all; ay, and munch Locusts with the poor Maronites in Mount Libanus; rather
than let his Gutts cling together -- while he eats Pudding and Sallat with the
Bramin when he can get no better Food: He is not such a Hog as not to eat Flesh
of a Jews dressing, because 'twas cut with its Throat toward Jerusalem, nor is
not such a Jew as to refuse a good sliver of a Hog, if he meets it handsomely
upon Governours-Island; or any other place on this or the other side on it.

I promised to tell you what Rambling Hands he has -- O they are a pair of
little Wanderers as ever went where they had no business -- not that they ever
dived into any Pockets besides his own, which they seldom take any Money from,
much less from another, -- he scorns it. -- Sir, -- you don't know him -- or
else -- he has a Sword and Pistol -- at your service; for be it known to ye,
he will never make use on it, unless to present at the Bushes, and furiously throw
'em over the Hedge -- But they strole in conjunction with his Eyes, over all
the Learned World, as his Feet over the natural one, cropping here and there,
nay, one may venture to say, every where, such delicate choice Flowers as
present themselves to his Inquisitive Peepers.

His Feet are of the same Humor with all the rest of his Body, and they so
infect his Legs, that he has much ado to keep up the Confederacy between 'em,
they have such a huge mind to be running away from one another, (so that it is
feared he will in time grow splay-footed) and from their Body too, as sweet a one
as it is, as Dr. Faustus's did from him, when the Countryman pulled to wake
him.

What should I tell you of his Soul, since his Body is the very Picture on it,
and if you know one, you cannot miss of the other among a thousand: It Is like
Gresham-Colledge, or the Anatomy-School at Leyden, hung round with a thousand
Knick-knacks that rambled thither, some of 'em half the World over -- But what
pains he takes to show 'em all, and does it with as much Decorum and gravity as
the old Fellow used to show the Tombs at Westminster; so that in his own words,
his ill Luck lies not so much in being a Fool, as in being put to such Pain to
express it to the World -- But should the Frollick go round, and all the World
write a Book of their Lives and Rambles, as he has done, he will ask one civil
Question -- Who would be Fool then? To sum up all his Character in two Words,
He is --

Inquire within, and you may know further.



Evanders CHARACTER. THE Author of these Rambles, Reviewed by himself.
Modesty may Justice claim,
Truth and I may do the same.
EVander is a Person without Flattery, endu'd with all Accomplishments that
Nature ever crammed into a Gelly of Stars to make a Chees-cake of. Like the
rising Sun round the Head of his Apollo, he is always employed in
circumnavigating the Sphincter of some Myoptical Primogenity; and sure I am,
that should Diogenes his Tub come to Life again, he would be the first Man
chosen by the States of the Moon, to craok Chestnuts with a pair of
Butter-firkins. But to be less Ciceronian:

He is one of an indifferent Stature, neither so high as the Monumental Irish
man nor full out so humble as that Modicum (...) Mortality that crawls about
with him -- whence you may safely conclude he is (...) middle-siz'd Man.

His Eyes are as black as a Coal -- (which when alive is red, when stark dead,
white) with a little dash of yellow in 'em, or else gray, blew, or a lovely
Hazle; for an impartial Historian must set down all probable Opinions, that the
Reader may the better know how to Judge. His Nose like Majesty, for it is in the
middle of his Face -- but more than that, it is either very high, or a little
rising, if not flat to a Fault.

His Complexion, like the Offspring of the black King of Aethiopia -- (who had
once a Daughter as white as Snow.) His Mouth of the widest, when gaping with
big Lips -- when he swells 'em with blowing his Nose, and as red as a
Scarlet-thred -- after he has been eating Mulberries.

His Teeth are as even as those of a Comb, tho sometimes they are broken -- and
as pure Ivory -- though both may want brushing. He speaks somewhat thick when
his Mouth is full, or he is angry -- but writes much better -- when he draws
you a Bill upon his Banker. He winks very often -- when he sleeps, and stumbles
a little in his Walk -- if you lay your Leg before him. He Dresses so
remarkably, you cannot but know him, if you had no other part of his Character
-- either in a plain, modest, genteel suit of Stuff, Cloth, Serge, Ratteen,
Silk or Velvet, or in Red or Blew, with a Sword, inlaid Silver-handle, or
Til^^ry Basket-Hilt, long black Wigg -- and ^ot rarely a short pretty
light-colour'd Bob, or middle-siz'd, with a Spanish lock behind. He has a kind
of Shuffling in his Gate, and yet very Majestic too when he pleases, the other
only being when one side of the Heel of his Shoo is worn away, or Tentoes have
lately suffered Dilapidations. That which makes him most remarkable, is, that
no Person alive, not Iris her self, ever saw him without a Goose-quill in his
Mouth, or between his Fingers, unless when it rambles into his Standish; and
yet more wonderful, he has certainly ten Fingers on his left hand -- when he
lays his right a top of it.

This is his Description, his very Impression, and so much to the Life, that
it is well the Gazett has no business with him; for were all these Ear-marks
published in it, he would never be able to peep out of doors, but all the whole
Street would be in an uproar, and cry -- That Is he!

This for the Notification of such as are ignorant of his Accomplishments; for
such as have the Happiness to know him,(...) this touch suffice:

He Is a Citizen of London and all the World, -- Loves Rambling, does n't love
Fighting -- loves Iris, does n't love Scolding; loves his Friend -- does n't
fear nor hate his Enemy; loves Fair-dealing; had rather be called Fool than
Knave; lets People laugh while he wins, -- can be secret if trusted; is Owed
more than he Ows, and can Pay more than that; makes his Word as good as his
Bond; will not do a foul thing, and Bids the World go whistle.

Here ends Evander's Character. Enter his LIFE.
A VOYAGE Round the WORLD: OR A Pocket-Library.
ROom for a Rambler -- (or else I Will run over ye) that ever was, is, and will
be so. My Life is a continued Ramble, from my Cradle to my Grave; was so before
I was born, and will be so after I am dead and rotten -- the History of which I
have been sweating at the best part of this seven Years; and having now with
great Pains and Industry, charge and care rendered complete, and ready for the
Press, I first send out this First Volume by way of Pos^ilion, to slap-dash,
and spatter all about him, (if the Critics come in his way) in order to make
Elbow-room for all the rest of his little Brethren that are to come after.

My Name is EVANDER, alias KAINOPHILUS -- aliar -- Your Humble Servant -- 'Twas
just upon my Tongues end, if 'thad been out, I Would have bit it off.

Thus you see I am a Rambling Name as well as Thing, that all may be of a piece
that belongs to me.

And if ever there was a Rambler since the wandering I^w, I am the Man -- was
the Boy, the Infant -- the -- the -- the Chicken -- the tread of a Cock-chicken
-- the Eye of a Needle -- the Point -- the nothing at all -- yet something --
and still a Rambler -- as you may find in the Frontispiece Hieroglyph^ck
Account of all my Life, Globe the first, Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The Text
containing the very cream, flower, heart and marrow of my Rambles -- my
Explanations and Comments whereon shall be the stuffing of this Book, and all
that are quarrelling who shall first Ramble out after it. -- Thus then that
super-ingenious Author --

After his first Rambles, which I need not to tell ye,
And his kicking and sprawling in his own Mothers Belly:
First mark how the Bantling to all outward appearing.
When he first came to Life was us dead (...) a Herring
Then he is born in a Coach -- for a Cart was not handy,
Where an old Woman fecht him again wl' good Brandy.
CHAP. I.
Of my Rambles before I came into my Mothers Belly, and while I was there.

AFter his first Ramble -- ] First, and not first -- for even before this, I
Rambled from the Beginning of the World, if not a great deal sooner. The
Essences of things are eternal, as the Learned say, and my first Ramble was
indeed out of Essence into Existence, from a Being in my Causes, into actual
Being.

But not to mount the Argument above my Readers Head, lest I should crack both
that and my own -- Let it suffice, that my Soul for ought I know, has been
Rambling the best part of this 6000 Years, if those are in the right on it who
hold the Praeexistence, and that all Souls were made at once.

However -- for my Body, I can make Affidavit on it -- that 't has been Rambling
so long and so far before my Soul stumbled upon it, that I lose the Track, and
can go no further. All matter is in motion, and therefore perpetually changed
and altered -- now in how many shapes that little handful which makes up my
Souls Luggage, has been formerly dressed, I Will promise you, I Will not undertake
to tell ye.

As great a Coward as I am, there may have gone I know n't how many perticles
of a Lion into my Composition, and as small as my Body is, my great Grandfather
might be made out of a Whale or an Elephant. You remember the Story of the Dog
that killed the Cat, that eat the Rat, -- for I love to Illustrate
Philosophical Problems, with common Instances for the use of the less knowing
part of the World, -- why just so here. To prove, I may have a piece of a
Roaring Lion rambled into me, -- How can any man alive prove but as long ago as
the Holy War, some or other of my Ancestors waited on K. Richard into
Palestine, and was there with him when he killed the Lion. This Gentleman might
have a Dog, -- this Dog being hungry, might fall a tearing the Guts of this
Lion, some of whose Body must pass into the Dogs, as well as other only through
it. This Dog might come home with the Gentleman again, and at length coming to
some untimely end, his Noble Carcass lie rotting in the Fields -- which very
place being fatned with his corrupted Carcass, might produce some Tuffs of
larger Grass than ordinary, wherein undoubtedly would be included some
Particles of the poor deceased Creature, -- which Particles might very easily
be devoured by some fat Ox, or Weather grazing there, allured by the length and
beauty of the grass, and so become part of this Sheep or Ox, -- and they again,
being brought to the Spacious Table of some of my Worthy Ancestors, might
Communicate the same Subtle parts of the Grass, the Sheep, the Ox, the Dog,
the Lion to their Tre^chers, thence to their Mouth, Stomach, Blood, -- and in
two removes more, to their Son and Heir, so from Generation, to Generation,
till at last, all centered in the Lion -- like Evander. -- This I say may be,
and Graver folks than he have made a huge splutter with such a kind of
business; -- but I am apt to think ( between Friends) if there be any thing
in it, that most of the Lyoness Particles rambled somewhere else, to another
Branch of the Family; and that more of the Sheep, the gentle Lamb, or such
harmless innocent Creatures Rambled into my Composition; for though I find
enough of the Lion in my Soul, yet this Treacherous Body will quake and tremble
at the approach of Danger: And I find a strong Inclination to bleat for
Succor, -- though still all that know me, know the very Character I give my
self, is, (and I should be best acquainted sure with my own self,) That I never
saw fear, but^i^ the Face of an Enemy. I could as easily prove one Leg of me
may have Rambled out of a Whale, and a piece of my left Hip from the
Shoulder Blade of an Elephant, -- for might not some of my Grandfathers be left
in Greenland (we have been Travelers of old) and there forced to eat
Whalesritters, or not to go so far; who knows but after the Elephant was burnt
in the Booth (I tell no lies, every body knows this is true) the Dirt and
Rubbish might be thrown out in the Fields, where Pease might be afterward
Sown, and so a piece of the Elephant brought home to Evanders Table, in a Dish
of Green-Pease. Now all the difficulty here will be, whether or no I use to eat
Green-Pease; -- but for the Truth of this, I Appeal to Stocks-Market, and all
the Neighbors.

And so I Am got home again, -- but must immediately take a Journey to Graffham,
my well-beloved Town of Graffham, and find my self in my Mothers Belly, -- just
Rambled out of nothing, or next to it, nothing like what I am now, into a little
live thing, hardly as big as a Nit. Should I tell you, as the virtuosi do, that
I was shaped at first like a Todpole, and that I remember very well, when my
Tail Rambled off, and a pair of little Legs sprung out in the room on it: Nay,
should I protest I pulled out my Note-book, and slap-dash'd it down the very
minute after it happened, -- let me see, -- so many Days, Hours, and seconds
after Conception, yet this Infidel World would hardly believe me; and therefore
I Will Advance nothing but what carries Demonstration in the Teeth on it, and will
make them believe in spite of their Noses: -- I say then, that as soon as my
Mother quickened, I began to Ramble with a witness, -- were she alive she would
swear it, -- however, not to trouble the World with a company of not very sweet
Depositions, to that purpose (for be it known I Am no Prince of Wales) it is an
infallible mark that I was alive, because I am so -- and am ready to enter the
Lists with any who shall Dispute to the contrary. But there did I keep such a
^ossing and tumbling, frisking and Rambling, and shifting a-sides, and turning
about from one place to the other, that after nine Months, my Mother could endure
it no longer, but out she turns me, and abroad I Rambled into the wide World.

CHAP. II.
My second Ramble into the World, and out on it, and in again, etc.

First mark how the Ban^ling to all outward appearing,
When he first came to Life was as dead as a Herring.
NOW here am I most abominably puzzled, and if my freedom lay upon it, could not
for my Blood resolve what to do. I had, to confess the Truth, prepared a great
many sparkling notions, pleasant Fancies, nea^ Thoughts, and whole Bushels of
Flowers to welcome my coming into the World.

I had Collected many a fine passage, and well-turned Period, as concerning
Life, and all the Conveniences, Inconveniences, Pleasure and Pain on it, which
could not have failed of Ministering abundant Diversion and Profit to the
well-disposed Reader. -- But how to lug it in, -- ay, there is all the Craft, --
what is a Man the better for having -- two Hogsheads at the Door; For look ye
now, and do but consider my case, -- I could cry I Am so pulled and tormented --
to talk of Life; and all those pretty things that I intended, -- how I looked
abroad when I first saw the Light, found the B^bby, and all that (but first the
Brandy-bottle) by the Light of Nature, and laughed in my Nurses Face: I say, to
talk of this when one was Dead-born, looks a little like a Figure in Rhetoric
called Nonsense, -- and yet where to stick it in, if I ^lip this Opportunity, I
cannot for my Life imagine: The Poet it is true has done both, and by a pretty
Oximoron, expressed my Sense extremely well: -- When he first came to Life, was
as dead as a Herring; but then he fastens that too with what goes before, -- he
was only so -- to all outward appearing, -- and that we know is fallacious; --
but alas we Prose Authors are tied up more strictly, and must write with
greater Gravity, and clearer Consistency, or else Envy will be presently upon
our Bones. -- Ha, I have found the way, -- I have it -- I will not take Ten pound
for my Thought; Mark -- ye me, Mr. Reader, I Will suppose I was born alive -- for
you know a Man may suppose what he will; -- I may suppose my self a Conjurer,
or you a Rhinoceros: And upon that supposal, I can most handsomely and
expeditiously drive in all the Rambling thoughts I had a mind to, -- supposing
then, that I lived two or three hours after I was Dead-born, and then died again.

O Life! Life! What a whim thou art? Thou art a perfect Evander, -- no body
knows what to make of thee; -- Thou art one tedious Ramble from nothing to
something, though that something is next to nothing -- Life is a troubled,
troublesome, and tempestuous Sea, a mere Irish Ocean, we take Shipping at our
Birth, with tears we Sail over it; with Care, Fear, Sorrow, Hope, (sometimes
worse than all the other three,) the Whirlwinds that blow us through it, and at
last with Sighs and Groans, we land at the Port of Death. Life is no better
than the Drudge of Fate, and seems only sent into the World, to keep Death in
Employment, and twist threads for the fatal Sisters, that they many n't want
work to cut 'em off again. That Rattle which Children cry for, and Men despise,
which no Man but's fond of (such Children we are) and yet scarce any but has
wished to be rid on it. How often have I thought on the Advice of the Indians to
their Newborn Children: Infant! Thou come into the World to suffer! Suffer
and hold thy peace: How often with a sad Melancholy pleasure have I reflected
on that Ingenious Poem, I have somewhere seen on this Subject.

I.
How soon does Man decay!
When Clothes are taken from a Chest of sweets
To Swaddle Infants whose young Breath
Scarce knows the way,
Those Clowts are little Winding-Sheets,
Which do consign and spurt them on to Death.
II.
When Boys go first to Bed,
They step into their voluntary Graves,
Sleep binds them fast, only their Breath,
Makes them not Dead.
Successive Nights, like rolling Waves,
Convey them quickly, who are bound for Death.
III.
When Youth is frank and free,
And calls for Music while his veins do swell,
All day exchanging Mirth and Breath,
In Company,
That Music Summon^ to the Knell,
That tolls his passage to the House of Death.
IV.
When Man grows Staid and Wise,
Getting a House and Home, where he may move
Within the Circle of his Bre^^h,
Schooling his Eyes
That dumb enclosure makes Love
Unto the Coffin that attends his Death.
V.
When Age grows low and weak,
Marking his Grave, and th^^ing every year,
Till all do melt and drown his Breath
When he would speak;
A Chair or Litter, shows the Beer
On which he will Travel to the House of Death.
VI.
Man e're he is aware,
Has wandered quite through a Solemnity,
And dressed his H^rse, wh^^e he has Breath
As yet to spare.
-- Then, now so may we learn to dye,
That all these dyings may be Life in Death.
Now the Reader will think me a mere T^ravian, thus to Celebrate my own
Nativity with Tears. -- But I cannot avoid it, -- when e're I reflect what a
nasty World I then came into, how crowded with Fools and Knaves; how much pain
for a little taste of what we can (...) -- How the greatest part on it is an
arrant cheat, and a mischievous one besides, -- how little a while we generally
stay in ^t, and yet how unfit to go out on it; -- all these Reflections are now
so strongly imprinted on my mind, that indeed I wonder how I could be persuaded
to come abroad into Light; and had not the innate Sympathetical Love I had for
Rambling even before I know what either that or my self was, tolled me on; I
might possibly have staid as long in my Mother's Lodgings, as the Physicians
tell us the Child of a certain French Woman did, who went sixteen years before
she was Delivered.

Yet all this Whineing, Whimpering, and hanging an, -- will do no good, -- turn
out I must; and abroad I Rambled on the 4th. day of May, A. D. 1659. Then, then
was the time, when the good Women brought my Father the joyful News of a Son
and Heir, after he had for five years despaired of them both.

The Reader will not be so unconscionable sure, to think I should give him an
account what pleasant sparkling Discourse passed among the Gossips and Midwi^e,
-- how they read my Fortunes, and gave their Judgments: How the Burnt-Claret
Rambled about, and the poor groaning Cheese, Gammons of Bacon, and Neats^Fongue
suffered for it -- no, -- that I cant, nor will not do, for two Reasons.

First, Because ^^were below the gravity of such a Discourse.

Secondly, Because they made such a hideous noise, I could not tell a word they
said.

Thirdly, Because I had not my Pen and Ink about me, to take Notes (for I don't
find in the Register, that I was born with one in my Hand; though as you have
been cold already, I think I Have had one there almost ever since) and I ^are not
burden my Memory with so many passages, or write what I am n't assured of its
Truth: But to omit six or seven and twenty Reasons between for Brevities sake;
One and thirtiethly, beloved, because I was dead born, and cannot remember one
word on it to save my Life.

And what hurt would it be, while in this Condition, if I entertain the Reader
with a doleful Ditty or two on this my sudden departure before ever I came
hither.

1.
So the Infant Day does rise,
Guilding Hills, and painting Skies;
Till some envious pregnant Cloud,
Does its blooming Glories shrowed.
2.
So a short-lived Winters Sun,
Sets almost as soon's begun:
Weeping Heaven laments its fall,
Mourning Earth its Funeral.
3.
So a Rose-bud does prepare,
To Salute the calmer Air:
Till some Envious Northern Gust,
Rends and spreads it in the Dust.
4.
Such, bright Infant, was thy Birth!
Such thy Parents Joy and Mirth;
Roses, Suns, and Days can be
But a Meiosis of thee.
5.
Such fair being! if so fair,
All thy Guardian Angels were.
Hide their Wings, and they will be styled,
Brothers to the lovely Child:
Whilst if he had Wingedbin,
All would think him Seraphim.
Humh! this Poetry and Flattery are inseparable, but Reader, there must be
grains of allowance, -- you must consider if I am called a Cherubim or
Seraphim, he only means a mortal one, besides I had then never had the
Smallpox, which, you know, makes a considerable difference both in Beauty of
Men and Women; and moreover, Age makes such odds in the same Face, that you would
swear it did not belong to the same person; -- for in your thoughts now to
compare the little muling Infant of an hour Old, and a span Long, little enough
to be put every scrap of me into a Quart-pot, as I really then was: To compare
that little Evander, and this great Evander, now the Cares of the World, Travel
and Age has altered him, and he looks not so Cherubinically as he did then;
you would hardly believe He was he, and I my self am ready to cry out, when I look
in the Glass and these Verses together, as Hellen did, -- Ego non sum Ego. But
there was an Epitaph made more merry, and less partial, only the two last
Verses seem added by some latter Hand, or else the Poet had the gift of
Prophecy; -- they are these.

Here lies a pretty little Knave,
In's Cradle dressing room and Grave;
Though over-small, not over-hot,
For it is a Quort-pot.
He winks, while he buried lies,
Least dusty Dust fly into his Eyes:
Which makes him ever since to wink,
When he goes to drink.
Well, methinks I have bin dead an unreasonable while, -- strike up Fiddler, as
in Rehearsal, for I can lie no -- longer, -- away Rambles my Nurse good Woman,
Father and all to a certain Quackess in the next Parish.

Where he is Born in a Coach, for a Cart was not handy,
And an old Woman fetched him again with good Brandy.
Yea, -- I say in a Coach, for by Mr. Poets leave, a Cart was neither Handy nor
Seemly, -- I leave that for him, if there is occasion, -- and so there is bob for
bob, -- not but that I honor and love the Gentleman with all my Heart; -- but
one good turn requires another, -- hang him that will not be merry with his
Friend, and such as give Joques, must take them: -- So -- I have Rambled out of
the way my self, and almost lost Cart and Coach too.

So ho! -- Coachman -- stop and take up one of the Company, -- well overtaken,
now I Am in again, -- and away they carried me as I was saying to the Learned old
Woman at the next Parish, who claps her Bottle to my little muzzle; had I bin
alive, I could nere have forgot how warm it was with carrying it in her
under-pocket, very near her painful Haunches; but to let that pass, it did the
feat. I came peeping into the World again, as brisk as a little Minew leaps up
at a Fly in a Summers Evening; and soon fall a tugging at my Nurses brown
Breasts, as hard as the Coun^ry fellows do the Bell-ropes on a Holy Day*
Methinks the sweet smack is hardly yet out of my Lips, and I Have a great fancy I
could suck still. Sure I have seen somewhat extremely like my greediness at
that time, -- O! I have it -- just, just by the Tail -- upon the Tip of my
Tongue, between my Teeth -- here it is: 'Twas like a horrid greedy fellow, I
have somewhere seen eating Custards, or plum-porridg, I cannot possibly tell
which, -- he had two Spoons, and large ones, -- so on he falls, and lays about
him like a Dragon, nor would so much as look, speak, or almost breath -- ti^^
finding the Spoons too tedious a way, down he throws, and at it with both Hands
-- down runs the Custard over his Beard into the Dish, and up again soon after,
-- Ay -- let them laugh that see it; but he empties the platter, and fills his
Belly before you could walk round the Room, -- just so did I, and this so often
and effectually at my Nurses Fair, Sweet, Snowey Bosom (though as I told you,
the Snow looked of a little dunnish Color, as if t'had bin -- trod upon) that I
began to burnish apace, and thrive amain, -- and had enough to let out as well
as to keep there, -- painting Maps in my Clouts almost every hour, of all those
Worlds I should afterward Ramble over.

Next I Rambled into my Chair with Wheels, then into my Leading strings, thence
into Breeches, to the extravagant Joy of my trembling Buttocks, -- for now I
thought my Father must say by your leave Son Evander, when he came to clench
his Instructions at the wrong end: And what happened after this, you shall know
if you will let me take Breath, and meet you again at the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Here with Cock-horse and Boots his Nurse is forthcoming,
Of his future Achievements the prosperous Omen;
The prophetical Shipton presenting the Baby
With a Staff that is his own, and a Sword too it may be.
THis Chapter is like to be kin to the Chapter of the Bull and the Unicorn in
Mahomets Alcoran, -- a Ramble from the very Contents, which I will not promise ye
you shall meet again after you have once left them, at least I can assure ye, I
find it necessary to expatiate, for as the Fellow said in Quixot, who blew up a
Dog like a Bladder, do you think it is nothing to write a Book?

I might probably have told you the Entertainment my Nurse and I made one
another, before I left her Tuition, in the last Chapter -- but O! my Mother, O!
my dearest Muz! why did you leave me? Why did you go so soon, so very soon
away, -- Nurses are careless, sad careless Creatures; and alas the young
Evander may get a knock in his Cradle if you dye and leave him to shift for
himself: Your Death leads me to the House of weeping; -- it spoils all my
Pastimes, dissipates all my Remains, kills all my Maggots -- persecutes me,
destroys me, makes a Martyr of me, and sets my very Brains a Rambling again, as
much as my Feet have been: -- But what does all this avail, -- could I get all
the Irish Howlers between Carickfergus, and the other side of Dublin to hoot and
hollow over her Grave, they would never bring her to Life again, -- for she was
dead. -- I forgot all this while to tell you that, forgive Reader the
Extravagance of my Grief; which leads my Fancy, and that my Memory along with
it, and then Judgment we know has such a dependence upon both, that in plain
English, I wish. I don't turn a mere Natural: -- I tell you again she is Dead --
what would you have, my Mother is Dead, and worse cannot happen unless Iris dye,
-- but alas -- she was then but an Egg -- or my Father, -- and he too is since
departed. Did the Roman Orator with so many Tears bemoan the Death of his
Virtuous Dear Mother, and shall not I, though no Roman, make as long an Oration
on a Mother, full as Dear, and full as Virtuous? But alas! Grief is tedious to
any besides those who feel it, who take a pleasure even in thus tormenting
themselves. Not therefore to acquaint the Reader with her Trances, Ecstasies,
and wondrous Visions in the other World, where she took Lodgings for three
days, and then out of tenderness, Rambled back again to see me her Dear
Evander. (The very thought of which -- does yet -- well, -- but I Am a Man)
which is sufficiently known to be true by all those that knew her:

Not, I say to force any thing on a Man's belief, which he himself has n't an
inclination to Swallow, I Will only tell you in brief, that my Dear Mother
Sicken'd and died, and came to Life again, just as they were putting her into
the Coffin to bury her; and Lives a fortnight, and then sicken and died again,
and was buried in good earnest, and almost broke my Heart, and my Fathers, though
little wretch as I was, I hardly then knew my loss, nor does the World yet know
it; but it shall if I can, do it. -- She was born, -- I will not tell you where,
for I Am ill-natured with my Sorrows: The Daughter of, -- I will not tell you who;
-- for if I prove otherwise than well, there will be a good Family Disgraced:
-- If you ask what she was, that I Will tell you, -- she was a Woman, yet no
Woman, but an Angel. I say an arrant Angel, as ever appeared upon this unworthy
Earth, only she assumed a real lasting Body; and continued in it some thirty or
forty years to teach the World Virtue, while other Angels use to make but
little stay among us, and then like Astrea, flew home again, because she found
the World Incorrigible.

She was the paragon of Perfection, and Loadstar of all Eyes and Hearts; and
well might my Dear Father Travel seven years after her Death, before he Married
again, for had he don't, not seven, nor seventeen, nor seventy, but seven
hundred, he would never have lit upon such another.

She was the pattern of Wives, Queen of Mothers, best of Friends, and indeed,
as my Father used to say truly of her, had all the Virtues of her Sex in her
little Finger; -- what had she then think ye all her Body over? To say more
than all, she was a very Iris, only a few years older, and well worthy to be
the Mother of Evander, were he but as worthy to be her Son. -- Nay -- but she
shall not think to escape without some Poetry on her Death, -- No, all my Relations
shall know what it is to have a Poet kin to 'em.

-- She did -- she did -- I saw her mount the Sky,
And with new Whiteness paint the Galaxy;
Heaven her methought with all its Eyes did view,
And yet acknow'edg'd all its Eyes too few.
Methought I saw in crowds blessed Spirits meet,
And with loud Welcomes her arrival greet;
Which could they grieve, had gone with grief away,
To see a Soul more white, more pure than they.
Earth was unworthy such a prize as this,
Only a while Heaven let us share the bliss. -- etc.
There are a great many more of 'em, but I don't love to gorge the Reader, whom
I rather choose always to leave with a Relish for his next Meal: I Will only
borrow his Patience, and a Friends Wit for an Epitaph, and then let her rest
'till she and I wake together.

Here lies Don Evander's Mother;
Death -- e're thou kill'^t such another,
Fair and good, and wise as she,
Time shall throw a Dart at thee.
In the last Chapter, I had clean forgot to give you the History of the second
Globe, which having such a direct aspect on the Body of all the following
Relation, and the Epitome of my Life, ought by no means to be omitted.

-- There you may see, if you will take the pains but to turn over to the
Frontispiece, my old Crone of a Nurse, ay and such a Nurse as I Would not envy
Jupiter his she-goat who suckled him, in a kind of Rapture and Prophecy,
presenting the Furniture of my future Life -- the Tools I was to set up with in
the universal Trade of Rambling; a Hobby- Horse, which you will see will one of
these days cast his Tail, and have four Legs start out in the room on it: A
pair of little Boots -- yet a great deal too big for my little Legs -- A Staff
-- for sometimes I paid it on Ten-toes -- though that has a stronger twang of
Sancho than his Master, and is directly against the most sacred Rules of Knight
Errantry, and never to be done, unless in a Pilgrimage, or on a Vow never more
to bestride a Horse again, 'till that of the flaming Giant, Sir
Fundermundando's, won in Mortal Battle -- as you may read at large in Don
Bellianis of Greece, or the seven Champions.

-- But I don't well understand what comes after -- there seems a little
malicious sting in the Tail on it -- A Sword too it may be -- Why does he think
I Will Ramble without a Sword -- or does he make a may be on it, whether I shall
ever have one of my own?

Now dare I venture a shoulder of Mutton to a penny Commons, that 'twas some
Shcollard or other writ these Verses, who finding at the University they had
but one Sword belonging to one College, and a pair of Boots between three
more, which they ride out with by turns, while the other stay at home in their
own defense, concluded strait that things went at the same rate all the World
over; -- No, Sir Author, as pert as you are, I tell you I have a Sword of my
own, and that those may know too who know me -- or you either Sir, I Will assure
ye Sir, for my Friends Cause is my own -- and it is at your Service, Sir,
whenever you please to make use of it.

Being thus provided and equipped Cap-a-pe in a Travelers Garb, Pen and Ink in
one Pocket, and Bread and Cheese in the other -- not in specie -- No -- Heroes
don't use to be mean -- but in a parcel of Gray-Groats and Edward Shillings,
tied up in the corner of my Handkerchief, my Daddy and I turned one side upon
Graffham, the place of my Birth, and away we troopt to another where we had
more business -- but I war'nt ye I have Wit enough to keep all close, and not
let you know what 'twas; this however I care not if I tell you -- that the very
hopes of Rambling, the Prospect of seeing a new Part of the World, or indeed a
New World to me, striking upon the strings of my Soul, before wound to the same
pitch, made most charming Music, and had you seen then the young Evander --
who now he sets up for Rambling indeed, does a new thing, and gets a
Horseback, is resolved to have a New Name too, and henceforth when he thinks
fit be called KAINOPHILVS; had you but seen what a brisk Air he then put on,
how lively and rosy he looked -- how sweet and how charming -- well -- but I
say no more -- being I say about to leave my beloved Graffham, I cannot but give
you and Posterity some account of it, as my famous Predecessor Coriat did of
Odcomb, which indeed does strangely agree with the Place of my Nativity -- But
the Excellencies of it being too large to be contained in a corner, or crowded
up in a piece of a Chapter, they shall have a whole one to themselves, that
immediately following.

CHAP. IV.
The Description of
-- The fine Town of Graffham -- the best in the Shire on it,
And a famous Town it is, if you ever did hear on it --
FRom henceforward Reader, don't expect I should give every distinct Ramble a
distinct Chapter, for truly I cannot afford it any longer; for the Chapters
being heavy things, and the Rambles brisk little airy Creatures, the last run
away so fast, and scamper about at such a mad rate, that the first, do what
they can, cannot keep pace with 'em, being besides a great many, one still
begetting another, and running all different ways from one another.

-- O but Graffham -- my dear Graffham -- I have not forgot thee -- No -- sooner
shall my Toes forget the use of Rambling, my Fingers of Writing, or my Teeth of
eating. I am resolved to write thy Memoirs with all the accuracy possible, both
for thy sake and my own --

First and mainly indeed -- that after Ages may know where I was born, and what
place was first so happy to claim my Nativity, nor leave Graffham, Aston,
Chessham, London, Boston, Col^n, Amsterdam, and half a hundred Places more a
quarreling for me to fifty Generations hence, as the Cities of Greece do for
Homer.

Graffham was the Place -- but what was this Graffham? I Will tell you if you
have Patience, but have a Care of Envy.

The least I can say in its Praise is this --

If wholesome Air, Earth, Woods, and pleasant Springs,
Are Elements whereby a Town is graced,
If strong and stately Bowers Contentment brings,
Such is the Town of Graffham, and so placed:
There Nature Art, Art Nature has embraced,
Without, within, below, aloft, complete;
Delight and State are there both interlac'd,
And Forrune smiles to make all fair and great.
There Houses are with Histories repleat,
Divine, Humane, all mutual Pleasures giving,
With work so lively, -- exquisite and neat,
As if Man's Art made Mortal Creatures living.
Pleasure it self does here in triumph ride,
To make the Place the ground of all her Pride.
When Brass did on the Golden Age intrude,
A happy Fate sure did this place seclude;
Where every Look does feast the curious Eye,
And bids the Soul gaze on eternally.
The naked Rocks are not unfruitful here,
But at some certain seasons every year,
Their barren tops with lushious Food abound,
And with the Eggs of various Fowls are crowned.
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime,
None sickly live, or dye before their time.
Several Excellencies there are from whence any Place uses to be commended by
Authors, few or none of which but exactly agree to that of my Nativity -- and
the first of them is -- Air -- that Dish we feed on every Minute, and that
without surfeiting, unless it gets into the Head or Belly; and this Nature has
so obliged the Town of Graffham with, that she has no need to send for Bottled
Air home, nor send her Natives abroad to a healthier place than her own, when
out of order.

The second thing that does even nobilitate our little Parish, is their Wool
-- Now you know what a splutter formerly there was about this Subject: An
honest Fellow had got him a couple of fat Weathers, and to keep 'em safe,
secured 'em in a Garden, just of the outside of 's House -- but all would n't
do, for the Argonauts, a company of Sheep-stealers as they were, having smelt
out where they grazed, seized upon 'em all, and for what Reason or Cause but
the excellency of the Wool, as well as the sweetness of the Mutton -- on both
which Accounts they were called -- The Golden-Fleece.

You have heard of Miletus I Am sure, you I mean my Learned Readers, though you
cannot tell where to find it now, -- one of the most famous Cities of Greece,
Mother that she was of Eighty Colonies; not was it less renowned for the
fineness of her Wool than for the Stateliness of her Buildings.

They may talk of the Royal Purple, and precious Scarlet, and Tyrtan Die, and I
know n't what Fiddle-faddles -- but what color amongst 'em all can compare
with native Innocence? and for that -- trust Graffham, show for show, against
all the world: -- Here Is that shall challenge Lemster, Cotswold, and all the
Wolds and Downs in England, as white as Honor, Chastity and Virtue, and as
pure as the Body and Soul of the beautiful Iris.

The third is, the tallness, altitude, or Maypolosity of our Church and
Steeple, erected so loftily, (as how can it choose? being at the top of a Hill,)
as that it appears the very Metropolitan of all the little Villages which like
Handmaids wait at awful distance about us. What care I for their Steeple-
crowned Pharos, that looked a hundred mile round -- or the Monumental Mumglass
-- that pretty Stripling of 24 Years growth, which, as the Fellow said of the
Ship, If it grows at this rate till it is a hundred year old, what a Monster
will 't be! Let Bow-steeple, and Salisbury Steeple, and Grantham Steeple run to
Seed as far as they will, and give the very Clouds a Glyster, or rather
Suppositor, -- I say Graffham Steeple is Graffham Steeple still -- and there is
an end on it.

The Fourth is, -- The Excellency of the Soil, which is so fat and lushious
that it does even flow with Milk and Honey, not to mention Curds and
Butter-milk, You may think this is a Poetical rant, but it is as true as I ever
was in Boston; for I remember very well, my Father kept seven Cows in
Glebe-field, besides a Red-Cow in the Close behind the Parsonage-house, and a
Bull in the Common, and it is hard luck if out of all them we had not milk
enough without scoring up behind the Door.

And for Honey, we had a whole street of little Thatcht Houses by the side of
our Orchard-wall, where, if the Reader will not believe there is Honey, let him go
thrust his Head in and taste it, where he 'll find a company of little angry
Gentlemen within will abundantly satisfy him of the truth of what I have
asserted.

Next for the variety of our sweet and wholesome Springs, distributed by the
prudent Artifice of old Dame Nature into sundry convenient places of our
Palaces: Some issuing out of an opake Concave, as if once the Nymphs kept Court
in the inside: Others dribling down daintily from the worn face of an old Rock,
whose blubbered Cheeks were always troubled with a Rheumatism. Some again just
peeping out of ground through a company of Pebbles, you would think 'em only the
sweat of the Earth, and growing still stronger and stronger, at last increase
to that Bulk, that by intercepting its crystal waves, and circumobjecting
Clods of Earth and Hurdles, the Country Swains, made thereof a Mathematical
Engine called a Sheep-pond, which none has better reason to remember than
Kainophilus, who at a certain Sheep-Sheering getting hold of a Sturdy-Ram, was
hurried away by the obstreperous Creature, and both together sous'd over head
and ears in the imprisoned Waters, -- I have good reason too to remember that,
-- for when I came Home dripping all the way, -- my Father gave me a
Remembrance which sufficiently warmed my inside though it did not dry that
without.

Now the Sixth thing for which our Town of Graffham is remarkably
recommentlable, is their famous Breed of Horses. O with what inexpressible
content and satisfaction have I seen those Cicurable Animals, hearken to the
sweet Instructions of his Rustical Curator? Shall I ever forget those ravishing
Accents, -- Ree -- Gee -- hoe Mather -- and the rest of 'em. Well -- these
Horses are certainly very docible Creatures, especially our Graffhamites, and
deserve for ought I know to be placed in the Skies, as well as either Pegasus
or Pacolets. -- But now we talk of Horses, what think you of that famous
Grecian Horse, called Bucephalus the Great, a true Pad to the scarce greater
Alexander, -- and yet these brave Creatures ben^t, always the wisest, -- for
that silly Animal was frighted at his own shadow, and flung, and flounc'd about
like a mad thing, -- whereas to my knowledge it is not a small matter will fright
our more generous Graffham-Horses, which are so far from Inclinations to
scampering, that I have seen 'em stand as indifferent and careless under Whip,
Spur, Staff and Wand, as if they were above the brutall methods of Force and
Violence, and I Would fain know what Horse is fit for a War-Horse, if not such a
one as will not stir an inch though he feels a Lump of Steel in the very Guts of
him.

But more than Horses, Wells, Springs, Rivers, Churches, Steeples and all, is
that most amiable Vmity, Peace, Amity and Love, which time out of mind has made
its Halcion -- nest in my fine Town of Graffham. Who ever heard of Armies
against Armies there, as in Rome, Jerusalem, Paris, and many greater Cities,
that are old and big enough to have more wit. Or to come nearer home, -- do we
use to quarrel for Shrieves, Lord Mayors, and Common-Council-men, and call Thou
Rogue, and thou Fool? -- No, -- catch us at that and hang us, -- Do but see how
infectious these foul great places are. There Is Branford now, which one would
think were a peaceable dusty place enough, and yet every body has heard of the
three Kings of Brandford at one time. -- O abominable, -- and them whole Armies
Incognito at Knightsbridg, and the Hammersmith Brigade, and I know not what, --
whereas the oldest man in Graffham never remembers an Army there, either
Cognito or Incognito, nor any other of their barbarous wicked ways, nor ever
knew above one King at a time since the Creation of the World, -- though a
parlous pestilent Fellow here, that don't live very many Miles off, would
persuade us simple Volk that we have got two Kings now, -- one that has good
handvast already, and 'tother that must have it when he can catch it, -- but one's
enough at one time, and God send we may have n'ere another this hundred year.

One Excellency more it has -- of which very briefly -- for -- for a word to
the wise, -- that is, -- It Is the birthplace of Evander. -- And O that he
could but have ^^aid there, and they still been happy in one another!

Oh if kind Heaven had been so much my Friend,
To make my Fate upon my Choice depend,
All my Ambition I would here confine
And only this Elisium should be mine,
See Reader what a value I have for it, my Love to my Country even checks my
Love to Rambling. One tugs one way, 'tother tugs 'tother, as if I was tearing
in pieces with wild-Horses. And yet methinks at Graffham, my dear Graffham I
was ever Rambling; -- 'twas always new, 'twas a mere Map of Iris, 'twas, 'twas
-- nay I can go no further. And indeed all great generous Souls, though they like
the Sun have a kind aspect for all the World, yet like him too, they favor
some beloved place more than others, if they love their particular Parents,
their Country which is their Common Parent, challenges too their love, -- and
in both Cases, not only Gratitude and Interest, but even Nature knits the bond,
and it must be a very high injury indeed, if any at all, which ought to dssolve
the last, tho the first should cease: for as that witty Rogue Lucian, the very
Roger of his Age, -- (...). (Not to venture any further in Greek; lest I should
slip in over head and ears before I Am aware, and then how shall I get out
again:) The very Smoke of our own Country is more dear, and looks brighter
than the very Fire of another. [There's Sense for ye now, in English, Greek and
Latin, or shall be before I Have done.]

O Graffham, Graffham! I say still, let all the World say what they will, my
Country is the best Country, the sweetest Country, the bravest, rarest,
gaudiest Country all the World over. Let the Laplander admire his own airy
Fields and close Habitation, which none but the Devil and he would dwell in, --
I say give me Graffham, -- let the Frenchman say Nature never made a Country
so happy as his own, -- Let him live upon Grapes and Frogs, the Italian praise
his Sallats, and the Butter-box his Herring, -- O but give me a Surloyn of
Graffham Beef, -- there is Beef, -- there is Fat, -- there is -- Pig and Pork, --
Cut and come again, -- well there is never a Great Turk of 'em all, neither he at
Constantinople, nor the other at Paris, that lives half so well as our
Churchwardens of Graffham, -- I know it -- never tell me, -- it has not its
fellow again: -- Welsh-Leeks, -- Irish-Potatas, Cornish Fumades, Scotch-Cakes,
-- Rocks, Hills, Mines, Loughs and Bogs, -- let 'em all ^ry their own is best,
-- I will not much quarrel with 'em for that, so they will all confess mine is
better, -- Ay -- let 'em e^'e be all Viceroys still, so I Am but Viceroy over
'em. -- So noble was that Speech of a dying Hero, -- I have always loved my
Country much more than my Life. So generous were the brave Old Romans, so
Fortunate withal -- they were indeed, as Iuvenals says greatly of one of 'em,
Magni animi prodigi, -- Even prodigal of their great Souls, and lavish of their
Lives, (perfect Evanders,) when their dear Country wanted 'em. -- One Throws
himself amidst his Enemies, the other leaps headlong into the midst of a fiery
Gulf, -- Curtius all armed to the black breach did ride -- Where alas! ah
where shall we find the like now, except at Graffham? I cannot hold in this
Handmaid, Muse, (I must get a Curb-bridle for her,) but she will run away with
me upon this Subject, and Good-b'uy Reader, for you are n't like to set sight
on me again, till the next Chapter.

Where are you all, you mighty Sons of Fame,
Whose Deathless deeds secured your Deathless name?
Whose Memory, spite of time and age survives,
Who when your Country asked 'em, scorned your lives;
Lived you alone in Monkish Tale and Fable,
At good K. Arthurs Court, and famed round Fable?
Or will not Agincou^t and Cresny tell,
What grovelling Conquered France then knew too well
When a small Troop of English Hero's stood,
Half drowned both in their own and Enemies blood;
Whilst the thick slain Carcasses that floated there,
Like Bridges them to Victory did bear.
O Courey! Talbot! Englands pride and Love,
Could you look down from your blessed Seats above,
Whose Looks, whose Names, when them they saw and feared,
Their Armies and their very Champions scared;
Could you look down from that calm blissful place,
On a degenerate cursed apostate race;
Who would for an old rotten Idol sell
To France their Bodies, and their Souls to Hell?
How would you blush lest it should there be known,
And hardly now your once-lov'd Country own!
-- But then a far more pleasing Glance bestow
Upon your fellow-Conquerors below.
There Fate draws near -- and now he lands, and now
Kneels on the Shore, and pays his second vow.
There, there he charged and shook the trembling ground
With sweat and dust and blood encompassed round.
See Courey see, -- to well known Bogs they run,
The Birds abscond before the rising Sun.
See Talbot, see thy Countrymen advance
Their conquering Standards on the Shores of France,
Now a fit match for England, strong and proved,
While Europes groans for vengance call aloud,
O happy he who their cursed Fields shall burn,
Shall blo^d for blood, and fire for fire return!
The God-like-man, shall crush that hellish crew,
Shall raise the oppressed, the oppressors shall subdue;
He happy too who there with crowds oppressed,
Shall lay his honorable Bones to rest;
Or he who over a Breach or Bulwark flies,
Shoots Death amongst 'em all, and conquering Dies.
CHAP. V.
A little more of Rambling in general. School-Rambles, and my being in danger
two or three times of Rambling out of the World.

I Say, as well as Thomas Sternhold -- Give me the World full wide. For had n't
I bin a strange Creature, had I continued penned up in a Quartpot ever since I
had been born, to peep and Mutter there, like a familiar Spirit shut up in a
Bottle; Love my Country I do, even, I think (I Would speak cautiously,) to fighting
for it -- so far I Am sure I do, but whether farther than about the Edges of that
terrible business, I cannot be positive, -- only I hope, as every good Citizen,
Regimented or not, that there will be no occasion for it. -- And who but
ill-meaning men, wish War so near our Gates that we should go out and meet it?
But notwithstanding all that, and more I could say, -- Rambling is still a
pretty thing, a very pretty thing truly, much improving the knowledge,
increasing the Experience, confirming the Judgment, strengthening, polishing and
burnishing both body and mind; it has made some Cheeks that shall be nameless
as bright as the Sun to my knowledge, and much of the same Color: What says
Herbert? Active and Rambling Spirits live alone,
Write on the other -- Here lies such an one.


-- Or something like it, for I have not the Book by me, I say again, -- who (but
an Old man) would live like the Old man of Verona? -- Come I Will tell you the
Story, because it is a pretty one, and every body don't know it. Once upon a
time there was an Old Man, a very Old Man Sir, that lived at Verona (or Millan
'twas, I cannot tell which,) and there this Old Man Sir, had never bin out of
this City all the days of his Life, -- was n't that a very strange thing? but
'twill be stranger yet. So Sir it fell out that once upon a time, O! but I
should have told ye before, that he was three score, -- I think 'twas
threescore, -- ay threescore years old. Now this Old Man Sir, as I was saying,
of threescore years old, had never bin without the Gates of the City in all
his Life: -- Did you ever hear the like? So Sir upon this the Duke of Millain,
if 'twas Millain, hearing of this strange Old Man Sir, was resolved to try
Experiments, and therefore forbid him as he hoped to live, not to stir one foot
out of the City upon pain of Death. Now what does this Old-Fool Sir do, but
because he could not Ramble abroad, though he'ed n'ere any mind to it before, but
now 'twas forbidden Sir, only because 'twas forbidden, had a months mind to go
out of Town, and because he could n't do it, took pet upon it, and broke's heart
Sir, and died; -- so there is an end of one that like a Snail would keep at
home while he might have Rambled, and could not do it when he would have don't.
And a fair warning it is to all such as are Enemies to Rambling: -- now what
Fools these great Loobies are that always lie at home in Chimny corners, to
observe I say what silly Loobies they are, I say not only Hee-Loobies but
Shee-Loobies, -- why they have no more wit in 'em than my Grannies Gozlin. I
warn't ye one Kainophilus, who has bin improving his parts abroad, would make
Fools of one and thirty of 'em bundled up together. Come I Will tell ye another
Story, that ye may see what Fools they are. There was a Woman lived at
Taunton-Dean: -- ye have heard zhure of Taunton-Dean, it is one o^ the bigst
Towns in all Zummerit-Zhire. Zoo Zur, this zame Woman having never avore bin
above a stones julk, or a Quoits cast out of her Parish bounds, happened to have
a young Vellow come a Zutering to her, a matter of zum twenty mile off, at
Cheeard 'twas, or thereabout; and zoo Zur at last it came about that a got hurs
and her Vathers Conzent, and Married hur, and zoo when a had Married hur, a zet
hur behind^un, and carried hur away to Ceeard. Zoo as they were a joalting to
joulting along upon the Kings Highway, and still went under and vurder, She
great Vool, that had never bin haaf zoo vur zuns she worcester abore, skream'd out to
un, and cried -- Why our Ian! what dozt meean to do, what dozt think to Cart me
to the Worlds eeand? Ian he whickered and laughed, zoo aded, till he almost
bewrayed a'z zel, zoo he ded, but at last a little about an hour by Zun, he got
ar hooam -- and then toald ar -- Why thou great Ooaf, dozt think we be come
near the Worlds-cand yet, why man the World is a hundred times zoo long as it is
twixt Taunton-Dean and Cheeard. Zavetly, zavetly Ian! keh hur again toon, and
chill tell thee zoo much Ian! wort' my Huzbon, chud zea thou wort as voul great
a Lyard as any in all theck World thou taakst of.

Now at this silly rate should a man talk that had never Traveled any further
than on a Processioning day, nor Rambled beyond the Hen-r^osts, or robbing
Orchards. -- But now a man that improves his time and youthful years as some
have done that shall be nameless, -- why he is Company for e're a King in
Christendom, ay and in Pagandom too -- as you will see when you come to America.

-- But being now describing my fuvenile Rambles, though I Will not trouble the
Reader with every Expedition I made a Nutting, or Birds-nesting, nor intend to
take any care how to bring my self from the last place I was rambling to, I can
by no means omit telling him what I promised (and I Am famous for keeping my
word,) what I promised him in the Contents of this Chapter, -- and account of
my Rambles to School, and from one to 'tother, and 'tother, to the next, and so
on, -- nor of my two or three Rambles I was just entering upon into 'tother
World. The names of my Schoolmasters were Mr. A. B. C. D. and almost all the
Chriss-cross-row over, but for the most part such Vinegar-faced, Mustard-nosed
Fellows, -- such heavy handed, thick Fingered, Foot-fisted Rascals, -- ay if I
am n't even with 'em, -- now it is my time, -- Ill yerk 'em -- back I Will scourge
'em as bad as they e're did me, or the Dr. of Paul's School his Maid Gillian, --
Come -- down with your Breeches you old Fornicators, you Inquisitors, you musty
Batchelers, you Goldfinders, you Men-floggers, you posterior-sweepers, -- to
Horse brave boys to Horse -- so there is one, two, three, twenty; d^ye ^^ince?
-- do you caper very well? -- remember when I did the like, when you made me hate
Lilly more than the great Turk, and poor Priscian that never did me any wrong,
though I did him, as bad as the Devil: -- So, are you penitent? -- kiss the Rod
-- all of ye -- one after another: -- how! stubborn -- Ha -- Ha, dye Rebel? --
up again -- O! are ye come to your selves? -- very well -- go get you into your
places, and as you like this come for more on it. Now Reader! don't you see the
very Picture of your self and what you have suffered, as I by these unchristian
pedagogues? Dos n't every fiber of your Buttocks tremble, as Busby's boys do
when they meet him again, as often as you reflect how often those filthy Fellows
have bin peeping in 'em? well I Am heartily glad I e're learnt to write, if
'twere for no other end than thus to paint these grim Fellows to the World in
their own Colors, and those as stinking ones as they e're made me paint my
Breeches with.

Thus will I them whip, strip and quarter,
Who my poor Buttocks once did martyr.
Alas that is not the way to deal with humane Nature, there requires a great
deal of art to form such tender things as youth. I Am very confident the Reason
why we speak no more Latin, nor more fluently in England, is because these
Intendants of Schoolmasters Dragoon us thus out of our Mother Tongue, -- they
use us not like rational Creatures. -- A Dog that is taught to fetch and carry,
has more sweet words, and sewer sour knocks and blows, than we poor Curs
generally meet withal, which before we can come to taste the sweets of Learning
and good Authors, sets us against even what ever looks like a Book, -- (so that
indeed I wonder how I came so much as to trade in 'em.)

Not but that I justly honor and respect those ingenious men, who little other
than devote themselves for their Countries sake to beat Greek and Latin, as
Oldham wittily calls it, and drive Learning, if possible, into such Block-heads
as I was -- not. Who by mild Arts, and attempring their Methods to the
disposition of the Lads they have to deal with, can do more in four years with
'em, than others in seven, ten, or ten hundred. The Happiness of those Youth
who fall into such hands, is more than they are sensible of; and it is confessed
the Reason why so many Tyrants, Fools and Dunces, who usurp that honorable
Employment is because the World has seldom wit enough to give such as are
otherwise their due respect and encouragement.

However it is, happy was I when my Father took me home out of their Purgatory,
and taught me himself -- But first I must tell you what were my chiefest
Rambles while in their Jurisdiction.

Two or three I had which were like to be very long ones, I being just upon the
Tiptoe to see my great Grandfathers.

One day while at School (at Dungrove, the place where I now boarded) returning
home about the time that Sols fiery footed Steeds began to make the Ocean hizz
with thrusting their hoofs into it, being attended with all my play-fellows,
(for they honored me) after we had embraced one another, (for we were civil)
and taken a kind Farewell, which had like to have been our last: As I was
Rambling home by a straggling River, that sneaks through the Town of [Latmus]
and gazing sometimes on the lofty Hills and flowery Dales, and sometimes on the
stately Swans that did now in Triumph ride in the Sedg^s of the meandring
Streams, (I think those Swans were Geese though, to tell truth) and by and by
listening to those feathered people that were warbling out their ravishing
Ditties in a sull^n Grove, and coo and coo unto each others moan, -- Owls,
Cuckoes, Phoenicopters, Rooks and Phoenixes -- why just then, all of a sudden,
before I could say what is this, or knew where I was, my Noddle now swimming
with a million of Fancies, (as I always had a very working Brain,) and I not
minding my way, in tumbled I into the River, hugging the waves so tenderly, you
cannot imagine -- But not to tell you what Discourse the Water-Nymphs and I had
together, how they took me down with 'em to their External Palaces, and
Seagreen dining Rooms, all hung with watchet Silk, and decked with Coral and
Mother of Pearl, I Will warr'nt you the cheapest thing amongst it: Not to puzzle
or Gagg your belief with such odd Accidents -- this I Am sure you will all credit
-- that when I was under water, I was in danger of drownding, and had I
continued there but one four and twenty hours, I had certainly been dead to
this day, -- and there had been an end of Kainophilus and all his Rambles: --
but as my better Stars would have it, who should lie sleeping just by the
waterside, but one Mr. I. R. (not James Rex, but another whose Name begins
with the same Letters) methinks I have him still before my Eyes, -- how he
startled when I flounc'd into the Water, thinking belike t'had been some
Spaniel Dog or other, -- how after I was under Water, he got upon his Breech,
rubbed his Eyes, and looked about him to see what was the matter, (for he has
told me all the story since) and lastly how he saw my Heels capering up, like
the Handle of a Milk-^ail when carried away by the stream, and catching me hold
by the left Leg, pulled me out in spite of half a Tun of water both in my
Clothes and Belly, and held me up by the Heels so long till I thought my Guts
would have dropped out at my Mouth, or at least I should have gone to Stool at
the wrong end. Nor yet could I find 'i' my heart to be angry with him, so
grateful is my Nature, for thus saving my Life, when I was within six Gasps
precisely of feeding the Fishes: -- I say precisely, for sure I should best
know the measure of my own Belly, for that must unavoidably have burst with six
go-downs more of that uncomfortable Element: -- So there is an end of that
Ramble; Fate held its own, and he that is born to dye in his Bed, shall never
be drowned.

But alas, alas! how various are the chances that assail us mortal men! -- how
constant is Fate in Inconstancy (that Flower I had out of English, Parnassus:)
Another sad accident showed I was Bullet-proof as well as water-Proof -- for
playing with a particle of Lead by Liquefaction and Comprehension upon
condensation metamorphiz'd into a globular Form, or as I said before, a
Leaden-bullet, not chawing it to shoot any body with, on my honor; the
Pontcullis not being shut down close enough in it, rolls at the Gate of my
Stomach, and stopped all passage of breath it self -- Now while I was snorting
and snufling, grunting and groaning --

When Death in Leaden slumbers hovered ore,
My strength decayed, and I could strive no more,
Then lo a-gentle M. G.
Maid from Heaven sent,
Thr^st down up* Throat a natural Instrument
Called her forefinger, and with many a thump
Against my groaning back, and sounding rump,
To her much joy, and my no little pain,
Up with a jerk the Bullet leapt again.
But think ye this is all -- no -- Death has n't yet done wi' me, and I was
just turning over by an odder whim than either of these: -- For as I was
expatiating in Dungrove Fields, my Mind and Body rambling alike, neither cared
or knew whether, I out of a Childish wantonness gathered a bearded Ear of Grass
or Corn, and put it into my Throat, thrusting it down so far, that when I went
to pull it up again, being against the grain, there it stuck and might have
done till 't had grown again, for I could n't wag it, any more than a poor
Gudgeon get out the Beard of a Hook after he has swallowed the fallacious Bait
and that together with it.

While I lay in this condition, sprawling and kicking, and staring and
stinking, what do me my kind Angel, but sends by at that time several of my
Relations, who accidently were jogging that way, -- who seeing me make so many
faces, but such wry ones, as showed I was not very merrily disposed, alighted
to my relief, and with much ado writhed the barbed Arrow, winged with so many
Deaths, out of my Throat again.

Anacreon died, O hone, O hone!
By the blunt Dart of a Grape-stone,
Adrian our Countryman the Pope,
Was choakt with Fly -- sad! not with Rope:
Stronger than both Evander's Fate,
By bearded Wheat sent to Deaths Gate;
And when he knocked at Gate of the Dead,
Death out oth' wicket thrust her head,
And opening boney Iaws thus sed,
It Is the third time, bold Youth! ^beware,
No more I catch you Rambling here!
Fate nibling at thy Throat has bin
Now thrice at least -- but still within.
I warn thee well -- look sharp about,
Lest next time it should come without.
There Is no need of your warning, Death, nor of the Dogrel Poet that speaks for
you, -- take you care of hanging, and I Will warn't I Will slip my Neck out of the
Collar well enough.

But soon after this last disaster, I begun to consider that I was now hop,
stride and jumpt into the Teens, and 'twas therefore high time to leave the
place where I had been so long imprisoned, and Ramble some where else. And
indeed I never loved constraint from my Infancy: That which I can otherwise
naturally and easily do, if it once come to be imposed, though by me upon my
self, though the most necessary Offices, I can hardly persuade my Body to it: The
very Members whereof, over which a Man has a particular Power and Jurisdiction,
sometimes refuse to obey (ah treacherous faithless Creatures -- they deserve to
be amputated for their Rebellion --) when I enjoin the most necessary, most
pleasing services at a certain hour, for the compulsive appointment baffles and
confounds them and me, -- and they immediately shrink up and excuse themselves
so you would wonder at it, either through Fear, or Spite, or Shame, I cannot tell
whether.

This constraint I was now freed from, and set up for a new Ramble with some of
my Relations who came to fetch me home; but should I relate all the mournful
Stories, and passionate Tears included in my bidding dear Chesham Farewell; how
many Bushel of Tears I wept; how many Seas I and my Friends rained in one
another bosom-(for after all the Love to Rambling, 'twas hard to part with
'em,) and how many Clouds and Hurricanes my sighs formed themselves into when
they got vent, and Rambled in the open Air; I verily believe t'wou'd swell this
Book into as many Folio's, as 'twill now be lesser Volumes.

I Will therefore wave 'em all at present, and only acquaint you that a fine
Sunshine Morning 'twas when I first set out again a Rambling, the Air was
perfumed with the sweet odours which (for that was the place I was now leaving)
the Sun exhaled from the bosom of the fertile Earth, oill it smelt as fragrant
as the breath of an Iris. The Birds whistled like any Carter, and the^e was
scarce a Hedge I passed, but welcomed me with new Songs, either from the two
winged or (...)-legged Birds that fate upon or under them. Never Traveller met
me, but most complais^ntly wished me good speed, and good enough I had on it, who
must Ramble round the World, before I rest my wearied Carcass. O how daintily
were the Medows and Roads crowded every where with Cowslips and Cow-T -- s,
D^^sies and Horse-Dung; nay, that is a very wholesome smell -- and as well as
the other, is a very good, of a pop^lous, well-traded, well managed Country. Nor
did any thing now trouble me, except my leaving my Dear Friends behind me, but
that I saw no^ Travelers enough to gather up those (...) I saw in the way (I
mean the sweet ones.) Thus pleasantly Traveled I and my Country Company, till
being arrived near the end of our intended Journey, we chopped upon a young Spark
near the end of a little Village we were passing through, who seemed to have been
born to better Fortune than he then possoss'd. He had a certain wild gaye^y in
his Looks, or rather the ruins of it, for 'twas clogg`d and broken with
after-misfortunes. He had oftentimes it seems in his younger years, and that
not long ago, (for he could scarce be above Twenty) transmuted a House into a
Hoggs-head, and many a flock of Sheep and drove of fat Oxen into Flasks of
Wine, and Bottles of Gla^et, till all being gone, he was at last reduced to
such extremity as to live on the frozen Charity of those who had known him in
his better Fortune. Do You k^ow that Person, quo^ one of the Company to me? No I
answered, how should I, never having seen him before? -- Why, says he again,
It Is the Prodigal Son of Mr. -- of -- who as young as he is, has already spent
Five hundred a year in drink: -- which was not spoken so low but the forlorn
Pilgrim overheard him, and turning back, briskly replied again, Yes, that have
I, Sir, and am Aerie still. -- Which unexpected sharp Repartee so pleased us,
that we took him into a kind of a Crab-Tavern, and giving him share in half a
dozen Bottles of Claret, left him as great as a King, and as happy for a few
hours, as if he had his Five hundred a year again: -- Well thought I in my
little head, this shall be a fair Warning to me, if ever I get five hundred a
year, or a thousand either, never to spend it so foolishly as this Fellow has
done, and be every Body's Iester, to fill his lean Belly.

Well, at last we are come to Tonsa, and my Fathers house, whose blessing I
ask't upon my bended knees, with humility enough to put pride out of
Countenance, for I can stoop you must ^now, when Duty or good manners require
it, but I am as stiff as a Stake, and my Hamms as obdurate as a Spaniards,
where I meet with a proud Fellow, whom I have no Obligation to flatter or
Honor. I did as much to my new Mother, and almost half a hundred
Grandfathers, and great Grand-mothers, saluting likewise in the most count,
and yet ample manner, all those, not a few Well-beloveds, whom I found there
met to congratulate my arrival -- but what is this to you, perhaps you may ask
me? Ay, but it is a great deal to me, and a very considerable part of my Life,
for as you will find the Plot thickens apace, and the hinge of all my future
Fortunes is just upon turning -- For here my Father himself taking me to task,
and instructing me with a mildness and gravity peculiar to our Family, both
inthe Languages and Arts, had if possible made me a Scholar: For which he had
all along designed me, hoping as much from my blooming presages, as from all my
Learned Predecessors, who had bin Scholars for ought I know e're since Adam,
I Am sure much longer than I can remember.

He found me soon, if without a Solaecism, in modesty of my self I may say it,
as extremely industrious: so not altogether indocil. For, being entirely
submissive to his Inclinations, I resolved, had he pleased, to have been a
Scholar in spite of nature, and accordingly advance I did, but at a very
uncomfortable rate, much as fast as a Cart with half a wheel broke off. For the
truth is, the sprightfulness and vigor of my Soul, being by the severity of my
former Master, either damm'd up, and quite extinguished, or else turned another
way from Learning, toward some more Rambling Entertainment, it could not be
expected I should do any great wonders. He tried me then at the Arts and
Sciences, giving me a little smack of all to see whether that would make me
more in love with Learning; but alas! all was the same. I only could beat
enough of 'em into my head to laugh or rail at 'em a little; which way you will
find by and by I shall exercise (either my Memory, or) my Invention.

My Father at last finding all his Drudgery and mine was in vain, and being
rather willing to make a Golden Tradesman than a Wooden Parson of me, he e'ne
at last agreed to my longing desires, and gave the long expected word, That I
should be an Apprentice.

But not a little nasty Country Apprentice, in some dingy hole of a Town not
half so big as Little-Britain, or Duck-Lane; no, that had been the ready way to
have set my great Soul a rambling away, and carry my little Body upon the back
on it, as soon as e're I came thither; and that too, never to return, never to
return, never to return to my place again -- but before -- cry-mercy, I was
stumbled into the purlieus of an old Song, and could n't find the way out again.

'Twas not, I say, in some narrow mean Country Town, but the famous and gallant
City of LONDON, where he had designed to plant the Hopes of his Family; nor
there neither in any of those dark holes before mentioned, but even in the very
Front, the Cream, the Heart, the choicest picked and culled part of the City,
Cheapside; nor there to a little sneaking What do you lack Trade, but to a
glorious, learned, stately -- hold there -- while it is is it is my own -- you
shall even picked out your self if you will have it. When things were once brought
to this pass, guess you whether I knew what to do with my self for Joy -- alas!
I forgot to eat, sh -- spit, pick my ears, blow my nose, or wash my face, for
almost a fortnight after. I tell you, I did not know where I was no more than a
Goose, nor whether I stood upon Land or Water.

You cannot imagine what strange notions the poor Country Volk have of this
glorrious fine Town of London. They think the Streets are all paved with Gold,
the Pillars of Porphyrian Marble, and Corinthian Brass, the Churches of
Sweetmeats, and the Houses of Ginger-bread, that it rains Maccaroons, and
hails March-panes, and that Pearls and Diamonds grow there (for they have heard
of Seed-Pearl, and what for, if not to sow it?) as plenty as Cresses and
Blue-bottles in the Fields and Meadows. A Country-Bumkin is a Cockney standing
upon his head -- just such a^ allow thing in the City as the other in the
Country^ and if Cit asks to see 'em spin M^lt, Bumkin will be as ready to ask
where they gather the Gold-Necklaces. Indeed it is too big for their Brains,
they have never seen any thing like it, and therefore can have hardly any
notion on it, none at least that is any more like it than a Horse is like a
Catterpillar. They can guess it is twice or thrice as big as the Town they carry
their Corn to Market to; but should you tell 'em, 'twas a hundred times bigger,
they would fall a whistling, and fetch the Whetstone forye. They have a strange
fancy too of the sagacity and memory of the good people that live there; sure,
think they, if such litterate Vellows as Hob and I know all our Parish, and the
next Hamlet too into the bargain, much more must all the vine Volk there know
one another. So that he who was so Book-learned to direct a Letter to his
loving Brother T. W. living in London, did not in the least doubt but he would have
it by next Post, and much wondered he heard no answer. But when they see such a
like fine Spark as my self come down from London with a Laced Cravat, Fringed
Gloves, and a Sword at my --, a's they mannerly use to style it, what a
flocking of Crows there will be about one poor Owl? Pray Mr. Evander, you have
been at London lately, did you zee my Zon Harry there? how does he grow? don't
he ^prout finely? I warrant he makes a sprunt Lad by this time, he is seventeen
year old come next Grass; you, you comes a fat-chopt Wench plucking you by
the other sleeve, did n't you zee our Tom that went up to be Chamberlain? ay
Chamberlain, 'twas at the great Inn there; I do not know what the Sign is, but
you could not miss it after you came into Town, for it is just in the way. Well,
I take it very unkindly, says another, that Will sends me never a Line, nor
Token all this while, to satisfy me if he be alive or dead. These London
Flurts, with their Silks and their Top-Knots; well, I say no more, but I see,
out of sight, out of mind.

And thus shall you be unmercifully worried to death every time you peep
abroad, and tell 'em a hundred times you don't know one of them you ask for,
they will cry, it is impossible; this London spoils every body, you're grown a
proud Fellow, and there is an end on it. But to see what work they make when they
come to see it themselves. One wise one indeed I have heard of, who had a great
longing that way, but durst not go to London for fear of losing his Labor, for
he went to zee the City, that he did, but knowing none of the Porters, he was
afear'd they would not let him in, and so came back again like what he went. But if
they have more Courage, and do once get in, not a King or Lord Mayor moves
through with half so much sta^e, delays and gra^ity. They think every Street is
made of Churches, but then are scandalized again to see all the Churches
Ale-housen, and yet the Volk in the inside of 'em Iacks of all Trades. He gives
every House and Sign a full quarter of an hours contemplation, and if he clears
one Street in a day, he makes a good days work on it. All the Body of him stares
together; his eyes ben't enough, but he must fill his mouth with strange sights
and r^ree-shows^ nay, both his hands which are lifted up with wonderment, and
one leg too twisted round his long Oaken Plant, whilst he lolls upon his arms
and the other, till some unlucky Black-guard Rogue or Apprentice strikes it away,
and down souses poor Hob in the kennel. Ay, and well if they escape so too, for
ten to one but they fall into the clutches of one cheating Rogue or other. who
asks 'em if they will buy a Ring newly found, which, wanting money, they shall
have for half the price; then Tom snickers, and thanks his good fortune, out
comes the Leather Bag, and away fly all the two-pences and bowed nine-pences,
for a piece of brass little better than a Curtain-Ring; nay, sometimes worse
than this too. As happened to a couple of wise Gothams in our Town ( for some
wise, and some fools all the World over) who having occasion to purchase two
groats-worth of Law, came one Term to London, and having dispatched that
important affair, resolved to spend one day in surveying the Rarities and brave
Sights that were to be seen here; upon which having laid out several two-pences
to their very great satisfaction, their evil Genius at last led 'em by the
Poultrey-Counter, a dreadful place it is as any out of Hell, not that I dread it
neither. True hearts know no fear; and it is well known I beard it every day
with an undaunted countenance, when my business calls me that way; but
dreadful, I say, to them who fall into their Harpy-hands, as these poor
High-shoons found it; for observing that Bunch of Catch-poles at the
Counter-Gate, which usually wait there to see if the Devil or his Friends the
Usurers have any Employment for 'em, they very innocently enquire, what was
there to be seen; to which one of these notorious honest Fellows replied, the
Lions.

The Lions, quo' Robin! Why we have not zeen them yet, Neighbor Iarvise! Ay the
Lions, cried another of those Wolves, but you cannot get at'em, for they been't
to be seen at this time o'day. Now this made the poor Creatures mad to get
at'em; they had Money enough; what cared they if they spent Six pence for such
a sight? with seeming much ado, at last they let 'em in; but no sooner there,
but they saw and felt Beasts of prey enough with a vengeance all round'em,
almost half a hundred Tatter d^malions ransacking'em for garnish; nor can they
imagine what they would be at, till one of them on the sudden Felt his Hat vanished
away, and putting up his Hand to see whether they had not stole Head and all,
before he could receive satisfaction in that point, found his Coat taking
everlasting leave of his Shoulders. The other compounding for his Head-case
freely surrendered his upper Garment, and so with loud Acclamations from all
the wild Arabs of the place they marched away in Querpo, blessing themselves for
so fair a riddance out of the Lions Den.

This it is not to Ramble; would Evander have had so little wit; no, Diamonds
cut Diamonds; trust him with all the Sergeants that Qu^vedo ever saw, and I
war'nt he comes off clear from 'em all ( if he may so say of himself without
blushing) and that you will see when he gets to this dreadful City; but first let
him come there, and he is now on the Road with a whole two or three Cart full of
Acquaintance and Relations to take their long leave. O what crying and
whimpering, and sobbing, and even loud downright yelling and roaring was there
amongst 'em! How many Tokens and Remembrances, broad Shillings and little
pieces of Gold were clapped into Kainophilus his Golls by he scarce knew who; so
that glad would he have bin to have taken his leave at this rate, and gone to
London every day in the year.

Upon the Road at last I got, and there had liberty to consider the happiness I
had, as I thought, then obtained by being freed from my Stepmother Learning;
and thus might I, or did I for ought you know; Mr. Cr^^ick that will be meddling
reflect on the several parts on it as I was taking my final leave.

Farewell Grammar, thou Bugbear to tender Striplings and Buttocks; how often
have thou steered my penitent Posteriours to a Burchen Wood, and made the
Butt-end of my Person weep Carnation Tears; nay, made the poor Pedant wear out
himself as much as me, in running through Thorns and Briars after some fugitive
rugged word or other that would not be hoop't into any of his common Rules.

O happy Golden Age! Sure there grew no Burch in it, or else the cursed use on it
was not then found out any more than that of Steel. then when Learning was
nothing but common Sense, and all the World spoke the same Mother Tongue, and
aimed at no higher a pitch of Oratory than to be understood, all the World
being then one Continent in Language.

All people then one Language spoke alone,
Interpreters the World then needed none.
There lived then no learned deep Grammarians,
There were no French, no Dutchmen, nor Tartarians,
Then all was one, and one was only all
The Language of this Universal Ball.
Then if a Traveller had gone as far
As from the Artick to the Antartick Star:
If he from Boreas unto Auster went,
Or from the Orient to the Occident:
Which way soever he did turn or wind,
He had been sure his Countrymen to find.
Then Grammar get thee about thy business, who have kept me longer now as well
as formerly than all the rest did or are like to do.

Logic, come ye next, and though you were hardly ever in, I Will quickly kick you
out of Doors; thou Intellectual Iangler, thou Learned Cant; thou mere Banter in
Mood and Figure, by which a Man may affirm or deny any thing; prove two Eggs
three, and that the Moon's made of Green Cheese. Thou hungry, beggarly
lean-jaw'd thing, as bad as Poetry. Thou somewhat like Reason, but not the
same, no more than a Monkey a Man; go get thee gone among thy own Thorns and
prick out thy Eyes.

Farewell Rhetoric, for thou art only Sauce to no Meat -- the Art of Lying
well. Thou that dressest up good sense in Bells and Fools caps, and make it
look like Nonsense, and that in Topknots and fine Clothes, and make Fools
believe it is sense. Get thee about thy business to the Beggars in Moor-fields,
teach'em Elocution, and all thy fine Tropes and Figures, and howl out together
with 'em, Dearly beloved people of -- it is a sad thing to be Blind.

But pray stay and take your Sister Poetry with you: If I come to be Mad or in
Love, I may have occasion for you both again, and perhaps may give you a Meals
Meat, or a Nights Lodging for your Company.

-- Poetry, Thou Ha, Ha, Ha, of the World! Efflorescence of Wit do they call
thee? Yes, just as much as the Froth of Bottled Ale is the best on it. O thou
Beggar Incarnate, as Barebreechd as Evander when from his last Globe he rambles
into his Grave.

-- Physics too! Go drowned your self in your own vacuum, and Build Castles in
the Air; and take Metaphysics along with you, a Witch-catching or Winnowing
Entity from unum verum and bonum.

-- Go troop all together, I Am for taking my leave and a fair riddance too all
at once, and intend to have no more to do with ye, unless taking ye in a Lump
without opening the Book, or reading one Syllable more about you.

-- But there is more yet to come, and I Am resolved once for all to make clear
work.

Farewell Astrology, for once and again I tell ye, Kainophilus was never cut out
for a Conjurer.

Farewell Geometry, for I can ramble round the World without thy help, and scorn
to measure how many Miles, Pearches, Feet, Inches and Barly-corns I run over.

Or number 'em either, and therefore well thought,

Troop off Arithmetic for Company, for he is an arrand Fool that cannot tell
twenty, and what can thou do more? Nay, ten is thy utmost Limits, and even
then thou art forced to vamp out one with a naught; and all the rest of thy
fruitless pains with so much more cost than worship, is only telling them nine
Figures over and over again till thou have lost thy self, and yet can never
get to the end of thy Journey.

Chiromancy, Shall I shake Hands with thee too? No, you are such a strolling
Gypsy, you are only fit to be whipped, or set in the Cage for a great Cheat as
thou art.

And when Mathematics can tell me how matter is infinitely divisible, and yet
not so, and ^econcile Demonstrations contradicting each other o'both sides,
then I Will keep that, though all the rest must trudge; but since it never can, let
that turn out to, and break its Neck or drown it self over its own Pons
Asinorum.

What a Fool am I after all to rail at what I don't understand? Learning has a
property much like that which a great man attributes in another sense to
Philosophy, as a little of that makes a Man an Atheist, but a great deal a
Religious person, so a smattering of Learning makes one despise it, a great
deal esteem and admire. Forgive me, O thou thing almost Divine, that I have
Blasphemed thee, without knowing thee, and if possible, let that either excuse
or alleviate my Fault and Punishment: Never a wretch wholost and left thee, as
I have done, but Repented dearly of it as soon as he came to know the crime he
had committed. I believe thou art the very Image of Heaven, and a great part of
that happiness we lost by our own folly. I inflict the most severe voluntary
Penance on my self for having thus abused thee? I Am content all my Life long
to bear the wretched Fate of standing at thy Door, and helping others in, while
I stay without my self, a helpless, ^^^^bless vagrant, and spend my weary days
in sighs, and only thinking what I might have been, had I improved by thy
auspicious aid and cultivated all those Golden Seeds, Nature so largely
sprinkled on her Evanders Breast.

This Justice done to Heaven-born Learning. I now proceed to give you an
account of my Journey, which these thoughts so far shortened, that I was now
arrived at the famous Metropolis of England, I had almost said the World, for
which you must go with me to the following chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Next he Rambles to London, where his Father's intent is (He might ask his
Son's leave though) to Chain him a Prentice.

NOW does the Reader greedily expect a Description of London, ay, and such a
one it shall be when it once comes, that shall put down Stow's Survey, Howel's
Londinopolis, Delawn, R. B. and all that ever writ on it since London-stone was
no bigger than a Cherry-stone, or Julius Caesar Built the Tower, I question not
in the least, no not in the least but 'twill Pit, Box and Gallery with -- let
me see -- with, ay with Iordan's Lord Mayor's show, or his Successors either,
though that is bold word that is the truth on it.

By this time I guess the Reader is big upto the Chin with expectation, as Mrs.
Abi gail and her little Master at Bartholome^ Fair' when they are just a going
to begin for two or three hours together, and to satisfy his Curiosity, I tell
him now whatever I made him believe in the last Chapter, that he is not like to
hear a word more on it this two hours. Thus do I love to elevate and surprise,
and sprinkle now and then some of that same in my writings which is so
remarkable in my self -- that people should miss what they expected, and find
what they never looked for -- though both still very excellent -- nor must you
think I do this without sound advisement and sage Reason, for my Father coming
here full in my way, and he being nearer akin to me than all the City of London
put together; besides, he conveying me thither, and placing me there, all the
Reason in the World I should dispatch him first -- that is to say make an end
of him -- that is to say, in a civil way, finishing and closing altogether his
Life and Death, and paying that just Tribute of Tears, Elelegies, Sighs, Groans
and Acrosticks due to his Super-precious memory -- for would it not be a
preposterous thing for me in the midst of my Apprenticeship, when my Father
died to run Rambling away from the Shop in the next Book, and leave my Masters
Business at six's and seven's -- no -- thank ye for that -- Evander had by that
time a more staid Head of his own, and was no such passionate admirer of hot
Suppings to trot so far after 'em. Besides to have my Fathers whole Life
together, the great Father of the not greater Evander -- why it looks noble and
very fine, and sounds as well as any thing in the World -- for when the Readers
of this Book, one Lord or the other Earl, this Wit and that Alderman shall find
the mavelous deeds of the Son, they will be very willing to go a little higher,
it being a very natural sort of Conclusion that this Son had a Father, and that
Father very probably, not unlike this Son -- and then -- there needs no more to
be said -- but that they would be extremely well pleased to see this wondrous
Father of this wondrous Son all together in one piece, not Hang -- Drawn and
Quartered, about through all the twenty four Volumes here an Arm, and there a
Leg, and there another Member -- Gentlemen your will shall be done -- it is
contrary to Evander's Nature to disoblige such Honorable Persons -- here it is
altogether, nay, I Will say that you will have a Lump on it; turn to the Index;
let us see, run along wi' your Finger -- Chapter, Chapter, Chapter, no, it is n't
here, Chap. 4. Chap. 5. not yet, Chap. 6. there, there ye have it, but then
what volume? ay, that should have bin thought of before the Chapter; why Volume
the tenth? no, eleventh, twelfth, twenty three, twenty five, no, that can never
be it because there been't so many. Is It the first then? Ay, the first be sure,
which should it be else sure? The Father ought to go before the Son because he
was Born before me. I write nothing but what is chastest Truth, and all the
Neighbors can justify it: Well then now ye have it; ye cannot miss't if ye had
never so much mind to it. Vol 1. Chap 6. The Life and Death of Evander's
immediate Male Progenitor. [All this pains I take now to make the matter clear,
and instruct even the meanest capacity how to make the best use of this most
useful Book] why then? stand by London, and Room for Father.

Who was Born -- what need ye know where? Is n't enough I have told you my own
Birthplace, Graffham; dearest Graffham, hold, hold, I was just going to Ramble
away to it again, and leave my very Father for my Country. But as I was saying,
what should people be so inquisitive for? This prying World would fain know my
Father; thank 'em for that, if they know my Father they will know me, if they
know the place of his Birth, that is one way to know him. Is It not sufficient a
Conscience that I wear so many Flowers, Feathers, Bells and fine things about
me, and turn my self out to the wide World to let 'em laugh their Small-guts
out, but I must needs show my Face too, not that I Am ashamed on it neither, I Am
no Panther, I don't say it is one of the best that Nature ever formed, but it is
as it is, and there is an end on it, and whose it is, do ye Fish out if you can,
for if I tell you, hang me at my own Sign-post; but what is all this to my
Father? why truly as near as Father and Son. And so this Father of mine Sir, as
I was saying, was Born somewhere or other, you don't know where, nor are n't
like to know unless you are good guessers. Thence he went to School, thence to
Gambridge, thence to a place as every Body you know must go to one place or
another, then from that place to another place, and from another place to
another place again.

And then he had several Children. Oh! but I should have told you first, that
he was married to my Mother, and then my Mother fell sick, and died, and was
almost buried, as I told you before, and then came to life, and died again in
good earnest, and was buried accordingly, and then my Father, (who had
something too of the Ramble in his brain, you may see by this, as well as his
Son, whence you may take notice, I Am no degenerate branch, nor does Evander
ramble from his virtuous Progenitors, though in good earnest he almost does from
his Sense, pray Reader put me right again, whereabouts was I before I stepped
over the unconscionable Essex style of this overgrown bursten-gutted
Parenthesis -- O -- then my Father went a Rambling, to show his Son the way,
and so he went, and he went till he came into Ireland, being resolved to endure
a long seven-years Apprenticeship to grief and sorrow for the loss of his
dearest Partner; and by the persuasion of his dearest Friends, or his own
Inclination, no great matter which, nor do I find it decided in his Writings;
he there studied Physic to divert his Melancholy, and during that time grew
perfectly acquainted with the nature and quality of all the venomous Beasts in
that Island, Toads, Newts, Vipers, Spiders, etc. dissecting as many of 'em as
ever he came near, and thereby gaining such unparalled skill in things of
that nature, that never did any person address themselves to him for cure in
those forementioned accidents, but he cured 'em one and all as fast as they would
come near him; so that not Greatrix himself that wonder-working Stroker ever
groped away the Gout or Kings Evil more infallibly than this dear Father, what
you have heard already; who thinking he had Rambled long enough, now came home
again to the great joy of all his neighbors.

And being assured his Wife, his dear Wife, and my dear Mother was dead in good
earnest, having waited seven long years to see whether she would come out of her
Trance the second time, and his rambling lost E^ridice would return any more,
finding all quiet and silent, her grave overgrown with grass, and not the least
chink, crevice, motion, whisper, or sign of her Intentions to see the light any
more till such a long time hence, that he thought 'twould be a folly to stay
for her, he e'ne married again.

After that he had several hopeful Sons and Daughters still surviving,
especially my friend Daphne, etc. but she would be too proud if she saw her name
here in words at length.

I Will not attempt to number all the great and good actions of such a Father,
because indeed it is impossible; for sooner could I tell you how many Stars
there are in Heaven, or Sands on the Seashore, or how many virtues Iris has,
or how many of her kisses will satisfy her ravished, transported, stark
staring mad-with-love Evander. Nay, perhaps were this possible to be done,
Prudence and Duty would yet strive and tug one way or to'ther whether publish
it or not. For the common Proverb Heroum filii noxae, wise Fathers generally
beget Sons that are otherwise, and the exuberant glories of his Life ecclipsing
my own, and rendering me a mere Dock leaf, a Iohn-a-Stiles, a perfect Noddy in
comparison of him; truly things being thus, Charity begins at home, and I ought
to have some regard to my dearer self, as well as to my dear Father, though
hardly can I pronounce which is most so. However, all the Interest in the World
shall never make me say, a false or a base thing of him; and what I shall write
shall be enough to let the World know it never had, nor never will find his
Fellow. For though I don't remember he had the gift of Proph^cy, whatever may
have been pretended, yet I can aver he had a quality much more profitable, he
was thrifty, and frugal, and careful for his Family, gave his Sisters portions,
and left a good Estate, and plentiful Fortunes among his own hopeful Children,
which inmy judgment is commendation enough for one Father.

And though I might add a thousand more, this in a manner would include, as it
excels all the rest; and shall I ever be able while I breathe to reflect on
such a Father without hugging his memory, and almost idolatrously adoring his
very Ashes? And indeed I don't much wonder Idolatry first crept into the World
by the fondness of Children to their deceased Parent, for I could hardly ever
behold the dear Picture of my dead Father (by the same token it used to hang up
behind door in the great Parlour) without almost kneeling to it, washing it with
my Tears, and then licking 'em off again.

-- But here being a very convenient Loophole, I cannot forbear a little Ramble
into the fertile common place of Children's Duty and Love to their Parents, both
dead and living, and shall present the Reader with several pat, pert, pleasant
stories to that purpose.

How much we are obliged to our Parents can never be enough accounted; that we
are so both for our Education and Being is equally certain. Being is no doubt,
in it self considered, without the appendages of any other good, a great
happiness: From our Parents, even the worst of men let 'em be, this we at least
receive. But more -- they bring us into such a state where every man may have a
tolerable degree of happiness if it been't his own fault. Quisque suae fortunae
faber -- every Man is the Brick-layer of his own ^ood Fortune -- ( or Smith, or
Carpenter, which you please.) If therefore any object that Being their Parents
gave 'em makes 'em only miserable, and therefore they been't obliged to thank
'em for it, they argue very ill, and besides very disingenuously, blaming others
for what they brought on themselves, and full as justly may Mankind blame him
that made 'em for all the miseries they could not have felt had they not had a
Being, whereas all of 'em were chosen and brought on themselves by their own
Folly.

If they will yet object, it is n't in a Man's choice to be poor or not, for then
none would choose it; it is easily answered, that it is perhaps much more so than
is generally concluded, most persons by carelessness reducing themselves to
these circumstances, and then falling foul both on Heaven and Earth for making
'em so -- Has thy Parent given thee Being, and can he do no more? -- why he has
done very fairly for thee already -- he has made thee a Freeman of the World,
and thou have a range of one and twenty thousand Miles to seek thy Fortune in;
and how many are there who raise themselves and Families on no larger a stock,
nay, at first all did so.

Do thou say thou art not obliged to Parents for thy Being, because they gave
it thee for their own pleasure, or out of Instinct, and almost necessity of
Nature -- that is a very false, as well as a most unmannerly way of arguing, for
it indeed destroys the nature of all Benefits, and makes no such thing as
obligation in the World. The Argument is fairly thus -- we are not obliged to
any Man for any good turn, he does us in which he takes pleasure, or which
mounts to the very same thing, which he does for his own pleasure, or which he
cannot avoid -- which he has a necessity for, that is indeed which he cannot
without some pain or inconvenience to himself forbear doing. For to be fair it
can rise no higher. Now lay this rule to any benefit in the World, and see, by
Mr. Seneca's leave, what work 'twill make with it.

I do the most virtuous action, the bravest thing in the World, undoubtedly for
my own pleasure or happiness, and that is and ought to be the chief end for
which I perform it, for why I Would fain know, do I relieve any that is miserable,
but for the pleasure I my self feel in doing it? if not yet lower, as some
ill-natured Persons interpret, for the pain of not doing it, the weakness and
kind of Incontinence in my Nature, that I cannot see a Person unhappy, but I
must feel his sore Leg, thin Jaws, or hungry Belly.

Yet more will they own they are obliged to Parents for a good Education, if
not for what in the World, and yet what is this but a piece of Nature -- as
great a necessity and pleasure as the giving 'em being. Pleasure is Interest --
Honor is the same -- both are engaged in handsomely breeding up those whom we
brought into the World. What is the Nature of a Benefit or Obligation? If it is
possible to be known we may fix its Notion to a Being given us. A Persons being
obliged to perform a good turn cannot alter the property -- if it is fair
arguing from contraries, and none ever yet denied it; why then if the not doing
what I Am obliged, to deserves disgrace and dispraise, and is an injury, then
doing what I ought and am bound to do merits Honor, Praise, and
Acknowledgment. It Is in vain, as those old towering Philosophers did very often,
to sit twisting fine Notions together, that were too high either for Truth or
Practice; and when brought down, and accommodated to the Scene of Life, will
never square, nor serve for any living thing. The freest thing in the World I
may be obliged to by the most indispensible ties, which yet if performed
deserves the clearest and loudest acknowledgment the Nature of Man can give.
What is freer than a generous Man's raising a brave Unfortunate? What Is he more
obliged to do? What can he take more pleasure in? What can be a greater
obligation to the Person so raised?

-- Well -- this it is to read Seneca -- one Notion begets another, and so to
the end of the Chapter, while my poor Father's forgot all this while as much as
if he never Begot me -- so did not Boleslaus -- that excellent King of Bohemia,
who never entered upon any Important Action, but out he pulls the Picture of
his Father, and after gazing on it, as if it had been his Mistresses -- and
serving it as I did mine, he used solemnly to desire he might never do any
thing unworthy of so great a Progenitor. Was not he an ugly Rogue of a Fellow?
And did he not well deserve such a horrid Death as got hold of him, who when
his poor old Father came to his House for a Meals Meat, he having a fat Capon
for Dinner, and seeing the old Man about to come in (a greedy-gut Bastard as he
was for his pains,) claps me up the Capon Dish, and all under the Table, and
persuades his Father they had nothing for Dinner but Rack-staves -- on which he
shabbing off again to seek a Dinner where he could catch it, or else Dine with
Duke Humphrey, this Rascally Son of his pulls out the Dish again, and thought
to be at it immediately up to the knuckles and fetch up all the time he had
lost -- when -- O! Lo! Behold wonder! this fat Capon was turned, metamorphos'd
or transmogriphy'd into a huge overgrown fat Toad -- fough upon it! And in half
a twinkling shot up like an Arrow, and caught this unnatural Wretch by the
Throat, pinching him like a Crab till it made him yell again, then crawling up
to his Mouth and Nose, there it sat pissing and spewing, and spitting Venom at
him till he dropped down dead, and never spoke word more.

And lest I should have the same ill Fortune (though I confess I did not see
the Man after he was dead) I Am resolved to make much of my Father, when he is
not only old, but dead, and not only dead, but rotten; though his Name smells
sweeter than Balsom, sweet as the Breath of my fragrant Aromatical Iris.

Ay and Dead he is sure enough, after he had carefully bound me Prentice, as I
told you before, and you shall hear hereafter -- he is as dead as Nebuchadnezzar
-- though his Fame shall never die, while either his Son, or his Son's Son shall
remain alive. (This Ramble is my Son.)

But when and how did he die? and where? and wherefore? and for what Reason --
Quis? quid? ubi? quibus? etc.

To the when, I answer, Nov. 4. 1676. An. Aetat. 48. and that is as much as many
an honest Man gets for his Epitaph -- but every honest Man is not my Father.

And being dead 'twill be very convenient to give him speedy Burial, though not
very speedy neither -- one may be too hasty in that matter. Duns Scotus, as
subtle a Head as my Father for his Life, was fooled out of this World at that
rate, and buried alive poor wretch, where he all mawl'd his Face and Hands at
such a rate against the Cossin, that 'twou'd have grieved ones Heart to have
seen him. To prevent which inconvenience, his Relations wisely fearing my
Father might have three Lives, because my Mother had two, who was so much
weaker than him, kept him above ground five days after his Death, to see
whether he intended to come back again; but finding him in earnest, and still
remaining in the same sullen Humor, they then would wait no longer, but e'ne
heaved him into his last Tenement in the Chancel --

And there let him lie till I come to him -- and how sweetly should he and I
and Iris lie there together in one another Arms -- Lie further Father; you
have got all the Bed to your self, and thrust us out upon the very Bedsted, but
though you had possession first, yet two to one's odds. -- However I Will be a
dutiful Son dead and living, and rather lie upon the Boards than hurt your
Ribs, which by this time may be a little tender.

But well remembered! I should have told you how he died before how he was
Buried. -- He did it like an honest and brave Man, as he had lived, and having
lived so well almost fifty years, certainly he could never be to learn to die
well for one quarter of an hour. He looked as if he would put Death out of
Countenance, as if he rather wished it than feared it -- but not because he was
frowardly weary of this life, but rationally assured of a better Not like that
Fool of a Philosopher, who after some three or fourscore years huffing God and
Man, and pretending to teach 'em both more than they knew before, had not
learned wit enough all that while to know whither he was going, and could leave
no wiser saying behind him than that of the poor Heathen -- Quae nunc abibis in
Loca? He had found a hole to creep out of the World at, and was going to take a
long leap in the dark he could not tell whither. He died then if we may
properly use that word of one who undoubtedly lives more now than before, he
has much the better by this alteration, and Deaths Exchange was to him far from
being any Robbery.

Next where -- whyat -- a certain place in England, that shall be uncertain to
you till you find his Epitaph.

Last of all wherefore, and for what Reason? Why that is a very ^rish Question
now, though it is asked in Latin: I scorn to put the World off with that road
answer, as trite as Ratcliff-highway for want of Breath, or because he could
live no longer. Every Magpy dies at that rate and for such sage Reasons. -- But
my Father's Death as well as his Life was all extraordinary.

The Original then of the fatal period of that beloved life more precious than
both the Indies, was no other than the incurable putrefaction of some Morbid
Juices in the Renal Concavities -- To speak plain (for I write for the vulgar,
though I protest it is much harder to stoop my Notions to their Capacities, than
at first to invent 'em) he died of the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, I cannot
be positive, after the most exquisite Torments, equaled by nothing but his
patience. -- There Is a Father if you talk of a Father -- I must, I may, I
shall, I will be proud of him as Alexander was of Jove. Not Great Alcides famed
Tyrinthian Hero,
Who slew the Seven-headed Lerna fein'd,
And dread Nemaean Thunder.


Not he, nor never a Heroic Killcow of 'em all ever kicked up with half a
quarter of that constancy and gravity that Kainophilus Father did -- who was
rackt and grown'd worse with that Millstone of a Stone he carried about with him
than ever Hercules with his poisoned Jerkin.

I have heard of a Person yet living, who had a Stone in his Kidneys of such a
prodigious magnitude, that it filled up almost all the concavity of his
Carcass, and you might easily feel it through his Flesh if you laid your Hand on
his Back. I cannot say what truth there is in it, nor would the World any sooner
believe me should I assure 'em that the Stone in my Fathers Body was so
immense, that I Have wondered it did not bunch up behind, and make him have a
Hump-back, or at least overpoise him in walking, and drag him backward with its
incredible weight.

However he died, dead he is and buried -- but not without his taking a decent
civil leave of the World -- he was not in so great haste to be so unmannerly,
or rub off without telling any Body.

Some of his last advice to us his beloved Offspring was to live in P^ace, and
Love one another, which those who don't, who love others better than they love
me their Brother, ay, and their elder Brother, their hope and prop of their
Family, their Kainophil -- I say no more, ^ut let 'em look to it, and get off as
well as they are able. -- And may Kainophilus get over that troublesome Ditch
that parts this World and the other as well as his Father did, when it comes to
his turn to leap.

Those shapes of Torture which to view in Paint
Would make another faint.
He did endure in true reality,
And feel what they could hardly bear to see.
-- His Soul so willing from his Body went,
As if both parted by consent.
No murmur, no complaining, no delay,
Only a sigh -- Ah John! Ah Nan! and so away.
Well -- I protest I find a Man's Genius* improves with using it -- the Reader
may well wonder at some great Master strokes in Poetry among my Works, and then
so strangely, like what they have seen in other places -- for good wits will
^ump -- and yet so very unlike -- for I scorn to Thieve, and dare say no Man
will own any of his own Goods upon my Ground -- but his wonder will be a little
moderated, when I tell him a secret. ^Tis that I and certain near and dear
Friends of mine used a long time to write Epistles in Verse to one another,
which so strangely improved my Hand at it, that were that Learned and Reverend
worthy Author Mr. John Bunyan yet living, I Would not fear to enter the Lifts with
him in Poetry, Rapture for Ra^our^, my Pen and Ink to his Budge^, and let him
drop as long as he would, as the Blind B^gg^r and the Knight did their Gold,
I Would not fear keeping pace with him. 'Twas this, I say, which brought me to be
as you see, Gentlemen, -- I vow there is no cheat in me -- be ye but Judges now
-- take the last Verse.

-- Ah ^ohn! A^ Nan, and so away! -- How soft, how natural and easy -- is it
not fine -- is it to be matched again? O Envy, Envy! Thou dumb Beast thou! If
thou woot n't speak, hold thy tongue! while I explain to such as better deferve
it, the meaning of that Verse whereof thy Ears are not worthy. Ah John! Ah Nan!
-- You must know my Name -- Hold, hold, -- I cry ye mercy, Mr. Reader, 'twas
out before I was aware on it -- you must know a Friend of my Fathers Name was
John, and he had a Sister her Name was Nan -- so these two he called upon the
very last words ever he said in this World -- and then he died for good and all
-- and I will not disturb him no more, and could almost resolve not to tell you a
word more about him -- but, it is hard for Friends to part -- why spare me a
Page or two more, you will be never the poorer your selves at the years end --
and be obliging, complaisant and Civil as I'l^ be to you when you write a Book,
and don't give me the L^^ or call me Flatterer, when I assure you my Father was
one of the rarest Men in the World* and that I Dreamed of his (...) three Days
before I heard on it -- Though I Am confident (...) have been falser things
Chronicled than either of these.

-- But I must give you a little more of his Character, (...) fancy he will never
rest in peace -- which indeed may (...) he made up of whatever is good in other
men, as the (...) Venus was from all the fine Women ^'the Country.

But I Will give you only some of the most remarkable (...)* and let the rest lie
mellowing till a Second Edition.

He was capable of every thing, and proud of nothing; ^ay, rather actually
Master of all things, of all the Perfections that could be sound or named: --
He had a Tongue fit to converse with Angels, and (...) yet better than that
Tongue; for 'twas so full of Virtue and (...), that 'twas never to be
exhausted. By an unparallel^d reach of understanding, he soared above the
highest, all other Perfections being so far from matching his, that they
deserve not to be mentioned, and the great distance between 'em made 'em appear
like a little point scarce to be seen and less to be regarded. In a place of
Athens, when one named Plutarch, the Echo answered Philosophy (if he (...)
tells the Story don't lie) so should his Nam^ be mentioned, 'twou'd certainly
answer either VIRTUE or EVANDER's FATHER.

His Breast was a brave Palace, a broad Street
Where all Heroic ample Thoughts did meet,
Where Nature such a large Survey had taken,
As other Souls to his dwel't in a Lane:
So look tall Hills on some small sneaking Valley,
So great Cheapside, on little Scalding-Alley.
For his Body, that rich Cabinet of a richer Jewel -- 'twas even a fit match
for what it contained. He had a graceful and a full comely Countenance, in
which, as if Nature had made a Mould on purpose for him, we might perceive a
duly composed Feature mixed of Gravity and Sweetness Ana -- His Mien so
becoming, that commanded Awe and Love together from all the Beholders. Hi^
Stature elevated somewhat above the common sort of ordinary tall Men -- The
habit of his Body spare, far from C^rpulency, but exactly proportioned. His
Hair was as black as the blackest Raven, and curiously ^url'd, as if it ^rept
back ag^n, and longed to kiss so sweet a Face -- Evander's true Father. In a
word, his very aspect was such, that any man that knew how, might borrow Wit
enough from it to serve him an Age -- Perfect Evander still -- For I protest,
now I think on it, I Have sometimes seen ingenious men stand stock still and stare
upon my Face, (such as it is) and after some Contemplation, break out into a
gentle smile, as who should say they received extreme Satisfaction, ^the very
beholding on it. He could say what he would, and prov^ what he said, and was so
perfect as not to be capable of Improvement.

As many Virtues joined in him, as we
Can scarce pick here and there in History
Though never so careful our Collections be.
Flower of all Flowers, a perfect living Book,
In which whoever had but chanced to look,
Would soon confess, unless small Understanders,
It did belong to some of the Evanders.
A Posie of Translations and Collections,
A very Rambling Chaos of Perfections;
Each pinned upon the Back so close of to other,
No passage by to read this for the other,
More than old Writers Practice ever could reach,
Though them I Have read) or Bunyan's self could teach;
Down with fair Innocence, each Night he lay
As I with Iris, Sol with Th^ti^ gay
When all the World we have rambled round through all the livelong-Day.
'BVY FATHER, -- But first, Pray bring me to London, Bind me 'Prentice, and
then Ramble to the other World as fast as you please, (though for all my stout
heart) seldom could I think of his Death for almost 16 years after, without
half-crying my Eyes out.

But as we are jogging if along for London (before he was Dead all this was)
what should we light upon in the side of a warm Hedge, but of all the Birds in
the Sky -- my Brother Cuckoo! -- Was n't that a very strange thing, Brother
Critlck? -- No truly, not strange at all -- but what follows is stranger --
over against this Hedge was another Hedge, and in that Hedge over against this
Hedge was an old Ivy-Bush, and in that Ivy-Bush was an Owl -- Now, it being
toward Evening, and a fine Summers Evening 'twas as one should see in a
Summers Day, what does the Cuckoo but cries- Cuc-koo? what does the Owl but fall
a (...) and Whittoow-hooing? what do I but stand still, and let my Horse graze
between 'em both to hear their melody? If you are any thing learned, I Am sure
you have heard of Apollonius's understanding the Sparrows Language, and why may
not I as well the Owls and Cuckoos -- O thought I wi' my self, what a brave
Recorder that Cuckoo's Bill would make? and then the Owls would do for a
Flagilet, to a wonder -- But while I was admiring their Skill and Harmony, I
was so ravished with their Charming Music; that could you believe it, That I
fell stark asleep under the Tree, and my Mind being full of the Idea's which
were in my Head, e're I fell asleep, they seemed still to continue their
Discourse, which now I understood better so than while waking, warbling out
between 'em this following Song -- in Stylo recitativ^ -- But now I think on it,
though I understood it, you will not, and therefore I Will not be at the pains and
charge of having new Characters cast to express their Language; for it neither
begins from the left to the right as ours, nor from the right to the left as
the Eastern, nor from top to bottom, nor bottom to top, as others -- nor any
way else that you or I can imagine, because 'twas inarticulate, and no language
at all. Don't call this trifling, for it is all in order to describe the
loveliest Trees, Hedge and Field to ye that you ever saw or heard of.

The Trees were not with Leaves of Gold,
Of such have I heard teil,
I cannot tell where in days of old
Kept by a Dragon fell:
The Hedge was not of Eglantine,
Where Nightingals do fing,
Nor yet of lovely Iessamine,
(Which is a pretty thing)
The Fields were not like Tempe bright,
Where Amaranthus grows,
And heavenly Moly, Jove's delight
And Cure of mortal woes.
The Trees of Crab, the Hedge of Thorn,
Which Brakes and Lods did mend;
The Field it was of Barly-Corn,
Come Kiss -- and there is an end.
Farewell, Reader, till we meet in London -- Ask but which way a Man and his Son
went, and any body there will tell ye presently.

CHAP. VII.
Next he Rambles to London --

I Promise the Reader to play at Bob-Cherry with him no more; but being arrived
now at London in good earnest, will give him such a Description of that famous
City, as I Will be bold to say, the World cannot parallels

However let Business go before Recreation, and my Trade being a little given
to Rambling; I shall more conveniently meet with the City after I Am bound
Pr^nt^ce and run about with a Note iv my hand -- as Globe the ^th.

To dispatch it then as hastily as possible, -- THIS INDENTURE Witnesses --
That I Kainophilus Vender of the Town of -- in the County of, -- etc. Not to
trouble you with all on it, I was bound to my good Behavior with that good
honest Man, my Master, as well as he to me, before the Chamberlai^, to have and
to hold from that time forwards, and seven years after, ^e^ring Date from
December. 7th. 1674. Now you expect my Masters Name, Sign, Trade, and all that --
No thank ye -- I have not forgot my Indentures -- wherein I swore to keep his
Secrets -- and this being both his and my own, If you would rip up my Guts for it,
you should not have it.

And what good would it do you if you had it? The Description of London will be
ten times more to the purpose, which I Will promise you, as being the best Flower
in the Book, shall be my Masterpiece -- And therefore I Will begin with the Name
on it very Methodically.

Whence should that be, but from King Lud, the Son or Father, it is no great
matter which, of the famous King Bladud, that flew I known't how many miles an
hour, and set the Devil a boiling his Coppers at Bath, I don't know how many
thousand year agon. -- What would People have more -- can there be a clearer
Argument, that this is true, than the very Gates called Ludgate to this day,
after his Name -- One can scarce tell what this hard -- to -- please World will
believe -- if not that neither, there is a great many score of Freemen-prisoners
in Ludgate (some of my acquaintance to my Sorrow) who will take their corporal
Oaths to the Truth on it, as freely as they would, that they ben't worth five
Farthings apiece, if that would get 'em out again.

But for more weighty Arguments -- What an unanswerable one is there near this
Gate, besides that it self? Is not there a Sign with the three Kings upon it,
one of which was the Founder both of the Gate and City adjoining -- Androg^us
LVD, and Temautius -- I cannot imagine what can be plainer. How many millions of
men have been contented with this Etymology before ever we were born? It Is
therefore in vain to trouble you with a rabble of other Derivations, or make
you writhe your Mouth five hundred ways with a company of cramp wel^h words,
whence some will have it composed -- you may therefore let alone both L^ong
Dinan, which signifies Shipton, or a Town, famous for the multitude of it is
Ships and Navigation -- a Llhwindian from Llhwin, a fortified Wood, in which
the Britains made their Towns, or which rather indeed were their very Towns,
before the Romans beat 'em into more wit, only plashing the Trees, and setting
up Stakes, and Watling or Hurdling the avenues, to keep out wild-Beasts or Men,
t^o a better Fence 'twas against the first, then the last -- to which perhaps
the word Glyn, yet in use for a thick Wood, is Cater -- Cozen -- but then for
the Tail on it -- let Diana take care of that -- the other end of the Word, as
these Crucifiers of Language pretend being drawn from her Name, there being
formerly a Temple dedicated to that Goddess, as it is thought, where Paul's now
stands.

Let this be how 'twill, if this will not be believed, neither will the queesie
chopped World so much wiser grown all of the sudden, than their
Great-Grandfathers, be contented with the to other Name more ancient then this,
and yet Julius Caesar, who (...) the Tower of London, and put the Lions in it as
sure as ever (...) Lud built Ludgate, calls it Troynovant -- or something so
like it, that it is altering five or six Letters, and 'twill be the self same
word -- now those who han't a mind to be counted great, ancient and famous, may
e'ne laugh at this as well as the other, but all true Trojans must needs be
proud of such worshipful and worthy Forefathers -- such indefatigable Ramblers
-- first from Troy to Greece -- then to Italy, then hither and thither and no
Body knows where, till they landed at Totness and built Troynovant or New-Troy
-- as I told you before. And if all this ben't enough, read old Ieffery over,
and see if he can satisfy you any better.

Methinks we have been a tedious while in London without seeing any of the Rary
shows in it -- 'Twou'd be enough to make my old acquaintance believe I came
hither for nothing at all, if I don't tell 'em what I saw with these own Eyes
of mine, at that very time. But shall besides make considerable additions from
my Observation of the alterations which happened since I first surveyed it.

Lets begin at Cornhil, and the Royal Exchange, see how things alter --
New-Troy is just the reverse of Old and instead of -- Nunc seges est ubi Troja
fuit -- Coru grows where Troy- Town stood -- it is now quite contrary, Troy
stands where Corn did grow -- or at least was brought thither to Market --
where there are now a little more precious Commodities traffick'd for.

But when I first come under the Exchange Gate -- bless my Ears what a B^z
there was -- 'twas High-change, and such a Notion of Volk, that I concluded it
must needs be either a Church or a Fair -- and as they humm'd like Bees, so
they swarm like 'em -- in and out, and out and in again, backward and forward
like the Tide at London Bridge -- but while poor Evander stood harmlesly
staring upon a Weather-glass, Cherry-Tree, and I cannot tell what Trinkets they
had there to sell, comes the Eddy of a Crowd, and runs me into that Whirl-pool
of m^n before I knew where I was -- But what a Picture of this World did I find
there, or rather of that below it. 'Twas one great Humm that stunned me as soon
as I got thither, and therefore don't expect any exact account on it, for I saw
it little more distinctly then people see things in their sleep.

-- Here was a fat Jew strutting, and a ^ean Christian, Cringing; a thin old
Usurer bobbing, and a jolly Ton^g H^^r nibbling, and just fit for sealing. A
burly Se^ Captain swearing and his Coxson, and some of his Crew crowding to
come up with him. One Merchant that receives the news of his L^sses, biting his
Nails, and the innocent paper, another who hears his Ship is safe in the Pool
after a good Voyage, Plu^ing and Cocking, and exalted higher than the Change-
steeple -- well thought on -- we'll step up that way. --

Nay -- if this ben't Paradise, why then a London Prentice will never find it
while he lives.

It Is a mere Spring-Garden within Doors -- a Moor-fields walk; -- a Sir George
Whitmores, a Musick-house, a every thing. It Is London turned outside in. Here Is
Streets, and Signs, and Paint, and Rogues, and Illts, and Dogs, and Fops, and
Fools, and Women -- Here Is Ribbons and L^ces, and Money, and Point Crava^s, and
Top-knots. Lads Ogling, Lasses winking, Maids flickering, Wives plotting, musty
Ba^chellors moulding, and overgrown Thorn-backs despatring, and just ready to
hang themselves in some of their own Inkle.

Do You see that sign there -- The -- who would think that modest Creature that
makes up her Mouth like a Button-hole, was no longer agon than last Night with
Squire -- at the -- a -- a -- ay, what business had she there -- that is the
Question -- business? why such business as others there would have been gl^d of
as well as she -- Eating of Oysters, and what hurt's in all that?

-- And she next Shop of the left hand of her -- she with the Monumental
Top-knots, and cloudy Brow beneath 'em -- does she look as if she carried Sir
-- Linen ^ome 't'other Evening. Not but that she came home again her self,
never the worse for wearing. -- But I must either talk softly, or withdraw as
speedily as I can, and run the Ga^mtle^ for my Life -- a Friend of mi^e, no
Enemy to Change appurtenances, for telling scarce so much Truth as this comes
to concerning 'em, dares not venture his Head up Stairs any more than thrust it
into a Hive of Bees, or Nest of Hornets.

Eternal what do you lacks adieu?
When I want Brass I Will come to you.
Or should a little Country sinner
In Broad-Cloth Wastcoat and Laced Pinner,
Enquire if any one could tell
The most frequented Road to Hell;
They need not hither walk and thither,
It Is but to send 'em -- you know whither.
-- But why so bitter against the poor Change-Wenches. -- The^e may be more
Reason than every one knows. Perhaps I might have two or three half-Mistresses
there, I will not tell ye how the sharp Iades served me -- only it vexes a Man of
sense and Reading to be -- well -- no more, let the wound e'ne close if 'twill,
and let others either take warning or learn wit as the burnt Child does.

-- For I have done with 'em, and rambled next to Lumbard-Street.

But what Hell-fulls of Money were there tumbled over one another -- I coudn't
have thought Pluto himself had been so rich -- but the truth is, he employs a
great many FACTORS -- I wandered from one end on it to to other, and in a little
Shop among all the rest, saw one that looked like an honest Man -- but not one
single Body in his Shop, and he exercising his patient Elbows against the
obdurate Counter.

This was many years since, and the City increasing every day, if there was one
honest Man there then, how many must there be by this time?

My thinks the very smell of such rare Provisions revives me, and I begin to
fancy the Gingling of so much Money would as soon make one Rich, as the smell
of Roast-Meat fill ones Belly.

-- Yet avaunt thou foul-Feind! I will not be contaminated! O Mammon I defy
thee -- do Sneer! Do Laugh -- do Glow at me -- nay -- it is all one --
I Will keep out of thy Clutches if possible -- I Will ramble far enough off from
thy ravenous Maw, -- Nay -- don't think to serve Vander as you have done other
Fools -- I cannot believe your Carcass is so sweet to be content to be eat and S
-- eat out again -- No no -- while there is room for a Soul like mine to
expatiate, I Will ramble I say once more to Amsterdam, Boston, Collen, Prester
John, Air, Earth, Purgatory and the World of the Moon before I Will have any thing
to do with thee, unless in a Civil way -- in a -- way of Trade -- as one dealer
with another, according a^ I find you Tractable and Honest -- so far I may be
moved -- but as you are a Feind, and mere Hobgoblin Incarnate -- I say again, come
not near me, nor lay thy polluted Golls upon my trembling Carcass.

O Gold, O Gold!
I cannot hold,
But must go scold
At such a Monster.
Thou who do dwell
In Caverns fell
Of deepest Hell;
But don't misconster
What I have said
By fury led,
At those who did
Monopolize thee.
Not of my own,
For I Will depone
My Fob has none,
How e're I prize thee.
O you Rich wretches,
Whose Conscience stretches
As Hog with vetches
Ramm'd up to'th' Muzzle.
So much you carry
Of Philip and Mary A pretty Figure whereby one species is put for all the rest.

That how to bear ye
Old-Nick 'twill puzzle.
Then throw your Dirt away
And get you gone to play
Be merry while you may
And wise too.
That all the World may know
You're more their Friend than Foe,
And no black thing below
Surprise you.
Gold -- Gold -- let me see! What Rhimes to Gold -- why the Lions in the Tower
come next -- it is no matter for Rhyme -- now Sympathy and Antipathy.

In went I after I had been staying half an hour upon Tower Hill, not to see
the Boys at M^rbles or Hustle-Farthing -- no, I had more sublime thoughts, and
employed 'em on better objects, being Nailed by the Ears to an old Fellows
Tongue, who hoped about on a pair of Stump-Legs, and cried Godly Books and
Ballads. But my thinks he did it with such incomparable grace; he did so whine
it and turn it, and speak with every part about him, Conjuring his Face into
more postures than a Friend at Bull and Mouth; so like one of the Catamountains
I saw when I got a little farther, that I expected when they would have opened
their Mouths and sung a Ballad, and the Lions themselves could hardly hold
forth louder, which yet they did to the purpose, for there going in a Woman
with Child to see 'em at the same time that I did, they fell a ^elping as loud
as the Guns on a Coronation Day; would you believe (nor I my self without
seeing and (...) it) (...) the Foundations of the Gate trembled, the Guns
rolled back on their Carriages, the Portcullis dropped down for fear, and the
water in the Thames spouted up as high as the Monument -- Till a Beauteous
Virgin who came with us, approached near the Grates, and immediately down they
lay as calm as Lambs, Fawned, Grinn'd, waged their Tails, not with such a
tremendous sweep as before, but as mild and gently as the Poetical Zephyrs
stroke, the Velvet leaves, or the branch of a Palm Tree leans toward its
Friend on the other side of the Brook; their furious manes lay as flat as a
shock-Dogs. Their Eyes lost their Lightnings as well as their Mouths their
Thunder, they pulled in their Claws, and purr'd like our old Puss at home, and
then went to Sleep as gently as a young Kitten.

Who now, to look upon 'em, would think those Creatures had Torn out the Heart
and Guts of so many a Flock of harmless Lambs or gentle Faun -- who would think
-- they e're had roared in Mauritanian Deserts.

Where swift Numidians on the Sunburned Shore,
With Clouds of Darts and Javelins urged their fate:
While with a generous rage, the Kingly Captives,
Leap over the Toyls, and scatter Man, Woman, and
Sucking Child, Horse, Ass, Dog, Cat, King and Keisar
Alls one that came near 'em --
There Is a Rise and a Fall -- there is two as natural Rambles or Transitions
from Low to High, and High to Low again, as -- (I scorn to compare with any but
my self) as you will find again in all our works.

But now I Will tell you a strange story, and a true one as e're Pliny or Aelian
told in their Lives. Gentlemen that would no more impose upon the World in a
thing they were not absolutely certain, or Eyewitnesses of, than Mounsieur le
Blank, or Sir John Mandevil. -- It Is about the strange nature, gratitude and
generosity of these Lions.

A certain Soldier, of one of these Nations, whom the Romans were pleased to
call Barbarians, whose name was Androcles, being led by his occasions through a
Huge Forest; in the most unfrequented part of it, met with a terrible Old
Lion, who as soon as he saw him, ran directly at him^ The poor Soldier saw no
possible way to escape, and gave himself for a Dead Man, fancying he was
already grovelling under the Lion, and the fierce Beast holding him down with
one Paw, and ^^^^ing him with the others -- But the Lion as soon as he came
near, began to look more mild and gentle, and perfectly fawned upon him, making
besides a kind of complaint and moan, and holding up his Foot, as if in his
^umb Language he desired a remedy. This strange Greeting began to imbolden poor
Andr^cles, who at last took hold of his Paw, (I cannot say shook hands with him)
and looking a little more narrowly upon it, found a great Thorn run in'ot,
which probably he had got a Hunting. And his Foot hugely swollen, and ^ankling
all over; Finding the ^ll, he soon found what business the Lion had with him,
and knowing he had a very surly Patient, as gently as possible picked the Th^rn
out of his Foot, and then squeezed the s^re, you may think not ever-hard, and
got the purulent matter out, which made him so uneasy; on which the Lion
finding himself better, made a kind of Obeisance to his Benefactor, and with
the most Royal smile that his grateful brutal majesty could command, took his
leave of him, and went into his Thicket again. -- Away went Androcles, and was
well contented to cure his wounded Patient i^ form paeuperis, nor once stopped
him to pay the Surgeon.

So it Fortuned that some years after in an Encounter between the R^mans and
his Countrymen, poor Androcles was taken Prisoner, and being a good likely
Fellow, as their cruel manner was, destined to make his Conquerors sport on
their bloody Theater among the other Gladiators. Others were to Fight with Men,
but his chance was to fall into more merciful hands, being with several besides
appointed to Fight with the Lions. A huge overgrown one there was, the door of
whose Den was set open, and out he thundered, while Androcles prepared himself
to dye like a Man as he had lived, and not let the Beast Revel in his Blood,
before he had first ^^st some of his own; -- But as the Spectators judged,
altogether in vain, for the Beast, who now appeared in full view, seemed large
enough, not only to kill him, but almost d^vour him whole before hand, and save
himself the labor. -- So on the stalks toward him, roaring for hunger, having
been on purpose kept from Food several days; his (...) exect, and rough'd about
him, his Eyes all Flaming and Bloody, and lashing his Sides with his Sceptral
Tai^, till the Theater rung ^g^n, and immediately at two leaps came up with his
adver^ary -- but no sooner was he close to him, when on the sudden, to the
amazement of all the Spectators, he s^ood stock still, and gazed upon him
without touching him, at length fell a (...) and ^icking his Hand, and at last
co^ch^ himself qui^tly at his Feet -- who by this time had found the (...) an
accident, discovering in the carriage of the Beast^ed him, the perfect
resemblance of what formerly happened in the Forest -- and concluded, as
indeed it was, that this was his grateful Patient whom he had so long before
cured of his wound, and who now returned him his Life in requital. He told the
amazed Spectators all the Story, which so extremely pleased them, that the
Romans, who to give 'em their due; would encourage generosity even in Beasts,
tho they practiced little mercy themselves, gave both him and the Lion Life and
Liberty, which quietly went about with him, and would never afterward forsake
him while he lived.

There Is a Story -- well made and well told -- why were there nothing else in
all the Book, this by it self would be worth your Eighteen-pence -- well --
while I can tell Tales at this rate, I Will never more sing a Song, nor to other
Nasty thing, tho I should be in company a hundred year together.

No -- I have not done with the Tower yet -- the next thing it presents me with is
-- I think -- more Lions still -- but two-Legged ones -- a company of Tall
Fellows that look stout enough to ea^ up half a dozen Lions, if turned loose
among 'em, (I don't mean Smithfield Lions neither -- the peaceful Evander could
make a shift to do that himself.)

By your leave Gentlemen, quo I, and in I shoulderd by 'em -- and the most
remarkable thing I saw there was Old Hary's Cod-piece -- and such a sizeable
one that I shall never more wonder there belonged so many Wives to it. And his
Daughters Pocket -- Pistol, and she had need wear a whiskin Fardingal to hide
that under it.

There I saw Arms enough to frighten all the Citizens in -- my Shop -- I Will
speak for my self, for I kno^ my own self best. There I saw the Glories of
England; the Royal Crown and Scepter -- which had like to have taken a Ramble
as well as I, and to be exiled after their owner was come home -- That cunning
Rogue Blood having enticed 'em to run away with him -- I don't care if I tell
you the Story, because it is a pretty one -- I cannot tell well how it fell out
(or at least it is too long a Ta^e now to trouble you with) out so it happened
that those two mighty Monarchs Col. Blood the First, and K. Cha^les the Second
fell out, and declared open War again one another, the Colonel, having been
outlawed, and so no longer under the Kings Protection. He finding his Forces
were scarce so many, or so strong as his Adversaries, betakes himself to
Stra^^gem, and disguises himself (ahsly Te^d -- ah cu^^ing (...) su^tle Rascal)
in a Gown of all the things in the Wor^^, and having laid Horses at convenient
places, slips into the Tower, and binding the poor Old Man, away whips me up
the Top of three Kingdoms in a little Satchel under his upper Habiliment, but
would n't ^o the old Gentleman any more hurt than came to him (...) his
binding. -- So off he marches with his Conquest -- but the Angel that guards
the English Monarchy, dreading the Omen if the Scepter and Crown had been lost,
sends home the Old man's Son just in the nick, who finding his Father in such a
peaceable posture, quickly unbound him, and out came all the Truth. -- 'Twas
not long, you may believe before a fearful Hubbub was set up for the lost
perquisites -- Blood had passed one Gate before, at the second the Cry reached
him, and the Warders oppose his passage -- He did not say much, but, up with
his brawny Paw -- sowze down goes one of one side, and to other of to other,
and away marches he between, Cuffing his way through 'em all like a Hercules,
and out he gets as far as the Wharf, when up comes one grim Porterly cowardly
Rogue or other, sneaks behind him and hi^s him one unlucky Remembrance under
the Ear, so down goes Crown, Scepter, Gown and Colonel, altogether as flat as
a Flounder, up they took him again, and carried him away to the King -- but I
happening that day not to be in the Council, cannot so well tell you what
Discourse these two great Persons had together, nor what Articles were drawn
between 'em -- only Blood came off, a Treaty was made, and he lived many a fair
year after. --

Now to observe the difference of Men -- How often might ^onest harmless
Evander have gone to have seen the Crown without ever stealing it at this
fellonious rate. -- It Is absolutely against my Nature to knock down Men at a
Blow as he did -- Nay, so far am I from being hardened enough for any such
Enterprise, that I Am pretty sure, as far as I can guess at my self, could the
Crown and Scepter have both been swallowed and laid close up in my very Belly
instead of under my Coat, had but one Soldier of all the Guards, nay, one
little Boy no bigger than a Cade-Lamb, looked upon me, very fear would have made
me so far from being able to conceal the Theft, that I should certainly have
voided it out into my Breeches. -- So innocent is the Soul of Kainophilus, so
like fair white Paper, wherein you may presently see the least blot or speck of
dirt that happens to fall upon it.

I observed nothing else there, except a kind of an Engin^ like a Scholars
Horse, and indeed I should have mistaken it for one, by the ridg^ of its back,
the leanness of its Body and immobility of its posture, only I could see no
Ribs, which uses to be the largest part in that sort of Creature.

A wooden sort of a dead Animal, quite contrary to Sinon's wooden Horse; for as
that carried Soldiers in his Belly, this does on its Back. But what is that to
Kainophilus? It shall be a fa^r warning to him however, and if he e're turn
Soldier for that trick, if that be the Preferme^t those poor Creatures must
meet with, he will be content to be mounted there with a whole File of Muskets
at his Heels till King James comes home again.

But lest he should be pressed for a Soldier, and made valorous against his
will, he is resolved to stay in that dangerous place (...) longer -- Away then
rubbed Evander (but did not hear the ^^^nons Discharged to honor his Departure)
and because he would be sure to be far enough out of harms way runs down
Gracious Street, and then up to the Top of the Monument.

And pity it is that pretty Knick-knack don't stand in the Center of the City,
for then 'twou'd look like the Middle-Pin in a pack of Nine-Pins among all the
Steeples that gore the Clouds in their passage, and even make rain against
their will. And then the Globe of Flames atop, if 't had but three or four
thousand weight of Lead melted into it for a Bias, would make the rarest Bowl
in Europe.

Here could I easily step over, with the Feet of my Fancy (wider then ten
thousand Colossus's, though one of them be big enough for a Ship to Sail
between its Legs) to all the Spires in London. I could take a Ramble indeed
over the tops of the Chimneys, with a handful of Salt in my Pocket, and catch
all the Swallows that came near me -- But, because I wou`d not Interlope upon
my future Design, having resolved to discourse distinctly of my ae^ial Rambles,
I Will even quietly descend as I went up, not in the outside, though that is the
shortest cut, as the Seaman did who broke his Neck from it while 'twas
Building, but a little the farthest away about, for the Stairs run winding,
which I look upon to be much the nearer way home than the other unless 'twas to
my long home -- which before I come to, O how many tedious Rambles must I take
-- how many a four draught of Dolor, and bitter Morsel of Grief must I
swallow? Truly 'twere worth the while to consider whether I had not been better
made an End all at once.

If a Man has not power over his own Life, over what has he any? -- Nay, It Is
plain, and allowed by all, that he gives this Power away, which he could never
do, if he never had it, when he enters into civil Society, or forms any
Government and submits himself thereto -- and grant but that, how can it be
unjust to throw that away which is better lost than kept? Does any one think it
cruel, inhumane or wicked to cut off a Leg or an Arm when it is Gangreen'd or
Mortified, when it is painful or dangerous, or useless? -- My Body is no better
than the Legs, and Arms, or rather Crutches of my Soul -- Why should it be a
Crime to throw those Crutches away and go alone, especially when they are
troublesome or rotten? Can it be a Fault to choose a better for a worse, and
don't all the thinking World agree that this stare we are now in, is but a
Slavery to sense, a ^^ndage to dull matter, which tedders us down like our
Brother Br^tes, where we are not only exposed to want and misery, but to all
the Insules and Abuses possible to be inferred, and impossible to be avoided.
Why then should I not pull up the stake, or get my Lock and Chain off, and
scamper away in the intermi^able Fields of the invisible World. -- That Region
of Spirits, Reason, Ease, and Rest -- Cleombrotus, Empedocles -- O how I e^^y
you -- who one rusht through the Fire, to other through the Water to reach
Immortality of to other side on it. Those were envious Fools who fault the
Sicilian Philosopher for plunging into Ae^^a, pretending he only did it for
vain Glory to be accounted a God -- No -- 'twas not that he might be so
accounted, but so be -- at least as like one as possible -- Imp^ssible,
immaterial, and wear out endless Durations as those above,

In undisturbed and Everlasting Ease.
I have often wondered what makes us Fools so childishly fond of Life -- Life
did I call it? -- this Death I mean rather, this Twilight-Battish kind of Being
we rather are ^ondemn'd to then properly may be said to Enjoy. KAINOPHILUS it is
certain he has some of the best things that make up what even the wisest part
of Mankind call Happiness. -- He has a lovely Iris in his bosom, in his Arms,
in his Heart -- ('it is Natural for a young Lover to refect first upon that, and
we are neither of us old, or were we so, would that ever quench that m^tual
flame which will last as long as our Souls) If he has not a lubberly Fortune,
such a Lumb^r of an Estat^ as lugs him down to ground with carrying it about
the world, if he has not all the fancied Conveniences that some pride themselves
so much in, and yet want more still when they have 'em, as those especially do
who eagerly languis^ for 'em, e're they are enjoyed, if he has not a large
Palace, a great Coach, nay, not so much as a Colash or Chair to raise the Dust
before him, yet he has more Content without 'em, and a many pretty little
things which many others want, and fancy they should think themselves very
happy in. He Is neither rackt with Stone, Gout, nor a worse Disease -- he is
seldom discontent, or uneasy -- Envys no Man, hates no man, wishes or does no
injury to any other, and as little as possible to himself -- Those little
inconveniences he meets with here (as a stranger must have some when out of his
own Country) he does not much fret at, and yet keeps 'em in as much as
possible, without exposing himself and troubling others. -- And upon the whole,
knows not any person in the World with whom he would change Circumstances for
altogether, or whose condition he either Wishes, or Envies -- And yet after all
this, he wishes himself condemned to eternal Exile and Confinement in this
earthly Dungeon, if he would not more cheerfully the next moment leap into to
other World, were all things there prepared for his Reception, and he for that,
then he would either sleep when drowzy, or rest when he is weary. --

Ware heads below then, -- for my Hands are upon the Balisters, as Temples on
the side of the Boat, and in half a Minute I shall sink down into everlasting
repose -- But art thou sure of this, Evander? -- then indeed 'twou'd be worth
the while. -- Look over a little what thy warm Imagination has thrown in faster
than Reason could weigh it. -- If a Man gives the Power of his Life away when
he submits to any Government, there is a great deal of difference between Power
and Act. He only submits to a higher Power than his own, for the Preservation
and Protection of his Life, as well as of the whole Community, not the
Destruction of it. Perhaps he is born under a Government already (as all the
World now are) He does not here choose Submission, nor so much make as find it.
The very Essence of a Man loses nothing by the loss of a sick part, but his
very Frame is dissolved when the Essential Union of Soul and Body is once
ruined. The Body is rather fancied incurable in many cases than really so. --
It Is impossible in the deepest pain or misery to pronounce positively we shall
never be at Ease, or never be Happy. We often make great Matters of what others
do, and we ought to laugh at and despise, and fancy a scratch of a Pin is a
Mortal Wound. We are not so tied to sensible Object, but we may whenwe please
mount to those that are rational and Divine -- not that even those are to be
contemned or disused, the Body being an Essential part of the Man, and has
therefore suitable Objects provided to entertain it, and must always have some
way or other, while it is not a Carcass. Those who leave a real certain good for
one that is uncertain are never reckoned very wise. -- Nay, he that quits his
post, when ordered upon pain of Death to maintain it, though for what he thinks a
more advantageous one, will hardly come off well with his General. -- How
unreasonable is it to expect the End without the Means, or the close of a long
Journey without stepping one foot forwards. This Life well spent is so much the
way to a better, that there is no other to it, and if any by-way is found, 'twill
only after long Wanderings bring you back again faint and weary where you first
set out, or worse, lead you where you lose both that and your self for ever. --
Have I so many pretty Conveniences of Life, and all strong Arguments they are
to remain in it the more contentedly, and make me look the more ungrateful who
despise 'em.

Then Live, Evander! Ay, so I will, -- you may trust me -- Hands off! Come down
Legs -- I will not turn such a Turk as to fly from the top of a Tower, where I may
civilly walk down Stairs.

Which I did, and saw the Inscription round what I had been a top of -- This
Protestant City, etc! O how Envy there grinns out of Hell, and another just
before her, to see it up again. -- I Will undertake to know a Iesult or a Iacobite
by bringing 'em to the Monument and pointing up to those words, as easily as
the Devil by his Cloven foot -- Look how they scowl and fret, and swear it is
all as loud a Lie as the Gunpowder Treason.

Let 'em be so kind to fret their Gills out if they think fit, while Evander
steps down to Old-Swan, and takes Water -- Stay, -- but it is against Tide --
What if the Mills should suck him in -- well considered -- An Elder-Brother's
Third is generally twisted very tenderly. -- I Am off of such a long Ramble --
I Will to the Stillyard -- The Tide runs strong -- It Is good to be sure -- Come
the three Cranes is but a little further -- or Queen-Hithe -- And now I Am here
it is but edging to Blackfriars Stairs, and then there is no danger; Ay, -- now
-- let us see -- sure now we 're safe -- be n't we Waterman -- See how the Rogue
laughs -- but he does not know my value as well as I do, and what a loss the
World would have if Evander should feed the Fishes.

-- So -- It Is very well -- the Boat is trimmed now -- do you see the Bridge --
what a thing it is -- a Street of Flying Houses -- not quite so large, though as
that Iesuitical-Bridge in China, which Father Kircher tells us of, from one
Mountain to another, above a Mile long, and I Have forgot how many broad -- but
however such a Bridge as a Man were better go over than put off his Stockings
and Shoes to wade through the River^ though in truth it is a dangerous place, for
there are Pick-Pockets ^nnumerable, almost as many as run drops of Water under
in a day -- Therefore I Would advise every Prudent man, that has any business in
Southwark side, if he has any charge of Money about him, to leave it with the
first Beggar he meets with at this End of the Street, and call for it as he
comes back again; or, if he be not in haste, any other time when he comes that
way.

You Waterman -- Hypocrite -- Element-Thrasher, hold Water there, and Land me
at New-Thames-Street, for I Have a mind to go meditate in St. George's Field for
a Quarter of an Hour. -- and meet me again at Lambith without fail; for I intend
(next Chapter) to go see the Tombs at Westminster.

CHAP. VIII.
A Whisker the last was -- longer than e're a one in Magna Chart^ -- But then
consider too, 'twas as full as an Egg and a great deal was dispatched in it --
it took up all one End of London -- now did not Kainophilus (which signifies by
the by, a Lover of News, not any thing of Kain, as if I were a kin to him) did
he not passionately love new ways and Paths, were he contented to drudge on at
the old Hum-Drum way of describing Cities, begin at one end and go to the
other, Why how much easier might he finish all this mighty task -- no, he must
have something pleasant as well as profitable, and that as well as the other, and
indeed both together -- therefore he takes this agreeable Method, and I Am sure
very new, to begin at the Change, thence to the Tower, so to the Monument --
thence half out of the World, then all in again, next to the Waterside --
whence any one wou`d have thought he would have surveyed all the Palaces along the
shore, the Temple, Summers^t Savoy, Northumberland, White Hall, and so to
Westminster -- no, -- this any body might have done -- but observe now the
surprising way I have found out -- away I walk a meditating, as I told you
before and meet the Water-man (without calling in to hear some certain Prayers
for some certain person) and then Sowse -- in I come upon Westminster before
you ever dreamt of me.

This Ancient and Noble City of Westminster, Built near a Plat of Ground
formerly called Thorney, from the Brakes and T^orns which then covered it, but
now Illustrious for its Building, Famous for its Inhabitants, and rendered
populous and remarkable by its Seats of Law, and Courts of Justice -- Now by
this grave period, does the reader think I Am going to transcribe Stow, or some
wise Fellow or other in praise of Westminster -- That very ugly unhandsome
reflection on Kainophil^s, who is not a person that uses to Color Old Books,
or new B^^d 'em, and then put 'em off for New, has turned his resolution, and
you shall not hear one word more of i^ Antiquity, Founder, or any thing ^^se but
what I please, for sure I Am the Master of my own Sense -- don't let the Reader
trouble me with so many impertinent Objections, for that unavoidably leads a
Man into Digressions from the main subject, and then these Digressions lead a
Man into further Digressions, for Error is infinite, and the longer you wander
in a wrong Path, my Shoes to yours, the further you go from the right, if they
are opposite one to the other: Not but that Digressions are so far from being
always a fault, that they are indeed often pardonable, and sometimes, a great
Beauty to any discourse -- but then they must be well turned and managed, they
must come in naturally and easily, and seem to be almost of a piece with the
main Story, tho never so far distant from it -- I love a Digression, I must
confess with all my Heart, because it is so like a Ramble -- but all this while
what is Digression to Westminster -- very much, for that it self's but one great
Digression from London, as St. James's from that, Kenzington, from that,
Hammersmith, from that, Brandford, from that, Hounslow. Heath, from that (never
fear, I Will find it again tho you should turn me loose Blindfold in the midst of
the Common) Salisbury from that (that Digression's a little the largest) Exeter
from that (larger again) the Mount in Cornwall from that (largest of all) -- The
Channel, Plymouth, Tor^ay, Portsmouth, B^achy, Deal, Dover, Thames-mouth,
Graves-End, Mile End, from the Mount -- and so I brought both ends of the City
together, and you home again before a full Pot of good Ale, you can swallow --

The Cock-Ramble of all my Four and Twenty Volumes.
But I know when it is well, and therefore come in and see the Tombs, and look
upon the Clock-work-Fellow that shows 'em -- all his Motions are like the two
fierce brazen Sparks at St. Dunstan's Di^l, there is such gravity, such extreme
Deliberation in the Motion of his Hand and Tongue, that you would scarce believe
him made of any more active M^tal than the Monuments he shows you.

-- Here li -- ^th -- en -- terr'd (quo' he) the Bo -- dys -- of (the Names
worn out) Great-Grand-father to Al -- by -- on the great, Mo -- narch of all
these Real -- mes, and Cor -- de -- li -- a his -- Wife; -- Nay, -- thought I
-- this is the way for us to turn Monuments too, if we stay here till all is
done, if it begins at this rate; so away Rambled I by my self, to make new
Discoveries among the Territories of the Dead, and overlookt heaps of Kings and
Lords, and scarce allowed 'em half-an-eye, so great is -- Somebodies Soul) till
who should I meet among'st 'em all, but the Immortal Cowley -- Hold, -- Let me
step three or four steps back, and rub my Fingers against the Marbles, for
indeed they are a little foul, before I presume to touch his sacred Monument.
--

-- How like is it to that great Man for whom 'twas made -- nothing glaring and
fantastic, but all Proper, Neat, Natural and Modest, and yet a certain Air to
has in it altogether, that the brightest Monument round him can hardly equal.

I should break out into a little ecstasy while weeping over his venerable
Ashes, and in some passionate Lines or other tell the World what to has lost,
and how little it deserved it. But if Phormi^ dared not talk of War before
Hannibal, the very Dust of Cowley has something in it so aweful that I dare not
affront it with such Poetry as I should bring in its Praises -- However I may,
I must again Sacrifice some Tears at thy incomparable Vrn -- I must almost adore
thee, and think that Divine Spirit which ever shone through all of thine, still
hovers over thy precious Relics, and can never Ramble from them.

Live then, Incomparable Man, live both without thy Tomb and in it, or rather
that in thee -- Thou have, thou ever wilt have a far better and a Nobler
Monument, a Mausoleum almost worthy Cowley. Heroes shall learn thy Davidis, and
with that ever keep thee in their Breasts and Memories. While Love, whil Virtue
lives, thy Lambent Flames shall warm the innocent Virgin bosom. A hundred Ages
hence shall they read thy Mistress, envying at once, and blaming that unknown
Goddess that made thee sigh in vain -- Nor shall even that great Name who paid
this so well deserved honor to thy Ashes be ever forgotten; Nor can Buckingham
want a Tomb, while Cowley has one --

-- And while they both live in the Works of Evander.
-- Come let us be e'n going -- There Is nothing else worth seeing that I know.
-- Let Thyn lie where he is till those who sent him thither come and weep over
his Tomb till they fetc him to life again -- And Fairborn of the other side, at
Tangier, more covered with the smoke of Cannons than he of Blunderbusses. --
But now we talk of Tangier -- Have you heard of the Mole and that barren blind
Bargain? -- Was n't Trelawney a brave Fellow? -- The Alcaide -- Sand Hills --
Marine^ Regiments. -- Well, -- The Reader cannot imagine what pains I take to
curbate all my might this rambling fancy of mine, to keep him Company, but though
I lean back to the very Crupper, the Jade starts, and winces about as if she
had a Nettle under her Tail -- So, -- So, -- I Will strok her, and see if fair
means will do -- She begins to be pretty civil, and walks peaceably along
toward the Parliament^ House, and the Hall -- but first let us call in at
Heaven, (here is a House of Entertainment so called) and take a little Soop by
the way -- That Is soon done -- Now Enter -- But whither are we going? Here Is a
hole indeed -- Evander knows what to do with his Life better than to venture
upon New-Discoveries -- Why it looks like the Entry into Okey Hole, or the
Deel's A -- of Peak. Let me see -- Is It possible to get in without creeping
upon Hands and Knees? Mercy of me, what black things with Green Wings are those
that I see wandering up and down within, and appearing through the Shades? -- Sure
they are no better than Incarnate Lawyers, and droves of poor deluded Wretches
dragging after them, out of whom they have Suck^ all their Blood and Substance,
till they look like Ghosts indeed, and miserable ones too; for all the shapes
of Rage, Fury, Despair, and Revenge appear in their Faces. -- Well, -- This
it is to have Land and Money -- Well fare Old Diogenes -- that happy Snail, that
always carried his shell about with him, and nothing else. Who ever heard he
had a Law Suit with his Landlord for Dilapidation, or his Goods ^elz'd for not
Paying Rent, or his Platters and Porridg-Pot for Chimney-Money? But it is a
known thumb'd sweaty Proverb, -- All Trades must live -- And so must he who
takes Malefactors to task after the Lawyers have done with them.

Will no Spiders live in the Roof of Westminster Hall? Why suppose that, yet
the want is pretty well made up with venomous Creatures below, that crowd along
so thick and numerous there is ^o antidote against 'em but an empty Purse.

What a Whipster was this Will^ Rufus, or rather what very Beef-eaters have the
Yeomen of the Guard been ever since Adam, when this Hall was built for them to
dine in -- and were full to the Top, both sides, and both ends turn in but
half-a-dozen of 'em, and if they did n't eat their way through -- let 'em lie
there. Observe the little Grates, and nooks and corners round about it -- sure
they were designed for Butteries, or rather Cupboards to this monster of a
dining room.

What a Hodg-podg of the World is here? Judges and Bailiffs, and Secondaries,
and old Women, and Curates, and Sergeants, and Bishops, and Young Heirs, and
Sh^^es, and Stockins, Gloves, Ribbons, Rattles, and Law Books -- Felons,
Sollicitors, Pick-pock^ts, Attourneys, Whores, Sempstresses and honest-women --
Hold -- why hold -- yes I say it and say it again, honest-Women, for I was there
once with Iris, and I Am so charitable at to hope there might be one more
besides her.

'Twou'd make one amazed now to consider the multitude of Women, and the
Paucity of honest Women. The magnitude of Whores, and the par^itude,
dwidlingness, or exiguity, of truly virtuous Creatures through this nasty
stinking World.

O London, London! If thou art not one Sodom and Gomorrha, thou yet come
pretty near it. Thou art a Turnbul street and Lewk^ors Lane from one end of
thee even to the other.

W^stminster-Hall- Whores. Channel-row- Whores, White Hall -- the Guards,
Charing cross- Whores, the Strand Whores, Temple Bar- Whores. Fleet street-
Whores -- but none after you come within Ludgate; what -- our end of the Town
palluted -- our Civil Laborious Citizens give their Minds to any thing of that
Nature -- no Fough! alas! the very mention on it turns any modest stomach and
brings up all the green and yellow ropey stuff, fat eggs, and snottyglib soft
substance from his Chin to his Navil.

Not that I speak any ill at all of any place in the World by way of experience
-- no -- all the World knows Kainophilus better (I mean all that do know me,
and that you know's the same thing to me.) -- I protest I was so far from any
such thing that when ever I walked through Cheapside it self, that Civil modest
place, if 'twere but a little in night, I always kept my hands in my Pocket for
fear any of these men catchers should truss me up under their Arms, and run
away with me, for Evander was a pretty little boy, and how easily might a great
Termagent Whore kidnap him at that ra^e -- carry him away from his careful
Master, get him into some blind hole and ravish him, and there he would be undone
for ever.

Westminster Ho! I Am but just in Palace-Yard all this while. Pa ace Yard!

That Is the Gate House -- at the sign of the fl^ing-shooe there -- see what we
must all come to -- ( To wear shoes I mean not to angle with 'em.)

How many Journeys had this poor shoe wanderd, how Indesatigably had it
Rambled, for alas it is all worn with labor, before it came to this sad
Condition. And yet after all to come to beg it is bread in it is old Age. It Is a
sad thing to think on.

Well, were I a Privy-Councellor, or a leading Parliament-(...), among many
other excellent projects, I should always be hammering out for the good of my
Country, I would certainly promote some Laws or other to prevent that
Inundation of Beggars which overflow this plentiful Country, and plague it as
much as the Lice did Egypt, and try if 'twere not possible to free our Country
from 'em as well as the Dutch do theirs.

Toward so great and excellent a work that Prince of excellent hopes, King
Edward the sixth, and this famous City of London, have both proposed a very
proper method, and given a glorious Example.

They first sorted the Poor into several distinct R^nks and Orders, -- The Poor
by Impotency, Casualty and Wickedness. For the first sort they provided
(besides many other particular Almshouses of particular Persons and Companies)
Christ-Church Hospital, where so vast a number of Fatherless Children of both
Sexes are so handsomely provided for.

For the second -- The Hospitals of St. Thomas in Southwark and St.
Bartholomews in Smithfield.

For the third -- Bridewell, the most necessary of all the three.

But now were I worthy to shoot my Fools bolt, I should think there is yet very
much wanting toward regulating this famous City, and after their Example the
whole Kingdom.

The first and main thing conducive to such a great end, would be a strict and
just execution of those excellent Laws we already have against Vagrants and
Vagabonds -- Gypseys and other, strolling Ramblers who equally impose upon and
injure their Country. For were all such, us were found young lusty and able to
work for their Livings, well ^hip'd out of their Lazyness, we should n't have
so many swarms of those People pestring and exposing our Streets, Churches,
Hedges and Roads as we have at present, and are yet ^^ke to have.

How many hundreds (we might perhaps add another Cipher) are there about
London, whose whole business and livelihood for themselves and Families is this
way brought in -- whole Streets and Fraternities of 'em living together, and
nursing up a brood of Beggars, from Generation to Generation.

Were these public Workhouses provided to employ those sort of People, Men
and Women, and Children (for ^ome sort of work, even the last would be capable
of) how much more Honor and Strength and Profit would it be to the City and
Nation?

For those who are really impotent, and incapable of working, all the Reason in
the World they should be provided for, and it might be worth the while to
examine whether the Gains acquired by the work of the others might not be so
improved as to maintain these without my charge to the State, or at least but
an inconsiderable one.

Not that all the public Houses of this Nature are to be like Bedlam's. In
some Cases and Instances great Cities are indeed to consult their Grandeur and
Honor, but for the most part Co^venience far outdoes Magnificence, and the
maintenance of perhaps a thousand wretches more in a comfortable being much
more honorable than having a fine Portal built, or the roof of a Hospital
mounted a story or two higher.

But not to forget these miserable wretches who first occasioned this Discourse
-- the Prisoners for Debt -- with Submission to the Policy of almost all
Mankind and all Ages, it seems an odd sort of a Punishment to infl^ct the
heaviest Pains, next to Death, it self, namely perpetual Imprisonment, on what
is very often rather a misfortune than a crime in those who suffer it, and that
for no end, not any good to be obtained by it.

If a Rogue run away with a great part of my Estate, if another breaks, or
another Fire my house and ruins me -- why it looks very hard that for these
miseries, I must endure others, and be confined to a stinking Dungeon all the
days of my Life, for what I did not cause, and cannot remedy. And then of those
who are imprisoned in this manner, is there one to ten who ever pays any thing
the more? -- nay don't this generally make 'em desperate, and careless whether
ever they come out again, or what they spend while they are there?

These as much deserve Pity and Charity, a^ another sort censure and
punishment, who when they have Estates or Trades carelessly lavish all away in
lewd or riotous living, or else by their fully, heedlesness, and neglect of
business and accounts, waste away insensibly, while a third more wicked than
both, get whatever Goods or Moneys they can possibly scrape together, and ru^
into Prison as into Garrison with all their Spoil, not careing thereby how many
industrious Families they inevitably ruin.

These last are infinitely worse than Robbery upon the Highway, and I think
deserve no less punishment. -- But the only speedy way to prevent their
villainy, would be effectually to root out all those Sanctuaries where they lurk
-- The Mint, White Friars, etc. For would any Forreigner believe, that the wise
and excellent Constitution of the English Government would allow places within
its Bosom where it has no power -- where its Writs and Officers are no more
regarded than they would be in Iapan or China?

For the lesser sort of Bankrupts, made so either by carelessness or Riot -- It
might not be amiss as a good prevention to their poverty, that the prudent
Custom of some Nations were Enfranchised here -- namely -- examining how every
Person lived at every years end by public Censors to that end appointed, at
least all such as were suspect either of Sloth or Debauchery -- For such as
offended on the worst side of the two, after admonition, Corporal punishment.
For the other a little more labor might in a great measure very much alter
Affairs in a few years, nor should we in all likelihood have our Prisons so
full, or our Shops and Houses so empty.

Well -- if the World laughs and looks a squint at all this grave Council, and
painful thoughts which I have laid up together for their advantage not mine,
why then -- they been't worthy on it, and there is an end, while I Ramble on to
somewhat else, after I have dropped four Farthings into the old Shoe I was
talking of, and then left it as I found it.

And Ramble on to the Privy-Garden; was n't that Kings Jester a merry Fellow
who sold this pretty spot of Ground to Build upon, and that Country Squire a
very Country Squire who bought it of him?

Let 'em both alone to make up their Bargain as well as they can, for we are
now got into Whitehall (nor will not so much as afford the poor desolate Popish
Chapel one Ave Mary as we pass by it.)

And what shall we stare upon here? It Is scarce worth the while to tell you
when 'twas Built, and by whom, and what 'twas first called -- York Palace -- as
it might have been afterward when King Charles the Second lived in it as well
as before King Henry the Eighth being Burnt out of House and Home at
Westminster, removed his Lodgings thither.

Every one in's way, Let those who understand Architecture admire the
Galleries, the Banqueting House, or new Lodgings, all which is like the
English better than it looks for: Let others admire the pleasant new Whi^ligig
of a Weather cock, erected before the Prince Landed, on purpose to see when a
Protestant Wind blew -- There are two things that please me infinitely more
than all this, or all the fine Pictures, Arms, Hangings, or any thing besides
-- And that is -- The much Eating, and no Fighting -- three hundred and sixty
four thousand Bushels of Wheat in a year -- very well -- Life has a lusty
staff, and will hardly fall for want of Bread; seven thousand Sheep -- very
well; fifteen thousand Yoke of Oxen -- O Beef Eaters! -- Hens, Pullers, and
Chickens innumerable -- forty six thousand six hundred and forty pound -- a
great many years ago -- and Butter's n't loved now less than 'twas then -- all
this is very well -- but -- what shall we do for Drink? Why a Man will never
choke where there is six hundred Tun of Wine, and seventeen hundred of Beer
broached in a Twelvemonth.

But that delicate, wise, sage Law -- that there must be no Fighting there --
The very thoughts on it does my Heart good -- methinks Kainophilus is so safe
when he is in that Blessed Palace -- How happy would he count himself if all
London, nay, all the World were but like it -- well does he deserve to have his
Hand cut off that strikes his Innocent Neighbor, and I Will willingly hold both
mine out for that purpose, if you ever catch 'em Fighting either there or any
where else.

What do you think of a walk at St. James's Park -- agreed -- it is a curious
place that is the truth on it -- The Canal, the Carriages, the Statue, the Owls,
the Walks, the Mall, the Ladies and fine things I saw there, quite dazzled my
Eyes to look upon 'em. -- So I took 'em off again, being quite ashamed to see
so many painted and patcht Creatures Squint and Ogle at me as if they would have
devoured me -- so I made haste and run the Gauntlet through 'em all, coming out
at the Palace, resolved for the Hay-Market and Charing Cross --

But in my way thither, met with the pleasantest Sign that ever Man looked upon
-- 'Twas a Man I think, or somewhat like one, with one Shoulder over his Head,
the the other down at his H^^l, his Toe turned back to his Neck, and his
Forefinger at the top of the Cieling, and Posture-Clark wri^under -- This
Whim's worth seeing -- in stepped V^nder, and found a Bottle of good Wine there,
and for the Diversion of Gentlemen saw all the Tricks, and heard the Stories;
some of which you shall hear as well as I -- once upon a time he was drinking
with some Gentlemen in a Room next the ^treet* and saw a very Beavish Fellow
pass by, full of ^^ms^lf up to the Brim, and as great he looked as he was able
to hold -- Come Gentlemen, says -- Posture, for a Gu^n^a I hit that Fellow over
the Pa^e with a Broom-staff, and he never touches me again -- art Mad -- why
he will certainly whip thee through the Lungs, or Nail thee to the Wall -- I Will
venture it -- Down he goes -- comes behind the Spark, and takes him a thump in
the Pa^e that almost felled him -- round turns he with his Sword half out, and
sees nothing, as he thought, but a perfect Natural, the subtle Rogue having so
altered the very Muscles of his Face, that any one would have Sworn he had been
Born a Changeling he slaver'd and dangled his Hands, while his Eyes lookt-like
a couple of Stones, and his Broom-staff between his Legs, and he lolling
upon it, and staring his Enemy in the Face -- who no sooner saw what a sort of a
thing he was going to run through, but he claps up his Sword again, and swore
heartily if he had n't been a Fool h^^'d have ripped up the Gu^^ of him.

Another time, either a certain Tailor had angered him, or he was resolved to be
merry with him -- he sends for him to take measure for a Suit of Clothes,
telling him, he was somewhat crooked, as he might see, and having heard he was
an ingenious Fellow for rectifying such disorders, had sent for him -- I war'nt
you Master -- quo' Monsieur Le Fisk -- I Am the best in England at it -- you
know the little Person of Quality, the length of whose Tongue supplies that of
his Body -- why I have boulster'd him up that he looks as str^^ght as an Arrow
-- very well -- out come Sciss^^s and Parchment, he takes measure of one whose
Right Shoulder wa^ out, ^or Clark has as great a command of all the Ioints of
his Body as Muscles of his Face -- It Is done -- you shall have it next Saturday
without fail -- It Is brought home acsording to order -- He tried it on, you
dull Dog, quo' ^lark -- could n't you remember which Shoulder 'twas (for now he
had put the other out) Master I Will Swear I was never so mistaken in my Life --
well -- I Will go home and alter'^ presently -- away he goes, brings it again,
and finds both Shoulders out -- Clark Swore then worse than at the first --
why, you shrid of Mankind -- did n't you see I was Hump-backt -- well -- I Will
stake my Life on it I please you this bout, home he takes it once more, and when
he brings it back, Clark was as strait as an Arrow. The poor Tailor stares
round on his Head, Back, both sides, and finding 'twas the very same Person who
he was sure the first time he saw him had one Shoulder out of order, the second
the other, the third both, and now all right again -- sto^d still a little
while and said nothing, at length cried out, It Is the Devil that is certain,
threw down the Clothes, and down^tairs he scamper'd as if Satan had really been
clapping him upon the Shoulder.

Well, if you laugh at these Stories as much as I did, they will do you more good
than a course of Physic, or a quarter of a years drinking the Waters.

But I cannot stay, my time's almost at an end, my Book's almost done, and I
find the Bulk grows upon me, and yet I Have almost three quarters of London yet
to Survey -- therefore away Ramble I to Charing Cross, as fast as if I Would
mounted behind his Majesty himself a top of his black Courser -- and a little
faster, for I Have a fancy I can walk better than that Beast, though scarce leap so
well -- for 'twas a terrible way from a deep Cellar, I know not how many yards
underground to skip up higher than a Balcony. Sir,

I trotted o^ about a quarter of an hour longer till I came to Summerset-House,
and being no Justice of Peace nor Knight, it being besides in the middle of the
day, ventured in among 'em.

It Is a curious Pile of Buildings, erected by Edward Duke of Summerset, Uncle
to King Edward the Sixth, in the year 1549. It has a pleasant, though small
Garden, and some walks between that and the Waters side, on which it is very
delectably seated -- as you may see if you will take a pair of Oars and go
thither.

By which you will have the advantage into the Bargain of a view of the Savoy --
that Famous School of the Jesuits, to whom some (you may guess how) good
Protestants sent their Children to be instructed, no Protestant or Englishman
having Learning enough for 'em, by that wonderful Scholar Poult^^, whose wit
was so great, and memory so little, that he forgot the Names of his own Popes.

Ah poor Catholics -- what pains they took? ( shame to us) how they sweated
and tugged for their Dagon while they were here (one would think they knew
their time was short) how laborious and indefatigable so nimbly to plant what
was more nimbly rooted up -- How many fine Lo^ging partitions, Schools and
Galleries -- after all to rub off without a stroke -- only with some hundreds
of thousands of Guineas and Curses, to be turned out of their new Built Hives (
poor Wasps! harmless Hornets! they wou^d not I warn't ye have hurt any
Protestant for all the World) to be packed first out of England, and then in
probability out of all the World, for if France falls it is very likely their
blessed Society may be dissolved -- this indeed is hard Fortune -- did not they
deserve it for having been so kind to the Heretic Dogs while they were here,
and cutting no more of their Throats, nor Firing their Cities to any purpose
above once or twice in an Age.

-- Let 'em go -- we shall find 'em again at Wild-house -- but first step up a
top of the May Pole; Alas poor Creature -- how art thou humbled -- thou who
had a Spire as high as a Steeple, and were almost long enough to have made a
Walking staff for the Cities Guardian Angel as he Rambled cro^s the Clouds.
Thou have worse luck than all the City besides thee -- Thus is Age despised --
for whereas that is risen three or four Stories higher, thou art taken so much
lower than when at first Erected.

This shall be a fair warning to Kainophilus to keep where he is, in a moderate
height, neither low enough for every one to tread upon, nor yet so tall and
topping as to make the Neighbors cut him down, for fear of tumbling a top of
'em, and breaking their Necks.

I will not say the Worlds-honester, for Evander will not Lie, but I Am confident it is
Wiser than 'twas formerly, was n't wise work for one Company of hot headed
Fools to set up this stripling of a May pole, and make half a wooden God of
him, Singing and Dancing, and not rarely, Fighting and Fudling and Whoring ^n
his Honor -- and were not another crew very discreetly Zealous who made War
against May poles (and Bear-baiting) with as much earnestness and vigor as
they would have done against Turk and Pope, slashing and hewing the innocent Timber
where e're they came near it -- whereas now neither are people so mad for or
against it, but as the poor Justice said upon the point -- They that will have
a Maypole shall have a Maypole, and they who will not may let it alone.

It Is uncertain whether the Fellow I Am about telling you a merry Story of, had
been Dancing at a May Pole or no, but sure* enough he was got finely Fox'd some
where or other in the Strand, and staid at it till the Watch was set -- and then
homeward he Rambled as his brutish Carcass could direct him, for his Soul was
Imprisoned (as the Dutch Towns when the Sluices were drawn up and the Dykes
pierc^d) and could do him no farther Service -- In this pickle such as 'twas,
and 'twou'd have bin worse had he happened into a Kennel or Common shore, was he
sholling through the Strand -- it was a Moon shiny Night, but the Moon being got
behind the Houses, shined only a slant, and sent a little stream of light out
of one of the small Lanes quite cross the Street -- This the I^^de^^ Indenture-
maker was now arrived at, and being a little sensible what a condition he was
in, and so very careful of any danger, fancied he was come somewhere or other,
for he had absolutely forgot where he was, to the side of a River -- so up the
Stream and down he goes to look for a Bridge, but finding none, reeled back to
try if he could leap over -- till coming to the side, he fancy^d the Brook too
wide for him, therefore put off his Stockings -- and Shoes to see whether he
could wade it -- in he steps very gingerly, but the further he thrust in his
Leg, finding the more of the Moonshine, off go his Breeches too -- not enough
yet -- the rest of his Clothes follow, Shirt and all, which tying up in a
Bundle over he throws, and himself wades after -- yet 'twou'd n't do -- he
finds it up to his Chin -- so out he strikes his Hands and Feet, down he falls
and mawls his Body against the Pavement, but finding he could make no way out
of this Enohanted River, falls a yelping for some good Body to lend him a Rope
and save his Life. The Watch who had stood near, and observed the Farce all the
while with a great deal of Diversion, took up the poor Drownded Creature, half
throttled with the conceit on it, and carried him to the Round-house, giving him
his Clothes again, where he lay till he was sober, and sufficiently ashamed of
that extravagance his Intemperance had thrown him into, though much more harmless
than many others in that mad condition have been guilty of.

Let^s step up a little to Wits Coffee-house, and present our Service to Mr.
Laureat -- that was -- what in the same Religion for a whole three or four
years together! indeed Mr. Bays it is unconscionable -- The Farce will grow dull
if you make no Incidents -- why there is no more of Plot in this than in the
Rehearsal. -- In your Ear -- shall we take a walk to Wild-house together --
there is a finer Opera to be shown than any of your own, though you take in that
you have pillaged from Milton among the rest, though it is confessed there is a Vein
runs through it all your own, and you make your Grandmother talk very knowingly
for one so Innocent.

By this time we are there, enter Prologue -- Beads -- Whips -- Mass-books,
dark Lobbies and Holy Water -- draw up the Curtain -- Act the first, Seen the
first -- But hold -- is there any distinction of Scenes in a Puppet-show? --
enter Priest, Scaramouch, Operator, or what you please, with two or three small
Harlequins like Tumblers or Rope-dancers to attend his merry -- Holiness -- so
-- now it begins -- Dye see this small little tiny scrap of Bread Gentlemen --
no bigger than a Christning Maccaroon -- look upon it all of you -- is n't Bread
Gentlemen -- ay Bread, what should it be -- well -- mark the end on it -- keep
your Eyes fixed -- by the virtue of Hocus-Pocus -- Hiccius Doctius, ^ey Presto!
but what is it now -- why Bread still -- nay -- then I Will be Burnt for a
Heretic, as you deserve to be for saying so -- why it is a Man, an Errant Man
(ay and more too) with Eyes and Nose, Teeth, Blood, Bones and Fingers, as you
and I have -- Mr. Bays -- did you ever see the like in all your Changes --
here is a turn without an alteration, a very pretty Miracle where nothing at
all is effected, but all things exactly in stat^ quo -- ay, but consider a
little -- softly -- your Eyes may be deceived -- the Senses often are so --
dear Mr. Bays, let me take you a gentle tweak by the Nose, and if you cannot
feel me, you shall persuade me I don't see that -- These are Sacred things, and
you ought not to make a May Game of 'em -- they were Sacred before you had the
handling of 'em, but you make 'em what you blame others for doing -- your
Priests there is as absolute a Merry-Andrew as e're a one in Smithfield -- you
Burlesque your own Religion so egregiously that a Man must not have one grain
of Spleen in his Nature, or else bite his Lips off to see all the Trumpery and
not laugh at it -- how do all the grave Persons then that are present with such
great Devotion -- yes -- observe how great it is -- there is an old Woman at once
mumbling her Beads and a piece of Biscuit -- another with one Hand on his Mass
Book, and another on his next Neighbors -- another with his Eyes turn^d up to
the top of the Crucifix, and his Mouth whispering to the next patched Lady that
leans languishingly that way and rests upon his Shoulder. A fourth most
devoutly twatling his Ora pro nobis, and at the same time slipping a Billet
Deux or Assignation Note into a Religious Creatures Glove that all in Tears
beholds the gaudy Idol just before her, but wipes ^em off to tip a promising
wink to her as Idolatrous Enamorato -- if all this been't true Mr. Bays, I
appeal to your Eyes as well as my own -- and sure there is no Transubstantiation
in this case what e're there is in others -- well you are a hardn'd insulting
Heretic -- get you gone and leave me alone to my Devotion -- agreed -- for you
are not worth Lampooning, having been flogg'd and yerkt so long between
Catholic and Heretic, that there is not one sound Inch left in Body, Soul or
Reputation -- now,

Now for the Temple -- but I met with all the Lawyers at Westminster -- Alas
there is nothing here now but a few solitary Whores wandering from one Staircase
to the other, as a Bird flutters about a Tree when her young ones are ravished
from her.

Fleet-bridge, I Would rather go over thee than tumble into the Ditch.

'Ware Bridewel, and we are got safe at Paul's. One wou^d think 'twere Built for
the Universal Church to meet in -- will it ever be up, or ever down again? when
it is so any Traveller that comes to see that glorious Structure, let 'em look
for Evander's Name, and if they don't find a thousand Guineas subscribed by him
toward that noble design, let 'em be so kind to do it for him, and trust to
his honesty for payment.

What Is next -- Pauls-Church-yard -- but I dare not stay, my Face may chance to
be known, and then Murder comes out immediately.

Cheapside -- it grows late, 't has been a pretty long walk -- the Sun's down
and the Light's up like half a hundred Suns together.

Let Us see -- Bow-Church -- Mercers-Chapel -- hold while it is well. It Is time
for ever^ honest Man to be at Home, and therefore here will I set up my Staff
and Ramble no longer, having brought you through the City to the Change where I
first begun.

And now, that none may say Evander is uncourtly, he will make a Leg and doff his
Hat before he parts, and then you're very welcome Gentlemen.

If the World be but so just to the Author, and so kind to its self as kindly
to accept this first Essay of his Iuvenile Rambles, which must of necessity be
the most barren part of all the rest, Kainophilus promises by all he values in
this World, by his own Honor, and by the love of Iris, to have the second
Volume out by the latter end of the next Term at furthest, comprehending an
exact and pleasant account of what happened to him (and many others) during his
seven years Apprentiship -- all the hardships some Prentices endure* all the
ways taken to ruin 'em, and how to avoid them all, lastly, the brave things
the London Prentices have done from him that killd the two Lions down to

Your Obsequious Pedestal and Humillimous Servants Servant Kainophilus Evander.
The End of the First Volume.
Books Newly Published.
A New Martyrology, or the Bloody Assizes, now exactly methodiz'd in one
Volume, comprehending a complete History of the Lives, Trials, Sufferings,
Death and Characters of Sir Edmondbury Codfrey, Justice Arnold, Mr. College,
Arthur Earl of Essex, William Lord Russel, Coll. Sydney, Capt. Walcot, Mr.
Rouse, Mr. Holloway, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Alderman Cornish, Mr. Bateman, Mr.
Noyce, Dr. Oats, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Dangerfield, the late Duke of Monmouth, with
the impartial History of his whole Expedition in the West; the Earl of Argyle,
Coll. Rumbald, Mr. Benjamin and Mr. William Hewling, Mr. William Ienkins, Mr.
Batiscomb, the Lady Lisle, Mrs. Gaunt, Mr. Nelthrop, Mr. Charles Speak, Coll.
Holmes, Mr. Hicks, Mr. Lark, Mr. Madders, Capt. Kid, Dr. Temple, Mr. Parret,
Capt. Annesly, and Capt. Matthews. Together with the Dying Speeches, Letters
and Prayers, etc. of all the rest of those Eminent Protestants who fell in the
West of England and elsewhere, from the Year 1679, to 1689* with the Pictures
of several of the chief of them in Copper Plates. To this Treatise is added the
Life, Death, and Character of George Lord Iefferies, with the History of his
Western Cruelties. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Abdicated Prince, or the Adventures of Four Years; a Tragi-Comedy, as it
was lately Acted at the Court at Alba Regalis, by several Persons of Great
Quality. The second Edition. Price 1 s.

The Bloody Duke, or the Adventures for a Crown; a Tragi-Comedy, as it was
Acted at the Court at Alba Regalis, by several Persons of ^reat Quality.
Written by the Author of the Abdicated Prince. Price 1 s.

The late Revolution, or the Happy Change; a Tragi-Comedy, as it was Acted
throughout the English Dominions in the Year 1688. Written by a Person of
Quality. Price 1 s.

The Royal Uoyage, or the Irish Expedition; a Tragi^ Comedy, as it was Acted,
and is now Acting in Ireland by the Chief Officers in his Majesty's Army. Price
1 s.

These four new Plays contain a full Account of the Private Intrigues of the
Two last Reigns, and of all the most Remarkable Transactions that have happened
since.

FINIS.
A Voyage Round the World: OR, A Pocket-Library, VOL. II.

Containing the Rare Adventures OF DON KAINOPHILUS, During his Seven Years
Prenticeship.

The whole WORK intermixed with Instructions for the Management of a Man's whole
Life.

As also with particular Remarks on the most noted BOOKSELLERS, AUTHORS and
POETS, In the City of London.

I wear my Pen as others do their Sword,
To each affronting Sot I meet, the Word
Is satisfaction; straight to thrusts I go,
And pointed Satyr runs him through and through.
Oldham. LONDON, Printed for Richard Newcome, 1691. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

Advertisement.
THere is newly Published, The present State of Europe: Or, the Hist^^cal and
Political Mercury: Giving an Account of all the public and private Occurrences
that are most considerable in every Co^^t for the Month of September, 1690.
with Reflections upon every State; to be contin^ed Monthly from the Original
published at the Hague by the Authority of the States of Holland and
West-Friezland.

The Mercury for the Month of August last is likewise done; they are both Sold
by the Booksellers of London and Westminster.

PREFACE TO THE Booksellers OF LONDON.
GENTLEMEN,
IHope I need not assure you that 'twould be the farthest thing in the World
from my Intentions, should any Passage in these Papers be thought a reflection
on your honorable Employment, so liberal and ingenuous, that it indeed seems
an ART rather than a TRADE: The very attempting any such thing would be the
worst defiling my own Nest, and would make me ashamed to look on my self as
well as you. That there are some ill Men (...) us, Spite of the Proverb, (...)
to (...) denied, nor needs it any Excuse, any more than the exposing those
Persons to the just Censures of present and future (...). The proper End of
(...) is to (...) Vice, the abuse on^t to expose Virtue under that Name and
Dress; (for in its own it is so amiable, that all the Wit and Malice of its
Enemies can neither render it ridiculous nor odious.) Thus wa^ the Old Comedy
grown so licentious as not only to expose but ruin the best of Men, bringing
their very Names openly on the Stage.

Were there any such thing in this Book. I Would be my self one of the first should
burn it, without putting the World to the trouble. But on the contrary, I
appeal to any not concerned, whether most of those here exposed are not such as
highly deserve it, and that by Things, not Names: For is there not all the
Reason (...) the World that a PROUD DON, (...) a designing Hypocrite, a
conceited ^lockhead or a whimsical Author, a (...) old Spend-thrift or a young
de^auch'd Fop, should be set out in their ^wn Colors? that both others may be
de^rr'd from following their Examples, and ^hey themselves possibly grow
ashamed of their own Folly. Cervantes among the ^paniards was the first who
wrote in this ^rolling sort of Prose-Satyr -- and being (...) neat Wit, and a
vast Genius, did it to ^dmiration, sufficiently exposing the empty ^ons of his
Nation, so full of their own ^ighty selves, supercilious to all Mankind
^esides. Quevedo was another Attempt of (...) same kind, tho not on the same
Subject, his Walk being something lower, and ^ore among that sort of People
which (...) have here to deal with. But all this ^ou know already, and I cannot
tell why I ^hou'd r^peat any more on it, unless to show (...) READING --
therefore I Will let the City-Romance alone, which perhaps is nearer the Design
here intended than (...) before mentioned. I have only to (...) you know, that
besides the Satyr her^ and there scattered in these Books, the^^ are many
things which want a Key, (...) are like to do so, for they were not wri^^ for
every Body, tho there is enough intelligible to entertain the World with a great
deal of Diversion. -- And now.

GENTLEMEN, I Am your Humble Servant, Kainophilus

Panegyric Verses.
To the Memory of my endeared Friend, Don Kainophilus, Author of this Book of
Rambles.
ISing the Man who Ropes and Cables bore
On that Right Hand which lifted Books before:
He, shook by Storms, and tossed by Tempests blast,
Now Anchors in his Iris Arms at last.
Dundee and Durina! Gluckstadt and Oran!
Vsbeck and Vlster! Rome and Ispahan!
Novogrod! Boston! Famagosta-Fair!
T^vestock renowned, and more renowned Tangier!
Open your Stony Iaws! Huzza and Bellow!
Nor stick to own you never saw his Fellow!
U. E. Student
in Oxford.
The headless Giant in Sir J. Mandevil's Travels, to the Author of this second
Volume of Rambles.
I Who am Porter grim within this Place,
And guard the Entry with my manly Face;
Who, thank my gentle Nurses! can defy
The Axe, the Gibbet, and the Pillory:
Who was by strong Enchantment tedder'd here
For (let me see!) some fifty-thousand Year;
Like a poor Monkey by the Loins confined,
Unless some stronger Charms my Chains unbind;
Left in this hopeful pickle out of spite
By Mandevile, that harsh uncourteous Knight:
To whom but you, Sir Author! should I flee,
To you, who have seen far rarier shows than He?
Who Mandevil himself out- Mandevil as far
As I beyond a Dwarf can throw the Bar:
Him Foreign Shores, though valued here no higher,
Whom his ungrateful Country scorns, admire:
Yet, what is contained in all his boasted store
Which your fair Vollume has not all and more?
Learnings advanced since he his Work begun,
But had he e're seen thine, 't had never been done.
His famous Works of Cocks in Woollen tell,
Thou'st seen 'em dressed in Down, and that is as well:
He of a horrible Land-Meermaid writes;
But thou at Sea have seen far stranger Sights:
Thou saw a score at once -- or would ha'don't, no doubt,
Had they but been so civil to peep out.
And since that one good turn requires another,
Since I on you your due applause bestow:
O let one Trav'ler aid against the the other!
O speak the word, Sir Knight! and let me go!
A Bookseller. ANAGRAM. O. B. seek all over.
DEar Friend! how did I seek all over?
And doubt I never should find thee more?
-- Well! since you are come, let thee and I
Each other kindly edify!
Begin! I Will follow Lie for Lie!
-- Sto -- ho -- hop! or all our Braggs are vain,
For Pegasus upon his Neck has got the Rein,
And away^ he flies thundering over the Plain,
-- But all of the sudden stops again;
(There Is a fine turn!) and softlier goes
Than Zephyr breaths or Lethe flows:
Than Spices brought from Western Isles,
Or than Valeria when she smiles:
Let Us to the Rack-staves tie him fast,
And then return to what is past.
O! B --! for Blockhead, whose dry Pate
Yet never yean'd at such a rate,
Who naught beyond thy Stall do know,
Nor e're did to New England go.
If thou would gain the Worlds Esteem,
Seek here all over, and learn from Him.
He Is not of the third dull seeking kind,
Of those who neither seek nor find.
Through all the World he seeks all over,
Seeks close and finds all and more,
For what he round the World does roam,
In's Mouth or Book he brings all home:
He claps it down before it is gone,
Slap-dash-he has't -- it is all his own.
So have I seen a Spaniel mild,
With Ears full large and long,
As Innocent as Chrysom Child,
As Garagantua strong:
When e're his Master cries, Seek out!
Forth he will like Lightning move,
He seeks all over, and all about,
To find the Staff or Glove:
His Master smiles, and will not chide,
If he returns when sent,
And spits in's Mouth and claps his side,
And Tray is well content.
O! B --! -- for Buzzard! who so loudly sings
As far as Tyber's distant Springs,
Who stretching out thy saily Wings,
Does seek all over in search of Fame,
Almost as far as the Author came:
E're thou come home, take one Voy'ge more,
(You Are not in haste) and seek all over:
O seek all over that various pack,
Thou bear upon thy brawny Back!
Seek over those long Gazets which often
Thy Claws from distant Fields have brought.
Put on thy Spectacles and proceed,
(Though it is not every Bird can read!)
Confess the Truth and be sincere!
In all the Libraries which are
Well stuffed with Books, thou seek'st all over;
Say -- Buzzard! did e're see the like before?
O! B --! for Critic B. for C. a small Mistake, 'twas but the very next Letter.
, who with envious Eye
On what thou can not mend do prye!
Find one Errata if you can,
In all this pretty Map of Man:
Vander in Minature for this
Is the true Microcosm of his.
Seek -- seek all over, from Heel to Chin,
If thou can find a fault therein.
O! B --! for Bookseller discreet!
The Hawkers all thy coming greet!
See how they gape in every Street!
Waiting the last, the happy Sheet:
See how they crowd about the Door!
See how they seek, and seek all over!
What Advertisement needs there more?
See how they are all prepared to roar --
-- And cry thy Book as heretofore;
Their Throats the Scholar's Maggots tore,
Whose Face to th'Life is drawn before,
With so much Beauty -- thine has hardly more.
So have I seen in Summer Eve
(Greats we'll with Smalls compare)
A Tripe-wife washing her fair Tripes,
Though not so fair as her:
She scrubs, and scrubbs, and turns 'em round,
And seeks, and seeks all over,
And though she has whole Cart-loads found,
Still seeks, and seeks for more:
Whilst all the little Silver Fry,
Which in the Water play,
Caper and Dance, and frisk on high
To catch the golden prey.
Then with it to some hole they fly,
Shake hands and part like you and I,
Kindly each other bid Good b'w'y',
Make a Leg and a Bow and away!
Well may the World go seek all over,
And thus lament in vain:
Two such wise Folks never met before,
Nor e're shall meet again.
A Poetical DIALOGVE between the Author of these Rambles and the discourteous
Reader.
Reader. JOhn Vander! John Vander! O where have thou been?
O! Vander John! Vander John! what have thou seen?

Author. Heaven and Earth, Sea and Land, all the World I Have been tossed on,
Nor lain still a wink from Graffham to Boston.

Reader. Declare it, nor spare it, for a Trav'ler may do it;
Upon such Authority none can dispute.

Author. Not -- I -- Sir! for why Sir! my Book it will spoil,
Take Counsel and buy Sir! if your Cares you would beguile.

Reader. O -- No -- Sir! for so Sir I shall never have done w'ye,
Nor is any so dangerous as a Surfeit on Honey.

St. Brandon, A Famous Trav'ler of whom the Golden Legend treats, to the Author.
A Pindarick.
FRom the dark abode of Hell:
From Purgatory Drying Pan, and Limbo-Fire:
From every a Kettle deep,
Where many a greasy Fire:
Grim Pitch-fork Feens in their own Gravy steep,
I Come strange News to tell.
Over Hedge and Ditch of old I ran,
Through Earth, and Air, and Sea, and Shore,
Further than either Devil or Man
Since, or before.
In Witches, and
In Faery-Land,
Where er'e my lying Monk was pleased to Willo'the-wisp me round,
Poor Judas I saw in a pitiful case:
His Lodging was on the cold ground,
But I did not envy his place,
Though he sat on a Stone to cool his Face.
( O hone! O hone!
Sure 'twas a Whet-stone!)
Then a Shipboard I went to my cost,
Where I, though a Saint, like a Dog in a Blanket was tossed:
She strikes! She strikes! six foot water in hold!
Pray! Pray! while you may, for your Mouths will quickly be cold:
She Is lost; She Is lost
For want of a Passion-miraculous Nail.
But I got up a Horseback a top of a Whale;
I rein'd him in strong,
And still kept my Seat, though the Stirups were a little too long.
Nor could his curvetting prevail:
All this and more did me betide,
Or else my Monk has foully ly'd,
Yet so much worth does in thy Labors shine,
My Legend, Great Don John! must yield to thine.
My Lady of Loretto's Chapel to the Author.
WOnder not that you hear my Tongue,
Although I have not used it long!
Why should you think it a greater Lie
That I can Talk, than that I fly!
May Thunder my Foundations strike,
If both of 'em been't true alike!
My Rambles well enough are known,
And what fine Slight-of-hand I Have shown.
Where Grazing's done I never would stay;
Like Tartar Carts, bait and away.
Some Hocus Angel whips me thence;
Prasto! I Am gone like Latten-Pence.
They Have used me kindly where I am,
Or else long since I Would gi'n 'em the sham,
And fled to th'place from whence I came.
Long I upon my Honor stood,
Knowing I was of Rambling wood;
Nay, durst have undertook a Course
With Pacolet's, or Astolfo's Horse;
Since at three standing Jumps, (Do You smile?)
I reached at least Three thousand Mile:
Which (burn me if I say not true!)
Is more than every House can do.
But thou, alas! have me outdone,
And all my ancient Trophies won:
Thy Heel and Head which much more rare is,
From Pole to Pole danced the Canaries:
Thy Rambles, worn in every Pocket,
Will put my Nose quite out of socket;
And whilst poor Fame is out of breath,
Will make me blush my self to death.
The simple Cobbler of Agawam to the Author of these Rambles.
There is a certain Trav'ler acomming yet behind,
Will ride the Reader off his Legs, and break his Wind.
WEre not my Friendship most sincere,
To please you I Would not write so far;
Though I retain an earnest Passion
For the good Authors of my Nation:
Who, I presage, shall never want one,
While they deal well with young Vander's Son.
Since Letters then, with the discerning,
Are held the Li^e and Soul of Learning:
Since yours must needs be most delighting,
Who'd still a pretty knack at Writing;
Whose easy Periods never hobled,
Sometimes Translated, but never Cobled.
Here lets begin, and one help the other,
As often has many a better Author.
It Is done -- how strong, how blessed are we?
Beaumont and Fletcher, Bays and Lee:
I Will the Chance-Customers attend,
And cry, Old Songs and Books to mend!
You, most the Chamber-practice plying,
Shall only mind Transmogriphying.
A VOYAGE Round the WORLD: OR, A Pocket-Library.
VOL. II.
CHAP. I.
The Explanation of the First Book of these Rambles, and the Design of the
whole. Some foolish Objections Answered.

THough the World has been pretty just to the First Volume of Evander's
Rambles, the Sale thereof not coming beneath his Expectations, or its own
Deserts, all such as have a true taste of Wit and Humor justly hugging and
admiring it; yet some Objections there are and have been made against it,
either by the Envy or Folly of some Persons in the World, the most of 'em, it is
true, below our notice; which therefore we shall answer as great Persons use to
do, by saying never a word, nor so much as vouchsafing 'em mention in these
Immortal Writings.

One only thing there is, which more for the sake of peace and Quietness, for
Decency, Profit, and such prudential Considerations, lest it should obstruct
the rolling forward of the other Two and twenty Globes yet behind in the
Frontispiece, and spoil the Sale of this, and what comes after, thereby
cheating the World of a most inestimable Treasure now just ready to pop into
their Libraries: I say, for such like Causes as these, rather than any
Necessity in the nature of the thing, Evander, Kainophilus and the Author
laying their Heads together, have resolved to give a sound and formal Answer,
that all the little snarful Critics may for ever after hold their peace, or
have their Dogs Teeth broke out by the dint of ponderous Argument.

The main Objection then against this First Book last past, as well as the
whole Design, is thus proposed by some wise ones; namely, That they don't know
what to make on it? They can neither find beginning nor ending, head nor tail,
nor cannot for their Lives tell what the Author would be at, what he drives at
or intends in part or whole. What use, what profit, what account it turns to,
what it is good for; how it answers the Name; how to reconcile Book and Title,
and make 'em kin to one another.

A Pocket-Library; a Trap-stick it is; why 'tis'n't so much as a Catalogue, and
my Pocket is already sufficiently furnished (quoth one Spark) with a
Manuscript-Library of my own or Mistresses, or Letters from Kainophil,
eternally to supply some certain Uses which only this new Library is like to be
employed in. However Paper is'n't yet so dear, a Man must give Eighteen pence
for a Weeks wiping. -- (Out you filthy Fellow, you offend the nice Evander, and
deserve to remain as long imprisoned in the nasty place you prate of, as the
Jew who would not come out on his own Sabbath: But we shall have them anon, and
my Author has a Pen will firk ye, if he sets about it.)

A Voyage round the World this (quoth another) Umph! but what Page shall we
find it in? The Author has quite forgot it, shattered the business out of his
thin Skull, and as the Panegyrist before him, bin graciously pleased to ramble
to somewhat else. Here Is indeed a parcel of odd nonsensical Tales of Graffham
and Dungrove, and a Country Bumkin coming to London, and flying in the Air, and
I know not what; but what is all this all this while to a Voyage about the
World? Why this is ten times worse than a Battle in Stylo recitativo. -- The
Man writes Shorthand (quoth another witty Rogue) and abbreviates Books into
Pages, them into Sentences, and them into Words, and between his
Doggrel-Philosophy, Prose and Poetry has shovel'd up such a Hodg-potch of stuff
here, as would make a Hermit tear his Beard to hear it.

Very well -- when ye are out of breath, it is hoped a Man may get room to speak
for himself.

The first grave Complaint against this useful, profitable, ingenious,
admirable Book (with modesty be it spoken) is, That People don't know what to
make on it. -- And what if they don't, Evander supposes 'twould puzzle a good
Logician to Analogyze all the famous History of the renowned Knight of the
Mancha, especially now P -- s has made nonscence on it by shifting the Scene,
(one Page in Spain, and the next in England.) Perhaps I had never any mind you
should know that I mean, nor what to make on it -- there lies all the Jest
sometimes; and why might not I intend my Book after the Tune of, I lent my Money
to my Friend? Or, Riddle me, Riddle me? If Evander had obliged the World with
the Second Edition of the Horn-book, a Primmer in Folio, or a new Protestant
Tutor in Twenty four Volumes, then 't had been enough to let the World have
known what to make on it. Who knows not that those things are most admired,
which are least understood? Unless the Infallible Church her self be foully
out, Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion; nay it may be as much policy for me
to have my Book unintelligible, as for them to have their Prayers, and all the
rest of their Religion. -- (Not that I Am a Papist for all that, -- No, -- I
abominate both Flogging and Fasting as against the Light of Nature, and as bad
as Transubstantiation, -- one of 'em as great an enemy to my Back, as 'tother
to my Belly; -- but for Illustration or so now and then, it is lawful to pick a
Flower, if one can find it, from e're a Dunghill in Christendom.)

This, supposing they could not understand it, as another great Person said in
a like case some years past, I am't bound to find Sense both for my Book and my
Readers. 'Twould be enough if I my self understood it, whether others do so or
no. And that I do, I am my self the properest Judge.

But that the World may not think me morose or envious, and to evidence the
goodness of my Nature by its being so communicative, I Will e'ne for once make
others as happy as my self. -- Kainophilus will tweak the World's great Nose,
open its Basin-Eyes, lug its stubborn Ears, and lead it into the most intimate
meaning of all those precious things laid up in the sacred Archieves of those
his admirable Works, past, present, and to come.

He undertakes so clearly to demonstrate the pleasure, profit, and excellent
advantage of the Premises, as to persuade any thing but an Usurer to purchase
'em, and lay 'em under the Pillow every night, as Alexander did Homer.

He Will prove as much, beyond contradiction, That it is a true actual Voyage
round the World, every Word and Paragraph therein as Authentic as the renowned
Mandevil, and as Moral as the famous History of Reynard the Fox; or the last
Edition of the same Book disguised under the Title of the Hind and Panther. And
that in all these Heads, the Design is carried on constantly, the Method not
confused, though somewhat Cryptical, and requiring a little study to crack the
Shell, and get out the Kernel.

The Frontispiece, the Explanation, the Title Page and Introduction make all
this appear without any trouble of telling it. The intent of the whole, as
therein appears, being to give a Iournal of Life, and a Description of the wide
World, and some Memoirs relating to the Actions of one particular Person from
his Cradle to his Grave, into which all the rest is most subtly woven. But
who that Person is, let none be so hasty to affirm. Those who dare be so
presumptuous, we shall meet with 'em in the next Chapter, and perhaps more
severely in other places, if they don't mend their Manners, and mind their own
Business.

Now this single Life, whose soever it is, is Hieroglyphically delineated in the
Twenty four Globes of the Frontispiece, none but his own actual Rambles having
the honor to be insculpt thereon; wherein you see he is carried through all
the Scenes of Life, from his coming bare-b -- 'd into the World, to his going
in like manner out on it, (which you may see most pleasantly described in the
Twenty fourth and last Globe.)

Through all which and every part of it, you will find Directions for management
of your self in any state of Life, Schoolboy, Prentice, Traveller, Soldier
(not too much though of that) Lover, Tradesman, and what not; with many pleasant
and useful Digressions with or without Occasion, some of which will cure the
Melancholy, if not as deep as any in Bedlam.

That ever any Man in his Senses (but all are not Evanders) should question the
Usefulness of this Design, and the past or following Volumes! That in the first
place 'twas highly useful to Me, which none need doubt I think the principal
Verb, I can assure 'em by my own Experience, t'has turned a penny these hard
times; and the Thing, Design and Method being all new and diverting, has taken
so well, I have no reason to be sorry of having obliged the World, since that
has done as much by me again; an Evidence of which, as well as of my Gratitude
for it, is this Second Volume.

Nor let any be so unjust to think the Usefulness of this Work is confined to
the Author alone (though Charity begins at home) his design being more generous
and communicative, and tending to the profit of others as well as himself, upon
more accounts than two or three.

The first is, because it is so pleasant, so diverting, so tickling, and all
that to those who do but understand the whim on it. To see a Man described and
not described, playing Bopeep with the World, and hiding himself behind his
Fingers; like Merry Andrew, clapping his Conjuring-Cap on, and then crying, Who
sees me now? -- thrusting his Head into a Bush, and like a cunning sort of a
Bird that comes from the Moon (whither he is to take a Voyage in one of these
odd Books) and then defying all the World (as Pembrook did) to know him by his
the other end. I say, to see this ingenious Author as close under the name of
Kainophilus, as Achates and Aeneas in the Cloak of Venus, seeing every Body,
and hearing what Folks say and censure of him, and none seeing or hearing him.
What in the World can be a more pleasant Spectacle, or better deserving the
Motto over the door where this monstrous sight is to be seen, -- Spectatum
admissi risum teneatis amici?

But alas, Evander's Person, though diverting enough, is far from being all the
pleasant Humors of this Book. Here are not only wise Ones, but Fools of all
sorts and sizes, -- Cit. Fools and Bumkin Fools, Prodigal Fools and
Flint-fisted Fools, Old, Young, and Middle-aged, Quarto's, Folio's, and
Decimo-Sexto's, enough to furnish all the Shops from Temple Bar to the
Poultrey-Counter; and if all this choice will not please ye, your Stomachs must be
too qu^asie ever to eat Porridge with Evander.

How many Comical Remarks, and Merry Fancies are stuck all over the Book, like
an Orange with Cloves, a Lover with Flowers, or a Madman with Straws or
Feathers, -- not to add a Traveller with Rambling Tales and Romances? What
think ye else of Evander's Character written by himself, at the beginning of
the Book, an inimitable Piece, and a Design hardly ever before attempted, and
that with as much Justice to himself, as Diversion to the Reader? What say ye,
Mr. Critic, to all the Poetry which shines through every part of it as thick
as the Stars in the milky way, or the Virtues and Graces of the incomparable
Iris? Of the admirable and surprising Novelty of both Matter and Method;
representing a Book made, as it were, out of nothing, and yet containing every
thing; the sweetness of the Groves, the pleasantness of the Country, the
purling of Streams, and harmony of the Birds, and whistling of the Winds, and
singing of the Cuckoes, and Meditations of Evander. Then of the other side, the
Grandeur of the City described in a method wholly new (of which more anon) and
all the Rarities therein described; the Stateliness of its Palaces, the
Magnificence of its Churches, and the Honesty of its Booksellers, which
singular Subject richly merits a Volume as big as all Tostatus together: But
alas! is here for want of room, wedged up into one or two single Chapters,
though neither the last Book, nor this, nor their own, nor all the Shops nor
Walls in London or the World (that is a bold word) are either strong enough, or
large enough or weighty enough to contain it.

But all this while, how will I make profit of what is only pleasant? Why as
easily as I make this Book, and that before it. If Pleasure be the chief Good,
as some Philosophers perhaps defensively and innocently enough, if rightly
taken, have asserted, then whatever is pleasant, must undoubtedly contain all
other goods under them, and among them the profitable ones.

But not to mount the Argument above the vulgar Readers heads, and perhaps my
own too, it is plain enough that what is so pleasant as this, must needs be
profitable too another way to the Body, by chearing the Spirits, sweetning the
Blood, dispelling black melancholy Fumes, and making it as brisk as a Prentice
just out of his Time, a Cracked Tradesman newly Set-up again, a jolly young
Bridegroom on the Wedding-night, or a fair Bride the next morning.

Then to the Mind, what more innocently diverting, keeping from a hundred worse
Employments, at once delighting and profiting, and mingling utile dulci so
exactly, that there shall not be a scruple over or under on either side, though
weighed in Apollo's own Balance.

Thus ye see how profitable the Book had been, though t'had been only pleasant.
-- But perhaps the grum sort of Readers will find fault with it for that very
cause; they must have somewhat sowerer and stiffer to humor their
Iackboot-Iudgments; -- something that will bear reading a hundred times over
without ever growing threadbare; -- that may exalt the Judgment, improve the
Mind, and all that. -- This they only call profit, and without this its beneath
their supercilious Worships leisure so much as to cast a glance upon it. --
Well, all this they shall have to please the grave Sirs, whom by the leave of
their Beards we must quarrel with for not acting like themselves, condemning
what they have never read, or not sufficiently reflected on. For which reason
Kainophilus must be again forced to do violence on his modesty, and point to
the particular choice Jewels enshrined in this rich Cabinet; by which may be
easily guessed how gravely and sagely he could have discoursed from one end to
the other, would the World have born it, as easily as all Hercules is measured by
his Foot, or the former Fruitfulness of the Holy Land by some precious snips
here and there to be found at this day.

I will not pretend to enumerate here all the sound pieces of good Philosophy,
Sense and Reason, as strong as Love or Mustard, which are scattered here and
there all throughout the forementioned Work; though some such places I Will
direct you to for my own Credit, as well as your Edification.

What an abstruse piece of Philosophy have ye there in cap. 1. page 27, 28, 29.
of the Transmutation of Matter, and the different almost infinite Forms it
passes through (which some of bigger Names have made so much work with) and
with what strength of Argument and pleasantness of Invention is it there proved
at least probable, that Vander is made of a roaring Lion, or mighty Elephant?

Turn over to chap. 2. and see but what a sound and useful Discourse of Life
presents it self to your Observation. Nay, so well inclined is Kainophilus,
that he lugs in this grave Meditation nolens volens, and talks of Life though
he came dead-born into the World.

Chap. 3. page 42. How dutifully and handsomely does he speak of his dear
Virtuous Mother, in those just Praises he gives that Paragon of Perfection,
both proposing a Pattern for the rest of Women to imitate in her, and Children
in him, whose Respect and tender natural Affection both to her and his Father
will never be forgoten till Virtue and Gratitude perish from the Earth.

The next Chapter is as famous for his Love to his Country, for which he would do
any think but fight, as that before to his Mother. Clinking in the close with a
Prophetical touch of the Reduction of Ireland.

I begin now to fear I have a small touch of the Conjurer, though I have so
often disclaimed it in the former Book. For those Verses being writ before His
Majesty Landed in Ireland, contain in a few lines as exact an Account of all
the Expedition, as if t'had been taken out of the Gazet after 'twas over. Let
the Reader be Witness else --

Their Fate draws near, and now he lands, and now
Kneels on the shore, and pays his second Vow.
There there he charged, and shook the trembling ground,
With Sweat, and Dust, and Blood encompast round.
See Courcy! See! to well-known Bogs they run,
As Birds obscene before the Rising-Sun.
So far Kainophilus has proved an errand Prophet, and does not much doubt but a
few Globes hence will bring the Completion of the two following Lines:

See Talbot! See! thy Countrymen advance
Their Conquering Standards on the shores of France.
I cannot imagine what the World would have, if all this don't take; nor know any
reason why Evander's Prophecies should not sell as well as Grebner's Emblems,
or Catastrophe Mundi.

Chap. 5. page 60. has an equally pleasant and profitable Discourse of
Schoolmasters, with some well deserved Strictures on that severity and cruelty
practiced by some of 'em, and just acknowledgment to those of more temper and
goodness.

Toward the end of which Chapter Evander confesses his Wit has a little run
away with him; so ungovernable a thing is towering Fancy, when not hand-cufft by
powerful Reason, flying out against Learning, beloved Learning, at so Satirical
a rate as almost makes his heart bleed to read it, when he thinks he has been
so unkind to that which has been so kind to him. -- But after he has thus
broken its Head, he gives so clever and kind a Plaster, that any one would be
glad to be so wittily abused, to have so good amends made him. -- See page 107.

In the Sixth Chapter there is such clear Arguments for Childrens Duty to their
Parents, so deeply laid, and strongly urged, that they are able to Convert a
Tartarian, and make him as dutiful a Bantling as any thing but Evander.

The Seventh describes the glorious Town of London twice as big as Graffham,
with all the Humors and Remarkables the Bumkin stares his Eyes and Teeth out
upon; and some of the most common Tricks put upon those poor Travelers; which
makes the Book useful for all Meridians, and may indifferently serve either for
Taunton-Dean or London.

Where after an ingenious and remarkable Story or two about Androcles and
Blood, the next we present you with is a noble Paradox so much agitated
concerning Self-murder; the rise of which is very suprizing; for who but an
Evander would have entertaind such a sage discourse with himself at the top of
the Monument, whether he should throw himself down in the outside and break
his neck, or civilly walk down Stairs as he came; which last he wisely chooses
for a great many Reasons, though one of the weightiest unluckily forgotten, --
Lest the Jury finding him Felo-de-se, his Estate should be lost, and not
descend to his Posterity; or in plain terms, not to be longer Enigmatical, lest
these Rambles, which as ye have often heard, he esteems the very Sons and Heirs
of his Brains and Body, should perish with him, or only creep out like a
helpless Abortive into the cold uncharitable World.

Then how grave, just, ingenious and tender is his Sacrifice to the Manes of
the Immortal Mr. Cowley in Westminster-Abbey, cap. 8. page 143. and how
Citizen, nay Alderman-like his Discourse upon Creditors and Debtors, the
Interest of Trade, Sanctuary, Prisons, etc. in the same Chapter, page 146, 147,
148. and onwards 155, and 156. as thorough a Confutation of Transubstantiation
as it deserves, and Wild-house, Priests, Laureat and all thrown flat upon their
backs.

Now I appeal to you, O grave Judges, the Authors, Printers, Booksellers and
Readers of this Famous City: To thee, O H -- st, the very Genius of Smithfield,
and grand Encourager and Patron of all the godly Books and Ballads in all the
Fairs of Kent and Christendom: To the most famous Conscience-splitter in
Cornhil, the famous Squire at the Harrow, or the indefatigable Author at the
Black Raven: To you, O Shirley, Philips, Wesley, the Vexers of Mankind, and
Translators of all Languages: And to thy great Ghost, O incomparable Bunyan,
whether from the Premises it does not appear as bright as a Brass Pan, and as
clear as a Crystal Drop at the end of Evander's Nose in the middle of Winter,
that this Book is as full of Profit, as an Egg of Meat, as my Pen with Ink (I
just dipped it over head and ears) as my Skull with Brains, or a Bookseller with
Honesty.

Another silly Objection started out of Envy's lean Jaws, is against that part
of the Title wherein this Book is called, A Voyage round the World. Ay, and so
it is and 'twill be, and a whisker of a Voyage too before it is done. -- But it is
only a pitiful Ramble from Post to Pillar, from Graffam to Tonsa and back again,
and to London and out again, and so to the place whence we came. --

Again, Impertinent! Will ye never be answered? Was there ever a Journey in the
World which did not begin at one place or another? The famous Predecessor and
Prototype of Kainophilus, the scarce greater Coryate (quem honoris causa
nomino) i. e. whose Breeches and Shoes are to this day honorably hung up in
his own Parish Church. -- He himself begins his Rambles some where, namely,
just where I do, at his own Birthplace, Odcomb, in the County of Somerset,
whence that sounding Title of Odcombian Tom, though I think Graffambian John
comes not an Ace behind it. And what do me I but precisely follow so good and
laudable Authority and Example, taking my rise at Graffam, in order to this
Hop-stride-and-Iump round the World.

This Description of all the World I begin early, and intend to prosecute
farther than ever any did before me.

I Begin my Rambles at nothing, which I soon make something of, and by that
time I have done, poor Vander will be nothing again.

And yet that nothing, something too; for I Am no Atheist, but yet such a
something as is between something and nothing.

What if I observe some minute passages in the prosecution of my Rambles, the
more exact still and perfect will the Iournal be; and why may not I make as
great a splutter with my Dialogue with Owls and Cuckoes, as grave Authors do of
Apollonius's Confabulation with the Sparrows and Oxen, since I dare venture one
of these Books to a Brass-Farthing one is as true as another?

Then for the gravity of some passages, I would make the same Excuse Osborn
does, and Cabbage his very words ('it is n't the first time perhaps, nor would
either he or you be ever the wiser) in a case of like nature, but not having
the Book by me at present, you must be content with the Quintessence on it.

Some People (quoth he) may very gravely blame me for inserting some such
slight Circumstances as these in my History (I think that he then mentioned was
the color of Queen Ann's Hair) Ay, but let 'em consider, -- He goes on -- so
far -- till he is out of sight; and were Kainophilus to be made a Viscount, he
cannot remember what is next. But will tell you what is more to the purpose, as he
was saying before, this Work is a fair and lawful Description of A Ramble round
the World. It Is true, here is yet but a small part on it described, nor I Will
assure ye have ye any more yet than a small part of this Ramble; and yet that
small one great enough too, if considered in it self, though but little in
regard of the whole World, nay all the Universe; which, as appears from the
Frontispiece and Verses before the First Book, he threatens to ramble all round
every nook and crook on it before he has done with it.

Once more, Mr. Kainophilus! How comes this to be a Voyage round the World,
when we never yet met ye so much as in a Sculler crossing the Water. You have
bin indeed, as ye told us before, sailing, and rowing and tugging by Land, when
ye ^ot a Horseback, where ye make tempestuous work on it, and your Vessel Reels
t^rribly. -- But all this is nothing to Sea-service, and we never heard of a
Voyage by Land since we were Christened, till ye were pleased to bring the word
into the World.

How, -- Evander not understand true English, who has been an Author these
three and twenty years, and could almost read his Criss cross-row in his
Mother's Belly! Who has so many English Dictionaries in his Study, and another
in his Head bigger than all together (and yet there is still room to spare both
for Brains and Projects) Does not he? -- nay -- now you ruffle his smooth Soul,
alter his fair Body, and discompose him all over. -- If ye go on at this rate,
with making Objections, a Man does not know how to answer (for their number, I
mean not their weight) ye shall e'ne write your self, and let the World laugh
at ye, for Evander will be your Fool no longer. -- But not to overrule this
Plea, we'll for once join issue, and giv't a fair Answer.

This Voyage round the World was made in the Ship of Fancy, which every one
knows, like the Cossaks Boats, sails as well by Land as Water. -- And now I
hope you are satisfied.

One Objection more I ingeniously raise my self, not to put others to the
trouble. I have pretty frequently mentioned the Famous Bunyan in the past, and
may perhaps in this present and future Rambles; but can assure the World,
notwithstanding a flurt of Fancy now and then, intended it with all the
Reverence he deserves. But if o't'other side, any malicious Person should be
displeased with me for quoting such a Tinker of an Author, let 'em know I have
a topping Example for the same, which to vindicate both my self and him, shall
be here inserted, and therewith I intend to close this Chapter. [See New
Observator, Vol. 2. Numb. 27.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
MR. John Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress, and many other excellent
Book^ that have found great acceptance, has left behin^ him ten Manuscripts
prepared by himself for the Press before his Death: His Widow is desired to
Print them (with some other of his Works which have been already printed, but
are (...) present not to be had) which will make together a Book of Ten
Shillings in Sheets, in Folio. (...) Persons who desire so great and good a
Wor^ should be performed with speed, are desired to send (...) Five Shillings
for their first Payment to the Undertaker, who is empowered to give Receipts for
the same.

CHAP. II.
A word of Reproof to all such as pretend they know the Author of these Rambles.

SO great a Glory do I esteem it to be the Author of these Works, that I cannot
without great injury to my self and Justice, endure that any should own 'em who
have nothing to do with 'em, like the Fellow at Rome, who pretended to Virgil's
Verses. But I need take no other way to confute these Plagiaries than Virgil
himself did, requiring the Tally to his Vos non vobis. -- Let any Man write on
at the rate this is already written, and I Will grant he is the Author of this
Book, that before, and all the rest to the end of the Chapter. -- No, there is
such a sort of a whim in the style, something so like my self, so
Incomprehensible (not because it is Nonsense) that whoever throws but half an
Eye on that and me together, will swear 'twas spit out of the moth of
Kainophilus. -- This by the bye.

But it is not the main business of this Chapter to assert what few will be so
impudent to deny, and what I could give Demonstration of by letting 'em see me
write these very words which they read here, and subscribing under it, --
Yours, Yours, Yours, -- in ten thousand Obligations of Love and Service,
Kainophilus Vander.

The main work in hand is, what the Contents explains in Shorthand. To rebuke
those, at least over-bold Persons, who pretend to know who this Kainophilus is,
and that better than I my self do, which seems a very hard case in my simple
Judgment.

Comes ye one grave and good Man to me, -- I beg your Pardon, -- 'twas but a
slip to a Friend of mine, and thus accosts him --

Are n't you ashamed Mr. -- thus to expose your self and your Friends to all
the World? -- Why have you no sense of Honor in ye, to write such a confounded
silly Book as this of your self -- ay -- of your self, -- there is the Jest
on it, I protest I Have hardly patience to think on it, -- to make your self the
perfect Maygame of the Town? -- Why at this rate you will be shortly pointed and
laughed at as you pass the streets, and the very little Boys will cry, -- There
goes the Black-Swan, or White-Raven.

Will they so, quo' I (quo' he I mean still) I protest I Am heartily glad on it,
and think it extreme good News. Why have the little Gentlemen so great an
esteem for me? -- Well, they honor me very much, and if a Pocket full of
Sugar-plumbs as long as the Monument will gratify 'em, they shall not want it.
Does the World take notice of me, point at me, smile for Complaisance and Joy
when I pass by, -- it is the very thing I Would be at, and I Am a made Man, -- I
shall get Money by it, besides Fame, Renown and Honor in abundance into the
bargain.

Was Demosthenes so proud, when one poor Tankard-woman cried, There goes
Demosthenes? And shall not I be infinitely more proud, and with better reason,
when not one, but the whole Society of Tankard-bearers, Men, Women and
Sucking-Children (which I find by the foresaid Story are a Corporation very
ancient) nay not only they, but all the Posse of Broom-men, Porters, Link-boys,
Kennel-rakers, C^rd-match-sellers and Booksellers, the very Mouth, Feet and
Hands of London, shall never see me stir out of Shop, but they will lift up their
wond^ing Month, and Eyes, and Hands, and cry out in Ecstasies, There goes the
Immortal Evander! For so they will call me, so they will be apt, grave Sir, to
think me, alas only out of their goodness; whereas I Am no more he, I protest
Sir, than I am Kainophilus; nor are they able to prove a word of what they say,
any more than that I am the Man in the Moon. -- People, Sir, you know will say
their pleasure, and many things may by chance be extremely likely, which yet
for all that are as far from true, as Chalk's from Cheese. I have been, I must
confess, mistaken more than once for that worthy Author, whom some have
flattered me that I a little resemble: But alas, strong fancy often makes
Likeness where it never finds any; and I believe, on my honesty, I Am no more
really like him, than Garnet's Beard in the Barley-Straw is like a Man.

Nay now, cries he, ye make me ten times madder at ye than before. Why are not
all these passages here that could belong to none but you; and that I know as
well as you, and scarce any beside us, -- persuade me I cannot feel my own Nose.

Whether you can or no, Sir, is no business of mine, Sir, any more, Sir, than
this of yours! That ever appearances should thus deceive a Man of Sense and
Years as you are, and make him so positive too, -- ay -- that is the vexation
on it, else the humor would pass well enough. Sir, you have often been upon a
City-Iury, remember a Man is never hanged for Circumstances. -- What are all
these Suspicions, and a hundred more, without positive Evidence? -- Ay --
there is the clinch of the Cause, the very top point and pinch of the Argument.
-- Grant I am so like Evander (though that is an argument I cannot be he, because
no like is the same) that I should have all the marks of him about me, a very
fair, proper, well made Person, in the Flower of my Age, Discreet and Prudent,
Magnificent and Generous, and Valiant to a Miracle, well dressed: And -- (hold,
if I go a little farther, I shall let every body know me indeed) I say,
supposing I had all these shrewd Earmarks about me, it might I confess be
enough to have me stopped by a Hue-and-cry if met by 'em, and they ordered to
apprehend him. But yet no Judge in England, not a George Lord Iefferys, whose
Life you may have at Mr. Dunton's in the Poultrey, would be such a cruel bloody
Dog to hang me by the Neck till I were dead, without any other Proofs than this
seeming Similitude.

Just thus did these two judicious Persons discourse on that weighty Subject,
which the graver of the two pressed on with further and heavier Arguments.
Whose Objections to that purpose, with several other on the same Head, I
Kainophilus, the very and real Author of these Rambles, now take upon me to
Answer for my own Honor, and the Satisfaction of the World, and prove
notwithstanding all the fruitless Allegations to the contrary, and some seeming
appearances, that neither Iohn-a-nokes, nor Iack-a-styles, nor
Will-wi-the-wisp, nor any other Person yet named or suspected, are the real
Authors of this Book, or the real Evander, but that I, and I only am he; and
who I am, is yet, and ever shall be a Secret as long as I please, since the
World neither does, nor for all its fleering perhaps ever shall or can know me.

Whoop (comes in an old Hawker-woman) what -- don't I know Vander? -- I that
have served him with Gazets and Pamphlets almost these ten years -- I Will take
my swear upon an Observator this is he, -- the very errand he, or else may I be
Spay'd by the next Sow-gelder. Why let us see -- he has the very leer of him, --
walk him -- there is his perfect shuffle, -- look -- he winks too, -- and is
twirling a Pen between his Fingers. Never tell me, -- I know him as well as my
own Mercury, or Dick Baldwin's Printing House. If 'twas Evander writ this Book,
I Am sure I know him, for there is never another of the name in the World, he is a
Phoenix, and this certainly must be he.

Go cry your Votes, ye old Bawd, -- sure this is a fine World, -- and they will
persuade me anon they know me better than I do my self. -- You know one
Evander, -- so did I too, -- but he must needs be the same in the Book, because
there is but one of the Name forsooth; -- and are you sure of that Goody
Strong-Lungs! See what it is to want reading, at least to be acquainted with
none but the Moderns. What has been, may be; and if there have been more
Evanders than one, why may not there be so still? and if two, as well for ought
I see two hundred, (though two will do my business as well as half a thousand.)
Now all the World that ever read Virgil so much as in the incomparable Ogylby's
splendid Version, knows there was a very grave old Gentleman of his
acquaintance called Evander, who had a Beard down to his Girdle-stead before
ever I was begotten; from the resemblance to his whole humor, not his Person,
the unwonted Gravity of my Temper, and Wisdom of my Actions, even in my younger
years, together with my delight in a sedentary Life, and dwelling a long time
up in a Garret (as this fine old Man did at his Country Farm a top of a Hill)
some were pleased many years since to give me the Title of Evander: But alas no
more the same Evander this silly Woman talks of, than a Man is the same with a
little Boy. -- I knew that same Evander as well as she for her days earnings;
-- alas -- I Am a staid Man, now turned of.... score, and he was a little nimble
Fellow, always Rambling and capering about like Quicksilver in a hot
Pudding-Pye. -- But here are the same Looks, -- a mere Chance, and Gate and
Shuffle, because I Am a Man of business, and go for the most part in haste, as
he did when he was Courting his Mistresses.

( An old Jade, -- she made me sweat, I Am glad I Am got clear on her. --) But
next for Kainophilus, the same wise Argument with that before.

There was once a silly Fellow who pretended a Design a little like this we are
about, to Ramble round the World; he began I think with Kent, and so intended
to run through all Christendom, and the rest of the World; but the pitiful
abortive Project, which could never pretend to that height of Thought, and
profundity of Invention with ours, for that cause never lived above two or
three days, and then was justly condemned to the stinking darkness of some
ignoble Bog-house. It Is not denied but that hence we may have taken the Name,
the only thing worth living in it, and have Examples enough for our practice.
Did not the ingenious Ariosto borrow several of his Names, particularly his
beautiful Angelica, from some dull forgotten Rhimer that went before him? Nay,
did not Virgil rake in Ennius his Dung, like a Gold-finder as he was, for that
very reason, that he might deserve the Name? And why may not we as lawfully pull
this single Name out of its nasty Oblivion, powder it, and dry it, and sweeten
it, and wash it, and make use of it for our own proper Cognomen, or otherwise,
as we see occasion.

Besides, I question whether he understood Greek, or could construe (...), or
(...); which till he does, all the World must grant he and the learned
Kainophilus here so often named, are two quite different Persons, and no more
the same than I and the Queen of Sheba.

You may rave and fret all this while, and cry all this is Banter, which I
confess is the readiest way of answering it; but I appeal to all sober Judges,
whether it been't almost as bad as Kidnapping a Man away, to go about to
persuade him he is what he is not; to make Trincalo a Duke; or as a good modest
Gentleman was some time since served by the Barbarian Africans, beat him into
Nobility, and make him stand in bodily fear of being at last thrasht into the
Royal Family.

To avoid which unsufferable Inconveniences, and others of the like pernicious
nature, I take all these pains with those who don't know what to make of me, to
show both what I am, and what I am not.

The third and last Name from which this peeping, peering, Eves-dropping World
pretends to know me, is I confess the least Heroical of all the three, namely
John, which they most subtly deduce from that line in the Explanation, --
Hold up phy Head John!

Ay, and so I can for all I have heard yet, or am like to hear. It Is true, the
Author of those Verses has been a little bold now and then, speaking something
too diminitively, not to add familiarly, of the Subject and Person he handles.
-- This fault I could wish he had here especially avoided: Had he used but the
mighty Hebrew word Iehochanam, instead of that pitiful sneaking Iohn-English, I
should e'ne have gloried in the Name, and defied the World to say its worst
upon it of that or me.

See but how they reason: The Author's Name was JOHN; They know one whose Name
is John; -- nay that they are sure of, they will prove it by the Register, by his
Bills and Bonds, and own Handwriting scrawl'd at the bottom of at least (in a
modest computation) One million and five hundred thousand Epistles and familiar
Letters. -- Well, pray go on, and don't waste him thus, why therefore he must
be the Author. In answer, -- we don't deny there is a certain Person in the
World known by the Name of John, nay two or theee hundred; but if the Argument
be good enough, all the rest must be the Authors on it, as well as Iohn-a-nokes
or Iohn-a-styles.

But this John is a Bookseller. -- Come prove that if ye can. -- I do it from
the foresaid Verses, -- Who e're heard of a King or a Bookseller drowned?
Worshipful reasoning. -- Well, how all this World is overrun with Fallacies!
-- How few can discourse clearly and handsomely? -- And how few are Evanders?

Granting he must be one of these two, does it follow he is the other, or both
together? He Is to ^huse which he will be, a King or a Bookseller, and assures ye
he has Wit enough to choose the best? To be short, Does not every body know
there have been King John's, as well as Bookseller John's (John King of Naples,
King of Jerusalem, King of England, besides a hundred and fifty little
Iohnny-Kings not worth taking notice of.) This the World knows, but I know
something more, and could name 'em a King John of my own acquaintance; nay, and
perhaps a Bookseller too, as well as the Party suspected; and then where is all
their arguing?

But this John Bookseller went to New England; -- Ay, there is the home-stroke;
-- now they think they have me as fast as the sage Gentlemen Aldermen had their
worshipful Brother the Cuckoe, when the Hedge was finished to keep in the noble
Bird for their own use; or the poor Bumkin when he pricks in a Leather. -- But
trust Vander for wrigling out again in spite of all their craftiness. Grant the
Frontispiece has New England, Boston, the Wigwams, and all that; nay, and a
Bookseller too for once, ay, and a John Bookseller, yet all this will not nor
shall not do to prove the Author of these Works is known to the World. For if
there were more John's and more Booksellers that went to New England, then the
case is clear, that from all has been said they can never prove who it is, since
it may be one as well as the other. But the Premises I assert upon my Honor,
and am sure that my honest Fellow-Traveller John (how do you like it Sir?) will
never deny it. -- Therefore the Conclusion stands as firm as a Rock of Adamant,
that ye don't know me, nor shall not know me, or (as I have it in my Memorial-Book
word for word) it is not at all proved that the Author of this Work should be
the Person whom the World believes it to be.

Once more whispering. -- Speak all at once, for I Will hear no more. -- Why,
quo' Mr. Critic, though these Evidences taken singly by themselves, may not be
able to conclude against the Person accused, yet all together they may; for we
often see, as in the Fable, one Stick Broken, when twenty such together, though
of equal force, separately would require a Hercules to snap 'em asunder.

Come -- never talk, -- is it not impossible that all these Characters should
meet in one Man, agreeing to the Author of these Works, and yet that Person not
be the Author. The Names Kainophilus, Evander, John. The Occupation a
Booksellr. Lastly, the Vbi, or wheresomness (as well as the Quis or Quid, --
the Whoiety or the Whatchicallity) namely New England. -- Look upon the
Evidence now it is summed up together, and if he ben't the Man, he is no Man at
all, but as perfect a Sprite as Posture-Clark in the the other Book.

Thus is a modest Man oppressed with noise, and endeavors used to press him to
Death with Weights, when Strength cannot do it. All I say, is, Circumstances are
but Circumstances still, though you pile 'em as high as the Monument. I deny
it, do you prove it, which you have not done, yet by all you have said. Till when,
you must give me leave to subscribe my self what I was before, and am still
like to be,

Your humble Servant, Johannes in Nubibus, alias, Clowdy John.

CHAP. III.
Containing something full as useful as the two formet.

SOhoe the House! Knock at his Breast or Backdoor, and ask if Evander be at
home; for the eternal Rambler seems to have forgot his main business, that
famous Life of his, which in the last Book he had so happily brought through
the first Stage, that of Childhood, which he ended with the beginning of his
Prenticeship.

I Will assure ye it is a great mistake, -- he is so far from having forgot what
he is about, that he thinks on it so much, he can mind nothing else; nay scarce
that neither, for he is in so brown a Study, or such deep far-fetcht Reflection
concerning the great Task he is now to go thorough, his Seven Years Service;
mingled with a little spark perhaps of displeasure at the World for forcing him
here to spend two Chapters in his own Vindication, that like a poor lean tired
Jade in a dark Road, stuck fast in Mire and Clay, he hardly knows how to wag an
Inch forward or backward.

Yet after a little pause he takes heart-a-grace, and gives you his own
Description in those most fresh springing Years of his tender Juvenility.

Do but step in there, Sir, in the Frontispiece, Globe 5. standing, or rather
growing in the inside of his Counter, like a Creeper against the side of an
House, -- with all the mortal Tokens of a Prentice appearing in his very
Phisnomy. -- Behold but the vastness of his Ears (if like their Picture) not
only large enough, as Oldham's Country Parson's, to make Night-caps for
himself, and roll up over his Head every night to keep him from the injury of
the Weather; but like an excellent Instrument serving at once for several uses:
-- spacious enough for Towels wherein the Cook-Maid (beshrew all her
Kitchin-stuff for it) would too often for his repose wipe her greasy Golls, and
cleanse her colly'd Fingers, -- nay had they been Leather, and of the same
length they are here described, ten to one but the Jade would have made use of
'em instead of Straps to whet her Knives upon. But alas all this is merely as
pleases the Painter (or Graver, it is no great difference) for Evander's Ears,
as well as all his other parts, were very proportionable, and as the Verses
before the Book, -- Thus in Man the parts agree, etc.

However leaving his Ears at present, which are at his Countries Service as
well as all the rest of his Body, I, he, and we, Kind, Courteous, and Gentle
Reader! are now to settle in our Geers, mind our Business, learn our Trade, and
do what an honest Prentice knows to be his Duty. What I have with a great deal
of tugging formerly proved, is just now to be rendered past all doubt, namely
the excellent profit and use, as well as Rarity, Novelty and Diversion of this
Book.

For here am I Kainophilus resolved to leave all Apprentices, both present and
future, such a Copy, as I doubt few of 'em will write after, none I am certain
ever excel.

Evander himself is that Copy, and if they will but take care to imitate him, and
follow such a high Example as he has set 'em, they will all in time stand as fair
for Aldermen as he himself does. Nor is what he writes confined to his own
single Experience, and more narrow Sphere, he having with the greatest pains
and accuracy, as his Custom is, cropped and culled the very choicest Flowers to
be found in other Writings, giving them the same liberty in his own, if they
think fit to make use on it.

The first and choicest care of young Evander, as to this World, was how to
please his Master, whom he was now married to, for better for worse, for seven
long years together, a great part of his life, and upon which all the rest
depended. And so acceptable was this care, so tender a regard had he to this
his industrious, though unworthy Servant, that he shall ever retain grateful
resentments of the same till he is all Dust and Worms-meat, And how deeply his
Character is imprinted in my heart, shall be seen by this Impression wrought
off from it, showing what he was, is, and none else ever shall be.

My Master was a grave good Man, -- a substantial honest Citizen of London.
Devout and Religious, without making a Trade on it, or as some of his Neighbors
in a too literal sense, making a Gain of Godliness. Nor thought this enough,
without being Just and Honest toward his Neighbor. Willing to do any Man a
good turn if he might without injury to himself; and as Charitable as Just,
whatever his own Opinions were of smaller Matters, thinking well of all whom he
knew not to deserve the contrary, though they differed from him; and well of
none for being of his Party, unless they had other Merits to recommend 'em. He
was never over-fond of public Honors and Employments, neither unwilling to
undergo 'em, if placed on him by the suffrages of Fellow-Citizens, or Laws of
the Land, thinking nothing too mean or heavy for him to stoop to, or stand up
under. He was so far from glorying in betraying his Country, and building his
own Fortues on its ruin, that he thought nothing but his Soul either of more
value, or more meriting his utmost care and concern. Accordingly he ever gave
his Hand, and as freely his Heart for such Persons as his Representatives in
Parliament, who were properly such really like him, and therefore fit to be so;
Gentlemen of honest Integrity, Prudence and Courage, versed in the Interests
both of City and Nation. His Religion was not confined to the Church any more
than the Shop; His behavior in his Family being grave and exemplary, his
Devotion constant, his Care over his Household tender and impartial. To his
Servants he seemed indeed a Father rather than a Master, but like a wise Father
avoided the two dangerous extremes of Severity and Fondness, that Scylla and
Charybdis, one of which, by their endeavoring to avoid the other, either sucks
in or dashes in pieces the most of Mankind. He indeed, if ever any Master, kept
this golden mean, steering exactly betwixt the Rock of one side, and Gulf on
the other. A sweeter Severity, or better tempered Gravity I never saw; he, like a
true wise Man, ordering his carriage toward his Servants as occasion required.
If sweet tempered and ingenious (like Evander) he used the softest and gentlest
methods with 'em; if rough and haggard, or abusing his goodness, he as well
knew how to be severe, and use that Authority he was invested with, though not
over-strain it, and so render 'em desperate.

In a word, he knew that he was their Master, not Patroon; that they were his
Servants, not his Slaves; neither were they his Masters. Accordingly, though he
would hardly strain his Authority so far as to command things unreasonable,
having much rather the equity of whatever he required should of themselves at
the first notice of his pleasure, oblige them to a ready compliance, yet in any
thing not irreligious, he would hold the Reins steady, not enduring to have his
Will disputed, but obeyed, commanding nothing unhandsom for them to do.

He knew the Infirmities of Youth, and made allowances for 'em, if not vicious
or scandalous; and by his dexterity and facility in managing 'em accordingly,
would work what he pleased upon `em, and not rarely saved 'em from ruin,
whenas had he used rougher methods, they had only flown out into desperate
courses, and broke the hearts of their careful Parents.

There Is a Master! -- the very Standard of Cheapside, and High Water-mark of
the City of London. What Is said of England in another sense, would in a sense
something like it, be soon true of him. 'T has been said, were there a Bridge
over the narrow Seas, all the Women in Europe would run over hither; -- so had
they but Liberty, all the Servants in England would run to him, and he would have
more Turn-overs than e're a Trader in Christendom.

But I cannot part with my dear Master so abruptly, -- I have a great deal more
of his due Laud and Praise yet behind, -- and should any pretend they have
somewhere else met with some of these Notions which now follow in his Praise,
let 'em know, that as long as it is all true of him, it is no matter where I had
it; -- and in good truth all Masterly Perfections seem to be so concentred in
him, that no Man alive can speak a good thing of a Master, but mine must
deserve it. The Painter when he drew a Venus, took an Eye from one Beauty, and
a Lip from another, a Leg from this, and a Hand from that; -- so alas am I
forced to do in this case, or else I should never be able to let the World see
my most excellent Master, the very best of Men, as Iris of Women; or in a word,
a perfect -- He-Iris -- whose very Footsteps I could kiss, with I think as much
gust as her dear Lips, those silken Cherries I should have called 'em:

Soft Cherries, which even Angels would entice,
Fruit only for the Bird of Paradise. --
That Is no Raven, cries one; -- And who ever said 'twas, Mr. Owl? -- What have
you to do thus to interrupt me in my Story? Rather hearken and learn what my
Master was, and you ought to be, if ever you come to fill so honorable a
Station.

He was, ay that he was, (perhaps I could say he is still) The Heart in the
midst of his Household, Primum vivens and ultimum moriens, (though I took my
leave of Grammar, you see I kept a little Latin, though not long enough for a
Neck-Verse, but the English on it is) -- First up, and last a bed, if not in his
Person, yet in his Providence. In his carriage he aims both at his own and his
Servants good, and makes it his principal endeavor to advance both. He very
wisely and narrowly over-sees their Work, knowing that the Master's Eye makes
the Horse fat; and as one wittily said, The Dust that falls from the Master's
Shoes, is the best Comp^st to manure any Ground. The Lion out of state wont run
if any looks upon him. -- Quite contrary, many Servants will not run unless they
are looked upon, -- and spurred too, sometimes, though not hagridden, or quite
jaded off their Legs by their Tantivy-Masters. Such was not mine, and yet
sufficiently careful and exact to take his Servants Reckonings, without which
they would reckon but little of him; and if he takes no account of them, they will
make no account of him, (there was Wit for ye forty year agon, and is still at
Sturbridge-Fair, and at that end of the Country) not caring what they spend,
who are never brought to an Audit.

He provided them Victuals wholesome, sufficient and seasonable; nor so allayed
his Servants Bread, as to make that Servants Meat which was not Mans-Meat. -- [
O, I shall never forget what a brave house the good Man kept, and how many a
sturdy Surloyn of Beef I have made groan under the vengeance of my hunger while
I lived in his Territories.] And though the Proverb says, -- When Belly is
full, Bones be at rest; yet after Meat came Mustard, or at least what was the
proper condiment, and cause of Digestion, a cheerful sprightly Temper, pleasant
Entertainments, and lawful Recreations, Stool-ball, Football, (by a sad token,
-- I had my Nose broke at one, and my Head at the other) Barley-break,
Hot^cockles, Questons and Commands, or any thing else, nothing could come amiss
to Evander in those days, though no^ ^^agon grows old. He remembered the good
Saxon Law of old King Ina. -- If a Villain works on a Sunday by his Lord's
Command, Let him be free: Never observing that Working on Sundays made People
better Artists, whatever Playing then may do. He never would threaten his
Servant, but rather immediately correct him, that is, not absolutely threaten,
but conditionally only, with promise of Pardon upon amendment: -- which was
never wanting in me where there was real occasion, being at least very sorry
when I had offended so kind a Master. He knew that a sour, harsh, unplacable
humor was as unsupportable as unpleasant and unprofitable to both sides of the
Relation, tormeting instead of reforming, and only tending to make Servants
keep their Faults, and leave their Masters. -- Wherefore in case of Threatening,
and on any necessity of just Punishment, he seldom or never passed his word,
but made present payment, lest the Creditor should run away from the Debtor.

In correcting a Servant, he never used to be a Slave to his own Passions,
common Justice, Reason, Pity and Humanity, as well as the Chamberlain, hindering
him from making new Indentures on the Flesh of his Apprentice, though he might
happen in some light instances to break the old. And indeed how many good
Servants are that way eternally ruined, and for ever unfitted to serve their
Country after they get out of their time, or their Master before, as certainly
Evander himself had been, had his Master gone to work with him as some wicked
Wretches in this City have done with their Prentices, ripping up their Guts,
beating out their Brains, or whipping 'em to Death, and so undoing 'em for
ever. For this reason my good Master would never strike me in the height of
his Passion, lest my Brains should fly about my Ears, and the stroke rebound
upon himself. But when he did find any Servant unlike me, and altogether
incorrigible, so that he found it impossible to wash the Blackamore white, and
whom he could never induce by Confession or Amendment to scowr out the Spots of
his Soul, he would e'ne fairly wash his hands of him, and turn him a grazing among
his Fellow-Cattle.

Tender he was to a miracle of his poor Servant in Sickness, or any other such
ill accident, making his House his Hospital. This by a good token Kainophilus
remembers, who had been underground ten years agon, had he been otherwise. So
like was his temper to that great Man Judge Hales, who would not let his sick
Dogs, or old Horses be hanged or knocked on the head, but gave 'em clean Straw,
and good Lodging; and for what they had done when well and lusty, kept 'em like
Gentlemen all their lives, as Prince Henry did the sick and old English Mastiff
who had made a Lion run away. -- Not that my Master, being neither a Prince nor
a Lord Chief Justice, I mean in his Estate or Birth, for he was both in his
Soul and Family, did use to keep his Prentices like Gally-Slaves, chained to
the Oar for Life; only I would be understood he had both a Fatherly care of us,
in our short state of Matrimony, both in Sickness and in Health, and all our
Lives after a distinguishing Aspect on those whom he had brought into the
World, manifesting all the Care, though none of the Severity of a Master
toward 'em as long as e're they lived. -- And how much good, sage and kind
Advice has he given Kainophilus since he came abroad into the World; which had
he but made use of, would have made him, if possible, greater and happier than
he is already!

-- Keep your Shop, and your Shop will keep you.
-- Even Reckonings make long Friends.
-- A Penny saved is a Penny got.
And a whole sack full of Proverbs as long as Sancho's, to the same purpose,
which I still remember, and are as it were the Beams and Rafters of my
Discretion and Reputation to this day.

Nor after he had turned us out into the wide World, did he leave us there to
bawl and cry, and kick our hearts out without any more regard what became of
us, as those ill or miserable Women who expose their Children in the Street or
Highway, and then run away from 'em. No, -- he would always listen and hearken
what became of us. No man ever went farther toward making an Apprentice than
he did, as if his care was not over at seven years end, but was to last all
life long. So great, so good a Character would he be sure to give of us, where
any thing of moment depended, that for my part I blush abominably I no better
deserve it, and if I reflect on what he has said of me, and what my modesty
tells me I really am, I profess I don't know my self, but sometimes fear he is
talking of some other. My Man Evander (quo' he) well, if I had a Daughter of
Gold I should not think her too good for him; -- so faithful, so honest, so
virtuous, (nay I must say for my self, as Nan Behn does, I am very innocent,
unless it be as to -- The Faults of gentle Love --) so careful, and obliging,
and industrious, and ingenious, -- well -- I expect to see him Master of the
Company at least, if not a Gold Chain about his Neck before he dies. -- Besides
truly he is well to pass, -- his Father left him...... and he has since made a
better Penny on it. -- He has the intimate acquaintance of several excellent
Pens, and therefore can never want Copies, and trust him for managing and
improving 'em. He has the Printers at his beck already, and orders those
Irregular Things as well as they their own heaps of Letters. -- He Will make a
Book vanish into the World, as quick as Spirits out on it, and bring it abroad
as easily as Leeson draws a Tooth, or as nimbly as a Flash of Lightning.

Besides, under the Rose, he is a pretty Author himself, has done several
curious things that I could name, and which I Will assure you have taken very
well, and by that trick he saves Copy-money, and gets himself immortal Fame and
Honor.

Nay -- I profess I can bear no longer. Dear Master hold your hand a little, or
I shall die of no other Death than a Surfeit of Praises. The best things
corrupted, are the worst and most dangerous, -- even a Man's own breath kills
him, if he holds it in but too long. -- Thus my modesty will choke me, if I
don't get vent for it; and when I Am out of hearing, praise me as long and as
much as you please, but I Am resolved I Will be even wi' you. -- I Will tell all
your faults at once, and the only one I know, is in this matter, -- If ever the
World can say you speak what is not true, it is when ye launch out in the Praises
of Evander.

However I shall n'ere forget this unexampled Kindness till I forget my self,
and more, my Iris; and so great and real a value and honor have I, and ever
will have for my Master, that even my Fellow-Prentices are no less dear than
Brethren, and his very Dog and Cat I esteem as much as if they were my own
little Cousins.

CHAP. IV.
As concerning the Small Pox. A Lesson for Prentices, and other things very
much to the purpose.

SO much for the Master -- Let his Servant be good or bad -- now for the
Servant, whatever be his Master.

If he has a good one, like mine, I Am sure he can never be too careful to
please him; and the way to do it, is to get fast hold of me, and follow me step
by step (unless I should happen to run clear away, or get into the Kennel) and
then he will scarce fail to attain perfection.

For as Philosophers have advised to have always the Picture of some Great
Person either before the Eyes, or instamp'd firmly on the Memory, that we may
never do any thing one would not be willing they should see, or unworthy such
noble Examples; so I cannot imagine any better way to instruct or reform the ill
habits too generally, alas, contracted among the Apprentices of London, than by
setting so exact a Pattern before 'em -- that when any difficult case happens,
they may only for their Satisfaction run thither, consult the Oracle, and cry
thus or thus did Evander.

And what he did, I am just going to tell ye. But many things fall out between
the Cup and the Lip -- so both you must be abridg'd from the Pleasure of
hearing, and I of telling it, till this ill Job is over -- For just as I had
stripped to my Doublet, and was preparing to thrash Instructions into your Ears,
and make you edify abundantly, comes that ugly, nasty, envious Disease, the
SMALL POX, that inveterate Enemy of good Faces, and mauled poor Evander at such
an unmerciful rate, that you would not know one snip of him again, so unlike did
he soon grow to what he was before. Hardly one twelve Months had been worn away
in those Golden Chains of his Apprenticeship, but he concluded Death was come
to set him free, for which he conn'd its lean Jaws no more thanks than the Old
Man did, who called it to ease him of his Bundle of Sticks.

No sooner I began to make Remarks and Observations, and to know how good a
Master I had, but I thought I had lost him again.

Instead of those sage and grave Notions that used to fill my Head, 'twas
crammed top full of Whimseys and Whirligigs, by the vehement agitation of my
distempered Fancy, as ever a Carkaseshell with Instruments of Death and Murder.
I was nothing but all Flame and Fire, and the red-hot Thoughts glared about my
Brains at such a rate, and if visible, would, I fancy, have made just such a
dreadful Appearance as the Window of a Glass-house discovers in a dark Night --
viz. a parcel of straggling fiery Globes marching about and hizzing, appearing
and vanishing high and low, transverse, and every where -- which at length in a
few days blew up my Head like a Bottle, and I had a Fire as uninterrupted, and
I think as hot as thnt we talk of, rolling all over me, boiling my very Bowels
into Tripes, and frying my poor Heart in its own Water, till I fancy it looked
like the broyl'd Soul of a Goose, or a piece of Cheese tosted over the Candle.
When poor Evander drunk, as my Nurse knows that was not often, 'twas like the
slaking of Iron in Water, or rather the Taylor's spitting upon his Goose, where
the little drops of moisture only stink and sputter, and fly off again; and I
can hardly persuade my self but if any Virtuoso had out of curiosity listened
at my Backdoor, they might have easily heard the small Beer and Posset Drink
hizz within me, as it came down into my Bowels.

What a multitude of Visions, Raptures and Revelations did I then see and
enjoy! and could I but have managed my Pen then as well as now, I might have
clapped down Matter enough for a Book four and twenty times as long as all these
Rambles -- But they are lost to the World, and there is an end on it; though neither
Rice Evans, who foresaw the blessed holy Christian Court of K. Chapter the II. nor
Mrs. James, who prophesies as fine things from his Brother's, could ever have
pretended to higher flights than the young Evander.

I foresaw Things that never was, are, or will be -- The Restoration of K.
James, and the Religion of his Friends, and the Courage of the Irish -- with
twenty thousand things more too tedious and strange to i^stance in.

-- But O my Face! my Face -- Had my Brains been only ^^rn'd topsy-turvy, or my
Wits lost by this Disease -- had my Eyes only been weakened, obliging me on
some occasions to wink ever after -- why all this might have been born by a Man
that had read Seneca (as a Fellow said in Cheapside, when another took him a
kick in the Br --) but to lose a good Face -- ay -- and such a Face as I lost
-- it is intolerable -- and I could have found in my heart not to have lived
afterward -- O that I had but Cowleys Verses on Madam Philips by me! I remember
he laments her hard Fate, and the cruel ravage that scurvy lustful Disease made
in her beau^eous Frame, that I can hardly forbear thinking 'twas writ for
Evander; and were I little less a man, should think he had mistaken the Names,
and writ Orinda instead of me. -- -- Cowley -- well-minded -- we have had no
Poetry all this whole live-long Book: sure the World will think we are turned
Quakers, to wear all this Linen (as what else is Paper) without any Lace
upon it. Let Us tune up then with all speed, and ^ncouple the biting Iambicks
against this foul Disease, the Small (I mean) Pox, which has so transmogriphy'd
Evander from Evander.

PAndora's Box
Let loose the [ Small subintelligitur.]
Pox
To mawl us,
And with foul scratches,
Poor ugly wretches,
Bescrawl us:
An Envious Jade,
Thus to invade
Fair Bodies,
And make 'em look
Like Crow, or Rook
(Which odd is.) [So's that -- but the Rhyme required it.]

Kainophilus
All o re does blush
To see it,
His Soul 'twou'd grate,
Did not hard Fate
Decree it.
So fair a Face,
So sweet a Grace
To lose thus,
Makes me my self,
Unhappy Elf,
Abuse thus.
With Tooth and Nail,
And Tongue I rail,
At Fortune;
Revenge from Jove,
For Peace or Love,
Importune.
To make her dote,
Or cut her Throat
Like Dido:
To make the Jade
Wear Masquerade,
As I do.
But Wishes naught avail -- and seeing it is no better, it is well it is no worse
-- I might have turned Fool as many others, (and then what would have become of
these Rambles?) But to be graver,

Is not that Man or Woman very near Dotage, who either admire their own Fine
Faces, or a^e tormented at the loss of 'em? Were the men all Evanders, the
Women all Iris's, time m^ll come when they would look as ugly as Mother Shipton, or
a half-skinn'd Chapfaln Scull in a Charnel-house. It Is but a few days perhaps,
at least years sooner, that this alteration must be made if Sickness had not
done it before, and saved Death the labor.

Supposing Beauty something real, it is b^t skin-deep, and may be all scratched
away in a moment. If Proportion an ^ Harmony (...) a ^art of Beauty, better
have all the parts of the Face agree and be like one another than otherwise. If
it is a Beauty to have some part of the Face black, why not yet more to have it
patched all over? Truth is, that Beauty is Fancy, at least the most part on it;
and as a person may well be angry, and full as justly, that they have lost a
Lap-full of Guineas they dreamt of, and imagined they were telling over, or
hugging the dear Bags that held 'em, as to have lost that which is little more
real than the other.

How common is it, that what pleases one, displeases another. The most
celebrated Beauties suit not all, though as celebrated Judges, and Presbyter John
thinks himself as happy with his black arm-ful of Joy, as the greatest Prince
of the white World in the Embraces of the most snowy Ladies.

Is it so? Why then Evander value not Beauty no more than that does thee. If it
does not like its old Habitation, let it find a better, and even stroll off
about its business like a Gypsy Queen as it is: (O that thou were but as well
rid of others as now of thy own) while thou marchest about thine, being well
recovered by the exquisite, and never-sufficiently acknowledg`d kindness of the
best of Masters, and after tallowing thy Face, and licking thy Lips, scrubbing
thy Thighs, and clawing thy Ha^nches, as is usual in those Cases, art returned
behind the Counter again as brisk as old Aeson when he had cast his Skin, and
grew as fresh as a Chrysom Child, though past fourscore and seventeen last
Midsummer.

On a double account I now came into a new World, being little acquainted with
the old one before, and what small acquaintance I had, in so fair a way of
leaving it.

When I once came abroad again, and was employed in the Town about my Masters
business more frequently than formerly, being now Head-prentice, and delivered
from that worst part of my doom, nothing in the World being a greater Curse to
a man of (my) Spirit, than to be a Servant of Servants, I fell into
acquaintance about Town, saw the Humors on it, and found enough to make me hate
some things, and be cautious of others. This added to what I formerly knew, and
would have told you before, had not Sickness chopped in between; I have here left
for the benefit of the World, and of you in particular, my dear Well-beloveds,
the hopeful London Prentices from Temple Bar to Aldgate, as you will find in the
following Chapters.

CHAP. V.
Of Atheists, and other Fools or Knaves of that nature.

NO sooner one Monday Morning, had my Master sent me out with a Note into
Ducklane, but who should I meet with at the turning down Shoemakers-Row, but a
young Spark of my Acquaintance, formerly my School-fe^low, some years before me
advanced to London, and placed by his careful Father, Apprentice to one Mr. --
A -- at the Sign of the -- not far from the sound of Bow-Bell. He appeared
extremely brisk and gay, professed himself heartily glad he had lit so luckily
on his old Acquaintance, and invited me to a Glass of Wine at the Queens-Arms
and Fountain; which being then in haste, and my Master expecting me back again,
having business himself abroad, I durst not accept, but promised soon to steal
an Opportunity to enjoy his good Company. --

We went chatting along together for two or three streets, talking of old
Stories and Acquaintance, several of whom he named to me, and where they lived,
-- withal adding, they and much other excellent Company were to meet at such a
Tavern (as well as I can remember at such a distance, 'twas the Nag's-Head in
Cheap Side,) that very Evening, whither if I could possibly steal time from my
business, he would engage I should be very welcome, pressing me very earnestly, this
being the first time he had the happiness to meet me in Town, not to refuse his
Invitation.

Being not unwilling I must confess to see the humors of the Town, as well as
my old Acquaintance, and not willing to disoblige this Person with whom I had
formerly contracted a great intimacy, I promised him, if I could possibly get
leave of my Master, I Would not fail meeting him at the time and place appointed. I
perceived indeed he smiled something scornfully when I mentioned asking leave,
and from that time began a little to suspect him, though his way lying different
from miue, we then immediately parted.

In the Evening, according to our assignation, I told my Master I had met some
of my Acquaintance whom I h^d not seen for several years, and ^equested his
leave to give them a visit for an ^our or two, it being in the long Winter
nights, and Shops shut early.

This he did not refuse, but withal obliged ^e to have a care of ill Company,
the ruin of ^hree quarters of the World, and to be sure not to ^^ay out late,
which he would by no means endure.

-- Modestly thanking him for his good Ad^ice, and promising to regard that,
and keep within the compass as to time, away I went to ^he place I told ye of.

But Heavens, -- what a Hell did I see and hearas ^oon as I entered. -- 'Twas
not now more than Se^en a Clock, and yet one good half of the Compa^y whither
my Acquaintance, whom I asked for ^at the Bar, conducted me, were as Drunk as
Brandy or Claret could make 'em; and the other half employing that little sense
they had ^in Volleys of Curses and Oaths. -- Stepping back ^gen over the
Threshold, as one who treads on a Snake, -- Is this (said I to him who was
introducing me) the good Company you promised to bring me to --? Why they seem
fit Company for none but themselves or Devils. -- As I was going forwards and
backwards at once, he stopped me in both motions, and half by force, half by
persuasion, got me in among 'em, laughing aloud at my ignorance and
squeamishness, and telling me I should shortly be one of them, and as merry and
wicked as the best.

Just such a tenderhearted Fool was I (cries he who brought me thither) when I
first came to Town, nay continued in the same fine precise humor till I was
almost pointed at as I passed the streets, till honest Jack here took pains
with me, and with the help of some of this good Company, soon made me as brave
a Fellow as the be^^ of 'em.

What, I warrant you (says another) this poo^ fresh water Soldier is afraid of
enquiring into the Till, and cheating his Master, and durst not swear or whore
though you would make him an Alder. man. -- But we must bear with him, and remember
what we once were our selves. -- I could hold no longer to hear 'em talk at
tha^ lewd rate, my blood boiled, my heart trembled, and I hardly had the
courage or patience to answer 'em, doubting whether I was fallen among a crew
of Devils or mortal Creatures. -- You were once Men (said I) but now I question
of what Species I ought to name ye; for there are oth^^ Beasts go upright as
well as you, which yet is more than I see most of the Company here can do.

They Would let me go on no further, but instead of being angry, as I expected,
fell all into a loud and most profuse laughter, reiterating the same i^ several
volleys, and not permitting me to insert a word between. Till at last, when
they were weary, he who introduced me looked wistly in my Face, and asked me very
seriously, -- But Evander, are you really of this mind? Is not the taste of
Mothers-milk yet off your tongue, and do you think it such a heinous thing to be
Drunk, as you pretend you believe it? What a deal of sour Religion and Virtue
you yet pretend to carry about you, as if there were any real Evil in being
merry with a Friend, giving Nature a Fillip, as you see we do here, and
enjoying our selves as well as our Masters do theirs. What hurt did that
charming Bottle there ever do, that you should so severely hold forth against
it? And why may not we forget our Troubles, and make the tedious seven Years
roll as glibly on as possible, since as the Poet,

The Wheel of Life no less will stay
In a smooth than rugged way.
And why should n't we drink as well as all Nature? the Sea, the Air, the Sun,
the Earth, the Birds and very Beasts themselves, to whom your grave side of the
World so often compare us. -- And a Beast I Would be with all my heart, were I to
choose what sort; for what a heavenly Creature is an Elephant, that can suck in
a whole Tun at a Gulp?

He would have gone on I believe at the same rate, if I had not interrupted
him, and in the next place wished himself a Whale, that he might drink whole
Seas, and spout 'em out again. I confess, said I, I expected not any thing that
looked like Reason from ye, and it is merely your goodness, since it is more than
a Beast is bound to give for his Actions, and such it seems you think or wish
your self to be. You ask whether there is any evil in being merry with a Friend?
I readily answer, No, but there is in being mad with 'em. Look but what
wonderful mirth there is among ye: Is not he very merry there that lies with
his Heels upwards against the Frame of the Table, or that other pair so well
matched, excellent Company (for themselves and the Hogs) who in their drunken
kindness kissed and slabber'd one another so long till they did the last
indeed. -- See else where they wallow half drowned in the nasty irruptions of
their own Stomachs? -- Or that Spark in the other corner, a very pleasant
Companion, who has been quarrelling and fighting all round, till the Liquor
(and some of his Fellow-Drunkards together) has knocked him down across one of
his Brethren in the same condition? -- And for those that still make shift to
keep upon their Legs (or Stools) are they not extremely merry and divertive,
who sit nodding one against another like the stinking Snuff of a Candle, when
it is just going out in the overheated Socket?

But alas, you design only to heighten Nature, to exalt and cheer it, not quite
sink and drown it at the rate that these have done: And how often pray have
they seen you in the same fine Circumstances that you do them? When you are
once got beyond the Barrieres of Temperance and Modesty, you can no more stop
your self, than after you are fallen from the top of a Tower, you can stay
betwixt that and the ground. 'Ti^ lawful to be cheerful, no body denies it, and
sometimes necessary too, but cannot a Man be so without beating the Watch, and
allarming all the Tenement? Or is there no difference (as an ingenious Man asks
you, between going up to your Chamber, and riding upon the ridge of your house?
All nature teaches us Sobriety, not Intemperance; nothing in the World has too
much moisture but it suffers for it, and quickly rots if it ben't dried again.
The very Rivers and Sea, the greatest Topers in the Universe, drink no more
than suffices 'em; nay, and that not so much for their own sakes as others, the
Rivers only suck in moisture for the Sea, and the Sea again for the Rivers,
unless we'll say this is not like Liquors in the Stomach, something
preternatural, but like that in the Veins, in a regular circulation to preserve
the whole. An Elephant drinks a great deal, and need enough there is of a large
swallow which has so large a Body, but what only slakes his thirst, would burst
a Horse to pieces, or any smaller Animal, none drinking beyond their
proportion, there being no Beasts in the World that will be drunk, as
Naturalists report, but a Swine and a Man, who are then fit company for one
another, and worthy no place but a Hogstye. On which account you well enough
give your Bottle the Epithet of Charming; for its Operation is just the same
with what the Enchantress Circe's Boles produced, charming Men into Hogs.

Your calling your Bottle Charming, puts me in mind of a pretty Criticism I
have some where or other met with. It Is that the old Jewish Conjurers used to
make use of a Bottle (called in their language Ob) either to keep the Devil in,
or which is much the same, to receive or give Oracles out on it, which were
muttered in a deep hollow Voice. Nor has the Devil yet left that way of
enchanting the World.

There Is a strange odd passage in that well attested Relation of the Demon of
Mascon: One of the Spectators of his Pranks seeing a Bottle dance about the
room, and hearing a Voice come from thence, gat hold of it, when immediately
the ^oise was transferred to another part of the room, and the Devil fell a
laughing very merrily, and speaking to the Person who took up the Bottle, asked
him if he thought him such a Fool to stay there, since if he had but clapped his
Finger in, and stopped the mouth on it, he would have held him imprisoned there, and
he could by no means have got out again. Whether the old ^yar kept to his trade,
and told a Lie here or no, is not much material; but this is certain, there is
something like it true in the case we are talking of. While this charming
Bottle o^ yours is close stopped, the Devil can do no feats with it; but if once
it is opened, he dances about the room to some purpose.

The young Divine (cries one of the Company) he talks as peremptorily of the
Devil here, a^ if he were one of his familiar Acquaintance. First prove there is
a God, before you tell us all these Tales of the Devil; for we believe one no
more than the other. Don't come to us with your antiquated Tales of Virtue and
Vice, and Heaven and Hell, and Good and Evil, we have bin past believing any
such old Wives Tales for many a fair year; Our Pleasure is our Religion, our
Body all of of us, this Life our Heaven, and when that is done, there is an end
of us.

That would be rare News to you, I confess, if you could prove it (replied
Evander) as easily as I can what you have now blasphemously, but according to
your own practice, politickly enough denied; for I Am sure he is a greater
Contradiction to himself than any pretended ones he e're found out in Religion,
who believes those things you have now talked of, and yet live as you do.

Tell me, ye Atheists, who sounded the first march and retreat to the Tide,
Hither shall thou come, and no further? When the Winds are not only wild in a
Storm, but even stark mad in an Hurricano, who is it that restores them again
to their wits, and brings them a-sleep in a Calm? Who made the mighty Whales,
who swim in a Sea of Water, and have a Sea of Oil swimming in them? Who first
taught the Water to imitate the Creatures on Land, so that the Sea is the
Stable of Horse- Fishes, the Stall of Kine- Fishes, the Stye of Hog- Fishes,
and the Kennel of Dog- Fishes, and in all things the Sea the Ape of the Land
--? Was not God the first Ship-wright, and are not all Vessels on the Water
descended from the Loins or Ribs rather of Noah's Ark, or else who durst be so
bold with a few crooked Boards nayl'd together, a Stick standing upright, and a
Rag tied to it, to adventure into the boundless Ocean? Whence came the Salt in
the Sea, and who first boiled it which made so much Brine? What Lodestone
first touched the Lodestone, or how first fell it in love with the North,
rather affecting that cold Climate, than the pleasant East, or fruitful South
or West? How comes that Stone to know more than Men, and find the way to the
Land in a Mist? In most of these Men take Sanctuary at Occulta Qualitas, and
complain that the Room is dark, when their Eyes are blind, for indeed they are
God's Wonders.

That there is a Supreme First Being, is as plain as that there is any Being at
all; for wherever there is order, there must be one First, as surely as there
must be an uppermost Round in the Ladder if there is an undermost. I need no
fairer Evidence to convince you of this, than your selves and all the World. --
Some certain qualms which sometimes will not let you believe what you fain would,
and that excellent order and harmony without you in all other parts of the
Creation which you endeavor to destroy in your selves, and which openly and
loudly confess something infinitely wise and perfect as their Father and Author.

But if you deny the Fountain, it is no wonder that you will not grant the Streams,
Virtue and Goodness, concluding just at that wise rate in this case, as ye do
in others. Because you know none of these, nor ever experienced 'em, therefore
there is no such thing; as because they never converse with honest Women, they
believe there are none in the World; and because they never saw a Spirit,
there is no such thing in being. It Is well you keep your Opinions from the
knowledge of the People, and disguise 'em as cunningly as you are able, for the
very Mo^ would be ready to bring you to the Pump, if they knew the only reason
that kept you from turning Pick-pockets was not from the wickedness of the
thing, but lest the Law should catch hold of you, that is in plain English, not
for fear of Conscience, but the Hangman; whence it is more than suspicious,
could you have a cleanly conveyance, you would be as ready to dive into your
Neighbor's Pocket, as into your own. And you do well to think there is nothing
after this Life, at the same time you think there is no Good or Evil. For were
there Evil, you know you have been sufficiently guilty on it, and accordingly
deserve punishment; and if these are all your Ioys, as I understand they are
some of the chiefest of 'em, Drunkenness and Rottenness, rivalling each other
in your Affections and Courtship.

Thus might I have e'ne gone on to Doomsday without their minding a word I
said, for by this time the Fumes of the Liquor, which it seems they had been
tunning in all that day, conquered that little Reason they had left, and threw
'em all into a brutish sleep; where I e'ne lest 'em to snore and stink
together, while I full glad of my happy Jail-deliver, Bow-bell now ringing,
got quietly home to my Masters, having had enough of their Company and
Discourse, which made my Hair stand an end when I thought on it; and being
sufficiently warned from ever coming amongst 'em afterward.

Those who think these Discourses perhaps too grave, and set, to have happened
in common Conversation, as before that I have described my Master above the
life, may yet remember that the divine Plato as well as the virtuous
Kainophilus, makes a very Angel of his old Master Socrates, and talks ten times
more gravely and formally in his Phaeda and other Dialogues, than I have done
in this.

The Intent whereof may be discovered with half an Eye, namely, to show the
Danger Youth is in, when it first arrives here, of lewd Company, and
atheistical, immoral Acquaintaince, which the honest Apprentice, who intends to
come to any thing, must take a special care to avoid, as I did ever after, as
he would the Plague, Fire, or any other desperate Mischief -- Their intention
being to strike at all, and cut up Religion by the Roots; and that once done,
neither moral Honesty, nor civil Felicity use to stay long after -- nor needs
there any more to warn any thinking Person against 'em, than of one side
exposing their Practices, and of the other answering their thin Pretense to
argument; both which I have here endeavored to perform.

CHAP. VI.
Being a Cage full of Cheats, Theives, Pick-pockets, Whores and Rogues.

IT IS generous to strike at the highest first, conquer once but the Grand
Vices, and be truly honest, and all the puny Sinners will fly before you -- Tho
this must be more than in pretense, or else Hypocrisy only makes an Addition
to the Sum which was high enough before. Too many there are who want that chief
Virtue of a Servant, F^delity, who yet pretend as highly to hate the
beforementioned Crew as Evander's self could do. To avoid whose dangerous
paths, Evander first took care to consider there was one always saw him, tho
his Master did not; and then most religiously abstained from the least Touch or
Fingering of what was not at his own dispose; a little inconsiderable business
generally making way for a greater, and the robbing of the Till, preparing for
the Portmanteau, as the Shop does for the Road. Believe it, you who are not yet
past Advice, it is much easier to abstain from a little than a great deal; and
if you once covet the forbidden Wedge, twenty to one but you are one way or
other found out and lost for ever; for the Devil has a kind of Method and
Color of Modesty in his Temptations.

At the first he tempts us to small Sins, to remit something of our wonted
Vigor, to indulge a little unto our corrupt desires, to unbend our Thoughts,
and to slacken our pace in prosecution of good Courses, that by cooling our
selves, we may be able to hold out the better. But when he has drawn us thus
far, he has gotten the Advantage of us, and having a Door open, lets in his
more ugly and horrid Temptations.

Sin has its several Ages and Growths, first it is but conceived and shaped in
the Womb of Concupiscence, then it is nourished and given suck by the Embraces
and Delights of the Will as of a Nurse; then,

Lastly, It grows into a strong Man, and does of it self run up and down our
Little World, invade all the Faculties of Soul and Body, which are at last made
the Instruments of Satan to act and fulfill it.

Satan at the first leads us downward toward Hell as it were by Steps and
Stairs, which tho they go lower and lower, yet we seem still to have firm
footing, and be able to go back at pleasure: But at last we find as the way is
more and more slippery, so the Enemy ready at hand to push us down into a
Dungeon of unrecoverable Misery, did not God's Mercy pluck us as a Brand out of
the fire. Thus, young Men, you see There is no Faith in Sin.

Peter first sleeps only, that seemed the Exigence of his Nature; then he
followed afar off, that happily was pretended to be only the drowsiness of his
sleeping; then he sits down at the Fire, and that was but the coldness of the
Air; but then comes denying, swearing, cursing, and had not Christ in time
looked back upon him, the next step and regress, would have reached unto the
Jaws of Hell. The Devil tempts Judas first to betray his Master, and then to
hang himself.

Reader, if thou art under any Temptation to drive a Trade in Sin, tho never so
small, and have made some Ventures already, and perhaps have received some
return of Profit or Pleasure, yet timely remember, what a horrible Wrack and
Devastation it will bring upon thee at last! Sin will one time or other find
thee out; delude not thy self with these vain Thoughts and Argumentations, I
will only go so far in Sin, to such a Stage in Wickedness, and no farther. By
these Stairs the unhappy Mr. Robert Foulks late Minister of Stanton-Lacy.
Foulks came up to that dreadful height, that (as he himself expresses it) it
amazed his Thoughts to look down the fearful Precipice he stood upon. But
suppose (which was never known) you should itch but once to try how pleasing
Sin will be, yet at Adam 's price you buy this painted Apple, and thereby lose
that Paradise of Innocence, and sweet Serenity of Mind, which before you
enjoyed.

Then resist the first beginnings, venture not upon a known Sin, tho never so
little, or neglect a known Duty, tho never so much against the Interest of
flesh and blood. Crush the Cockatrice; every Step thou make in Sin, brings
thee in greater danger: Repentance may be denied, or come too late; and it is
ill venturing Eternity upon our last breath; he that fights the Battles of the
Hellish Commander, he will soon find him courageous enough to lead him into a
more bloody Field.

When the forementioned Foulks first entered upon an irregular amor, if any
body would have suggested to him where it would have ended, he would certainly
have answered with the Assyrian, Am I a Dog that I should do this? yet he was
the Dog that did it.

Sin in its minority is easily opposed, at first to resist it requires not so
much labor, but there is no withstanding when it has attained to maturity.

The heights of Wickedness appear so monstrous at a distance to one that is but
newly entering upon it, that he flatters himself he shall never come thither;
but after long continuance in it, and suppressing many Convictions, violating
many Vows and Resolutions, after many Evasions to shift off the Imputation,
Apologies to excuse or lessen it, Lies and Protestations to deny it, he becomes
strangely altered, he is not what he was, but is insensibly brought more and
more into the Snare of the Devil, who leads him captive at his pleasure, and
one sin draws on another, and each of a more deformed Production than another,
like the Serpents of Africa, who by their promiscuous Copulations, have
engendered such strange and ugly Monsters as Nature never intended.

He that boldly ventures to break one Commandment, will in a little time as
boldly venture to make a breach on all.

Whosoever allows and licen^es himself in the Practice of any one Sin, tho he
think it never so small, that man involves himself in a fatal kind of necessity
to admit of a Train to attend and support it: Try not thy self, but trust my
words.

For we had no farther off than next door a sad and remarkable Instance of this
nature, which I believe I shall never forget while my Name is Vander. 'Twas at
the Cane-shop he lived, at the Sign of the -- over against the famous --
Tavern. His Father an honest Country Minister, who strained hard to put his Son
to so comfortable a Trade, being his eldest, and the hope of his Family, and
expected to have been a Comfort to all the rest, tho he unhappily proved quite
contrary; beginning first with small puny Thefts now and then from his
unsuspecting Master, but carrying himself all the while like an Angel, as he
verily thought him. From selling now and then, or embezelling his Masters Goods
to his own use, he came to mount higher, and by the Advice of wicked Company,
and Instigation of the Devil, grew at last acquainted with his Till, and
getting a false Key made by the Impression of the other taken in Wax, proved
such a Cash-keeper for him, as he neither suspected, nor desired.

One great Incentive to his thus purloyning from his Master, were some ill
Women, with whom he was acquainted; and who living at the other end of the Town,
though as common as the Road thither, pretended to be Persons of Quality, and
must be treated, forsooth, and caressed acaccordingly. This Trade held so long,
till by his continual finding Moneys in the Till mistold, his Master at length
suspected him, and to try him one day, left there a parcel of Money, every
piece of which he had both told and marked, to prevent any mistake in the
discovery; and the Bait laid, bids his Man be careful of the Shop, and went out
as about business; nor did he disobey his Commands, not only looking narrowly
to the Shop, but to the Till it self, taking out four or five pieces of the
Money left on purpose for him, resolving to have the other pull at it the next
Morning, though he feared to take a greater Sum at one time, lest it should be
missed and suspected.

In short, home comes the Master late in the Evening, to bed they all went, and
when he was asleep, his Breeches on Examination confessed the fault, and
discovered all the Thievery by the marked Pieces which he had taken. Nothing was
said that Night, but the next Morning his Master having also discovered his
lewd Company; and ill Haunts, fairly took him to taks, proved against him the
Thievery and other Villainy, and not willing to expose his Father, for whom he
had a just respect, writ an Account of all to him, desiring him to fetch his
Son home, or take some other care of him, else he must be obliged to make him
serve the rest of his time in Bridewell.

This sudden Thunderclap threw the young Spark into such a Consternation, that
like the man who hanged himself in the Prison, lest he should be found guilty
of Felony; or the old Woman who cut her Hogs Throat to save his life; away he
run for fear of being turned away -- and hyes him to the other end of Town among
his great Acquaintance, who finding the sheep fleeced, kept'on the Mask no
longer, but owned themselves downright Iilts, Thieves, and Pick-pockets, as
alas! a Whore's but a starving Trade of it self, unless they have some other
such way to eak out an honest Livelihood. And indeed their Hands are generally
as nimble as their Tongues, angling for Watches, Letters, or whatever their
good Fate presents 'em.

It Is strange! that even these forlorn Wretches should not be able to subsist
without a sort of Order and Government among 'em. They are indeed as perfect a
Corporation, as any Company in England, and use as much Method in the sending
out Parties; this scowring one Street, and the other another; none interloping
on the Province, or Walk, as they call it, that does not belong to 'em. So that
the Thief-catchers, either the Marshal's Man or others, whose business it is,
has 'em at what Command he pleases, sends for the Heads of 'em, and for a Sum
of Money recovers your Watch, Sword, or Guinea as often as you please to lose'em.

To this degree of Wickedness was this unhappy undone young Man now risen, and
had, as was thought, but one step now between that and the Gallows; but by good
Fortune for him, he came to a more honorable end, and Justice overtook him
without the help of the Hangman; for it chancing that two Gentlemen quarreled
in Fleet Street, and drew upon one another, he coming by officiously pretended
to part the Fray, and running between the fierce Combatants, seized one of 'em
in his Arms while another of his Companions prepared to pick his Pocket: But
the other Gentleman whether out of rage that he could not come at his
Adversary, so resolving to reach him through the other, or by a mistake, made a
fatal pass and ran poor Pick-pocket through the Back, that he fell down dead with
an Oath in his Mouth, and never spoke word after.

CHAP. VII.
The Chapter of the Booksellers.

STAND! not a Foot further at the hazard of your Ears -- and well if you come
off so, Evander! make your self ridiculous as long as you please, but let us
alone you were best -- (...) --

Or, What Sir -- What mean you, Sir -- What would you be at, Sir -- don't you
know as well as I, and every body else that has seen or ^heard of me, that
Evander never saw fear but in the face of an Enemy?

Or, Sir, steps in a desperate Hyper-Gorgonick Mortal, who lives not above one
Semidi^meter of the Earth from Westminster Hall -- Or -- I Will cut your Throat,
I Will shoot ye in the Head, I Will pash out your Brains with the heel of my Shoe
(hold there) I Will rip out your great and small Guts, and make Tripes and
Fiddle-strings of 'em; and after I have done all this, Beat ye till you are as
black as a Raven.

Umph! truly that is very hard to a man that endeavors to get an honest
Livelihood in the way of his Trade, and hurts no body -- What is it this young
Man has done -- certainly he has been truanting a little, or has been formerly

Petticoatized --

that he is so desperately afraid of the Lash. Had he been one of the naughty
Youths of the Town, that sit all the Day between the Comb and the Glass, that
dress, as it were, in Print, only to have the Ladies say, Look what a delicate
Shape and Foot that Gentleman has! had he not been a careful, industrious,
studious, sober, honest Man, who makes it his business to keep his Shop, oblige
his Customers; nay, rather than be idle or gad abroad, turning his Books, and
dusting his Shelves; then there might have been some reason for his
Apprehension. But alas! all the World knows him a great Trader both in London
and the Country; a grave, staid, facetious Person, never out of temper or
humor, discreet to a Miracle, incapable of being affronted, or scandalized, so
fair is his Name, and so sweet his Disposition. And this Character he had had,
if he could have staid for it, without all this trouble; but has by this strange
and unwonted fit of passion (ten to one but he had been in Company before, and
no man alive is always the same) so discomposed my Thoughts as well as his own,
that all the designed Method is overturned; and instead of a formal orderly
Visit intended to the principal Booksellers, the Glory of Trade, and of London,
must now be forced to take 'em higgledy-piggledy, and so lose a great many of
'em that Fame and Immortality designd 'em; for which irreparable Loss they may
blame this young Man's intempestive rashness, not our unjust Partiality.

'Twas the intention of Kainophilus, as he has before recommended to the raw,
unexperienced Apprentice, the necessary Accomplishments of Religion,
Temperance, and Fidelity, by showing the Mischiefs and Dangers of the contrary
Vices, so to have proceeded on the next Virtue, as necessary very near to the
happiness of a young Man as any of the other -- namely Industry. And as he had
recommended the past Virtues by showing the ill face of their contraries, he
would have endeavored to have demonstrated this by its own Light, and that
with no disadvantage in the Example of Evander.

The Scene I had laid to reduce this into action, was the City of London, the
Dress and Form in which I appeared thereon, most convenient for Expedition,
accouter'd like the Boys that run with the Gazet my Hat under my Arm, my Note
in my Hand, and I almost breathless, tripping it through the Streets like a
Roe-buck, and calling in at all the Booksellers, and giving you a little touch
of their virtuous Qualities, for the Proverb is sufficient Evidence, though
there is Knavery in all Trades else, we have none in ours, though there may
perhaps be a little Foolery now and then, of which some may think these Books
an Instance; but some wiser than some, and those think otherwise.

However, whether they do or no, I must mind my business, and what it is,
squint back to the Frontispiece, and there you will find it,

Globe the V.

Where he vamps about Town for Caesar and Strada,
The Horn-book, Morocco, John Bunyan, Granada.
I ask your Pardon once more, dear Reader, I feel I have Rambled away from the
Booksellers, and fallen among the Books again, but they are so near kin, you will
easily pardon it -- and I make no question the Booksellers would entirely
forgive me, should I forget 'em altogether.

However, I take 'em all to witness against this Dogrel-writer in ordinary, who
insinuates in his roguy Rhymes, as if I was employed in nothing but Godly
Books, Plays, and Horn-Books; whereas I appeal to all you that know me, whether
I have not very often been at your Shops both for Quarto's and Folio's, and
sometimes lugg'd home some reverend Commentator that was like to break my Back
before I got thither.

Not but that, as I told you before, I profess as deep a Respect and Veneration
for the worthy Mr. Bunyan, as the very Man that prints him. -- and the truth
is, that devout Author has always had the good Fortune to fall into the hands
of as religious Booksellers.

The lewd World, it is true, will scoff and jeer, but who can help it, if we are
safe in our own Integrity, and can so easily despise 'em? Thus were my dear
Friend and Namesake John yet living, should I hear any ugly Stories or Rhymes
of him -- as one very scandalous one I with detestation remember,

In Cases of Conscience so far he has gone
Resolving of others, he has quite lost his own --
Abominable -- but I say in such a Case thus would I endeavor to comfort him,
were there any need on it -- Truly dear Brother -- The World has thought Evander
is a Man endowed with some Sense, yea, and that above his Neighbors, but if I
am a proper Judge in this Case -- I protest on the word of a Rambler, I had
many fine things more to hold forth on this Subject, but I know not how it
comes to pass, on the sudden they are all lost again, like Friends in a Crowd; I
am just in the same Condition with that forecited Great Person, when he could
n't tell what was next in his Sermon; my Head, is as it were, in a Pudding-bag,
and I have not a word more to say tho 'twere to get it out again.

What a noise here has been about one poor Author -- what shall we then do when
we meet with 'em in the next Chapter all together? Sure all Bedlam would scarce
hold 'em.

And now I am about Godly Books, commend me to Dunton's Blessed Martyrs, which
I remember, among other things, I had once upon my Note.

I shall never forget that Remarkable Person, tho I were to live as long as his
Raven -- I had the Honor that time to see, and discour^e with him; and I
confess the World is in the right, that he is something like that Evander which
makes such a splutter in it -- but I Am still of the same mind I was before --
they can never prove I am he --

So much, however, I Will acknowledge, That there is a great Intimacy and
Acquaintance between us offered, I must own, first on his part, tho mine the
Advantage and Honor; the Reason I cannot guess, unless that by his Skill in
Physiognomy he knew I should live to be a famed Author, and therefore was
willing to oblige me, that he might afterward have some good Copies from me.

However, I must give him such a Character as he deserves, and indeed as a near
and dear Friend of his gave me under his own Handwriting.

He is a Man so and so, thus and thus, neither full so high as the monumental
Irishman, nor quite as humble as that Modicum of Mortality that walks about
with him (whom they who know no better, think his next Neighbor.)

I am to give him no Character that shall make him blush, -- nor believe I can
-- (so punctual is he in all his Dealings) however to avoid it, will say not
one Word more besides what I find in my Notes of that day's Transactions --
He Is famous for one thing -- That he is generous to a Miracle, has a swinging
Soul of his own, and would part with all he has to serve a Friend -- and that is
enough for one Bookseller.

Tempora mutantur -- that is no News, but that Things should change at such an
odd rate, would be very wonderful, did not we see a thousand Examples on it
every day -- and one of the strangest I know, is in the Sign, and other
Appurtenances of this said Shop.

That ever a beautiful Angel (with a delicate gilt Turkey-leather Bible into
the bargain) should in a few years be thus changed, translated, and
transmogriphy'd into a thing as black as a Bugbear, an ill-boding,
ill-sounding, ill-looking Raven.

I have often wondered why the Party aforesaid, should choose this Sign above
all the rest, and can imagine none but this following, which lies somewhat out
of the way of common Reading and Observation: The Banner of the Danes, or
rather their Standard Royal, had a Raven curiously wrought in it (as the Romans
an Eagle.) The reason, probably, by the jetty Blackness thereof, as a sort of a
Foil to set off the natural whiteness of their own Skins; the Danes being
generally, as all men know, very fair-hair'd, Fair-complexion'd Men? And who
knows but this Author, having some where or other met with this Story, hung up
the Raven for his Sign upon the same reason.

But to come from the Sign to the Shop, -- What difference? -- There was
formerly a very Spark lived in it, -- the young, the wild, the witty, the gay,
and all that, who was forced to march off for the famous Sham-Riot at
Guild Hall, being actually concerned in looking down from a Balcony, and
bewitching the poor Loyal Party at such a rate, that hundreds of 'em could n't
speak a word for a week after. -- See but what a Rambling Fate some Men have;
-- then he turned a Man of War, so did not his peaceable Successor, nor the as
peaceful Evander, both of which I am confident had rather have their Bodies
quietly eaten by Worms, than torn to pieces in Foreign Nations by howling
Wolves, or rapacious Vultures.

Well, now my hands in, I Will on a little further, and would fain call a little
of the other side of the way, at one, whose Conscience is streighter than his
Sign, but he is so up to the Ears among great Persons and Business (perhaps
engaging for a 3d. Volume) that I Will not venture on him, only your humble
Servant Mr. -- (a curious Shop this, well built, lightsom, high, well furnished,
-- well if ever he quits it, I Will step in after him, -- as -- has been done by
others a hundred times over.

I Would Ramble on as far as Cornhil, were it not for fear of being gored by one of
Four Creeds; but Oldham's dead, and so there is the less danger.

Among other April- Errands, the wise Author of the Poem sent me a
Play-catching, instancing in the Empress of Morocco, and the Conquest of
Granada. A most abominable work, -- that ever he should offer to desile my
Fingers with meddling with a Play. -- It Is a Monkey-trick, let me tell him, to
make use of poor Puss's Paw to scratch out the Chessnuts which he himself eats.
He never heard I warn't ye of the Devil that carried away a whole shoulder of a
Playhouse on his Back, as easily as a Fox trusses a Goose. The sage Evander in
vain rebuked him, and asked the meaning on it. -- All I could get out of him was
his Judgment of Plays in general, which word for word I Will insert as follows.

Moral Representations in themselves can never be unlawful, may be very useful.
To see Vice represented like it self, deformed and odious, though high and
prosperous, and at last thrown down and trampled by those who envied and
admired it. To see Virtue, in its own Face, all charming and lovely, brave though
unfortunate, pressed all round, and wading through all, and at last enthroned,
prosperous and triumphant, -- What can more tend to the advancement of one, and
depression of the other, with those especially who are led by Sense more than
Reason, though this admits both?

The many of the present Plays, it is acknowledged generally, take the quite
contrary course; especially the Comedies, the best of which that I have seen,
take more care to express the Humors of the Country, Vices and all, than to
amend 'em; and these they dress in the loveliest colors of Wit and Fancy, for
not only Priests, but as far as I see,

Laureats of all Religions are the same.

And thus for One that is mended by Plays, such as they are now, Ten thousand
may be injured or ruined. For the truth of which I appeal to any ingenious
Debauchee, if any such be to be found. Nor are yet the Plays so much perhads
chargeable herewith (though bad enough) as the Company which come there. It Is
as common a receptacle for W -- and R -- as Bridewel it self (though that the
more proper of the two.) There are perhaps almost as many Jilts as Women, so
much more dangerous than Pick-pockets, as they search deeper, and pilfer what is
more precious than that they aim at, Reputation and Virtue.

Yet all this is clearly accidental to Plays; these inconveniences may be
removed, and only Virtue and Vice shown as they ought to be; or if Humor, such
as are diverting, and yet innocent; and it argues want of depth, if not plain
dullness, not to be able to fill up a Comedy without the help of a Bawd or a
Whore.

On the whole, my Judgment is (if any body valued it) that in this case as well
as many others, the contending Parties share the Truth betwixt 'em. One side,
and that I believe the honester, knowing the notorious Debauchery and Lewdness
of those Sinks of Sin, out of a little over-boyling Zeal, over-shoot the Mark,
and call all Plays and Dramatick Poetry the Devil's Books, as much as Cards
themselves are (in which they may be much in the right,) for the evil, but
separable Appendages thereof condemning the thing in it self, though not only
innocent, but useful and profitable in its own nature.

The other defend Plays in general, and so far are in the right, but strain the
point too far on one side, as the first on the other; defending the modern
Plays from the Notion of Plays in general, and thus easily overlooking, if not
taking in, all those cursed, little less than Incentives to Lewdness and
Villainy, which from the Company, the Subject represented, and the softness of
the Music, are sucked in by the Eye and Ears of the Spectators. -- So much for
his Judgment, for further he says not, nor would I for all the World add mine,
for a reason that I Will keep to my self. --

But though he has done with Plays, I have not, but must step into George-yard,
and ask at a Gentleman's Shop, called Infortunatus, for a Play he lately
printed, which it is thought will make him an Alderman (by that time all the
Impression is sold off.) Some of the Flowers on it I remember to this day, which
ye shall have immediately, if ye will not trouble me with a hard word called
Antichronismes, and tell me I clap present, past and future together, talking of
what happened ten years agone and but last week in the same breath, which agrees
not with the dignity and accuracy of an Historian.

I could blow away this Objection with only in one word owning my self a
Prophet, some hints of which you have heard already, for I Am sure you have read
Homer, and what he talks of Calchas, or one old Conjuring Rogue or another of
'em, (...), etc. -- A cunning Man, who knew whatever was, is, or never shall
be. Just so might --

But not to insist on that Argument, know ye, that what Evander writes, is
rather Poetry, than naked insipid History, and that you know confounds time as
it pleases, and makes nothing of a hundred years difference if a good Thought
depends upon it.

But now for the Flowers. -- How nobly does Patrick, with his Irish sense, keep
up the Character of a King and Queen? -- How sweet, majestic and delicate a
turn is that, when he makes the Queen throw aside her Gown, and discover a pair
of Velvet Breeches on, page 5. with a sharp Innuendo, that she wore the
Breeches. -- And then how Heroically does he make the King complain of this
sore grief, page 6. -- Was ever King Unfortunate like me,
Who married one below his Pedi -- gree,
That now insults and hectors -- as you see.


But he soon makes all up in the Characters of his Heroes; for after the poor
King of Poland was raised from the dead to tell his Tale, he loo's the young
Hero at him, as if he were the erranter Sprite of the two. At first indeed he
makes him very civil, and drinks to the Sprite with as much complaisance as
Don-Iohn himself in the Temple; but the mischief is, he makes all his Heroes
(like himself I suppose) very quarrelsom in their Drink, for without any
affront in the world he falls a hussing him, draws his Whiniard, and tells him
not in Prose, but downright Heroic --

But that I know thou art already dead,
I would cut off thy old Politic Head.
But then for Tropes and Figures;

What People's those who boldly do intrude
Within the limits of my Latitude.
Then how easy and free the little Folks talk;

Then let us know what is your sacred Will,
I am the City's Mayor, He Consta -- bill.
Then of the other side, the sweet Cadency, and all that --

Did we come here to Hector, Scold and Dance,
Or talk of things of greater Impor -- tance?
But the Reader is by this time as weary as Evander; for this Spark of an
Author, it is e'ne pity to dash ^ well-meaning modest Creature at first setting
out, and therefore I Will say no more but that if his Motto be true at the
beginning of his Book (which by the way he Cabbidg'd from the Playhouse)
Vivitur ingenio, etc. and he has really nothing but his Wit to live upon, it
must needs be worse Diet than Rackstaves, and the poor Wretch must needs be
very Skeleton already, and can never live a Quarter-of-an-year to an end.

Farewell Tom. -- Spare my Shoulder, as ever thou expectest the Sergeants should
yours, and I Will e'ne steal round by Lombard Street.

Here once lived a Bookseller, that had he still been of our Trade, I question
whether the Proverb would have kept us safe, unless that old escape -- There Is
no general Rule without an Exception, might have saved us. -- such a Pirate,
such a Cormorant, -- Copies, Books, Men, Shops, all was one; he held no
Propriety, right or wrong, good or bad, till at last he began to be known, and
our Trade not enduring so ill a Man among 'em to disgrace 'em, spewed him out,
and off he marched I neither know nor care not whither.

And now ye talk of Cormorants, what kind of a Fish is a

Conger? --
Why it is an overgrown Eel, that devours all the Food from the weaker Grigs,
and when he wants other Food, swallows them too into the bargain. A poor Fly
cannot stir upon the water, but -- pop, he is at him; nor so much as a Tripe-wife
cleanse her rich Commodities, but he will gobble up as greedily as a Duck,
whatever falls from 'em.

Now there are of these Congers diverse and sundry Countries and Nations: Some
of 'em as far ou^-shine (and out-bid) the rest, as a Rose the rest of the
Flowers in the Garden. These are of a North-Country race, much about the Tweed
mouth, and it is thought sometimes ramble even to the Firth of Dunbritton, or
the Isles of Mull and the Orcades. Look but how lofty and stately they bear
themselves, -- you would think 'em all Leviathans, and there is no coming near 'em
unless you would slip into their Gills. Venus orta Mari is a good old Observation:
For some of these same Fish are very waggish prolifick -- but there is room
enough in the wide Sea to turn out as much Spawn as Nature has given 'em.

But Scotland being a barren Country, others are rather for the Shannon or
Boine; or not yet content, ramble further, all the four Seas, nay all the World
over, and observe the Rises and Falls of the Dutch, German, Italian, and all
the great Rivers in the World. -- They Will swim with or against Tide, live in
any Stream, Pool, Lake, Pond or River, and so slippery withal, that no Hook can
catch 'em, no Hand detain 'em, no Spear strike 'em, no Wear hold them. Nor will
they ever be quiet, and leave plaguing all the little fry in this (watery)
World, till they tumble down through some Vortex or other into the grand Abyss.

There Is Sauce enough for one Fish, or else it is very hard, --

I could return again to Booksellers, and give ye Epithets and Characters
suitable for 'em all, and take in the Auctioneers too into the bargain.

I could begin with Mr. M --, who commenced and continued Auctions upon the
Authority of Herodatus, who commends that way of Sale for the disposal of the
most exquisite and finest Beauties to their Amoroso's; and further informs the
World, that the sum so raised was laid out for the Portions of those to whom
Nature had been less kind, that he will never be forgot while his Name is N --,
or he a Man of remarkable Elocution, Wit, Sense and Modesty, Characters so
eminently his, that he would be known by them among a thousand.

'T would be tedious and unconscionable to go thorough all Cheapside, Paul's
Churchyard, Little-Britain and Duck-lane, to describe every Man, Woman and
Sucking-Child, Stationer, Bookseller, Binder, Stitcher and Hawker. This is
general may suffice for an impartial Character of that honorable and honest
Employment, as fas as my own Observations give me, --

That they are generally Men that make a Conscience, Just and Kind to one
another, endeavoring with all their power to promote each the Interest and
Copies of his Neighbor; -- and above all, Civil and Generous to their
particular Authors; of which more in the next Chapter.

If there is any Person who takes it amiss that he is not so honored as to find
his Name mentioned in this Chapter, he need do no more than speak his mind
freely of this Book, and then he shall certainly see himself inserted in the
next Ramble. For these present Characters (both of the Booksellers and Authors
have been both read and approved by a Club of 'em) and are as much applicable
to one as I say they are as much designed for this Man as that Man, and that
Man as this Man, and disprove it if you can.
another. But if any by winceing shall prove himself guilty, I resolve to run
Kingdoms or Reams of Paper out of breath in the Satyrizing such a Fop, that did
not know when he was well, and upon

The Word of a Bookseller,
(and that you will say is a proud Expression) will meet with him in every Ramble
to the end of the Twenty four Globes. For (as Oldham says) I wear my Pen as
others do their Sword,
To each affronting Sot I meet, the word
Is Satisfaction, straight to Thrusts I go,
And pointed Satyr runs him through and through.


CHAP. VIII.
Of Love, and all That.

Toward the end of the last Chapter I hung out a red Flag of Defyance, and
told the Corporation of Authors, they were best make ready, for I intended to
fire a whole Broadside among 'em, and they were to expect a sharp Engagement.
But it is not the first time things have been in this posture, and yet no harm
done -- accordingly having great Examples before me, I Am resolved at present to
retreat from the Enemies -- but yet with a resolution to swinge 'em off the
next time I get among 'em.

In the mean time must dispatch a little necessary business in my own memorable
Life, and therein recommend to others (as I have all along done) what I my self
found both practicable and easy.

I don't intend to run through all Oeconomics to find the whole Duty of a Servant
-- my main Work is to describe some of the main Pillars and Rafters on which he
must lay both his present Happiness, and future Fortunes; most of which have
been already discoursed of, tho one or two more remains, which ought not to be
forgotten.

And the first of 'em is Veracity -- Dare to be true -- has Sense as well as
Wit (...) Poetry in it: I am confident it is Cowardice is the ^arent of most
vices; men dare not be singular or ^irtuous, that is in effect, are afraid both
of themselves and others, lest they should be fa^igued and laughed at -- But as
this holds in most ^ther Cases, so particularly in this, in reference ^o a
Master -- I have done some fault or other, which I dare not own, and the next
Re^uge is (...) Lie to get rid on it; where to be sure the Re^^dy is worse than
the Disease. And this the Truth is, some ill-natured Masters almost force their
Servants into, by being so implacable and ^nmerciful, so furious, and more like
distracted (...) than that grave sober thing -- a Citizen, that their Servants
think it better to run into the Devils Paws than theirs.

My Advice in this case is -- if you light into the Hands of such a Master as
Evander's, after ^^y Fault, deal ingeniously with him, and frank^y acknowledge
it with modest assurances of your ^tmost care to prevent the like for the
future; this will not fail to work upon any thing that has ^ut a spark of Goodness
or Generosity in their Composition.

But if they are of the Rank abovementioned, there is yet no wild Beast so
fierce, but there is some way or other to deal with 'em. Do in this Case as if
you met a mad Bull in the Fields, clap your self behind a Tree, and by that
time he turns his long, heavy Carkase, you are either out of danger, or got
further off from him -- The meaning is, slip out of the way, and avoid the
first Onset, which is always the most furious -- Or still there is another
slipping aside, even though in his presence. No doubt it may be lawful in some
cases to deceive, tho it is not to ^ye. Stra^tagems in War, are Instances of one
without the other, and that too without any mental Re^servation. It Is mere
Cowardice to excuse you^ self by a Lie, and mere dullness not to be abl^ to do
it without one. Those who are so thick headed, they cannot find the mean, have
this com^fort, that Nature has generally made 'em bette^ able to bear a Kick or
two, than others; and however they are provided within, bin bounti^ful to 'em
without, and kindly endu'd them with such natural Helmets, as it is no easy
mat^ter for 'em to have their Heads broken -- which if it does now and then
happen, they may as patiently endure (and not with much more Sense) as a Pile
those ponderous knocks that beat him into the Earth; or those Stones which the
P^viers thump into the Streets to mend the Highways.

So much for you, now for my self again, and yet still for you. O my kind
Fellow-prentices, that either as a Buoy, or Landmark, by avoiding me, or
sailing by me, you may safely guide your selves through this seven years Voyage in
the good Ship, the Apprentice of London.

Hitherto I hope I have led you right, by my self keeping the right path; now
I Will do it by going in the wrong -- which may as easily be done as a true
Conclusion drawn from Premises as false as Transubstantiation.

And the first, the last, the great, the main Rock that poor Evander split
himself against, and hardly swam ashore with his Life, was Love, Fatal Love,
poisonous Love, bewitching Love, cheating, jilting, treacherous Love --
Diaboli^^^ Love -- if there is a Devil in the World, that is it -- sweet,
charming, cordial, faithful, divine, celestial Love -- ay, if there be an Angel
upon Earth ( I mean an Angel in Petticoats) certainly my Love was that very
Angel.

An Angel, a Goddess, -- a Sun, a Moon, an -- all the Seven Stars together --
nay, she was the milky way, she had hundreds of thousands of little Virtues and
Graces, and Beauties and Charms, that none could distinctly see, unless he
looked through the Telescope of Love, tho all the World perceived 'em in a Lump
lightning and glaring quite cross the Horizon whenever she appeared abroad
unclouded -- Pray Mr. Critic don't be trouble some -- I know you will tell me
Love is blind; and how should he see what other People cannot, when he does not
so much as see what they can -- I Will answer this by an easy Experiment: Don't
Children see a hundred fine, gaudy things in the dark, which they could never
discover, unless they were without Light: And do but try a trick I Will tell ye,
and then you will trouble me no more with such frivolous Objections, wink as hard
as you can, and let me take you a good swinging close tweak by the Nose, and if
I don't make you see as many Stars in nothing at all, as we Lovers do in our
Mistresses, why then I Will throw away my Pen, and never write Ramble more.

-- Just at the same rate does that arch Wag Cupid lead us poor silly Captives
as we are, lead us by the patient Nose, from Post to Pillar, and from Pillar to
Post again, hither and thither, and no body knows where; after no body knows
who, and when the Show is over, we our selves cannot tell for what. Thus did he
once lead me like a loving Ass as I was for my pains, seven long Miles to see
the happy place, (an old Stump of a Tree, where my Mistress had sat seven
years before, and afterward got upon my Shoulders, like the black Cat, when
Men are going to hang themselves, weighed me down whether I would or no, and
made me most ingloriously kiss the very place which had been beautified with
the closer Appropinquation to her amiable Posterioristica; like those whom the
Lancashire Witches made kiss the Mare's backside who drew 'em to the Gallows.

I know the grave Philosophers with long Beards, will not fail to bestow a
Sardonick Smile upon me for these, as they will call 'em, youthful
Extravagancies, and perhaps too, they may justly enough blame me; but yet I can
as justly appeal from their Sentence, as not capable Judges: They never knew
what 'twas to love, or if they might possibly in days of yore have been
enamored on the beautiful Perfections, and perfect Beauties of one of Queen
Bess's Maids of Honor, 'twas yet so long since, they may easily have forgotten
it.

I must therefore tell 'em what Love is, before they can be competent Deciders
in this business, or know whether I am more blameable or praiseworthy in
admitting it a Guest into my tender Heart. Love is a natural Distemper, a kind
of small Pox most have either had it, or is to expect it, and the sooner the
better; surely I was never well cured on it in my Prenticeship, or I had never
fallen into a Relapse when I was out of my Time; but want of Knowledge misguided
me then, and so I fell into a Quagmire. But in my last Amor (as you will find in
my Rambles a wiving, which are to make a distinct Volume, containing New
Observations concerning Love and Women, with my own experimental Reflections,)
I was so discreet as not to advance a step without a Demonstration.

Love is all Mystery and Maze -- says one that had reason to know; but what is
that to the purpose? It Is no better nor worse than one of Aristotle's occult
Qualities, a Cover-slut for Ignorance, and only confessing in other words, that
I cannot tell what it is.

However, I Am confident I know what it is not, tho perhaps I cannot so well tell
what it is. Love is not Desire any more than the Hangman is the Lord
Chief-Iustice: What Desire is there (in that Sense wherein it is here taken)
when distance and absence part the Lover from his Object -- Nay, to venture
nearer, how easy and common is it even in the presence of what is most
passionately and dearly loved, to abstract really as well as mentally, from any
thing of that Nature. Even the Spark himself may be appealed to, whether he
always desires his Mistress, and yet he will swear heartily that he always loves
her. Desire is the Flame of Love, and there is to be sure Fire without Flame,
tho hardly Flame without Fire; a little of one, and a little of the other does
very well.

After all, for the Platonick-tale is either a Whim, or a Cover, or Friendship,
or nothing at all. It Is true enough, nor can it modestly be denied, that the
same sort of Love I have for a man, I may have for a Woman; but then for the
most part the Sex will steal in, and quickly make a difference.

That Wag Boccaline has a pleasant Story enough (among a great many others) in
his Advertisements from Parnassus to this purpose -- The Virtuosi there having
fallen into the Acquaintance of some famous She-wits and Poetesses, and thought
themselves for a long time extremely happy in a Platonic Conversation with 'em
-- But 'twas not long before Apollo discovered some such certain Familiarities
and Intimacies betwixt his Virtuosi and the Ladies, that being afraid Parnassus
would be over-stockt if they continued there much longer, he immediately
expelled all those dangerous Creatures, and ordained by a perpetual Edict they
should never be admitted after.

I could give a nearer and truer Instance to the same purpose -- 'Twas not many
years since, that there lived in Loudon a Sect of persons pretending to
perfection -- and perpetual Virginity -- all their Love being Angelick, without
the least mixture of Matter, tho betwixt different Sexes every one having their
particular Friend.

Thus things continued for some Months, they admiring their own Purity and
Sanctity above all Mankind -- when behold -- unluckily several of the Virgins
began to burnish and thrive amain, and at the usual time, to the amazement of
all the Society, this their pure Friendsh, sent several living Babes into the
World -- After which they were forced to drop their Principles, and be content
with matrimonial Purity instead of that virginal one to which they at first
pretended.

Love is the Greensickness in men -- it makes 'em stark mad for Toys and
Trifles, as Women are for Plaster and Oatmeal.

Now you know what Love is, I Will tell you what 'twas I loved --

She was -- indeed -- a Non-parel -- a She-Phoenix, a half-Iris, a Match for
Evander.

Admired Mrs. Rachel! -- thou Paragon of Beauty and Virtue -- Roses, Stars,
^allys, Pinks, Rubies, Pearls and Violets -- nay, more (to make use of Similies
at that time nearer to the purpose, and more upon my Heart) -- Rost-beef,
Mine'd-pies, Gammon of Bacon, Bottl'd-ale, Football, and Cricket-play. For thy
dear sake I could neither eat Rost-beef, mawl Minc'd-pies, guzzle
Plumb-porridge, take the Ball a Hand-kick as high as Bow-steeple Balcony, nor
play at Cricket any more than a Trap-stick -- I looked like a Mome, a mere
Ninny, as I may say in Modesty, and dared not so much as squint in the ^lasses
as I went by the Cabinet-makers in Cheapside, lest I should discover a pair of
Ears starting out of my Head two or three handfuls beyond the Standard -- and
then out of indignation fall a breaking the Glasses, and have ten pounds to pay
for my Afternoons Ramble.

The truth is, most of her Rubies and Pearls, were those of her Teeth and Lips;
and she wore more sparkling Diamonds in her Eyes, than either on her Fingers,
or in her Cabinet.

Her Estate, I must confess, was somewhat like a Molehill on the Globe of the
Earth, like Great Britain in the Map, when the Grand-Signior clapped his Thumb
upon it, or all that Grecian's vast Estate, and spacious Demeans, which filled
not so much as one single Line in the Description of the Globe.

In a word; had she much, or had she little, I admired her, I adored her, I
raved, stamped, stormed, fretted, fumed, foamed, and wanted nothing but a
Chain, a Grate, and a Truss of Straw, to have made me as mad as any in Bedlam.

Ah! thought I with my self, would this dear Creature but love me, I should be
as good a man as my Master -- a happier person than King Caesar, and as
magnificent as Heliogabalus -- no -- I should never cease loving her, or love
her less -- it is impossible, had I her, I should not be content tho I went a
begging with a wooden Dish and Leg, and not feast, tho I eat nothing but
Sparibles and Pebble-stones -- Then would I fall a rhyming (for that is the
infallible Token of a true Stanch Fallback-fall-edge-Lover.) I robbed all
Sternhold and Hopkins of their Flowers, and made Posies like any Firz-bushes
(not for their roughness, but sweetness and largeness) some of which here
follow.

O Rachel dear -- attend and hear
The words that I do say,
My plaints eke heed -- so may thou speed
For ever and for ay.
My Heart is broke -- by Love's fell stroke,
My head also likewise,
I will maintain -- that I am slain
By thy dead-doing Eyes.
Then put thy fist -- if that thou list
Out of thy poke so kind,
And when I Am dead -- pull off my Head,
Or I will look thee blind.
Now you steer and snicker, Mr. Reader, because to show the Sweepingness of my
Genius, I condescend to this humble sort of Poetry -- I Will have you to know
this was one of my first Essays, but like one truly inspired, as if I had
undoubtedly washed my Lips in the Caballine Fount, I immediately mounted to the
very top of Parnassus, grew a mere Adept in a twinkling, and was most
intimately acquainted with all the Sylphs and Gnomes (called by the Ancients,
Nymphs and Demigods, and Muses, who taught me the true galloping Pindarick, in
which, as if Pindars Soul had crept into Evander (not Horace) he thus fell a
courting his Mistress, tho in their way forgetting what he is about, rambles to
a Tale of a Cock and a Bull, and scarce says one word of her.

In imitation of Horace -- Book 2. Ode 20.
NON usitata, nec temui ferar Penna -- ]
No Sternholds or Hopkinsian strain
My buskined Muse
Henceforth will use,
We such low thoughts disdain.
[Biformis per liquidum aethera Vates -- ]
A Bookseller and Poet too,
Nor Earth nor Heaven such wonders saw before,
Nor, shall do more,
(Tho strange it is true.)
[Neque in terris morabor
Longius, invidiaque major
Vrbes relinquam]
What shall I longer stay below?
Ungrateful London! what will thou prepare?
What offers to detain me there?
(If that e'nt fair, hang fair!)
E're I from thee and Envy go.
[Non ego pauperum
Sanguis parentum -- non ego quem vocas
Dilecte, Mecenas, Obibo,
Nec Stygia cohibebor unda.]
Mistake me not, I Am now no more
That Rambling poor Foot-post I was before;
Not that dark Wight, that nameless Man
His Father called dear John, with his dear Nan:
Nor think I Will still keep trotting here,
To Paul's Churchyard or the Auctioneer:
Nor will I wade the Kennels through,
And spoil new Hose and handsome Shoe.
[Jamjam residunt cruribus asperae
Pelles, and album mutor in alitem
Superne, nascunturque leves
Per digitos humerosque Plumae.]
Tentoes farewell, -- I Am changed into a Fowl
Some call a Goose, but most an Owl:
I feel, I rising feel from Rump to Crown
My harsh black Hair melt to soft snowy Down;
And I have Goose-Quils of my own.
[Then I rambled from Horace]
My Body a pick-pack on my Soul,
Rambles to view the spangl'd Pole,
Rambles a-round to search my Dear,
Unwearied Walks from Sphere to Sphere,
Knocks at each door, and asks -- Is Rachel here?
With Legs for Oars the aetherial Waves I plough,
My Wings spread wide, the Sails unfurled
Now, now, -- just now --
I scamper away through the Fields of the Air to the
-- End of the World.
There Is Flame, -- there is Salt, -- Air and Spirits, and all the four Elements
together. -- Show me such another Translation, Application, Improvement, and
all that, and I Will sell you my Skull to make a Close-stool of, and use it as
the King of the Lombards did, for a Cawdle-Cup, after you have done with'^.

And then for Prose-Love -- I believe I went as far as any Man, -- stabbing,
dying, groaning, hanging I made nothing of 'twas my daily Employment and
Recreation, and I could at last eat Knives or Rats bane as fast as a Jugler. I
grew careless toward any thing else; I could neither see, hear, taste, smell,
nor understand any thing in the world but what related to my charming Rachelia
(as I called her) with a little more Heroic turn than plain Rachel. And should
an Evangelist, with an Angel at his Elbow, have told me that Goddess of my Soul
had so much as one speck of Deformity, one single Mole, either in Body or Mind,
I should have said -- By your leave, Mr. Evangelist, -- I must suspend my
Faith. -- Thus much would I have said to his Face out of civility, but behind
his back no more have valued his Testimony than the Alcoran. -- No -- my purest
pure had such a Soul, it shined through her Body, and such a Body, you might
see her Soul through't. Which some may think much at one, but however there is a
different conception in it, and it makes one line more to fill out the Book.

You may perhaps think this History of my Love looks a little Rambling. -- I Am
glad on it, for it humors my design rarely, Love is besides of it self a very
Rambling Passion. -- Evander is sure he found it so for more Reasons than one,
but especially because it made him Ramble so abominably from his Master's Shop
and Business, and right or wrong make her Lodgings in the road to the place
whither I was going, as commonly as could be taking Al^gate in the way to
Temple Bar; and on^e I remember, the Spring-Garden at Fox-Hall was my nearest
road out of Cheapside into Paul's Churchyard.

Neither is the Charms of Wapping Wapping Frolic any more to be forgotten than
Prince Rupert, Squire Geeree, Madam T -- lis, or the Green-Dragon.

Ah the folly of green years!
To be short, thus I continued Loving upon the stretch without fear or wit, so
long till I had forgot my self and every thing else, till I found my Mind as
much disfigured with that feverish disease, as my Face with the Smallpox, --
and to lose -- such a Face, and such a Mind --

Il'l say no more, but it makes me still Lightheaded to think on it, since here
only, from this unlucky period, may I date all the unhappinesses of my future
Life, -- as most Young Men may theirs; for to speak truth, I doubt it turned my
Brains, and they hardly have ever bin right since.

However I had sense enough at last left to discover Dr -- ke and -- il for
that.
others were favored more than me. But then was I ten times madder than ever
Love had made me. -- Raging I tare my Hair (pity!) and cried, -- and almost
died, -- and wanted nothing but --

-- A Dale with Cypress surrounded --
Either to have killed my Rival or hanged my self.

This hanging brings to my mind a pretty Story, which though not much to the
purpose, I Will tell the World, because but few of 'em have ever heard it; and
after that let me alone to tack it to the present Story.

A cunning Spark there was toward the end of our unhappy Civil Wars, during
Cromwell's Usurpation, who had by practice arrived to an admirable dexterity in
throtling Men, and hanging 'em whether they would or no, without the Formality
of a Sheriff, a Psalm and a Ladder. He having admittance into Oliver's
Embassador's Lodgings in Holland, pretends to present him a Petition, and while
he was eagerly talking, out comes the Noose, ana whip -- over Mr. Embassador's
Head, and had certainly dismissed him before his time, had not one of the Retinue
ran in to his assistance, while in the tumult made about it, the Hangman as
well as Ambassador, slipped his Neck out of Collar, and got away in the Crowd.

-- A neat way 'twas, -- well -- at that rate dared I have fought with e're a
Rival in Christendom: For whatever happens, there is no Blood in this case, and
till that comes, Evander's as Valiant a Lion. Besides, Antipathy and Honesty
would have secured me from letting the Rope ever touch my Shoulders; and I had
no more feared they could have done me any hurt by making a Hempen Pass at me,
than hang up a wet Eel by the Tail with a four penny Halter.

However, loose I am from the Gallow-Tree of Love, but know no more how I got
clear, than a Dog does when the Halter breaks and he runs away, -- though
methinks I look back upon it much at the same unpleasant rate, that the poor Cur
leers over his Shoulder at the unlucky Branch which he has just escaped.

And as the dying Wretches use to fay in those Circumstances (as you may see in
Dunton's new Book) -- I hope good People you will all take warning by my sad
Example, who alas as little thought once of coming to this place, as any of you
here present to behold and bewail my unfortunate end. But just at the end of
the Speech comes a gracious Reprieve, and instead of plain hanging, I am only
to be transported -- with Joy I mean (that is a fancy) at my unexpected
deliverance. But if e're I ^all in Love again, unless by the grave way of
Matrimony, or so, (for what is past was only Platonic) let me be turned over in
good earnest, or what is worse -- let me Love on till my Ears grow as long as
Midas's. In the mean while, to carry on the Metaphor, as some Robbers when
pardoned have discovered all the methods of the Road, and done their Country
excellent Service, even so will I clear my Gizzard immediately, and declare all
I know, that the incautelous Apprentice may avoid the danger I had been so near
split upon.

Fly Love as a Viper, and you will easily outrun him. -- You are invulnerable
behind, (as Achilles in his Heel) but if you look but over your Shoulder, you are
a dead Man. He Is a double Basilisk, and whoever sees first, kills the Spectator
as dead as a Log.

When you perceive him bending his Bow at you (that is the Lasses pretty pinking
Eyes) be sure you never stand him, and think to look him out of Countenance,
for it is an impudent young Rogue as ever lived by March-pane and Sugar-plumbs.
Remember here Cowardice is the truest Valor, and Evander is an Alexander. Wink
when you fight with Love, if you ever hope to conquer. -- Ha! -- now he levels
all his Ordnance at ye, -- whole Broadsides, -- upper and lower Teer, -- you
sink to the deep if you lie there any longer. The Port-holes are all up, -- the
Tombkins out, Prim'd, Match ready, -- the little Fire-Ship of a Woman opens her
Lips, and discovers two Rows of Teeth enough to charm an Angel, -- so smooth,
so white, so even, and so pretty. There Is no remedy, unless you get out of
Gunshot (a Ducal Coyl of Cables will hardly do) but she has ye between Wind
and Water, ^akes ye fore and aft, and down you go to the deep.

If you would not be in Love, never be idle, nor worse employed than if you
were. Do n't read Romances or Amorous Tales, at least till your Mind is formed,
and you have seen something of the World: Otherwise you will be immediately for
Christning your self with one barbarous heathen Name or other, unless you light
upon the Seven Champions, and then -- whip -- you are St. George and the
Kitchin-Maid perhaps, or next tawdry Semstress, the beautiful Sabra, only
Daughter to the Black King of Morocco.

Keep sober, have a care of Claret, use Phlebotomy, and I warn't you will fly
the other thing in the Almanac. To sum up all, do n't play the Fool, and you
never need fear falling in Love,

Probatum est, Kainophilus Vander.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Authors.

GVardeuz vous Gentlemen! Look all to your hits, for here is a silly sarcastical
Fellow whispers me in the Ear, and tells me, if I Will take his Advice, we shall
be very witty upon ye, if ye know how. There let him e'ne scold by himself if
he please, for I Will have nothing to do with it, nor am n't such a Fool to run my
Pen, as the Smith did his red-hot Gad, among a whole Nest of Hornets, lest I
should both ^ire my own Hatches, and bring all about my Ears into the bargain.

However, since he is so importunate, I Will step in, and ask the Advice of my old
Friends P -- and -- G -- that perfect Pylades and Orestes to one another; f^r G
-- loves P -- as well as C -- rs, and P -- loves G -- as well as K. James, and
I Will willingly be at the charge to have 'em both erect a Scheme for that very
purpose, and tell me whether the Enterprise will be dangerous or no --

-- So it is done, -- What Is all this Conjuring? -- Saturn, Mars, Trigon,
Dragon's-Head --,-Tail, -- ay, for this I am much the wiser, I hope they will be
pleased to construe it, for I see it is all Heathen-Greek to Evander. I see it is
done to my hand, and in Verse too, as excellent as their own monthly Doggrel.

For Reasons not so proper to be shown,
But to the Stars, and our own selves best known:
It Is our infallible Prognostication,
Thy greatest danger will be -- Fustigation.
Now must I be forced to go to another Conjurer to know the meaning of that
last ugly hard word, which I do n't like the Looks of -- Fustigation --
methinks the very word smells of Crab-Tree, and I dare lay a broken Pate
there is something of a Cudgel in it. Let me consider therefore very gravely how
my Ribs stand affected that way. -- There was I remember a Namesake of mine in
New England, who on the Report of the French's Resolution to attack those
Parts, not knowing how fighting would agree with him, gave a Fellow Half a
Crown to thrash him with discretion, and rise by degrees both in weight and
number of the blows as he found he liked it. I am n't willing to repeat this
Trial, for perhaps that would be a double drubbing, when perhaps one would do.
Hang all these Prognosticating Wizzards, they know no more than I do. Was not
one of 'em a shrewd cunning Fellow, to Prophecy of the then Prince's landing
in England, when he heard it talked of in Holland by every Herring-woman? And
then was it not a very shrewd and lucky hit, and deep discovery, that whenever
he landed, the Priests would run away? -- And there is the Marrow of a whole
Twelvemonths Conjuration.

But then for the other of 'em, that blessed Saint, who deserves to have his Name
inserted in the room of the Gunpowder-Treason, which he left out in his
Almanac. He must certainly have a great many Familiars at his back, who lived
once so nigh Hell, when a Tailor working up in a Garret, and almost the same
advantage to view the Stars, with the Ea^tern Nations, who were the first
Astronomers, from the tops of their Houses.

Riddle me, riddle me, Mr. G. and eris mihi magnus Apollo, -- and I Will make a
Pope of thee, -- Whether will the Prince of Wales be a Boy or a Girl? Is this
same here a likely Fellow to kill a King? Will I. D. of M. be routed? Who shall
have the best on it at Salisbury? When comes King Arthur home again? -- Alas!
alas! the Idols are chap-fall'n, and the Oracles dumb, -- not a word to save a
Kingdom.

But is Maddam C -- rs silent too? Nay then either the World or She will not last
much longer. That Pythonissa to the Catholic Oracle, who received her
Inspirations the same way the Priestesses did of old. She heaves -- poor
Wretch, the fits just on her, -- how strong she is! -- she swells strangely,
and at last out comes the bloody Bladder, and there is an end on it.

Modest Creature, -- the very naming her in public, will make her go near to
blush her self to death. Young, pretty, innocence, -- how it looks! -- She
appears in Court in such Confusion as a poor Wench at Fisteen that come^ to
swear a Rape upon a Man.

An Author too? Was not a Midwife, and al^ the appurtenances of that honorable
Calling, enough for one B -- d to live upon? Must she Midwife Pamphlets as well
as Bastards into the World? -- Ay, and that of her own Handwriting, and
Conceiving (without help of Man) as sure as ever the young Royal Babe was his
who owned him.

Will you murder a poor Old Woman? a Compassionable Creature, -- have a little
pity, Vander, -- if not -- there is one stands behind, that efack will tickle
you off as bad as you have her.

-- Who -- my old Friend Nobbs! -- poor tame thing, his Sting is gone, and he has not bin able to Fiddle any Tune worth hearing this many a fair day.

It Is true, he makes a shift, like an old Musician thrown out of the
Playhouse, to stroll up and down to Alehouses and Booths, and Wakes and
Fairs, and Whitson-Ales, or the like, to pick up a few Pence now and then, though
scarce enough to pay for Rozin.

I should make him too proud, I Am certain, if I should tell him his Writings
were very much like Evander's, and just such a Rambling Air may be found in one
as in t other. Nay perhaps I took the hint from him of this very way, which has
since been so acceptable to the World.

He played the Fool, made People laugh, writ ^on to the end of the Chapter,
without thinking one minute, and got Money by it, and just so does Evander.

Hark ye, Sir Kainophil! comes a little piece (...) Crape buzzing in my Ears.
-- Consider what you say and do, -- there is respect due to the ^^fortunate,
especially those who have been Great, and are still Men of Sense and Ing^nuity.
That Person you speak of so scurrilously, has perhaps done as much Honor to
the English Language, as most others you can name. There Is something so
pleasant and bewitching in the worst of his Writings, that they Charm even
where they Wound; and his Fallacies are so neat, they would almost tempt one to
shut one's Eyes and believe they are all sound Reason. There Is something very
Masterly in all he writes, and what you will hardly meet in any other. And
besides you know what he has done of undoubted value; he only has had the rare
happiness of bettering some of the best Authors in a Translation, and his
Seneca and Offices will live as long as the World.

All this I knew before, but what is this to Honesty? there is the Jewel. -- Wit
is no more commendable in a Knave, than Courage in a Highway-man. -- A Man that
betrays his Religion and Country in pretending to defend it, and writes round
to all the Points of the Compass, -- that is not only for breaking down the
Walls, and dismounting the Cannon when the Enemy is at the Gate, but for
opening that too to let^ 'em in; and cannot plead ignorance, as other Me^
perhaps might in the same Circumstances. One that is ungrateful for Benefits and
Bread* and snaps at the hand that gives it, that is notoriously immoral, and by
his Conversations manifests no more respect to the Laws of God than Men; but
thinks a Gentleman may dispense with one, as well as a King with the other.
Such a Man, let him be what he will for Wit or Sense, can never yet be esteemed
basely enough, or rendered more contemptible than he deserves.

(As for young Nobbs, I have nothing to say to him at present, but only wish he
may take care not to follow the Example of his Predecessor.)

It Is pity Towzer's old Worrier, Harry Care, is n't now alive; but instead of
him, we could ^end him a poor Namesake of his with a Discourse of Uncleanness,
were not Threescore and ten a better Antidote against it than all the Books in
the World.

Would one ever think it possible that a Person of the Sagacity and Experience
of some Persons, should go to such a Person as S -- the Conjurer to know
whether he were best run away, when he was like to be hanged if he stayed any
longer?

O S -- thou Shame of all Authors, Astrologers, Physicians and Rhimers, as much
as Kainophilus of Booksellers! The Shame, because the Glory; for thou
out-shinest and dazzlest 'em all in every one of those noblest Professions, as
much as Tho. Sternhold would thee in Poetry, were he yet alive. So true was the
Character the Western Hangman Iefferys.
gave thee, -- Whatever thou may be for a Conjurer, thou art certainly the
Devil of a Poet. -- And if there is any thing in the Stories of Inchantation,
thy Verses have as much virtue in 'em as any Abracadabra in the World; for it
must be a very stubborn malady indeed, that would not out to hear thy Poetry.
It Is true, there is a small mistake in some of 'em, unless taken with a Grain,
-- thy Medicines as thy Bills tell the World --

Will cure any curable Diseases
If by Medicines are meant Verses, the Bill is certainly in the right; for if
so long since as Virgil's time, 'twas notorious that -- Cantando rumpitur
anguis, Now Art and Poetry are so much improved, 'twould split a very Dragon to
hear thee charm over him.

However, what is more to the purpose, thou do certainly charm abundance of
little white and yellow Angels into thy own Pocket, and all the while look in
the Faces of the choused Wretches, whence they are conjured as innocently and
sincerely as if every Lie thou tell 'em were Gospel: and all the Infallible
Q^ack-Medicines thou sell'st 'em, were nothing under Bezoar-stone, or Aurum
Potabilt.

Among all the wise Droves attending for Responses at this Oracle, who ever
thought to have found my Friend Democritus, etc? What Female-Devil is it he would be
acquainted with? A Wag I warn't him, -- there is Nose, there is Eyes, there is
Complexion. -- Well -- if all this fails, I Will never trust Physiognomy again. An
Author too as sure as Infallibility. -- See but how he bites his Nails, and
scratches his Head, and twirls his Fingers, all mortal symptoms of the plague
of Writing.

O the virtue of Broom-Ale, certainly there is no other Helicon. -- But an
Author and an honest Fellow, love his Friend, hum a merry Song, pay every one
his own, not run in debt, not ask for his Money till the Copy is finished, have
no cares, sing and dance away a thoughtless Life, -- why these are all
Miracles, and there is not such another President (unless in Kainophilus
perhaps) throughout the whole Corporation.

Well -- if I do get a sound dry basting, I am fated into it as much as ever the
Author of that word himself was; for I no more intended to fall a-board my good
Friends the Authors, than to mawl my own Face, as you may see at the beginning
of this Chapter, but ha'been drilled along from G -- y to C -- rs, and so on,
till now I was as good plunge quite through, for I Am fairly got Half-Seas over
without knowing where I was.

And the next I intend to Ramble to, is a certain famour Doctor and no Doctor,
who has been an inveterate Press-mauler for above this twenty year. He has
printed at least a hundred Bound Books, and some two hundred Sermons, -- but
the cheapest pretty pat things all of 'em, -- pence a piece as long as they will
run, which, if you will step into Smithfield or Moor-Fields, you may hear some
Ballad-Singer or other tuneing to the sad and doleful Ditty that he sung just
before.

I was reading one of 'em with a great deal of application and care, when all
of the sudden I was frighted out of my sober Thoughts with a whole volley of
Oaths, fired like a Blunderbuss up the Garret-Stairs where this Author and I
were confabulating, -- and at length the thing appeared that made all the
noise. I at first could not imagine what 'twas, -- it looked like a Wood-Coal
half out, red in the middle, and covered with white Ashes of both sides on it.
Away the thing rolled to the other side of the room, then between tumbled and sat
down upon a decrepid Joynt-stool (some of the best Furniture Authors Houses use
to be provided with) and after having breathed a little while longer, which I
could compare to nothing but the twinkling of a Coal just before it goes out,
fell a Swearing again so loud, I began to fear he would untile the House, or blow us
all out at the Window.

I have heard of a famous piece, called, A Satyr against --; but how much
soever that was cried up, dare averr this Person was himself a greater and
sharper Satyr against Debauchery, than ever that was against --

He began after disimboguing some mouthfuls more of Oaths, to speak a few words
without 'em, and now and then something witty enough would drop from him, but
so lewd, so fulsomly, nauseously wicked, such a nuisance to Mankind as well as
Christianity, that I wonder our Authors don't expel him from among 'em.

'Twas about Change-time I remember when we saw him, and he never comes out of
his Hole till Noon; so that I find he had improved his time well, and in a
modest computation was got most entirely Drunk in about an hour. -- But never
did poor Wretch pay more dearly for his Debauchery than he does. No sooner gets
he home, and falls down dead-drunk as Brandy can make him, (as he never is, not
to wrong him, above once a day) but old Kate, his Shee-Familiar of a Wife,
takes him to task, and with a powerful Wand that she has a'top of the Bed, does
so, so lace him, till she is so weary of the Exercise she can hardly stand any
more than he, and then lugs him to Bed, as the Butchers carry Hogs by the hind
Leg. But the next day, when the poor penitent Creature wakes, -- O Kate! O
what is the matter wi' me! -- my Bowels, my Ribs! -- O Kate -- my old Bones are
all turned to Jelley in my Body! -- for pity, -- one Gill of Brandy! -- one
Noggin --! one Comfort! or -- O, a little warm Ale to put me in a Sweat, and if
ever I recover this bout, I Will be the best Husband in the World! I Will Translate
like a Pack-horse, and Compose like a Dragon, -- and bring home a whole Peck
full of Money every Saturday night.

But then to hear her answer in a Note above all those in the Greek Musicians.

O thou old sinful Fornicator -- see what you bring your self to -- here you
have bin among your drunken Companions -- quarrel and fight, and are soundly
basted among 'em, then make a bad shift to reel home; and I must have the
mending on ye again, must I -- no -- lie and rot where you are, for I am never a
doit the better for ye.

Nay, now Kate -- you are obdurate -- will nothing molli^ie -- ^Tis too long to
tell you all the Dialogue, so we'll leave that, and take up one of Lucians.

Why, F -- d! I looked for a Book, and here is nothing but a Preface, or at
least the Porch hinders one from seeing the House -- But why of all Loves is
this devout Christian so wondrous angry with the Fathers for pil^ering poor
Lucian to fill up some gaps in their Sermons? Is there no medium but the
reverend old Gentleman must needs be guilty of flat Felony (I hope though not
beyond benefit of Clergy,) is there no remedy? And why may n't good Wits j^mp,
the Fathers and Lucian, as well as you and Dablancour?

And now we talk of Fathers, commend me to Daniel in the Den -- there he is
fast enough, but how he will get out again, is all the que^tion. He Is no more
likely to stir then his -- Angels locked in direful Chains -- well -- it is even
a very Tragical business, and there is an end on it -- or at least both sides
wish there was, and with equal reason.

I protest there is more lewdness among us Authors, than I could ever have
imagined. I slept in (among my other Rambles) and called to see a certain
little Poetical Friend and Acquaintaince, but I found he had taken up my
Employment, and Rambled himself to Bartholomew-Fair with Mrs. Isabella -- Let
'em alone unless they were better, and make Room for some of a fairer Character
-- and room must be made, for here comes Brother K -- mounted upon some
Apocalyptical Beast or other, with Babylon before him, and Zion behind him, and
a hundred thousand Bulls, and Bears, and furious Beasts of Prey, roaring, and
ramping, and bellowing at him so hideously, that unless some kind Angel drop
from the Clouds and hacks and hews very plentifully among 'em, he must
certainly be torn as small as a Love-Letter, and then chaw'd and devoured --
and worse than all, perhaps turned out again a little less sweet than he went in.

Then will he make such lamentable Dittys, that 'twou'd be almost worth the
while to try the Experiment upon him to hear 'em. Yea, he would be wounded as
much as his own Zion, and take some of the Doggrel out of her Mouth, to make
his sad and doleful Complaint.

To the best of Vander's Memory, he has dressed one of the aforesaid Ladies
great Persecutors in Crape, with a little Band and a Rose in his Hat -- sure
this is he -- that brings up the Rear of the Authors.

But who is it has been persecuting him of late -- What else is the meaning of
that Patch over half his Face, and his Hand over the rest on it? I dare venture
the price of the next Copy, he has no Money in his Pocket, and that he is now
railing in's Heart at all the World -- But there is no Love lost between 'em;
and because he is my Friend, I Will tell him what they say of him to be even with
him.

He Is a silly, empty, conceited, morose, maggo^y Fellow (cry they, for I Would not
say so for a World, what -- disoblige an Author! no, catch me at that -- but
thus still they say, and I can bring witness on it if there was any occasion) of
no Principles, and as little Honor or Honesty.

A small poetical Insect, like Bays in every thing but writing well -- an odd
mixture of Lead and Mercury -- as heavy and dull as an old Usurer, and yet as
unfixt and whimsical as Evander. Still changing, displeased, unquiet, uneasy, a
perfect Contradiction to himself and all the World?

Culprit -- By whom will ye be tried?

Cheer up Mr. Author, Evander's your Council, and all is well enough.

Not by his Country, unless he liked 'em better -- By my self, and the other
part of the Answer. Perhaps all this Indictment is true, but I believe it is
not; and my reason is, because he would then thrive better; for such as you
talk of, I can only see respected and valued. If to be no Bigott of one side,
or to defile ones own Nest, or contradict ones Judgment of the other, be having
no Principles; I acknowledge he has no more than those that make the Objection.
If he is angry with the World, and scorns it into the bargain, he now both
treats and esteems it as it deserves, too hard a Task for those whom it
flatters, or perhaps for himself, should it ever change its Humor, and grin
upon him.

In the mean time, who is not restless that is uneasy -- bid a sick man lie
still, or preach Patience to one that is pincht and pricked with Needles, and
you may chance to make him laughed at ye in the midst of his Torment.

In spite of his present Quarrel with the World, he loves the brave, and never
envies Virtue when he sees it fortunate, but rather feels such a pleasure, as
nothing else here gives him. If he is angry when a Knave grows great, while an
honest Fellow starves by him; wiser folks than he have played the fool in the
same manner, and fretted at what cannot be avoided.

But we must not have a Sermon as long as one and thirtiethly Beloved -- take
Vander's Counsel, Let the World alone, and that will do the same by you -- But
while you pester 'em thus with your troublesome Objections and Answers, waste so
many Reams of Paper when it is so dear, and might be better employed at the
Bake-house, or House of Office, and print as many weak, ridiculous things as
Kainophilus himself; they must even, in their own defense, rail at ye; and if
you have any Friends left, you will as certainly lose them as you have the other
-- Thus impartial I love to be -- Stay Vander -- quoth he for himself, I defy
all the World to make me have one Friend less than I have already -- while you
and I hold together a Fig for Fortune -- Those who complain I write silly
Things, are very much in the right, but one of these two they must grant,
either that I can do better, or cannot; if the last, why do they blame me? if
the first, let the World thank it self for finding me no better Employment --
which till it does, I Will pester it, I Will rail at it, I Will have no mercy upon
that, or my self; in the mean time let it even pity me, or scorn me as it
thinks fit, for I shall be just as much the better for one, as the worse for
the other -- and so -- have amongst 'em again.

To the Poets.
TO you who lived by Drink, not Eating,
Your Brother Rhymer sends greeting,
Abdicated.
A Fumbler past fifty,
Ungodly, unthrifty,
Who lost Wit and Pension together.
So greedy, so needy,
So wild, and so giddy.
He Would turn Turk should the Mufti come hither.
Laureat.
A Rhymer so famed,
Need never be ashamed
Of his Faiths or his Works imperfection.
The Players all fear
He Will turn Priest the next year,
And leave 'em to another Election.
-- A poor Lunatic --
Leave Bro^m, or thou'art mad,
And drink Helebore, Natt:
Nor disgrace the Poetic Profession!
If you are madder than they,
They Will all run away,
And leave thee whole Bedlam's possession.
Prince Prettyman.
And is it not pity
That an Author so pretty,
With a second Translation should cheat us!
Perswade's if you can,
That this Vid. Frontis. of Creeches Horace.
Goose is a Swan,
Or Horace akin to Lucretius.
Lock and Key.
Is the Narrative done.
Or how goes it on,
Speak E^kanah! out of thy Garret.
Such a Picture and Tale
Like his Play could n't fail,
When he hoped the brave Irish would carry't.
Sol fa.
Thou can play, thou can sing
To a Mayor, or a King,
Tho thy luck on the Stage is so scurvy.
Such a Beau, such a Face,
Such a Voice to disgrace
Such a mine, it is the De'el Mr. D --
The humble Address, etc.
Of Critics the best
Why do thou contest
To make such a Whelp of an Author?
While thou lashest the School,
Thy own Works are more dull
Than any man living e're saw there.
Jack Gentleman
Since Jordan is dead,
Why's his Successor fled,
When the P^geants so dearly did need him?
Death of late made a Feast
Both of HERO and PRIEST,
And he went over the Sea to succeed 'em.
The rest will keep cold. Now would I fain see the Faces of all those Gentlemen
who find their own here -- but I cannot guess at 'em without Book -- D --
swells, S -- swears, L -- raves, T -- smiles, E -- struts, and so on -- I hope
they will fall upon the Author. Lampoon him to some purpose, and then my Book's
made -- it runs like Lightning; and I do'nt fear two Impressions, no more than
it (in days of yore) 'twas got into the Observator.

Don't be so brisk, cries another wise, grum Fellow that sees me pluming and
cocking -- Those Gentlemen have all more Wit -- they will no more mind you, than
the Gallant in the other Book, did Clark, but let you, your Author, and your
Doggrel sink in that Obscurity and Ob^ivion they deserve.

To let the Reader see I have not forgot my self all this while, any more than a
Spaniel loses his way when he runs over Hedge and Ditch; I'l^ now return to my
main business, the Life of young Kainophilus -- who by this time had run thr^^
his seven years pleasant Slavery, and was now ready to shake off those golden
Chains, for such were his made by so good a Master; of which he will take his
leave with one notable Occurren^^ more, which ought not to be forgotten -- The^
day before his Time was out, he received the^ 199th Letter from his Father,
which he sent during his Prenticeship, and that very day another, which made up
the precise Sum of 200; all which he yet preserves through all his Travels,
Rambles, Uppings and Downings, and Forthgoings and Incomings of his Life, and
will no more part with 'em than with his Freedom when he has it, but resolves
to have 'em buried under his Head (as the old Woman her Bag of Nuts) when he
creeps into the dark hole in the 24th. Globe of the Frontispiece.

However, the Thoughts of that did n't spoil his Mirth, but abroad he ranged
like a young Swallow in the Spring, with so much sprightliness and joy, that he
could hardly feel himself, or the Air he breathed in. -- H^ (or I, it is much
the same) had the good fortune to be courted and esteemed by all that knew him;
and was a Lad of singular Expectations, and extraordinary Hope. Honors met him
wherever he walked, and his ways were strow'd with Complements and How^d'y's.

The greatest Sphere in which he acted at his first stepping over the Threshold
into the World, was that of an Addresser -- He had the honor to be one of the
brisk London Prentices (a matter of some 30000 in all) who presented the famous
Petition to Sir P. W. nay, so great was his Reputation, he was chosen the
Treasurer to that honorable Society (tho the Secretary's place might have done
as well) and he it was who had the happiness of their Company at a magnificent
Feast made at his Freedom -- And happy too happy had it been for Evander had
Fortune still thus smiled upon him, and he been happy still -- Yes, and he was
so for some fair years after -- but how happy then, and how unhappy afterward,
how he fell in Love with Iris, and dispatched the grand Affair of Matrimony,
how he turned Author and then Rambler -- he will tell you immediately -- but
first must step to the Printers to get this Book workt off, and you shall have
the Third

-- Before a pot of good Ale you can swallow,
and further says not --
Yours ever Evander.
The End of the Second Volume.
Books lately Printed.
PRactical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately preached in a Congregation in London, by Timothy Rogers, M. A.
after his Recovery from a Sickness of near two years continuance.

Mr. Roger's Sermon, preached upon the Death of a young Gentleman, entitled,
Early Religion; or, the way for a Young Man to remember his Creator. Mr.
Shower's Sermon at Madam Ann Barnardistans Funeral.

A Voyage round the World, or a Pocket-Library; divided into several Volumes:
The first of which contains the rare Adventures of Don KAINOPHILVS, from his
Cradle, to his Fifteenth Year; the like Discoveries (in such a method) never
made by any Rambler before; the whole Work intermixed with Essays, Historical,
Moral and Divine, and all other kinds of Learning. Written by a Lover of
Travels, and recommended by the Wits of both Universities. Price Bound 1 s. 6d.

The Second Volume of the Pocket-Library, intermixed with wholesome Instructions
for the management of a Man's whole Life. As also with particular Remarks on
the most noted Booksellers, Authors and Poets in the City of London. Price
Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Vaniety and Impiety of Judicial Astrology, whereby Men undertake to
foretell Future Contingencies, especially the particular Fates of Mankind by
the Knowledge of the Stars. By Francis Crow, M. A.

The Character of a Williamit^, being the Reverse of a late unlicens'd
Treatise, entitled, The Character of a Iacobite, by what Name or Title soever
dignified or distinguished. Written by a Person of Quality.

A true and impartial Narrative of the Dissenters New Plot; together with an
Account of the chief Conspirators Names and principal Consults, as well as of
several Persons of Quality who have abet^ed and encouraged them. By one who was
deeply concerned therein. This Book has made a great noise in the World, by
being mis-understood. Price 6.

A Discovery of the horrid Association and Conspiracy of the Papists in
Lancashire, to raise War and Rebellion in the Kingdom of England, during the
absence of King William in Ireland; In a Letter of Instruction from a Roman
Catholic of great Quality in London, to a Papist Muti^eer in Lancashire. Price
6 d.

An Antidote against Lust: Or, a Discourse of Uncleanness; showing its various
Kinds, great Evil, the Temptations to it, and most effectual C^re. By Robert
Carr, Minister of the Gospel.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the Fourth Volume, by several Ministers in and
about London, preached in October, 1689.

A New Martyrology: Or the Bloody Assizes, now exactly methodiz'd in one
Volume, comprehending a complete History of the Lives, Actions, Trials,
Sufferings, Dying Speeches, Letters and Prayers of all those eminent
Protestants who f^ll in the West of England, and elsewhere, from the Year 1878.
to 1689. The Third Edition with large Additions.

Mr. Oak's Funeral Sermon.

Mr. Kent's Funeral Sermon: Both preached by Mr. Samuel Slater.

A complete History of the Life and Military Actions of the General of all the
Irish Rebels now in Arms; wherein you have an Account of his Birth and
Education, his Advancement and Honors, his treacherous Disarming the
Protestants, and Cruelties toward them; The Progress of his Arms; the Towns he
has taken and demolished, the Families he has ruined; together with a Relation
of the Skirmishes, Battles, Sieges, and remarkable Transactions which have
happened in Ireland; with the particulars of the bloody Fight in the North, the
manner of the late King's Landing at Kingsail, with what remarkable has
happened since; as also a brief Description of the Kingdom of Ireland in its
Provinces, Principal Towns, Fortresses, Situation, and present deplorable
State. Dedicated to the Gentlemen-Soldiers now in Their Majesty's Army in
Ireland. Price 1 s.

Early Piety, exemplified in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathaniel Mather, who
having become at the age of Nineteen an Instance of more than common Learning
and Virtue, changed Earth for Heaven, October. 17. 1688. The Second Edition, with
a prefatory Epistle by Mr. Matthew Mead.

The Tragedies of Sin, together with Remarks upon the Life of the Great
Abraham. By Stephen Iay, Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire.

-- Daniel in the Den, by the same Author.

Poetical Fragments, by Richard Baxter. Published for the use of the Afflicted.
The Second Edition.

Mr. Lee's Joy of Faith.

Dr. Robert's Key to the whole Bible. In Folio.

Observations on several remarkable Passages throughout the Old and New
Testament.

The Progress of Sin: Or, The Travels of Ungodliness. The Second Edition. By B.
Keach. Price 1 s.

A Search after Honesty and plain Dealing: Written by Dr. Shirly. Price bound,
1 s.

Poems on several Subjects never handled before. Written by an Oxford Scholar.

The Complete Tradesman: Or, The Exact Dealers daily Companion, instructing him
in the whole Art and Mystery of Trade and Traffic. Price Bound 1 s.

The Travels of True Godliness, from the beginning of the World to this present
day, in an apt and pleasant Allegory. The Seventh Edition. By. B. Keach. Price
1 s.

The Abdicated Prince: Or, The Adventures of four years. The Second Edition.
Price 1 s.

The Bloody Duke: Or, The Adventures for a Crown. Price 1 s.

The Late Revolution: Or, The Happy Change. Written by a Person of Quality.
Price 1 s.

The Royal Voyage: Or the Irish Expedition. Price 1 s.

These Four last Books contain a full Account of the Private Intreagues of the
two last Reigns, and of all the most Remarkable Transactions that have happened
since.

Now in the Press, and going to it, viz.
A Treatise of Fornication occasioned by the late Birth of several
Illegitimates in the Parish of C -- To which is added a Penitentiary Sermon
preached before the Guilty Persons in the public Congregation, upon John 8.
11. -- Go and sin no more.

The Third Volume of the Pocket-Library, etc. Reformed Religion, or Right
Christianity described in its Excellency and Usefulness in the whole Life of
Man: By M. Barker, Minister of the Gospel. The Second Edition, with Additions.

The Pilgrims Guide: To which is added the Sick-mans Passing-b^ll. The Second
Edition.

Newly Published.
THE Wonders of Free Grace: Or, A Complete History of all the Remarkable
Penitents that have been Executed at Tiburn, and elsewhere, for these last
thirty years; containing Bishop Atherton's Life and Death, who was executed for
B -- r^. Bringhurst's Life and Death. Bottler's Life and Death. Nathaniel
Butler's Life and Death. Charles Butler's Life and Death. Clark, her Life and
Death. Evans, her Life and Death. Parson Foulk's Life and Death. Hobry, her
Life and Death. Holland's Life and Death. Kirk's Life and Death. Marketman's
Life and Death. Morgan's Penitent Death. Parker's Life and Death. Savage's Life
and Death. Short's Life and Death. Stern's Life and Death.

To which is added, a Sermon preached in the Hearing of a Condemned Malefactor
immediately before his Execution.

THE Pocket-Library.

VOL. III.

Containing a further Account OF THE JUVENILE RAMBLES OF DON KAINOPHILUS, With
his first Project of Girdling the World, etc.

The whole WORK intermixed with Essays Historical, Moral and Divine.

This Ramble is my Son: Randolph. LONDON, Printed for Richard Newcome. 1691.
Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
1. THere is just now published, The Present State of (...) Or, The Historical
and Political Mercury; giving an Account of all the Public and Private
Occurrences that are most considerable in every Court, for the Month of
November, 1690. Sold at the Rav^n in the Pou^tr^y, where are to be had every
Month (to this time) beginning from July, 1690.

2. A Voyage Round the World, or a Pocket Library, Vol. II. containing the rare
Adventures of Don Kai^^philus during his Seven years 'Prenticeship: The whole
work intermixed with Instructions for the management of a (...) As ^lso with
particular ^e^arks on the (...) Booksellers Authors and Poets in the City of
London. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

3. The Wonders of Free Grace: Or, A Comple^t History of all the Remarkable
Penitents that have been Executed at Tyburn and elsewhere, for these last
Thirty years; containing Bishop Atherton's Life and Death, who was Executed
^for B -- ry. Bringhurft's Li^e and Death. Bottler's Life and Death. (...) Life
and Death. (...)'s Life and Death. Clark, her Life and Death. Evans, her Life
and Death. Parson Foulk's Life and Death. Hobry, her Life and Death. Holland's
Life and Death. Kirk's Life and Death. Marketman's Life and Death. Morgan's
Penitent Death. P^rker's Life and Death. Savage's Life and Death. Short`s Life
and Death. Stern's Life and Death. To which is added, a Sermon preach`d in the
Hearing of a Condemned Malefactor immediately before his (...) by (...) Price
^ound 1 s.

4. The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology, whereby men undertake to
Fo^etell future Contingenc^es, especially the particular Fates of Mankind, by
the Knowledge of the Stars. By Francis Crow, M. A.

All Four Sold at the Raven in the Poultrey.

TO His Honored Friend, JOHN KING, Esquire (my late Fellow-Traveller through part
of America, Germany, Holland, and other Countries,) and now going again to
Ramble.
GReat Travel (says the Holy Text) is ordained for the Sons of Adam, and none
of his Posterity has been found without his share, since our Life is but a
Pilgrimage, and all of us in a wayfaring condition on this side Eternity. No
sooner do we leave the little Closers where we were framed, than we begin our
Ramble to those more spacious Chambers in the bowels of the Earth. Every breath
we draw, is a step toward it; and whilst you are reading this, you pass one of
the Stages on the Road. And therefore, most dear Sir, I do not at all
discommend your present design, that is laid upon so just and ancient
Foundations; but seeing you are going again to launch your self into an Ocean in
which lie many Rocks, whereon some for want of skill, or inadvertency, have
suffered Shipwreck, it will not be amiss to take a Map along with you; wherein
you may discover those Gulfs on which many before you have bin ruined, and so
avoid those Misfortunes which their Destruction has rendered more signal.

By Travel a Man may be said to reduce into Practice that which before he only
had the Theory of, without being deluded by the often erroneous Assertions of
others; and how fatal unto Truth the dependence upon the Tradition and
Authority of Men has been, Truth it self can best discover. Not that by this I
would seem to impose a necessity of Traveling upon all Mankind, for I know all
are not equally qualified for it; nor is it absolutely necessary to our
wellbeing. But seeing Novelty is a thing so agreeable to our nature, besides
the delight which the mighty Variety will afford you, you will be thereby
rendered more amiable unto all your Acquaintance, when it shall please God to
return you unto them again.

Every body will find something in you that will be pleasing to himself; one
will be ravished with the Spices of Arabia, and another with the gaudy Plumes of
the Indians, whilst you your self shall be able to make more advantageous
Collections (out of the great Book of Nature,) and observe how the Image of the
Creator, as in several sorts of shapes, is represented in every Nation, as well
as in every Man.

The Gluttony of the Dutch, and the Drunkenness of the German; the morose (...)
of the Spaniard, and the fantastical Airiness of the French; the revengeful
Subtilty of the Italian, and the stable Fidelity of the English, will be no
unpleasing Diversion; when in the enjoyment of the latter, you may recollect
the dangers and inconveniences of the others: The Barbarity of the Heathen,
will make you bless the Fate which has placed you in another Society; and some
good Men which you may find among them, (for Pearls are often in the Sands)
will make you admire the Excellency of Morality, and perhaps laugh at the idle
O^tentations of those who after all there pretenses to more direct Rules, take
more oblique Courses.

These will be the noblest Objects of your regard.

And thus you may give a better Account of your time than that unfortunate
Traveller, who being demanded by some Friends, What kind of place Venice was?
made answer, That haste and approaching night made him gallop through it
without taking any notice of it, and too many may be found of that humor, who
to conceal their Ignorance, often (...) it with worse Circumstances, as is said
of the Woman who with her Clothes to save the misfortune which from a window
fell on her head, exposed those other parts which Decency and Nature obliged
her to conc^al.

I will no longer trouble you with the Advantages of Travel, because you cannot
be without a prospect of them, by which you are chiefly induced to undertake
it. And I question not but those which you will make, will give you a view of
more to be acquired; of which when you are Master, they will represent others
unto you, and so by a long Concatenation of what at once does profit and
delight, ^^ad you to such things as in their fruition will make you capable of
greater Achievements.

Perhaps the following Observations will not be altogether unwornhy your
perusal, and a place in your Palmers-scrip. They have been the Reflections of
my Retirements when in them, as from some distant height I took a little View
of the World, and if you shall find them either profitable or delightful, my
endeavors can receive no greater Compe^sation, than to arrive at so desirable
a Goal.

And I hope you will find 'em both, seeing Man is naturally an Inquisitive
Creature, continually hankering after Novelties; and though for the most part a
mere Stranger at home, regardless of the Geography of his own Breast, (as I
shall show in a Treatise entitled, A Map of Man: Or, ^Vander in Minature,
which will contain my Rambles round the Little World;) the worst and most
deplorable Ignorance, would yet seem acquainted with all the World beside.

How solicitous are we about the Affairs of Germany! How curious to understand
the Rarities of Egypt! the Situation of Jerusalem, the Magnificence of
Versailles, and uncertain Tales of Prester John! Nay so far is this Itch of
Curiosity indulged, (...) a little) but I am continually stopped by one or other,
to know what News from New England, Holland, Flanders, and those other
Countries I have seen, and what Rarities I have found there. Where e're I come,
I am looked upon as one arose from the dead, (having been two Years absent from
my Native Country) and rec^^ved with as many Quer^es of what I have both seen
and heard, as would possibly be put to such an one.

First Daphne takes me, and holds me fast by the Fist half an hour, to know
what fashioned Top-Knots the Dutch Froes wear, and will (...) be torturing some
News out of me from the East Indies; for she hearing I have crossed the Seas,
concludes (do you judge how rationally) that I have been there.

But I am no sooner eased of her, but Mutius catches me by the Golls, demanding
of me whether Boston be a great Town or a little one? How John. V -- r does?
How Books sell there? And whether Ben. H -- s be yer living? Or John H --
arrived when I left the place?

His mouth being stopped, a third examins me boldly, what News from Cullen? Where
the Emperor's Army is? How the Duke of Lorrain died? Of what Form is the Grand
Visier's Tent? How fares it with the Pope? Of what Age is the Mogul? What Is
become of Teckely? How fares all the Englishmen in those Parts? Where lies
Prince Waldeck's Forces? Of what Color is the Great Cham's Beard? What Tidings
of Tyrconnel? And such a Tempest of Inquisition, that it almost shakes my
patience in pieces. To ^ase my self of all which, I am forced to set Pen to
Paper, and let the several Volumes of my Rambles talk, whilst I take my ease
with silence; which though they prove like a prattling Goss^p, full of many
words to small purpose, yet this I Will fay for this Third Volume,

That it is my Son (...)
.
(Then should I not be an hard-hearted Brute of a Father, if I could be so
cruel as to send him into the wide World, without speaking so much as one good
word for him,) and contains, A Continuation of several rare Adventures relating
to my Seven Years Prenticeship; Philaret's Friendship; A Countey-Life; and my
Project of Girdling the World, etc. able to make you smile away an hour or two
under the greatest pressures either of Body or Mind; and will, as the learned S
-- d has it,

Cure every curable Disease.
Now if this Volume alone will do such Wonders, what think ye will the whole
Work perform when finished; secing `twill contain

A Little Library:
Or Complete Help to Discourse, upon all Occasions. By the help whereof you may
cross Rivers without Boat or Bridge, boundless Seas without Ships, and climb up
Mountains without pains, and go down without danger; ^econcile the Future and
the Present Tense: see Asia in England, Travel the Holy Land, and go to the
Holy War with Mr. Fuller: see the brave Baker defending Derry^ the valiant
Grafton beating the Irish; the Electoral Princes storming Mentz and Bonn* see
the Grand Signior in the Seraglio: Infallibility in his Grandeur, and C --
bussing his Toe; and with the wandering Knight, Sir Francis Drake took his
Voyage about the World, December. 13. 1577.
Drake, put a Girdle round the World: On which daring Adven^ure^ Wit thus
pleasantly de^^ants.

Drake, who th`encompass'd Earth so fully knew,
And whom at once both Poles of Heaven did view:
Should Men foget thee, Sol c^uld not forbear
To Chronscle his Fellow-Traveller.
Would you see the Wars and Actions of the Roman Emperors, you may here see
them trend the Singe again, with less cost and hazard than at first. You may by
the study of these Rambles, live in all Ages; see Adam in Eden, sail with Noah
in the Ark, sit and cons^lt with Julius Caesar, converse with S^nec^, Plutarch
and Horace, conferr with all the wise Ph^losophers, go to School at Athens, and
with a free access hear all Disputes.

Thus Friend, you see I make bold to imitate one Alexander of Greece, who still
as he went Dragooning about the World, de scribed the Wanderings and as it were
the Tom ^oriat was a ^^lly Traveller, who in King James his time beat upon the
Hoo^^ about two or three thousand Miles, and returned home as very a Coxcomb as
he went out. See his Travels, called his Crudities.
Tom Coriatilm of his Expeditions.

But what need I go so far as Macedonia for a Pattern, seeing we have so many
Precedents at home? One tells us in Octavo, That he has been in Turkey;
another, That he has been at Rome; a third, that he has bin in France: (And
do^^tless you my Friend, will e`re long be telling the World ((...) Folio of
your Travels to Hambrough The place you first designed, when we parted at^,
^msterdam, in 1^86.
, Ve^ice, Japan and Greenland.)

When a Fellew (as the Wallagrophist further observes in his Britton delcrib`d)
has a Maggo^ in his Fate, or a Breeze in his Tail, that he cannot fix long in
a place: Or perhaps when he has entitled himself by some Misdemeanors either
to the Pillory or Gibbet, to disinherit himself of his deserved right, he
^^irts into Holland, or is transported into some Foreign Country; where
conversing a little while, he thrusts into the World, The History of his
Adventures; he varnisheth over his Banishment with the name of Travel, and
styles that his Recreation, which was indeed his Punishment, and so dignifies a
Ramble by the name of a Journey. He tells what Wonderments have surprised him,
what fragments of Antiquity have amazed him, what Structures have ravished him,
what Hills have tired him. In a word, he is big with Descriptions, and obliges
you with the Narrative of all his Observations and Notices. See^g every one
almost that has but untru^s^d in a Foreign Country, will have his Voyage
recorded; and every Letter-Carrier beyond Sea, would be thought a Drake or a
Candish.

I thought with my self, why may not I have the liberty of relating my Rambles,
and of communicating my Observations to Mankind.

It is s^id, that Onme tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci: If that be not
done here, yet it is an Essay of that kind; being a mixture wherein with great
variety things highly and daily useful a^e interwoven with delghtful
Observations. Now Friend, if you by reaping in few Minutes the fruits of many
Hours Travel, shall receive any content, I shall not only be satisfied for
this, but encouraged for a Fourth Volume; and for ever to remain,

Your obliged Friend and Fellow-Traveller. KAINOPHILVS.

A VOYAGE Round the World: OR, A Pocket-Library,
VOL. III.
CHAP. I.
Being a Continuation of several rare Adventures (relating to 'Vander's
Prenticeship) impossible to be left out.

-- But first to the purpose. -- Here Page, bring me a Brimmer. -- So, so, --
now I can write Rambles again!

I AM here to tell the Reader, That the greedy World being in Post haste for the
Second Volume of my Life, I had not time to finish the Adventures of my Seven
Years Prenticeship. I shall therefore add what was wanting upon that Subject,
in this Third Volume; as also several other things impossible to be left out,
and so reserve my Rambles a Wiving (and the other things promised in the last
Volume) for the Subject Matter of another Book.

The continued History of my Life needs no preambulatory Discourses to render
it Charming. For it is supposed the French, Dutch, Italians, and in a word,
almost all Nations will welcome me into their Language.

The nicest Critics allow me to be a pleasant Fellow, and judge my Adventures
may be read with as much Edification as my Country men's [Nobs] or the
celebrated Dreamer of Bedford.

I am no such Fool to fight with a Windmill, or take a Flock of Sheep for a
mighty Army. All my Conflicts (in Youth) were with my hard Fortune, against
which it becomes every wise Man to combat.

If a Man wants diversion, and be out of humor, he need only read my Dialogues
with Philaret and Iris, to put him into a fit of laughter.

But whither do I Ramble from my Subject of 'Prenticeship? But Reader, I hope
you will ex^use it in me, seeing when at any time I go out of my way, it is rather
upon the account of License than Oversight. For, as I told you at first, my
Subject is Rambling, and therefore is it that I suffer the least sudden Thought
or extravagant Fancy to lead me ten, twenty, nay sometimes ^n hundred Pages out
of my way.

And to confess the truth, I have got such a trick of making Digressions, that
I find it is hardly possible for me to hold long to a Point.

There is something in Traveling, I fancy, that makes a Man's Thoughts reel,
and that leads his Pen to wander as much about as his Person does.

I have strangely faggotted up diverse Pieces, or made an odd Composition; but
let them go ramble if they will into the World as they rise, for I have a mind
to represent the Progress of my Humor, that every one may see every Piece as
it came from the Forge.

My Rambling Fancies follow one another, but sometimes at a great distance, and
look toward one another, but it is with an oblique glance. I have read a
Dialogue in Plato of such a motly and fantastic Composition, as had the
beginning of Love, and all the rest of Rhetoric. I love a Poetical march by
leaps and skips: There are pieces in Plutarch where he forgets his Theme; yet
how beautiful are his Variations and Digressions! and then most of all when
they seem to be fortuitous, and introduced for want of heed. It Is the
indiligent Reader that loses my Subject, and not I; there will always be found
some words or other in a corner to make good my Title Page, though they lie
very close.

I Ramble indi^creetly and tumultuously, my Style and my Wit wander at the same
rate: And now if this be an Error, I humbly conceive it is an Error on the
right hand, wherein I am but better than my Word. Constanoy is not so
absolutely necessary in Authors as in Husbands; and for my own part, when I
have my Pen in my Hand^ and Subject in my Head, I look (...) my self as mounted
my (...); wherein although I design to reach such a ^own by night, yet will I
not deny my self the Satisfaction of going a Mile or two out of the way to
gratify my Senses with some new and diverting Prospect. Now he that is of this
Rambling Humor will certainly be pleased with my frequent Digressions: However
in this^ have the honor to imitate the Great Montaigne, whose Umbrage is
sufficient to protect me against any one age of Critics. But I Will Ramble no
further now from my main Design; for should I not stop here, I should launch
into an Ocean, in which I should lose my self and your patience, and despair to
ken ashore in less than an hours sailing. So that now being returned again to
my Prenticeship Rambles, I shall lead you on to

GLOBE IV.
Where I fly from my Trade (what would come on it one told me)
But the Man nor the Master together could hold me:
So that here you see Vander in his Juvenile Rambles,
Addressing himself for Bread and Cheese to the Brambles.
But in GLOBE V.
There you will find that the Commons were unkind to a Stranger,
So Vander returns, and takes Wit in his Anger.
Not that I was without my Faults neither^ No, alas it is a frailty that attends
See Scotch Votes, Numb. 59.
(...) to be mistaken and grow irregular; yet to be guilty of Errors, and
acknowledge and redress 'em on better Information, is all the advance one can
make toward the attaining of that Perfection which Humane Nature is capable of.

I shall therefore spend some following Pages in acknowledging and retracting
my Errors and Mistakes whilst an Apprentice.

It is no shame to confess our Crimes. Shame! It is a shame for to recite it;
there is no deformity, no blemish in the exercise of any Virtue. Zacheus his
Restitution was not his Brand, but his Renown; not his Stain, but his Ornament:
It was the Robe of a sacred Convert, the Perfume of a penitent Publican, the
Fragrancy of exemplary Equity for all succeeding Ages.

When a lascivious Youngster, slinking out of an unreputable House, started
back, being espied by Diogenes, the Philosopher advertised him, That his
recess, his withdrawing thence, need not put him to the blush or damp, but his
entrance thither.

A Confession of a Crime does not breed an Ulcer, but cure it. If it be
objected, That it does light a Torch to manifest the fester'd sore, which
before was concealed: I answer, This discovery is the Luster of Repentance, the
Honor, the Trophy of it; at the worst it is but the Scar of a healed Wound,
after the Victory of a Battle. However, if it be interpreted an Infamy, it is
only by depraved Men suggested by damned Spirits. It is a dignity in the
estimate of the blessed Saints and Angels, and all good Men. Phocion
apprehended the Praise of a vile Person to be a Reproach, a See more of this in
the Bishop of Worcester's late Sermon.
Scandal.

He that repents is well near innocent. Nay sometimes a failing and return is a
prompter to a s^rer hold. S. Ambrose observes, that S. Peter's Faith was
stronger after his Fall than before, so as he doubts not to say, That by his
Fall he found more Grace than he lost. A Man shall beware the steps he once
has stumbled on. And thus we see often that the Devil cosins himself, by
plunging Man into deep offenses. How base a part then is it to twit any with
their former Iuvenile Crimes, i^ they themselves are reformed; for my own part,
I must confess I find enough in my own breast to damp my censuring others, and
he that does not, let him fling the first stone.

And therefore now in hopes of a candid Construction from my honest Readers, I
will here record the Follies that attended the servile part of my Life.

And if by divulging my defects (for I have not so little Man in me as to want
my Faults, nor so much Fool in me as to think it) I fairly bring thine to
remembrance, it will not only compensate my labor in writing, but thine in
reading.

I (here) make the whole World my Confessor, and many things that I could not
confess to any one in particular, I here deliver to the Public; and send my
best Friends to the Black Raven, there to inform themselves concerning my most
secret Thoughts. What I have done I have done; nor shall thou behold my
penitence until thine Eyes arrive to the end of my Rambles. If thou find any
misfortunate steps (if any of my Juvenile Follies may deserve so hard a Phrase)
in the morning of my days, before the blossom of my Youth was fully blown (my
Humor and Will being now forced to be curbed by a Masters Looks) let my
penitent Tears (Sorrws fittest Livery) seek out my Excuse in thine own guilt,
and then blush for us both, and at length gloss over all with a charitable
Construction, without which thou art an Object (I had almost said) not clean
enough to spit on; the slandering and uncharitable Tongue being the Abstract
and Venom of all Baseness. 'Twas said of St. Chrysostom, Nunquam ulli
maledixit, That he never spoke ill of any Man.

If People must be talking of me, I would have it to be justly and truly. I
would come again with all my heart from the other World, to give any one the
Lie, that should report me other than I was, though he did it to honor me.
Plautus said, By his good will he would have Tale-bearers and Tale-hearers
punished, the one hanging by the Tongue, the other by the Ears. Were his Will a
Law in England, many a tattling Fop would have his Vowels turned to Mutes.

Certainly it is an ignoble thing to publish that to all, that we dare not own
to any. It Is a pitiful Cowardice that strikes a Man in the dark, and like a
Serpent bites him by the heel, and then creeps into his hole for want of
Courage to abet his Actions. To invenome any Man's Name by Aspersions, that
freely tells us his Crime (and with the Pelican dissects himself before us,
that so by ripping up his own Bowels, we might see where the defects of
Humanity reside) is to add stripes with an Iron Rod to him who before has
fley'd himself with his own whipping; and is always by a Noble Mind looked upon
with great disdain. It Is below the gallantry of Man to tyrannize over the weak:
The brave Soul scorns Advantages. Is it noble in Arms to fight against the
naked? To meet my Enemy without a Weapon, is his Protection if I be provided.

But alas there is no Man that blames another, but himself comes under the lash
in some other kind, it being as natural for Men to err, as to be: And the
purest Gold of upright Men that ever we read extant, had yet something of an
Allay. No Man living is so circumspect, so considerate, or so fearful of
offending, but he has much to answer for: The difference is, that we do not all
transgress in the same way: He only may tax others by privilege, that has not
in himself what others may tax. He that cleanses a Blot with blotted Fingers,
makes a greater Blurr. And therefore it is that a good Man sets a guard upon
his Lips, and examins all his Language e're it passes. The Scripture says,
Speak evil of no man; then sure their hands cannot be clean, that throw so much
dirt in other Men's faces. A good Name is like the Apple of our Eye, of which we
are always tender; and the reason may be, because it is of great use in serving
God and our Generation; therefore whosoever it be that goes to lessen our
Credit, labors in what he can to prevent the good we might do to the end of
our Lives. To cut the throat of a fair Reputation with Hums -- and Haws, -- and
with an -- O but (which but -- generally proves more prejudicial than the
Criminals Mark of T -- R -- F at an Arraignment.) you know him not so well as
I, is to act a Villainy that wants a name.

The Tongue is connexed by Veins to the Brain and Heart, by which Nature
teaches us, that it is to be governed by the Intellect, whose seat is in the
head, so that it may agree with the Heart. Every honest Man will use both his
Ears and his Heart, before he whets his Tongue: But some Readers (that shall be
nameless here, for we design to firk 'em in our Twentieth Volume) have Souls
good for little but to salt their Bodies, and exercise the Graces of others.

But that I may return to my promise, I am here to tell you, That I own nothing
but Defects and Infirmities throughout all my Apprenticeship: That my manner of
Life then (my sole Interest!) was a deep sense of my impiety, a constant
acknowledgment of a constant guilt, with the Prophet David, My sin is ever
before me: And that of Tertullian is my Motto, Born to drive on no design, to
expedite no task but Repentance. Not an Action I did, but upbraided me with
folly and nonsense; and the reason was, because as yet I saw but the outside of
the World and Men, and conceived them according to their appearing glister. I
pursued all vanities for happiness, and enjoyed them best in this fancy. My
Reason served (now) not to curb but to understand my Appetite, and prosecute
the motions thereof with the greater earnestness. I thought it might be proper
to leave Repentance for gray hairs (a bold adventure, seeing I had no Lease of
my Life, and was not sure of the next hour) and therefore sinn^d to better my
understanding; and because I would not lose my Time, I spent it. I was apt to
distaste Religion (that is the swetetest of Pleasures) as a melancholy thing,
and thought my self ten years elder for a thought of Heaven. I scorned and
feared, and yet hoped for old Age, but durst not imagine it with Wrinkles. I did
(but I suffered) much for my Knowledge, and a great deal of Rachel for that!
Folly (did or should have) made me a wise Man. [My self was my own
Temptation,] for my Temperament now giving Sense pre-eminence above Reason, it
added fuel to the fire of Youth* and was the Mother of all my irregular Actions.

In these green St. Austin himself had occasion enough to repent the Follies of
his Youth; for we read, that in his tender years he robbed Orchards, kept
Concubines, fell in Love, haunted Stage Plays, and went to Astrologers. See his
Confessions, page: 76.
years 'twas my practice to have my Thoughts search no farther than my Eyes: I
never now did any thing that I wished not to do again; and was never wise, but
after Misfortunes; untamed blood did goad me into folly, until Experience
rein'd me in, I rid unbitted, wild, and in a wanton fling.

But my good Master considering, that the way to amendment was never out of
date, was resolved to try to the utmost how he could curb my Rambling Humor;
and he did it so well, that under his charge I lived full I was Bound on the
7th of December, 1674. both by my Father's Consent, and also to his
Satisfaction.
Seven Years; which being expired, he made me

First, Free of the Company of Stationers;

And then A Freeman of the City of London.

How I performed my part as an Apprentice in all respects, I am not able to
declare, it being nothing pertinent to that grave stuff wherewith I intend to
line my Book: For what passages can such green years afford worthy thy
Knowledge, or my Description.

But Reader, wherein I have erred upon any account, it is from Heaven and my
Master, and not from thee, that I (heartily) ask forgiveness. I confess 'twas a
noble saying of the Great See his Essays, lib. 3. page 48.
Montaigne, after he had finished his Rambles, That were he to live over his
life again, he would live exactly as he had done: I neither (says he) complain
of the past, nor do I fear the future; and if I am not much deceived, I am the
same within that I am without. I cannot say so; for though I am but just peept
into the Thirtieth year of my age, and have always industriously devoted my
Time and Rambles to the knowledge of Countries, Books and Men; yet were I to
correct the Errata's of my short Life, I would quite alter the Press: Not an
Action have I done in which the Eagle-eyed may not easily perceive many unhappy
steps (excepting one, I mean, the Choice of my better and dearer self; which
could not have been better made, had I had a thousand Advisers, or as many
Worlds to have ranged in to have pleased my Eye and Fancy; I verily think, that
had all the married Sons of my Grandfather Adam met with so good a Wife, they
would have thought they had bin still in Paradise, or at least that they had
met with this Life but as an Earnest of the happier to come. Certainly she
never read of a Virtue which she did not forthwith put into act.

No greater Blessing could to Mortal fall,
I now methinks am Caesar, Cresus, all
That we can happy or delightful call.
Had the Great Conqu'ror reached the British shore,
And his victorious Arms had triumphed over
This World of Iris.
Bliss, -- he never had wept for more.
A minute in her company entertains me with an age of Pleasure: When I have it
(which is ^sually eight hours a day) it puzzles my Soul to find subject for
another Wish, or to think of a Happiness that I do not enjoy:

It Is all the Sweets of Life!

I have the Universal Globe in having Iris, and in her company can sit and
scorn the Splendor of a Crown. And therefore my Body shall be hers, and so
entirely hers, that never any but her self shall have part therein. She shall
not need to watch over my Fidelity, because I shall be more jealous thereof
than she can; and if I should chance to offend therein, my hand shall prevent
both the Laws of God and Man in the revenge of so great a wrong. And if Death
permits me to survive her, be assured, that even to (...) very Ashes I will
keep a Body pure, and (...) inviolable; for Separation shall never (...) place
in our Union, which is too great to (...) exampled.

Iris. Hold Vander, or you will make me blush my self to death: But know (if
you're real) I am resolved, that Winters chilling Storms, nor Summers scorching
^eat, attended with the sharp contests of Poverty, shall never part us; Death
it self, in all its dismal (...), is not of force to shake my fixed
determination. Were all the Floods, the Rivers and Seas, that with their
crooked arms embrace the Earth, betwixt us, I Would ^ade through all and meet thee.
Were all the Alps heaped on each others head; were Pelion joined to O^^a, and
they both thrown on Olympa's top, they (...) not make so high a Wall, but I
would scale (...) find thee.

Vander. Iris, thy singular kindness puts me in mind of Queen Elenor, who
accompanied her Husband (Edward I.) to the Holy Land; in which Voyage he being
stabbed by a Saracen with a poisoned Dagger, when no Medicine could extract the
Poison, she did it with her Tongue, licking daily, while her Husband slept, his
rankling Wounds, whereby they perfectly closed, and yet her self received no
harm! So sovereign a Medicine (said Speed) is a Woman's Tongue, anointed with
the virtue of lovely Affection. Pity it is (faith Mr. Fuller) such a pretty
Story should not be true, because then we might hear of one Woman's Tongue that
has done good. But Iris, you yet are young, and have not ^^rugled with
Misfortunes, nor contended with the World, and therefore know not of what force
they are; consider how the tender Iris, i^ she Ramble with me (as she says she
will) must be often forced to make the Ground her Bed* and underneath some
spreading Tree lie stretched* exposed to all the injuries of Weather, wh^^^
soft sleep flies from her careful Breast, and she with sighs and groans is
forced to wound the murmuring Air.

Iris. If upon some bleak Mountains top, whose covering is Snow, and Globes of
solid Ice, where Winters lasting Tyranny still reigns, you should be forced to
make your Bed, I Would there repose: This Arm should be your Pillow, whilst your
Iris, your obedient Iris froze to your side; witness the two hundred Garden
Walks, which surely you have not forgot.

Vander. Could you do this -- Yet think again, and well consider, that many sad
Accidents may attend me in Traveling, which you think not of, and I may soon
be summoned to the Grave; and should you be left alone in a strange Land, and
far from your Relations, meet with much contempt and scorn abroad; then will be
the time of your repentance, then you will blame that ill-starr'd day you left
your Country and Friends for the company of Vander.

Iris. Let not that trouble my Dear at all; for when unfriendly Death, with his
cold Icy hand, shall grasp your Life, I Will mourn much like a Widow-Turtle, till
in floods of swelling Grief I Am wasted to Eternity; and then our Bodies shall
not be disjoined, but in one Grave we'll lie, till our returning Souls shall
wake the drowsy courses, and hand in hand we take our way to Heaven.

Vander. Can there be such constant Faith in Woman? O thou Glory of your Sex!
let me revenge of so great a wrong. And if Death permits me to survive her, be
assured, that even to her very Ashes I will keep a Body pure, and Troth
inviolable; for Separation shall never have place in our U^^^on, which is too
great to be exampled. I am re^^lved, that Winters chilling Storms, nor Summers
scorching heat, attended with the sharp contests of Poverty, shall never part
us; Death it self, in all its dismal shapes, is not of force to shake my fixed
determination. Were all the Floods, the Rivers and Seas, that with their
Crooked arms embrace the Earth, betwixt us, I Would wade through all and meet her.
Were all the Alps heaped on each others head; were Pelion joynd to Ossa, and
they both thrown on Olympa's top, they should not make so high a Wall, but I
would scale and find her. If upon some Mountains top, whose covering is Snow,
and Globes of solid Ice, she should be forced to make her Bed, I Would there
repose; this Arm should be her Pillow, whilst Vander, shivering Vander, froze
to her side. And when unfriendly Death, with his cold Icy hand, shall grasp her
Life, I Will mourn much like a Widow-Turtle, till in floods of swelling Grief I Am
wa^ted to Eternity; and then our Bodies shall not be disjoined, but in one
Grave we'll lie, till our returning Souls shall wake the drowsy Courses, and
hand in hand we take our way to Heaven.)

But so much for a Parenthesis of about three Pages: Return we now to my Life
again; wherein not a line have I written but has need of Correction, or at least
an Ocean of penitent Tears.

And therefore how glad should I be, could Time unweave my Age again to the
first thread, that so once more being made an Infant, I might be a better
Husband of those golden hours that (like a Bird from the Hand of the Owner) are
now vanished out of sight.

I am thus free in accusing my self, believing (what See his Enchiridion.
Quarles says) He that Confesses his Sin, begins his Journey toward Heaven; he
that is Sorry for it, mends his pace; he that Forsakes it, is at his Iourneys
end, But alas, --
-- Semel insanivimus omnes!
And we daily see the Life of the most precise amongst us is but one continued
Blot, we may see folly attending the wisest of Men, and perhaps even at that
very instant too when they would eagerly persuade us to follow their dictates,
at the same time they grow Cinical and morose, and the Tub of a Diogenes is but
the Derision of an Alexander.

Should I speak of those Noble Caesar, Pompey, Hannibal and Alexander.
Heroes, who knew no work so full of ease as to Conquer whole Regions at once,
we shall find folly and rashness always mixed with their Enterprises. Should I
speak of Alexander (whose Fame was as universal as the Sun) he flew Parmenio;
should I mention the more than pious Marcus Antonius, he lost the World for a
Cleopatra, a Woman, a thing in Petticoats.

All o^r Actions are marked with the Character of Weakness; our Humanity
supposes us Frail and Inconstant; and the decaying Nature of what we enjoy,
tells us every day, there is no solid Happiness in Life. This was a Saying of
good Bishop Usher.
The best Man living does enough in the day, to bring him upon his Knees at
night.

How vain a thing is Man, whom Toys delight, And Shadows fright!
Variety of Impertinence
Might give our dotage some pretense;
But to a circle bound
We sin in a dull round.
We sit, move, eat and drink;
We dress, undress, discourse and think:
By the same Passions hurried on,
Imposing or Imposed upon:
We pass the time in Sport or Toil,
We plow the Seas or safer Soil.
Thus all that we project or do,
We did it many a year ago;
We travel still a beaten way,
And yet how eager rise we to pursue
The Sins of each returning day,
As if its Entertainments were all new!
I now expect to be snarl'd at by the sower Fops of the Town for this free way
of writing, but surely (as Friend Seneca has it) our Philosophy might carry us
up to the bravery of a generous Mastiff, that can hear the barking of a
thousand Curs, without taking any notice of them.

It was well answered of an old Courtier, that was asked how he kept so long in
favor, Why (says he) by receiving Injuries, and crying, Your humble Servant
for them. Will any but a Madman quarrel with a Cur for barking, when he may
pacify him with a Crust? What have we to do but to get further off and laugh
at him? It Is true, Fidus Cornelius fell down right a crying in the Senate House
at Corbulos, saying, That he looked like an Estridge. But now ever remember
this, no Man was ever ridiculous to others, that laughed at himself first. It
prevents mischief, and it is a spiteful disappointment of those that take
pleasure in such Abuses. There are none more abusive to others, than they that
lie most open to it themselves; but the humor goes round, and he that laughs
at my Rambles to day, will have some Person or other fleering at his Maggots to
morrow, and revenge my quarrel.

He that is listening after private discourse, and what People say of him,
shall never be at peace. How many things that are innocent in themselves, are
made injurious yet by mis-construction; wherefore some things we are to pause
upon, others to laugh at, and others again to pardon. It Is the part of a
Christian not to believe any thing till he is very certain of it; for many
probable things prove false; we are prone to believe many things which we are
unwilling to hear, and so we conclude and take up a Prejudice before we can
judge.

I never condemn any Man unheard, or without letting him know his Accuser or
his Crime. It Is a common thing for your Pick-thanks to say, Do not you tell
that you had it from me; for if you do, I Will deny it, and never tell you any
thing again. By which means Friends are set together by the Ears, and the
Informer slips his Neck out of the Collar. Admit no Stories upon these terms;
for it is an unjust thing to believe in private, and to be angry openly; for
without the making the best of every thing, there is no living in society with
Mankind. Let us never be too credulous; some make it their sport to do ill
Offices, others do them only to pick a thank; there are some that would part
the dearest Friends in the World.

If it be a small matter (says Seneca) I would have Witnesses; but if it be a
greater, I would have it upon Oath, and allow time to the Accused, and Council
too, and hear it over and over.

I know not which is worse, the Bearer of Tales, or the Receiver; for the one
makes the other. The generous Man, where he cannot stop others Mouths, he will
stop his own Ears: The Receiver is as bad as the Thief.

Reader, while I speak this to you, I prescribe to my self, what I write I
read, and desire to reduce all my Meditations to the ordering of my own Manners.

Well, but some one will say, this design of making a Man's self the Subject of
his Writing, were indeed excusable in Rare-and-Famous-Men, who by their
Reputation had given others a curiosity to be fully informed of them; who have
Qualities worthy of Imitation; whose Life and Opinions may serve for Example.

To which I answer, If the World find fault that I speak of my self, I find
fault that they do not so much as think of themselves. Socrates that taught,
Nosce Teipsum; learnt likewise to know himself; and by that study was arrived
to the Perfection of setting himself at naught. And the old Philosopher
Heraclitus.
never wanted occasion for his Tears, whilst he considered himself.

I have this to say (as an Apology for treating of my self) that never any Man
treated of a Subject he better understood and knew, and therefore in this
Subject I am the most understanding Man alive.

Sir William Cornwallis says of Montaigne's Essays, That it was the likeliest
Book to advance Wisdom; because the Author's own Experience is the chiefest
Argument in it. And indeed, should every Man write an exact Narrative of the
various Experiences and Circumstances of his Life, comprehending as well his
Vices as Virtues, and have them with simplicity related, how useful would this
prove to the Public! But this so impartial Account may rather be wished for
than expected, since Men have ever preferred their own private Reputation
before the real Good of themselves or others. Alas, every Man is not an Evander!

But now if contrary to the mode of such Travelers as lose their Thoughts in
the open Air where they were conceived, I have with more diligence registered
mine: It was out of no Opinion they deserve a longer life, but to prevent
Idleness. 'Twas my leisure hours at Sea that first put into my Head this fancy
of Writing; wherein when I found my self totally unprovided of other Matter, I
present my self to my self for Argument and Subject. All I seek, is by my Pen
to find Employment for a Spirit that would break the Vessel, had it nothing to
work upon.

Alas, Reader, Writing is as natural to me as Eating; I was born Studying, as
you find by my early Rambles.

And indeed no Man comes into the World to be idle. Adam in the state of
Innocence (when Emperor of the World) must dress the Garden; and after it was
denounced against him, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread.
Solomon's Princess eats not the bread of idleness. St. Paul labored. The
Highpriests among the Jews had, and the Great Mogul at this time has a Trade,
at which (as I heard in Leiden) he is to labor every day. And you may take
notice, that she is set out to us as skilled in Cookery, whose Brother was
Solomon in all his glory. Shall we eat, and not work? Shall we yawn away our
precious hours? Shall we think with the Lillies (which neither spin nor labor)
our clothes will grow upon us.

Alas, Idleness is the Mother of all Mischief. St. Austin says, That he that is
employed, is tempted with one Devil; but he that is Idle, with a thousand.

I heard, whilst I was in Holland of so great a Sluggard, that (as 'twas said)
he never saw the Sun rising or setting in his whole life, but would usually
tell it for News at Noon, that the Sun was up.

I remember I have read in an Italian History of one so Idle, that he was fain
to have one to help him to stir his Chaps when he should eat his Meat.

Such is the vileness of the Age we live in, that Idleness is counted an
Ornament, and the greatest gentility, is to do nothing; whereas it is Action
only that is noble; and not only the Celestial Bodies are in continual motion,
but he that is most high, is Purissimus actus; and besides the Contemplation of
his own Goodness, is ever at work in Acts of Providence, and government of his
Creatures.

It Is Action that does keep the Soul both sweet and sound. There is a kind of
good Angel waiting upon diligence, that ever carries a Laurel in his Hand to
Crown her. The bosomed Fist beckons the approach of Poverty; but the lifted Arm
does frighten Want. How unworthy was that Man to live in the World, of whom it
was said, He never did ought, but only lived and died.

Diligence and Moderation doubtless are the best steps to mount up to
Preferment Think no Labor Slavery, That brings in Penny savourly. says old
Tusser. And there is a great deal of gravy in those musty old Proverbs.
A Man is neither good, nor wise, nor rich at once; yet softly creeping up
those hills, he shall every day better his Prospect, till at last he gains the
Top. A poor Man in Boston once found the Tag of a Point, and put it in the lap
of his Shirt: One asked him what he could do with it? He answers, What I find
all the year (though it be never so little) I lay it up at home till the years
end, and with all together I every New-years-day add a Dish to my Cup-board. He
that has the Patience to attend small Profits, usually grows a great Man.
Polemon ready to die, would needs be laid in his Grave alive; and seeing the
Sun shine, he calls his Friends in haste to hide him, lest (as he said) it
should see him lying.

Seneca would have a Man do something, though it be to no purpose. The Turks
enjoin all Men, of what degree soever, to be of some Trade: The Grand Signior
himself is not excused. Mahomet the Turk (he that Conquered Greece) at the very
time when he heard Ambassadors, did either Carve or Cut wooden Spoons, or Frame
something upon a Table. This present Sultan makes Notches for Bows. Cunus the
Noble Roman was sound by the Fireside seething of Turnips when the Samnite
Ambassador came for Audience. Julian the Emperor was ashamed any Man should see
him Spit or Sweat, because he thought continual labor should have concocted
and dried up all such Superfluities. Artaxerxes made Hafts for Knives, Bias
made Lanthorns, Homer sung Ballads, Aristotle was a Corn-cutter, and Domitian
the Emperor (having no Rambles to write) spent his time in killing Flies with
a Bodkin. Nicias the Painter was often so intent on his Trade, as to forget
Food, and omit the reception of Nature's support. Alexander never slept save
with his Arm stretched out of the Bed, holding in his Hand a Silver Ball, having
a Silver Basin by his Bedside, that lest he slept too securely, the falling of
the Ball might awake him to Battle.

But why should I multiply Examples of this kind, seeing here are enough to
convince the Lazy how glorious a Virtue Diligence is; and to authorize my
Practice in writing my own Life and Travels, seeing Emperors, Kings and Nobles
have employed their time on as trivial Subjects.

Montaigne says, That nothing can be so absurdly said, that has not been said
before by some of the Philosophers. And I am the more willing to expose my
Whimsies to the Public, forasmuch as though they are spun out of my self, and
without any Pattern I know they will be found related to some ancient humor;
and some will not stick to say, See whence he took it! It Is true, I cannot deny
but in this Book there are many things that may perhaps one day have bin made
known to me by other Writers; but if they have, I have utterly forgot by whom.
But say, they were all Collections: Is the Honey the worse because the Be
sucks it out of many Flowers? Or is the Spider's Web the more to be praised,
because it is extracted out of her own Bowels? Will thou say, the Tailor did
not make the Garment, because the Cloth it was made of was weaved by the Weaver?

Therefore let no body insist upon the Matter I write, but my Method in
writing. If I have borrowed any thing, let them observe in what I borrow; if I
have known how to choose what is proper to raise or relieve the Invention, which
is always my own,; for if I steal from others, it is that they may say for me,
what either for want of Language or want of Sense I cannot my self express.

It Is true, I have always an Idea in my Soul which presents me a better form
than what I have in this Book made use of, but I cannot catch it, nor fit it to
my purpose. I can neither please nor delight my self, much less ravish any one.
The best Story in the World would be spoiled by my handling. If therefore I
transplant any of others Notions into my own soil, and confound them among my
own, I purposely conceal the Author, to awe the temerity of those precipitous
Censures that fall upon all sorts of Writings: I will have my Reader wound
Plutarch through my sides, and rail against Seneca, when they think they rail
at me; I must shelter my own weakness under these great Reputations.

But though there is nothing in this Book I have cudgel'd my Brains about, yet
I must confess, during my 'Prenticeship, I was a kind of Persecutor of Nature,
and would fain then have changed the dull Lead of my Brain into finer Metal.
And to speak the truth, I have ever had a strange hankering after Learning; but
to atchieve it, Nature was too kind to me, she hope me to nothing but Patience
and a Body; yet what I have, I usually have perfect; for I read it so long
before I can understand it, that I get it without book. It Is confessed I am a
great Nomenclator of Authors, which I have read in general in the Catalogue,
and in particular in the Title ( for I seldom go so far as the Dedication.) But
as for Poetry (except in the case of Rachel) I never ventured upon it, thinking
it impregnable: But as for Astronomy and Logic, etc. I ventured twice in my
'Prenticeship to make a breach into it; for you must note I have an Invention,
though it extends it self no further than the patching together a few
Chamber-Collections, and you will find my disposition of them to be as methodical
as the Book-binders, when he places ( X) in the place of ( A): I wear my Wit in
my Belly, and my Guts in my Head, a very Natural might bob my Brains, my
Pia-mater is not worth the ninth part of a Sparrow. I cannot in circumvention
deliver a Fly from a Spider, without drawing the massy Irons, and cutting the
Web. O how often has my Brain turned at Philosophy? How often have I made I --
L -- fear studying, judging it, by observing me, to be a kind of Duncery? How
often in my Gown and Nightcap have I sat up till midnight in my Master's
Back-Shop, to the vanquishing of some six lines in Homer or the minor Poets,
being unwilling to forget all my Greek; but alas, I could never yet (after a 7
years biting my Nails, and as long scratching that which goes for my Noddle)
get acquaintance with above a Muse and a half, nor never drink above siz -- q.
of Helicon. And therefore Reader, expect here neither Squibs nor Fireworks,
Stars nor Glories; for to be yet more inward with thee, the cursed Carrier lost
my best Book of Phrases, and the malicious Mice or Rats ate up all my Pearls
and Golden Sentences. I was never yet so well accomplished as to study the
jingling and cadences of words; have not learnt to say, Yes forsooth and No
forsooth, to call a Straw a Strew forsooth; nor had I ever the modishness to
search in the Looking-glass, which words gave the most grceful motion to the
Lips: And indeed fine Language would as ill become me, as a Poet does fine
Clothes; but it may be some may understand my plain talk better than them whose
Pen drops Nectar or Life-Honey, choice and refined Conceits; not but thou shall
now and then have a similitude from the Sun, or the Moon, or so; or if they be
not at leisure, from the grey-ey'd Morn, a shady Grove, or a purling Stream:
But I Will engage this shall not fall out often enough to choke thee. For what can
thou expect from one, the chief burden of whose Brain is the carriage of his
Body, and the setting his Face in a good frame: From one that weighs his Breath
between his Teeth, and dares not smile beyond a point, for fear t'unstarch his
Look: From a Puppy-Snout, so utterly nothing, that he knows not what he would
be or write: From one who is just such a Man (to a tittle) as his Tailor
pleases to make him.

And to speak the truth, I find my Bodily qualities are very well fitted to
those of my Soul. I have not put on the quaint garb of the Age, which is now
become a Man's total; nor humbled my Meditations to the industry of Complement,
nor afflicted my Brain by an claborate Leg; but my Scrape is homely, and my Nod
worse. I cannot kiss my Hand, and cry, Madam your humble Servant, nor talk idly
enough to bear her company; my Bussing a Lady is somewhat too savoury, and the
reason may be, because I usually mistake her Nose for her Lip. Avery Woodcock
would puzzle me in carving, for I want the Logic of a Capon, (yet this I must
say for my self, that when I am at a Feast, the perplexity of Mannerliness will
not let me feed.) As for my Hat, it is commonly nayl'd to my Head, except at a
Christening, and then all my Behaviors are printed. But it were enough to make
a Stoic forget his gravity, and an Heraclitus to burst into laughter, to hear
me discourse the Gossips. My Tongue is the Gentleman Usher to my Wit, and still
goes before it; yet is my Head (which looks as if t'had worn out three or four
Bodies, and was legacy'd to me by my Great-Grandfather) always so busy about
Matters of Learning, that I can seldom find time to comb my Hair, wash my
Hands, or to consider whether that which I take for a Band be not a Dishclout,
or whether it it do not stand toward the Alehouse. I seldom cut my Nails till
they are long enough to scratch my Grannum out of her Grave; and as seldom wipe
my Nose, which is still my Limbeck, and my Mouth is the Receiver. So that I am
just like one of the old Philosophers, the length of whose Beards did assure
the World that they had not time from their deep Contemplations to cut them. So
that I fancy it would hugely accommodate me to dwell as Diogenes did, in a Tub,
for there my Nose might drop at pleasure. I am one that am not guilty of making
Legs (as thinking that they are made already) but I choose rather to make Faces,
such as were never made before, and are usually more lowering than the last day
of January.

In a word, I have seen a handsomer Mortal carved in monumental Gingerbread. If
you have ever viewed that wooden Gentleman that peeps out of a Country Barber's
Window, you may fancy some resemblance of me. But though I have little to boast
on above the gross and common work of Nature, and am not acquainted with the
modish styles in writing; yet for all that I am a plain-spoken Lad, I'se call a
Spade a Spade, and will not bid you deosculate your Posteriors; but when I
would speak to that purpose, I speak the plainest English.

As to my Chin, I Would compare it to the Gnomon of a Dial, but that it is not
fringed with Hair enough to stand for the twelve hours. My Eyes are heavy, and
naturally require the light. My Cheeks resemble Famine painted on a clean
Trencher. I am the very Ape of a Man, a Iack-of-Lent, a very Top, that is of no
use but when it is whipped and lasht

My shortest things are my Hair, which is usually cut to the Figure of Three.
Two high cliffs run up my Temples, and a cape of shorn hair shoots down my
Forchead with Creeks indented, where my Ears ride at anchor.

When I have got any piece of News, it is easier to make Stones speak, than me
to hold my peace. And therefore it is I hate all places where there is an Echo,
because it robs me of my dear Repetition, and confounds the Company as well as
me.

But of all Mortals I admire the Shorthand Men, who have the patience to write
from my Mouth; for had they the Art to shorten it into Sense, they might write
what I can say in a continued discourse of six hours long on the back of their
Nail; for my Invention consists in finding a way to speak nothing upon any
thing, and were I in the Grand Signior's power, he would lodge me with his
Mutes; for nothing and nothing to purpose are all one.

My very Brains (as Manichaeus's Skin) are stuffed with Chaff. I am ever sick
of a Diabete; nor do I read but weed Authors, picking up cheap, and refuse
Notes, and then with Domitian, retire into my Study to cath Flies.

Were there any Metempsychosis, my Soul would want a Lodging, no single Beast
could fit me; for I should out of pure love to novelty change more Lodgings
than ever Pythagoras's Soul did. Twice every day a thousand Fancies and
Fegaries crowd into my Noddle so thick as if my Brain kept open-house for all
the Maggots in nature.

If you would know how I dispose of my Hands, you must note, one is commonly
pinching my Snuffers (which have made 'em swell to a Proverb) but Reader, where
I use to keep the other, is not fit to tell thee; only thus much I must
acquaint thee, that considering how nasty they commonly are, it is a great
wonder that they do not poison me. Poison me, did I say? alas! why should I
think so? Seeing Cleanliness is but a new Invention, Sluttery was the mode of
the Grandmothers, of our Great Great Grandmothers, when Romulus's Wife wore a
Flannel Smock a whole Twelvemonth together, and Aeneas wiped his Fingers upon
his Doublet instead of a Napkin. Sluttery is an Emblem of the simplicity of the
old World before Pomp and Luxury came in fashion. The Victuals for a Sloven
costs little; for a T -- d's as good for a Sow as a Pancake.

Why then should Sluttery poison any Man's Stomach, seeing Venus her self was
born out of the Scum of the Sea? And it has been observed how for the most
part the rarest and most excellent Men for Learning, Wit and Sense have been
most negligent and careless in their Apparel; and as we say Slovens: Erasmus
says of Sir Thomas Moore, Quod a puero semper in vestitu fuit
negligen^iss^mus; That from a Child he was ever most careless and slovenly in
his Apparel. Paracelsus, and Master Butler of Cambridge, we read have been the
like: And the ingenious Fuller was so great a Sloven, that he was noted for it
throughout all Europe, and thence arose this Proverbial Speech, You Are as great
a Sloven as Doctor Fuller.

Dr. Fuller once asking a witty Cousin of his (that is still living) how he
should go disguised, for that he had in every street so many Hats, that 'twas
troublesome to him to walk along. To which she replied, O Uncle! Uncle! do but
every morning wash your Face and Hands, and once a week put on a clean Band,
and I Will engage no body will know you.

And then for his Virtues, a Sloven is a Man of Constancy: I prove it by this
sturdy Argument, -- I ever was, am, and what I am, ever shall be, a Sloven,
without any alteration or change.

But Reader, I Will stop here, for should I draw my Picture at large, it were
enough to defile my Pen; my Ink is too cleanly for a further Description, only
thus much I shall say at parting, That were I pictured in all my various
humors, and self-disguisings, I know nothing in the world that would look more
like a Fool, that were not one indeed; my most deliberate Actions are all
beyond the degree of ridiculous!

So that, Reader, you see my Soul is a proper Tenant for the House it lives in;
both which were naturally ill Matched, to show, that a generous Spirit may be
lodged under any shape.

It may be now some will admire that I fall so foul on my own Intellectuals.
Why Reader know, that I do it in hopes that the novelty of the Humor will sell
my Book. I believe Kainophilus is the first Author that ever cried stinking
Fish, and therefore I hope that my Extravagancy in this Affair, will serve as a
Bait to catch a few silly Gudgeons: And indeed (as Scaliger observes) nothing
more invites a Reader, than an Argument unlooked for.

By these Features of my Confession, Men may imagine others to my prejudice; but
whatever I deliver my self to be, provided it be such as I really am, I have my
end; neither will I make any excuse for committing to Paper such mean and
frivolous things as these, the meanness of the Subject I write of compels me to
it.

Some time is no doubt allowable for mere Recreation: This is certainly
harmless. I hope nothing will be found here that may either make me justly
blush to own, or another to read. And I hope all will grant this kind of
Diversion a little more excusable than every day setting my Brains a-float,
(No! No! the little Glasses are my Favorites, I ever hated an Excess at
Drinking!) or fooling away two or three years, and it may be a many Reams of
Paper in doleful Ditties of Philander and Phillis.

But if the Character I have here drawn of my self be thought by some to be a
little too frolicksom, they that think so will do well to remember, that a
little good Humor must be forgiven to a Traveller, whose Spirits are too much
in motion, to be so settled and so grave as they ought to be.

But whither do I gallop again? It Is high time for me now to relate whether or
no an Indenture could curb my rambling humor, or kill those restless Maggots
that had so often rigled themselves into my active Pate?

And in answer to this, I do affirm, That if any thing could be mingled with
Servitude to make it sweet! if any thing could reconcile Apprenticeship to
Nature! if any thing could beget an acquiescence in such a state, I did not, I
could not want it.

But for all this, methoughts Apprenticeship had in it something of I knew not
what, that I could not brook: Fetters of Gold do not lose their nanure, they
are Fetters still! Had Bajazet's Cage been made of Diamonds as 'twas of Iron,
yet it was a Cage, (and that was provocation enough to that rambling Spark to
make him beat out his Brains against its Bars.) And I now thought being
confined to Europe (that is to say, to my Master's Shop) every corner of it was
a Prison till I was in America, or in some other part of the World.

But being Bound, I must Obey. So that now poor Vander sat him down, like
Patience smiling at Grief: For alas, I had never before danced to the Music of
Fetters! understood not the Rhetoric of a Flap in the Face, and could not well
digest the easiest Chapter in Fisty-cuff-Logick, nor know how to be confined,
after so much Rambling to the narrow limits of a Bookseller's Shop.

But at last considering, that the whole World was a Purchase too little for a
fair Reputation! That Rambling (though the darling Joy of my heart) had emptied
my Purse faster than Fortune could fill it: And that it was the practice of
Youth (who like the Sun often rises clear and dancing, though he sets in a Cloud)
to look upon distant Prospects with a magnifying Fancy, laying these weighty
Matters together, I resolved now to ride at Anchor one seven years within the
sound of Bow-Bell.

But alas, I had not been sixty minutes Alphabetizing and sorting of Books
before my old Rambling Maggot began to crawl and bite afresh; upon which I
immediately grew as fickle and wavering as if I had drank Liquor distilled from
a Woman's Brains; and nothing would satisfy me now till I saw the Situation of
my Father's House again. It Is true, my Master did advise me (for which I Will pay
and ever owe him as many Thanks as Arithmetic can count) to beg my Father's
Consent before I rambled again; but my runnagate Mind being set on a galloping
Frollick, he might with as much ease have found out the Quadrature of a Circle,
or the Taylor's Name that works to the Man in the Moon, as have parted me from
another Ramble; for beginning now to imagine that a Trade was troublesome, and
that the toil of keeping Accounts would be a labo^r too tedious for my
Mercurial Brains, I was impatient till I was on another Ramble. And no sooner
had the Night began to draw its Curtains, but Evander draws his.

And after taking leave of my Master, I cast a longing look toward my Father's
House (with whom I left my Heart but as a Pledge till I returned) and put my
self on my way thither.

[And now farewell London, till we meet again!]

Being mounted on Bayard-a-ten-toes, and expecting no Whittington His Bells
Chym'd thus (as he thought) Turn again Whittington, Lord Mayor of London.
Bells to Chime me back, forward I rambled apace; and though I set out from
London with the early Sun, yet I had his company but a little while; for just
as I got within sight of Tyburn (that three-legg'd Horse, on whose fatal back
many a Man has rambled to the other World) he withdrew into an Appartment
behind a Cloud: At whose absence the Heavens frowning, I began to suspect 'twas
an ill Omen of my Father's displeasure for my so speedy leaving my Master's
House. But however, now to repent of my Rambling Project was irksom, and to
fear was a Passion that I ever thought below me, (the Valiant Heart knows no
trembling;) Cowards wink when they sight, but the truly Valiant dare face their
danger! your Noble hearts dare leap into Flame! Caesar spoke like Caesar, when
he bid the Mariners fear nothing in a Storm, for they carried Him and his
Fortunes. Calamities astonish only Men of ordinary Spirits; he must be ignorant
of the condition of Human Life, who fears or flies the miseries that attend it.

When a Man has once gotten a habit of Virtue, all his Actions are equal; he is
constantly one and the same Man, and he does well not only upon counsel, but
out of custom too. Shall I tell you now in a word, The sum of Human Duty is
Patience where we are to suffer, and Prudence in the things we do. And shall
not a Man venture the crossing of an intemperate Lust, for the conquest of
himself? It is a great encouragement to well-doing, that when we are once in
the possession of Virtue, it is our own for ever.

It Is a f^ight that shrinks the Soul into a corner, out of which it dares not
peep to look for help; but he that prepares for a mischief, meets nothing new
to amaze him. To avoid occasions, and to be above Accidents, is one of the
greatest masteries of Man.

In a danger, I do not, nor never did, so much consider how I shall escape it,
as of how little importance it is whether I escape it or no. Should I be left
dead upon the place, what matter? Not being able to govern Events, I endeavor
to govern myself, (as knowing a Man never taken in Passion is a Mark of the
sublimest reach of Wit, seeing thereby he puts himself above all vulgar
Impressions. It is the greatest of Dominions to rule ones self and Passions.
This is indeed the Triumph of Free Will! Few Passions break my sleep; but of
Deliberations, the least will do it. I love misfortunes that are purely so,
that do not torment and teaze me with the incertainty of their growing better.
Seneca Agamemnon.
Dubia plus torquent mala:
Doubtful Ills do plague us worst.


The fear of a Fall astonishes me more than the very Fall itself. Ill-luck
(quoth the Frenchman) is good for something. French Proverb. Were I as deep in
the Book of Fame as Caesar, I would not care if I were stabbed to morrow; for
then I hope I should be at the end of my toil, and only have the pleasure to
look down from some Star of the first magnitude (for such are the Celestial
Palaces of honest Pilgrims) and see with delight the Trophies and Statues every
where set up in memory of my Herick Actions, from the Picture shining with
Izinglass and Golden Leather to the Marble Effigies and Pyramid of Brass.

I was therefore now resolved (being on the Road) to Hope the best, and to
out-brave all fears of my Father's displeasure. It Is true, there were in my way
no shady Woods for Nightingales to ^ull me into soft slumbers, no murmuring
Rills to which I might make my sorrowful Complaints, no kind Hermits to invite
me to their Cells; all my comfort was in HOPE, and the Compassion of my
Guardian-Angel.

(When Alexander Rambled through Asia, he gave large Donatives to his Captains,
insomuch as Parmenio asked him, Sir, what do you keep for your self? He
answered [HOPE]:) So on I rambled like a very Alexander, and by that time I had
trudged it as far as Action, I began to examine my little Fob, to see what
Pennies I had to carry me home.

(And Reader, you must know in those Juvenile days --

Good Coin was unto me a precious thing,
Because it bore the Picture of my King.)
And indeed, when all is done, there is no Friend like the Penny.

But my Gold (that Female Charm) which in days of yore was wont to be as sweet
a Cordial to my Purse, as Drams to my Stomach, having Wings, was gone; the
knowledge of which was as welcome to my rambling Thoughts, as the unexpected
sound of a Passing Bell usually is to the scraping Usurer (who like a Dog in a
Wheel toyls to roast Meat for others eating) when it tolls him away from his
Bags to his Grave. But now calling to mind, that Fortune was never more kind
than when she had emptied my Pockets, I briskt up my Spirits with that golden
Verse out of Horace -- Cantabit vacuus coram latrone Via^or. And on I went
still with a merry heart ( a Dish brave enough to feast a Prince!) but before I
got to Vxbridge (which was the next Town in my way home) I found my Guts in an
uproar, and a Civil War commenct between my Mouth and my Somach; but now having
no Money left, I knew not how to salve up the difference, neither would my
Stomach hearken to any thing but a Bill of Fare in its grumbling manner of
speaking. But though my Hunger was of a Folio size, yet I knew not where to have
a Dinner in Decimo-sexto, and therefore was constrained now --

To feast my lean Corpse with swallowing empty Fare,
And for heart-chearing Food, devour the Air.
It seems my Tutress Fortune had a mind to keep me fasting, on purpose to put
me upon Trials of Skill.

Reader, you know, an empty Belly makes a witful Brain. She knew Necessity, and
the the lowliness of my Pocket, would soon constrain me to summon my Wits to a
Consultation for Replenishment. Every Fool can put the Sweat of his Tenants in
his Pocket: He Is the darling of Fortune, that carries his Estate in his Brains;
She never forsakes the bold and daring!

With these thoughts I hushed my whimpering Stomach into a-kind-of-Truce. But
mark the sequel, before I could ramble as far as Chalfont (which was the next
Village in my way) my Belly, which had no Venture non habet Aures, says learned
Nimshag, an ancient Vtopian Philosopher, in his Treatise of the Antiquity of
Ginger^read, lib. 7. page 300000000.
Ears, rung Noon again; and my Appetite ( the most infallible sort of Clock)
chym'd out, Dinner, Dinner, Dinner, at least a dozen times.

So that now I was forced to screw up Invention a Note above Ela, to find out
some speedy relief, for I could no longer suppress the Insurrection of my
twelve little Guts, or quiet the murmurings of the grand Rebel Colon, who was
now every minute confuting the Philosophical Maxim of non datu^ vacuum.

But give a Man Luck, and cast him into the Sea; and rather than he shall sink,
the In spite of Goodman Lilly, who says, That Mars in the 8th. House with the
Head of the Dragon, betokens that the Child then born shall be drowned, and not
dye of a Roap.
Gallows will bail him out. For much further now I had not Rambled --

Before instead of cutthroat slaughtering Shambles,
Each Hedge allowed me Berries from the Brambles.
The Bullis, Hazle-Nut-Tree, Hopps and Slowes,
Attend my Stomach wheresoever it goes:
And for good Sauce I seldom were at charges,
For every Crab-tree did afford me Verjuice.
My Banquet sometimes was green Beans and Peason,
Nuts, Pears, Plumbs, Apples, which were now in season.
My Music waits on me in every Bush,
Which was my Brother Cuckoo and the Thrush:
The mounting Lark sang in the lofty Sky,
And Robbin-Read-breast made me melody.
Moreover to accomplish my content,
Here were all things to please my Eye and Scent:
The Earth embroidered with the various hew
Of green, red, yellow, purple, spangling blew,
Carnation, crimson, damask, spotless white,
And every color that might please the sight.
My Drink I now did not go far to look,
Each Spring's my Tap, my Barrel is each Brook,
Where I did quaff, and to it agin by fits,
Yet never stood in fear to hurt my Wits:
For why? 'twas Ale of Grandam Natures brewing,
And very seldom sets her Guests a spewing.
To all which I was kindly welcome still,
Good Entertainment, though the Cheer was ill.
Long I had not been thus Epicurizing on Nature's Cheer and Bounty, before I
observed at some little distance, a plain Country-Fellow, in a gray homespun
Coat; his Girdle near as big as a Horse-Collar about his Wast; his Doublet
seemed to be but one great patch in Quarto, and his Hat exactly of the fashion
of The place of Evander's Nativity.
Graffhamsteeple, sitting under a large Beech-tree listening to the pretty
Music which the Birds made in the neighboring Plains, ( who seemed as merry
in the Woods as Lovers at a Iunket) and sometimes whistling himself to bear
them company in their melodies. A long time methoughts I saw him thus sweetly
entertain himself, and at last he pulled out of his Breeches (or
Leathern-Cupboard) a piece of Bread and Cheese, which with Eyes lifted up to
Heaven he seemed to acknowledge a liberal Dinner. I was much taken with the
innocence of his Looks, and the rich contentment which I thought I read in his
Face; which bred a great desire in me to know him better, and see something
more of a Virtue hid under Rags; and so approaching nearer to him, I asked him
how he came to lead so merry a life, when to outward appearance he looked like
a Man in great distress.

Alas Sir, said he, as Fortune is not my Landlady, so I fear not her
displeasure; and having Contentment (that Heaven of the other World and this)
though I have nothing but a Crust to live on, I can feast upon it. He is the
happy Man that can calmly wish and want, and so can I: I can sing, My mind to
me a Kingdom is! I was never yet dejected under the most biting frowns of
Poverty, except it was in my sleep, which has been often broke with laughing!
The Plow and Dairy are the very mound of my Meditation; I expostulate with my
Oxen very Understandingly, and speak Gee and Who better than English: my Mind
is not much distracted with Objects, but if a good Cow come in my way, I stand
dumb and astonished, and though my haste be never so great, will fix here half
an hour's contemplation: my Habitation is a poor thatch't Roof, distinguished
from my Barn by the loopholes that let out the Smoke, which the Rain had long
since washed thorough but for the double Cieling of Bacon on the inside, which
has hung there from my Grandsire's time, and is yet to make Rashers for
Posterity: My Religion is part of my Copyhold which I take from my Landlord,
and refer it wholly to his Discretion: My Compliment with my Neighbor is
usually a good thump on the Back, and my Salvation commonly some blunt Curse.
As to my Feet, they never stink so unbecommingly as when I trot after a Lawyer
in Westminster Hall, and even cleave the ground with hard scraping, in
beseeching of his Worship to take his Money.

But should both Indies spread their Laps to me!
And court my Eyes to wish their Treasury,
My better Will they neither could entice,
Nor this with Gold, nor that with all her Spice:
For what poor things had these Possessions shown,
When all were mine, but I were not mine own?
Others in pompous Wealth their thoughts may please,
And I am rich in wishing none of these:
For Youth, which happiness would you beg first,
Still to have Drink, or never to have Thirst?
No Servants on my beck attendant stand,
Yet are my Passions all at my command;
Reason within me shall sole Ruler be,
And every Sense shall wear her Livery:
Lord of my self in Chief; when they that have
More Wealth, make that their Lord which is my Slave*
Yet I as well as they with more content,
Have in my self a Houshold-Government;
My Intellectual Soul has there possessed
The Steward's Place, to govern all the rest.
When I go forth, my Eyes two Ushers are,
And dutifully walk before me bare:
My Legs run Footman by me, go or stand;
My ready Arms wait close on either hand:
My Lips are Porters to the dangerous door,
And either Ear a trusty Auditor:
And when abroad I go, Fancy shall be
My skilful Coachman, and shall hurry me
Through Heaven and Earth, and Neptune's watery Plain,
And in a moment drive me back again:
The Charge of all my Cellar, Thirst, is thine;
Thou Butler art, and Yeoman of my Wine:
Stomach the Cook, whose Dishes best delight,
Because their only Sauce is Appetite:
My other Cook Disgestion; where to me
Teeth Carve, and Palate will the Taster be;
And the two Eyelids when I go to sleep,
Like careful Grooms my silent Chamber keep;
Where lest a Cold oppress my vital part,
A gentle fire is kindled by the Heart;
And lest too great a heat procure my pain,
The Lungs fan Wind to cool those parts again.
Within the inner Closet of my Brain
Attend the nobler Members of my Train;
Invention, Master of my Mint, grows there,
And Memory, my faithful Treasurer.
And though in others it is a treacherous part,
My Tongue is SECRETARY to my Heart:
And then the PAGES of my Soul and Sense,
Love, Anger, Pleasure, Grief, Concupiscence,
And all Affections else are taught to obey
Like Subjects, not like Favorites, to sway:
This is my MANNOR-HOUSE; Then Lad you see,
I live Great-Master of a Family.
My Wishes are but few, all easy to fulfill,
I make the Limits of my Power the Bounds unto my Will.
But should I leave or mind my It seems he was a Shepherd by Profession.
Crook no more,
I might perchance get RICHES and be POOR.
Oh Humane Blindness! had you Eyes to see,
There is no Wealth to scorned Poverty!
Prithee observe (adds he) yonder Birds (in the Meadows through which we are
passing) how merry, pleasant and jovial they be, who neither sow nor reap, nor
have any Barns wherein to lay up their Food; and I think my self at least as
rich and happy as those silly Creatures. The whole Creation is be spangled with
the Blessings of God, which is as free for my use as theirs, and at present my
Wants are all supplied, and I have no reason to doubt but they will be so for
the time to come.

Oh then Contentment! the Minds that travel to thy Indies, how rich they be?
For they always return laden with that True Philosophers-stone, that turns the
most rugged circumstance of Life into Gold.

It Is Contentment alone that can Alchimy the allay or Misfortunes of Life, and
by a certain Celestial Superfoetation, turn all the Brass of this World into
Gold.

He having ended his charming Talk (with which I could have feasted my Ears
till the declining Sun had once more rounded the World) we traveled on a-pace,
till at last we came to a stately Mountain, beautified with lovely Prospects,
on whose towering brow --

He showed me more than e're I saw o'th'Cliff
Of Lofty, and of Heaven-daring Tenariff.
But Sol his speedy Journey would not stay,
And posting Time did call me thence away.
So on we rambled further, till we came to a Little Town Little Missenden.
, at the furthermost end of which, upon the Common, stood his Dwelling House
(or Dunghill rather) modeled into the shape of a Cottage; which Reader, to
draw thy Lips to the height of a smile (by the help of Wallograph. p 17.
Wallography and my own Invention) I Will here describe.

A poor old ruinous Fabric it was, the Windows whereof were vanished. Its
outward surface was so all-to-be-negro'd with such swarthy plaster, that it
appeared not unlike a great blot of Cow-turd: This Structure stradled over
about eight Else of ground, above the surface whereof the Eves were advanced
about two Yards, and the Chimney peeped out about a Foot above the Eves; the
light flowed in through the old circumference of a bottomless Peck; which being
stuck in the Thatch, supplied the place of an Orbicular Casement. The Door-way
was a breach in the Wall toward one end; which being of a dwarfish size, i. e.
two Foot lower in stature than an ordinary Man, we were forced to abridge our
Dimensions, and to creep in. The Parlour, Hall, Kitchen, i. e. one Room within
was prettily adorned with the Poetry of Ballads; a cripled Pipkin with a
broaken shin, near allied to a Dish of the same matter; a vocal Spoon with a
Whistle at the end; and a Tipsie Cradle reeling in the corner, (methoughts)
were a pretty sort of Goods, and not unhandsom Furniture. A whole Litter of
Children was strewn upon the Floor; only one Mop-headed Boy was Tripos'd on a
Cricket, and blew the Fire. The carved Mantle-tree seemed to be defended by a
little wooden Fellow furiously strutting in an Oaken Cloak; and I perceived the
Window was endors'd with the Picture of a Fly. I observed that the bulky
Cupboard was a Nuisance to the whole Family of Household Stuff, which it had
mightily disobliged by intrenching on their Liberties, they grutching it so
much room; and indeed the Table, Bed, and other Utensils, have not suffered a
little detriment by its injurious Contiguity.

He having treated my Eyes with his Domestic Bravery, he pulls out of his The
Lapper of his Shirt.
Flaxen-Pantry the Reversions of that Which he called his Afternoon's-Luncheon.
Bread and Cheese which he was nibling when I first saw him, and with words of
a Crown a dozen, cries,

Come, merry be thy Heart, dear Lad!
Fellow-Traveller, eat and spare not!
My Pockets lying speechless, I looked for small Entreaty, but most laboriously
with my Teeth I wrought as if I had designed to have ballasted my Guts for an
East India Voyage.

Thus did I feast on Scraps, (the poor Man's Cheer)
And paying nothing, I found nothing dear;
But 'twas because my Purse was Fortune trod,
That he referred the payment unto God.
But now the day growing old, I thought it would not be long e're silent Night
would put him to Bed; so up I started, and after three or four Scrapes, and
twice bussing the Hand, we parted.

By that time I had Rambled a Mile further, who should I overtake but my
Fellow-Traveller's Shee-Clog, or the good Huswife of this little Tenement (that
I had left behind me) with her Tippet bristling, her Mouth mumping, and her
Hands knitting; she had a cade Lamb at her rere attending upon her, and a
Kitten in the van, conducting her home.

Upon my first glympse of this Country Dame, I saw so much gaiety and pleasure
rendevonz'd in her Looks, I could not forbear asking the reason thereof. To
which she replied (interlining each word with a Smile)

My Husband's Mind and mine are one so fixed,
That Argus Eyes can see no odds betwixt;
And all our Strife (if ever Strife was meant)
Is who of the two shall live the most content.
It Is this (adds she) is the cause of my mirth and jollity. It Is true
(continued she) when I eye the Nobles of the Earth in their Royalty and dazzling
Glory, when I think of Nero in his Rambles to Rome with his thousand Silver
Chariots, and his Mules all shod with Gold: When I hear (as I do sometimes) by
the honest Lungunners of those gaudy Sparks that glitter in the Courts of
Kings: When I see the sedulous Merchant crossing the Seas to the remotest --
Extremos currit mercator an Indos.
Indies; or look on the wealthy Usurer (who as the Devil sits laughing in his
Conscience) measures his Time by the counting of his Bags: I fall down on my
knees, and cry,

Blessed Lord! What a poor Atom am I, if compared with these Glorious Piles of
State!

But then again, when I sit down and consider that --

Safe from all Weathers I contented dwell
In my poor House, (though it is a homely Cell)
And that without a Sigh or golden Wish
I can look on my Beechen Bowl and Dish:
Methinks then in my heart such Riches be,
That Persian Kings aere Slaves compared with me.
And prithee Boy, tell me, Did not beggarly Crates show a braver Spirit when he
danced and laughed in his Threadbare Coat, and his Wallet at his back, which
was all his Wealth, than Alexander when he wept because there were no more
Worlds to conquer?

He contemned what this other did cry for!

What was great Caesar also but the same,
A crack-brain'd Huff that set the World in flame:
Who Lord of the whole Globe, yet not content,
Lacked Elbow-room, and seemed too closely pent;
What madness was it, that born to a fair Throne,
Where he might Rule with Justice and Renown,
Like a wild Robber he should choose to roam
A pitied Wretch with neither house nor home!
No Man can be Poor, that has enough; nor Rich, that covets more than he has.

Content is all we aim at with our Store,
And having that with Little, what needs more?
Alexander, after all his Conquests, complained that he wanted more Worlds: He
desired something more even when he had gotten all.

Whether is it better to have much, or enrugh? He that has much, desires more,
which shows that he has not yet enough; but he that has enough, is at rest. The
richest Man that ever lived is poor in my opinion, but he that keeps himself to
the stint of Nature, nor does neither feel Poverty nor fear it. Nay, even in
Poverty it self there are some things superfluous: Those which the World calls
Happy, that felicity is a small splendour that dazles the Eyes of the Vulgar,
but our rich Man is glorious and happy. Within there is no Ambition in Hunger or
Thirst. Let there be Food, and no matter for the Table, the Dish, and the
Servants. It Is not for us to say, this is not handsome, that is common, the other
offends my Eye. Nature provides for health, not delicacy. When the Trumpet
sounds a Charge, the poor Man knows that he is not aimed at; when they cry out,
Fire, Fire, his Body is all he has to look after: If he be to take a Journey,
there is no blocking up of Streets, and thronging of Passages for a parting
Complement. No Man finds Poverty a trouble to him, but he that thinks it so;
and he that thinks it so, makes it so. He that is not content in Poverty, would
not be so neither in Plenty; for the fault is not in the Thing, but the Mind;
if that be sickly, remove him from a Kennel to a Palace, he is at the same pass.
If there were nothing else in Poverty but the certain knowledge of our Friends,
it were yet a most desirable Blessing when every Man leaves us but those that
love us.

In a word, Let the Mind be great and glorious, and all other things are
despicable in comparison; the future is uncertain, and I had rather beg of my
self not to desire any thing, than of Fortune to bestow it.

As soon as she had ended her pretty Chat, she drops me two or three Curtsies
(as low as the ground) as a Token of Farewell; which I soon repaid with as
many Bows as I thought so virtuous a Mind had a right in any Habit to exact.

And on I rambled again (admiring still at these loving Tur^^s whenever they
came in my thoughts) in hopes that some B^rn or Enchanted Castle would present
it self to my sight. -- And here, kind Reader, stand and admire at the
Good-luck of a Pennyless Rambler: For behold! no sooner had the Sun ^^llaby'd
the Day, but I espied, about a Mile off, a happy Prospect of glimmering Thatch;
which the nearer I approacht, the more visibly it appeared in the shape of a
House.

It was called by way of Irony, a Castle, whose Governor was a decayed Tailor.

This Cross-legg'd Knight was (as I afterward heard) ^mble of Foot, though a
Dwarf in bulk, so that Nine such might well Club to the Elementing of a MAN.

When I came up to his House, peeping in at the Windows, I beheld a whole
Company of Spanish Pike-men, alias Pedicula^^n Limb-dressers, sitting in rank
and file upon a long Table exercising their Small-Arms, to the endangering of
the life of many a ^ix-footed Animal.

Then turning my Eyes toward the Cupboard (where methoughts I could with a
million of thanks have squeezed in my ^aded Corpse for a nap or two) I beheld
the Master and Mistress of these Shreds of Humanity with a whole Every Man to
his Trade.
Library of their little selves (printed in several Volumes) tripping up a
Ladder to the Appartments of their several Cabbins.

Seeing such a brood of Cormorants at my first look, I thought it would be to
no purpose to beg for a Lodging here; I therefore now purely entrusted my
Condition to the Protection of Heaven, --

And stayed not here, although mp Toes were sore,
But made a shi^t to Ramble two Miles more
To Wendover; a Hedge does there enclose
Grounds on the right hand, there I did repose;
There with my Mother-Earth I thought it fit
To lodge, and yet no Incest did commit;
My Bed was sweetened with good wholesome Airs,
And being weary, I went up no Stairs;
Heaven was the Roof that canopy'd my Head,
The Clouds my Curtai^, and the Earth my Bed;
The Moon my Torch, the Stars my Candlelight,
The Grass the Cap that bound my Head this night.
T^us in great Pomp I laid me down to sleep,
Whilst that the Owls my Lifeguard were, to keep
My drousie Ears from CRIES of bleating Sheep.
Here my Bedfellows and Companions were
My Staff, one Coat, a Bull, four Cows, two Steer;
But yet for all this most confused Rout,
We had no Bed-sticks, yet we fell not out.
"Thus NATVRE, lik an Aucient Free Upholster,
"Did furnish me with Bedstead, Bed and Bolster;
"And the wide Skies, for which high Heaven be thanked,
"Allowed me a large Covering and BLANKET.
"The Lark also, when it was time for waking,
"Did sing me up, and all my ready making
"Was gaping, stretching, and a little shaking:
"And finding my Host this Night both free and kind,
"I like a True-Man left my Sheets behind:
But now my Muse her self craves some repose,
And while she sleeps, I Will spout a little Prose.
No sooner had Day's wakeful Porter stepped over the Eastern Threshold, to bring
the welcome News of approaching Day, but up I started from my Grassy-Bed, and
after a shrug or two away I rambled again toward my Father's House; and by
that time I got as far as A Town two Miles on this side my Father's House.
Halton, my last Night's Supper, which was as much as nothing, began to rise in
my Thoughts; upon which I began a second time to address my self to the
Brambles for relief to my barking Stomach.

And having treated my Guts with a plentiful Breakfast of Hips and Haws, on I
went, contemplating the Summer's pride, and the Earth's bravery, and from them
both concluded the great felicity of a Country-life, as if the one would never
fade, and the other always endure, resolving in my thoughts never to see London
again, being ravished with the delights of the verdant Fields, and enamored on
the beauties of the Spring, accounting none truly happy, but he who enjoyed the
felicities of a Country life: Is he addicted to study, Heaven is the Library,
the Sun, Moon and Stars his Books to teach him Astronomy, that great Volume his
Ephemerides, out of which he may calculate Predictions of times to follow; yea
in the very Clouds are written Lessons of Divinity for him, to instruct him in
wisdom; the turning over their leaves teach him the variation of Seasons, and
how to dispose his business for all Weathers. Who therefore would not consume
his youth in such delightful studies, that have power in them to keep off old
age longer than it would? or when old age does come, is able to give it the
livelihood and vigor of youth? Who would no^ rather sit at the foot of a hill,
tending a ^lock of Sheep, than at the helm of Authority, controlling the
stubborn and unruly Multitude? Better it is in the solitary Woods, and the wild
Fields, to be a Man among Beasts, than in the midst of a peopled City to be be
a Beast among Men.

As I was thus stricken into admiration of these beauties, and wholly taken up
in a contemplation of the felicities of a retired life, being already in my
thoughts an absolute ^ountry Man, I being now some miles distant from London,
the Metropolitan City of our fruitful Albion, on a sudden the Welkin began to
roar, and send forth terrible peals of thunder, the serene Sky was
over-shadowed, and Phoe^us hid his head behind a Cloud, the Heavens began first
to weep small tears, afterward to pour them in full Rivulets upon the thirsty
Earth; I had then no Pent-house to walk under to keep me from the Rain, nor was
there a red Lattice at every nook and corner (as at London) to give me
entertainment; the sp^eading Boughs of the sturdy Oak were too feeble to defend
me from being wet; I looked like a drencht Mous^, having never a dry thread on
me; what to do I knew not, Money I ^^d none, Friends none, a Stranger both to
the Place and People, unexperienced in the World, as in the way where I
traveled; the consideration of those things made me add more moisture to the
earth by the salt ^ears that trickled from my eyes, to stand still I thought
was in vain.

So forwards I went, wet without, and dry within, (sorrow they say causes
drouth) at length I spied by the corner of a Wood a little thatcht Cottage;
thither I went, and found by an old rotten Stick that darted out of it in
imitation of a Sign-post, that it was an Alehouse; this something revived my
drooping Spirits, so in I went, to dry my outside and wet my inside; where I
found a good fire, and sto^e of company of both Sexes merrily trouling the Bowl
about, singing of Catches, and smoking Tobacco; no sooner was I en^red, but
one of them drank to me a full cup; so down I sat amongst them, being all alike
free Citizens of the wide World, the Strong Ale soon washed away all sorrow from
my heart, and now that I had a warm fire to sit by, and a house over my head, I
bid a ^ig for all foul weather.

The great store of Rain that now fell, made the Highways like Hafty-Pudding,
by which means though I rid in Shoes and Stockings, (for being now tired, I
hired me a little Palfry) yet I was sufficiently be-booted with dirt. I rid
over the Common melancholy alone, but coming to Chesham Thicket, there was
company enough, such as I liked not by any means; and now Gramercy Horse, for
had not he looked as scurvily as I rid bootlesly scandalous, I had undoubtedly
been robbed; for I had no other Arms about me than those of the Primitive
Christians, Tears and Prayers; but say I had, to what purpose had it bin,
seeing I made it a Case of Conscience to kill a Man, though it were in my own
defense* It Is true, I seem furnished sometimes with two defensive Weapons, an
old rusty Sword, and a liberal Hand; not to strike, but to give away my Purse;
which is my politic device to preveut robbing. But now if I had Valor in me,
I was afraid to show it: Besides, it dwelt at least a furlong from my face;
for the cowardly form of that could not but encourage an Enemy. Never was poor
Horse and beastly Man so surveyed before, by Devils I think, for their Faces by
their Vizard (...) seemed every whit as black.

Escaping that danger, I got the fourth days journey to Wendover, alighting, I
fell all along, for I had kicked away my Legs in riding thither. Never did I
find the difference till now of riding on a Yard-arm and on the sharp ridg'd
back of a surfeited Jade; I had not so much skin left upon my breech as would
make a white Patch for an Ethiopian Lady of Pleasure. Here I lay three days to
recover the damage my Posteriors had sustained by riding my wooden Horse. In
which time I observed but little remarkable, but a Tapster's playing with a
Fellow of the Town for Money in a little by Alehouse, where was sold
incomperable Ale, which I found out by the information of a Cobbler, the
reflection of whose face would have afforded light enough to an Alehouse at
midnight.

This Cobbler having been drinking till his Brains were shipwrackt in a deluge
of Canary, yet unable with all that Liquor ^o quench his Nose, which appeared
so flaming, that when he was smoking, it could not be discerned by the most
critical Eye, at which end his Pipe burned with the more red-hot fire;
staggering toward his Lodging about the Suburbs of the Morning, without any
other light than was reflected from his S^ellified Countenance, chanced to
encounter a certain Hydrogogical Engine, by the Students in the Mathematics
called a Pump, which he taking for some cross-grained Fellow, that would not
give the way, made so furiously at it, that with the terrible shock himself was
beat backwards, and fell down just under the Spout, which a Maid having made
use of just before for water to wash her house, it still continued to drisle
softly; whereupon the sprawling Gentleman being much more enraged, (^or you
know no Injuries are so picquantly resi^ted by generous Spirits as those that
come attended with contempt,) cries out, You Dog! cannot you be content to bea^
and abuse me, but you must piss upon me too, and thereupon draws his Knife, and
like a dying Hero, from the ground made several passes at his Adversary, till
the Watch going their Rounds interrupted the ridic^lous Combat; but perceiving
the Gentleman Cobbler had got a considerable Wound in his Skull, took care for
his safe conveyance to his Lodging, left the excess of his Prowess might engage
him in more such perilous Adventures.

Leaving this Town, I found that I had more Money going out of it, than I
brought into it, and so I merrily rode on ^o Weston. Here my jaded Beast gave
up the Ghost, it was time for us to part, for we were both weary of one the
other. The Moneys that I had here borrowed was just enough to procure me the
sight of another, but exceeding different from the former; as the one was
exceeding dull and heavy, this was all air and fiery. However, that I might not
be laughed at, I adventured to cross his back; but I was scarce settled in the
Saddle, when this understanding Beast knowing by my sitting him, that he had a
foolish and unskilful Governor to deal withal, grew headstrong, flew away with
me like Lightning; for my part I thought I had got the Devil between my legs,
and that I was riding Post upon some bellish Design. I knew quickly whom I had
to deal withal, a thing that would have his will, and therefore thought it a
piece of imprude^ce to curb his extravagant running, knowing well that that
pace would not last always.

I gave him his head, let him go which way, and as fast as he pleased; in truth
he was (...) acquainted with the Road than his Master, and would not be
persuaded out on it by any such ignorant Hawl-bowling as my self.

That night my Horse and I (for I must give his Horseship the pre-eminence)
came to Resbrow (seven miles distant from my Journeys end) entering the Town, he
went directly to his Inn, and was known to the Hostler, calling him by some
familiar term, I know not what now, and asked me whether the Horse was mine? I
replied that he was so, and why should not I own him, since he entitled me by
running away with m^, not I with him; and since by an unexpected chance I had a
benefit thrown into my hands, I was resolved to make use of it; and so I did,
for the next day, very early, I rode away with him for Tonsa (where my Father
lived:) his heat and fury by this time were pretty well qualified, and I could
ride him then my own pace, whereas before I would willingly have condescended
to have had a Leg or an arm brok^, to have secured the Bone of my Neck. And
certainly I shall never forget with what a complemental fear I embraced my
Horse's Neck, committing the protection of all my Limbs to several Supporters,
but my Legs wholly to my Stirrups.

I went on now in my Progress, as the day before: Then began a shower of Tears
to fall from my Eyes, considering how I had left my Master, lamenting my Loss,
and fearing what fatal courses I might take. It was no less trouble to me to
think that I had nothing still but Hazel and Brambles to address my self to,
for the appeasing of an hungry Stomach.

Now methoughts I began to loath my aforementioned Manna, Blackberries, Nuts,
Crabs, Bullice, etc. and longed to taste of the Fleshpots again; but not a bit
could I yet get but what the Hedges afforded me.

All day I thus wandered about, not daring to come near any Town, having had
such bad success hitherto.

And now Night came on again, which put me in mind of procuring a Lodging
somewhat warmer than the last.

A Barn presently offered it self to my ^ight, which I acco^ted, and without
delay or fear entered into the Enchanted Castle, where I found Accommodations
for the most faithful and valiant Spa^k that ever strode Saddle for Lady's sake.

Here might I take my choice of variety of fresh Straw, but my weariness would
not permit me to complement my good fortune one jot, and so I tumbled over head
and ears.

By that time the Morning was two hours old, I was again on another Ramble,
traveling now with a speed that showed I rather used Wings than Legs!

All things in Nature, the nearer they come to the Center, the quicker they are
in their Motion; so much as a Hackney-Iade (whose Ribs would be dear at
Threepence a side) if he have any dormant mettle left, when he comes near to
his home, he will both prick up his ears, and mend his pace.

And now Heavens keep me moderate, lest, excess of Joy should ^ak^ my Virtue
less!

Reader, you are now to suppose me within sight of my Father's House: which as
soon as e're I saw, Oh how did my Blood frisk and caper in every Vein! Oh the
Oceans of Delight that now flowed within me! I seemed even ruined with
Transport, and undone with Pleasure! my Breast was too narrow to contain my
Ioys!

And doubtless the weary Seaman, who after a tedious Voyage descries the Land
at last --

(For whose glad sight he gets the Hatches under,
And to the Ocean tells his Ioys in thunder.)
never eyed the first glimpse of shore (on the top of his trembling Mast) with
half that pleasure I enjoyed upon a fresh sight of my former home.

Being come into the Tonsa.
Town where my Father lived, how nimbly did I pass the streets, while yet my
Affections lacquey before me! as being eager to hear what kind of Comment he
would make upon this new Adventure.

Delays in great Expectations are killing! It Is perfect Hell that puts off for
ever.

And now that I might out-brave all fears of a kind Reception, as I rambled
through the Garden leading to his House, thus I argued with my self:

Why should I so much as dream of my Father's anger, when I know he is subject
and obnoxious to no body; Who shall blame him if he receive me kindly, or set
limits to his Mercy? Nay, who can tell the measure of a Father's Bowels.
FATHER! the very word has a tenderness in it, and is full of all Pity and Love.
-- It may be there is irresistible Eloquence in the word Peccavi, and the
Spectacle but of one extravagant Action surely will have Rhetoric enough in it
to carry a Cause where a Father is Judge! But admit he be so much provoked by
my Childish Humors, in leaving so good a Master, that it should extinguish in
him the peculiar Affections of a Father, yet surely it can never destroy the
common Passions of Humanity, Mercy and Pity! in which he ever delighted. But
say he should prove inexorable, it is because he loves me: And surely that is an
obliging Quarrel, whose only End is Friendship!

These discoursive Thoughts were no sooner vani^ht, but my next step brought me
to my Father's door; where being arrived (resolving now to have an end of my
Fears or my Hopes, for delay is a cruel wrack, and kills by peace-meals,) I
knocked with a courage, that loudly declared there was one at the door that was
not afraid of being heard.

My Father by a wonderful accident hearing the noise, sends no less Person than
himself to see who was in such monstrous haste; and opening the door (his Heart
not believing what his Eyes saw) he startles back like one amazed! And surely
had I been a Messenger from the Man in the Moon (or, which is more frightful,
the pale Ghost of some merciless Usurer) he could not have been more surprised.

But at length, after viewing and circumviewing my Face, as if he had designed
to have drawn my Picture, or to have surveyed something through me, to this
purpose he expressed himself.

Father. Bless me! Son John, is it you or your Ghost?


Son. Sir, possibly 'twould be more to your satisfaction if I were a thing of
Air, but I am a substantial Mortal, even your very Son Kainophilus.


Father. Why how now, Son John, what have you served your Seven Years already?

To these words of my Father's (after I had put Finger in Eye) I returned the
following Answer.


Son. Truly Sir I cannot deny but that the thoughts of being an Apprentice in
the City of London, whilst I gazed on it at a distance with the Eyes of
Expectation and Desire, had something gay and lovely in it! But now having made
a trial, ( Yes, adds my Father, and a short one too,) its former luster
vanishes, and I see it a quite different thing from what it was represented to
me. But Sir, if my returning home has occasioned your anger against me, I
humbly beg Pardon from Heaven, and Forgiveness from you. Be pleased therefore
to mitigate my offense, by revolving in your mind the fewness of my years,
which makes me (as it does many others) prone to Rambling Fancies. And for once
(I entreat you Sir) look on this youthful, and my first Elapse, but as a thing
which maturity of years may rectify; and if you can forgive my Follies, I will
study to forget them, and daily endeavor by a dutiful Carriage to declare to
the World how much I will be your obedient Son, Kalnophilus.


To which he replied, Son John, you say well, b^t alas! what is become of your
lost hours? have they made you any promise of returning again when you have
need of them? or can you show me which way they went? No, alas my Child! they
are gone without recovery, and in their flight methinks Time seems to turn his
head and laugh over his shoulder in derision of you that made no better use of
him when you had him, than to leave so good a Master, of whose good nature and
worth I was so well assured by my London Friends.

My Father had no sooner read me a Lecture upon this extempore Frollick (and
refolved upon sending me back to my Master) but he calls for Pen, Ink and
Paper, and bids me write down his Dying Counsel, which he gave me in the
following words.

An Exact Copy of my Father's Dying Counsel which he gave me December. 25. 1675.
at the Parsonage-house in Tonsa.
Concerning your Soul.
1. AS you have been a Son of many Prayers and Tears, ^eing a long time
earneftly begged of God, and against all human Hope being brought forth into
the World by God's special Hand of Providence, and being wonderfully restored
to life again after some hours seeming death, which immediately ensued after
your birth; and being likewise as signally delivered from the nearest hazard
and likelihood of death, when you had the Smallpox; I do therefor exhort and
ch^rge you, in the presence of the All-seeing God, and as you will answer it
before Jesus Christ, the Judge of the Quick and Dead, that you make it your
primary and principal care and endeavor to know, fear, love, obey and serve
God, your Creator and Deliverer, as he has revealed himself through his Son by
his Spirit, in his Holy Word.

2. I do likewise counsel you to read Gods Holy Word, both in the Latin and
English Bible, as often as you have opportunity: And I also counsel you to read
over Wollebius's Compendium of Theology, in Latin and English, till you well
understand both, at such seasons as you may most conveniently do it.

3. I do likewise counsel you, constantly every Morning and Evening to pray
unto God for his Direction, Protection and Benediction in all that you do, and
that with an audible Voice when you may conveniently do it; or at least
mentally, expressing all possible reverence, affection, joy and thankfulness to
God through Christ therein.

4. I counsel you likewise manfully to resist all Extremes, sinful sadness and
despondency of Spirit, and to exercise Faith, Cheerfulness and Delight in the
remembrance of all God's Mercies and Deliverances.

5. I do likewise counsel you, carefully to shun all evil Company, with all
temptations to, or occasions of evil.

6. I do likewise counsel you to be dutiful to your Mother, loving to your
Brothers and Sisters, obedient to your Master, diligently and faithfully to
serve the Lord in all relations and conditions as he requires.

Concerning your Body.
1. I counsel you to use moderate Exercise and lawful Recreations for the
necessary health of your Body; being always moderate in your eating, drinking
and sleeping: Never spend too much time or cost in any Exercise or Recreation.

Concerning your Estate.
1. I do counsel you never to desert your Trade or Calling, which you have by
God's special Providence been called unto.

2. I do counsel you to serve out your full time with cheerfulness and delight,
endeavoring to acquaint your self with all the Mysteries and Improvements of
your Trade; and if you find not convincing Reasons to the contrary, to serve as
Iourneyman for one year (because I judge you may by that means gain more
Acquaintance and Interest, and a further insight into your Trade.)

3. I do counsel you not to Marry before you be twenty five years of age,
unless some remarkable Providence shall induce you thereunto.

4. I do likewise counsel you to use all possible prudence in your Choice of a
Wife; that she be truly Religious, and at least eminently Virtuous, that is
born of honest Parents, and who is of Age and Estate suitable unto your self.

5. I do likewise counsel you, not to sell any part of your Estate in Land, if
either your Wife's Portion, or your borrowing of Money upon Interest, may
convenintly serve to set up your Trade.

6. I do likewise counsel you to have a convenient Shop, in a convenient place,
at your own charge, (which will very much facilitate and make way for your
suitable and comfortable Marriage;) yet if you shall by some remarkable
Providence meet with a Wife of a considerable Estate, you may by her Portion
set up your Trade, without mortgaging of your Land.

7. Lastly, I likewise counsel you in all things, and in all times, so to
think, and speak, and act, as you may be willing to appear before God at Death
and Judgment.

Tonsa, December. 25. Ann. Dom. 1675.
No sooner had my Father ended his Dying Counsel, but my courteous Friends who
heard it with a wonderment equal to their ignorance, invite me to a Su^loin of
Beef, by the help of which and a little of the Decoction of Barley, I got
strength enough to ramble to bed; where being refresht with a twelve hours nap,
up I mounted, and repairing to my Father's Chamber (after begging his Blessing)
I presented him with a shower of T^^rs, and so we parted, but alas! alas! never
to see each other again till we meet in the other For this was the last time I
saw him alive.
World.

My Father, at this solemn parting, gave me several Letters (all written by my
own Mother Lydiah C -- r.
) wishing me to read them often, and keep 'em in memory of her to my dying day;
which that I may the better do, I Will here print 'em word for word, and are as
follows.

My own Mother's Letters (which she sent to her several Relations) given me by
my Father at our last parting.
Mrs. Lydiah C -- ^'s Letter to her Brother B -- n.
Loving Brother,
WHen you consider how Priscilla expounded the way of God perfectly unto
Apollos, I hope you will take in good part the sincere and cordial Wishes of a
weaker Vessel. Providence has set our Bodies at a great distance, yet how near
and dear you are unto my Soul the Lord knows, whose eternal Welfare I as
vehemently desire as mine own; and should be unspeakably glad, if (as we have
lain in one Mothers Belly and Bosom together) we might also lie down in the
same divine Embraces of infinite Love.

Brother, I know not whether I shall ever see your Face any more; not that I
speak in respect of present Sickness, but in regard of the uncertain brevity of
Life. Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? Oh that same Expression, And
where is he? has often put my Soul into a wondering frame; because the
Scripture ^aith, after Death comes Judgment.

Brother, I humbly and ingenuously confess that I am less than the least of all
those who look Heaven ward, yet that I am a bruised Reed, or as smoking Flax,
I cannot deny: But, O Brother! I would have you a tall Cedar in Religion, a
Pillar in the Church of God, a valiant Champion for the Truth, one that may
attain unto the full stature of a perfect Man in Christ:

Brother, believe me, I blush at these Scriblings of mine, yet how fain would I
write unto you, (seeing I cannot speak with you) that I might put you in mind
of Eternity, of Eternity, that little word of the greatest concernment. But
when this Thought first entered into my Heart, I bewailed, oh I bewailed my own
ignorance, unbelief, inconsideration, and want of zeal; and I thought you might
justly smile at my forwardness in exhorting you (who am so unable my self) and
might say, Who is this that darkneth Counsel with words without knowledge? Yet
because the Widdow's Mite was kindly accepted of by Christ, Brother, do you
vouchsafe a benign aspect upon this weak attempt, otherwise you will discourage
a young Writer quite. Indeed I want skill to write my words, and words to
express my Mind. What shall I say? O would to God the grave and gracious
Counsels of that Holy Man (now in Heaven) might always sound in both our ears.
Shall I wish he were alive again, that we might be blessed with his Fatherly
Admonitions and Instructions, concerning that one thing necessary? Or may nor
we be known to be the Spiritual Children of our Father Abraham, if we walk in
the steps of his Faith, though he knows us not, being dead? Alas, alas, I am
sure (I may speak it of my self) though one should (...) from the dead, it
would be nothing available, unless God did bring my unsensible and un^eachable
heart under the powerful convincements of his Word, which is a more sure word
of Prophecy than a ghostly Relation, unto which we are all bound to take good
heed.

Brother, search the Scriptures, for in them you shall find (...) life, and
they testify of Christ. I profess unto you I know nothing in all this World
worth the k^owing, but a ^rucified Christ, and to be fully persuaded upon
unquestionable grounds of a saving Interest in him. Undoubtedly the pale Horse
is prancing up and down in the World, upon which Death rides; and we know not
how soon he may have us under his feet; but that we may escape out of the hands
of that Horse-man's Page, (Rev. 6. 8.) that we may so live in Christ, that
Death may be an advantage to us; that we may so walk in the Faith, that we may
have this testimony in our own Conscience, that all our ways and paths are
well-pleasing to the Lord our great Sovereign; that we may so, even so run as
to obtain an Immortal Crown at last, (though the Righteous shall scarcely be
saved;) and that we might be found upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, among the
sealed one's of God, is the earnest and daily Prayer of

Your loving Sister, Lydiah C -- r.

Mrs. Lydiah C -- rs Letter to her Brother J -- h.
Loving Brother,
YOU are a young Man, and you read of the young Man in the Gospel, concerning
whom it is said, Christ looking upon him, loved him. I think that was but a
common love, because of some hopefulness of more good, or of less discovery of
more evil in him than in many others. The Lord knows, that I do most tenderly
love you as a Brother in the flesh; but oh how much more should I love you as a
Brother in Christ. Now that you may have a share in the Soul-saving love of
Christ, that you may be more intimately acquainted with the deep Mystery of the
Gospel, that you may consecrate the flower of your Youth to God, that you may
fly all Sins incident to your present state, that you may be sensible of
continued Mercies, that you may improve all opportunities and abilities which
you have received from God for God, that you may earnestly contend for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, that you may follow the Lord fully in your
Generation, and that you and I, with all our Relations, may one day sit down in
heavenly places together with Jesus Christ, is the uncessant Prayer of

Your very loving Sister, Lydia C -- r.

Mrs. Lydia C -- r's Letter to her Sister C -- d.
Loving Sister C -- d,
YOu are a Mother, it is a Blessing, yet but an e^^thly Blessing. Children are
certain Cares, uncertain Comforts. Now that you may bear Christ in your Spirit,
as you have born Children in your Body, that you may have further experience of
the preserving Love of God, which passes the tenderness of maternal Affection
(Isa. 49. 14. 15.) that you may always enjoy the light of God's countenance,
that ye may be strengthened with all might, according to the glorious power of
God in your inward Man, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness;
that you may by your heavenly conversation adorn the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
that you may be couns^^ed and comfotted by the sweet influences of the Spirit
of Grace, and that you may be one of those who shall be caught up in the
Clouds, together with all the Saints, to meet the Lord in the Air, and be for
ever with him, is the fervent Prayer of

Your very loving Sister, Lydia C -- r.

Mrs. Lydia C -- r's Letter to her Aunt C -- d.
Most endeared Aunt,
WHen I love in the Truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known
the Truth. Grace be with you, Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you through
the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord. I wish above all things that you
may prosper and be in health, even as your (...) prospers. I have no greater
joy than to hear that all the Lord's People walk in the power of Godliness,
showing forth the Praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his
^arvellous light. It is true, I have need to be more fully instructed of those
who have attained unto a full age, and by reason of use have their Senses
exercised to discern both good and evil; yet as one who has obtained this
grace of the Lord, as to be faithful in a few things, I shall not be negligent
to put you in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and are
established in the present truth. That which the Lord expects at our hands, is,
that we should walk worthy of him who has called us unto a Kingdom; that we
should live unto the praise of his rich Grace, who has so freely poured out
his Soul unto death for us. Dying Love justly merits an humble, lowly, thankful
and fruitful Conversation. Truly we live in a crooked and perverse Generation;
Satan has his Seat in every place; great is the subtilty of Sin, the
deceitfulness of our own Hearts, the power and malice of our spiritual
Adversary: It nearly concerns us therefore to give all diligence to make our
calling and election sure, before we go away from hence, and be no more.

Aunt, my continual and ^ervent desire is, that we may be every day more and
more enlightened into the depths of special and distinguishing love, and that I
may be helped forward in my Faith and Joy in the Holy Ghost by your
Experiences, is the Prayer of

Your affectionate Cousin, Lydia C -- r.
My love unto all my Cousins, praying that they may be blessed with all
spiritual Blessings in the common Savior.



Mrs. Lydia C -- r's Letter to her Sister D -- w.
Loving Sister D -- w,
THat we should exhort one another daily, consider one another, and provoke one
another unto Love and good Works, is the Exhortation of the Scripture, and such
Counsel as I desire might be written upon your heart and mine.

Sister, you are now entered into the World with me; but that an abundant
entrance may be administered into the Kingdom of God unto us both; that we may
with Mary, choose the better part, which shall never be taken from us; that we
may grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; that we may not be
weary of well-doing; that we may approve our hearts unto God in all manner of
holiness; that we may be filled with Spiritual Graces suitable to our Relations
and Conditions; that we may persevere unto the end; that we may have the sense
of God's love kept alive and warm upon our hearts; that we may bring forth much
fruit proportionable to the precious enjoyments of Divine Mercy; that we may
make it our business to praise, exalt and glorify him, who has abundantly
loved us in his Son; that we may have a continual eye upon him, who is the
Authir and Finisher of our Faith; that we may earnestly strive to attain unto
the Resurrection of the Dead; and that we may learn Christ, love Christ, and
live Christ, is the restless desire of

Your very loving Sister, Lydia C -- r.
Your Husband and you shall not be forgotten by me, in my pleadings at the
Throne of Grace. Farewell.



I had no sooner received these five Letters of my Mother's, and promised my
Father to observe his Orders about ^em, but on I went in my Rambles again for
London: But verily Reader, had you seen me before I was gotten fix yards on my
way thither, you would have thought I had mortgaged some of my Garments, or that my
Clothes were some where in Trouble, that I might still keep up the port of
Traveling by Coach. For the Petticoateers falling upon me, and snatching one
my Hat, another my Cloak, a third my Cane, a fourth my Belt, but not my Sword
(for to speak truth I had none) and a fifth my Wig, (and 'twas a favor,
believe it, my Head escaped) they had almost reduced me to Primitive Innocence.

But at length getting clear of the Gypsies, away I rambled again for London;
and getting into the Road, I applied my self (Citizen like) to the outside of
my Beast, a meagre and idolatrous Animal, that did homage almost to every Stone
he met with.

When I came to my Master's, he received me with a sweetness peculiar to
himself. It Is true, he might have refus`d me for one inconsiderate Act, and yet
have been highly just; but he (being unwilling to screw up Justice to the pitch
of an Injury, As Friend Seneca has it.
a temper proper to Brutes) acts the part of a generous Man, and welcomes his
returning Prodigal.

How well I pleased him the remaining part of my Time, may be guessed at by my
Father's Letter which he sent me two years after I was Bound; which I Will add
here, and with that conclude my Prenticeship Rambles.

My Father's Letter sent me two Years after I was Bound, being the last I
received from him.
Dear Child,
THY Master's Letter to me last Week, gives me great encouragement to think,
that (if please God I live) I shall receive a great deal of comfort from thee:
He writes so fully (that I profess I never read more written concerning any one
in my life) of thy Cheerfulness, Tractableness, Industriousness, willing to
learn and obey, of thy Truth and Honestly, and especially of thy desire and
endeavor to know and serve the Lord. Oh, Child! this good Character of the^ is
the most comfortable and reviving (...) that I have taken all the time of my
late and long (...) I pray God continue thy good R^so^^tions, of (...),
Master^s (...) Commendations of thee. Now, dear Child, if thy deserts answer
these Praises, I shall not fear but I shall meet thee in Heaven hereafter,
(though through my Corpora^^ Indisposition I fear I shall see thy face no more
on Earth;) and in the new Jerusalem (if thou die in the Arms of Divine
Embraces;) I shall see thee not disfigur`d with Pockholes, but dignified with
Celestial Glory: And there will thou see thy own Mother's face, who killed
herself with excessive love to thee, and who died, praying so earnestly for thy
Everlasting Salvation. But I must subscribe in haste (being much indisposed
through a Cold I caught last Lord's Day in Preaching)

Your real loving Father, Still praying for the Welfare of your Soul and Body,
AMATUS.

ERRATA.
For Chap. IX, X, XI. (being those which next follow) read Chap. II, III, IV.

CHAP. IX.
An Account of Kainophilus's early love to Rambling. The Reasons why he first
surveyed England. His Remarks upon it. An Account of his Adventures into
Buckingham Shire, with what passed there. His accidental meeting with Philaret
on the Road. A Description of their Friendship. Their pleasant Frollick of
Rambling Round the World.

THat I have been a Rambler both before, when, and ever since I was born, you
have heard already by another Hand; it is my Province to add here, that the
Passion of Voyaging did so fortify it self in me with Age, that I had hardly
attained twenty Years, but my Mind was set on A Ramble round the World -- Men's
generosa ultra polos!


And now (being freed from a Masters beck) I resolved to have one glympse of
another Country, though Death himself should set the Ladder. The truly Valiant
fears nothing but the duing an Injury: He that never fears is desperate, and he
that fears always is a Coward. He is the truly valiant Man that dares nothing
but what he may, and fears nothing but what he ought: Certainly then that
Spectacle which Vander dares not look in the Face, is very affrighting.

But because I was in love with the old Proverb, Do nothing rashly, I was
resolved to see some of the Rooms of my Native Country, before I ventured over
the Threshold thereof Methinks

thinks it is a burning shame, to see that most English Men can give a better
account of Fountainbleau than Hampton Court; of the Stadt-house in A^sterdam,
or the Indian Wigwams than they can of the Royal Exchange, Oxford, Cambridge,
or mo^e renowned Graffham.

It Is true, he that would see much in a little, must Travel the Low Countries:
Holland is all Europe in an Amsterdam- print, for Learning, War, and Traffic.

But it is England! England! alone, that is a little World within it self, a
Paradise for Women, and the very Queen of Isles. It Is the Darling of Ceres and
Bacchus, the Air sweet and cherishing; the Glorious Sun that sets and goes down
in other Countries, seems only to pass by the English Coasts. Nature as her
Darling has embraced England with a River and large Moat, intending still as
she made, to lay up her Principals and Originals in this her Cabinet. The
Natives have Faces like Angels, Wits like Muses, Charms like Graces, and are
cast in a Mould between the Earthly Spaniard, and the trifling French.

In a word, It Is Excellencies are too bigg for Description, and therefore well
might the Greek Poet cry out; -- (...)
(...) (...):
and that English- man be justly censured, who embarks for another Country
before he has viewed his own.

These Considerations made me first resolve for a Ramble round my Native
Country; and tho I very well knew there was great Dangers attending such an
Adventure; yet I thought it below a Man for the Love of Life to lose the Reason
of Living, seeing -- All may have Herb. Chapter Porch
(If they dare try) a glorious Life or Grave.


And therefore now I began to grow weary of the Life I led, and believed it was
high time to think of departing. And no wonder! I was so soon on another
Frollick, for a wandering Humor found me out as I say Capering in the
Winding-Chambers of Nature, even there I lay forming Idea's of long Voyages,
and New Worlds; and perhaps too grunting out, (for it is pure Charity to lend a
Crutch to a lame Conceit.)

Bout-Ship, Stedy! Stedy! Hard-up! Hard-a-weather! How wind ye my Hearts of
Gold? East? or West, and by Nor^?

Some say I was no sooner born but my Eyes had Language, and my Looks were
offering at Discoveries.

Of all my Members, the last that Rambled was my Tongue, (that Mother of Speech
that shapes our Breath into Words,) as if I were loath to use so deceitful an
Organ; and certainly I was best Company with it when I could but just Mutter
and Lisp.

I am apt to think, could I have seen and spoke in my Mothers Belly, I had
always been pointing to some far Country, and crying,

Cheer up my Mates, the Wind does fairly blow,
Clap on more sail, and never spare,
Farewell all Lands, for now we are
In The Narrow, Narrow Sea^^, and merrily we go.
Bless me, it is hot, another Bole of Wine,
And I shall cut the Burning-line:
Ho Boys she scuds away,
I round the World am sailing now!
And verily, Sirs, there is no resisting of Fate; He that is born under a
Rambling Planet, all that he does to ^ix him at home does but hasten his
Travels abroad. My self experienc^^ the truth of this, for tho at this juncture
I had many Friends and Servants too, and all things else about me that could
render Life gay and sweet, yet on a sudden

(Being born a Rambler,)

Naturam expel as furca licet usque recurret.
Horace,

Nature returns, and now tho Business had fettered my Legs, and my whole Life
seemed bu^ as one Marriage-day, (such crouching was there now to the Rising
Sun;) yet all this could not fix my little Carcass, or limit my roving Mind to
a narrower Circuit than the whole Creation.

And therefore when I had as carefully even'd with all Men, (for as to my
Morals I am or should be an Honest Man,) as if I had been upon my last leave
with the World, and had given a solemn Adieu to my Summer-Friends,

I was soon on the March, not caring whither (...) Rambled, to meet the Sun at
his Rising, or at (...) going down, provided only that I but Ramble; ^elieving
now, that tho my whole Life should be a daily Invention, and each Meal a New
Stratagem, yet that the Pleasures of Traveling would sweeten all: And
according to my Expectation every day rose upon me with a fresh Delight, and
still where e're I came, I was t^eated with all the Delicacies of Nature and
Art; the Air was kind and soft, the Fields were Trim and Neat, the Sun benign
and cherishing, -- Nature each day dressed all the World anew! -- and in a
word, the whole Creation was free and obliliging, and from every thing I met I
received a Civility.

So that my whole Travels were performed with great Satisfaction, and I was so
well pleased with every thing that I saw or heard as I went along, that I never
thought my self at home, till now I had no home to go to.

'Twas now! (as if the whole World had been my proper Birthright and Dwelling)
that I had a Kitchen smoking in every Country, a Table covered in every
Shire, and a Lodging (^^ias Barn) for a Scrape, or a How d^ye in every Village
I came at: But if at any time Fortune withdrew her Smiles, (for she is constant
in nothing but Inconstancy,) then all I met with I embraced for Brethren, (
proving our Kin in a long series from Adam,) and so improved this far-fetched
Relation into a passionate Hugg, and that for Money. Hunger will caper over
stone Walls, I might add, over Hills set upon Hills, and therefore did I choose
in Affliction rather to make my Brains my Exchequer, than (like a Modest
Gentleman) to groan under the Slavery of a Blushing Temper.

I was never when in Trouble, for Drink and be Rich, for I well knew I could
not live (...) Tempore, fe^st my Guts in a Dream; or like a Mouse in a Cheese,
enlarge my House-room by Eating.

But whither do I Ramble again? It Is time now to return to the History of my
English Adventures, which were begun on the 10th of March, 1681. just as the
Sun had newly shaken off the Scales of Pisces, and brushed himself with the
Tail of Aries, and was beginning afresh his Yearly Ramble through the Zodiac.
'Twas now that I as it were by Sympathy, being weary of a fixed Life, took a
Resolution to walk to the Globe in Cornhill, where meeting with a knot of
loving Neighbors, in the height of our caressing Endearments, one was for
making a visit to the East Indies, and another to the West; If you will go, I Will
go, says one; and I Will go if you will go, says another, till at last they
concluded upon it to go all together.

The next Question, was, whither we should March, and after a long Debate, they
were all for France excepting my self.

So after three or four Scrapes, and twice Bussing the Hand we parted -- But by
that time I had Rambled a Mile or two from London, who should I meet but
Philaret, (an Old Acquaintance,) and thus I began to salute him.

Kainophilus. Well met Dear Friend! What say you to a Ramble now, as far as
Earth, and Seas, and Love can carry us?

Philaret. -- Agreed! I never was out at a Mad Frollick, tho this is the
Maddest I ever undertook: Sir, I take you at your Word, and if you are for a
Merry Jaunt, I Will try for once who can foot it farthest; there are Hedges in
Summer, and Barns in Winter to be found: I with my Knap-sack, and you with your
Bottle at your Back. We Will leave Honor to Madmen, and Riches to Knaves and
Fools, and Travel 'till we come to the ridge of the World, and then drop
together into the next. -- Hang Pinching! -- We Will Ramble till we can see both
Poles knock; 'till we leave the Moon and Stars, and Light behind us; 'till we
find Mountains of Gold without a Fiction, (and seeing Novelty is a thing so
agreeable to our Natures) we will wander still on, till we view the Cradle of
the Infant-Morn, observe the Chambers of the Rising Sun -- see him take Coach,
Man! and be able to distinguish the Color of his Horses, and their several
Kinds: -- Nor rest yet, 'till by our own Hazard we have discovered New Worlds,
and brought one Hemisphere to some Acquaintance with another; nay, Ramble till
-- But here is enough in Conscience for a taste of a Frollick, I Will therefore
now (with your Worships Leave) sit down and rest me, for I am at the End of the
World already. --

Philaret and I being thus agreed on a Rambling Project, you shall now seldom
see us two asunder: We dwell together like Soul and Body: Had one been a Boy
and the other a Girl, sure enough we had been Man and Wife. If one of us had
been Castor, and the other Pollux, it had been well for Mariners, for we should
always have appeared together. Why had we not both one Mother? Why were we not
Twins? for never were two better pleased with one another's Company; part us
and ye kill us, for when Soul and Body part it is Death.

So that now pursuing my first Resolutions of viewing my Native Country, my
Fellow Traveller and I like two Sons of Priam, Per varios casus, per tot
discrimina Rerum, took half a dozen Guinea's in our Pockets to fortify our
selves against the Attacks of Hunger, Thirst, and other Enemies of Men upon a
Ramble; and much about Noon we walked out of Town, and took the Road to
Cholsbury in Buckinghamshire, designing to make that the first St^ge of our
Ramble.

When we had walked about half way thither, invited by a Consort of Birds,
which sung very sweetly in a Neighboring Hedge, we by mutual Consent, sat down
on a Bank, partly to observe the Harmony these pretty winged Choristers made,
and partly to feed our Eyes with the variety of Detectable Objects, which
seemed to out-vy each other, and strive which should most engage the Beholders
Attention. Bless me, says Philaret (let my Fellow-Traveller pass by this Name.)
Who would be buried alive in a Tavern, and soberly fuddle himself to Death,
with the perpetual s^eams of a Wine-Cellar, when he may be thus healthily
inebriated with the Natural Pleasures of Liberty, and an unconfined Life: From
henceforth I resolve to live

Lord of my self, account^ble to none
But to my Conscience, and my God alone:
Let others who such meannesses can brook,
Strike Countenance to every great Man's look.
I rate my Freedom higher, nor will I
For Food and Raiment truck my Liberty.
But if I must to my last shifts be put,
To fill a Bladder, and twelve yards of Gut,
Rather with counterfeited wooden Leg,
And my right Arm tied up, I Will choose to beg:
I Will rather choose to starve Q^i mori didicit, servire didicit, (says Seneca,)
He that has learned to dye, has forgot to serve.
at large, than be
The Gaudiest Vassal to dependency.
For what greater Grief can there be to an ingenuous and free Spirit, who
sitting at a spurious Table, to be placed at the lowest, to be carved unto of
the worst and first cut, as of boiled Beef, Brawn, and the like? and if the
Lady, or loose-bodyed Mistress presents unto him the Meat from her Trencher,
then assuredly it was burnt too much! If he ^e carved out of a Pasty of
Venison, it was some Part that was bruised in the Carriage, and began to s^ink:
Yet for all this, (if he be a Servant) he must be obsequious, endure any Jeer,
whisper for his drink, and rise at the coming in of the Basin or Ewer: And as
Oldham says to his Friend, as soon as e're the Tarts appear, he must hastily
retire, (for Dainties are no more for a Servile, then they are for a Spiritual
Maw) to do the which, any Generous an truly Noble Spirit had rather (I am
persuaded) dine with my Lord Mayors Hounds in Finsbu^y Fields.

I think it hard for a Soul that does not love Liberty, ever to raise it self
to another World, I take it to be the Foundation of all Virtue, and the only
seasoning that gives a relish to Life: And tho the laziness of a slavish
subjection, has its Charms for the more gross and Earthly part of Mankind; yet
to Men made of a better sort of Clay, all that the World ca^ give without
Liberty has no taste. It Is true, nothing is sold so cheap by unthinking Men;
but that does no more lessen the real value of it, than a Country Fellows
Ignorance does that of a Diamond, in selling it for a Pot of Ale: Liberty is
the Mistress of Mankind; she has powerful Charms that do so dazzle, that we
find Beauties in her, which perhaps are not there, as we do in other
Mistresses, yet if she was not a Beauty, the World would not run Mad for her.

Who, then (adds he) dear Kainophilus, would not exchange the Stench and Foggs
of London for this open Balmy Air? Or the noisie din of Coaches, Carrs, etc.
for the delicious Whispers of Zephyrs; the charming ruffle of the Leaves; the
agreeable murmur of Fountains, and the matchless Harmony of the Birds? Can any
thing be more transporting? Can any thing be more Desirable, than the free
Enjoyment of these Felicities? Listen to these Feath^r'd Quires. Their Music
is nothing else but a perpetual Triumph in their Liberty. Their various Tunes,
but so many joyful Echoes to their airy Rambles; recording to each other the
happy Flights they take! Their Throats act over and over the Rambles of their
Wings; rambling through all the Notes with exquisite Dexterity. Now Dorian
sleepy Airs, then Phrygian Martial Tunes: Mind but that Treble which sounds so
high and clear! Then mark the deep-stretch'd Base! How well they mix their
Flats and Sharps! Hear how they Sing apart the high Counter and Mean! And then
together Sing three Parts, or a Trio of two Trebles, one Concordant, and a
Bourdon; and after all, every one Sings alone the Four Parts. Oh Jolly
Ramblers! Oh Frollick Vagabonds! Who would not emulate your Mirth, your Joy,
your Happiness? Who would not be a Rambler, since it is a Life so full of Bliss?

Thus did the ravished Philaret express himself, and just as I was about to
Reply, there fell a sudden Shower of Rain mixed with large Hail, which occasioned
us to rise in have from our Seats, and Ramble to seek for some shelter. After a
little scampering in the Shower, we came at last to an old holl^w Oak, into the
sides of which Time had eaten a Door; so that finding open House kept there, we
entered the Tenement, judging it to be Rent-free. Its Hollow was very capacious
and large, sufficient to contain four Men together, standing upright. It was
closely Arched at the top by part of the solid Trunk, so that not the least
drop of Rain or any other Moisture could find a Cranny to distill through. We
were both extremely pleased at our New Mansion, and took it as a good Omen of
our Ramble, since Nature has in every Corner such a Sanctuary for the
distressed Pilgrim. But the Weather clearing up again, we addressed our selves
to our Journey, and in less than an Hour we arrived at Cholsbury, where having
housed our selves, and taken some Re^res^ment, we took a walk about the Town,
of which I will relate to you what I found remarkable, and worthy Observation
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. X.
An Account of Kainophilus's Rambles through Cholsbury. His pleasant
Description of it. A Relation of his further Adventures in company with
Philaret in the prosecution of their Ramble Round the World. With several other
Remarkable Occurrences.

ACcording to my promise in the last Chapter, I am obliged to give some Account
of the most observable Occurrencs in our Survey of Cholsbury. After my
Companion and I had honestly paid our Stomachs their usual Bill of Fare, and
bribed our Noses with a Pipe or two of Tobacco, we called for our Landlord, and
told him we had a great Inclination to see the Town. He being a brisk jolly
Fellow, presently offered us his Company and Service; so we hoisted up our
Bums, and made to the Streetward.

But we had not got clear of the Sands that were strewed on the Floor of the
Room where we were at Anchor, when there was an Embargo suddenly laid on our
Ears by a strange confused noise in our Chamber over our heads, which mightily
surpised us.

Our Host hastened up Stairs, and desired us to follow him; which we readily
did, being greedy of the Novelty. The Chamber Door was open, and gave us an
opportunity of beholding a very pleasant Spectacle.

Some young Seafaring Sparks were got together a fudling in this Chamber, and
having drank themselves into Land Calentures, fancied the Room to be a Pinnace,
floating on the Sea in a Storm (for the Wind indeed was high, and made the
Windows clatter) attributing their Reeling to the rocking of the Vessel, and
being strongly possessed with this conceit, and the danger they were in, every
one begins to act his part, and consult the common safety; there was a noise of
Haul Cat, Starboard, and the rest of the Marine Cant, Fly (says one) up to the
Mair-Top, and discover: He climbs by the Bed-post to the Tester, there reports
a turbulent Sea and Tempest toward, and wills them, if they will save their Ship
and Lives, to cast their Lading Overboard. At this, all to work, and hoist
into the Street, as to the Sea, what next comes to their hands, Stools, Tables,
Tressels, Trenchers, Bedsteds, Cups, Pots, Plate and Glasses. Here a Fellow
swaggering, they take him for the Boatswain; one lies struggling upon the floor,
as if he swom for Life; a third takes the Bass-Viol for the Cock-Boat, sits in
the Belly on it, labors, sweats, and rows, his Oar the Stick with which the
Fiddler played: A fourth bestrides his Fellows, thinking to 'scape that way: In
the Chimney lies one whistling, another gaping, another swearing and cursing,
and all of them in such a Tempest of Imagination, that had not the Master of
the House interposed his Authority, and seasonably assumed the Office of Master
of the supposed Pinnace, commanding all hands down in the Hold; they were upon
the point of casting all the Lading Overboard, and hoysting all his Goods out
of the Window into the Street. But at his Command they all ran down Stairs
helter skelter, with a hideous outcry of, All hands to the Pump, imagining a
Leak was sprung in the Hold. When they were come down into the Entry, the Air
began to work upon their floating Stomachs, and there was a mighty wambling
within them; one springs a Leak in his Fore-Castle and Cook-Room, another in
the Stern, till having unladed their drunken Carcasses, they began to awake out
of their Dreams, and shaking their Ears, tumbled out of doors as fast as they
could. What became of them afterward I know not, for I hilaret and I taking
our Landlord along with us, entered now upon viewing the Town, and the Rarities
in it: Which when we beheld, we were so far from being over-ravish'd with joy
at the Sight, that we took it for some enchanted Castle, in regard we could not
see so much as one Stone of all that magnificent Pile, which our Landlord had
been building in our fancy; rather we were more than usually surprised at the
humility of the Structures, and the lowliness of the Owners.

Rambling into the middle of the Town, we entered a House, the Master of which,
had he not been a Scot, you would have sworn him a Turk, regardless of his
Habitation in this World, in expectation of Fools-Paradise in the next.

It was a Hovel, or rather Stye, in length about six and thirty Foot, not
covered Cathedral like with Lead, nor yet with a glittering Copper, after the
Sweedish manner, but according to the Scotch custom, very meanly thatcht with
Oaten Reeds; not such as the Arcadian Shepherds pip'd withal, but plain
downright illiterate Straw. The Fire was made near the Bedside, at one end,
which for want of a Chimney, wrapped the whole Family, Guests and all, like so
many Ixions in a continual Cloud of Eye-tormenting Smoke: Near to the Bedside
lay the Corn and Hay, which you may be sure was not worth its weight in Gold;
and at the other end, without the distinction of Partitions, stood two Sheep, a
Cow, and an old Horse. So that it may may be verily believed, that Virtue her
self, in all her Exiles and Persection, never lived in such a homely Hermitage;
and Marius, when he lay hid among the Bulrushes in the Fens of Minturnus, might
be thought to have lodged in a Palace to this ill-favored resemblance of
Noah's Ark.

But indeed the Tenements all over the Town, are suitable to the Guests that
possess them; for as these seem to be Dirt molded into Men, so those are the
same matter kneaded into Houses; they are all very humble Cottages, and low in
stature, so that a Man may ride upon the Ridge, and yet have his Legs hang in
the Dirt; those that are so magnificent as to be crested with a Chimney, are
mightily valued, as most Cocking Fabrics.

Philaret and I were not so vain as to expect very splendid Furniture in such
contemptible Huts; but we soon perceived what Utensils were most necessary; a
Dish^clout and a Beesom, and such cleansing Implements, are very proper to
correct the filthiness of their Mansions; we found no Apartments in these their
Habitations, every Edifice where ere we came being a Noah's Ark, where a
Promiscuous Family, a Miscellaneous Heap of all kind of Creatures did converse
together in one Room; the Pigs and the Pullen, and other Brutes either
truckling under, or lying at the Beds-feet of the little more refined, yet
their Brother Animals. They are much addicted to the Sin of Nastiness,
wallowing in filthiness like so many Swine; so that the whole Town seems to be
but a general Stye.

You may swear they are made of Earth, without a Metaphor, appearing like so
many Dirt-Images or like that of Prome^heus made of Clay. The meaner sort of
Women are generally such Draggle-Tails, that the Cattle in their Bosoms are
quag-mir'd in the filth of their well-gleb'd Attire; so that the frisking Fleas
are so far from Levalto's that we are verily persuaded they can scarce pull out
Proboscis, and their Feet from the Bogs.

We could not perceive that they were guilty of much Learning; of which the
lowest degree is several notches above their most exalted capacity. We met with
one pretty proband in the Alphabet; but for the most part the knowledge of the
least Iota is rare and unusual.

A Man skilled in Orthography is admired as a Sophy, and a Writer of his Name
is termed a Rabbi. The Top-gallant of the Parish possibly may be so wise in
Hieroglyphick, as to scrawl the Character of a Mystic Mark, though such deep
Literature is not frequent among them. Some of their Ancestry have smelt rank
of Astrology, one whereof, Pretty by name, was very notable at the Stars, and
most intimate with the Planets, insomuch that sometimes he would fling at a
Futurity, and venture at a Prognoshick concerning the Weather.

To the Wisdom and Philosophy of this Sophy, his little Boy Bardus added
Poetry; a Lad (it seems) notably inspired with Flames and Firebrands, with
Heats and Raptures, and such kind of Tackle that are used by Poets.

The Disciples of this Laureat were termed Bards, the great Embalmers of
Heroic Actions; who (I warrant you) will wrap up an Achievement so securely
in a Monument of single Verse, that all the niblings in the World shall never
be able to devour the Immortality of a Name. They ballad-sung the Praises of
Renowned Heroes, and in lofty strains wire-draw'd their fame, and stretched
their Glory to after Ages.

The most Famous of these Meter-mongers were Robbin Hadwood, my Gaffer
Glaskirion, and of late years old Farmer Davy, and our Neighbor Blunderbus.

As for the Loves of these Villagers, the Intriegues of their Amors are not a
little remarkable, they being very pretty Animals when disguised with that
Passion: They are Tinder to such Flames, being quickly set on fire, even by the
least spark, which when it has caught the Match of their Souls (for they have
Brimstone in them as well as in their Bodies) they are presently kindled into
Transport and Ecstasy; and these model them into the shapes of a thousand
Anticks, and make them show more tricks than Banks his Horse.

Sometimes they are shaking the Globules of their Noddles, and sometimes
dancing some Geometry with the Figures of their Feet; now they smite with
clapper of Fist their troubled Breasts, and anon sound out some Knells of
dismal Groans, being variously affected according as the weather is in their
Dorinda's Faces; if Aspect be clear, then is Hobnail Serene; if Brow be cloudy,
then is he very Showry.

He commonly ore-flows in his prattle about the Princum prancumness of his
Mistress, and is witty even to a Jest on the Fineries of their Habiliments; in
describing of which he is pretty lucky at Similitude, and is happy in his
Comparisons about her Person. One in this Town (as our Landlord told us) having
a glympse through the Keyhole of her Saffron Body, burst out into a Panegyric
of the Bees-waxness (as he phras'd it) of her Tawny Complexion; and seeing her
Tipp^t to bristle into the ereetness of a Turbant, he fell a laughing at the
Cox-comb (as he termed it) of her Coif and Head-gear.

He seldom troubles his Madam with the Salutation of a Letter, but usually
accosts her with the Missive (as I may say) of his nown Person, which being
broken up in her presence, out-fly the Contents full of flame and rapture.

We heard of one that went a wooing with a Gun upon his Sholder, being resolved
(it seems) if Love be a warfare, not to enter unarmed into the Camp of Venus;
still as his coy Aminta shifted from his presence, he marched Musketeering
about the Room, and most fiercely pursued her, till at last in the brisk
Encounter of a close Embrace, this warlike Instrument took an occasion,
somewhat unmannerly, to go off, and Blunderbuss'd the Mistress on her Br^ech on
one side of the house, and poor Booby on his Nose on the other; so that being
much dismayed at this unhappy Accident, one scrabled one way, and the other
another, to the total separation of a pair of Lovers, and to the utter spilling
of a Mess of Love.

These Cholsburians are pretty devout in their Worship, though the Exercise of
Religion is somewhat scarce, and have a pretty glowing zeal, though their
Church is at a great distance from their Town. It Is almost incredible how far
they are fain to trudge for a little Homily, which when they have expected,
have been mump'd with a Sermon ten times worse. For on such Raw-bone Li^ings
there cannot be expected very plump Parts.

The ordinary Revenue of this Spiritual Preserment may possibly be about Ten
Marks per An^um; a Bay of Watling for a dwelling, endowed with no more Glebe
than just what it stands upon, only perhaps it may be home-stall'd with as much
ground as may hold a Stye for the Pig, and a ^oost for the Pullen.

This Divine Cottage is situated some Leagues from the Temple; so that the Holy
Man with ^rab-Tree Truncheon sets out with the Sun, and ^tretcheth his Legs
with a good handsome walk, before he arrives to Pulpet to st^etch his Lungs, and
wears out much of his Soles before he can teach his Stall to mend their Souls.

Their Church is a Thatcht Tabernacle, which being steepled (as it were) with a
Lover-hole, seems to be really that what the Temple resembled when profaned by
the Jews, I mean, rather the Picture of a Pidgeon-house, than a holy Sanctuary.
It was I perceived (for our La^dlord carried Philaret and I^on purpose to see
it) Wainscoted toward the East with little Desks like Pounds, where Levite
imprisoned for about half an hour, fodders the poor gazing Dunces with some
melancholy Tear-fetching Story about a Grim Fellow called Death, who ambles
Folks on his back into another World.

Their Recreations are various; In the whity-brown Evening, or in the Twilight,
they ru^ hooling about their Common with Kites at their heels, certain Comets
of Paper, which they tow^ along with a tall string, and make themselves merry
with the length of their Tails, which are a large Series of jagg'd Tossels,
raged with a Candle, as with the twinkling of a Star. Happy is the Man amoug
them that can most descreetly manage this Artificial Planet; and he is
presently dubbed the very Phaeton of their Country, that can most swiftly career
it with this little lanthorn'd Phoebus. The Scrubs want Candle on Earth, and yet
they must needs be sticking up Lights in the Socket of Heaven; there is scarce
half a pound in the whole Lordship either to scare away darkness, or to work
by, and yet these Raskals (forsooth) will be studding the Sky with Luminaries
to play by. --

As for true and real Hunting, there is no such thing among them, only they
have (as it were) the Picture and some kind of resemblance of that Pastime; for
their Principality affording them but few Hares, they course a Lock of Hay in
lieu thereof, and halloo the Puss of a good nimble wisp.

The whim of it is this; when they have a mind to refresh themselves with
somewhat that is a kin to, or with an Idea of Hunting, they make diligent
search for a Furlong or two of smooth and champion ground, which at last being
found, they purchase a Bundle of the swiftest Hay; this they expose to the Fans
of Aeolus, which being presently started by force of puff, it souds away, and
the Dogs pursue it with mighty speed.

In rainy Weather they have also their In-door ^ivertisements as well as other
Nations, such (...) Question and Command, Rump-pressing, Hod-Cockles,
Chap-smutting, Snap-applt, and the like. Some are cunning at the Cockall, not
so much for picking off the meat (though they are good (...) that too) as at
throwing it with accuracy, and chequering the Sport with variety of Tumble.

As far as we could perceive, they love Holyday Fingers, and care not much for
encumbring them with that Inconventency, called Work. We could not in all our
Rambles about this Town wind very many Feasts among them, the shabbiness of
their Soil being not able to nourish and pamper Luxury; so that a Cook, unless
he exercise on himself, and dress his own Fingers, he is immediately starved
here for want of an Employment. They make some little Invitations perhaps to a
Sheeps-head or so; and will junket with Hop-tops with brisk alacrity. Such
plain, mean (and as I may say) Borough Food was even their Festival
Entertainments; but as for any Embroidered* and (as it were) Metropolitan Mess,
such as Plumb-porridge, and Ve^ison Pasty, we never so much as heard of them in
their Territories.

Their Mart for Law is a Corporation Town called Ailsbury, which Philaret and I
visited afterward (as you will hear auon,) where there is a Court of Judicature
decked with a Judge, Counselors, Attorneys, Sollicitors, and other Furniture
which embellish the Law: Hither they trudge for Decision of Cases, and here
Red-Coat Integrity dispenses Equity.

Most of their Indictments are generally the Tragical effects of some dismal
Counter-scuffle, where a Bloody Nose and a broken 'Shin is ample matter for the
Commencement of a Suit; for they being of a fiery Temper, sometimes choler is
kindled by an Antiperistasis with a Pot of of Ale; and then they fall to biting
and scratching as hard as they can drive, and the wounds of this Caterwauling
and Bickering affords stuff for an Action the next day; which being once got
into the Pounces of a Ailsbury Attorney, is dandled into a Business of no small
Aggravation.

Oh! How these Pettifoggers will hugg a Buffeting, and improve a Squabble.

They are the very Bellows of Contention, and will soon blow a Spark into a
great Combustion. They are a kind of Tinkers in the Law, who usually make holes
on Purpose that they may mend them; nay, sometimes they will play at Loggerhead
themselves to set others together by the Ears, and so (as if fighting was
contagious) will infect the silly Varlets into Quarrels and Blows.

One marching along the Streets, advanced the Scolding of two Women into an
huge Tumult, as Duels into great Wars; and made the snarling of two Dogs thrive
into an Action, and the fighting of two Mastiffs to end in the Court of the
Common Pleas: But perhaps the Spoils from the Skirmishes of such Clients are as
Pillage from a Scotch Army See more of this Description in the Treatise called
Wallagrophy, for the Character there given exactly answers to these
Cholsburians.
.

These are some of the choicest Observations Philaret and I made during our
stay at Cholsbury; we might easily have added more, (the whole Town indeed
being but one grand Remark,) but being pretty well satisfied with what we had
seen already, we both resolved to prosecute our Ramble: But if it should be our
chance to have our Lot to set our Feet on that Soil a second time, we shall
venture to present another Show of it, for it is pity such a rare Sight as
Cholsbury should want a Trumpet; nay, and a Fool too to proclaim and expose it
to the World.

After we had crammed our Budget with these few Notices, longing now for change
of Air, we bid aduieu to our Host, and fairly troop'd out of the Town next way
our Fancy led us, and soon came in the Fields; in one of which there were three
different Paths, and we having as yet formed no Design, but only pure Ramble,
took the old Adage for our Guide, Medio tutissimus ibis: The middle Path,
brought us into a fair Meadow, which we had no sooner entered, but our Ears
were arrested by a Voice far surpassing the utmost flight of Panegyric: For
tho it was not governed with Skill, yet it did so repay the Defect of it with
its native Sweetness, that Art was absent without being missed, and I could not
but have some Curiosity to see who was the Possessor of so much power to
please. Directing therefore our Rambling Steps toward that part of the Field
whence the Voice came, my Eyes quickly ceased to envy my ears, for they
discovered kneeling by a Cow, and singing to her (whilst she Milk'd her,) a
Person who in the habit of a Milkmaid, seemed to disguise, and yet make good
the Character of one of those Nymphs the Poets are wont to describe: I need not
tell you this fair Creature had the Blushes of the Morning in her Cheek, the
Splendour of the Sun in her Eyes, the grateful freshenss of the Fields in her
Looks, the whitenss of the Milk (she had before her) in her Skin; least you
should think I spent too much time in gazing on her: But I may perhaps without
much Hyperbole, give you this Account of her, that though her Clothes were
suited to her Condition, yet they were very ill suited to her Beauty, which as
if Nature intended a Triumph over Fortune, did without any assistance of
Ornament, more distress my Liberty than others have been able to do with all
their most curious Dresses. In a word, she looked at once so Innocent and
Pretty, that she seemed like to do Mischief, without at all intending it.
Whilst my Eyes were fixed on her as attentively as dazzled ones could be, the
lovely Milkmaid took up her Pail to carry it homewards. As she passed by me,
upon the last glimpse, she vouchsafed me a Smile; which I then thought would
have made me very happy, if it had proceeded from Kindness, not bare Civility.
And she went away with a look so Serene as well as taking, that she seemed to
carry home with her far more quiet then she left me possessed of. And to
confess the Truth,

Of all the loveliest things, and noblest too,
That Art or Nature have produced to view,
Woman alone does most affect my Mind,
When from her Sexes foul defects refined;
Who if she be with these few Virtues stored,
Has all that the Creation can afford:
Beauty enough to raise a frozen Love,
Yet not so great as should our wonder move.
Fair without Scorn, and Witty without Pride,
A Bliss too often to that Sex denied;
Chaste as Diana when her Rape's designd,
And where she loves as billing Turtles kind:
Constant to one, and only so far coy,
As may not create his pain, but raise his Joy;
Modest but not Reserved, tho free not vain,
Her Garb becoming, neither gay nor plain,
Quiet tho bold, Religious not precise,
With more Devotion in her Heart than Eyes:
Tho saving yet not covetous; and still,
Yet not for want of words, but want of will:
And when she does her kind Affections place,
Makes Love, not Money Vmpire in the Case.
If such a one, yea, Gods on Earth there be,
I Will dye if this Fair Milkmaid was not she.
Which made me as I rambled along so to dote upon her, that at length I forgot
my self.

And indeed this Fair Milkmads Eyes, Mouth, Teeth, and Hands, seemed to have
been made only to furnish the God of Love which da^ts. When she opened her
Mouth, methoughts I saw the three Graces sporting in her Countenance, when she
Smiles there needs no day! And her Body was so exactly proportioned in all its
parts, that had she lived in the Time of Phideas, he had certainly taken her
for the Model of his Venus, which was the Admiration of all the World: And my
Respect to her was (for a while) equal to her Charms.

But being now engaged in a Rambling Frollick, with my Dearer Philaret, who by
Traveling thus far together with me, was become more precious to me than
Eyesight, Space, and Liberty, beyond what can be valued rich or rare! I was
constrained to have recourse to Philosophy, which could supply me with no other
Remedies but Patience.

Nay, I find the Philosophers themselves have been vanquished by Female Charms;
Diogenes and Aristotle, became they not Fools hereby? And Seneca, whose Morals
are the Rules of the Wisest, was not he driven out of Rome for his Amorous
Practices?

Nay, Reader, I tell thee plainly, the Precepts of Philosophy influenced me not
a whit; I derided them, though I was now but in my Twenty third year, and was
resolved to love on, and that more excessively than all the Philosophers put
together.

It Is Women that have always won the greatest
Victories: It Is their trade to Conquer.
It Is certainly a Misfortune and a Miracle at once, to confess at what a tender
age I was first subjected to Love; it was indeed by chance, for it was long
before the years of Choice of Descretion. I do not remember my self so long
ago; and my Fortune may very well be coupled to that of Quartilla, who could
not remember since she was a Maid; yet cannon I tax my self from my Birth till
now, with one single Thought that ever exceeded the Rules of Modesty.

But Love, in my Opinion, is not properly and naturally in its season, but in
the age next to Childhood. For, Amor ordinem nescit.
Div. Hieron.

Love knows no order, miscarriages and ill successes give him Appetite and
Grace: You put Love in the Stocks, when you guide it by Art and Wisdom.

Discreet Cowly.
? What means this word Discreet?
A Curse on all Discretion;
This barbarous term you will not meet
In all Loves Lexicon.
Ioynture, Portion, Gold, Estate,
Houses, Housholstuff, or Land,
(The low Conveniences of Fate)
Are Greek no Lovers understand.
Believe me, Reader, when once Love
Enters into a Breast,
The two first things it does remove,
Are Friends and Interest.
Moreover, one would think Cupid were not only blind but dumb, since he renders
every Member of the Body vocal, except the Tongue. Hence it is that Lovers with
more Eloquence communicate Sighs than Words, as so many internunctany Particles
of Vital Air, and like Doves of Venus mourn forth animated Letters. Hence it is
that they keep a silent intercourse with their Fingers, now Eloquent without a
Pen, and weave Dialogues in little Posies. They hear one another mutual
Wishes, and read one another visible Souls by those vocal Messengers of the
Affections, affable Nods, and darting Smiles. Sometimes their significant
Gestures, composed (as it were) of so many Rhetorical Figures, court in a
various and myste ous Dialect. Sometimes their ranging Aspects are earnestly
fixed on one another as on Strangers, and while they seem to disown all
acquaintance, grow familiar by ^ealth. Sometimes their Souls interchangeably
gliding from their Eyes, take a cursory taste of Bride-Kisses at a distance,
and bring home their stolen Sweets with Triumph. It Is at once their greatest
boast and pleasure to remain undiscovered. Their wandering and Extatick Souls
freely pass too and fro (as 'twere) within the same Body, and converse as
softly, as if in a Soliloquy.

But more of this hereafter in my Rambles a Wiving (which are to make a
distinct Volume) seeing here is enough at present to show, That Love, to whose
friendly influence the orderly System of the Universe ows its composure, has
left it self in Confusion, and is all perfect Riddle.

Observe again, how greedily their Souls, keeping Sentinel in their Ears, lie
and catch for words; and how their Souls, in a perpetual emanation gliding from
their Eyes, waste themselves in passionate Glances, and suffer many a faint
Swoon with gazing.

So impatient is the whole Man of departure, that sometimes he shifts himself
into the Eye, sometimes into the Ear, and lives only in that part where he
enjoys his Consort.

Thus Love teaches Men a more compendious knack of living, and makes them
content, like some Insects, with one only Sense.

Yet this is not to maim the Man, but to render him more Divine by the fewness
of Organs required to the function of Life.

And indeed the Heart of Man really in love with a fine Woman, does nothing but
what is reasonable, (I say with a fine Woman, for whoever makes a Napkin of a
Dishclout, will certainly find it an imperious Rag; Set a Beggar on Horseback,
and he will ride to the Devil) all its soft and tenderest Motions, its innocent
Tremblings, Mutius.
harmless Fears, melting Sighs, lambent Fires, are as highly rational as the
gruff and churlish Schoolmans most regular demonstration.

Love, when discreet and rational, is,
A pleasing Sweetness, harmless Fire,
A tender, melting, gay Desire:
A something more than Wealth or Fame,
A tender something wants a name.
Such Thoughts and Remarks upon Love as these, all which were occasioned by the
sight of this pretty Milk-Maid, deceived the tediousness of the way, and the
Night now beginning to over-take us, Philaret was clearly for going toward some
House of Entertainment, and endeavored to rouse me out of the brown study this
Encounter had put me in. How we disposed our selves that Evening, I will relate
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Kainophilus in his Ramble to Buckingham, is accosted with three very great
Hogs, Swine of profound intriegue. His peculiar Remarks upon an Assembly of
Ducks. Kainophilus and Philaret are trepan'd by half a dozen Press-Masters.
Their fortunate Escape. An Account of some Observables in Buckinghamshire. A
Philosophical Description of Time. With a Digression concerning the Pleasures
of a Country-Life. Together with several other pleasant Adventures.

MY Fellow-Traveller fearing left I should grow Phlegmatic with gulping too
much of the Milk of Love, thought it convenient to make a Posset of my Humor,
and therefore did very zealously hasten me to put forward, that so we might
arrive before it was dark at some House of Entertainment, where he was in hopes
to curdle and sour my Inclinations to the Milk-Maid we lately saw, with a
Bottle or two of good Wine. So we agreed to walk to Buckingham; and just as we
were advancing on the Highway, we encountered a Congregation of Ducks, very
seriously wadling along, and I suppose some important Affair was in Agitation
among them, for they were occupied in earnest, cackling one to another: What
was the Subject Matter of their Discourse, I thought not good Manners to ask,
but by the gravity of their Gate, the Sageness of their Countenances, and the
Politic nodding of their Heads, I guessed that all the Worms in their way
would incur a praemunire, or that they were going to serve a quo-warranto upon
the Spiders. Philaret conceited, by their peeping into every hole they espied
in the Bands as they went along, that they were like the Churchwardens,
hunting the Alehouses for Company on a Sunday Night: Whether the Comparison
will hold or not, I leave the Learned to judge; but this I can make Affidavit
of, That this platfooted Deta^chment were very scrutinous and busy in their
Rounds, scarce a Pismire could escape without taking a Note of her Abode. I saw
one of these cackling Inquisitors Kidnap a poor silly Worm before it had sipt,
being just crept into the little blind housing-ken of a neighboring Puddle.
Another Spirited a Fly; a third snaps a Spider which she found within the
Confines of a certain Diminutive Lough in the Wheel-Tracks. I must confess I
had the least Compassion for the fate of the Spider, because I humbly conceived
she was but served in her kind; her whole Life being spent in trepanning and
murdering of Flies; a Creature I cannot but sympathize withal, not only for her
rambling Humor, but also for another laudable faculty, common to us both,
which is, breeding of Maggots. But though I did not much condole the Death of
the Spider, yet methought the Comportment of the Duck toward her
Snipper-snapper-ship, was an Emblem of the common course of this World, where
the greater Vices generally devour the lesser, and both of them join to destroy
the Virtues.

Philaret and I leaving this Assembly of Ducks to their Emblematical Game,
jogged on toward Buckingham: We had not gone a Bow-Shot e're we were accosted
by three very great Hogs, who seemed to be Swine of profound Intreigue by their
plodding Aspect, and we could evidently discern the Signatures of a deep
forecast on their very Snouts, so that by this and the other outward
circumstances of their Skins, we guessed they had been making no ordinary or
shallow Experiments in a Quagmire. They saluted us en passant with two or three
Complemental Gruntles, and proceeded in their Peripatetick Speculations, whilst
we pursued our Journey.

We arrived at Buckingham just as the Sun was taking the Bath, and the Earth
was putting on her black Pyramidical Nightcap. The place we designed to have
taken up our Quarters in that Night, was the Ship-Tavern; but before we got
thither, we were (as it were) constrained by the extreme courtesy of half a
dozen lusty Press-Masters to turn aside into another Lodging. These
Land-Pirates jumped upon us out of their Cabin, a little Alehouse as we went
along, and coming up with full Stern of us, quickly grappled, and towed us back
again to their Den, seeming to discover much good Manners to Strangers, for
they gave us the Right Hand of Fellowship, and placed us at the upper end of a
close Box where they were drinking, seating themselves by us on each side; and
to make us as easy as they could, they took from us our Canes. By their
Converse they seemed to be Men of lofty Notions, for every Word they spoke was
Laced with an Oath of the First Rate, lo^d as Thunder! and high as Heaven! I
offering to run, one of 'em breaks my Pate^ (...)* I took patiently; saying,
What Is all this to (...) Man that has read Seneca? But Philaret by his Natural
Eloquence so charmed 'em both, that they let him go untouched. And indeed to
resent like him when it is proper, is the Action of a complete Man. Good Humor
makes a Good Tongue: It Is a great Art in Life to know how to sell Air: Words
answer almost every thing, and nothing is impossible for them. The Mouth should
always be full of Sugar to sweeten the words; for Enemies themselves can then
relish them: Courtesy does not give but engage, and the gallant way of it
renders the Obligation the greater. Nothing inslaveth a grateful Nature like a
free Benefit, he that conferrs it on me, steals me from my self; Favors tho
imparted, are not gifts, but purchases, that buy Men out of their own Liberty.
I know not that I am ever sadder than when I am forced to accept Courtesies
that I cannot requite. If ever I should affect injustice, it should be in this,
that I might do Courtesies and receive none.

And indeed Philaret by the Art of Complaisance even made 'em good Humored
whether they would or no; yet my Companion and I found no great Temptation to
tarry in their Company: And therefore sending for a Friend or two, that were
Housekeepers in Buckingham, to avouch our Quality, we were dismissed.

From hence we adjourned to the Ship Tavern, where we caress our Minds, and as
I may say, cully our selves out of our more watchful and importunate Thoughts,
with the wheadli^^^ (...) sinuations of Sparkling Canary. Our (...)



snatched us from the Jaws of the Sea-bums, obliged us with their Company, and
with an Account of some Observables in the Town of Buckingham, (where we now
were) and also with a Description of the whole County, of which this is the
chief Town.

Buckingham is the shire Town of this County, fruitfully seated upon the River
Ouse, and was fortified formerly with Rampires, and a strong Castle mounted on
a high Hill, whereof nothing now remains but some small signs of such a place.
The Shire it self is divided into eight Hundreds, wherein are fifteen Market
Towns, a hundred eighty five Parish Churches, and is in the Diocese of Lincoln;
out of it are Elected fourteen Parliament Men; For the County 2. Buckingham. 2.
Chippin-Wincomb. 2. Alisbury. 2. Agmondisham. 2. Wendover 2. and Marlow 2. It
gives Titles to George Villiers Duke of Buckingham, and Robert Bruce Earl of
Ailsbury.

BVCKINGHAM-SHIRE has on the East Hertfordshire and Bedfordshire, on the West
Oxfordshire, on the North Northamptonshire and Huntingdonshire, and on the
South Hertfordshire; it has its name from the plenty of Beech-trees, which the
Saxons call Bucken, with which the Country was formerly so overrun, that it was
altogether impassible, and became a Refuge for Thieves and Robbers, and
occasioned that Proverb in this Country, Here a Bush, and there a Thief, for
which cause they were cut down.

The Country generally is of a rich plentiful Soil, and passing full of
Inhabitants, who chiefly ^mploy themselves in grazing of Cattle, and (...) laud
and praise of the Shire be it spoken, here is in it great plenty of Mutton
Evanders so much admired Food.
The Chilteen, (a Place so called in this Country) got that Name according to
the very Nature of the Soil of Chalky Chilt.

In 1665. Ian. 20. about six a Clock at Night there was an Earthquake in some
parts of Buckinghamshire, which was attended with a unusual kind of noise in
the Air, but was quickly over; it much affrighted some People on the sudden, to
hear their Chairs and Stools quake under them, and to hear Tables and such
things to clatter in the Rooms, and the whole House to shake.

King Will. the Conqueror gave a Manor, and certain Yard-lands in
Buckinghamshire to a Person upon this Condition, That the Possessor or Owner
thereof should find Straw or Litter for the Kings Bed whenever he came that
way; which shows what an alteration there is as to matter of Grandeur since
that time. The best and biggest bodied Sheep in England, are in the Vale of
Ailsbury in this County, where it is nothing to give Ten pound or more for a
Breed Ram; so that should a Forreigner hear the price thereof, he would guess
that Ram to be rather some Roman Engine of Battery, than the Creature commonly
so called.

Foreigners much admire at our English Sheep, because they do not (as those in
other Countries) follow their Shepherds like a pack of Dogs, but wander all
abroad; and the Popish Priests tell their ignorant Folks, That this
disobedience of our Sheep happened to us, because we have left their great
Shepherd the Pope, (a very profound Reason.)

Roger Wendover was born at a Market Town of that Name in this County, and was
bred a Benedictine in St. Albans, where he became the Kings Historian; and it
is observable, that our English Kings had always a Monk, generally of St.
Albans (as being near London, the Staple of News and Books) to write the most
remarkable passages of their Reigns, and some add, that their Chronicles were
locked up in the Kings Library, and were never suffered to be opened in that
Kings, nor his Sons life; if so, they had a great encouragement to be
impartial, not fearing a blow on their Teeth, though coming near to the heels
of Truth; as being hereby in some kind tied up from doing them any hurt; this
Roger began his Chronicle at the Conquest, and continued it to 1235. which
Matthew Paris and others carried down further after his Death.

The Lady Hester Temple, Wife to Sir Thomas Temple, was born at Latimers in
this County, she had four Sons and nine Daughters, who lived to be Married, and
so exceedingly multiplied, that this Lady saw seven hundred extracted from her
own Body; Vives tells of a Village in Spain of about an 100 Houses, whereof all
the Inhabitants issued out of one certain old Man who then lived, and says, the
Spanish Language did not afford a Name whereby the Youngest should call the
Elder, since they could not go above the Great Grandfathers Father; but had the
Offspring of this Lady been contracted into one place, they were enough to
have peopled a City of a competent proportion, though her issue was (...) so
long in succession as broad in ^xtent: this Lady dyed in 1656.

Sir Edward Cook, that Famous Commentator of the Law was born in this Shire.
This great Man at length growing weary of a public Employment, retires into
the To a little Village called Waterstock, in Oxfordshire.
Country; where falling in love with a private Life, he ended his days, A^tat.
82. An. Dom. 1641. Like him,

Evander's Choice.
Grant me, indulgent Heaven, a Rural Seat,
Rather contemptible than great;
Where though I taste Life's sweets, still I may be
A thirst for Immortality.
I would have Business, but exempt from strife,
A private, but an active Life.
A Conscience bold, and punctual to his charge,
My stock of Health, or Patience large.
Some Books I Would have: and some Acquaintance too,
But very good, and very few:
Then, if one Mortal two such Grants may have,
From silent Life I Would steal into my Grave:
I Would live unthought of, and unheard of die,
And grudge Mankind my very Memory.
Oh the Blessings of Privacy and Freedom! the Wish of the greatest, but
Privilege only of mean ones. It was Augustus's Prayer, That he might live to
retire, and deliver himself prom public Business.

To think a Man shall be safe and quiet when he is great, it is Statute Madness:
For my own share I do declare, That when I retire into my little Grotta, in the
midst of a fine Wood, near a Crystal Stream, there I find happiness and
content beyond an Imperial Crown: Here I observe the Lady Flora to cloth our
Grandam Earth with a new Livery, diaper'd with pleasant Flowers, and checkered
with delightful Objects; there the pretty Songsters of the Spring, with their
various Music, seem to welcome me as I pass along; the Earth puts forth her
Primroses and pretty Dayses to behold me; the Air blows with gentle Zephyres to
refresh me; here I find such pleasure, with a Gusto relevante, that I could bid
adieu to Alcinous, Adonis, and Lucullus Gardens, and would not envy the
Thessalians for their Tempe: If I were Epicurus (the Master of Pleasures) I
should wish to be all Nose to smell, or else all Eyes to delight my sight.

If I lie under the protection of Heaven, a poor Cottage for retreat is more
worth than the most magnificent Place: Here I can enjoy the riches of content
in the midst of an honest poverty; here undisturbed sleeps, and undissembled
joys do dwell; here I spend my days without cares, and my nights without
groans; my innocence is my security and protection.

Here are no Beds of State, no Garments of Pearl or Embroidery, no materials
for luxury and excess; the Heavens are my Canopy, and the glories of them my
Spectacle; the motion of the Orbs, the courses of the Stars, and the wonderful
order of Providence are my contemplation.

My Grotta is safe, though narrow, no Porter at the door, nor any business for
Fortune; for she has nothing to do, where she has nothing to look after.

Here I am delivered from the tumults of the World, free from the drudgery of
business, which makes us troublesome to others, and unquiet to our selves; for
the end of one appetite or design is the beginning of another.

I value Epicurus's (...), live closely, beyond a Diadem; and must say with
Crates, That Men know not how much a Wallet and security of Mind is worth. A
Beggar may be as magnanimous as a King; for what can be greater or braverthan
for a poor Man to live in contempt of the World?

This is the Way to Heaven which Nature has chalked out, and its both secure
and pleasant; there needs no train of Servants, no pomp or equipage to make
good our passage, no money or letters of credit for expenses upon the voyage;
but the graces of an honest mind will secure us upon the way, and make us happy
at our journies end.

Similis, Captain of the Guard to Adrian the Emperor, having passed a most
toilsom life, retired himself, and lived privately in the Country for seven
years, acknowledging that he had lived only seven years, and caused on his
Monument to be engraven, Hic jacet Similis, cujus aetas multorum annorum fuit,
ipse septem duntaxat annos vixit.

You perhaps ( Readers) have more Friends at Court than Kainophilus has, a
larger Train, a fairer Estate, and more illustrious Title; but what do I care
to be outdone by Men, in some cases, so long as Fortune is overcome by me in
all.

Zeno hearing Theophrastus commended above any of the Philosophers, for his
number of Scholars, It Is true (said Zeno) his Quire is larger than mine, but
mine has the sweeter Voices; so others may have more Lordships, ample
Possessions, and larger Territories; but I have the sweetest life, because more
retired.

Nothing comes amiss to me, but all things succeed to my very wish; there is
here no wrangling with Fortune, no being out of humor for Accidents;
whatsoever befalls me, it is God's pleasure, and it is my duty to bear it: In
this state I feel no want; I am abundantly pleased with what I have; and what I
have not, I do not regard; so that every thing is great, because it is
sufficient.

What is all the Glory and Grandeur of the World, or the great Territories in
it, to that happiness which I do now possess and enjoy?

The whole compass of the Earth to me seems but a Point, and yet Men will be
dividing into Kingdoms and Dominions.

King Philip receiving a fall, in a place of wrestling, when he turned himself
in rising, and saw the print of his Body (in the Dust) Good God (said he) what
a small portion of Earth has Nature assigned us, and yet we covet the whole
World!

For a Man to spend his life in pursuit of a Title, that serves only when he
dies to furnish out an Epitaph, is below a wise Man's business. To Seneca the
whole compass of the Earth seemed but a Point, and all the greatness thereof
only matter of sport. If you look upon the brave Palaces, renowned Cities,
large Kingdoms, you may compare them to those little Houses of Sand, or Dirt
made by Children for their Entertainment, which Men stand by and laugh at. How
ridiculous then are the Titles as well as the Contests of Mortals! Such a
Prince must not pass such a River, nor another Prince those Mountains; and why
do not the very P^smires canton out their Posts and Jurisdictions too? For what
does the bustle of Troops and Armies amount too, more than the business of a
swarm of Ants upon a Molehill. Alas, where is Xerxes's Army now? Can they now
walk in Battle array? or thunder about their Tombs?

Walking 'tother day through Fleet Street, I will have the Wall, cried one. Yea
(said I) take the House too, if you can agree with the Landlord. I confess I
had a months mind to draw, but upon kinder thoughts to my self, and out of mere
compassion to a tender Carcass, I began to remember, that Honor would not
fetch me to life again; ( Alas, Reader, I would not be killed, to be Lord Mayor
of the City of London!) and that the punctilio's of Birth were not worth a
Duel; I therefore recommended the Safety of my Body to the Protection of my
Feet, and fairly left Mr. Huff to enjoy his humor. And to speak the truth, the
Scene of all the most important Actions here below, where both at Sea and Land
we tug and scuffle for Dominion and Wealth, is but a very Trifle. My good
Friend, the King of France enquiring where Holland was in the Map, was desired
to remove his Thumb, that hid it; which made him break forth into wonder at its
narrow extent, and large bustle it kept in the World. Holland is scarce a
Thumb's breadth, and the Universe little more; then what a poor Ambition is it
to be the Greatest Man in a City? What Is a City to a Shire? What a Shire to the
whole Island? What this Island to the Continent of Europe? What Europe to the
whole Earth? What that Earth to a Star (the least of which (if I may be
believed) is Eighteen times bigger than it?) What that Star to Heaven? and that
to the Heaven of^ Heavens? And so by a Retrogradation, how little, how nothing
is the poor Glory of the Greatest Monarch? For within the hollow Crown that
rouuds the mortal Temples of a King, Death keeps his Court, and there the
Antique sits scoffing his State, and grinning at his Pomp, allowing him a
breath, a little Scene to Monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks, infusing
into him with self and vain conceit, as if the Flesh which walls about his life
were Brass impregnable; but being a little while humoured thus,

Comes Death at last, and with a little Pin
Bores through his Castle Walls, and farewell King.
To use the very words of a late Poet.
What though it does appear,
We came in with the Conqueror?
Impartial Death will no Excuses hear.
Valor and Wit, Magnificence and State,
Are sorry Pleas to unrelenting Fate.
Which quickly will this fatal truth evince,
How little less a Beggar's than a Prince.
One way or other all must die,
The Peasant and the Crowned Head,
The same dark Path must tread,
And in the same cold Earth both undistinguisht lie;
(Whilst the sad Soul her Voyage takes
Through gloomy Fens, and Stygtan Lakes,
Unable to procure a longer stay,
Into Eternal Exile sails away.)
Now he that seeks satisfaction in the highest enjoyments in the World, as in
Honors and Grandeur of Condition, how soon does his mind nauseate the
Pleasures of it, and how quickly does he feel the thinness of a popular breath.
Those that are so fond of Applause while they pursue it, how little do they
taste it when they have it; like Lightning it flashes on the Face, and is
quickly gone, and it is a wonder if it leaves not a blast behind it.

It Is true, it is fit and necessary that some Persons in the World should be in
love with a splendid Servitude; yet certainly they must be much beholding to
their own fancy, that they can be pleased at it. For he that rises up early,
and goes to Bed late, only to receive Addresses, to read and answer Petitions,
is really as much tied and abridged in his freedom, as he that waits all that
time to present one.

In a word, if it is a pleasure to be envied and shot at, to be malign'd
standing, and to be despised falling, and to endeavor that which is
impossible, which is to please all, and to suffer for not doing it, then is it
a pleasure to be Great. These are Truths verified by the best of Demonstration,
which is the woeful Experience of the highest Favorites of Fortune in all Ages.
Let Seneca speak for all in his incomparable Ode on this Subject: In truth,
(says he) to see our Kings sit all alone at Table, environed with so many
Servants prating about them, and so many Strangers staring upon them, as they
always are, I have often been moved rather to pity than to envy their
Condition. It would never sink into my fancy, that it could be of any great
benefit to the Life of a Man of sense, to have twenty People prating about him
when he is at Stool. So that in truth, the advantages of Sovereignty, are, upon
the matter, little more than imaginary.

Well, I have thought on it, and I find
This busy World is nonsense all:
I here despair to please my mind,
Her sweetest Honey is so mixed with Gall.
Well then, I Will try how it is to be alone,
Live to my self a while, and be my own.
Here, in this shady lovely Grove,
I sweetly Think my hours away;
Neither with Business vexed, nor Love,
Which in the World bear such tyrannick sway.
Let Plots and News embroil the State,
Pray what is that to my Books and me?
What ever be the Kingdoms fate,
Here I Am sure to enjoy a Monarchy;
Lord of my self, accontable to none,
Like the first Man in Paradise alone.
The uneasy Pageantry of State,
And all the plagues to thought and sense
Are far removed, I Am placed by fate
Out of the Road of all Impertinence:
Thus though my fleeting Life run swiftly on,
'Twill not be short, because it is all my own.
Then let us go and talk of Wills, and not of Births and Grandeur. And yet not
so, for what can we bequeath save our dull Bodies to the ground; our Lands and
Lives (if we are Loyal) are the King's, and nothing can we call our own but
Death, and that small model of the barren Earth, which serves as Paste and
Cover to our Bones.

And thus Reader you see many Liberties may be taken in a private condition,
that are dangerous in a public.

I can walk alone where I please, without a Sword, without Fear, without
Company; I can go and come, eat and drink, without being taken notice of.

What with our open and secret Enemies, we are never secure, but these are the
Infelicities and Miseries of Courts, not of Cottages: Servitude is the Fate of
Palaces.

What are Crowns and Scepters, but Golden Fetters and Splendid Miseries, which
if Men did but truly understand, there would be more Kingdoms than Kings to
govern them.

A great Fortune is a great Slavery, and Thrones are but uneasy Seats.

If Heaven shall vouchsafe me such a Blessing, that I may enjoy my Grotta with
content, I can look upon all the great Kingdoms of the Earth a so many little
Birds-Nests.

And I can in such a Territory prude my self as much as Alexander did, when he
fancied the whole World to be one great City, and his Camp the Castle of it.

If I were advanced to the Zenith of Honor, I am at the best but a Porter,
constellated to carry up and down the World a vile Carcass; I confess my Mind
(the nobler part of me) now and then takes a walk in the large Campaign of
Heaven, and there I contemplate the Universe, the Mysterious Concatenation of
Causes, and the stupendous Efforts of the Almighty, in consideration whereof I
can cheerfully bid (...) to the World. Depone hoc apud te, nunquam plus agere
Sapientem, quam cum in conspectu ejus, Divina atque Humana venerunt.

You will find by Experience (which is the best Looking-glass of Wisdom) that a
private Life is not only more pleasant, but more happy than any Princely State.
Then

Happy the Man who his whole time does bound Cowly.

With the enclosure of his little ground:
Happy the Man whom the same humble place,
(The Hereditary Cottage of his Race)
From his first rising Infancy has known,
And by degrees sees gently bending down
With natural propension to that Earth
Which both preserved his Life, and gave him Birth.
Him no false distant Lights by Fortune set,
Could ever into foolish Wanderings get:
He never Danger either saw or feared,
The dreadful Storms at Sea he never heard:
He never heard the shrill Alarms of War,
Or the worse Noises of the Lawyers Bar:
No change of Consuls marks to him the Year,
The change of Seasons is his Callender:
The Cold and Heat Winter and Summer shows,
Autumn by Fruits, and Spring by Flowers he knows:
He measures Time by Landmarks, and has found
For the whole Day the Dial of his Ground.
This Man the Day by his own Orb does prize,
In the same Field his Sun does set and rise.
He knows an Oak, a Twig, and walking thither,
Beholds a Wood and he grown up together:
A neighboring Elm born with himself he sees,
And loves his old contemporary Trees:
The very House that did him erst behold
A little Infant, sees him now grown Old;
And with his Staff walks where he crawled before,
Counts the age of one poor Cottage and no more.
Thus Health and Strength he t'a third Age enjoys,
And sees a long Posterity of Boys.
About the spacious World let others roam,
The Voyage Life is longest made at home.
I can easily believe that Dioclesian, after his retreat from the Empire, took
more content in exercising the Trade of a Gardener in Salona, than in being
Emperor of Rome; for when Maximianus Herculeus writ to him to resume the Empire
(which he had with much felicity governed for twenty years) he returned this
Answer, That if he would come unto Salona, and observe the rare Productions of
Nature, and see how the Coleworts, which he had planted with his own hands, did
thrive and prosper, he would never trouble his Head with Crowns, nor his Hands
with Scepters.

This made Scipio, after he had raised Rome to be the Metropolis of almost the
whole World, by a voluntary Exile to retire himself from it, and at a private
House in the middle of a Wood, near Linternum, to pass the remainder of his
glorious Life no less gloriously.

There is no Safety, no Security, no Comfort, no Content in Greatness: This
made a Great Man say, Requiem quaesivi and non inveni, nisi in Angulo cum
Libello: I have sought for rest and quiet, but could not find it but in a
little corner with a Book. Vive tibi, and lon^e no^^na magna fuge.

O the Sweetness and Pleasure of those blessed Hours that I spend apart from
the Noise and Business of the World! How calm, how gentle, not so much as a
Cloud or breath of Wind to disturb the Serenity of my Mind! The World to me is
a Prison, and Solitude a Paradise.

Give me then, with Sir Edward Cook, a retired Life, a peaceful Conscience,
honest Thoughts, and virtuous Actions, and I can pity Caesar.

But whither do I ramble again? It Is time now to return to Philaret.

Come, Philaret, let us be jogging! for if we stay thus long in a place, we
shall never get Round the World.

Then farewell Buckingham till we meet again. After an hours travel in Dust and
Sun, Philaret and I fancied we saw a little Cottage; and indeed all the
following Rambles are little more than a History of what might be;

Yet whatsoever of Fiction I bring in,
It Is so like Truth, it seems at least a Kin.
This little Cottage (as we found at our arrival thither) was inhabited only by
those peaceful Animals called Hogs. And now the liquid Silver gushing from the
Welkin, we here begged for shelter: And a great deal of Complements we had
about the introducing us into their Enchanted Castle, which will run much
better in Pindarick-Doggerel, than plain Verse.

Kainophilus. By your Civil and complaisant.
leave Mr. Hog!
If one may be so bold to presume,
For your Betters make room.

Hog. You unmannerly A rude ill bred Swine.
Dog,
To wheedle one out of ones place;
When the Wind and the Rain drive so fast in ones face.

Kainoph. In vain all the Herd to your succor you call,
For in spite of the Proverb the strongest now goes to the wall.

Hog to his Herd. Come then my dearest dirty Loves,
(My choice Seraglio large as Jove's)
Let Us away to Chestnut Groves
And there secure our Droves.

And They all retire with their whole Crew, for other lodging.
ramble and gruntle and ramble again,
'Till Heaven take pity and dry up the Rain.
Philaret and I being indifferently refresht by virtue of this shelter, we went
forward very courageously, and after a little time, we saluted a good handsome
Town, called Ailesbury.

This Ailesbury is a fair Market Town, compassed about with many most pleasant
green Meadows and Pastures, of which the whole Vale is termed the Vale of
Ailesbury.

How many Alehouses there were in this Town, Philaret and I had not time to
number, only we saw the signs of some horned Beasts, as the Bull, the Ram, etc.
But what the People are that dwelt therein we know not, but guess you may have
good Liquor there for your money. As for the Cage and Stocks there, let those
that have been in them, give you a description of them.

During our stay in Ailesbury was solemnized a Westminster-Wedding, (as the
Learned have it) a Couple so fit for one another and no body else, that
Bridewel in conjunction with Newgate could not have afforded so suitable a
match, they were pleased, honorably attended with a Regiment of Broom-men,
Kitchinstuff Merchants and Pickpockets, etc. to repair to Ailesbury- Church,
where having tied the unslipping knot in their return homewards, the wind
began to rise between Mr. Bridegroom and Mrs. Bride, which in short time
increased to so dreadful a storm, that their Vessels fell foul on each other.

Mr: Bridegroom in this extremity took his dearest Spouse into his Arms with
such a passionate Embrace, that she almost resigned her last breath in those
Endearments; but having recovered her self from the amorous Trance, she in
requital gave him a Kiss so close, that it fetched off above half of one of his
Ears; he still prosecuting his Fondness gave her a back salute with his Foot,
which she answered by stroaking his lovely Eyes so long with her double Fists,
till he could hardly see: And by these pleasant Love-Toys, endeavoring to
outvy each other in affectionate Expressions, they were so transported in the
open fields for above half an hour, till the Company fearing a surfeit of
delight from such excess of dalliance, interrupted their intwined Arms: so that
Mr. Bridegroom gathering up the ruins of his Peruke, and she decently resitting
her Tresses, and so much as she could find of her Head-geer, at a famous
fountain hard by, repaired the Beauty of her battered Physiognomy; and so both
lovingly retired hand in hand to their poor Habitations, and are like to live
as kindly and as happily as most Couples now adays about Town.

These were the most Remarkable Passages I could learn concerning Ailesbury,
though Philaret and I discoursed of diverse other Matters; but amongst all the
Subjects of our Chat, we handled none so often, and so feelingly, as the Bottle
and the Glass, which were of Momentous Importance to us, because we could not
for ever enjoy them. Strange Infatuation! Preposterous Greediness! To
monopolize that which every Tavern can surfeit us with, and be prodigal of that
which once elapsed, can never be obtained again. Nature is bountiful in every
thing but Time; of that she is a Niggard, and gives it us drop by drop, Minute
by Minute, so that we can never possess two Minutes at once, nor regain one of
them when it is lost: And yet we spend our Time by wholesale, and in the Lump,
as if the Retail Care of Hours and Minutes were below us. It Is said that in the
Globe there is no certain stated first Miridian from whence to derive
Longitude. I am sure in the Extent of Time, there is no Equator to be found
from whence to begin a Latitude. Time runs in a direct Line forward: It is a
rectilinear Series of Moments, and allows no Digression. He that can discover
the least Step toward a Latitude in Time, may claim Letters Patents from Nature
to serve the whole World with new-fashioned Dials, Watches and Clocks, and to
live by this Sideway of duration till Time be stretched as broad as 'twill be
long. But yet notwithstanding this narrow Minuteness of Time, we squander it
away at random, as if we had an inexhaustible Treasure of Ages to dispose of.

Such Thoughts as these, I remember, seasoned our more Insipid Chat; and how
crude and raw soever our Evenings Conversation had been, these Reflections like
a desert of Condited Fruits, gave a good Farewell, and at length closed up our
Banquet. So Philaret and I, after this short view of the Town, betook our
selves to Bed, where I desire you to let us rest an hour or two; and then I
shall awake in a Humor more diverting than hitherto.

Phoebus had no sooner cried Gee hoe unto his Team, but Philaret and I were
both booted and spurred for a New Ramble.

And believe it Reader! He is truly a Scholar who is verst in the volum of the
Universe, who does not so much read of Nature, as study and contemplate Nature
her self.

After nine hours riding, we arrived at Marlow, twenty miles distant from
Ailesbury, where was an Inn preferred to my acceptance by Philaret's
Commendations, who knew the Servants Names as well as if he had been their
Godfather, though the House never owned his Company but one night.

The Money which I had about me I conveye^ under my Bed, and so to Supper we
went: T^^e House was full of Guests, which made our ^^ost limit his person to a
quarter of an Hours tar^iance with each Company. Every Room did (...) (...) him
of one another, which shows ^^^ough no Man's particular Command had interest in
his service yet) he had least interest in himself.

His Wife supplied his absence to all Companies, for he could do nothing else
but talk to them, and her Tongue was heard every where.

She it is, whose Beauty clips the Wings of a Traveller's swift desire, and
begets the ease of his plodding Breast; for her House appears his Journeys end;
but her Company multiplies the Reackoning above the reach of Arithmetic.
Philaret had the Discourse at Table, which consisted (for the most part) of the
antiquity of his Company, he being a Woollen-Draper. Sometimes he described the
Humors of the Greenwich Usurers, who, as he expressed it, had Hearts of Marble
and Entrals of Brass. All his own proceedings (in Eight years Apprentiship) he
related to me, and how long he fetched up Coals for the Maid, scrapt Trenchers,
and made clean Shoes.

But now my Host and his Wife came both up to stay and talk with us. Surely he
was the very Maidenhead of his Mother, begot, his Father being asleep, or but
Practitioner in that Art, as appeared by the Workmaship of his Face and Body,
so ill favored and deformed was he. Her shape proclaimed Nature prodigal of
her riches, and vainglorious of her cunning, so generally handsome was she; yet
seemed to dote upon his Feature; it is wondrous strange, but Love is blind;
which made my Muse (though dulled with a gross Supper) sing thus:

Let ^one hereafter dare to blame
The Gods, for making Cupid blind.
Lest his offense be plagued with shame,
And all Men's hate, besiege his mind.
For by this Couple we do plainly prove,
That without blindness, there could be no Love.
Our Hostess fell fast asleep as she sat by the fire side; her Husband waked
her with saying, She was always sleeping or talking. This stirred up a strange
frivolous question; Why a Woman is more drowsy and talkative than a Man?

I made answer thus; Because she was made of Adam's Flesh when he was asleep;
secondly, she was made of his Rib, the Rib lies near to the Heart, the Heart is
Master of Thoughts, and Thoughts beget Words. This liked our Landlord so well,
that he desired to be farther acquainted with me: But it now growing late,
Philaret and I went to Bed.

Morpheus destroy these vigilant Carriers, these unquiet disturbers of Rest,
that bawling (like Demi Cannons) rent the Porches of my Ears. Were my Eyelids
cut off, I could not be wider awake than I am now, though it be just three a
Clock; the time when Spirits, Ghosts and Faires visit Tombs and Churchyards,
whose unsubstantial Shapes steal away our Motion, scare our Reason from us. Yet
durst I go round the World, unarmed with Beads, or blessed with a Crucifix; wear
my Soul within my Scabbard, my Life tied to my Heel, as careless of success;
with such an angry Valor was I inspired at that time, because deprived of
Sleep.

But by and by, the modest Morn blushed in the East; and the Sun (to recompense
those Tears shed by weeping Plants) showed forth his Head, gilding the Tops of
lofty Trees, placed there by unequal Nature to intercept that Comfort which
Shrubs lose by their low humility.

The elevated Lark leaves his dewy Bed to welcome him, and drops down tired, by
striving to climb higher than his Voice. I bid farewell to sleep' and called up
the Chamberlain, who brought me word, Philaret (being very sick) desired my
Company. To his Chamber I went, found him groaning in the Bed, encompast with
Tokens of his Wives careful Love; three Night-Caps, two Waste-coats, a large
Tiffany to keep his Neck warm, two pair of Italian-Drawers, and a little
Down-Cusheon: which being thrust into his Codpiss makes his Br -- (forsooth)
unsensible of a hard Saddle or a trotting Horse. His Sighs kindled great pity
both in my self and the Hostess, whose Experience was his Physician, and
brought him a Posset cleared with the juice of sundry Herbs.

But Art now proves a Bungler! All her Culinary Medicines could not tune Nature
into Harmony again, or make Philaret fit for another Ramble.

For alas! No sooner had he swallowed the Posset, but he falls into a deep
Trance.

Upon this my Hostess and I (who sat by his Bedside like the very pictures of
Sorrow) thinking his Soul had taken an irrecoverable step into the other World,
fall to work, strip him naked, and laid him out in a Winding Sheet as a
suitable banquet to entertain the expecting Worms.

But just as we were putting the black Cloth of Death over his Eyes, we
perceived him breath, upon which we fell to chaffing and ^ubbing his Head and
Feet till we had reduced his wandering Senses to their former office and vigor.

Having thus dragged back his rambling Soul (that had been all this while
clambring up the Celestial Battlements for a glimps of the promised Land)
Don-Iohn-Kainophilus (who was almost ready to burst with joy to see so dear a
part of himself risen from the dead) being curious to know what strange Sights
he had seen in his Trance, he gave me the following account, as near as I can
remember it, from his own mouth.

My dear Kainophilus;
In the midst of the silent night as you and my Landlord were sitting by my
Bedside, I fancied that a blew mist came over my Eyes and doz'd my Senses;
when methoughts a lovely Youth clad in a glorious garb stood by me, and with
beaming Eyes so dazzled me with Rays of Light, that I was much amazed; but long
he paused not, e're he snatched me from you both, and with expanded Wings flew
swift, as I thought, through many Regions paved with Stars and shining with
glittering Fires; where I beheld strange Shapes and heard amazing Voices, and
mounting still higher and higher, at last he brought me within sight of a most
Glorious Palace, whose outside shined with such exceeding Brightness, that I
was obliged sometimes to shut mine Eyes as not capable of steady gazing: At the
Gate stood Throngs of glorious forms in Robes of purest white, with Crowns of
Gold upon their Heads, Palms of Victory in their Hands, and golden Harps in
their Mouths, whereon they played melodiously, ravishing all my Senses with
their charming Voices; and methougts, they seeming in their Songs to express
much Joy at my approach, I was about to enter this Celestial Mansion; but on a
sudden hearing a Voice as loud as Thunder crying, Return, return, for you
cannot enter here till you fling off your Cloths of Flesh: I sunk down like
lightning and just now starting at the supposed Fall, I waked.


And thus to the Admiration of all the World, he lived in Person, as it were to
learn to dye by his own Funeral, and to see it celebrated before his Eyes; and
after he had with abundance of Pleasure viewed his Coffin, Winding Sheet and
Deathbed Shrouds (having a great curiosity to see himself buried in Effigy)
he walked with Kainophilus ten days after to Marlow Chancel to see his Tomb,
that so he might (as he courageously said) Look Death full in the face, and
learn to dye generously.

Oh Noble Courage! that can triumph at the sight of a Tomb!

Oh glorious Action! where Ga^lands of Cypress dispute the Pre-eminence with
Laurel and Palm!

Oh gallant Self-Victory! that so bravely puts a gloss on the Face of Death!

And indeed no one can say he is resolved for Death, that cannot undergo it
with his Eyes open, or meet it the boldest way. Cowards wink when they fight,
but the truly valiant dare face their danger.

One saying to Damidas that the Lacedaemonians w^^e likely very much to suffer,
if they did not in time reconeile themselves to Prince Philip's favor: Why,
you pitiful Fellow, replied he, what can they suffer that do not fear to dye?
It being demanded of Agis, which way a man might live free? Why, said he, by
despising Death. Then who would be a Slave to his fears that is so near the
reach of Liberty? The most voluntary Death is the most brave: Was not Philaret'
s viewing his Grave with pleasure an act of Courage beyond all that we read of
Caesar? And the truth on it is, Living is Slavery if the Liberty of dying were
taken away: The most obliging Present Nature has made us, and which takes from
us all color of complaint of our condition, is to have delivered into our
custody the keys of Life; she has only ordered one door into Life, but a
thousand ways out. It Is true, we may be straightened for Earth to live upon, but
Earth sufficient to dye upon can never be wanting.

Caesar being asked what Death he thought to be the most desired, made answer,
The least premeditated and the shortest: If Caesar dared to say it, it is no
cowardice in Philaret to believe it; however believe it or not, it is all one to
Mounsieur Death, who seeing him recovered of his long Trance, falls now to
twisting his Guts till he died in earnest, so that,

His new Life and his Exit seemed to meet
His swaddling Bands, almost his winding Sheet,
And from his Deathbed he does but arise
To see his Grave; returns again and dies.
Ah Philaret! Must we part then? First let me close thy Eyes, bedew thy Cheeks
a little, compose thy body for the Grave, follow thee thither; and then farewell
till we meet in the other World!

Poor miserable Man! If Fate happen to gild ^o're one Inch of thy unhappy Span,
and lend a ^limpse of Heaven in a Friend; how soon does the beauteous Vision
vanish out of sight?

But why do I sigh and groan -- seeing
'Tw'ont be long before it will be said
Of me, as it is of Phil. Alas! he is dead.
So that now leaving Marlow behind me, and Philaret fast asleep in his Grave,
at least I suppose so, for I could not stay to see him buried. I was resolved
to return for London, and fix there till I had wore out the thoughts of him.

And now going to take leave of my Hostess, I perceived all the House in an
uprore, the Nurse weeping, the Maid howling, Daphne, Molly and Tiddy crying,
the Cat wringing her hands; and all the House in a great perplexity, except old
Towzer, who like a cruel-hearted Cur shed not so much as one single Tear.

Having given 'em the last becken of Farewell, on I troop'd the pace of a Butter
Woman's old Mare, leaving it to the discretion of my Horse to go which way to
London he pleased; so he would but bring me there at night 'twas all I desired,
believing assuredly that it was only in that wherein the very Essence and Being
of all Adventures consisted.

After eight hours Travel in Dust and Sun, safely arrived at London, just as
the Sun (having run his (...)) was prancing down his Western-Hill (...).

Before the Windows of the Day were quite shut i^ I got to my Quarters, where
(being weary) ^^sie Sleep soon drew the fringed Curtains of my Eyes.

By that time, 8 hours repose, like a good Cloth-worker, had set a refreshing
Nap upon my tired and threadbare Limbs, the Sun again like an unwearied
Rambler came dancing over the drousy Hills to unbar the doors of Night, and to
signify to the Skies that they might now, if they please, play the good
House-Wife, and put out their Candles.

This made my Heart dance the Canaries in my Breast without the help of a
Violin. For my Patience (you may well imagine) was now on the Tenter-hooks till
I was on my Rambles again.

So jumping out of my nitty Couch, with a courteous design to free my tender Br
-- from the persecution of the lousy Blankets (for my Pockets could not reach
to the gentility of Sheets) I fell to dressing my little dapper self, as trim,
as neat, and as Gay, as if I had set all night between the Comb and the Glass,
or had robbed some Petty-Milliner of all his Nick Nacks; though ('it is a folly to
lie for it) some of my Linen seemed to be of an old or dusty translation. Then
running to the Barbers for a new Face; for you must note, tho my Beard as yet
was but of the third Edition or Cut, (and consequently one downy hair hardly
stood within call of another) yet some supersluous branches there were which
Mr. Snipper-Snapper soon lopt off.

So that now being dressed as it were in print, and sparklishly equipped in Mode
and Figure, I took my Pilgrim's-Staff in one hand, and two (I cannot say a Pair
of) Gloves in the other, and marched very methodically into the City; where I
had not rambled the length of the Royal Exchang, till on every side I was
surrounded with variety of dazzling Objects, the meanest of which was no less
than a Legion of Wonderments to my stupefied Eyes; upon which gaping and
staring as Country Clowns usually do, I soon gazed my self into an Ecstasy.

But scarce had the crimson Blushes of Aurora given the World an intimation of
that glorious Luminarie's approach which was to enlighten it; when there
appeared coming from a stately and magnificent House in Cornhill, so lovely a
Troop of Ladies, that had there yet wanted any thing of day, the Stars might in
modesty have retired from a new Sphere of brighter Constellations; among whom
the Lady Rachelias Beauty had luster enough to intimate the little want there
was of a rising Sun. She advanced at the head of this charming Company toward
the Black Raven in the Poultry; from whence I went in company with them to a
little Island, which composed a Garden, wherein Art and Nature had equally
contributed to captivate the Senses. But soon after our Arrival here, that our
pleasures might be the more undisturbed, we all withdrew to a shady Grotto
wat^^ed with many artificial Springs, which l^y ^n the most retired part of the
Garden. Where after feasting our selves with Cherries ^^d all sorts of curious
Fruits; the Night coming on we parted.

But after three days Rambling about the City and Suburbs, and after as long
feasting my Eyes with Novelties, I began at last to be even tired with
Pleasures, and glutted with City Charms. So that here by a dear-bought
Experience, I found, that the wandering Fancy of Man (nay, that even Life it
self) is a it were but a mere Ramble or Fegary after the drag of something that
does itchifie our Senses, which when we have hunted home, we find nothing but a
mere delusion.

This is the Nature and common Condition of even the most pleasing, sensible
Objects: They first tempt, then please a little, then disappoint, and lastly
vex. The Eye that beholds them blasts them quickly, riffles and destroys their
Glory, and views them with no more delight at first; than disdain afterward.
Hence, there must be frequent diversions; other Pleasures must be sought out;
and are chosen, not because they are better, but because they are new. So that
like Bees in a Garden we hum and rove about from Flower to Flower, and as soon
as we have tasted one and exhausted 'its sweetness, we lave it and fly away to
another, seeking in vain to eternize our Pleasures by a continued circle of
Varieties.

And therefore, Reader, if tempted by an impatient Affection to any thing not
without danger or difficulty attained, catechize your self with this Question,
What Wish, Fortune or Labor ever presented you with, that after a full
fruition did not soon grow tedious; or at best came not far short of what
creaking Expectatlon, had undertaken it should perform?

Randolph.
Fruition with Fruition's burst.
The very Honey of all
Earthly Joy
Does soonest Cloy.
And this I the rather mention, Cowley.
because I do not remember that I have ever had in all my Life the same
thoughts of any good (my Nuptial Tie excepted) in the very time of the enjoying
it as I had before. I have known when I have promised my self vast
satisfactions; and indeed where could I expect more than in London, where in
every Street fine and dainty things lie even trodden under feet, becoming
almost vile through their abundant plenty^ and my Imagination has presented me
at a distance with a fair Landscape of Delights, yet when I drew nigh to grasp
the alluring Happyness like the In Sion Garden.
Sensitive-Plant, it contracted it self at the touch, and shrunk almost to
nothing in the fruition. And though after the Enjoyment is past it seems ^s great
again upon Reflection as it did before in expectation, yet should a Platonical
Revolution make the Circumstances recur, I should not think so. I found 'twas
ever with me as with the Traveller, to whom the ground which is before him, and
that which he has left behind, seems always more curiously embroydered and
delightsome than that which he stands upon; so that my Happiness (like the time
wherein I thought to enjoy it) was always either past or to come, never
present. Methought, I could often say upon a recollection, how happy was I at
such a Time? or when I was in expectation, how happy shall I be if I compass
such a design? but scarce ever I am so, I was highly well pleased, Methoughts
whilst I expected, whilst I hoped for a new sight of London, till fruition
jogged me out of my pleasing Slumber, and I knew it was but a Dream. And this
single observation has often made me even in the very pursuit after Happyness,
and full Career of my Passions, to stop short on this side Fruition, and to
choose rather with Moses upon Mount Nebo, to entertain my Fancy with a remote
Prospect of the happy Land, than to go in and possess it, and then repine. How
then shall Man be happy, when (setting aside all the crosses of Fortune) he
will complain even of Success, and Fruition it self shall disappoint him?

Fruition adds no new Wealth, but destroys;
And while it pleases much, yet still it cloys,
As in Prospects we are there pleased most,
Where something keeps the Eye from being lost,
And leaves us room to guess; so here restraint
Holds up delight, that with excess would saint.
And the reason, I humbly conceive, may be this: In all earthly matters
Expectation takes up more Joy on Trust, than the Fruition of the thing is able
to discharge. Most Men in their own Fancies extract the Pleasures of things
from troubles annexed to them, which when enjoyed must go together; surely a
Good unlooked for is a Virgin Fuller.
Happiness; whereas those who obtained what long they have gazed on in
Expectation, only marry what themselves have deflowred before. No Matters are
so fair as the Pencil of the Expectant lims them out in his Hopes. The first
taste of pleasure indeed is commonly very grateful to us; but after we have
often repeated it, it grows flat, and after that loathsome.

Farewell Fruition, thou grand cruel Cheat,
Which first our hopes do raise, and then defeat:
Farewell thou Midwife to abortive Bliss,
Thou Mystery of Fallacies.
Distance presents the Object fair,
With charming Features, and a graceful Air;
But when we come to seize th'inviting Prey,
Like a shy Ghost it vanishes away.
So to the unthinking Clown the distant Sky
Seems on some Mountain's Surface to rely:
He with ambitious have climbs the Ascent,
Curious to touch the Firmament.
But when with an unwearied pace
Arrived he is at the long wished for place,
With sighs the sad defeat he does deplore,
His Heaven is still as distant as before.
And yet 'twas long e're I could see,
This grand Impostor's frequent Treachery,
Tho often fooled, yet I should still dream on
Of Pleasure in Reversion.
Tho still he did my Hopes deceive,
His fair Pretensions I would still believe:
Such was my Charity, that tho I knew,
And found him false, yet I would think him true.
Thrasonides, a young Man of Greece, having gained a Ladies Consent for
Marriage, refused to enjoy her, that he might not, (as he said) by Fruition
quench and stupi^ie the unquiet Ardor with which he so pleased himself.

But whether do I ramble? How many Miles ( alias Pages) am I again out of my
way? Surely my Readers will think that I have forgotten my self, or my End of
coming to London: But let them if they will, for I Will not trust my self here to
the Heat that so noble a Subject inspires, and shall therefore reserve it for
the next Volume. So that now Exit Bookseller, and enter Author to act all the
^^r Parts.

FINIS

