The VOICE of the NATION, OR, An humble Address to the High and Honorable
Court of PARLIAMENT, for their just Severity to repress the growing Boldness of
Atheism and Profaneness in the Land.
WE cannot but acknowledge with our best thankfulness, your Wise and Godly Care
to continue, and firmly to establish the Heavenly blessing of PROTESTANT
RELIGION among us, and to strengthen this English Monarchy against the
pretended Title and the unwearied Attempts of the Papal Tyranny. A greater
danger calls now upon your Zeal toward God, and Love to your Country, even to
put a stop by your Wisdom and Authority, to the growing Disease of Domineering
Atheism, and both Actual and Doctrinal Blasphemy.

For while you take a godly care that we may continue PROTESTANTS, a Question
is moved openly, Whether we must be CHRISTIANS? and the grounds of Christianity
are (we will not say Undermined, but) boldly battered with unreasonable
Reasons, and the highest Scorn. Whereby your Holy Design of asserting the
Protestant Religion will be eluded: For the least and the first Evil intended
by that Plot of Satan is Indifference of RELIGIONS; and the next (which of it
self will follow) Contempt of all RELIGION.

But in effect it is the old Popish Plot; for it is known that the first Task
of the Emissaries of Rome sent into England is to instill into the minds of
Protestants the Principles of Popery; and when these will not take, then the
Principles of Atheism. The Zeal of Religion being once taken away, these
Craftsmen may with little contradiction work their Politic Interest. Which,
though it be represented as different from that of Religion, yet it is most
evidently true, that the Promoters of Atheism (or they by whom they are acted)
are Agents of the Common Enemy of England, the Court of Rome.

Such men will not fail to suggest unto you the old Maxim, Deorum injury Diis
cure, that the injuries offered unto God, must be left to Gods judgment. But
you have so much Piety and Wisdom happily matched together, as to see that Gods
interest is yours also; and that the Faith, Fear, and Love of God, are the
strength of the State, the Cement of Commerce, and the Guardian of Private and
Public Interesses. They that go about to eradicate these Principles out of the
minds of the Kings Subjects, are the Sworn Enemies of the State, and the
greatest Plagues of Mankind; therefore to be driven from all Societies, and to
be punished as the worst of Malefactors, Enemies to God and Men, and Monsters
in Nature.

A Right Reverend Bishop lately promoted to Heaven, a Person in whom we have
lost one of the soundest Head-pieces of this Age, in his accurate and
seasonable Treatise of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion, after he
has confuted Atheism with mildness, and sanctified solidity, delivers thus
his opinion how Atheists ought to be dealt with in a Christian State; and such
would have been his Vote in the House of Lords.

Whatever Disputes have been raised concerning the lawfulness of punishing men
for their Dissenting Consciences in matter of Religion, yet never any man
questioned the lawfulness of punishing men for their Profaneness and Contempt
of all Religion. Such men as renounce Conscience, cannot pretend that they
suffer for or it. And certainly this Vice deferveth upon many accounts the
greatest severity of Laws, as being in its own nature destructive of the very
Principles of Government, and the peace of all Societies; besides the mischiefs
consequent upon it from the Divine Vengeance. ^98
The same Wise Prelat adds an Observation of Seneca, that several Countries
appoint several punishments for the Violation of Religion, but every Country
appoints some, and it does not any where escape unpunished. If Pagans took
that Order to vindicate False Religions, shall we Christians be less diligent
to Vindicate the only true one?

His Lordship alleges also Plato de Legibus, pronouncing that Atheism ought
to be punished capitally, as of most pernicious consequence to Government. And
truly if words of High Treason against the Kings Majesty be punishable with
Death by the Laws of our Land, it is very unreasonable that words of High
Treason against Gods infinite Majesty should escape unpunished, for want of Laws
to repress the Offenders. That Essential Want, adds much to the Boldness of
such Offenders: For if there be any Statutes against Blasphemy, they are looked
upon as antiquated. And though the offense be Vulgar, yet none (God forgive us)
is indicted for it at any Assizes or Sessions, there being no encouragement for
the Delator.

Yet the abuse of Religion ought to be looked upon as a common Injury, and
every man is concerned to endeavor a Vindication of it, says the same
Religious and Prudent Bishop: And he brings in for it a Rule in the Civil Law,
Religio contaminata ad omnium pertinet injuriam. If every man is concerned in
it, much more a Politic Body. ^d.


And since your Wisdom is sufficiently satisfied that the Scandal is general,
and that this Expostulation is the Voice of every Person in this Land that has
any Piety in his heart, or any tenderness for the Public Preservation, We
crave and expect of you, Noble PEERS and Worthy PATRIOTS, our Vindication of
that Common Injury, and Defense against the daily danger of so many of us, who
(as much as the spiritual danger is more pernicious then the temporal) have
more ground then David to say, Our soul is among Lions, and we lie among them
that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword. Men that set their mouth against Heaven, and with a masterful
impudence affirm that there is none to behold or judge them, cast contempt upon
the Holy Scripture, the Saints mentioned in it, and the very Person of JESUS
CHRIST God blessed for evermore. Men that bear themselves as the Kings of Wit
among a company of Fools; esteeming them no better that own Piety and Religion.

And when pious rational men, that will not be overawed by their
peremptoriness, offer to teach them better, they will be sure to put th^^ out
of that Discourse too serious for them, with their studied Common-places of
Buffonry against Godliness and Conscience. But tho^^^ thereby they be far from
winning their godly Opposers, they stun them with horror, and leave their
memory stuffed and stained (again their will) with their pestiferous
communication.

Such men have no ground to say, that before we call upon Authority to restrain
and punish them, they ought to be convinced of the^^ Error, for so they have
been already, as much as could be done with Learning, Piety, and found Reason.
And so much good has the^^ Wickedness done, that it has given occasion to
excellent Books, and powerful pithy Sermons to that purpofe; several of which
have bee^ Printed by his Majesty's Command. And it has put a necessity upon
our Religious Clergy to bend their Studies to the defeating of tha^ Hellish
Conspiracy, which attempteth to break the Banks of Conscience and Religion,
that Vice may have its full Scope in the World.

But hitherto these holy and rational endeavors have done no other effect (for
any thing we see) toward the vicious Atheists, but to make them more proud and
insulting; without any respect of the Laws of God and Men. We may praise God
that the late godly endeavors against Atheism have powerfully settled the
tempted Christians in their most holy Faith. But Divines may Write and Preach
their heart out, yet men whose God is their Belly and their Lust, will speak
and do what they list.

Since then such pestilent persons are not to be confuted but by Authority, we
humbly crave that Confutation at your hands, as your Wisdom shall think most
sit; justly fearing, that if we neglect to put a timely stop to that ranging
Pestilence, the wrath of our jealous God will break upon us, for not fighting
against those that fight against him.

Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to he like-minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind and one
mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 15.5

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, 1675.


