ARCHITECTURE 1692


AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE ARCHITECTURE OF Uitruvius.

CONTAINING A System of the whole WORKS of that Author.

Illustrated with diverse Copper Plates, curiously engraved; with a Table of
Explanation,

To which is added in this Edition

The Etymology and Derivation of the Terms used in Architecture.

First done in French by Monsr Perrault, of the Academy of Paris, and now
Englished, with Additions.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Swall and T. Child, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
The Introduction.
Article 1. OF the great merits of Vitruvius, and the Excellencies of his
Works. Page 1. Art. 2. Of the method of the Works of Vitruvius, with short
Arguments of every Book. 9. A division of his whole Works into three parts,
whereof 1. treats of Building, 2. Gnomonical, 3. Mechanical. A second division
into three parts, 1. of Solidity, 2. of Convenience, and 3. of Beauty. The
Arguments of the Ten Books. 11, 12, etc.

THE FIRST PART. Of the Architecture that is common to us with the Ancients.
Chap. I. Of Architecture in general.
Art. 1. Of the Original of Architecture, 17. The first occasion of
Architecture; the Models of the first Architects, 19. The Inventers of the four
Orders of Architecture, 20.
Art. 2. What Architecture is, 23. Definition of it; an Architect ought to have
the knowledge of eleven things, viz. Writing, Designing, Geometry, Arithmetic,
History, 24. Philosophy, moral and natural, 25. Physic, Law, Astronomy, and
Music. 26.

Art. 3. What the parts of Architecture are, 27. There are eight parts in
Architecture, viz. 1. Solidity, 27. 2. Convenience, 3. Beauty, 4. Order, 5.
Disposition, 28. 6. Proportion, 7. Decorum, 8. Economy, 32.

Chap. II. Of the Solidity of Buildings.
Art. 1. Of the choice of Materials, 23. Vitruvius speaks of five sorts of
Materials, 1. Stone, 33. 2. Bricks, 34. 3. Wood, whereof diverse sorts are used,
as Oak, Fir, Poplar, Alder, 35. Pine, Cypress, Juniper, Cedar, Larch, 36. and
Olive; 4. Lime; 5. Sand and Gravel, 37. of which several sorts, Pit, River, and
Pozzalane, 38.
Art. 2. Of the use of Materials, 39. Of the Preparation of Stone, 39. Of Wood,
40. Of Bricks, 41. Lime and Sand, 43.
Art. 3. Of the Foundation, 45. In Foundations, to take care that the Earth be
solid, 45. Of the Masonry, 46.
Art. 4. Of the Walls, 47. Six sorts of Masonry, 48, 49. Precautions to be used
in binding the Walls, to strengthen them with Wood, 50. That they be exact
perpendicular, 51. to ease them of their own weight, by Timber or Arches over
doors and windows, and by Butresses in the earth, 53.
Art. 5. Of Flooring and Ceiling, 54. Of Flooring upon the Ground, 54. between
Stories, 55. Open to the Air as Terrass, etc. 57. the Roof, 58. Cornice, 59.
Art. 6. Of Plaistering, 59. For great Walls, For Fresco, 60. for Partitions,
61. For moist places, 61.

Chap. III. Of the Convenience of Fabrics.
Art. 1. Of convenient Situation, 63. That a place be convenient, it ought to
be fertile, accessible in a wholesome Air, not on low Ground or marshy, 64. How
to know a wholesome Climate, 65.
Art. 2. Of the Form and Situation of the Building, 65. The Streets and Houses
of a City to be the most advantagiously exposed in respect to the Heavens and
Wind, 65, 66. The situation of each Room to be according to the use of it; of
Dining-rooms, Libraries, Closets, etc. 67, 68.
Art. 3. Of the Dispositions of Fabrics, 68. The Dispositions of Buildings to
be according to the use of the House, either public or private; of Merchants
Houses; of Country Houses; Of the several Apartments, 70. Of Lights, 71.
Art. 4. Of the convenient form of Buildings, 71. Of the Walls of Cities; Form
of public places, 72. which were different among the Greeks and Romans; of
Stairs and Halls, 72.

Chap. IV. Of the Beauty of Buildings.
Art. 1. In what the beauty of Buildings consists, 74. Two sorts of beauty in
Buildings; 1st, Positive, which consists in the Symmetry, Materials, and
Performance, 75. 2d. Arbitrary, which is of two sorts; 1. Prudence, 2.
Regularity; which consist in the proper providing against Inconveniences, and
observing the Laws of Proportion, 76. The beauty is most seen in the proportion
of these principal parts, viz. Pillars, Piedments, and Chambranles, 78. From
these things result two other, Gender and Order, 73.
Art. 2. Of the five Genders, or sorts of Fabrics, 80. The five sorts are
Pycnostyle, Systile, 80. Diastyle, Areastyle, Eustyle, 81. The Genders to be
always agreeable to the Orders of Architecture, 82.
Art. 3. Of the five Orders of Architecture, 84. The distinction and difference
in the several Orders; consists in the Strength and Ornament; Vitruvius speaks
but of three Orders, 85.
Art. 4. Of things that are common to several Orders, 85. There are seven
things common to all Orders, viz. Steps, 85. Pedastals, 86. the diminution of
Pillars, the Channelings of Pillars, which is of three sorts, 89. the
Piedemont, 90. Cornices, and Acroteres, 93,
Art. 5. Of the Tuscane Order, 93. The Tuscane Order consists in the Proportion
of Columns, in which there are three parts, the Base, the Shaft, and the
Capital, 94. Of Chambranles; and of the Piedement, 95.
Art. 6. Of the Dorick Order, 96. The Dorick Order consists in the proportion;
of the Columns, which have been different at diverse times, and in diverse
Works, 96, 97. The parts of the Column are the Shaft; the Base which it
anciently wanted but has since borrowed from the Attick: the proportion of the
Base, 97 and the Capital, 98. the Archiatrave, which has two parts, the
Platbands and the Gouttes. 98. the Frise, in which are the Triglyphs and the
Metops, 98. the Proportion of them, 99. Of the Cornice, its proportion, 99.
Art. 7. Of the Ionick Order, 101. The preportion of Pillars of this Order,
101. The Pillars set upon the Bases two ways, perpendicular, and not so, 101.
Proportion of the Base, divided into its parts the Plinthus, the Thorus, the
Scotia upper and lower, with the Astragals, 102. Of the Capital, its proportion
and parts, 103. Of the Architrave, wherein to be considered, the proportion it
must have to the Pedestals, and to the height of the Column, 105. to the
breadth at the bottom, 106. and to the jetting of the Cymatium, 106. Of the
Frise and Cornice, 107.
Art. 8. Of the Corinthian Order, 108. This Order different from the Ionick in
nothing but in the Capitals of Pillars, being otherwise composed of the Dorick
and Ionick; the proportion of the Capital, 109. in which are to be considered
its height, its breadth at the bottom, the Leafs, Stalks, the Volutes, and the
Roses, 109. Of the Ornaments, 110.
Art. 9. Of the Compound Order, 110. The Compound is not described by
Vitruvius, it being a general Design, and borrows the parts of the Capital
(which is the only distinction it has) from the Corinthian, Ionick, and Dorick
Orders. 111.

THE SECOND PART, Containing the Architecture that was particular to the
Ancients.
Chap. I. Of public Buildings.
Art. 1. Of Fortresses, 113. In Fortification four things are considered; the
disposition of the Ramparts; the Figure of the whole place, 114. the building
of the Walls; thickness, materials, and terrass; the figure and disposition of
the Towers, 115, 116.
Art. 2. Of Temples, 116. Temples divided into the Greek and Tuscan Fashion; of
the Greek some were round and some square; in the square Temples of the Greeks
three things are to be considered; 1. the Parts, which are five, the Porch, the
Posticum, 117. the Middle, the Portico, and the Gates, which were of three
sorts, viz. Dorick, 118. Ionick, 120. and Attick, 120. 2. The Proportion, 121.
and 3. The Aspect, in respect to the Heavens, 122. and to its own parts, which
were different in Temples with Pillars, and those without Pillars; of Temples
with Pillars there are eight sorts, 122, 123, 124. Round Temples were of two
sorts, Monoptere, 125. Periptere, 126. Temples of the Tuscane Fashion, 126. The
Ancients had fourteen sorts of Temples, 127.
Art. 3. Of public Places, Basilica's, Theaters, Gates, Baths, and Academies,
127. The Fabrics for public Convenience were of fix sorts, I. Marketplaces
of the Greeks of the Romans, 128 their Proportions; II. Basilica's, their
Proportions, Columns, Galleries, and Chalcediques, 128. III. Theaters, composed
of three parts; the Steps or Degrees which enclosed the Orchestra, 125. the
Scene which had three parts, the Pulpit, the Proscenium, 130. and the
Palascenium, 131. And the Walking-places, 131. IV. Gates, which were either
natural or artificial, built three ways, 132. V. Baths, consisting of many
Chambers, their Description, 133, 134. VI. Academies composed of three parts,
the Peristyle, 134. the Xystile, 135. and the Stadium, 136.

Chap. II. Of Private Buildings.
Art. 1. Of the Courts of Houses, 137. The Courts of Houses were of five sorts,
four whereof were made with jettings out, or Pent-houses of four sorts the
Tuscan, 137. the Corinthian, the Tetrastyle, the Vaulted, 138. the fifth sort
uncoverted, 138.
Art. 2. Of the Vestibulum or Entry, 139. The proportion of the Vestibulum was
taken three ways, for the length, breadth, and height, 139. Of the Alley in
the middle, 140.
Art. 3. Of Halls, 140. Three sorts of Halls, the Corinthian, the Egyptian,
and the Cyzican, 141.
Art. 4. Of the Distribution of the Apartments among the Ancients, 142. The
Distribution of the Apartments different among the Greeks and Romans; what the
Difference was, 141.

Chap. III. Of things that equally appertain to Public and Private Buildings.
Art. 1. Of Aqueducts, 143. The manner the Ancients used to take the Level
exactly, 143. Water was brought by Aqueducts, or by Pipes of Lead, or Potters
Work, 144.
Art. 2. Of Wells and Cisterns, 145. The Precautions the Ancients used in
digging their Wells, to discover bad Water, and in making their Cisterns, 145.
Art. 3. Of Machines for carrying and lifting up great Stones and Burdens,
146. Machines for drawing Pillars, 147. Architraves, 147. for raising great
Weights, three sorts; first, with a Handmill; second, with a Windlas, 147.
third, with several Ropes, to be drawn by Men's Hands, 148.
Art. 4. Of Machines for elevating Waters, -- 149. Five sorts; I. The Tympan,
149. II. A Wheel with Boxes. III. A Chain with Buckets. IV. The Vice of
Archimedes. V. The Pomp of Ctesibius. 151.
Art. 5. Of Water-mills for grinding Corn, -- 152. The Water-mills of the
Ancients were like ours.
Art. 6. Of other Hydraulick Machines, -- 153. Three sorts of Water-Machines;
first, for showing the hour, 153. Second, Organs, 154. Third, for measuring the
Way by Water, 154, by Land, 155.
Art. 7. Of Machines of War, 155. Three kinds; I. To dart Arrows, etc. 155. II.
To batter down Walls, 157. III. To cover them in their Approaches to the Walls
of the Besieged, 158.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE TEN BOOKS OF THE ARCHITECTURE OF VITRUVIUS. THE
INTRODUCTION.
ARTICLE I. Of the great Merits of Vitruvius, and the Excellencies of his Works.
THERE are so many things in the Works of Vitruvius that do not directly
appertain to Architecture, that one would think they were less fitted to
Instruct those that have a design to learn the Precepts of this Art, than to
persuade the World that the Author was the most knowing Architect that ever
was, and a Person of the greatest Merit: He had the Honor to serve Julius
Caesar and Augustus, the two Greatest and most Magnificent Princes of the
World, in an Age when all things were come to the highest degree of Perfection.

For one may see in reading his Works, which are full of a wonderful variety of
Matters, which he treats of with a singular Erudition, that this great Man had
acquired that Profound Knowledge which is necessary for his Profession by more
excellent Methods, and more capable of producing something excellent, than the
bare exercise and ordinary practice of a Mechanical Art could possibly Lib. 6.
Preface.
do; being complete in all the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and his great Wit
being accustomed, even from his Cradle, to understand the most difficult
Matters: He had acquired a certain Facility which mere Artizans have not, of
penetrating the deepest Secrets, and all the difficulties of so vast an Art, as
that of Architecture.

Now as it is true that in the Practice and Exercise of Arts, one does not
always easily distinguish the Abilities Lib. 2. Pref.
of those that work in them. The great Capacity of Vitruvius before the
publishing of his Book, which he Composed when he was in Years, had not all the
Esteem it deserved; which he complains of in his Preface, and Lib. 6. Pref.
in the Age he lived; though it was full of the most refined Wits, yet he had
the fortune of others, to find few to defend him from the Surprises and Attacks
of false Reasoning, and from the injustice that prejudice creates, to those who
apply themselves more to cultivate the Talents they possess, than to make
parade of them.

Vitruvius was a Man, who, as to Lib. 2. Pref.
the exterior, made a small Figure, and who had not heaped up great Lib. 6.
Pref.
Riches by the practice of his Profession; and having, as it were, buried Lib.
3. pref.
himself in study, and wholly given himself over to the Contemplation of
Sciences, understood little of the Arts of the Court, or the Crafty Slights of
pushing on his Fortune and making himself considerable; for though he was
bestowed upon, and recommended to Augustus, by the Lib. 3. Pref.
Princess Octavia his Sister, we cannot find that he was employed in any Works
of great Importance. The Noblest Edifice that we can learn that Augustus caused
to be built, was, the Theater of Marcellus; and this was done by another
Architect: And the only Fabric we can find he was employed in was not at Rome,
but at Lib. 6. Pref.
Fano, a very little City; insomuch, that the greatest part of the Architects
of that Age, who had gained the general Vogue, being so ignorant, that they did
not know even (as himself is forced to declare) the first Principles of their
Art: The Quality of a mere Architect was become so Contemptible, that if his
Books had not carried all the Marks of an extraordinary Knowledge, and rare
abilities, and undeceived the World by taking away the prejudice that his small
employ created him, the Precepts he has left us would have wanted that
Authority that was necessary to support them.

For Architecture being an Art that has scarce any other Rule to walk by, in
performing all those Excellencies her Works are capable of, than what we call a
Good Fancy, which truly distinguishes that which is Beautiful and Good from
that which is not so; it is absolutely necessary that one be persuaded that the
Fancy he follows is better than any other; to the end, that this Persuasion
insinuating it self into them that study this Art, it may form in them a
Correct and Regular Idea, which without this Persuasion, would be always
floating and uncertain; so that to establish this Good Fancy, it is necessary to
have one to whom we give great / deference, and who has merited great Credit by
the Learning that is found in his Writings; and is believed to have had
sufficent abilities of choosing well among all Antiquity, that which is most
solid and capable of founding the Precepts of Architecture.

The Veneration we have for the first Inventers of Arts, is not only Natural,
but it is founded upon Reason; which makes us judge, that he that had the first
Thought, and first invented any Thing, must needs have had a fitter Genius, and
a better Capacity for it, than all those that afterward labored to bring it
to its utmost Perfection. The Greeks, who were the Inventers of Architecture,
as well as of other Sciences, having left many Works behind them as well in
Building as in Books, which were looked upon in the time of Vitruvius, as the
Models of what was perfect and accomplished in this Art, Vitruvius chiefly
followed and imitated them; and in the Composition of his Book, gathered from
them all that was to be found Excellent and Rare in all their Works; which
makes us believe, that he has omitted nothing that was necessary, to form the
General Idea of Good and Beautiful, since there is not the least probability
that any thing could escape so Rare a Wit, Illuminated with so many different
Lights.

But because at present the Reputation of Vitruvius is so generally
established, that all Ages have placed him in the first Rank of great Wits, and
that there is nothing necessary to recommend the Precepts of Architecture, but
to prove they were drawn out of his Works: We having here designed to make only
an Abridgment of his Works, we thought it would be necessary to cut off many
things that this Famous Author has drawn out of an infinity of Writers, whose
Works are now lost, and only gives a short Account of the Contents of every
Book, in the beginning of this Abridgment; handling only in this Book, those
Things that directly belong to Architecture; disposing the Matter in a
different Method from that of Vitruvius, who often leaves off the Matter he is
treating of, and takes it up again in another place.

The Order we have proposed to our selves in this Abstract, is, That after
having given an Account in few words of what is contained in the whole Book; we
Explain more particularly what we judge may be serviceable to those that study
Architecture. This Treatise is divided into Two Parts; The First contains the
Maxims and Precepts that may be accommodated to Modern Architecture; the Second
contains all that appertains to the Ancient and Antique Architectures; which,
though often affected, have little that is now made use of, may yet nevertheless
serve to form the Judgment, and regulate the Fancy, and serve for Examples of
things that may be useful.

I make a Distinction between the Ancient Architecture, and the Antique
Architecture, and the Modern; for we call that Architecture Ancient of which
Vitruvius has writ, and of which we may as yet see many Examples in the
Fabrics that remain in Greece. The Architecture which we call Antique, is that
which may be found in the Famous Edifices, which, since the Time of Vitruvius,
were built at Rome, Constantinople, and many other places. The Modern, is that
which being more accommodated to the present use, or for other Reasons, has
changed some of the Dispositions and Proportions which were observed by the
Ancient and Antique Architects.

ART. II. The Method of the Works of Vitruvius, with short Arguments of every
Book.
ALL his Works are divided into Three Parts: The First Lib. 1. Chap. 3.
Treats of Building; The Second is Gnomonical, and treats at large of
Astronomical and Geometrical Affairs. The Third gives Rules and Examples for
making Machines or Engines serviceable, either in War or Building. The First
Part is treated of in the Eight first Books: The Second in the Ninth: The Third
in the Last.

The First Part which relates to Building is twofold, for they are either
public or private. He speaks of private Buildings in the Sixth Book; and as to
that which relates to public Buildings, it is likewise divided into Three
Parts, viz. That which has Relation to Security, which consists in
Fortifications, described in the Third Chapter of the First Book; That which
appertains to Religion, of which he treats in the Third and Fourth Books, and
that which relates to public Conveniences, as Town-Houses, Theaters, Baths,
Academies, Marketplaces, Gates; of which he treats in the Fifth Book.

The Gnomonical part is treated of in the Ninth Book.

The Third Part which treats of Machines, is treated of in the Tenth and Last
Book.

Besides there particular Matters of Architecture, there are Three things that
appertain to all sort of Edifices, which are, Solidity, Convenience, and
Beauty. He speaks of Solidity in the Eleventh Chapter of the Sixth Book; of
Convenience, in the Seventh Chapter of the same Book; and of Beauty through the
whole Chapter of the Seventh Book; which contains all the Ornaments that
Painting and Sculpture are capable of giving to all sorts of Fabrics; and as
to Proportion, which ought to be esteemed one of the principal Foundations of
Beauty, it is treated of throughout all his Works.

But to make it better understood, in what Method every Book explains those
things, we must tell you, That in the First Book, after having treated of those
things that belong to Architecture in General, by the Enumeration of the Parts
that compose it, and of those that are required in an Architect, the Author
explains in particular what choice ought to be made of the Seat where we ought
to Build, as to Health and Convenience; after he speaks of the Foundations and
of the Building of Fortifications, and the Form of Towers and Walls of Cities,
he dilates himself upon the Air and Healthiness of the Situation.

In the Second Book, he speaks of the Original of Architecture, and what were
the first Habitations of Mankind; after he treats of the Materials, viz. of
Brick, Sand, Lime, Stones, and Timber: After which he treats of the different
Methods of laying, binding, and Masonry of Stones. He Philosophizes upon their
Principles, and upon the Nature of Lime, upon the choice of Sand, and the time
of cutting of Wood.

The Third Book treats of the Proportion of the Temples, and of seven sorts of
them which are those called Antes, Prostyle, Amphiprostyle, Periptere,
Pseudiptere, Diptere and Hypaethre. After he speaks of the Different spaces
that ought to be betwxit every Pillar, to which he gives the Five Names
following, (which in the latter Part of this Book shall be more fully
explained, as well as diverse Terms of Art) viz. Pycnostyle, Systyle, Diastyle,
Araeostyle and Eustyle. After that, he gives in particular the Proportions of
the Ionick Order, and demonstrates that it has a Proportion with Humane Bodies.

The Fourth gives the Proportion of the Corinthian and Dorick Orders for
Temples, with the Proportions of all the Parts that compose them.

The Fifth treats of Public Fabrics, viz. of Marketplaces, Theaters,
Palaces, Baths, Schools for Sciences, and Academies for Exercises, and in
Conclusion, of Seaports; and after occasionally discourses at large upon
Music, because, speaking of Theaters, he gives an account how the Ancient
Architects, were in some places of the Theater wont to place Vessels of Brass
to serve for several sorts of tunable Echo's, and augmenting the Voice of the
Comedians.

In the Sixth he teaches what were the Proportions and Forms of private Houses
among the Greeks and Romans, as well in the City as Country; and describes all
the parts of the House, viz. the Courts, Porches, Halls, Dining Rooms,
Chambers, Cabinets and Libraries.

In the Seventh he treats of the manner of making use of Mortar for Plaster and
Floors; how Lime and the Powder of Marble ought to be prepared to make Stuck.
He speaks likewise of the Ornaments that are common to all sorts of Buildings,
as Painting; and all sorts of Colors, as well Natural as Artificial, that the
Ancients made use of.

In the Eighth he speaks of Waters, and Rivers, and Fountains; viz. of their
Springs, of their Nature, and Properties; how they are to be sought; and of the
Conduits that are to bring them to Cities and Villages.

The Ninth is wholly Gnomonical, and teaches the manner of making Sun-Dials,
and gives an account of the Rules of Geometry, how to measure solid Bodies. He
discourses at large of the Course of the Stars, and the particular Description
of those that are called Fixed Stars.

The Last is taken up wholly in the Description of making Machines to lift up
great Weights, and others for several uses; viz. for the Elevation of Water for
Corn-Mills, Water-Organs and Measuring the Way as well by Sea as by Land; but
it chiefly treats of Machines fit for the use of Building and War.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE TEN BOOKS OF ARCHITECTURE Written by VITRUVIUS. PART. I.
Of Architecture that is common to us with the Ancients.
CHAP. I. Of Architecture in General.
ARTICLE I. Of the Original of Architecture.
It Is related by Historians, That Lib. 2. Chap. 1.
Men, who in former times inhabited Woods and Caverns like wild Beasts, first
assembled themselves to make Houses and Cities, which was occasioned by a
Forest that was set on fire, which drew all the Inhabitants together by its
novelty and surprising effects; so that many Men meeting together in the same
place, they found out means, by helping one another, to harbor themselves more
conveniently, than in Caves and under Trees; so that it is pretended, that
Architecture was the Beginning and Original of all other Arts. For Men seeing
that they had success in Building, which necessity made them invent, they had
the Thoughts and Courage of seeking out other Arts, and applying themselves to
them.

Now even as they took Trees, Rocks and other Things that Nature her self
furnished Beasts to harbor themselves under, which were made use of as Models
for the first Houses, which at first were only made of green Turf and broken
Branches of Trees, they made use of them afterward, in the same manner, to
arrive at something more perfect. For passing from the Imitation of the Natural
to that of Artificial, they invented all the Ornaments of Edifices that were
most curiously wrought, in giving them the Form and Shape of those things that
are simply necessary to Lib. 4. Chap. 2.
the most natural Buildings: And the Pieces of Timber of which the Roofs and
Floors of Houses are made, were the Original of Pillars, Architraves, Frises,
Triglyphs, Mutils, Brackets, Corniches, Frontons or Piediments, which are made
of Stone or Marble.

The Pillars which are to be smaller at top than at bottom, were made in
Imitation of the Boles or Trunks of Trees, and their use was taken from the
Carpenters Posts that are made to support the Building. The Architraves which
are laid across many Pillars, represent Summers that join many Posts together.
The Frises imitate the Muring that is raised upon the Summers betwixt the ends
of the Beams that are laid directly upon the Pillars. The Triglyphs represent,
the Ceiling or Joyner's work which was made upon the ends of the Beams to
conserve them. The Corniches are as it were the extreme parts of the Joists.
The Modillions represent the ends of the Sheers, and the Dentels represent the
ends of the principal Rafter. The Frontons are made in imitation of the Firms
or Girders, upon which is laid the Roof of the House.

There is likewise another Original of Architecture, which is taken from the
Inventers of the several Orders, and those that added the Ornaments to
embellish them. For it is the common Lib. 4. Chap. 2.
Opinion, that the first Fabric that was made, according to any of the Orders,
was the Temple that King Dorus built in Honor of Juno, in the City of Argos.
And it obtained the name of the Dorick Order when Ion the Conducter of a Colony
which he established in Asia, made many Temples be built according to the Model
of the Temple built by Dorus in Greece.

But the Ionians having changed some of the Proportions and Ornaments of the
Dorick Order, were the Authors of another Order, which was called the Ionick,
according to which, they built a Temple in Honor of Diana. The reason of this
change was, that this Temple being dedicated to a Divinity, which they
represented under the Shape of a Young Lady, they thought it was proper to make
their Pillars more tapering, the better to represent the airy Stature of this
Goddess, and for this reason they adorned it more delicately, adding Bases
which represent the Buskined Ornaments of the Legs and Feet, according to the
Mode of that time; and Made the Channellings deeper to represent the Foldings
and Plaits of a fine light Garment. They put likewise Volutes or Scrowls upon
the Capital, pretending that they imitated the Head-Dress of a Young Lady,
whose Hair Beautifully descending from the top of her Head, was folded up under
each Ear.

Afterward Calimachus an Athenian, embellished the Capitals of the Pillars,
adding to them more Beautiful Volutes or Scrowls, and more in number, enriching
them with the Leaves of Brank Vrsine and Roses. It Is said, That this Capital,
which, according to Vitruvius, makes all the Distinction betwixt the Corinthian
and Ionick Order, was invented by this ingenious Artisan upon this occasion.
Having seen the Leaves of the abovementioned Plant grow round about a Basket
which was set upon the Tomb of a Young Corinthian Lady, and which, as it
happened, was set upon the middle of the Plant. He represented the Basket by
the Tambour or Vase of the Capital, to which he made an Abacus to imitate the
Tile with which the Basket was covered, and that he represented the Stalks of
the Herb by the Volutes or Scrowls, which were ever after placed upon the
Corinthian Capital. See Table the IXth.

This great Artist likewise invented other Ornaments, as those we call Eggs,
because of the Ovals in the Relief which are in the Mouldings of the Corniches
and are like Eggs. The Ancients called this Ornament Echinus, which signifies
the sharp prickly shell of Chestnuts, because they found these Ovals
represented a Chestnut half open, as it is when it is ripe.

He likewise makes mention of another Lib. 3. Chap. 2.
Famous Author, who found out the proportion of all the Parts of a Fabric,
which was Hermogenes; to whom he attributes the Invention of the Eustyle,
Pseudodiptere, and of all that is beautiful and excellent in Architecture.

ART. II. What Architecture is.
ARchitecture is a Science which ought to be accompanied with the Knowledge of
a great many other Arts and Sciences, by which means Lib. 1. Chap. 1.
it forms a correct Judgment of all the Works of other Arts that appertain to
it. This Science is acquired by Theory and Practice. The Theory of Architecture
is that Knowledge of this Art which is acquired by study, traveling and
discourse. The Practick is that knowledge that is acquired by the Actual
Building of great Fabrics. These Two Parts are so necessary, that never any
came to any great Perfection without them both. The one being lame and
imperfect without the other, so they must walk hand in hand.

Besides, the Knowledge of things that particularly belong to Architecture,
there are infinite other things that are necessary to be known by an Architect.

For, First, it is necessary that he be able to couch in writing his intended
Building, and to design the Plan, and make an excellent Model of it.

Geometry likewise is very necessary for him in many occasions.

He must also know Arithmetic to make a true Calculation.

He must be knowing in History, and be able to give a reason for the greatest
part of the Ornaments of Architecture which are founded upon History. For
Example, if instead of Pillars he support the Floors of the House with the
figures of Women, which are called Cariatides, he ought to know that the Greeks
invented these Figures to let Posterity know the Victories they obtained over
the Cariens, whose Wives they made Captives, and put their Images in their
Buildings.

It Is necessary likewise, that he be instructed in the Precepts of Moral
Philosophy; for he ought to have a great Soul, and be bold without Arrogance,
just, faithful, and totally exempt from Avarice.

The Architect also ought to have a great Docility which may hinder Lib. 1.
Chap. 11.
him from neglecting the advice that is given him, not only by the meanest
Artist, but also by those that understand nothing of Architecture; for not only
Architects, but all the World must judge of his Works.

Natural Philosophy is likewise necessary Lib. 1. Chap. 2.
for him for to discover what are the Causes of many things which he must put a
remedy to.

He ought also to know something of Physic, to know the qualities of the Air,
which makes Places Healthful and Habitable, or the quite contrary.

He should not be ignorant of the Laws and the Customs of Places for the
Building of Partition Walls, for prospect and for the conveying of Waters and
Sewers.

He ought to know Astronomy, that he may be able to make all sorts of Dials.

It was necessary among the Ancients, that an Architect should have skill in
Music to make and order Catapults and other Machines of War, which were strung
with strings made of Guts, whose found they were to observe, that they might
judge of the strength and stiffness of the Beams which were bended with those
Strings. Music was also necessary in those days for the placing musically
Vessels of Brass in the Theaters, as we have said before.

ART. III. What are the Parts of Architecture.
THere are Three Things which ought to meet in every Fabric, viz. Solidity,
Convenience and Beauty, which Architecture gives them; by the due ordering and
disposition of all the Parts that compose the Edifice, and which she rules by a
just Proportion, having regard to a true Decorum, and well regulated Occonomy;
from whence it follows, that Architecture has Eight Parts, viz. Solidity,
Convenience, Beauty, Order, Disposition, Decorum, Economy.

Solidity depends upon the goodness of the Foundation, choice of Materials, and
the right use of them; which ought to be with a due order, disposition and
convenient Proportion of all Parts together, and of one in respect of another.

Convenience likewise consists in the ordering and disposition, which is so
good that nothing hinders the use of any part of the Edifice.

Beauty consists in the excellent and agreeable form, and the just proportion
of all its parts.

Order is that which makes, that all the parts of an Edifice have a convenient
bigness, whether we consider them apart or with Relation to the whole.

Disposition is the orderly Ranging and agreeable Union of all the parts that
compose the Work; so that as Order respects the Greatness, Disposition respects
Form and Situation, which are Two Things comprised under the word Quality,
which Vitruvius attributes to Disposition, and opposes to Quantity, which
appertains to Order. There are three ways by which the Architect may take a
view beforehand of the Fabric he is to build, viz. First, Ichnography, which
is the Geometrical Plan; Orthography, which is the Geometrical Elevation, and
Scenography, which is Perspective Elevation.

Proportion, which is also called Eurythmy, is that which makes the Union of
all parts of the Work, and which renders the Prospect agreeable, when the
Height answers the Breadth, and the Breadth the Length; every one having its
just measure. It is defined, the Relation that all the Work has with its Parts,
and which every one of them has separately to the Idea of the whole, according
to the measure of any Part. For as in Humane Bodies there is a Relation between
the Foot, Hand, Finger and other Parts; so amongst Works that are Perfect, from
any particular Part, we may make a certain Judgment of the Greatness of the
whole Work: For Example, the Diameter of a Pillar, or the Length of a Triglyph,
creates in us a right Judgment of the Greatness of the whole Temple.

And here we must remark, that to express the Relation that many things have
one to another, as to their Greatness or different Number of Parts, Vitruvius
indifferently makes use of three words, which are Proportion, Eurythmy, and
Symmetry. But we have thought it proper only to make use of the word
Proportion, because Eurythmy is a Greek word, which signifies nothing else but
Proportion; and Symmetry, although a word commonly used, does not signify in
the Vulgar Languages what Vitruvius understands by Proportion; for he
understands by Proportion, a Relation according to Reason; and Symmetry, in the
vulgar Languages, signifies only, a Relation of Parity and Equality. For the
word Simmetria signifies in Latin and Greek Relation only. As for Example, as
the Relation that Windows of Eight Foot high, have with other Windows of Six
Foot, when the one are Four Foot broad, and the other Three: and Symmetry, in
the Vulgar Languages, signifies the Relation, for Example, That Windows have
one to another, when they are all of an equal height and equal breadth; and
that their Number and Distances are equal to the Right and the Left; so that if
the distances be unequal of one side, the like inequality is to be found in the
other.

Decorum or Decency, is that which makes the Aspect of the Fabric so correct,
that there is nothing that is not approved of, and founded upon some Authority.
It teaches us to have regard to three things, which are, Design, Custom and
Nature.

The Regard to Design makes us choose for Example, other Dispositions and
Proportions for a Palace than for a Church.

The Respect we have to Custom, is the Reason, for Example, That the Porches
and Entries of Houses are adorned, when the Inner Parts are Rich and
Magnificent.

The Regard we have to the Nature of Places, makes as choose different Prospects
for different Parts of the Fabric, to make them the wholsomer and the more
convenient: For Example, the Bed-Chambers and the Libraries are exposed to the
Morning Sun; the Winter Apartments, to the West; the Closets or Pictures and
other Curiosities, which should always have equal Light, to the North.

Economy teaches the Architect to have regard to the Expenses that are to be
made, and to the Quality of the Materials, near the Places where he Builds, and
to take his Measures rightly for the Order and Disposition; viz. to give the
Fabric a convenient Form and Magnitude.

These Eight Parts, as we have said, have a Relation to the Three first, viz.
Solidity, Convenience, Beauty, which suppose, Order Disposition, Proportion,
Decorum and Economy. This is the reason that we divide this first Part only
into Three Chapters; the first is of the Solidity; the second of the
Convenience; the third of the Beauty of the Fabric.

CHAP. II. Of the Solidity of Buildings.
ARTICLE I. Of the Choice of Materials.
THE Materials of which Vitruvius speaks are, Stone, Brick, Wood, Lime, and
Sand.

All the Stones are not of one sort, for some are soft, some harder, and some
extremely hard.

Those that are not hard are easily cut, and are good for the Inner Parts of
the Buildings, where they are covered from Rain and Frost which brings them to
Powder, and if they be made use of in Buildings near the Sea, the Salt
Particles of the Air and Heat destroys them.

Those that are indifferently hard, are fit to bear Weight; but there are some
sorts of them, that easily crack with the heat of the Fire.

There is likewise another sort of Stone, which is a kind of Freestone; some
are Red, some Black, and some White, which are as easily cut with a Saw as Wood.

The best Bricks are those which are only dried and not baked in the Fire; but
there are many Years required to dry them well: and for this Reason, at Vtica,
a City of Africa, they made a Law; That none should make use of Bricks which
had not been made five Years: For these sort of Bricks, so dried, had their
Pores so close in their Superficies, that they would swim upon Water like a
Pumice-Stone; and they had a particular Lightness, which made them very fit for
all sorts of Buildings.

The Earth of which these Bricks were usually made was very Fat, and a sort of
White Chalky Clay without Gravel or Sand, which made them Lighter and more
Durable; they mixed Straw with them to make them better bound and firmer.

The Woods which were made use of in all Buildings, are Oak, Poplar, Beech,
Elm, Cypress, Firr; but some of them are not so proper for Building as others.

The Firr, because it has great plenty of Air, and Fire, and but little Earth
and Water, is light, and does not easily bend; but is very subject to Worms and
Fire.

The Oak which is more Earthy lasts for ever under Ground; but above Ground is
apt to cleave.

The Beech which has little of Earthiness, Humidity and Fire, but great plenty
of Air, is not very solid and easily breaks.

The Poplar and the Linden Trees are only good for light Work, they are easily
cut and so finest for Carving.

The Alder is good to make Piles of in Marthy Places.

The Elm and the Ash have this property, that they do not easily cleave, and
that they are pliable.

The Yoke-Elm is likewise pliable, and yet very strong; this is the Reason that
they made Yokes for their Oxen of them in Old Time.

The Pine and the Cypress have this defect, that they easily bend under any
Weight, because of their great Humidity; but they have this Advantage, that
their Humidity does not engender Worms, because of their Bitterness which kills
them.

The Juniper and the Cedar have the same Virtue of hindering Corruption: the
Juniper by its Gum, which is called Sandarax, and the Cedar by its Oil called
Cedrium.

The Larch-Tree has likewise the same Virtue, but its particular property is,
that it will not burn. There is a remarkable Story of this Wood, which is, That
when Julius Caesar besieged a Castle at the Foot of the Alps, there was a
Tower built of this Wood, which proved the Principal Defense of the Place. He
thought to take it easily by making a great Fire at the Foot of the Tower, but
for all this great Fire, the Tower did not suffer the least Damage.

The Olive Tree is likewise very serviceable, if it be put in the Foundations,
and Walls of Cities; for after it has been singed a little, and interlaced
among the Stones, it lasts for ever, and is out of all danger of Corruption.

Lime is made of White Stones or Flinty Pebbles, the harder the Stones are
which it is made of, the better it is for Building. That which is made of soft
Spongy Stones, is proper for Plastring.

There are five sorts of Sand; viz. Sand that is dug out of the Ground, River
Sand, Gravel, Sea-Sand, and Pozzolana, which is a Sand peculiar to some Parts
of Italy.

The best Sand is that which being rubbed between the Hands makes a little
Noise, which that Sand does not, which is Earthy, because it is not rough.
Another Mark of good Sand is, that when it is put upon any Thing that is White
and shak'd off, it leaves no Mark behind.

The Sand which is dug out of the Earth has all these Qualities, and is
esteemed the best. Vitruvius makes four sorts of it; viz. White, Black, Red,
and Bright like a Carbuncle.

If it happen that there be no good Place to dig Sand in, we may make use of
Sea-Sand, or River-Sand, which is likewise better for Plastering than the Sand
which is dug, which is excellent for Building, because it drys quickly.
Gravel likewise is very good, provided the grosser Parts be taken away.
Sea-Sand is worst of all, because it is long adrying; and for this Reason, where
it is made use of in Building, they are forced to desist sometimes till it dry.

The Sand which is found near Naeples called Pozzolana is so proper to make
good Mortar, if it be mixed with Lime, that not only in the ordinary Fabrics,
but even in the very bottom of the Sea it grows into a wonderful hard Body. In
Old Times they made use of it for Moles or Ports of the Sea, for after having
made with Piles and Boards a Partition, they filled up the whole Compass of the
Partition with this Mortar, which dried of it self in the middle of the Water
and became a solid Body.

ART. II. Of the Use of the Materials.
THE first thing we should have a Care of before we begin to build, is, to have
the Stones dug out of the Quarry before they be used, and to expose them in
some open Place, to the end that those which are endamaged by the Air, during
this Time, may be put in the Foundation, and those that prove Durable and Good
may be kept for the Walls above Ground.

We must likewise have a great care of the Wood which we make use of; That it
be cut in a seasonable Time, which is in Autumn and Winter; for then it is not
full of that superfluous Humidity which weakened it in dilating its Fibers, but
it is firm and well closed by the Cold. This is so true, that the Wood of Trees
which grow and become very great in a little Time, by reason of their great
Humidity, is tender and apt to break, and very unfit for Building Which
Experience shows us particularly in those Firrs called Supernates, which grow
in Italy, on that side the Apennine, toward the Adriatick-Sea, for they are
great and beautiful, but their Wood is not good for Building; whereas those on
the other side of the Mountain, which are exposed to Heat and Dryness, called
Infernates, are very good for Building.

This superfluous Humidity endamages Trees so much, that we are sometimes
constrained to make a hole at the foot of the Tree and let it run out, which is
the occasion of the Practice which is observed in cutting of Wood for Building,
to Tap that Tree at the Foot, cutting not only the Bark, but even some part of
the Wood it self, and so leave it for some time before it be Felled.

It is likewise easy to judge of what great Importance the draining of this
superfluous Humidity is for strengthening the Timber, and hindering Corruption,
Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
from this, That those Piles which are interlaced among the Stones in the Walls
and Fortifications of Towns endure for ever without Corrupting, when they have
been burnt a little on the outside.

Bricks ought not to be made use of Lib. 1. Chap. 11.
but in very thick Walls; for this reason they did not build with Brick in
Rome, for to save Ground; they were not permitted to make the Walls of their
Houses above a Foot and a Half thick, which Makes about Lib. 2. Chap. 8.
16 Inches and a half of our Foot.

They likewise never made the top of their Walls with Brick; for the Brick of
the Ancients not being baked, this part of the Wall would have been easily
endamaged; for this reason they built it with Tiles, a foot and a half high,
comprizing the Cornish or Entablature which was made likewise of Tiles to cast
off the Water and defend the rest of the Wall. They likewise chose for these
Cornishes the best Tiles, viz. those that had been long on the top of the
Houses, and given sufficient Proof that they were well baked and made of good
Matter.

The Walling with Brick was so much esteemed among the Ancients, that all their
Fabrics, as well public as private, and their most beautiful Palaces were
built with them. But that which principally made this sort of Building be
esteemed, was its great Duration; for when expert Architects were called to
make an Estimate of Buildings, they always deducted an 80th. part of what they
judged the Building cost for every Year that the Wall had been standing, for
they supposed that the Wall could not ordinarily endure more than Fourscore
Years; but when they valued Buildings of Brick, they always valued them at what
they cost at first, supposing them to be of an Eternal Duration.

To make the right use of Lime and Sand, and to make good Mortar of them, it is
necessary that the Lime be first well Quenched, and that it be kept a long
time, to the end that if there be any Piece of it that is not well burnt in the
Kilo, it may, being extinguished at leisure, soften as well as the rest. This
is of Great Importance particularly in Plastering and Works of Stuck, which is
a Composition of Marble finely beaten with Lime. For if any little Pieces
remain that are not well baked, when they come to be made use of, they crack
and break the Work.

The way to know whether the Lime be well Quenched, is thus: You Lib. 7. Chap.
3.
may thrust a Chip of Wood into it or a Knife, and if the Chip of Wood meet
with any Stones, or that the Knife comes out clean without any sticking to it,
it signifies the Lime was not will burnt; for when it is well Quenched, it is
Fat and will stick to the Knife; but the quite contrary happens to Mortar, for
it is neither well prepared, nor well mixed, if it stick to the Trowel.

For to make the right use of Sand, you must first consider what it Lib. 2.
Chap. 4.
is to be employed in; for if it be Mortar for Plastring, you must not make use
of Sand that was lately dug out, for it drys the Mortar too fast, which cracks
the Plastring; but quite contrary if it be to be employed in Masonry, it must
not have been a long time exposed to the Air, for the Sun and the Moon do so
alter it, that the Rain dissolves it, and turns it almost all into Earth.

The Proportion that Sand and Lib. 2. Chap. 5.
Lime ought to have to make good Mortar, should be three parts of Sand that is
dug, or two parts of River-Sand or Sea-Sand against on of Lime, and 'twill be
yet much better, if you add to the Sand of the Sea and the River a third part
of Tiles well beaten.

One of the Principal Things that Lib. 7. Chap. 3.
is to be observed in making Mortar is, to mix it well. The Grecian Workmen
were so careful of this, that they Tewed it a great while, putting Ten Men to
every Vessel wherein they wrought it, which gave so great a hardness to the
Mortar, that when any big pieces of Plaster fell off the Old Walls, they made
Tables of it.

ART. III. Of the Foundation.
THE Foundation is the most important Lib. 6. Chap. 11.
part of the Fabric; for the Faults committed in it cannot be so easily
remedied as in other parts.

To lay the Foundation well, you must dig till you come to solid Lib. 1. Chap.
5.
Ground, and even into the solid as much as is necessary to support the Weight
of the Walls; it must be larger below than above the Superficies of the Earth.

When you have found firm Earth Lib. 3. Chap. 3.
to make it more solid, you must beat it with a Rammer; but if you cannot
arrive at solid Earth, but find it still soft and spungy, you must dig as far
as you can, and drive in Piles of Alder, Olive, or Oak, a little singed, near
together, and fill up the void Places between the Piles with Coal.

In short, you must make all Masonry Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
with the most solid Stone that can be found for this use.

To make the Binding of the Stones the stronger in the Foundation of great
Fabrics, you must put Piles of Olive a little singed and placed very thick
from one Parement or Courk to another, which serves, as it were, for Keys and
Braces; for this Wood so prepared, is not subject to Worms, and will endure for
ever, either in the Earth or in the Water, without the least Damage.

When you would make Cellars, Lib. 6. Chap. 11.
the Foundations must be much larger; for the Wall that is to support the Earth
requires a greater thickness to resist the strong Efforts that the Earth makes
against it in Winter, at which time it swells and becomes more heavy by reason
of the Water it has drunk up.

ART. IV. Of the Walts.
THE right ordering of Stones Lib. 4. Chap. 2.
joined with Mortar, which is called Masonry, is sevenfold; there are three of
them which are of hewed Stone; viz. that which is in Form of a Net, that which
is in Binding, that which is called the Greek Masonry, There are likewise three
sorts of Masonry of unhewed Stones; viz. that which is of an equal Course; and
that which is of an unequal, and that which is filled up in the middle; the
seventh is compounded of all the rest.

The Net-Masonry is that which is made of Stones perfectly squared in their
Courses, and are laid so; that the Joints go obliquely, and the Diagonals are
the one Perpendicular, and the other Level. This is the most pleasing Masonry
to the Sight, but it is apt to crack. See the Figure A. Table I.

The Masonry called the Bound-Masonry, is that, as Vitruvius explains it, in
which the Stones are placed one upon another like Tiles; that is to say, where
the Joints of the Beds are Level, and the Mounters are Perpendicular; so that
the Joint that mounts and separates two Stones falls directly upon the middle
of the Stone which is below.

Some Authors call this sort of Masonry Uncertain, but they are mistaken; for
they read Incerta instead of Inserta it is not so Beautiful as the Network,
but it is more solid and durable. See the Figure BB. Table I.

The Masonry which Vitruvius says is particular to the Greeks, is that, where
after we have laid two Stones each of which make a Parement or Course, another
is laid at the end, which makes two Parements or Courses, and all the Building
through observe this Order. This may be called Double-Binding; for the Binding
is not only of Stones of the same Course one with another, but likewise of one
Course with another Course. See Figure CC. Table I.

The manner of Walling by unequal Courses called Isodomum by the Ancients,
differs in nothing from the Masonry called Bound-Masonry, but only in this,
that the Stones are not hewed. See Figure D. Table I.

The other manner by unequal Courses called Pseudisodomum is also made of
unhewed Stone, and laid in Bound-Work, but they are not of the same thickness,
and there is no equality observed, but only in the several Courses, the Courses
themselves being unequal one to another. See Figure A. Table I.

The Masonry which is filled up in the middle, called by the Ancients
Emplecton, is likewise made of unhewed Stone and by Courses, but the Stones are
only set in order as to the Parements or Courses, but the middle is filled up
with Stones thrown in carelessly among the Mortar. See Fig. FF, GG, H. Table I.

Among all these sorts of Masonry, that will always be best which is made of
Stones of an indifferent size, rather lesser than greater; to the end that the
Mortar penetrating them in more parts may bind them faster, and the strength of
the Mortar does not so soon decay. For we see that the Mortar which is laid in
the Joints or Seams of the greater Stones with time decays and turns to Dust,
which never happens to the most Ancient Fabrics which have been built of
little Stones. From thence we may conclude, that it is ill Husbandry to be
sparing of Mortar.

For this reason Vitruvius proposes another sort of Masonry, which may be
called the Compound Masonry, for it is all the former together, of Stones hewed
and unhewed, and fastened together with Cramp-Irons. The Structure is as
follows: The Courses being made of hewed Stone, the middle place which was left
void is filled up with Mortar and Pebbles thrown in together; after this they
bind the Stones of one Parement or Course to those of another with Cramp-Irons
fastened with melted Lead. This is done to the end, that the abundance of
Mortar which is in the middle may furnish and communicate a sufficient Humidity
to the Joints of the great Stones which make the Parements. See the Figure K.
Table I.

There are many Precautions to be given to make the Masonry more firm and
durable, and these Precautions are common to all the different sorts of Masonry.

When you would have the Walls Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
very thick, for great and heavy Buildings, you must strengthen the inner part
of the Wall with long Piles of singed Olive, which serves for Keys and Braces,
for this Wood being so prepared never corrupts.

It is likewise of great Importance for the strength of Walls, that all be Lib.
6. Chap. 1^.
directly Perpendicular, and that the Chains, the Pillars and Pieds-droits or
Piers be so situated, that solid always answered to the solid; for if Vide Index
there be any part of the Wall or any Pillar that carrys false, it is
impossible the Work should continue long.

There are also two ways of strengthening the Walls, which are either to ease
them of their own weight, or of that of the Earth which they are to support.

The first way of easing is in those Places where there are void spaces, as
above Doors or Windows. These easements may be made two different ways; the
first is to put over the Lintel which supports the Wall, which is over the void
space of the Gates and Windows, two Beams, which lying or resting below
directly upon Pieds-droits or Piers meet together above.

The other way is, to make directly over the void spaces Vaulted Arches with
Stones cut corner-ways and tending to one Center. For the Walls be so
strengthened by the means of these easements, that part of the Wall which is
below will not sink at all being easied of the load of the part that is above,
and if some defect should happen by tract of time, it may be mended without
propping that which is above.

The second way of easing, is, for Walls that are made to support the Earth;
for, besides the extraordinary thickness which they ought to have, they should
have likewise Buttresses on that side next the Earth, so far distant one from
another as is the breadth of the Wall; they ought likewise to have an
Emparement or large Foundation which must be equal to the height of the Wall,
so that they go diminishing by degrees from the bottom to the top, where they
come to equal the height of the Wall.

The effect of these Buttresses is not Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
only to support the Earth by their Resistance, but likewise to lessen its
Efforts when it swells, in dividing it into many parts.

And if it be judged that these Buttresses Lib. 6. Chap. 11.
be not sufficient, the Wall also which supports the Earth must be strengthened
with other Buttresses within.

ART. V. Of Flooring and Ceiling.
THere are four sorts of Flooring, some are upon the Superficies of the Ground,
others between two Stories, others make the Roof of the House in Platform, and
the last is Plat-Fond.

To make those Floors that are upon the Ground, you must first make the Earth
smooth and plain, if it be firm and solid, if not, it must be beaten with a
Rammer with which they ram down their Piles; and after having covered the Earth
with the first Lay or Bed, called Statumen by the Ancients, which was of Flinty
Stones about the bigness of ones Fist, among which was mixed Mortar made of
Lime and Sand. Then they laid the second Bed, which they called Rudus, which
was made of lesser Stones, of which there were three Parts for one of Stone if
they were new, for if they were taken out of old Buildings, five parts of
Stones or Pibbles would be required for two of Lime.

The Greeks had a way of making their Lib. 7. Cap. 4.
Floors in those low places where cold and humidity ordinarily reign, which
freed them from there Inconveniences. They dug the Earth two Footdeep, and
after having beaten it well, they laid a Bed of Mortar or Cement a little
sloping from either side to the Channel, which conveyed the Water under Ground;
they laid a Bed of Coal upon the first Mortar, and having beaten them well,
they covered them with another Cement or Mortar made of Lime, Sand and Ashes,
which they made smooth when it was dry with a Polishing-Stone. These Floors
presently drank up the Water that fell upon them, that one might walk barefoot
without being incommoded by the Cold.

For the Floors which are between two Stories, there must be a particular care
taken, that if there be any Partition below it, that it may not touch the
Flooring for fear lest if the Flooring came to sink a little, it might be broke
upon the Partition which remains firm.

To make these Floorings, the Boards must be nailed at each end upon every
Joist, to the end they may not warp; these Boards or Planks being covered with
Straw, to hinder the Lime from wasting the Timber, the first Bed must be laid,
made of a mixture of Mortar and little Stones a hand breadth, which must be
beaten a long time with Iron-Levers, and so it must make a solid Crust which
must be nine Inches thick; upon it shall be laid the Noyau or Ame, which must
be at least six Inches thick: It must be made of Cement, with which must be
mixed one part Lime for two parts of Cement. Upon the Ame or Noyau Vile Index.
is placed the Parement made with the Rule, afterward it must be scraped and
all the Eminences and Inequality taken away: After that must be laid a
Composition of Lime, Sand and beaten Marble, to fill equally all the Seams or
Joints.

If a Flooring be to be made in the open Air, as upon Terrasses, that may
endure Rain or Frost without any Damage; you must nail upon the Joists two
Ranks of Boards across, one above the other; and having laid the first Bed, as
is said before, it must be Paved with great Square Bricks two Foot Square,
which must be hollowed in the Ends in the Form of a half-Channel, the breadth
of an Inch, which must be filled with Lime mixed with Oil. These Square Bricks
must be higher in the middle, sloping two Inches for every six Foot; that is to
say, a Forty-eighth Part: Upon these Square Bricks must be laid the Ame; upon
which, after it has been well beaten, as well as the rest, must be put great
Square Stones; and to hinder the Moisture from hurting the Boards, it is good
to pour as much of the Lees of Oil as they will soak up.

The under part of the Flooring, and the Plat-Fonds, must be made also with
great Care. To make the Plat-Fonds or Flat-roofs in the Form of a Vault, you
must nail to the Joists of the Boards, or to the Rafters of the Roof, from two
Foot Lib. 5. Chap. 10.
to two Foot pieces of crooked Timber, and Choice must be made of Timber that
is not apt to rot; such as, viz. Cypress, Box, Juniper, and Olive; no Oak must
be made use of, because it will warp and crack the Work. The Joists being
fastened to the Summers, you must fix to them Spanish-Broom with Greek-Reeds
well beaten. These Reeds are in stead of Laths, which at present are made use.
of to make the Eaves of Houses; over these Reeds must be laid a Plaster of
Mortar, made of Sand, to hinder the Drops of Water which may fall from above
from endamaging these Plat-Fonds. After which, the under part must be Plaster'd
pretty thick, making all Places equal with Mortar made of Lime and Sand, that
it may be afterward Polished with Mortar made with Lime and Marble.

The Ancients sometimes made double Vaults, when they were afraid Lib. 5. Chap.
10.
that the Humidity which is engendered, by the Vapors which mount up might rot
the Wood which is upon the Vaults. This Method they principally made use of in
their Baths.

The Corniches which are made use of under the Plat-Fonds, ought to be little,
left their great Jetting out, or Projecture should make them heavy, and apt to
fall. For this Reason they ought to be made of pure Stuck of Marble, without
any Plaster, that all the Work drying at the same time, may be less apt to
break.

ART. VI. Of Plastering.
TO make Plaster that it may continue a long time, and not crack; you must take
Care to lay it on Walls that are very Dry; for if the Walls be Moist, the
Plastering being exposed to the Air, and drying faster than the Walls, will
crack.

To do this Methodically, it must be laid, Bed after Bed, or Lay after Lay,
having a great Care not to lay one Bed till the other be almost dry. The
Ancients put six Lays, three of Mortar made of Lime and Sand, and three of
Stuck. The first Lays or Beds were always thicker than the last, and they were
very careful to make use of no Mortar made either of Sand or Stuck in their
Plastring, that had not been a long time beaten and mixed together; especially
the Stuck, which must be beaten and mixed till it will not stick to the Trowel.

They took likewise a great deal of Pains to run several times over and beat
the Plaster, which gave it a Hardness, a Whiteness, and Polished it so well,
that it shined like a Mirror.

These Plasterings so made, serve to Paint in Fresco upon; for the Colors
being laid upon the Mortar before it was dry, pierced it, and Embodied with it;
so that the Painting could not be defaced though it were washed; which would
easily be washed off if the Mortar were dry.

They likewise laid these Plasterings upon Partitions of Wood filled with fat
Earth, nailing Reeds to them, as we do Laths, and daubing it over with Clay,
and then putting on another row of Reeds across upon the former, and another
Bed of fat Earth or Clay, upon which they laid Beds of Mortar and Stuck, as we
have said before.

For the Plastering of low and moist places, they had a great many other
Precautions, especially within the Lib. 7. Chap. 4.
House; for as what belonged to the Out-part of the House, they contented
themselves to Plaster from the Bottom of the Wall to the height of three Feet,
with Cement.

But as to the Inward-parts of the House, when the Ground without was higher
than the lowermost Flooring; they run up a little narrow Wall against the great
one, leaving betwixt the two Walls only the distance of a Channel or Sewer,
which they made lower than the Flooring, to receive the Water which might be
gathered against the Walls, and let it run out; and to the End they might
hinder the gathering of much Water, by the Vapors which might be enclosed
between these two Walls, they made toward the top of the little Wall Vents to
let it out, and this little Wall was Plastered on the Outside with Mortar and
Stuck, as we have said before.

When the Place was too narrow to permit those Counter-Walls to be made within,
they put hollow Tiles one upon another against the Wall, and placed and
plaster'd them over with Mortar and Stuck. These Tiles which were Pitched over
within, and were Demi-Channels, let the Water fall down into the Sewer, which
sweat from the great Wall, and so let all the Vapors, which were engendered by
Humidity, go out at the Vents.

CHAP. III. Of the Convenience of Fabrics.
ARTICLE I.
ONE of the Principal Things Lib. 2. Praef.
the Architect ought to consider, is the Convenience of the place where he
would Build the Fabric. This is the reason that Dinocrates was blamed by
Alexander, for having proposed him an Excellent Design for Building a City in a
Barren place, and incapable of Nourishing those who were to Inhabit it.

We must then choose a place that is fertile, and has abundance of every
thing; and which has likewise Rivers and Ports capable of furnishing it with
all the Product and Commodities of the adjacent Countries.

The Third thing to be considered is, whether the Air be wholesome; and for
this End, we must choose a high situated place, that it may be less Subject to
Fogs and Mists; it must be likewise far from all Morasses, because the
Corruption that may be caused by the infectious Breath of Venomous Beasts which
commonly are engendered there, makes the place very unwholsom, unless these
Morasses be near the Sea, and situated high, that the Water may fall easily
from them into the Sea, and that the Sea may likewise sometimes overflow them,
and by its Saltness kill all the Venomous Beasts.

It is likewise to be remarked, That a City situated upon the Sea, must needs
have an unwholsom Air, if it be toward the South or the West; for generally
the Heat weakens Bodies, and the Cold strengthens them; and so we see by
Experience, that those who go out of a Cold Country into an Hot, have great
difficulty to keep themselves in Health; whereas on the contrary, the
Inhabitants of Hot Countries who go into Colder, have generally good Health.

The Ancients were accustomed to judge of the Quality of the Air, Water and
Fruits, which might render a place wholesome by the Constitution of the Bodies
of those Beasts which were nourished there, and to this End they consulted
their Entrails; for if the Liver was Corrupted, they conjectured that the same
thing must happen to Men that should Inhabit in that place.

ART. II. Of the Form and Situation of the Building.
AFter having chosen a wholesome place, the Streets must be laid out according
to the most Advantageous Aspect of the Heavens, and the best way will be to lay
the Streets out so, that the Wind may not come directly into them, especially
where the Lib. 1. Chap. 6.
Winds are great and cold.

The Prospect of Private Men's Houses is made more or less Commodious, by the
Openings which are differently made, to receive the Air and the Light ccording
to the Quality of the Parts that are in the Fabric.

For the Cellars, Granaries, and generally all places that we would Lock up, or
keep any thing in, should Lib. 6. Chap. 9.
be exposed to the North, and receive very few Rays of the Sun.

The different Use of the Parts which Compose the Buildings, do likewise
require different Situations for the Dining-Rooms in Winter, and the Baths
among the Ancients, were always turned to the West, for that Situation made
them warmer, because the Sun then shone upon them, about Lib. 6. Chap. 7.
the time they were wont to make use of those Apartments.

The Libraries ought to be turned to the rising Sun, because they are generally
made use of in the Morning; besides, the Books are not so much damnified in
Libraries so situated, as in those which are turned to the South and West,
which are subject to Worms and a certain Humidity which engenders Moldiness,
and consequently destroys the Books.

The Dining-Rooms for the Spring and Autumn, should be turned toward the East,
to the end, that being covered from the great force the Sun has when it is
near Setting, they may be cooler about the time they are to be made use of.

The Summer Apartments must be turned to the North, that they may be fresher
and cooler.

This Situation is likewise very proper for Closets, which are adorned with
Pictures for the Light which is always equal, represents the Colors always
alike.

There must likewise great respect be had to the difference of Climates, for
the Excess of Heat and Cold, require different Situations and Structures; for
the Houses in the Northern parts of the World, ought to be Vaulted, and have
few Openings, and turned to the South; On the contrary in Hot Countries there
must be great Openings and turn to the North; to the End that Art and Industry
may remedy the Defects of the place.

ART. III. Of the Disposition of Fabrics.
THE Disposition or Distribution of Fabrics contributes much to their
Convenience, when each thing is so placed, that it is in a Proper place for the
Use for which the Fabric is Designed; and for this reason the Townhouse and
the Marketplace ought to be in the Middle of the City, Lib. 6. Chap. 6.
unless it happen that there be a Port or a River; for the Market ought not to
be far distant from those places where the Merchandise is.

The Houses of Private Men, ought to be differently disposed, according to the
diverse Conditions of those that Dwell in them: For in the Houses of Great Men,
the Apartments of the Lord, must not be at the Entry, where ought to be nothing
but Portico's, Courts, Peristyles, Halls, and Gardens to receive the great
Number of those who have Business with them, and make their Court to them.

The Houses of Merchants ought to have at the Entry their Shops and Magazines,
and all other places where Strangers are to come about their Business.

The Country Houses ought to have Lib. 6. Chap. 9.
a different Order and Disposition from those of the City.

For the Kitchen ought to be near the Ox-house, so that from their Cratches
they may see the Chimney and the rising Sun; for this makes the Oxen more
Beautiful, and makes their Hair lie better.

The Baths ought likewise to be near the Kitchen, that the Water may be more
conveniently heated.

The Press ought not to be far from the Kitchen, for that will much facilitate
the Service that is necessary for the Preparation of Olives. If the Press be
made of Wooden Beams, it ought to have at least for 16 Foot Breadth, 40 Foot of
Length, if there be but one; or 24, if there be 2.

Not far from the Press, must the Cellar be placed, whose Windows must be
turned to the North, because the heat spoils the Wine.

On the contrary, the Place where the Oil is kept, ought to be turned to the
South; to the End, the gentle heat of the Sun may keep the Oil from freezing.

The Houses for Sheep and Goats ought to be so large, that each of them may at
least have 4 Foot for his place.

The Stables must likewise be Built near the House in a warm place, but not
turned toward the Chimney; for Horses that often see the Fire, are generally
ill Coated.

The Barns and Granaries, as likewise the Mills, ought to be at a pretty
distance from the House, because of the Danger of Fire.

In all sorts of Fabrics, a particular Care must be taken that they be well
lighted; but the Light is principally necessary in the Stair-Cases, Passages,
and Dining-Rooms.

ART. IV. Of the Convenient Form of Buildings.
WHEN we are assured of the Convenience of the place where the City is to be
Built, by the Knowledge we have of the goodness of the Air, of its Fertility,
Rivers and Ports, care must be taken to make Fortifications, which do not only
consist in the Solidity of the Walls and Ramparts, but principally in their
Form.

The Figure or Form of a place ought neither to be Square, nor Composed of
Angles too far advanced, but it must have a great number of Corners, to the end
the Enemy may be seen from all Parts; for the Angles that are so far advanced,
are ill to be defended, and more favorable to the Besiegers than the Besieged.
The Approach to the Walls must be made as difficult as possible.

The most Convenient Form of Public Places, is to have in their Breadth 2
Thirds of their Length; The Greeks made about their Public places Double
Portico's, with Pillars near together, which Supported the Galleries above.

But the Romans finding this great number of Pillars to be inconvenient, placed
them at a greater distance one from another, that they might have Shops well
lighted.

The Stair-Cases of all Public Buildings, ought to be large and straight, and
to have many Entrances, to the End the People may come in and out conveniently;
but we shall speak of this more largely in another Lib. 5. Chap. 3.
place.

The Halls where great Assemblies are to meet, ought to have their Ceiling very
high, and to give them their true Proportion, we must unite the Length and
Breadth, and give the half of the whole for the height of Lib. 5. Chap. 2.
the Ceiling. The Halls where the Ceiling is not so high, must have only their
breadth, and half of their Lib. 6. Chap. 6.
length for their height.

In vast and high places, to remedy the Inconvenience of the noisy Echo, about
the middle of the height of the Wall, must be made a Cornish round about to
break the course of the Voice; which without that, beating against the Walls,
would beat a Lib. 5. Chap. 2.
Second time against the Ceiling, and cause a troublesome double Echo.

CHAP. IV. Of the Beauty of Buildings.
ARTICLE I. In what the Beauty of Building Consists.
BVildings may have two sorts of Beauty, the one Positive, and the other
Arbitrary. Positive Beauty, is that which necessarily pleases of her self;
Arbitrary, is that which does not necessarily please of her self, but her
agreeableness depends upon the Circumstances that accompany her.

Positive Beauty, consists in Three principal Things; viz. In the Equality of
the Relation that the Parts have one to another, which is called Symmetry, in
the Richness of the Materials, in the Properness, Neatness, and Exactness of
the Performance.

As to what regards the Relation of the Parts of the Fabric one to another,
Vitruvius has not spoke of it, but only where he prefers the Netway of Walling
before all other sorts of Masonry, because of the Uniformity that is in that
Figure, and the laying Lib. 2. Chap. 8.
of the Stones; As to the Richness of the Materials, he leaves the Disposition
to him that is at the Expenses of Lib. 1. Chap. 2.
the Building; and he acknowledges that the Beauty of the Performance depends
wholly upon the Dexterousness Lib. 6. Chap. 11.
and Industry of the Workmen.

The second sort of Beauty, which only pleases by the Circumstances that
accompany it, is of two sorts; The one is called Wisdom, and the other
Regularity. Wisdom consists in the reasonable use of Positive Beauties, which
result from the use and convenient ranking of the Parts; for the Perfection of
which, to a rich and precious Material, is given an Equal and Uniform Figure,
with all the Property and Correctness possible.

Vitruvius gives us two Examples of this sort of Beauty; The first is, When
Bosses or Relievo's are made to hide the Joints, putting them directly under
the Bosses which hide them by their jetting or projecture, for this gives them
great Beauty and an agreeable Aspect.

The second is, When we consider the Winter-Appartments, that we have a care,
that upon the Ceiling there be little or no Carving, and that the Ornaments be
not made of Stuck, because it has a shining whiteness, which will not endure
the least nastiness; for it is impossible to hinder the smoke of the Fire and
Candles which are lighted in the Winter, from tarnishing the beautiful Color
of the Work to which the Filth will stick, and enter into the Crevises of the
Carving, which cannot be wiped out.

The Regularity depends upon the Observation of the Laws which are Established
for the Proportions of all the Parts of Architecture, the Observation of these
Laws extremely pleases those that understand Architecture, who love these
Proportions for two Reasons.

The First is, That they are for the most part founded upon Reason; which
requires, for example, that the parts that support and are under, be stronger
than those above; as we see in Pedestalls, which are broader than the Pillars
they support, and they are broader at the bottom than the top.

The other Motive is Prevention, which is one of the most usual Foundations of
the Beauty of all things, for even as we love the Fashion of the Clothes which
the Courtiers wear, although this mode have no Positive Beauty, but only for
the Positive Merit of the Persons that wear them; so we are accustomed to love
the Proportions of the Members of Architecture, rather because of the great
Opinion that we have of them that Invented them, than for any Positive Beauty
which is found in the Works of the Ancients, where these Proportions are
observed; for often these Proportions are against Reason; as we may see in the
Thorus of the Ionick Base, in the Faces of Architraves and Chambranles, or
Door-Cases, with their Mouldings, where the Strong is supported by the Weak,
and many other things, which Custom only has made supportable.

These Proportions appertain to Three principal Members, which are Pillars,
Piedements, Chambranles; the Pillars taken Generically, and as opposite to
Piedements, and Chambranles or Door-Cases, have Three parts, viz. The Pedestal,
the Pillar, and the Ornaments. Every one of these Parts is likewise divided
into Three other Parts, for the Pedestal is composed of the Basis, its Die and
its Cornish; the Pillar Comprehends its Base, Shaft and Capital. The Ornaments
consist in the Architrave, Frise, and Corniche.

The Piedement or Fronton, has likewise Three Parts, viz. The Tympan, the
Corniches, and the Acroteres. The Chambranle or Door-Case is composed of two
Pieds-droits, or Piers, and the Lintel which also supports a Frise, which has
likewise its Cornich.

The Disposition, Form, and different Proportions of all the Parts make two
things, to which all that is Beautiful in Building has a Relation, which is
Gender and Order.

Gender depends of the Proportion, which is between the thickness of the
Pillars and the space betwixt them.

Order, does likewise depend in part upon the Proportion which is between the
thickness of the Pillars, and their height; but we must likewise join to this
Proportion many other things that appertain to the principal Parts of the
Pillars, and other Parts which accompany it, such as are the Gates, the
Chambranles, or Door-Cases; and other things which are different in different
Orders.

ART. II. Of the Five sorts of Fabrics.
THERE are Five sorts of Fabrics; The First is called Pycnostyle, viz. where
the Pillars are very close one to another, in such a Proportion that there is
but from one Pillar to another, the space of a Diameter and half of the Pillar.
See the Fig. A A. Tab. 2.

The Second is called Systile, viz. where the Pillars seem to be joined
together, are notwithstanding a little more distant one from another than in
the Pycnostile; for the intercolumniation is two Diameters of the Pillars.

The Defect that is observed in the Systile as well as in the Pycnostile is,
that the Entrance of the Fabrics which are placed in that distance are very
narrow: So that Vitruvius remarks that the Ladies as they walk to the Temple
hand in hand, were forced when they came thither to quit one another, because
they could not Lib. 2. Chap. 3.
go two a Breast between the Pillars. See the Figure B B. Tab. II:

The Third is called Diastyle; viz. where the Pillars are further distant, the
space of the Intercolumniation being three Diameters, and the Inconvenience is,
that the space is so great, that the Architraves which lie upon the two Pillars
are in danger of breaking; because the Ancients made them of one Stone. See
Figure C C. Tab. II.

The Fourth is called Areostyle; viz. where the Pillars are set very thin,
there is no certain Proportion, but the distance of one Pillar from another, is
much greater than that of Diastyle; Lib. 3. Chap. 2.
and for this reason it can have no Architrave but of Wood. See the Figure D D.
Tab. II.

The Fifth is called Eustyle; viz. where the Pillars are distant from one
another by a more convenient Proportion than in any of the other kind. The
distance consists of two Diameters of the Pillars, and one Fourth part of the
Diameter: It has also this in particular, That the Intercolumniation in the
middle is larger than the rest, having three Diameters of the Pillars; for this
reason it surpasses all others in Beauty, Solidity, and Convenience. See Tab.
III.

Although the Essentials of these sive Kinds, consist in the Proportion that is
between the Diameter of the Pillar, and its Intercolumniation, they are also
different by the Proportion which is between the Diameter of the Pillar and its
height for the Genders or sorts, in which the Pillars are close one to another,
ought to have the lesser Pillars; and in that kind, where the Pillars are in a
greater distance one from another, they ought to be greater.

But it is true, notwithstanding that these Proportions are not always observed,
and that very often, to the Ionick and Corinthian Pillars, which are the
smallest of all, Intercolumniations are given, whichp are proper to those of
the Thuscan Order, where Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
the Pillars are the greatest.

But the Ordinary Practice is, to give to the Pillars of the Areostyle kind,
the Magnitude of the 8th part Lib. 3. Chap. 2.
of their height.

As to the Diastyle and Eustyle, the height is divided into Eight parts and an
half, to give one to the breadth.

In the Systyle Kind, the Height is divided into Nine parts and an half, and
one is given to the thickness.

In the Picnostyle, the thickness of the Pillar is the 10th part of the height,
the reason of these different Proportions is founded upon this, that these
Pillars do seem to lose of their thickness according as they are in Proportion
great or long; and it is likewise for this Reason, that it is thought convenient
to have the Pillars in the Corners thicker by a 50th part. See Tab. II. and
Tab. III.

ART. III. Of the Five Orders of Architecture.
THE Five Orders of Architecture are, the Thuscan, the Dorick, the Ionick, the
Corinthian, and the Compound.

These Orders were Invented to satisfy the Design that might be had of making
Fabrics more or less Massy, and more or less adorned, for the Distinction of
these Orders consists in two things, that as the Thuscan and Dorick Order are
more massy and less adorned, so the Corinthian and Compound are Slenderer and
Richer, the Ionick holds the Middle, as well in its Proportions, as its
Ornaments, being less massy and more adorned than the Thuscan and the Dorick,
and more massy and less adorned than the Compound and the Corinthian.

Though Vitruvius has only divided Architecture into Three Orders; viz. The
Dorick, the Ionick and the Lib. 4. Chap. 1. Praef. 4. Lib. 4. Chap. 7.
Corinthian; he does not for all that forget to give the Proportions of the
Thuscan, and speak of the Compound.

ART. IV. Of Things that are Common to several Orders.
BEfore we treat of the Differences of these Five Orders, it would be proper to
speak of those Things that are common to several Orders; as are the Steps,
Pedestals, the Diminution of Pillars, their Channelling, Piedements, Cornices,
and Acroteres.

The Steps which are before the Temple, ought always to be of an unequal
Number, to the end, that having put the right Foot in mounting Lib. 3. Chap. 3.
the first Step, it may likewise be upon the last.

They ought not to be more than 6 Inches 10 Lines high, nor less than 6 inches.

Their breadth ought to be proportioned to their height, and this Proportion
ought to be of 3 to 4; so that if the Steps be 6 parts high, which is 3 times
2, they must be 8 broad, Lib. 9. Chap. 2.
which is 4 times 2; following the Proportion of a Triangular Rectangle
invented by Pythagoras.

The Landing-places ought not to be narrower than 16 Inches and an half, nor
broader than 22 Inches, and all the Steps that are round about a Lib. 3. Chap.
3.
Fabric should be all of the same breadth.

The Pedestals which support many Pillars of the same Rank, will be much
handsomer if one make them jet out before every Pillar like a Joynt-Stool; for
otherwise, if the Bases were all of one size, they would resemble a Channel.

If Leaning-places, or Elbow-places are to be betwixt the Pedestals, it is
necessary that they be as high as the Pedestals, and that the Cornices of the
Pedestals, and of the Leaning or Elbow-places be equal, and have a true
Proportion one to another.

All the Pillars ought to go diminishing toward the top, to augment their
Strength, and render them more Beautiful, imitating the Bodies of Lib. 5. Chap.
1.
Trees, which are greater at the Bottom than at the Top. But this Diminution
must be lesser in the great Pillars which have their highest part further from
the Sight, and which by Consequence makes them at the top seem lesser,
according to the ordinary Effect of Perspective; which always diminishes
Objects according to the measure Lib. 2. Chap. 2.
that they are distant from the Eye.

The Rule of this different Diminution is, that a Pillar that is 15 Foot high,
ought to have in the upper part 5 parts of 6 in the which the Diameter of the
Base of the Pillar is divided; that which is from 15 to 20 Foot, ought to have
5 and an half of the 6 and an half of the Diameter; that which is from 20 to
30, ought to have 6 of the 7 parts of the Diameter; that which is from 30 to
40, must have 6 and an half of 7 and an half of the Diameter; that which is
from 40 to 50, must have 7 of 8 of the Diameter. These Diminutions do not
belong to the Thuscan Order, whose Pillars are much more diminished; as we
shall show hereafter.

Besides this Diminution which is made toward the top of the Pillar, there is
another below, which makes the Pillar about the middle swell like a Belly; the
measure of this swelling is taken from the magnitude of this Lib. 3. Chap. 3.
which makes up the Distance between the Channels.

There is another sort of Diminution of Pillars, which is made of one Pillar in
respect of another; It is of 2 sorts, viz. when a second rank is placed upon
the first, for then the second Pillar must be lesser a fourth part than those
below, or when Portico's are made that have Pillars in the Corners, for those
in the middle must be less than Lib. 3. Chap. 2.
those in the Corners, a 50th part.

The Channellings are so called, because they are as it were Demi-Channels,
which descend from the top of the Pillar to the bottom; they represented the
Plaites of the Garments of Women, which the Pillars resembled. Lib. 4. Chap. 1.


There are three sorts of Channellings, the two first are particular and proper
to the Dorick Order; the third is common to the Ionick, Corinthian and
Compound: The two first are more plain and simple, and fewer in number Lib. 4.
Chap. 3.
than the others.

The most Simple is that which is not hollowed at all, and which has only Pans
and slat Fronts or Faces.

The other is a little hollowed; to make this hollowness, a Square must be
made, whose Side must be equal to the Pan, in which the Channelling is to be
made, and having put one foot of the Compass in the middle of the Square, make
a crooked Line Lib. 2. Chap. 3.
from one Angle of the Channelling to the other, both these Channellings are
made up to the number of Twenty.

The other Orders have 24, and sometimes 32, when it is designed to make the
Pillars seem greater than they are; for the Eye judges that all things are
greater when they have Lib. 4. Chap. 1.
more and different Marks, which lead as it were the Sight to more Objects Lib.
4. Chap. 4.
at once.

These Channellings are deeper than those of the Dorick Order, and the depth
ought to be just so much, that a Carpenter's Rule being put into the Cavity,
touch with its Angle the bottom, and with its sides the two Corners of the
Channelling. Vitruvius has not taught us what the Proportions of the
Channelling should be, in respect of the Fillet which makes up the space
between the Channellings, nor what the breadth of the Fillet should be, which
he has established for the rule of the swelling Belly of the Pillar.

The Piedement is composed of a Tympan and Cornices; to have the true height of
the Tympan, we must divide the breadth which is between the two ends of the
Cymatium of the Larmier, or Drip which supports the Piedement, into 9 parts,
and give one to the Tympan.

The thickness of the Cornice being added to this 9th part, makes up the height
of the whole Piedement or Fronton.

The Tympan ought to be Perpendicular upon the Gorge of the Pillar, the things
that are common to all Cornices are, that the Cornice of the Piedement must be
equal to that below, excepting the last great Cymatium, which ought not to be
upon the Cornice below the Piedement, but it ought to go over the Cornices
which are sloping upon the Piedement or Fronton.

This great Cymatium ought to have of height an 8th part more than the Crown,
or Drip, or Larmier.

In places where there are no Piedements, in the great Cymatiums of the
Cornices, must be cut the Heads of Lions, at such a distance, that there must
be one directly upon every Pillar, and that the other answer directly upon the
great Dalles, that cover the House. These Heads of Lions are pierced through to
convey the Water which falls from the Roof upon the Cornice: The Heads of the
Lions which are not directly upon the Pillars, ought not to be pierced, to the
end the Water may flow with the greater impetuosity through those which are
directly upon the Pillars, and that it may not fall between the Pillars upon
those who are to go into the Portico's.

The Greeks in their great Buildings never put any Dentels under the Modillons,
because the Rafters could not be under the Forces, or Sheers, and it is a great
fault that That, which according to the true Rules of Building ought to be
placed above, should be placed under in the Representation.

For this Reason, the Ancients never approved of Modillons in the Piedements,
nor of Dentels, but only simple Cornices; for neither the Forces, Sheers, nor
the Rasters can be represented in the Piedements, out of which they cannot jet
but only directly out of the Eaves of the House upon which they lie sloping.

The Acroteres are three Pedestals, which are upon the Corners and Middle of
the Piedement to support Statues; those of the Corner ought to be as high as
the Middle of the Tympan; but the Acrotere in the middle ought to be higher by
an 8th part than the other.

All the Members or Parts which shall be placed upon the Capitals of Pillars,
viz. Architraves, Frises, Cornices, Tympans, and Acroteres, should incline
forward the 12th part of their height.

There is likewise another General Rule; which is, that all the parts that jet
out, should have their Projecture equal to their Height.

ART. V. Of the Thuscan Order.
IT has been said that all Buildings have three Parts, which may be different
according to the diverse Order, viz. The Pillars, the Piedements, and the
Chambranles, or Door-Cases; and that the Pillars had three Parts, which are the
Pedestal, the Shatt, and its Ornaments, viz. The Architrave, the Frise and the
Cornice.

Neither the Proportion of the Pedestals, nor of the Gates and Chambranles of
the Thuscan Order are to be found in Vitruvius.

The Proportion of the Pillar is Lib. 4. Chap. 7.
this, that its thickness below is the 7th part of its height, it is Diminution
is the 4th part of the Diameter of the Pillar, its Base has half of the
Diameter of the Pillar for its height, the Plinthus being round, makes one half
of the Base; the other half is for the Thorus, and for the Conge or Apophygis,
Vid. Conge explained.

The height of the Capital is half the Diameter of the Pillar, the breadth of
the Abacus is equal to the whole Diameter of the Pillar at the bottom, the
height of the Capital is divided into three Parts; one of them is allowed the
Plinthus, which serves instead of an Abacus; the Echine has another; and a
third Part is for the Gorge of the Capital comprehending the Astragal, the
Conge, or Apophygis, which are immediately under the Echine.

Upon the Pillars must be laid the Sabliers, or Wooden Architrave, joined
together by Tenons, in the form of a Swallows Tail.

These Sabliers ought to be distant one from another about an Inch; for if they
should touch one another, the Timber would heat and corrupt.

Upon these Sabliers which serve for an Architrave, must be built a little
Wall, which will serve instead of a Frise.

The Cornice which is laid upon this little Wall or Frise, has Mutal's which
jet out.

All the Crowning should have the 4th part of the height of the Pillar. The
little Walls that are built between the ends of the Beams which rest upon the
Pillars, must be garnished and covered with Boards, which must be nailed upon
the ends of the Beams.

The Piedement, which may be either of Stone or Wood, and which must support
the Faistag or Top, the Forces, and the Pans, has a particular Proportion; for
it must be much raised to give it a sufficient sloping for the running of the
Water. See Tab. V.

ART. VI. Of the Dorick Order.
THE Dorick Pillar has had in diverse times, and in different Buildings,
different Proportions; for at first it had only for its height 6 times its
Diameter; this Proportion imitating that of Humane Bodies, in which the length
of the Foot is the Lib. 4. Chap. 1.
6th part of all the Body, afterward they allowed 7 times its Diameter.

But this Proportion that the Pillars of the Temples had at the Beginning, was
afterward changed in that of the Theaters, where they were higher by half a
Diameter; for they made them 15 Modules high, for in the Dorick Order the
Semi-Diameter of the Pillar at the bottom is the Module, which Lib. 5. Chap. 9.
in other Orders is a whole Diameter.

The Dorick Pillar is composed as well as the rest of a Shaft, Base and
Capital, though Vitruvius makes no mention of the Base; and it is easy to
conclude, that in the Ancient Buildings this Order had none; for it is said,
That when they would make the Ionick Order more Beautiful than the Dorick, they
added a Base to it; and there is yet to be seen in Ancient Lib. 4. Chap. 1.
Buildings of this Order, Pillars without a Base; but when a Base is added to
it, it must be Attick Base, whose Proportion is as follows.

The whole Base ought to have a Module for its height; that is to say, half the
Diameter of the Pillar; this Module being divided into three parts; one is for
the Plinthus; the other two parts are divided into four, of which one is
allowed for the upper Torus, the three which remain, are divided into two: The
half below is for the lower Torus, the other is for the Scotiae, comprising the
two little Squares or Filets. The breadth of the Basis in General is a 4th of
the Diameter of the Pillar at the bottom, added on every side; but this jetting
is excessive, and without any Example, and Vitruvius himself makes it lesser in
the Ionick Base.

The height of the Capital as well as the Base is one Module, the breadth is
two Modules and an half, the height of the Capital being divided into three
parts, one must be allowed for the Plinthus or Abacus, with its Cymatium; the
other is for the Echine, with its Anulets; the third appertains to the Lib. 4.
Chap. 3.
Gorge of the Capital.

The Architrave which comprehends its Platte-Band with the Gouttes or Pendant
Drops, which are under the Triglyphs, is as well as the Capital of one only
Module; the Gouttes or Drops with their little Tringle, ought to have the 6th.
part of a Module, the breadth under the Architrave ought to be equal to that
above the Pillar.

Upon the Architrave in the Eriese ought to be the Triglyphs and the Metops.
The Triglyphs have a Module and a half for their height, and a Module for their
breadth; the Metops are as high as broad; One Triglyph must be placed directly
upon every Pillar, and the Intercolumniation ought to have three; toward the
Corners must be placed the Demi-Metops.

The breadth of the Triglyph being divided into six parts, five of them must be
left in the middle, and the two halfs which remain on the right and the left,
must be for Demi-Graveurs; The part in the middle, and the two last of the
five, must be for the three Feet, and the two which are betwixt the three Feet,
must be for the Graveurs or Channels, which must be hollowed, following the
Corner of the Mason's Rule. The Capital of the Triglyph ought to have the 6th.
part of a Module.

Upon the Capital of the Triglyph is placed the great Cornice, its Jetting or
Projecture, is half a Module and the 6th, part of a Module, its height is half
a Module, comprising the Dorick Cymatium, which is under it.

On the Plat Fonds of the Cornice, must be hollowed little strait ways, which
must answer perpendicularly to the sides of the Triglyphs, and the middle of
the Metops.

Straight upon the Triglyphs must be cut 9 Goutes or Drops, which must be so
distributed, that there may be six length-wise, and three broad-wise; in the
Spaces which are betwixt the Metops, because they are greater than those
between the Triglyphs: nothing must be cut unless it be Foudres. Moreover
toward the border of the Crown must be Carved a Scotia.

Some advance perpendicularly above the Triglyphs, the Ends of the Forces or
Principals to frame the Mutils which support the Cornices; so that as the
Disposition of Beams has caused the Invention of Triglyphs, so the jetting of
the Forces has caused the Disposition of the Mutils, which support the
Cornices. See Tab. VI.

ART. VII. Of the Ionick Order.
THe Proportion of the Pillars of the Ionick Order in the beginning had Eight
Modules or Diameters for their height, but the Ancients quickly added half a
Diameter, when to make this Pillar more Beautiful than the Dorick, not only for
its height, but also for its Ornaments, they added a Lib. 4. Chap. 1.
Base to it, which was not used in the Dorick Order.

The Pillars must be set upon their Bases two ways; for sometimes they were
perpendicularly set, and sometimes not, viz. The outward rows of Pillars; when
there were more Ranks than one; for that part of the Pillar which is toward
the Wall of the Fabric must necessarily be perpendicular, and the outward part
must have all the Diminution, and must lean toward the Wall.

The Pillars that are within the Lib. 3. Chap. 3.
Porch, and are betwixt the Wall and the outward Pillar must stand
perpendicularly.

The breadth of the Ionick Base is the Diameter of the Pillar, to which is
added a 4th. and an 8th. part; its height is half the Diameter; its height
being divided into three parts, one is allowed for the Plinthus, the rest being
divided into seven parts, three are allowed to the Torus above, after equally
dividing the four which remain, the two above are for the upper Scotia, with
its Astragal: The two below are for the lower Scotia, which will appear greater
than the upper, because it extends to the edge of the Plinthus, the Astragals
must have the 8th. part of the Scotia, whose Jetting or Projecture must be the
8th. part of the whole Base joined to the 6th. part of the Diameter of the
Pillar. See Tab VII.

As to the Capital, the Abacus must have in its Square the Diameter of the
bottom of the Pillar, adding to it an 18th. part; half of the Abacus ought to
be the height of the Capital, comprizing the Round of the Volute or Scroll, but
there must be subtracted from the corner of the Abacus a 12th. part and an
half of the height of the Capital, and after the whole thickness of the Capital
must be divided into nine parts and an half, and one and an half must be left
for the thickness of the Abacus, that the Volutes or Scrolls may be made of the
eight which remain; then having left under the Abacus four parts and an half of
these eight, a Line must be drawn in the place which cuts the two across and
the Points of the Section shall be Eyes, which shall have eight parts for their
Diameter; in half the space of the Eye shall be placed the Centers through
which shall be drawn with a Compass the Spiral-Line of the Volate, beginning
the height under the Abacus, and going into the four Quarters of the Division,
diminishing till we come directly to the first Quarter, and giving to every
Quarter a particular Center.

Then the thickness of the whole Capital must be so divided that of nine parts
which it contains, the Volute has the breadth of three under the Astragal, on
the top of the Pillar, which must be directly upon the Eye of the Volute, that
which remains above the Astragal, must be allowed for the Abacus, Channel, and
the Echine or Egg, whose jetting beyond the Square of the Abacus must be of
the same bigness of the Echine or Egg.

The Channel must be hollowed the 12th. part of its breadth.

The Girdle or Cincture, or the lateral part of the Capital, ought to advance
out of the Tailhoir Abacus, as much as it is from the Center of the Eye to the
height of the Echine.

The thickness of the Axis of the Volutes, which is the thickness of the
Volute, seen sideway, and which makes up the extreme parts of that which is
called commonly Balisters, ought not to exceed the magnitude of the Eye. See
Tab. VIII.

These Proportions of the Ionick Capital, are only for Pillars of 15 Foot,
those that are greater require other, and generally the greater Proportions are
required for the Pillars that are greater; and for this reason we have said,
that the higher the Pillars are, the less Diminution they must have; so when
the Pillars are above 15 Foot, we must add a 9th. part to the Diameter of the
Pillar for to give the breadth to the Abacus; to which is never added more than
an 18th. part to Pillars of 15 Foot.

The Architraves shall be laid upon the Pillars with Jettings equal to the
Pedestals, in case they be not all of one size, but in form of Joint-Stools, to
the end Symmetry may be observed.

The height ought to be different, according to the proportion of the height of
the Pillar; for if the Pillar be from 12 to 15 Foot, we must allow the
Architrave the height of half a Diameter of the bottom of the Pillar, if it be
from 15 to 20, we must divide the height of the Pillar into 15 parts, to the
end we may allow one to the Architrave; so if it be from 20 to 25, the height
must be divided into 12 parts and an half, that the Architrave may have one;
and so proportionably.

The Architrave ought to have at the bottom which lies upon the Capital, the
same breadth that the top of the Pillar has under the Capital.

The Jetting of the Cymatium of the Architrave ought to answer the bottom of
the Pillar, the height of the Cymatium ought to be the 7th. part of the whole
Architrave.

The rest being divided into 12 parts; three must be allowed to the first Face,
four to the second, and five to that above, upon which is the Cymatium.

The Frise ought not to be so high as the Architrave by a 4th. part, unless
something be carved there, for then that the Carving may be more graceful, the
Frise ought to be bigger than the Architrave by a 4th. part.

Upon the Frise must be made a Cymatium of height the 7th. part of the Frise,
with a Jetting equal to its height.

The Dentil which is upon the Cymatium, shall have the height of the Face of
the middle of the Architrave, with a Jetting or Projecture equal to its height;
the cutting of the Dentils ought to be so made, that the breadth of every
Dentil may be the half of its height, and the Cavity of the cut which is
between every Dentil may have two parts of three, which makes the breadth of
the Dentil.

The Cymatium which is upon the Dentil, must have the 3d. part of the height of
the Dentil.

The Crown with its little Cymatium must have the same height with the Face of
the middle of the Architrave.

The great Cymatium ought to have the height of an 8th. part more than the
Crown or Drip.

The Jetting or Projecture of the whole Cornice comprehending the Dentil ought
to be equal to the space that there is from the Frise, just to the top of the
great Cymatium, and generally speaking all the Jettings or Projectures shall
have the better grace when they are equal to the height of the Jetting Members.
See Table VII.

ART. VIII. Of the Corinthian Order.
THE Pillars of the Corinthian Order have no other Proportions than the Ionick,
except in the Capital, whose height make them appear slenderer and higher. The
other parts or Members, as the Architrave, Frise, and Cornice, borrow their
Proportions from the Dorick and Ionick Order, Lib. 4. Chap. 2.
having nothing particular, for the Corinthian Modillons are imitated by the
Mutils of the Dorick Order, and the Dentils are the same with the Ionick; this
being so, we have nothing to do but to give the Proportions of the Capital,
which are these; The Capital comprizing the Abacus, has for its height, the
breadth of the bottom of the Pillar.

To have the true breadth of the Abacus, we must have a care that its Diagonal
be double the height of the Capital, the bending that the sides of the Abacus
have inward, is a 9th. part of a side, the bottom of the Capital is equal to
the Neck of the Pillar. The thickness of the Abacus is a 7th. part of the whole
Capital.

Two of these seven parts must be taken for the height of every Leaf, of which
there are two Ranks, each of which has four Leaves.

The Stalks or little Branches are likewise composed of other Leaves, and which
grow between the Leaves of the Rank above, ought to have two of these seven
parts comprising the Volutes.

These Volutes begin within the Stalks, of which, those that are the greatest
extend to the Extreme parts of the Angles of the Abacus; the other are below
the Roses.

These Roses which are in the middle of every Face of the Abacus, ought to be
as great as the Abacus is thick.

The Ornaments of the Corinthian Order, viz. The Architrave, the Frise, and the
Cornice, do not in the least differ from those of the Ionick Order. See Tab. IX.

ART. IX. Of the Compound Order.
VITRVVIVS has not spoke of the Compound Order, as of an Order distinct from
the Corinthian, the Lib. 4. Chap. 1.
Ionick and the Dorick; He only tells us, that sometimes upon the Corinthian
Pillar was placed a Capital composed of several parts, which were taken from
the Corinthian, the Ionick and Dorick Orders.

But a Consequence may be drawn from thence, that the Order at present called
the Compound, might have been in use in the time of Vitruvius, although they
then did not make a distinct Order of it; Since that, our Compound Order is not
essentially different from the Corinthian, but by its Capital; and so one may
say, that this sole difference of the Capital ought to make it a distinct Order
from the Corinthian, since according to Vitruvius, the Corinthian Capital
alone, made the Corinthian Order.

The parts that our Compound Order borrow from the Corinthian Order, are the
Abacus, and the two Ranks of the Leaves of Branch-Vrsin, which it has retained,
although the Corinthian have quitted them for the Leaves of the Olive.

The other part that it takes from the Ionick, are the Volutes; which it forms
in some manner according to the Model of the Volutes of the Corinthian Order,
in bending them even as the Abacus; for they are direct upon the Ionick
Capital, as well as the Abacus.

The Echine, or Quarter Round, which it has under the Abacus, it borrows rather
from the Dorick Order, than from the Ionick; because this Echine is immediately
under the Abacus, as it is in the Dorick Order, which is not in the Ionick,
which between the Echine and the Abacus, places the Channel which makes the
Volute; it may notwithstanding be said, that it imitates the Echine of the
Ionick Order, in that it is cut with Oves or Eggs, which is rarely found in the
Dorick Capital, but are always in the Ionick.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE TEN BOOKS OF ARCHITECTURE. PART II. Containing the
Architecture peculiar to the Ancients.
CHAP. I. Of Public Buildings.
ARTICLE I. Of Fortresses.
BUildings are either Public, or Lib. 1. Cap. 3.
Private; Those that are Public, appertain either to Security, or Religion, or
Public Convenience. The Fortifications of Cities are for Security, the Temples
for Religion, the Marketplaces, Town-Houses, Theaters, Academies are for the
Public Convenience.

The Disposition and Figures of the Ramparts were so ordered, that the Towers
advanced out of the Walls to the end, that when the Enemy approached them, the
Besieged which were in the Towers, might fall upon their Flank, both on the
Right and the Left.

They took likewise great Care to make the Approaches to the Walls difficult,
ordering their Ways so, that they came not directly, but to the Left of the
Gate. For by this means, the Besiegers were constrained to present to them that
were upon the Walls the Right side, which was not covered with a Buckler.

The Figure of a strong place ought neither to be Square, nor composed of
Angles that advance too far. But the Ancients made them with many Sinuosities
or Corners, for Angles that are too far advanced, are more advantageous for the
Besiegers, than the Besieged.

The thickness of the Wall was so ordered, that two Armed Men might walk by one
another upon the Wall without justling.

They made their Walls strong and durable, with sindged Beams of Olive, which
bound them and kept them up.

Although there be nothing that makes the Ramparts so strong as Earth, they had
not for all that the Custom of making Terrasses, unless it were in some place
where some Eminency was so near the Wall, that the Besiegers might easily enter.

To make the Terrasses strong, and to hinder the Earth from pushing down the
two Walls that supported it, they made Buttresses or Counterforts which went
from one Wall to another, to the end, that the Earth being divided into many
parts, might not have that weight to push the Walls.

Their Towers were round, for those that are square are easily ruined by their
Warlike Engines, and their Battering easily broke down the Corners.

Directly against the Tower, the Wall was cut off within the breadth of the
Tower, and the Walls so interrupted were only joined with Joyces, which were
not nailed down; to the end, that if the Enemy made themselves Masters of some
part of the Wall, the Besieged might take up this Bridge made of Joists, and
hinder their further advance.

ART. II. Of Temples.
THE second Sort of Public Fabrics, which are those that belong to Religion
are the Temples, which among the Ancients were of two Sorts; some were after
the Greek, Lib. 4. Chap. 4.
and some after the Tuscan Fashion.

The Temples after the Tuscan Fashion were Square, the Greeks made them
sometimes Round, sometimes Square; in the Square Temples of the Greeks, there
are three Things to be considered, viz. The Parts that compose it, the
Proportion of the Temple, and its Aspect.

The Parts of the Square Temples, were for the most part Five; for they had
almost every one of them a Porch before the Temple called Pronaos, and another
Porch behind the Temple, called Posticum, or Opisthedomos, the middle of the
Temple, called Cella, or Sacos; the Portico's or Isles, and the Gate.

The Porch was a place covered at the Entrance at the greatest part of Temples,
being as broad as the whole Temple. There were three sorts of them. Some were
surrounded with Pillars on three Sides; Others had only Pillars in the Front,
the Sides of the Porch being made up by the continuation of the Side-Walls of
the Temple; Others were made up at the Sides, partly by Pillars, and partly by
the Continuation of the Side-Walls of the Temple.

The Posticum of the Temple was equal to the Porch, having likewise a Gate, but
all Temples had not Posticums, though almost every Temple had its Pronaos, or
Porch.

The Middle of the Temple, called Cella, was a place enclosed with four Walls,
having no Light but at the Gate, unless it were uncovered, as we shall show
hereafter.

The Portico's which make the Isles, were ranks of Pillars, sometimes single,
sometimes double, which stood along the Sides of the Temple on the outside:
some Temples wanted this part.

The Gates of the Temples were different according to the difference of the
Order of the Architecture, according to which the Temple was built: there was
the Dorick, the Ionick, and the Attick.

The height of the Dorick Gate was taken by dividing into 3 parts and an half,
the space which is from below to the bottom of the Plat-fond of the Portico,
which Platfond was called Lacunar: they allowed 2 to the height of the Gate
under the Lintel: this height was divided into 12 parts; 5 and an half were
taken for the breadth of the Gate below, for above it was straiter by a 3d.
part. A 4th. part, and even an 8th. part of the Chambranle or Door-Case,
according to the height of the Gate, which was to be less straitened above, the
higher it was. The breadth of the Chambranle or Door-Case, was the 12th. part
of the height of the Opening of the Gate.

The Chambranle or Door-Case grew straiter and straiter toward the top, viz.
the 4th. part of its breadth: it was only edged with a Cymatium, with an
Astragal.

Upon the Cymatium above the Chambranle or Door-Case, was a Frise called
Hyperthyron, which had the same breadth with the Chambranle or Door-Case. Upon
this Frise was placed a Dorick Cymatium, with a Lesbian Astragal; both of them
jetting out very little.

Upon the Moulures the Flat-Crown was placed, with its little Cymatium, which
jetted out the whole breadth above of the Chambranle or Door-Case, with its
Mould.

The height of the Ionick Gates was taken as those of the Dorick; but to have
the right breadth, they divided the height into 2 parts and an half: To allow
them one and an half below, it was straightened at the top, as the Dorick Gate
was; the breadth of the Chambranle was the 14th. part of the height of the
Opening of the Gate; this breadth of the Chambranle, or Door-Case, being
divided into 6, one was allowed for the Cymatium, the rest being divided into
12, 3 were allowed to the 1st. Face comprising its Astragal, 4 to the 2d. and 5
to the 3d.

The Frise which is called Hyperthyron, was made with the same Proportions that
are in the Dorick Order. The Consoles or Shouldering-Pieces, descended directly
to the bottom of the Chambranle or Door-Case, without comprizing the Foliage or
Leaf-work that they had at the bottom: The breadth above was the 3d. part of
that of the Chambranle or Door-Case, and at the bottom they grew straiter by a
4th. part.

The Attick were like the Dorick, but their Chambranles or Door-Cases had only
a Plat-band under the Cymatium, and this Plat-band or Face, had only the
breadth of 2 parts in 7, into which was divided all the rest of the Chambranle
or Door-Case with its Mouldings.

The Proportion of the Temples was so ordered, that they were twice as long as
broad, but it is not to be understood precisely, but only of Temples that were
without Pillars, whose length was divided into 8, and 4 were Lib. 3. Chap. 3.
allowed for the breadth.

The Temples which had Pillars round about, could not have this double
Proportion; for as much as the length had only the double of the
intercolumniations, and by consequence a Lib. 4. Chap. 4.
Pillar less than the double of the Pillars before and behind. Lib. 3. Chap. 3.


The Aspect of the Temples signifies two things in Vitruvius, viz. The
Disposition of the parts of the Temple, in respect of one another, and the
Disposition in respect of the Heavens.

As to what regards the Disposition of the Temple in respect of the Heavens,
the Ancients always observed to turn them toward the Sunrising, if the place
were not ill-disposed for it, and that some great Street obliged them to turn
it otherwise.

As to what belongs to the Disposition of the parts, viz. of the Porch,
Porticum, Isles or Oiles within the Temple and the Gates, it was different in
the Temples which were without Pillars, and in those which had Pillars.

The Temples without Pillars, were those that were not 20 Foot broad, the
length of these Temples being divided into 8, 4 were allowed for the Lib. 4.
Chap. 4.
breadth, 5 for the length of the Temple within, and 3 for the Porch.

The Temples which had Pillars were of 8 sorts; The 1st. and the most Simple,
was that which was called Ad Antes, because in this sort of Temples, there were
only 2 Pillars in Lib. 3. Chap. 1.
the Face or Front before, betwixt 2 Antes. There was 3 sorts of these Temples.

The First and the most Simple, had 2 Pillars before the Face of the Temple, at
whose Corners there were 2 Antes, and the 2 Pillars supported a Piedement or
Fronton.

The Second Sort had likewise but 2 Pillars, but they were between 2 Antes upon
the same Line with the Antes; and these Antes with the 2 Pillars, made up the
Face of the Porch of the Temple.

The Third Sort was, when betwixt 2 Pillars which were at the Face before,
which made up the Porch, there were likewise 2 others within the Porch; these
Pillars within, were not so thick as those without, although they were of an
equal height; but to the end they might seem as thick as those without, they
made more Channellings, for the most part 28 or 32, supposing those without had
24; this was done to get more room within the Porch. These Temples had also
this particular to themselves, that the Front of the Porch was closed with
Partitions of Marble or Joyner's Work, which ran from the Ante of one of the
Corners to its neighboring Pillar, and from this Ante to the other Pillar, and
from this Pillar to the other Ante.

The second Sort of Temples, with Pillars, was called Prostyle; which differed
not from the first, but in this, that besides the 2 Pillars of the Temple, Ad
Antes, there were two others directly on the Angular Antes.

The Third Sort was called Amphiprostyle; because it had Pillars as well behind
as before.

The Fourth Sort was the Periptere, which in the Front, as well as behind, had
6 Pillars, and 12 on every side, counting those of the Corners: the distance
which was between the Pillars and the Walls, was equal to that which was
between the Pillars.

The Fifth, the Pseud-diptere, viz. False Diptere, it had 8 Pillars in the
Front, and as many behind, and 15 on every side, counting those of the Corners:
the Pillars were distant from the Wall, the space of 2 Intercolumniations, and
the thickness of a Pillar.

The Sixth Sort was the Diptere, which had 8 Pillars before and behind, and 2
rows round about.

The Seventh Sort was called Hypethre, because the inner part of the Temple was
uncovered, it had 10 Pillars before and behind; and as to the rest, it was like
the Diptere, but in this particular to it self, that all about it had two
Orders of Pillars, at a little distance from the Wall, to make Portico's, as in
the Peristyles.

The Eighth was called Pseudo-Periptere or False Periptere; for the Disposition
of the Pillars was equal to that of the Pillars of the Periptere: This Temple
having 6 Pillars in the Front, and behind, and 11 in the Isles or Wings; but
the Disposition of the Walls of the Temple was different in this, that they
extended even to the Pillars, which made no Portico, for they were joined to
the Walls, except those of the Porch which were insulated, or stood alone like
Islands.

The Round Temples were of 2 sorts; The first were called Monopteres, because
they had no Walls, having only an Isle or Wing; viz. Pillars which supported a
Coupe. Their Proportion was, that dividing the whole Temple into three, one
part was allowed for the Steps upon which the Pillars were placed, which had
their height equal to the distance that there was from one Pillar, to that
which was Diametrically opposite to it.

The Second Sort which was called Periptere, had Pillars upon their Basis round
about the Temple, the space that was between the Basis and the Wall was the
5th. part of the whole Temple, and the Diameter of the Temple within, was equal
to the height of the Pillar.

The Temples after the Tuscan fashion were square, having 5 parts in length and
4 in breadth; the Porch which was as great as the rest of the Temple, had 4
Pillars in the Front; the Sides were closed half by the Continuation of the
Walls of the Temple, half by 2 Angular Pillars; and there were likewise 2
Pillars in the middle of the Porch: The Temple had 2 Chapels within on each
Side.

We find that the Ancients had 14 Sorts of Temples, viz. 1. The Temple without
Pillars. 2. The Temple ad Antes Simply. 3. The Temple ad Antes, with 2 Pillars
upon the same Line with the Antes. 4. The Temple ad Antes, with Pillars of an
unequal Magnitude. 5. The Prostyle. 6. The Amphiprostyle. 7. The Pertptere. 8.
The Pseudo-diptere. 9. The Diptere. 10. The Hypethre. 11. The Pseudo-Periptere.
12. The Monoptere. 13. The Round Periptere. 14. The Tuscan. See the Tab. 2, 3,
4.

ART. III. Of Public Places, Basilica's, Theaters, Gates, Baths and Academies.
THE Third Sort of Public Fabrics are those which are Built for the
Convenience and Use of all People; and there are Six Sorts of Lib. 5. Chap. 1.
them, viz. Marketplaces, Basilica's, Theaters, Gates, Baths and Academies.

The Marketplaces among the Greeks were surrounded with Pillars close one
against another. Among the Romans, the Pillars which environed the
Marketplaces, had larger Intercolumniations, for they made Peristyles, under
which were Shops.

The Proportion of the Marketplaces was so ordered, that having divided the
length into three parts, they allowed two for the breadth; the Basilica's had
never less breadth than the third part of their length, nor more than the half.

The Pillars were as high as the Isles or Wings were broad, and these Isles or
Wings had a third part of the great Vault in the middle.

There was likewise a Second rank of Pillars upon the Wings, which made high
Galleries, and these Second rank of Pillars were placed upon a Pedestal in the
form of a Partition, high enough to hinder those that were in the high
Galleries from being seen by those that were below.

At the End of every Basilica, there was a high and great Hall called
Chalcidiques, which were joined one to another by high Galleries: they served
the Spectators while Justice was distributed.

The Theaters were composed of three parts, viz. The Steps or Degrees, which
were instead of Seats for the Spectators: they were disposed in a Semicircle,
and they closed a void space in the middle and at the bottom of the whole
Theater, which was called the Orchestra.

The Orchestra was made in the Grecian Theater, to Dance the Ballets. The
Senators were placed in that of the Romans, because the Ballets were Lib. 5.
Chap. 6.
Danced upon the Scene.

Above and quite round the Steps or Degrees was a Portico of Pillars, Lib. 5.
Chap. 6.
the Steps being separated by diverse Palliers, or Landing and Resting places
which went round, and by straight passages which went ascending from Lib. 5.
Chap. 6.
one Palliere or Landing place to another; so that the ways which led from the
second Palliere to the third, parted betwixt those of the first, and ended
betwixt those of the third. The Steps or Degrees were 14 or 15 Inches high, and
from 28 to 30 broad.

Under the Degrees, above every Palliere, there were in the great Theaters 13
Chambers, in which were Vessels of Brass, set to several Tunes, or Tones; which
by their Echo augmented the Voice of the Players. The Scene or Stage, was
composed of the Pulpit, the Proscenium and the Parascenium. The Pulpit was the
place where the Actors played: it was raised not above five Foot at the most
above the Orchestra, or Pit.

The Proscenium was the Front of the Stage, which was adorned with Pillars of
several sorts one above another. These Orders were so proportioned, that the
second was a fourth part lesser than the first. The third diminishing according
to the same Proportion.

The Front had three Gates, that in the middle which was the greatest was
called the Royal Gate, the two others were called the Gates of Strangers.

These three Gates were closed with Machines, made in a Triangle, and composed
of three Fronts or Faces well Painted, to represent Buildings in Perspective;
they served for Lib. 5.
the changing of the Scenes, when these Machines were turned. And the Paintings
represented three sorts of Buildings, which made three sorts of Scenes, viz.
The Tragic by Magnificent Palaces, the Comic by Private Houses, the
Satirical (i. e. the Pastoral) by Fields and Groves.

The Parascenium or Postscenium was the hinder part of the Theater, and the
place whither the Actors retired and dressed themselves, and had their
Rehearsals, and where the Machines were kept. Near the Theaters, were Public
Walks, in length a Stadium, which is about 90 Perches. There were Trees
planted, and round about it were double Portico's, which were every one as
broad as the Pillars on the outside were high; for those within were higher by
a fifth part, than those without, and they were likewise of a different Order;
for those without were of the Dorick Order, and those within of the Ionick or
Corinthian.

The Ancients built their Ports in two manners; at those which were Natural,
they only made Portico's round about with Magazines and Towers at the Ends, for
to shut the Port with a Lib. 5. Chap. 13.
Chain.

Those which were Artificial, were built three several ways: The first was to
make Partitions of Wood only, without emptying the Water which was within the
Partitions, and they cast into the Partitions, Stone and Mortar made with
Pozzolana, thrown in hand over head; for they were certain that this Mortar
would grow dry in the bottom of the Water. The second Way was by making
Partitions with ordinary Clay, or fat Earth at the bottom of the Sea, after the
Water had been emptied out by Pumps. The third Way was to build a Mole upon the
Seacoast, and to cast it in when the Mason's Work was sufficiently dry, which
only required two Months time. That they might the better throw these Moles
into the Sea, they built them half upon the Seacoast, and half upon an heap of
Sand which they made close to the Seacoast; to the end, that this Sand which
was stopped by nothing but by the Walls, built only to support it during the
time that the Mole was a drying, might let it fall when the Sea came to carry
away the Sand after that the Walls were beaten down.

The Bathes of the Ancients consisted of many Chambers; some for Lib. 5. Chap.
10.
Men, and some for Women.

Some of the Chambers had a moderate Heat, to warm their Bodies insensibly, and
prepare them for a stronger Heat to make them Sweat.

The Chamber they were to Sweat in, was called Laconicum, and was round, and
Vaulted like the ends of an Oven, pierced at the top with a round Opening,
which was opened and shut with a Buckler of Brass, which hung at a Chain, by
which means they augmented or diminished the Heat according to the Proportion
that they pulled up, or let down the Buckler.

One and the same Furnace heated both the Air and the Water, according to the
Disposition of the places which were nearer or further from the Furnace, whose
heat was communicated to the Chambers from under the Flooring, which was made
full of little holes.

The Water was likewise diversely tempered by the different situation of three
great Vessels of Brass, whose Water went from one into another, and there were
Pipes that conveyed these three sorts of Water into the Bath.

The Academies of the Ancients, which they called Palaestra, was a place where
the Youth learned Letters and their Exercises. They were composed of three
parts, viz Of a Peristyle, a Xyste, and a Stadium; the Peristyle was a Court
surrounded with Portico's, which were of two sorts; three of them were Simple,
and one Double.

The Simple stood in a row against three Bodies of Lodgings, composed of many
great Halls, where the Philosophers had their Disputes and Conferences.

The Bodies of the Lodgings, which was the length of the double Portico, and
one part of the Bodies of Lodgings which turned in, were distributed into
several parts, for the Studies and Exercises of Youth; for there they had their
Classes, their Baths, their Stoves, and their Tenis-Court.

The Xyste was a place planted with Trees, and surrounded with Portico's on
every side: These Portico's were of two sorts.

There was one double which was set against the Bodies of the Lodgings, to
which the double Portico of the Peristyle was joined.

The Simple Portico's had two Wings, under these Simple Portico's there were
hollow Ways, where they performed their Exercises; the rest of the Portico was
raised to the right and the left, for those that had a mind to Walk while the
rest performed their Exercises, in the hollow ways.

The Place which was compassed with these three Portico's, was planted with
Trees, which made Allies, where the Wrestlers exercised in Winter, when it was
fair Weather.

The Stadium was on the Side of the Peristyle and the Xyste. It was an Alley of
90 Perches; on each Side it had many Steps or Degrees, which made a sort of a
long Theater bending in at both ends; these Steps or Degrees were made for the
convenience of seeing them that Run.

CHAP. II. Of Private Buildings.
ARTICLE I. Of the Courts of Houses.
THE Houses of the Ancients had five sorts of Courts, of which the greatest
part were covered round about by the Jettings which supported the Water-Channel
or Gutter, in which all the Water that Lib. 6. Chap. 3.
fell from the Roof met together.

These Courts made with Jettings, were of four sorts; The first was called the
Tuscan, this Court was surrounded with a Jetting en auvent, which was laid upon
four Beams, supported by other standing Beams placed in the Corners.

The second Sort was called Corinthian; it had likewise Beams, but they were
further from the Walls than in the Tuscan Court, and they were laid upon
Pillars.

The third Sort was called Tetra-style, because the Beams were supported with
four Pillars which were in the place of the standing Beams that were made use
of in the Tuscan Court.

The fourth Sort was called the Vaulted; because the Jetting that it had round
about, was supported by Vaults.

The fifth Sort of Court that had no Jetting, and which was called the
Uncovered, had the Water-Gutter directly upon the Wall, and was only covered
with the Entablature.

ART. II. Of the Vestibulum or Entry.
THE Houses of the Ancients had Great and Magnificent Entries, they were
sometimes 15 Perches long and 9 broad, and they were supported upon two ranks
of Pillars, which made a Wing on each Side, the Proportion of their breadth and
length was taken three Ways. The first was, when having divided the length into
5, 3 were allowed for the breadth. The second was, when having divided it into
3, 2 were allowed for the breadth. The third was, when having made an
Equilateral Square, the Diagonal of this Square was taken for the length, and
the Side for the breadth.

The height was equal to the length, taken from the Pavement below, to the
bottom of the Plat-Fonds or Flat-Roof, which was hollowed on the other side the
Beams, the seventh part of the whole height.

The Proportion that the Alley which was in the middle between the Pillars, had
with the Wings, was different according to the Magnitude of the Vestibule or
Entry, for the greater they were or the lesser, the Wings had a proportionable
breadth with the Alley in the middle; So that if the Vestibule or Entry was 100
Foot long, the Wings had only for their breadth the 50th. part of the length;
and when it was but 30 Foot long, they had only the 3d. part.

ART. III. Of Halls.
THE Ancients had three Sorts of Halls; Viz. The Corinthian, the Egyptian, and
the Cyzican.

The Corinthian had Pillars round about against the Wall, and these Pillars
supported the Floor made in form of a Vault. Surbaissee.

The Egyptian Halls had their Pillars distant from the Wall in the manner of
the Peristyle, and they supported only an Architrave without a Frise and
without a Cornice; upon this Architrave there was another row of Pillars,
between which were the Windows. The Floor which reached from the Pillars to the
Wall, served for a Terrasse without.

The Cyzican Halls had this in particular, that they were turned to the North,
and had a Prospect of the Gardens; they were principally made use of by the
Greeks; the Proportion Lib. 6. Chap. 6.
of these Halls was as follows, Their length was double their breadth, and as
to their height, this Rule was observed to have the height of all Sorts of
Apartments that are not so broad as long, they added their length to their
breadth, and took half of the sum for their height. The Apartments which were
no longer than broad, had in height their breadth, and half their breadth.

ART. IV. Of the Distribution of the Apartments among the Ancients.
THE Romans and the Greek: ordered Lib. 6. Chap. 10.
and distributed differently their Apartments; for the Romans had their Courts
and Entries magnificent: but the Greeks had only a narrow Entrance, through
which they passed into a Peristyle; this Entry had of one Side a Porter's
Lodge, on the other Lib. 6. Chap. 3:4.
Side the Stables.

The Apartments of these two Nations differed in this, the Apartments of the
Women were separate from the Apartments of the Men among the Greeks; insomuch
that they Dined apart. They had likewise particular Rooms reserved for
Strangers apart, where they only gave them Lodging, and never treated them
above one Day.

CHAP. III. Of things that equally appertain to Public and Private Buildings.
ARTICLE I. Of Aqueducts.
IN Order to the bringing of Waters to Towns and Cities, the Level must be
exactly taken; to the end, it may be known whether the Waters can be brought
thither or no. The Ancients to this end made use of an Instrument called
Corobates, Lib. 8. Chap. 6.
which was directed by a Lead, and by Water, when the Wind hindered them from
making use of the Lead.

They brought their Water three several ways; viz. by Aqueducts, by Pipes of
Lead, and Pipes baked in a Potter's Furnace. They allowed for the Channels or
Sewers of the Aqueducts, for every 100 Foot, half a Foot of Declination or
Sloping; and if any Hills were in their way, they dug through them, making
Vents to give Air at convenient Distances.

The Pipes of Lead were at least 9 Foot long; they made them of bended Sheets
or Plates, and of different thicknesses, according to the Proportion of the
greatness of the Pipes; these Pipes had likewise their necessary Declination or
Sloping, and if any Valley was in the way, they made it equal to the Level with
a Wall; they likewise made many Vents, to give the Water Air, and to know where
to mend the Pipes.

The Pipes of Potter's-Work, were two Inches thick; they were joined together
with Mortar mixed with Oil, and when they had Conde or Joint to make, they made
use of a red Free Stone which they pierced through, to receive the two Ends of
the Pipes.

ART. II. Of Wells and Cisterns.
IT being remarkt oftentimes that the Water which is under the Earth has many
bad Qualities, and exhales vapors, which often stifles those which work in the
Wells, after that they are dug, and the Water begins to gather together. The
Ancients had this Precaution, to let a Lamp gently down into it, and if it
extinguished it, they took it for an Infallible sign that the Water was bad.

The Cisterns were made to receive Rain Water in great Conservatories under
Ground; whose Walls on all Sides, and at the bottom were built with Mortar of
strong Lime, and Sand, and Pebbles, all well beaten together. They made several
Conservatories, and the Water passed from one to another, to the end it might
leave all the Dirt in the first and second; They likewise put Salt in their
Cistern-Water to make it more subtle.

ART. III. Of Machines for carrying and lifting up great Stones and Burdens.
CTesiphon and his Son Metagenes, Architects of the Temple of Ephesus, invented
Machines to carry great Stones, out of which Pillars and Architraves were to be
made. That which was made to draw the Pillars, Lib. 10. Chap. 6.
was but a sort of a Frame as long as the Pillars, in the end of which were
fastened Pins of Iron, which entered into the ends of the Frame, and served
instead of an Axle-tree, the Pillar itself serving for a Wheel: And this had
the desired Effect, because of the disposition of the place through which these
Stones were to be drawn, which was a flat and level Country.

The other Machine for drawing of Architraves, was the same Frame which had two
Wheels at each end, which supported the Architrave; which served instead of an
Axle-tree.

For the raising of great Weights, Lib. 10. Chap. 9.
they had three sorts of Machines. The first was composed of three pieces of
Wood, which were joined together at top by a Pin which went through them all;
so that there were two of these pieces which were on one side, a little
distance one from the other, and the third was opposite to them; The two which
were together on the one side, had a Hand-Mill which drew a Rope, which passed
within a Truckle with three Pullies, of which that part which had the two
Pullies was fastened to the top of the Machine, and that which had but one, was
fastened to the Weight to be drawn up.

The second Machine was stronger Lib. 10. Chap. 2.
than the first, because the Moulin had more Pullies, and instead of a Moulin
or Hand-Mill, it had a great Wheel, whose Axle-tree drew a Rope which passed
through these Pullies, and upon the Wheel there was another Rope twisted, which
was drawn by a Windglass; sometimes the great Wheel was hollow, so that Men
could walk within it, and so turn it.

The third had but one long and strong piece of Wood, which was kept up and
stayed by Shrowds, as the Mast of a Ship is. By the help of these Shrowds, they
bended and turned this piece of Wood where they pleased, drawing the Shrowds
fast on the one side and loosening them on the other. The Mouft's Crane as well
those which were fastened to this piece of Wood, as those which were fastened to
the Weight which was to be drawn up, had each of them three ranks of Pullies,
which had three in every rank, that three Ropes might go through them, which
were not drawn by Hand-Mills, nor by Wheels, but by Men who pulled several at
one time at the same Rope: And that this might be done with the more ease, the
three Ropes or Cables after having passed the last Pullies of that part of the
Moufte which was at the top of the Machine; they descended down below, each
upon one Pully, which was but the height of the Men: this Machine quickly
povverfully lifted up the greatest Weights.

ART. IV. Of Machines for Elevating of Waters.
THESE Machines were of four sorts.

The first was the Tympan, of which Lib. 10.
there were two sorts; The first elevated a great deal of Water, but not very
high, for it only mounted to the Axle-tree of the Tympan, which was a great
Wheel made of Planks which made two bottoms divided into eight from the Center
to the Circumference, each Separation, having an opening half a Foot wide near
the Circumference to draw the Water, which being elevated upon the Axle-tree,
ran through the Cavities which were hollowed in each Separation.

The Second Machine, was a Wheel which elevated the Water as high as its
Circumference, by the help of several Boxes which were fastened round about, and
which poured out the Water into a Reeve as the Wheel, having mounted, began to
descend.

The Third Machine was a Chain Lib. 10. Chap. 2.
with Buckets, as the one mounted, the other descended, being drawn by the
Axle-tree.

The Fourth Machine was the Vice or Skrew, which is attributed to Archimedes,
though Vitruvius makes no mention of the Inventor. This Vice was made of a
piece of Wood, long sixteen times its Diameter: about this piece of Wood was
put Obliquely a Hoop of Willow VVood besmeared with Pitch, and it was Conducted
by turning from one end of the piece of the Wood to the other: Upon this Hoop
others were put so that they were like the Vaulting of a Staircase whose
ascent goes turning. This being done, this Vice was fastened and strengthened
with Planks, which were pitched within, and covered with Iron Rings and Plates
without: At the two ends of the piece of Wood, were Pins, which entering into
the Suckets, made the Machine capable of Motion. This Vice or Skrew was placed
according to the bent or sloping of the Triangle Rectangle of Pythagoras. This
Machine elevated easily a great quantity of Water, but it could not carry it
high.

The Fifth Machine, was the Pump of Ctesibius; it was composed of two Lib. 10.
Chap. 2.
Bodies of Pumps, in which the Suckets having drawn the Water when they were
pulled up, they both pressed it violently into a Pipe which was fastened at the
bottom of the Body of the Pump when they went down. For the Water by the
Impulsion of the Sucket, was forced to enter into these Pipes, because it could
not go out by the Openings by which it entered, because of the Suckets which
stopped them, these two Pipes were joined together in a Tambour, which had
likewise its Suckets, which hindered the Water from descending into the Bodies
of the Pumps, after it had been pressed into the Tambour, or Vase, which had
another Pipe, through which the Water was forced as high as they pleased, by
Impulsion of the Suckets.

All these Machines were either moved Lib. 10. Chap. 10.
by Strength of Men, or by VVater-Mills, according to the convenience of the
place.

ART. V. Of Water-Mills for Grinding of Corn.
WAter-Mills were moved by the Lib. 10. Chap. 10.
help of a great Wheel which had many VVings, which were forced by the
Current. The Axle-tree of this great Wheel, traversed another Wheel which had
Cogs, which made the Lantern or Trundle-head go, which was placed
Horizontally, which was traversed by a Beam of Iron, which entered through
above, into an Iron in form of a Wedge, which helped to fasten the Beam in the
Millstone, above which was the Mill-Hopper, in form of a Funnel.

ART. VI. Of other Hydraulick Machines.
THERE were many other Machines which moved by the help of the Water, as
Hour-Glasses, Organs, Machines for Measuring the VVays, and knowing the
swiftness or flowness of Sailing.

The Hour-Glasses marked the Hours by the help of Water, which passing slowly,
a little hole made at the bottom of a Vessel, and falling into another, in
elevating it self insensibly in the Vessel which it filled, raised a piece of
Cork, which hanging at one of the ends of a Chain wrapped about an Axle-tree,
and which had at the other end a little Bag full of Sand, and a little lighter
than the Cork: for this Chain turning, the Axletree likewise turned a Pin or
Hand, which marked the Hours upon a Dial.

The Organs played by help of two Lib. 10. Chap. 12.
Suckets, which were pulled up or let down in the Bodies of the Pump. The
Suckets pushed the Air with violence into a Funnel reversed in a Copper Coffer
half full of Water, and pressed the Water, and constrained it to ascend round
about within the Coffer, which made that its weight in making it re-enter into
the Funnel, pushed the Air into the Pipes, and made them Play, producing the
same Effects that the Bellows did.

They measured the way that the Lib. 10. Chap. 14.
Ships make by the help of a little Mill, which was fastened to the Ship, and
which turned by the resistance that its VVings found in the Water when the
Ship went forward and the Axle-tree of this Mill had a little Rong or Tooth,
which every round pushed forwards one of the Teeth of the great Wheel, which
turned another, and that another which turned a Pin or Handle, which marked the
number of turnings, that the Mill made, by which means it was easy to take an
account of the Perches, and Leagues that the Ship failed.

They made use of the same Machine on the Land, fixing to the Nave of the
Wheel of a Coach, a Tooth which made many Wheels be turned as in the
abovementioned Machine, at the last of which, was fastened a Pin or Handle,
which marked the number of Perches and Leagues. This Machine had likewise a
sort of a Counting Wheel, which at every Mile that the Coach went, let a
Pibble fall into a Vessel of Brass, to give notice that they had gone a Mile.

ART. VII. Of Machines of War.
THE Machines of War of the Ancients Lib. 10. Chap. 15.
were of the three Sorts, for they were made either to Lance, Arrows, such as
were the Scorpions or Javelins, such as were the Catapulta's, or Stones, such
as were Ballista's or fiery Darts, such as were the Pyroboli, or they were made
to beat down the VValls, such as were the battering Rams, and the Terebra, or
to come covered to the VValls, and so safely Mount the Ramparts, such as were
the Tortoises; or Testudo's, and the Towers of Wood.

The Scorpions were a sort of great Lib. 10. Chap. 18.
Crossbows, which were made use of to defend the VValls, and which likewise the
Assailants made use of in the wooden Towers, to annoy those that defended the
VValls.

The Catapulta, lanced Javelins or Javelots, from 12 to 15 Foot in length, they
were made of two Trees, set one against another, like the Masts of a Ship,
which were bended in drawing them with a Hand-Mill. These Trees being on a
sudden unbent, furiously struck together, and forced violently the Javelin.
They were bent the one after the other by the same Cord, which was made of
Guts, to the end, that the Master who managed the Engine, might be assured,
that the two Trees or Beams were equally bent. He knew it by sounding the Cord
when both the Beams were bent, and when the End above was drawn even to the
Capital of the Machine, where they were stayed by a Pin of Iron, which was
driven out by a quick stroke of a Hammer when they unbent it. There was a
Cylinder which traversed an excentrical piece, by the help of which they
heightened, or let down the End of one of the Beams below, according as the
Master of the Machine judged it necessary, for the augmenting or diminishing
their bent, which was known by the sound of the Cord, which was alike in both,
when they were equally bent. See Table XI.

The Ballista's were bended and strung as the Catapulta's, but instead of
Javelins, they cast great Stones.

The Pyroboli were Machines, which Lib. 10. Chap. 22.
lanced or cast Darts, to which was fixed combustible Matter, which was
kindled when they darted it against Machines of War or Shipping.

The Ram was to beat down Walls and make breaches. It was a great Beam
headed with Iron; it was hung by the middle, and pushed by the Soldiery with
great violence against the Walls.

The Terebra was something like the Ram, being a strong Beam pointed with
Iron, but it was sharp pointed, and it made way for the Ram, splitting the
Stones.

The Testudo or Tortoise, were great Lib. 10. Chap. 20.
large and low Towers of Wood, which were rolled upon six or eight Wheels, they
were covered with raw Hides to defend them from fire. Their use was to cover
them that approached the Walls to undermine them, or beat them with the
battering Ram.

The Towers of Wood were made to raise the Assailants as high as the Walls, to
chase the Besieged away with Arrows and Scorpions, and to lay Bridges from the
Towers to the Wall; they were sometimes Thirty Fathoms high, having Twenty
Stages. They were covered, as the Tortoises with raw Hides; they had each of
them a Hundred Men, which were employed as well to move them, as to annoy the
Besieged.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Figures inserted here are those only which are chiefly necessary to the
understanding of Vitruvius, that is to say, those which serve for the
comprehending the Rules that Architecture gives for Buildings, now in use. The
Figures of other things, of which Vitruvius treats, are ommited, it being
enough to give One only, to serve as an Example of each kind, viz. one for all
Temples, one for all Theaters, and one for all Machines.

THE EXPLICATION Of the FIRST TABLE.
THIS Table contains the seven several sorts of Masonry; A is the first, which
was called Reticulatum, because it was like the Mashes of Nets; BB is the
second, it is called Insertum, that is to say, bound Masonry, because the Stones
are one bound within another, every one being bound with four, two below, and
two above: CC is the third sort, which was particular to the Greeks; it may be
called double binding, for it is not only of Stones of the same course, but of
two courses III. D is the fourth, called Isodomum, because the Beds or Lays are
equal in height. E is the fifth, called Pseudisodomum, because they are of an
equal height. FF, GG, H is the sixth, called Emplecton, because it was filled
up any way in the middle. FF are the Stones which make the Courses. K is the
seventh, which may be called Compound, because its Courses are of hewn Stone,
and the middle filled up with Rubbish; and these Courses are fastened together
with Cramp-irons.

This Table refers to page 47.

Plate I


THE EXPLICATION Of the SECOND TABLE.
THis Table contains the five sorts of Edifices: AA is the Pycnostyle; that is
to say, where the Pillars are very close, the Intercolumniation being but of
one Diameter, and a half of the Column: BB is the Systyle, viz. where the
Pillars have two Diameters of Intercolumniation: CC is the Diastyle, viz. where
the Pillars are at that distance, that they have for the Intercolumniation
three Diameters: DD is the Areostyle, where the Pillars are far asunder. There
is no certain Proportion; we have given in this Figure four Diameters of
Intercolumniation, it may have more: The fifth sort called Eustyle, is in the
third Table.

This Table refers to page 80.

Plate II


THE EXPLICATION Of the THIRD TABLE.
THis Table contains the Plan and Elevation of the fifth sort of Edifices,
called Eustyle, viz. where the Pillars are distant one from another by more
convenient Proportion: Its Intercolumniations have all two Diameters and a
quarter, except the Intercolumniations in the middle of the Face before and
behind, which have three Diameters.

This plan shows the different parts of the ancient Temples: AA, AA, are the
Isles or Wings which are Portico's, having a rang of Pillars on the one side,
and the Wall of the Temple on the other. B is the part called the Pronaos or
Porch. C is the part called Posticum, viz. the hinder part of the Temple. D is
that Part called Cella, or the Nave or Body of the Temple.

This Table relates to p. 81, and 117.

Plate III


THE EXPLICATION Of the FOURTH TABLE.
THis Table contains the Plan and perspective Elevation of a Temple, called
Hexastyle and Pseudodyptere, viz. Which has six Columns in the Faces, before
and behind, and which has simple Portico's, but which are as large as the two
Portico's of the Temples which have them double. This Plan and this Elevation
may serve for other Temples, which as to what concerns the essential parts
explained in the precedent Table, are like to this here, as are the Periptere,
the Diptere, and the Hyperthre, which only differ in the number of Columns, or
suchlike circumstances.

Plate IV


THE EXPLICATION Of the FIFTH TABLE.
THis contains the Proportions of the Tuscan Order. AA is the Base of the
Column, which has for its height the first Semidiameter of the Column: It Is
divided into two equal parts; that below is for the Plinth, marked I; that
above, marked K, is for the Thorus, and for the Conge or Apophygis. BB is the
Capital, which height is equal to its Base: It Is divided into three; the first
marked L, is for the Gorge, with the Conge and the Astragal; the second, marked
M, is for the Echinus or quarterround; the third, marked N, is for the Plinthus
or Abacus, called by the French Tallor. C is one of the Faces of the Sabliers
which serve instead of an Architrave. EE is the under part of the Sabliers,
which answers to the Diameter on the top of the Column, marked D. F is a Tenon
shaped like a Swallows Tail, which joins the two Sabliers together. G is the
little Wall which serves for a Frize. H is the Cornice.

This Table relates to page 93.

Plate V


THE EXPLICATION Of the SIXTH TABLE.
THis contains the Proportion of the Doriek Order; AB is the top of the Shaft
of the Column; this top shows the Plan of the two sorts of Channelling or
Fluting, which are particular to the Dorick Order. The one half has Chanelling
or Fluting that is not hollowed, and make only Flat Faces or Pans. B is the
other half, which has Channelings a little hollowed, viz. one quarter of the
Circle: They are formed by the help of a Square C, whose sides are equal to
every one of the Pans. DEF is the Capital divided into three equal parts. D is
for the Gorge; E is for the Echinus, and for the Anulets or Rings; F is for the
Abacus; G is the Architrave; H is the Triglyph; I is the Metop; K is the
Demi-metop; L is the Cornice; M are the six pendant Drops which are under the
Triglyph; N, O are the Pendant Drops, which are in the Platfond of the Cornice.

This relates to page 96.

Plate VI


THE EXPLICATION Of the SEVENTH TABLE.
THis contains the Proportions of the Jonick Order and the Attick Base: A is
the Plinth of the Attick Base, which is the third part of the whole Base, of
which the upper part is the fourth part of what remains after the Plinth is
taken; the interior part is half of what remains, and the other half is the
Scotia. CD is the Plinth of the Jonick Base, which is the third part of the
height of the whole Base. E is the Thorus which contains three parts of seven,
into which is divided what remains, the other four being for the two Scotia's,
and the two Astragals; which are betwixt the Thorus and the Plinth. F is the
Capital, whose Proportion is explained in the eighth Table. G, H, I, K is the
Architrave, which has four parts, viz. the Face marked G; the second marked H;
the third marked I, and the Cymatium of Simaise, marked K; L is the Frise. M,
N, O, P, Q is the Cornice. M is the first Cymatium; N is the Dentil; O is the
second Cymatium; P is the Crown with its little Cymatium or Simaise.

This Table relates to page 101.

Plate VII


THE EXPLICATION Of the EIGHTH TABLE.
THis contains the Proportions of the Ionick Capital, of which only half is
seen here: AB is the half of the breadth of the Abacus, which is regulated
according to the breadth of the bottom of the Column, of which one half is
marked B 18; for the bottom of the Column being divided into 18, 19. are
allowed to the Abacus: AC is the Retreat which must be made of the Corner A, of
the Abacus inwardly, to draw the Line CD, which must regulate the Eye of the
Volute over which it must cross as it passes. To make this Retreat we must take
one part and a half of twelve, into which is divided the height or thickness,
OF, of the whole Capital, which height is equal to half the breadth of the
Abacus. This height, marked CD, is divided into nine parts and a half, of which
one and a half is given to the Abacus, and four and a half from the Abacus to
the middle of the Eye, which is traversed by the line GH; the Figures 1, 2, 3,
4, mark the four Centers of the first four quarters of the Volute; the four
second quarters, and the four third (for the Volutte has twelve) are taken in
the Diagonal 4, 3, and 2, 4. H, I, is the Astragal at the top of the Pillar
which answers the Eye of the Volute. KK is the Egg or Echinus; L is the Axis of
the Volutes; MM is the ceinture of the lateral part of the Volutes. This
relates to page 103.

Plate VIII


THE EXPLICATION Of the NINTH TABLE.
THis contains the Proportions of the Corinthian Capital, which makes all the
distinction betwixt Jonic and the Corinthian Order, all other Members,
according to Vitruvius, being the same. A is the Corinthian Capital, which has
for its height only the Diameter of the bottom of the Column; B is the Capital
of the Pantheon, which is higher by a seventh part, viz. the thickness of the
Abacus; CD is the height of the Capital divided into seven, of which the Abacus
has one, the Voluta's and Foliages and Stalks two, the Foliage in the Range
above two, and that in the Range below two. To have the breadth of the Abacus,
we must give to its Diagonal OF the double of its height CD. To have the
greatness and just Proportion of its bending H, we must divide the breadth of
the Abacus EG into nine parts, and give it one.

At the bottom of this Table is represented the Herb Branhursine, which grows
round about the Basket, which is covered with a Tile, from which Vitruvius says
the Sculptor Callimacbus took the first Model of the Corinthian Capital.

This Table relates to p. 108.

Plate IX


THE EXPLICATION OF THE TENTH TABLE.
THis contains the Plan and Elevation of the Theater of the Romans. AA is the
Portico which went round the Theater below. BB are the Entries through which
they passed from the Portico's into the Orchestra C.KDEDK the Pulpitum or
Stage; MM the landing-place which separated the Degrees above from those below:
LM the Stars which are between the degrees. NN the Portico above in the
Theater. PP the Passage under the degrees. TT the Stars by which they mount to
the Portico's above. KIHIK the Scene. H the royal Gate. II the Gates of
Strangers. KK the Gates in returning. OOO the Machines used in changing the
Scenes. GG the part of the Theater behind.

This Table relates to p. 125.

Plate X


THE EXPLICATION Of the ELEVENTH TABLE.
THis contains the Explication of the Carapulta, which was a Machine of War
used by the Ancients to dart Javelins of an extraordinary bigness. A are the
two Beams one against the other, and joined, which after having been drawn,
pushed the Javelin with great force when they were unbent. There is one of
these Beams, which is represented as being joined to the Capital of the Machine
by an Iron Pin, the other ready to be joined when the Master of the Machine
sounds the Cord with his right Hand, shall have it neightned or let down, the
end marked C, as much as is necessary, to give it an equal Bent to the other.
This is done by the help of an excentrical piece, which is traversed by a
Cylinder, which the Master turns with a Laver, which he holds in his left Hand.
D, EE is the Capital of the Carapulta. EE are are the holes through which the
Rope passes to draw the Beams. F is the end of one of the Beams represented in
great. G is one of the Pins which traversed a round Eye, by the help of which
the Beam is joined to the Capital. H is the Cylinder which traverses the
excentrical piece I. This Plate relates to page 155.

Plate XI


Explication of the Hardest Terms in Architecture.
A
ABacus, from (...); which signifies a square Trencher: In French it is called
Talloir; it is that quadrangular Piece commonly accompanied with a Cymatium, and
serves instead of a Drip or Corona to the Capital. It supports the nether Face
of the Architrave and whole Trabeation. In the Corinthian and the Compound
Orders, its Corners are called the Horns, the intermediate Sweep and Curvature;
the Arch, which his commonly a Rose carved in the middle. Acroteria or
Acroter's from (...), Summa pars; they may be properly called Pinnacles, for
Pias and Battlements were made sometimes more towering; but when they stood in
Ranges with Rails and Balisters: Upon flat Building they still retained their
Name, with this only difference, that such as were placed between the Angular
Points, were styled the Median, or middle Acroteria. Annulets, are little
square Parts turned round in the Corinthian Capital, under the Quarter-Round,
called Echinus. Ante, is a square Pillaster, which the Ancients placed at the
corners of the Walls of the Temples. Amphiprostyle, from (...), Circa, and
(...); Columna was a sort of a Temple which had four Columns in the Front of
the Temple, and four in the Face behind. Architrave, from a Mungril Compound of
two Languages, (...) Principalis, and Trabs; it is the first Member of that
which we call Entablature; in Chimnies the Architrave is the Mantle; over the
Jambs of the Doors and Lintels of Windows, it is called the Hyperthron, from the
Greek (...), super, and (...), Janua or Ostium. Astragal, from the Greek word
(...); which signifies the Vertebrae, or little Joints in the Neck or Heel;
hence the French call it Talon, or the Heel itself: It Is a Member of
Architecture joined to Bases, Cornices, Architraves, etc. it is round like a
Ring, and therefore it is called by the Italians Tondino. Attique signifies
after the manner of the City of Athens. In Vitruvius it is the Name of the Basis
which the Moderns have given to the Dorick Pillar. We call Attique in our
Buildings, a little Order placed upon another much greater; for instead of
Pillars, this little Order has commonly nothing but Pillasters of a particular
Fashion and Order, which we call Attique Apophyges, vide Conge.
B
BAsilica, from the Greek word (...), Rex or King among the Ancients. It was a
great Hall which had two Ranges of Pillars, and had two Isles or Wings, upon
which were Galleries: These Halls, which at first were made for the Palaces of
Kings, were afterward turned into Courts of Justice, and after that into
Churches; which Form has always been observed. Ballustre is the lateral part of
the Jonick Capital. Our Workmen have given it that name, because it somewhat
resembles a Balluster.
C
CHanel, in the Jonick Capital, is that part which is under the Abacus, and
lies upon Echinus or Egg, and which has its Contours or Turnings on every side
to make the Voluta's Cariatides are Statues of Women, which serve instead of
Pillars. Cincture is that part which makes the middle of the Ballustre of the
Jonick Voluta. Conge in French, in Latin Apopbyges, from the Greek word (...),
because that part of the Pillar taking as it were a rise, seems to emerge and
fly from the Basis like the Proceltus of a Bone in a man's Leg, In short, it is
no more than the Rings or Ferils heretofore used at the Extremities of wooden
Pillars, to preserve them from splitting, afterward imitated in Stone-work.
Corona is properly that part of the Cornice which the French call Larmer or
Drip, because it defends the rest of the Work from Wind and Weather: It is
often taken by Vitruvius for all the Cornice. Corona, called the Plat or flat
Crown, is a particular Member in the Dorick Gate; it is made by so extraordinary
enlargement of the Face of the Corona or Drip, that it has six times more
Breadth than Projecture. This sort of Corona is no where found among the
Ancients, but only in the Writings of Vitruvius. Cymatium, from (...), which
signifies a rouling Wave; is a Member of Architecture, of which the one half is
Unequal and the other Concave, the one being hollow above, and the other below.
There are two sorts of them, the one called the Gola or Throats, or the
Doucine, whose advanced part is Concave; and the other is called by the French
the Talon or Heel, whose advanced part is hollow below, as the first is above.
D
DIE is the middle of the Pedestals, viz. that which is between their Basis and
their Cornice. It Is so called, because it is for the most part of a Cubit form,
as Die's are that are used in play. Dentils, or Teeth, is a Member of the
Jonick Cornice, which is square, and cut our at convenient distances, which
gives it the form of a Set or Gang of Teeth. Diastyle, from (...) and (...):
Columna is a sort of Edifice where the Pillars are distanced one from another
the breadth of 3 Diameters of the Pillar. Dipters, from (...) and (...): Ala
signifies that which has a double Isle or Wing; the Ancients called so the
Temples, which were surrounded with two Ranges of Pillars, for there two Ranges
made two Portico's, which they called Wings, we Isles, from the French word
Ailes, which signifies Wings, because as Wings are on the sides of Birds, so
these of Edifices.
E
EChinus, from (...), a Hedg-hog; it is a Member of Architecture, which we call
a Quarter-round; it has its name from the roughness of its Carving, resembling
the prickly Rhind of the Chestnut, and not unlike the Hedg-hog; it is commonly
next to the Abacus, and carved with Ovals and Darts, sometimes called Eggs and
Anchors, because these pretended Chestnuts are cut in an Oval form. Entahlature
signifies properly the Flooring or Lofting with Boards; it comes from the Latin
word Tabulatum. In Architecture it is that part which is composed of the
Architrave, Frise, and Cornice, for in effect this part is the extreme part of
the Flooring, which is supported by Pillars, or by a Wall if it have no
Pillars. Eye is the middle of the Jonick Volute, which is cut in the form of a
little Rose. Eurythmie, from (...) been, and (...) numera: it signifies
Proportion; it is taken in its general signification in Architecture; for in its
particular signification it signifies the true measure that is observed in
Dancing after Music. Eustyle, from (...) been, and (...) a Pillar; its the
Order where Pillars are rightly placed, the Intercolumniations being two
Diameters and a quarter.
F
FAce is a Member of Architecture, which has a great Breadth and a small
Projecture; it is in Architraves. Filet is a little square straight Member.
Fresco, and to paint in Fresco or Freth, is an Italian Phrase, and it signifies
the Painting which is made upon the Plaistering before it be dry. Frise is that
part which is between the Architrave and the Cornice.
G
GNomonick is the Art of making Sun-dials; it is derived from the Greek (...),
which signifies that which srews a thing, as the Cock or Pin of the Dyal shows
what a clock it is. Gorge, or the Gule or Neck, is the narrowest part of the
Dorick Capital, which is between the Astragal, above the Shaft of the Pillar
and the Annulets. Gatte, or Drops, are little parts, which to the number of six
are put below every Trigiyph in the Architrave of the Dorick Order.
H
Hydraulick, from the Greek (...); which signifies Water, is an Engine that
plays by the help of Water, especially where there are Pipes and Flutes.
Hypethre, from (...) and (...) ether; signifies a Building whose inside is
exposed to the Rain and open Air. The Ancients called so all Temples that had
no Roof. Hyperthyron, for (...), super, and (...) Janua, a Gate or Door: It
signifies that which is above the Gate; it is a large Table, which is upon the
Dorick Gates in the manner of a Frise.
I
IChnogaphie, from (...) vestigium, and (...) Scribo, or Insculpo; which
properly signifies the Figure that the Plane of the the Foot impresses upon the
Earth. By it in Architecture is understood that which is commonly called the
Plan of the Edifice.
L
LAcuner, or Platfond, is the Flooring or Planching above the Portico's.
Laconicum was a dry Stove to sweat in: It was so called, because it was much
used by the Lacedaemonians. Larmier or Drip, vide Corona.
M
MEtope, from (...) and (...), foramen, intervallum. Signifies the Front; it is
the Name of the empty spaces in Freeze of the Dorick Order, between the
Triglyphs. Modillion signifies in Italian a little Model, a little Measure:
It Is that part which is so often repeated in the Corinthian and Compound
Cornice, which supports the Projecture of the Larmier or Drip. This part is
called the little Model in respect of the great Model, which is the Diameter of
the Pillar; for as the Proportion of an Edifice depends on the Diameter of the
Pillar, so the greatness of the Modellians, their number, and their space or
distances, must have a just Proportion or true Relation to the whole Fabric.
Module or Model is a measure that is made use of to regulate all the Proportion
of the Fabric: In the Dorick Order it is half the Diameter of the Pillar; in
other Orders the Module is the whole Diameter. Monoptere, from (...) solus, and
(...) ala; is that which has but one Wing or Isle; it was a sort of a round
Temple, whose Roof was supported by Pillars only. Mutuli, from (...), which
signifies defect, as being made thinner, and more abated above than below. It Is
a sort of a Modellion in the Cornice of the Dorick Order.
N
NOyan is the middle part of the Flooring of the Ancients. They made it with
Ciment, which they put betwixt a Lay or Bed of Pibbles, cimented with Mortar
made of Lime and Sand.
O
ORchestra, from (...) selto; signified the place where they danced; it was the
lowest place in the Theater, which was between the Scene, viz. the place where
the Players acted, and the Seats where the Spectators sat. It was in this
place where the Greek Comedians were wont to dance. Order, those Fabrics are
said to be of different Orders, when the Proportion which is between the
thickness of the Pillars and their height, with all other things which are
required to this Proportion, are different. Ornaments, Vitruvius so calls the
Architrave, Frise, and Cornice. Oval, vide Echinus.
P
PArascenium, from (...) and (...) tentonum, is the back part of the Theater or
Scene. Periptere, from (...) circum, and (...) ala, which has a Wing round
about. This was a sort of a Temple, which had Pillars on all the four Parts,
which was different from the Prostyle, which had only Pillars before. or In the
Front, and from the Amphiprostyle, which had only Pillars before and behind,
and none on the sides. Peristyle, from (...) circum, and (...) columna;
signifies that which has Pillars round about: It differs from the Periptere in
this, that the Pillars of the Peristyle are within, as it were round about a
Court, and those of the Periptere are without, as in the Temples of the
Ancients. Pedestal, is that part which supports the Pillar. Pied-droit is a
square Pillar, which is in part within the Wall. Pillaster is the same, with
this Difference; that the Pillaster has a Bese and a Capital, as a Pillar has,
which the Pied-droit has not. Platt-band is a square Member, which terminates
the Architrave of the Dorick Order, and passes immediately under the Triglyphs.
Plinthus signifies a Brick or square Tile. It Is in Architecture taken for that
square Member which makes the Foundation of the Base of the Pillar. Posticum is
the back Gate of a Fabric. Portico is a long place covered with a Floor or
Flatfond, supported by Pillars. Proscenium, from (...) and (...) tentorium; it
signifies the forepart of the Scene; it was an Edifice as high as the last
Portico of the Theater, whose Face or Front was adorned with many Ranges of
Pillars. Prostyle from (...) and (...), signifies that which has Pillars before
only. This was one sort of the Temples of the Ancients. Pseudodiptere, (...):
mendax, (...)bis, and (...) ala; signifies a false Diptere. This was a kind of
a Temple among the Ancients, which had Porticoes round about, which were every
one as large as the double Portico of the Diptere. Pseudoperiptere, from (...)
mendax, and (...), and (...) ala, was a sort of a Temple, where the
Side-Pillars were part in the Wall of the inner side of the Temple, which was
enlarged sufficiently to enclose within the space which was allowed the
Porticoes of the Periptere. Pulpit was the place upon which the Comedians
acted, which we now call the Stage. Picnostyle, soom (...) dentus, and (...)
columna; signifies a Building where the Pillars were very close one to another;
so that the Intercolumniation had but a Diameter and a half of the Pillar.
R
RVdus was a sort of gross Mortar, which was made use of for smoothing, and
equally filling and levelling the Superfices of the Walls, before the fine
Plaster was laid on: It was likewise made use of for the second Bed or Lay of
the Flooring.
S
SCene signifies a Tabernacle, Tent, or Pavillion, from the Greek (...). It was
in the Theater of the Ancients a great Face or Front of Building, adjoined with
Pillars and Statues, which had three great Openings, in which were Pictures in
Perspective, which represented the Lodgings where the Tragedians and Comedians
dwelt. Sabliere is a piece of Wood as long as a Beam, but not so thick. Scotia,
from (...) tenebrae, Darkness, is a Member of Architecture, hollowed as a
Demi-channel: It Is particularly affected in the Bases where it is placed,
between the Torus and the Astragals; it is sometimes put under the Drip, in the
Cornice of the Dorick Order. Statumen signifies generally whatsoever is made
use of to support any thing in Architecture; it is Mortar mixed with Pibbles,
which served for the first Lay or Bed in Flooring. Systyle, from (...) con, and
(...) columna; signifies building where the Pillars seem to be joined together,
for the Intercolumniation is but of two Diameters of the Pillars.
T
TOrus is a Member in the Base which is round, in the form of a great Ring; it
comes from the Latin word Torus, which signifies a Bed. Tringle is a little
square Member, which is directly upon every Triglyph, under the Platt-band of
the Architrave, from whence hang down the Guttae, or pendant Drops in the
Dorick Order. Triglyph, from (...), and (...) sculptura; because it is divided
into three parts, and engraved, it is a Member in the Freeze of the Dorick
Order, directly upon every Pillar, and in certain spaces in the
Intercolumniations. Tympan signifies a Drum; it is that part of the bottom of
the Frontons which answers the naked of the Freeze; it is triangular, and
placed upon the Cornice of the Entablature, and covered over again with two
other Cornices which slope a little.
V
VOlute signifies wreathed, and turned about from Volvendo; it is a part of the
Capitals of the Jonick, Cotinthian, and Compound Orders, which represents the
Burk of a Tree twisted and turned into a Spiral line.
X
XYste, from the Greek (...), which signifies scraped; it was the place where
the Wrestlers exercised; it was so called because they made their skins be
scraped and rubbed smooth, to make the Sweat fall, and to make their Bodies
more slippery, that their Adversaries might have the less hold of them when
they closed.
To the Reader.
ABridgments of Vitruvius have been formerly printed, but none of them have
followed the design which Philebert de l'Orme has given in his Third Book: He
desires that in abridging Vitruvius the matters which this Author treats of
confusedly should be put into order, and that the things belonging to the same
Subject, which are found dispersed in diverse places, should be collected
together into one Chapter. This Method, which the most part of the eminent
Writers have neglected, has been carefully observed in this Treatise, it
serving very much to the better appeehending and retaining the things treated
of. We have been exact to put in nothing that is not taken out of Vitruvius, to
which end the Book and Chapter of his Works are all along quoted in the Margin;
nothing being added, but some few lines here and there, to continue the
Discourse, and render it more clear: Notwithstanding which precautions, some
things may possibly still remain obscure, in which case the Reader must have
Recourse to the whole Works of Vitruvius, where he will find all necessary
Explanation.

This little Treatise is not only necessary for those who begin the study of
Architecture, but will be also of great use to even Masters themselves; for it
is not to be doubted, that Vitruvius being so great a Master in this Art, his
Authority, together with that of all the Ancients, which is included in his
Works, must be capable of instructing the Apprentices, and confirming the
Masters, and thereby establish the good Maxims and certain Rules of
Architecture.

Advertisement concerning this Translation.
THis Abridgment having been very well received in French, we have ventured to
put it in English, and doubt not but it will be as acceptable to our Nation,
who are allowed to be as competent Judges of this Art as any. The Translation
is very exact; the Cutts altogether as well, if not better, than in the French;
and in the Table of the Explication of the Terms used in Architecture, we have
added the Etymology and Derivation of them, which is not in the French.


