The Visor plucked off FROM Richard Thompson of Bristol, Clerk, In a Plain and
True Character of Him.
RICHARD THOMPSON was descended of Honest Protestant Parentage both by Father
and Mothers side: and whilst he was yet but very Green in years, he was sent by
them from Wakefield-School in Yorkshire, about the year, 1663. unto University
College in Oxford, and thereof he was a Member and a Scholar in the Old
Foundation, by the space of six or seven years.

Before he had fully performed his Exercise for his Masters Degree (which he
afterward went to complete at Cambridge, forasmuch as he took himself unjustly
put by a Fellowship in Un. Coll. Oxon) he entered into Deacons Orders, Dr.
Fuller Bishop of Lincoln Ordaining him in S. Margarets Church Westminster,
about the year 1668. and he received his Orders of Priesthood from the same
hands in King Henry the Seventh's Chapel, the fourteenth of March, 1670.

He was no sooner thus qualified but he was sent by the then President of
Magdalen College, the Reverend Dr. Thomas Pierce, to serve in his Cure of
Brington in Northamptonshire, and continued there some years, not without some
special Marks of Favor from the Right Honorable the Earl of Sunderland, who
lived in that Parish.

But Dr. Pierce being made Dean of Sarum, about the year 1675. he quitted that
Curacy, as the other did his Living, and went upon Invitation given him, to
live with the Dean in his own House at Sarum; where he soon after in the year
1676. bestowed upon him, First a Prebend, and then a Presentation to St. Mary's
in Marlborough. In the year following, 1677. he Traveled with Mr. Jo:
Norborne, of Calne in Wiltshire: But before he had spent full twelve months in
France with him, he was recalled back into England upon the Vacancy of
Bedminster by Bristol, which is the Name of that Living whereof he is now
Possessed.

Whilst he was abroad, he neither Studied at St. Omers, nor Doway, neither ever
saw those Places, neither ever Traveled over any part of Flanders or Italy,
but of France only.

At Paris chiefly, (and in the Academy of Monsieur Foubert a Protestant) he
spent near seven months of the time he stayed there. And all that time
frequented the English Ambassadors Chapel, received the Sacrament whenever it
was administered, Preached twice, and Read Prayers often in that Chapel during
his stay there,

At Gien upon the Loyre, he sojourned in Monsieur Du Paizy, the Protestant
Ministers House, and all the time he stayed there, (which was about six weeks,)
he went constantly to the Protestant Church, and to that only: And moreover,
received the Sacrament from Monsieur Du Paizyes Hands, chiefly to make the
Papists there despair of warping him to their Communion, unto which he had been
solicited by some offers of Preferment.

At Blois he frequented the Protestant Church in like manner, and lodged in a
Protestants House by the space of six weeks more, and never lodged in a
Papists, but when the Necessities of Travel would admit of no other.

Yet he does not deny but he sought curiously the Acquaintance of any men more
famous than other, within the several Orders that are in the Church of Rome, as
well as of those in the Protestant Churches. And that he frequently heard the
Peers Bourdalou and Menestrie, (as well as the Reverend Clode and Daille, etc.)
forasmuch as they were great Masters of the Language, and of the Pulpit.

He does not deny, but that he saw Mass performed twice or thrice, whilst he
was abroad, (having never seen it performed in England,) But says 'twas
Curiosity, not Religion carried him thither. And that he only went to See and
Observe, not to Partake, and much less to Assist at that Most Idolatrous
Sacrifice.

He declares that he is so far from being Staggered in his Religion, by what
he saw, that he is but the more Confirmed and Rooted in it. And shall choose to
live out of an Alms-Basket, within the Communion of the Church of England,
rather than be tempted by the Off^r of any Preferment (be it never so Great) to
Apostatize from Her.

Since his return in England, 1678. He has made it his Business more than
ever, to serve this Churches Interest; and Lives and Acts in all humble
Obedience unto all Her Laws. Owns Her Homilies and Articles, the Standard of
True Protestant Religion. Has frequently Subscribed to them, and to the Book
of Canons and Constitutions, and perhaps few men vary less, from the Rubric in
performing all the Offices contained within the Book of Common Prayer.

He has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy at least Eight several
times, as his Circumstances have required him, and how he has Preached and
Acted in Conformity thereto, there are Thousands in the City of Bristol will
bear him witness.

He has hitherto refused no Tests to assure him to the Government, for a True
Protestant, and is farther ready to embrace any future Tests, that shall
lawfully be imposed on him.

So that it is mightily to be wondered at, How it comes about that he is traduced
for a Papist, or any ways Popishly Affected.

For, besides that even his Enemies that now persecute him, cannot deny, but
though he be very Young. yet he leads a most Strict and Severe Life, and
someway Answerable to his High Character and Calling: He has a Cloud of
Friends to attest that he has been always most Industrious to serve the King
and the Church of England, notwithstanding the Many Difficulties which he has
had to wrestle with, and some more than Ordinary Discouragements too, since he
came to Bristol.

For Example.
I. It is Notoriously known there, that in less than two years space he
Proselyted many Anabaptists and Quakers, Baptizing them Publicly. II. That in
the same space of Time he has perfectly grounded near two hundred Children in
the Church of Englands Catechism, and it is not long since he carried up near
an hundred of them to the College, there to be Confirmed by the Present
Bishop. III. It is certain that whether he Preach or Read the Prayers only, he
is never without a full Auditory, and that there are three times the number of
Communicants, that used to be, whenever he has administered the Holy
Sacrament. IV. There are many most worthy Gentlemen in that City, that will not
be Ashamed to own their Establishment in the Church of England, to the great
pains which he has taken with, and among them. V. Lastly. Forasmuch as his
present Circumstances do require it, he may dare to Boast farther; That as no
Young Man was ever more persecuted by the Church of Englands Enemies within
that City; and particularly, by Day, Young, Young the Preacher, Whitehead,
Hort, Roe, Read, Tyley, Crosley their Factors; So has no Young Man been ever
more beloved there, among hers, and our Gracious Sovereigns most obedient
Subjects and Friends.
Sir John Lloyd's Certificate concerning Mr. Thompson, under the Seal of the
Office of his Majoralty.
WHereas Richard Thompson, Vicar of St. Mary Redcliff, and St. Thomas, two
Eminent Churches within the City of Bristol, even from the time of his first
appearance to officiate in those Churches, has been privily traduced, and now
of late openly and maliciously branded, by the multiforme Fanatics of this
City, for a Church-Papist and Jesuit. for the Rector of St. Omers, so
Nick-naming St. Thomas, and with many like Terms of Obloquy and Slander, the
Invention whereof may be reckoned upon as the very first and peculiar gift of
that Party, whose great and only Masterpiece it has been and still is, by
like Maliciously Witty and Wicked Methods and Artifices to expose alike His
Loyalty and Ministry, and to lessen that Esteem and Reputation he has thereby
gained in the Hearts and Affections of all the Kings Majesty's Loyal and Loving
Subjects within this City.

These are therefore at the Request of and just Due to the said Richard
Thompson, to Certify unto all, unto whom these Presents shall come, that the
said Richard Thompson, is well known to me John Lloyd, Knight, and Major of the
said City, and to all the Kings Majesty's Loyal and Loving Subjects therein, to
be a Person of most Innocent and Exemplary Life and Conversation, a most
Constant and Careful Dispenser of Gods most Holy Word unto the People under his
Charge, a most Diligent and Zealous Assertor of the Kings Majesty's Supremacy
in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, in opposition to all Schismatical and
Factious Persons and Principles, under what Names soever they pass or prevail
amongst us, and also of all the Christian Doctrines, together with the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England, as they are now Owned and Established
by Law.

In Testimony whereof I have caused the Seal of my Office of Majoralty to be
affixed, Dated the Eighteenth Day of September, Anno Dom. 1679. John Lloyd,
Major.

The Lord Bishop of Chichester, lately of Bristol, his Certificate.
THese are to Certify whom it may concern, That Mr. Richard Thompson, Minister
of St. Mary Redcliff, in the City of Bristol, is a Person of much more than
ordinary Endowments for Learning, an Excellent Preacher, and which crowns both
the former, a man of a Clean Life and Unreprovable Conversation. A Person free
from Novelties in Religion, but very Sound and Orthodox in the Doctrins he
Preaches: and thoroughly Conformable as to Discipline. Those Parishioners when he
came to them were a perverse Ill-principled People. His Convincing Arguments
together with his modest and prudent Behavior among them, has brought them to
Conformity, and made some Christians indeed who before he came were only
reputed so. He has Converted Quakers, and brought many Non-Conformists home
again to the Church. The Truth is, his Learning, Industry in his Calling, and
his most Exemplary Life, may be an Excellent Pattern for all that City Minsters
to Imitate. And it would be both for their Credit and Comfort to do after his
most Laudable Example.

I could say much more of him, because whilst I was Bishop of Bristol, he lived
under my own Eye. I was Witness to that Great and Good Success God did Bless
the Great Pains he took in the place where yet he is. Himself and one
Clergyman or two more, was all I could boast of in that City whilst I was
their Bishop. But in Conclusion, I know no Man of his Years, that better
deserves very good Preferment in our Church, than this Young Man does.

And this I do Testify sincerely from my heart, and give under my hand, this
fourteenth day of September, in the Year of our Lord, 1679. at my Palace in
Chichester. Guy Chichester.

The Dean and Chapter of Sarum, their Certificate.
OMnibus quorum interest innotescat per Praesentes, Ricardum Thompson in
Artibus Magistrum, and Vicarium de Bedminster juxta Bristoliam, quamdiu apud
nos commoratus est, pie vitam, sobrieque and laudabiliter traduxisse. In
concionibus saepe habendis sedulo curam adhibuisse, strenue studiis Theologicis
navasse operam; Nec unquam (quod scimus) docuisse quicquam vel tenuisse, quod
Ecclesia Anglicana non etiam approbat atque tuetur. Cujus praesertim
Disciplinae and superioribus quibuscunque ab omni part conformem morigerumque
se praestitit. In quorum omnium Testimonium, and fidem iisdem faciendam, nomina
nostra and cognomina, plane and ex animo opposuimus.

Sept. 13. Annoque Salutis reparatae. 1679. Thomas Pierce Dec. Sarum Daniel
Whitby Praecentor Sarum Ricardus Drake Cancellarius Sarum Ricardus Hill Can.
Resid. Sarum Franciscus Horton Can. Resid. Sarum.


A Certificate Signed by several of his Auditors upon the Thirtieth of January,
1679. being Persons of great Reputation for Loyalty as well as Fortune.
THese are to Certify all whom it may concern, That we whose Names are
hereunto Subscribed, were present at the Parish Church of St. Thomas within the
City of Bristol, on the Thirtieth Day of January, 1679. where we then heard Mr
Richard Thompson Preach very solemnly on the Occasion of that Days Fast. To
which Sermon every one of us for himself does Declare, he was very attentive.
And we do all hereby Certify and Declare that we do not remember that the said
Mr. Thompson, did then say in his Prayer or Sermon, That there was no Popish
Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot, or any thing to that, or the like effect. And we
are ready to make Oath of the same, if required. But on the contrary, we have
heard him detest and abhor the Popish Plot. And we do further Certify that the
said Mr. Thompson, is, and by all the time we have known him, has been a True
and Loyal Subject to our Most Gracious Sovereign, and of a very Sober and Pious
Life and Conversation amongst us, every way suitable to his Function.

Witness Our Hands this Thirteenth day of November, 1680. John Hicks, Alderman.
Richard Crump Alderman. John Knight George Morgan Thomas Davidge Edmond Brand
John Broadway Walter Gunter John Hellier John Oliff John Yeomans John Combs
George Bourchier Thomas Turner George Heart James Millerd Ralph Oliff James
Twyford Daniel Pym Thomas Hartwell Edmund Arundel Richard Benson Francis
Yeomans Thomas Durbin Charles Allen.


THE END.

