HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS OF ECCLESIASTIC AFFAIRS IN SCOTLAND And Politic
related to them, Including the Murder of the Cardinal of St. Andrews, And the
Beheading of their Queen Mary in England.

By Ri. Watson.

Sanguis sanguinem tetigit. Hosea Chap. 4. ver. 2 By swearing, and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and commiting adultery they break out, And blood
touches blood.

London, Printed by G. D. for John Garfield, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Rolling-Presse for Pictures, near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, over against Popes-head-alley. 1657.

TO The Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, And Religious Assertour of Christ's
Catholic Church, JOHN LORD Bishop of ROCHESTER.
My Lord.
THE certain hazard of all one has, or is, in these uncertain times, annexed
to the nicessity of a strict account, to be rendered in the porch or passage
unto eternity, of the managing all affairs and offices, relating either to
obligation, or restitution in this world; puts me upon a serious review of mine
own concernment, wherein, among many instances of chief regard, I find one of
my great engagements unto your Lordship with the impresse or character of Holy
Orders, into which I received my entrance by the imposition of your sacred
hands, unto whom I take my self, in some degree of duty to stand responsable
for what I act by that Commission, or write with any reflection upon the
Doctrine or Discipline of our Church. The Historical Observations, I here
humbly present your Lordship with, are inseparable from that title in respect
of both. the Sect of Schismatics I describe, having, according to the
Tradition I am guided by, in a phrenetick fury from the beginning, thrown the
price of their estates at their false Apostles fe^t, and they with them cast
souls and bodies into the fire of a raging persecution, by impious cruelties
when predominant by opprob^ious calumnies when unarmed, and by civil wars, when
their plough shares and pruning hooks could at any time be fashioned into
swords or axes, for the cutting down not only superfluous innovations in the
habit, but the very body and existence of that Apostolic rule and worship to
which pattern we pretend. I pursue them but to the period of their first
domestic insolences, drencht in the blood of that famous Queen. Whom their
best Poet, but one of Her Majesty's worst subjects, once thought worth this
Distich; Quae sortem antevenis meritis, G. Buchan Epig. ad Mariam illustriss.
Scotorum Regina^
virtutibus annos,
Sexum animis, morum nobilitate genus.


What latter attempts they made, when they marched over their borders to reform
according to the mysterious model of their new Cove*nant, that whereunto their
old enormous practices ought rather to have been conformed, is declared and
historiz'd by that Royal Pen* which has Registered to their eternal infamy
their cutting in sunder the common Tie^ of nature, (...). cap. 13.
sovereignty, and bounty; their forgetting special fresh obligations wherewith
their active spirits had been gratified, not without some seeming diminution
to, or depr^ssion of the Doners interest and honor; their inroad with an
intent to confirm the Presbyterian copy they had set, by making our Church to
write after them, though it were in bloody characters. How infatuated they were
in those counsels, how by providence defeated in their most desperate wicked
e^ds, the unpittied spectacle of their downfall demonstrates to all the world.
Yet my Lord, this is not to raise a Trophee out of their miseries, or to
trample on their dejected persons. If, by pourtrai^ing the horrid actions of
their Ancestors, I can excite their guilty consciences to compare the copy
with the original, and repent effectu^lly for the transcend^ncie of their own
rebellions, I shall have great complacency in the assurance that I have outrun,
or outwrit my hopes. Howsoever in what proportion I may expect credit to be
given unto my care, which was not little, in the Collection, and what
resignation by the impartial Reader unto the naked truth of the contents. I
shall not doubt but hereby I may, in the same, confirm all pious and humble
hearts in the preferring the ancient and univ^rsal successive government of the
Christian Church before the new Genevatizing bloody discipline of some heady
Scots; and persuade all moderate and quiet minded men to acknowledge one
supremacy over both estates, by trusting the same hand with Christ's Scepter
here on earth, which himself does with it and the civil sword. But this
endeavor may seem impertinent, if not impudent, in the face or memory of that
most Reverend heroic Prelate, Archbishop Spotswood.
whose greater eminency in authority, and interest in the same Country has
with much more advantage, particularly and amply satisfied the world by a
grearer Volume, for the suppressing which so many subtilties and violences had
been used, At Schidam in Holland.
beside the power of a foreign Magistrate, for a surprisal of the Secretary
in his preparing it to the Press that nothing could be a surer evidence, than
such self-confessing guiltiness, against that party, nor ought else, after the
Grace and Reverence of the renowned Author, put a greater estimate and opinion
upon the Book, at least if published as he writ it. May it please your Lordship
therefore to believe upon my word (who am invested with the second order to
make it valid) that this Treatise was designed long since in a preparatorie
antecedence unto the other, and to that purpose, with more ingenious confid^nce
than worldly prudence, trusted in the same hand which was to print and reap the
profit of His Grace's work, from which, after the dilatory pretenses of some
judgment to be made by a view to be taken of it, or rather after the Printers
turn was served in dispersing the greater Copies, it was returned with this
sentence, delivered by a person (whose name I had not) of much learning,
honor, and integrity, upon perusal of it, That there was too much gall in the
ink wherewith it was wrote, and supposed that an enemy was the Collector, for
that through the sides of those the design is against, our own Mother is
wounded. My Lord, if the name of that severe person, with a particular of his
exceptions, had been sent me, I should have endeavored his satisfaction, or if
theirs could have been otherwise effected whom I serve in it, and mine own
reputation preserved, who have made implicit reference to this in another Book
(a sharp reply to which I am yet to expect) perchance I might have chosen
rather to lose my pains, than give such a person scandal or confront his
censure, professiing in the words of my learned Colleague heretofore, 'Dr. Ier.
Tailors Epist. Ded. before his Further Explic. of the Doctr. of Orig. s^n.
now a most singularly devout and acute Divine, in the case of like question,
and appeal unto your Lordship, That I would rather dye, than either willingly
give occasion or countenance to a schism in the Church of England (I mean that
Church of England which conformed her self to the Ancient Latin and Greek
Church) and I would suffer much evil before I would displease my dear Brethren
(I add such as keep close to their due principles) in the service of Jesus and
in the Ministeries of that Church: Wherefore my Lord, if any thing of that
nature have passed my Pen, in the vacancie of a Synod. I submit to any Canon of
retractation or penance shall be prescribed me by your Reverence, together with
that joint primitive Oracle, and most worthy person, who^ the Doctor took (and
I do by his wary precedent) for the other Pillar of his Sanctuary* the Lord
Bishop of Sarum, whose countenance and favor I some years since was honored
with, more I presume for the integrity of my principles, than any meritorious
pregnancie in my parts. But my Lord if some timorous or superstitious Ca^t^le
in my Grave Censour, would keep me so far from Rome, as to thrust me into the
precincts of Geneva, I confess to him and all the world, that upon
demonstrative reasons, I am much more afraid in Christianities behalf of the
Leman Lake, than Tiber, and look with more horror on the rebellions sprung,
and reprobatory damnation denounced from thence, than on any encroachment upon
Kings, or indulgencies unto the people, so prodigally made by, and defused from
the Papal See. In fine my Lord, the glosses are not many I have upon points
controverted between the Church of Rome and us* if those few be so short as to
render my sense suspected, I will enlarge them when called upon, to the full
state I have made of them deliberately unto my self. For the gall in my ink, I
shall say only with your Lordships leave, I know not where more commendably or
excusably, I may affect to give it a deeper black, than in the relation of
their proceedings, whose souls were as red as scarlet, and the issue of all
their enterprises died in blood. I may be no less concerned to anticipate an
after c^nsure, incident from persons of another rank I mean such of the Scotch
Nobility, or related to them, whose faith and gallantry has effaced such their
ignoble progenitors impeachments in their coats, and yet may conceive their
Names and Families purposely tainted by my Pen, where I make a blot in some
branch of their pedigree or descent. To whom I profess I searched not their
Heraldry for a distinction* but as I intended no man injury or disrepute, so I
preferred necessary truth to his or their vulgar honor in my design. Which
being in that respect a case of Conscience, craves likewise your Lordships
cognizance, though as it regards the rule of prudence, I must answer it at my
hazard. For the rest, my Lord, til it appear by more than an obscure single
suffering that I have infringed the canon of Christian Charity, or deviated
from the doctrine and practice of the Ancient Church. I humbly crave your
Lordships favorable protection of this essay, and of my name in that communion
into the Ministry whereof your ordination introduced me, which no new
discoveries nor discourses, in foreign parts have obliged my reason to desert,
nor does any self-conviction discourage me in my subscription as that Churches,
and My Honored Lord,

Caen Aug. 27. 1657. Your Lordships most humbly obedient Son and Servant Ri.
Watson.

HISTORICAL Collections.
IF the sacred Oracles and Records, H. Scripture more at large had been the
best rule to reform by.
which Christ with his Apostles, Evangelists, Disciples, delivered unto the
ears, and deposited in the hands of the Primitive-Church, had been at large in
every particular, preserved, and by the same authority successively
transmitted, whereby that smaler volume of their writings has been manifested
to our knowledge, and commended to our belief; the errors and abuses in
Christianity had been fewer, or refomation whenever necessary, more regular;
such a standing rule giving sudden Evidence against the least obliquities which
Schism and Heresy could transgress in; and being a Bar against the boldness
of those spirits, which, when the letter of Scripture is not (as it never but
is in the sense) clear and powerful to confound them, rather multiply than
rectify things amiss, upon their pretended privilege of prophecy or
revelation. The mystery of Gods providence in withholding this succor from his
people, That we have suffi^ient.
is not so much to be repined at, as his mercy to be magnified in administering
the remainder of those helps, which is complete to the support and satisfaction
of any moderate inquirer after the general of doctrine, and particulars of
discipline, the explication of the former, and enlargement of the latter being
ever taken into the power of the Catholick-Church, The supplement from the
Catholic Church which is indulgent enough to keep all in a Christian communion.
which in its orginal purity, so studied a visible communion of Saints, that
either by express dispensation, or indulgent connivance, many national,
provincial, yea, in^eriour corporate or collegiate Congregations, had that
latitude of difference, and singularity of profession or practice^, for which
any proper (...) pretense could be produced before a general Council, or in
less matters, before their Patriarch and Bishops, vested with authority to
such purpose, as wherein their content and complacency kept all devout
well-meaning Christians from Schism and a scandalous separation. Others whose
pride, Gods judgment and hers upon Schismatics and Separatists.
ambition, or covetousness, carried them beyond the canon of moderation and
peace, were severely censured, cursed, excommunicated, cut off from Christ's
body, which like rotten members they might otherwise have corrupted and
gangrand, having no readmission or reunion to that holy, sound continuity,
without serious and open repentance, humble submission to the high authority of
the Church, which if they persisted obstinately to contemn or neglect, the
power of truth subdued their doctrines, the storm of Gods wrath dispersed their
conventicles, the sword of his vengeance executed their persons in some
exemplary temporal death, if it pursued them not to eternal damnation.

How far the visible Church, whether Roman or Greek, The defection and
division of Churches not here handled.
made at any time a general defection from her self, in a manifest detortion
of, or declention and deviation from her own canon, is neither my design nor
duty (in reference to my present undertaking) to search, no more than to
condemn or vindicate particular Churches in their separate condition. The Sum
of what I intend in this my Treatise is, to show how the Scotch-Presbyterian
Kirk, The Scotch reformation irregular and impious.
which when time was, would have fain been accepted as the pattern of purity,
and clearest extraction of Christian Religion, began Reformation upon no deep
sense, no deliberate Examen how corruption crept in; nor proceeded according to
any other rule than the Anomalie of a prejudicate fancy or premeditated malice,
which intended rather the destruction of persons, than composition of minds ^o
a due temper and sobriety in worship; having no other commission but what was
given out by the spirit of disobedience and error; nor the countenance of any
precedent beside what might be cited from the unhappy success in the attempts
of Rebellion and Schism.

The first Sect of preparatory Reformers their History pretends to, K. James 4*
were the Lollards of Kyle, who in the reign of King James the fourth, The
Lollards.
about the year 1494. becoming numerous and troublesome both to Church and
State, were accused to the King not only as Heretics, Accused for Rebels.
but Rebels. The chief points or articles insisted on, which I am concerned to
observe were these.

That it is not lawful to fight for the faith, Against War,
nor to defend the faith by the sword. Knox (to save the reputation of his own
proceedings) adds, if we be not driven to it by necessity, which is above all
law. By the former clause the sword is taken out of the Kings hand, who must be
no military Defender of the Faith: by the latter it is given to the people,
whose safety having a supremacy above the law, may frame an arbitrary necessity
to rebel. That Christ ordained no Priests to consecrate as they do in the
Romish Church, Priests consecrating.
these many years. The sense whereof is best interpreted by another. That every
faithful man and woman is a Priest. So that every one consequently (even of
either Sex) may administer the Sacrament of the Altar, or at least, that no
ordination is necessary to endow or qualify him that consecrates. Or lastly,
That no particular form of words proceeding from his mouth, have, by Christ's
institution, any special efficacy to the transmutation of the common elements
into mystical and Sacramental essences, conferring grace upon, or operating it
in the worthy receiver.

Tithes.
That Tithes ought not to be given to Ecclesiastical men, as they were then
called (to them that since are called Classical, I think they are not due) to
wit, wholly, says Knox, but a part to the Poor, Widow, or Orphans, and other
pious uses: and good reason surely; for if the widow has them, these
pharisaical hypocrites know whence to fetch them, and under what pretense to
devour the houses where they are. As great impiety may be cloaked under the
name of pious uses, when the principal must be supposed the advancement of the
discipline, toward which if a chargeable rebellion be found necessary, not
only the tenth but the whole stock must be piously employed, and the Poor with
the Orphan set out of the way.

That Christ at his coming has taken away all power from Kings to judge, and
That the unction of Kings ceased at the coming of Christ. Of this Knox is
ash^med and will therefore needs have the article not to be the Lollards their
Ancestors, but the venomous accusation of the enemies, whereas both in his time
and ours howsoever disguised, according to this doctrine has proceeded the
whole practice of the Presbytery against their Princes.

Episcopal benediction.
That the blessings of Bishops are of no value, which passes only with this
charitable animadversion by the same hand ( of dumb dogs they should have been
styled.)

Excommunication.
That the excommunication of the Kirk is not to be feared.

That in no case it is lawful to swear.

That true Christians receive the body of Jesus Christ every day by faith.
Sacrament of the L. Supper.
So no need of the Sacrament.

Divorce.
That after Matrimony be contracted and consummate, the Kirk may make no
divorcement.

That faith should not be given to Miracles; Miracles.
so that it should seem Christ was mistaken in his means to propagate the
Gospel.

That we are no-more bound to pray in the Kirk than in other places. Praying in
Churches.


That they which are called Princes and Prelates in the Church are thievs and
robbers. Prelates.


These men Knox calls the servants of God, K. James 5. 1657.
whose merciful providence he magnifies in preserving the register of their
tenants, who without public doctrine (he means by the authority of a general
Assembly) gave so great light to the Kingdom of Scotland. The importunity used
by some of their faction about the King prevailed for their pardon, the rather
because some ridiculous apertnesse in their answers rendered them, The King
pardoned them,
men not of depth to carry on a design, and this discovery was thought enough
to awe them, and the check they had from Court to restrain them; for many years
after was little controversy had about Religion, until Patrick Hamilton Abbot
of Fern, a man though devout, yet of an hot and violentspirit, discontented at
home, passes over into Germany, where at Wittenberg meeting with Luther and
Melancthon, Patrick Hamilton goes for Germany.
as he increased his dislike of the doctrine he left professed in Scotland; so
he did his animosity against the persons of Bishops and such as had the
government of that Church. The zeal of Gods glory (as Knox writes) did so eat
him up, that he could not long continue to remain there, but to ease his
stomach he returns into his Country, Returns to reform Scotland.
and as if he had been vested with Apostolic Commission, he solicites,
disputes, and with too much virulen^y declaimes against the divinity of the
times, taking the Reformation both of Pulpit and Schools into his care. The
sound hereof comes soon to the ears of the Archbishop of S. Andrews, the
particulars were chiefly debated by Cambell a Dominican Friar and learned
Thomist, with whom he had disputed at large, and being somewhat pleased that he
had as he thought, and the other professed, made him his convert, he was*
beyond expectation, by the same man accused of Heresy, Is accused by Cambell.
and upon his articles condemned to be burnt, for trifles (as Knox says) viz.
Pilgrimage, Purgatory, Prayer to Saints, and for the dead: Yet as great a
Martyr as he was, his printed work shows him to have been a more subtle
Sophister, than orthodox Divine.

To omit the great discouragement he gives to Christian endeavors, False
doctrine in his bo^^ about the law.
by this assertion in terminis, The law binds us to do that which is
impossible for us, and the cold water he casts upon practick obedience by this,
The law does nothing but command thee, explaining it to be only to inform our
knowledge, God not requiring nor expecting performance, putting off that
obligation upon Christ: His perverting the sense of many texts in Scripture,
from which he draws two ungrounded licentious conclusions, Faith only saves,
Increduli^y only condemns, Faith.
whereby good works are cashir'd, and a salve is found for all bad ones, the
world, the flesh, the Devil can suggest to: His bold enlargement of the
Apostles assertion, Justification.
excluding from our Justification Charity, which is the work of the Gospel,
which we act by the benefit of Christ's passion, and by the assistance of his
grace, because he exempts the works of the law: His sophistry in an
antithetical argument, Works.
No works make us righteous, Ergo, No works make us unrighteous, whereas S.
Paul says, That the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven, 1
Cor. 6.9.
and he declares such unrighteous, as do the works of the flesh. Gal. 5.19.
Mism^k^ng works only characters of a good or evil man, and the reward to
bear, by consequence, no proportion unto them, which is contrary to the
Evangelicall doctrine. Mat. 16.27.
That God will reward every man according to his works: Beside that through the
whole series of his wri^ing, he makes Christianity an idle speculative
profession, Speculative Christianity.
a mere perspective of the passion of Christ. For all which I impute not to him
the guilt of heresy, nor excuse them that executed him as such.

Some young students and Friars his sect^ries.
The reverence that had been paid him for his strictness of life and ability of
parts, according to the learning of that age, was much augmented by a constant
resolution at his death, which put the younger students and novices upon a
combination for maintaining his Tenants, and the breach they made, let out some
Friars to rail against the abuses of the Bishops. The patronage of Mr. Gawin
Logie and Mr. John Maire added some reputation to these actions, Logie.
Maire.
and a reformation was attempted by some more unworthy instruments upon their
credit. The light pulpit discourse of Friar Arithe with his gossips catched
some slight people in a jest, Friar Arithe.
while other graver men by more serious arguments, multiplied consider^ble
proselytes in good earnest, insomuch as the Archbishop of S. Andrews, according
to the rigor of his Religion, began to call for more fire and faggots, but was
stopped a little by the witty advice of Mr. John Lindsey, who told him, My Lord:
If ye will burn them, Lindseys advice to the Archbishop of S. Andrews.
let them be burnt in hollow Cellars, for the smoke of Mr. Patrick Hamilton
has infected as many as it blew upon, some touch of it was thoughr to have
tainted Alexander Seton a black Friar and Conf^ssor to King James the fifth,
Al. Seton the Kings Confessor p^t from him.
who presuming upon the opportunity of his privacy, endeavored to withdraw the
Kings affections from the Bishops, and his conscience from some part of his
Religion, which by more prevalent counsel of Ecclesiastical persons about the
Court, made him be discharged of his office, and his dread of the fire, carried
him out of the Realm. From Berwick by letter he appeals to the King, whom
notwithstanding he accuses to himself of weakness and ignorance, His Letter to
the King.
being very invective against the Churchmen who at that time, as well as the
Presbyters since, waved in many things their due subjection, and in the name of
Christ took upon themselves, the authority of the King. I find no mention of
any answer returned, but I do of his progress from thence to London, where at
S. Paul's Cross he retracted some of the new divinity he had published. Hi
retraction.
After this for ten years space these violent oppositions in Religion were
interrupted, The Reformation interrupted in Scotland.
the civil wars making other disputes and partisans upon temporal principles
among the Scots. In which time began a reformation in England, from King Henry
the eights differences with the Pope, Begins in England.
whether the pillage of Abbeys, and demolishing other religious places, easily
invited the Scottish laborers, who would always be found at leisure for such
work. About the year 1534. began a new Inquisition in Scotland, 1534.
wherein was eminent the perverse demeanor of one David Straton an ignorant
Gentleman, Straton denies Tyth-fish.
though in the Catalogue of their Martyrs* of whom when the Bishop of Murray,
Prior of S. Andrews, demanded the customary Tithe of his Fish, his answer was,
If they would have Tithe of that which his servants wan in the se^, it were but
reason that they should come and receive it where they got the stock, and so
(as it was constantly affirmed) he caused his servants to cast the tenth fish
into the sea. Is anathematized.
The process of cursing laid against him by the Church being encountered with
his contempt was re-enforced by a summons to answer for his heresy, to
maintain which having hitherto no pretense, but the perverseness of his will,
the Lord of Dun Arskin very lately illuminated in the point lends him his lamp
to look out some better reason, Instructed to maintain his errou^ by Dun Arskin.
and because he could not read, bids him hearken, which he did with more
diligence than devotion, desirous to meet with what might color the
affectation of his errors, to which purpose the Lord of Lawristons
field-lecture conduced luckily, Mat. 10.33. Mar. 8 38.
chancing to be rather out of S. Matthew than the Prophet Malachy, where the
Pharisaical tything of Mint and Cummin being taxed might serve his turn to
slight all Christian Decimations as publican-extortions, Matthew. 23.23.
and no weighty matters of the law. Though that was not the text that brought
the spirit of prayer upon him, Matthew. 10.33.
but another on which he might have made a better comment by his repentance
than unwildy resolution; and known, that the denial of tenths is the denial of
God in his institution before men, and may perhaps be retaliated before the
holy Angels by his Son. Sentence of death being passed, he asked grace of the
King, David Straton executed.
which Knox says, he willingly would have granted, but the Bishop proudly
answered, [no more proudly than the Presbyters more than once since then] That
the Kings hands were bound in that case, and that he had no grace to give to
such as by their law were condemned.

Notwithstanding the severity exercised upon him and many other, the
Reformation (for precedents unto which by this time their Merchants and
Mariners had traffiqued in foreign parts) makes its way into the cloisters,
and by Friar Killors contrivance (which John Knox seems to approve of very
well) shows it self upon the stage in a Satyrick play, Fri^r Killors play.
and that on a Good Friday morning the subject whereof was the passion of our
Savior Christ, most envious paralels being made between the Jewish Priests and
the Scottish Bishops. This gave the occasion of a more close search into the
Friars opinions, He and others burnt.
which being found such as suited not with the present profession and
government of the Church, sent him with many other too zealous reforming
accomplices unto the fire. Not long after George Buchanan laid his cockatrice
egg, G Buchanan encourage^h schism and rebellion:
not only of Iudaisme, which himself hatched in a Lenten meeting at the eating
of a Paschal lamb, but of Schism and Rebellion, which His Majesty endeavored
to crush upon the first discovery, notwithstanding the trust he had reposed in
him of instituting some his natural children. He was by the Kings special Order
(as they say) committed to prison, 1539.
whence he made an unhappy escape, Escapes out of prison.
to the ruin almost of that Kingdom by his writing.

All this while the Royal Reformers in England marched furiously, so as King
James had no mind to meet them at York, K. James de^lines an interview with K.
Hen. 8.
nor give King Henry there the interview he desired. This, though imputed to
his Clergy, was taken as a discourtesie from himself, which set the English
jealousy on fire, and that at last burnt out into a war. King James was not
so absolute at home as to cement at pleasure the Scottish intestine divisions, A
war between them.
where the equality of power did so mi-party his thoughts, that he knew not which
side to head, nor had he alwaie^ the liberty of his choice. His distrust of
both made him enter into secret counsel with his Clergy, by whose advice and
assistance he levied on a sudden a v^ry numerous Army, the design whereof was
scarcely thought of in England, when it actualy entered upon the borders. But
such scruples were scatered by some disaffected persons to the Church and
Crown, as made most of the Soldiery dispute the justce of the quarrel when
they were to handle their arms, The Scotch Army defeated.
or without consulting their conscience, leave them in the field. The loss of
this Army so troubled the King that he cast off all care to recruit it, This
discomfiture was called Gods fighting against pride for his own little flock.
and measuring the shortness of his days by the extremity of his grief, he
becomes too true a prophet of his death Some six days before his Queen was
delivered at Linlitquow of a daughter, Knox says God as ev^dently here fought
against K. James as K B^nhadad bu^ ^n his parralell he finds out noth^ng for
the detect^on of the Nobles out of distaste at the General chosen by the King
The King dies.
whom John Knox, very civ^lly calls, the scourge of that Realm, as her mother,
one that brought continuing plagues upon the same, and that her whole life
declared her to be such. No less did his brethren spare the deceased King, but
called him Murderer, and rejoiced at the taking away of such an enemy to Gods
truth.

1542. Q Mary
In the Kings last will were four Protectors o^ Regents of the Kingdom
appointed; the Cardinal of S. A^drews, A Protector or R^gen^s by the Kings
will.
the Earls of Huntley, Arguyle and Murray, but these were men, especially while
in the Cardinals company, very unlikely to promote the new Religion, or the
more unjustifiable ends of the pretended Reformers of the Church. The young
Earl of Arran was found a fitter subject to work on, They are rejected by the
Reformers and the Earl of Arran declared Governor.
the facility of his nature rendering him very flexible to their desires, and
the narrownes of his judgment admitting, in no latitude, an ability to
counterplot at any time their designs, or a discovery of their purposes, but
what they laid directly in his sight. His pretense of the second place in
succession to the Crown gave him color, and the Lord Grange furnished him with
courage, to claim the government during the minority of the Queen; which that
faction of the Nobility soon bestowed upon him, who had more will to rule with
him, than reason to suppose that in his hands lay the best security for her
person. Yet to enable him for that, or some other more secret ends, were
presently delivered up to him the Kings Treasure, Jewe^ls, Plate, Horse, The
Kings treasur^, etc. delivered to him.
etc. which notwithstanding they scarcely give him liberty to look on, before
they set him to study controversies in Religion, and tutor him as well in the
polemick divinity, as politics of that party. They set him to study
controversies.

Show him the bloody Sc^ol^, and instruct him by it.


And to point the bluntness of his nature by some new animosity of spirit, they
show him his own name, among others, in a private Schedule of the K. being a
memorial of such as of whose disaffection to his person, government religion,
good notice being taken, as good care might be had to prevent the ^ll effects
of that humor, which they suggested to be a destination of them unto ruin.
This was called the bloody Scroll, and the discovery of it, a great deliverance
of Gods, which some godly men, as they termed themselves (that is, such as
whose guilt made them conscious how much concerned they were in it) fearing the
execution of their ends and intents thereof, being left to the Cardinal as a
Legacy by the King, pressed the Governor to ^ake notice of, to betake himself
for what pu^pose God had exalted him to that honor, and how great expectation
was had of him. The principal of their meaning, being to depose the Cardinal
for their own security, he understood not, and therefore they put upon him one
Guilliame a lapsed Friar, Friar Guilliame a pointed to preach down Superstition.
with some others to be privileged in the preaching down Superstition, a word
of as great extent in those times as since, from which was taken as much
advantage for a licentious and violent Reformation. But the Friars arguments
being more powerful to draw the people into sedition, than the Bishops to a
dispute: A Ballad made against his doctrine by Witsow servant to the Bishop of
Dunkell.
one of their servants thought to rhyme down the ridiculous part of the practice
in a ballad, for which he had like to have lost his life, as the Cardinal his
liberty, who for some time was their prisoner in Dalkeith and Seaton; The
Cardinal of S. Andrews imprisoned.
but this project being advanced, and another passed the vote in Parliament
about a marriage between Prince Edward of England and their Queen, whether by
command or connivance of the Governor, or intercession of the Queen Mother, to
which they add the bribing of his keeper the Lord Seaton, and Lethington, he
was soon after set free. Set free.


About this time they obtained with some difficulty the use of the Bible in the
vulgar tongue, The Bible in the vulg^r tongue.
not to lea^n out of it the duty of obedience to the supreme Magistrate, The
ill use made of it.
not to study the sincere doctrine and sense of the holy word; but to have the
same advantage with the heretics of old, to wrest the authority of sacred writ
out of the hands of the Catholic Church, and to serve their purposes at any
time, rend the letter from the meaning of the holy Spirit. For th^s they cited
the pattern of primitive Christians, whom they never meant to imitate, and the
authority of some Fathers, who countenanced that indulgence to humble holy men;
-- qui estis? quando, and unce venistis? quid in meo agitis non mei? -- mea est
possessio, ol^m possid^o prior possi^eo........ Ego sum haeres Apostolorum....
Vos certe exhaeredaverunt semper and as dicaverunt ut extraneos ut inimicos. De
Praescr. c. 37.
but in canvasing the question, I find not them calling upon Tertullian, who
spoke his mind too freely, adjudging them for Heretics, who came short of
them in pertinacy and error, and excluded all that were so from any benefit of
the Bible in their oppositions unto the Church. The first good use they made of
it was the garnishing their libells and rebellious Pamphlets; and the first
fruits of the new amity between England and them, was the l^berty of getting
thence in great numbers, the most angry Treatises penned in favor of King
Henry's fury against the Church.

The contract of Marriage was made solemnly in the Abbey of Hallirud-house, The
contract of Marriage between Prince Edward of England and Q Mary celebrated.
to the confirmation of which, howsoever the Governor was prevailed with to
have Christ's sacred body b^oken between him and Mr. Sadler the Ambassador from
England; yet the Queen and Cardinal and what they call the faction of France,
which was the principal nobility, are confessed to have no consent in it, upon
which the Commissioners were afterward questioned for their proceedings, The
Commissiners questioned for it.
but being maintained by the great politic Patriot, the pretended Parliament,
it mattered not what the Holy spiritual father, or natural mother had to say
against them, the young Queen must be disposed of as they thought fittest, and
the great Seals of both Kingdoms, for a second ratification, interchanged.

But soon after came out of France I. Hamilton, the Abbot of Paisly, and Mr.
David Painter afterward Bishop of Rosse, The Abbot of Paisly and Mr. D. Painter
come from France wi^h advice to the Governor.
men formerly cried up by the Reformers for their learning, life, religion; and
expected by them to become pillars of the new Temple they were building; but
their private instructions directed them to the Court, with new advice to the
Governor, to consider whither his petty Counselors were carrying him; what
the consequences might be of the alterations in religion; what commodity in
continuing the ancient League with France; and what hazard of his own ^ightful
succession to the crown under the displeasure of the Pope, who legitimated his
birth by favoring the marriage of his mother after the divorcement of his
father from Elizabeth Hume then alive, although he might have had security, as
to the last, from the Reformers, who acknowledged afterward they would with
their whole force have fortified him in the place that God had given unto him,
and would never have called in Question things done in time of darkness. So it
seems they can digest the Popes dispensations when they serve their turn. The
Abbots counsel being observed to make impression in the Governor, The Courtiers
conf^ont the Reformers.
some of the Courtiers took courage to confront his zealous party, and one let
fly a desperate speech. That neither He nor his friends could ever be at
quietness, till a dozen of those Knaves, that abused his Grace were hanged.
Some of them about him that had deserved it, disliked the liberty taken to
speak so much truth, and secretly withdrew themselves. Friar Guilliame being
inhibited his licentious preaching, Fr. Guilliame forbid to preach He and
others Banished.
went for Engand, others had their dismission, and the Lord Governor betook
himself unto the Cardinal, and Lords better affected unto the Q. This was
called renouncing the profession of Christ Jesus holy Gospel, as if the
Christian Creed were then confined to the Cabinet, as since to the Consistory.
But this impetuous calumny forced not through his resolution, The Governor
less resolved than formerly.
nor did his rash oath, lately taken to the English Ambassador oblige him to
withstand the counsel of breaking the imperfect League, the only difficulty
was how to raise money for preparations requisite to a defensive war* Prepares
for war with England.
which they must now expect from King Henry of England, whose will in woing,
though for his Son, must not be checked without ^evenge. Toward this the
Clergy, upon the motion of the Cardinal, who made it a case of conscience in
the vindication of Religion, raised great contribution,, and an opportunity of
breaking the league offered it self, when the hostages for the observance of
conditions were to be delivered, An opportunity to break the Le^gue.
the denial of whom was seconded with the stay in Scotland of some noble
personages late prisoners in England, who had their liberty but on parole or
bail, none returning to custody but the Earl of Cassils, Earl of Cassils kept
parrole.
who stood more upon his honor, and word passed unto King Henry, then his duty
to serve his Queen and Country, for which singular instance of adhering unto
his promise, and for the hopes King Henry had that being gratified with his
liberty, he might gain him to some future service, he commended his fidelity,
rewarded him and sent him home; but being deceived in the rest, and by the
Governor in the contract, he seized upon all the Scottish Ships with^n his
ports, The Scotch ships seized on in England. A w^r proclaimed.
and proclaimed a war, yet made no haste to it that Summe^, but used the
prudence and industry of his Ambassador before he recalled him, and afterward
of the party he had in Scotland, to regain the Governors faith in the
performance of his word. In the mean time comes from France the young Earl of
Lenox, Earl of Lenox comes from France.
who setting aside the dvan^age the Governor had by the Popes cherishing the
divorce, was reputed to have a near^r relation unto the Crown, His pretenses
against the Governor.
and so far said to be justified in his pretenses by the deceased King, as that
he had intended to declare him succ^ssor in default of heirs. Much contrivance
is charged on the Queen Dowager and the Cardinal in and after the Earls coming
over, somewhat whereof may be not improbable, to keep the Governor more firm
to them, to the title of whose estate, as well as honor, the Earl was rival,
and ready to step into all, if the importunity of that par^y he first headed
had ^ecovered him from the Court, which prevailing not, the Earl thereby
frustrate of his hopes, and the amarous addresses he made to the Queen Dowager
not so entertained as to correspond with his ambition of a Royal marriage, His
address to the Q. Dowager.
he takes livery and s^isin of what was left him, the forlorn party of
Reformers, joining his with their counsels and discontents. His heading with
the Reformers.
His interest added somewhat to the number they got together out of anger
against the Cardinal, and now revenge against the Governor, whom they took to
be a creature of their own making, and thought he would have continued to
acknowledge their sovereignty while he did wear the badge of honor they
bestowed upon him. Those who on other reasons, were of a faction for England
came in to them. Having modeled their Army, they send a challenge to the
Cardinal at Edinburgh, They challenge the Cardinal.
undertaking to give him, and whatsoever forces would come out against them,
battle between that and Leith. This the Cardinal seemed not to decline, yet
prudently judging the medley of those bravadoes could not be kept long
together, and that he might have a greater necessity ere long to use a better
Army against the English than he had yet in readiness; put the appointment off
from day to day, whereupon the more impatient part deserted them, and some
other by good conference received good s^tisfaction; to that their General the
young Earl became jealous of the remainder, The Earl leaves them and resigns
himself.
and thought it better policy to resign himself, and pass over voluntarily,
than to stay till he were fetched by his enemies, or delivered up by his
despairing friends. Thus persuaded, he goes to Edinburgh, where he was
entertained with a little more cu^tesie in the City than he would have been in
the field; yet he liked not the complement so well as to trust to it, but by
the advice of some friends, withdrew in the night to Glascow, Yet withdraws
again and garrisons.
and from thence having garrisoned the Bishops Palace, to Dunbarton Some offers
were made of an accommodation between the Governor and the Earl, but the
jealousies on both sides were such as could not be concentred in a point of
mutual satisfaction, and so multiplied into counter designs and perturbations
of public p^ace. This civil discord hastened King Henry's preparations* who in
the beginning of May 1544. The English invade Scotland.
poured forces into Scotland by sea and land, which troubled many the great
ones there little, as Sr. George Douglasse, having a party there.
who being taken out of prison upon their approach, said in meriment; I thank
King Henry and my gentle Masters of England. And indeed he had so many fellow
servants devoted to the English, that the Governor and Cardinal could not
raise a sufficient power of loyal subjects to make resistance. So the Army,
having sacked and burned Edinburgh, wrought their pleasure at Leith and other
places adjacent, returned home.

After this, Earl Lenox sends his Apology into France to no purpose.
the Earl of Lenox sends an express into France with as advantageous pretenses
as he could contrive, for his proceedings in Scotland; but King Francis, who
advised his going th^ther to some better purpose than upon a private quarrel
he had against the Protector to raise a power against the Crown, would
vouchsafe his Messenger no hearing, nor his Letters reading, but set such a
guard upon him as made him doubt whether he had the liberty of his person, at
least fear to hazard it by giving intelligence to his Lord about the counsels
of that Court. This straightened the Earl in the necessity he was reduced to of
seeking some protection for himself: In the midst of which distraction the
Governor, after few days siege, took the Castle of Glascow, and left no
secure sanctuary for the Earl but England, Castle of Glascow taken by the
Governor.
which he soon resolved on having promises of his welcome, yet could not take
his leave without attempting some revenge upon a Territory belonging to the
Hamiltons, wherein he gratified his passion more than justified his prudence,
Earl Lenox makes a rash attempt upon the Hamiltons
or satisfied his friends, who were so sensible of the loss sustained by it,
that he could not prevail with them to engage again; yet having an affected
fondness to keep up the reputation of a party against the malignity of
fortune, they importuned the Earls retirement to Dunbarton Castle: but his own
courage being conquered, he thought no place inexpugnable, and so
weather-beaten at land he put himself upon the mercy of the sea and King
Henry's kindness, who furnished a pillow for his disquiet and dejected
thoughts, the breast of Lady Margaret Douglasse his fair N^ece, Flies into
England, where he mar^ies K. H. Niece.
whom he propounded acceptably unto him for a Wife. The headless company he
left behind him fearing more the extremity of rigor from the Hamiltons, which
by their rashness they had merited, than knowing how to protect themselves,
like desperate persons stood prepared to do mischief, though with no hopes to
survive it. Upon consideration of whose perverseness, or compassion unto their
persons, the Queen Mother rescued them from their enemies and themselves, Q.
Mother protects the party he leaves behind.
taking them under her particular command and care; and so preserved their
lives against their hopes, if not their wills, but could ^ot secure their
goods, which by their incensed enemies were seized on and set to sale.

Several incursions were made afterward by the English, with such success that
at last the Nobility (some of whom were not so sensible of the public
dishonor and detriment done to their Country, The Scotch Nobility weary of
their English friends.
as of the damage themselves suffered in their private possessions, which could
not well be secured in a common dvastation) applied themselves more
obsequiously to the Governor, uniting their strength, and compromising their
counsels, which helped them to a little victory, and that after their
chasticement invited some auxiliaries from France, commanded by Monseiur
Montgomery de Lorge, De Lorge brings over French forces.
who had instructions to enquire after the disorders unnecessarily caused by
the Earl of Lenox and his party, and to rebuke them as well as cherish others
who had showed more conscience in continuing loyal, than curiosity in searching
reasons and opportunity how or why they might not be so. They with the Scots
march to the borders and return with booty.
The countenance of these French forces much hastened the Scotch levies, so
that in a short time was raised an Army of 15000. men, with which they marched
to the borders of England, where in the spoil of the Country they quitted some
old scores, and might have made a farther inroad, if not divided in their
counsels; but they returned home with the reputation and booty they had gotten,
as soon after did De Lorge into France. The late success against the publ^ck
enemy, upon whose preparation or approach Scotland was never free from
intestine tumults and disorders, gave the Governor and Cardinal opportunity
for a progress and visitation through the Country, The Governor and Cardinal
make a ^rogress to set all in order.
to compose the ruptures in the Ecclesiastic and Civil body; to encourage the
hearts of such as were any way inclinable to peace and duty, and to castigate
persons whom they found refractory against the law and establishment of the
Kingdom: wherein though some of their proceedings may be censured for too much
rigor, A moderate sense of their proceedings.
yet somewhat must be indulged to humane infirmity, that not always in Rulers,
whether temporal or spiritual, is guided by the sweet influence of Christian
charity, the perfection whereof is not only to pardon, but to do good for
evil, at least in judicature not to be over balanced by the sense of any
personal affronts, so as to recompense them with revenge, and make the sword
of justice to execute more by the authority of their passion than the Law.
Beside, whatsoever were the abuses crept into Religion, when they find
improper persons and uncommission'd for that purpose, not only lopping off the
superfluous boughs, but laying the Axe unto the root of all, with design to
plant nothing of the word of God that they pretend to, but wild fancies of
their own, and not only to argue out works, but fight up their Faith, and
claim by their doctrine a propriety in all possessions, whose owners submit not
to it; what prevention is used, especially by persons in present government,
may in charity be hoped to ensue as well from a godly zeal to maintain the
better part, as a barbarous cruelty and perverseness to keep up the worse, which
being all the apology I intend for them, passing my word and promise, that
howsoever prejudiced I will relate no circumstance partially, much less
falsely, to the disadvantage of the Reformers, I will briefly instance the
proceedings against such persons as occur most notorious in their story.

Somewhat before this time, in the year 1540. one Sr. John Borthwick, Sr. Jo.
Borthwick proc^ss'd and condemned when absent.
commonly called Captain Borthwick, was in the Cloisters of S. Andrews before a
multitude of the principal Clergy and Nobility process'd and condemned though
absent and out of reach The articles are published, but because too succinctly,
and it may be not indifferently; or impartially, by his accusers and Judges; I
conceive it no injury to him, to lay down, for his sense and the substance of
that he scattered before; what I collect from the answers himself framed
afterward, and commended to his friends.

He is unjust as to the Pope, and uncharitable to the best of that Religion.
The first Article was, His levelling the Pope of Rome with any other Bishop or
Prelate whatsoever. Where, as he might have enlarged h^s Christian moderation
to the allowance of some precedence and privileges granted him by the
submission and Canons of unsuspected Councils, and given him, for S. Peter's
sake a Patriarc^ate at least: so much more might he have abstained from
comparing the whole communion of that Religion to common Thieves and Robbers,
having the Pope for their Captain; and because they called him Holy Father (a
Title from Antiquity rendered to the dignity not only of that, but other Sees)
affixing to the persons of all successively invested with it the guilt of
Treason, Murder, Rapine and all kind of such evils.

A branch of the third Article (for I omit all wherein he is to be commended
for asserting the truth, or not condemned for speaking modestly and prudently
his own opinions) that I say, was concerning the lawfulness for all Bishops to
be coupled and joined in Matrimony. His answer for Bishops marriage not very
apposlic.
In answer to which, his business was not only to exclaim against the practice
of the Roman Church for prohibiting their Clergy marriage, who cannot have the
confidence to deny that a greater enlargement was left to them by S. Paul whose
doctrine he chiefly urges; and by the Cannons of the Christian Church a long
time after, which themselves have not expunged in their editions; but rather
ingeniously to clear this point and scruple. 1 Cor. 6 12.
Whether Saint Paul having said; That all things which are lawful are not
convenient; A question put in behalf of the Roman Church.
whenever the Governors of a Church find inconvenient what they know
lawful they may not innocently lay a restraint upon that liberty, since they
force no man unto the function, but simply make it a condition obliging any man
that will enter in, who upon conscience of his infirmity, has room enough to
bestow himself otherwise in the world. And those who since plead for Sir
John's, are to frame some distinction between that general Canon of the Roman
Church, and those particular Statutes or laws in diverse or all the Reformed,
The Reformed Churches restrain from marriage.
which oblige, beside individuals, several Colleges and Corporations of people
to an unmarried life, who make a forfeiture of their preferments and profits,
whenever they enter into that state. Secondly, Sir John citing the doctrine
of S. Paul, was to take notice of his advice to all men, 1 Cor. 7.7.
to be as he was, which argued a possibility they might be so; much more that
out of all men a selected number might be called to serve God at his Holy
Altar, with pure hands and hearts, and after to make up the Lambs special
train which St. John tells him were virgins not defiled with women, redeemed
from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. S. Paul
misinterpreted.
As to that Sr. John pretended, That S. Paul where he described the perfect
image of a good Bishop, did reckon and account marriage amongst the other good
gifts which he required to be in them: yea, that he numbered Matrimony among the
principal virtues pertaining unto a Bishop, it is very ridiculous, the most
thereby imported being a toleration to such as cannot lie alone, or will not
trust a Steward with their accounts, and unworthy a reply. In his answer to the
fourth, Calling the Pope Antichrist, Sir John impetuous against the Pope.
among them which made him Pro-Christ by succession and Vicar general of the
Church, whatsoever in the eyes of some men, it had of truth* undeserving the
imputation of Schism; it had little of prudence, nor could it produce less
than a condemnation by those Judges, whose Religion and interest was to keep up
the Tradition of their Fathers.

In the fifth, A separation from all Churches.
preferring his particular faith before that of the whole National Clergy, yet
rendering no account of it but in the destructive part of what he disliked: nor
declaring of what other communion he was, primitive or modern, but rather that
he mean'd to be of none by his crying down material Temples and Chapels
(wherein the Papists putting an Image or Crucifix will not excuse him) he
savours of too much insolence and self-conceit, sending every man to a separate
subsistence by himself* for which God in his holy Scripture gives no authority
unto any: beside that, it dissenteth from the Article which the Apostles put in
their Creed.

To the sixth Article about the Temporal Jurisdiction of the Clergy, In some
cases spiritual men may have temporal jurisdiction.
he might have so far condescended as to permit it where their spiritual
function was not interrupted by it; or if it were, where the King supreme in
spiritual and temporal, dispensed with it, their office being supplied by
others: as likewise where the cases of conscience were so involved with the
points of propriety, interest and profit, that any difficulty arising required
the resolution rather of a Priest than Lawyer, such as which are to be found in
Deuteronomy. 17. The places he cites against it implies only a singular humility,
without ambition or vainglory, to be enjoined them, and may as well be used
against the composing any differences, the greatest act of Christian Charity,
as judging Controversies and Suits in law.

In the seventh, A limitation in sequestring Church revenues.
about The Kings sequestring the revenues of the Church, whatsoever may be the
Royal power in reserved cases, to assume, or transfer the whole from one name
to another, as from Priests to Ministers (if the name must be so reformed) from
Convents to Colleges; yet to rend in pieces the wills and testaments of the
dead, and to take their Legacies from a lazy Clergy, to throw them upon a
luxurious Laity, has not hitherto been so approved by God in a blessing upon
the persons or posterity of them that gaped for this holy morsel, but that many
instances have been made of prodigious ends, taking away the possessors,
ruining their families, with an insensible loss of such lands and inheritances
as more justifiably descended on them. What comparison Sr. John makes between
the Priests of Baal, An unchristian comparison.
or Iezabel, and those of Rome, sparkles out from the fervency of his zeal,
which too much transports him when he pretends to the same commission with
Daniel and Elias.

Upon the ninth, about the power of the Church in making Canons, The Church
has power to make Canons
he ^aies too much restraint or rather indeed nulls it in pretending it only
declarative of what was made by God for the Nation of the Jews, or what was
published by Christ to his Apostles sent among them and the Gentiles, whereas
the abolishing most part of the former, left room for a new Law to be inserted
in its place; nor when Christianity had entered only into private houses, The
reasons why.
was it proper to have so many orders issued out, as when it should after
spread it self openly throughout the world. The authentic limitation which he
fancieth out of 23. John, may give a greater liberty than the Church of Room
has yet taken; for granting him what he may expect, but calls not for, that
the seventh verse brings all intended within the compass of the Moral Law;
yet that, as to the practice both in the first and second Table, brancheth it
self into several parts of the positive, as well sacred as judicial then proper
for that Nation, which since being abolished by Christ, some Evangelical
constitutions were to succeed, whereof all the Texts in the Gospel against
Traditions do not deprive the Church. The conditions he annexeth to the Levites
privilege, Malachy 2* reach not unto the Christian Priests, unless he can
demonstrate them as completely furnished out of the 4. Evangelists, which
rather represent (and that but very briefly, even when they are drawn into an
harmony) the state and discipline of the Church at that time, than make
provisional Cannons in all cases, for all Christian Congregations in succeeding
ages. As to what power the Prophets had universally which he says, is so very
lively d^scribed, Ezekiel. 33. that they should hear the word out of Gods own
mouth and declare it unto the people. When he can prevail with God to speak
viva voce, as lively to Christian Priests, or but whisper to them in dreams, or
show them Hieroglyphics of his pleasure in frequent visions; it may be the
Church of Rome will lay down her necessity of calling Councills, and suspend
the execution of her Cannons. The sum of what passed between Christ and his
Apostles, as to matter of faith, he might believe to be comprehended in the
history of the New Testament, whereupon no question the Apostles did more
dilate in their dispertion than is preserved for our reading, and the like was
done by their successors in the institution of the Church. But as to matters of
practice, considering how many years Christ conversed with them, Sir John could
not but conceive many particulars unregister'd, or fallen short of his Age; nor
had they been, if preserved, applicable to all times, according to the variety
of which, and other circumstances the Decretalls multiplied, and so will
Ecclesiastical Canons increase in number, or be alterable for necessity or
decency unto the end.

What presses most in the tenth Article, Sir John declineth, The Reformation
in England no good pa^tern for Scotland.
and therefore no wrong is done him, if he be thought imprudently to have said,
etc. That Religion (that is to say, so much of it as Henry 8. turned off) was
to be abolished and destroyed as then in England, where (whatsoever good
reformation has since been made) a great deal of Murder, Rapine and Injustice
was acted, and countenanced, by what King, and to what purpose the world
knows: And the Cardinal with his Clergy had good reason, beside private
interest* to prevent so passionate and sacrilegious a change in Scotland. Some
moderation S^r John shows in permitting S. Augustines Monks to stand, Monks in
the primitive Church.
for not whom alone, but others of ancient institution as much may be pleaded,
if S. Basils Rule and the historical passages of S. Hierom and other holy
Fathers be duly read, whose Convents were made no brothel houses nor
swine-sties, nor was their worship such, as to devote them unto the devil, and
yet much reverence they gave unto the Relics of Christian Martyrs. And
reverence given to Relics.
They that afterward made counterfeits, for gain of proselytes or money, may
the better sort dispute the point of pi^ fraus with his Knightship and the
worse with his hypocritical corrupted Sectaries, who pretend to as great
miracles, in having Gods Spirit at their call, and the power of all his Ancient
Prophets in their Night-caps. The habits of Monk^ (which he excepts against)
were in the purest times imposed upon them, and fitter it may be were they for
a Cloister, than those by which the tribe of precisians will since be
distinguished in the Church. My opinion of the senten^e against Sr. J^h^
Borthwick.
Yet am I not so angry with Sr. John Borthwick for his separate singularity in
opinion as to justify the sentence passed upon him to be executed in effigy,
while absent and in person, when he could be chatched, my portion being not
with them that condemn Heretics to fi^e and faggot; but if he did (as commonly
such unquiet spirits do) under the pretense of conversion, instigate the people
against the government of that Kingdom, because not of his Religion, I refer
him to the La^, and should no otherwise have wished his pardon than upon a
serious acknowledgement of his fault.

What fol^ows in Fox's Acts, of a conference between the Bishop of Dunkelden
and Dean Thomas, a Canon of St. Colmes Inch, I cannot judge of finding little
or nothing about it in their own Historians; nor can I credit one particular of
the Bishops stout saying, Unlikely stories about the Bishop of Dunkelden.
I thank God I never knew what the Old and New Testament was, howsoever rise
the Proverb which he pretends to be so common in Scotland, Ye are like the
Bishop of Dunkelden, that knew neither New nor Old Law no more than the like in
Buchanan, That upon a strict enquiry at Dundee after the Readers of the New
Testament most of the Priests, The Priests at Dundee.
who sure were licensed, professed so much ignorance of the Book, as they
contentiously averred it to be written by Martin Luther, thereupon rerejected
it and required the Old. And somewhat to be suspected is that which comes
after: Dean Thomas and six Friars.
That the Dean with six other Friars and a Gentleman were burned principally
upon these articles, of the Deans preaching every Sunday on the Epistles and
Gospels, and their eating of flesh in Lent, for which more moderate penance to
my knowledge is inflicted in other Catholic Countries at this day, and that
ancient Canon is not wantonly abused upon reasonable causes dispensations,
without any great difficulty are obtained. And therefore another story of like
nature, countenanced by Buchanan, and most passionately laid forth by Knox, of
four hanged in St. Ionhstons for eating one poor Goose on a Friday (which could
not afford each of them a leg and a wing) has little of my belief, 4. Hanged
in St John's town.
and indeed the less because I find them conceal what Fox, out of no meaning I
ghess, to deal more impartially, inserteth, Their hanging up the Image of St.
Francis, The Reformers abuse the Image of St. Francis and raise tumults.
nailing Rams horns to his head* and a Cows rump to his tail: and some of them
interrupting Friar Spense in his Sermon, maintaining the established doctrine
of those times, the necessity of prayer to Saints, whereupon followed such a
tumult of the people, as hazarded his life, which murder would have been more
unjustifiable before God and man, than the hanging up four or four hundred of
them for attempting that on the person of one, which might and did draw after
it the destruction of many, not in halters upon a legal sentence, but by the
sword rebelliously employed, as well against their Prince as their fellow
subjects, which will appear too evidently in the sequel of this story.

I shall not follow every little Martyr to the st^ke* An impartial censu^e of
the R^formed Martyrs.
^et not any of them is there but I should heartily commisera^e if I were as we
I pers^aded, as some Historians seem to be, that he suffered clearly for the
tender^ess of his consci^nce, or by the merciless cruelty of his m^licious
Judges. But when I discover in most the^r pr^a^hing, praying, disc^ursi^g,
designing, c^unselling, such a ^^irit of virulency against their Roman
Adversaries, which must ^e censured incompetible with that Christian charity
which the best patte^ns, the most exemplary sufferers in the primitive times
dec^^red, principally at their death; when very few of them can be so justified
in their strictness of Religion, as they are most evidently to be condemned for
sedition; whatsoever indirect proceedings may be observed in their trials;
whatsoever accumulative articles were by mistake or wilful injury, cast upon
them; I cannot so commend them for their virtues, as to flatter posterity by
the example into their errors. Therefore passing by a multitude of petty
Saints* whom Knox and Buchanan canonize as they go, Knox and Buchanan a ^loudy
couple.
some of whom may be feared to deserve no other red letters in the Calender
than themselves, whose names are deeply dyed in the blood, which is not little,
shed upon the rebellious practices they prescribed: I will discuss only the
passages about one more signal than the rest, out of whose ashes the Scottish
Reformation was raked, The Scotch Reformation raked out of Mr. George Wishearts
ashes.
and beside the murder of the Cardinal, a consequent rebellion advanced chiefly
upon the reputation of his name, though I will not allege it as apparently
founded in his doctrine. The man I mean is Mr. George Wisheart of B^nnets
College in Cambridge where he is famed to have lived a very studious and
religious life, His course of life at Cambridge.
yet not without some such singular eccentrick motions from the custom of
other honest men in his time, as gave some part of his piety the character of
Melancholy, and the impress of cruelty to some, severity in his discipline. An
instance of the former in his Wearing and sleeping in Canvas, which his sheets
and shir^s, freez-mantle and other habits weekly, or monthly, or quarterly, as
his fancy served he bestowed upon the poor. His having a tub of water nightly
by his bedside, wherein he by moonshine bathed himself, to allay some heat
that troubled him in his rest. And by the latter he so exasperated the young
spirits of his pupills, that the desperate part of them complotted his murder
to obtain their deliverance; His return to Scotland.
his apprehension whereof might be the reason that brought him back into his
Country with the Scottish treaters that came from England, who when they had him
at home magnified him for a Prophet, and sent him up and down under color of
Religion to draw the people to their party. where he passed for a Prophet.
What Town soever rejected him he denounced against it fire and sword by the
spirit, which judgment they prepared as Gods instruments to fulfill. He began
at Montrosse, Inhibited to preach.
and thence passed to Dundee, where an inhibition was given him in the Queen
and Governors name, and they that brought it were told by him that they chaced
from them the messenger of God. The Lord Marshall and other Noble men, whose
part he acted, Diverse Noblemen encourage him.
would have maintained him in the place, or have taken him along with them, but
some other spirit di^ected him to the Westland where the Bishop of Glascow was
fain to raise a great party to dispute with Mr. George's disciples for the
Church, which the Earl of Glencarne and dive^s Gentlemen of Kyle would have
made good for him, but that he thought it as good mustering his men at the
Market-Crosse, as he did otherwhile about a Molehill, or some other little
piece of rising ground in the fields. The Gentry flock to him.
This itenerant Doctor thus traveled from place to place, and wheresoever he
lodged thither the devoted Gentry of that quarter addressed themselves, with
their armed Vassals and Tenants to receive Orders rather for the managing the
great design, than instructions for the amendment of their lives. If any were
so addicted to their old Religion or allegiance, or so disposed to their
quiet, that they made no appearance worthy Mr. Georges preaching or presence,
He envies and threatens where they do not.
he would run from his Tet into an invective for an hour or two, still
brandishing his threats of fire and sword, as at Haddington, because he could
not take from his pulpit an account of an hundred auditors in the Church; after
which vehemence so dejected in spirit, having it may be, some other intimations
of his being at the end of his prophetic race, that the last part of his
speech was like a testament at departure, and his goodnight a taking leave for
ever of his acquaintance: which howsoever he meant it proved proper enough,
being seized on before morning at Ormeston, by order from the Governor with
the Cardinals advice, He is seized on by Earl Bothwel.
as a person dangerous, for his sowing the tares of sedition among the seed of
his new Evangel. The Earl Bothwel with a guard of House was employed in
surprising him, or else he had not been taken, nor was he without some
resistance and articling with the Earl, having some armed Proselytes in the
house, who observe no orders, obey no commands but when they cannot help it,
who would not have surrendered him, but that they saw themselves overpowered.
What promise (if any) the Earl Bothwell had passed for his protection, was not
judged so obligatory, as his allegiance to deliver him up to justice, which he
did after some better satisfaction, than what Knox most ambiguously and
maliciously instanceth, the Cardinals gold, or the Queens undertaking to favor
him in all lawful suits to women: And imprisoned in the castle of St. Andrews.
Edinburgh was not thought so fit a place for his imprisonment as the Castle of
St. Andrews, whither he was shortly sent, and soon after brought unto his
trial, although the bold opportunity of one David Hamilton, the speaker for
him and his partisans, by a mixture of advice, entreaty, terror, had wrought
the Governor into some uncertainty of allowing the proceedings. He is brought
to his Trial.
About the end of February 1546. the Judges Ecclesiastical and Civil sitting
in the Abbey Church, Mr. Wisheart was sent for to answer diverse articles
alleged against him, who going into a Pulpit, according to the custom of that
place (after one Father Lawder a Priest, who was to manage the accusation, He
makes an Apologetical Oration.
had read the articles against him) began an Oration, making entrance and
advancing what he could into the minds of his Auditors, under the glorious
canopy of the Word of God, which only, and that purely and sincerely he
pretended to have taught, and nothing in the mother tongue beside the ten
Commandments, the twelve Articles of the Faith, and Prayer of the Lord, and at
Dundee the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans, where I do not find he insisted
long upon the 13. Chap. at least in the sense the holy Apostle intended it,
though I censure him not to have deserved the unhandsome titles put upon him by
Lawder at the beginning of every Article; Thou false Heretic, Runnagate,
Traitor and Thief, etc. which is not a form prescribed against any person
brought before that justice, added little force to the sequel of his
accusation, part of which as to the substance, he might Christianly and
honorably have acknowledged, With what moderation he might have demeand
himself.
I mean that wherein the latter Tenants of the Roman-Church superinduced to
that purity her great Apostles planted in her, carry more weight in the ear,
than the genuine stalk is able to support. But where the accusation was justly
laid in behalf of the Government under which he l^v^d, or the Authority of the
Church delivered to her by Christ and his Apostles and their incorrup^ed
Successors, I must elevate Mr. Georges answers, and leave the rest to the
restriction or relaxation of men's ^i^^vate opinions in the world.

To the first, which charge him with preaching at Dundee, He cannot pretend
to the same liberty with the Apostles.
after the Governor had commanded him to desist, and again after the Bishop of
Brechen had excommunicated for cont^macy of that kind; he in v^in claims the
liberty taken and given, but not in that latitude by the Apostle in the Acts,
Chap. 5.29.
We shall rather obey God than men, which qualifies not every man with a
mission that pretends to it of his own head; nor with a remission of his
passive obedience to higher powers; else every bold Heretic, rightly so
called, may assume as much. Nor can he wrest that of the Prophet Malachy, Chap.
2.2.
I shall curse your blessings, and bless your cursings, says the Lord,
against the after Excommunication in the Christian Church, which duly
regulated, the Romans may challenge and justify to be valid in fit cases.

Nor as to the ninth Article will St. John and St. Peter countenance him in
laying hands of Ordination upon himself, when the one says, Nor to self
Ordination.
He has made us Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6.
and the other, 1 Pet. 2.9.
He has made us a Kingly Priesthood, any more than they will another man in
setting the Diadem on his head which he thinks fitter for it than the Kings; or
taking that Scepter into his hand, which he supposes an infirm Potentate
cannot hold.

For the eleventh Article, The abstinence and feasts of the Church to be
observed.
about the lawfulness of eating flesh on Friday as well as Sunday, As to the
purity of days (which bears proportion to the Passion and Resurrection) or
indifferency of meat^, abstracting from all Superiors rational commands, and
in pious people an humble commemoration of Christ's suffering, by their
suffering somewhat weekly at that time, St. Paul may justify him in his answer
(though they were other days he meant) but yet* by his favor, not in
reversing the Statutes or Canons composed in piety and prudence, which
encounter no principles of Religion, nor deny fit supplies to the necessity of
nature, or moderate desires of a regular appetite in due season.

His extreme insolence in renouncing obedience to General Councils, and
professing his neglect to read their Canons.
But that which betrayed his ignorance extremely, or an insolent arrogance of
singular extraordinary indowments from God for the interpretation of his Word;
or where that in practicals and circumstantials is silent, for the intelligence
of his pleasure; was his answer to the 15. Article which charged him with
denying to obey Provincial or General Councils, whereof he owned no knowledge,
as if the History of Gods Church in the purest times of Christianity had not
been worth his search, nor the exemplary endeavors of the ancient Doctors and
Fathers, who confounded heathen and heretics by their writings; with joined
hands raised an edifice of Religion, according to the most exact model they, at
so near a distance traditionally received from Christ and his Apostles;
deserved his review, nor what they sealed with their blood, so much of his
reverence as to consider, wether so many did, and himself but one could not,
err, especially when the very Bible, to which he appealed for the authority of
his doctrine, had been for its own integrity and incorruption of words and
points, and consequently of sense (whether their glosses and commentaries be
admitted or no) and could be commended to him by no more powerful testimony
than their Canons, neglected and scorned by him, for the introduction of what
Knox and he, a pretty pair to be paralled with representative Christianity in
the majestic Sessions of Emperors and Bishops* had for seditious ends
concluded in a corner. Whether his singularity in these or any other exorbitant
opinions, What reason his Judges might have to condemn him.
proceeded from passion or persuasion I shall not determine; nor can I clear
his Judges in their sentence of condemnation unto death, unless his sedition
were so manifest and dangerous (which it might be) that no security could be
given for the public peace, but by his removal. The manner of it as it lies in
the vulgar story, was with more pomp and curiosity than became the gravity or
charity very requisite in Cardinals, Yet they are to be blamed for the pomp.
Bishops, or inferior Clergy; Mr. Georges behavior near the time of his
execution such, in many particulars, as became an humble, pious and courageous
Christian, as appears by diverse prayers and discourses; yet his popularity, And
he for popularity and want of charity at his execution.
and debasing Prelacy, had not quitted him the very day he was to suffer, when
he beseeched the brethren and sisters, those Epi^oen Priests of his making, to
exhort their Prelates to the learning of the Word of God, etc. To tell them,
That if they would not convert themselves from their wick^d error, there
should hastily come upon them the wrath of God, which they should not eschew;
very Prophetic, and positive, and prevalent no question, from such mechanic
mouths. And though he forgave the Hangman, when about to do his office, yet he
had not so much chari^y for the Cardinal, against whom this angry Martyr
denounces the sentence of a violent death, revealed to him, more likely by
John Lesly, Melvin, and Carmichel (if it were not the overflowing of his own
bloody heart concurring in the design) whose hands were to act it, than by any
Oracle from heaven, where no such murders are forged, his last words being
these, as his own Friend has recorded them: He who in such state from that
high place feeds his eyes with my torments, within few days shall be hanged
out at the same window, to be seen with as much ign^miny, as he row there
leans in pride.

The credit of the new gospel had been cracked, if the prediction of this great
prophet had not been hastily accomplished, which his principal disciples took
presently into their care, His disciples make great haste to murder the
Cardinal.
whose stomachs were so full of indignation against the Cardinal, that their
meat could not down before they had declared it at their tables, That the blood
of Mr. George should be revenged, or else it should cost life for life. The
most proper instruments for such a purpose must be men of metal, whose spirits
being exasperated by a sympathy with their late deceased Friend, or a passive
sense of some late injury apprehended from their great enemy, that lived
against as many of their wishes as there accrued minutes unto his time, were
predisposed to any desperate attempt. Three or four such were pitched upon to
surprise Babylon (so they called the Castle of the Cardinal of St. They do it
barbarously.
Andrews) upon whom they speedily executed the work it is their own language,
that is, they wickly murdered him in his Chamber. In which act John Lesly and
Peter Carmichael being too hasty, they were rebuked by James Melvin the more
sedate Reformer of the three, and told, Melvins grave speech in the act.
This work and judgment of God ought to be done with greater gravity. He
presents to him the point of the sword, says, Repent thee of thy former wicked
life, that is, stopping the godly brethren in their course, strikes him twice
or thrice through with a stog sword, and so he fell. All honest Christians were
astonished at so horrid and execrable an act, but the meek disciplinarians did
not only, says Buchanan, approve it, -- non solum factum probarunt, sed and
gratulatum ad liberta^is publicae auctores venerunt, quidam etiam vitam
^ortunasque cum illis conjunxerunt.
but came to gratulate these authors of their public liberty, others ventured
life and fortunes with them for the future; libertatis authors, so it should
seem the Cardinal had tied up their hands, till this stog sword cut the knot
and set them at liberty to do mischief uncontrouled afterward. John Knox is so
tickled with the business that he becomes very witty, and because he would not
lose his jest, tells his Reader expressly, Knox professes himself merry at it.
he writes merrily about it: but by this time he knows (if he changed not his
mind) that the end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14.13.
I believe. That his heart and he might not keep at distance, 1547.
the Easter following he goes to live with the murderers in the Castle, and not
long after from the cry of this blood takes his call to the ministry, He goes
to live with the murderers in the Castle.

His calling to the Ministry.


which was the greatest vengeance that ever God sent to that Kingdom. For this
first thriving plant of the discipline being set by the sword and cherished by
These blessed authors of liberty says Buchanan, while they continued in the
Castle tanquam armis p^cta licentia, in stupra and adulteria ali^q, hominum
otio abundantium vitia profusi, jus and aequum. He might have inserted* and
religionem sua libidine metiebantur

Knox's first Sermon.


license and lust, the soil prepared by the Cardinals blood, grew up on a
sudden to branch it over all Civil Magistrates and Laws, and in short space
over-topt Royal Authority it self, some comfortable assurance whereof he gave
to the brethren in his first Sermon upon Dan. 7.24, etc. And another King shall
rise after them, and he shall be unlike unto the first, and he shall subdue
three Kings, and shall speak words against the most High, and think that he can
change times and laws; And they shall be given unto his hands until a time and
times, and dividing of times. But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take
away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end. So great a
Scholar might easily prove that the Prophet Daniel spoke this directly of the
Scots, which the Lord of Nydrie, a man fervent, The Lord of Nyrde's advice
upon it.
so ^arre I believe him, not when he adds, and upright in religion, so well
understood, that he told some body (you may guess whom he meant) We would
counsel you and them to provide better defense than fire and sword, for it may
be that else you may be disappointed: Men now have no other eyes than they had
then. A multitude of disciples by such good doctrine had Knox drawn to him at
St. Andrews; The Bishops complain.
The Bishops complain to the Queen and Council, they are willed to be quiet
and promised remedy ere long. The Reformers with all might and main endeavor
to prevent the marriage of the young Princess with the Dolphin of France, The
Refomers angry.
being yet too weak, they rail at the Parliament that made it, account it a
matter of sale in the Governor, and prophecy she shall become a plague and
punishment to Gods people. At length the rest of those uncleanly birds of
Babylon (now truly called so) the Cast^e of St. Andrews, The Castle of St.
Andrews taken from them, they in it sent for France.
was thrown out, care* being taken that John Knox should be cag'd and carried
away with them for France. Here the Gospel was at a stand for some time, Knox's
various fortune in his travails to and fro.
till John fluttered homeward so near out of danger as he could; lighted first
at Barwick, thence flew to Newcastle: There was no chirping yet for him in
Scotland: He takes a new flight to L^nd^n, where having muted as much mischief
as he could upon the death of King Edward the sixth, he passes to Geneva,
stays there till he had a new call by the Congregation assembled at Frankford,
where he found not all birds of his feather, yet sets up his tune to as high a
note of treason as he could, and in an Admonition to England calling the
Emperor little inferior to Nero, In his admoniinto to England, he abuses the
Emperor, Queen and Q. Dowager.
and the Queen more cruel than Iezabel, being accused he gets away in the dark,
shrouds himself for a while under the wings of Geneva, thence to Deep, and
thereafter to Scotland, where in the interim had been several alterations of
State, though little as yet in religion; The Queen Dowager being in the year
1554. Who is made Regent.
made Regent (much importunity or rather a visible necessity constraining the
Governor to resign) had the Crown put upon her head, as seemly a sight says
John Knox in the new Gospel language as to put the saddle upon the back of an
unruly sow. At this change the brethren creep in, The Reformers creep again
into Scotland.
first Harlow a simple and weak man, then Willock under the cover of some
Commissions from the Duchess of Embden, and at last to beat down the idol
Mass, comes John Knox with his hammer. At first he falls to work in the night
with the Earl of Glencarne, Knox chiefly undertakes the work.
Earl of Marschel and Henry Drummond, whom he forms into so good a conceit of a
godly exhortation he made, that they are earnest with him to send a Letter to
the Queen Regent that might move her to hear the word of God. I shall not
recite all the arguments and good language he used to that purpose, by some few
passages expressed may the Reader be able to judge of the rest. Unless in your
regiment and in using of power your Majesty be found different from the
multitude of Princes and head Rulers, His most impudent Letter to the Queen
Regent.
this pre-eminence wherein ye are placed shall be your dejection to torment and
pain everlasting, (that is in plain English, Except she gives way to the
discipline she shall be damned.) An Orator and Gods Messenger might justly
require of you now (by Gods hand promoted to high dignity) a motherly pity
upon your Subjects, a justice inflexible to be used against murderers and
common Oppressors; a heart void of avarice and partiality; a mind studious and
careful for maintenance of that Realm and Commonwealth (above whom God has
placed you) and by it has made you honorable, with the rest of virtues, which
not only Gods Scriptures, but also writers (illuminated only with the light
of nature) require in Gods Rulers. But vain it is to crave reformation of
manners, where Religion is corrupted. So that the Queen being not reformed is a
merciless mother, an unjust countenancer of murderers, etc. a covetous and most
partial creature, a negligent or wilfully destructive Governesse, void of all
virtue required, and, being desperately vicious, unfit to Govern. -- Except ye
speedily repent, ye and your posterity shall suddenly feel the dispersing hand
of him who has exalted you, ye shall be compelled will ye or not, to know that
he is eternal against whom ye address the battle, and that it is he that
moderateth the times, and disposes kingdoms, ejecting from authority such as
be inobedient, and placing others according to his good pleasure; that is, John
Knox and his accomplices shall depose you, as it proved. But here John
overreached, and laid himself with his gospel flat upon the ground, whence he
had been taken up with a witness, if he had not scrambled away again to Geneva,
Knox flies away to Geneva.
after which escape he was burned in effigy at Edinburgh Cross. Yet like to
two buckets, of which one, to be sure is up, if the other be down, John Willock
returns the second time from Embden, Willock returns in his place.
who preaches the Nobility into secret Conventions and close counsels, which
brake out into Sedition at Edinburgh, Sedition and sacrilege the effects of
his doctrine.
where by a zealous brother, James Chalmers of Geitgyrth the Queen was
personally affronted, Churches pillaged and in part demolished, for which the
Brethren assemble, (in what manner ye may judge, for all their singing Psalms
and praying) So that (see the power of their Notes) the proudest of their
enemies were, they tell us, astonished. In the mean time they have their
mountebanks that dispatch by poison most of the Nobility and Bishops that went
to the young Queens marriage in France, And poisoning some of the Nobility in
France.
because there were murders enough otherwise to be done at home, that which
might be more religiously wrought, John Knox is sent for back from Geneva by
Glencarne, Lorne, Knox sent for.
etc. advises the rest to work their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage
upon what hazard soever, or by whatsoever opposition, be it against Kings, or
Emperors. Who draws them into a Congregational Covenant.
Hereupon the first Covenant is entered into by the new named Lords, etc. of
the Congregation, and soon after is made the first Oration and Petition of the
Protestants of Scotland to the Queen Regent, After which they petition.
wherein they style themseves, a part of that power which God had established
in that Realm to defend their brethren from cruel murderers; propound a
Reformation to be made, such as they think fit to prescribe, and seem at that
time content (which those of their race since disavow) That not only the rules
and precepts of the New Testament, but also the writings of the Ancient
Fathers, and the godly and approved Laws of Justinian the Emperor might decide
the controversy betwixt them. The Queens gracious and Christian answer.
To this Petition they received a gracious answer from the Queen, liberty of
conscience restrained in nothing but from public Assemblies in Edinburgh and
Leith: For which Her Majesty had in return the dutiful character of crafty,
dissimulate and false thinking woman, Their unchristian ingratitude.

A querulous Letter against the Romans Catholic Clergy etc.


that made her profit of both parties. Has a querulous Letter directed to her,
and the Parliament against her Clergy, whom they reproachfully call,
Place-holders of the Ministers of the Church; with a protestation limiting the
Supreme power in deputing Judges for Civil affairs, and menacing, That if any
tumult or uproar should arise among the members of the Realm, for the diversity
of Religion, and if it shall chance (as they intended it should not, having
certainly determined) that abuses be violently reformed, that the crime thereof
be not imputed to them, who most humbly do now seek all to be reformed by an
order. The Earl Glencarne, etc. second this in a private address, and forewarn
the Queen of the inconveniences that were to follow. To prevent which, and give
what satisfaction could be reasonably desired, she summons all their Preachers
to Sterling, and they according to their never-failing accustomed manner, all
the puritan Gentry, The peoples giving confession, etc.
etc. to accompany them, and this they called, The peoples giving confession
with their Preachers. Knox arrives.
John Knox casually arriving at the same time repairs to Dundee, and craves
leave (which was not difficult to be obtained) to accompany the Brethren, and
give confession of his Faith with them, who instead of appearing before the
Queen, according to the grace of God granted to him (they are his own words)
carries them to St. Iohnston, and so exhorts them, that they there fall to the
pillage of the Monasteries, Monasteries pillaged, etc.
destroying the Charter House, wherein was the Tomb of King James the first,
whereat the Queen taking just indignation, and complaining to her Nobi^ity
about it, the Brethren send Her Majesty a smart Letter, beginning meekly with
As heretofore with jeopard of our lives, A sharp Letter sent to the Q. Regent.
and yet with willing hearts, we have served the Authority of Scotland, and
your Majesty now Regent in this Realm -- but soon after tell her, They shall be
compelled to take the sword of just defense against all that shall pursue them
for the matter of Religion and their conscience sake, which ought not, nor may
not be subject to mortal creatures (the Queen Regent was a mortal creature,
Ergo) further than by Gods word man is able to prove that he has power to
command them (that is further than they have a mind to be commanded) Upon the
Queens approach they send for more auxiliaries to St. Iohnston. To some
Noblemen that declined them, or had a desire to be neuters, they write,
Excommunication threatened the neutral Nobility.
That if in this time of their trouble they looked through their fingers, and
joined not themselves to them, as of God they were reputed Traitors, so they
should be excommunicated from their society, and from all participation with
them in the administration of the Sacraments. Their number of the new supply
proved not so great, but that they were fain to make an appoinment with the
Queen, and quit the Town after John Knox had exhorted them to constancy in a
Sermon, that is, to meet again so soon as handsomely they could, which they did
to a second Covenant at Perth, whereof one clause was, That they should not
spare labo^rs, goods, substance, bodies and lives, Their second Covenant.
in maintaining the Liberty of the whole Congregation, and every member
thereof, against whatsoever person (no Queen excepted) shall intend the said
trouble for cause of Religion, or any other cause d^pending thereupon* or lay
to their charge under pretense thereof, although it happen to be colored with
any other outward cause. So that they might murder, steal, or break any civil
law of the Realm, and the Congregation must defend them, if prosecu^ed or
questioned by the Magistrate, that being but a colorable outward cause to
trouble their Religion. Whereupon several outrages being acted by them that now
began to be called, Keepers of Liberty, as seizing upon the Irons of the
Coyning-house, They seize on the Coining Irons.
because of the impression in the Images they stamped, and a late pretense of
appeal made from the Queen Regent unto their young Queen and Dolphin of France,
her Husband. A Proclamation of restraint is sent in their names to be published
at Edinburgh Cross. A Proclamation from the young Queen and Dolphin.
Yet notwithstanding upon some conference with the Regent, she condescended to
give them liberty of religion, provided, that wheresoever she was, their
Preachers should cease, and Her Majesty's be maintained. But this would not
pass, because it put to silence Gods true Messengers, that is, restrained them
from railing down the Queens own Religion to her face. The Queen, to get rid of
her trouble, An Agreement at Eden^urgh.
if she could, not long after at Edinburgh caused such an Agreement to be made,
as could not be denied by them that pretended to any peace or quietness at all.
Accordingly Articles on both sides were drawn, agreed, signed and proclaimed.
These shrewdly troubled the Brethren in black, who meant nothing less than a
Peace. And perceiving some of their party so conscientious as to keep faith and
make so great a relapse to their duty, as to go to the Queen at her call, they
convene and subscribe a third bond at Sterling, A third bond.
whereof this is a link, -- As we tender the maintenance of true Religion, that
none of us shall in time coming pass to the Queen Dowager, to talk or commune
with her, for any Letter or Message sent by her unto us, or yet to be sent with
consent of the rest, or common consultation thereupon: which was so religiously
observed by Knox, Strictly observed by Knox.
that he returns the Queens Letters upon her hands, and would not give them to
the Lords, as was by Her Majesty required. But now must a new quarrel be picked
to fetch in the Lords and rest of the Brethren that adhered to the agreement at
Edinburgh; From the Q. Regents fortifying Leith they take occasion to traduce.
And this was by the Queens fortifying the town of Leith, which, though but
intended for a place of retreat in case she should be overborn by their
strength, which now made appearance in several places, and many times nearer
approaches than she liked, was notwithstanding vogued to garrison her Towns
with the French, and to have in design by them, the conquest of the Kingdom.
By way of charge and Declinatour passed diverse Letters and Proclamations on
both sides; From hence mounted the Brethren to admonitions, from admonitions to
votes about deprivation, upon justification thereof by Willock and Knox the
prime of the Clergy; From votes to articles and the Act of Suspention together
with the banishment of her person, Admonish, Deprive.
allowing Her Majesty but 24. hours to prepare for her passge into France.
Banish her.
But the walls of Leith were not to be blown down by this breath, All in vain.
nor was it strong enough to fill the sails for her passage into France: A
stronger wind blew out of the Town, which so dispelled the Congregational
Brethren, The Brethren disperse.
that glad was he who could shelter himself; and many grew desperate of the
cause. But John Knox by power of the spirit, Are recollected by Knox.
when but a spark or two of rebellion was left, could ever blow it up into a
flame, which he began now at Sterlin in a Sermon upon the 80. Psalm v. 4, 5, 6,
7. and increased it in another afterward some where else upon John 6.
exhorting the Congregation that they should not faint, but that they should
sti^l row against the contrarious blasts, till that Jesus Christ should come
(so that only the day of judgment is to put an end to the Presbiterian
commotions) But nothing can be done without a Covenant, Another Covenant at
Edinburgh.
which An. 1560. was entered at Edinburgh. That what person soever will plainly
reject their godly enterprises, and will not concur as a good and true member
of their Commonwealth, they shall fortify the authority of Council to reduce
them to their duty, etc. The issue of this, as of all their Covenants, was to
put many quiet conscientious people to the choice of either extreme, without
the privilege of a detestable neutrality: Do as we do, Rebel or perish;
whereby they never faild of an Army that should guard the gospel with an
unparalleled villainy, An Army raisd by it.
and resist the Queen Regent unto her death, Q. Regent dies.
which fell out very opportunely while they lay at the siege before Leith,
being, if not procured by their means, very evidently hastened by their malice,
denying Her Majesty the benefit of some drugs, Their inhumanity toward her.
for which she sent to her Apothecary and Chyrurgeon, and in her inrecoverable
condition not indulging her free speech with some Lords jointly though of their
own faction, and what courtesy they granted, being clogged with the ungrateful
presence, and more unpleasing discourse of John Willock, Brother-rebel-preacher
with Knox, who was sent on purpose to set the Queens conscience on the rack,
and torture it to despair if he could. By all these unchristian proceedings,
having speeded on their impatient wishes, and fretted open a passage for that
Royal soul to expire, they become soon Lords not only of the Congregation, but
Country, and having eleven points of the law (their young Queen and her
Husband being absent in France) upon advantage enough they capitulate with
their Majesty's for the twelfth. They capitulate with the young Queen and King.
In which pacification the Deputies from France would not meddle with the matter
of Religion, but agreed that a certain number of Noblemen should be chosen in
the next Convention and Parliament to be sent to their Majesty's, to whom they
shall expose those things that shall be thought needful for the State of that
business. In the interim, the Brethren I Will warrant you were not idle, but
after public thanksgiving at Edinburgh for their deliverance, A Thanksgiving.
that is to say, for the death of their Queen, upon whom they heap (though they
name her not) a heavy load of calumnies in their prayers: A Committee sits to
distribute Ministers, and so Knox is made Primate of Edinburgh, Ministers
distributed.
or in it rather of Scotland, that being the fountain head from whence all
future Rebellion must stream, by Goodman to St. Andrews, by Heriot to Aberdeen,
by Row to St. Iohnston, etc. And though they will have no Bishops, they will have
Overseers (...), Overseers.
Spotswood for Lothian, Winram for Fife, etc. And now to work they go to drive
the stray-doctrine and discipline of the Country, into the Parliament pound at
Edinburgh. Please your Honors comes presently from the supplicant Barons,
Gentlemen and Burgesses; A Confession of Faith.
A Confession of Faith with a more imperious preface or title from the
Presbytery out of Matthew 24. And this glad tidings of the Kingdom shall be
preached through the whole world for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall
the end come; that is, the Presbyterian Scot shall pull down all Government in
the world, establish the Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon the earth, and then the
end shall come, the work is done, it is fit then the wages should be paid,
especially since by this new engine they draw Christ into their Covenant, The
contents of it.
chap. 11. rebellion into the fifth Commandment under the notion of saving the
life of innocents, and repressing Tyranny; resisting authority if they take it
to pass the bounds of the Magistrates office, not suffering innocent blood to
be shed if they may gain-stand it, chapter 14. Likewise they dash all moral virtues
at a stroke, restrain the power of Gods Grace from effecting due obedience to
his Law, chapter 15. Confine the Catholic Church to themselves, and such as shall
communicate with them, denying all other Christians the undeniable benefit of
their Baptism, chapter 16, 18. which they say notwithstanding, chapter 21. was
instituted of God to make a visible difference betwixt his people, and those
that are without his League. Pretend to reconcile these contradictions, making
both true at a time. This Church is invisibly known only to God, who alone
knows it, whom he has chosen, etc. chapter 16. and yet the notes, signs and
assured tokens, whereby the immaculate Spouse of Christ Jesus is known (to
whom?) from the horrible Harlot the Church malignant we affirm are, etc.
Defraud Antiquity and lineal descent in an undivided continuity the reverence
rendered by the Primitive Fathers of the Church, Quod apud multos unum
invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum. Tertul. lib. de Praesript* c. 28.
and to be paid by us for the first knowledge and benefit of the Gospel: and
yet at the same time running to the Ancients for strengthening the authority of
the Canon. For the doctrine taught in our Churches (say they) is contained in
the written Word of God, Hoc est vere proprie^ue Cathol^cam -- si sequamur
universitatem antiquitatem consencionem vincent. Lyrin. cap. 3.
to wit, in the Books of the New and Old Testaments, in those Books we mean
which have been reputed (by whom but Bishops and Episcopal Doctors? no
Pre^byterian) canonical: Depriving the Church of her just privilege in
interpreting the Scriptures under a pretense of bestowing it upon the Spirit,
Multum necesse est propter tantos tam var^i erroris anfractus ut Prophetae and
Apostolicae interpretationis linea secundum Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus
norma dirigatur. Vincent. Lyr. c. 2.
distracting Christians hereby in matter of opinion, without extraordinary
divine revelation, as in the point of Justification, wherein St. Paul and St.
James seem to differ; and in matters of practice by the example of St. Peter
and St. Paul, Gal. 3. All this in one chapter viz. 18. frame a plausible excuse for
negligence in, or after the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, chapter
21. Exclude all but Preachers, though Priests or Deacons, from the efficatio^s
administration of the Sacraments, annexing the power and virtue of the same to
divine revelation or operation of a Sermon, and so defrauding many that have
had legitimate imposition of hands, called Ordination, of the character and
exercise of that power Justify such as resist Supreme powers, doing that which
appertains not to their charge, chapter 24. so taking away the glory of Christian
humility, patience and the crown of Martyrdom it self. Ret^act in part ch 15.
what they professed, chap. 18. about the notes of the Church, and so take Gods
Name in vain, making a formal conf^ssion of his truth to no purpose.

This pretty Pageant framed in a schismatical Assembly, It is voted in
Parliament.
was brought into the packt Parliament to be voted The true Representative of
the doctrine of Christ's Church, which the Bishops suffered quietly to pass by
without spoiling any of the pastboard or guilding, The Bishops not hindering it.
because they durst not (writes Knox) say any thing to the contrary; and very
likely when they knew it would be to no purpose, and were well assured they
should pay their Ecclesiastical Benefices, if not their lives, for a syllable
of any such contradiction, the Brethren having petitioned that they might be
compelled to answer to former accusations, and to other likewise they had yet
to lay to their charge, which were such no doubt as wanted no weight of further
delinquence to press them down to the depth of any Parliamentary Vote. This
Confession of Faith very liberally suffrag'd, was sent into France by the Lord
St. John to be ratified by their Majesty's. Their abominable hypo^risie in
sending it over to be ratified in France.
By which act of pretended submission to the supremacy of their Princes, we may
interpret the true meaning of all the rest, and take a sure essay of the
Presbyterian subjection, whatsoever otherwhere they pretend, which I desire the
Reader diligently to observe, and have in mind whenever afterward shall occur
their hypocrisy in dutiful expressions, for says no less author than Mr.
Knox; No ratification brought he [the Lord St. Iohn] unto us but that we little
regarded or yet do regard; Their confessed independency on Kings and Queens.
for all that we did was rather to show our dutiful obedience, than to beg of
them [the King and Queen] any strength to our religion, which from God has
full power, and needed not the suffrage of man [wherefore then was it put to
the Vote in Parliament?] but in so far as man had need to believe it, if that
ever he shall have participation of the life everlasting. Such obedience as
this showed the Soldiers to our Savior when they bowed the knee before him
and mocked him, Mat 27 29.
saying, Hail King of the Jews. John 19.3.
Buchanan acknowledges it was sent to the Queen without hope of grant, only
to discover the nakedness of her thoughts; magis and ejus animum nuderent, quam
quod quicquam impetrare sperarent. Lib 17
as good an argument of the modesty, as the other was of loyalty of the
Brethren. But this was not enough to make the Assembly magisterial, who
themselves must stoop as low as any lay-brother in doctrine and confession of
faith. It is the discipline that must hold up the rod (at least, if not the axe
too) bind their Kings in chains, The book of discipline framed
and their Nobles in links of iron. To the framing of which, immediately after
this Parliament dissolved, commission was given to Mr. John Winram, Sub-prior
of St. Andrews, Mr. John Row and John Knox, Mr. John Spotswood, John Willock,
Mr. John Dowglass Rector of St. Andrews: all John's and beloved disciples, that
had laid their heads on Christ's breast, and knew his heart about the reglement
of his Kingdom. Yet their letters of credit were not so good as to obtain the
reception of Ambassadors from heaven, though they pretended their message was
in every point consonant to the word. The Lord Erskin as great a professor as
he was, Refused by most of the Nobi^ity.
and the major part of the Nobility refused this new model, Knox imputes it to
the care of his Kitchen, and it is not unlikely he and the rest thought their
title as good to the Church lands, that they might eat the fat, and be clothed
with the wool of the lambs which themselves as well the Clericall John's, had
taken the pains to worry and slay. Or it may be they had a care of their eyes
which already began to swell with fatness, Psalm. 73.
and if they yielded this, they would go on with the Psalmist, being hold^n
with pride and overwhelmed with cruelty, they would then do even what they
lust. Yet this courtesy they did the discipline, to call it, A Book of devout
imaginations, that is, zealous whimzies, which might run the round in the Name
sakes noddles, but if they once got ab^oad with power to captivate the thoughts
of other men which were to be kept in a more reasonable service and obedience
of Christ, they were to be cast down by the Apostles command, 2 Cor. 10.5.
like high things that exalt themselves against the knowledge if God; yet
Argile, Glencarn, and the whole private pack of conjured Rebels subscribe the
Book, Subscribed by some.
and promise to set it forward at the uttermost of their power, whose names
were enough to write Nobility in the front, and hold it out with the
approbation of the Honorable to the people. But to accomplish the work, behold
the hand of God appears through this cloud, Great ^oy among them at the death
of K. Fr. 2.
and scatters morning roses in the way of the R^formers. Here (says Knox) was
joy to Scotland, and matter of Thanksgiving for the wondrous work and
inestimable benefit of the Lord. And what is this but the death of an innocent
young King Francis the second, Husband to the Queen of Scots? who because no
friend to the Brethren, and so a robber, etc. Knox cannot but brand his memory
in the forehead with, Knoxes uncharitable judgment of it.
He was suddenly stricken with an Apost^me in the deaf ear that nev^r would
hear the truth of God. His glory perished, and the pride of his stubborn heart
vanished in smoke. Upon notice hereof was a new Convention of the Nobility at
Edinburgh, wherein the Book of Discipline was again perused in favor of some
that pretended ignorance, The Book of Discipline perused.
who when they heard it were not so taken as to own it by subscription, or add
to the authority of it by their vote, yet to prepare the way for the people to
be acquainted with it, twelve things called Superintendents are ^ut out,
Superintendents elected.
chipt and fashioned, just after the pattern in the Book. Brief observations
upon their elections.
And because all must run in the name, John Spotswood is appointed for
Lowthian, and as the leading man is in the printed form and order of the
election March 9 1560. In which form I shall only intimate two or three things
as I go. First, that the election of him [not only approbation] is in show
devolved upon the people, who promise obedience to him as their Pastor no
longer than he remains faithful in his office. This election of the people is
styled, The Call of God in them [who it should seem miraculously moves their
hearts, and directs them to the summoning of Iohn] This John must profess,
That the life of Angels relates to Christ as Head and Mediator of his Church,
that is, if any thing, Christ came to redeem as well Angels as men, and either
summoned part of those lapsed spirits out of Hell, or recovered others that
never had been condemned so low. This John must further profess himself Subject
to the wholesome discipline of the Church, and, to avoid ambiguity, the
discipline of the same Church by which he is now called to this office; so that
the people that call John are infallibly the Church, and this the Churches
Discipline, though it has not yet an establishment by the law. Farther, as a
note of true Christian liberty, it is left at large to the people to require of
him what other conditions or qualifications they think fit. After which in
recompense for all this kindness and privilege, they are to oblige themselves
to take what he shall preach for Gospel, and to maintain John -- against all
such as wickedly would rebel against God and his holy Ordinance; that is, They
are to make a tumult when John holds up his finger and fight against the Queen
her self as a rebel if, though never so deservedly, she suspend him from the
exercise of his Superintendence or Over seeing, as they call it. At last, God
is mocked in a prayer, and blasphemously craved his benediction and assistance
in this work begun, which shall appear by and by to be naught else but the sin
of witchcraft, a rebellion against his own anointed their Sovereign Queen. But
all this while somewhat else was in hand beside the Superintendence of John.
The L. James sent into Fra.
The Lord James is sent into France, but with such limited instructions from
the black Brethren, that he must by no means condescend that the Queen should
have either the public or private exercise of her Religion [this is Christian
liberty too: The Queen to be denied the e^er^ise of her Re^igion.
] This would be to betray the Church of God, and expose the Reformation to
danger, who making this reply, She may have it secretly in her Chamber, Who can
stop her? no body (...) I, though every body meant it, they all showed the
danger, and let him go. But before his return, a little to stop the violence of
these furious Reformers, comes over an Ambassador from France with three
demands, the last of which was, That the Bishops and Churchmen should be
restored in their former places, An Ambassador from ^rance.
and be suffered to intermit with their livings. The Council were not very
ready to give him answer, He is delayed by the Council.
but put him off to the Parliament in May, and then having no stomach to sit,
feigned a dilatory pretense, That they would wait the certainty of the Queens
pleasure, whereof the Bishops having assurance good enough held a meeting at
Sterlin, The loyal Nobility busy.
and the Loyal Nobility were busy in executing Her Majesty's comands, the end
whereof the prophetical brethren not liking very well, rubbed up their invention
and framed a jealousy of the Queens authority to be usurped, and their
allegiance moved them (tenderhearted men) to meet as numerous as they could
at Edinburgh, to prevent it. After this, as a most certain token of Rebellion
at hand, comes a new supplicate from the Assembly of the Church to the
Parliament (met at length) most humbly beseeching their Honors, They are
interrupted by a menacing Supplicate.
that such order may be taken that they have not occasion to take again the
sword of just defense ('it is not the sword of the spirit they mean) which they
had willingly ^esigned over into their hands This wrestled so well with the
civil authority, that hereby, writes Knox, got Satan the second fall after he
had begun to trouble the state of Religion. Now returns Lord James with Letters
from the Queen desiring the Lords to entertain quietness, Lord James returns
with monitory Letters from the Queen.
and to suffer nothing to be attempted against the Contract of peace made at
Leith, till her own home-coming. In obedience whereunto, having dismissed the
French Ambassador with a negative to all he brought, The French Ambassador
denied all, and dismissed.
they divide themselves into several squadrons, burn and ruin all the
Monasteries and religious houses they come near, and this in such a trice, The
Reformers burn and spoil.
that they accounted it little less than a miracle, and bragged that God
wrought potently with them by his hand. It was time now for the Queen her self
to come over, these Masters of mis-rule keeping no better order, whose sudden
arrival surprised the Brethren, but upon several grounds and reasons drew a
great confluence to her Court. The Queen comes over.
The Reformers seemed as officious as the best, wipe their mouths and supple
them into as smooth language as oil, and drop nothing but honey at the lips,
which the good Queen requited with all fair concessions of their liberty in
Religion, reserving only the privilege of her Family; but this was against
the Lord James's instructions, Cannot obtain the privilege of her private
Chapel.
to testify their adherence: whereunto, her devotions disturbed, and had not
some better temper (that is a stronger hand) interposed, her Chapel had been
in all likelihood razed unto the ground, for the Book of Discipline affords it
no singular indulgence, which the Preachers vehemently exhorted to have
ectablisht by an Act and public law [ of the sword,] affi^ming, That if they
suffered things to hang in suspense when God had given unto them sufficient
power in their hand, they should after sob for it, but should not get it. In
order whereunto, the Earl of Arrane protests against the Queens Proclamation,
That Gods Law having pronounced death to the Idolater -- he would have it
universally observed. Universal includes all particulars, and so the Queens not
exempted, Nor be secure of her life if she e^ercise her Religion.
but the meaning is, if she say her prayers according to the persuasion of her
c^nscience, she must dye. To enforce this, John Knox preaches a most violent
Sermon, enveigheth against Idolatry, Knox's Sermon.
adds, That one Mass (he confesses there were no more suffered at first) was
more fearful unto him than if 10000. armed enemies were landed in any part of
the Realm of purpose to suppr^sse the whole Religion: And because he improved
not the mystery of this clause into an actual rebellion, he professed himself a
very formal penitent afterward, Repented of, because not enough seditious.
that he had not spoke his meaning plainer; that he had not directly animated
them to put their hands to the work of the Lord [that is, execute his law
against Idolaters, and murder the Queen for maintaining a single Mass.] The
good Queen for all this admits him to her presence, reasons mildely with him
about the point, The Queen reasons with him and confounds him.
wherein she so accutely and judiciously acts her part, that she makes him
maintain all the absurdities incident thereunto. Opposition to supreme
Majestrates by the sword: That the Israelites in Egypt, Daniel and his company
in Babylon, and any of the children of God otherwhere, would have made
resistance by the sword, if God had given them the power and the means. To the
proof of which, in behalf of the Primitive Christians, I wonder he cited not
this of Tertullian, Vrbes, insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula, castra
ipsa, tribus* decurias, palatium, Senatum, forum impleverunt, they were
numerous enough, yet no Knoxes among them, nulli inter illos Albiniani, nulli
Nigriani, nulli Cassiani. The dispute being ended, His revenge in an insolent
character of Her Majesty.
he gave this manerly character of the Queen; That there was in her a proud
mind, a crafty wit, and an indurate heart against God and his truth. After this
the matter of Religion for the Queen and her Family was more publicly agitated
between the Nobility and Ministry, The Nobility and Ministry divided about the
Queen and Discipline.
neither party convinced* and so each to other made opposite conclusions. Many
Lords retracted their subscription to the Discipline, and drew into question
the expedience of Assemblies. This put them upon offering the Discipline to the
Queen, which Her Majesty absolutely refused. Hereupon the state of the question
is altered, and Burrowes a bold fellow, is set in the front of a seditious
party, Burrows's articles.
to put up articles about maintenance for the Ministry of the Reformation. For
quietness sake to this purpose, The Bishops give up a third part of their
revenues.
the Bishops relinquish the third part of their revenues, to settle which,
Commissioners are ordered, and to satisfy any of the discontented faction,
proclamation is made, that it shall be dispatched with all possible speed. Some
makes jests upon it, as the Earl of Huntley bids Good morrow to the Lords of
the two parts. Huntlies jeer.
But Knox who gaped at the whole, Knox's censure.
said in earnest; That the Spirit of God was not the author of it, for he saw
two parts freely given to the Devil, and the third must be divided between God
and the Devil. The regret at this so sticks in the stomachs of him and his
Assembly brethren that they are fain to have recourse to their usual remedy,
and disgorge it in a filthy supplicate to the Queen, He and his Brethren
supplicate with wonted impudence.
part of the contents were these: Gods hands cannot long spare in his anger to
strike the head and the tail, the inobedient Prince and sinful people -- They
press the Queen again 1562.
to forsake the practice of her Religion, and revile it as the fosterer of
whores, adluterers, drunkards blasphemers of God, etc. threaten that the
obstinate maintenance of it shall in the end be to her destruction of soul and
body, if she rep^nted not -- declare They could no longer keep silence, unless
they would make themselves criminal before God of her blood, perishing in her
own iniquity, and they plainly admonish her of the danger to come -- They
humbly require that Bishops may not be set up again, to empire above the people
of God, for they fear that such usurpation of their former estate will be
neither in the end pleasant to themselves, nor profitable to them that would
place them in that tyranny -- That if the Papists think to triumph where they
may, and to do what they list, where there is not a party able to resist them,
that some will think, that the godly must begin where they left. But the equity
and civility of tendering such language was discussed between Secretary
Lethington and the Brethren, who advised them upon any grievance to make
complaint and appeal to the Law. Secretary Lethington discourses with them.
Here one mends the matter and says, If the sheep shall complain to the Wolf
[the Queen] That the wolfes whelps have devoured the lambs, the complainer may
stand in dange^, etc. After such cautious reasoning, as Knox calls it, the
supplication was left to the Secretary to review, who moderated the language,
but not so as to gain a grant from the Queen, nor indeed did the Brethren
expect it, but took advantage hereby to pursue their design to stir up the
people by certain emissaries s^nt from the Assembly, of whom the great
incendiary Knox must be one, whose gospel had the usual success in Kyle and
Gallowoy, the chief Professors meeting at Air, A Covenant a^ Air.
where they covenanted to maintain the Ministers of the evangel against all
persons, power and authority, that should oppose themselves to the doctrine
propounded -- So that whosover should hurt, molest or trouble any of their
bodies, should be reputed enemies to the whole -- except he submit to the
government of the Church then established [they say not by whom.] At the next
Assembly were great complaints made about the Churches lacking Ministers*
Complaints about Ministers, etc. December. 25. 1562.
and Ministers their stipends, etc. For redress hereof some thought of a new
Supplication, others mentioned that no answer had been given to the former. So
that for such things which could not be done without the Queen, they ^eem'd to
express themselves dutiful subjects in waiting her pleasure, the rest that
could, they did by themselves, not craving her consent or approbation, unless
in mockery to make sport. But because the law kept not pace with the Brethrens
haste, nor, as they thought, the Queen with the law, they take an easy
occasion for a quicker dispatch. Having discovered some Priest that said Mass
at Easter, A P^iest seized on for saying Mass.
avowed by the Bishop of St. Andrews contrary to the Queens Proclamation, they
take justice into their own hands, clap him up in prison, whose pardon the
Queen could scarcely obtain with abundance of tear^: punish others, and give
int^mation to the Abbot of Cosragnel, the Parson of Sangohar, Encouragement
given to punish such without leave from Queen or Council.
etc. that they should neither complain to the Queen nor Council, but should
execute the punishment that God had appointed to Idolaters in his L^w, by such
means as they might wherever they should be apprehended. This incensed the
Queen, yet put her not beside a tempered discourse with John Knox (whose you
may be s^re had been this bloody advice) to whom Her Majesty propounds this
question: Will ye allow that they shall take my sword in their hand? who
answered, The Queen expostulates with them about it.
The sword of justice is Gods -- and they that in the fear of God execute
judgment where God has commanded, offend not God, altho^gh Kings do it not;
neither yet sin they that bridle Kings to strike innocent men in their rage.
The Queen yielded not to his reason, she did to his power with her poor
deceived lieg people: Suffers much against her interest.
And so strickt she was in observing her laws made against her own interest,
that she suffered the Bishops and d^vers other Priests to be summoned before
the Earl of Argile, accused and committed to prison. In requital for which act
of impartial justice writes John Knox, All this was done of a most deep craft,
to abuse the simplicity of the Protestants, that they should not press the
Queen with any other thing concerning matters of Religion. For which she is
scarcely thanked.
A good encouragement for Princes to grant any thing to the Presbytery, when by
their largest concessions they shall obtain nothing but the character of
politic deceivers, gain neither upon their affection nor duty. Indeed the more
reasonable part of the Nobility and people did somewhat reverence the Queen for
her great largeness, and decl^n'd for some time being further importunate
instruments of her trouble, or the Clergies imperious tyranny upon her
conscience, which made an absolute breach between the Earl of Murray and Knox,
E. Murray and Knox at difference.
who denounced Gods judgments upon him for his coldness in his service: The
like he did publicly in a Sermon to the rest that should consent to the Queens
Marriage with an Infidel (for such are all Papists with the Presbytery, though
they hold the same Creed) which he said was to banish Christ Jesus from the
Realm. Knox questioned by the Queen.
These and other his ex^travagancies were such as disliked both parties, who
concurred to have him questioned by the Queen, which, poor Lady, she could not
do (according to his desert) for the passionate cries and tears which, this
Tiger confesses, burst out in such abundance, that her Page could scarcely
furnish her with Handkirchiefs enough to dry her eyes. To whom all the apology
he makes is, His Apology*
his moderation used out of the Pulpit, a falsehood, as may be evid^nc'd by his
other discourses and Letters, as likewise in that he said, He was not master of
himself, but must obey him who commands him to speak plain, and to flatter no
flesh upon the face of the earth. The Queens grief had so prevailed with her,
that he was commanded to wait a time in the next chamber, where, to testify
his compassion and sense of those Royal Tears, he entertained merry discourse
with the Court Ladies, jeering them about their beauties and apparel. At last
he had liberty given him to depart, and that (according to the Queens good
nature) without a c^nsure. He is dismiss^d.
In recompense of which kindness, two Felons Armstrong and Cranstone being to
undergo the trial of the law, Summons the Country to rescue Armstrong and
Cranstone.
John Knox, (to whom, by his own acknowledgement, the charge was given to make
advertisements whenever danger should appear, because zealous brethren)
summons in by Letters the Country to their rescue, For which the Master of
M^xwel quits his acquaintan^e.
for which the Master of Maxwell, his old friend; discharged himself of a
rebellious familiar, and never would own him more. He was again brought before
the Queen and Council, but dismissed as formerly, though as impudently as ever
he maintained all his rebellious doctrine, and blaspemously abused Scripture to
confirm it.

In December 1563. was another General Assembly, A general Assembly where the
Ministers petition.
and several Petitions of Ministers presented, but their dutiful demeanor had
not been such, as to win a speedy answer and grant of their demands. They
complained of some such speech given them. As Ministers will not follow our
counsel, so will we suffer Ministers to labor for themselves, and see what
speed they come. To which the whole* Assembly made this modest reply: If the
Queen will not we must. Some dispute there was between the Lord Secretary
Lethington and the Brethren* Go^dman being their speaker, for John Knox was
sullen and musty at that time, Knox ou^ of humor.
having lashed out so far, that some even of the Protestants themselves said,
What can the Pope do more than to send forth his Letters and require them to be
obeyed. At length he made a speech, wherein he desired to have his actions
justified and owned by the whole Assembly, Thre^etns the Ass^mb^y.
or else he threatened he would never in public, nor private, as a public
Minister open his mouth in doctrine or reasoning. The Brethren trembling at
this immediately voted and avowed his fact to be the fact of the whole
Assembly. But this with the rest, alienated the affections not only of the
Queen and Court, but of rational Lay-Protestants from their Ministers, The
Ministers disliked by most.
whereat they, hating the name of Dumb dogs (which was the insepar^ble title of
the Bishops) barked aloud every day in their Pulpits, but as it happened this
was no time to bite. In the next Assembly 1564. their words were scanned, some
advocates they found, but more accusers. Here, as in the other, A s^hism among
the Reformers.
was a public Schism^ among the Reformers, diverse Lords and Ministers
withdrawing themselves, and transacting many things about the Church: A dispute
betw^en L. Se. Lething^on and Knox, who maintains strange doctrine.
At length they were drawn together to the hear^^g of Knox's Cause, which was
very largely discussed between the Lord Secretary Lethington and him. The
propositions maintained by Knox were these five.

1. That Subjects have delivered an innocent from the hands of their King, and
therefore offended not God.

2. That Subjects have refused to strike innocents, when a King commanded, and
in so doing denied no just obedience.

3. That such as struck at the commandment of the King, were before God
reputed murderers.

4. That God has not only of a subject made a King, but also he armed
subjects against their natural King, and commanded them to take vengeance upon
him according to his law.

5. And lastly, That Gods people has executed Gods law against their King,
having no farther regard to him in that behalf, than if he had been the most
simple subject within the Realm.

To the proof of these, holy Scripture and Ecclesiastic History is shamefully
wrested; Scripture and History wrested to prove it.
all the extraordinary precedents in the Old Testament forced to justify the
new practice of the Schismatical Scots, and John Knox made as familiar with
God, and as private to his most secret counsels, as any of the Prophets or
Apostles in the Bible.

These are to this day the doctrines of the Disciplinarian Brethren, A caution
to Princes and Subjects concerning the Presbyterians.
by which Kings and Princes may see how much concerned they are to beware of,
and by an indispen^able coercive power, when they have it, to restrain them:
And all good subjects are to abandon utterly their opinions and practice, lest
the Devil possess them, as from the beginning he has done these swine, and
cast them down headlong into Hell.

At the end of this dispute, much ado there was about the votes of the
Assembly, but their divisions being many, they at last advised Knox to send for
the opinions of Calvin and other eminent Divines in the Reformed Churches,
Their opinions and practices intended to be counten^nced by the Reformed
Churches.
which he cunningly declined, pretending he was assured he had them all on his
side (a pretty credit for the foreign Reformation) and would not so wrong his
cause as to call it in question before any of them. And so, re infecta, the
Assembly brake up.

Not long after the banished Earl of Lenox had leave to return into Scotland,
E. of Lenox returns into Scotland.
and was graciously received by the Queen. In favor of whom, that he might be
restored to his lands, A Parliament called in favor of him.
Her Majesty intended to call a Parliament, but desired the Earl of Murray that
nothing about Religion might be mentioned; He said, he could not promise it,
for the precise Ministry, The Assembly rigid about Church affairs.
as they were now called, did not use to stand to the Queens courtesy in Church
aff^irs. Nor did they now forbear, although they knew Her pleasure, but gave in
again their old factious articles, and ordained many things in their Assembly
about the Church.

Now begins the Queens affecti^on to show itself toward the young Lord Darley,
The Queen declares her intent to marry the L. Darley.
and Secretary Lethington is dispatched into England to signify to Queen
Elizabeth, that she minded to marry him. Whether in reference to this or no I
know not, Knox summons the Country to arms and a suppl^cate.
but Pope Knox's Bulls are dispersed abroad, and the Brethren of Edinburgh,
Dundee, Fife, etc, summoned to come in and arm themselves to make a new
supplication to the Queen, which was presented in very dutiful manner (no
question) by the Superintendent of Lowthian, wherein Her Majesty was advised to
take heed of the matter, if any Idolatry and Superstition were used at Easter
following. The poor Queens task was hard, The Queen accomplices with their
desires.
having two Popes to please, but this nearer home threatening greater mischief
to her Crown and person, must be served first, and accordingly prohibitions
were sent out to all suspected places and persons, especially to the Bishop of
St. Andrews and Aberdeen, not to use Mass. And that they should not do any
such thing as was feared by the Protestants, or convene any Council, etc. This
stopped not the strickter inquisition of the Precisians, Sir James Carvet
intercepted after Mass and exposed to mockery and violence at Edinburgh Cross.
who intercepted Sir James Carvet upon the road, having it should seem, been at
some private Mass, revested him with his garments, carried him to the
Market-Crosse at Edinburgh, bound the Chalice to his hand, and him to the
Cross, let him stand there an hour or two for the boys to throw eggs at,
which they called, Serving him with his Easter eggs. This popular piece of
justice was approved afterward, This justice allowed and again appointed at the
Assize.
and seconded by a grave censure to the same punishment at the Assize, only
for some solemnity, he had appointed to him the attendance of the Hangman. The
Queen sent a serious Letter to the Provost and Bailiff, to proceed legally with
the seditious executioners of justice, but hereof was little notice taken
beside setting Sir James and his company at liberty upon Her Majesty's special
Command. 1565.
In the month of May following some of the Precise Nobility and Clergy being
angry that they failed of a design they had against the Earl Bothwell (whom
they summoned to Edinburgh, The Precise Nobiilty and Clergy assembling about
religion, are summoned by the Queen unto her Marriage.
but he diverted toward France) turned their Law-Court into an Ecclesiastic
Assembly, and, without any authority from the Queen, sat down to consult about
maintaining of Religion, but Her Majesty knowing by custom that would end in a
Rebellion, cites them all to Sterlin about her marriage with the Lord Darley,
and to subscribe a Writ about obedience to him as their Sovereign, which the
Brethren that bent themselves every way to cross her, caused the Earl Murray to
refuse, E Murray refuses.
till some conditions about religion were consented to on her part, and a
Convention ordered to be at St Iohnston to that purpose. A day for which being
prefixed, that a business of that consequence might be the more sedately and
peaceably deliberated on, A convention at St. Iohnston.
the principals of the Precisians summon in what strength they could out of the
Country, which Her Majesty foreseeing was to force her consent to whatsoever
they would propound, Put off by the Queen.
put off the day till she had advised with her Council, after which the 23. of
June following was appointed, but the Queen being by that time too well guarded
agai^^t the intended violence, the Brethren had no stomach to assemble; And let
fall by the Brethren, who divert E. Murr^y's going thither by a feigned story.
and to divert the Earl of Murray, who ^as going thither, feign a formal sto^y
of a design upon his person. That the Lord Darley should discourse with him and
draw him into a dispute, whereupon David Rizio (of whom more shall be said
hereafter) was to strike in, and with some other Assistants that were in
readiness, murder him. To color the Earls absence, was given out that he was
taken with a flux, and lay sick at Lochlevin, where he remained till the Queen
came to Edinburgh. In the interim, there is held a general Ass^mbly of the
Church July 24. By this time the Brethren had mustered their strength, A Church
Assembly held.
and were resolved to capitulate to the rigor with the Queen, six very modest
Articles are drawn up, and sent by five Commissioners to be ratified by Her
Majesty in Parliament. The first and fifth of which were to have her sign her
own death, Very insolent articles sent by Commissioners unto the Queen.
in case she altered not her Religon, for the Papistical and blasphemous Mass,
with all Papistical Idolatry, etc. must be abolished throughout the Realm, not
only in the subjects, but also in the Queens own person, with punishment
against all persons that should be deprehended ( Her Majesty expressly named in
the former, and not excepted in the latter, and the punishment appointed for
Idolaters is death, as they every where mention) The Queen having received this
pleasing message departs privately to Dunkeld, Who departs to Dunkeld,
whither they follow her.
whither she is persecuted by this Commission, prevailed with for audience, and
importuned for a dispatch. In her answer she delays them for eight days,
after which she intended to be in Edinburgh with her Council. To gain Her
Majesty's concession the Brethren arm themselves and assemble at St. Leonard
Crag. And appear in arms at St. Leonard Crag.
The Queen saw it was now high time to speak her mind, which she did in a
particular return to the six Articles. To the first, The Queens answer to their
Articles.
she only demanded of her subjects what she freely gave to them, liberty of
Conscience in the exercise of Religion: hoped they would not press her to
receive any religion against her conscience, which should be unto her a
continual trouble by remorse, and a perpetual unquietness. And to deal plainly,
Her Majesty neither will nor may leave the Religion wherein she has been
nour^shed and brought up. But the Brethren still prosecute the religious cause,
and to prepare it the better for the Parliament approaching* the Earls of
A^gile and Murray, etc. meet at Sterlin to consult. Argile and Murray meet.
The Queen takes this ill; s^nds her two Advocates Mr. Spense and Mr. Crichton,
who c^uld by no means persuade them to come to Edinburgh. The Queen p^orogues
the Parliament to the first of September, The Parliament prorogued.
preparing by Letters and Proclamations to be in as good a military posture of
defense as they could.

Upon the 18. of July Proclamation was made for obedience to be rendered to the
Lord Darley as King, L. Darley proclaimed King. The Queen disturbed in her
Marriagr.
the next morning he was Married to the Queen, notwithstanding such disturbance
intended as the Queen was fain to raise an Army to secure her in her Marriage.
The Precise Lords had appointed the rendezvous for their forces the 24. of
August, and a countermand issued out from their Majesty's to attend them at
Linlithgow the same day. But upon the 19. day of that month John Knox preaches
before the King at Edinburgh upon Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God, Knox's Sermon.
other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we
make mention of thy name. He declaims against Tyrants and wicked Princes, says
expressly, That God sets in that room (for the offenses and ingratitude of the
people) boys and women -- That God justly punishe^ Ahab and his Posterity,
because he would not take order with that Harlot Iezabel. The King knew whom he
meant, Displeased the King.
and forbore his dinner out of anger. Knox was summoned before the Council, and
wished to abstain from preaching for some few day^s; He answered, That he had
spoken nothing but according to his Text, and if the Church would command him
either to speak or abstain, he would abstain So far as the word of God would
permit. So the Kings command must give way to the Churches, and John Knox
regulate the Churches too according to the word,

The Lords range up and down the Country to increase their strength, The Lords
divided in their Councils.
but find not what success they hoped for. This makes some divisions in their
Councils, Murray and Glencarne were for an accommodation; the Hamiltons put no
confidence in peace, pretending the enmity of Kings was implacable, no other
way to be extinguished but by their death. This harsh advice took place with
none but such as adhered to them upon a mystical reason, their nea^ ^itle to
the Crown: And many others looking upon the quarrel as prosecuted upon private
interest, more than the public good, which was pretended, deserted their
party, and so infirmed their strength. The remnant sent a Letter to their
Majesty's, A Letter sent from that party to their Majesty's.
flattering their persons, but enveighing against their Council, putting in
some caution for Religion, and menacing a hard market for their blood, if
sought. The Princes guessing this might be to gain time, remitted no whit of
their Military care, but made hard marches, the weather being very bad. A
Proclamation at St. Andrews*
At St. Andrews Proclamation was published to inform the subjects about the
true state of the difference, demonstrating to them that nothing less was
mean'd than Religion most pretended; how hardly they were used, according to
Mr. Knoxs's Doctrine, like Boys and Gyrls in their pupillage, the Lords
appointing their Council as their Guardians. The Ministers all this while were
no cyphars, The Ministers petition unseasonably for their means.
but knowing their Majesty's were somewhat necessitated for money to pay their
Army, which was come to a considerable number of 18000 men, thought it the
fittest time to supplicate for their means. This piece of impertinency was
easily swallowed among greater troubles, their authority being not such at this
time as to stand upon terms, and expostulate at length the Holy Lords of the
Congregation being confiscate and banished: Therefore they fall to their
Prayers for patience, They pray for patience, having not power enough to fight.
comfort, and constancy to the exiled, which John Knox did not without
honorable mention of them as the best part of the Nobility, the chief Members
of the Congregation. But prayers and tears were not wont to be the only arms
of this new Church, and though they had no other at present, yet some course
must be taken to reduce them into possession of such a power. This cannot be
done without the exiled Lords return into the Country, for which their Letters
and missive supplicates not prevailing, Enquiry made about the obstruction of
their supplicates.
enquiry was made about the principal obstruction, the common current of the
Queens favor and mercy diffusive enough. requiring naught of the most
delinquent Subject, but to take the pains to stoop and taste it as he pleased.
This was found to be David Rizio Her Secretary, who by the excellency of his
parts, and fidelity of his service, D. Rizio pretended to be it, whose murder
they design, and at^^mpt to draw the King into the plot.
in these many turns of treachery and falsehood, had raised himself to an
intimacy with the Queen, much beyond the quality o^ his Birth, or place in Her
Court. The Brethren had no such free access to the retirements of the Royal
Palace as afforded them an opportunity to commit such a rape on Majesty as
this: nor could there be they thought, a better hand than the King to rend in
sunder the Queens heart, and rifle thence, by prerogative privilege, the
counterfeit of her dearest servant, whom they were resolved to have thrown out
of the world, that she might never more have benefit by his Counsel, nor
content by his presence and attendance. But such transcendent wickedness as
this requires supreme providence to guide it, nor can any miraculous mischief
be wrought but by the plenipotence of Heaven. To this purpose a Fast is
proclaimed by the Assembly, A Fast procla^med for success,
and observed, No Fast for strife and debate, Isai 58.
nor to smite with the fist of wickedness; such a Fast, no doubt, as the Lord
had chosen, to undo the heavy bu^thens, to break the yoke, and to let the
oppressed go free. The Kings head is daily possessed by convenient instruments
with variety of jealousies about his Queen: Suggestions unto the King against
the Queen, and D. Rizio.
her privacies with David Rizio are suggested as no arguments of her
matrimonial fidelity; and the precedence of her name before his ( Her paramours
invention) did derogate as much from the due authority of an Husband, as from
the Majesty of a King. Naught but David Rizio's removal can make way for the
future innocence of the Queen: and very just is it thought that his heart blood
should blot out his hands error in the writs. But barefaced murder is not so
beautiful as to draw a tender Conscience to embrace it. Religious mask may hide
somewhat of the horror, and necessity of state animate, an adventure to take it
by the hand, which the Lords of this black Council weighing with themselves,
propound three Atticles to the King. Establishing the Religion. Recalling the
banished Lords, and in the rear of these, Three Artices propounded by the Lords
unto the King.
The murder of David Rizio. His Royal word might vanish into air, and be no
standing evidence for the security of the actors, who press for a subscription
by his hand. The discourse alone upon this is enough for an after-claim to his
consent, and the counterfeit of his name to give his disavowing Majesty the
lie. Howsoever if his engagement were any, the reverence of a Father that
advised brought him half way upon the misse-taken borders of his duty, and old
Patrike Ruvens resurrection, who had for many months been bedridden: but skipped
very lively into this action, might impose on his youth as an oracle from the
dead. Upon the Saturday before the Tuesday prefixed by the Queen for the
attainder of the Lords, D. Rizio hurried from the Queens presence, and murdered.
this cripled assassin in the company of the Earl Morton, Lord Ruthuen, Lord
Lindsay, etc. broke into the presence, and in Her Majesty's sight who was then
great with child, carry violently away her servant of greatest secrecy and
trust, and within a Chamber or two by fifty three strokes with their whingers
or daggers, murder him for the advancement of the Discipline, which work now
goes on a pace, the Earl Murray and the banished Lords returning to the Court
upon a pretended summons from the King These with the Murderers sit in Council,
desire the Queen to take the act for good service, The Queen desired to take
this for good service.
because hereby were so many Noblemen restored. The poor Queen was fain to be
silent in what she could not help, and not knowing how soon her own turn was to
come, She is jealous of the like violence intended to her person.
as an essay of their intentions, desired the armed Guard might be dismissed,
for granting which the cruel Brethren count the King uxorious and simple, the
Earl Murray facile, and the other Lords too inclinable to submit. Her Majesty
though good natured, was neither stupid, nor partial when endued with exercive
power. The blood of Rizio called upon her for Justice more then the memory of
his good service, or her own affection did incite her to revenge. This
opportunity she took to summon her loyal Subjects to Dunbar, Yet calls the
Lords etc. to account for the murder.
whither Her Majesty privately withdrew. The guilty Lords did not like to have
any armed assemblies appear but their own, and accounted it an entrenchment on
their privilege for the Queen to act any thing but by their counsel. At the
same time and Edinburgh, Tolboth.
place where they should have answered to their charge, they convene to protest
against the Q. proceedings, They protest against her proceedings.
yet wanting that which was wont more then either their authority or innocence
to spirit their dispute, they disperse themselves to seek each a single
sanctuary in a corner. But disperse.
The King and Queen in March were attended with a strong Guard to Edinburgh,
His Majesty having before by Proclamation quit himself, The King quits himself
by proclamation of all guilt.
not only of the guilt, but all foreknowledge of the murder (which is not
inconsistent with what was said of an article propounded, so they acquainted
him not upon his refusal with their design) search is made by order after the
actors and partisans, Search made after the actors.
care being taken that the Brethren which so zealously prayed and fasted for
poor Rizio's death, should not surfeit at their leisure on his blood. The
common hackney-interruption of every Royal enterprise or process was the humble
and lamentable complaints of Her Highnesses poor Orators, An interruption by
the Ministers supplicates.
the superintendents and Ministers, etc. who still want (...) means, and at
this time, it may be a reward for their late service. But here they fetch their
breath short, and cannot lengthen out their supplicate as heretofore, to
abolishing the Mass, and antichristian Bishops, The demur upon acceptance of
the Quee^s grant.
the temporal sword was wanting which should strengthen their weak hands, and
confirm their feeble knees. The Queen gratified their present modesty with a
promise, although the Assembly was nice in owning her gracious performance
afterward, for the writ of maintenance subscribed by Her Majesty being
publicly presented, they take time to deliberate about acceptance of it from
her hand, and answer very gravely, That it was their duty to preach to the
people the Word of God truly and sincerely, and to crave of the auditors the
things that were necessary for their sustentation, as of duty the Pastors
might justly crave of their flock; and further it became them not to have any
care. Of whose denial they could have made better us^.
Which plain contradiction can ad^mit of no other Salve but this. That they
wanted not the subsistence, for which they so frequently and importunately
petitioned, nor had they any desire to be answered by a grant; but this
colorable pretense they could ever make use of to usher in their more peevish
demands, upon denial whereof, or (which they made ever equivalent) delay, the
public commiseration of their poverty who labored in the Gospel melted the
peoples loyalty into a tumult. Iac. 6. June 1566.
About this time comes matter of joy for all, A Prince born.
though upon several grounds, and different hopes of advantage to be made by
it, the birth of a Prince, of whom if the Brethren can get the godly education,
and mold the new d^scipline into his creed, there can be Gospel enough beside
Knox's Book against the Empire of Women, or else club law, which is better to
prevail with the Queen for a surrender of the Crown and Scepter into his hand.
In reference hereunto, after thanks and praises, are made many supplications to
God, and wishes (more powerful persuasions being wanting) that he might be
Baptized according to the manner of the Reformed Churches in the Realm. And
against the Brethrens mind baptized by the Archbishop of St. Andrews.
But the Bishop of St. Andrews is thought to have a more authentic mission
then the Brethren, and the Sacrament efficacious from his hand though none but
boys could be got to bear torches at the solemnity of the Christening. This
check to the Discipline seemed ominous, This they take ill from the King.
and if the future removes in the Princes education should be answerable, the
Brethren saw they might be mated in the end. The King had either taken no
impression by their counsel about Rizio, or retained very little of it after
his dispatch. He had been so uxorious as to put the bloody Lords to shift for
themselves, and being given to his sports might possibly leave the young child
wholly to the Queens disposal; at the best he was but a Cipher in Religion, A
Regent o^ Protector thought more proper for their occasions.
and filled up the room of a more significant figure, a Regent, or Protector of
the Prince. The strong reports of his engagement against Rizio has wrought a
visible suspicion in the Queen, and that will be enough to draw a popular
jealousy upon her self, though Murray and his accomplices be the true politic
Assassins that act a second Trajedy in the murder of the King. Howsoever this
bloody business was contrived and executed, Whereupon the King is obscurely
murdered, and one of his servants strangled.
the Corpse of the murdered King was thrown into a Garden, and one of his
Servants strangled with him, the house where he lay in Edinburgh blown up in
triumph for the design taking effect, or as a signal to the Brethren to
blaspheme God by their midnight Thanksgiving.

The Queen again in solitude.
Now was the poor Queen once again reduced to her solitude, without the comfort
or assistance of a Husband, in greater haz^rd of her peace and security then
ever by what she foresaw would be act^d against her by the Reformers under the
umbrage of her Son. To prevent what she well could of this mischief she casts
her self upon the despe^ate adventure of a sudden marriage. The experience she
had of Earl Bothwels trust, Thinks of marrying E. Bothwel.
and the clear opinion the world had of his courage led her nuptial affection
unto his comely person by the hand. The intended divorce between the Earl and
his Lady upon the lawful ground of too near consanguinity would assuredly set
him at liberty for her purpose, and Her Majesty thought Religion as well as
policy might be had to justify his help, Having forecasted all difficulties to
be encountered.
being then at leisure, in supporting of a Crown, she presumed on her innocence
to quit her from the slander of the Brethren about her former familiarity with
the Earl, and upon the justice of the Law to wash his hands in the sight of the
world from the murder of the King. What other inevitable difficulty, she must
encounter, she left to providence and the fortune of war. And if by all the
fair means to be used the precise mouths could not be stopped from shooting
bitter words, and sharp arrows against her person or government, she saw no way
left but to hold their hands, and ^ut their venomous tongues out with the
Sword. But the Brethren were never wont to be backward, to raise a Rebellion in
their own defense as they called it, and much more unlikely is it they should
be now when a young Prince was committed by Heaven unto their charge. The
fountainhead for sedition was most commonly at Edinburgh, which now had for a
Conduit John Craig the Minister, John Craig declaims against it, and excites
the people to rebellion.
who declaimed fiercely against the divorce and marriage, and as boldly as
could be maintained his discourse when he was questioned for it before the
Council. Hence tumults beginning, the Queen thought to seize the Castle of
Edinburgh to suppress them, The Queen demands Edinburgh Castle, and obtains it
on an hard condition, for the person of the Prince, the original of her ruin.
which she demands of the old Earl of Mar, who, though sick at Sterling*
advised by his Confessors would make no surrende^, and exchange he would for
no les^ then the person of the Prince. The condition was hard, ^et at length
consented to by the Queen, who might have saved some part of her future trouble
it may be her head, if when she kissed and shook hands with her Babe, she had
taken off her Crown, and thrown it into the cradle, for now we hear of no more
Supplicates, They address now no more supplicates.
and humble addresses to her; they had now a Royal Infant in their hands, whom
as young as he was, they had taught to speak far better language then his
Mother, and to act (with good authority and judgment no question) their hearts
desire in behalf of the D^scipline. The Queen may now proclaim what she please,
as she did, they say, large favors toward the poor Protestants, she mistakes
her self, they are no such men as mean to live on her alms, having got her
only jewel in possession, and will have very shortly her Crown; but they had
not hands enough yet to remove it, being like a nail fastened in a sure place
of Female magnanimity, Isai. 22.23*
and innocence, and the Throne had by late marriage acquired a stout Champion
to protect it; nothing now but sl^under and violence can get it into their
power, and they must be sure to coin the former of good metal, whereby to
purchase an effectual assistance in the latter. Their malicious calumny of the
Queen, and E. Bothwell's resolution to murder the young Prince.
They set up shop at Sterlin, and hammer out a conceit that the Queen and Earl
of Bothwell had an undoubted resolution to murder the young Prince, and next a
band or covenant to protect him. But Argile one of the banded Lords, could not
sleep well with this shackle about his Conscience, and the next day reveals the
conspiracy to the Queen. She has many of the Lords that adhere to her, The
Queen raises an Army.
and a daily access of strength from the common people But Her Majesty makes
first approaches by her goodness* before she moves toward the conspirators with
her power. Having proclaimed a Grant of their demands for Religion, Yet
proclaims great concessions.
she does the like to the other Article of policy, and passes her Royal
promise to be hereafter guided by the advice of her Nobles. This they thought
was to direct a way to Sterlin, where having yielded all, it might be taken for
reason or a civil favor to gratify her with the restitution of her Son. To
intercept her in this have they besiege Her Majesty and the Earl at Borthwike
Castle, They besiege Her Majesty at Borthwike-Castle.
where nothing was wanting to the surprisal of their persons but the Earl of
Athols men to stop a pass, by which they both escaped to Dunbar. The Rebels
thus defeated in their plot, Thence they go to Edinburgh.
make what have they can to Edinburgh, where they found no hard entrance into
the City, and they pretended to some underhand favor from Balfour Governor of
the Castle; yet as guilt is prone to suspicions and fears, they confide not so
much in their friends or strength, but that divided in their counsels the
prevailing party inclined to a disbanding and shifting for themselves; Yet
incline to disband, but are prevented by the Queens approach.
but the Queens Army drawing near, despair of mercy made them resolute, and
united their factions to hazard all at once. Musselburgh field was the place
where both Armies met, and being ready to join battle* An unfortunate Treaty
by the French Agents means.
Mon. Croke the French Agent unhappily interposeth for a Treaty; gets the Queen
to promise pardon, and then offers it in her name to the Lords of the
conspiracy; they had no mind to take her word, nor his, and the Earl of
Glencarn very majestickly told him, They came not thither to take, but to give
pardon at their pleasure. The Queens yiedling to this parley put a jealousy
into her Army that she had no great faith in the good fortune of the Battle,
The Queens Army discouraged.
and Glencarns bold answer spoke a too fixed resolution in their enemies. This,
and some treachery that was acted in the dark, made a great party declare
against the business for which they came into the field. The Queens passion,
running too quick a division upon entreaties and menaces, evidenced to them the
distraction of her m^nd, which at length brought her to a precipice, and threw
her into a ruin, She sends to treat personally with the L. Kirkaldie of Grange,
with whom he holds a discourse while the Earl Bothwell of late made Duke of
Orkney was out of present danger. Her Majesty's discourse with L. Kirkaldic of
Grange, while E. Bothwell slips away. Her horrid entert^inment in the Rebels
Army.
Afterward Her Majesty goes with him to the Rebels, by whom she was at first
received with as much reverence as hypocrisy could counterfeit, which being
only a false paint upon the van or front of the Army, when she had made a
little farther entrance, she heard a loud cry, Burn the Strumpet, and
Parricide, Burn the Strumpet and Parricide, This courtesy pursued her until
she was welcomed by a Pageant, a fair banner displayed, wherein was pictured K.
Henry, (the Lord Darley) that was dead, and a little Infant (the young Prince)
at his Prayers to God for revenge upon the murderer. This was carried by two
Soldiers between two Spears, and which way soever the Queen turned her face. as
maliciously as might be, this was presented to her. When the poor innocent Lady
fainted not under the burden of her guilt, but impatience of this most
unchristian reproach, they held her upon her horse, and the banner still
displayed on purpose it may be (there being more yet undiscovered of the
design) to affright her Royal Soul into her body, if it attempted to spring
out. Being somewhat recovered, they hurrey her toward Edinburgh, but her
faintness of spirit, after the late torture, declining so great have, a common
Soldier was instructed to cry out, You linger to no purpose; The Hamiltons are
not at hand here for your rescue. When they had brought her to the City, they
thrust her into an Inn, where if she looked but out at window, She is thrust
into an Inn at Edinburgh, and guarded.
to weep at that liberty, as the tears trickled down with the sad sound of her
sighs, and the pity of some tender hearted people ascended in a whisper, she
was sure to have that cursed banner a fresh presented, which forced her to this
choice, a perpetual rack, or close imprisonment, yet the Rebell^ fearing the
effects of such still conference between a distressed Queen, and her
commiserating subjects, Thence posted away to the Isle of Lochlevin.
post her the next day to a Castle in the Isle of Lochlevin* where a proud
harlot insults and tra^ples upon her calamitous person, while her ambitious
bastard plays the part of a pretender to the Crown.

And now it was high time for the godly Ministers to meet in an assembly, and
with the Seal of the Spirit make good all these proceedings; The Ministers
^ssemble.
which they did, and farther service, for the Hamiltons had got a strong party
of the Nobles, and as great an Army as the Brethren. To these and to diverse
N^utrals were sent several conscientious letters from the Cl^rgie, to summon
them in for the settling of Gods true worship in the Church, beside a spiritual
quaternion of John Knox* Douglas, Row, and Craig are deputed Commissioners with
instructions to like purpose, Four Commissioners deputed by them to summon in
the Hamilton's, etc.
in expectation of whose return was the Assembly prorogued. But so much time
was lost, for neither soothing Letters, nor supling language could prevail for
their company. This summons, though rejected, was sufficient to authoriz^ the
faction at Edinburgh, to combine in the maintenance of some such Articles as
these. Articles agreed on by the Rebels.


That all crimes and offenses against God should be punished according to Gods
word, etc. but they make no particular mention, as that does, of Witchcraft and
Rebellion.

That they would protect the young Prince, against all violence, (his
Imprisonment at present they counted none.)

That he should be committed to the care of four wise and godly men. The first
time, I have heard of a Clerical Assembly choosing Lords Protectors, That they
would set up and further the true worship of God, -- and all that may concern
the purity of Religion, and life. And for this to take arms if need require.
They should have added, Where need requires another pretense, they would take
that for taking arms, or if it please them, take arms without any.

That all Princes and Kings hereafter in this Realm before their Coronation
shall take Oath to maintain the true Religion, which if they do, to be sure
theirs is out of protection. This being done, the Assembly brake up.

They are yet p^rplex'd in their thoughts what to do with the Queen.
But all this while they were troubled how to r^d their hands of the Queen, who,
though a prisoner, had yet such authority at liberty as prevented the Brethren
from being absolute in their power. In consultation about her, some were for a
conditional restitution, others for a legal Trial, deposition, and condemnation
to perpetual imprisonment; but Knox and the meek-sp^rited Assembly-men, upon
some holy inspiration published this merciful censure in their Pulpits, To
have her divested of Royal authority and executed, which took effect in the
end, although not in so short a time, nor by the same hands they then hastily
desired. Queen Elizabeth's emulation* etc. made her countenance some of their
proceedings.
Queen Elizabeth of England, whose Royal dignity did rather cherish her in,
then exempt her from, an eager emulation, which is very inseparable, (in some
cases happily incident) to her Sex, partly by that, and partly upon a
conscientious care to preserve and enlarge what is called in the Mass, the
Protestant Religion, the sincerity of which was ever pretended, but never
mean'd nor practiced by the Presbytery in Scotland; and farther upon the
jealousy she had of the great reputation, and growing power of her successor,
had from time to time recruited the strength, and supported the fainting
spirits of that faction; yet at such opportunities, and upon such politic
advantages, as gave all her actions the countenance of justice, and her self
the honor of being as bitter to theirs: but when by the help of her Sword they
had cut out their way, and got the Royal Scepter in their reach, like
perfidious Rebels, ungrateful and cruel Murderers, as she called them, Their
ingratitude and scorn returned upon her.
they turned the point upon her self, would stand no more to the courtesy of
her imperious mediation; denied her Ambassador access to their Queen, and sent
him back with a French Proverb in his mouth, Il perd le jeu, qui la isse, la
party, to bid her have a care to continue a Friend to their party, lest having
got the fore-game for them, she lose an after-game, more considerable, when she
plays it for her self.

In the interim the Lords Lindsey and Ruthuen were sent to the Queen to have
two Wri^s signed; The Queen moved to q^it her Crown, and permit Murray to be
Regent.
one for the renunciation of the Crown and Royal dignity; the other to ordain
the Earl of Murray Regent* K James 6.
during the Princes minority. They having by their hard usage brought upon Her
Majesty some infirmity of body, did her the courtesy to put her in mind of
that as a fair pretense, why she gave up her Crown and Government, but to
balance that, they threatened her with Death if she refused. Whether Her
Majesty set her Hand or no, is not so certain, as that it was proclaimed she
had, at the Market-cross of Edinburgh; and soon after the young Prince Crowned
King at Sterlin, The Prince Crowned at Sterlin.

K. James 6.


where John Knox sanctified his inauguration with a Sermon, and Earl Morton,
one of them that killed his Father, with Lord Hume that mean'd as much unto his
Mother, when he besieged her in Borthwike Castle, took the Oath in his behalf,
That he should constantly live in the profession of the true Religion, and
maintain it, etc. It Is no matter whether the King knows it to be true or false
he swears to.

The next solemnity was to proclaim the Regent, who was returned out of France,
Murray returned out of France, and proclaimed Regent.
whither he had cunningly diverted to avoid the discovery about the murder of
the King, and his personal appearance in the deposit^on of the Queen.

After eleven months Imprisonment (in all which time she was not once
permitted the sight of her Son, which she earnestly desired,) Her Majesty by
the help of George Douglas, The Queen escapes out of prison.
Broth^r to the Regent, makes an escape out of the Castle, and Island of
Lochlevin, and within ten days got an handsome Army, and fought a Battle for
the recovery of her right; but her Friends that were stronger in their
affections then arms, Her last ill success in Battle.
were unfortunately dispersed, and her self narrowly escaped to the borders of
England. Afterward, She escapes to England for protection.
having sent a Letter to Queen Elizabeth to crave protection in her Kingdom, as
apprehending some danger in her stay where she was, prevented the Queens answer
by her coming to Carliste.

What passed before Queen Elizabeth's Commissioners at York and herself at
London, whither the Regent came, being only a discussion of the Scotch factions
on all sides, and including title of the Clericall proceedings, I purposely
omit.

The Regent being returned into Scotland, meets with new commotions, Queen
Elizabeth's three Desires unto the Regent.
raised by the opportunity of his absence; and afterward was overtaken by that
which pleased him worse: three desires from Queen Elizabeth in behalf of the
banished Queen.

1. That she might be restored to her former Authority, and place. Or,

2. That she might be joint Regent with her Son, aad her Name as well as his in
all public Acts and Writings, yet so as Murray should bear all the sway until
the King came to seventeen years of age: Or,

3. That, if the Queen of Scots liked of it, she might enjoy her peace in a
private condition, and with it what honor should not be prejudicial to the
Royal dignity of the King* Beside, the Queen of Scots sent (...) Letter to
demand a fair judicial hea^ring about the business of her marriage with Earl
Bothwell, Queen of Scots demands a hearing about her last marriage.
that if (...) were found illegal, she might have the benefit of a divorce, and
be qui^ of that engagement. These were referred to a Parliament at Perth, where
the last of Queen Elizabeth's propositions were yielded to, All discussed in the
Parliament at Perth.
upon hopes to get her within the limits of their power, when she could have no
pretense to raise a party, being divested of all her Royalties, and to be
acknowledged as no other then a private person, and subject to the rigor of
their Laws, by which within a very short time she might be reduced to her
former condition in the Castle of Lochlevin. To the Queen of Scots Letter they
make exceptions upon her assuming the title of Queen, Whence the two Queens
reeeive little satisfaction.
etc. and when offer was made that that should be amended, and urged as a
strange Paradox that they which had so much pressed the illegality and impiety
of that marriage, would not now ye^ld unto a cognizance of the business; they
made many frivilous demurs, as to have 60 days given for the summons of Earl
Bothwell, who was now in Denmark* etc. and at last spoke plainly, They demurre
about E. Bothwell.
that they would have her send to the Danish King to take his Head off, and
then she was at liberty to marry whom she pleased. Queen Elizabeth not liking
the Perth Parliaments answer, nor the young Messenger that brought it, they
called another at Sterlin, Pelkarne sent with their apology to Queen Elizabeth.
and from thence sent Pelkarn with a subtle enlargement about* their declining
the two former of her three Propositions; but because they saw so long as the
ex l'd Queen had the countenance of Queen Elizabeth, she had oppo^tunity to
encourage, and some means to assist their enemies, Their subtilty in making a
diff^rence between the two Queens by much falsehood mixed with little truth.
which now began to be somewhat potent; they take a sure way, to set the two
Queens at variance by several suggestions, wherein what was true, had been
done by Murray's advice, if not first procurement, the private overture of a
Marriage between the Queen of Scots, and the Duke of Norfolk: and what was
false, they were sure would incense Queen Elizabeth, and prevent all
possibility of farther mischief from the South* Of this nature was

That she had passed away to the D. of Andyn her right to the Crown of England,
That She and the Duke of Norfolk intended to cut off the present Royal
poss^ssours of both Kingdoms, which plot^ must be discoverd by providence just
at Pelcarnes coming to the English Court, whereupon the Queen and Duke were
presently secured. Q. of Scots and D. of Korfolk s^cured.
After this the Regent Murray goes on with less opposition, and better success
in Scotland, ye^ in the midst of his victories was rewarded for his murders,
rebellions and falsehood, being shot at Lithgow in the belly upon a private
revenge, Regent M^rray killed.
and so prevented of dispatching the young Prince, which may be very fairly
guessed by his proceedings to be intended, his Mother boasting her self to have
been the Wife, not the Harlot of James the fifth, and so this her son the
lawful inheritor of the Crown.

The holy Brethren would fain had Murray cannoniz'd for a Saint and Martyr in
the cause, The Brethren prosecute revenge.
and his blood revenged they cared not upon whom, so any of the Queens dutiful
Subjests might be cut off. To bring such upon trial as stood most in their way,
were many popular supplicates presented, and what reason was rendered for
deferring the enquiry, at least till the Assizes, if not rather till the next
Assembly in May, they either take for a close compliance of their Peers with
the Queens, or an impolitick yielding advantage to their enemies. At length
some of the wisest began to put in questions by what authority they could
proceed to this or any other execution of Laws, the Queen being deposed, A
sc^upulous question put to them.
the King in his nonage, and no legal establishment to be made of a successor
to Murray in his Regency of the Kingdom. Fain would they have made use of an
old by grant extorted from the Queen, but that they found null by the former
election of Murray, and if now taken up for authentic, might be thought a
recalling her Majesty's authority from the dead. This not holding good, they
leave all their saucy French Proverbs behind them, T^eir applicatlons to Q.
Eliz. rejected.
and come fawning upon Queen Elizabeth in English; she denies them as well
advice as assistance, having before made plausible promises of both to the
Queen of Scots, though her prisoner, The Rebe^l^ were sensible what ground the
Qu^ens party daily got by their Anarchy, and though their necessities hastened
them toward a conclusion of somewhat, yet, not knowing what, they were to seek
by what means, and in what method to effect it. Queen Elizabeth, who seemed not
full^ satisfied with the thing, must not be disgusted by the person. The Earl
of Lenox, the young King's Grandfather is pitched on for several reasons looking
that way; They confer regal power upon the Earl of Lenox.
and first upon some Assembly revelation he was chosen an Interrex or
Interloping King, which soon after by some divine counter-light was discovered
to be a monster in Government, suspected for Saturnes unnatural stomach, that
might possibly devour the young King and Jesus Christ's Scepter to boot, which
the Presbytery had given him to play with in his hand. To avoid this danger
they divest him of his intercalary Kingship, Divest him again of it, and make
him Regent.
and having no law upon earth to empower them, they furnish him with a Regency
from heaven. And now in his time no question all Parliamentary as well as
Assembly authority may plead to be by divine right, and their proceedings are
justified by this extraordinary providence of God. Upon this Patent the new
Regent reforms what he could by the sword, according to the true sense of the
Discipline. The poor captive Queen in compliance with the principles of nature,
and likewise in discharge of her civil duty (who had the trust though not
possession of a Kingdom) by submisse, Q: of Scots by all means endeavors her
liberty.
yet enough Majestic, requests in England; by a mediation from France and
Spain, agitates what she can for her liberty, and this for stopping farther
effusion of Christian blood in her Country, and preventing the progress of
oppressive tyranny over her party. Queen Elizabeth sensible of these
unchristian proceedings, by her arbitrary power sometimes orders a truce
between the Scots, Queen Eliz: gives fair answers to her, and her intercessors.
gives fair answers as well to her prisoner as foreign Ambasdours that
interceded for her: advises with her Council, Wherein some were mis lead by
too facile credulity of false informations from the North; others, not
improbably, Q. E^izabeths Council how affected at this time.
corrupted; all too much ad^cted to their own interests, and an overweening
solicitude about the peace and security of England. This begat an overture too
high and imperious for a magnanimous freeborn Princess to yield to; K. James
5.
put new thoughts and designs into the Pope, Spaniard, and French; enlarged the
breach between her English Subjects, They involve her in a multitude of
difficulties.
(for they had been divided and some unsatisfied in the proceedings relating to
the Scotch Queen) revived and multiplied conspiracies at home. Into all these
did the northwind blow the sparkles of the Disciplinarian Rebellion, which more
or less increased the flame where they lighted, if upon matter ready to fire
with a touch. Queen Elizabeth finding her self environed with danger, She calls
the Scots to accoun^ about the deposition of their Queen.
and apprehending no possible security but in a perfect composure of the Scotch
differences, in order to it calls upon the Presbyterian division for a new
account about the deposition of their Queen. They exhibit a large remonstrance
upon it, They exhib^te a large Remonstrance rebellious and antimonarchiall
enough.
stuffed with so much pride and barbarous insolence, as left no place for
religion, reason, or law, although they were great pretenders to the last,
pleading Ancient privilege of the Scotch peoples superiority to their Prince.
K James 6.
This (for which their Reformed Brethren may thank them) they fortified with
Calvin's authority, and in some cases enlarged it to imprisoning and deposing
Kings what, or wheresoever. They not only justified their censure but
magnified their own lenity to their Queen, as to the pa^doning of her life,
1571.
to the succession of her son, who being in their power, and standing only by
their pleasure, no marvail if in this years Assembly and Parliament, all Acts
and Statutes made before by him and his Predecessors annexed the freedom and
liberty of the true Kirk of God, a^e ratified by his name, whenas yet he could
not superscribe them with his hand. Queen Elizabeth saw and disliked the drifts
of these Antimonarchical maxims and practices, Queen Eliz: dislikes it.
yet not resolute enough to trust providence with the preservation of her
person. At the next meeting in the Lord Keepers House, persists in one of her
principal demands from the Queen of Scots Commissioners to have, beside the
delivery up of two strong Castles, the Duke of Castle Herault, the Earls of
Huntl^y, Argile, Humes, Yet persists in her high demand from the Qu: of Scots
Commissioners.
H^ris, etc. to be Pledges or Hostages for the good behavior of their Queen.
This was to change one pri^oner for more, to disarm the Scotch Queen and turn
her into a wilderness of wolves, or more savage beasts, ready every minute to
devour her. The Bishop of Ross and her other Delegates, looked over Queen
Elizabeth's shoulder and her Councils to see the black Assembly men vying hard
for the honor of this fatal invention; returned a modest answer to Her
Majesty,, Their modest answer.
That this could not be yielded in Christian prudence, nor mercy to their
miserable Mistress, which was repelled by the L. Keeper with that sharp reply,
which, L: Keepers sharp reply.
if any thing, cut off all mutual confidence in the Queens, That the Kingdom,
Princes, Nobles, Castles, and what soever else was valuable in Scotland, K.
Iemes 5.
could be no considerable pledge for the security of England.

A truce between the divided parties in Scotland, made by Q: Eliz.
While matters were thus carried on there, both parties in Scotland by Queen
Elizabeth's order, enter into a truce which the Disciplinarians kept according
to the articles of their faith, putting to the sword what persons of quality
they wished out of the way, wherein the murder of their late King, and a
feigned design to poison this now in being, served them very plausibly for a
disguise; They seized upon what Castles and Forts they could get by fraud or
stratagem, without any great noise of arms; among the rest, that on Dunbriton
frith, where the fury of the meaner sort being slacked by customary murder, The
Regent and his do notwithstanding what they please.
the wrath of the Regent and his sanguinary Chaplains must have a solemn holy
sacrifice to appease it, which was the Archbishop of St. Andrews, whom they
found in that Castle. They hang up the Ar^h-Bishop of St: Andrews.
He craved the ordinary justice of the law, but the fear of Queen Elizabeth's
mediatory Letters, K James 6.
or any other prevalent possibility to save him, carried him the shorest way by
a Council of war, to be, as he was, dispatched at the Gallows. But divine
vengeance not ^ong after found the Regent out at Sterlin, sitting secure, as he
thought, in his Parliament of Rebolls, where by the hands of some on the Queens
party, Revenge taken upon the Regent.
he paid the due debt of his blood to the innocence of that holy Martyr whom he
murdered.

And now the good Brethren haing diverse months since, out stripped the rebellious
precedents of their ancestors, by leaping over the letter, and all pretentions
of Law and authority in the election of their Regent, find themselves safe on
this side all scrupulous trouble, and so without any more addresses into
England, or home disputes about stating their power, commit their cause to the
protection of John Erskin Earl of Mar, whose first ominous repulse before
Edinburgh, and mild temper inclining toward a composure, together with his
impardonable endeavors to bring in again Archbishops and Bishops, They make
the E of Mar his successor, who is so vexed by them, that he shortly dies
with gr^ef.
drew such swarms of contentious Presbyters about him, that after thirteen
months struggling with his own Conscience and their unconscientious
proceedings, he dyed through extremity of grief.

The Parliaments fierce proposition to Q Eliz. about the Queen of Scots.
In this time, by the good managing of the Brethren, a proposition was made by
the Members of Parliament in England, That if the Queen of Scots acted any
thing against the known Laws of the Land, upon advantage given by her contract
of marriage with the Duke of Norfolk, she should be proceeded against as a Wife
to one of the Peers of the Realm. Rejected.
But for Royal Majesty's sake Queen Elizabeth interposeth by her power, and
would not suffer it to be put to the Vote of the House, or at least not enacted
as a Law. A resolution taken by the Rebels in Scotland fatal to the Queen and
her party.
After all this juggling and underhand contrivance, the Disciplinarian faction
in Scotland perceiving trouble and hazard increasing upon them at home, and
potent enemies multiplying abroad, resolve now to cut up root and branch of all
that hindered the growth of their dominion, and having but blunt instruments in
Scotland, make bold with the highest authority, and sharpest ax of England to
effect it, wherein as part of the work is easy with some rotten boughs, which,
having no intrinsecal conjunction nor continuity with that body whereof they
had been arms and members, were broaken off at pleasure by the hand of Justice:
so the knotty pieces were, not without some difficulty wrought off by the
strength of malice, and acuteness of subtilty in the too partial industrious
Journeymen for the cause. The Bishop of Rosse, the Queen of Scots greatest
agent and advocate, fencing under the umbrage of the public Embassy, saved
his life, but not his liberty to do her service, Felion, Story, Barnes, Mather,
Diverse executed in England.
etc. were at several times arraigned, and executed, But these were taken to be
at too great a distance to give warning to their captive Queen. The Duke of
Norfolk was her principal adhearent they aimed at, The Duke of Norfolk Beheaded.
the most likely Champion to have justified her title; who, though at his death
he protested his chiefest endeavors had been to reestablish the oppressed
Queen, and suppress the rebellious practices in her Kingdom; yet, because his
Plot was laid in the dark, and his accomplices abroad such as, for their own
ends, kept not within the compass of his designs, but wrought the ruin of
England into their hopes, met with Law enough to condemn him by his Peers, and
after four months reprieve by the Queens singular favor, inexorable Justice
to behead him upon the Scaffold.

The Brethren well-pleased at the success of their designs, and approach of
the Ax so near their Queen.
This much heightened the Assembly men in Scotland, who wiping their eyes to
behold, with much consolation of spirit, by what a slender thread their
successes had hung the ax over their imprisoned Queen, endeared each other by
the mutual assurance they gave, it could not be long before her Head too must
off, and then the Discipline they thought would take place with the
unquestionable Succession of the King. Not ten days passed after the Dukes
death, To whom Commissioners are sent to expostulate.
before they wrought by their Agents, that Commissioners were sent, Lord de l'
Amor, Sadler, Wilson, and Bromley, to expostulate with the Queen of Scots
about her treasonable practices against the Crown of England, and to ring the
knell of the Dukes destiny in her ears. The French, more earnestly than before
interceding for her liberty, The French interceding, are answered with
instances from their own and other Nations.
are silenced with instances of their own cashiering their Kings, Childerike by
Pipin, Charles of Lorraign by Hugh Capet, imprisoning the Queens of Lewis,
Philip the Long, and Charles the Fair, successively. The cases of Henry the
Second of England, Alphonsus of Castile, and Charles the fifth of Spain, and
Scicilie are produced as precedents for taking the Crown, their Mothers
surviving; And the honorable restraint of the Queen of Scots pleaded a favor
beyond her desert, or on this side her guilt, and only for the security of
Queen Elizabeth and her Kingdom, yet room was left for the Queens ingenuity to
acknowledge that the former extraordinary and extrajudicial examples were not
drawn clear off from their Lees, nor justifiable in every circumstance that
accompanied them. After this the Duke of Momorancie Ambassador from the King of
France presses a cessation of Arms in Scotland, Momoranchies propositions not
hearkened to.
a free Parliament, or at least delegates from both sides to treat at London
with the like deputed by the Queen of England, and French King; but this could
not be hearkened to, and the aversion of Lord Grange with his Garrison in
Edinburgh Castle from peace, upon hopes of supplies out of France, is made the
only bar against a general accord.

The Assemblies domineer while no Regent in Scotland.
Since the Earl of Marre's death, there had been no Regent in Scotland, but
Christ's viceroies in black took the care of both Swords, and passed Assembly
acts at pleasure, authentic, no question, so long as the young King breathed
in the Country, who must pay the Church tribute for his life by an innocent
compliance to enact what they list, to which purpose they kept him, and would
not part with this Jewel to England, nor France, though both desired to have
him out of the noise and danger of their Wars: but this looked like a Monarchy
divinely limited by the boundaries of the Discipline, which might sweeten their
liberty by degrees to a silent desertion of all future Government by a King.
Queen Elizabeth therefore, Q. Elizabeth calls upon them to choose one, They take
E: Morton as fittest for their purpose.
who was in a manner perpetual Protectrice calls upon them to go about the
election of a Regent. The Earl Morton was the man they made choice of, whereby
they seemed both to gratify the Queen, and provide a mercenarie creature to
their purpose, he having not long before delivered up the Earl of
Northumberland who had fled to Scotland for refuge, and for a piece of money
unworthily (as to the point of personal honor) betrayed an obliging Friend,
who had fed and harbored him in his exile. The late Earl of Mar had broak
the Assemblies Instructions in his Regency by offering at some restraint unto
the Church, which had been better doubted upon the Infant person of the King,
and therefore his Son might well be opposed in his hereditary privilege to
have the young King in his custody, especially his own minority requiring
rather to have than to become a Guardian, The young E: of Mar becomes
Guardian to the King.
yet conditions being made, the charge was conferred upon him, for to secure
the main good order was taken by the new Regent, That no Papist nor factious
person (under which were comprised all loyal Subjects) should have access unto
the King. Orders made by the new Regent.
An Earl with only two Servants attending him; A Baron with one; All others
single and unarmed. The Queens party in Scotland faint.
The Queen of Scots deplorable condition in England discouraged her principal
abettors at home; The Duke of Castle Herald and Huntley are drawn in to
acknowledge the King and his Regent; the Lord Grange, Humes, and Lidington
maintain their loyalty so long as they can in Edinburgh Castle, which after a
siege laid to it by Queen Elizabeth's Forces (which she lent the Regent out of
kindness hastened by her jealousy of the French, Edinburgh Castle taken by the
help of the English Forces.
from whom the Queens Royalists in Scotland expected succor) was resigned, and
according to the Disciplinarian mercy, the first was hanged, the second
scarcely pardoned, at Queen Elizabeth's entreaty; the third, having sometime
been a Friend, sent to Leith, and yet upon-after-thought, because of a subtle
and active headpiece, supposed very probably to be poisoned, by which Christian
proceedings the Presbyterian Rebels become absolute Masters, rule King and
Country without contradiction.

And now their work being done, The Scotch army disbanded.
they turn their pack-horse Soldiers to grass, some of whom get new
entertainment in Swedeland, others agree better with the employment in France,
and the Low Countries. The cessation of arms in Scotland gives the restless
Brethren some respite to bethink themselves how to work mischief abroad. The
Bishop of Rosse, Bishop of Rosse banished England upon the Scots importunity.
though a prisoner in England, had his head at liberty to devise, and too many
hands in readiness to execute what he should command upon any visible advantage
against them. Their importunity being not able to prevail for injustice, and
cruelty enough to put him to death, they accept of his exile out of England,
though they foresee that will not quit them of their fears. Morton cannot
obtain a league etc. with England.
Morton the Regent craves a league with England of mutual defense against all
foreign Forces, and would have a large pension for himself and some Scots his
devoted guards against the pretended attempts to depose him; but that would not
be hearkened to; somewhat else with less charge, and slight proofs did
accumulate gu^lt upon the Queen of Scots for contriving a dangerous Match
between a Scotch Earl of the blood, the Kings Uncle, Queen of Scots a^cused of
cont^^ving a Match.
and the Lady Elizabeth Candish the Countess of Shrewsburies Daughter, for
which her Mother and diverse Ladies were imprisoned.

Soon after the good old Earl of Castleherault having taken no great content in
changing sides, E Castleherault dies with grief.
and forsaking his quond^m pupil and Queen, by the mod^rate way of
disciplinar^an dispatch was vexed into a sickness, and dyed.

In the year 1577 was discovered Don John of Austria's design to marry the
Queen of Scots, Don John of Austria fails in his design to marry the Q. of
Scots.
which the Brethren fores^eing, would imply the liberty of her person, and
confusion of their cause, were not wanting in d^ligence to quicken information,
and aggravate prejudice to the Queen of England. The Don ^ailing of strength
and assistance to carry on this, and other vast youthful designs, the next
year, as it is thought took no other pestilent infection then grief, which
brought him to his Grave.

And dies.
In the year following the face of Government in Scotland was altered Earl
Mortons covetous converting that public treasure to his temporal use, Morton
deposed from his Regency.
which should maintain Christ's Ecclesiastic Kingdom in luster, brings upon
him the damnation of the Discipline, in deposing him from his Regency, being
scarcely afforded the favor of communion with his Peers. The King yet but
twelve years of age was apprehensive enough of the tyranny he had been under,
and in capacity to accept any courteous tender as well of his liberty as of his
Crown. It was found convenient to trust him with the title of Governing, but
that he might be sure not to surfeit upon the power, he had his twelve
Godfathers to pass upon him for every year one. Twelve appointed to assist the
King in governing, Morton one of them, but defeated in his purpose to do all.
Earl Morton was kept in to instruct the rest rather how to give in verdict,
upon His Majesty's actions then Counsel to his person, and had the cunning to
keep himself foreman of the Jury; but unadvisedly endeavoring to improve his
interest to the retroduction of detestable regency, split his own with the
twelve Members superintendency in pieces, and to little purpose secured the
King in the Castle of Sterling, there being a Regal power pretended abroad that
gave the Earl of Athol commission to leavy an Army to meet him in the Field.
Sir Robert Bows the English Ambassador composed the public difference at
present, after which a better expedient was supposed to be found, to prevent by
poison all further martial attempts of Athol, while Earl Morton betook himself
more unto his privacy than innocence at home.

The first salley of Regal government under the pretended personal conduct of
the King put the Assembly brethren in mind to strengthen their incroachment
upon the Church, The King begins to show himself to the terror of the Assembly.
to which purpose follows a discharging of Chapters with their election of
Bishops; the titular Bishops are warned to quit their antichristian
corruptions, in particular was instanced their receiving Ecclesiastic
emoluments, so that, notwithstanding all former Acts and agreements for life,
their known assignation of benefice must be as well extinct, as their
Jurisdiction and office: Preserves the Bishops in some part of their Rights and
revenues whereof the other would deprive them.
yet to please the young King, who beyond his years had a discretive Judgment,
and held Episcopacy in a reverend esteem, that they might seem to leave them
somewhat to do, they make them Itinerant Visiters of their Hospitals,
themselves being the Sacrilegious Collectors of the Rents. Beside this, 2 B: of
Discip. cannot ye^ pass in Parliament
they heave hard to obtain an establishment of the policy in the Second Book of
their Discipline, but as that, yet could not be got to be incorporated with
other Parliament Acts; At this time two French Noblemen raise fears and
jealousies in abundance, D: of Alanson attempts a marriage with Q: Eliz.
the Duke of Alanson in England by endeavoring a Marriage with Queen
Elizabeth, with whom he held private conference, but was suspected to aim at
restoring the Queen of Scots, Lord Aubignie in Scotland, who was become the
only favorite of the King. The consequences of the Marriage were debated by the
Lords in Council, and their opposite possibilities or conjectures represented
to the Queen. D. of Lenox, and E: of Arran set at difference by the Assembly.
The new humors of Esme Stuart, Lord d' Aubignie, whom the King had ^arely
c^eated Duke of Lenox, was a business undoubted to be of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, and therefore taken into consideration by the Assembly, the
Christian result of whose counsels was this. To set up against him an emulous
rival, James Stuart of the Ochiltrie Family, called Earl of Arran, which title
he attained by cession from one of the Hamiltons not well in his wits, to whom
he had been Guardian; but these two were soon reconciled by the King* and the
Assembly Brethren defeated in their plot. Reconciled by the King.
They can soon find means to be revenged, and make the King hear of his
misdemeanour. A large complaint is sent up to Queen Elizabeth, which being
sweetened with the discovery of a feigned design to conveigh the captive Queen
out of rison, Then they accuse Lenox to Q: Elizabeth.
laid to the charge of the Duke of Lenox rellisheth well in the Court and
Council of England, from whence come endeavors and Embassies to degrade him
from favor if not his honor, Who demands to have him banished.
and dem^nds to have him bani^^ed out of Scotland. The young King had now quit
himself of his pupillage, The King will not part with him.
and with that of his custom, to return suppliant answers by his Regent
according to the instructions that ever accompanied the demands. Sir Robert
Bows the Agent was admitted to deliver his Message, but not with his condition
to have Lenox removed from the Council, and therefore went grumbling home
without audience. Humes was sent with a complement after him, and had the like
reception in England, where he was turned over to Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and
could have no admission to the Queen. Lord Burleigh at large expostulated with
him about the miscarriage of some in the Scotch Kings Council. Humes his Agent
hears of this from the L: Treasurer in England.
The Queen of Englands succesfull endeavors were magnified, and her tender
care in preventing many eminent mischiefs from the French; Some sharp language
was used, which was hoped would cut off the Kings affection to the Duke of
Lenox, and make way for Mortons restitution to favor; but the issue was
otherwise, Morton questioned.
Morton was questioned for many great enormities, especially the murder of the
Kings Father, Randolph is sent to intercede somewhat magisterially, and hinder
the proceeding against him for his life. The King adhears to his Laws, by which
he answers he is bound to submit Delinquents to Justice. Randolphs sent to
intercede, but prevails not*
Randolph by the help of the Assembly Brethren makes a strong faction of
Lenox's enemies and Mortons Friends, draws Argile, Angus, and many other of the
Nobility to the party, but their different interests caused division in their
counsels, made them quit the engagement, and leave Morton, after proof and his
own confession of the murder, to pay his Head ^o the Justice of the Law.

In this time passed many arrogant. Acts in their general Assemblies: Arrogant
Assembly Acts. 1579.
one among the rest did confine the holy Kirk of Jesus Christ in that Realm to
the Ministers of the blessed Evangel, and such as were in communion with them,
excluding all the Episcopal party, and de^iv^ring them up to Satan as being
Members of a Kirk divided from the Society of Christ's body. They professed,
That there was no other face of Kirk* no other face of Religion, No
Christianity allowed but in Scotland, and where is a conf^rmity in Religion
unto the Kirk.
then was presently at that time established, which therefore is ^ver styled
Gods true Religion, Christ's true Religion, the true and Christian Religion,
admi^ting, it seems, no other Religion to be so much as Christi^n but that.
Beside th^s, other Acts there were ent^enc^ing upon the civil authority, Th K:
checks them.
whereupon the King by Letter required the Assembly to abstain from making any
innovations in the Policy of the Church, and from prejudging the decisions of
the State by their conclusions, They contest with him by a Committee. And
extort his subscription to the Negative Confession, with a c^mmand of the like
from all.
to suffer all things to continue in the condition they were* during the time
of his minority; They regard not his letter; send a Committee to Striveling to
contest with His Majesty, and sit down again about the ordering their
Discipline; Set John Craig a Presbyter about framing a most rigid This is that
Craig, and this that confession which K: James reflects upon in Hampton Court
conference, saying, That with his, I renounce and abhor his detestations and
abrenuntiations he did to amaze the simple people, that they not able to
conceive all those things, utterly gave over all, falling back to Popery, or
remaining still in their former ignorance, yea if I, says his Majesty, should
have been bound to his form, the confession of my Faith must have been in my
Table Book, not in my head.
Negative confession of Faith; Never let His Majesty have quiet, until himself
and his Family subscribe it; Wrest a charge from him to all Commissioners and
Ministers to require the like subscriptions from all, and upon this authority,
taken by violence, play the tyrants over the Consciences of the people They
censure the Presbytery of Striveling for admitting Montgomery to the
temporallity of the Bishopric of Glascow, and him for aspiring thereto,
contrary to the word of God, and Acts of the Kirk.

While they are thus fencing with the spiritual Sword in Scotland, their pure
Brethren in England execute their Commission by the pen, where the marriage
between Qu. Elizabeth and Alanson, new Duke of Anj^u, being in a manner
concluded, they set out a virulent book with this Title, The Gulf wherein
England will be swallowed by the French Marriage, but the Author, John Stubbs
of Lincolns-Inne, a zealous professor, as he must needs be who was
Brother-in-Law to Cartwright, and one William Page, who dispersed the Copies,
soon after had their hands cut off on a Scaffold at Westminster, and played
their parts no more at that weapon.

But the civil Sword must have its turn, A public stratagem practiced by the
Brethren.
and what no menacing bulls of the Assembly, nor any pointed calumnies of
mercenary pens can keep off, must by a stratagem be declined at first, and yet
the same afterward authorized by strength. The long disconsolate captivity of
the Queen, and despair of ever obtaining her liberty, had withdrawn her
thoughts from her Scepter on earth, and raised them to an higher kingdom than
the Scots, The Queen of Scots directs her thoughts to an higher kingdom and
means to resign all up to her Son.
whereon that they might be fixed without any diversion, she resolves to divest
her self of the other interest, and confer freely her Royal title upon her Son.
The Assembly Brethren have intimation hereof, Whereupon the Brethren put all
into confusion.
do not like to have their King become absolute, or Reign by any other Title
than what he had before received on courtesy from them. The Duke of Lenox, and
Earl of Arran are two good Friends to his Majesty, not to be isntrumental in
promoting so just an advancement to his Crown, and therefore it is the
Presbyters tasks to preach them out of all favor with the people, and then an
opportunity is fairly taken in their absence from Court for the Earls Gowry,
Mar, Lindsey, and others, The King invited to the Castle of Ruthen, and
detained prisoner.
to invite his Majesty to the Castle of Ruthen, and by the Laws of Displinarian
hospitality, detain him prisoner, dismiss his retinue, deny him the liberty to
stir abroad but at his peril. Nor indeed could he well be at leisure to walk
for the perpetuity of business they found him within doors, They press him most
insolently to do their business.
forcing him first by a Writ to recall Earl Angus from England, whither the
guilt of his late rebellion had carried him; by another after the imprisonment
of His Majesty's dearest Friend, to command the Duke of Lenox into France, who
being in possession of Dunbriton Castle, might have disputed the freedom of
that Royal command, if his clear awful spirit had not dreaded the thought of
the least disloyal averseness to obey; And by a slight of singul^r cunning
tyranny in a third, framed into a Letter to Queen Elizabeth of England* to
justify their act, and contract the guilt of that unnatural sin in laying
violent hands upon himself; By a fourth to authorize the Convention of States
indicted by them. All acts of such transcendent rebellion, that George
Buchanan, their never-failing advocate before, could be wrought neither to
advise by his Council, nor justify with his pen; nay, Buchanan deserts them,
and repents of what he had done heretofore.
it is said he turned penitent upon it, retracted with tears what he had writ
before in their cause, and wished he could wash out all the spots, the black
calumnies he had dropped upon Royal Majesty with his blood, yet further, he would
have writ retractions, if being so old, he could have hoped such a conversion
would not have been interpreted an act rather of dotage then devotion.

The Queen of Scots much affected with this treasonable surprisal of her Son,
Queen of Scots complains to Queen Eliz.
complains at large to Queen Elizabeth in a Letter, appeals to her conscience
for Justice, and summons her to her plea about the differences between them
before the highest Tribunal of Heaven; yet very charitably imputes the
obstruction of intercourse between her and her Son for a twelvemoneth before,
as likewise Queen Elizabeth's long silence, notwithstanding some former
importunate letters, not unto her self, but some malignant disposition in her
Council. Queen Elizabeth's blood and thoughts had many quick motions upon this
querulous writing, Queen Eliz: very uncertain what to do.
many ebbs and flows of resolutions and fears; at length Mr. Secretary Deal,
Sends two Commissioners to the Queen of Scots.
an austere man, and no Friend at all unto the Royal Prisoner, was joined in
Commission with the Earl of Shrewsbury to expostulate the business with the
captive Queen, and yet treat with her about articles of enlargement: but the
Disciplinarian Scots being called in about what concerned them, The
Disciplinarians make new jealousies about Fa: Holt.
raised new spirits of division, by interposing ungrounded jealousies of one
Father Holt a Jesuit, and some other Emissaries lately come over, as they
alleged, on purpose to plot the invasion of England, and therewith a violent
rescue of their Queen. As little truth as there was in this calumny, Qu: Eliz:
by her Agents Courts King James kindness.
there was Sophistry enough to prevail with Queen Elizabeth to lay aside the
complaint of her prisoner, and to employ her two Agents in Scotland, Bows and
Davison in vying Courtship with two other from the French, to gain upon the
affection of the King. The News of the Duke of Lenox's death at Paris, D:
Lenoxs's death.
though accompanied with that which confounded his enemies, who thought they
had undone him by traducing him for a Papist, puts life into the Kings banded
Jailers, who take assurance by this they had him prisoner during pleasure, but
His Majesty escapes soon after to the Castle of Saint Andrews makes them curse
the lying spirit in their Prophets, King James makes an escape.
and desperate enough to become executioners of themselves, but the good King,
reprieved them by his mercy, Offers pardon to all that ask it.
offering pardon unto all that could find confidence to ask it; but this
appeared in none but Earl Gowrie, who corrupted the benefit of it unto his
bane, The rest, not long after, being banished, went some into Ireland, others
into France, only Angus asked and had a confinement unto his Earldom. Queen
Elizabeth sends Sir Francis Walsingham to the King, Sir Francis Walsingham sent
to counsel him.
not so much to gratulate his liberty, as to instill some sententious Counsel
how to use it. He meets with a greater luster and gallantry in the Scotch Court
then he expected, and a young King as grave a politician as himself. He was
entertained better than his carriage to the captive Queen had deserved, and
returned with an answer no less modest than Majestic. Though many acts had
passed the Assemblies of late derogatory to the safety and Royal authority of
the King, The Assemblies justify their late Treason.
yet none more than the justifying the late Treason, requiring the Ministers in
all their Churches to commend it unto the people, and threatening
excommunication to such as subscribed not, though against their Conscience, to
the unjust judgment of the Assembly. And in the year 1582* the Assembly at
Saint Andrews proceeded violently against one Montgomery Bishop of Saint
Andrews, And commit new.
cutting off the appeal he had made unto the King, rejecting both his Letter
and Messenger sent on purpose to inhibite them.

The late treasonable justification voted by the Assembly, though nipt in the
bud by the Kings unexpected escape, and all the leaves scattered by the breath
of his displeasure into several corners of the world, began now to sprout again
in a second conspiracy, many of the Traitors being at that time appointed by
Gowry returned again, and under the color of care and courtesy to the King,
Gowrie etc* attempt again the surprisal of the King.
attempting a second surprizal of his person. But the Earl of Arran, whom they
had not now time or opportunity to secure, seizes upon Gowrie at Dundee, and
the Kings martial appearance, But himself is seized on, etc.
suddenly affrights his Accomplices out of the Castle of Sterlin, which they had
taken. Queen Elizabeth, whose Court because the Cathedral of Religion, was ever
abused as a sanctuary after a Scotch rebellion, had now a new address to make
by mediation unto their King; And her Secretary Walsingham, Walsinghams Letters
not observed by E: Hunsdon.
by the (no justifiable) privilege of his place issued out Writs in Her
Majesty's name, though without her knowledge, for their admission into the Holy
Island. The Letters were not obeyed by Earl Hunsdon, who d^sputed the
Secretaries single separate authority, nor was the Queen hearken^d to otherwise
then by yiedling a legal trial, E: Gowrie beh^aded.
which cost Gowrie h^s Head, for all the promises he had of better success from
o^e Maclen a W^tch whom he had consulted in the case.

To balance this somewhat must be done by the Disciplinarian undertakers in
England, Letters feigned in the n^me of the Queen of S.o.s.
who frame diverse L^tters in the name of the Queen of Scots, and some English
fugitives conveigh them into the Papists houses, and then make discovery of a
plot. Hereupon, as slight and improbable as the proofs were* the Earls of
Northumberland and Arundel were confined, Upon which diverse Nobles are
questioned.
his Lady imprisoned, diverse examined, and the Lord Paget scarcely by h^s
prudent innocence protected. And the Judges for their severity against Papists.
Queen Elizabeth though facile in hearing their complaints, was not so
barbarous as to execute the cruelty of their Counsels, but called her Judges to
account for their extreme serverity against the Papists, granting indemnity and
liberty to many Jesuits and Priests. Yet Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador was
sent home; and Throckmorton, whom he was said to have encouraged in an
intricate conspiracy* being neither constant in denying, nor clear in
confessing, nor at all, cunning in concealing or disguising his guilt,
Throckmorton hanged.
was hanged.

A new Treaty between the two Queens is now commenced, A reconciliation between
the two Queens prevented:
and Sir William Wade employed in an overture unto the Queen of Scots* but the
Agitators of differences between them, renew their division by unseasonable
jealousies and fears, and Wade falls to pasting Father Creyghtone the Jesuits
torn papers together, neglecting a far more Christian and honorable artifice*
which he might have s^ewed by cementing the unhappy rupture in two so Royal and
magnanimous Ladies hearts. This new discomposure gave the Scottish partisans in
England a colorable pretense to enter into an association for Queen Elizabeth's
security from danger, An ^ssociation in England.
which was managed by the policy of the Earl of Leicester: The Queen of Scots
took hence an alarm o^ her ruin, Queen of Scots sees a necessity of complying
with Q: Eliz:
yet chose rather to submit somewhat of her spirit, then in an humor sacrifice
her life unto their malice. She sends her Secretary Nave with Articles so near
Queen Elizabeth's demands as had wrought undoubted reconcilement, The Scots
Presbytery foreseeing the effect of it, declaim against her, their King^ and
Council in the Pulpit.
if it had been consistent with the Discipline of the Kirk; but this the Scotch
Ministry declared to be otherwise in their Pulpits; call out for help, as if
both Kingdoms had been on ^ire, and Christian Religion in danger to be consumed
by the flames, inve^gh bitterly against their Queen, King, and his Council;
slight the Kings summons to answer; stand upon their Ecclesiastical exemption,
and Presbyterian privilege of immunity from his censure. The King began from
hence to apprehend it better for his safety, and more agreeable with his honor
to restore the Mi^er to the Church, Upon their flighting the Kings summons they
are inhibited, and Episcopacy settled.
then cast away his Crown to a mungrel lay-Clerical Assembly. Hereupon he
recalls Bishops to their primitive jurisdiction and dignity; inhibites all
Presbyteries and their Synods, together with the popular parity of Ministers,
and among other Acts pas^eth this in the eight Parliament ^olden at Edinburgh
May 22. 1584. The Kings supr^macy established by Act of Parliament.
which alone cuts off all their vain ^retences to this day.

For as much as some persons being ^ately called before the Kings Maje^ty, and
his secret Council, to answer upon certain points to have been enqui^ed of
t^em, concerning some treaso^able, seditious, and contumelious ^^eeches,
uttered by them in Pulpits, ^chools, and otherways to the disdain and reproach
of his Highness, his Pro^enitors, and present Council, con^^mptuously declined
the judgment of ^is Highness and his said Council in that behalf, to the evil
example of others to d^ the like, if timely remedy be not provided: Therefore
our S^veraigne Lord, and his thre^ Estates assembled in this present
Parliament, ratifieth and approves, and perpetually confirms the Royal power
and authority over all Estates, as well spiritual as temporal within this
Realm, in the person of the Kings Majesty, our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and
Successors: And also statuteth, and ordains, that his Hign^ss, his Heirs and
Successors by themselves, and their Councils, are, and in time to com^ shall be
judges competent to all person His Highnesses subjects, of what estate degree,
function, or condition so (...) they be, spiritual or temporal, in (...)
matters wherein they or any of the^ shall be apprehended, summoned, (...)
charged to answer to such things (...) shall be enquired of them by our (...)
Sovereign Lord and his Council And that none of them which shall happen to be
apprehended, called, (...) summoned to the effect aforesaid, pr^sume to take in
hand to d^cline (...) judgment of his Highness, his Heirs and S^ccessors, or
their Council in the Premises, under the pain of Treason.

This Act puts many of the Assembly birds upon the wing, who, Hereupon ^ivers
Mi^isters take their flight.
i^n^cent D^^es, take none but a Virgin breast for their refuge. Queen
Elizabeth, Q Eliz: restrains their violence* but counten^nceth them too much.
whose too industri^us infirmi^y it was to keep up her popular interest with
all, as well as to enjoy the honor and more clear content of an impartial
conscience within her self, although she gave no ear to their querulous
Remonstrances in private, nor permitted their public libelling in her
Churches, yet cherished their persons, and very unproperly employed their
endeavors to preserve Religion from innovations, which made no such real
impressions in Scotland, as some untrue aggravating relations had in the
time^ous minds of her Reformed English Subjects and her self. This practice of
Her Majesty being observed by those who looked ou^ of the Scotch Kings Court,
put the Earl of Arran upon a forward tender of his Service to meet Her
Majesty's desires, and Her Agent the Lord Hunsdon upon the borders: Earl of
Arran offers a meeting with L: Hunsdon upon the borders

The fugitives proscribed Patrike Gray sent Ambassador for England.


but before the time the Sterlin fugitives, whom she had protected, were
prescribed, and at it charged by the Earl with their treason against the King.
The complement he left of his real intentions at parting, took place until
Patrike Gray came with another Embassy and particular Articles from King
James. But the ill offices, it was suspected, he did at the same time, to the
captive Queen, Qu: of Scots practices too much for her self.
gained him no reputation with her party; and put her upon some such
extraordinary courses, as betrayed her into a new prison under more restraint,
and L^icester, And Leicester against her and her party.
it is said, upon murderous designs, who would not hear of her liberty, less
of her succession to the English Crown. To cover whose private spleen and
malicious attempts, new fears are fetched from the Roman Catholics, and their
designs magnified in a mist unto the people, whereby a sharper edge is set
upon the severity of the Laws. This alteration encouraged some of the precise
Scottish Religion to pursue the Queens commands for pressing in Parliament to
have the Bishops reformed, and to others, Queen Eliz: requires a reformation of
Scots Bishops.
as may be not improbably conjectured to murder the Earl of Northumberland in
the Tower, Earl of Northumberland, ^urdered in the Tower.
because a known Friend to the Queen of Scots, though they left the pistol
wherewith they acted it in his Chamber, and the opinion of self-assasinate at
his door. Not long after was Sir Edward Wotton sent Ambassador into Scotland,
to renew a league, and present the King with his English retinue, which the
Regents in his Minority had neglected or pawned for auxiliary support of their
power. Sir Edward Wotton sent Ambassador into Scotland.
While conditions about this and a marriage with the King of Denmarks daughter
were making at Court, some others were broken at a meeting upon the borders,
where, though the usual Oath for mutual security was taken, the Earl of Bedford
was slain, and though by whom not known, yet the Lord Fernihurst Governor of
the middle Borders was accused and imprisoned, E: of Bedford slain at a meeti^g
upon the borders.

L: Fernihurst imprisoned.

E: of Arran confined.

Qu: Eliz demands their persons, is denied.

She sends home the Scottish Fugitives.


because a firm adherent to the Queen of Scots, and the Earl of Arran c^nfined,
because a favorite of the Kings. The charge was fiercely prosecuted by the
English, who in the name of the Queen demanded to have their persons delivered,
which not obtained, the E^rl of Angus, Mar Glames, and other presc^ibed
Fugitive^, are sent home, who have no sooner set foot in Scotland, but by the
advice and assistance of the Assembly brethren, they summon all ^n the Kings
name to them for defense of the Evangel, removing ill Counselors from the
King, and conserving the old amity with the English. Being got into a body of
8000 at Fankirk, Arran transgresses the rules of his confinement to expres^e a
more considerable duty to the King, A rebellious army raised by them.
unto whom he accuses Patrike Gray of this Treason (which he cunningly
declines, E: of Arran accuses P: Gray of Treason.
) and fortifies Sterlin in d^fense of the King; but the work was not done when
the Rebels drew near, and began to set their scaling Ladders to the walls. Is
besieged, and narrowly escapes.
The Earl of Arran knowing his person was principally aimed at, (for Lord
Fernihurst was lately dead in prison) conveighs himself and one Servant away
privately by a bridge, and then the Town-garrison retreat unto the King in the
Castle. The Rebels display their banners in his sight; Lord Gray is sent out
to demand the reason of their coming; The Rebels answer to L: Gray.
receives a meek answer, To kiss the Kings hands. The King expresses no liking
of their armed love, offers restitution of all their goods if they will depart.
They capitulate and h^ve what they ask of the King.
They will have the interest of admission to his presence, and when they have
it, capitulate for his Castles and chief holds, which, there being no remedy,
are granted, with the delivery up of diverse noblemen, Earls Montross,
Crawford, Rothsay, etc. their pardon signed, and the Treaty for a league with
the Queen of England renewed. A league renewed with England.
One Article whereof, had it be^n sooner agreed on, had preserved both Kingdoms
in better security, and fettered the unruly Di^cipline to its duty, A
considerable Article had it been agreed and kept heretofore.
viz That neither Prince should for time to come afford assistance or favor to
any Traitor or Rebel, or any that had made a public defection; nor suffer
them to be relieved by others; nor harbor them publicly or privately in their
Dominions, etc. And had another been omitted, which, Another about Religion,
the ambiguity whereof does more hurt than good.
when before care had been taken for defense of the Christian and Catholic
Religion, draws in the rea^m of The pure Reformation, which the Catholic
Romans interpreted by the Scotch negative confession: and the Catholic
Protestants by the many. Assembly Acts condemning and branding the sacred
Episcopal order and jurisdiction, as Antichristian, happily the persons of both
Princes had not been engaged in such after-hazard, nor had such designs been
prosecuted for the invasion of their Kingdoms. For this Treaty was no sooner
concluded, but a most desperate conspiracy in England broak out, supposed to be
long since laid by the too zealous consistory at Rome, A Conspiracy in England
discovered.
but took life now, being hastily hatched by some preternatural Scotch Assembly
^ hear in this agreement. The chief actors in it were Father Ballard a Priest
of the Seminary at Rhemes, Babington a a young ingenious, and learned
Gentleman, of a good extraction and Family in Darby-Shire; Many executed for it.
Sarisbury of Derbigh-shire; Tichbourne of Hampshire, with ten other Gentlemen
of good quality, all which were afterward hanged, and some dismembered alive in
St: Giles's fields, the common place of their meeting. Their design was to
have killed Queen Elizabeth; set at liberty the Queen of Scots, and by the help
of For^eign strength to have altered the face of Religion in both kingdoms. The
Q. of Scots though suspected to be private unto all three, The Queen of Scots
how far concerned in it.
in the general, yet p^ofess'd to her death that she encouraged none but that,
which nature suggesting and justifying, conduced to the liberty of her injured
person, and half restitu^ion to ^er Crown. Her two Secretaries Nave and Curle
were brought in by Walsinghams cunning, if not corrupted rather by his cost
very unnaturally to accuse her; Walsingham and her own Secretaries charge more
upon her then she owns.
who, as from the beginning, he daily instructed a false Brother with as much
hypocrisy and perjury as could be, to carry on this fatal contrivance: so it is
not certain whether by him, and other polit^ck instruments he had, he
discovered or made more of what was desperate in the plot.

Before the Queen of Scots came to her trial, She is prejudged too soon by
persons uncommission'd.
several judgments passed upon her in private, anticipating the enquiry after
better evidence, and the^r Sovereigns prerogative in granting pardon at her
pleasu^e. They whom neither the fury of Disciplinarian zeal, nor any private
malignant spirit had possessed, The more prudent, yet as loyal grue milder
censures.
deliliberately sounding the shallowness of her guilt, and computing the
shortness of her life by her sickness, adjudged her only to a stricter
confinement, and adventu^'d to have the possibilities of ^ischie^ prevented by
the p^udence of the State. Others who had been lighted to a Religion that made
murder and innocence consistent, did not care if some wickedness were invented
to d^spach her quickly any way, so by the Law Leicester as otherwise, Leicester
wo^l^ have her poi^on'd.
so desirous to become voluptuous in revenge, ^n^used his sentence in a cup of
ling^ing poison, that he might take at leisure his delight in the preassurance
of her death; And wanting an help to discourse at his Feast, invited Walsingham
to accompany him in judgment, and sent a Presbiterian Divine to prepare his
Conscience by a Classica^l indulgence, Walsingham not prevailed with to consent.
but he pretends he had refused a less courtesy to Morton, who it may be to
balance the guilt of both Kingdoms, had advised to have her sent into
Scotland, Yet d^rects the contrivers to a methodical proceeding.
and executed on the Borde^s, yet having compromised his Vote as the major part
should determine it, begins to rectify their method, and puts them upon debate
by what Law they should proceed. There were but two cited for their purpose,
one of 25 Edward 3. the other 27 Eliz. The latter was concluded the more
proper, because in effect confessed to be made upon design, and so more
naturally operative for the end it was intended to. Those of the Iuncto knew
what arguments were most prevalent with the Queen to sign a Writ of Delegacy
for enquiry, Queen Elizabeth yields to their persuasions for signing a Writ o^
Delegacy.
wherein a multitude were nominated, who must not deny to serve up their
honors, and sacrifice their conscience in appearance unto their Queens name,
but indeed to some more passionate impotency in her Council. Most of these were
sent unto Fotheringham Castle, where the Queen of Scots was prisoner to Sir Dru
Drurie and Sir Amias Pawlet, She looking upon her Judges, and their Commission
in their papers, The Queen of Scots prudent d^meanour reward the Delegates at
Fotheringham Castle.
thought the sight of their names did antidate her doom; yet made no except^on
against their persons, only stood upon her Majesty as a Queen, and chose a
thousand deaths rather than descend to the capacity of a Subject. The late
association, and Act of Parliament ensuing upon it, with the neglect had of her
in the league, she put out of her way in discourse, with as much scorn as she
left charity in the room to forgive the injury she thought done he^ by them.
She thought her cause deserved the Theater of the world, and a Diet of Princes
fitter than the Subjects delegated by any one to decide it: yet a free
Parliament her Majesty accounted no contemptible arbitrament, and hoped there
her innocence should not be pinioned by a party, but left to the liberty of
defense. At length the Lord Treasurer telling her somewhat harshly, Lord
Treasur^r rigid wit^ her.
That if she would not ye^ld her presence before the Delegates, her absence and
contum^cy should be no bar to them in executing their Commission, she charged
him and the rest home enough with this poinant answer: Her Majesty answ^rs him
accordingly.
Then sift your Consciences, have a care of your Honors, and God reward you and
your Heirs according to the Justice you administer to me. The next day she
sends for some of the Delegates, Submits to a Trial, but on condition.
and putting in caution that her submission might not derogate from the honor
of her predecessors, nor prejudice any way her successors in their right, Her
Majesty professed that by Sir Christopher Hattons persuasions she was resolved
to condescend to Queen Elizabeth's desires in a public justification of her
self. In the time of her trial Justice Gawdies narration was more particular
than the rest, Justice Gawdies too particular n^rration.
out of which he concluded, That she had conspired with Ballard and the rest of
his Accomplices, approved assented, promised aid, and pointed out the way to
effect their design Ballard and Babington she protested she knew not; The
Queen protests against it.
acknowledged that many indeed unknown to her had offered such service as to
which she gave no encou^agement; and how far they proceeded she neither knew,
nor being in prison could hinder. What confessions were made by those who had
suffered, she did impute to the sense or fear of their tortures; And what her
own Secretaries produced, she i^terpreted rather their cunning than malice, to
shift off from themselves what they thought would never be questioned in her.
Yet their hopes failed, or else her charity mistook, for their evidence cast
her, though but made out of their papers, and such as Nave in an Apology
disclaimed. Nave disclaims his p^pers.
Such as it was they transmitted from Fo^heringham Castle to Westminster, where
a full Parliament voted up to the sense of the principal Delegates, some out of
zeal, others for fear, The English Parlia^ent passes sent^nce according to
the sense of the Delegates.
a third sort in rev^rence of, and implicit credulity in their state policy,
and skill of the Laws; All out of hopes to please Queen Elizabeth, by removing
the object of her jealousy and emulation Yet the sentence passed, the Queens
signing keeps at a distance, But Q: Eliz: makes no have to sign the Bill.
having a long p^ocession of demurrs and apologies between, and when her hand
came to take hold of the Justice, security, necessity, which in this case was
tendered to her in the name of her Subjects, it seemed not to have confidence
enough to own any Commission from her heart. The King of Scots did the part of
a Son, to preserve his Mother, King James endeavors to pre^erve his Mother,
but ^ann^t.
and measured not his affection and duty by the length of the league, nor
confined his endeavors to the circle of the English Crown he must look for. It
is certain there was an unhappy conjuncture of his Mothers fate with his late
surprisal at Sterlin, which made him as unfit to expostulate, as the Assembly
Ministers were backward to pray, who disobeyed His Majesty's commands to
recommend the safety of their Queen his Mother in their public devotions to
God. Commands the Ministers to pr^y in p^blick for her, who deny him and her
that respect.
The Scotch Nobility, that were of the Eldership did as their black Brethren
inspired them, and made Patrike Gray forget his Message which he had from the
King, Pa^rike Greys proverb to Qu, E^iz.
to deliver in place a proverb made by the Synod, and often inculcate in Queen
Elizabeth's ears, That a dead Woman could not bite This made her thoughts become
somewhat sententious, Who is troubled in mind about her execution.
being often heard to whisper to her self, with a sigh, Endure or strike, and
then after some respite, Strike, lest thou be struck. The last it should
seem left the imp^essi^n, and signed the Bill for execution, which committed to
Secretary Davison with a mixture of com and re mands, V^certain instructions
given to Davison with the feigned Bill.
was posted away by one Beale a zealous professor, and effected with more have
then pretended good liking- Davison being called into the Starr* Chamber for
acting according to a right or w^o^g understanding of Her Maj^sties meaning,
and fined ten thousand pounds with imprisonment during the pleasure of the
Queen* He is fined and imprisoned for g^ing be^ond the meaning of them.


With wh^t courage and true Christian resolution that Royal and magnanimous
Princess entertained her Death; may be read at large in the Histories of those
Times, which I will not go about to contract, lest I commit Sacrilege on a
Saint. The Queen very reso^ute and ^eligious at her death.
I shall only among other circumstances intimate how the Disciplinarian malice
pursued her Soul with a sharper edge than the Ax had, that but at two strokes
divide^ her Head from her body, denying her last Conscientious request, A
Priest denied her.
to have a Priest of her own Religion to converse with, and her Execution being
out of the Assembly jurisdiction, an impertinent Deane was procured to spin out
a long Prayer as near the prescript of the Discipline as he durst. Fletcher
Dean of Peterburgh.
In the midst of this Tyranny upon her Soul, she performed the office of a
Royal Priest unto her self, and having blessed her Friends, and forgiven her
enemies, she assumed Majestic confidence enough to demand Justice in the
distribution of her Legacies. All being done Her Majesty intended,
Virgin-Iustice (if not deflowred by the violence of this act) with a faint
boldness employing the Ax which she scarcely had in her power, Justice blushed
when she suffered.
her scales dropped down, and with shame enough she held her trembling hand
before her Eyes.

FINIS.
Books printed and sold by John Garfield at the Rolling-Presse for Pictures,
near the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill, Viz.
RHanodaeus Medicinal Dispensatory* containing the whole body of Physic,
discovering the Natures, Properties, and Virtues of the Plants, Minerals, and
Animals, the manner of Compounding Medicines, with the way how to administer
them: Methodically digested into Five Books of Philosophical and Pharmaceutical
Institutes; Three Books of Physical Materials, both Galenical and Chemical,
with a perfect Apothecaries shop: And a Physical Dictionary adjoined with the
said Dispensatory, explaining all the hard Words and Terms of Art in the said
Dispensatory.

Ochinus his Dialogue of Poligamy and Divorce: Wherein all the Texts of holy
Scripture and Arguments from Reason and the Laws and Customs of Nations that
have been, or can be brought for, or against Poligamy, are urged and answered
interchangably, by two persons.

Daphnis and Chloe, a most sweet, amarous and pleasant Pastoral Romance for
young Ladies: Translated out of Greek by George Thornly, Gentleman.

A Physical Dictionary, or an interpretation of such crabbed Words and Terms of
Art, as are derived from the Greek or Latin, and used in Physic, Anatomy,
Surgery, and Chemistry: With a definition of most Diseases incident to the
Body of Man* and a description of the Marks and Characters used by Doctors in
their Receipts.

The Wise man's Crown* and the Way to Bliss two Books of Chemical and
Rosie-Cra^ian Physic, will be Published for the benefit of Posterity, by John
Heydon a servant of God, and Secretary of Nature.


