April. 23. 1653.

Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.

AYTAPKEIA, OR THE ART OF DIVINE CONTENTMENT BY THOMAS WATSON, M. of A. of
Emmanuel College in Cambridg, and now Pastor of Stephens Walbrook, LAND.

The Second Edition, corrected.

Godliness with Contentment is great gain. 1 TIMOTHY 6. 6. (...). Eurip. Beatus
est qui suis contentus est. Seneca. LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Ralph Smith,
at the sign of the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1654.

The Epistle to the Reader:
Christian Reader,
HAving seriously considered the great dishonours done to Almighty God (as well
as the prejudice which does accrue to our selves) by the sin of Discontent, (a
Catholic and Epidemical sin In statu maxim^ querulo and moroso fiui sumus. Sen.
;) It did at first put me upon the study of this subject. Nor is it incongruous
to handle this next in order to the Christian Charter. I showed you there the
great things which a Believer has in reversion, Things to come are his; and
here, behold a Christians holy and gracious deportment in this life, which
discovers it self in nothing more eminently, then in Contentation. Discontent
is to the soul, as a disease to the body Est animi ag^i^udo. Cic. Tusc. 4.
; it puts it out of temper, and does much hinder its regular and sublime
motions heavenward. Discontent is hereditary, and no doubt but it is much
augmented by the many sad eclipses and changes that have fallen out of late in
the body politic; yet the disease is not to be pleaded for, because natural;
but to be resisted, because sinful. That which should make us out of love with
this sullen distemper, is the contemplating the beautiful Queen of
Contentation Contraria juxta se po^ita, etc.
. For my part, I know not any ornament in Religion that does more bespangle a
Christian, or glitter in the eye of God and man, then this of Contentment. Nor
certainly is there any thing wherein all the Christian virtues do work more
harmoniously, or shine more transparently then in this Orb. Every grace does
act its part here, and help to keep the soul in its (...); this is the true
Philosophers stone, which turns all into Gold; this is the curious enamel and
embroidery of the heart, which makes Christ's spouse all glorious within. How
should every Christian be ambitious to wear such a sparkling Diamond! If there
be a blessed life before we come at Heaven, it is the contented life; and why
not contented? Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen Genesis 4. 6.
? Man of all creatures has the least cause to be discontented. Can thou
deserve any thing from God? does he ow thee any thing? What if the scene turn,
and God puts thee under the black rod? Whereas he uses a rod, he might use a
Scorpion; he might as well damn thee, as whip thee; Why then art thou so
querulous? why do thou give way to this irrational and unthankful sin of
discontent? The good Lord humble his own people for nourishing such a viper in
their breast, as does not only eat out the bowels of their comfort, but spits
venom in the face of God himself. O Christian, who art over spread with this
fretting leprosy, thou carriest the man of sin about thee; for thou set
thy felf above God, as if thou were wiser then he, would saucily prescribe
hun what condition is best for thee. O this Devil of discontent, (...), exinde
(...).
which whomsoever it possesses, it makes his heart a little hell. I know there
will not be perfect contentment here in this life Amplissie ma quaque laetitia
subsit quaepiam vel parva quarimonia. Lucius Apul. Florid. l. 2
, (...). Perfect pleasure is only at Gods right hand Ps. 16. 11
; yet we may begin here to tune our instrument before we play the sweet lesson
of Contentment exactly in heaven. I should be glad if this little piece might
be like Moses his casting the tree into the waters Ex. 15. 25
, to make the uncouth, bitter condition of life, more sweet and pleasant to
drink of. I have once more adventured into the public; this I acknowledge to be
rudi Minerva, homespun; some better hand might have made a more curious
draught: but having preached upon the subject, I was earnestly solicited by
some of my Hearers to publish it; and although it is not dressed in that rich
attire of eloquence, as it might; yet I am not about Poetry, or Oratory, but
Divinity; nor is this intended for fancy, but practice. If I may herein do any
service, or cast but a mite into the treasury of the Churches grace, I have my
desire. The end of our living is to live to God, and to lift up his Name in the
world Nihil turpius est quam grandis natu senex, qui nullum aliud habet
argumentum quo probet se diu vixisse prater atatem. Seneca. de Tranquil.
. The Lord add an effectual blessing to this work, and fasten it as a nail in
a sure place; He of his mercy make it as spiritual physic to purge the ill
humor of Discontent out of our hearts, that so a crown of honor may be set
upon the head of Religion, and the crystal streams of joy and peace may ever
run in our souls: which is the prayer of him who is desirous to be a faithful
Orator for thee at the throne of grace,

THOMAS WATSON.
From my study at Stephens Walbrook, May 5. 1653
TO THE Christian Reader.
A Word spoken in due season, how good is it? Prove. 15. 23.
As God gives to his creatures their meat in season Ps. 104. 27.
; so his faithful stewards provide for his household their portion of meat in
due season Luke 12. 42.
. And as it is with corporal food, the season adds much both to the value
and usefulness thereof; in like manner it is with food spiritual. In this
regard, the brokenness of these times (wherein the bosoms of most people are
filled with disquiets, and their mouths with murmurings) may well render this
Treatise the more acceptable. The seas are not so stormy (though never more
troublesome then at this day) as men's spirits are tempestuous, tossed to and
fro with discontents. And now the Lord (who makes every thing beautiful in
his time Eccl. 3. 11.
) has most opportunely put into thy hand a profitable discourse to calm
unquiet hearts. Adam in Paradise dashed upon the rock of discontent (which some
Divines conceive was his first sin.) This with many instances more in
Scripture, together with our own sad experience, does both speak our danger and
call for caution. Now godliness is the only sovereign Antidote against this
spreading disease; and Gods grace alone (being settled and exercised in the
heart) can cause steadiness in stormy times Heb. 13. 9.
. Whereas, Contentation arises either from the fruition of all comforts, or
from a not desiring of some which we have not Dr. Hall.
. True piety does put a Christian into such a condition: Hereby we both possess
God, and are taught how to improve him who is the only satisfying, everlasting
portion of his people Psalm. 73. 25, 26.
. Herein Christ (though poor in this world Mat. 8. 10.
) greatly rejoiced. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, the lines are
fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage Psalm. 16. 5, 6.
: upon this account also Iacoh said, Vbi been esse poterit sine te? ubi male
esse poterit cum te? Bern.
I have enough Genesis 33. 11.
; or, (as it is in the Original) I have all. God the Father, and Christ his
Son had sweet satisfaction in each other when there was no other being Prove.
8, 30, 31.
; therefore such who possess and improve God through Christ, cannot possibly be
dissatisfied. The Almighty is the God of all grace 1. Pet. 5. 20.
, of all comfort 2 Cor. 1. 4.
, and of salvations Psalm. 68. 20.
; in which respects, neither deficiencies or disappointments, lossess or
crosses can cause disquieting discontents in that bosom where faith is
commander in chief. The Prophet Habakkuk rejoiced in the God of his salvation,
when the pestilence went before him Hab. 3. 5
, and burning coals came forth of his feet; and when he supposed all
creature-succors both for delight and necessity to be quite removed. verse. 17,
18.
This, this is the life which Christians should endevor, and may attain by the
vigorous regular actings of precious faith. This is the gain of Contentment,
which comes in by godliness, when providence are black and likely to be
bloody; now, The just shall live by his faith Hab. 2. 4.
. That speech of learned Mr. Gataker is weighty, Heb. 10. 28.
and well worth the marking, A contented mind argues a religious heart, and a
discontented mind argues an irreligious heart. And that worthy Divine Mr.
Greenham was bold to say, They never felt Gods love, or tasted forgivenes of
sins, who are discontented. This likewise was an holy breathing of reverend Dr.
Hall in his Meditations, I have somewhat of the best things, I will wit
thankfulness enjoy them, and will want the rest with contentment. By attaining
and maintaining this frame of heart, we might have much of heaven on this side
heaven. Holy contentment makes them truly rich, whom the oppressing world
makes very poor Dives est qui sua forte gaudet, animus est potissimum qui
divites facit. Sen.
. Hereby our sweetest morsels shall be well seasoned, and our bitterest potions
well sweetened Prove. 17. 1.
. Had we learned to enjoy contentment in Jehovah, who is immutable and
all-sufficient, this heavenly frame of spirit should never perish or change in
the midst of the most amazing alterations in Church and State, Nihil tam
acerbum est, in quo non aequus animus solatium inveniat. Id.
with which his Majesty is pleased to exercise us; whereas because we live
alone upon sublunaries, therefore we are apt with Nabal to die upon the nest 1.
Sam. 25. 37.
* through dejectedness, upon the approach of imagined dangers. When God sees
cause to cut us short of many creature-accommodations, faith will moderate our
desires after them, assuring the soul that nothing is withdrawn, or withheld,
which might be really advantageous; and doubtless it is a great piece of
happiness upon earth, not to long after that which the Lord is pleased to deny
Beatus est qui quae non habet, non cupit. Aug, Omnia habet qui nihil
concupiscit. Sen.
. Indeed men act rather like Heathens then Christians, when they fret upon some
particular inferior disappointments, notwithstanding Gods liberality laid
forth upon them in many other respects. As Alexander the Monarch of the world
was discontented because Ivy would not grow in his gardens at Babylon.
Diogenes the Cynick was herein more wise, who finding a Mouse in his sachel,
said, he saw that himself was not so poor, but some were glad of his leavings.
Oh how might we (if we had hearts to improve higher providence) rock our
peevish spirits quiet by much stronger arguments! let us men lay before our
eyes the practices of pious men recorded in Scripture for our imitation, as
Jacob, Agur, Paul, etc. Genesis 28. 20.
and let us charge home upon our consciences, Pro. 30. ^.
divine exhortations backed with strong reasons, 1 Timothy 6. 7
and encouraged with sweet promises. It was the grave counsel of holy Greenham;
Having food and raimont, take the rest as an overplus. Are we not less then
the least of Gods mercies? Ge^. 32. 10
Is not God our bountiful benefactor? why then do we not rest contented with
his liberal allowance? Oh let us chide our wrangling spirits, and encourage
confidence with contentment in God, Psalm. 43. 5.
as blessed David did. My pen has outrun my purpose when I undertook this
preface; but I will no longer (good Reader) detain thee in the porch, wherein
I have designed to quicken and to prepare thee to the more fruitful improvement
of this seasonable, useful Treatise; wherein the Author has exercised to good
purpose, both the Christian graces, and ministerial gifts with which God has
enriched him. Herein the Doctrine of Christian contentment is clearly
illustrated, and profitably applied; the special cases (wherein through change
of providence discontents are most commonly occasioned,) are particularized,
and preservatives applied to secure the soul. Although some other worthy
Divines have been helpful by their discourses upon this subject; yet there is
much of peculiar use in this Treatise. The Apostle tells us that some
manifestation of the Spirit is given unto every man to profit withal 1 Cor. 12.
7.
. Thy soul-profit is propounded as the Author^ end in publishing this piece,
and that this end may be accomplished, is the unfeigned desire, and hearty
prayer of him who is,

Thy servant in, and for Christ, SIMEON AS^^
May 3. 1653.
THE ART OF DIVINE CONTENTMENT.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction to the Text.
PHIL. 4. 11. I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.
THese words are brought in by way of Prolepsis, to anticipate and prevent an
Objection. The Apostle had in the former Verses (...)
, laid down many grave and heavenly exhortations; among the rest, to be
careful for nothing, Verse. 6. Not to exclude, 1. A prudential care Neque enim
prohibetur quod hom^ de rebus in posterum necessariis non solicitetur, Aquin.
in Heb. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 8
. For He that provideth not for his own house, has denied the Faith, and is
worse then an Infidel. Nor, 2. A Religious care. For, we must give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure 2 Pet. 1. 10
. But 3. To exclude all Iubet Apostolus, ut deponatur anxia cura, quod ista non
nisi ex infidelitate proficiscatur. Zanchy.
anxious care about the issues and events of things; Take no thought for your
life, what you shall eat Mat. 6 25
: and in this sense it should be a Christians care not to be careful. The word
in the Greek [Carefull] comes from a Primitive Dicitur (...).
, that signifies, To cut the heart in pieces, a soule-dividing Care: take heed
of this. We are bid to commit Ps. 35 7.(...)
our way unto the Lord: the Hebrew word is, Roll (...)
thy way upon the Lord. It is our work to cast care 1 Pet. 5. 7.
, and it is Gods work to take care. By our immoderacy we take his work out of
his hand.

Care, when it is excentrick, either distrustful, or distracting, is very
dishonorable to God; it takes away his providence, as if he sat in heaven, and
minded not what became of things here below; like a man that makes a clock, and
then leaves it to go of it self. Immoderate care takes the heart off from
better things; and usually while we are thinking how we shall do to live, we
forget how to die. Curis tabescimus omnes. -- Care is a spiritual canker, that
does waste and dispirit; and cui bono? We may sooner by our care add a furlong
to our grief, then a cubit to our comfort. God does threaten it as a curse;
They shall eat their bread with carefulness Ezekiel. 12 19
: better fast, then eat of that bread. Be careful for nothing.

Now lest any one should say, I, Paul, thou preachest that to us, which thou
have scarce learned thy self; Have thou learned not to be careful? The Apostle
seems tacitly to answer that in the words of the Text; I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

Egregia Sententia! A speech worthy to be engraven upon our hearts, and to be
written in letters of Gold upon the Crowns and Diadems of Princes. The Text
does branch it self into these two general parts.

I. The Scholar, Paul: I have learned.

II. The Lesson: In every state to be content.

CHAP. II.
The first branch of the Text, The Scholar, with the first Proposition.
I Begin with the first. I have learned. 1. Observe. (...), it is a practique
word.
Out of which I shall in transitu observe two things by way of paraphrase. 1.
It is not (...), but (...). The Apostle does not say, I have heard, that in
every state I should be content; but, I have learned. Whence, 1. Doctr. 1. Doct.
It is not enough for Christians to hear their duty, but they must learn their
duty. It is one thing to hear, and another thing to learn; as it is one thing
to eat, and another thing to concoct. Saint Paul was a Practitioner, Christians
hear much, but it is to be feared, learn little. There were four sorts of
ground in the Parable Luk 8. 5.
, and but one good ground. An emblem of this truth, many Hearers, but few
Learners. There are two things which keep us from learning.

Slighting what we hear. Christ is the Pearl of Price; when we disesteeme this
Pearl, we shall never learn, either its value, or its virtue. The Gospel is a
rare Mystery; in one place it is called the (...). Act. 20. 24.
Gospel of Grace, in another, (...). 1 Corin. 4. 4.
the Gospel of Glory; because in it, as in a transparant Glass the glory of
God is resplendent; But, he that has learned to contemn this Mystery, will
hardly ever learn to obey it. He that looks upon the things of Heaven as
things by the by, and perhaps the driving of a trade, or carrying on some
politic design to be of greater importance; this man is in the high road to
damnation, and will hardly ever learn the things of his peace. Who will learn
that which he thinks is scarce worth learning?

2. Forgetting what we hear Tantum scimus quantum in memoria tenemu^. Plato in
Timaeo.
. If James 1. 25.
. Aristotle calls the Memory, the Scribe of the Soul; and Bernard calls it the
Stomach of the Soul, because it has a retentive faculty, and turns heavenly
food into blood and spirits. We have great memories in other things; we
remember that which is vain. Cyrus could remember the name of every Soldier in
his huge Army; we remember injuries Scribit in marmore lasu^. Clcero l. ^. de
orat.
. This is to fill a precious Cabinet with dung; but, quam facilis oblivio boni?
as Hierom says, how soon do we forget the sacred truths of God? We are apt to
forget three things, our faults, our friends, our instructions. Many Christians
are like Sieves, put a Sive into the water, and it is full; but take it forth
of the water, and all runs out: So, while they are hearing of a Sermon, they
remember something; but take the Sieve out of the water, as soon as they are
gone out of the Church, all is forgotten. Let these sayings (says Christ)
sink down into your ears Luke 9. 44.
; in the Original it is, put these sayings into your cares (...).
; As a man that would hide a jewel from being stolen, locks it up safe in his
chest, Let them sink; The word must not only fall as dew that wets the leaf,
but as rain which soakes to the root of the tree, and makes it fructify. Oh
how often does Satan, that foul of the Air, pick up the good seed that is
sown!

Use. Let me put you upon a serious trial; Use. Trial.
Some of you have heard much; you have lived forty, fifty, sixty years under
the blessed Trumpet of the Gospel; What have you learned? You may have heard a
thousand Sermons, and yet not learned one. Search your consciences.

1 You have heard much against Hearers, or are you Scholars?

How many Sermons have you heard against Covetousness; That it is the root, on
which Pride, Idolatry, Treason do grow 2 Timothy 3 2, and 4.
? One calls it a (...);
Metropolitan sin: It is malum complexum, it does twist a great many sins in
with it. There is hardly any sin, but Covetousness is a maine ingredient
into it; and yet are you like the two daughters of the Horse-leach, that cry,
Give, give. How much have you heard against rash Anger; that it is a short
frenzy, a Ira est brevis insania. Sen.
dry drunkenness; That it rests in the bosom of fools Quid prodest vinum non
bibere, and ira inebriari? Hieron. Eccles. 7. 9.
; and upon the least occasion do your spirits Magnoque irarum fluctuat astu.
Virg.
begin to take fire? How much have you heard against Swearing? It is Christ's
express mandate, Swear not at all Mat. 5. 34.
; this sin of all other may be termed the unfruitful work of darkness Ephesians.
5. 11.
. It is neither sweetened with pleasure, nor enriched with profit, (the usual
vermilion wherewith Satan does paint sin.) Swearing is forbidden with a sub
poena. While the swearer shoots his oaths, like flying arrows at God, to
pierce his glory; God shoots a flying roll of curses Zach. 5. v. 2, and 4.
against him; and do you make your tongue a racket, by which you toss oaths
as Tennis-balls? Do you sport your selves with oaths as the Philistines did
with Samson, which will at last pull the house about your ears? Alas! how have
they learned what sin is, that have not yet learned to leave sin? does he
know what a Viper is, that plays with it?

2. You have heard much of Christ, have you learned Christ? The Jews (as one
says) carried Christ in their Bibles, but not in their hearts Hieron.
; Their sound went into all the earth, Romans 10. 18.
Romans 10. 18. The Prophets and apostles were as trumpets, whose sound went
abroad into the world; yet many thousands who heard the noise of these
Trumpets, had not learned Christ; They have not all obeyed, verse. 16. (...).


1. A man may know much of Christ, and yet not learn Christ. The devils knew
Christ. Mark 1. 24.


2. A man may preach Christ, and yet not learn Christ; as Judas and the
pseudo-Apostles. Phil. 1. 15.


3. A man may profess Christ, and yet not learn Christ. There are many
professors in the world that Christ will profess against. Mat. 7. 22, 23.


Quest. What is it then to learn Christ? Quest.
Answ. 1. To learn Christ, is to be made like Christ. Answ. 1.
When the divine characters of his holiness are engraven upon our hearts. We
all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image 2 Cor. 3. 18. (...).
. There is a Metamorphosis made; a sinner viewing Christ's Image in the Glass
of the Gospel, is transformed into that Image. Never did any man look upon
Christ with a spiritual eye, but went away quite changed. A true Saint is a
divine Landscape or picture, where all the rare beauties of Christ are lively
pourtraied and drawn forth. He has the same Spirit, the same judgment, the
same will with Jesus Christ.

2. To learn Christ, is to believe in him; My Lord, my God John 20. 28.
. When we do not only credere Deum, but in Deum; which is the actual
application of Christ to our selves, and as it were the spreading the sacred
medicine of his blood upon our souls. You that have heard much of Christ, and
yet cannot with an humble adherence say, My Jesus, be not offended if I tell
you, the Devil can say his Creed as well as you.

3. To learn Christ, is to live Christ. When we have Bible-conversations, our
lives as rich Diamonds cast a sparkling luster in the Church of God Phil. 1. 27.
; and are (in some sense) parallel with the life of Christ, as the Transcript
with the Original. So much for the first notion of the word.

CHAP. III.
Containing the second Proposition.
have learned, 2. Observe. (...) is a word imports difficulty.
is a word imports difficulty, it shows how hardly the Apostle came by his
contentment of mind; it was not natura in genitum. St. Paul did not come
naturally by it, but he had learned it (...) significat hanc rem esse
disciplina, and exercitationis, and se divinitus edoctum, esse. Estius in loc.
Beza.
; It cost him many a prayer and tear, Non ex revelatione, aut ex libris (...),
sed ex longo rerum usu, and gratia Christi per Spiritum residen^e. Zanchy.
it was taught him by the Spirit.

Whence Doct. 2. Good things are hard to come by. Doctr. 2.
The business of Religion is not so facile as most do imagaine. I have
learned, says St. Paul (...). Chrysostom.
. Indeed you need not learn a man to sin, this is natural Psalm. 58. 3.
, and therefore facile, it comes as water out of a Spring. It Is an easy thing
to be wicked; Hell will be taken without storm Facili^ descensus Averni.
, but matters of Religion must be learned. To cut the flesh is easy, but to
prick a vein, and not cut an artery is hard. The trade of sin needs not to be
learned, but the Art of Contentment is not achieved without holy industry;
(...), I have learned.

There are two pregnant reasons, why there must be so much study and
exercitation.

1. Because spiritual things are against nature. 1. Contra naturam,
Every thing in Religion is antipodes to nature. There are in Religion two
things, Credenda and Facienda, and both are against nature. 1. Credenda.
1. Credenda, Matters of Faith. As, for a man to be justified by the
righteousness of another, to become a fool that he may be wise, to save all
by losing all; 2. Facienda.
this is against nature. 2. Facienda; Matters of practice. As, 1.
Selfe-denyall; for a man to deny his own wisdom, and see himself blind; his
own will, and have it melted into the will of God, plucking out the right eye,
beheading and crucifying that sin which is the favorite, and lies nearest to
the heart Peccatum in delitiis. Bern.
; For a man to be dead to the world, and in the midst of want to abound; for
him to take up the Cross, and follow Christ, not only in golden, but bloody
paths; to embrace Religion when it is dressed in its nightcloathes, all the
Jewels of honor and preferment being pulled off, this is against nature,
Malumus vitium excusare, quam excutere. Sen.
and therefore must be learned. 2. Selfe-examination. For a man to take his
heart (as a watch) all in pieces, to set up a spiritual inquisition, or Court
of conscience, and traverse things in his own soul; to take David's Candle and
Lanthorn Psalm. 119. verse. 105.
, and search for sin; nay, as Judge to pass the sentence upon himself, 2 Samuel
24. 17
this is against nature, and will not easily be attained to without Learning.
Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me converti^e ferrum.
3. Self-reformation. To see a man as Caleb, of another spirit, walking
antipodes to himself, his heart changed, the current of his life altered, and
running into the channel of Religion; this is wholly against nature, and is as
strange as to see the earth fly upward, or the bowl run contrary to its own
byasse. When a stone ascends, it is not a natural motion, but a violent; the
motion of the soul heavenward, is a violent motion, it must be learned: flesh
and blood is not skilled in these things: Nature can no more cast out Nature,
then Satan can cast out Satan.

2. Because spiritual things are above nature: 2: Supra naturam.
There are some things in nature that are hard to find out, as the causes of
things, which are not learned without study. Aristotle, a great Philosopher
(whom some have called an Eagle fallen from the clouds,) yet could not find
out the motion of the River Euripus, therefore threw himself into it; What
then are divine things, which are in a sphere above Nature, and beyond all
humane disquisition? as the Trinity, the hypostatical Union, the mystery of
Faith, to believe against hope; only Gods Spirit can light our candle here.
The Apostle calls these the deep things of God (...). 1 Cor. 2. 10
. The Gospel is full of Jewels, but they are locked up from sense and reason.
The Angels in heaven are searching into these sacred depths 1 Pet. 1. 12.
.

Use. Let us beg the Spirit of God to teach us; Use.
we must be divinitus edocti: The Eunuch could read, but he could not
understand, till Philip joined himself to his chariot Acts 8. 29
. Gods Spirit must join himself to our chariot; He must teach, or we cannot
learn; All thy children shall be taught of the Lord Isa. 54. 13
. A man may read the figure on the Dial, but he cannot tell how the day goes,
unless the Sun shine upon the Dial; we may read the Bible over, but we cannot
learn to purpose, till the Spirit of God shine into our hearts 2 Cor. 4. 6.
. Oh, implore this blessed Spirit, it is Gods Prerogative Royal to teach. I am
the Lord thy God, that teaches thee to profit Isa. 48. 17
. Ministers may tell us our lesson, God only can teach us; We have lost both
our hearing and eyesight, therefore are very unfit to learn. Ever since Eve
listened to the Serpent, we have been deaf; and since she looked on the tree
of Knowledge, we have been blind; but when God comes to teach, he removes
these impediments Isa. 35. 5.
. We are naturally dead Ephesians. ^. 1
; who will go about to teach a dead man? Yet behold, God undertakes to make
dead men to understand mysteries! God is the grand Teacher. This is the reason
the word preached works so differently upon men; two in a Pew, the one is
wrought upon effectually, the other lies at the Ordinances as a dead child at
the breast, and gets no nourishment. What is the reason? because the heavenly
gale of the Spirit blows upon one, and not upon the other; One has the
anointing of God, which teaches him all things 1 John 2 27.
, the other has it not. Gods Spirit speaks sweetly, but irresistibly. In that
heavenly doxology, none could sing the new song, but those who were sealed in
their foreheads Rev. 14 2
: reprobates could not sing it Novum Canticum reprobi discere non possunt.
Paraeus.
. Those that are skillful in the mysteries of salvation, must have the seal of
the Spirit upon them. Let us make this our prayer, Lord, breath thy Spirit into
thy Word: and we have a promise, which may add wings to prayer, If Luke 11 13
ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children: how much
more shall your heavenly Father give his Spirit to them that ask him?

And thus much of the first part of the Text, The Scholar, which I intended
only as a short gloss or paraphrase.

CHAP. IV.
The second branch of the Text, The Lesson it self, with the Proposition.
II. I Come now to the second, The Lesson it self; In whatever state I am,
therewith to be content.

Here was a rare piece of learning indeed, and certainly more to be wondered at
in Saint Paul, that he knew how to turn himself to every condition, then all
the learning in the word besides, which has been so applauded in former ages
by Julius Caesar, Ptolomy, Xenophon, the great admirers of Learning.

The Text has but few words in it, In every state content; but if that be true
which once Fulgentius said, that the most golden sentence is ever measured by
brevity and suavity, then this is a most accomplished speech; here is magnum in
parvo. The Text is like a precious Jewel, little in quantity, but great in
worth and value.

The maine Proposition I shall insist upon, Doct.
is this. Doctr. That a gracious spirit is a contented spirit. The Doctrine of
Contentment is very superlative; and till we have learned this, we have not
learned to be Christians.

1. It is an hard Lesson. The Angels in heaven had not learned it; they were
not contented. Though their estate was very glorious, yet they were still
soaring aloft, and aimed at something higher. Jude ver. 6. The Angels which
kept not their first estate. They kept not their estate, because they were not
contented with their estate. Our first Parents clothed with the white robe of
innocence in Paradise, had not learned to be content; they had aspiring hearts,
and thinking their humane nature too low and homespun, would be crowned with
the Deity, and be as gods Genesis 3. 5.
; Though they had the choice of all the trees in the Garden, yet none would
content them but the tree of Knowledge, which they supposed would have been as
eyesalve to have made them omniscient. Oh then, if this Lesson were so hard to
learn in innocence, how hard shall we find it Ars omnino mira and difficilis,
quae toto cordis adnisu discenda est. Greg. hom. 16. in Eze^h.
, who are clogged with corruption?

2. It is of Universal extent, it concerns all. 1. It concerns Rich men. One
would think it needless to press those to Contentment whom God has blessed
with great estates, but rather persuade them to be humble and thankful; nay,
but I say, Be content. Rich men have their discontents as well as others. As
appears, 1. When they have a great estate, yet they are discontented that they
have no more; they would make the hundred talents a thousand. A man in wine,
the more he drinks, the more he thirsts: Covetousness is a dry dropsy* Sicut
hydropicus. Quo plus sunt potae, eo plus sitiuntur aquae. H^perius.
; an earthly heart is like the grave, that is never satisfied Prove. 30. 16.
; therefore I say to you rich men, Be content.

2. Rich men, if we may suppose them to be content with their estate, (which is
very seldom;) yet, though they have estate enough, they have not honor enough
(...).
; if their barnes are full enough, yet their turrets are not high enough. They
would be some body in the world, as Theudas, who boasted himself to be some
body Act. 5. 36.
; they never go so cheerfully, as when the wind of honor and applause fills
their sails; if this wind be down, they are discontented. One would think
Haman had as much as his proud heart could desire; he was set above all the
Princes, advanced upon the pinnacle of honor to be the second man in the
Kingdom Esth. 3. 1.
; yet in the midst of all his pomp, because Mordecai would not uncover and
kneel, he is discontented, verse. 2. and full of wrath, verse. 5. and there is
no way to assuage this plurisie of revenge, but by letting all the Jews blood,
and offering them up in sacrifice. The itch of honor is seldom allayed without
blood; therefore I say to you rich men, Be content.

3. Rich men, if we may suppose them to be content with their honor, and
magnificent titles, yet they have not always Contentment in their relations.
She that lies in the bosom, may sometimes blow the coals; as Jobs wife, who
in a pet would have him fall out with God himself, Curse God and die. Sometimes
children cause discontent; how often is it seen that the mothers milk does
nourish a Viper? and he that once sucked her breast, goes about to suck her
blood? Parents do often of Grapes gather thorns, and of Figs thistles;
Children are Sweet-briar. Like the Rose, which is a fragrant flower; but, as
Basil says, it has its prickles. Our relative comforts are not all pure wine,
but mixed; they have in them more dregs then spirits, and are like that River
Plutarch speaks of (...).
, where the waters in the morning run sweet, but in the evening run bitter.
We have no charter of exemption granted us in this life; therefore rich men had
need be called upon to be contented.

2. The Doctrine of Contentment concerns poor men. You that do not suck so
liberally from the breasts of Providence, be content; it is an hard Lesson,
therefore it had need be set upon the sooner. How hard is it when the
livelihood is even gone, a great estate boiled away almost to nothing, then to
be content? The means of subsistence, is in Scripture called our life, because
it is the very sinews of life. The woman in the Gospel spent all her living
upon the Physicians Luk 8. 43.
, in the Greek it is, (...), She spent her whole life upon the Physicians,
because she spent her means by which she should live. It Is much when poverty
has clipped our wings, then to be content: but, difficilia pulchra; though
hard, it is excellent; and the Apostle here had learned in every state to be
content.

God had brought Saint Paul into as great a variety of condition, as ever we
read of any man, and yet he was content, else sure he could never have gone
through it with so much cheerfulness, See into what vicissitudes this blessed
Apostle was cast. We are troubled on every side 2 Cor. 4. 8.
, there was the sadness of his condition; but not distressed, there was his
content in that condition; We are perplexed, there is his affliction; but not
in despair, there is his contentation. And if we read a little further, In
afflictions 2 Cor. 6. 4^
, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, etc.
there is his trouble, and behold his content; verse. 10.
As having nothing, yet possessing all things. When the Apostle was driven out
of all, yet in regard of that sweet Contentment of mind (which was like music
in his soul,) he possessed all. We read a short Map or History of his
sufferings, In prisons more frequent 2 Cor. 11, 23, 24, 25.
, in deaths often, etc. Yet behold the blessed frame and temper of his spirit, I
have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

Which way soever Providence did blow, he had such heavenly skill and
dexterity, that he knew how to steer his course. For his outward estate, he was
indifferent; he could be either on the top of Jacobs ladder, or the bottom; he
could sing either placentia or lachrymae; the dirge or the antheme; he could be
any thing that God would have him: I know how to want, how to abound; here was
a rare pattern for us to imitate^ Paul in regard of his faith and (...), was
like a Cedar, he could not be stirred: but for his outward condition, he was
like a Reed, bending every way with the wind of Providence; when a prosperous
gale did blow upon him, he could bend with that, I know how to be full: and
when a boisterous gust of affliction did blow, he could bend in humility with
that; I know how to be hungry. Saint Paul was (...) (as Aristotle speaks) like
a Die, that has four squares; throw it which way you will, it falls upon a
bottom: Homo quadratus Erasm.
Let God throw the Apostle which way he would, he fell upon this bottom of
Contentment. A contented spirit is like a Watch; though you carry it up and
down with you, yet the spring of it is not shaken, nor the wheels out of
order, but the watch keeps its perfect motion: So it was with St. Paul; though
God had carried him into various conditions, yet he was (...) lift up with the
one, nor cast down with the other. The spring of his heart was not broken, the
wheels of his affections were not disordered, but kept their constant motion
toward heaven; still content. The Ship that lies at anchor may sometimes be a
little shaken, but never sinks: Flesh and blood may have its fears and
disquiets, but grace does check them: A Christian having cast anchor in heaven,
his heart never sinks; a gracious spirit is a contented spirit.

This is a rare Art: Paul did not learn it at the feet of Gamaliel; I am
instructed: (...) (...).
, ver. 12. I am initiated into this holy Mysteriis initiatus sum.
mystery; as if he had said, I have gotten the divine Art, Zanchy. Sacrit
imbutu^ sum^ Ambros.
I have the knack of it; God must make us right Artists. If we should put some
men to an Art that they were not skilled in, how unfit would they be for it?
put an husbandman to Limning or drawing Pictures, what strange work would he
make? this is out of his sphere. Take a Limner that is exact in laying of
colors, and put him to plough, or set him to planting and graffing of trees,
this is not his Art, he is not skilled in it: Bid a natural man live by
Faith, and when all things go cross, Be contented; you bid him do that he has
no skill in, you may as well bid a child guide the the stern of a Ship; To live
contented upon God in the deficiency of outward comforts, is an Art which flesh
and blood has not revealed; nay, many of Gods own children, who excel in some
duties of Religion, when they come to this of Contentment, how do they bungle?
they have not yet commenced Masters of this Art.

CHAP. V.
The resolving some Questions.
FOr the illustration of this Doctrine, I shall propound these Questions.

Quest. 1. Quest.
Whether a Christian may not be sensible of his condition, and yet be contented?

Answ. Yes; Ans.
For else he is not a Saint, but a Stoic. Rachel did well to weep for her
children, (there was nature;) but her fault was, she refused to be comforted,
(there was discontent.) Christ himself was sensible when he sweat great drops
of blood, and said, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me Matt.
26. 39
: yet he was contented, he did martyr and crucify his own will: Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will. The Apostle bids us humble our selves under
the mighty hand of God 2 Pet. 5. 6
, which we cannot do unless we are sensible of it.

Qu. 2. Quest.
Whether a Christian may not lay open his grievances to God, and yet be
contented?

Ans. Yes: Answ.
Unto thee have I opened my cause, Jer. 20. 12. Jer. 20. 12
and David poured out his complaint before the Lord Ps. 142. 2
. We may cry to God, and desire him to write down all our injuries; Shall not
the child complain to his Father? When any burden is upon the spirit, Prayer
gives vent, it eases the heart: Hannah's spirit was burdened, I am (says she)
a woman of a troubled spirit 1 Samuel 1. 18
. Now, having prayed and wept, she went away, and was no more sad; only, here
is the difference between an holy complaint and a discontented complaint; in
the one we complain to God, in the other we complain of God.

Quest. 3. Quest.
What is it properly that Contentment does exclude?

Answ. Answ.
There are three things which Contentment does banish out of its Diocese, and
can by no means consist with it.

1. It excludes a vexatious repining, What contentment excludes.
this is properly the daughter of Discontent. I mourn in my complaint Psa. 55.
2
: he does not say, I murmur in my complaint. Murmuring is no better then
mutiny in the heart; it is a rising up against God. When the Sea is rough and
unquiet, it casts forth nothing but foame; when the heart is discontented, it
casts forth the foam of anger, impatience, and sometimes little better then
blasphemy. Murmuring is nothing else but the scum which boils off from a
discontented heart.

2. It excludes an uneven discomposure. When a man says, I am in such straits,
that I know not how to evolve or get out, I shall be undone. Head and heart are
so taken up, that a man is not fit to pray, or meditate, etc. he is not
himself: just as when an Army is routed, one man runs this way, and another
that, the Army is put into a disorder: So a man's thoughts run up and down
distracted. Discontent does dislocate and unjoynt the soul, it pulls off the
wheels.

3. It excludes a childish despondency; and this is usually consequent upon the
other. A man being in an hurry of mind, not knowing which way to extricate, or
wind himself out of the present trouble; begins succumbere oneri, to faint and
sink under it. For Care is to the mind as a burden to the back, it loads the
spirits, and with over-loading sinks them. A despondent spirit is a
discontented spirit.

CHAP. VI.
Showing the nature of Contentment.
HAving answered these Questions, What Conten^^tion is.
I shall in the next place come to describe this (...), or Contentment.

It is a sweet temper of spirit whereby a Christian carries himself Se
aquanimiter fert, B^de.
in an equal poize in every condition. The nature of this will appear more
clear in these three Aphorisms.

1. Contentment is a divine thing; acquisition, Aphorism. (...) non
acquisitione, sed infusione.
but infusion: it is a slip taken off from the tree of life, and planted by the
Spirit of God in the soul; it is a fruit that grows not in the garden of
Philosophy, but is of an heavenly birth: It is therefore very observable, that
Contentment is joined with Godliness, and goes in equipage; But Godliness
with Contentment is great gain 1 Timothy 6 6
. Contentment being a consequent of Godliness, or concomitant, or both: I call
it divine, to contradistinguish it to that Contentment which a moral man may
arrive at; Heathens have seemed to have this Contentment, but it was only
(...), the shadow and picture of it, the Beryll, not the true Diamond: theirs
was but civil, this is sacred: theirs was only from principles of Reason, this
of Religion: theirs was only lighted at Nature's torch, this at the Lamp of
Scripture. Reason may a little teach Contentment; as thus, Whatever my
condition be, this is that I am born to Job 14. 1
; and if I meet with crosses, it is but (...), a Catholic misery; all have
their share, why therefore should I be troubled Far quam sortem omnes
patiuntur, nemo recusat.
? Reason may suggest this; and indeed, this may be rather constraint, then
content, but to live securely and cheerfully upon God in the abatement of
creature-supplyes, Religion only can bring this into the souls exchequer.

intrinsecall thing, it lies within a man, Aphorism,
not in the bark, but the root. Contentment has both its fountain and stream
in the soul; the Beam has not its light from the Air: the beams of comfort
which a contented man has, do not arise extrinsice from foreign comforts,
but from within; as sorrow is seated in the spirit, The heart knows its own
grief Pro. 14. 10.
: So Contentment lies within in the soul, and does not depend upon externals.
Hence I gather, that outward troubles cannot hinder this blessed Contentment;
it is a spiritual thing, and arises from spiritual grounds, viz. The
apprehension of Gods love. When there is a tempest without, there may be music
within: a Be may sting through the skin, but it cannot sting to the heart:
Outward afflictions cannot sting to a Christians heart, where Contentment lies.
Thieves may plunder us of our money and pla^e, but not of this pearl of
Contentment, unless we are willing to part with it, for it is locked up in
the cabinet of the heart. The soul who is possessed of this rich treasure of
Contentment, is like Noah in the Arc, that can sing in the midst of a Deluge.

3. Contentment is an Habitual Aphorism.
Contentment does not appear only now and then, as some Stars which are seen
but seldom: it is a settled temper of the heart. One action does not
denominate: he is not said to be a liberal man, that gives alms once in his
life; a covetous man may do so, but he is said to be liberal, that is given to
liberality Rom 12 13.
; that is, who upon all occasions is willing to indulge the necessities of the
poor: so he is said to be a contented man that is given to Contentment. It is
not casual, but constant. Aristotle in his Rhetoric, distinguishes between
colors in the face that arise from passion, and those which arise from
complexion; the pale face may look red when it blusheth, but this is only a
passion: he is said properly to be ruddy and sanguine, who is constantly so, it
is his complexion. He is not a contented man who is so upon an occasion, (and
perhaps when he is pleased;) but who is so constantly, it is the habit and
complexion of his soul.

CHAP. VII.
Reason pressing to holy Contentment.
HAving opened the nature of Contentment, I come next to lay down some reasons,
or arguments to Contentment, which may preponderate with us.

The first is, Reason. 1. Virtute praecepti.
Gods precept. It is charged upon us as a duty; Be content with such things as
you have Heb. 13. 5.
; the same God who has bid us believe, has bid us be content; if we obey not,
we run our selves into a spiritual praemunire. Gods Word is a sufficient
warrant; it has authority in it, and must be a supersedeas, or sacred Spell to
discontent; Ipse dixit was enough among Pythagor as his Scholars. Be it enacted
is the Royal style. Gods Word must be the star that guides, and his Will the
weight that moves our obedience; his fiat is a Law, and has majesty enough in
it to captivate us into obedience; our hearts must not be more unquiet then the
raging Sea, which at his Word is stilled Mat. 8. 26.
.

2. The second reason enforcing Contentment, Reason 2. Virtute promissi.
is, Gods promise: For, He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13. 5. Where God has engaged himself, under hand and seal, for
our necessary provisions. If a King should say to one of his Subjects, I will
take care for thee, as long as I have any Crown-revenues, thou shall be
provided for; if thou art in danger, I will secure thee; if in want, I will
supply thee; would not that Subject be content? Behold, God has here made a
Promise to the Believer, and as it were entered into bond for his security, I
will never leave thee; Shall not this charm down the devil of discontent? Leave
thy fatherless children with me, I will preserve them alive Je^. 49. 11.
. Me thinks I see the godly man on his deathbed much discontented, and hear
him complaining, What will become of my wife and children when I am dead and
gone, they may come to poverty? says God, Trouble not thy self, Be content, I
will take care of thy children, and, Let thy widows trust in me. God has
made a Promise to us, that he will not leave us, and has entailed the promise
upon our wife and children, and will not this satisfy? True Faith will take
Gods single bond without calling for witnesses.

3. Be contented, Reason. 3. Virtute decreti.
by virtue of a Decree. What ever our condition be, God the great Umpire of the
world has ab aeterno decreed that condition for us, and by his providence
ordered all appertinances thereunto. Let a Christian often think with himself,
who has placed me here, whither I am in an higher sphere, or in a lower? not
chance or fortune, (as the pur-blinde Heathens imagined;) no, it is the wise
God that has by his providence fixed me in this Orb: We must act that scene
which God will have us; say not, Such an one has occasioned this to me; look
not too much at the under-wheel. We read in Ezekiel of a wheel within a wheel
Ezekiel. 1. 16.
* Gods Decree is the cause of the turning of the wheels, and his Providence is
the inner wheel that moves all the rest. Gods Providence is that (...) or
helm, which turns about the whole ship of the Universe. Say then as holy
David; I was silent (...)
, because thou, Lord, did it Psalm. 39. 9.
. Gods Providence (which is nothing else but the carrying on of his Decree,)
should be a supersedeas and counterpoison against discontent; God has set as
in our station, and he has done it in wisdom.

We fancy such a condition of life good for us, whereas if we were our own
carvers, we should often cut the Ista aligimus quae plus nocent quam placeut.
worst piece. Lot being put to his choice, did choose Sodom Genesis 13. 10.
, which soon after was burnt with fire. Rachel was very desirous of children,
Give me children or I die Genesis 30. 1.
, and it cost her her life in bringing forth a child. Abraham was earnest for
Ishmael, O that Ishmael may live before thee Genesis 17. 18.
! but he had little comfort either of him or his seed; he was borne a son of
strife, His hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him. The
Disciples wept for Christ's leaving the world; they chose his corporal
presence, whereas it was best for them that Christ should be gone, for else the
Comforter would not come Joh. 16. 7.
. David chose the life of his child, he wept and fasted for it 2 Samuel 12. 16.
; whereas if the child had lived, it would have been a perpetual monument of
his shame. We stand often in our own light; if we should sort, or parcel out
our own comforts, we should hit upon the wrong. Is it not well for the child
that the Parent does choose for it? were it left to its self, it would perhaps
choose a knife to cut its own fingers. A man in a paroxysme calls for wine,
which if he had, were little better then poison; it is well for the Patient that
he is at the Physicians appointment.

The consideration of a Decree determining, and a Providence disposing all
things that fall out, should work our hearts to holy Contentment. The wise God
has ordered our condition; if he sees it better for us to abound, we shall
abound; if he sees it better for us to want, we shall want; be content to be at
Gods dispose.

God sees in his infinite wisdom the same condition is not convenient for all;
that which is good for one, may be bad for another; one season of weather will
not serve all men's occasions; one needs Sunshine, another Rain; one condition
of life will not fit every man, no more then one suite of apparel will fit
every body; Prosperity is not fit for all, nor yet Adversity: If one man be
brought low, perhaps he can bear it better, he has a greater stock of grace,
more faith and patience; he can gather grapes of thorns, pick some comfort out
of the Cross; every one cannot do this. Another man is seated in an eminent
place of dignity; he is fitter for it; perhaps it is a place requires more
parts, and judgment, which every one is not capable of Ex omni ligno non fit
mercurius.
; perhaps he can use his estate better, he has a public heart as well as a
public place. The wise God sees that condition to be bad for one which is good
for another; hence it is, he places men in different orbs and spheres, some
higher, some lower; one man desires health, God sees sickness better for him;
God will work health out of sickness, by bringing the body of death into a
consumption. Another man desires liberty, God sees restraint better for him; he
will work his liberty by restraint; when his feet are bound, his heart shall be
most enlarged. Did we believe this, it would give check to the sinful
disputes, and cavills of our hearts; shall I be discontented at that which is
Enacted by a Decree, and Ordered by a Providence? is this to be a child or a
rebel?

CHAP. VIII.
Use I.
Showing how a Christian may make his life comfortable.
Use I. Use I. Inform.
IT shows us how a Christian may come to lead a comfortable life, even an
heaven upon earth, be the times what they will; viz. by Christian contentment
Prove. 15. 13
; the comfort of life does not stand (...), in having much; its Christ's maxim,
Man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he does possess
Luke 12 15
; but it is in being contented Nullae profecto majores sunt divitiae, quam sua
sort contentum esse^ haec enim virtu^ efficit, ut id quod habet aliquis, sit
ei satis, su^^que animum in pauper^ate reddet divitem, Hyperius.
. Is not the Be as well contented with feeding on the dew, or sucking from a
flower, as the Ox that grazeth on the Mountains? Contentment lies within a
man, in the heart: and the way to be comfortable, is not by having our barnes
filled, but our mind quiet. The contented man (says Seneca) is the happy man;
discontent is a fretting humor, which dryes the brains, wastes the spirits,
corrodes and eats out the comfort of life: Discontent makes a man that he does
not enjoy what he does possess. A drop or two of vinegar will sour a whole
glass of Wine. Let a man have the affluence and confluence of worldly
comforts, a drop or two of discontent will imbitter and poison all. Comfort
depends upon Contentment; Jacob went halting when the sinew upon the hollow of
his thigh shrank: so, when the sinew of Contentment begins to shrink, we go
halting in our comforts. Contentation is as necessary to keep the life
comfortable, as oil is necessary to keep the lamp burning; the clouds of
discontent do often drop the showrs of tears. Would we have comfort in our
lives? we may have it if we will Quisque est fortunae suae faber.
. A Christian may carve out what condition he will to himself Quid votis opu^
est? fac t^ ipse foelicem. Seneca.
. Why do thou complain of thy troubles? it is not trouble that troubles, but
discontent; it is not the water without the ship, but the water that gets
within the leak which drowns it; it is not outward affliction that can make the
life of a Christian sad; a contented mind would sail above these waters, but
when there is a leak of discontent open, and trouble gets into the heart, then
it is disquieted and sinks. Do therefore as the Mariners, pump the water out,
and stop this spiritual leak in thy soul, and no trouble can hurt thee.

CHAP. IX.
Use II.
A check to the discontented Christian.
Use. II. HEre is a just Reproof to such as are discontented with their
condition. Use II. Reproof.


This disease is almost Epidemical. Quis est tom compositae foelicitatis, ut
non ^^^qua ex part cum sta^^^ sui qualitate rix^tur? Boethius de Consol.
Philos. lib. 2.
Some are not content with their callings which God has set them in; they must
be a step higher, from the Shop to the Pulpit Number. 12. 2.
; they would be in the Temple of Honor, before they are in the Temple of
Virtue; who step into Moses chair, without Aaron's Bells and Pomegranates;
like Apes, which do most show their deformity when they are climbing. Is it
not enough that God has bestowed gifts upon men, in private to edify, that he
has enriched them with many mercies; but, seek they the Priesthood also Numb.
16. 9.
? What is this but discontent arising from high-flown pride? These do secretly
tax the Wisdom of God, that he has not screwed them up in their condition a
peg higher. Tentat Superbia, Aug.
ut frangat. Every man is complaining that his estate is no better, though he
seldom complains that his heart is no better. Suae quemque conditionis
poenitet: one man commends this kind of life, another commends that Hic utraque
circumflum vitam coelibem deflet, ille nup^iis foelix, orbus liberis alieno
censum nutrit haeredi, alius prolc laetatus, filii delictis moestus
illachrymat. Boethius.
; one man thinks a Country-life best, another a City-life, as the Poet
elegantly expresses it.

O fortun ati mercatores, gravis annis
Miles ait, multo jam fractus membra labor;
Contra Mercator navim jactantibus austris,
Militia est potior, quid enim concurritur horae
Momento? cita mors venit, aut victoria laeta. Horat.
The ^^^ldier thinks it best to be a Merchant, and the Merchant to be a
Soldier. Men can be content to be any thing but what God will have them. We
may cry out with the same Poet,

Qui fit, Maecenas, ut nemo quam sibi sortem
Seu ratio dederit, seu fors objecerit, illa
Contentus vivat? laudet diversa sequentes? Hor. 1. Satyr.
How is it that no man is contented? Very few Christians have learned Saint
Paul's lesson; neither poor nor rich know how to be content, they can learn any
thing but this.

1. If men are poor, they learn to be, 1. Envious: they malign those that are
above them. Another Prosperity is an ey-sore; when Gods candle shines upon
their neighbors Tabernacle, this light offends them. In the midst of (...) men
can (in this sense) abound* viz. in envy and malice: An envious eye is an
evil eye. 2. They learn to be querulous, still complaining, as if God had
dealt hardly with them; they are ever telling of their wants, they want this
and that comfort; whereas their greatest want is a contented spirit. Those that
are well enough content with their sins, yet are not content with their
condition.

2. If men are rich, they learn to be covetous; thirsting insatiably after the
world, and by any unjust means scraping it together; their right hand is full
of bribes, as the Psalmist expresses it Ps. 26. 10
. Put a good cause in one scale, and a piece of Gold in the other, and the Gold
weighs heaviest. There are (says Solomon) four things that say, It is not
enough Pro. 30. 15.
. I may add a fifth, viz. the heart of a covetous man. So that neither poor nor
rich know how to be content.

Never certainly since the Creation did this sin of discontent reign, or
rather rage, more then in our times; never was God more dishonored; you can
hardly speak with any, but the passion of his tongue betrays the discontent of
his heart: every one lisps out his trouble, and here even the stammering tongue
speaks too freely and fluently.

If we have not what we desire, God shall not have a good look from us, but
presently are sick of discontent, and ready to die out of an humor. If God
will not give the people of Israel for their lusts, they bid him take their
lives; they must have Quails to their Manna. Ahab though a King, and one would
think his Crown Lands had been sufficient for him, yet, is sullen, and
discontented for want of Naboths Vineyard. Jonah though a good man and a
Prophet, yet ready to die in a pet Jonah 4. 8.
, and because God killed his Goard, Kill me too, says he. Rachel, Give me
children, or I die; she had many blessings, if she could have seen them, but
wanted this of contentation. God will supply our wants, but must he satis^ie
our lusts too? many are discontented for a very trifle; another has a better
dress, a richer jewel, a newer fashion. Nero not content with his Empire, was
troubled that the Musicians had more skill in playing then he: how fantastic
are some, that pine away in discontent for the want of those things, which if
they had, would but render them more ridiculous.

CHAP. X.
USE. III.
A swasive to Contentment.
Use. III. Use. III. Exhortation.
IT exhorts us to labor for Contentation; this is that which does beautify
and bespangle a Christian, and as a spiritual embroidery does set him off in
the eyes of the world.

But, Objection.
me thinks I hear some bitterly complaining, and saying to me, Alas, how is it
possible to be contented? the Lord has made my chain heavy Lam. 3. 7.
, he has cast me into a very sad condition. (...). Homer. Iliad 2.


Answ. There is no sin, Answ.
but labors either to hide it self under some mask, or if it cannot be
concealed, then to vindicate it self by some Apology. This sin of discontent I
find very witty in its Apologies, which I shall first discover, and then make
a Reply. We must lay it down for a Rule, that discontent is a sin, so that
all the pretenses and Apologies wherewith it labors to justify it self, are
but the painting and dressing of a strumpet.

SECT. I.
The first Aplogy that Discontent makes, Answered.
The first Apology which discontent makes is this; 1. Apology.
I have lost a child. Paulina upon the loss of her children, was so possessed
with a spirit of sadness, that she had like to have intombed her self in her
own discontent; our love to Relation is oftentimes more then our love to
Religion.

Answ. 1. 1. Reply.
We must be content, not only when God gives mercies, but when he takes them
away. If we must in every thing give thanks, 1 These. 5. 18. 1 These. 5. 18.
then in nothing be discontented.

2. Perhaps God has taken away the Cisterne, 2. Reply.
that he may give you the more of the Spring; he has darkened the Starlight,
that you may have more Sun-light. God intends you shall have more of himself,
and is not he better then ten Sons? Look not so much upon a temporal loss, as
a spiritual gain; the comforts of the world run dregs; those which come
out of the Granary of the Promise, are purer and sweeter.

3. Your child was not given, 3. Reply.
but lent. I have, says Hanna, lent my son to the Lord 1 Samuel 1. 21.
. She lent him? the Lord had but lent him to her. Mercies are not entailed upon
us, but lent; what a man lends, he may call for again when he please. God has
put out a child to thee a while to nurse, will thou be displeased if he takes
his child home again? O be not discontented, that a mercy is taken away from
you; but rather be thankful, that it was lent you so long.

4. Suppose your child be taken from you, 4. Reply.
either he was good or bad; if he was Rebellious, you have not so much parted
with a child, as a burden; you grieve for that which might have been a greater
grief to you: if he was Religious, then remember, he is taken from the evil to
come Isa. 57. 1
, and placed in his cell of felicity. This lower Region is full of gross and
hurtful vapors; how happy are those who are mounted into the celestial
Orbs! The righteous is taken away; in the Original it is, he is gathered (...)
; a wicked child dying is cut off, but the pious child is gathered. Even as
we see men gather flowers, and candy them, and preserve them by them; so has
God gathered thy child as a sweet flower, that he may candy it with glory, and
preserve it by him for ever. Why then should a Christian be discontented; why
should he weep excessively? Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep
for your selves Luke 23. 28.
. So, could we hear our children speaking to us out of heaven, they would say,
Weep not for us who are happy, we lie upon a soft pillow, even in the bosom of
Christ; the Prince of peace is embracing us, and kissing us with the kisses of
his lips, be not troubled at our preferment; Weep not for us, but weep for your
selves, who are in a sinful, sorrowful world, you are in the valley of
tears, but we are on the mountains of Spices; we are gotten to our harbor,
but you are still tossing upon the waves of inconstancy. O Christian, be not
discontented that thou have parted with such a child; but rather rejoice that
thou had such a child to part with. Break forth into thankfulness. What an
honor is it to a Parent to beget such a child, that while he lives encreas^th
the joy of the glorified Angels Luke 15. 10.
; and when he dies, increases the number of the glorified Saints? Lachryma
poenitentiu^ sunt vinum Angeloru^. Bern. sermon. 30. super. Cant.


5. If God has taken away one of your children, 5. Reply.
he has left you more; he might have stripped you of all. He took away all
Jobs comforts, his estate, his children, and indeed his wife was left, but as a
cross. Satan made a bow of this rib (as Chrysostom speaks) and shot a
tentation by her at Job, thinking to have shot him to the heart; Curse God and
die: but Job had upon him the breast plate of Integrity; and though his children
were taken away, yet not his graces; still he is content, still he blesses
God. O think how many mercies you still enjoy; yet our base hearts are more
discontented at one loss, then thankful for an hundred mercies.

God has plucked one bunch of Grapes from you, but how many precious Clusters
are left behind?

Object. But it was my only Child, Object.
the staff of my age, the seed of my comfort, and the only blossom, out of
which the honor of an ancient family did grow.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
God has promised you (if you belong to him) a name, better then of sons and
daughters Isa, 56. 5.
; Is he dead that should have been the monument to have kept up the name of a
Family? God has given you a new name, he has written your name in the book
of Life; behold, your spiritual Heraldry; here is a name that cannot be cut
off.

2. Has God taken away thy only child? he has given thee his only Son:
this is a happy exchange. What needs he complain of losses that has Christ,
he is his fathers brightness Heb. 1. 3*
, his riches Col. 2. 9.
, his Isa. 42 1.
delight. Is there enough in Christ to delight the heart of God, and is there
not enough in him to ravish us with holy delight? He is wisdom to teach us,
righteousness to acquit us, sanctification to adorn us; he is (...), that
Royal and Princely gift; he is the bread of Angels Christus panis angelorum.
B^rn.
, the joy and triumph of Saints; he is (...), all in all Col. 3. 10.
; why then art thou discontented? though thy child be lost, yet thou have him
for whom all things are loss.

7. And lastly, 7. Reply.
let us blush to think that nature should seem to outstrip grace. Pet. Mart.
Puluillus an Heathen, when he was about to consecrate a Temple to Jupiter, and
news was brought to him of the death of his son, would not desist from his
enterprise, but with much composure of mind gave order for decent burial.

SECT. II.
The second Apology answered.
2. Apology that discontent makes, 2* Apology.
is, I have a great part of my estate strangely melted away, and trading begins
to fail.

God is pleased sometimes to bring his children very low, and cut them short in
their estate, it fares with them as with that widow who had nothing in her
house save a pot of oil 2 King. 4. 2.
; but be content.

1. God has taken away your Estate, 1. Reply.
but not your Portion. This is a sacred Paradox. Honor and Estate are no part
of a Christians Jointure, they are rather ac^essaries then essentialls, and are
extrinsecall and foreign, therefore the loss of these cannot denominate a
man miserable, still the portion remains, The Lord is my portion says my soul
Lam. 3. 24.
. Suppose one were worth a million of money; and he should chance to lose a pin
off his sleeve, this is no part of his estate, nor can we say he is undone: the
loss of sublunary comforts is not so much to a Christians portion, as the
loss of a pin is to a million. These things shall be added to you Mat. 6. 32.
; Adj^cientur, they shall be cast in as overplus: when a man buys a piece of
cloth, he has an inch or two given in to the measure; now, though he lose his
inch of cloth, yet he is not undone, for still the whole piece remains: our
outward estate is not so much in regard of the portion, as an inch of cloth is
to the whole piece; why then should a Christian be discontented when the title
to his spiritual treasure remains? a thief may take away all my money that I
have about me, but not my land; still a Christian has a title to the land of
promise. Mary has chosen the better part which shall not be taken from her.

2. Perhaps if thy estate had not been lost, 2. Reply
thy soul had been lost Pecuniam perdidisti, fortassis illa te perderes,
manens.
; outward comforts do often quench inward heat. God cannot bestow a jewel upon
us, but we fall so in love with it, that we forget him that gave it; what pity
is it that we should commit idolatry with the creature! God is forced sometimes
to draine away an estate; the plate and jewels are often cast overboard to
save the passenger. Many a man may curse the time that ever he had such an
estate, it has been an enchantment to draw away his heart from God. Some there
are that will be rich 1 Timothy 6. 9.
, and they fall into a snare Aliud est esse di vitem, aliud velle flori
divitem: hic cupiditas accusatu^, non a^rum. Bid.
. Art thou troubled that God has prevented a snare? Riches are Thorns Mat.
13. 7.
, art thou angry that God has pulled a way a thorn from thee? Spinae
suffocantes and pungentes.
Riches are compared to thick clay Hab. 2. 6.
, Perhaps thy affections, which are the feet of the soul, might have stuck so
fast in this golden clay that they could not have ascended up to heaven, be
content; if God damme up our outward comforts, it is that the stream of our
love may run faster another, way.

3. If your estate be small, 3. Reply
yet God can bless a little. It Is not how much money we have, but how much
blessing. He that often curses the bags of gold Ex male Quae^itis vix gaudet
tertius haeres.
, can bless the meal in the barrel, and the oil in the cruse. What if thou
have not the full fleshpots? yet thou have a promise, I will bless her
provision Psalm. 132. 15.
, and then a little goes a great way; be content, thou have the dew of a
blessing distilled: a dinner of green herbs, where love is, is sweet; I may
add, where the love of God is: another may have more estate then you, but more
care; more riches, less rest; more revenewes, but withal more occasions of
expense: he has a greater inheritance, yet perhaps God does not give him power
to eat thereof Eccles. 6. 2.
, he has the dominion of his estate, (...). Menand.
not the use; he holds more, but enjoyes less: in a word, thou have less gold
then he, perhaps less guilt Lucrum in arca, damnum in Co^scientia. Aug. in
Sermon. Innocent.
.

4. You did never so thrive in your spiritual trade, 4. Reply.
your heart was never so low as since your condition was low; you were never so
poor in spirit, never so rich in faith. You did never run the ways of Gods
Commandments so fast as since some of your golden weights were taken off. You
never had such trading for heaven all your life Foelix mutatio, ubi Deum pro
mundo accipi^^us, pro terr^s ^^^lum.
; this is uberrimus quaestus. You did never make such adventures upon the
promise as since you left off your Sea-adventures. This is the best kind of
merchandise; O Christian, thou never had such incomes of the Spirit, such
spring-tides of joy; and what though weak in estate, if strong in assurance? be
content, what you have lost one way, you have gained another.

5. Be your losses what they will in this kind, 5. Reply.
remember in every loss there is only a suffering; but in every discontent
there is a sin, and one sin is worse then a thousand sufferings. What?
because some of my revenews are gone, shall I part with some of my
righteousness? shall my faith and patience go too? because I do not possess
an estate, shall I not therefore possess my own spirit? O learn to be content.

SECT. III.
The third Apology answered.
The third Apology is, 3. Apology.
It is sad with me in my relations; where I should find most comfort, there I
have most grief. This Apology or Objection brancheth it self into two
particulars, whereto I shall give a distinct Reply.

1. My child goes on in rebellion; 1. Branch.
I fear I have brought forth a child for the Devil. Reply.
It is indeed sad to think that hell should be paved with the skulls of any of
our children, and certainly the pangs of grief which the mother has in this
kind are worse then her pangs of travel; but* though you ought to be humbled;
yet not discontented: for consider

1. You may pick something out of your childs undutifulnesse; (...).
the childs sin is sometimes the Parents Sermon; quod dolet, docet, the
undutifulnesse of children to us may be a memento to put us in mind of our
undutifulnesse once to God. Time was when we were rebellious children; how long
did our hearts stand out as Garrisons against God? how long did he parley with
us, and beseech us ere we would yield? he walked in the tenderness of his
heart toward us, but we walked in the frowardness of our hearts toward him;
and since grace has been planted in our souls, how much of the wild Olive is
still in us? how many motions of the Spirit do we daily resist? how many
unkindnesses and affronts have we put upon Christ? Let this open a spring of
^e^^^tance; look upon your child^s rebellion, and mourn for your (...)
rebellion.

2. Though to see him undutiful is your grief, 2. Reply.
yet not always your sin. Has a Parent given the child, not only the
milk of the breast, but the sincere milk of the word 1 Peter 2. 2.
? Have thou seasoned his tender years with Religious education? thou can do
no more; Parents can only work knowledge, God must work grace; they can only
lay the wood together, it is God must make it burn; a Parent can only be a
guide to show his child the way to heaven, the Spirit of God must be a
lodestone to draw his heart into that way. Am I in Gods stead (says Jacob)
who has withheld the fruit of the womb Genesis 30. 2.
? can I give children? So, is a Parent in Gods stead to give grace? Who can
help it, if a child having the Scripture, light of conscience, Scripture
education, these three Torches in his hand, yet runs wilfully into the deep
ponds of sin? Weep for thy child, pray for him; but do not sin for him, by
discontent.

3. Say not, 3. Reply.
you have brought forth a child for the Devil, God can reduce him; He has
promised to turn the heart of the children to their Parents Mal. 4. 6.
, and to open springs of grace in the Desert Isa. 35. 6
; When thy child is going full-saile to the Devil, God can blow with a
contrary wind of his Spirit, and alter his course. When Paul was breathing out
persecution against the Saints, and was sailing hell-ward, God turns him
another way; before he was going to Damascus, God sends him to Ananias; before
a Persecutor, now a Preacher. Though our children are for the present fallen
into the Devils pound, God can turn them from the power of Satan Acts 26. 18.
, and bring them in at the twelfth hour. Monica was weeping for her son
Augustine, at last God gave him in upon prayer, and he became a famous
instrument in the Church of God.

2. The second branch of the objection is; 2. Branch.
But, my husband takes ill courses, where I looked for honey, behold a sting.

Answ. It Is sad to have the living and the dead tied together; yet, let not
your heart fret with discontent; mourn for his sin, but do not murmur. For

1. God has placed you in your relation, 1. Reply.
and you cannot be discontented, but you quarrel with God. What? for every
cross that befalls us, shall we call the infinite wisdom of God in question?
O the blasphemy of our hearts!

2. God can make you a gainer by your husbands sin; 2. Reply.
perhaps you had never been so good, if he had not been so bad. The fire burns
hottest in the coldest climate; God often by a divine Antiper^stasis turns the
sins of others to our good Etiam poccatum ipsum in bonum convertit, Aug. in
Romans 8.
, and makes their maladies our medicines. The more profane the husband is, often
the more holy the wife grows; the more earthly he is, the more heavenly she
grows; God makes sometimes the husbands sin a spur to the wives grace. His
exorbitances are quasi flabellum, as a pair of bellows to blow up the flame
of her zeal and devotion the more, and e contra.

Is it not thus? does not thy husbands wickedness send thee to prayer? Thou
perhaps had never prayed so much, if he had not sinned so much; his deadness
quickens thee the more; the stone of his heart is an hammer to break thy heart.
The Apostle says, The unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband
1 Cor. 7. 14.
; but in this sense, the believing wife is sanctified by the unbelieving
husband, she grows better; his sin is a whetstone to her grace, and a
medicine for her security.

SECT. IV.
The fourth Apology Answered.
The next Apology that discontent makes, 4. Apology.
is, But my friends have dealt very unkindly with me, and proved false.

Answ. It Is sad when a friend proves like a Brook in Summer Job 6. 15*
; The Traveller being parched with heat, comes to the brook, hoping to refresh
himself; but the brook is dried up: yet be content.

1. You are not alone, 1. Reply.
others o^ the Saints have been betrayed by friends; and when they have lean^ed
upon them, they have been as (...) foot out of joint. This was true in the
Type, David Psalm. 55. 12, 13.
; It was not (...) enemy reproached me, but it was thou^ a man, mine equal, my
guide and (...) acquaintance; we took sweet counse^ together; and in the
Antitype, Christ^ he was betrayed by a friend; and why should we think it
strange to have the same measure dealt out to us as Jesus Christ had? The
servant is not above his Master.

2. A Christian may often read his sin in his punishment; 2. Reply.
Has not he dealt treacherously with God? how often has he grieved the
Comforter, broken his vows? and through unbelief sided with Satan against God?
How often has he abused love? taking the Jewels of Gods mercies, and making a
golden calfe of them, serving his own lusts? how often has he made the free
grace of God, which should have been a bolt to keep out sin, rather a key to
open the door to it? these wounds has the Lord received in the house of his
friend Zach. 13. 6.
. Look upon the unkindnesse of thy friend, and mourn for thy own unkindnesse
against God, shall a Christian condemn that in another, which he allows too
much in himself?

3. Has thy friend proved treacherous? 3. Reply.
perhaps you did repose too much confidence in him. If you lay more weight upon
an house then the pillars will bear, it must needs break. God says, Trust ye
not in a friend Mica. 7. 5.
; perhaps you did put more trust in him, then you did dare to put in God:
Friends are as Veniceglasses, we may use them, but if we lean too hard upon
them, they will break. Behold, matter of humility, but not of sullenness and
discontent.

4. You have a friend in Heaven will never fail you; 4. Reply.
There is a friend (says Solomon) that sticks closer then a brother Such a
friend is God; Pro. 18. 14.
he is very studious and inquisitive in our behalf; he has a debating with
himself, a consulting and projecting how he may do us good; he is the best
friend, which may give contentment in the midst of all discourtesies of friends.

Consider, 1. He is a loving friend. God is love 1 John 4. 16.
, hence he is said sometimes to engrave us on the Palms of his hand, Isa. 49.
16.
Isa. 49. 16. that we may be never out of his eye, and to carry us in his
bosom, Isa. 40. 11.
Isa. 40. 11. near to his heart. There is no stop or stint in his love; but as
the River Nilus, it overflowes all the banks: his love is as far beyond our
thoughts, as it is above our deserts. O the infinite love of God, in giving the
Son of his love to be made flesh Quantus Deus quantillus factus often homo? Aug.
, which was more then if all the Angels had been made worms! God in giving
Christ to us, gave his very heart to us, here is love pensil'd out in all its
glory, and engraven as with the point of a Diamond. All other love is hatred in
comparison of the love of our friend.

2. He is a careful friend; He cares for you 1 Pet. 5. 7


1. He minds and transacts our business as his own, he accounts his peoples
interests and concernments as his interest.

2. He provides for us, Grace to enrich us, Glory to ennoble us; It was David's
complaint, No man cared for my soul Ps. 142. 4
; a Christian has a friend that cares for him.

3. He is a Prudent friend Dan. 2. 20.
. A friend may sometimes err through ignorance or mistake, and give his friend
poison in stead of sugar; but God is wise in heart Job 9. 4.
. He is skillful as well as faithful; he knows what our disease is, and what
Physic is most proper to apply; he knows what will do us good, and what
wind will be best to carry us to heaven.

4. He is a Faithful friend Deuteronomy. 7. 9, 10.
; and he is faithful, 1. In his Promises, In hope of eternal life, which God
that cannot lie has promised Tit. 1. 2.
. Gods people are childen that will not lie It Is. 63. 8
; but God is a God that cannot lie; he will not deceive the faith of his
people; nay, he cannot: he is called (...), the Truth; he can as well cease to
be God, as cease to be true. The Lord may sometimes change his Promise, (as
when he converts a temporal Promise into a spiritual;) but he can never
break his Promise.

5. He is a compassionate Friend. Hence in Scripture we read of the earnings of
his bowels Jer. 31. 20.
. Gods friendship is nothing else but compassion; for there is naturally no
affection in us to desire his friendship, nor no goodness in us to deserve it;
the lodestone is in himself. When we were full of blo^d, he was full of
bowels; When we were enemies, he sent an Embassage of peace; When our hearts
were turned back from God, his heart was turned toward us. O the tenderness
and sympathy of our friend in Heaven! We our selves have some relentings of
heart to those which are in misery; but it is God who begets all the mercies
and bowels that are in us, therefore he is called the Father of mercies 2 Cor.
1. 3
.

6. He is a constant Friend. His compassions fail not Lam. 3. 22.
. Friends do often in adversity drop off as leaves in Autumn Dum fueris foelix
multos numerabis a micos. Nubila si fu^rint tempora, solus e^is
Amici circa sartaginem, as Plutarch says; these are rather flatterers then
friends. Ioa^ was for a time faithful to King David's house, he went not after
Absal^ms Treason, but within a while proved false to the Crown, and went after
the treason of Adonijah 1 Kin. 1. 7
; God is a friend for ever. Having loved his own, he loved them to the end
(...). Joh. 13. 1.
. What though I am despised, yet God loves me? What though my friends cast me
off, yet God loves me; he loves (...), to the end, and there is no end of that
love.

This me thinks, in case of discourtesies, and unkindnesses, is enough to
charm down discontent.

SECT. V.
The fifth Apology answered.
The next Apology is, 5. Apology.
I am under great reproaches Deteriores sunt qui famam corrumpunt quam qui
praedi^ diripi^^t. Greg.
Let not this discontent; For,

1. It is a sign there is some good in thee; 1. Reply.
. Quid mali feci? says Socrates; what evil have I done that this bad man
commends me? The applause of the wicked usually denotes some evil, and their
censure imports some good Ps. 38. 20
. David wept and fasted, and that was turned to his reproach Ps. 69. 10
; as we must pass to Heaven through the pikes of suffering, so through the
clouds of Reproach.

2. If your reproach be for God, 2. Reply
as David's was; For thy sake I have borne reproach Ps. 69. 7.
, then it is rather matter of triumph then dejection; Christ does not say, when
you are reproached, be discontented; but (...), Rejoice Man. 5. 11.
. Wear your Reproach as a Diadem of honor, for now a spirit of glory rests
upon you 1 Pet^r 4. 14.
. Put your reproaches into the inventory of your riches; so did Moses Heb. 11.
26.
. It should be a Christians ambition to wear his Saviors livery, though it be
sprinkled with blood, and sullied with disgrace.

3. 3. Reply.
God will do us good by reproach Boni per contumeli^ as meliores existunt.
Gregor. in Hom.
; as David said of Shimei his cursing, It may be the Lord will requite good for
his cursing this day 2 Samuel 16. 12.
; this puts us upon searching out sin. A child of God labors to read his sin
in every stone of reproach that is cast at him; besides, now we have an
opportunity to exercise patience and humility Detractione pationtia nostra
probatur. Aug. lib. 3. contra P^til.
.

4. Jesus Christ was content to be reproached for us; 4. Reply.
He despised the shame of the Cross Heb. 11. 2.
. It may amaze us to think, that he who was God could endure to be spit upon,
to be crowned with thorns, in a kind of jeere; and when he was ready to bow
his head upon the Cross, to have the Jews in scorn wag their head, and say,
He saved others, himself he cannot save. The shame of the Cross was as much
as the blood of the Cross; His Name was crucified before his Body. The sharp
arrows of Reproach that the world did shoot at Christ, went deeper into his
heart then the spear; His suffering was so ignominious, that as if the Sun
did blush to behold, it withdrew its bright beams, and masqued it self with a
cloud; (and well it might, when the Sun of Righteousness was in an eclipse;)
all this contumely and reproach did the God of glory endure, or rather despise
for us. Oh then, let us be content to have our names eclipsed for Christ; let
not reproach lie a^ our heart, but let us bind it as a crown about our head.
Alas, what is reproach? this is but small shot, how will men stand in the mouth
of the Canon? those who are discontented at a reproach, will be offended at a
faggot.

5. Is not many a man contented to suffer reproach for maintaining his lust, 5.
Reply.
and shall not we for maintaining the truth? Some glory in that which is their
shame Phil. 3. 19.
, and shall we be ashamed of that which is our glory? Be not troubled at these
petty things; he whose heart is once divinely touched with the loadstone of
Gods Spirit, does account it his honor to be dishonored for Christ Act. ^5. 4.
; and does as much despise the worlds censure, as he does their praise.

6. We live in an Age, 6. Reply.
wherein men dare reproach God himself. The Divinity of the Son of God is
blasphemously reproached by the Socinian; The blessed Bible is reproached by
the Antiscripturist, as if it were but a legend of lies; and every man's faith a
fable; The Justice of God is called to the bar of Reason by the Arminian; The
Wisdom of God in his providentiall actings, is taxed by the Atheist; The
Ordinances of God are decryed by the Familist, as being too heavy a burden for
a freeborn conscience, and too low, and carnal for a sublime Seraphique
spirit; The Ways of God which have the Majesty of holiness shining in them,
are calumniated by the Profane; The mouths of men are open against God, as if
he were an hard Master, and the path of Religion too strict and severe; If men
cannot give God a good word, shall we be discontented or troubled that they
speak hardly of us? such as labor to bury the glory of Religion, shall we
wonder that their throats are open sepulchers Romans 3. 31.
, to bury our good name? Oh let us be contented while we are in Gods scouring
house, to have our names sullied a little; the blackler we seem to be here,
the brighter shall we shine when God has set us upon the celestial shelfe.

SECT. VI.
The sixth Apology answered.
The sixth Apology that Discontent makes, 6. Apology.
is disrespect in the world. I have not that esteem from men as is suitable to
my quality and graces. And does this trouble? Consider

1. The world is an unequal Judge, 1. Reply.
as it is full of change, so of partiality. The world gives her Respects as she
does her places of preferment; more by favor often, then desert. Have thou the
ground of real worth in thee? that is best. Worth is in him that has it;
Honor is in him that gives it Honor est in honor ante.
; better deserve respect, and not have it, then have it, and not deserve it.

2. Have thou grace? 2. Reply.
God respects thee, and his judgment is best worth prizing. A Believer is a
person of honor, being borne of God. Since thou wast precious in mine eyes,
thou has been honorable, and I have loved thee Isa. 43. 4.
. Let the world think what they will of you; perhaps in their eyes you are a
castaway, in Gods eyes a Dove Cant. 2. 14.
, a Spouse Cant. 5. 1.
, a Jewel Mal. 3. 17.
; others account you the dregs and offscouring of the world 1 Cor. 4. 14.
, but God will give whole Kingdoms for your ransom Isa. 43. 5
. Let this content; no matter with what oblique eyes I am looked upon in the
world, if I am rectus in curia, God thinks well of me. It Is better that God
approve, then man applaud. The world may put us in their Rubric, and God put
us in his black-book. What is a man the better that his fellow prisoners
commend him, if his Judge condemn him? Oh labor to keep in with God, prize
his love, let my fellow subjects frown, I am contented, being a favorite of
the King of heaven.

3. If we are the children of God, 3. Reply
we must look for disrespect; a believer is in the world, but not of the world;
we are here in a pilgrim-condition, out of our own Country, therefore must not
look for the respects and acclamations of the world, it is sufficient that we
shall have honor in our own Country Heb. 13. 14
; It Is dangerous to be the worlds favorite.

4. Discontent arising from disrespect, 4. Reply
favors too much of pride; an humble Christian has a lower opinion of
himself then others can have of him. He that is taken up about the thoughts of
his sins, and how he has provoked God, he cries out as Agar, I am more brutish
then any man Prove. 30. ^
; and therefore is contented though he be set among the Dogs of the flock Job
30. 1.
. Though he be low in the thoughts of others, yet he is thankful that he is
not laid in the lowest hell Ps. 86. 13
. A proud man sets an high value upon himself, and is angry with others
because they will not come up to his price. Take heed of pride; O had others a
window to look into thy breast, (as Crates once expressed it) or did thy heart
stand where thy face does, thou would wonder to have so much respect.

SECT. VII.
The seventh Apology answered.
The next Apology is, 7. Apology.
I meet with very great sufferings for the truth Scala aurea ad c^^lum, sed
c^cumsepta gladiis.
. Consider

1. Your sufferings are not so great as your sins. Put these two in the
balance, 1. Reply
and see which weighs heaviest; where sin lies heavy, sufferings lie light.
A carnal spirit makes more of his sufferings, and less of his sins; he
looks upon one at the great end of the Perspective, but upon the other at the
little end of the Perspective. The carnal heart cries out, Take away the
Frogs; but a gracious heart cries, Take away the iniquity 2 Samuel 24. 10.
. The one says, never any one suffered as I have done; but the other says,
Never any one sinned as I have done Mica. 7. 9.
.

2. Art thou under sufferings? 2. Reply.
thou have an opportunity to show the valor and constancy of thy mind; some
of Gods Saints would have accounted it a great favor to have been honored
with martyrdom. One said, I am in prison till I am in prison; thou countest
that a trouble which others would have worn as an ensign of their glory.

3. Even those who have gone only upon moral principles, 3. Reply.
have shown much constancy and contentment in their sufferings. Curtius being
bravely mounted, and in armor, threw himself into a great gulf, that the
City of Rome might according to the Oracle be delivered from the Pestilence;
and we having a Divine Oracle, that they who kill the body cannot hurt the
soul; shall we not with much constancy and patience devote our selves to
injuries for Religion? and rather suffer for the truth, then the truth suffer
by us? The De^ii among the Romans vowed themselves to death, that their legions
and soldiers might be crowned with the honor of the victory. O what should we
be content to suffer to make the truth victorious? Regulus Pet. Mart.
having sworn that he would return to Carthage (though he knew there was a
furnace heating for him there) yet not daring to infringe his oath, he did
adventure to go; we then who are Christians, having made a vow to Christ in
Baptism, and so often renewed it in the blessed Sacrament, should with much
contentation rather choose to suffer then violate our sacred oath. Thus the
blessed Martyrs, with what courage and cheerfulness did they yield up their
souls to God? and when the fire was set to their bodies, yet their spirits were
not at all fired with passion or discontent. Though others hurt the body, let
them not the mind through discontent; show by your heroic courage that you
are above those troubles which you cannot be without.

SECT. VIII.
The eight Apology answered.
The next Apology is, 8. Apology.
The prosperity of the wicked. Answ. I confess it is so often, that the evil
enjoy all the good, and the good endure all the evil. David, though a good man,
stumbled at this, and had like to have fallen Psa. 73. 2*
; well, be contented, for remember,

1. These are not the only things, 1. Reply.
nor the best things, they are mercies without the pale; these are but acorns
with which God feeds swine; you who are believers, have more choice fruit, the
Olive, the Pomegranate, the fruit which grows on the true Vine Jesus Christ;
others have the fat of the earth, you have the dew of heaven; they have a
South-land, you have those springs of living water which are clarified with
Christ's blood, and indulcorated with his love.

2. To see the wicked flourish is matter rather of pity then envy; 2. Reply.
It Is all the heaven they must have. Woe to you rich men, for you have received
your consolation Luke 6. 24.
. Hence it was that David made it his solemn prayer, Deliver me from the
wicked, Psalm. 17. 14.
from men of the world which have their portion in this life, and whose belly
thou fillest with thy hid treasure, Psalm. 17. 14. The words (me thinks) are
David's Letany; from men of the world which have their portion in this life,
Good Lord deliver me. When the wicked have eaten of their dainty dishes, there
comes in a sad reckoning which will spoil all. The world is first musical, and
then tragical; if you would have a man fry, and blaze in hell, let him have
enough of the fat of the earth. O remember, for every sand of mercy that runs
out to the wicked, God puts a drop of wrath into his Vial. Therefore as that
soldier said to his fellow, Do you envy me my grapes? they cost me dear, I
must die for them. So I say, Do you envy the wicked? alas, their prosperity is
like Hamans banquet before execution. If a man were to be hanged, would one
envy to see him walk to the gallows through pleasant fields and fine
galleries, or to see him go up the ladder in cloth of gold? The wicked may
flourish in their bravery a while, but, when they flourish as the grass, it
is, that they shall be destroyed for ever Ps. 92. 7
. This proud grass shall be mowen down. Whatever a sinner enjoyes he has a
curse with it Mal. 2. 2
; and shall we envy? What if poisoned bread be given to dogs? The long furrows
in the backs of the godly have a seed of blessing in them, when the table of
the wicked becomes a snare, and their honor their halter.

SECT. IX.
The ninth Apology Answered.
9. The next Apology that discontent makes for it self, 9 Apology
is the evils of the times. The times are full of Heresy and Impiety, and this
is that which troubles me. This Apology consists of two branches, to which I
shall answer in specie; and first,

1. The times are full of Heresy. 1 Branch.
This is indeed sad, The Heresy of the times.
when the Devil cannot by violence destroy the Church, he endeavors to poison
it; when he cannot with Samsons Foxtailes set the corn on fire, then he sowes
tares; as he labors to destroy the peace of the Church by Division, so the
truth of it by Error; we may cry out with Seneca, Vere vivimus in temporum
faecibus. We live in times wherein there is a sluice open to all novel opinions,
and every man's opinion is his Bible. Well, this may make us mourn, but let us
not murmur through discontent: Consider.

1. Error makes a discovery of men, 1. Reply.


Bad men; Error discovers such as are tainted and corrupt. When the Leprosy
brake forth in the forehead, then was the Leper discovered. Error is a
spiritual Bastard, the Devil is the father, and pride the mother; you never
knew an erroneous man, but he was a proud man; now, it is good that such men
should be laid open, to the intent, first, that Gods righteous judgments upon
them may be adored 2 These ^ 2* 12.
. Secondly, that others who are free be not infected. If a man has the Plague,
it is well it breaks forth; for my part, I would avoid an Heretic as I would
avoid the Devil, for he is sent on his errand. I appeal to you, if there were
a Tavern in this City, where under a pretense of selling wine, many hogsheads
of poison were to be sold, were it not well that others should know of it that
they might not buy? it is good that those who have poisoned opinions should be
known, that the people of God may not come near either the sent, or taste of
that poison.

2. Error is a Touchstone to discover good men; it tries the gold, There must
be Heresies, that they which are (...), approved, may be made manifest 1 Cor.
11. 11.
. Thus our love to Christ and zeal for truth does appear. God shows who are
the living fish, viz. such as swim against the stream; who are the sound sheep,
viz. such as feed in the green pastures of the Ordinances; who are the Doves,
viz. such as live in the best air, where the Spirit breaths; God sets a
Garland of honor upon these, These are they which came out of great
tribulation Rev. 7. 14
. So, these are they that have opposed the Errors of the times; these are they
that have preserved the virginity of their conscience; who have kept their
judgment sound, and their heart soft. God will have a Trophy of honor set upon
some of his Saints, they shall be renowned for their sincerity, being like the
Cypress, quae viriditatem in hyeme non amittit Ambrose
, which keeps its greenness and freshness in the winter-season.

2. Be not sinfully discontented, 2. Reply.
for God can make the errors of the Church advantageous to truth. Thus the
truths of God have come to be more beaten out and confirmed; as it is in Law,
one man laying a false title to a piece of land, the true title has by this
means been the more searched into and ratified: some had never so studied to
defend the truth by Scripture, if others had not endeavored to overthrow it by
Sophistry; all the mists and fogs of Error that have risen out of the
bottomless pit, have made the glorious Sun of truth to shine so much the
brighterr. Had not Arius and Sabellius broached their damnable Errors, the
truth of those questions about the blessed Trinity had never been so discussed
and defended by Athanasius, Augustine, and others; had not the Devil brought in
so much of his princely darkness, the Champions for Truth had never run so
fast to Scripture to light their Lamps. So that God who has a wheel within a
wheel, overrules these things wisely, and turns them to the best. Truth is
an heavenly plant that settles by shaking.

3. God raises the price of his truth the more; 3. Reply.
the very shreds and filings of truth are venerable. Etiam ramenta auripretiosa.
When there is much counterfeit metal abroad, we prize the true Gold the more:
the pure wine of Truth is never more precious then when unsound doctrines are
broached and vented.

4. Error makes us more thankful to God for the jewel of Truth. 4. Reply.
When you see another infected with the Plague, how thankful are you, that God
has freed you from the infection? when we see others have the Leprosy in the
head, how thankful are we to God that he has not given us over to believe a
lie, and so ^e damned? It is a good use that may be made even of the Error of
the times, when it makes us more humble and thankful, adoring the free grace of
God who has kept us from drinking of that deadly poison.

2. The second Branch of the Apology that discontent makes, 2 Branch of the
Apology.
is the impiety of the times. I live and converse among the profane, The
impiety of the times.
O that I had wings like a Dove, that I might fly away and be at rest Ps. 55.
6.
! Answ. It is indeed sad to be mixed with the wicked, David beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved Psalm. 119 158.
; and Lot, (who was a bright Star in a dark night) was vexed* or as the word
in the Original may bear, wearied out, (...).
, (...), with the unclean conversation of the wicked 2 Pet. 2. 7
; he made the sins of Sodom spears to pierce his own soul; we ought (if there
be any spark of divine love in us) to be very sensible of the sins of others,
and our hearts bleed for them, yet let us not break forth in murmuring or
discontent, knowing that God in his providence has permitted it, and surely
not without some reasons. For,

1. The Lord makes the wicked an hedge to defend the godly; 1. Reply.
the wise God often makes those who are wicked and peaceable, a means to
safeguard his people from those who are wicked and cruel. The King of Babylon
kept Jeremy, and gave special order for his looking to, that he did want
nothing Jer. 39. 11, 12.
. God sometimes makes brazen sinners to be brazen walls to defend his people.

2. God does interline and mingle the wicked with the godly, 2. Reply.
that the godly may be a means to save the wicked; such is the beauty of
holiness, that it has a magnetical force in it to allure and draw even the
wicked. Sometimes God makes a believing husband a means to convert an
unbeleeving wife, and e contra. What know thou, O wife, whether thou shall
save thy husband? or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife
1 Cor. 7, 16.
? The godly living among the wicked, by their prudent advice, and pious example
have won them to the embracing of Religion; if there were not some godly among
the wicked, how in a probable way without a miracle can we imagine that the
wicked should be converted? Those who are now shining Saints in Heaven,
sometimes served diverse lusts Tit. 3. 3
. Paul once a persecutor; Augustine once a Manichee; Luther once a Monk; but by
the severe and holy carriage of the godly, were converted to the faith.

SECT. X.
The tenth Apology answered.
The next Apology that Discontent makes, is lowness of parts, 10. Apology.
and gifts.

I cannot, says the Christian, discourse with that fluency, nor pray with that
elegancy as others.

Answ. 1. 1. Reply.
Grace is beyond gifts; Thou comparest thy grace with another gifts, there is a
vast difference; Grace without gifts is infinitely better then gifts without
grace; in Religion, the vitals are better then the intellectuals: Gifts are a
more extrinsecall and common work of the Spirit, which is incident to
reprobates; grace is a more distinguishing work, and is a jewel hung only
upon the Elect. Have thou and seed of God, the holy anointing? be content.

I. Thou say, thou can not discourse with that fluency as others.

Answ. Experiments in Religion are beyond notions, and impressions beyond
expressions. Judas no doubt could make a learned discourse of Christ; but
welfare the woman in the Gospel, that felt virtue coming out of him Luke 8. 47.
. A sanctified heart is better then a silver tongue. There is as much
difference between gifts and grace, as between a Tulip painted on the wall, and
one growing in the Garden.

II. Thou say, thou can not pray with that elegancy as others.

Answ. Prayer is a matter more of the heart then the head. In prayer it is not
so much fluency prevails, as fervency Jam. ^. 16.
; nor is God so much taken with the elegancy of speech, (...).
as the efficacy of the Spirit. Humility is better then volubility; here the
mourner is the orator, sighs and groans are the best Rhetorique.

2. Be not discontented; 2. Reply.
For God does usually proportion a man's parts to the place where he calls him:
Some are set in an higher sphere and function, their place requires more parts
and abilities; but the most inferior member is useful in its place, and shall
have a power delegated for the discharge of its peculiar office.

SECT. XI.
The eleventh Apology answered.
The next Apology is, 11. Apology.
The troubles of the Church. Alas, my disquiet and discontent is not so much
for my self, as the public. The Church of God suffers.

Answ. I confess it is sad, and we ought for this to hang our Harps upon the
Willowes Ps. 137.
; he is a wooden leg in Christ's body, that is not sensible of the state of the
body. As a Christian must not be proud flesh, so neither dead flesh. When the
Church of God suffers, he must sympathize; Jeremy wept for the Virgin daughter
of Sion. We must feel our brethrens hard cords through our soft beds; in
Music, if one string be touched, all the rest sound; when God strikes upon our
brethren, our bowels must sound as an Harp Isa. 16. 11
; be sensible, but do not give way to discontent. For consider,

1. 1. Reply.
God sits at the stern of his Church Ps. 46. 5.
; Sometimes it is as a ship tossed upon the waves, O thou afflicted and tossed
Isa. 54. 1^
: but cannot God bring this ship to haven, though it meet with a storm upon
the Sea? The ship in the Gospel was tossed, because sin was in it; but it was
not overwhelmed, because Christ was in it. Christ is in the Ship of his Church,
fear not sinking; The Churches Anchor is cast in Heaven. Do not we think God
loves his Church, and takes as much care of it as we can? The names of the
twelve Tribes were on Aarons breast, signifying how near to Gods heart his
people are; They are his portion Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
, and shall that be lost? His glory Is. 46. 13
, and shall that be finally eclipsed? No certainly. God can deliver his Church,
not only from, but by opposition; the Churches pangs shall help forward her
deliverance.

2. God has always propagated Religion by sufferings. 2. Reply.
The foundation of the Church has been laid in blood Sanguine fundata est
Ecclesia, sanguine crevit.
, and these sanguine showers have ever made it more fruitful. Cain put the
knife to Abels throat, and ever since, the Churches veins have bled; but she is
like the Vine, which by bleeding grows; and like the Palm Tree, which may have
this motto, Percussa resurgit; the more weight is laid upon it, the higher it
rises. The holiness and patience of the Saints under their persecutions, has
much added both to the growth of Religion, and the Crown. Basil, and Tertul.
observe of the Primitive Martyrs, that diverse of the Heathens seeing their
zeal and constancy, turned Christians. Religion is that Phoenix which has
always revived and flourished in the ashes of holy men. Isaiah sawen asunder;
Peter crucified at Jerusalem with his head downwards Eusebius.
; Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, Polycarp of Smyrna, both marryr'd for Religion;
yet evermore the Truth has been sealed most by blood, and gloriously
dispersed; whereupon Julian did forbear to persecute, non ex clementia, sed
invidia; not out of pity, but envy, because the Church grew so fast, and
multiplied as Nazianzen well observes.

SECT. XII.
The twelfth Apology answered.
The twelfth Apology that Discontent makes for it self, 12. Apology.
is this: It is not my trouble that troubles me, but it is my sins that do
disquiet and discontent.

Answ. Be sure it be so; do not prevaricate with God and thy own soul, in
true mourning for sin, when the present suffering is removed, yet the sorrow
is not removed; but suppose the Apology be real, and sin is the ground of your
discontent* Yet I answer, a man's disquiet about sin, may be beyond its bounds
in these three cases.

1. When it is disheartning, 1. Reply.
that is, when it sets up sin above mercy. If Israel had only pored upon their
sting, 10. Dolor exanimans.
and not looked up to the brazen Serpent, they had never been ^ealed. That
sorrow for sin which ^rives us away from God, is not without sin, for there
is more de^paire in it then remorse; The soul ^ath so many tears in its eyes,
that it cannot see Christ. Sorrow as sorrow ^oth not save (that were to make a
Christ of our tears,) but is useful as ^t is preparatory in the soul, making
sin vile, and Christ precious. Oh ^ook up to the Brazen Serpent, the Lord
Jesus; a sight of his blood will ^evive, the medicine of his merits (...)
broader then our sore.

It is Satan's policy, either to keep is from seeing our sins; or if we will
needs see them, that we may be swallowed up of sorrow 2 Cor. 2^.
, either he would stupifie us, or affright us; either keep the glass of the
Law from our eyes, or else pensil out our sins in such Crimson colors, that
we may sink in the quicksands of despair.

2. When sorrow is indisposing, it untunes the heart for prayer, 2. Dolor
impediens.
meditation, holy conference; it cloisters up the soul. This is not sorrow, but
rather sullenness, and does render a man not so much penitential, as Cynical.

3. When it is out of season; God bids us rejoice, 3. Dolor intempestivus.
and we hang our harps upon the Willowes; he bids us trust, and we cast our
selves down, and are brought even to the margin of despair. if Satan cannot
keep us from mourning, he will be sure to put us upon it when it is least in
season.

When God calls us in a special manner to be thankful for mercy, and put on
our white robes, then Satan will be putting us into mourning; and in stead of a
garment of praise, cloth us with a spirit of heaviness; so God loses the
acknowledgement of a mercy, and we the comfort.

If thy sorrow has tuned and fitted thee for Christ, if it has raised in thee
high prizings of him, strong hungerings after him, sweet delight in him; this
is as much as God requires, and a Christian does but sin to vex and torture
himself further upon the wrack of his own discontent.

And thus I hope I have answered the most material Objections, and Apologies
which this sin of Discontent does make for it self. I see no reason why a
Christian should be discontented, unless for his Discontent. Let me in the
next place propound something which may be both as a loadstone and a whetstone
to Contentation.

CHAP. XI.
Divine Motives to Contentment.
AND so I proceed to the Arguments, or Motives that may quicken to Contentment.
SECT. I.
The first Argument to Contentation.
1. Consider the Excellency of it. Contentment is a flower that does not grow
in every Garden; The first Argument to Contentation.
it teaches a man how in the midst of want to abound. You would think it were
excellent, if I could prescribe a receipt, or antidote against poverty; but
behold, here is that which is more excellent; for a man to want, and yet have
enough, this alone contentment of spirit brings. Contentatio is (...), a remedy
against all our troubles, a levamen to all our burdens, it is the cure of care.
Contentation, though it be not properly a Grace, it is rather a disposition of
mind; yet in it there is optimum temperamentum, an happy temperature and
mixture of all the graces: It is a most precious compound which is made up of
Faith, Patience, Meekness, etc. which are the ingredients put into it. Now
there are in specie these seven rare excellencies in Contentment.

1. A contented Christian carries heaven about him; 1. Excellency of
Contentation.
For what is Heaven but that sweet repose and full contentment that the soul
shall have in God? in Contentment there is the first fruits of Heaven.

There are two things in a contented spirit which makes it like Heaven.

1. God is there; Something of God is to be seen in that heart. 1. Ibi Deus.
A discontented Christian is like a rough tempestuous Sea; when the water is
rough, you can see nothing there; but when it is smooth and serene, then you
may behold your face in the water Prove. 27. 19.
. When the heart rages through discontent, it is like a rough Sea; you can see
nothing there, unless passion and murmuring; there is nothing of God, nothing
of Heaven in that heart; but by virtue of Contentment, it is like the Sea when
it is smooth and calm, there is a face shining there; you may see something of
Christ in that heart, a representation of all the graces.

2. Rest is there. O what a Sabbath is kept in a contented heart! 2. Ibi
requies.
What an Heaven! A contented Christian is like Noah in the Arc; though the
Arc were tossed with waves, Noah could sit and sing in the Arc. The soul
that is gotten into the Arc of Contentment, sits quiet, and sails above all
the waves of trouble; he can sing in this spiritual Arc. The wheels of the
Chariot move, but the axle-tree stirs not; the circumference of the Heavens is
carried about the Earth, but the Earth moves not out of its center. When we
meet with motion and change in the creatures round about us, a contented
spirit is not stirred or moved out of its center. The sails of a mill move
with the wind, but the mill it self stands still; An emblem of Contentment:
When our outward estate moves with the wind of providence, yet the heart is
settled through holy Contentment; and when others are like quicksilver shaking
and trembling through disquiet, the contented spirit can say as David, O God,
my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed Ps. 57. 7.
; what is this but a piece of heaven?

2. Whatever is defective in the creature, 2. Excellency.
is made up in Contentment. A Christian may want the comforts that others have,
the land, and possessions; but God has distilled into his heart that
Contentment which is far better; In this sense that is true of our Savior, He
shall have in this life an hundred fold Mat. 19. 29
. Perhaps he that ventured all for Christ, never has his house or land again;
I, but God gives him a contented spirit; and this breeds such joy in the soul,
as is infinitely sweeter then all his houses and lands which he left for
Christ. It was sad with David in regard of his outward comforts; he being
driven (as some think) from his Kingdom, yet in regard of that sweet
contentment he found in God, he had more comfort then men use to have in time
of harvest and vintage Psalm. 4, 7.
. One man has house and lands to live upon, another has nothing, only a small
trade; yet even that brings in a livelihood. A Christian may have little in the
world, but he drives the trade of contentment; and so he knows as well how to
want, as to abound. O the rare art, or rather miracle of contentment! Wicked
men are often disquieted in the enjoyment of all things; the contented
Christian is well in the want of all things.

Quest. But how comes a Christian to be contented in the deficiency of outward
comforts? Quest.


Answ. A Christian finds contentment distilled out of the breasts of the
Promises. Answ.
He is poor in purse, but rich in Promise. There is one promise brings much
sweet contentment into the soul; They that seek the Lord, shall not want any
good thing Ps. 34. 10.
. If the thing we desire be good for us, we shall have it; if it be not good,
then the not having it is good for us. The resting satisfied with this Promise,
gives contentment.

3. Contentment makes a man in tune to serve God; 3 Excellency.
it oiles the wheels of the soul, and makes it more agil and nimble; it
composeth the heart, and now is fit for prayer, meditation, etc. How can he
that is in a passion of grief, or discontent, serve God without distraction 1
Cor. 7. 35.
? Contentment does prepare and tune the heart. First you prepare the Viol, and
wind up the strings, ere you play a fit of music. When a Christians heart is
wound up to this heavenly frame of Contentment, then it is fit for duty. A
discontented Christian is like Saul when the evil spirit came upon him. O what
jarrings and discords does he make in prayer! When an Army is put into a
disorder, now it is not sit for battle: When the thoughts are scattered and
distracted about the cares of this life, a man is not fit for devotion.
Discontent takes the heart wholly off from God, and fixes it upon the present
trouble, so that a man's mind is not upon his prayer, but upon his ^rosse.

Discontent does disjoynt the soul, and it is impossible now that a Christian
should go so steadily, and cheerfully in Gods service. O how lame is his
devotion! The discontented person gives God but half a duty, his Religion is
nothing but bodily exercise, it wants a soul to animate it. David would not
offer that to God which cost him nothing 2 Sa^^* 24 24*
; where there is too much worldly care, there is too little spiritual cost in a
duty. The discontented person does his duties by halves; he is just like
Ephraim, a cake not turned Hos. 7. 8
; he is a cake baked on one side; he gives God the outside, but not the
spiritual part, his heart is not in duty; he is baked on one side, but the
other side dough; and what profit is there of such raw, indigested services? He
that gives God only the skin of worship, what can he expect more then the shell
of comfort? Contentation brings the heart into frame; and then only do we give
God the flower and spirits of a duty; when the soul is composed; now a
Christian does rem ^gere, his heart is intense and serious. There are some
duties which we cannot perform as we ought without Contentment; As,

1. To rejoice in God. How can he rejoice that is discontented? he is sitter
for Repining then Rejoyceing.

2. To be thankful for mercy. Can a discontented person be thankful? he can
be fretful, not thankful.

3. To justify God in his proceedings Ezra. 9. 23
. How can he do this who is discontented with his condition? He will sooner
censure Gods wisdom, then clear his justice. Oh then how excellent is
Contentation which does prepare, and as it were string the heart for duty?
Indeed Contentment does not only make our duties lively and agil, but
acceptable. It Is this that puts beauty and worth into them; for Contentment
settles the soul: Now as it is with milk, when it is always stirring, you can
make nothing of it, but let it settle a while and then it turns to cream: When
the heart is overmuch stirred with disquiet and discontent, you can make
nothing of those duties; how thin, how fletten, and jejune are they? But when
the heart is once settled by holy Contentment, now there is some worth in our
duties, now they turn to cream.

4. Contentment is the spiritual Arch, 4. Excellency.
or pillar of the soul; it fits a man to bear burdens; he whose heart is ready
to sink under the least sin, by virtue of this has a spirit invincible under
sufferings. A contented Christian is like the Camomile, the more it is trodden
upon, the more it grows; as Physic works diseases out of the body, so does
Contentment work trouble out of the heart. Thus it argues; If I am under
reproach, God can vindicate me; If I am in want, God can relieve me. Ye shall
not see wind, nor rain; yet the valley shall be filled with water 2 Kings 3.
17.
. Thus holy Contentment keeps the heart from fainting; in the Autumn when the
fruit and leaves are blown off, still there is sap in the root: When there is
an autumn upon our external felicity, the leaves of our estate drop off, still
there is the sap of Contentment in the heart; and a Christian has life
inwardly, when his outward comforts do not blossom. The contented heart is
never out of heart. Contentation is a golden shield, that does beat back
discouragement. Humility is like the lead to the net, which keeps the soul
down when it is rising through passion; and Contentment is like the cork which
keeps the heart up when it is sinking through discouragement. Contentment is
the great underpropper; it is like the Beam which bears whatever weight is
laid upon it; nay, it is like a Rock that breaks the waves.

It Is strange to observe the same affliction lying upon two men, how
differently they carry themselves under it. The contented Christian is like
Samson, that carried away the gates of the City upon his back Judges 16. 3.
; he can go away with his cross cheerfully, and makes nothing of it; the other
is like Issachar couching down under his burden Genesis 49. 14.
: the reason is, the one is content, and that breeds courage; the other
discontented, and that breeds fainting. Discontent swells the grief, and grief
breaks the heart. When this sacred sinew of Contentment begins to shrink, we go
limping under our afflictions. We know not what burdens God may exercise us
with, let us therefore preserve Contentment; as is our Contentment, such will
be our courage. David with his five stones and his sling, defied Goliath, and
overcame him. Get but Contentment into the sling of your heart, and with this
sacred stone you may both defy the world and conquer it; you may break those
afflictions which else will break you.

5. A fifth excellency is, 5. Excellency.
Contentment prevents many sins and tentations.

1. It prevents many sins. Where there wants Contentment, there wants no sin;
discontentednesse with our condition, is a sin that does not go alone, but is
like the first link of the chain, which draws all the other linkes along with
it. In particular, there are two sins which Contentatation prevents.

1. Impatience. Discontent and Impatience are two Twins; This evil is of the
Lord, why should I wait any longer 2 Kings 6. 33.
? As if God were so tied that he must give us the mercy just when we desire.
Impatience is no small sin, as will appear, if you consider whence it arises; As,

1. It is for want of faith. Faith gives a right notion of God; it is an
intelligent grace; it believes that Gods wisdom tempers, and his love sweetens
all ingredents; this works patience; Shall I not drink the cup which my
Father has given me? Impatience is the daughter of infidelity. If a patient
has an ill opinion of the Physician, and conceits that he comes to poison him,
he will take none of his Receipts. When we have a prejudice against God, and
conceit that he comes to kill us, and undo us, then we storm, and cry out
through Impatience. We are like a foolish man ('it is Chrysostoms simile) that
cries out, Away with the plaster, though it be in order to a cure; is it not
better that the plaster smart a little, then the wound fester and rankle?

2. Impatience is for want of love to God. We will bear his reproofs whom we
love, not only patiently, but thankfully. Love thinks no evil 1 Cor. 13.
. It puts the fairest and most candid gloss upon the actions of a friend; Love
covers evil. If it were possible for God in the least manner to err, (which
were blasphemy to think) love would cover that error; love takes every thing
in the best sense; it makes us bear any stroke, It endures all things 2 Cor.
13. 7.
; had we love to God, we should have patience.

3. Impatience is for want of Humility. The impatient man was never humbled
under the burden of sin; he that studies his sins, the numberless number
of them, how they are twisted together, and sadly accented, is patient, and
says, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him Mica. 7. 9.
. The greater noise drowns the lesser; when the sea roares the rivers are
still, he that lets his thoughts expatiate about sin, is both silent and
amazed, he wonders it is no worse with him. How great then is this sin of
impatience? and how excellent is Contentation which is a Supersedeas or
counterpoison against this sin. The contented Christian believing that God
does all in love, is patient, and has not one word to say, unless to justify
God Ps. 51. 4.
. That is the first sin which Contentation prevents.

2. It prevents murmuring, a sin which is a degree higher then the other;
murmuring is a quarrelling with God, and enveighing against him, They spoke
against God Number. 21. 5.
; the murmurer says interpretatively, that God has not dealt well with him,
and he has deserved better from him. The murmurer charge God with folly;
This is the language, or rather blasphemy of a murmuring spirit, God might have
been a wiser and a better God. The murmurer is a mutineer. The Israelites are
called in the same text murmurers and Rebels Numb. 17. 10*
; and is not rebellion as the sin of witchcraft? Thou that art a murmurer, art
in the account of God as a Witch, a Sorcerer, as one that deals with the Devil.
This is a sin of the first magnitude; murmuring often ends in cursing: Micah's
mother fell to cursing when the talents of silver were taken away Judge. 17* 2.
. So does the murmurer when a part of his estate is taken away; our murmuring
is the Devils music; this is that sin which God cannot bear, How long shall I
bear with this people that murmur against me Numb. 14. 7.
? It is a sin which whets the sword against a people, it is a land-destroying
sin; Murmur ye not as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer 1 Cor. 10. 10.
. It Is a ripening sin; this, without Gods mercy, will hasten Englands
funerals. O then how excellent is contentation which prevents this sin? To be
contented and yet murmur, is a soloecism; A contented Christian does acquisce
in his present condition, and does not murmur, but admire. Herein appears the
excellency of contentation, it is a spiritual antidote against sin.

2. Contentment prevents many temptations; discontent is a devil that is
always tempting. 1 Tentation
1. It puts a man upon indirect means: He that is poor and discontented, will
attempt any thing; he will go to the devil for riches; he that is proud and
discontented will hang himself, as Achitophel did when his counsel was
rejected. Satan takes great advantage of our discontent; he loves to fish in
these troubled waters. Discontent does both eclipse reason and weaken faith;
and it is Satan policy, he does usually break over the hedge where it is
weakest. Discontent makes a breach in the soul, and usually at this breach the
devil enters by a tentation, and storms the soul. How easily can the devil by
his Logic dispute a discontented Christian into sin? He forms such a
syllogism as this; He that is in want must study self-preservation: But you are
now in want, therefore you ought to study self-preservation. Hereupon to make
good his Conclusion, he tempts to the forbidden fruit, not distinguishing
between what is needful and what is lawful. What? says he, do thou want a
livelihood? never be such a fool as starve; take the rising side at a venture,
be it good or bad, eat the bread of deceit, drink the wine of violence. Thus
you see how the discontented man is a prey to that sad tentation, Pro. 30* 9*
to steal, and take Gods name in vain. Contentation is a shield against
tentation; for he that is conented, knows as well how to want, as to abound.

He will not sin to get a living; though the bill of fare grows short, he is
content. He lives as the birds of the air upon Gods Providence, and doubts not
but he shall have enough to pay for his passage to heaven.

2. Discontent tempts a man to Atheism and Apostacy; 2 Tentation
sure there is no God to take care of things here below; would he suffer them
to be in want who have walked mournfully before him Mal. 3. 14
? says discontent; Throw off Christ's livery, desist from thy religion. Thus
Jobs wife, being discontented with her condition, says to her husband, Do
thou still retain thy integrity Job 2. 9.
? as if she had said, Do thou not see, Job, what is become of all thy
Religion? Thou fear God and eschewest evil, and what art thou the better?
see how God turns his hand against thee; he has smitten thee in thy body,
estate, relations, and Do thou still retain thy integrity? what? still devour?
still weep and pray before him? Thou fool, cast off Religion, turn Athiest.
Here was a sore tentation that the Devil did hand over to Job, by his
discontented wife; only his grace as a golden shield did ward off the blow from
his heart, Thou speak as one of the foolish women. What profit is it, says
the discontented person, to serve the Almighty? Those that never trouble
themselves about Religion, are the prosperous men, and I in the mean while
suffer want: as good give over driving the trade of Religion, if this be all my
reward; This is a sore tentation, and often it prevails; Atheism is the fruit
that grows out of the blossom of discontent.

Oh then behold the excellency of contentment, it does repel this tentation.
If God be mine, says the contented spirit, it is enough, though I have no
lands or tenements, his smile makes heaven; His loves are better then wine;
Better is the gleanings of Ephraim then the vintage of Abiezer Jud. 8. 2*
. I have little in hand, but much in hope; my livelihood is short, but this is
his promise, even eternal life 1 John 2 25.
. I am pursued by malice, but better is persecuted godliness then prosperous
wickedness. Thus divine contentment is a spiritual antidote both against sin
and tentation.

6. Contentment sweetens every condition. 6 Excellency.
Christ turned the water into wine, so Contentment turns the water of Marah
into spiritual wine. Have I but little? yet it is more then I can deserve or
challenge. This modieum is in mercy; it is the fruit of Christ's blood; it is the
legacy of free grace: a small present sent from a King is highly valued; this
little I have is with a good conscience, It Is not stolen water; guilt has not
muddied or poisoned it; it runs pure. This little is a pledge of more; this bit
of bread, is an earnest of that bread which I shall eat in the Kingdom of God.
This little water in the cruse, is an earnest of that heavenly Nectar which
shall be distilled from the true Vine. Do I meet with some crosses? my comfort
is, if they be heavy, I have not far to go; I shall but carry my cross to
Golgotha, and there I shall leave it; My cross is light in regard of the
weight of glory. Has God taken away my comforts from me? it is well, the
Comforter still abides. Thus Contentment as an honeycomb drops sweetness into
every condition. Discontent is a leaven that sowers every comfort, it puts
aloes and wormwood upon the breast of the creature, it lessens every mercy, it
trebbles every cross; but the contented spirit suckes sweetness from every
flower of providence, it can make a treacle of poison. Contentation is full of
Consolation.

7. Contentment has this excellency, 7. Excellency.
it is the best commentator upon Providence; it makes a fair interpretation of
all Gods dealings. Let the Providence of God be never so dark or bloody,
Contentment does construe them ever in the best sense. I may say of it as the
Apostle of charity, It thinks no evil 1 Cor. 13
. Sickness (says Contentment) is Gods furnace, to refine his gold and make it
sparkle the more; the prison is an Oratory, or house of prayer. What if God
melts away the creature from me? he saw perhaps my heart grew too much in love
with it; had I been long in that fat pasture, I should have surfeited; and the
better my estate had been, the worse my soul would have been. God is wise, he
has done this, either to prevent some sin, or to exercise some grace. What a
blessed frame of heart is this? A contented Christian is an Advocate for God
against unbelief and impatience; Whereas Discontent takes every thing from God
in the worst sense; it does implead and censure God: This evil I feel is but
a symptom of greater evil: God is about to undo me; The Lord has brought
us hither into the wilderness to slay us Numb. 20. 4.
. The contented soul takes all well; and when his condition is never so bad,
he can say, Yet God is good Ps. 73. 1.
.

SECT. 2.
The second Argument to Contentation.
The second Argument or Motive Contentment is, a Christian has that which may
make him content O fortunatos ^i^ium bona si sua nurin^. Virgil.
.

1. Has not God given thee Christ? in him there are unsearchable riches Ephesians:
3. 1
; He is such a golden mine of wisdom and grace, that all the Saints and Angels
can never dig to the bottom; He is an enriching pearl, a sparkling Diamond,
the infinite luster of his merits makes us shine in Gods eyes Ephesians. 1. 7
; in him there is both fullness and sweetness; he is ineffabile bonum Aug^
. Scrue up your thoughts to the highest (...) and pinnacle, stretch them to the
utmost period, let them expatiate to their full latitude and extent; yet they
fall infinitely short of those ineffable and inexhaustible treasures which are
locked up in Jesus Christ: and is not here enough to give the soul content? A
Christian that wants necessaries, yet having Christ, he has the one thing
needful Qui habet habentem omnia, habet omnia.
.

2. Thy soul is exercised and enameled with the graces of the Spirit, and is
not here enough to give contentment? Grace is of a divine birth; it is the new
plantation; it is the flower of the heavenly Paradise; it is the embroydery of
the Spirit; it is the seed of God 1 John 3. 9.
; it is the sacredunction; 1 John 2. 27.
it is Christ's pourtraiture in the soul; it is the very foundation on whch the
superstructure of glory is laid. O, of what infinite value is Grace! What a
Jewel is Faith! well may it be called precious Faith 2 Pet. 1. 1.
. What is love, but a divine sparkle in the soul? A soul beautified with
grace, is like a room richly hung with Arras, or Tapestry, or the Firmament
bespangled with glittering Stars. These are the true riches Luke 16. 11.
, which cannot stand with reprobation; and is not here enough to give the soul
contentment? What are all other things but like the wings of a butterfly,
curiously painted? but they defile our fingers. Earthly riches, says
Augustine, are full of poverty Divitia corporales paupertatis plenae sunt. Aug.
; so indeed they are. For, 1. They cannot enrich the soul; Oftentimes under
silken apparel, there is a therd-bare soul. 2. These are corruptible. Riches
are not for ever, as the wise man says Prove. 27 24.
. Heaven is a place where gold and silver will not go; a Believer is rich
toward God Luke 12 21.
, why then art thou discontented? has not God given thee that which is better
then the world? What if he does not give thee the box, if he gives thee the
Jewel? What if he denies thee farthings, if he pays thee in a better coin?
he gives thee gold, viz. spiritual mercies. Should not Joseph's brethren have
been content that their sacks were filled with corn, though there had not been
money in the mouth of their sacks? What if the water in the bottel be spent?
thou have enough in the fountain; What need he complain of the worlds
Emptiness that has Gods Fullness? The Lord is my portion, Psalm. 16. 5.
says David, then let the lines fall where they will, in a sickbed, or
prison; I will say, The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I
have a goodly heritage.

SECT. 3.
The third Argument to Contentation.
The third Argument is, Be content, for else we confute our own prayers; We
pray, Thy will be done; It is the will of God that we should be in such a
condition; he has decreed it, and he sees it best for us: Why then do we
murmur, and are discontented at that which we pray for? either we are not in
good earnest in our prayer, which argues hypocrisy, or else we contradict our
selves, which argues folly.

SECT. 4.
The fourth Argument to Contentation.
The fourth Argument to Contentment is, because now God has his end, and Satan
misseth of his end.

1. God has his end. Gods end in all his cross providence, is to bring the
heart to submit and be content; and indeed this pleases God much, he loves to
see his children satisfied with that portion he does carve, and allot them. It
contents him to see us contented; Therefore let us acquiesce in Gods
Providence; Now God has his end.

2. Satan misseth of his end. The end why the Devil (though by Gods permission)
did smite Job, in his body and estate, was to perplex his mind; he did vex
his body on purpose that he might disquiet his spirit. He hoped to bring Job
into a fit of discontent; and then, that he would in a passion break forth
against God; but Job being so well contented with his condition, as that he
falls to blessing of God, he did now disappoint Satan of his hope. The Devil
shall cast some of you into prison Rev. 2. 10.
. Why does the Devil throw us into prison? It is not so much the hurting our
body, as the molesting our mind that he aims at; he would imprison our
Contentment, and disturb the regular motion of our souls; this is his
design: it is not so much the putting us into prison, as the putting us into a
passion, that he attempts; but by holy contentation, Satan loses his prey, he
misseth of his end. The Devil has often deceived us; the best way to deceive
him, is by contentation in the midst of tentation; our contentment will
discontent Satan. Oh, let us not gratify our enemy. Discontent is the Devils
delight; now it is as he would have it, he loves to warm himself at the fire
of our passions. Repentance is the joy of the Angels, and Discontent is the joy
of the Devils: As the Devil danceth at discord, so he sings at discontent. The
fire of our passions makes the Devil a bon-fire; it is a kind of heaven to him
to see us torturing our selves with our own troubles; but by holy Contentment
we frustrate him of his purpose, and do it as it were, put him out of
countenance.

SECT. 5.
The fifth Argument to Contentation.
The next Argument is, by contentment a Christian gets a victory over himself:
For a man to be able to rule his own spirit Fortior est qui se quam qui
fortissim^ vincit moenia. etc.
, this of all others the most noble conquest Prove. 16. 32.
. Passion denotes weakness; to be discontented, is suitable to flesh and
blood; but to be in every state content; reproached, yet content; imprisoned,
yet content; this is above nature; this is some of that holy valor and
chivalry, which only a divine spirit is able to infuse. In the midst of the
affronts of the world to be patient, and the changes of the world to have the
spirit calmed; this argues (...), as Homer speaks; this a conquest worthy
indeed of the Garland of honor. Holy Job divested and turned out of all,
leaving his Scarlet, and embracing the Dunghill, (a sad catastrophe,) yet he
had learned Contentment. It Is said, He fell upon the ground and worshipped Job
1. 20
. One would have thought he should have fallen upon the ground and blasphemed;
no, he fell and worshipped. He adored Gods justice and holiness; behold, the
strength of grace; here was an humble submission, yet a noble conquest; he got
the victory over himself. It Is no great matter for a man to yield to his own
passions, this is facile and foeminine; but to content himself in denying of
himself, this is sacred.

SECT. 6.
The sixth Argument to Contentation.
The sixth great Argument to work the heart to Contentment, is the
consideration that all Gods providence, how cross or bloody soever, shall do
a Believer good; And we know that all things work together for good to them
that love God Romans 8. 28.
. Not only all good things, but all evil things work for good, (...).
and shall we be discontented at that which works for our good? Suppose our
troubles are twisted together, and sadly accented, as the Poet describes it.

Litora quot conchas, quot amoena Rosaria flores,
Quotve soporiferum grana papaver habet,
Sylva feras quot alit, quot piscibus unda natatur,
Et Tenerum pennis, era pulsat avis,
Tot premor adversis, etc. Ovid.
What if sickness, poverty, reproach, Lawsuits, etc. do unite, and muster
their forces against us? All shall work (...), for good; our maladies shall be
our medicines: and shall we repine at that which shall undoubtedly do us good?
Unto the upright there arises light in darkness Ps. 112. 4.
. Affliction may be baptized Marah; it is bitter, but physical. Because this is
so full of comfort, and may be a most excellent Catholicon against discontent;
I shall a little expatiate.

Quest. It will be enquired how the evils of affliction work for good? Quest.


R. Several ways. Answ.


1. They are disciplinary; they teach us Schola crucis est schola lucis.
. The Psalmist having very elegantly described the Churches trouble, Psalm. 74.
prefixeth this title to the Psalm, (...), which signifies a Psalm giving
instruction; that which seals up instruction, works for good. God puts us
sometimes under the black rod; but it is virga disciplinaris, a rod of
discipline; Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it Mica. 6. 9.
. God makes our Adversity, our University: Affliction is a Preacher; Jer. 6. 1.
Blow the trumpet in Tekoah, Ier. 6. 1. The Trumpet was to preach to the
people, as appears, verse. 6. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem. Sometimes God
speaks to the Minister to lift up his voice like a Trumpet Isa. 58. 1
; and here he speaks to the Trumpet, to lift up its voice like a Minister.
Afflictions teach us.

1. Humility, commonly prosperous and proud; corrections are Gods corrosives to
eat out the proud flesh. Jesus Christ is a Lily of the valleys Cant. 2. 1.
, he dwells in an humble heart; God brings us into the valley of tears, that
he may bring us into the valley of humility; Remembering my affliction, the
wormwood and the gall, my soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled
in me Lam. 3. 19, 20.
. When men are grown high, God has no better way with them, then to brew them
a cup of wormwood. Afflictions are compared to thorns Hos. 2. 8
; Gods thorns are to prick the bladder of pride: suppose a man run at
another with a sword to kill him, accidentally, it only lets out his
impostume, this does him good. Gods sword is to let out the impostume of pride,
and shall that which makes us humble, make us discontented?

2. Afflictions teach us Repentance, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastifed. I repented, and after I was instructed I smote upon my thigh, etc
Jer. 31^ 18, 19.
. Repentance is the precious fruit that grows upon the Cross. When the fire
is put under the Still, the water drops from the Roses: fiery afflictions make
the waters of Repentance drop and distill from the eyes, and is here any cause
of discontent?

3. Afflictions teach us to pray better Mala quae hi^ nos premunt ad Deum ^re
confugiunt. Greg.
, They poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them Isa. 26. 16.
. Before they would say a prayer, now they poured out a prayer; Vigilab at in
ceto qui stertebat in navi, Jonah was asleep in the ship, but awake and at
prayer in the Whales belly. When God puts under the firebrands of affliction,
now our hearts boil over the more; God loves to have his children possessed
with a spirit of prayer. Never did David the sweet singer of Israel tune his
Harp more melodiously; never did he pray better then when he was upon the
waters. Thus afflictions do in discipline, and shall we be discontented at that
which is for our good?

2. Afflictions are probatory Psalm. 66. 10, 11.
. Gold is not the worse for being tried, or corn for being fanned. Affliction
is the touchstone of sincerity, it tries what metal we are made of;
affliction is Gods fan, and his sieve. It Is good that men be known; some serve
God for a livery, they are like the fisherman that makes use of his net, only
to catch the fish: So they go a fishing, with the net of Religion, only to
catch preferment; Affliction discovers these. The Donatists went to the Goths,
when the Arians prevailed; Hypocrites will not fail in a storm; true grace
holds out in the winter-season. That is a precious faith, which like the star
shines brightest in the darkest night. It Is good that our graces should be
brought to a trial; thus we have the comfort, and the Gospel the honor; and
why then discontented?

3. Afflictions they are expurgatory; these evils work for good, because they
work out sin; and shall I be discontented at this? What if I have more
trouble, if I have less sin? The brightest day has its clouds, the purest
gold its dross, the most refined soul has some lees of corruption. The
Saints lose nothing in the furnace, but what they can well spare, their dross;
is not this for our good, why then should we murmr? I am come to send fire on
the earth Luke 12 94.
. Tertullian understands it of the fire of affliction. God makes this like the
fire of the three children, which burned only their bonds, and set them at
liberty in the furnace: So the fire of affliction serves to burn the bonds of
iniquity; By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is
all the fruit, to take away his sin Isa 27. 9
. When affliction or death comes to a wicked man, it takes away his soul; when
it comes to a godly man, it only takes away his sin; is there then any cause
why we should be discontented? God steeps us in the brinish waters of
affliction, that he may take out our spots. Gods people are his husbandry 1
Cor. 3. 9.
; the ploughing of the ground kills the weeds, and the harrowing of the earth
breaks the hard clods; Gods ploughing of us by affliction, is to kill the weeds
of sin, his harrowing of us, is to break the hard clods of impenitency, that
the heart may be the fitter to receive the seeds of grace; and if this be all,
why should we be discontented?

4. Afflictions do both exercise and increase grace.

First, they exercise grace: affliction does breath our graces; every thing is
most in its excellency, when it is most in its exercise. Our grace, though it
cannot be dead, yet it may be asleep, and has need of awakening. What a dull
thing is the fire when it is hid in the embers, or the Sun when it is masqued
with a cloud; a sick man is living, but not lively; afflictions quicken and
excite grace. God does not love to see grace in the eclipse. Now faith puts
forth its purest and most noble acts in times of affliction: God makes the fall
of the leaf the spring of our graces* What if we are more passive, if grace be
more active?

2. Afflictions do increase grace: as the wind serves to increase and blow up
the flame; so do the windy blasts of affliction augment and blow up our graces;
grace spends in the furnace, but it is like the widows oil in the cruse,
which did increase by pouring out. The torch when it is beaten, burns
brightest, so does grace when it is exercised by sufferings. Sharp frosts
nourish the good corn, so do sharp afflictions grace; some plants grow better
in the shade then in the Sun; as the Bay and the Cypress. The shade of
adversity is better for some then the Sunshine of prosperity. Naturalists
observe, that the Colewort thrives better when it is watered with salt water
then with fresh: So do some thrive better in the salt water of affliction; and
shall we be discontented at that which makes us grow and fructify more?

5. These afflictions do bring more of Gods immediate presence into the soul.
When we are most assaulted, we shall be most assisted, I will be with him in
trouble Ps. 91. 15.
. It cannot be ill with that man with whom God is by his powerful presence in
supporting, and his gracious presence in sweetning the present trial. God will
be with us in trouble, not only to behold us, but to uphold us; as he was
with Daniel in the Lions den, and the three children in the furnace. What if
we have more trouble then others, if we have more of God with us then others
have? we never have sweeter smiles from Gods face then when the world begins to
look strange; Thy Statutes have been my songs, where? not when I was upon the
throne, but in the house of my pilgrimage Ps. 119. 54.
. We read, The Lord was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the
fire 1 King. 19 11.
; but in a metaphorical and spiritual sense, when the wind of affliction
blows upon a believer, God is in the wind; when the fire of affliction
kindles upon him, God is in the fire, viz. to sanctify, to support, to
sweeten. If God be with us the furnace shall be turned into a festival, the
prison into a Paradise, the earthquake into a joyful dance. Oh why should I be
discontented when I have more of Gods company?

6. These evils of affliction are for good, as they bring with them
Certificates of Gods love, and are evidences of his special favor. Affliction
is the Saints livery, it is a badge and cognizance of honor. That the God of
glory should look upon a worm, and take so much notice of him, as to afflict
him rather then lose him, is an high act of favor. Gods rod is Sceptrum
Regale, a Scepter of dignity. Job calls Gods afflicting of us, his magnifying
of us Job 7. 17.
. Some men's prosperity has been their shame, when others affliction has been
their crown.

7. These afflictions work for our good, because they work for us a far more
exceeding weight of glory 2 Cor. 4 17.
. That which works for my glory in heaven, works for my good; we do not read in
Scripture that any man's honor and riches do work for him a weight of glory,
but afflictions do; and shall a man be discontented at that which works for his
glory? The heavier the weight of affliction, the heavier the weight of glory;
not that our sufferings do merit glory, (as the Papists do wickedly gloss;)
but though they are not causa, they are via; they are not the cause of our
crown, yet they are the way to it, and God makes us as he did our Captain
perfect through sufferings Heb. 2. 10.
; and shall not all this make us contented with our condition? Oh I beseech
you, look not upon the evil of affliction, but the good. Afflictions in
Scripture are called visitations Job 7. 18.
, the word in the Hebrew (...), to visit, is taken in good sense as well as a
bad. Gods afflictions are but friendly visits; behold here Gods rod like Aarons
rod blossoming, and Ionathans rod, it has honey at the end of it. Poverty
shall starve our sins Foelix paupertas beata miseria.
; the sickness of the body shall cure a sinsick soul: O then in stead of
murmuring and being discontented, bless the Lord; had thou not met with such
a rub in the way, thou might have gone to hell and never stopped.

SECT. 7.
The seventh Argument to Contentation.
The next Argument to Contentment is, consider the evil of discontent.
Malcontent has a mixture of grief and anger in it, and both these must needs
raise a storm in the soul. Have you not seen the posture of a sick man?
sometimes he will sit upon his bed, by and by he will lie down, and when he is
down, he is not quiet; first he turns on one side, and then on the other, he
is restless: this is just the emblem of a discontented spirit, the man is not
sick, yet he is never well, sometimes he likes such a condition of life, and
when he has it, yet he is not pleased, he is soon weary; and then another
condition of life, this is an evil under the Sun.

Now the evil of discontent appears in three things.

1. The sordidnesse of it, 1. Evil of discontent.
it is unworthy of a Christian.

First, it is unworthy of his profession. nosce te esse hominem, know thou art
a man Fer mansuete fortunam tuam, nosce te esse hominem. Tully.
. So I say, Bear thy condition contentedly, nosce te esse Christianum, know
thou art a Christian. Thou professest to live by faith, what, and not content?
Faith is a grace that does substantiate things not seen Heb. 11. 1.
, says looks beyond the creature, it feeds upon promises, faith lives not by
bread alone. When the water is spent in the bottle, faith knows whither to
have recourse; now, to see a Christian dejected in the want of visible
supplies, and recruits, where is Faith? Oh, says one, my estate in the world
is down. I, and which is worse, thy faith is down. Will thou not be contented,
unless God let down the vessel to thee as he did to Peter, wherein were all
manner of beasts of the earth, and fowls of the air Acts 10 12.
, must you have first and second course? This is like Thomas, Unless I put my
finger into the print of the nails, I will not believe John 10 25.
. So, unless thou have a sensible feeling of outward comforts, thou will not
be content. True faith will trust God where it cannot trace him, and will
adventure upon Gods bond though it has nothing in view. You who are
disco^tented because you have not al you would, let me tell you either your
faith is a nonentity, or at best but an embrio; it is a weak faith that must
have stilts and crutches to support it. Nay, discontent is not only below
faith, but below reason; why are you discontented? is it because you are
dispossessed of such comforts? well, and have you not reason to guide you? does
not reason tell you that you are but tenants at will? and may not God turn you
out when he please? You hold not your estate jure, but gratis, not by a
juridical right, but upon favor and courtesy.

2. It is unworthy of the relation we stand in to God; a Christian is invested
with the title and privilege of sonship Ephesians. 1. 5.
; he is an heir of the promise: Oh consider the lot of freegrace is fallen upon
thee, thou art nearly allied to Christ, and of the blood royal; thou art
advanced, in some sense, above the Angels; why then art thou, being the Kings
son, lean from day to day? 2 Samuel 13. 4.
2 Samuel 13. 4. Why art thou discontented? Oh how unworthy is this? as if the
heir to some great Monarch should go pining up and down because he may not
pick such a flower.

2. Consider the sinfulness of it; The second evil of discontent.
which appears in three things.

of it.
The causes The concomitants The consequences
causes; which are these.

1. Pride. He that thinks highly of his deserts, usually esteems meanly of his
condition; a discontented man is a proud man, he thinks himself better then
others, therefore finds fault with the wisdom of God that he is not above
others Nec quemquam jam far potest Caesarve prior^m, Pompeiusve parem. --
Lucan. l. 1. Pharsal.
. Thus the thing formed says to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus
Romans 9. 20
? Why am I not higher? Discontents are nothing else but the aestuations and
boilings over of pride.

2. The second cause of discontent is envy, which Augustine calls vitium
diabolicum, the sin of the Devil; Satan envied Adam the glory of Paradise,
and the robe of innocence: he that envies what his neighbor has, is never
contented with that portion which Gods providence does parcel out to him
Fertilior seges est alienis semperin agris, Alterius moss^s grandius uber
habet. Ovid.
; as envy stirs up strife, (this made the Plebeian faction so strong amongst
the Romans) so it creates discontent; the envious man looks so much upon the
blessings which another enjoyes, that he cannot see his own mercies, and so
does continually vex and torture himself. Cain envied that his brothers
sacrifice was accepted, and his rejected, hereupon he was discontented, and
presently murderous thoughts began to arise in his heart.

3. The third cause is Covetousness. This is a radical sin. Whence are
vexing Lawsuits, but from discontent? and whence is discontent, but from
covetousness? Covetousness and contentedness cannot dwell in the same heart.
Avarice is an heluo, that is never satisfied. The covetous man is like
Behemoth, behold, he drinks up a river, he trusts that he can draw up
Jordan into his mouth Job 40. 23.
, There are four things (says Solomon) say, It is not enough. I may add a
fifth, The heart of a covetous man, he is still craving. Covetousness is like
a Wolf in the breast, which is ever feeding; and because a man is not
satisfied, he is never content.

4. The fourth cause of Discontent is Jealousy, which is sometimes occasioned
through melancholy, and sometimes misapprehension. The spirit of jealousy
causes this evil spirit. Jealousy, is the rage of a man Pro. 6. 34
: and often, this is nothing but suspicion and fancy; yet such as creates real
discontent.

5. The fifth cause of Discontent is distrust, which is a great degree of
Atheism. The discontented person is ever distrustful. The bill of provision
grows low; I am in these straits and exigencies, can God help me? Can be
prepare a table in the wilderness? sure he cannot. My estate is exhausted,
can God recrute me? My friends are gone, can God raise me up more? sure the
arm of his power is shrunk. I am like the dry fleece, can any water come upon
this fleece? If the Lord would make windows in Heaven, might this thing be 1
King. 7. 2.
? Thus the Anchor of hope, and the shield of faith being cast away, the soul
goes pining up and down.

Discontent is nothing else but the Echo of unbelief: and remember distrust is
worse then distress.

2. Discontent is evil in the concomitants

1. Discontent is joined with a sullen melancholy; a Christian of a right
temper, should be ever cheerful in God; Serve the Lord with gladness Ps. 100.
ver. 2.
. A sign the oil of grace has been poured into the heart, when the oil of
gladness shines in the countenance. Cheerfulness credits Religion; how can the
discontented person be cheerful? Discontent is a dogged, sullen humor;
because we have not what we desire, God shall not have a good word or look
from us; as the Bird in the cage, because she is pent up, and cannot fly in the
open air, therefore beats herself against the cage, and is ready to kill her
self. Thus that peevish Prophet; I do well to be angry to the death Jonah 4.
.

2. Discontent is accompanied with unthankfulness; because we have not all we
desire, we never mind the mercies which we have: we deal with God as the
widow of Sarepta did with the Prophet; the Prophet Elijah had been a means to
keep her alive in the famine; for it was for his sake that her meal in the
barrel, and her oil in the cruse failed not; but as soon as ever her son
dies, she falls into a passion, and begins to quarrel with the Prophet; What
have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to call my sin to
remembrance, and to slay my son 1 Kings 17. 18.
? So ungratefully do we deal with God; we can be content to receive mercies
from God; but if he does cross us in the least thing, then through discontent,
we grow techy and impatient, and are ready to fly upon God; thus God loses all
his mercies (...). Lucian. Epigr. 2 Chro. 29. 31.
. We read in Scripture of the thankoffring (...) Lucian. Epigr. 2 Chro. 29. 31.
. The disco^tented person cuts God short of this; the Lord loses his
thank-offering. A discontented Christian repines in the midst of mercies, as
Adam, who fined in the midst of Paradise. Discontent is a Spider that sucks the
poison of unthankfulness out of the sweetest flower of Gods blessings; and by
a devilish chemistry extracts dross out of the most refined Gold. The
discontented person thinks every thing he does for God too much, and every
thing God does for him too little. O what a sin is unthankfulness Ingratus vit
andus est ut dirum scelus, nec cogitari pestil emius potest, nam tellus ipsa
f^dius nihil creat. Pet. Crini^us. l. 2. Poem.
! it is an accumulative sin. What Cicero says of Parricide Qui occidit
patrem, pli^rima commitit peccata in uno.
; I may say of Ingratitude, there are many sins bound up in this one sin,
it is a voluminous wickedness; and how full of this sin is Discontent? A
discontented Christian, because he has not all he would, therefore dishonours
God with the mercies which he has. God made Eve out of Adams rib, to be an
helper (as the Father speaks;) Chrysostom.
but the Devil made an arrow of this rib, and shot Adam ^o the heart: So does
discontent take the rib of Gods mercy and ungratefully shoot at him; Estate,
Liberty shall be employed against God. Thus it is oftentimes; behold then how
Discontent and Ingratitude are interwoven and twisted one within another, thus
Discontent is sinful in its concomitants.

3. It is sinful in its Consequences, 3. Discontent is sinful, In its
consequences.
which are these:

1. It makes a man very unlike the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God is a meek
Spirit. The Holy Ghost descended in the likeness of a Dove Mat. 3. 16.
. A Dove is the emblem of meekness; A discontented spirit is not a meek
spirit.

2. It makes a man like the Devil. walking about 1 Pet. 5. 8.
; it is his rest to be walking. And herein is the discontented person like him;
for he goes up and down vexing himself, Seeking rest and finding none; he is
the Devils picture.

3. Discontent disjoynts the soul, Is any man afflicted, let him pray Jam. 5.
13.
. But, is any man discontented, how shall he pray? Lift up pure hands without
wrath 1 Timothy 5. 8.
. Discontent is full of wrath and passion; The Malcontent cannot lift up pure
hands; he lifts up leprous hands, he poisons his prayers; will God accept of a
poisoned sacrifice? Chrysostom compares prayer to a fine Garland; Those, says
he, that make a Garland, their hands had need be clean: Prayer is a precious
Garland, the heart that makes it had need be clean. Discontent throws poison
into the spring, (which was death among the Romans;) Discontent puts the heart
into a disorder and mutiny, and such a one cannot serve the Lord without
distraction.

4. Discontent sometimes unfits for the very use of reason; Jonah in a passion
of discontent, spoke no better then blasphemy, and nonsense; I do well, says
he, to be angry to the death Jona. 4. 8
. What? to be angry with God? and to die for anger? sure he did not know well
what he said. When Discontent transports, then like Moses, we speak
unadvisedly with our lips. This humor does even suspend the very acts of
reason.

5. Discontent does not only disquiet a man's self, but those who are near him.
This evil spirit troubles Families, Parishes, etc. If there be but one string
out of tune, it spoils all the music. One discontented spirit makes jarrings
and discords among others. It Is this ill humor that breeds quarrels, and
Lawsuits. Whence is all our Contention, but for want of Contentation? From
whence come wars and fightings among you, come they not hence, even of your
lusts Jam. 4. 1
? in particular from this lust of Discontent? Why did Absalom raise a war
against his Father, and would have taken off not only his Crown, but his
Head? was it not his discontent? Absalom would be King. Why did Ahab stone
Naboth? was it not discontent about the Vineyard? Oh this Devil of Discontent!
Thus you have seen the sinfulness of it.

3. Consider the simplicity of it. The simplicity of it.
Surely they are disquieted in vain Psalm. 39. 6.
, which appears thus.

1. Is it not a vain simple thing to be troubled at the loss of that which is
in its own nature perishing and changeable? God has put a vicissitude into
the creature; all the world rings changes, and for me to meet with inconstancy
here, to lose a friend, estate, to be in a constant fluctuation, is no more
then to see a flower wither, or a leaf drop off in Autumn. There is an Autumn
upon every comfort, a fall of the leaf; Now it is extreme folly to be
discontented at the loss of those things which are in their own nature
loseable. What Solomon says of Riches, is true of all things under the Sun,
They take wings. Noah's Dove brought an Olive Branch in its mouth, but presently
flew out of the Arc, and never returned more: Such a comfort brings to us
honey in its mouth, but it has wings; and to what purpose should we be
troubled, unless we had wings to fly after and overtake it?

2. Discontent is an heartbreaking; By sorrow of the heart the spirit is
broken Prove. 15. 13.
, it takes away the comfort of life. There is none of us but have many mercies
if we can see them; now, because we have not all we desire, therefore we will
lose the comfort of that which we have already. Jonah having his Gourd smitten
(a withering vanity,) was so discontented, that he never thought of his
miraculous deliverance out of the Whales belly; he takes no comfort of his
life, but wishes that he might die. What folly is this? we must have all or
none; herein we are like children, that throw away the piece which is cut
them, because they may have no bigger. Discontent eats out the comfort of life.
Besides, it were well if it were seriously weighed how prejudicial this is,
even to our health: For Discontent, as it does discruciate the mind, so it
does pine the body; it frets as a moth, and by wasting the spirits, weakens the
vitals; The plurisie of Discontent brings the body into a consumption; and is
not this Folly?

3. Discontent does not ease us of our burden, but makes the cross heavier. A
contented spirit goes cheerfully under its affliction. Discontent makes our
grief as unsupportable, as it is unreasonable. If the leg be well, it can
endure a fetter, and not complain; but if the leg before, then the fetter
troubles. Discontent of mind is the sore that makes the Fetters of affliction
more grievous. Discontent troubles us more then the trouble it self, it steeps
the affliction in wormwood. When Christ was upon the Cross, the Jews brought
him gall and vinegar to drink, that it might add to his sorrow. Discontent
brings to a man in affliction gall and vinegar to drink; this is worse then the
affliction it self. Is it not folly for a man to imbitter his own cross?

4. Discontent spins out* our troubles the longer. A Christian is discontented,
because he is in want; and therefore he is in want, because he is
discontented; he murmurs, because he is afflicted; and therefore he is
afflicted, because he murmurs. Discontent does delay and adjourne our mercies.
God deals herein with us as we use to do with our children; when they are
quiet and cheerful, they shall have any thing; but if we see them cry and
fret, then we withold from them: We get nothing from God by our discontent,
but blows. The more the child strugles, the more it is beaten: When we
strugle with God by our sinful passions, he doubles and trebbles his strokes;
God will tame our cursed hearts. What got Israel by their peevishness? they
were within a 11 days journey of Canaan, and now they were discontented, and
began to murmur; God leads them a march of forty years long in the
wilderness. Is it not folly for us to adjourne our own mercies? Thus you have
seen the evil of Discontent. I have been long upon this Argument; but nunquam
nimis dicitur quod nunquam satis dicitur.

SECT. 8.
The eighth Argument to Contentation.
The next Argument or Motive to Contentment is this; Why is not a man content
with the competency which he has? perhaps if he had more, he would be less
content. The world is such, that the more we have, the more we crave Crescit
amor nummi quantum ipse pecunia crescit.
; it cannot fill the heart of man. When the fire burns, how do you quench it?
not by pouring oil on the flame, or laying on more wood, but by withdrawing
the fuel. When the appetite is enflamed after riches, how may a man be
satisfied? not by having just what he desires, but by withdrawing the fuel,
viz. moderating and lessening his desires. He that is contented has enough. A
man in a fever or dropsy, thirsts; how do you satisfy him? not by giving him
liquid things which will inflame his thirst the more, but by removing the
cause, and so curing his distemper. The way for a man to be contented, is not
by raising his estate higher, but by bringing his heart lower.

SECT. 9.
The ninth Argument to Contentation.
The next Argument to Contentment is, The shortness of life. It is but a
vapor says James. Jam. 4. 14.
(...) (...). Sop^ocles.
, life is a wheel ever running. The Poets Phocilides.
painted time with wings, to show the volubility and swiftness of it. Job
compares it to a swift post, Job 9. 25.
(our life rides post) and to a day, not a year. It is indeed like a day.
Infancy is as it were the daybreak, Youth is the Sunrising, full growth is
the Sun in the Meridian, old age is Sunsetting. Sickness is the evening, then
comes the night of death. How quickly is this day of life spent? often times
this Sun goes down at noonday; life ends before the evening of old age comes;
Nay, sometimes the Sun of life sets presently after Sunrising. Quickly after
the dawning of Infancy, the night of death approaches; nay, sometimes the life
is eclipsed before the dawning of Infancy, when the mothers womb becomes the
tomb. Oh, how short is the life of man! The consideration of the brevity of
life may work the heart to contentment. Remember thou art to be here but a
day; parum viae, quid multum viatici? thou have but a short way to go, and what
needs a long provision for a short way Quid opus est ad brevem vitam longis
opibus? Hyper.
? if a Traveller has but enough to bring him to his journies end, he desires
no more. We have but a day to live, and perhaps we may be in the twelfth hour
of the day; why, if God give us but enough to bear our charges till night, it
is sufficient. Let us be content. If a man had the lease of an house or farm,
but for two or three days, and he should fall a building and planting, would
he not be judged very indiscreet: So when we have but a short time here, and
death calls us presently off the stage, to thirst immoderately after the world,
and pull down our souls to build up an estate, is it not extreme folly?
Therefore as Esau said once in a profane sens concerning his birthright; Lo, I
am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright do to me? So
let a Christian say in a Religious sense; Lo, I am even at the point of death,
my grave is going to be made, and what good will the world do me? if I have but
enough till Sunsetting, I am content.

SECT. 10.
The tenth Argument to Contentation.
The tenth Argument or Motive to Contentment is; Consider seriously the nature
of a prosperous condition. There are in a prosperous estate three things.

1. Plus molestiae, 1. Plus molestiae.
more trouble. Many who have abundance of all things to enjoy, yet have not so
much content and sweetness in their lives, as some that go to their hard
labor. Sad, solicitous thoughts do often attend a prosperous condition. Care
is the malus genius, or evil spirit which haunts the rich man, and will not
suffer him to be quiet. When his chest is full of gold, his heart is full of
care, either how to manage, or how to increase, or how to secure what he has
gotten. Oh the troubles and perplexities that do wait upon prosperity! The
worlds high seats are very uneasy; Sun shine is pleasant, but sometimes it
scortcheth with its heat; the Be gives honey, but sometimes it stings:
Prosperity has its sweetness, and also its sting. Competency with Contentment
is far more eligible. Never did Jacob sleep better then when he had the
heavens for his Canopy, and an hard stone for his pillow. A large voluminous
estate, is but like a long trailing garment, which is more troublesome then
useful.

2. In a prosperous condition there is plus periculi, 2. Plus periculi.
more danger, and that two ways.

First, Ex part ipsius, in respect of a man's self. The rich man's Table is often
his snare; he is ready to ingulph himself too deep in these sweet waters
Magnae foelicitatis est a foelicitate non vinci. Aug. de verb. Dom. c. 13
. In this sense it is hard to know how to abound. It must be a strong brain
that bears heady wine; he had need have much wisdom and grace that knows
how to bear an high condition; either he is ready to kill himself with care,
or surfeit himself upon luscious delights. Oh the hazard of honor, the damage
of dignity! Pride, security, rebellion, are the three worms that breed of
plenty Deuteronomy. 32 15.
. The pastures of prosperity are rank and surfeting. How soon are we broken
upon the soft pillow of ease (...) Theophylact.
? Prosperity is often a trumpet that sounds a retreat, it calls men off from
the pursuit of Religion. The Sun of Prosperity often dulls, and puts out the fire
of zeal. How many souls has the plurisie of abundance killed Plurimi sunt
qui paupertate positi non habent patientiam; and qui abundantia, non habent
temperan^tiam. Remigius.
? They that will be rich, fall into snares 1 Timothy 6. 10.
. The world is birdlime at our feet, it is full of golden sands, but they are
quicksands. Prosperity like smooth Jacob, will supplant and betray; a great
estate without much vigilance will be a thief to rob us of heaven; such as are
upon the pinnacle of honor, are in most danger of falling.

Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus, and celsae graviore casu
Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos
Fulmina montes, etc. Hor. carm. l. 2. ode. 10.
A lower estate is less hazardous. The little Pinnace rides safe by the Shore,
when the gallant Ship advancing with its mast and top-saile, is cast away. Homo
victus in Paradiso, victor in stercore. Adam in Paradise was overcome, when Job
on the dunghill was a conqueror. Samson fell asleep on Delilahs lap: Some
have fallen so fast a sleep on the lap of ease and plenty, that they have never
awaked till they have been in hell Turpi fregerunt secula luxu Divitiae molles,
etc. Juvenas. 6, Satyr.
. The worlds fawning is worse then its frowning; and it is more to be feared
when it smiles, then when it thunders Periculosior est mundus blandiens quam
fulmi^ans. Aug.
. Prosperity in Scripture is compared to a candle: Job 29. 3. When his candle
shined upon my head. How many have burnt their wings about this candle; Segetem
ubert as nimiae sternit, rami onere franguntur, ad maturitatem non pervenit
nimia foecunditas Sen. ad Lucillium Ep. 80.
: The corn being over-ripe sheds, and fruit when it mellowes, begins to rot;
When men do mellow with the Sun of Prosperity, commonly their souls begin to
rot in sin. How hard is it for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
Luke 18 24.
? His golden weights keep him from ascending up the hill of God; and shall we
not be content, though we are placed in a lower Orb? What if we are not in
so much bravery, and gallantry as others? we are not in so much danger; as we
want the honor of the world, so the temptations. Oh the abundance of danger
that is in abundance! We see by common experience, that Lunaticks, when the
Moon is declining and in the waine, are sober enough; but when it is in the
full, they are more wild and exorbitant: When men's estates are in the waine,
they are more serious about their souls, more humble; but when it is the full
of the Moon, and they have abundance, then their hearts begin to swell with
their estates, and are scarce themselves. Those that write concerning the
several Climates; observe, that such as live in the Northern parts of the
world, if you bring them into the South part, they lose their stomachs, and dye
quickly; but those that live in the more Southern hot climates, bring them
into the North, and their stomachs mend, and they are long-lived: Give me leave
to apply it; bring a man from the cold starving climate of poverty, into the
hot Southern climate of prosperity, and he begins to lose his appetite to good
things, he grows weak, and a thousand to one if all his Religion does not
die; but bring a Christian from the South to the North, from a rich flourishing
estate into a jejune low condition, let him come into a more cold and hungry
air, and then his stomach mends, he has better appetite after heavenly
things, he hungers more after Christ, he thirsts more for grace, he eats more
at one meal of the bread of life then at six before; this man is now like to
live and hold out in his Religion; be content then with a modicum, if you have
but enough to pay for your passage to heaven, it suffices.

2. A prosperous condition is dangerous ex part vicini, in regard of others; a
great estate for the most part draws envy to it Foelicitas semper subjecta
est invidiae. Laert. Diogenes de vit. Philos.
. Whereas in parvis quies. David a Shepherd was quiet, but David a Courtier,
was pursued by his enemies: envy cannot endure a superior; an envious man
knows not how to live but upon the ruins of his neighbor; he raises
himself higher by bringing others lower. Prosperity is an eyesore to many.
Such sheep as have most wool are soonest fleeced. The barren tree grows
peaceably, no man meddles with the Ash or Willow, but the Apple Tree and the
Damsin shall have many rude suitors. Oh then be content to carry a lesser
sail; he that has less revenues has less envy; such as bear the fairest
frontispiece, and make the greatest show in the world, are the white for Envy
and Malice to shoot at.

3. A prosperous condition has in it plus recensionis, 3. Plus recensionis.
a greater reckoning; every man must be responsible for his talents. Thou that
have great possessions in the world, do thou trade thy estate for Gods glory?
Art thou rich in good works? Art thou a (...)? Grace makes a private person a
common good. Do thou disburse thy money for public uses? it is lawful (in
this sense) to put out our money to use. Oh let us all remember an estate is a
depositum, we are but stewards, and our Lord and Master will ere long say,
Give an account of your stewardship; the greater our estate, the greater our
charge; the more our revenues, the more our reckonings. You that have a lesser
mill going in the world, be content, God will expect less from you, where he
has sowed more sparingly.

SECT. 11.
The eleventh Argument to Contentation.
The eleventh Argument is the example of those who have been eminent for
Contentation. Examples are usually more forcible then Precepts. Abraham being
called out to hot service, and such as was against flesh and blood, was
content. God bids him offer up his son Isaac Gen, 22. 2.
; this was a great work, Isaac was filius senectutis, the son of his old age;
filius dilectionis, the son of his love; filius promis^i, the son of the
promise: Christ the Messiah was to come of his line, in Isaac shall thy seed be
blessed; so that to offer up Isaac seemed not only to oppose Abraham's reason,
but his faith too; for if Isaac die, the world for ought he knew must be
without a Mediator. Besides, if Isaac be sacrificed, was there no other hand
to do it but Abraham's? must the Father needs be the executioner? must he that
was the instrument of giving Isaac his being, be the instrument of taking it
away? yet Abraham does not dispute or hesitate, but believes against hope, and
is content with Gods prescription. So, when God called him to leave his
Country Heb. 11. 8.
, he was content. Some would have argued thus, what? leave all my friends, my
native soil, my brave situation, and go turn pilgrim? Abraham is content;
besides, Abraham went blindfold, he knew not whither he went Verse. 8.
. God held him in suspense, he must go wander he knows not where; and when
he does come to the place God had laid out for him, he knows not what
oppositions he shall meet with there; the world does seldom cast a favorable
aspect upon strangers Genesis 31. 15.
, yet he is content, and obeyes; He sojourned in the land of promise Heb. 11. 9.
; behold a little his pilgrimage. First, He goes to Charron, a City in
Mesopotamia; when he had sojourned there a while, his father dies; then he
removes to Sichem, then to Bethlem in Canaan; there a famine arises, then he
went down to Egypt, after that he returns into Canaan, when he came there
('it is true, he had a promise) but he found nothing to answer expectation; he
had not there one foot of land, but was an exile: in this time of his
sojourning he buried his wife; and as for his dweling, he had no sumptuous
buildings, but led his life in poor cottages: all this was enough to have
broken any man's heart; Abraham might think thus with himself, is this the land
I must possess? here is no probability of any good; al things are against me;
well, is he discontented? no, God says to him, Abraham, go leave thy Country,
and this word was enough to lead him all the world over, he is presently upon
his march; here was a man had learned to be content. But let us descend a
little lower, to Heathens Socrates Philosophorum lucu. lentissimus, pauper
semper, ^udis pedibus incedens, sordido palliolo contentus, honores omniaque
terrena, contemnens. Plut.
. Zeno (of whom Seneca speaks) who had once been very rich, hearing of a
shipwreck, and that all his goods were drowned at Sea, Fortune, says he (he
spoke in an Heathen dialect) has dealt well with me, and would have me now to
study Philosophy Iubee me fortuna expeditius Philosophari. Seneca.
; he was content to change his course of life, to leave off being Merchant, and
turn Philosopher. And if an Heathen said thus, shall not a Christian much more
say when the world is drained from him, Iubet Deus mundum derelinquere and
Christum expeditius sequi, God would have me leave off following the world, and
study Christ more, and how to get to heaven? Do I see an Heathen contented, and
a Christian disquieted Pudeat, pudeat illos nomine tenus Christianos quibus
quod ad hanc rem attinet Ethnici rectius sapuerunt. Hyperius:
? How did Heathens vilify those things which Christians magnify? though they
knew not God, or what true happiness meant, yet would speak very sublimely of
a numen or Deity, and of the life to come, as Aristotle and Plato; and for
those Elizian delights which they did but fancy, they undervalued and
contemned the things here below; it was the doctrine they taught their
scholars, and which some of them practiced, that men should strive to be
contented with a little; they were willing to make an exchange, to have less
gold, and more learning; and shall not we be content then to have less of the
world, so we may have more of Christ? May not Christians blush to see Heathens
content with a viaticum, so much as would recruit nature, and to see themselves
so transported with the love of earthly things; that if they begin a little to
abate, and the bill of provision grows short, they murmr, and are like
Michah, Have ye taken away my gods, and do you ask me what I aile Judge. 18.
24.
? Have Heathens gone so far in contentation, and is it not sad for us to come
short of them that came short of heaven? These Heroes of their time, how did
they embrace death it self? Socrates died in prison, Hercules was burnt alive,
Cato (whom Seneca calls virtutum viva imago, the lively image and portraiture
of virtue) thrust through with a sword, but how bravely, and with what
contentment of spirit did they die? Shall I, says Seneca, weep for Cato, or
Regulus, or the rest of those Worthies that died with so much valor and
patience? Did not cross providence make them to alter their countenance? and
do I see a Christian appalled and amazed? Did not death affright them, and does
it distract^s? did the springhead of Nature rise so high, and shall not Grace,
like the waters of the Sanctuary, rise higher? We that pretend to live by
faith, may we not go to School to them who had no other Pilot but reason to
guide them? Nay, let me come a step lower, to creatures void of reason; we see
every creature is contented with its allowance, the beasts with their
provender, the birds with their nests, they live only upon providence; and
shall we make our selves below them? let a Christian go to School to the Ox
and the Ass, to learn contentedness; we think we never have enough, and are
still laying up; the fowls of the air do not lay up, they reap not, nor
gather into barnes Mat. 6. 26.
it is an argument which Christ brings to make Christians contented with their
condition. The birds do not lay up, yet they are provided for, and are
contented, Are ye not (says Christ) much better then they? but if you are
discontented, are ye not much worse then they? let these examples quicken us.

SECT. 12.
The twelfth Argument to Contentation.
The twelfth Argument to Contentment is, whatever change or trouble a child of
God meets with, it is all the hell he shall have. Whatever eclipse may be upon
his name, or estate; I may say of it as Athanasius of his banishment, it is
nubeucla cito transitura, a little cloud which will soon be blown over; and
then his gulf is shot, his hell is past; Albus ut obscuro detergit nubila coelo
Saepe notus, neque parturit imbres
Perpetuos, sic tu Sapiens finire memento
Tristitiam. Hor. Ode 7. l. 1.


Death begins a wicked man's hell, but it puts an end to a godly man's hell. Think
with thy self, what if I endure this, it is but a temporary hell; indeed, if
all our hell be here, it is but an easy hell. What is the cup of affliction to
the cup of Damnation? Lazarus could not get a crumbe; he was so diseased, that
the dogs took pity on hi^, and (as if they had been his physicians) licked his
sores; but this was an easy hell, the Angels quickly fetched him out of it. If
all our hell be in this life, in the midst of this hell we may have the love
of God, and then it is no more Hell, but Paradise. If our hell be here, we may
see to the bottom of it; it is but skin-deep, it cannot touch the soul, and we
may see to the end of it; it is an hell that is shortliv'd Noote pluit tota
redeunt spectacula (...)
: After a wet night of affliction comes a bright morning of the Resurrection;
if our lives are short, our trials cannot be long. As our riches take wings and
fly, so do our sufferings; then let us be contented.

SECT. 13.
The thirteenth Argument to Contentation.
The last Argument to Contentment is this, To have a competency and to want
Contentment, is a great judgment. For a man to have an huge stomach Cannium
appetitum.
, that whatever meat you give him, he is still craving, and never satisfied;
you use to say, this is a great judgment upon the man: Thou who art heluo
pecuniae, a devourer of money, and yet never have enough, but still criest,
Give, give, this is a sad judgment; They shall eat, and not have enough Hos.
4. 10
. The throat of a malicious man is an open sepulcher Romans 3. 13.
, so is the heart of a covetous man. Covetousness is not only malum culpae,
but malum poenae; it is not only a sin, but the punishment of a sin. It Is
a secret curse upon a covetous person, he shall thirst, and thirst, and never
be satisfied; He that loves silver, shall not be satisified with silver
Eccles. 5 10.
, and is not this a curse? What was it but a severe judgment upon the people
of Judah? Ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with
drink Hag. 1. 6.
. Oh let us take heed of this plague; Did Esau say to his brother, I have
abundance, my brother, (...)
or as we translate it, I have enough? and shall not a Christian say so much
more? It Is sad that our hearts should be as a stene to heavenly influences, and
as a sponge to earthly vapors. Let all that has been said, work our minds to
holy contentation.

CHAP. XII.
Three things inserted by way of Caution.
IN the next place I come to lay down some necessary Cautions; Caution 1.
though I say a man should be contented in every estate, yet there are three
estates in which he must not be contented.

1. He must not be contented in a natural estate; here he must learn not to be
content. A sinner in his pure naturals in under the wrath of God Joh. 3. 16
, and shall he be content when that dreadful Vial is going to be poured out?
is it nothing to be under the scorchings of divine fury? Who can dwell with
everlasting burnings? A sinner as a sinner is under the power of Satan Acts 26.
18.
, and shall he in this estate be contented? who would be contented to stay in
the enemies quarters? while we sleep in the lap of sin, the Devil does to us
as the Philistines did to Samson, cut the lock of our strength, and put out our
eyes 2 Cor. 4. 4.
; be not content, O sinner, in this estate. For a man to be in debt body and
soul, in fear every hour to be arrested and carried prisoner to hell, shall he
now be content? here I preach against contentation, Oh get out of this
condition, I would hasten you out of it, as the Angel hastened Lot out of Sodom
Genesis 19: 15.
; there is the smell of the fire and brimstone upon you. The longer a man
stays in his sin, the more sin does strengthen Heb. 3. 13.
; it is hard to get out of sin when the heart as a garrison is victualled and
fortified. Vincere consuctudinem est dur^ pugna. Aug.
A young plant is easily removed, (...). Hippocr. l. 2. Aphor. 9.
but when the tree is once rooted, there is no stirring of it: thou who art
rooted in thy pride, unbelief, impenitency, it will cost thee many a sad pull
ere thou art plucked out of thy natural estate Jer 6. 16
. It Is an hard thing to have a brazen face and a broken heart, He travelleth
with iniquity Ps. 7. 14.
Psalm. 7. 14. Be assured, the longer you travel with your sins, the more and
the sharper pangs must you expect in the new birth. Oh be not contented with
your natural estate. David says, Why art thou disquieted, O my soul Ps. 4. 53.
? but a sinner should say to himself, Why art thou not disquieted, O my soul?
why is it that thou layest afflictions so to heart, and can not lay sin to
heart? It Is a mercy when we are disquieted about sin; a man had better be at
the trouble of setting a bone, then to be lame, and in pain all his life;
blessed is that trouble that brings the soul to Christ. It Is one of the worst
sights to see a bad conscience quiet; of the two, better is a fever, then a
lethargy. I wonder to see a man in his natural estate content; what, content to
go to hell?

2. Though in regard of externals a man should be in every state content,
Caution 2.
yet he must not be content in such a condition wherein God is apparently
dishonored. If a man's trade be such that he can hardly use it but he must
trespass upon a Command (and so make a trade of sin) he must not content
himself in such a condition; God never called any man to such a calling as is
sinful; a man in this case had better knock off, and divert; better lose some
of his gain, so he may lessen some of his guilt. So for servants that live in
a profane family (the suburbs of hell) where the Name of God is not called
upon, unless when it is taken in vain; they are not to content themselves in
such a place, they are to come out of the Tents of these sinners; there is a
double danger in living among the profane.

1. Lest we come to be infected with the poison of their ill example. Joseph
living in Pharaohs Court, had learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh Genesis 42
15.
. We are prone to suck in example Vivitur exemplis magis quam legibus.
; men take in deeper impressions by the eye then by the ear. Dives was a bad
pattern, and he had many brethren that seeing him sin, trod just in his
steps; therefore says he, I pray thee send him to my fathers house, for I have
five brethren, that he may testify to them that they come not into this place
of torment Luke 16 27, 28.
. Dives knew which way they went; it is easy to catch a disease from another,
but not to catch health. The bad will sooner corrupt the good, then the good
will convert the bad; take an equal quantity and proportion, so much sweet wine
with so much sower vinegar, the vinegar will sooner sower the wine, then the
wine will sweeten the vinegar. Sin is compared to the plague 1 Kings 8. 38.
, and to leaven 1 Cor. 5. 7.
, to show of what a spreading nature it is. A bad master makes a bad servant;
Jacobs cattle by looking on the rods which were speckled and ringstrak'd,
conceived like the rods. We do as we see others before us, especially above us.
If the head be sick, the other parts of the body are distempered. If the Sun
shine not upon the mountains, it must needs set in the valleys. We pray, Lead
us not into temptation, and do we lead our selves into temptation? Lot was the
worlds miracle, who kept himself fresh in Sodoms falt water.

2. By living in an evil family we are liable to incur their punishment;
Pour out thy wrath upon the families that call not upon thy Name Jer. 10. 25
. For want of pouring out Prayer, the wrath of God was ready to be poured out.
It Is dangerous living in the Tents of Kedar. When God sends his flying roll,
written within and without with curses, it enters into the house of the thief,
and perjurer, and it consumes the timber and the stones thereof Zach. 5. 4.
. Is it not of sad consequence to live in a profane perjured family, when the
sin of the Governor pulls his house about his ears? if the stone and timber
be destroyed, how shall the servant escape? And suppose God send not a
temporal roll of curses in the family, there is a spiritual roll, and that is
worse Pro. 3. 33.
. Be not content to live where Religion dies. Salute the brethren, and
Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house Col. 4. 15
; the house of the godly is a little Church, the house of the wicked a little
hell Pro. 7. 27
. Oh incorporate your selves into a religious family, the house of a good man
is perfumed with a blessing Pro. 3. 33.
. When the holy oil of grace is poured on the head, the savor of this
ointment sweetly diffuseth it self, and the virtue of it runs down upon the
skirts of the family. Pious examples are very magneticall and forcible. Seneca
said to his sister, Though I leave you not wealth, yet I will leave you a good
example. Let us ingraffe our selves among the Saints; by being often among the
spices, we come to smell of them.

3. The third Caution is, Caution. 3.
though in every condition we must be content, yet we are not to content our
selves with a little grace. Grace is the best blessing. Though we should be
contented with a competency of estate, yet not with a competency of grace. It
was the end of Christ's Ascension to heaven, to give gifts, and the end of those
gifts, that we may grow up into him who is the head, Christ Ephesians. 4. 15.
. Where the Apostle distinguishes between our being in Christ, and our growing
in him: our ingraffing and our flourishing: be not content with a modicum in
Religion. It Is not enough that there be life, but there must be fruit.
Barrenness in the Law was accounted a curse. The farther we are from fruit,
the nearer we are to cursing Heb. 6. 8
. It Is a sad thing when men are fruitful only in the unfruitful works of
darkness. Be not content with a dram or two of grace; next to a still-borne, a
starveling in Christ is worst. Oh covet more grace, never think thou have
enough; it is bona and honesta avaritia; we are bid to covet the best things 1
Cor. 12.
: it is an heavenly ambition, when we desire to be high in Gods favor; a
blessed contention, when all the strife is who shall be most holy. Saint Paul,
though he was content with a little of the world, yet not with a little grace;
he reached forward, and pressed toward the mark of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus Phil. 3. 13, 14.
. A true Christian is a wonder, he is the most contented, and yet the least
satisfied: he is contented with a morsel of bread, and a little water in the
Cruse, yet never satisfied with grace; he does anhelare, pant and breath after
more; this is his prayer, Lord, more conformity to Christ, more communion with
Christ; he would feign have Christ's image more lively pictured upon his soul.
True grace is always progressive: as the Saints are called Lamps and Stars
in regard of their light; so trees of righteousness Isa, 61. 3
for their growth; they are indeed like the tree of life, bringing forth
several sorts of fruit.

A true Christian grows, 1. Forma, in beauty. Grace is the best complexion of
the soul; it is at the first plantation like Rachel, fair to look upon; but
still the more it lives, the more it sends forth its rays of beauty. Abraham's
faith was at first beautiful; but at last it did shine in its orient colors,
and grew so illustrious, that God himself was in love with it, and makes his
faith a pattern to all Believers.

2. A true Christian grows Suavitate, in sweetness. A poisonfull weed may
grow as much as the Hyssop, or Rose-mary; the Poppy in the field, as the Corn;
the Crab, as the Pearmaine: but the one has a harsh, sour taste, the other
mellows as it grows; An hypocrite may grow in outward dimensions, as much as a
child of God; he may pray as much, profess as much; but he grows only in
magnitude, he brings forth sour grapes, his duties are leavened with pride;
the other ripens as he grows, he grows in love, humility, faith, which do
mellow and sweeten his duties, and make them come off with a better relish. The
Believer grows as the flower, he casts a fragrancy and perfume.

3. A true Christian grows Robore, in strength; he grows still more rooted,
and settled. The more the tree grows, the more it spreads its root in the earth
(...). Col. 2, 7.
: A Christian who is a Plant of the heavenly Ierusulem, the longer he grows,
the more he incorporates into Christ, and sucks spiritual juice and sap from
him; he is a dwarf in regard of humility, but a giant in regard of strength.
He is strong to do duties, to bear burdens, to resist tentations.

4. He grows Vigore, in the exercise of his grace; He has not only oil in
his lamps, but his lamps are burning and shining. Grace is agile and dexterous,
Christ's vines do flourish Cant. ^. 11.
; hence we read of a lively hope 1 Pet. 1. 3
, and a fervent love 1 Pet. 1. 22.
; here is the activity of Grace. Indeed sometimes grace is as a sleepy habit in
the soul, like sap in the vine, not exerting its vigor, which may be
occasioned through spiritual sloth, or by reason of falling into some sin; but
this is only pro tempore, for a while; the spring of grace will come, the
flowers will appear, and the fig tree put forth her green figs* The fresh gales
of the Spirit do sweetly revive and refocillate grace. The Church of Christ,
whose heart was a garden, and her graces as precious spices, prays for the
heavenly breathings of the Spirit, that her sacred spices might flow out Cant.
4. 16.
.

5. A true Christian grows Incremento, both in the kind and in-the degree of
grace. To his spiritual living he gets an augmentation; he adds to faith,
virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6.
here is grace growing in the kind; and he goes on from faith to faith Romans 1.
17.
, there is grace growing in the degree. We are bound to give thanks to God for
you, brethren, because your faith grows exceedingly 2 These. 1. 1.
; (...), it increases over and above. And the Apostle speaks of those
spiritual plants which were laden with Gospel fruit Phil. 1, 11
, Phil. 1. 11. A Christian is compared to the Vine, (an emblem of
fruitfulness,) he must bear full clusters: We are bid to perfect that which is
lacking in our faith 1 These. 3 10.
. A Christian must never be so old as to be past bearing; he brings forth
fruit in his old age Ps. 9^. 14.
. An heaven-borne plant is ever growsing; he never thinks he grows enough;
he is not content unless he add every day one cubit to his spiritual stature.
We must not be contented just with so much grace as will keep life and soul
together; a dram or two must not suffice, but we must be still increasing with
the increase of God Col. 2 19.
: We had need renew our strength as the Eagle Isa. 40. 31.
; our sins are renewed, our wants are renewed, our tentations are renewed,
and shall not our strength be renewed? Oh be not content with the first embryo
of grace, grace in its infancy and minority. You look for degrees of glory; be
you Christians of degrees. Though a Believer should be contented with a modicum
in his estate, yet not with a modicum in Religion. A Christian of the right
breed labors still to excel himself, and come nearer unto that holiness in
God, who is the original, the pattern and prototype of all holiness.

CHAP. XIII.
USE. 4.
Showing how a Christian may know whether he has learned this divine Art.
Use. IV. THus having laid down these three Cautions, Use. IV. Trial.
I proceed in the next place to an use of Trial. 4. How may a Christian know
that he has learned this lesson of Contentment? I shall lay down some (...),
or characters by which you shall know it.

1. A contented spirit is a silent spirit. 1 Character.
He has not one word to say against God; I was dumb, or silent Psalm. 39.
, because thou, Lord, did it Psalm. 39.
, Ps. 39. Contentment silenceth all dispute; He sits alone and keeps
silence Lam. 3. 28.
: There is a sinful silence, when God is dishonored, his truth wounded, and
men hold their peace; this silence is a loud sin: and there is an holy
silence, when the soul sits down quiet and content with its condition; When
Samuel tells Eli that heavy message from God, that he would judge his house,
and that the iniquity of his family should not be purged away with sacrifice
for ever 1 Samuel 3. 13.
, does Eli murmur, or dispute? No, he has not one word to say against God; It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good Ver. 18.
. A discontented spirit says as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? why should I suffer
all this? why should I be brought into this low condition? Who is the Lord?
But a gracious heart says as Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what he will
with me. When Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, had offered up strange fire,
and fire went from the Lord, and devoured them Levit. 10 1.
, is Aaron now in a passion of discontent? No, Aaron held his peace Verse. 3.
. A contented spirit is never angry, unless with himself for having hard
thoughts of God. When Jonah said, I do well to be angry, this was not a
contented spirit, it did not become a Prophet.

2. A contented spirit, 2 Charact.
is a cheerful spirit; the Greeks call it (...); Contentment is something more
then Patience; for Patience denotes only submission (...) Significat,
adversitates sustinere, Cyprian. item perseverare, Causabon.
, Contentment denotes cheerfulness. A contented Christian is more then
passive; he does not only bear the Cross, but take up the Cross Matthew. 16. 24.
. He looks upon God as a wise God; and whatever he does, though it be not ad
voluntatem, yet ad sanitatem Aug.
; it is in order to a cure: Hence the contented Christian is cheerful, and
with the Apostle, takes pleasure in infirmities, distresses, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 10.
He does not only submit to Gods dealings, but rejoice in them; he does not
only say, Just is the Lord in all that is befallen me; but Good is the Lord.
This is to be contented. A sullen melancholy is hateful; it is said, God loves
a cheerful giver 2 Cor. 9. 7.
; I, and God loves a cheerful liver. We are bid in Scripture not to be
careful, but we are no where bid not to be cheerful. He that is contented
with his condition, does not abate of his spiritual joy; and indeed he has
that within him which is the ground of cheerfulness; he carries a pardon
sealed in his heart Mat. 9. 2.
.

3. A contented spirit, 3. Charact.
is a thankful spirit Job 1. 2 (...).
. This is a degree above the other; In every thing giving thanks 1 ^hes. 5.
. A gracious heart spies mercy in every condition, therefore has his heart
scrued up to thankfulness: others will bless God for prosperity, he blesses
him for affliction. Thus he reasons with himself, Am I in want? God sees it
better for me to want then to abound; God is now dieting of me, he sees it
better for my spiritual health, sometimes to be kept fasting; therefore he
does not only submit, but is thankful. The Malcontent is ever complaining
of his condition; the contented spirit is ever giving thanks. Oh what height of
grace is this! A contented heart is a Temple where the praises of God are sung
forth, not a Sepulcher wherein they are buried. A contented Christian in the
greatest straits has his heart enlarged, and dilated in thankfulness. He often
contemplates Gods love in election, he sees that he is a monument of mercy,
therefore desires to be a pattern of praise. There is always gratulatory
music in a contented soul; the Spirit of grace works in the heart like new
wine, which under the heaviest pressures of sorrow, will have a vent open for
thankfulness; this is to be content.

4. He that is content, no condition comes amiss to him; so it is in the Text,
in quocunque statu, in whatever state I am (...). Chrysostom.
. A contented Christian can, prout res exigit, turn himself to any thing,
either want, or abound. The people of Israel knew neither how to abound, nor
yet how to want (...). Theophilact.
; when they were in want, they murmured; Can God prepare a table in the
wilderness? and when they ate and were filled, then they lifted up the heel.
Paul knew how to manage every estate; he could be either a note higher, or
lower; he was (in this sense) an Universalist, he could do any thing that God
would have him Similis est vita rotae, in cuju^smodo infima, modo suprema part
versamur. Aquinas.
: If he were in prosperity, he knew how to be thankful; if in adversity, he
knew how to be patient; he was neither lift up with the one, nor cast down with
the other. He could carry a greater sail, or lesser Magna and rara virtus est
inter epulas esurire, inter vestes algere, inter honores humiliari. Scivit
Hannibal penuriam pati, nescivit abundare, nam delitiae Capuanae Hannibalem
invictum enerva runt, and Rom^nis jam imbellem vincendum objecerunt. Bern.
. Thus a contented Christian knows how to turn himself to any condition.
Sicut bonus est dux and peritus, qui in quolibet exercitu operatur secundum
exigentiam ejus; and coriarius, qui ex quolibet corio facit optimos sotulares;
Aquinos.
ita Christianus sapiens, qui scit quolibet statu been se gerere. We have
those who can be contented in some estate, but not in every estate. They can be
content in a wealthy estate, when they have the streams of milk and honey;
while Gods candle shines upon their head, now they are content; but if the
wind turn and be against them, now they are discontented. While they have a
silver crutch to lean upon, they are contented; but if God breaks this crutch,
now they are discontented; but Paul had learned in every estate to carry
himself with equanimity of mind (...). Chrysostom.
; others could be content with their affliction, so God would give them leave
to pick and choose. They could be content to bear such a cross; they could
better endure sickness then poverty, or bear loss of estate then loss of
children; if they might have such a man's cross, they could be content; any
condition, but the present; this is not to be content. A contented Christian
does not go to choose his cross, but leaves God to choose for him; he is
content both for the kind, and for the duration. A contented spirit says, Let
God apply what medicine he pleases, and let it lie on as long as it will; I
know when it has done its cure, and eaten the venom of sin out of my heart,
God will take it off again. In a word, a contented Christian, being sweetly
captivated under the authority of the Word, desires to be wholly at Gods
dispose; and is willing to live in that sphere and climate where God has set
him; and if at any time he has been an instrument of doing noble and brave
service in the public, he knows he is but a rational tool, a servant to
authority, and is content to return to his former private condition of life.
Cincinnatus, after he had done worthily, and purchased to himself great fame in
his Dictatourship, did notwithstanding afterward voluntarily return to till
and manure his four acres of ground. Pet* Maryr.
Thus should it be with Christians, professing Godliness with Contentment,
having served Mars, not daring to offend Jupiter, lest otherwise they discover
only to the world a brutish valor, being so untamed and headstrong, that
when they have conquered others, yet they are not able to rule their own
spirits.

5. He that is contented with his condition, 5. Charact.
to rid himself out of trouble will not run himself into sin. I deny not
but a Christian may lawfully seek to change his condition; so far as Gods
providence does go before, he may follow; but when men will not follow
providence, but run before it, as he said, This evil is of the Lord, why
should I wait any longer 2 King. 6
? if God does not open the door by his providence, they will break it open,
and wind themselves out of affliction by sin; bringing their souls into
trouble by bringing their estates out of troubble. This is far from holy
Contentation, this is unbelief broken out into rebellion. A contented Christian
is willing to wait Gods leisure, and will not stir till God open a door. As
Paul said in another case, They have beaten us openly, uncondemned, being
Romans, and have cast us into prison, and now do they thrust us out privily?
nay verily, but let them come themselves and fetch us out Act. 16. 37.
: So with reverence, says the contented Christian, God has cast me into this
condition, and though it be sad and troublesome, yet I will not stir, till God
by a clear providence fetch me out. Thus those brave spirited Christians, Heb.
11. 35. They accepted not deliverance Heb. 11.
, that is, upon base, dishonorable terms. They would rather stay in prison,
then purchase their liberty by carnal compliance. Estius observes on the
place, they might not only have had their enlargement, but been raised to
honor, and put into offices of trust; yet the honor of Religion was dearer to
them, then either liberty, or honor. A contented Christian will not remove,
till as the Israelites, he see a pillar of cloud and fire going before him: It
is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the
Lord Lam. 3. 26.
. It Is good to stay Gods leisure, and not to extricate our selves out of
trouble, till we see the star of Gods providence pointing out a way to us.

CHAP. XIV.
USE. 5.
Containing a Christian Directory, or Rules about Contentment.
Use. V. I Proceed now to an use of direction, Use 5. Direction.
to show Christians how they may attain to this Divine Art of Contentation.
Certainly it is feasible, others of Gods Saints have reached to it, St. Paul
here had it; and what do we think of those we read of in that little book of
Martyrs, Heb. 11. who had trialls of cruel mockings and scourgings, who
wandered about in Deserts and Caves, yet were contented; so that it is possible
to be had. And here I shall lay down some Rules for holy Contentment.

SECT. 1.
1. Rule. Advance Faith.
All our disquiets do issue immediately from unbelief. It Is this that raises
the storm of discontent in the heart. Oh set faith a work; it is the property
of faith to silence our doubtings, to scatter our fears, to still the heart
when the passions are up. Faith works the heart to a sweet, serene composure;
it is not having food and raiment, but having Faith which will make us content.
Faith chides down passion; When Reason begins to sink, let Faith swim.

Quest. How does Faith work Contentment? Quest.


Answ. 1. Faith shows the soul, Answ. 1.
that whatever its trials are, yet it is from the hand of a Father; it is indeed
a bitter cup, but, Shall I not drink the cup which my father has given me to
drink? it is in love to my soul; God corrects with the same love he crowns
me; God is now training me up for heaven, he carves me, to make me a polished
shaft. These sufferings bring forth patience, humility, even the peaceable
fruits of righteousness Heb. 12. 11
. And if God can bring such sweet fruit out of a sower stock, let him graft me
where he please. Thus Faith brings the heart to holy Contentment.

2. Faith sucks the honey of Contentment out of the hive of the Promise. Christ
is the Vine, the Promises are the clusters of Grapes that grow upon this Vine;
and Faith presses the sweet wine of Contentment out of these spiritual
clusters of the Promises. I will show you but one cluster; The Lord will give
grace and glory Ps. 84. 11.
: here is enough for Faith to live upon. The Promise is the flower out of which
Faith distills the spirits, and quintessence of divine Contentment. In a word*
Faith carries up the soul, and makes it aspire after more noble and generous
delights then earth affords, and to live in the world above the world Discite
in hoc mundo supra mundum esse. Ambrose.
. Would you lead contented lives? live up to the height of your Faith.

SECT. 2.
2. Rule. Labor for Assurance.
Oh let us get the interest cleard between God and our own souls. Interest is a
word much in use, a pleasing word. Interest in great friends, interest-money;
Oh if there be an interest worth looking after, it is an interest between God
and the soul; Labor to say, My God. To be without money, and without friends,
and without God too Ephesians. 2. 12.
, is sad; but he whose faith does flourish into Assurance, that can say, I know
in whom I have believed 2 Timothy 2 12.
, (as Saint Paul,) that man has enough to give his heart contentment. When a
man's debts are paid, and he can go abroad without fear of arresting, what
contentment is this? Oh, let your title be cleared; if God be ours, whatever we
want in the creature, is infinitely made up in him. Do I want bread? I have
Christ the bread of life. Am I under defilement? his blood is like the trees of
the Sanctuary, not only for meat, but medicine Ezekiel. 47 12.
. If any thing in the world be worth laboring for, it is to get sound
evidences that God is ours. If this be once cleared, what can come amiss? No
matter what storms I meet with, so that I know where to put in for harbor. He
that has God to be his God, is so well contented with his condition, that he
does not much care whether he has any thing else. To rest in a condition where
a Christian cannot say God is his God, is matter of fear; and if he can say so
truly, and yet is not contented, is matter of shame. David encouraged himself
in the Lord his God Sam. 30.
; It was sad with him, Ziklag burnt, his wives taken captive, he lost all, and
like to have lost his Soldiers hearts too, for they spoke of stoning him; yet
he had the ground of Contentment within him, viz. an interest in God, and this
was a pillar of supportment to his spirit. He that knows God is his, and all
that is in God is for his good; if this does not satisfy, nothing will.

SECT. 3.
3. Rule. Get an humble spirit.
The humble man is the contented man; if his estate be low, his heart is lower
then his estate; therefore he is content. If his esteem in the world be low,
he that is little in his own eyes, will not be much troubled to be little in
the eyes of others. He has a meaner opinion of himself then others can have of
him. The humble man studies his own unworthiness; he looks upon himself as
less then the least of Gods mercies Genesis 32. 10.
, and then a little will content him: He cries out with Paul, that he is the
chief of sinners 1 Timothy 1. 15.
; therefore does not murmr, but admire: He does not say his comforts are
small, but his sins are great. He thinks it a mercy he is out of hell,
therefore is contented. He does not go to carve out a more happy condition to
himself; he knows the worst piece God cuts him, is better then he deserves. A
proud man is never contented, he is one that has an high opinion of himself;
therefore under small blessings is disdainful, under small crosses impatient.
The humble spirit is the contented spirit; if his cross be light, he reckons it
in the inventory of his mercies; if it be heavy, yet takes it upon his knees,
knowing that when his estate is worser, it is to make him better. Where you lay
humility for the foundation, Contentment will be the superstructure.

SECT. 4.
4. Rule. 1 Timothy 3. 9.
Keep a clear Conscience.
Contentment is the Manna that is laid up in the Arc of a good conscience; Oh,
take heed of indulging any sin. It Is as natural for guilt to breed disquiet,
as for putred matter to breed vermin. Sin lies as Jonah in the ship, it
raises a tempest. If dust, or motes be gotten into the eye, they make the eye
water, and cause a soreness in it; if the eye be clear, then it is free from
that soreness: If sin be gotten into the conscience, which is as the eye of
the soul, then grief and disquiet breeds there; but keep the eye of conscience
clear, and all is well. What Solomon says of a good stomach, I may say of a
good conscience: Pro. 27. 7.
To the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet; so to a good conscience every
bitter thing is sweet; it can pick contentment out of the Cross. Good
conscience turns the waters of Marah into wine. Would you have a quiet heart,
get a smiling conscience. I wonder not to hear Paul say, he was in every state
content; When he could make that triumph, I have lived in all good conscience
to this day Act. 23. 1.
. When once a man's reckonings are clear, it must needs let in abundance of
contentment into the heart. Good conscience can suck contentment out of the
bitterest drugge; under slanders, This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
conscience 2 Cor. 1. 12.
: in case of imprisonment, Paul had his prison-songs, and could play the sweet
lesson of contentment when his feet were in the stocks Acts 16. 25. Augustive.
; one calls it bonae conscientiae Paradisus, the Paradise of a good conscience;
and if it be so, then in prison we may be in Paradise. When the times are
troublesome, good conscience makes a calm; If conscience he clear, what though
the days be cloudy? Is it not a contentment to have a friend always by, to
speak a good word for us? such a friend is conscience. Good conscience, as
David's Harp, drives away the evil spirit of discontent. When thoughts begin to
arise, and the heart is disquieted; Conscience says to a man as the King did
to Nehemlah, Why is thy countenance sad Neb. 2. 2.
? So says Conscience, have not thou the seed of God in thee? art not thou an
heir of the Promise? Have not thou a treasure that thou can never be
plundered of? Why is thy countenance sad? Oh keep conscience clear, and you
shall never want contentment. For a man to keep the pipes of his body, the
veins and arteries free from colds and obstructions, is the best way to
maintain health: So, to keep conscience clear, and to preserve it from the
obobstructions of guilt, is the best way to maintain contentment. First
conscience is pure, and then peaceable.

SECT. 5.
5. Rule. Learn to deny your selves.
Look well to your affections, bridle them in. Do two things,

1. Mortify your desires. 2. Moderate your delights.
1. Mortify your desires; We must not be of the Dragons temper, who (they
say) is so thirsty, that no water will quench his thirst; Mortify therefore
your inordinate affection Col. 3. 5.
; in the Greek it is (...), your evil affection; to show that our desires when
they are inordinate, are evil. Crucify your desires, (...), be as dead men; a
dead man has no appetite.

Quest. How should a Christian martyr his desires? Quest.


Quest. 1. Get a right judgment of the things here below: Answ.
They are mean beggarly things; Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not
Pro. 23. 5
? The appetite must be guided by reason; the affections are the feet of the
soul, therefore they must follow the judgment, not lead it.

2. Often seriously meditate of mortality; Death will soon crop those flowers
which we delight in, and pull down the fabric of those bodies which we so
garnish and beautify. Think when you are locking up your money in your chest,
who shall shortly lock you up in your coffin?

2. Moderate your delights. Set not your hearts too much upon any creature Ps.
62. 10
. What we over-love, we shall over-grieve. Rachel set her heart too much upon
her children, and when she had lost them, she lost her self too; such a vein
of grief was opened as could not be stenched, she refused to be comforted. Here
was discontent. When we let any creature lie too near our heart, when God pulls
away that comfort, a piece of our heart is rent away with it. Too much
fondness ends in frowardness. Those that would be content in the want of
mercy, must be moderate in the enjoyment. Jonathan dipped the rod in honey, he
did not thrush it in. Let us take heed of ingulphing our selves in pleasure;
better have a spare diet, then by having too much to surfeit.

SECT. 6.
6. Rule. Get much of heaven into your heart.
Spiritual things satisfy; the more of heaven is in us, the less earth will
content. ps. 63. 5.
He that has once tasted the love of God, his thirst is much quenched toward
sublunary things; the joys of Gods Spirit are heart-filling and heart-chearing
joys; he that has these, has heaven begun in him, Romans 14. 17. and shall we
not be content to be in heaven? Oh get a sublime heart, Seek the things that
are above Col* 3. 1
; fly aloft in your affections, thirst after the graces and comforts of the
Spirit; the Eagle that flies above in the air, fears not the stinging of the
serpent; the serpent creeps on his belly, and stings only such creatures as
go upon the earth. Discontent is a Serpent that stings only an earthly heart;
an heavenly soul that with the Eagle flies aloft, finds abundantly enough in
God to give contentment, and is not stung with the cares and disquiets of the
world.

SECT. 7.
7. Rule. Look not so much on the dark side of your condition, as on the light.
God does chequer his providence, white and black, as the pillar of cloud had
its light side and dark; look on the light side of thy estate; who looks on the
back side of a landscape? Suppose thou art cast in a Lawsuit, there is the dark
side; yet thou have some land left, there is the light side. Thou have sickness
in thy body, there is the dark side; but grace in thy soul, there is the light
side. Thou have a child taken away, there is the dark side; thy husband lives,
there is the light side. Gods providence in this life are various, represented
by those speckled horses among the Myrtle-trees Zach 1. 8.
, which were red and white; mercies and afflictions are interwoven, God does
speckle his work. Oh, says one, I want such a comfort: but weigh all thy
mercies in the balance, and that will make thee content. If a man did want a
finger, would he be so discontented for the loss of that, as not to be
thankful for all the other parts and joints of his body? Look on the light
side of your condition, and then all your discontents will easily disband; do
not pore upon your loss, but ponder upon your mercies. What? would thou have
no cross at all? Why should one man think to have all good things, when
himself is good in part? would thou have no evil about thee, who have so
much evil in thee? thou art not fully sanctified in this life, how then
think thou to be fully satisfied? never look for perfection of contentment
till there be perfection of grace.

SECT. 8.
8. Rule. Consider in what a posture we stand here in the world.
1. We are in a military condition, we are soldiers 2 Timothy 2 3.
; now a soldier is content with any thing, what though he has not his stately
house, his rich furniture, his soft bed, his full table? yet does not
complain; he can lie in straw as well as down; he minds not his lodging, but
his thoughts run upon dividing the spoil, and the garland of honor that shall
be set upon his head; and for hope of this, is content to run any hazard,
endure any hardship. Were it not absurd to hear him complain that he wants
such provision, and is feign to lie out in the fields? a Christian is a
military person, he fights the Lords battles, he is Christ's, Ensigne-bearer.
Now, what though he endures hard fare, and the bullets fly about, he fights
for a Crown, and therefore must be content.

2. We are in a peregrine condition; Pilgrims and Travelers. A man that is in
a strange country is contented with any diet or usage, he is glad of any
thing, though he has not that respect or attendance as he looks for at home;
nor is capable of the privileges and immunities of that place, he is content;
he knows when he comes into his own country he has lands to inherit, and
there he shall have honor and respect: So it is with a child of God, he is in
a pilgrim-condition, I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my
fathers were Ps. 39. 12
. Therefore let a Christian be content, he is in the world, but not of the
world; he is borne of God, and is a Citizen of the new Jerusalem Heb. 12. 10.
; therefore, though he hunger and thirst, and have no certain dwelling place 1
Cor. 4 11.
, yet he must be content, it will be better when he comes into his own country.

3. We are in a mendicant condition; we are beggars, we beg at heaven gate,
Give us this day our daily bread; we live upon Gods alms, therefore must be
content with any thing; a beggar must not pick and choose, he is contented with
the refuse. Oh, why do thou murmr that art a beggar, and art fed out of the
almes-basket of Gods providence?

SECT. 9.
9. Rule. Let not your hopes depend extrinsice upon these outward things.
Lean not upon sandy pillars; we often build our comfort upon such a friend or
estate, and when that prop is removed, all our joy is gone, and our hearts
begin either to fail or fret. A lame man leanes on his crutches, and if they
break he is undone: let not thy contentment go upon crutches, which may soon
fail; the ground of contentment must be within thy self. The word (...),
which is used for contentment, signifies selfe-sufficiency; a Christian has
that from within that is able to support him; that strength of faith and good
hope through grace, as bears up his heart in the deficiency of outward
comforts. The Philosophers of old, when their estates were gone, yet could take
contentment in the goods of the mind, their learning and virtue; and shall not
a believer much more in the grace of the Spirit, that rich enamel and
embroidery of the soul? Say with thy self, If friends leave me, if riches take
wings, yet I have that within comforts me, viz. an heavenly treasure, Omnia mea
mecum porto; when the blossoms of my estate are blown off, still there is the
sap of contentment in the root of my heart, I have still an interest in God,
and that interest cannot be broken off. Oh never place your felicity in these
dull and beggarly things here below.

SECT. 10.
10. Rule. Let us often compare our condition.
Quest. How should I compare?

Answ. Make this five fold comparison.

1. Let us compare our condition and our desert together; 1. Comparison.
if we have not what we desire, we have more then we deserve. For our mercies,
we have deserved less; for our afflictions, we have deserved more.

First, in regard of our mercies, we have deserved less. What can we deserve?
Can man be profitable to the Almighty? we live upon free grace. Alexander gave
a great gift to one of his subjects; the man being much taken with it, This
(says he) is more then I am worthy of; I do not give thee this, says the
King, because thou art worthy of it, but I give a gift like Alexander. Whatever
we have is not merit, but bounty; the least bit of bread is more then God owes
us; we can bring faggots to our own burning, but not one flower to the garland
of our salvation; he that has the least mercy, will die in Gods debt.

afflictions we have deserved more. Thou have punished us less then our
iniquities deserve Ezra 9. 13.
. Is our condition sad? we have deserved it should be worse; has God taken
away our estate from us? he might have taken away Christ from us: has he
thrown us into prison? he might have thrown us into hell; he might as well
damn us, as whip us; this should make us contented.

2. Let us compare our conditions with others, 2. Comparison.
and this will make us content; we look at them who are above us, let us look
at them who are below us Dum tibi aliena pericula memoras, mitius portas tua^.
Isid. Soliloq. l. 1.
; we see one in his silks, another in his sackcloth; one has the waters of a
full cup wrung out to him, another is mingling his drink with tears; how many
pale faces do we behold, whom not sickness, but want has brought into a
consumption! think of this and be content. It Is worse with them, who perhaps
deserve better then we, and are higher in Gods favor. Am I in prison? was not
Daniel in a worse place, viz. the Lions den? Do I live in a mean cottage? look
on them who are banished from their houses. We read of the Primitive Saints,
that they wandered up and down in Sheeps skins and Goats skins, of whom the
world was not worthy Heb. 11. 37.
. Have thou a gentle fit of an Ague? look on them who are tormented with the
stone and gout, etc. others of Gods children have had greater afflictions, and
have borne them better then we. Daniel fed upon pulse and drank water, yet was
fairer then they who ate of the Kings portion Dan. 1. 15.
; some Christians who have been in a lower condition, that have fed upon pulse
and water have looked better, viz. been more patient and contented then we who
enjoy abundance. Do others rejoice in affliction, and do we repine? Can they
take up their cross, and walk cheerfully under it, and do we under a lighter
cross murmr?

3. Let us compare our condition with Christ's upon Earth; what a poor, mean
condition was he pleased to be in for us? he was contented with any thing. For
ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for
your sakes he became poor 2 Cor. 8. 9.
. He could have brought down an house from heaven with him, or challenged the
high places of the earth; but he was contented to be in the wine press, that
we might be in the wine-celler; and to live poor, that we might die rich; the
manager was his cradle, the cob webs his canopy; he who is now preparing
mansions for us in heaven, had none for himself on earth, he had no where to
lay his head. Christ came in Forma pauperis; who being in the form of God,
took upon him the form of a servant Phil. 2. 7.
. We read not of any sums of money he had; when he wanted money he was feign
to work a miracle for it Mat. 17. 27
. Jesus Christ was in a low condition, he was never high, but when he was
lifted up upon the Cross, and that was his humility; he was content to live
poor, and die cursed. Oh compare your condition with Christ's.

4. Let us compare our condition with what it was once, 4. Comparison.
and this will make us content.

spiritual estate with what it was once. What were we when we lay in our
blood? we were heirs apparent to hell, having no right to pluck one leaf from
the tree of the promise; it was a Christless and hopeless condition, Ephesians. 2.
12.
Ephesians. 2. 12. but now God has cut off the entaile of hell and damnation; he
has taken you out of the wild Olive of nature, and ingraffed you into Christ,
making you living branches of that living Vine; he has not only caused the
light to shine upon you, but into you 2 Cor. 4 6.
, and has interessed you in all the privileges of sonship; is not here that
may make the soul content?

temporal estate with what it was once: alas, we had nothing when we stepped
out of the womb; For we brought nothing with us into the world 1 Timothy 6. 7.
; if we have not that which we desire, we have more then we did bring with us;
we brought nothing with us (but sin;) other creatures bring something with
them into the world; the Lamb brings wool, the Silkeworme silk, etc. but we
brought nothing with us. What if our condition at present be low? it is better
then it was once; therefore having food and raiment, let us be content;
whatever we have, Gods providence fetched it in to us; and if we lose all, yet
we have as much as we brought with us. This was that that made Job content,
Naked came I out of my mothers womb Job 1. 2^
; as if he had said, though God has taken away all from me, yet why should I
murmr? I am as rich now as I was when I came into the world; I have as much
left as I brought with me; naked came I hither; Therefore blessed be the Name
of the Lord.

5. Let us compare our condition with what it shall be shortly. 5. Comparison.
There is a time shortly coming, when if we had all the riches of India, they
would do us no good; we must die, and can carry nothing with us; so says the
Apostle, It is certain, we can carry nothing out of the world 1 Timothy 6. 7
; therefore it follows, having food and raiment, let us be therewith content,
Vetera ^rangantur ^epulchra, ^ssa divi^um agnos^as non ^pes. Bid.
verse 8. Open the rich man's grave, and see what is there; you may find the
Misers bones, but not his riches: were we indeed to live for ever here, or
could we carry our riches into another world, then indeed we might be
discontented when we look upon our empty bags; but it is not so* God may
presently seal a warrant for death to apprehend us, and when we die, we cannot
carry our estate with us. Honor and riches descend not into the grave, why
then are we troubled at our outward condition? why do we disguise our selves
with discontent? Oh lay up a stock of grace, be rich in faith and good works,
these riches will follow us Rev. 14. 13.
; no other coin but grace will pass current in heaven, silver and gold will
not go there; labor to be rich toward God Luke 12 21.
; and as for other things be not solicitous, we shall carry nothing with us.

SECT. 11.
11. Rule. Go not to bring your condition to your mind, but bring your mind
to your condition.
The way for a Christian to be contented, is not by raising his estate higher,
but by bringing his spirit lower; not by making his barnes wider, but his heart
narrower Non qui parum habet, sed qui plus cupit, pauper est Laert. Diogenes.
; one man a whole Lordship or Manor will not content; another is satisfied
with a few acres of land; what is the difference? the one studies to satisfy
curiosity, the other necessity; the one thinks what he may have, the other what
he may spare Si vis ess^ Dives (in quit Pythocles) no^ est pecuni^ adjiciendi^
sed cupidi^tatibus d^ trahendum^^
. (...). Chrysostom.
.

SECT. 12.
12. Rule. Study the vanity of the creature.
It matters not whether we have more or less of these things, they have
vanity written upon the frontispice of them; the world is like a shadow that
declineth; it is delightful, but deceitful, it promises more then we find,
and it fails us when we have most need of it O quantum est in rebus inane.
. All the world rings changes, and is constant only in its disappointments:
what then if we have less of that which is at best but voluble and fluid? The
world is as full of mutation as motion; and what if God cuts us short in
sublunaries? The more a man has to do with the world, the more he has to do
with vanity. The world may be compared to ye, which is smooth, but slippery;
or to the Egyptian Temples, without very beautiful and sumptuous, but within
nothing to be seen but the image of an Ape; every creature says concerning
satisfaction, It is not in me. The world is not a filling, but a flying
comfort. It Is like a game at Tennis; Providence bandies her golden balls, first
to one, then to another. Why are we discontented at the loss of these things,
but because we expect that from them which is not, and repose that in them,
which ought not? Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd Jonah 4. 6.
? what a vanity was it? Quid est omnis hujus mundi voluptas? annon virens
hedera, quae textili sylva per parietem inserpit, latamque supra caput umbram
explicat? paravit Deus vermem and percussit he^eram, and exaruit: is a prorsus
hederae nostrae subi^^o marcescunt, simulque cum illis omne illud umbratile
gaudium. Drexel. de Eter. p. 163.
is it much to see a withering Gourd smitten? or to see the Moon dressing it
self in a new shape and figure?

SECT. 13.
13. Rule. Get fancy regulated.
It is the fancy which raises the price of things above their real worth;
what is the reason one Tulip is worth five pounds, another perhaps not worth
one shilling? fancy raises the price; the difference is rather imaginary then
real: so, why it should be better to have thousands then hundreds, is, because
men fancy it so; if we could fancy a lower condition better, Status humilis
efficax virtutis gymnasium. Achesilaus.
as having less care in it, and less account, it would be far more eligible;
the water that springs out of the rock, drinks as sweet, as if it came out of a
golden chalice Dulcis prosiliens aqua sivere Petra fluens, sive in poculo, sive
ex mandibulo asini, ad restinguendam sitim sufficit. Paenis subcinericius, mel
agreste possunt te fortem reddere aeque ac cibus splendi-dissimus. Hyperius.
; things are as we fancy them. Ever since the fall the fancy is distempered;
God saw that the imagination of the thoughts of his heart were evil Genesis 6. 5
. Fancy looks through wrong spectacles; pray that God will sanctify your
fancy; a lower condition would content, if the mind and fancy were set
right. Diogenes preferred his Cynical life before Alexanders royalty; he
phancied his little cloister best. Fabricius a poor man, yet despised the gold
of King Pyrrhus.

-- Contentus honesto
Fabricius parvo spernebat munera regum:
Sudabatque gravi Consul Serranus aratro. Claud. l. 1.
Could we cure a distempered fancy, we might soon conquer a discontented
heart.

SECT. 14.
14. Rule. Consider how little will suffice nature.
The body is but of small continent, and is easily recruited. Christ has
taught us to pray for our daily bread; Parvaseges satis est, nature is content
with a little; (...), not to thirst, not to starve is enough, says Gregory
Nazianzen, meat and drink is a Christians riches, says St. Hierome Cibus and
potus sunt divitiae Christianorum.
; and the Apostle says, Having food and raiment, let us be content.

-- O prodiga rerum
Luxuries, nunquam parvo contenta paratu,
Et quaesitorum pelago, terraque ciborum
Ambitiosa Fames, and lautae gloria mensae.
Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam,
Et quantum natura petat. --
Lucan. l. 4. Pharsal. The stomach is sooner filled then the eye; How quickly
would a man be content, if he would study rather to satisfy his hunger then
his humor?

SECT. 15.
15. Rule. Believe the present condition is best for us.
Flesh and blood is not a competent judge. Surfeited stomachs are for
banqueting stuff; but a man that regards his health, is rather for solid food.
Vain men fancy such a condition best, and would flourish in their bravery;
whereas a wise Christian has his will melted into Gods will, and thinks it
best to be at his finding. God is wise, he knows whether we need food, or
physic; and if we could acquiesce in providence, the quarrel would soon be
at an end. O, what a strange creature would man be, if he were what he could
wish himself? Be content to be at Gods allowance. God knows which is the
fittest pasture to put his sheep in; Sometimes a more barren ground does well,
whereas rank pasture may rot. Do I meet with such a cross? God shows me what
the world is; he has no better way to weane me, then by putting me to a
stepmother. Does God stint me in my allowance? he is now dieting me. Do I meet
with losses? it is that God may keep me from being lost. Every cross wind
shall at last blow me to the right port. Did we believe that condition best
which God does parcel out to us, we should cheerfully submit, and say; The
lines are fallen in pleasant places.

SECT. 16.
16. Rule. Do not too much indulge the flesh.
We have taken an oath in Baptism to forsake the flesh. The flesh is a worse
enemy then the devil; it is abosome traitor: A bosom-traitour.
an enemy within is worst. If there were no devil to tempt, the flesh would be
another Eve to tempt to the forbidden fruit. Oh take heed of giving way to it;
whence is all our discontent, but from the fleshly part? The flesh puts us upon
the immoderate pursuit of the world; it consults for ease and plenty; and if it
be not satisfied, then discontents begin to arise. Oh, let it not have the
reins, martyr the flesh; in spiritual things the flesh is a sluggard, in
secular things an Horsleech, crying, Give, give. The flesh is an enemy to
suffering Non durum est quod patimur, sed molles sumus. Seneca.
, it will sooner make a man a Courtier then a Martyr, Oh keep it under; put its
neck under Christ's yoke, stretch and nail it to his Cross; never let a
Christian look for contentment in his spirit, till there be confinement in his
flesh.

SECT. 17.
17. Rule. Meditate much on the glory which shall be revealed.
There are great things laid up in heaven, Though it be sad for the present,
yet let us be content in that it will shortly be better, it is but a while, and
we shall be with Christ, bathing our souls in the fountain of his love; we
shall never complain of wants or injuries any more; our cross may be heavy,
but one sight of Christ will make us forget all our former sorrows. There are
two things should give contentment.

1. That God will make us able to bear our troubles 1 Cor. 10. 13. Chrysostom.
. God, (says Chrysostom) does like a Lutenist; who will not let the strings
of his Lute be too slack, lest it spoil the music; nor will he suffer them to
be too hard stretched, or served up, lest they break: So does God deal with us,
he will not let us have too much prosperity, lest this spoil the music of
prayer and repentance; nor yet too much adversity, lest the spirit fail before
him, and the souls which he has made Isa. 57. 16.
.

2. When we have suffered a while 1 Pet. 5. 10.
, we shall be perfected in glory; the Cross shall be our ladder by which we
shall climb up to heaven. Be then content, and the scene will alter. God will
ere long turn our water into wine; the hope of this is enough to drive away all
distempers from the heart. Blessed be God, it will be better: We have no
continued City here Heb. 13
, therefore our afflictions cannot continue. A wise man looks still to the end:
The end of the just man is peace Psalm. ^7. 37.
. Me thinks the smoothness of the end should make amends for the ruggedness
of the way. Oh eternity, eternity! think often of the Kingdom prepared. David
was advanced from the field to the throne. First he held his Shepherds staff,
and shortly after the royal Scepter. Gods people may be put to hard services
here; but God has chosen them to be Kings, to sit upon the throne with the
Lord Jesus. This being weighed in the balance of Faith, would be an excellent
means to bring the heart to contentment.

SECT. 18.
18. Rule. Be much in Prayer.
The last Rule for Contentment is, Be much in Prayer. Beg of God that he will
work our hearts to this blessed frame; Is any man afflicted, let him pray: Jam.
5. 13.
. So, is any man discontented, let him pray. Prayer gives vent. The opening of
a vein, lets out the bad blood: When the heart is filled with sorrow and
disquiet prayer lets out the bad blood. The key of prayer oiled with tears
(...) lachrymis egeriturque dolor.
, unlocks the heart of all its discontents. Prayer is an holy spell or charm
to drive away trouble; Prayer is the unbosoming of the soul, the unloading of
all our cares in Gods breast, and this ushers in sweet contentment. When there
is any burden upon our spirits by opening our mind to a friend, we find our
hearts finely eased and quieted. It is not our strong resolutions, but our
strong requests to God which must give the heart case in trouble; by Prayer the
strength of Christ is brought into the soul; and where that is, a man is able
to go through any condition. Paul could be in every state content; but that you
may not think he was to do this of himself, he tells you, that though he could
want and abound, and (...), do all things (...). Chrysostom.
; yet it was through Christ strengthening, him Phil. 4. 13. It Is the child
that writes, but it is the Scrivener guides his hand. St. Paul arrived at the
hardest duty in Religion, viz. Contentment; but the Spirit was his Pilot, and
Christ his strength, and this strength was ushered in by holy prayer. Prayer is
a powerful Orator, Constantine the Emperor, as he did write Christ's Name
upon his door, so he did invoke his Name in his closet Eusebius.
. Prayer is an exor^^^ with God, and an exoroist against sin. The best way is
to pray down discontent* What Luther faith of Concupiscence I may say of
Discontent; Prayer is a sacred Leech Oration est hirudo animae.
to suck out the venom and swelling of this passion. Prayer composeth the
heart, and brings it into tune. Has God deprived you of many comforts? bless
God that he left you the Spirit of Prayer.

Use. 6. The last use is of comfort, Use. VI. Consolation.
or encouraging word to the contented Christian. If there be an heaven upon
earth, thou have it. O Christian, thou may insult over thy troubles, and
with the Leviathan laugh at the shaking of a spear, Job 4. 1. 29
Job 41. 29. What shall I say? thou art a crown to thy profession; thou do
hold it out to all the world, that there is virtue enough in Religion to give
the soul contentment. Thou show height of grace. When grace is crowning, it
is not so much for us to be content; but when grace is conflicting, and meets
with crosses, tentations, agonies; now to be content, this is a glorious thing
indeed.

To a contented Christian, I shall say two things for a farewell.

First, God is exceedingly taken with such a frame of heart. God says of a
contented Christian, as David once said of Goliahs sword, There is none like
that, give it me, 1 Samuel 21. 9. If you would please God, and be men of his
heart, be contented. It is said that Rebecca made Isaac savoury meat, such as
her husband loved; would ye give God such a dish as he loves? bring him this of
Contentment. The Musician has many lessons to play, but he has one above all
the rest: There are many lessons of holy Music that delight God, the lesson of
repentance, humility, etc. But this lesson of Contentment is the sweetest
lesson that a Believer can play. God hates a froward spirit.

Secondly, the contented Christian shall be no loser. What lost Job by his
patience? God gave him three times as much as he had before. What lost Abram by
his contentment? he was content to leave his Country at Gods call; the Lord
makes a Covenant with him, that he would be his God, Genesis 17. He changes his
Name; no more Abram, but Abraham the Father of many Nations. God makes his feed
as the Stars of heaven; nay, honors him with this title, The Fatther of the
Faithful. The Lord makes known his secrets to him, Genesis 18. 17.
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I will do? God settles a rich
inheritance upon him, that land which was a type of heaven, and afterward
translated him into the blessed Paradise. God will be sure to reward the
contented Christian. As our Savior said in another case to Nathaniel, Because
I said I saw thee under the fig tree, beleevest thou? thou shall see greater
things then these. John 1. 50.
So, I say, Art thou contented (O Christian) with a little, thou shall see
greater things then these* God will distill the sweet influences of his love
into thy soul: He will raise one in the cru^e; and when that is done, he will
crown thee with an eternal enjoyment of himself; he will give thee Heaven,
where thou shall have as much contentment as thy soul can possibly thirst
after.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
Chap. 1. THe Introduction to the Text. page 1, 2. Chap. 2. Containing the
first proposition. p. 5 Chap. 3. Containing the second proposition. p. 14 Chap.
4. Containing the third grand proposition, viz. a gracious spirit is a
contented spirit. p. 22 The lesson of Contentment is hard to be learned. It is
of universal extent, Ibid. It concerns Rich men. p. 24 Poor men. p. 26
Chap. 5. Whether a Christian may not resent his condition with some sadness,
and yet be content? p. 32 Whether a Christian may not lay open his grievances
to God, and yet be content? p. 33 What it is properly that Contentment does
exclude out of its Diocese. page 34. Chap. 6. Showing the nature of
Contentment. page 36 Contentment is A divine thing. p. 36 An intrinsecal thing.
p. 38 An habitual thing. p. 39
Chap. 7. Containing the reasons which press to holy Contentment. 1. Gods
Precept. p. 41 2. Gods Promise. p. 42 3. Gods Decree. p. 43, 44
Chap. 8. The first Use showing how a Christian may live comfortably in the
midst of troubles. p. 49 Chap. 9. Use 2. A Reproof to the discontented
Christian. p. 52 Chap. 10. Use 3. A swasive to Contentment. p. 58 Several
Apologies that Discontent makes for it self answered. The first Apology
answered. p. 59 The second Apology answered. p. 66 The third Apology answered.
p. 72 The fourth Apology answered. p. 78 The fifth Apology answered. p. 85 The
sixth Apology answered. p. 90 The seventh Apology answered. p. 93 The eighth
Apology answered. p. 96 The ninth Apology answered. p. 99 The tenth Apology
answered. p. 108 The eleventh Apology answered. p. 110 The twelfth Apology
answered. p. 114
Chap. 11. Divine Arguments or Motives to Contentment. The first Argument, The
excellency of Contentment. p. 118, 119 The second Argument, A Christian has
that which may make him content. p. 142 The third Argument, Else we confute our
own prayers. p. 146 The fourth Argument, By Contentment God comes to have his
end, and Satan misseth of his end. p. 147 The fifth Argument, Thus a Christian
gets a victory over himself. p. 149 The sixth Argument, All cross providence
work for our good. p. 151 The seventh Argument, The evil of Discontent. p. 164
Which appears in 3. things. The sordidnesse. p. 165 The sinfulness. p. 167 The
simplicity. p. 178
The eighth Argument, The more a man has, the less he is satisfied. p. 182
The ninth Argument, The brevity of life. p. 184 The tenth Argument, The evils
that do attend a prosperous condition p. 187 The eleventh Argument, The
examples of those who have been eminent for Contentation. p. 195 The twelfth
Argument, The present misery and indigence of the godly, is all the hell he
shall have. p. 202 The thirteenth Argument, Not to have a contented mind is a
great judgment. p. 204
Chap. 12. Three Cautions laid down. Though a Christian should be in every
state content, yet he must not be content 1. In his natural estate. p. 207 2.
Where God is dishonored. p. 209 3. With a little grace. p. 213
Chap. 13. The fourth Use, trial; Showing the Characters of a contented
spirit. 1. A contented spirit is a silent spirit. p. 221 2. A contented spirit
is a cheerful spirit. p. 223 3. A contented spirit is a thankful spirit. p.
224 4. To a contented spirit nothing comes amiss. p. 226 5. A contented spirit
will not rid himself out of trouble by running himself into sin. p. 230
Chap. 14. Use 5. Direction, Propounding several Rules for holy Contentment. p.
233 1. Rule. Advance Faith. p. 234 2. Rule. Breath after Assurance. p. 236 3.
Rule. Get an humble spirit. p. 239 4. Rule. Keep a clear Conscience p. 241 5.
Rule. Learn to deny your selves. p. 244 6. Rule. Labor for an heavenly heart.
p. 247 7. Rule. Look not on the dark side of your condition, but the light
side. p. 248 8. Rule. Consider in what a posture you stand here in the world.
p. 250 9. Rule. Let not your hopes depend upon extrinsecals. p. 253 10. Rule.
Often compare your condition. p. 255 11. Rule. Go not to bring your condition
to your mind, but bring your mind to your condition. p. 263 12. Rule. Study
the vanity of the creature. p. 264 13. Rule. Get fancy regulated, p. 266 14.
Rule. Consider how little will suffice nature. p. 268 15. Rule. Believe the
present condition best. p. 269 16. Rule. Do not too much indulge the flesh. p.
271 17. Rule. Meditate much on the glory to be revealed. p. 272 18. Rule. Be
much in prayer. p. 274
Chap. 15. Use 6. Comfort to the contented Christian. p. 277
FINIS.

