Mary's Choice Declared in a SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Right
Honorable Lady MARY WHARTON, Late Wife of the Honorable Sir Thomas Wharton,
Knight of the Bath; At Edlington in the County of York.

Together with a Narrative of the Religious and Holy Life, and Death of that
excellent Lady.

By P. W. Rector of Edlington.

Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain; but a Woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised,

Prove. 30.31. Vivit post funera virtus.

London, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at the
White Heart in Westminster Hall, and at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1674.

Viro vere Honorabili, and omnigena Virtute ac Pietate insigni,

Domino Thomae Wharton Equiti Ord. Balnei Patrono suo Colendissimo:

Nec non D. Philippo Wharton Armigero unico ejus, and optimae Spei Filio:

Una cum Elizabetha ipsius uxore, ac viri Generosissimi D. Richardi Hutton de
Goldsborough Armigeri Filia unica:

Praecorditer adhuc lugentibus Conjugem dilectissimam, Matrem desideratissimam:

Hanc qualemcunque Conciunculam Funebrem

Et annexam Narratiunculam In perpetuae observantiae Testimonium. Funebrem

D. D. D. Iisdem omni Obsequio Devinctissimus, P. W.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have here given thee a rude draught of a very exact President; presenting
thee with an excellent Subject, but very inartificially handled. My
acquaintance with this excellent Lady was very short, she not living two years,
after I had the happiness to know her; yet had that short time been more
carefully improved, thou had been entertained with much more than is here
represented. But this is the common mistake of us miserable mortals: we set not
that price, we ought, upon present Virtue, nor are we so provident, as to enjoy
the benefit of it so fully as we might, whilst we have it: only when it is
taken from us, it leaves behind it a deep sense of our loss, and want of what
we had, together with an helpless repentance, that we made no better use of it,
whilst we had it. Besides this disadvantage: I who am the most unworthy of all
her former acquaintances in the Ministry, and most unable and unfit for such an
undertaking, yet am necessarily put upon this task (none other being at hand,
with whom she has in this short while so frequently conversed) by reason of my
Relation to her, and near neighborhood. This Picture deserved an Apelles, to
have drawn it to the Life: and great pity it is, that so choice a piece should
be exposed to thy view with such dull and dusky colors, and by such an
unskillful hand. But I question not, but that every pious and ingenuous Reader
will from these hints, represent to himself much more than I have or can
express; and by his larger apprehension supply my defects. Thou have the Sermon
in the same Method, wherein it was Preached, without addition of any chief
head: only in the transcribing diverse passages are considerably enlarged;
partly from what was then prepared, but could not be delivered in the short
time allotted for such discourses (there being also many Noble and Honorable
Persons to solemnize her Funeral, who had many miles to their home) and partly
from what did occur in the transcribing, which I judged suitable to the
Discourse in hand. The Narrative is, in good part, such as was spoken at the
Funeral; but here very much enlarged; not only upon the former accounts, but
mostly upon further information of many particulars, whereof I had no
knowledge, before this was intended to be published. I assure thee (Reader) it
is not from any ambition the Author has to appear in Print, that has made
this Discourse public. The conscience of his own insufficiency for such
undertakings has hitherto kept him within the bounds of privacy: which if he
now seem to have transgressed, thy charity will rather impute it to some other
urgent cause, than his own choice. It is but lost labor, and actum agere, to
censure his weakness, who himself has done it before thee. The best use thou
can make of what he has done, is seriously to apply, what thou find to
concern thy self, and to imitate the example here laid before thee; choosing
with her that good Part, whereof our Savior has given assurance, that it
shall not be taken away from thee. That both thou and I may make such use of
what is here presented, shall be the Prayer of

The most unworthy in Gospel-Work, P. W.

Mary's Choice.
St. LUKE X. XLII. But one thing is needful; and Mary has chosen that good
Part, which shall not be taken away from her.


THis Text is a part of our Savior's Answer to Martha's expostulation with him
for detaining her Sister from her assistance, whilst all the Work lay upon her
hands, in making provision for him and his Disciples; Lord (says she) do
thou not take care, etc. Verse. 40.

Mary being so well employed, sitting at his feet, and hearing his Word, ( ver.
39.) well might our Savior have sharply rebuked Martha's obstreperous and
unseasonable disturbance; but with all mildness he only admonishes her, how
much Mary's employment was to be preferred before hers; Martha, Martha,
Repetitio nominis est indicium dilectionis, aut for^e movendae intentionis, ut
audiret attentius. Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 26. Aret. and others in loc.
(says he) thou art careful and troubled, etc. Verse. 41.

Diverse Interpreters suppose here a vehement reprehension of Martha's
overmuch solicitude for things not necessary; and her neglect of the one thing
necessary, which Mary had chosen. But others suppose, that the words do not so
much import a reprehension of Martha's loving care, as a defense of Mary who
was better employed, and therefore excusable, Non opus reprehendit, sed munus
distinxit, Aug. ubi supra Sermon. 27. So also Ambr. in loc. Simo^ de Cass. l. 9.
c. 33. Bucer and others, in loc.
though she did neglect inferior business.

In this part of his Answer, which is to be the Subject of our Discourse; we
may observe,

1. An Admonition to Martha; That one thing is needful. 2. A commendation of
Mary, for her choice of that one thing; Mary has chosen, etc.
In treating of the former of these, we shall enquire by way of Explication, 1.
What this one thing is? 2. How it is called one? 3. In what respects it is said
to be necessary.

I. For the first, it is evident in the Text it self, that this one thing is
that good part, which Mary had chosen: and not that abstracted Monas, or unity
(which some speak of (but extra rem, besides the Text, as one says) opposed to
multiplicity, Calv. in loc.
nor yet that unity which is opposed to Schism (as St. Augustine seems to take
it) nor yet that little which may suffice for hospitable entertainment, Aug. de
verb. Dom. Sermon. 26. Vid. Theophil. Lyser. Stella, etc. in loc.
excluding superfluity (as some others expound it:) Nor can it be that
conceited perfection which the Popish Monks contend for; sequestring themselves
from all worldly employments, that they may attend nothing else, but (as they
pretend) Divine Contemplation. Hieron. in Thr. lib. 2. cap. 3. Bern. Sermon. 5.
de assumpt. Mariae. Theoph. ubi supra.
Though St. Jerome, and other of the Fathers, have by way of allusion made such
use of this Text: which yet is far from the purpose of our Saviors Words. For
can any man think, that this was Mary's constant and continual Work, because
she was at this time so careful to improve this present opportunity of her
Saviors company? We know that God has ordained, that all men should serve him
in their several vocations; Gal. 5.13.
and serve one another in Love, in the diligent performance of each duty in
that state of Life, in which Providence has placed them; 1 Cor. 7.17.
as the Lord has called every man, etc. Our Savior would have us make a wise
distribution of our times: yet ever preferring the best employment, when it
suits with our possible leisure, and seasonable opportunity.

This one thing then here meant, is that which Mary makes her present business.
To understand which, we must consider it with a double reference, 1. To the
End. 2. To the Means.

1. The End, or main thing intended is everlasting happiness; which consists in
the fruition of God, in nearest communion with him according to our present
condition and capacity: which is,

1. Here in Part, Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3. Ephesians. 1.14.
in some foretasts of Divine Comforts, which it pleases the Lord to allow his
Servants, as an earnest or pledge of that which is prepared for them in Heaven.
This consists in the sense and feeling of the Love of God, shed abroad into our
hearts, Romans 5.5.
by the Holy Ghost, and is obtained especially by the exercise of Faith and
Love.

2. Hereafter we shall enjoy him in Eternal Glory, 2 Cor. 5.4. Phil. 1.23. 1
Cor. 13.12. Psalm 10.11. Acts 20.22. Luke 22.29. 1 Pet. 1.4. 2 Timothy 4.8. Jam
1.12. Phil. 3.14. Joh. 10 28. Mat. 25.34. E^h 1.14. Col. 1.5. Heb. 5 9. 1 Cor.
2 9. Psalm 31.19. Isa 64 4. Phil. 3.13, 14. (...) Eccles. 12.13.
of which we are incapable, whilst we remain clothed with this mortal and
corruptible Tabernacle: which therefore the Saints so earnestly desire to put
off, that they may be with Christ: For then in perfect Glory we shall see him
face to face, in the fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. This is that
Inheritance, Kingdom, Crown, Price, Life, Joy, Glory, etc. so often mentioned in
the Scripture: and which is said to be purchased, prepared, and laid up for all
those that obey him, love, and fear him; that put their trust in him, and
diligently seek him. This is that one thing, which we are required to seek, to
lay hold on, to take by force, to fight, strive, and run for, etc.

2. This one thing is likewise considered with reference to the Means whereby
the mentioned End is obtained. To attend which was St. Paul's greatest care and
business: which is indeed work enough for a man to do in his whole Life, with
all his might. This is the whole of man, i. e. all he can do to attain
happiness. It is the one thing, which comprehends All, that is to be done in
order to Eternal Life; therefore must needs be very extensive. But we shall
confine our Discourse, especially to that part of this All, which is in the
Context, verse. 39. viz. Hearing the Word.

One observes, Gualt. in Luc. 10.39. Acts 22 3.
that Disciples were wont to sit at the feet of their Teachers, as a sign of
Humility and observance. So St. Paul was said, to be brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, being perfectly by him instructed in the Law. In this (says that
Author) consists the true worship of God, and the Salvation of man.

1 That we cast our selves at the feet of Christ, Quanto humiliti, sedebat,
tanto amplius capiebat. Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 27.
i. e. that we humble our selves before him with a contrite heart, and tremble
at his Word, Isa. 66.2.

2. That we receive his Word by a true and lively Faith; which begets in us
true Love to God, and exhilarates the soul, by the sweet contemplation of the
promises contained in the Word: whence proceeds, an earnest and ardent study,
and desire to obey the commands of God. Which is the cause, that the fruit of
the Word so heard, diffuseth it self through the whole Life. Thus we see what
this one thing is.

II. Now we are to consider, how it is faid to be one? It is one, not
exclusively (as though whilst we attend this, we were bound to neglect all
other duties, which God requires of us: or those comforts, which he is pleased
to allow us) but intensively: It must be our chiefest aim and scope in our
whole Life: It must have the pre-eminence before all other business, and
requires our greatest care. All we do, 1 Cor. 10.31.
ought to be referred to the glory of God in our Salvation. So that though we
have many shafts to shoot, yet but one mark; many Offices to discharge, yet but
one aim in them all. As all the Springs discharge their several Streams through
the proper Channels of their respective Rivers, into one Ocean; So a Christians
diverse duties tend all to the same Savation. Insomuch, that even worldly
affairs are to be managed with an heavenly mind. It was an excellent Moral
saying of one, which may be well applied to our purpose;

Quicquid agis, prudenter agas; and respice finem. What e're thou have to do,
do prudently;
And let the End be ever in thine eye.
This point should be the Center, in which all our actions meet. Scopus vitae
Christus, was the Symbol of that worthy Emperor Jovinian; and should be the
resolution of every one that is called Christian. Otherwise, if we neglect this
one, all other our most plausible actions, are but (as St. Augustine speaks of
the virtues of the Heathens) splendida peccata, glorious sins. Since (as he
disputes against the Pelagians) Virtues are not distinguished from Vices, Non
officiis sed finibus a vitiis discernondae sunt virtutes. -- Non actibus sed
fin bus pensantur officia Aug. contr. Julian. lib. 4 cap. 3. Quid vobis cum
virtutibus, qui Dei virtutem Chistum ignoratis? Bern. Sermon. 23. sup. Cantica
so much by their Acts, as by the End for which they are done. Likewise St.
Bernard upon the same account, tells the most accurate Moralists, and exactest
Philosophers; that they had nothing to do with Virtue, being ignorant of
Christ, who is Virtus Dei, the power of God (1 Cor. 1.24.) For without him we
can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.

We see then, that this thing is so one, that it is All; and that all things
without this one thing, are Nothing.

III. This one thing is said to be needful, (...). Unum est necessarium.
or (as the vulgar Latin has it) necessary.

1. In it self considered, it is simply and absolutely necessary; without which
it is impossible to be happy. For our happiness consists in the full and
complete enjoyment of God, which cannot be without real communion with him; nor
can we have any communion with him, but in conformity to his Will. So that we
must be holy here, or else we can never be happy hereafter: Nor can we attain
to holiness, so as to walk with God, but in his own way.

2. Divine Ordination also confers a double necessity upon this one thing,
Necessitas Praecepti. M c. 6.8. Lu. 10.25, etc. Mar. 10 17, etc Heb. 5.9. and
11.6. and 12.28. 2 Pet. 3.14. Romans 2.7, 10.
viz.

1. Of the Precept, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. requiring us to fear the Lord our God, to
walk in his ways, to love and serve him with all our heart and soul, etc. It
is not left to our choice, to devise any other way, than he has appointed.
Heaven is entailed upon those only, that obey, and diligently wait upon the
service of God, and that patiently continue in well doing. We deceive our
selves, if we think to come in Heaven any other way, than that which he has
prescribed.

2. Another necessity is of the Means, Necessitas medii. Acts 4.12. John 1.12.
Rom 10.14.
whereby Eternal Life is obtained. Salvation were utterly unattainable by lost
man, if Christ had not purchased it for him: nor can we partake of his
purchase, unless we receive him; nor can we receive him, but by Faith; neither
can we believe what we have no knowledge of; nor can we know except we be
taught. We must some ways learn, what we can believe.

Oh! how necessary is this word of Faith? Romans 10 8.
which is Mary's present business, to receive from the mouth of him, who is the
Word ( Joh. 1.1.) that she may be taught the Word of Life by him, Who is the
way, and the truth, and the Life, Joh. 14.6.

In which Word St. Bernard observes seven necessities. Non ambigo esse plures,
and alias, sed hae interim occurrunt. Bern. Sermon. 85 super^ Cantica. Psalm
36.9. Ephesians. 1.8. Psalm. 119.104 Cant. 8.5. 1 Cor. 1.24.
Not but that there be more; but he only mentions those which came to mind. The
Soul (says he) seeks this Word, 1. Cui consentiat ad correctionem: that by
divine admonition, the obliquities of our conversation may be reformed, Psalm.
119.9. 2. Quo illuminetur ad cognitionem; that in his light, we may see light;
whereby the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, we may come to know
God, our selves, and our Duty. 3. Cui innitatur ad virtutem; that leaning upon
Him, who is the power of God; we may be able to resist temptation, and overcome
all the difficulties, we shall find in the way to happiness. To. 8.35, etc.
So that nothing shall be able to separate us from the Love of God. 4. Quo
reformetur ad sapientiam; Psalm 19.12.
that the errors of our judgments may be corrected by his instruction. 5. Cui
conformetur ad decorem; that observing his direction, 1 Pet. 2.21. Phil. 2.5,
15, etc.
and following his example, we may live blamelesly, and without offense. 6. Cui
maritetur ad foecunditatem; (so he expresses himself;) that the faithful soul
being as it were married to this Word, Col. 1.10. 1 Cor. 15.58.
may become fruitful unto every good work, so as to abound in them. 7. Quo
fruatur ad jucunditatem; that tasting of this sweetness, we may with assured
comfort pass through all the sorrows, Psalm 23.3.5^.3. Romans 12.12. 1 Pet. 1.8.
and trials which here abide us, and in the midst of all our fears and griefs,
may yet rejoice in the Lord, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.


David was so sensible of this, that he overlooks all other things, and urges
the Lord in his most earnest Prayers, to grant him this one thing, Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord; that will I seek after; that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my Life, etc. His desire was to make
this one thing his chiefest business, Psalm. 62.5. My Soul, wait thou only upon
God. Hence his earnest longing to be at that Work, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart
pants after the water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul
thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God?
He was so exceedingly ravished with the Glory, and heavenly sweetness of that
employment; Psa. 84.1 2, 10. Vid Molier. in Psalm. 84.
that he esteemed one day so spent, better than a thousand otherwise; and
preferred the meanest Office in this attendance, before the greatest pleasures,
in the Tents of such as regarded not Gods service, notwithstanding all the
gallantry and bravery of their habitations, together with all the solace and
pleasure of their carnal employments.

Thus much concerning this one thing, and the necessity thereof. Now we shall
draw some Inferences from what we have so explained.

Use 1.
First, We learn hence, that other things are not so necessary, whatever the
World judges either of this or them.

1. There is not so great need of them as of this; they are needful in their
kind, and place; God having ordained them for the comfort of this Life, in
their several uses. But this is indispensably necessary to the attainment of
everlasting happiness; as without which no man shall ever see God. We may reach
Heaven without Riches, or Honor, or Applause of men, Heb. 12.14.
etc. Yea without Health, or bodily Strength, or Beauty, etc. but never without
Holiness, and attendance upon Gods Service.

Whilst we sojourn here below, we have a little need of these subsidia, or
helps requisite to the support of our outward man. But, O that we did not so
dote on them, as if they were the unum necessarium. By which preposterous
acting we make our Life more cumbersome here, and prevent the enjoyment of
everlasting Life, by troubling our selves too much about these many things, and
neglecting this one. Well did that Heathen discern the non-necessity of these
many things, which distract the minds of men; could he but as well have known
that one thing, which is so necessary. That is near-hand (says he) which might
serve turn; Ad manum est quod satis est, ad supervacua sudatur. Senec. Epist. 4.
all our toil and sweat is for that, which is superfluous. Those Stars, whose
light is not only pleasant, but useful in the Suns absence, disappear at his
return. Surely, if we were more near the Rays of the Sun of Righteousness, we
should not be so much taken with the glimmerings of these lesser comforts.

2. But that which is also very considerable; if we cordially choose this one
thing, we shall be sure to have our part of those other things, (which
worldlings so much prize, Mat. 6.33. Romans 8.32. Psalm 34.10.
) in our proportion, as our heavenly Father sees needful for us. For they that
seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. This is the most compendious way,
to attain the highest degree of contentment, which only makes a man what he
would be.

Use 2.
How much then are they to blame, who take no care for this one needful thing?
whose whole time is employed in making provision for the flesh, Romans 13.14.12.2.
to fulfill the lusts thereof; and in conforming themselves to this present
evil world, which lies wholly in wickedness: 1 John 5.19. Phil. 3.19.
whose God is their Belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things. Their inward thought is, how to make themselves great in Wealth, and
Honor, to enjoy, and fulfill all their pleasure. And whilst they prosper in
their way, and all things succeed to their desires, they bless themselves, and
other men praise and flatter them, Psalm 49.18.
as if they were the only wise and prudent men in the world, who best know how
to do well to themselves. But whilst they reject the Word of the Lord, what
wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9.
Surely no other than that which is declared not to descend from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish: that which is enmity against God; James 3.15. Romans
8.7. Jer. 4 22.
which is only to do evil, but to do good has no knowledge. The utmost issue
of all their designs, and practice is, to prove themselves Fools (as he was
rightly called, Luke 12.26.) For what can all this profit them, when their Soul
shall be required of them? Are not they fools, who with so great eagerness
pursue their own undoing, rejecting this one thing, which is so necessary to
their Salvation? They surfeit upon the pleasures of this Life, and nauseate the
service of God; saying unto him, Job 21.14.
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Finding neither
carnal pleasure, nor profit in Religion, they are wholly averse from it;
saying, It is vain to serve God; Mal. 3.14. Job 21.15.
and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance? And what profit should
we have, if we pray unto him?

Thus whilst they like not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1.28. (...).
1 Timothy: 1.19.4.2. Ephesians. 4.19. (...).
they are justly given up to a reprobate mind, void of all judgment. So that
they do not only make Shipwreck of a good conscience, which being cauterized,
and seared, is become dedolent, and past feeling: yea they proceed so far at
last, as to draw black Lines upon that very (...). Romans 2.15. Ephesians. 4.18.2.12.
Register of natural Principles, which God had written in their hearts: whereby
they become utterly alienated from the Life of God, without Christ, Aliens,
Strangers, Hopeless, and Atheists, without God in the world. Whatever esteem
these may have among men; yet with all their Honor, (...). Psalm 49.26.
since they understand not (being not acquainted with this one thing) they are
no better than the Beasts that perish.

Use 3.
But oh! Let it be our care to make sure of this one thing, which is so
necessary. Trifle away no more precious time: let that suffice which is spent
already upon the vain pleasures, and follies, 1 Pet. 4.3.
and gayties of the world, whilst we have neglected this one thing: especially
laying to heart these few considerations.

1. How short and uncertain the time is, 1 Cor. 7.29. James 4.14. Ephesians. 5.16.
(...)
which we have before us. It would be our best husbandry now to redeem the
time, and make the best advantage of our present opportunity. Let not that
bargain slip out of our hands: though it be purchased with the loss of those
former delights and pleasures, which we have so hotly pursued; but could never
gain any true comfort, 1 Timothy 6.9. (...).
or satisfaction from them: but contrarily they drown, and plunge us in
destruction, and perdition.

2. What if God should call thee to an account in that present state, and
posture in which thou now art? This must certainly be called for; and the time
is at hand, Luke 16.2.
when thou must be no longer Steward; when thou must give a strict account,
what thou have done with each Talent, wherewith thou have been trusted: how
thou have spent thy time, and state, and strength, and gifts: what progress
thou have made in this one necessary thing. O let the conscience of thy
negligence hitherto, and of thy present poverty, Rev. 3.17.
blindness, and nakedness (so occasioned) move thee to consider, how thou may
provide for that great account, that thou may give it with joy, and not with
grief.

3. Consider thy happiness, if when the Lord comes, he find thee so employed.
Luke 12.43.
Then shall thou be blessed; as our Savior promises. But with what face will thou look upon him, if his coming find thee idle, as to this one thing, and
only busied in worldly employments, or possibly in the service of Satan, and
Sin?

4. Consider, that none of those other many things, which have been so eagerly
sought after (how ever glorious in the eyes of the world, or in thy own
deceived judgment) can stead thee at all in that day, if thou want this.

That man whose seize were so considerable, and the care of his
conversation so exact, Mark 10.17.18, etc.
that our Savior is said to love him; who also had great possessions: yet
could not with all these come into a capacity of Heaven and Eternal Life, for
want of this. O, how many, otherwise complete men, come short of Heaven, for
lack of this? Can any man persuade his own reason, that Wealth, Honor, etc. or
any of those Excelsa mundi, those so much admired things of the World can
entitle him to Heaven? or that his wit, parts, learning, or carnal wisdom can
make him acceptable in the sight of God? or that his moral and innocent
deportment among men, should procure his everlasting happiness without this one
thing? Surely then no Rich, nor Prudent, nor merely Moral man should ever come
into Hell. Then should Heaven and Eternal Glory be as obvious to Pagans, Turks,
and other Infidels, as to true Believers. Then had our Savior in vain told his
Disciples, that the way to Heaven was so strait, Mat. 7.14. Luke 13.24. Mark
16.16. John 3.18.
that there be but few that find it; and that many shall strive to enter in,
and shall not be able: in vain had he said, that he who believes not, is
condemned.

5. Consider, that this one is the only thing which shall never fail, when all
the glory of the World shall pass away: 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. 1 John 2.17.
when the friendship of the world shall stand thee in no stead. But of this
afterward.

Having now done with the first part of the Text, viz. our Saviors Admonition
to Martha; we come to speak of the second part, viz. the Commendation of Mary.
Where we shall consider,

1. The Party commended, Mary.

2. The thing for which she is commended, viz. because she made choice of that
good part, etc.

I. The Party commended is described,

1. In the Text, by her Name, Mary.

2. The Context compared with some other places, that make mention of her, will
give us some light concerning her condition.

1. Mary is a Name renowned in Scripture. No one Name affords more plenty of
good Souls registered in holy writ, than this. There we read of many and
excellent Mary's.

1. Mary, or Miriam (all is one) the Sister of Moses: who was instrumental in
bringing the Israelites out of Egypt; Micah 6.4. Exodus 15.20.
and was most active in praising God for that deliverance.

2. Mary the Mother of our Lord, saluted by the Angel, Luke 1.28.
the favorite of Heaven, and blessed among Women; of the Blood Royal, of the
house of David; admirably devout; verse 46, etc. 2.14, 51. John 19 25. Acts
1.14. Luke 2.35.
a great hoarder of heavenly treasure; she abode by the Lord at his Death, and
with his Church after his Ascension; was much versed in Affliction, etc. as was
foretold by holy Simeon.

3. This Mary in the Text; It is vulgarly taken for granted (especially in the
Church of Rome) that this Mary, and Mary Magdalen are both one, and also the
same with that Woman, Luke 7.37 who was a sinner. But this opinion is
vehemently opposed, and refuted by diverse learned men amongst them, especially
by Faber Stapulens. and Jod Clictoveus, and since by the Jesuit Salmeron, in
Luc. 7. of which see an account in Gerh. Harm. c. 143. Also Vid. Lyser. Har. c.
58. Jansen. Conc. Evang. c. 55. Came^ar. in John 11.1.
of whom hereafter.

4. Mary Magdalen, out of whom Christ cast seven Devils, Luke 8.2. A zealous
follower of Christ, and who administered to him of her substance, Luke 8.2.
Diligent in attending upon the Cross, and Sepulcher of Christ, Mat. 27.56, 61.
and 28.1. Mar. 15.47. To whom our Savior first appeared after his
Resurrection, Joh. 20.14. which she also, by his appointment, carefully reports
to his Disciples, Verse. 18.

5. Mary the Mother of James and Joses; The fifth and sixth Mary's also are
taken for one and the same by Jans. Conc. Evang. cap. 143. and Gerh. Harm. de
Resur. cap. 1. St. Hieron. is uncertain, Contr. Helv. cap. 7. and Ep. 150 q --
4. But Joh. 19.25. They are distinct in most Greek Copies, as also in our
Translation, and Lat. Arab. and Eth. more clearly in the Syria^k, and Persian,
by a copula. So likewise does Aretius render it.
who with

6. Mary the Wife of Cleophas, waited upon the Cross of Christ, (and doubtless
were also of those that prepared Spices and Ointments to anoint his Body, Mar.
16.1. Luke 24.1.) Mat. 27.56. Joh. 19.25.

7. Mary the Mother of John Mark; whose House was the receptacle of the Church,
Act. 12.12.

8. Another Mary is mentioned by St. Paul, with this commendation; that she
bestowed much labor upon the Saints, Romans 16.6.

So many gracious and excellent Women we find in Scripture called by this Name.

^. As for her condition: she is is here said to be the Sister of Lazarus and
Martha (compared with J h. 11.) How religiously affected she was, appears by
this Context. She is supposed to be of Noble extraction; and it is manifest by
this place, that they were very wealthy, by their liberal and frequent
entertainment of Christ and his Disciples, and by the great and sudden
provision they made for him, which at this time filled Martha's hands so full
of business. And that they were of special note, Calv. Lyser, Jansca. etc. in
loc.
may appear by the great concourse of so many of the Jews, who came in to
comfort the two Sisters, at the Death of Lazarus, Joh. 11.19. How much she was
in favor with Christ, and beloved by him, appeared by his frequent visits, and
turning in thither.

-- Rarae fumant felicibus arae.
It has ever been accounted rare, to find so much devotion, and religious care
in Persons that are Rich, Great, and Eminent in the World.

But we here see this Mary so careful of her Souls benefit, that she casts off
all other business, to attend only on this one, sitting at Jesus feet to hear
his Word.

Our Savior says, That a Rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: Mat. 19.23, 24.
and that it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, etc. And
verily there is great reason why it must be so. Since Rich men of all others
are most exposed to temptations, 1 Timothy 6.9. Mat. 13.22.
and snares. There is a deceitfulness in Riches, which meeting with a
deceitful, and desperately wicked heart easily prevails, to make such a man
instrumental to undo both himself and others. Jer. 17.9.
For,

Certe enim multa peccata videntur ad Divites pertinere. Quum enim plus agunt,
and plus ministrant, and plus ad eos pendet res familiaris ampla; difficile
est, ut non plura peccata contrahant. Aug. in Psalm. 132. Psalm. 2.3. Jer. 5.5.
1. He has power to execute, what ever his naughty heart desires to do.
Quicquid libet, licet. He scorns to be controlled, Psalm. 12.4. who have said,
With our tongue we will prevail, who is Lord over us? We have power in our
hand, to enforce obedience to our Orders: if we say it, who dare gainsay it?
Their Motto is, Sic volo, sic jubeo: and who may dispute their commands? They
have enough to maintain their Pride; to practice their Vices; to gratify the
Flesh; to trample under foot their reprovers, and remove out of the way, what
ever may give check to their proceedings. What care they for the Law and
Commands of God? They are resolved to break those bonds in sunder, and cast
away those cords from them.

When the Prophet Jeremy had considered the state of Jerusalem, and saw the
Commonalty so rude and incorrigible; he imputed it to their Poverty, which for
want of breeding, and converse with the more civil and refined sort of men,
rendered them utterly ignorant of, and unacquainted with the ways of the Lord.
But he hoped to find some better entertainment of his errand among the great
ones: who by reason of their advantage of education, and converse, etc. could
not be ignorant of such things as they were most concerned to know. But these
(says he) have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. They were
grown such sons of Belial (as they said of Nabal, Belial i.e. absque jugo. Quod
de collo suo Dei abjecerint servitutem. Hier. lib. 2. in Ephesians. 4. He derives it
from (...) absque and (...) jugum.
1 Samuel 25.17.) that he could not speak to them. Men that could not endure the
yoke of any wholesome Law or discipline; or the curb of a Reproof, or Admonition.

2. But as they have power to do what they list; so they want not friends to
justify their misdoings; nor fordid flatterers to sooth them in their
wickedness, nor companions to excite, and provoke them to evil; nor instruments
to gratify their lusts, and act their pleasure.

3. They are out of the reach of those, that cordially desire their
reformation. Inferiors are disdained; Heb. 13.17.
and their faithful Pastors (who stand charged with the care of their Souls,
and at whose hands their blood will be required, Ezekiel. 3.18. Amos 5.10. Jer.
18.18.43.2.20.8, 10. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Jer. 11.21.
if they connive at their sins) if they discharge their duty, are sure to meet
with such entertainment, as the Prophets of old had, viz. hatred, contempt,
contumely, and persecution. These are such, as neither fearing God, nor
regarding man, dare say to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things;
speak unto us smooth things, etc. Get you out of the way, etc. Cause the holy
one of Israel to cease from before us, Isa. 30.10, 11.

But what speak I of such wicked persons, whose transgressions declare them
such as have not the fear of God before their eyes; Psalm 36.1.
when Riches and worldly advantages have such a bad influence upon the best
hearts, being such incentives to their remaining corruptions? Psalm 30.6. Read
the like of Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. 32.23, etc. Mat. 6.29.20.21.
Even David was too prone to be exalted in his prosperity, and upon account of
his greatness did greatly offend; as is diversely recorded in his story. It is a
rare thing to find prosperity humble, or devout. Men grow too careless of
Heaven, when they have so much treasure laid up on Earth. Besides, it is the
unhappiness of rich men (though they be good) that either they have none to
reprove them; or else through passion, and height of Spirit (in conceit of
their distance) they cannot, or will not bear a reproof. If Jesurun wax fat, he
will kick. Deuteronomy. 32.15. 1 Cor. 1.26. (...).
Well therefore might the Apostle conclude; not many (Rich or) mighty men of
power, nor Noble (or well-born) are called.

Use 1.
Oh what need then have great and rich men to keep their hearts with all
diligence, that they be not ensnared with the deceitfulness of Riches, Prove.
4.23.
so as to neglect their better part? St. Paul well knew their danger, when he
required Timothy to charge them, That they be not high minded, 1 Timothy 6.17, etc.
nor trust in uncertain Riches, etc. But to lay up for themselves a good
foundation for the time to come, laying bold on Eternal Life. According to
this, is our Saviors ferious admonition; Luke 16.9.
Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when you
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. He teaches how to
make the best advantage of the unrighteous Mammon; and to convert those
occasions of sin to contrary purpose; that the good use of our Riches may
procure us friends and favor, when we shall stand in greatest need.

Use 2.
Nevertheless, though there be but few great and Rich men, that mind the things
of God, and make a right use of their worldly advantages: yet (blessed be God)
there are some such. And O how are such men bound to praise God, and we for
them! that he has given them (together with their Riches and Honor) an holy,
humble, tractable, gracious Spirit, truly desirous to serve him, improving each
opportunity (as Mary here) for the advancement of their everlasting Salvation:
preferring in their most deliberate choice this one thing necessary, before all
the pleasures, and treasures in the World. Whose Riches are helps to
fruitfulness in works of mercy; Heb. 13.16.
who forget not to do good, and to communicate, knowing that with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Oh how lovely, and pleasant a thing is it, to see a great and Noble Person
serious and devout in the service of God? Who with Royal Holy David has
learned to prefer the true and sincere serving of God before all his Riches and
Honors; Ps. 119.14, 72.
and to set more by the divine favor, than all that good, Psalm. 4 6, 7.63.3.
Psa. 26.4. etc. 119.115. Psalm 1.1, 2.
which worldings so busily enquire after, yea, than Life it self. Therefore
with that religious King, he will not converse with vain persons, but casheers
all wicked company, that he may attend upon heavenly employments: esteeming him
only blessed, Who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the
way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful; but delights in the Law
of God, and makes it bis continual meditation. Such are blessed men indeed:
who, as they provide well for their own sure peace and comfort; so are they
public blessings to all their Relations, and to whomsoever else have the
happiness of converse with them: whilst the light of the holy conversation
becomes more conspicuous, and so more exemplary, by the advantage of that
height wherein Providence has placed them. Like benign Planets, their
influence cheareth all within their reach. How useful are such men both to
Church and Commonwealth? They study the prosperity of Sion, which they prefer
before their chief joy. Psalm 137.6. Job 31.16.
And their care is with Job to gratify the desire, and answer the hope of the
needy, to feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, etc. These men's practice, and
privileges you may see lively described, Psalm. 112. per totum.

Hitherto we have considered the party thus described. It remains to speak of
the Thing, for which she is commended. Where we have,

1. Her Act, (...), she has chosen.

2. The Object, or thing chosen, (...), that good part.

I. For the first: Choice supposes two or more things, or ways proposed to a
man's discretion, of which he takes that which pleases him best. The rational
man can prefer nothing in choice, Electio est melioris acceptatio.
but sub ratione boni; and would not miss in it, if the rectitude of the
judgment were not vitiated. As some distempered Bodies refuse good meat, to
feed on Ashes, Coals, or Gravel: which is not properly the fault of the
Appetite, but occasioned by the prevailing distemper. The Israelites guided by
their Lust, loathed Manna, and lusted after the Fleshpots, and the Onions, and
Garlic of Egypt. Yea, even gracious souls, Number. 11 5.6.
through mistake, do often mischoose. Thus Lot beholding the pleasantness of the
plain of Jordan, Genesis 13 9. etc.
chose Sodom for his Habitation.

God puts man to his choice: he sets him, as it were in Bivio (as the Ancients
feigned of Hercules) to choose which way he pleases. S^e, Deuteronomy. 30.15.
I have set before thee this day, Life and Good, and Death and Evil. Here men
make a different choice, as they stand affected.

1. Those that fear God, and consult their own eternal welfare, choose the
good, and refuse the evil. Such was David's choice; Psalm 84.10.
I had rather (says he) be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, etc. How often
does he record this choice in Psalm 119? Psalm 119.13, 14.30, 36, 37, 72, 97,
173. and alibi. Joseph. Anti^. Jud. l. 2. c. 5.
which shows how exceedingly he was pleased with it, and with the very thoughts
of it. Such was Moses's choice: who being adopted by Pharaoh's Daughter and
Heir, that had designed him for her Heir, and Successor to the Kingdom (if we
may believe Josephus) yet refused all that Honor, and grandeur, and the
appendant Riches and Pleasures, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
to embrace the hardest lot of the people of God, Affliction and ^eproach;
having respect unto the ((...)) recompense of reward. This was the commendation
of those Eunuchs, Isa. 56.4. that they did choose the things that pleased God:
let men be pleased or displeased.

2. But the wicked hate knowledge, Prove. 1.22, 29. Isa. 65 12. and 66.4.
and do not choose the fear of the Lord. They do evil before his eyes, and
choose that, wherein he delights not: but choose their own ways, and their
soul delights in their abominations. One would think it was impossible, that
men in their wits should refuse everlasting Happiness, for momentary and sinful
pleasures: but our daily experience makes it manifest. Pro. 1.22, 32. and
12.15. and 17.16. Psalm 94.8. Jude 10.
Therefore the Scripture justly calls such men Fools, Bruits, and mad men, etc.
who wilfully refuse the paths of life, and desperately rush upon their
everlasting ruin.

But God gives more grace to his children; who following the guidance of his
Spirit, with Mary make choice of this good part upon best consideration: For,

1. They are sensible of their own need. They know they are sick, Mat. 9.12.
Ps. 109.24, 26. Rev. 3.17, 18.
and stand in need of Medicine; weak, and need support: they know they are
wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: and therefore make have
to Christ for spiritual riches, and heavenly grace (whereof he has an
inexhaustible store, Joh. 1.16. Ephesians. 3.8.) to enrich them; for eye salve of
divine knowledge (from his plenitude, Col. 2.2, Ephesians. 1 17, 18. Ph^^. 3.9.
3.) to illuminate them; for the robe of his righteousness, to cover their
nakedness. Necessity enforces them (as the Prodigal, Luke 15.17, etc.) to go
to him for relief; who so lovingly invites them, Mat. 11.28. and is ready
ebviis ulnis, with spread arms to embrace them. Therefore they refuse the evil,
and choose the good, seeing the inevitable destruction in the one, and assured
comfort in the other.

2. They see and acknowledge the glorious excellency of holiness, and heavenly
practice: how excellent it is in it self, being the lively Image of the most
holy God; Ephesians. 4 24. 2 Pet. 1.4.
whereby they are made partakers of the divine nature. As also the sweetness
and comfort of its exercise: whereby they have communion with God, conversing
and walking with him (as Enoch and Noah did, Mic. 6.5. Gal. 5.25. Romans 8.1. and
6.4.
Genesis 5.22. and 6.9.) in and after the Spirit, in newness of Life, having their
conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. As Children of Light, Ephesians. 5.8. David
seeing this, prefers one day so spent before a thousand otherwise. Psalm 84.10.
Indeed one hours sweet enjoyment of God, gives the Soul more satisfaction,
than all the pleasures of the world can give: Psa. 119.14, 72. Phil. 3.7, 8.
and is therefore to be chosen rather than all Riches. Christ alone (who is
only thus enjoyed) is to be preferred before all gain. And every wise Merchant,
who trades for Heaven, will sell all, to purchase this Pearl. Mat. 13.45, 46.


To enlarge upon this Subject, would soon exceed the intended limits of this
Discourse. Therefore I shall only intimate this further: that the way of
holiness is the high way to everlasting happiness (which is but Holiness
perfected in Glory) For without holiness no man shall ever see God: Heb. 12.14
Mat. 5.8. Ps. 15. and 24.
since that beatifical Vision is reserved for them only, who are pure in heart,
and Life.

Use 1.
Oh then, how ill do those men provide for their immortal Souls; who either
wilfully refuse what Mary chose; or make a bad choice of such things, as are
either hurtful, or at least unprofitable; or that only pretend to make this
good choice, but do not; or that relinquish (after such profession) what they
seemed to choose?

1. How many are there, who enjoy the precious opportunities of this Word, Heb.
2.3.
so constantly Preached amongst them, and yet neglect so great salvation;
making light of the Lords earnest invitation (as those recusants, Mat. 22.5.)
who refuse, Prove. 1.24, 25, 29. Isa. 65.2.
when he calls, and when he stretches forth his hand, regard it not; who set
at naught all his counsel, and will none of his reproof; but hate knowledge,
and will not choose the fear of the Lord? These men put away the Word of God
from them; thereby declaring that they judge themselves unworthy of Eternal
Life: whilst they even say unto God, Acts 13 46.
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Hating
instruction they cast Gods Word behind them; instead whereof they choose their
own ways, Job 21.14. Psalm 50.17.
and their soul delights in their abominations; Isa. 66.3, 4.
whereby they provoke God to choose their delusions. And even as they delight
not to retain the knowledge of God in their minds, it pleases him to give them
over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. (...).
to do those things which are most unseemly and unhandsome, and quite contrary
to all decency and duty.

Thus it fares likewise with them, Jer. 2.36. Judge. 5.8. 2 Timothy 4 3. 1 Timothy 4.1.
Gal. 3.1.
who (in reference to Religion) gad about to change their way, with the
Idolatrous Israelites, choosing new Gods, new opinions, and fancies. Who having
itching ears, heap to themselves teachers after their own lusts; and whilst
they give ear to those seducing Spirits, which bewitch them, they depart from
the Faith, and do not obey the Truth. For not receiving the love of it, 2 These.
2.10, etc.
they will not believe it, but take pleasure in unrighteousness. Wherefore God
in just judgment sends them strong delusions, that they should believe a Lie;
and gives them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts: Yea,
Romans 1.24. Rev. 22.11. Ephesians. 4.19. Heb. 2.3.
they give themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. Thus they receive a just reward of their slighting this good part,
and neglecting so great salvation.

2. And although some of these wilful refusers do escape these gross
debaucheries; yet they are so far left to themselves, as (with Demas, 2 Timothy 4
10.) to embrace this present World, which lies wholly in wickedness, and can
afford no better thing than Lust and Pride; 1 John 5.19.2.16. Cum pereunte
deceptrice, and ipsi pereunt. A^g. 1. Cor. 7.31. 1 Pet. 1.24. Prove. 11.7.
Psalm. 49 11. (...) Intima eorum viscera.
to which whilst they conform themselves, they perish with that perishing
cheat. For as its form, and outward appearance (it being nothing more) even all
its pomp and glory perishes, and passes away, withers, fades, and
vanishes; so does the worldlings hope, and expectation, even his inward
thoughts, his plots, designs, and projects to perpetuate his Name and
Inheritance in his posterity. So that whilst they refuse this one thing
necessary, they make choice of such things, as are either destructive or
unprofitable.

3. Neither can they escape this reproof, who only pretend to make choice of
this good part, but do not. Who have a Form, and appearance of godliness, but
deny the power thereof. They have a figure, 2 Timothy 3.4. (...).
or shape of holiness, but not the substance and essence; using it only as a
Vizard or Mask to cover their shameful deformities. Mat. 23.27.
Our Savior compares them to painted Sepulchers, which are gloriously gilded
on the outside, but inwardly are full of all uncleanness. Such feign themselves
just men (as Luke 20.20.) and boast with that Pharisee ( Luke 18.11, Isa. 65.5.
Luke 16.15. Mat. 15.8. Psalm 78.36. Hos. 11.12. Acts 8.21. Ezekiel. 14.3, 4.
12.) that they are holier than others, justifying themselves before men; but
God knows their hearts; how far they are from him, when they draw near, and
flatter him with their Lips, and lie unto him with their Tongues, compassing
him about with their lies, but their heart is not right with him. For in it
have they set up their Idols; therefore the Lord will not be enquired of by
them; but will answer them according to the multitude of their Idols, and not
according to their pretense. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of
men, and bring to light the hidden things of darkness, 1 Cor. 4.5.
and make manifest the counsels of their bearts, and render to every man
according to his works; then shall these pretenders be sent away with a Non
novi vos, Mat. 7.23.
I know you not, depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

4. But how damnable then is the condition of those, that have seemed Religious
and devout, pretending to choose the better part; but after all their
flourishes have started aside like a deceitful Bow, Psalm. 78.57. and 18.21. 2
Pet. 2.22.
and wickedly departed from their God; returning with the Dog to his vomiting
again, and with the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. Whatever
these have seemed, or pretended to be; they may have had some slight taste of
the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.4, 5.
and of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the World to come; not only
their understandings being enlightened, but their affections also moved, like
those Temporaries, ( Mat. 13.20. Mar 4.16.) who immediately receive the Word
with joy, (...). Rev. 22.17. Psalm 17.15. and 63.5. Romans 15.13. 1 Pet. 1.8.
none more forward, nor sooner close with it than they: but they never had any
deep taste of that heavenly sweetness, which the Lord vouchsafes his beloved (
Cant. 5.1.) to whom he gives large draughts of his Grace and favor, to their
full satisfaction, replenishing their hearts with unspeakable joy. They have
never attained that which holy David so passionately commends, ( Psalm. 34.8.)
and admires ( Psalm. 119.103.) nor have they really experienced how gracious the
Lord is. 1 Pet. 2.3.


Let not this be Interpreted to the prejudice or discouragement of any poor
soul, that has sincerely made choice of the Lord Jesus as his Portion,
esteeming all things short of him as dung and dross in comparison of him; Phil.
3.8. Psalm. 42.1. and 119.38, 131.
who pants after him, as the Heart pants after the water Brooks, and longs for
his Commandments, and is devoted to his fear: Though he yet has not attained
such satisfactory perceptions and experience of the divine favor, as to keep
his love sick heart from fainting, when the beloved withdraws himself, Cant.
5.6, etc.
and cannot be found upon diligent search, etc. Those consolations are often
delayed, and this good Wine is reserved for the last; this great goodness is
laid up for all such as fear God, though they for some time neither see nor
feel it. Psalm. 31.19.
He knows (though they do not) the thoughts of Peace, Jer. 29.11.
that he thinks toward them, and will manifest in his due time.

But these who are here apprehended, are such as never had any real hungring,
or thirsting after Righteousness: but have only for low ends seemed to comply
with the Gospel, and have taken up only a form of Godliness. Ps. 106.21, 24.
Therefore it is no marvel, that they soon forget God their Savior, and
despise the promised Inheritance, lusting after their former Fleshpots, and
preferring the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, before the Milk and Honey of
Canaan. Having taken a few steps out of Sodom, the remembrance of their former
pleasures, there prevails upon them to look back (but as it was with Lots Wise,
Heb. 10.39.
Genesis 19.26.) to their own perdition. Their glorious building had no better
than a sandy Foundation; therefore when the rain, Mat. 7.26, 27. 2 Pet. 2.20,
21. Luke 11.25, 26.
and floods, and wind beat upon it, it must needs fall. Their blaze goes out in
stinking snuff, their latter end being worse than the beginning.

Use 2.
Surely then it highly concerns every man to examine himself, whether he has
made a serious choice with Mary of this good part. If we have done so indeed,
not deceiving our selves,

1. We shall earnestly desire, and long to enjoy what we have so chosen (as was
said before) our souls will thirst for God, for the living God, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
and 101.2.
and cry out with holy David, When shall I come and appear before God? And, O
when will thou come unto me? So did that gracious soul long after the
Ordinances of God (wherein only he could enjoy him, whom he so dearly loved)
that he opened his mouth and panted, Psalm. 119.131. verse 20.
longing for his Commandments: like one that had run himself out of breath, in
pursuit of what he passionately desires, and stands in greatest need of, so
that he even breaks his heart with vehement striving to obtain it. The longing
soul cannot be without this one necessary thing: it cannot brook delays, but
presses upon the Lord. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, Psalm. 13.1.
Quamdiu, quamdiu cras and cras? Quare non modo? Quare non hac hora? Aug. Co^s.
lib. 9. cap. 12.
for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I be put
off from day to day? Why not now, Lord? said St. Augustine, after the Lord had
opened his eyes to discover, and his heart to choose and desire this one thing.
This choice can not stand with a careless indifferency.

2. We shall diligently and solicitously enquire after, and make use of all
means to obtain it. That eager desire, even now mentioned, will enforce
earnestness in Prayer, attentiveness in Hearing, studiousness in Reading,
seriousness in Meditation. All our delight will be in the Law of the Lord, and
in his Law we shall meditate day and night. How sweet will the glad tidings of
Salvation be to the longing Soul? How comfortable to hear of joy and gladness,
and that Peace of God which passes all understanding, Mat 7.7. Prove. 2.3, etc.
10.4. Heb. 12.3.
and all those sweet breathings of the Holy Ghost in the Gospel of Salvation?
And these are the requests of those only, that ask, and seek, and knock. This
hid treasure cannot be found, but by most diligent search. It is the diligent
hand, that brings in this riches. He that would partake of these joys, must not
be weary, Genesis 49.18.
nor faint in his mind, nor slack or take off his hand, but persist with all
perseverance, even to the last gasp, waiting (with good Jacob) for this
Salvation. J^b 23.12. Prove. 8.11. Phil. 3.8.


3. Such as choose this good part, will esteem it according to its worth. They
will set an higher price upon it, than any worldly treasure. Thus Job preferred
it before his necessary Food; David before all Riches; Solomon accounts it
better than Rubies, and that all the things that can be desired, are not to be
compared to it. Such a price did St. Paul set upon Christ (who is the substance
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.23.) that he accounted all things but loss, and no
better than (...). Unus apex doctrinae, etc. in Gal. 5. Ego quidem sine verbo
ne in Paradiso optarim vivere: At cum verbo etiam in Inferno facile est vivere.
Id. in Psalm. 120.
Dung (or Dogs meat) that he might win Christ. This made Luther say, That one
Tittle of the Word was more worth than Heaven and Earth; and that he would not
wish to live in Paradise without the Word; but with it he could live in Hell it
self. A strange Hyperbole, but an express evidence of his exceeding great
affection to it.

4. This choice is ever attended with great care, that we come not short of
that which we have chosen. Let us fear (says the Apostle, Heb. 4.1.) lest any
come short, or be cast behind (as he that sets in vigorously to run the Race,
(...).
but fails before he reach the Goal). And again, we ought abundantly to heed,
that we spill not, or shed the things which we have heard, (...). 2 John 8.
Rev. 2.25.
Heb. 2.1. As a riven Vessel which loses the liquor poured into it. This is
that which St. John advises; Look to your selves, that we lose not the things,
which we have wrought, but that we may receive a full reward. Such was that
admonition to the Church of Thiatira: That which ye have already hold fast. He
that is serious in his choice, will (with St. Paul) stretch forth to those
things, which are yet before, and press toward the mark (or scope) for the
Prize, Phil. 3.13, 14.
and grow yet more vigorous in the pursuit. J^b 17.9. (...)
The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands, shall add
strength.

Thus it appears, that no careless or sloathful persons, who set light by the
Word of God; or such as neglect it; or prefer the World before it; or that
grudge to be at cost or pains to attend upon it, can be said to make choice
with Mary of this good part.

Use 3.
Let us therefore take care, that Mary's Choice may be ours; considering, what
has been said before, our great necessity of it, and the great benefit and
comfort it brings with it. If we refuse, we are undone for ever; whilst we
wilfully neglect, and reject everlasting Happiness, for the love of momentary,
vain, and sinful pleasures.

Behold the Lord has brought thee before the two Mounts, Gerizim, and Ebal;
Deu. 27.12, 13. Deu. 30.15, 19.
setting before thee this day Blessing and Cursing, Life and Good, Death and
Evil. Thou have thy choice: consider what thou have to do, whether thou will
Live or Die Eternally. Do not delay the Lord, weary not his patience; Jude 4.
turn not this Grace of God into lasciviousness; Despise not the riches of his
goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to Repentance. Romans 2.4.
Take heed now, lest there be in thee an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. Heb. 3.7, 8, 12.
Hear his voice, while it is called to day, lest you be further hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. Now is the day of thy visitation, take care to know
it, and improve it. This day is Salvation come to thine house; Lu. 19.41, etc.
verse 9. Isa. 65.2. Ezekiel. 18.32.
open thy heart and entertain it. Lay hold on Eternal Life, whilst the Lords
hand is stretched out all the day to offer it. Do not continue to walk in thy
evil way, after thine own thoughts; but turn to the Lord, that thou may live.

Object. But perhaps thou will say, How gladly would I make this choice? but
alas, I am so oppressed with violence of Temptations, and overpowered by my own
vigorous corruptions; that my desires are nipt in the bud, and prove abortive:
so that I still come short and fail of the attainment. Besides, I have no power
in my self, so much as to will, without Gods special Grace. And it is not of
him that wills, Romans 9.16.
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. But this is reserved
in the secret of his own hidden counsel, unknown to me. For he has mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. verse 18. Eccles 9 1.
And who knows either love or hatred, by all that is before him?

Resp. Yet are we not upon any of these considerations, to be discouraged from
this choice. Vid. Chem^. Exam. part 1. de fid. justific. Ge^h. Tom. 3. de
justific. c. 4. sect. 96.
As for that saying in Eccles. 9.1. it is not rightly applied to this case,
(though so much urged by the Papists, against the certitude of Divine Grace) as
our Divines have abundantly proved. And let us further consider, that God has
sufficiently declared in his holy Word, how seriously he wills, that we
should choose and enjoy this great blessing. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Why do we object against our selves his secret counsel (which belongs not to
us) and neglect his revealed Will, wherein he does assure us by his Oath, that
he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked; Ezekiel. 33.11.
but rather that he should turn from his way and live? And though the
possession of this Salvation (which is the end of our Faith, and holy
conversation) be beyond the reach of any creatures merit; 1 Pet. 1.9. Ephesians.
1.14. Isa. 55.1. 2 Cor. 5.20. Ezekiel 18.31. John 5.40. 6.37.
yet it is purchased to our hand, by the precious blood of our Redeemer. And
does not the Lord freely offer it? Does he not woo us to it, and beseech us to
accept of it? Dot he not expostulate with those that refuse it; why they will
die, and not come to him that they might have Life: And gives all assurance,
that those who come unto him, he will in no wise cast out. If we despond in the
sense and apprehension of our own imbecility, 2 Cor 3.5.
as not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves: Let us
withal consider, that all our sufficiency is of God, whose Grace is sufficient
for us, and who will perfect his strength in weakness. 12.9.
He will work all our works in us: without whom indeed we can do nothing, but
may do all things by him strengthening us. Isa. 26.12. J^hn 15.5. Phil. 4.13.
Rev. 22.12. Heb. 10.37. 2 Cor. 6 2. Isa 45.9. Psalm 145.19.


And that thou may not think him long; he has told thee, that he will come
quickly, and not tarry: yea, that now is the accepted time; now is the day of
salvation: Now, that he has put it into thy heart to desire it, to pant after
it, to seek it, and pray for it. For he never said to the seed of Jacob, that
they should seek his face in vain; but will fulfill the desire of them that
fear him, he will hear their cry, and will save them.

Now that we may manage this choice aright, we must proceed by such degrees, as
reason directs in every considerable act, wherein the understanding must
perceive, the Will begin, Prudence direct, and Constancy perfect the Action. So
it is here.

1. Take sufficient cognizance of the things commended to thy choice, that thou
choose not blind fold. We never enjoy the true benefit and comfort of our
choice, till we know the excellency and use of it. Nor is it accounted of as
Worship, when we Worship God ignorantly, as the Samaritans, Acts 11.23. Psalm
82.5. John 12.35. Deuteronomy. 15.21. Mal. 1.8.
and Athenians did. He that knows not, walks on in darkness, and knows
not whither he goes. And God will not accept a blind sacrifice; it is an
abomination to him.

2. The Will also must readily close with this discovery: For an unwilling
choice, is no choice. A wicked man may choose to act in some things virtuously,
for fear of the punishment, that attends the contrary practice. 2 Cor. 9.7.
Col. 3.23. 2 Cor 8.12.
The Lord loves cheerful obedience, when we grudge not our Duty, nor do it as
of necessity, but willingly. It pleases him best, when the heart accompanies
the work. A little with good will is accepted.

3. Consult, and deliberate seriously, by what means thou may accomplish thy
desire and obtain this choice. In vain is a choice pretended, when the means is
not attended. We can never hope, nor think to obtain this good part, but only
in that way, and in the use of that means which God has appointed. In this
case he has so ordered, that the Means should partake of the nature of the
End. Salvation is begun in Holiness, which is the foundation of Happiness, and
the Earnest, and First Fruits, and a Fore-tast of Heavens joy. Romans 2 7, 10.
Glory, Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Life, and Peace shall be rendered unto
them, who seek for it, by patient continuance in well doing. It is not idling
at home, or following thy carnal pleasures, or looking after thy worldly
occasions, when thou should be at Church in the solemn Worship of God, or in
holy exercises in they Family, or in thy Closet, which will bring thee into
acquaintance with the Almighty. For the friendship of the world is enmity with
God. James 4.4. 1 John 2.15.
And, if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Therefore Mary having made this choice of the End, she likewise chooses the
Means whereby it is obtained.

4. Having thus deliberately pitched upon the way, let there be a resolute
determination to enter upon it. Lay obligations upon thy soul to pursue this
choice with all serious diligence. Thus David having considered that
blessedness belongs only to those that are undefiled in the way, Psa. 119.1, 2.
who walk in the Law of the Lord, and that keep his Testimonies, and seek him
with their whole heart, and that it is Gods command, that we should do so:
Verse 5.
he straightway falls to Prayer, that his ways might be so directed; and in
the rest of that devout Psalm, he very frequently professes his resolution to
walk in this way with all diligence: Yea, he binds himself by solemn vow to do
it; I have sworn (says he) and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments. Verse 106.


5. Yet all this is not sufficient, unless we actually engage in the diligent
and conscientious use of the Means, whereby we may obtain our choice; of which
we have spoken before; Trial 2.

6. Lastly, It is necessary, that we persevere unto the End; that we be not
weary of well doing: Gal. 6.9.
For in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. The Promise (in the Epistles
writ by Christ's appointment) is Vincenti dabitur: The reward is given to him
that overcomes. It is not said Currenti or Pugnanti, to him that runs, or
to him that striveth (though without these, no conquest) but to him that
overcomes: As before, Trial 4.

Thus much concerning Mary's Act: She has chosen.

II. We are now to speak of the Object, or thing chosen, viz. that good part
which shall not be taken away from her. In which words the Object is described
by two Prophecies: 1. It is good. 2. Durable, such as shall not be taken away
from her.

1. It is (...), That good part.

The vulgar Latin Translation calls it Optimam partem, that best part, as it is
indeed, though the Original express it only in the positive degree, which yet
does import the superlative, calling it That good part (...) by way of
excellency.

We have before showed how comprehensive this one necessary thing is, having
respect both to the End, and Means whereby the End is attained. And in that
means we did more especially consider Mary's present employment; which was to
sit at Jesus Feet, and hear his Word. (...). Hom. Iliad 1. de Nestore.
Her Eyes and Ears did even hang upon his Lips, which were to her like Lillies
dropping sweet smelling Myrrh, (Cant. 5.13.) How sweet were his words unto her
taste? yea sweeter than Honey to her mouth (Psalm. 119.103.) She sat down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to her taste, Cant. 2.3.

It is true: Hearing is but the Means to attain some degrees of this good part.
But it being so considerable a part of Mary's Choice, and her present
employment, and an evidence of her choice of the rest; we shall consider, how
good it is.

One observes (out of Seneca, To. de Trugill in fest. Assumpt.
as he tells us) that all external things are propter corpus, for the Body, as
Meat, Clothes, etc. And that the Body is propter sensus, for the Senses; that
by corporal Organs we might perceive the wonderful works of God: and that the
Senses are propter mentem, for the Mind, being subservient to it: and the Mind
(in which are the rational faculties of understanding and will) is propter
Deum; that we may attain to heavenly knowledge, and divine wisdom, etc. This
alone were sufficient to commend Hearing the Word of God, which tends to the
perfecting of man's best part, and the obtaining of his utmost End. But to speak
something more largely of it; Consider that,

1. It is the Means which God has ordained, Acts 26.18. Romans 12.2. John 5.25.
Ephesians. 2.1. Nemo adeo ferus est, ut non mi^escere possit, Si modo culturae
patientem accommodet aurem, Hor. Ep. 1.^.
to turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. It
changes men from Sinners to Saints, from children of Wrath, to children of
God, and Heirs of Heaven: transforming them thus by the renewing of their mind,
whereby they come to prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect Will
of God. It raises from Death to Life: so were the Ephesians quickened, who
before were dead in trespasses and sins. It will meeken and tame the fiercest
nature (as one said well of Learning) forcing the most Tyger-like, and Lion
like hearts (as they feigned of Orpheus's Harp) to lay aside their brutish,
and cruel nature, and become tractable. It is by the power of the Gospel thus
received, That the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie
down with the Kid, etc. and a little Child shall lead them. Isa. 11.6, etc.


This is the Fire and Hammer, wherewith God breaks the Rocks (the stoniest
hearts) in pieces. It makes the flintyest heart contrite and humble, and to
tremble at the Hearing of it: whereby it becomes tractable, and ductile, ^om.
6.37. (...).
apt to receive divine impressions. Hence the Apostle praises God, who had so
molded the Romans, that they were delivered into that form or type of Doctrine
(for so it is in the Greek) they were cast into that mould, or received that
stamp. Surely that which has such an happy operation upon the heart, must
needs be good.

2. It leads the way to every other Duty. We hear, that we may learn; and learn
that we may practice, and do that which we have learned. It is from hence that
we are furnished with meet subjects for meditation, and with direction in our
Prayers to God. By this we are instructed in our duty both to God and man. For
it is this Grace of God which brings salvation, Tit. 2.11, 12.
that teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

3. It is therefore preferred before other duties and employments. Martha's
diligence in her careful and loving entertainment of Christ, is here set behind
Mary's devotion in hearing his Word. To offer sacrifice was a necessary duty
under the Law. Exodus 23.15.
None must appear before the Lord empty. Yet when this is neglected, sacrifice
is not esteemed, but rather abhorred. For to obey is better than sacrifice: and
to hearken, than the fat of Rams. 1 Samuel 15.22. Prove. 15.8. Jer. 6.19, 20. Isa.
1.11.66.3.4. Psalm 51.17. Isa 66 2. Eccles. 5.1. Prove. 28.9. Acts 6 2. 1 Cor.
1.17. Praedicandi munus est prius, potius, difficilius and magis necessarium.
Par. in 1 Cor. 1.17.
But the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. When men do not
hearken to his Word, but reject it: to what purpose is their bringing Incense
from Sheba, etc. Their burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor their sacrifices
sweet. The most acceptable sacrifice is a broken spirit, and an heart that
trembles at Gods Word. What ever men pretend in religious service; if they be
not ready to hear; all they do is in Gods account no better than the sacrifice
of Fools. And he that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
Prayer shall he abomination. Therefore the Apostle preferred the Preaching of
the Word before Alms, and administering the Sacraments; which yet are necessery
duties: but this is more excellent, difficult, and necessary; as being ordained
for the salvation of all those, that by true and lively Faith receive it; (
Sam. 1.21. 1 Timothy 4.16.) and without which, we know not how to perform the
other.

Now Hearing is the nearest End of Preaching: therefore the excellency that is
ascribed to Preaching, is for the sake of Hearing.

4. It is the most excellent Antitode against the poison, and the malignity of
sin. Now are ye clean (says our Savior) through the Word which I have spoken
to you. John 15.3.17.17. Psalm 119.9.
Even young men in that wanton and unruly Age may cleanse their way by this
means. For it discovers the ugliness of Sin; so that a mind well instructed,
cannot but loath that abominable thing (which the Lord hates) and himself also,
Jer. 44.4. Ezekiel 6.9. Jam. 1.23. Ephesians. 5.12, 13.
for the evils that he has committed in all his abominations. The Law of God
is a mirror or Glass, whereby a man may discover his spiritual deformities; it
is the light which makes manifest the hidden things of darkness, and sets them
out in their proper colors; and that shows us the way wherein we should walk,
and guides our feet into the way of Peace.

5. It is indeed the Word of Eternal Life; the Word of Salvation; John 6.68.
Acts 13.26.20.32.
the Word of Gods Grace, which is able to build us up, and to give us an
inheritance amongst the sanctified. Therefore to make choice of this, must
needs be with Mary to choose that good part, whereof indeed this is the least
part, as but leading to that which does complete it.

II. The second illustration of this Choice is, that this good part is also
durable, It shall not be taken away. This makes good the former: it is
therefore the better good, because permanent. Psalm. 1.3.
The fruit of this devout Hearing shall never fade. Those that are thus planted
in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God; Psalm. 92.13,
14. Boni operis transituri merces est requies permansura. A g. Mat. 6.19, 20.
they shall bring forth fruit in old Age, they shall be fat and flourishing.
The wages of this transient work shall be everlasting rest. This part shall not
be taken away: For,

1. No enemy can take it away: no Thief can rob us of this treasure. If any
could, it must be either the Devil, or the World, or the Flesh, or Death. But

1. The Devil cannot, notwithstanding all his malice, power, or subtilty. The
Gates of Hell, with all their temptations, terrors, or stratagems can never
deprive us of this choice. That enemy may tempt, and sift, and buffet, 1 Cor.
7.5. Luke 22.31, 32. 2 Cor. 12.7, 9.
etc. But the grace of God is sufficient to preserve and uphold the soul in
temptation; and through Christ's intercession Faith shall not fail. He may
thrust sore at the child of God, to make him fall; but the Lord will help.

Upon resistance he is forced to flee; Psalm 118.13. Jam. 4.7. Romans 16.20. Gal.
2.20. Ephesians 3.17. Luke 11.22. 1 John 4.4.
and shall at length be trod underfoot, through the power of Christ, who lives
and dwells in every true Believer. The victory must certainly (in this case)
fall to the stronger: and surely greater is he that is in his Saints, than he
that is in the World.

2. The World cannot take it away, notwithstanding all its enmity, and
malignity, or its scorns, and reproaches, and cruel mockings, and persecutions;
or yet its snares, enticements, John 16.33. 1 John 5.4, 5.
etc. There is power enough in Christ by Faith in him, to overcome it.

3. Nor yet shall the Fesh, that remains in corrupt nature, ever be able to
take it away; notwithstanding all its averseness to that which is good, or
perverseness, and strong inclination to that which is evil. Romans 7.
Though it be rebellious, and lust against the Spirit, and hinders from duty,
and provokes to sin; yet shall it never prevail so far, as to deprive a
Believer of his choice. For it is daily crucified, mortified, Gal. 5.24.
and subdued by the power of divine Grace, which works mightily in every
child of God. Though he be compassed about with this body of death, and forced
to cry out with St. Paul, Romans 7.23, 24.
O wretched man that I am, etc. Yet he can also him thank God, that Jesus
Christ is his deliverer.

4. Neither yet can Death or any of its attendants take it away. For it is
never able to separate from the love of Christ, To 8.35, etc. 1 Cor. 15.54.
being swallowed up in that victory, which God gives us through Christ our
Lord.

2. As no enemy can, so God will not take it away. For 1. He delights in it,
Isa. 57.15.
to see his children to make this choice. He whose Name is holy, who inhabiteth
Eternity; whose Throne is the Heaven, and the Earth his footstool, 66.1, 2.
etc. Yet this Almighty God has a special eye, to him that is of a poor and
contrite spirit, and trembles at his Word. For he sees his own Image, and
likeness there; wherewith he is so taken, that he is held in the Galleries to
behold it. Cant. 7.5. Psalm 34.18. 1 Cor. 6.19. Psa. 132.13, 14.
So great pleasure does he take in this, that he is ever nigh unto such an
heart, and delights to dwell in it. It is his Temple, his chosen and desired
habitation, his Rest, where he will dwell, for he has desired it, and will
take up his residence, and make his abode there. He engages his Word and
Promise never to forsake it. John 14.23. Heb. 13.5.


2. Besides, it is the work of his own Spirit, by which he leads into all
truth, brings the soul in frame, sacrifices the whole man, kindles holy
desires, and fervent affections toward himself, and what ever may conduce to
everlasting happiness. It is the Spirit which works all our works in us; Isa.
26.12. Romans 8.26. Phil. 2.13.1.6.
helps our infirmities; gives both to will, and to do: and what he has begun,
he will not take off his hand, until he has also finished.

3. Furthermore; it is part of the purchase of the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, viz. to sanctify here, as well as to glorify in Heaven. He has
procured both the Choice, and Grace to choose. And he shall surely obtain the
fruit of his sufferings: he shall see of the travel of his Soul, Isa. 53.11.
and shall be satisfied. Having paid an infinite ransom for his Captives, he
will take care, that they may be actual partakers of that dear bought Freedom.
He will lose none of those, whom the Father has given him: John 6.39.17.12.
therefore he improves the opportunity of his exaltation to the right hand of
the Father, in making intercession for them; and a part of his Prayers in their
behalf is, Romans 8.34. Luke 22.32. Joh. 17.11, 15, 17, 19, 23, 24.
that their Faith may not fail: but that they may be kept through the Name of
the Father, from the evil that is in the World; and that they may be sanctified
through the Truth, which is his Word; that they may be made perfect in one;
until they be with him, where he is, that they may behold his Glory. Heb. 7.25.
John 11.42. Heb. 5.7. (...). Vid. Par. Gerh. Estius, and a Lap. in loc.
Now he ever lives to intercede thus for them, and he is sure to speed: for
the Father will deny him nothing, and he is heard always for his Piety, or (as
others) for his Dignity. All which being considered, it must follow, that as he
has merited for them Grace to choose this good part, so likewise that what
they have so chosen, shall never be taken away from them.

4. Yea, God has laid upon himself a Covenant-engagement, to maintain this
Privilege, which he has vouchsafed to his Saints. As for me, Isa. 59.21.
this is my Covenant with them (says the Lord) My Spirit which is upon thee,
and my Words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
etc. from benceforth, and for ever. Again, I will put my fear in their hearts,
and write it in their inward part, and I will be their God, Jer: 31.33.32.4.
Heb. 13.5.
and they shall be my People: and I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. Likewise he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. And very aptly to our purpose, speaks that Promise of our
Savior: Whosoever drinks of the water, John 4.14.
that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give
him, shall be in him a Well of Water, springing up into everlasting Life. And
in another place; He that believes in me, John 7.38. Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.13.
Psalm 119.49.
out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. Thus he has promised, who
is the God of Truth, and cannot Lie; and will not he remember the Word unto his
Servants, wherein he has caused them to hope? Surely he will ever be mindful
of his Covenant; of the performance whereof he has given so many securities:
105.8.111.5.
for he has bound it with his Oath, Heb. 6.17. and Seal, Ephesians. 5.13. and
Earnest, ibid. verse. 14. and the first fruits of his Spirit, Romans 8.23. which
is a blessed forerast of Eternal Happiness, in some degrees of that joy of the
Holy Ghost, which is unspeakable and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. and of that
Peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. And shall we think all
this to be in vain? as indeed it might be, if it could be taken away. No
surely; his design in these various confirmations of his Promise, and of our
Faith in it is, that by such immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God
to Lie, Heb. 6.18.
we might have strong consolation.

5. Lastly, This good part so chosen and enjoyed is of a spiritual and divine
nature. 2 Pet. 1.4.
Although through the strength of remaining corruption, and the violence of
temptation it may for the time be obscured, and eclipsed: yet it shall never be
extinguished, and utterly lost.

This Reed may be shaken, and bruised; Mat. 12 20.
but shall not be quite broken: This Flax may be reduced to smoking, but shall
not utterly be quenched.

The Seed that is sown shall remain, 1 John 3.9.
though for a time it lie hid underground, yet the Prolifick virtue that is in
it will make a seasonable appearance, that it was not dead when it lay hid. Job
19.28.
The root of the matter is still in him, who is once planted in the Courts of
the House of our God; so that he shall still bring forth, Psalm 92.13.
though sometimes (for the while) his branches show neither Fruit nor Leaves;
yet that Sap which is retired to the heart and root, will certainly put forth
its vigor again, and produce both Leaves and Fruit. The things that are
chosen, Col. 3.1. 2 Cor. 4.18. Col. 1.5. 2 Timothy 4.8. Mat. 25.34. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.
are above; things not seen, and eternal; our Hope and Crown is laid up for us
in Heaven; the Kingdom and Inheritance was prepared for us from the Foundation
of the World; and it is inoorruptible, and fades not away, being reserved in
Heaven for us; and we our selves are kept by the power of God through Faith
unto Salvation, etc.

How should these things be; if this good part so chosen could be taken away?

Since therefore this one thing is so necessary, so good, useful and
profitable; and withal so durable, that when we are once actually possessed of
it, we can never be wholly deprived of it: What remains; but that we prefer it
in our esteem, according to its worth, before all things in the World: and
speedily resolve (as we were before exhorted) to make this Choice with Mary? To
which the Lord direct us, and in it assist us, for his great Names sake: To
whom with our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, that ever blessed Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, be all Glory, Honor, and Praise now and ever.
Amen.

A Narrative of the Religious and Holy Life and Death, of the Lady Mary, late
Wife of Sr. Thomas Wharton Knight of the Bath: In great part as it was
delivered at her Funeral, with many material passages since added.
HAving now done with the Text, it will justly be expected, that I should speak
something of that Heavenly Soul, whose Corpse are now to be Interred; to
solemnize whose Funerals, so many Noble and Worthy Persons are here
congregated. She was a very suitable Parallel to Her in the Text, both in her
Name and Choice. Nor will it seem strange to those that knew her, that she
should be in some degree matched with those renowned Mary's, whom we have had
occasion to mention (the Mother of our blessed Savior only excepted, who was
favored, and blessed above all Women) had she but enjoyed the Privilege of
their opportunities, to have given like evidence of her great Devotion, and
Heavenly affection.

Her Extraction was Noble and Honorable (as this Mary's in the Text is
probably supposed to be) being the Eldest Daughter of the late Right Honorable
Henry Earl of Dover, whose Grandfather was the renowned Henry Lord Hunsdon,
Cousin German, by the Mothers side, to that most excellent Queen of ever
blessed memory, Queen Elizabeth. Her Mother was of the Ancient and Worthy
Family of the Pelhams, of Haland in Sussex, called Lady Judick, Daughter of Sir
Thomas Pelham, whose Ancestors were of great Note many hundred years ago,
meriting for Chivalry, in the service of their King and Country, an access of
Honor, which is yet born in their Arms.

She was Born November 13. 1615. being the third Child (after two Sons) and the
Eldest Daughter of her Parents: who had besides her, three Sons (of whom, the
Right Honorable John Earl of Dover is yet living) and three Daughters, all
eminent for Piety, and all commendable endowments, whereof two are with the
Lord, and one yet surviving. Her Mother died, leaving them very young: yet she
having the advantage of seven years more than the Eldest of her other Sisters,
supplied a Mothers care of them, in their tender years. And what influence her
instructions, advice, and gracious example in all her comportment had upon them
was very evident, in their early proficiency in all Virtue, and gracious
imitation of so fair a Copy.

It pleased God, who had made Choice of her for himself before all time,
Eccles. 12.1. In seculo nobilis apud Deum cupit esse nobilior. Auth. Epist. ad
Demetriadem. Ab illustribus nasci, Deo per spiritum renasci. Nobilis genere,
sed multo nobilior sanctitate. Hier. E. 27. ad Eustoch. de Paula. -- Nobilitas
sola est, atque unica virtus, Juv. Sat. 8. Illa dives, quae in Deo est dives.
Cypr. de hab. Virg. Dan. 11.21. 1 Kin. 21.20, 25 Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. Romans
6.12. 2 Pet. 2.19. Non est quod sibi aliquis de nobilitate generis blandiatur,
si ex meliore part sit famulus. Multo est indignius mente servire quam
corpore. Auth. Ep. ad Demetr.
to work her to a serious Choice of his ways in the best time: To remember her
Creator in the days of her youth. For even in those frail times, which most
others waste, and ravel out in folly and vanity, she received such an happy
tincture of true Piety, and the fear of God, as never lost, but ever increased
its luster till her last breath. This advanced her pious Soul above all carnal
privileges of Nobility, Ancestry, and all terrene Glories derived from her
eminent Progenitors, to fix upon that which was only able to make her truly
Noble and Glorious. She was indeed Noble in the account of the World; but not
satisfied with that, her desire was to be more Noble in the sight of God.

Her Heaven-born Faith trampled under-foot all conceit, or consideration of
secular advantage. It was no great matter to her, to issue from illustrious
Progenitors: her greatest ambition was to become the Child of God by spiritual
birth. She esteemed it but a small thing to glitter with the Ensigns of a Noble
Family, whose great care was to be enrolled among the Saints, and Family of
God. She forgot her self to be Rich or Honorable; regarding it only so far,
that the holiness of her mind, might exceed the splendor of her outward man:
For she esteemed that to be the greatest, which is the truest Nobility, viz. to
be the Child of God, and coheir with Christ. Being thus persuaded, her
constant endeavor was to preserve the honor of her Nobility, by keeping it
unstained from those Vices, which are not only a blemish to it, but leave the
offenders (how Nobly so ever extracted) under the ignominy of degeneracy, and
in the rank of the vilest of men; who sell themselves to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord; whereby they become willing slaves to the Prince of
darkness, who works effectually in and by them, leading them Captive at his
Will. Whilst they serve their own Lusts, and suffer sin to reign in their
mortal bodies, obeying it in the lusts thereof; they even proclaim themselves
to be the servants of sin, being by it vanquished, and brought in bondage. She
well knew, that no man has any cause to boast of his Nobility, when his better
part is enslaved; it being much more shameful to enslave the mind than the
body. Her care therefore was to transfer all outward advantages, to the inward
adorning of the Soul; slighting all secular Pomp and splendor, that she might
with more freedom choose that good part, which could not be taken away from her.

Having so early received into her tender heart the Heavenly dew of Divine
Grace; natural corruption (that common disease of all mankind) was thereby even
nipt in the bud, and received its Deaths-wound before it could get that
advantage, which it ordinarily obtains in miserable mortals.

How soon did she begin to perform her Baptismal Vow and Covenant, renouncing
the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked World, and
all the sinful lusts of the Flesh? Those vanities which were the carnal
delights and darlings of her equals, were her burden and grievance. When to
please Relations, and that she might not seem too scrupulously morose, she was
some-waies necessitated to be present at the interludes which were at certain
times acted in the Family; yet (as I have heard her sometimes say) her heart
was otherwise employed, and she would ever be sure to take the first
opportunity to withdraw, and retire her self from those vanities, to exercise
her thoughts in better meditations, according to her (yet slender) capacity.

Being grown up to years of discretion, when her towardliness was more
conspicuous in her Religious and Gracious comportment; how dear and precious
was she to all such of her acquaintance, as had devoted themselves to the fear
of God? She was ever beloved and honored by them; and they of all others were
most dear to her.

Whilst she kept in her Fathers-House, and afterward till the day of her
Marriage, besides her secret retirements, she was a diligent Attendant upon
public Ordinances; not omitting to watch at Wisdoms gates, and wait at the
Posts of her House continually. Insomuch as, living under the Ministry of that
Eminent and faithful Servant of Christ, Doctor Holdesworth, she would not miss
either Lords-Daies, nor Holy Days Sermons, nor Mornings Prayers, on
Wednesdaies and Frydaies, nor such times in the Week as he appointed for
Catechize: though she was constrained hereby to leave her mornings rest very
early; and for haste cover with her Scarf the defects of those Dresses, which
detained others of her Rank, from that, which she more prized, than all worldly
gayeties.

But these were her more obscure times before she was so fully known to those,
who are yet living, witnesses of her pious regard to heavenly practices. From
whose credible reports, and my own knowledge in the (O too short) time of our
acquaintance (which was not full two years) take these ensuing few Observations.

It was the thirtieth year of her Age, before she gave way to any motion of
Marriage (though she had many from very considerable persons) but at that time
it pleased God, who orders all the concernments of his dear Children for
their assured good, to present her with such a motion, as could not but be
acceptable to her, viz. Sir Thomas Wharton, Knight of the Bath, and only
Brother to the Kight Honorable Phillip Lord Wharton of Wharton: who being well
acquainted with that Family (to which his was nearly allied) took so much
notice of her Virtues, and gracious conversation (the great attractive of his
affections to her) that gave him occasion to move her in order to Marriage.
Which motion (most happy to them both) she upon serious consideration did
embrace; yet with this provision (such due regard she had to filial duty) that
her Fathers, and her Uncle Sir Thomas Pelham's consent (whom she ever honored
as a Father, and he ever tenderly loved her as a Child) should first be
obtained. Sir Thomas was at hand, and therefore the first address was made to
him, who readily and cheerfully gave his approbation. Her Father was then at
Oxford with the King, and his whole Estate under sequestration; nor had she any
further expectation from him of any augmentation of that Portion, which was
long before in her own hands, and dispose; yet would she not Marry, till his
assured consent was gained, to her full satisfaction; which himself did
signify to her by diverse Letters (which I have seen) written from Oxford:
wherein he declared, that he was assured, that Sir Thomas would prove both
honest and kind; and farther assured her, that his blessing should accompany
them in their Marriage, etc.

And now was the time, when that light of Divine Grace, long since kindled,
must become more conspicuous, shining more and more unto that perfect day.
Prove. 4.18.
Now that precious seed, which had taken such firm root in her heart, and had
already made a hopeful progress in the blade, shall produce the Ear, and after
that the full Corn in the Ear, and yield the great Husbandman an acceptable
Harvest. Mark 4.28.


To mention the particular passages of her well spent Life, would rather be to
write an History, than (what is only intended) a short Narrative. I can
therefore here give only a general account of some few passages, which yet may
sufficiently evidence the sincerity of her Faith, working by Love, which is the
whole of Christianity.

What is intended may be referred to these two Heads; 1. Her Qualification. 2.
Her Conversation.

1. For the former of these; She was a careful observer of the Apostles earnest
Exhortation; adding to her Faith Virtue, and to Virtue, Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.5.
etc.

The odious aspersion of Solifidianism could not be fastened on her; though in
the point of Justification, she depended only and wholly upon the righteousness
of Christ imputed to the Believer, and received by Faith: in this case not at
all looking at her own inherent righteousness. Her Faith was a lively and
active Faith, manifesting its vigor and genuine nature by its proper fruits.
It provoked those Virtues, wherewith she was plentifully furnished, Virtus, a
viribus, quasi viri vis. Varro. de Ling. Lat. lib. 4.
to exert their force and strength (whence they are so called.) in the
production of every good work as she had opportunity.

And because she was persuaded it was as necessary to do well, as to do good;
which cannot be without some good competency of knowledge to direct each
virtuous action: Therefore she gave all diligence, to add to her Virtue
Knowledge; not only speculative, whereby she knew what she ought to do; but
practical, in doing what she knew: which produced the advantage of a further
degree, viz. experimental knowledge; by which means she reaped the sweetest
comfort, which arises from the conscience of well-doing. Her knowledge was
savoury, and her judgment sound in the things that concern salvation. She was
never tainted with Novel opinions, and fancies; but well acquainted with, and
tenacious of the form of sound words contained in the holy Scriptures; and as
they are taught in the Church of England, whereof she was a true and dutiful
Child. So well was she grounded in the Principles and main points of Religion,
that she was out of the reach of the subtilest Papists seduction; as she
sometimes was not free from their attempts, but ever from their Impressions.

Moreover, knowing that whilst we are in this Tabernacle, we bear in our bosoms
a rebel to the law of our mind; the Flesh lusting against the Spirit; that she
might subdue and mortify that enemy, she gave all diligence to add to her
knowledge, temperance, (...). Maenand.
that promptuary of Virtue, most remarkable.

1. In her eminent and exemplary Modesty, and Chastity. She never came within
the reach of the most curious suspicion of Immodesty, Virgin or Wife: being
ever careful to abstain from all appearance of evil by any wanton word or
gesture.

2. In her moderate use of those subsidia, which our heavenly Father knows are
needful for us, and therefore is pleased to allow us for the comfort of our
Life.

1. In her Apparel. She restrained her self from the use of those Fashions,
which though in themselves they are unseemly (to say no worse) yet are too
frequent and common in use amongst such as were her equals: Peccandi fomenta,
Lupana^^ insignia, ornamenta Meretricum, etc. Cypr. de hab. Virg. Tertul. de
hab. Mal. and de cult. Foeminarum. Vide etiam, Aug. Epist. 73. and de Doctr.
Christ. l. 4. c. 21. Ambr. l. 1. de Virg. Hier. Epist. 10. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
whereby the practice is become incorrigible, and the contrary disdained by the
exorbitant. She never used to bare her Breasts and Shoulders, or Paint, or Spot
her Face, etc. or any such Dress, as were ever exploded by all sober
Christians, and vehemently reproved by the Primitive Fathers, as enticements,
and provocations of Lust, ornaments of light persons, and inventions of the
Devil, etc. But this chaste Soul abhorred to be so disfigured. Her ornaments
were not broidered or platted Hair, Gold, or Pearls, or costly array (though
she wanted none of those things, if she had fancied them) but the hidden man of
the Heart. Her best Dress was that shamefacedness and Sobriety commanded by St.
Paul, (1 Timothy 2.9.) and the incorruptible ((...)) of a meek and quiet spirit,
which St. Peter tells us, takes such worth in the sight of God. This is the
Dress which Tertullian commends to Christian Women; men: Vestite vos serico
probitatis, byssino sanctitatis, purpura pudicitiae. Taliter pigmentatae Deum
habebitis Amatorem. Tert. de cultu foemin. in fine.
Cloth your selves (says he) with the Silk of Honesty, with the Satin of
Sanctity, with the Purple of Modesty: in such Paints God will be your Lover. In
such attire would she appear before God, as she knew was best pleasing to him.

2. Nor was her Temperance less remarkable in reference to her Diet: being
nothing studious, or desirous of dainty or costly Fare. Her ordinary food was
good and wholesome; but plain, and such as is most accommodate for the ends for
which God has ordained it: viz. preservation of Health, and increase of
strength: not to please a dainty Palate, or gratify an exorbitant Appetite,
and excite Lust. But the ordering of Family provisions by her appointment, was
plentiful, as to ordinary Housekeeping; generous and free in her
entertainments, to the great contentment of her Friends and equals: whose
Visits were exceeding frequent and grateful.

Neither was she wanting to add fortitude to her other Virtues; resolutely
persisting in well-doing, being strengthened with power by the Spirit in the
inward man, Ephesians. 3.16.
to resist the temptation, and overcome the difficulties, which are ever ready
to obstruct all godly endeavors. She was indeed (...), a Woman of valor,
never weary of well-doing, nor faint in her mind: Prove. 31.10. Lxx. (...). v.
L. Mulier fortis. Gal. 6.7. Heb. 12.3. Job 17.9. Heb. 10.23. Rev. 2.10.
but held on in her way, growing yet stronger and stronger, she held fast her
Profession, and was faithful unto the End, that she might obtain the promised
Crown.

But the Crown of all her Virtues was her Sincerity. They were not in show
only, but in reality and truth: she was what she seemed; her Gold needed no
Gilt. She was (as is said of the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 45.13.) glorious within,
as well as without. Her hidden man was richly furnished; though not so much
exposed to the eye of man, as of him who sees in secret, and searches the
heart and reins. Nevertheless, though it be most difficult to determine of any
man's sincerity, which is only know to him, that is the discerner of the
thoughts and intentions of the heart; yet where there are such clear
appearances, and satisfactory evidences; he must be less than a Christian, that
has not so much Charity, as to conclude that such a one as she, must needs be
sincere: who did so uniformly practice godliness to the last period of her
Life; never varying, or abating in her godly care and watchfulness, but always
proceeding in a constant tenor of an holy conversation, according to that
invariable rule, Gal. 6.16. Her universal closing with all good, and
detestation of all sin, abstaining from the very appearance of evil; hating sin
both in her self and others: her fervent zeal for Gods glory; her cordial Love,
and vehement affection to, and constant use of all his holy Ordinances: her
ready submission to his Will in all things; her fear to offend him in any
thing; her grief frequently expressed, that she was not more holy; her earnest
desire of and longing for farther assurance of divine favor; her exemplary
Humility, ever having low thoughts of her self, and of any thing she did,
always acknowledging her great defects in each Duty, and her unworthiness of
the least mercy; esteeming her self the greatest of sinners, and the least of
all Saints (as St. Paul) nothing esteeming any thing she was or did, 1 Timothy 1.
15, Ephesians. 3.8. Phil. 3.8. Opibus and nobilitate contempta, facta est in
humilitate nobilior, Hier. Ep. 16. Psalm 50.23.
no not her greatest seize in Grace and Holiness (as to any dependence
upon them) much less her outward privileges of Nobility, and worldly
greatness, that she might gain Christ.

II. As for her Conversation it was suitable to her Qualifications; ever
studying to walk according to the rule of holiness. Her great care was to
prepare her heart to seek the Lord: that she might in all things order her
conversation aright, both toward God and man.

1. In respect of God, what is said in Scripture of Enoch, Noah, and other holy
persons, that they walked with God, was also verified in her.

How she did deport her self in secret duties, was known only to God, and her
own Soul: according to her Saviors admonition. Yet if we may measure her more
retired Devotions, Mat. 6.6.
by what was evident in Church and Family Duties, nothing could be more
affectionate. Her secret Prayers, as also her Meditations, and heavenly
raptures were more immediate exchanges between her pious Soul, and him whom her
Soul loved. Some part whereof could not yet be so concealed, but that such as
were near her, could observe her constant retirements, and by her Discourses
take notice (at least in general) how her time was employed in her Closet. For
such is the nature of true Love, that it cannot contain, but must at sometimes
break forth in the praises of its beloved, and express its joys and heavenly
content in him whom it so much admires; as is evident by the Discourse of the
Church in the Canticles. Vid. Cant. 2.16 5.10, etc. 6.3.7.10.
Those ravishing joys cannot be concealed: the Daughter of Jerusalem must be
acquainted with the excellencies of her beloved, and how exceedingly she is
affected with, and to him.

Thus much, and much more was known to her dear and indulgent Husband (who
himself was not only an incourager, but also an excellent example and Pattern
of private Devotions) as follows:

1. Her diligent and careful Reading of the holy Scriptures, which being a
considerable part of her retirements, brought her to a familiar acquaintance
with the revealed Will of God. She tasked her self with Reading a daily
portion; which was studiously performed. And what good use she made thereof,
may be gathered from her Observations which were found among her Papers written
with her own hand, Prove. 3.3. These were called Totaphoth, or Phylacteries, and
by the Rabbis Tephilin. Of which read. Buxtorf. Synagog. Jadaic. cap. 4.
Ainsw. and Synops. Critic. in Exodus 1^.
which I have seen and perused: wherein no less than three hundred remarkable
passages were transcribed verbatim, to be the subject of her private
Meditations, and that she might more firmly imprint them in her memory,
according to that injunction of Solomon: write them upon the Table of thy
heart. Thus the Lord commanded the Israelites that they should write certain
Sections of the Law, which they should wear upon their hands, and as Frontlets
before their eyes: that the Law might be had in perpetual remembrance. These
were in time superstitiously, and hypocritically abused, as appears, Mat. 23.5.
But she was far from ostentation, nor was this pious care of hers known till
after her death. Amongst others, these Scriptures she most especially proposed
to her Reading and Meditation, at such times as she set apart for private
humiliation, Dan. 9. Isa. 61. Ezr. 9. Neh. 9. Joel 2. Jam. 4.9, 10. Mat. 6.18.
Isa. 58.1 Joh. 1.9. Neh. 1. ad 10. I have transcribed them as they were found
in her Papers.

And as she was thus diligent in reading the holy Scripture: so did she also
take great pains and delight in reading of such Books as were written by those
worthy persons, who were of greatest esteem among the most serious and
religious Readers. For as her great design in reading was to understand the
good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God; so she rationally conceived,
Romans 12.2.
that none could more likely acquaint her with the mind of God, than those who
were designed to this Office, and who conversed most with him in their pious,
exemplary, and constant practice: remembering that the secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. Psalm 25.14. Prove.
3.32. These Authors were commended to her by B. usher, and others who were
fully for the Church of England.
Amongst these, she chiefly read Mr. Daniel Dyke, of the deceitfulness of the
Heart (a Book she highly prized, and often times read over) Mr. Arth.
Hildersham's works also, and Dr. Preston's, Dr. Sibs, Mr. Dod, Mr. Rogers's
seven Treatises, and the Epitome, called The Practice of Christianity; Mr. John
Downham's Christian Warfare, though very voluminous, yet could not the bigness
of any good Book prevent, but rather excite her diligence.

Near her end she was Reading Mr. Calvin's Institutions (translated into
English) the second time, having not many weeks before Read it quite through.

Many other such good and practical Authors she had carefully Read with great
profit, turning their words into Works. For she was ever careful, not only to
take in more light by such good men's pains, but chiefly to feel her heart
warmed by their kindly heats. She used her Reading in stead of a Looking-Glass,
whereby to discover and reform, whatsoever was amiss in her practice; and also
how to adorn her conversation with regular obedience: so that her Reading did
not only enrich her mind with knowledge, but beautify her life with virtuous
practice; knowing that God has given us his Word and Law, not only to be
known, but to be actually obeyed. For what does it profit, to learn what we
should do, if we do not what we have learned? When she would recreate her mind
with any pleasant Discourse; besides her Reading of serious History, she took
great delight in Reading Mr. Herbert's Verses, most of which she could repeat
without Book. These her recreation instead of Playbooks, and Romances.

2. Besides her diligent and unwearied Reading (which was not only part of her
Closet work, but usually her afternoons employment, when not hindered by
company, or not exercised in needle work, for she was never idle) she
constantly observed her designed and slated times for secret Prayer. In which
if she were at any time hindered by entertainment of friends, etc. yet would she
redeem time even from her sleep, rather than shorten her accustomed Devotions.

And here though no other account can be expected, than of every pious Soul,
Mat. 6.6. 2 Samuel 7.18. Dam. 6.1^.
whose care is not to be seen or heard in those retirements by any but their
heavenly Father: yet by providence something was found among her Papers,
written with her own hand upon a special occasion, which may afford some
discovery of her godly and devout frame of Spirit, even in that heavenly and
secret Duty.

The occasion was this: That Reverend and holy man of God Mr. John Hudson (now
the Right Reverend Bishop of Elphin in Ireland) Preaching upon that Text, 1 Samuel 1.27. For this Child I prayed, etc. amongst other savoury passages
observed; That Mercies and Blessings obtained by Prayer will be sweet, and that
we should especially record special mercies, which practice would both help our
memory (we being very apt to forget mercies, Psalm. 106.7.) and also strengthen
our Faith, Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3, etc. verse. 8, 9. I will hear what God the Lord
will speak, etc. Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him. Her gracious
Soul made such good use of that Sermon, that she from that time resolved to
keep a Record of such special mercies, as it should please the Lord to
vouchsafe her; more especially such, as were given in upon Prayer. And in those
Papers wherein they were found Recorded, she thus bespeaks the Lord in her
Prayers.

O my God, I desire now to come before thee, humbled in my Soul for my own
baseness and filthiness from Head to Foot: Every member of my Body being ready
and inclined to every sin; every faculty of my Soul being polluted and defiled
with that foul and ugly sin, wherein I was conceived and born. And to aggravate
this; having received, and still possessing more mercies, and gracious
dispensations from thee, than (I think) ever any creature had. But it is thy
free grace, who can as well give me a thankful heart, as a receiving hand:
which I beg for his sake, upon whose account only I come before thee, and have
this confidence to approach unto thee. And here, O Lord, through thine
assistance I desire to recount, as I am able, some of those innumerable
mercies, that I daily receive.

Then after an enumeration of many general mercies, she thus proceeds. Good
God, give me the Grace likewise, that all this thy goodness may not be in vain
upon my poor Soul. -- I bless thy Name for the gracious presence of thy blessed
Spirit, at all times, when I set my self before thee in earnest to seek thy
face and favor in private; and in especial at a Fast I kept, and Sacrament I
received, when I was left all alone at Wobourn, when I received much comfort,
etc.

Then again reckoning up many particular mercies received at the Lords hand
upon her Prayers to him, for her Husband and Son: amongst which she forgets not
affectionatly to mention the good means of Grace and Salvation, they had lived
under, and the contented, peaceable, plentiful, cheerful condition they had
enjoyed ever since they came together. But these (says she) are but Ones of
thousands, that I have and do enjoy. O give me to live in some measure
answerable to this goodness of thine, etc.

After this manner has she Recorded the many special mercies, deliverances,
blessings, which she, her Husband, Son, and Family had received; noteing the
day and month of the year. And the whole contexture is in the same tenor of
Prayer and Praises; ever desiring of the Lord, that he would give her to live
the life of Faith, and Thanksgiving, which was her frequent expression. But the
particular mercies conferred upon her self and her Relations, were not the only
Subject of her thankful praises. So great was her affection to the Church of
God, and to her dear native Country, that public blessings were also sound
Recorded in her secret Devotions. Thus when it pleased God to heal the breaches
of this distracted Nation, by the happy Restoration of his Royal Majesty: she
thus expresses her deep sense of that wonderful change. But now, O God, I am
confounded, and know not what to say, nor which way to begin to bless and
praise by great Name for thy infinite preservations of, deliverances to, and
blessed restoration of our dear King, and his Family from their sad banished,
and distracted condition, which they have long lain under, to their own
Inheritance. And all this is beyond what we could have asked or thought; to be
without blood, or obligation to strangers, or any thing but thy own hand, which
is for ever to be magnified, and adored for this great Work; for which I
beseech thee to give me, and all thine, to live the life of Faith and
Thanksgiving; to lay our selves in the dust, and to be low in our own eyes,
that thou alone may be exalted for these great and wonderful things, that
thou have done in our days, for preserving them in the true Religion in the
midst of diverse temptations, and keeping them from diverse dangers of Soul and
Body: for all which let our Souls bless thy great Name.

This may suffice to give some aim, whereby to measure her private Devotions,
which could not otherwise be discovered, but by her own Papers, occasioned as
is before declared. But by this it may appear, how serious she was in her
Meditation of Gods loving kindness to her, and her Relations in every
concernment: with which she was so exceedingly affected, that she could not
forbear to speak of it in her private discourses with her friends. In the short
time of our acquaintance, how frequently have I heard her, with tears of joy
express her deep apprehensions of Gods gracious Providence in their outward
prosperity beyond her hopes; admiring his blessings, according to his holy
promise, heaped upon them, she knew not how; owing his hand, and disowning all
their own care and endeavor, as of no signification in reference to the
greatness of (even outward) mercies received.

This wrought her Soul to the highest content with that Estate which it pleased
God to place her in: which had it been much meaner, would yet no doubt, have
been acceptable to her thankful heart, which ever took its measure from the
consideration of Gods bountiful providence, in administering blessings suitable
to her condition; and not from any ambitious emulation of others grandeur.

Such as is said was her more private converse with God. What was more obvious
to the eyes of men, was very exemplary; whether we consider her deportment in
the public Congregation, or in her Family duties.

In the public Prayers in the Church (as also in the Family) her Posture,
outward gesture, and voice was ever most decent, humble, and reverent with all
evidences of a broken, contrite, serious, and servent spirit; expressing
greatest affection, with such diligent and undistracted attention, without the
least show of Ostentation, that whosoever observed her deportment, could not
but conclude, 1 Samuel 1.12, 13. Sancti sine voce cl^mant ad Deum. -- Inspirante
Spiritu sancto apud Deum per silentium Sanctorum clamor auditur. Aug. Ser. 90.
de temp.
that her Prayers (like Hannah's) were more the work of the heart, than of the
lips; or as it is said of Moses, that he cried to the Lord, even whilst he kept
silence, Exodus 14.15.

And that she might not lose the opportunity of enjoying any part of Divine
Service, she ever came to the Church before the beginning of Prayers, at the
usual hour.

Nor had she less regard to the Preaching of the Word. She would not miss one
Sermon, whilst she was able to go abroad. And she constantly writ every Sermon,
which every morning she perused in the following Week: that she might both
better digest in Meditation, what she had heard; and that her memory might
better guide her in the contexture with the next Discourse upon the same
Subject.

This Ordinance she ever highly prized, esteeming it one of the greatest
blessings it pleased the divine bounty to vouchsafe her. Isa. 66.2. Heb. 5.14.
(...). 1 John 1.1. 1 These. 5.21.
She was one of them, that trembles at his Word, which ever had an awe upon her
spirit. Having her senses exercised by reason of use (or habit obtained by
customary diligence) to discern between good and evil, so that she was able to
try the spirits, whether they were of God, and to prove all things, that she
might hold fast that which is good; when she was satisfied concerning the
soundness of the Doctrine, and Orthodoxy of the Preacher, she would receive
that which was so Preached, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the
Word of God, 1 These. 2.13. (...). Acts 16, 14.
which had therefore an effectual operation on her believing heart: which (like
Lydia's) was ever open to attend with all reverence to the things which were
spoken. She considered that she was at that place and time, especially present
before God, to hear what his Ambassador had in commission to say to her; what
she was about; and to what end she came thither, viz. to learn, not to carp at
or despise what she heard. She was so judicious, as to discern the Preachers
weakness (if he were such) but yet had so much reverence to the Ordinance of
God, and charity to the Minister, as to pity, not despise his weakness. Her
humble heart, like the low Valley, Corfluit enim aqua ad humilitatem convallis;
denatat de tumoribus collis. Aug. Ser. 27. de verb. Domini.
entertained those refreshing Streams, which were sent forth from the Fountain
of Life; that could find no place of abode in a proud and censorious heart.

Such was her pious regard to the Preaching of the Word. Nor had she less
respect to both those holy Sacraments, which our Savior ordained in his
Church, in their respective use. Therefore when any Infant was to be Baptized,
she would ever attend with all reverence to the whole Office; rejoicing to
behold a new Member admitted with such solemnity into the Church; fervently and
affectionately joining with the Congregation in Prayers to God for it.

As for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, she so greatly hungered after that
spiritual food, that she would not lose the opportunity of one Sacrament, when
(as at the feast of Easter) it was more frequently administered. What care she
took that she might be a fit guest at that heavenly Feast, may appear by that
passage, which was before observed out of her Papers: humbling her self in a
private solemn Fast, the week before the Sacrament, that she might by
self-examination become more sensible of her failings and wants; whereby she
might be prepared with more eager appetite, and desire to partake of those
comforts, which are there represented, ratified, and exhibited to every true
Believer. And it appears by her own careful observation, that the fruit was
answerable; in these words, Wherein (says she) I received much comfort.

I have never observed in any Communicant greater evidence of humility,
reverence, and devotion than in her reception of the holy Elements; which
together with her eager desire, careful preparation, and diligent attendance
upon that divine Ordinance, was a sure argument of that great comfort which she
received in the use of it.

The last Sacrament which she ever received, was upon June 9. 1672. being the
occasion of her coming abroad, after a long weakness, which had confined her to
her house, and was indeed the last time of her being abroad. She had a longing
desire to receive it in the public Congregation (having once before received
it in private, by reason of her great weakness) which was (as God was pleased
to order it) to the great prejudice of her health. That morning, more than her
strength could bear, she rose two hours earlier than of a long time before she
had done: the day was very rugged, and the air unmild; so that in all
probability her coming abroad was a great cause of increasing her distemper.
But with desire she desired to eat with us this Passover before her approaching
Death. Luke 22.15.
Being therefore conducted by her tender Husband to the Church, after Sermon
she received the Sacrament with more than ordinary Devotion: which was indeed
to her a blessed viaticum before her departure hence, (...).
into her heavenly Mansion (which was but the tenth day after) where she now
enjoys him immediately (without the use of Ordinances) whom her Soul loved.

Besides this conscientious attendance on, and careful improvement of the
Ordinances, and public means of Salvation; her earnest desire of holiness, and
increase of Grace was evident by the great pleasure she took in godly discourse
and conference; wherein that part which she usually bore was proposal of such
Queries, in which she desired further satisfaction; with some affectionate
expressions arguing self-application, and that seldom (if ever) without
contrite tears. Her humble and broken spirit, would ever judge her self
unworthy of offered comfort; yet would earnestly listen to it, desiring with
David, to hear the voice of joy and gladness, admiring it, Psalm. 51.8.
and not wilfully rejecting what she was urged to receive; entertaining each
argument with joyful tears, which might give her any assurance, or hope of
divine favor through Christ, on whose alone merits she wholly relied,
trampling under-foot all conceit of any worth of her own Righteousness.

And when there was any occasion to speak to her by way of advice, exhortation,
or admonition; with what complacency would she receive it? What ever was said
on such occasion to her (with any evidence from the Word, that it was the Will
of God and a declared duty) was ever readily admitted without the least
reluctance or hesitancy. For the true fear of God, and his love shed abroad in
her heart constrained her obedience. Yea, so careful was she, that she might
not in any thing offend; that she would make request (where she was confident
of Faithfulness) to be reproved; of which I had this experiment. Upon our first
acquaintance, when I was but newly settled in the Rectory, having a fit
opportunity, none being present, she thus bespoke me: Sir, Herein she imitated
that gracious Queen Anna Bullen, who was her great Grandfathers Aunt. Vid. Book
of Martyrs, Vol. 2. p. 371.
(said she) God has sent you hither to take care of our Souls; therefore I
entreat you, that you would not spare, faithfully to reprove whatever you shall
see amiss in me. For she esteemed faithful reproof to be a requisite and
necessary duty both of a Minister, and of a Friend. Accordingly having such
encouragement, I resolved upon that ground, to deal freely with her, as I
should have occasion. But I ever observed such an uniform regard of duty, and
care of her deportment at all times, and toward all persons; that during the
residue of her Life, nothing offered it self, which any ordinary discretion
could think worthy of a reproof: so careful she was to practice the Apostles
prescript, Phil. 2.15. That ye* may be blameless, and harmless, etc.

Such was her Conversation toward God: Therefore,

2. She could not miss to order her Conversation aright toward all sorts of
men: which indeed was most lovely and exemplary, her light shining forth, to
the glory of her heavenly Father, and the great refreshment of such pious Souls
as had the happiness to know her. For,

1. She was of a lovely and amiable comportment toward all with whom she did
converse; being altogether unaccustomed to any morosity, or disdain, even
toward inferiors, though of lowest rank. In her entertainments she was
always cheerful (which was indeed her constant temper) and even her mirths
were not only innocent, but also grateful.

And as her good nature inclined her to love all mankind; Grace directed her
more especially to affect those that were (in her judgment) beloved of God.
She had learned David's lesson, Psalm 15.
to honor them that fear the Lord; and also followed his example, in placing
all her delight in the Saints that are in the Earth, whom she esteemed of all
men the most excellent. These were ever dear to her, though differing in
judgment from her in such things wherein we ought to bear with one another.
For she loved Religion, not Division. Religio, a ligando.
When she admitted any into the number of her nearer Friends; as she was
exactly judicious to guide her choice (wherein she was seldom, if ever,
mistaken) so she was faithful, and constant, to continue her affection without
change, or suspicion of change; Joh. 13.1.
imitating therein her Savior, in loving them unto the End.

2. Nor was she only courteous, but also innocent, and harmless in all her
deportment: being of a meek, quiet, peaceable spirit, she became an absolute
Mistress of her Passions. I cannot remember, that I ever saw her discomposed by
any prevalent passion. Her constant frame was interwoven with cheerfulness, and
seriousness: usually cheerful and pleasant in humane concerns, serious in
Divine. But never (that upon enquiry I could hear of) either transported with
anger, clouded with sullenness, swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, or
exorbitant in her joys: though she has not wanted occasions enough, no doubt
(since none can be free) to excite and provoke passion. None could better know
how to bear and digest an injury; nor could any be more fearful to do one. None
more loath to take offense, and none more careful of giving any. Though she
could see as soon as another, any undecent, and provocative misdemeanor of an
inferior: yet she knew how to connive, without any malice toward the
offender: for that Monster had no place in her calm heart. If at any time she
found her self mistaken in faulting another (though a Servant) she would be
really sorry for it: and I have heard her say, that in such case, she would not
grudge to ask them forgiveness.

3. Her Charity and Bounty in giving, was beyond her Estate, which yet was
plentiful to her own content, and in which she found no want, but to satisfy
her eager desire to communicate, and do more good. Though a less Estate, than
she had, would have pleased her thankful and humble heart; yet the greatest
would have been little enough to have supplied her Beneficience; being so
devoted to practice that Apostolical injunction, viz. to be careful to maintain
good Works for necessary uses, Tit. 3.4. Psa. 92.13. etc. 1.3.46.2. Ezekiel. 27.
Rev. 22.
that she might not be unfruitful. Having been planted in the House of the
Lord, by that River of the Sanctuary, whose Streams make glad the City of God,
she flourished in his Courts, bringing forth her fruit in its due season, yea,
even in old Age still flourishing.

Verily her Charity was most exemplary, whether we consider its measure,
manner, principle, or End.

Her end in giving was not for Ostentation or vain glory, that men might see
and applaud her Charity. For so much as was possible, she so concealed it from
others knowledge, that none but such instruments as she must necessarily make
use of to convey her Alms, and the parties relieved might be conscious of it.
Her only design was to glorify God in doing good to his poor Creatures, Mat.
25.40. In this also she imitated (according to her ability) her noble Ancestor
Queen Anna Bullen, Book of Mart. ubi supra.
and to his living Temples, which our blessed Savior takes as kindly as if
done to himself.

The measure of her Alms was liberal and bountiful. Her gifts were distributed
with a full hand, as her store could furnish her with supplies. For from the
time of her Marriage, her most kind and indulgent Husband allowed her (upon her
request for this purpose) a considerable monthly which was freely committed to
her dispose: of which she was so sparing from other uses, that she would rather
abridge her self in some things that her condition might require, than she
would pinch her Alms, which was ever proportionable to the case she had under
consideration.

The way and manner she observed in her beneficence, was ever directed by
Prudence. For seeing such largess must necessarily disable her from the
frequency which she desired (that practice being indeed a great part of her
joys) therefore she would ever make prudent choice, not only of the way
whereby, but also of the Party whom she should relieve.

As for the Party to whom she would extend her Bounty; that she might not cast
away her Money, either through indiscretion or vain glory, she was ever careful
to discharge this as a Duty, in obedience unto Gods command: not heedlesly
giving, but where she was persuaded that she ought to do it: observing that
advice, Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, Prove. 3.27. Heb. (...)a
Dominis ejus, Dominum illum efficit necessitate and te Dispensatorem Deus. Jun.
in loc. Psalm. 119.72.
when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. She would therefore give only
there, where she thought it was a due required by God; either by way of
recompense for their pains, who labored and watched for her soul, ( Heb.
12.13.) as she was directed by Gods Word, 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Cor. 9.11. Gal.
6.6. (For she had learned with holy David, to prefer the Law of Gods mouth
before worldly Riches) or by way of compassion, where there was real, and not
pretended necessity. She was persuaded, that God required her to help, when he
was pleased to present her with such an object of Charity. But then did she
judge, she had got the fittest object, when this necessity was accompanied with
sincere Piety, Omnibus nos debitores fecit communis humanitas; sed fidelibus
vinculum arctius spiritualis cognationis, quam Dominus inter nos sacravit.
Calv. in Gal. 6.10.
according to the Apostles prescript, Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity let us
do good to all men, especially to them who are of the household of Faith. There
she accounted her Charity most due.

But she was not only careful to make right choice of the Party whom she ought
to relieve, but also of that way and means, whereby she might do them most
good, and her Charity make for the greatest advantage. The Hungry she would
Feed, and procure Clothes for the Naked, and comfort the Sick with such things
as she had. That of Job. 29.13. might fitly be applied to her: The blessing of
those that were ready to perish, came upon her, and she caused the Widows
heart to sing for joy. She was the poor Orphans Mother, taking some of them
into her own Family, Ita singulis suam pecuniam dividebat, ut singulis
necessarium erat, H^eron. Ep. 27, Job 31.16.
others were kept to School, others were placed forth as Apprentices with her
Money. For some poor Families she would purchase Cows, that the Children might
have Milk; or what other ways she could devise, whereby to help poor and
decayed people. Thus she withheld not the poor from their desire, nor would
she cause the eyes of the Widow to fail. Nor was this her practice for a fit,
or seldom, but constant, and continued till her dying day, she was not weary of
well-doing, nor did she fail to the last; leaving order even at her End for
further distribution of the remainder, yet undisposed of. No doubt, but she now
enjoys a plentiful Crop of that blessed Seed; and her Works follow her.

Such was her converse with others, who were not her Family Relations. What her
deportment was toward them, I shall speak the less, because I cannot say
enough. She that thus walked with God, and whose Conversation toward all
others, was such as is before declared, must needs be most benign and
respective to all her Relations. To mention her goodness toward each of them
particularly, would but too much grate upon their grieved spirits, and renew
their yet fresh sorrows for so great a loss.

This I may presume to say, that no Husband could lose a more loving,
respective, obedient, and in each regard a better Wife, and Friend: No Child a
more tender, loving, careful Mother: No Servant a more loving, meek, provident,
indulgent Lady, that could more desire and endeavor their good. And this not
only in reference to their body and outward man; but with more especial respect
to their Souls, and spiritual state. It was ever her great desire and careful
endeavor, that all who were near her, should serve God with her, and that she
might ever find them in the fear of God. Nor could any thing more grieve her,
than at any time to see any of them offend or sin against God.

As to her carriage in all things toward her Husband, and his reciprocally
toward her. I have never observed in any married pair a greater mutual
complacency, than betwixt them two. They lived together as if they had but one
Heart, and one Will in all things: that which was pleasing to either, was ever
most eligible to the other. Yea, who ever observed any difference of opinion in
them, or the least discontent, or ever heard any contest between them; whose
only strife was, whether of them should more please and gratify the other?

But instead of larger reports of her gracious and loving respects to her
nearest Relations, these few notes following may suffice to declare her
affection to them, and care for them: which I have transcribed out of her own
Papers, prepared five years ago (she having long labored under an Hectic
distemper) and which she delivered with her own hands, one to her Husband, and
the other to her only Son, the day before her Death.

Some part of the Paper to her Husband being dated Feb. 20. 1667. is as
follows,

My dear Heart Sir Thomas Wharton,
OUR good and gracious God will be thy great support and comfort in all
conditions, and will make up all Relations, without whom none could have given
any contentment. We have by his mercies lived more happy days, than almost
any: but changes must come to us, as well as to all others. Therefore let us be
thankful for all our good we have enjoyed; and be willing and ready to give up
what is dearest to us, when he calls, who will do nothing to hurt us, being our
most loving Father in Christ, who has bought us with his precious blood. This I
believe, Lord help my unbelief, and give me to live the life of Faith and
Thanksgiving, and prepare me for his Will, whether Life or Death. I am very
infirm, but heart whole, etc.

Then making mention of her only Son,

Of whom (says she) I need not desire your taking care, for he is yours as
much as mine, and I know you love him, etc. I would fain have him much in your
company, or under your eye. Though I know, his Youth and your Gravity will not
altogether suit; yet I hope you will allow him grains, and he yield you all
obedience of Love, as well as Fear. I shall need to say nothing of his
Marriage: for I think we both agree, in desiring he may meet in the first place
with Piety, Virtue, and a good Extraction. And if any Wealth or Beauty attend
upon these, let it come: they are not ill Servants, though unfit to be
uppermost in our desires or esteem. If God give his blessing, a little will be
enough; if not, enough will be too little to satisfy the covetous desire: from
which good God deliver him. I had rather his Education might instruct him to
use that little be will have, well; than to covet more, to spend ill.


The Paper to her Son follows verbatim.

My dear Philip,
I Pray God bless you; and he who has raised you from many illnesses and
weaknesses, raise your heart and life to some degree answerable to these great
mercies, and all other which I am not able to reckon up. I am at this time, I
praise God, well, and have no illness on me; but grow Old, and infirm often:
which makes me desire to leave something in charge with you, which you may
read, and remember your old Mother by.

In the first place, Love and fear God; and press and strive every day to
increase more and more in the love and service of him, in whom you live, move,
and have your being. There is no Wisdom or Policy like it. And the more you
converse with Gods Word, and his People, the more you will find it, and the
better you will like it: For in his Service is perfect freedom. Let me conjure
you to let no day go without reading the holy Scripture, and other good Books,
as you have leisure; you will find them excellent company. And do not only
Read, but consider what you Read, to remember it. I should be very glad, you
would early fit, and prepare for the communion of the blessed Body and Blood of
Christ; not rashly because others do it, but advisedly; finding the want of it,
and the preciousness of it; which may give you a true hunger and thirst after
it, and all other Ordinances of God; upon which, I pray, attend very
diligently. Next, Honor and Love your King, and look upon Rebellion as the sin
of Witchcraft. Observe and obey all his just commands; and what ever they be,
pray for him, and submit, and suffer what you cannot obey of them; but never
rise, nor murmur at any lawful Authority, though it be never so cross to your
own humor; but patiently bear what you cannot amend. Lastly, Reverence,
Honor, Obey, and Love your Father. Obey his commands, observe his
instructions, mark his reproofs to prevent the need of them any more. And let
them not make you love his company less; for it is his kindness. When he is
angry, be your very mild, and discreet in your replies; and do not expostulate
with him, but own your fault, which will quickly obtain pardon: for he loves
you dearly, and so would I fain have you do him. Be careful of him in Age or
Sickness: Love to be in his company. And always choose the best company; for
there is no good got in ill, mean company. And avoid, as much as you can, all
Debauchery, and these that are so. Let the fear of God first prevail with you;
then the pleasing of your Father, and your dead Mothers injunctions, when she
was alive. And consider well your Vow made in Baptism, which though it were
then promised by others, yet you are bound to perform now, as your Catechize
teaches you. To which end consider the Church-Catechise well, and there you
will find your obligation: which I beseech God to enable you to strive to
perform in resisting the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and Loving our good
God, and our Neighbors. I would give you warning of two sorts of People; the
Flatterer, and the Backbiter; and of being either your self. And when any
flatters you to your Face, be not pleased with it, but have a more strict guard
upon your behavior and actions, and examine whether it belong to you or no; if
it do, give God the glory; if not, take that occasion to endeavor after being
what you would be thought to be. And if you hear any speak ill of others, who
do not deserve it: Look to your self; for you are like to have the same, when
your back is turned. My dear Child, be careful of your ways; and let not these
things I say, be slighted by you: for they come from one that loves you, and
wishes your welfare, I assure you; by Name your old Mother,

Mary Wharton.
Feb. 26. 1667.

By this it may appear, what pious and loving regard she had to her dearest,
and nearest Relations; that after her Death they might have this (as her last
Legacy) to put them in mind of her dear affection to them, and of her most
godly desire of their spiritual welfare after her departure. She had reserved
these Papers, by her in her Cabinet, till she apprehended her approaching
Dissolution. And then though exceedingly faint, yet with a cheerful countenance
(which had ever been her ordinary aspect, Index animi vultus.
an argument of a serene mind) she with her own hands transmitted them to
theirs.

And since we are in hand with Paper-evidences of her pious Virtues, it shall
not be amiss in this place, to insert the Testimony of the Right Reverend
Bishop of Elphin, in Ireland (formerly mentioned) who had spent much of the
time with them, during the troubles in Ireland, whereby he had the opportunity
of intimate acquaintance with the Family; and therefore most able to give a
good account of their Conversation. Having received intelligence of her Death,
he writes this consolatory Epistle to her soffowful Husband, from Elphin.

Honored Sir,
ALthough the decease of your pious Consort, and sense of your loss must needs
work an exceeding great grief: Yet the consideration of her holy Life,
religious End, and the hope of receiving her again, cannot but revive and
comfort you. I need not tell you, that her public carriage was an exact
Commentary upon that description, which Solomon's M^ther gives of a Virtuous
Woman. Her gentle, discreet, well-tempered demeanor, all that ever knew her,
or had the happiness to converse with her, will without blushing be witnessed
by them. But that which sets her beyond all verbal praises: As she was of a
Virtuous, so of a Gracious disposition. I speak it unfainedly: The fear of God
was planted in her heart: she had not an outward semblance, or show of Piety,
but the Power of Godliness; which she manifested in her conscionable
frequenting of the public Ministry; with Mary treasuring up the Word in her
heart, and bringing it forth into action. What hours were spent in her Closet,
in Prayer, Reading, Meditation, which was a great means of her spiritual
progress in Knowledge and Grace, and the surest evidence and seal of sincerity,
is best known to your self. It pleased God by a long and lingering Sickness, to
mean her from the delights of this World, to carry her thoughts and desires
Heavenward, living fruitfully, and dying comfortably. The Lord showed in her,
that it is not in vain to serve him; and that a constant course of a Religious
Life, will minister abundance of sweet consolation at the hour of Death, etc.


And in another Letter of a much later Date, having occasion to make mention of
her, he has these words, Little is nothing, and much not enough to be recorded
of her Piety, Loyalty, Charity, and Devotion. Her own Works will praise her in
the gates.

Thus much I thought good to Transcribe from the Letters of that Holy and
Reverend Prelate, as an unquestionable confirmation of what I have declared in
this Narrative.

Hitherto we have had a general account of some remarks in her exemplary Life:
And even as she lived so she died. Qualis vita, Finis ita.
Indeed a great part of her Life was but as it were a lingering Death. For many
years before her Death, she was afflicted with an Asthmatical distemper, which
caused (as I conceive) an Hectic, under which she labored till she left this
troublesome World. No means was left unassayed by her loving and careful
Husband; but Nature was by degrees so far spent and weakened, that the
continual use of Cordials prescribed by the most expert Physicians could not
repair, much less restore it, but only a little prolong, and draw out the
infirm thread of her daily-dying-life. She that had spent the days of her
Youth, and her more healthful years so studiously in the Service of God, must
needs make the greatest improvement of this dispensation to the advantage of
her inward man, which was daily renewed, as her outward man daily decayed;
whilst she lived in a continual expectation of her Dissolution.

This gradual decay of natural vigor, together with her wasted s^^rits, and
extreme shortness of breath considered; we could not expect, that when ever it
should please God to visit her with any extraordinary Distemper, threatening
Death, she should speak much, though she much desired to do it. Hence it came
to pass, that we want the verbal evidences of her dying consolations, as also
the benefit of her last advice, and dying admonitions to us, who are left
behind to bewail our loss of so great a treasure. She seemed to foresee thus
much diverse years before her Death, having had so frequent experience of her
inability, to speak after any more than usual motion of her Body, when the
humors were stiring. This might be one cause (besides those other which we
spoke of) that she prepared those Papers to her Husband and Son, to supply the
want of words, in case of such feared inab^lity. Accordingly (as was most
probable) it came to pass: For that very day, after she had received the
Sacrament, she retired to her Chamber, which she never afterward left, till her
earthly part was carried forth to burial. From which time her speech so failed
her by degrees, that at last she did rather whisper than speak (and very
difficulty even that) which likewise failed some short while before her Death.

With what remarkable Patience and cheerfulness did she entertain these last
assaults of her accustomed Distempers, smiling even in the face of Death, as
being confident of the Conquest, though she must die in the Conflict? What ever
pain, or faintings she endured; you should hear no complaint, or observe any
evidence of discontent, but of cheerful and patient submission to the Will of
her heavenly Father. So long as she was any ways able she ceased not to
evidence her earnest desire of, and great delight and complacency she took in
our Prayers, and in each consolatory discourse then directed to her. Her
careful, and then sorrowful Husband being in Prayer with her, not long before
her departure, though strength and voice seemed utterly to have failed, yet she
strained her self to utter an audible, and affectionate Amen, at the end of his
Prayer, wherein he had resigned her up to the Lord. Immediately before her Death
I was entreated by her mournful Husband to perform that Office, when she now
seemed insensible of any thing said or done: Yet those that kneeled by her,
observed by the motion of her Hand (her Face being turned from the Bedside)
that she was not without some apprehension of those things which were uttered
in Prayer, in her behalf; and conceived that she would have endeavored to have
said Amen in the Conclusion, but could not utter it.

Thus as she lived in Prayer, with it she took leave of the World, to go to her
Savior; where she is partaker of his Prayer, which he put up for her, and all
his Elect, whilst he lived on Earth, viz. that they may be with him, where he
is; that they may behold his Glory, which the Father has given him: Which that
We also may with Her behold; let us follow her Example, and we shall not fail
of her Happiness.

FINIS.

