HEAVEN Taken by STORM: OR, The HOLY VIOLENCE a Christian is to put forth in
the pursuit after Glory.

By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of the Gospel.

Phil. 3. 4. I press toward the mark.

(...). Chrysostom de Poen. Hom. 59

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Tho. Parkhur^, at the Sign of the Golden-Bible on
London Bridge, 1670.

TO THE Right Honorable, Sir WILLIAM TURNER, Knight, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY OF
LONDON.
Right Honorable,
IT is the happiness of this City, to have a Magistrate that bears not the
Sword in vain. Your place is high; God has lent you his own Title: Psalm. 82. 6.
your work is great, it lies in the distribution of Justice, which (according
to Aristotle) comprehends all virtues in it. And in this your high orb you have
acted vigorously. Your good Government has helped to raise, if not London's
structures, yet its fame. My Lord, to be a (...), a public Good, will both
render your life honorable, and your death comfortable Gratius (...) pro^
aliis quam magnas (...) habert. Ciccro.
. God did reserve you for such a juncture of time as this. When is there more
need of zeal in superiors, than when vice grows heady in inferiors. The
subject I here humbly dedicate to your Lordship, is, Violence for Heaven. A
Divine (...), or temperature of soul to be much aspired after; for by this you
may help to save not only your self, but others. Put on Integrity as a Robe;
and let zealous violence more adorn you than the richest Chain of Gold. But I
have cause to break forth into Panegyricks. Indeed your own works praise you in
the gates. Your prudence and courage; your impartiality in deciding Causes;
your punishing of Oaths, and correcting the false balance; your compliance
with his Majesty's Royal Proclamation against Health-drinking, have erected for
you a living monument in the breasts of all sober and pious men. Among other
things, your Self-denial has been eminent in leting go some of your
Perquisites for the good of others.

-- Posse and nolle nobile est -- (...).
The former Governors that had been before me (says Nehemiah) were chargeable
unto the people, and had taken of them Bread and Wine, etc. but so did not I.
What pity is it that London should, like Sparta, keep such a Governor but one
year. My Lord, I hate to give flattering titles Job 32. 22
; but I have taken this boldness to say this little, both for your Lordship's
encouragement, and the imitation of those that shall succeed in your Chair. My
Lord, this small Tractate comes under your Honors Patronage, and entreat your
favorable perusal and acceptance of it; it was intended you sooner, but some
emergent occasions intervening prevented. If this little spark shall give light
or heat to any heart, I have my desire. The great God who has placed you at
the helm of this City, fill you with his heavenly benediction, and so animate
you with all might by his Spirit in the inner man, that you may be an
Eben-ezer, a stone of help to us; that you may do worthily in London, and be
famous in your Generation; so prays he who is,

Sir, Your Servant in the Gospel, THO. WATSON
July 9. 1669.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A.
Apostasy whence it arises, page 109 Arguments to Violence in prayer, 36
B.
BAckwardness to Self-examination, 56 Bloody violence, 9
C.
CArnal sriends obstructions, 179 Caution about violence, 168 Comfort to the
violent Christian, 191 Company of the Saints to be frequented, 188 Covetousness
condemned, 103
D.
DAnger in losing our former strictness, 107 Decay of Holiness reproved, 104
Degrees of Glory, 150 Dividers of Religion, 115 Difficulty of Self reflection,
57 Drawing near to God a duty, 199
E.
EArthly things unsatisfactory, 143 Examples of zealous Saints, 162
Excellencies of God to be studied, 213 Exhortation to draw near to God, 209
F.
FOrmalists in Religion censured, 96
G.
GRace when declining, 105
H.
HEaring of the Word, 29 How we may hear with devotion, 31 Heart to be bound to
God by Vows, 186 Help to meditation, 55 How we may do to draw near to God, ^14
Hindrances of holy Violence, 169 Holy Conference, 71 Hypocrisy reproved, 207
I.
IGnorant Violence, 8 Incentives to holy violence, 134 Interest in God to be
cleared, 215
K.
KIngdom of Heaven how understood, 5 Kingdom of Heaven excelient, 144
L.
Love draws the heart to God, 216
M.
MAgistrates to punish the nocent, 6 Magistrates to defend the innocent, 7
Manner of our drawing near to God, 202 Meditation, what? 42 Moderation in
matters of practical Piety, dangerous, 92 Mortification of sin, 17 Motification
how effected, 19 Motives to draw near to God, 209 Motives to meditation, 53
O.
OBjections against this holy Violence, answered, 121
P.
PRrayer to be kept up in the Family, 183 Promise made only to ardent Prayer,
39 Provoking our selves to holy duties, 20
R.
REasons enforcing holy violence, 84 Rules for the promoting holy violence, 691
S.
Saints Objection answered, 193 Salvation-work not so facil as some imagine, 88
Sanctifying the Lord's Day, 63 Self examination what? 56 Sinners far off from
God, 197 Slothful Christian^ rebuked, 94 Spirit of God to be implored, 189
Stirring up of the heart in prayer, 34 Subject of Meditation, 44 Subtilties of
Satan in tempting, 75
T.
TRial of a violent Christian, 118 Truth's Excellency, 11, 12
V.
VIgilance the way to violence, 185 Violence for Heaven what it implies, 14
Violence to be offered to Satan, 74 Violence to be offered to the world, 79
Violence of wicked men how shown, 98, 100 Violence for Heaven, and diligence in
a calling not inconsistent, 154 Unbelief to be avoided, 169
W.
WOrd of God how to be read, 23, 24 World an enemy to Religion, 172
HEAVEN taken by Storm.
MATTHEW. 11. 12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force.
John Baptist hearing in prison the fame of Christ, sends two of his Disciples
to him with this Question, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for
another? verl. 3. Not (as Tertullian thinks) that John Baptist knew not that
Jesus Christ was the True Messiah; for he was confirmed in this, both by the
Spirit of God, and by a sign from Heaven, John 1. 33. But John Baptist hereby
endeavored to correct the ignorance of his own Disciples, who had a greater
respect for him than for Christ.

In the fourth Verse Christ answers their question, Go and show John again
those things which ye do hear and see; the blind receive their sight, the lame
walk, the Lepers are cleansed, etc. Jesus Christ demonstrates himself to be the
true Messiah, by his Miracles, which were real and ocular proofs of his
Divinity. John's Disciples being departed, Christ falls into an high elogium
and commendation of John Baptist: Verse. 7. What went ye out into the Wilderness
to see; a reed shaken with the wind? As if Christ had said, John Baptist was no
unconstant man, fluctuating in his mind, and being shak^n as a Reed from one
opinion to another; Per arundinem c^m sit nutanti ca^ine, and ^ovis vel
l^issimo ve^to nunc b^, nunc ill^ agitatur, intelligit salv^ (...) ^even and
instabil^m, at talis A^io no^ ^at Johannes; sed co^stans, and (...) s^t
simili^, n^ in car^ quidq^m s^e sententiae mutant. Prugensis.
he was no Reuben, unstable as water, but was fixed and resolute in Religion,
and a Prison could make no alteration in him.

Verse. But what went ye out for to see, a man clothed in soft raiment? John
did not indulge his senses; he wore not silks, In E^o v^t Johannes, (...)
suppetunt visti^m a^t ci^um d^e, sed ^culta (...), austera and squalida; no^
^uit homo ^ollis, ^d loc^s, id (...) illi^ ^o ^ntur. Idem.
but Camels hair; nor did he affect to live at Court, but in a Wilderness, Mat.
3. 3, 4.

Again, Christ commends John as being his forerunner, who prepared the way
before him, verse. 10. He was the morning Star which did precede the Sun of
Righteousness; and that Christ might sufficiently honor this holy man, he does
not only parallel him with, but prefer him before, the chief of the Prophets.
Verse. 9. What went ye out for to see, a Prophet? yea I say unto you, and more
than a Prophet. Verse. 11. Among them that are born of women, there has not
risen a greater than John the Baptist: He was eminent both for Dignity of
Office, and Perspicuity of Doctrine; and so the Text is ushered in: From the
days of John the Baptist ^ntil now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffere^ violence,
and the violent take it by force. In which words there is,

1. The pref^ or introduction; from 1.
the days of J^ the Baptist until now. John Baptist was a zealous Preacher, a
Boanerges, or Son of Thunder; and after his Preaching, People began to be
awakened out of their si^s.

Hence learn, what kind of Ministry is like to do most good, namely, That which
works upon the Consciences of men. John Baptist did lift up his voice like a
Trumpet, he preached the Doctrine of Repentance with power, Mat. 3. 2. Repent,
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: He came hewing and cutting down men's
sins, and afterward preached Christ to them. First, He poured in the Vinegar
of the Law, then the Wine of the Gospel. This was that preaching made men
studiously seek after Heaven: John did not so much preach to please, as to
profit; he chose rather to discover men's sins, than to show his own eloquence.
That is the best looking-glass, not which is most gilded, but which shows the
truest face. That Preaching is to be preferred, which makes the truest
discovery of men's sins, and shows them their hearts. John Baptist was a burning
and a shining light; he did burn in his Doctrine, and shine in his Life; and
from that time men pressed into Heaven. Johanne Christun and poe^itentiam
praedicante, po^lus mag^o imp^tu accurrit ad oblatam gra^. M^sterus.
Peter (who was filled with a spirit of zeal) having humbled his hearers for
their sins, and opened to them a Fountain in Christ's Blood, they were then
pricked at their heart, (...).
Act. 2. 37. It Is the greatest mercy to have a Soul-searching Ministry. If one
had a desperate Wound, he would desire to have it searched to the bottom. Who
would not be content to have their Souls searched, so they may have them saved?

2. The matter in the Text, The Kingdom 2.
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven? Quest.


Some interpret it of the Doctrine of Resp. No^a Evangelii doctri^ ad quam jam
ultro constuebat Turba, Erasm.
the Gospel, which reveals Christ and Heaven. So Erasmus.

But I rather by the Kingdom of Heaven understand Glory: and so learned Beza
and others.

This Kingdom suffers violence (...)
.

It Is a Metaphor from a Town or Castle that holds out in War, and is not taken
but by storm Metaphora sumpta a Castris, vel ab Arce^ quapiam quae irrump^ibus
hostibus diripitur. Erugens.
. So the Kingdom of Heaven will not be taken without violence; Impitu quodam in
illud p^pitur. Junius.
The violent take it by force.

The Earth is inherited by the Meek, Mat. 5. 5. Heaven is inherited by the
violent. Our life is military; Christ is our Captain, the Gospel is the Banner,
tho Oraces are our spiritual Artillery, and Heaven is only taken in a forcible
way. The words fall into two parts:

1. The Combat, suffers violence. 2. The Conquest, The Violent take it by
force.
The right way to take Heaven is by Storm: Or thus, None get into Heaven but
violent Observe.
ones. This violence has a double aspect.

It concerns men as Magistrates; they 1.
must be violent.

1. In punishing the nocent. When Aaron's Urim and Thummim will do no good,
then must Moses come with his Rod. The wicked are the bad humors and surfeit
of the Commonwealth, which by the care of Magistracy are to be purged out. God
has placed Governors for the ^terrour of evil do^rs, 1 Pet. 2. 14. They must
not be like the Sword-fish, which has a Sword in his Head, but is without an
Heart. They must not have a Sword in their Hand, but no Heart to draw it out
for the cutting down of impiety. Connivance in a Magistrate supports vice, and
by not punishing offenders he adopts other men's faults, and makes them his own
Qu^ non prohibet cum potest, jubet.
. Magistracy without zeal is like the body without spirits. Too much lenity
emboldens sin, and does but shave the head which deserves to be cut off.

2. In defending the Innocent. The Magistrate is the Asylum, or Altar of
Refuge, for the oppressed to sly to. Charles Duke of Calabria, was so in love
with doing Justice, that he caused a Bell to be hung at his Palace gate, which
whosoever did ring, was sure presently to be admitted into the Duke's presence,
or have some Officers sent out to hear his cause. Aristides was famous for his
Justice, of whom the Historian says, he would never favor any man's cause
because he was his friend, nor do injus^ice to any because he was his Enemy.
The Magistrates balance is the oppressed man's shield.

This violence concerns men as Christians. Though Heaven be given us freely, 2.
yet we must contend for it Solerter and strenue (...) ^st, nec in tanto rerum
cardine ^ssandum, cum h^c una r^s natura ho ninis dignasit in q^a vires imp^dat
o^es suas. Clarius.
, Eccles. 9. 10. What thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might. Our
work is great, our time short, our Master urgent; we had need therefore summon
together all the powers of our souls, and strive as in a matter of Life and
Death, that we may arrive at the Kingdom above: We must not only put forth
diligence, but violence. For the illustrating and clearing the Proposition, I
shall show,

1. What violence is not meant here: 1.
This violence in the text excludes 1. An ignorant violence; to be violent for
that which we do not understand, Acts 17. 23. As I passed by, and beheld your
Devotions, I found an Altar with this Inscription, (...), To the unknown God.
These Athenians were violent in their devotion; but it might be said to them,
as Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 22. Ye worship ye know not
what. Thus the Papists are violent in their Religion, witness their penance,
fasting, dilacerating themselves till the blood comes, but it is a Zeal without
Knowledge: their Metal is better than their Eyesight. When Aaron was to burn
the Incen^e upon the Altar, he was ^st to light the lamp^, Exodus 30. 7. When
zeal like incense burns, first the lamp of knowledge must be lighted.

2. It excludes a bloody violence, which is twofold: First, when one goes to
lay violent hands upon himself. The body is an earthly prison, where God has
put the Soul; we must not break Prison, but stay till God by death lets us out.
The Sentinel is not to stir without leave from his Captain: nor must we dare to
stir hence, without Gods leave. Our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 6. 19. when we offer violence to them, we destroy Gods Temple. The Lamp of
life must burn so long as any natural moisture is left like oil to feed it.

Secondly, When one takes away the life of another. There Is too much of this
violence now adays. No sin has a louder voice than blood, Genesis 4. 10. The
voice of Clamitat i^ C^lum vox sanguinis, etc.
thy Brothers Blood cries unto me from the ground. If there is a Curse for him
that smites his Neighbor secretly, Deuteronomy. 27. 24. then he is double cursed that
kills him. If a man had slai^ another unawares, he might take Sanctuary, and
fly to the Altar: but if he had done it willingly, the holiness of the place
was not to protect him, Exodus 21. 14. If a man come presumptuously upon his
neighbor to slay him with guile, thou shall take him from mine ^ltar that he
may die. Joab being a man of blood, King Solomon sought to slay him, though he
caught hold on the horns of the Altar, 1 King. 8. 29. In Bohemia formerly, the
Murderer was to be beheaded, and put in the same Goffin with him whom he
killed. Thus we see, what violence the Text excludes.

2. What violence is meant here; it is an Holy Violence. This is twofold. 1. We
must be violent for the Truth. Here Pila^e's question will be moved, What is
Truth? Truth is either the blessed Word of God; which is called, (...), The
Word of Truth. Or those Doctrinals which are deduced ^om the Word, and agree
with it as the Dial with the Sun, or the Transcript with the Origi^al; a^, the
doctrine of the Trinity, the doctrine of the Creation, the doctrine of
Free Grace, Justification by the blood of Christ, Regeneration, Resurrection of
the dead, and the life of Glory: these Truths we must be violent for, which is
either by being Advo^ates for them, or Martyrs P^ius ruat coe^m qua^ p^eat
^mica (...). Luther.
.

Truth is the most glorious thing; Pulchrior ^st ver^t as Christianorum quam
Helen Graeco^. Aug. Ep. ad Hie^.
the least filing of this gold is precious: what shall we be violent for, if
not for Truth? Truth is ancient; it is gray hairs may make it venerable; it
comes from him who is the Ancient of days. ^d verum quod primum. Ter^ull.
Truth is unerring, it is the Star which leads to Christ. Truth is pure, Psalm.
119. 140. It is compared to Silver refined seven times, Psalm. 12. 6. There is
not the least spot on Truth's face, it breathes nothing but sanctity. Truth is
triumphant; it is like a great Conqueror, when all its Enemies lie dead, it
keeps the field, and sets up its Trophies of Victory (...) Chrysostom.
. Truth may be opposed, but never quite deposed. In the time of Dioclesian,
things seemed desperate, Truth ran low, soon after was the golden time of
Constantius, and then truth did again lift up its head. When the Water in the
Thames is lowest, an high tide is ready to come in. God is on Truth's side, and
so long there is no fear but it will prevail: The Heavens being on fire shall
be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. 12. but not that Truth which came from Heaven, 1 Pet.
1. 25.

Truth has noble Effects. Truth is the Seed of the new birth. God does not
regenerate us by Miracles or Revelations, but by the word of truth, Jam. 1. 18.
As truth is the breeder of grace, so the (...).
feeder of it, 1 Timothy 4. 6. Truth sanctifies, John 17. 17. Sanctify them by
thy Truth. Truth is the Seal that leaves the print of its own Holiness upon us;
it is both speculum and lavacrum, a Glass to show us our blemishes, and a Laver
to wash them away. Truth makes us free, John 8. 32. it beats off the fetters of
sin, and puts us into a state of Sonship, Romans 8. 11. and Kingship, Rev. 1. 6.
Truth is comforting; this Wine cheers. When David's Harp and Viol could yield
him no comfort, Truth did, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction,
for thy Word has quickened me. Truth is an antidote against error Error is
the Adultery of the Mind; it stains the Soul, as Treason does the Blood. Error
damns as well as Vice. A man may as well die by Poison, as Pistol; and what can
stave off Error but Truth? The reason so many have been trapanned into Error,
is, because they either did not know, or not love the Truth. I can never say
enough in the honor of Truth. Truth is basis fidei, the ground of our faith;
it gives us an exact model of Religion; it shows us what we are to believe:
Veritas irradiat intellectum, animat sidem. Be^n.
Take away Truth, and our Faith is Fancy. Truth is the best flower in the
Churches Crown: We have not a richer Jewel to trust God with, than our Souls,
nor he a richer Jewel to trust us with, than his Truths. Truth is Insigne
Honoris, an Ensign of Honor; it distinguishes us from the false Church, as
Chastity distinguishes a virtuous Woman from an Harlot. In short, Truth is
Ecclesiae praesidium, the Bulwark of a Nation: 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. it is said, the
Levites, (who were the antesignani, the Ensign-Bearers of Truth) strengthened
the Kingdom. Truth may be compared to the Capitol of Rome, which was a place
of the greatest strength: or the Tower of David, on which there hang a thousand
shields, Cant. 4. 4. Our Forts and Navies do not so much strengthen us as
Truth. Truth is the best Militia of a Kingdom; if once we part with Truth, and
espouse Popery, the Lock is cut where our strength lies. What then should we be
violent for, ^f not for Truth? We are bid (...), to contend as in an Agony, for
the faith delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. If Truth once be gone, we may write
this Epitaph on Englands Tombstone, The Glory is departed.

2. This holy violenceis, when we are 2.
violent for our own salvation, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure. The Greek word (...) signifies anxious carefulness,
Jansen. Beza. Gerhard.
or a serious beating ones thoughts about the business of Eternity; such a Care
as sets Head and Heart a work: in this channel of Religion all a Christians
zeal should run.

3. The third thing is, what is implied 3.
in this holy violence. It implies three things:

1. Resolution of Will. 2. Vigor of Affection. 3. Strength of Endeavor.
1. Resolution of the Will. Psalm. 119. 6. I have sworn, and will perform it,
that I 1.
will keep thy righteous Judgments. Whatever is in the way to Heaven (though
there be a Lion in the way) I will encounter it. Like a resolute Commander that
charge through the whole Body of the Army. The Christian is resolved, come on
it what will, he will have Heaven. Where there is this resolution, danger must
be despised, difficulties trampled upon, terrors contemned Qui Regni Dei
desid^rio tenentur, violentia quadam irrumpu^ ut participes illius, fiant cum
dispendio vitae. Munster.
. This is the first thing in holy violence, resolution of will, I will have
Heaven whatever it cost me; and this resolution must be in the strength of
Christ.

Resolution is like the biass to the bowl, which carries it strongly. Where
there is but half a Resolution, a will to be saved, and a will to follow sin,
it is impossible to be violent for Heaven. If a traveller be unresolved,
sometimes he will ride this way, sometimes that; he is violent for neither.

2. Vigor of the Affections. The Will proceeds 2.
upon Reason Volunt at sequitur dictamen intellectus.
; the Judgment being informed of the excellency of a state of Glory, and the
Will being resolved upon a voyage to that Holy Land, now the Affections follow,
and they are on fire in passionate longings after Heaven. The Affections are
violent things Qui vim fa^it, vehementi studio properat. Ambr. in Iuc. lib. 8.
, Psalm. 42. 2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. Kimchi, Abon-ezra
The Rabbis note here, that David says not, My soul hungereth, but thirsts;
because naturally we are more impatient of thirst than hunger. See in what a
rapid violent motion David's affections were carried after God. The affections
are like the wings of the Bird, which make the Soul swift in its flight after
Glory. Where the affections are stirred up, there is offering violence to
Heaven.

3. This violence implies Strength of 3.
Endeavor, when we strive for salvation as about a matter of life and death.
It Is easy to talk of Heaven, but not to get to Heaven; we must operant navare,
put forth all our strength; nay, call in the help of Heaven to this work.

4. The fourth thing is, how many 4.
ways a Christian must offer violence; four ways.

He must offer violence 1. To Himself. 2. To the World. 3. To Satan. 4. To
Heaven.

1. He must offer violence to Himself. This Self - Violence consists in two
things: 1. Mortification of sin. 2. Provocation to duty.


1. Offering violence to ones self in a spiritual sense, consists in
mortification 1.
of sin: Self is the flesh, this we must ofter violence to. Regno vis inserri
non possit, nisi and nobis ipsis vim inferamus. Brugens.
Hierom, Chrysostom, Theophilact, do all expound taking Heaven by force, the
mortifying the flesh: the flesh is a Bosom-Traitor, it is like the Trojan Horse
within the Walls which does all the mischief. The flesh is a sly Enemy; at
first it is dulce venenum, afterward scorpio pungens, it kills by embracing.
The embraces of the flesh are like the Ivy embracing the Oak, which sucks out
the strength of it for its own Leaves and Berries: So the flesh by its soft
Embraces, sucks out all heart for Good, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against
the spirit. The pampering of the flesh, is the quenching of Gods Spirit. The
flesh choaks and stifles holy motions: the flesh sides with Satan, and is true
to his Interest. There Is a party within that will not pray, that will not
believe. The flesh inclines us more to believe a temptation than a promise.
There needs no wind to blow to sin, when this tide within is so strong to carry
us thither. The flesh being so near to us, its counsels are more attractive: no
chain of Adamant binds so fast as the chain of lust. Alexander, who was Victor
mundi, Conqueror of the world, was captivus vitiorum, led captive by vice. Now
a man must offer violence to his fleshly desires, if he will be saved, Col. 3.
5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth. Membra T^rrena
vocat Apostolus Affectus pravos, hi enim sunt quasi membra vete^is hominis. Lap.
The mortifying and killing sin at the root, is when we not only forbear the
Acts of sin, but Faelix mors quae vitam ^on au^ert sed tra^rt in me^ius.
hate the in-being. Plurimi peccata radunt non eradicant. Bern.

Nay, where sin has received its deadly wound, and is in part abated, yet the
work of mortification is not to be laid aside Carnis desideria n^ uno ictu sed
sensim res^anda su^t. Corn. Lap.
. The Apostle persuades the believing Romans ^o mortify the deeds of the
flesh, Romans 8. 13. In the best of Saints there is something needs mortifying;
much pride, envy, passion; therefore mortification is called crucifixion, Gal.
5. 24. which is not done suddenly: every day some limb of the body of death
must drop off In quantum non pep^ris tibi, in ta^tum tibi Deus pa^ cet. Tertul.
. Nothing harder than a Rock (says Cyril) yet in the clefts thereof some weed
or other will fasten its roots. None stronger than a Believer, yet do what he
can, sin will fasten its roots in him, and spring out sometimes by inordinate
desires. There is something needs mortifying. Hence it was St. Paul Meta^hora a
pugilibus sumpta. Chem^it.
did (...), beat down his body, by prayer, watching, fasting, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

But, is it not said, Ephesians. 5. 29. No Quest.
man ever hated his own flesh?

As flesh is taken Physically for the bodily Resp.
compages or constitution, so it is to be cherished; but as flesh is taken
Theologically for the impure lustings of the flesh; so a man must hate his own
flesh. The Apostle says, Fleshly lusts war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. If
the flesh does war against us, good reason we should war against the flesh.

How may one do to offer violence to Quest.
himself in mortifying the flesh?

1. Withd^aw the fuel that may make Answ.
lust burn Pas^ (...) litiis, vi^ (...). Ambrose, lib. 1. de poenit.
. Avoid all temptatious. Take heed of that which does nourish sin. He that
would suppress the Gout or Stone, avoids those meats which are noxious. They
who pray they may not be led into temptation, must not lead themselves into
temptation.

2. Fight against fleshly lusts with spiritual Weapons; Faith and Prayer. The
best way to combat with sin, is, upon our knees. Run to the Promise, Romans 6.
14. Sin shall not have Dominion (...).
over you: or, as the Greek word is, it shall not Lord it. Beg strength of
Christ, Phil. 9. 13. (...).
Sampson's strength lay in his hair, ours lies in our Head Christ. This is one
way of offering violence to ones self by mortification. This is a mystery to
the major part of the world, who do rather gratify the flesh than mo^tifie it.

2. The second thing wherein offering (...)
. violence to a man's self consists, is, in provocation to duty. Then we offer
holy violence to our selves, when we excite and provoke our selves to that
which is good. This is called in Scripture, a stirring up our selves to take
hold of God, Isa. 64. 7. * (...) Qu^ (...). ^o erius.
Consider,

1. What absolute need there is to 1.
stir up our selves to holy Duties.

In respect of the sluggishness of our 1.
hearts to that which is spiritual; blunt tools need whetting; a dull creature
needs spurrs. Our hearts are dull and heavy in the things of God, therefore we
had need spur them on, and provoke them to that which is good. The flesh
hinders from duty: when we would pray, the flesh resists; when we should
suffer, the flesh draws back. How hard is it sometimes to get leave of our
hearts to seek God? Jesus Christ went more willingly to the Cross, than we do
to the Throne of Grace. Had not we need then provoke our selves to duty? If our
hearts are so unstrung in Religion, we had need prepare and put them in tune.

The exercises of Gods Worship are contrary to nature; therefore there 2.
must be a provoking of our selves to them. The motion of the Soul to sin, is
natural, but its motion toward Heaven is violent. The stone moves easily to
the Center; it has an innate propenseness downward; but to draw up a Millstone
into the Air, is done by violence, because it is against nature: so to lift up
the heart to Heaven in duty, is done by violence, and we must provoke ourselves
to it.

2. What it is to provoke our selves 2.
to duty.

1. It is to awaken our selves, and 1.
shake off spiritual sloth. Holy David awakens his tongue and heart when he
went about Gods service, Psalm. 57. 9. Awake up my glory, I my self will awaken
early Et linguam allo^uitur, and (...) and cor. Muscul.
. He found a somnolency and dullness in his soul, therefore did provoke himself
to duty. I my self will awake early. Christians, though they be raised from the
death of sin, yet often they fall asleep.

2. Provoking our selves to duty implies 2.
an uniting, and rallying together all the powers of our soul, and seting them
on work in the exercises of Religion. A man says to his thoughts, Be you fixed
on God in this duty; and to his affections, Do you serve the Lord without
distraction. Matters of Religion are done with intenseness of Spirit (...) Act.
26.
.

3. The third thing is to show the several 3.
duties of Christianity, wherein we must provoke and offer violence to our
selves: I shall name seven.

1. We must provoke our selves to reading of the Word. What an infinite 1.
mercy is it that God has honored us with the Scriptures! The barbarous
Indians have not the Oracles of God made known to them: they have the Golden
Mines, but not the Scriptures, which are more to be desired than much fine
Gold, Psalm. 19. 10. Our Savior bids us search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. We
must not read these holy lines carelessly Q^arit Scriptura lectorem attentum,
oscitantem autem respuit. Rivet, Isagoge ad Script*
, as if they did not concern us, or run them over hastily; as Israel ate the
Passover in haste, but peruse them with reverence and seriousness. The noble
Beroeans did search the Scriptures daily, Acts 17. 11. The Scripture is the
Pandect of divine Knowledge; it is the rule and touchstone of truth (...).
Traen.
; out of this Well we draw the water of life. To provoke to a diligent reading
of the word, labor to have a right notion of Scripture.

Read the Word as a book made by 1.
God himself. It is (...), given by divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16. It is the
Library of the Holy Ghost. The Prophets and Apostles were but (...), God^
Amanuenses or Notaries to write the Law at his mouth. The Word is of Divine
Original Differt Scriptura specifice a symbolis fidei quia (...) ve^ est, illa
autem per consen^um ad^ eam quae est regula and m^sura om^is veritatis
revelatae. Riv.
, and reveals the deep things of God to us. That there is a Numen or Deity, is
engraven in man's heart, and is to be read in the Book of the Creatures;

-- Quaelibet herba Deum -- But who this God is, and the Trinity of Persons in
the Godhead, is infinitely above the Light of Reason; only God himself could
make this known. So for the Incarnation of Christ, God and man hypostatically
united in one person; the mystery of imputed Righteousness; the doctrine of
faith: what Angel in Heaven, who but God himself could reveal these things to
us? How may this provoke to Diligence and Seriousness in reading the Word which
is divinely inspired. Other Books may be made by holy men, but this Book is
indicted by the Holy Ghost.

Read the Word as a perfect Rule of 2,
Faith; it contains all things essential to salvation Ador^ plenitudinem
Scripturae. T^tul. Psa. 19. 7.
. I adore the fullness of Scripture, says Tertullian. The Word teaches us how
to please God; how to order our conversation in the world: it instructs us in
all things that belong either to Prudence or Piety. How should we read the Word
with care and reverence, when it contains a perfect Model and Platform of
Religion; and is able to make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 17.

When you read the Word, look on it as a soul-enriching Treasury. Search 3
here as for a vein of Silver, Prove. 2. 4. In this word are scattered many
divine Aphorisms, gather them up as so many Jewels. This blessed Book helps to
enrich you; it fills your head with knowledge, and your heart with grace: it
stores you with Promises: a man may be rich in bonds. In this field the Pearl
of Price is hid: What are all the worlds Riches to these? Islands of Spices,
Coasts of Pearl, Rocks of Diamonds; These are but the Riches that Reprobates
may have, but the Word gives us those Riches which Angels have.

Read the Word as a Book of Evidences. 4.
How carefully does one read over his Evidences? Would you know whether God be
your God? Search the Records of Scripture, 1 Jo^. 3. 24. Hereby we Know he
abides in us by his Spirit he has given us. Would you know whether you are
^eirs of the Promise? you must find it in these sacred Writings, 2 These. 2. 13.
He has chosen us to salvation through sanctification. They who are vessels of
grace, shall be vessels of glory.

Look upon the Word as a spiritual 5.
Magazine, out of which you fetch all your weapons to fight against sin and
Satan. 1. Here are weapons to fight against sin. The Word of God is a
consecrated sword, that cuts asunder the lusts of the heart. When pride begins
to list up it self, the Sword of the Spirit destroies this sin, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
God resists the proud. When passion vents it self, the Word of God, like
Hercules-club, beats down this angry Fury, Eccles. 5. 9. Anger rests in the
bosom of fools. When Lust boils, the Word of God cools that intemperate heat,
Ephesians. 5. 5. No unclean person has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ.
2. Here are weapons to fight against Satan. The Word fenceth off temptation.
When the Devil tempted Christ, he three times wounded the old Serpent Palsas de
Scripturis Diaboli sagittas, ve^is Scripturarum fra^git clyp^is. Brugens..
with the Sword of the Spirit. It Is written, Mat. 4. 7. Satan never sooner
soils a Christian, than when he is unarmed, and without Scripture-weapons.

Look upon the Word as a spiritual 6.
Glass to dress your selves by: It is a Looking-glass for the blind, Psa. 19.
8. Splendoris sui radiis coecitatem depellit, Rivet.
In other glasses you may see your faces; in this glass you may see your
hearts, Psalm. 119. 104. Through thy Precepts I get understanding. This
Looking-glass of the Word clearly represents Christ: ^t sets him forth in his
person, nature, offices, as most precious and eligible, Cant. 5. 16. He is
altogether lovely; he is a (...).
wonder of beauty, a Paradise of delight. Christ who was veiled over in types,
is clearly revealed in the Glass of the Scriptures.

Look upon the Word as a Book of 7.
spiritual Receipts. Basil compares the Word to an Apothecaries shop, which
has all kind of Medicines and Antidotes Onnis animi m^rbus in Scriptura habet
medic^am.
. If you find your selves dead in duty, here is a Recipe, Psalm. 119. 50. Thy
Word has quickened me. If you find your hearts hard, the Word does liquefie and
melt them; therefore is compared to fire for its mollifying power, Jer. 23. 29.
If you are poisoned with sin, here is an herb to expel it.

Look upon the Word as a sovereign 8.
Elixir to comfort you in distress; it comforts you against all your sins,
temptations and afflictions. What are the Promises, but divine Cordials to
revive fainting Souls. A gracious heart goes *(...). Ignatius.
feeding on a Promise, as Sampson on the Honeycomb, Judge. 14. 9. The word
comforts against sickness and death, 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting?
A Christian dies embracing the Promise, as Simeon did Christ, Heb. 11. 16.

Read the Word as the last Will and 9.
Testament of Christ. Here are many Legacies given to them that love him;
Pardon of sin, Adoption, Consolation: this Will is in force, being sealed in
Christ's Blood. With what seriousness does a Child read over the Will and
Testament of his Father, that he may see what is left him?

Read it as a Book by which you must 10.
be judged, John 12. 48. The Word I have spoken, shall judge him at the last
day. They who live according to the Rules of this Book, shall be acquitted;
they who live contrary to them, shall be condemned. There are two Books God
will go by, the Book of Conscience, and the Book of Scripture: the one shall be
the Witness, and the other the Judge. How should every Christian then provoke
himself to read this Book of God with Care and Devotion! This is that Book
which God will proceed by at the last. They who fly from the Word as a Guide,
shall be forced to submit to it as a Judge.

2. The second Duty of Religion 2.
wherein we must provoke our selves, is, in Hearing of the Word. We may bring
our bodies to the Word with ease, but not our hearts without offering violence
to our selves. When we come to the Word Preached, we come about a business of
the highest importance, therefore should stir up our selves, and hear with the
greatest devotion. Constantine the Emperor was noted for his reverend
attention to the Word. Luke 19. 48. All the people were attentive to hear him.
In the Greek it is, they hanged upon his lip (...), Pendebat ab ore ejus,
tanquam extra se raptus prae aviditate. Brug.
. When the Word is dispensed, we are now to lift up the everlasting doors of
our hearts, that the King of glory may enter in.

How far are they from offering violence 1.
to themselves in hearing, who scarce mind what is said, as if they were not at
all concerned in the business: they come to Church more for custom than
conscience, Ezekiel. 33. 31. They come to thee as the people comes, and they sit
before thee as my people, and hear thywords, but they will not do them. If we
could tell them of a rich purchase, or of some place of preferment, they would
diligently attend; but when the Word of Life is Preached, they disregard it.

2. How far are they from offering 2.
violence to themselves in hearing, who come to the Word in a dull, drowsy
manner, as if they came to Church to take a Receipt to make them sleep. The
Word is to feed; it is strange to sleep at meat. The Word judges men; it is
strange for a prisoner to fall asleep at the Bar. To such sleepy hearers God
may say, Sleep on. He may suffer them to be so stupefied, that no Ordinance
shall awaken them, Mat. 13. 25. While men slept, the enemy came and sowed
Tares. The Devil is never asleep, but sows the tares of sin in a drowsy hearer.

That we may, when we come to the Word, offer violence to our selves, and stir
up our selves to hear with devotion, consider,

1. It is God that speaks to us. If a Judge give a charge upon the bench, all
listen. If a King speaks, all give attention. When we come to the Word, we
should think thus with our selves, We are to hear God in this Preacher.
Therefore Christ is said, Now to speak to us from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25. Christ
speaks in his Ministers, as a King speaks in the person of his Ambassador.
When Samuel knew it was the Lord that spoke to him, he lent an ear, 2. Sam. 3.
5. Speak Lord thy Servant hears. They who slight God speaking in his Word,
shall hear him speaking in his wrath, Psalm 2. 5. Then shall he speak to them
in his wrath.

2. Let us consider the weightiness of the matters delivered to us (...).
Ch^sost.
. As Moses said to Israel, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I call Heaven and Earth to Record this
day, that I have set before you life and death. We preach to men, of Christ,
and the Eternal Recompenses; here are the magnalia Legis, the weighty matters
of the Law; and does not all this call for serious attention? There is a great
deal of difference between a Letter of news read to us, and a Letter of special
business, wherein our whole Land and Estate is concerned. In the Word preached,
our Salvation is concerned; here we are instructed to the Kingdom of God, and
if ever we will be serious, it should be now, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. It is not a vain
thing for you, because it is your life.

3. If the Word be not regarded, it will not be remembered Mort^m formidate
ae^ernam, si verba vi^ae, i. e. alimenta justiti^, in ^moriae ar^a no^ tenetis.
Greg.
. Many complain they cannot remember, here is the reason, God punishes their
carelessness in hearing, with forgetfulness. He suffers Satan to take away the
Word from them, Mat. 13. 4. The Fowls of the Air came and devoured the seed.
The Devil is no Recusant: he come^ to Church, but it is not for any good
intent; he gets away the Word from men. How many have been ro^ed of the Sermon
and their souls both at once?

4. It may be the last time that ever God will speak to us in his Word; it may
be the last Sermon that ever we shall hear; and we may go from the place of
hearing, to the place of judgeing. Did people think thus when they come into
the Houseof God, Perhaps this will be the last time that God will counsel us
about our souls; the last time that ever we shall see our Minister's face, with
what devotion would they come! how would their affections be all on fire in
hearing! We give great attention to the last speeches of friends. A Parents
dying words are received as Oracles. Oh let all this provoke us to diligence in
hearing: let us think, this may be the last time that Aarons Bell shall sound
in our ears; and before another day, we shall be in another World.

The third Duty wherein we are to 3. Duty.
offer violence to our selves, is in Prayer. Prayer is a duty which keeps the
trade of Religlon agoing. When we either join in prayer with others, or pray
alone, we must use holy violence; not eloquence in prayer but violence carries
it Sit oration pura, servi^ etc. Prosper.
. Theodorus speaking of Luther, Once (says he) I over heard him in prayer,
but, (good God) with what life and spirit did he pray! It was with so much
Reverence as if he were speaking to God, yet with so much confidence, as if he
had been speaking to his friend. There must be a stirring up of the heart

1. To Prayer. 2. In Prayer.
1. A stirring up of the heart to Prayer, Job 11. 13. If thou prepare thine
heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him. This preparing our heart is by
holy thoughts and ejaculations. The Musician first tunes his Instrument before
he plays.

2. There must be a stirring up of the heart in Prayer. Prayer is a lifting up
of the mind and soul to God Elevatio me^tis ^d Deum.
, which cannot be done a right without offering violence to ones self. The
names given to prayer import violence. It is called wrestling (...)
, Genesis 32. 24. and pouring out the soul, 1 Samuel 1. 15. both which imply
vehemence. The affection is required as well as the invention. The Apostle
speaks of an effectual fervent prayer, (...).
which is a parallel phrase to offering violence.

Alas, how far are they from offering violence to themselves in prayer, 1. That
give God a dead heartless prayer Th^bulum sine Pru^is. Luth.
. God would not have the blind offered, Mal. 1. 8. As good offer the blind as
the dead. Some are half a sleep when they pray; and will a sleepy prayer ever
awaken God Psalm. 44. 23.
? Such as mind not their own prayers, how do they think that God should mind
them? Those prayers God likes best which come seething hot from the heart.

2. How far are they from offering violence, that give God distracted prayer?
while they are praying, they are thinking of their shop and trade (...) o^as
(...) aliu (...) de no^ (...) gitas. Be (...) d^ or^.
. How can he shoot right whose eye is quite off the mark? Ezekiel. 33. 31. Their
heart goes after their covetuousness. Many are casting up their accounts in
prayer, as Hierom once complained of himself. How can God be pleased with this?
Will a King endure that while his subject is delivering a petition, and
speaking to him, he should be playing with a feather? When we send our hearts
on an ^rrand to Heaven, how often do they loiter and play by the way? This is
matter of blushing. That we may offer violence to our selves, and by fervency
feather the wing of prayer: let these things be duly weighed.

The Majesty of God with whom we 1.
have to do. He sees how it is with us in prayer, whether we are deeply
affected with those things we pray for. The King came in to see the guests,
Mat. 22. 11. So when we go to pray, the King of glory comes in to see in what
frame we are: he has a window which looks into our breasts, and if he sees a
dead heart, he may turn a deaf ear. Nothing will sooner make Gods anger wax hot
than a cold prayer.

Prayer without fervency and violence, 2.
is no prayer; it is speaking, not praying. Liveless prayer is no more prayer,
than the picture of a man is a man. To say a prayer, is not to pray, Aschanius
taught his Parrot the Lords Prayer. St. Ambrose says well, It is the life and
affection in a duty that baptizeth Affectus operl nome^ imponit. Ambros.
it, and gives it a name. It Is the violence and wrestling of the affections
that makes it a prayer, else it is no prayer. But a man may say as Pharaoh, I
have dreamed a dream, Genesis 41. 15.

3. The zeal and violence of the affections in prayer best suits with Gods
nature. He is a Spirit, John 4. 24. and sure that prayer which is full of life
and spirit, is the savoury meat he loves, 1 Pet. 2. 5^ Spiritual Sacrisices
acceptable to God C^m slammis affluere coeperit oration in odoriseros expirat
fumos; ^scit iti^re recto ad Deum ire oration quae succensa non fuerit; si
srigida, ^bito relabitur. Bern. super Cant.
. Spirituality and fervency in duty, is like the spirits of wine, which are the
more refined part of the wine. Bodily exer^ise profits nothing. It Is not the
streaching of the lungs, but the vehemence of the desire makes music in Gods
ear Ephesians. 5. 19.
.

4. Consider the need we have of those things which we ask in prayer. We come
to ask the favor of God; and if we have not his love, all that we enjoy is
cursed to us. We pray that our souls may be washed in Christ's blood; and if he
wash us not, we have no part in him Joh. 1^. 8.
. These are such mercies, that if God deny us, we are for ever undone.
Therefore what violence had we need put forth in prayer? When will a man be
earnest, if not when he is begging for his life?

5. Let it provoke violence in prayer to consider, those things which weask,
God has a mind to grant. If a Son ask nothing but what his Father is willing
to bestow, he may be the more earnest in his suit. We go to God for pardon of
sin, and no work more pleasing to him than to seal pardons. Mercy is his
delight, Micah 7. 18. We pray to God for an holy heart, and this prayer is
according to his will, 1 These. 4. 3. This is the will of God, your
sanctification. We pray that God would give us an heart to love him. How
pleasing must this request needs be to God! This, if any thing, may excite
prayer, and carry it in a siery Chariot up to Heaven, when we know we pray for
nothing but what God is more willing to grant than we are to ask.

6. No mercy can be bestowed on us but in a way of prayer. Mercy is purchased
by Christ's blood, but it is conveyed by prayer. All the promises are bonds made
over to us, but prayer puts these bonds in suit. The Lord had told Israel with
what rich mercy he would bespangle them; he would bring them to their native
Country, and bring them thither with new hearts, Ezekiel. 36. Yet this Tree of the
Promise would not drop its fruit, till shaken with the hand of prayer, verse
37. For all this will I yet be enquired. The breast of Gods mercy is full, but
prayer must draw the breast. Surely, if all other ways are blockt up, there is
no good to be done without prayer; How should we ply this oar, and by an holy
violence stir up our selves to take hold of God?

7. It Is only violence and intensness of spirit in prayer has the p^omise of
mercy affixed to it, Mat. 7. 7. Knock and it shall be opened. Knocking is a
violent motion. The Aediles among the Romans had their doors always standing
open, that all who had petitions might have free access to them. God's heart is
ever open to servent prayer. Let us then be fired with zeal, and with Christ
pray yet more earnestly*. It Is violence (...).
in prayer makes Heaven-gates fly open, and fetches in whatever mercies we
stand in need of.

8. The large returns God has given to violent prayer Nemo ad D^um precaus and
slens accessit, qui ^on quod petiit accepit.
. This Dove sent to Heaven, has often brought an Olive-leave in its mouth,
Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him. Crying prayer
prevails Ora^io pura coelos p^trans vacua non red^bit. Aug. in Sermon.
. Daniel in the Den prayed and prevailed. Prayer did shut the Lions mouth, and
open the Lions Den Coelos tundimus, De^n tangimus, misericordiam extorqu^mus.
Ter^ull. Apol.
. Fervent prayer (says one) has a kind of Omnipotency in it. Sozomen says of
Apollonius, that he never asked any thing of God in all his life that he
obtained not. Sleidan reports of Luther, that perceiving the interest Joh.
Sleid. Comment.
of Religion to be low, he betook himself ^o prayer; at length rising off his
knees, he came out of his Closet triumphantly saying to his friends, ^cimus,
Vicimus, We have overcome, ^e have overcome. At which time it was obso^ved,
there came out a Pro^lamal ^ion from Charles the Fifth, that none should be
further molested for the Profession of the Gospel. How may this encourage us,
and make us hoise up the sails of prayer, when others of the Saints have had
such good returns from the holy Land.

That we may put forth this holy violence in prayer, it is requisite there be a
renewed principle of grace. If the person be graceless, no wonder the prayer is
heartless. The body while it is dead has no heat in it: while a man is dead in
sin, he can have no heat in duty.

2. That we may be the more violent in prayer, it is good to pray with a sense
of our wants. A beggar that is pinched with want, will be earnest in craving an
alms. Christian, review thy wants; thou want an humble spiritual frame of
heart; thou want the light of Gods countenance; the sense of want will
quicken prayer. That man can never pray fervently, that does not pray
feelingly. How earnest was Sampson for water, when he was ready to die, Judge.
15. 18. I die for thirst.

3. If we would be violent in prayer, let us beg a violent wind. The Spirit of
God is resembled to a mighty rushing wind (...), etc. Chrysostom. de prec.
, Acts 2. 2. Then we are violent, when this blessed Wind fills our sails, Jude
v. 20. Praying in the Holy Ghost. If any fire be in our Sacrifice, it comes
down from Heaven.

The fourth Duty wherein we must 4. Duty.
offer violence to our selves, is Meditation; a duty wherein the very heart and
lifeblood of Religion lies. St. Bernard calls Meditation animae viaticum, a
bait by the way Bern in Cant.
. And another says, (...) Periand.
. Meditation may be thus described; It is an holy exercise of the mind,
whereby we bring the truths of God to remembrance, and do seriously ponder upon
them, and apply them to our selves. In meditation there are two things.

1. A Christians retiring of himself, a locking himself up from the world.
Meditation is a work which cannot be done in a crowd.

2. It is a serious thinking on God. It is not a few transient thoughts that
are quickly gone, but a fixing and staying the mind upon heavenly objects: This
cannot be done without exciting all the powers of our souls, and offering
violence to our selves.

We are the more to provoke our selves to this duty, because

1. Meditation is so cross to flesh and blood. Naturally we shun holy
meditation. To meditate on worldly secular things, if it were all day, we can
do it without any diversion Acies mentis ad levissima quaeque retimditur and
resilit. Mornaeus.
: But to have our thoughts fixed on God, how hard do we find it? how do our
hearts quarrel with this duty? what pleas and excuses have we to shift it off?
The natural averseness from this duty shows, we are to offer violence to our
selves in it.

2. Satan does what he can to hinder this duty. He is an enemy to meditation.
The Devil cares not how much we hear, nor how little we meditate. Hearing
begets knowledge, but meditation begets devotion. Meditation does ballast the
heart, and make it serious; and Satan labors to keep the heart from being
serious. What need therefore is there of offering violence to our selves in
this duty? But methinks I hear some say, when they sit alone they know not
what to meditate of; I shall therefore surnish them with matter of meditation.

1. Meditate seriously upon the corruption 1.
of your nature. We have lost that pure quintessential frame of soul that once
we had. There is a Sea of sin in us. Our nature is a source and seminary of all
evil O quam mul^ seras i^ homi^is. Cord, tanquam in abditissima sylva
latitantes detegas P. Mornaeus.
: like Peter's sheet, wherein were wild beasts and creeping things, Acts 10.
12. This sin cleaves to us as a leprosy. This original pollution makes us
guilty before the Lord; and though we should never commit actual sin, this
merits Hell. The meditation of this would be a means to pull down our pride.
Nay, even those that have grace have cause to walk humbly, because they have
more corruption in them than grace; their dark side is broader than their light.

2. Meditate seriously upon the death 2.
and passion of Christ Foderunt latus Christi, -- and p^r has rimas licet mihi
sugere mel de p^tra, Bern^ in Cant.
. His soul was over-cast with a cloud of sorrow when he was conflicting with
his Fathers wrath; and all this we should have suffered, Isa^ (...). 5. He was
wounded for our transgressions. As David said, Lo I have sinned, but these
sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 17 So we have sinned, but this Lamb of
God, what had he done?

1. The serious meditation of this would produce Repentance. How could we look
upon him whom we have pierced, and not mourn over him? When we consider how
dear our sins cost Christ; how should we shed the blood of our sins which shed
Christ's blood?

2. The meditation of Christ's death would fire our hearts with love to Christ.
What friend shall we love, if not him who died for us? His love to us made him
cruel to himself. As Rebecca said to Jacob, Genesis 27. 13. Upon me, upon me be
the curse. So said Christ, Upon me be the curse, that poor sinners may inherit
the blessing.

3. Meditate on your Evidences for 3.
Heaven. What have you to show for Heaven, if you should die this night? 1. Was
your heart ever thoroughly convinced of sin? Did you ever see your self lost
without Christ? Conviction is the first step to conversion, Joh. 8. 16. 2. Has
God ever made you willing to take Christ upon his own terms, Zach. 6. 13. He
shall be a Priest upon his Throne: Are you as willing that Christ should be
upon the Throne of your heart to rule, as a Priest at the Altar to intercede.
Are you willing to renounce those sins to which the biass of your heart does
naturally incline? Can you set those sins as Uriah in the forefront of the
battle to be slain? Are you wiling to take Christ for better for worse; to take
him with his Cross, and to avouch Christ in the worst of times. 3. Have you the
indwelling-presence of the Spirit? If you have, what has Gods Spirit done in
you? Has it made you of another spirit? meek, merciful, humble? Is it a
transforming Spirit? Has it lest the impress of its own holiness upon you?
These are good evidences for Heaven. By these, as by a spiritual touchstone,
you may know whether you have grace or no. Bewar^ of false Evidences. None are
further from having the true Pearl, than they that content themselves with the
counterfeit.

4. Meditate upon the uncertainty of 4.
all sublunary comforts. Creature-delights have their flux, and reflux, How often
does the Sun of worldly pomp and grandeur go down at noon. Xerxes wa^ forced to
fly away in a small vessel, who but a little before wanted Sea-room for his
Navy. We say every thing is mutable; but who meditates upon it? The world is
resembled to a Sea of glass mingled with fire, Rev. 15. 2. Glass is slippery,
it has no sure footing: and Glass mingled with fire is subject to consume. All
creatures are fluid and uncertain, and cannot be made to fix. What is become of
the glory of Athens, the pomp of Troy? 1 John 2. 17. The world passes (...).
away: It slides away as a Ship in full sail. How quickly does the Scene alter?
and a low ebb succeed an high tide? There Is no trusting to any thing. Health
may be turned to sickness; friends may die; riches may take wings. We are ever
upon the Tropicks. The serious meditation of this, would 1. Keep us from being
so deceived by the world. We are ready to set up our rest here, Psalm. 49. 11.
Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue for ever. We are apt
to think that our Mountain stands strong. We dream of an earthly Eternity.
Alas, did we meditate how casual and uncertain these things are (...). Ignat.
^p.
, we should not be so often deluded. Have not we seen great disappointments;
and where we have thought to suck honey, there we have drunk wormwood?

2. The meditation of the uncertainty of all things under the Sun, would much
moderate our affections to them. Why should we so eagerly pursue an
uncertainty: Many take care to get a great estate; it is uncertain whether they
shall keep it. The fire may break in where the thief cannot: or if they do keep
it, it is a question whether they shall have the comfort of it. They lay up for
a child, that child may die; or, if he live, he may prove a burden. This
seriously meditated on, would cure the dropsy of covetousness; and make us sit
loose to that which hangs so loose, and is ready to drop off from us.

3. The meditation of this uncertainty would make us look after a certainty;
that is, the getting of grace. This holy anoi^ting abides, 1 John 2. 27. Grace
is a flower o^ Eternity, -- Nonfertur^ad umbras inclyta virtus -- Death does
not destroy grace, but transplant it, and make it grow in a better soil. He
that has true holiness, can no more lose it, than the Angels can, which are
fixed Stars in Glory.

5. Meditate of Gods severity against sin. Every Arrow in Gods Quiver is shot
against it*. Sin burned Sodom, (...). Chrysostom.
drowned the old world. Sin kindles Hell. If when a spark of God's wrath flies
into a man's Conscience, it is so terrible, what is it then when God stirs up
all his wrath? Psalm. 78. 39. The meditation of this would fright us out of our
sins. There cannot be so much sweetness in sin, as there is sting. How dreadful
is God's anger! Psalm. 90. 11. Who knows the power of his wrath? All fire
compared with the fire of God's wrath is painted and imaginary. O that every
time we meddle with sin, we would think with our selves we choose the Bramble,
and fire will come out of this Bramble to devour us.

6. Meditate on eternal life, 1 John 2. 25. This is his promise, even eternal 6.
life. Life is sweet, and this word Eternal makes it sweeter. This, lies in the
immediate vision and fruition of God. 1. This is a spiritual life: it is
opposite to that animal life which we live now. Here we hunger and thirst; but
there we shall hunger no more, Rev. 7. 16. There is the marriage-supper of the
Lamb, which will not only satisfy hunger, but prevent it. That blessed life to
come does not consist in sensual delights, meat, and drink, and music; nor in
the comfort of Relations: but the Soul will be wholly swallowed up in God, and
acquiesce in him with infinite complacency. As when the Sun appears, the Stars
vanish: So when God shall appear in his glory, and fill the soul, then all
earthly sensitive delights shall vanish. 2. It is a glorious life. The bodies
of the Saints shall be enameled with Glory: they shall be made like Christ's
glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. And if the Cabinet be of such curious needle work,
how rich shall the Jewel be that is put into it! how bespangled with glory
shall the soul be! Every Saint shall wear his white Robe, and have his Throne
to sit upon. Then God will put some of his own glory upon the Saints. Glory
shall not only be revealed to them, but in them No^ ta^tum ad^it gloria, sed
inerit. Bern.
, Romans 8. 18. And this life of glory shall be crowned with Eternity; what Angel
can express it! O let us often meditate on this.

1. The meditation of eternal life would make us labor for a spiritual life.
The Child must be born before it is crowned. We must be born of the Spirit,
before we are crowned with glory.

2. The meditation of Eternal Life would comfort us in regard of the shortness
of natural life. Our life we live now, flies away as a shadow. It is called a
flower, Psalm. 103. 15. a vapor, Jam. 4. 14. Job sets forth fragil life very
elegantly in three of the Elemen^s, Land, Water, Air, Job 9. 25, 26. Go to the
Land, and there man's life is like a swift Post. Go to the Water, there man's
life is like a ship under sail. Look to the Air, and there man's life is like a
Flying Eagle. We are hasting to the grave. When our years do increase, our life
does decrease Cum (...), (...). Seneca.
. Death creeps upon us by degrees. When our sight grows dim, there death creeps
in at the Eye. When our hearing is bad, there death creeps in at the Ear. When
our Legs tremble under us, there is death pulling down the main pillars of the
House; but eternal life comforts us against the shortness of natural life. That
life to come is subject to no infirmities; it knows no period. We shall be as
the Angels of God, capable of no mutation or change. Thus you have seen six
noble subjects for your thoughts to exspatiate upon.

But where is the meditating Christian? Here I might lament the want of holy
meditation. Most people live in a hurry; they are so distracted with the cares
of the world, that they can find no time to meditate; or scarce ask their Souls
(...) they do. We are not like the Saints in former Ages. David did meditate in
Gods Precepts, Psalm. 119. 15. Isaac walked in the evening to meditate, Genesis 24.
63. He did take a turn with God. What devout meditations do we read in St.
Austin and Anselm? But it is too much out of date among our modern Christians.

-- Terras Astraea reliquit. -- Those Beasts under the Law which did not chew
the cud were unclean. Such as do not chew the cud by holy meditation, are to be
reckoned among the unclean. But I shall rather turn my lamentation into a
persuasion, entreating Christians to offer violence to themselves in this so
necessary Duty of Meditation. Pythagoras sequestered himself from all society,
and lived in a Cave for a whole year, that he might meditate upon Philosophy.
How then should we retire and lock up our selves at least once a day that we
may meditate upon Glory.

1. Meditation makes the Word preached to profit; it works it upon the
Conscience. As the Be sucks the flower; so by meditation we suck out the
sweetness of a Truth. It is not the receiving of meat into the mouth; but the
digesting of it makes it nutritive. So it is not the receiving the most
excellent truths in at the ear, that nourishes our souls, but the digesting
them by Meditation. Wine poured into a sieve run^ out. Many truths are lost,
because Ministers pour this Wine into sieves, either into leaking Memories, or
feathery minds. Meditation is like a soaking rain, that goes to the root of a
Tree, and makes it bring forth fruit.

2. Holy meditation quickens the affections, Psalm. 119. 97. O how I love thy
Law! It is my meditation all the day. The reason our affections are so cold to
heavenly things, is, because we do not warm them at the fire of holy
meditation. As the musing on amorous objects makes the fire of lust burn; the
musing on injuries makes the fire of revenge burn: so meditating on the
transcendent beauties of Christ, would make our love to Christ flame forth.

3. Meditation has a transforming pow^ in it. The hearing of the Word may
affect us; but the meditating of it does transform us, Meditation stamps the
impression of Divine Truths upon our hearts. By meditating of God's holiness,
we grow holy. As Jacob's Cattle by looking on the Rods, conceived like the
Rods: so while by meditation we look upon God's purity, we are changed into his
likeness, and are made partakers of his Divine Nature.

4. Meditation produces Reformation, Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and
turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. Did but people meditate on the
damnableness of sin; did they but think when they meddle with it, there is a
Rope at the end of it, which will hang them eternally in Hell; they would break
off a course of sinning, and become new Creatures. Let all this persuade to
holy meditation. I dare be bold to say, if men would spend but one quarter of
an hour every day in contemplating heavenly objects, it would leave a mighty
impression upon them, and through the blessing of God might prove the beginning
of an happy conversion.

But how shall we do to meditate? Quest.


Get a love to spiritual things. We usually meditate on those things which Answ.
we love. The voluptuous man can muse on his pleasures: the covetous man on his
bags of gold. Did we love heavenly things, we should meditate more on them.
Many say, they cannot meditate, because they want memory; but is it not rather
because they want affection? Did they love the things of God, they would make
them their continual study and meditation.

5. The fifth Duty wherein we are to 5 Duty.
offer violence to our selves, is, Self-examination; a duty of great
importance. It is a parlying with ones own heart, Psalm 77. 7. I commune with
my own heart. David did put interrogatories to himself. Self-examination is the
setting up a Court in Conscience, and keeping a Register there, that by a
strict scrutiny a man may know how things stand between God and his own Soul.
Self-examination is a spiritual Inquisition; a bringing ones self to trial. A
good Christian does as it were begin the day of Judgment here in his own Soul.
Self-searching is an Heart-Anatomy. As a Surgeon, when he makes a Dissection
in the Body, discovers the intestina, the inward parts, the Heart, Liver,
Arteries: so, a Christian anatomizeth himself; he searches what is flesh, and
what is spirit; what is sin, and what grace, Psalm. 77. 7. My spirit made
diligent search: As the Woman in the Gospel did light a Candle, and search for
her lost Groat, Luke 15. 8. So Conscience is the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.
27. A Christian by the Light of this Candle must search his Soul if he can find
any grace there. The Rule by which a Christian must try himself, is the Word of
God, Fancy and Opinion are false Rules to go by. We must judge of our
spiritual condition by the Canon of Scripture. This David calls a Lamp unto his
feet, Psalm 119. 105. Let the Word be the Umpire to decide the controversy
whether we have grace or no. We judge of colors by the Sun: So we must judge
of the estate of our souls by the light of Scripture.

Self-examination is a great Duty incumbent Lam. 3. 40.
; it requires self-excitation: it cannot possibly be done without offering
Persc^temur vias. Junius.
violence to our selves.

1. Because the duty in it self is difficult: 1. It is act us reflexivus, a
work of self-reflection; it lies most with the heart. It Is hard to look inward.
External acts of Religion are facil; to lift up the eye to Heaven, to bow the
Knee, to read a prayer; this requires no more labor than for a Papist to tell
over his beads; but to examine a man's self, to turn in upon his own Soul, to
take the Heart as a Watch all in pieces, and see what is defective, this is not
easy. Reflexive acts are hardest. The eye can see every thing but it self. It
is easy to spy the faults of others, but hard to find out our own. 2.
Examination of a man's self is difficult, because of self-love. As ignorance
blinds; so self-love flatters. Every man is ready to think the best of himself.
What Solomon says of love to our neighbor, is most true of self-love, i^
hides a multitude of evil, Prove. 10. 12. A man looking upon himself in
Philautiae speculo, in the glass of self-love, his virtues appear greater than
they are, and his sins lesser. Self-love makes one rather excuse what is amiss,
than examine it Malumus vitium excusare quam excut^re. Seneca.
.

2. As examination is in it self difficult; so it is a work which we are very
hardly brought to. That which causes a back wardness to self-examination, is,

1. Consciousness of guilt. Sin clamours inwardly, and men are loath to look
into their hearts, lest they should find that which should trouble them. It is
little pleasure to read the Handwriting on the wall of conscience. Many
Christians are like tradesmen that are sinking in their Estates; they are loath
to look over their Books, or cast up their accounts, lest they should find
their Estates low: So they are loath to look into their guilty hearts, lest they
should find something there, which should affright them: as Moses was
affrighted at the sight of the Rod turned into a Serpent.

2. Men are hardly brought to this duty, because of foolish presumptuous hopes:
they fancy their estate to b^ good, and while they weigh themselves in the
Balance of presumption, they pass for current. Many take their salvation on
trust. The foolish V^gins thought they had had Oil in their lamps as well as
the wise, Mat. 25. Some are not sure of their salvation, but secure. If one
were to buy a piece of Land, he would not take it upon trust, but examine the
title. How confident are some of salvation, yet never examine their title to
Heaven?

3. Men are not forward to examine themselves; because they rest in the good
opinion of others: how vain is this! Alas, one may be Gold and Pearl in the eye
of others; yet God may judge him Reprobate Silver: others may think him a
Saint; and God may write him down in his black-book. Judas was looked upon by
the rest of the Apostles, as a true Believer; they would have been ready to
have given their hands to his certificate; yet he was a Traitor. Standers by
can but see the outward carriage; they cannot tell what evil is in the heart.
Fair streams may run on the top of a River, but vermin may lie at the bottom.

4. Men are hardly brought to examine themselves, because they do not believe
Scripture. The Scripture says, The heart is deceitful above all things, Jer.
17. 9. Solomon said, there were four things too wonderful for him that he could
not know, Prove. 30. 19. He might have added a fifth; The Way of man's heart. The
heart is the greatest Impostor; it will be ready to put one off with seeming
Grace, instead of saving. The heart will persuade that a slight tear is
Repentance; a lazy desire is Faith. Now because the generality of people do not
believe that there is such fallacy in their hearts, therefore they are so slow
to examine them. This natural backwardness in us to self-reflection, should
cause us to offer the more violence to our selves in making a through
disquisition and search of our hearts.

Oh that I might prevail with Christians, to take pains with themselves in this
great work of Examination. Their salvation depends on it. It is the note of an
Harlot; she is seldom at home, Prove. 7. 11, 12. Her feet abide not in her
house; now is she without, now in the streets. It is a sign of an Harlot;
Professor, to be altogether abroad, spying the faults of others; but is never
at home with his own heart. Oh let us try our Hearts, as we do Gold by the
Touchstone. Let us examine our sins, and finding out this leven, burn it. Let
us examine our Grace, whether it be of the right kind. One went into the field
to gather herbs, and he gathered wild gourds, and then Death was in the Pot. 2
Kings 4. 40. So many think they have Grace, the right Herb; but it proves a
wild gourd, and brings death and damnation. That we may offer violence to our
selves in this great business of Examination, let these few things be seriously
weighed.

1. Without self-examination we can never know how it is with us. If we should
die presently, we cannot tell to what Coast we should sail; whether to Hell or
Heaven. It is reported of Socrates, when he was going out of the World, he had
this speech, I am now to dye, and the gods know whether I shall be happy or
iniserable. That man who is ignorant of the state of his Soul, must needs heve
the trembling at the heart, as Cain had a shaking in his flesh. By a serious
serutiny of our hearts, we come to know to what Prince we belong, whether to
the Prince of peace, or the Prince of the ai^.

2. If we will not try our selves, God will try us. He will examine us as the
chief Captain did Paul, by scourging, Act. 22. 24. He will ask that question as
Christ, Whose image ^d superscription is this? And if we cannot show him his
own image, he will reject us.

3. There is secret corruption within, which will never be found out but by
searching Non vidimus fundum cordis nostri, ^bi secreta lat^t (...). Lap.
. There are in the heart (as Austin says) hidden pollutions Plangen^e ^ebrae.
. When Pharaoh's Steward accused Joseph's Brethren of having the Cup; they
durst have sworn, they had not the Cup in their sack. Little does a man know
what Atheism, Pride, Uncleanness is in his heart, till he searches.

4. The great advantage which will accrue to us: the benefit is great which way
soever things turn. If upon examination we find that we have not grace in
truth, then the mistake is discovered, and the danger prevented. If we find
that we have grace, we may take the comfort of it. How glad was he that had
found the Pearl of great pri^e? He that upon search finds that he has but the
minimum quod sic, the least degree of grace, is like one that has found his
Box of Evidences; he is Heir to all the Promises, and in a state of Salvation.

And that we ^ay go on the more successively in this work, let us desire God to
help us to find out our hearts, Job 34. 32. That which I see not, teach thou
me. Lord, take off the vail; show me my heart; let me not perish through
mistake, or go to Hell with hope of Heaven. Plurimi, spe periclitantur. Aug 6
Duty.


The sixth duty wherein we must offer violence to our selves, is, The Religious
sanctifying of the Lords day. That there should be a day of holy rest dedicated
to God, appears from the institution. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day.
Our Christian Sabbath comes in the room of the Jewish Sabbath: it is called
(...), the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. from Christ the Author of it. Our Sabbath is
altered by Christ's own appointment. He arose this day out of the grave, and
appeared on it often to his Disciples, 1 Cor. 16. 1. To intimate to them (says
Athanasius) that he transferred the Sabbath to the Lords day. And St. Austin
says, That by Christ's rising on the first day of the week, it was consecrated
to be the Christian Sabbath in remembrance of his Resurrection Dominicus dies,
Christi Resurrectione declaratus est Christianis, and (...) illo coepit habtr^
festivitatem (...).
. This day was ant^tly called, Dies Lucis, the day of Light; as Junius
observes. The other days of the week would be dark, were it not for the shining
of the Sun of Righteousness on this day. This day has been called by the
Ancients, Regind di^rum, the Queen of days. And St. Hieroni preferrs this day
above all solemn Festivals. The Primitive Church had this day in high
veneration: it was a great badge of their Religion: for when the question was
asked, Servasti Dominicum? Keep thou the Sabbath? the answer was made,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian, and dare not omit the celebration of the
Lords day. What great cause have we thankfully to remember this day! As the
benefit of Israel's deliverance from the Babylonish captivity was so great,
that it drowned the remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt, Jer. 16. 14.
So the benefit of our deliverance from Satan's captivity, and the rising of
Christ from finishing the glorious work of our Redemption was so famous, that
in respect of this, his other benefits receive as it were a diminution. Great
was the work of Creation; but greater the work of Redemption. It cost more to
redeem us, than make us. In the one, there was only the speaking a word, Psalm.
148. 5 in the other the shedding of blood, Heb. 9. 22. The Creation was the
work of God's fingers, Psalm. 8. 3. the Redemption, the work of his arm, Luke 1.
5. In the Creation God gave us ourselves; in the Redemption he gave us himself.
So that the Sabbath putting us in mind of our Redemption, ought to be observed
with the highest devotion, Herein we must offer holy violence to our selves.

When this blessed day approaches, we should labor, that as the day is
sanctified; so our hearts may be sanctified.

We must on this day rest from all the (...)
works of our calling. As Abraham when he went to Sacrifice, left his Servant
and Ass at the bottom of the hill, Genesis 22. 5. So when we are to worship God
this day, we must leave all secular business behind. And as Joseph when he
would speak with his Brethren, thrust out the Egyptians: so, when we would have
converse with God this day, we must thrust out all earthly employments. Though
works of necessity may be done, and works of charity, (for God will have mercy,
and not sacrifice); yet in other cases we must cease from all worldly
negotiations. It is observable concerning Mary Magdalen, that she refused to
anoint Christ's dead body on the Sabbath day, Luke 23. 56. She had before
prepared her ointment, but came not to the Sepulcher till the Sabbath was past.
She rested that day from civil work, though it were a commendable and glorious
work (the anointing of Christ's dead body).

When this blessed day approaches, 2.
we must lift up our hearts in thankfulness to God, that he has put another
price into our hands for the gaining of heavenly wisdom. These are our
spiritual harvest-daies; now the wind of God's Spirit blows upon the sails of
our affections, and we may be much furthered on in our heavenly voyage.
Christian, lift up thy heart to God in thankfulness, that he has given thee
another golden season, and be sure thou improve it; it may be thy last. Seasons
of grace are not like the Tide; if a man misleth one tide, he may have another.

This day approaching, we must in the 3.
morning dress and fit our souls for the receiving of the Word. The people of
Israel must wash their garments before the Law was delivered to them. Our
hearts must be washed by prayer and repentance, the Oracles of God being to be
delivered to us.

And being met together, we must set our selves as in the presence of God with
seriousness and delight to hear God's sacred Word. Take heed of distractions
which fly-blow our duties.

We must labor to be bettered by 4.
every Sabbath: where the Lord lays out cost, he looks for fruit. Fresh
anointings of God are to be thirsted after; and new cubits to be added to our
spiritual stature. We must not be like the Salamander, which lives in the fire,
but is never the hotter. Christians should on these days aspire after
communion with God, and endeavor to have the illapses of his Spirit, and
clearer discoveries of his love in Christ. In short, we should do on a Sabbath
as Moses; he ascended the Mount that he might have a sight of God.

We must dedicate the whole day to 5.
God. Under the Law a single Sacrifice was appointed for other days of the
week; but two Lambs were to be offered upon the Sabbath. All this day must be
spent with God: he must have worship in the public; and when we come home, he
must have family worship. Many leave all their Religion at Church (as I have
seen some do their Bibles) not hallowing God's name in their own houses, Mal.
3. 8. Will a man rob God? When men pretend to Worship God in the Temple, but
cut him short of family and closet-duties on a Sabbath; this is to rob God, and
steal a part of his day from him.

Good reason we should consecrate the whole Sabbath to God, and give him double
devotion, for God doubles his blessings upon us this day. As the Manna did rain
twice as much on the sixth day, as any of the other days: so the Manna of
spiritual blessings falls twice as much on the Sabbath day as any other.

We must rejoice in this day, as being 6.
a day wherein we enjoy much of God's presence, John 8. 56. Abraham saw my day
and rejoiced. So when we see a Sabbath day coming, we should rejoice. The
Protestants in France called their Church Paradise, because there they met with
God Sleidan.
. The Jews called the Sabbath, desiderium dierum, the desire of days, Isa. 58.
13. Thou shall call the Sabbath a delight. This we should look upon as the best
day, as the Queen of days, crowned with a blessing, Psalm. 118. 24. This is the
day which the Lord has made; we will rejoice and be glad in it. He has made
all the days, but has sanctified this. We should look upon this day as a
spiritual Mart for our souls, wherein we have holy commerce and traffic with
God. This day of Rest is the beginning of an eternal rest. This day God sets
open the Pool of Bethesda, in which those waters flow that refresh the broken
in heart. And shall not we call this day a delight? The Jews on the Sabbath
laid aside their Sackcloth and Mourning.

This is in a right manner to sanctify a duty; and it is a duty wherein
Christians must excite and offer violence to themselves.

Above all others, how well does it become those into whose hands God hath-put
the power of Magistracy, to show forth holy violence in causing the Lord's day
to be strictly observed? What a rare pattern has Nehemiah set all good
Magistrates, Neh. 13. 15. In those days saw I in Judah some treading
winepresses on the Sabbath, and bringing in sheavs, and all manner of burdens
which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; and I testified against
them in the day wherein they sold victuals, Verse. 17. Then I contended with the
Nobles of Juda^, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and
profane the Sabbath day? How dare ye infringe the command, and make a false
entry upon God's freehold? My Lord, your Proclamation for the pious observation
of the Sabbath, and your punitive acts upon some offenders, have given a
public Testimoney of your zeal for this day. The keeping up the honor of the
Sabbath, will much keep up your Magisterial honor.

The seventh Duty wherein we must 7. Duty.
offer violence to ourselves, is holy conference: and indeed we are backward
enough to it, therefore had need herein provoke our selves, Mal. 3. 17. They
that feared the Lord spoke often one to another. A gracious person has not
only Religion in his heart, but in his tongue, Psalm. 37. 30. The Law of God is
in his heart, and his tongue talks of Judgment: he drops holy words as
Pearls. It Is the fault of Christians, that they do not in company provoke
themselves to set good discourse on foot: it is a sinful modesty: there is
much visiting, but they do not give one another souls a visit. In worldly
things their tongue is as the Pen of a ready Writer Verba ^oliis leviora. Ovid.
; but in matters of Religion, they are as if their tongue did cleave to the
roof of their mouth. As we must answer to God for idle words; so for sin-full
silence.

Oh let us offer violence to our selves in this, in setting abroach good
discourse! What should our words dilate and expatiate upon but Heaven? The
world is a great Inn; we are guests in this Inn. Travelers, when they are
met in their Inn, do not spend all their time in speaking about their Inn;
they are to lodge there but a few hours, and they are gone; but they are
speaking of their home, and the Country whither they are traveling. So when we
meet together, we should not be talking only about the world; we are to leave
this presently; but we should talk of our heavenly Country, He^. 11. 16.

That we may provoke our selves to good discourse (for it will not be done
without some kind of violence) let these considerations be duly weighed.

The discourse demonstrates what 1.
the heart is Verba su^t nuncia cordis. Bern.
. As the Glass shows what the face is, whether it be fair or foul: so the words
show what the heart is. Vain speeches discover a light feathery heart: gracious
speeches are the bir^h of a gracious heart. The water of the Conduit shows what
the Spring is.

Holy con^erence is very edifying. 2.
The Apostle bids us edify one another, Ephesians. 4. 29, And how more than this
way? Good conference enlightens the mind when it is ignorant; warms it when it
is frozen; settles it when it is wavering. A good life adorns Religion; good
discourse propagates it.

Gracious discourse makes us resemble 3.
Christ. His words were perfumed with holiness: grace was poured into his lips,
Psalm. 45. 2. He spoke to the admiration of all: his hands wrought Miracles, and
his tongue spoke Oracles, Luke 4. 22. All bare him witness, and wondered at the
gracious words which proce^ded out of his mouth. Christ never came into any
company, but he set good discourse on foot. Levi made him a feast, Luke 5. 29.
and Christ feasted him with holy discourse. When he came to Jacob's Well, he
presently speaks of the water of life, John 4. The more holy our speeches are,
the more we are like Christ. Should not the members be like the head?

God takes special notice of every 4.
good word we speak when we meet, Mal. 3. 16. They that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another; and the Lord ^earkened and ^eard, and a Book of
Remembrance was written before him: Tamerlain that Scythian Captain had always
a Book by him of the names and good deserts of his servants which he
bountifully rewarded. As God has a Bottle for the tears of his people: so he
has a Book in which he writes down all their good speeches, and will make
honorable mention of them at the last day.

Holy discourse will be a means to 5.
bring Christ into our company. The two Disciples were communing of the death
and sufferings of Christ; And while they were speaking, Jesus Christ came among
them, Luke 24. 15. While they communed together, Jesus himself drew near, and
went with them. When men entertain bad discourse, Satan draws near, and he
makes one of the company; but when they have holy and gracious conference,
Jesus Christ draws near, and wherever he comes, he brings a blessing along
with him. So much for the first, the offering violence to our selves.

2. We must offer violence to Satan. 2.
Satan opposes us both by open violence, and secret treachery. By open
violence, so he is called the Red Dragon; by secret treachery, so he is called
the Old Serpent. We read in Scripture of his snares and darts; he hurts more by
his Snares, than by his Darts.

1. His Violence. He labors to storm the castle of the heart: he stirs up to
passion, lust, revenge. These are called (...), fiery darts, Ephesians. 6. 16.
because they often set the soul on fire. Satan in regard of his fierceness is
called a Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks
about seeking whom he may devour. Not (says Chrysostom) whom he may bite, but
devour (...), etc.
.

2. His Treachery. What he cannot do by force, he will endeavor to do by
fraud. Satan has several (...), subtle policies in tempting.

In suiting his temptations to the complexion 1.
and temper of the body. Satan studies the Physiognomy, and lays suitable
baits. He knew Achan's covetous humor, and tempted him with a wedg of Gold. He
tempts the sanguine man with Beauty.

2. Another sub^ilty is to draw men to evil, sub specie boni, under a pretense
of good. The Pirate does mischief by hanging out false colors: so does Satan
by hanging out the colors of Religion. He puts some men upon sinful actions,
and persuades them much good will come of it. He tells them in some cases they
may dispense with the Rule of the Word, and stretch their conscience beyond
that line that they may be in a capacity of doing more service. As if God
needed our sin to raise his glory.

3. Satan tempts to sin gradually. As the Husbandman digs about the root of a
tree, and by degrees loosens it, and at last it falls. Satan steals by degrees
into the heart: he is at first more modest: He did not say to Eve at first, Eat
the Apple; no, but he goes more subtly to work; he puts forth a question,
Has God said? sure Eve thou art mistaken; the bountiful God never intended to
debar thee one of the best trees of the Garden. Has God said? sure, either God
did not say it; or if he did, he never really intended it. Thus by degrees he
wrought her to distrust, and then she took of the fruit and eat. Oh take heed
of Satan's first motions to sin, that seem more modest -- principiis obsta --
He is first a Fox, and then a Lion.

4. Satan tempts to evil in licitis, in lawful things. It was lawful for Noah
to eat the fruit of the Grape; but he took too much, and so ^inn'd. Excess
turns that which is good into evil. Eating and drinking may turn to
intemperance. Industry in ones calling (when excessive) is covetousness. Satan
draws men to an immoderate love of the creature, and then makes them offend in
that which they love. As Agrip^a poisoned her Husband Claudius in t^t meat he
loved most.

5. Satan puts men upon doing good out of bad ends: if he cannot hurt them by
scandalous actions, he will by virtuous actions. Thus he tempts some to espouse
Religion out of policy to get preferment; and to give alms for applause, that
others may see their good works, and canonize them. This hypocrisy does leven
the duties of Religion, and make them lose their reward.

6. The Devil persuades to evil by such as are good. This sets a gloss upon his
temptations, and makes them less suspected. The Devil has made use sometimes
of the eminentest and holiest men to promote his temptations. The Devil tempted
Christ by an Apostle. Peter disswades him from suffering. Abraham a good man
bids his wife equivocate: Say, Thou art my Sister. These are his subtilties in
tempting. Now here we must offer violence to Satan, 1. By faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9.
(...).
Whom resist steadfast in faith. Faith is a wise intelligent grace; it can see
an hook ^der the bait. 2. It is an Heroic ^ce; it is said, (...), above all,
to quench the fiery darts of Satan. Faith resists the Devil.

1. As it does keep the castle of the heart that it does not yield. It is not
the being tempted makes us guilty, but giving consent. Faith enters its Protest
against Satan.

2. Faith not only not yields, but beats back the temptation (...). Chrysostom.
. Faith holds the promise in one hand, and Christ in the other: The promise
encourages faith, and Christ strengthens it: so faith beats the enemy out of
the field.

2. We must offer violence to Satan by prayer. We overcome him upon our knees.
As Sampson called to Heaven for help: so a Christian by prayer fetches in
auxiliary forces from Heaven. In all temptations go to God by prayer. Lord
teach me to use every piece of the spiritual armor; how to hold the shield,
how to wear the helmet, how to use the sword of the Spirit. Lord strengthen me
in the battle; let me rather die a Conqueror, than be taken prisoner, and led
by Satan in Triumph. Thus we must offer violence to Satan. There is a Lion in
the way; but we must resolve upon fighting.

And let this encourage us to offer violence to Satan. Our enemy is beaten in
part already Heb. 2. 10.
. Christ who is the Captain of our salvation (...). Ignat.
, has given Satan his deaths wound upon the Cross, Col. 2. 15. The Serpent is
soonest killed in his head. Christ has bruised the head of the old serpent.
The Devil is a chained enemy, and a conquered enemy; therefore fear not to give
battle to him. Resist him, and he will fly: he knows no march but running away.

3. We must offer violence to the world. The world shows its Golden Apple, it
is a part of our vow in Baptism to fight under Christ's banner against the
world. Take heed of being drowned in the luscious delights of it. It must be a
strong brain that bears heady wine. He had need have a great deal of wisdom and
grace, that knows how to bear a great estate. Riches often send up their
intoxicating fumes, which make men's heads giddy with pride. Jesurun waxed fat
and kicked, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. It is hard to climb up the hill of God with too many
golden weights. Those that want the honors of the world, want the temptations
of it, The world is blandus Demon, a flattering enemy. It is given to some as
Michol to David, for a ^are. The world shows its two breasts of pleasure and
profit, and many fall asleep with the breast in their mouth. The world does
never kiss us, but with an ^ntent to betray us. It is a s^ken halter. The world
is no friend to grace: it chokes our love to heavenly things: the earth puts
out the fire. Naturally we love the world, Job 31. 24. If I have made Gold my
hope; the Septuagint renders it, If I have been married to my Gold (...). Si
posui aurum in conjugium.
. Too many are wedded to their money; they live together as man and wife. Oh
let us take heed of being entangled in this pleasing snare. Many who have
escaped the Rock of scandalous sins, yet have sunk in the world's golden
quicksands. The ^in is not in the using of the world, but in the loving, 1
John 2. 15. Love not the world. If we are Christians, we must offer violence to
the world. Believers are called out of the world: they are in the world, but
not of it, John 17. 16. As we say of a dying man, he is not a man for this
world. A true Saint is crucified in his affections to the world, Gal. 6. 14. He
is dead to the honors and pleasures of it. What delight does a dead man take
in pictures or music? Jesus Christ gave himself to redeem us from this present
evil word, Gal. 1. 4. If we will be saved, we must offer violence to the world.
Living fish swim against the stream. We must swim against the world, else we
shall be carried down the stream, and fall into the dead Sea. That we may offer
violence to the world, let us remember,

1. It is deceitful; our Savior calls it, (...), The deceitfulness of Riches,
Mat. 13. The world promises happiness, but performs nothing less. It
promises us Rachel, but puts us off with blearey'd Leah: it promises to
satisfy our desires, but it increases them: it gives poisoned Pills, but
wraps them in Sugar.

2. It is defiling, Jam. 1. 17. Pure Religion is to keep himself unspotted from
the world. As if the Apostle would intimate, that the world is good for nothing
but to spot: it spots first men's consciences, and then their names. It is
called (...), filthy lucre, 1 Pet. 5. 7. because it makes men so filthy. They
will damn themselves to get the world. Ahab would have Naboth's Vineyard,
though he swum to it in blood.

3. It is perishing, 1 John 2. 17. The fashion of the world passes away. The
world is like a flower which withers while we are smelling to it.

Fourthly, We must offer violence to 4.
Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence. Though Heaven is given us
freely, yet we must take pains for it. Canaan was given Israel freely, but they
must fight with the Ca^aanites. It is not a lazy wish, or sleepy prayer will
bring us to Heaven; we must offer violence. Therefore in Scripture our
earnestness for Heaven is set out by those allegories and metaphors which imply
violence.

1. Sometimes by striving, Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate.
The Greek word is (...), Strive as in an Agony.

2. Wrestling, which is a violent exercise, Ephesians. 6. 12. We are to wrestle
with a body of sin, and with the powers of Hell.

3. Running in a Race, 1 Cor. 9. 24. So run that ye may obtain. We have a long
Race from Earth to Heaven, and but a little time to run; it will soon be
sunset. Therefore so run. In a Race there is not only laying aside all weights
that hinder; but a putting forth all the strength of the body; a straining
every joint that men may press on with all swiftness to lay hold on the prize.
Thus Saint Paul presses (...), toward the mark, Phil. 3. 14. Alas, where is
this holy violence to be found?

1. Many have made themselves unfit to run this blessed Race; they are drunk
with the pleasures of the world. A drunken man is unfit to run a Race.

2 Others neglect to run this Race all their life; and when sickness and death
approach, now they will begin. A sick man is very unfit to walk, much less to
run a Race. I acknowledge, true Repentance is never too late; but when a man
can hardly stir his hand, or lift up his eyes, now is a very unfit time to
begin the Race from earth to Heaven.

4. This earnestness for Heaven is compared to fighting, which implies
violence. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight the good fight of Faith. It is not enough to be
laborers, but warriers. Indeed in Heaven, our armor shall be hung up in token
of victory: but now it is dies praelii, a day of battle; and we must fight the
good fight of Faith. As Hannibal forced a way for his Army over the Alps and
craggy Rocks: So must we force our way to Heaven Non est ad magna faci^is
as^nsus. Cyprian.
. We must not only pray, but pray fervently, Jam. 5. 16. This is offering
violence to Heaven.

The Reasons why there must be this 1.
offering violence to Heaven, are

1. God's indispensible command. He has enacted a Law, that whosoever eats of
the fruit of Paradise, shall eat it in the sweat of his brow, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. The Greek word (...),
imports an anxious solicitous care about salvation.

2. God's decree. The Lord has in his eternal decree joined the end and the
means together; striving and entering; the Race and the Crown. And a man can no
more think to come to Heaven without offering violence, than he can think to
come to the end of his Journey, that never sets a step in the way. Who expects
an harvest without plowing and sowing? How can we expect the harvest of glory
without labor. Though our salvation in respect of Christ is a purchase; yet in
respect of us, it is a conquest.

3. We must offer violence to Heaven in regard of the difficulty of the work;
Taking a Kingdom. First, we must be pulled out of another Kingdom, The Kingdom
of darkness Acts 26. 18.
. To get out of the state of nature is hard, and when that is done, and we are
cut off from the wild Olive, and implanted into Christ, there is new work still
to do; new sins to mortify; new temptations to resist; new graces to quicken.
A Christian must not only get Faith, but go from Faith to Faith, Romans 1. 17.
This will not be done without violence.

4. We must offer violence to Heaven, in regard of the violent assaults made
against us.

1. Our own hearts oppose us. It Is a strange Paradox: Man who does naturally
desire happiness, yet opposes it: he desires to be saved, yet hates that holy
violence which should save him.

2. All the powers of Hell oppose us. Satan stands at our right hand, as he did
at Joshuah's, Zach. 3. 2. Shall not we be as earnest to save our souls, as the
Dragon is to devour them? Without violent affections, we shall never resist
violent temptations.

5. We must be violent, because it is a matter of the highest importance. A man
does not beat his head about trifles, but matters wherein his life and estate
are concerned. Violence is to be offered, if we consider,

1. What we shall save: The precious soul. What pains do we take for the
feeding and enriching the body, the ^rutish part? O then what violence should
we use for the saving the soul? The body is but a Ring of Clay, ^he soul is the
Diamond. The soul is the glass wherein the image of God is seen Plato.
. There are in the soul some shadows and faint representations of a Deity. If
Christ thought the soul worth shedding his blood, well may we think it worth
spending our sweat.

2. Consider what we shall gain? a Kingdom. What violence is used for earthly
Crowns and Empires; men will wade to the Crown through blood. Heaven is a
Kingdom which should make us strive for it, (...). Chrysostom.
Non ad sudorem tantum sed sanguinem, even to blood. The hopes of a Kingdom
(says St. Basil) should carry a Christian cheerfully through all labors and
sufferings.

There must be offering violence in 6.
regard of that aptness and proneness in the best to grow remiss in Religion.
When they have been quickened in a duty, they are apt to grow dead again. When
they have been heat at the fire of an Ordinance, they are apt to freeze again;
therefore they must be still offering violence. The heart, like the Watch, will
be apt to go down; therefore must be ever and anon wound up by prayer and
meditation. The fire of devotion will soon go out, if it be not blown up. A
Christian's own experience of his inconstancy in good, is cogent enough to holy
violence.

If there must be this offering violence Use 1. Inform. 1. Branch.
; it shows us it is not so easy a thing as men imagine to get to Heaven. There
are so many precepts to obey; so many promises to believe; so many Rocks to
avoid, that it is a difficult matter tobe saved (...). Ignatius.
. Some fancy a fine easy way to Heaven, an idle wish, a deathbed tear; but
the text tells us of offering violence. Alas, there is a great work to be done;
the biass of the heart is to be changed. Man by nature does not only want
grace, but hate it. He has an envenomed spirit against goodness, and is angry
with converting grace; and is it easy to have the heart metamorphised? for the
proud heart to be made humble; for the earthly heart to be made heavenly: can
this be done without using violence? It is all up hill to Heaven, and it will
make us sweat before we get to the top of the hill. Indeed Hell will be taken
without storm: the gates of Hell, like that Irongate, Acts 12. 10. open of
their own accord: but if we get to Heaven, we must force our way: we must
besiege it with sighs and tears, and get the scalingladder of faith to storm
it. We must not only work, but fight. Like those Jews, who built the wall of
Jerusale^ Nehem. 4. 17. Every one with one of his hands wrought in the work,
and with the other hand held a weapon. A Christian is commanded upon hot
service; he must charge through the whole Army of his lusts, every one of which
is stronger than Goliath. A Christian has no time to lie fallow; he must be
either praying, or watching; either upon the Mount, or in the Valley; on the
Mount of Faith, or in the Valley of Humility. Worldly things are not obtained
without labor: what toiling in the shop? what sweating in the furnace? and do
we think Heaven will be had without labor? Do men dig for worms, and not for
gold? Those who are in Heaven are employed; much more should they who are
getting thither. The Angels are Ministering spirits, H^b. 1. 14. The wings of
the Seraphims are hieroglyphical, and show us how swift they are in God's
service. If the Angels in Heaven are busying themselves in noble and honorable
employment, how industrious should we be who are getting up the ^ill of God,
and have not yet arrived at a state of glory? Is salvation-work so facil? can a
man be saved per saltum? can he leap out of the Devil's arms into Abraham's
bosom? Oh no, there must be offering violence. Some think, free grace will save
them; but it must be in the use of means, Watch and Pray. Others say, the
promises will bring them to Heaven; but the promises of the Word are not to be
separated from the precepts. The promise tells us of a Crown; but the precept
says, So run, 1 Cor. 9. 24. The promises are made to encourage faith, not to
cherish sloth. But say others, Christ has died for sinners; and so they leave
him to do all for them, and they will do nothing. Then the text is out of date,
and all the exhortations to striving, and fighting the good fight of Faith, are
in vain. Our salvation cost Christ, Blood; it will cost us, Sweat. The boat may
as well get to shore without rowing, as we can to Heaven without offering
violence.

2. It shows us the great mistake of 2. Branch.
ignorant people, who think the bare doing of duties, though in never so slight
superficial a manner is enough. The text tells us of offering violence.

1. In the business of Prayer: They think it is enough to mutter over a few
words, though the heart be asleep all the while: what offering of violence is
here? Christ was in an Agony at prayer, Luke 22. 44. Many when they pray are
rather in a Lethargy than in an Agony. Jacob wrestled with the Angel in prayer,
Genesis 32. 24. The Incense was to be laid upon burning coals, Levit. 16. 22.
Incense was a type of prayer, and the Incense upon coals, was a type of
fervency in prayer. Few know what the spirit of prayer means; or what it is to
have the affections boil over. When they are about the world they are all Fire;
when they are at prayer they are all Ice.

2. In Hearing of the Word: Many people think it is enough to bring their
bodies to the Assembly, but they never look to their hearts. They satisfy
themselves that they have been at Church, though they have not been with God
there. Others go to a Sermon as to the Exchange, to hear news; new notions that
please their fancy, but do not attend to the word as about a matter of life
and death. They do not go to meet with Christ in an Ordinance; to have the
breathings of his Spirit, and the infusions of his Love. Alas, what little
violence for Heaven is to be seen in most peoples worship? In all the
Sacrifices of the Law there was fire. How can those duties be accepted, which
have no fire in them; no offering of violence?

3. If there must be this offering of 3. Branch.
violence to Heaven, then it shows us how dangerous moderation in Religion is.
Violence and moderation are two different things. Indeed moderation in the
things of the world is commendable. We should moderate our desires here; and
use the world as if we used it not 1 Cor. 7. 31.
. We may, as Jonathan, dip the end of the Rod in honey, but not thrust it in
too far: in this sense moderation is good: but moderation in matters of
practical piety is sinful: it is contrary to offering violence. Moderation in
the world's sense is for one not to be too zealous, not to be too fierce for
Heaven. Moderation is not to venture further in Pelago^se, non ita commissuru^
^sset, qui^ quanda libet, penem re^erre posset.
Religion than may stand with self-preservation. As the King of Navarr told
Beza, He would launch no further into the Sea, than he might be sure to return
safe to Land. To keep on the warm side of the hedge, is a main Article in the
Politicians Creed. Moderation in the world's sense is neutrality. The moderate
person has found out a medium between strictness and profaneness; he is not
for debauchery, nor yet for purity. It was the advice Calvin gave Mel^ncthon,
that he should not so affect the name of moderate, that at last he lost all his
zeal. To be lukewarmin matters of Religion, is far from offering violence to
Heaven, Rev. 3. 19. Be zealous and repent, If any shall ask us why we are so
violent, tell them, it is for a Kingdom. If they shall ask us why we make such
haste in the ways of Religion, tell them, we are running a^ heavenly Race, and
a softly moderate pace will never win the prize. Moderation has made many lose
Heaven; they have not made haste enough; they have come too late (like the
foolish Virgins) when the door has been shut.

Use 2. Reproof. Out of this text I 1. Branch.
may draw forth several arrows of Reproof.

1. It reproves slothful Christians Billii Anthol. Sacr.
, who are -- quibus est alto dulce sopore frui --
settled on their l^es: they make a lazy Profession of Religion, but use no
violence. They are like the the Lillies, which toil not, neither do they spin.
The Snail by reason of its slow motion, was reckoned among the unclean, Levit.
11. 30. St. Austin calls idlness the burial of a man alive. There are some
faint velleities; oh that I had Heaven! but a man may desire Venison, and want
it, if he does not hunt for it (...).
, Prove. 13. 4. The soul of the sluggard wishes and has nothing.

-- Neque mola, neque farina -- Men could be content to have the Kingdom of
Heaven; but they are loath to fight for it. They choose rather to go in a
feather-bed to Hell, than to be carried to Heaven in a fiery Chariot of zeal
and violence. How many sleep away, and play away their time; as if they were
made like the Leviathan, to play in the Sea! Psalm. 104. 26. It is a speech of
Seneca, No man is made wise by chance Nemo cas^ fit sapiens. Sen.
. Sure it is, no man is sav^d by chance, but he must know how he came by it,
namely, by offering violence. Such as have accustomed themselves to and idle
lazy temper, will find it hard to shake it off, Cant. 5. 3. I have put off my
Coat, how shall I put it on? The Spouse had laid her self upon the bed of
sloth, an though Christ knocked at the door, ^he was loath to rise and let him
in. Some pretend to be Believers, but are idle in the Vineyard. They pretend to
make use of faith for seeing, but not for working: this Faith is fancy. O that
Christians had a spirit of activity in them, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16. Arise and be
doing, and the Lord be with thee. We may sometimes learn of our enemy Fas est
and (...) ab host doc^i.
. The Devil is never idle; he walks about, 1 Pet. 5. 8. The world is his
Diocese, and he is every day going his visitation. Is Satan active? is the
enemy upon his march coming against us? and are we asleep upon our guard? As
Satan himself is not idle; ^o h^ will not endure that any of his servants
should be idle. When the Devil had entered into Judas, how active was Judas! He
goes to the High Priest, from thence to the band of Soldiers, and with them
back to the Garden, and never left till he had betrayed Christ. Satan will not
endure an idle servant; and do we think God will? How will Heathens rise up in
Judgment against slothful Christians! What pains did they take in the Olympian
games; they ran but for a Garland of flowers, and do we stand still who run for
a Crown of Immortality? Certainly if only the violent take Heaven, the idle
person will never come there. God puts no difference between these two,
slothful and wicked, Matthew. 25. 26. Thou wicked and slothful servant.

2. It reproves the Formalist, who puts 2. Branch.
all his Religion in gestures, and vestures, emblems of devotion, and thinks
this will entitle him to Heaven, Rev. 3. 1. Thou have a name to live and art
dead. The form and outside of Christianity is judged necessary.

1. It is a means to keep up men^ credit in the world. Should they be visibly
profane, such as are sober would not come near them; they would be looked upon
no better than baptized Heathens: therefore they must make a ^ew of devotion,
out of policy to gain some repute and esteem among others.

2. A form serves to stop the mouth of conscience: had not they some kind of
outward devotion, their conscience would fly in their face, and they would be a
terror to themselves: therefore they think it expedient to have a form of
Godliness. But alas, what is all this? The Text speaks of offering violence to
Heaven. What violence is there in a form? Here is no taking pains with the
heart; a form, but no power, 2. Tim. 3. 5. Significat (...), i a^e pietat is
simula^. Bez^.
Formalists are like the Tombs in the Church, which have their eyes and hands
lift up to Heaven, but no soul. The Formalists devotion runs out most in
punctilioes, and niceties: he neglects the weightier matters of the Law, Faith
and Mercy, Matthew. 23. 23. He scruples superstitious phancies, but makes no
reckoning of sin: he is more afraid of an Hare crossing his way, than of an
Harlot in his bed. He ha^es sanctity. Christ had no such bitter enemies as the
formal Pharisees. The formalist is never violent, but in persecuting the power
of godliness.

3. It reproves such as are violent in 3. Breach.
a bad sense: they are violent for Hell; they go thither in the sweat of their
brows, Jer 8. 6. Every one turned to his course; as the horse rusheth into the
battle. A war-horse rusheth violently among the guns and pikes: so did they
rush into sin violently. Men are violent,

1. In opposing Good. 2. In pursuing Evil.
1. In opposing Good. Several ways. 1.
1. They offer violence to the Spirit of God. The Spirit knocks at the door of
sinners hearts; he waits till his head be filled with dew, and his locks with
the drops of the night; but sinners repulse and grieve the Spirit, and send
away this Dove from the A^k of their souls, Acts 7. 51. Te do alwais resist the
Holy Ghost. The Spirit offers grace to the sinner, and the sinner offers
violence to the Spirit, Isa 63. 10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit;
and may not the Lord give over striving? God who is willing to come in when we
open to him, has not promised to come again if we unkindly repulse him.

2. They offer violence to conscience. Conscience is God's Preacher in the
bosom; and this Preacher cannot flatter: it tells men of their pride,
covetousness, abuse of mercy; but they, instead of being violent against their
sins, offer violence to conscience: they silence and imprison conscience. But
as the Prophet Zachary, when he was dumb called for a table book, and did
write, Luke 1. 63; So when conscience cannot be permitted to speak, it will
write: it writes down men's sins; and when at death they shall be forced to read
the handwriting, it will make their hearts tremble, and their knees smite.
This I fear is too common, for men to offer violence to their conscience: and
what will be the issue? They who will not hear the voice of conscience, shall
be sure to feel the worm of conscience.

3 They offer violence to God's image. The Saints (who are God's lively
picture) are opposed and shot at. This is a cursed violence, Gal. 4 29* As he
that was born after the flesh, persecuted him who was born after the Spirit; so
it is now, Christ himself is stricken at through Believers. The Church has
been always in the Torrid zone: The Plowers have plowed upon her back. The
earth has been sown with the bodies of the Saints, and watered with their
blood. Persecutors, I grant, are of an ancient Family. The first man that was
born in the world was a Persecutor, namely Cain; and he has had a numerous
offspring, Nero, Trajan, Domitian, Dioclesian, Maximinus. Chrysostom says,
that the apples of his eyes fell out. Faelix Earl of Wartemburg being at supper
at Auspurg, did take an oath, that before he died, he would ride up to the
spurs in the blood of the Lutherans; but was afterward choked in his own
blood. Persecutors are the curse of the Creation; being some of those thorns
and briars which the ear^h brings forth

2. Men are violent in pursuing Evil. 2.


1. They are violent in their Opinions, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Privily they shall bring
in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought them. Arrius was such an
one, and afterward his bowels gushed out. And truly the spirit of Arrius is
yet alive at this day, while men dare deny the Deity of the blessed Son of God.
Many of the Heretics of old were so violent, that their Opinion was to them a
Bible, and some of them died in maintaining their heresies. These were the
Devil's Martyrs.

2. They are violent in their Passions (...).
. Anger is a short frenzy Brevis insania. Sen.
, Jam. 3. 9. The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity. In this little member
there is a great world, viz. a world of sin: such as would be counted sober,
yet are drunk with passion. Their prayers are cold, but their anger hot. They
spit fire as the Serpent does poison. Fiery passions without Repentance, bring
men to the fiery furnace.

3. They are violent for their lusts, Tit. 3. 3. Serving diverse lusts. Lust is
(...), an inordinate desire or impulse, provoking the soul to the gratifying
its carnal desires Prav^ cupidit^es sunt port^ Inferi, per quas ad mortem
descendunt ^mines. Augustine.
. Aristotle calls them brutish lusts, because when lusts are violent, they will
not let reason or conscience be heard; but a man is carried brutishly to the
satisfying the flesh Plurimi cupidita ibus se ma^cipant; etiam in humano
corpore plantae brutique vitam agunt; brutum, number usquam in plantam degenerat?
and num-planta in lapidem? immo an ulla est qu^, quantum potest, non emicet
extra solum, seseque in quras attollat? demque, uno excepto homine, nunquid
tot^ m^ndo occurat, quod gradum suum, qu^d dignitatem non accurate tuc^ur and
retineat? Mornaeus.
.

1. Men are violent for their drunken lusts. Though death be in the cup, they
will drink it off. One having almost lost his eyesight, the Physician told him
there was no cure for him, unless he would leave off his excessive drinking *
Vale lumen amlcum.
; then says he, Farewell sweet light: he would rather lose his eyesight than
leave his drinking.

2. They are violent for their unclean lusts. Men are said to burn in lusts,
Romans 1. 27. The Apostle intimates that lust is a kind of feavour. Feavourish
heats are not more pernicious to the body, than lust is to the soul. O what
folly is it, for a drop of pleasure to drink a Sea of wrath O voluptates dum
suadet is inungit is, sed postea us (...) ad mortem (...) pungitis. Austin.
.

3. They are violent for their oppressive lusts: they wrong and defraud others,
and by violence take away their right. Instead of clothing the naked, they
make them who are clothed naked. These birds of prey live upon rapine. They
are cruel, as if with Romulus they had been suckled with the milk of Wolves.
They smile at the curses of the poor, and grow fat with their tears. They have
forgotten Christ's caveat, Luke 3. 14. Do violence to no man. Ahab violently
took away Naboth's Vineyard, 2. King. 21. 11. Hell is taken by this violence,
Prav. 4. 17. Who drink the Wine of violence. This wine will turn to poison at
last, Psalm. 11. 5. Him that loves violence God's soul hates.

4. They are violent for their covetous lusts. Covetousness is the soul's
dropsy, Amos 7. 2. Who pant after the dust of the earth. They compass Sea and
Land to make Money their Proselyte Magis aurum suspiciunt qua^ coelum. Minut.
Oct.
. Their god is made of gold, and to it they bow down. Those who bowed down on
their knees to drink of the waters, were accounted unfit Soldiers for Gideon,
Judge. 7. 6. So are those unfit for Christ, that stoop immoderately to the love
of earthly things. They who are violent for the world, what have they but the
wind? Eccles. 5. 16. What profit has he who has labored for the wind? The
world c^nnot enrich the soul, it cannot remove pain. If pangs of conscience
come, the world can no more give comfort, than a Crown of Gold can cure the
headache.

4. It reproves them who have in part 4. Branch.
left off that holy strictness and violence in Religion as once they had. Their
f^rvour is cooled and abated. What they do is so little, that it cannot be
called violence. They serve God, but are not ^ervent in spirit. They do not
leave off duty, but they grow dead in duty. They have left their first love,
Rev. 2. 4. N^ om^ ch^itatem ami^, sed (...) m de illius servere remisiss,
inq^it Rib^a.
It is with them as fire when it is going out; or as the Sun when it is going
down. Like aguish men: before they were in a Paroxysm, or hot fit of zeal; but
now the cold fit has taken them, they are formal and frozen in Religion. Time
was, when they called the Sabbath a delight, Isa. 58. 13. How were their hearts
raised in duty! how diligently did they seek him whom their soul loved! but now
the case is altered; their Religion does languish, and even vanish. Time was,
when they were in an Agony, and did send forth strong cries in prayer Now the
Chariot-wheels are pulled off, and the spirit of prayer is much abated. Their
prayers do even freez between their lips: a clear sign of the decay of grace.
These persons are grown both lethargical and consumptive.

1. Lethargical, Cant. 5. 2. I sleep, but my heart wakes. Though grace was
alive in her, her heart waked; yet she was in a dull drowsie-temper, I sleep.
When the heart burns in sin, and cools in duty, it is a sure sign of growing to
a stupid lethargy.

2. Consunptive. There are two signs of persons in a spiritual consumption.

1. When their desire after Christ and Heaven is not so strong as it was. A
consumptive man's stomach decaies. Christians have not such violent affections
to heavenly things; they can desire Corn and Wine, and the luscious delights of
the earth; but, Christ is less precious; they are not in pangs of desire after
him, a sad symptom their grace is in a consumption.

2. When they are not so vigorous in motion. A man that is lively and stiring
at his work, it is a sign he is in health; but when he is listless, and cares
not to stir, or put his hand to any thing; a sign nature is a declining. So
when men have no heart to that which is good, they care not to put themselves
upon the exercises of Religion; they have lost a spirit of activity for God;
they serve him in a faint sickly manner; it is a sign they are consumptive.

When the pulse can scarce be felt, it beats so low; men are near dying: So
when those who were once violent for Heaven, but now we can scarce perceive any
good in them, the pulse beats low, grace is ready to dye, Rev. 3. 2. (...),
mort^ vicina. Paraeus.
To you who have abated in your holy violence, and are grown remiss in duty,
let me expostulate with you, as the Lord did by the Prophet, Jer. 2. 5. What
iniquity have your Fathers found in me? What evil have you found in God, that
you leave off your former strictness? Has not God fed you with Manna from
above, and given you his holy Spirit to be your guide and comforter? Has he
not made you swim in a Sea of mercy? What evil have you found in Prayer, that
you are less violent in it? Have not you had sweet intercourse with God? Have
not you sometimes been melted and enlarged, insomuch that you have thought your
selves in the subbu^bs of Heaven when you have been upon this Mount? Has not
the Dove of Prayer brought an Olivebranch of peace in its mouth? What evil have
you found in the Word? Time was when you did take this Book and eat it, and it
was honey in your mouth? Has the Word less virtue in it now? Are the Promises
like Aaron's dry Rod withered and sapless? What iniquity have you found in the
ways of God, that you have abated your former violence in Religion? O remember
whence you are fallen and repent, and do your first works, Rev. 2. 5. Consider
seriously,

1. The less violence for Heaven, the less peace. Our consciences are never at
peace in a drowsy state. It is the lively acting of grace makes the heart calm
and serene. These two go together, walking in the fear of God, and in the
comforts of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31. Christian, if once thou growest remiss
in Religion, conscience will chide. If thou belongest to God, he will never let
thee be quiet, but will send some affliction or other to awaken thee out of thy
security, and make thee recover that active lively frame of heart as once thou
had.

2. You that grow more dead in God's service, and leave your first love, give
great advantage to Satan. The less violent you are, the more violent he is; the
less you pray, the more he tempts: and what a case are you now in? How can
grace that is weak and sickly withstand violent temptations; Hence it is, God
suffers his own people sometimes to fall into sin, as a just punishment of
their lukewarmness, and to make them more zealous and violent for the future.

3. Your remisness in Religion, though it may not damn you, it will damage
you. You will lose that degree of glory, which else you might have had. Though
your remisness may not lose your Crown, it will lessen it, and make it weigh
lighter.

4. The more lazy a Christian's desires are, the more lively his corruptions.
The weaker the body grows, the stronger the disease grows. Oh therefore pray
for qui^kning grace, Psalm. 143. 11. Beg fresh gales of the Spirit to blow upon
you. Never leave till you have recovered that holy violence which once you had.

2. It reproves those who have quite 2. Branch. Reproof.
left off all violence: they have left off reading and praying in their family.
There is not so much as a face of Religion to be seen, they are fallen finally
In quibus principium fervet, medium tepet, exitus alget; illos hypocritas
suisse patet, q^i victoriae coronam non consequuntur. Paraeus.
. Such were Joash, Jehu, Julian. The goodly building of their profession which
others admired, now has not one stone left upon another.

But, Why do men thus run retrograde in their motion, and quite throw off that
violence which they seemed once to have?

1. Because they never had a principle of spiritual life (...).
. Things that move from a principle of life are constant, as the motion of the
pulse: but things artificial are apt to be at a stand, and their motion
cease. As a clock when the weights are hung on, goes; but take off the
weights, and it stands. So the Apostate never moves in Religion, but for gain
and applause; and when these weights are taken off, he is at a stand, he goes
no further. That branch must needs wither that has no root to grow upon.

2. Men throw off all violence, and degenerate into Apostasy, because they
never did duties of Religion with delight. St. Paul delighted in the Law of God
in the inward man, Romans 7. 22. It was his Heaven to serve God. A man that
delights in pleasure will never give over: but the Apostate never had any true
delight in the ways of God; he was rather forced with fear, than drawn with
love: he served a Master that he never cared for; no wonder then he leaves his
service.

3. Men degenerate into Apostasy through unbelief, Psalm. 78. 22. They believed
not in God, verse. 41. They turned back and tempted God. Sinners have jealous
thoughts of God; they distrust his love, therefore desert his service: they
think they may pray, and hear, and to no purpose, Mal. 3. 14. What profit is it
that we have kept his Ordina^nes? We may draw near to God in duty, but He will
never draw near to us in mercy. Thus Unbelief and Atheism prevailing, the
livery of Religion is presently thrown off, and all former violence for Heaven
cease. Infidelity is the Mother of Apostasy.

4. Men leave off their former violence, and prove Judasses and Devils be cause
they love something else more than Religion. There is some lust or other their
heart is engaged to and their violence for sin has destroyed their violence
for Religion. Solomon the great Turk, seeing many Christians go over to
Turcism, he asked them, What moved them to turn Turks? They replied, They did
it to be eased of their Taxes. They were drawn from God through the prevalency
of covetousness. If there be any lust in the heart predominant, it will get
head, and destroy all former zeal for Religion. Abimeleck a Bastard, destroyed
threescore and ten of his Brethren upon one stone, Judge. 9. 15. If there be any
lust the heart runs after, this bastard-sin will destroy threescore and ten
duties; it will murder all that violence for Heaven which a man did once seem
to have.

5. Men leave off former violence out of pusillanimity: if they are violent in
Religion, they fear they may lose their profits and preferments; nay, their
lives. The coward never yet won the field. When carnal fear grows violent, all
violence for Heaven is at an end.

-- Incipit esse malus, qui timet esse bonus -- Many of the Jews who were great
followers of Christ, when they saw the swords and staves, left him. Prove. 26.
25. In the fear of man there is a snare. Carnal fear makes sin appear less than
it is, but danger greater.

6. Men leave off violence for Heaven for want of patience. Sensible feeling of
joy is withheld, and they have not patience to stay for the full recompense of
reward. Hypocrites are all for present pay; and if they have not that suddenly
which they desire, they bid adieu to Religion; and say, as that wicked King, 2
King. 6. 33. Why should I wait for the Lord any longer? They consider not that
God is a free Agent, and will dispense his blessings in the fittest season, but
they go to tie God up to their time. They forget that joy is a part of the
reward, and would they have the reward and their work not yet finished? Does
the servant use to receive his pay before his work is done? Jam. 5. 7. The
Husbandman waits for his precious fruits of the earth: He does not look to sow
and reap in a day. But Hypocrites are always in haste; they would reap joy,
before they have done sowing the seed of Repentance: and because comfort is a
while deferred, they are offended; they will serve God no longer: their
patience is at an end, therefore their violence is at an end.

7. Men leave off holy violence, and degenerate into profaneness, out of a
just judgment of God, leaving them to themselves; they often resisted the
Spirit, and sent it away sad from them, and now as a just judgment, God says,
My Spirit shall no longer strive; and if this wind does not blow upon their
sails, they cannot move. If this Sun withdraw from their climate, they must
needs freeze in impenitency. They before sinned against clear convictions; they
silenced conscience, and God has seared it. And now if an Angel should preach
to them from Heaven, it would do them no good. O how dismal is this! the
thoughts of it may strike us into an holy consternation. Thus we see why men
apostatize and leave off their violence for Heaven.

Well, but what do they get by this? let us see what a purchase Apostates make.

They proclaim their folly; for all 1.
their former violence for Heaven is lost. He who runs half the Race, and then
faints, loses the Garland, Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous turns away from
his righteousness, all his righteousness that he has done shall not be
mentioned. All men's prayers and tears are lost. The Apostate unravels all that
he has been doing. He is like a man that with a pensil draws a curious
picture, and then comes with his sponge and wipes it out again, Gal. 3. 4. Have
ye suffered so many things in vain? Perhaps, for Religion a man has suffered
many a reproach and affront; and have ye suffered all this in vain? Here is
folly indeed.

It will be bitterness in the end, Jer. (...).
2. 19. Know therefore that it is an evil and bitter thing that thou have
forsaken the Lord. Men by leaving off their violence for Heaven, get a thorn in
their conscience, a blot in their name, a curse in their souls. What got Judas
by his Apostasy but an halter? So that it will be bitterness in the end. The
Apostate when he dies drops as a wind-fall into the Devil's mouth.

5. It reproves those who put off 5. Branch.
this violence for the Kingdom till old age. When they are fit for no other
work, then they will begin this. No man says, I will learn my trade when I am
old. It is imprudence for one to begin to work for Heaven, when he is past his
labor. There is a night of sickness and death coming, and our Savior says,
The night comes when none can work, Joh. 9. 4. Sure a man can put forth but
little violence for Heaven when old age, and old sins are upon him. Besides,
how unworthy and dis-ingenuous is it, to give the Devil the flower of youth!
and God the d^egs of old age! Therefore God rejected Cain's Sacrifice, because
it was stale before he brought it, Genesis 4. 2. There is little hope of their
salvation, who are never violent for Heaven, till their disease grows violent.

6. It reproves those that are so far 6. Branch.
from using this violence for Heaven, that they deride it. These are your
zealous ones: 2 Pet. 3. 3. In the last days there shall be scoffers. Holy
walking is become the object of derision, Psalm. 69. 12. I am become the song of
the drunkards. This shows a vile heart. There are some, who though thy have no
goodness themselves, yet honor them that are good. Herod reverenced John
Baptist. But what Devils are they who scoff at goodness, and reproach others
for doing that which God commands! This age produces such as sit in the chair
of scorners, and throw their squibs at Religion. In Bohemia, when some of the
Martyrs were the next day to suffer, they comforted themselves with this, that
this was their last Supper, and to morrow they should feast with Christ in
Heaven; a Papist standing by, asked them in a jear, if Christ had any Cooks in
Heaven to dress their Supper? Oh take heed of such an Ishmael-spirit! ^t is a
sign of a man given over to the Devil. God scorneth the scorner, Prove. 3. 34.
And sure he shall never live with God, whose company God scorns.

7. It reproves them who instead of 7. Branch.
taking Heaven by force, keep it off by force; as if they were afraid of being
happy; or as if a Crown of glory would hurt them. Such are

1. The ignorant, who shut their eyes against the light, and refuse to be
taught the way to Heaven, Hosea 4. 6. Thou have rejected Knowledge. The Hebrew
word (...)
signifies, to reject with disdain. As I have read of a Scotch Bishop, who
thanked God he never knew what the Old and New Testament was Act. and Mon^m.
. I wonder where that Bishop took his text.

2. The profane, who hate to be admonished, and had rather die than reform,
Amos 5. 10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate. These keep off Heaven by
force. Such were those, Acts 13. 46. Seeing you put away the Word from you. The
Greek word may be (...).
rendered, seeing you shuff it away with your shoulders. As if a sick ^n should
bolt out the Physician, lest he should cure him, Job 21. 14. Who say unto the
Almighty depart from us. God is loath to b^ gone; he woes and beseeches sinners
to accept of terms of mercy; he is loath to be gone, but sinners will have him
gone; They say to him, Depart. May not we say to these, quis effascinavit? who
has bewitched you? What madness beyond Hyperbole is this, that you should not
only forsake mercy, but fight against it; as if there were danger in going to
Heaven. These who put away salvation from them, are felo de se, they do
wilfully perish; they would not hear of any thing that should save them. Were
it not a sad Epitaph to be written upon a man's Tombstone, Here lies one that
murdered himself? This is the condition of desperate sinners, they keep off
Heaven by force; they are self-murderers. Therefore God writes their Epitaph
upon their grave, Hosea 13. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self.

3. Let us then examine whether we Use 3. Examination.
put forth this holy violence for Heaven? What is an empty Profession without
this? like a Lamp without Oil. Let us all ask our selves, What violence do we
use for Heaven?

1. Do we strive with our hearts to get them into an holy frame? How did David
awaken all the powers of his soul to serve God, Psalm. 57. 8. I my self will
awake early. The heart is like a Bell that is a long while a raising.

2. Do we set time apart to call our selves to an account, and try our
evidences for Heaven, Psalm. 77. 6. My Spirit made diligent search. Do we take
our hearts as a Watch all in pieces, to see what is amiss and mend it. Are we
curiously inquis^ive into the state of our souls? Are we afraid of painted
grace, as of painted happiness?

3. Do we use violence in prayer? Is there fire in our Sacrifice? Does the wind
of the Spirit filling our sails, cause groans unutterable? Romans 8. 26. Do we
pray in the morning as if we were to die at night?

4. Do we thirst for the living God? Are our souls big with holy desires, Psalm.
73. 25. There is none upon earth my soul desires besides thee. Do we desire
holiness as well as Heaven? Do we desire as much to look like Christ, as to
live with Christ? Is our desire constant? Is this spiritual pulse ever beating?

5. Are we skilled in self denial? Can we deny our ease, our aims, our
interest? Can we cross our own will to fulfill God's? Can we behead our beloved
sin? To pluck out the right eye requires violence.

6. Are we lovers of God? It is not how much we do, but how much we love. Does
love command the ^astle of our hearts? Does Christ's beauty and sweetness
constrain us? 2 Cor. 5. 14. Do we love God more than we fear Hell?

7. Do we keep our spiritual watch? do we set spies in every place, watching
our thoughts, our eyes, our tongues? When we have prayed against sin, do we
watch against temptation? The Jews having sealed the stone of Christ's
Sepulcher, sent a watch, Matthew. 27. 66. After we have been at the Word, or
Sacrament (that sealing Ordinance) do we set a watch?

8. Do we press after further degrees of sanctity? Phil. 3. 13. Reaching forth
unto those things which are before (...).
. A good Christian is a wonder; he is the most contented, yet the least
satisfied; he is contented with a little of the world, but not satisfied with a
little grace; he would still have more Faith, and be anointed with fresh Oil.
Paul desired to attain unto the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. 11. that is,
he endeavored (if possible) to arrive at such a measure of grace as the Saints
shall have at the Resurrection.

9. Is there an holy emulation in us? do we labor to outshine others in
Religion? To be more eminent for love and good works?

(...). Homer. Il.
Do we something which is singular? Matthew. 5. 47. What do you more than others
(...) iaem valet quod (...). Beza.
?

10. Are we got above the world? though we walk on Earth, do we trade in
Heaven? Can we say as David, Psalm. 139. 17. I am still with thee. This requires
violence; for motions upward are usually violent.

11. Do we set our selves always under God's eye? Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the
Lord always before me. Do we live soberly and godlily, remembering whatever we
are doing, our Judge looks on?

If it be thus with us, we are happy persons. This is the holy violence the
text speaks of, and is the right way of taking the Kingdom of God. And surely
never did Noah so willingly put forth his hand to receive the Dove into the
Ark, as Jesus Christ will put forth his hand to receive us into Heaven.

4. It exhorts all Christians to this Use 4. Exhortation.
holy violence for Heaven. But before I press the exhortation, let me remove
some Objections that may be made against this blessed violence.

1. But we have no power of our Object. 1.
selves to save our selves? you bid us be violent, as if you should bid a man
tied fast in fetter ^to walk.

It Is true, We cannot till grace ^nsw.
come, effectually operate to our own salvation. Before conversion we are
purely passive; and when ^od bids us convert and turn, this is to show us what
we ought to do, not what we can do. Yet let us do quoad posse, what we are able.

1. We have power to avoid those Rocks, which will certainly ruin our souls; I
mean, gross sins. A man needs not to b^ in bad company; he needs not swear, or
tell alye; nor would he do it if it were by Law death to swear an Oath.

2. We have power to put our selves upon the use of means, praying, reading,
holy conference; this will condemn men at the last day; they do not act so
vigorously in their sphere as they might; they do not use the means, and try
whether God will give grace. God will come with that silencing question at
last, Why did not thou put my money to the Exchangers? Matthew. 25. 17. Why
did not thou improve that power I gave thee?

2. Though we have not power to save our selves, yet we must pursue after
salvation, because God has made a promise of grace, as well as to grace. He
has promi^ed to circumcise our hearts; to put his Spirit within us; to enable
us to walk in his statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. So that by prayer we are to put the
bond in suit, and to press God with his own promise. Though I will not say with
the Arminians, upon our endeavor God is bound to give grace; yet he is not
wanting to them that seek his grace: D^us volentibus non d^e st
N^y, he denies his grace to none but them that wilfully refuse it, Psalm. 81.
11. Israel would none of me.

2. But this offering violence is hard, Object. 2.
, and I shall never be able to go through it.

Admit it be hard, yet it is a duty, and Resp. 1.
there is no disputing duty. God has made the way to Heaven hard.

To try our Obedience. A child obeys 1.
his Father, though he command him hard things. Peter's obedience and love was
tried when Christ bade him come to him upon the water.

God does it that he may raise the 2.
price of heavenly things. Were the Kingdom of glory easily obtained, we should
not have valued it to its worth. Such is our nature, that we slight things
which are easily come by. If Pearls were common, they would soon fall in their
price. If Christ and Heaven might be had without violence, these blessings of
the first magnitude would not have been had in such high veneration.

But let not the difficulty be objected. What though salvation-work be hard.

1. Is it not harder to lie in Hell? Is not suffering vengeance worse than
offering violence?

2. We do not argue so in other things. An estate is hard to come by, therefore
we will sit still: No, difficulty does the more when and sharpen our endeavor;
and if we take such pains for these inf^riour things, how should we for that
which is more noble and sublime! The profit will abundantly countervail the
labor.

3. Though the business of Religion at first seems hard, yet when once we are
entered into it, it is pleasant. When the wheels of the soul are oiled with
grace, now a Christian moves in Religion with facility and delight. Romans 7. 22.
I delight in the Law of God in the inward man. Christ's yoke at the first
putting on seems heavy; but when once it is on, it is easy. To serve God, to
love God, to enjoy God, is the sweetest freedom in the world. The Poets say,
the top of Olympus is always quiet Olympi cacumen (...) qui^tum.
. The first climbing up the rocky hill of Heaven is hard to flesh and blood;
but when we are gotten up toward the top, there is peace and delight; we see a
pleasant prospect, and are ready to cry out as Peter on the Mount of
transfiguration, It is good to be here. What hidden Manna do we now find! this
is the anticipation or for^tast of glory.

3. But if I put my self upon this violent Object. 3.
exercise in Religion, then I shall lose that pleasure I have in my sin, my
mirth and melody, and I shall exchange delight for labor; and so I shall be no
more Naomi, but Marah. Voluptuous persons speak as the Fig Tree in the Parable,
Judge. 9. Shall I leave my fatness and sweetness, all my former pleasures, and
now offer violence to Heaven, live a strict mortified life? This crosses the
stream of corrupt nature.

Leave the pleasure in sin! The Scripture Answ. 1.
does so describe fin, that one would think there should be little pleasure in
it. The Scripture calls it,

1. (...), a debt. Sin is compared to a debt of ten thousand talents, Matthew.
18. 24. A talent of gold among the Hebrews, was valued at almost four thousand
pounds. Ten thousand talents is a figurative speech, to express how great a
debt sin is; and do you call this a pleasure? is it any pleasure for a man to
be in debt?

2. The Scripture calls sin a disease, Isa. 1. 5. The whole head is sick. Is it
any pleasure to be sick? Though all do not feel this sickness, yet the less the
distemper is felt, the moremorta.

3. The Scripture compares sin to Gall and Wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. It breeds a
bitter worm in the conscience. What a worm did Spira feel? Sin stings a man
with wrath, Joh. 3. 34. And do you call this a pleasure? sure you put bitter
for sweet, Isa. 5. 20.

The pleasures of sin do gratify only 2.
the sensitive part of man, not the rational. Pleasures are called carnal,
because they delight only the body. How absurd was that speech of the rich man
in the Gospel, when he was speaking of his store of goods, and his barns being
full, Soul, take thine ease, Luke 12. 19. He might have said more properly,
Body take thine ease; for his soul was never the better for his riches, nor
could it feel any delight in them. Though his barns were full, his soul was
empty. Therefore when Satan tells thee, If thou usest violence for Heaven, thou will lose all thy pleasures: ask him, what pleasures are they Satan? such as
please only the senses, they do not delight the mind; they do not comfort the
conscience; they are such delights wherein the bruit creatures do exceed me.

3. These sugared pleasures in sin the Scripture says are but (...), for a
season, Heb. 11. 25. Like fire in straw which makes a blaze, but is presently
out, 1 John 2. 17. The world passes away, and the lusts thereof. It passes
away swiftly as a ship under sail. Worldly pleasures perish in the using; like
a flying shadow, or flash of lightning; and are these to be preferred before an
eternal weight of glory?

4. The present sweetness which is in fin will turn to bitterness at last, Like
the Book the Prophet eat, Ezekiel. 3. 3. Sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the
belly. Honey is sweet, but it turns to choler. Sin is a sweet poison Dulce
v^nenum. ^ern.
, it delights the palate, but torments the bowels. When once the finner's eyes
come to be opened at death, and he feels some sparks of God's wrath in his
conscience, then he will cry out for horror, and be ready to lay violent hands
upon himself. We may say of the pleasures of sin, as Solomon of wine, Prove. 23.
32. Look not on the wine when it is red, when it shows its color in the glass,
afterward it bites like a Serpent (...).
. So look not on the smiling pleasures of sin; be not delighted with its
beauty, but affrighted with its sting (...). Chr. Epist.
? Do the damned in Hell feel any pleasure now in their sins? Has their cup of
wrath one drop of honey in it? Oh remember, after the golden Crowns, and women's
hair, come the Lions teeth, Rev. 9. 8. Thus I have answered the first part of
the Objection; I shall lose all my pleasures in sin.

If I put forth this violence in Religion, 2.
I shall exchange my delight for labor. I must dig a way through the Rock, and
while I work I must weep.

Resp. Though you must use violence, yet it is a sweet violence; it is a labor
turned into delight, Psalm. 138. 5. They shall sing in the ways of the Lord. To
send out faith as a spy to view the heavenly Canaan, and pluck a bunch of
Grapes there; what delight is here? Romans 15. 13. Joy in believing. To love God
(in whom all excellencies are combined) how sweet is it! To love beauty is
delightful. To walk among the promises as among beds of spices, and taste the
fruit, oh how pleasant! The labor of a Christian brings peace of conscience,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.

-- Sed juvat ipse labor -- And whereas it is said that this holy violence
takes away our joy, and while we work we must weep; I answer, a Christian would
not be without these tears. The tears of a Saint (says Bernard) have more true
joy in them, than all worldly delight. The Oil of joy is for mourners, Isa. 61.
3.

4. I would use this violence for Object. 4.
Heaven, but I shall expose my self to the censure and scorn of others. They
will wonder to see me so altered, and think it nothing but a religious frenzy.

Consider who reproach thee; they Resp. 1.
are the wicked (...). Epict.
; such as if Christ were alive on earth, would reproach him. They are blinded
by the God of the world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. It is as if a blind man should reproach a
beautiful face.

2. What do they reproach thee for? it is for offering violence for Heaven. Is
it a disgrace to be laboring for a Kingdom? Tell them thou art doing the work
that God has set thee about. Better they should reproach thee for working in
the Vineyard, than God damn thee for not working.

3. Jesus Christ was reproached for thy sake, Heb. 12. 2. He endured the shame
of the Cross; and wilt not thou be contented to bear reproaches for him? These
are but the chips of the Cross, which are rather to be despised than laid to
heart.

If I use this holy violence, and turn Object. 5.
religious, then I shall lose such yearly profits which my sin has brought in.
As Amaziah said, What shall I do for the hundred Talents? 2 Chronicles. 25. 9.

Is there any profit in sin? did ever Resp. 1.
any one thrive upon that Trade? by that time you have cast up the reckoning
you will find but little profit.

1. By the incomes that sin brings in, thou treasurest up vengeance, Romans 2. 5.
While thou put unjust gain in thy bag, God puts wrath in his viol; and will
you call this profit?

H^God.
(...). Whatever money a man gets in a sinful way, he must pay interest for it
in hell.

2. That cannot be for thy profit, which makes thee come off a loser at last.
Thou losest Heaven and thy soul; and what can countervail this loss? What is a
man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. 16. 26.
God (says Chrysostom) has given a man two eyes; if he lose one, he has
another; but he has but one soul, and if that be lost, he is undone for ever.

But I have so much business in the Object. 6.
world, that I can find no time for this holy violence. As the King of Macedon
said, when they presented him with a book treating of Happiness, (...), I am
not at leisure.

See the folly of of this objection: What Resp. 1.
is the main business of life, but looking after the soul? and for men to say
they are so immersed in the world, that they cannot mind their souls, is most
absurd and irrational. This is to make the greater give way to the less. As if
an Husbandman should say, he is so busy in angling, or looking after his Bees,
that he has no time to plow or sow. What is his occupation but plowing? Such a
madness is it to hear men say, they are so taken up about the world, that they
have no time for their souls.

Could God find time to think of thy Resp. 2.
salvation? could Jesus Christ find time to come into the world, and be here
above thirty years in carrying on this great design of thy Redemption, and
can thou find no time to look after it? Is the getting a little money that
which obstructs this violence for Heaven? Thy money perish with thee.

Can thou find time for thy body? Resp. 3.
time to eat and sleep? and not find time for thy soul? can thou find time to
employ about thy recreation? and no time to employ about thy salvation? can
thou find time for idle visits? and no time to visit the Throne of Grace?

Oh take heed thou go not to Hell in the crowd of worldly business. Joshua.
who was a Commander of an Army, yet his work as a Soldier was not to hinder
his work as a Christian: he must pray as well as fight; and take the Book of
the Law in his hand, as well as the Sword, Josh. 1. 8.

Thou, whosoever thou art that make this Objection about worldly business,
let me ask thee, Do thou think in thy conscience that this will be a good
excuse at the last day, when God shall ask thee, why did thou not take pains
for Heaven? thou shall say, Lord, I was so steeped in worldly business, that I
was hindered. Were it a good plea for a servant to say to his Master, he was so
drunk that he could not work? Truly, it is much like thine, to say thou were so
drunk with the cares of the world, that thou could not be violent for the
Kingdom.

Having answered these Objections, let me reassume the exhortation, pressing
all Christians to this violence for the heavenly Kingdom. As David's three
Worthies ventured their lives, and brake through the host of the Philistims for
water, 2 Samuel 23. 16. Such a kind of violence must we use, breaking through all
dangers for obtaining the Water of life.

1. Consider the deplorable condition Motive. 1.
we are in by nature; a state of misery and damnation; therefore what violence
should we use to get out of it! Were one plunged into quicksands, would he not
use violence to get out? Sin is a quicksand, and is it not wisdom to extricate
our selves out? David being encompassed with enemies, said, His soul was among
Lions, Psalm. 57. 4. It Is true in a spiritual sense, our soul is among Lions.
Every sin is a Lion that would devour us, and if we are in the Lion's Den,
shall we not use violence to get out? The Angels used violence to Lot; they
laid hold on him, and pulled him out of Sodom, Genesis 19. 16. Such violence must
be used to get out of the spiritual Sodom. It is no safety to stay in the
enemies quarters.

2. It is possible that in the use of Motive. 2.
means we may arrive at happiness. Impossibility destroies endeavor: but here
is a door of hope opened. The thing is feasible. It is not with us as with the
damned in Hell; there is a tombstone rolled over them. But while we are under
the sound of Aaron's Bell, and the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel is blown in our
ears, while the Spirit of Grace breaths on us, and we are on this side the
grave; there is great hope that by holy violence we may win Paradise. An
absolute impossibility of salvation is only for them who have sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and cannot repent, but who these are is a secret sealed
up in God's Book: else here is a great encouragement to all to be serious and
earnest in the matters of eternity, because they are yet in a capacity of
mercy, no final sentence is already passed; God has not yet taken up the
drawbridge of mercy. Though the gate of Paradise is strait, yet it is not shut.
This should be as Oil to the wheels, to make us lively and active in the
business of salvation. Therefore as the Husbandman plows in hope, James 5. So
we should pray (...) hope; do all our work for Heaven in hope; for the white
flag of mercy is yet held forth. So long as there was Corn to be had in Egypt,
the Sons of Jacob would not sit starving at home, Genesis 42. 3. So there is a
Kingdom to be obtained; therefore let us not sit starving in our sins any
longer.

This violence for Heaven is the grand (...). Motive.
business of our lives: What did we come into the world for else? we did not
come hither only to eat and drink, and wear fine clothes; but the end of our
living is, to be violent for the Kingdom of glory. Should the body only be
tended, this were to trim the scabbard, and let the blade rust: to preserve the
lumber, and let the child be burnt. God sends us into the world as a Merchant
sends his Factor to trade for him beyond the Seas. So God sends us hither to
follow a spiritual trade, to serve him and save our souls. If we spend all our
time aut aliud agendo, aut nihil, in dressing and pampering our bodies, or idle
visits, we shall give but a sad account to God, when he shall send us a letter
of summons by death, and bid us give an account of our Stewardship. Were not he
much (...) be blamed that should have a great deal of Timber given him to build
him an house, and he should cut out all this brave Timber into chips? Just so
is the case of many; God gives them precious time in which they are to provide
for a Kingdom, and they waste this time of life, and cut it out all into chips.
Let this excite violence in the things of God; it is the main errand of our
living here; shall we go out of the world and forget our errand?

4. How violent are the wicked in 4. Motive.
ways of sin! violent for their malicious lusts, Prove. 1. 16. Their feet run
to evil Quod utro^ue pede ^tuntur, notatur and ^estinatio and impetus. Car^wr.
. Violent for their unclean lusts. Amnon offered violence to his Sister, he
would have his lust, though it cost him his life, Sinners tire out themselves
in the Devil's drudgery, Jer 9. 5. They meary themselves to commit iniquity.
They are out of breath with sin, yet not out of love with sin, Jer. 50. 38.
They are mad upon their Idols. So violent were the Jews, that they would spare
no cost in their Idolatrous worship, Isa. 46. 6. They lavish gold out of the
bag. So fiercely were they bent upon Idolatry, that they would sacrifice their
Sons and Daughters to their Idol god^, Jer. 32. 35. They built the high places
of B^al to cause their Sons and Daughters to pass through the fire. Were men
thus violent for their lusts and Idols; and shall not we be violent for a
Kingdom? Nay, you that are now ingrafted into Christ, how violent perhaps have
some of you been formerly in evil? how did you once spend your selves in a
sinful way! like Paul, who before his conversion breathed out threatening and
slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, Act. 9. 1. Perhaps you have been
violent in drawing others to sin, you have been tempters to them; and perhaps
some of them whom you have seduced to sin, are now crying out of you in Hell,
and saying, They had never come there if it had not been for your example;
should not the consideration of this humble you? should not this make you the
more violent in Religion, that you may bring some glory to God before you die?
should not you be as industrious to save souls, as you have been to damn them?
Were you to live to the age of Methusalem, you could never do God service
sufficient for the dishonor you have done to him.

5. This holy violence has much delight 5. Motive.
mingled with it, Prove. 3. 17. All her ways are pleasantness. Though the way
of Religion has thorns in it (in respect of persecution) yet it is full of
Roses, in respect of that inward peace and content that the soul finds in it. A
man is violent at his recreation; but there is an inward delight he takes in it
which sweetens that violence. St. Paul made Religion his recreation, Romans 7.
22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. In the Greek, (...), I
take pleasure; not only Heaven it self is delightful, but the way thither. What
ravishing delight has a gracious soul in prayer! Isa. 56. 7. I will make them
joyful in the house of prayer. What delight in holy contemplation! A Christian
has such illapses of the Spirit, and meets with such transfigurations of soul,
that he thinks himself half in Heaven. Serving of God is like gathering of
Spices, or Flowers, wherein there is some labor, but the labor is recompensed
with delight. The way of sin has bitterness in it. The ^ears while they lick
the honey, are stung with the Bees. So while men are following their lusts,
they have checks of conscience, which are a foretast of Hell. Better want the
honey; than have this sting. But the violence for Heaven is spiced with such
joy, that it is not labor, but pleasure.

V. This violence and activity of 6. Motive.
Spirit in Religion, puts a luster upon a Christian. The more excellent any
thing is, the more active. The Sun is a glorious creature, as a Giant it runs
its Race, Psalm. 19. 5. Fire, the noblest element, sparkles vigorously. The
Angels are described with wings, Isa. 6. 2. which is an emblem of their swist
obedience. The more violent we are in Religion, the more Angelical we are.

7. How violent was Christ about our 7. Motive.
salvation! He was in an Agony; he continued all night in prayer, Luke 6. 12.
He wept, he fasted, he dyed a violent death; he rose violently out of the
grave. Was Christ so violent for our salvation, and does it not become us to be
violent, who are so nearly concerned in it? Christ's violence was not only
satisfactory, but exemplary. It was not only to appease God, but to teach us.
Christ was violent in dying, to teach us to be violent in believing.

8. This holy violence brings Rest Omuis Motus te^dit ad qui^tem.
; 8. Motive.
motion tends to rest, Heb. 4. 9. There remains a rest for the people of God.
Indeed, there is a motion which does not tend to rest: they who are violent in
a way of sin, shall never have rest, Revel. 4. 8. They rest not day and night.
Such as are graceless, shall be restless. But the violence a Christian takes,
leads to rest. As the weary Traveller sits down at night and rests him, Psalm.
116. 7. Return to thy rest, O my soul. Holy violence is like the flying of
Noah's Dove to the Ark, where it found rest.

9. If we use what violence we are 9. Motive.
able, God will help us, Phil 2. 12.. It is God who works in you both to will
and to do. The Spirit helps us in prayer, and so proportionably in all other
duties of Religion, Romans 8. 26. The Promise encourages, and the Spirit
enableth. In all earthly Races a ^an runs in his own strength; but in the Race
to Heaven we have the Spirit of God helping us; he not only gives us the Crown,
when we have done running; but he gives us legs to run; he gives exciting and
assisting grace; the Spirit of God helping, makes our work easy. If another
helps to carry a burden, it is less difficult. If the Loadstone draw the Iron,
it is not hard for the Iron to move. If the Spirit of God, as a divine
Loadstone, draw and move the heart in obedience; now the work goes on with more
facility.

10. This blessed violence in Religion 10. Motive.
; would be preventive of much sin. While men are idle in the Vineyard, they are
a prey to every temptation. We do not sow our seed in fallow ground; but Satan
does sow most of his seed of temptation in hearts that lie fallow. When he sees
persons unimployed, he will find them work to do; he will sti^ them up to one
sin or other, Matthew. 13. 25. While men slept, the enemy sowed tares. When Satan
finds men in a drowsy condition, their sleeping time is his tempting time; but
by holy violence we prevent the Devil's design; we are so busied about
salvation, that we have no leisure to listen to a temptation. St. Hierom gave
his friend this advice, to be always well employed, that when Satan came with
a temptation he might find him working in the Vineyard. When the bird is flying
it is safe, when it sits still on the bough, then it is in danger of being
shot. When a Christian sits still, and is unactive, now the Devil shoots him
with his fiery darts.

11. The folly of such as are violent 11. Motive.
for the world, but not for the Kingdom above. Alas, how insipid are all these
things that we lay out our sweat and violence upon, they will not make us
happy. King Solomon did as it were put all the creatures into a limbeck, and
still out the quintessence of them, and behold all was vanity, Eccles. 2. 8.

1. These earthly things that we so toil for, are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6. 17. It Is
uncertain whether we shall get them. All that are Suitors to a Virgin do not
speed. All that come to a Lottery have not a prize.

2. They are unsatisfactory. Could men heap up Silver as dust; had they as much
as the Devil promised Christ, All the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them; yet they can no more fill the heart, than a drop of water can fill the
cistern, Eccles. 5. 16. What profit has he that has labored for the wind?

3. They are transient; death feeds at the root. All worldly possessions are
like a Castle of Snow in the Sun: or like a posie of flowers which withers
while we are smelling to it. O what folly is it to put forth all ones violence
for the world, which is but for a season, and not for Christ and grace. As if a
condemned man should be earnest to get his dinner, but never mind getting his
pardon.

12. The next motive is in the text; ^2. Motive.
this violence is for a Kingdom (...) Chrysostom.
. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence. And what will we be violent for, if
not for a Kingdom; Men will wade to a Kingdom through blood: This is a Kingdom
worth striving for. Cyprus is an Island so exceeding fertile and pleasant, that
it was anciently called Macaria, which signifies Blessed. This title of Blessed
may more fitly be given to the heavenly Kingdom. If the Mountains were Gold; if
every Sand of the Sea were a Diamond; if the whole Globe were a shining
Chrysolite, it were infinitely beneath the glory of this Kingdom.

1. The immunities of the heavenly (...).
Kingdom are great.

1. There shall be a freedom from sin; here sin keeps house with us; it is as
natural to us to sin, as to breath. The soul that is most refined, and
clarified by grace, is not without some dregs of corruption. St. Paul cried out
of a Body of sin. He who is inoculated into Christ has still a taste and
relish of the wild Olive. But when we ascend to the heavenly Kingdom, this
mantle of sin shall drop off. That Kingdom is so pure, that it will not mix
with any corruption, Rev. 21. 27. A sinful thought shall not creep in there.
There is beauty which is not stained with lust, and honor which is not swelled
with pride.

2. In that blessed Kingdom there shall be freedom from the assaults of the Red
Dragon. It Is sad to have Satan daily soliciting us by his temptations, and
laboring to trappan us into sin. Temptation is the Devil's Powder Plot, to
blow up the fort-royal of our graces; but this is the blessed freedom of the
heavenly Kingdom, it is not capable of temptation. The old Serpent is cast out
of Paradise.

3. In that blessed Kingdom, there shall be freedom from divisions. In this
world, God's own Tribes go to war. Ephraim envies Judah, and Judah vexes
Ephraim. The Soldiers Spear pierced Christ's side; but the divisions of Saints
pierce his heart. Christ prayed that all his people might be one, as he and his
Father are one, Joh. 17. 21. But how do Christians by their discords and
animosities go about what in them lies to frustrate Christ's Prayer. But in the
Kingdom of Heaven there is perfect love, which, as it casts out fear, so
strife. Those Christians that could not live quietly together here, in that
Kingdom shall be united. There Calvin and Luther are agreed. In that celestial
Kingdom there shall be no vilifying or slandering one another, or raking into
those sores which Christ died to heal. Christians that could not pray together,
shall sing together in that glorious quire: there shall not be one jarring
string in the Saints music.

4. In that heavenly Kingdom there shall be freedom from all molestations. Our
lives now are interlined with troubles, Psalm. 31. 10. My life is spent with
grief, and my years with sighing (...). Euripid.
. There are many things to occasion disquiet: Sometimes poverty afflicts;
sometimes sickness tortures; sometimes unkindness of friends breaks the heart.
Our lives, like the Irish Seas, are full of tempests; but in the Kingdom of
Heaven is nothing to administer grief; there all is serene and calm; nothing
within to humble, or without to molest.

2. The Royalties and excellencies (...)
of that Kingdom are great. We may say of Heaven, as it was said of Laish,
Judge. 18. 9, 10. We have seen the Land, and behold it is very good; a place
where there is no want of any thing.

The heavenly Kingdom abounds with (...)
Riches, Rev. 21. 21. The Twelve Gates were twelve Pearls. Earthly Kingdoms are
fain to traffic abroad for Gold and Spices: In the Kingdom of God are all
Rarities to be had, all commodities of its own growth; therefore figured by the
Tree of life, bearing several sorts of fruit, Rev. 22. 2. How rich is that
place where the blessed Deity shines forth in its immense glory infinitely
beyond the comprehension of Angels.

2. The delights of the heavenly Kingdom are unmixed. The comforts here below
are checkered. Honor may be stained with disgrace; joy interlarded with
sorrow. Our stars are mixed with clouds; but the delicacies of Heaven are pure
as well as pleasant. There i^ honey that has not one drop of gall, The Crystal
spring of joy has no settling of sorrow at bottom. The Rose in that Paradise
is without prickles; the Sun in that horizon is without eclipse.

3. This Kingdom above is durable,

-- (...) -- Suppose earthly Kingdoms to be more glorious than they are, their
foundations of gold, their walls of pearl, their windows of Sapphire, yet they
are corruptible, Hos. 1. 4. I will cause the Kingdom to cease. Troy and Athens
now lie buried in their own ruins. But the Kingdom of Glory, as it is made
without hands; so without end. It is the everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1. 11. Now
methinks, if ever we will use violence, it it should be for this Kingdom; this
Kingdom will make amends for all our labor and pal^ns (...). Chrysostom. Sermon.
in Eutropium.
. Caesar marching with his Army toward Rome, and hearing that all the people
were fled from it, said, they that will not fight for this City, what City will
they fight for! So if (...).
we will not put forth violence for this Kingdom of Heaven, what will we be
violent Currite Christ'ani, (...) currite, ut a^reolam, splendidissim^m
sc^licet gloriae bravi^, (...). Lap.
for! I s^y to all, as the children of Dan in another sense, Judge 18. 9. We
have seen the Land, and behold it is very good; and are ye still? Be not
slothful to go, and to enter to passess the Land.

13. The more violence we have used 13. Motive.
f^r Heaven, the sweeter Heaven will b^ when we come there. As when a man has
been a grafting Trees, or seting Flowers in his garden, it is pleasant to
review and look over his labors: So in Heaven, when we shall remember our
former zeal and activity for the Kingdom; it will indulcorate Heaven, and add
to the joy of it. For a Christian to think, such a day I spent in examining my
heart, such a day I was weeping for sin; when others were at their sport, I was
at my prayers; and now, have I lost any thing by this violence? My tears are
wiped away, and the wine of Paradise chears my heart. I now enjoy him whom my
soul loves; I now have the Crown and white Robe: I so longed for. O how
pleasant will it be to think, this is the Heaven my Savior bled for, and I
swet for.

14. The more violence we put forth 14. Motive.
in Religion, the greater measure of glory we shall have. That there are
degrees of glory in Heaven, seems to me beyond dispute.

1. There are degrees of torment in Hell Mat. 23. 14.
; therefore by the Rule of contraries degrees of glory in Heaven.

2. The Scripture speaks of a Prophet's Reward, Mat. 10. 41. which is a degree
above others.

3. The Saint^ are said to shine as the Stars, (...) (...). Now one sta^
differs from another in glory. So that there are gradations of happiness; and
of this judgment is Calvin; as also many of the ancient Fathers. Consider then
seriously; the more violent we are for Heaven, and the more work we do for God,
the greater will be our reward. The hotter our zeal, the brighter our Crown.
Could we hear the blessed souls departed speaking to us from Heaven, sure thus
they would say, were we to leave Heaven a while, and to dwell on the earth
again, we would do God a thousand times more service than ever we have done; we
would pray with more life, act with more zeal; for now we see, the more has
been our labor, the more astonishing is our joy, and the more flourishing our
Crown.

15. Upon our violence for the Kingdom, 15. Motive
God has promised mercy, Mat. 7. 7. Ask and it shall be given you; seek and ye
shall find; knock and it shall be opened to you.

1. Ask.] Ask with importunity. A faint asking begs a denial Qui frigide (...),
etc.
. King Ahashuerus stood with his golden Scepter, and said to Queen Esther, Ask
and it shall be given to half of the Kingdom. But God says more, Ask and he
will give the whole Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. It is observable, the door of the
tabernacle was not of brass, but had a thin covering, a vail, that they might
easily enter into it: So the door of Heaven is through Christ's blood made
easy, that our prayers put up in servency may enter. Upon our asking, God has
promised to give his Spirit, Luke 11. 13. And if he gives his Spirit, he will
give the Kingdom: the Spirit first anoints, 1 John 2. 27. and after its
anointing Oil comes the Crown.

2. Seek and ye shall find.] But, is it not said, Many shall seek to enter in
and shall not be able? Luke 13. 24. I answer, that is, because they did seek in
a wrong manner.

1. They did seek ignorantly, setting up an Altar to an unknown god. It is ill
seeking Pearls in the dark. Ignorant people seek Heaven by their good meanings;
they seek in the dark, and no wonder they miss of salvation.

2. They did seek proudly. They sought Heaven by their own merits; whereas we
are to seek the Kingdom in Christ's strength, and in his name.

3. They did seek lazily; as the Spouse sought Christ on her bed, and found him
not, Cant. 3. 1. So many seek Christ in a supine manner; they seek, but they do
not strive.

4. They did seek hypocrit ^ally; they would have Heaven and their lusts too.
Like that Protestant Prince Cambden speaks of, who set up one Altar in the same
Church to the true God, and another to the Idol. But let not such seekers ever
think to find happiness, let not them think to lie in Dalila's lap, and go to
Abraham's bosom when they die.

5. They did seek inconstantly: Because mercy did not come presently, they gave
over seeking.

But else if we seek the Kingdom of Heaven cordially, God has pawned his Truth
in a promise, we shall find, Jer. 29. 13. Then shall ye find me, when you
search for me with all your heart.

3. Knock and it shall be opened.] Knocking implies violence. But we must do as
Peter, Acts 22. 16. He continued knocking. We must continue knocking by prayer,
and Heaven-gate shall be opened. How may this be as Oil to the wheels? how may
it excite holy violence, when we have so gracious a promise of mercy upon our
earnest seeking of it.

16. This holy violence will not hinder 16. Motive.
men in their secular employments. Violence for the Kingdom, and diligence in a
calling, are not inconsistent. Christians, you may work for Heaven, yet work in
a trade. God has given you a body and a soul, and he has allotted you time to
provide for both: he has given you a body, therefore be diligent in your
calling; he has given you a soul, therefore be violent for Heaven. These two
may well stand together, providing for a family, and praying in in a family. He
that does not exercise himself in some honest employment, is guilty of the
breach of that Commandment, Six days shall thou labor. God never sealed
warrants for idleness Iacumbit omnibu^ ut labor^t. Quistorp. vid. Ambros. lib.
6. Hexam. cap. 4. Virgilium. lib 4. Ae^cid. Horatium Sa^. 1. Plinium, lib. 11.
c. 30, etc.
. The sluggard shall be indicted at the day of judgment for leting his field
be overrun with thorns Prove. 24. 30.
. They are hypocrites who talk of living by faith, but refuse to live in a
Calling. Only remember, that the pains you tak in Religion must exceed the
other, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God. First, in order of time,
before all things; and first in order of affection, above all things. Your soul
is the nobler part, therefore that must be chiefly looked after. In your
calling show diligence; in Religion violence.

But some may say, We are so encumbered in the world, that all time for Relion
is swallowed up; we cannot get leave from our calling to read or pray?

Resp. If your trade be such that you cannot allow your selves time for your
souls, then your trade is unlawful. There are two things make a trade unlawful.

1. When persons deal in such commodities as they know cannot be used without
sin. Selling of black spots, or idolatrous Pictures and Crucifixes.

2. When their trade does so involve them in worldly business, that they cannot
mind eternity, or make out one sally to the Throne of Grace. They are so much
in the shop, that they cannot be in the closet. If there be such a trade to be
found, doubtless it is unlawful; but let not men lay it upon their trade, but
upon themselves; their trade would give them leave to serve God, but their
covetousness will not give them leave. O how many put a fallacy upon their own
souls, and cheat themselves into Hell.

17. There is but a short space of time 17. Motive.
granted us, therefore work the harder for Heaven before it be too late, Indeed
we are apt to dream of a long life, as if we were not sojourners, but natives,
and were to stay here always. The blossom of childhood hopes to come to the
budding of youth; and the bud of youth hopes to come to the flower of age; and
the flower of age hopes to come to old age; and old age hopes to renew its
strength as the Eagle Psalm. 49. 11.
: But if we measure life by a pair of Scripture-compasses, it is very short: it
is compared to a flying shadow, Job. 8. 17. to an hand-breadth, Psalm. 39. 5. as
if there were but a span between the cradle and the grave, -- parum abest a
nihilo --. Is the time of life so short, and may be shorter than we are aware?
what need is there zealously to improve it before it be slipped away? if time
runs, let us so run, 1 Cor. 9. 24. He that has a great business in hand, and
the time allotted for doing it is but short, had not need lose any of that
time. A Traveller that has many miles to ride, and the night ready to
approach, had need spur on the harder, that the night do not overtake him: So
we have a long journey, and the night of death is drawing on, how should we use
spurs to ou^ sluggish hearts, that we may go on more swiftly!

18. A man's personal day of grace 18. Motive.
may be short. There is a time while the Scepter of grace is held forth, 2 Cor.
6. 2. Now is the accepted time. The Lord has prefixed a time wherein the means
of Grace shall work or not work. If a person come not in by such a time, God
may say, Never fruit grow on thee more. A sign this day of grace is past, when
conscience has done speaking, and God's Spirit has done striving. Whether
this day may be longer or shorter, we cannot tell; but because it may so soon
expire, it is wisdom to take the present opportunity, and use all violence for
Heaven. The day of grace hastens away: no man can (like Joshua) bid this Sun
stand still; and if this critical day be once past, it cannot be recalled. The
day of grace being lost, the next is (...) day of wrath. Jerusalem had a day,
but she lost it, Luke 19. 44 If thou had known, even thou, in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.
After the expiration of the day of grace, no means or mercies shall prove
effectual: Now (...), they are hid from thine eyes. Which is like the ringing a
doleful knell over a dying person; therefore put forth all violence for Heaven,
and do it in this, (...), before it be too late, and the decree be gone forth.

19. If you neglect the offering violence 19 Motive
now, there will be no help for you after death. When men shall open their eyes
in another world, and see into what a damned condition they have sinned
themselves, O now what would they not do, what violence would they not use, if
there were a possibility they might be saved! When once the door of mercy is
shut, if God would make new terms far harder than before, they would readily
seal to them. If God should say to the sinner after death, Would thou be
content to return to the earth, and live there under the harrow of persecution
a thousand years for my sake? Yes Lord, I will subscribe to this, and endure
the world's fury, may I have but thy favor at last. But, will thou be content
to serve an Apprentiship in Hell a thousand years, where thou shall feel the
worm gnawing, and the fire burning? Yes Lord, even in Hell I submit to be; so
that after a thousand years I may have a release, and that bitter cup may pass
away from me. But, will thou for every lie thou have told, endure the rack?
will thou for every Oath that thou have sworn, fill a bottle of tears? will thou for every sin thou have committed, lie ten thousand years in sackcloth and
ashes? Yes Lord, all this and more if thou requirest, I will subscribe to; I am
content now to use any violence, if I may but at last be admitted into thy
Kingdom. No, will God say; there shall be no such condition proposed to thee,
no possibility of favor, but thou shall lie for ever among the damned, and who
is able to dwell with everlasting burnings? Oh therefore be wise in time, now
while God's terms are more easy, embrace Christ, and Heaven, for after death
there will be nothing to be done for your souls. The sinner and the furnace
shall never be parted.

20. How without all Apology will 20. Motive.
you be left, if you neglect this violence for heaven! Methinks I hear God
thus expostulating the case with sinners at the last day, Why did you not take
pains for Heaven? has not there been a Prophet among you? Did not my Ministers
list up their voice like a Trumpet? did not they warn you? did not they
persuade you to use this violence, teling you that your salvation depended upon
it? but the most melting Rhetoric of the Gospel would not move you. Did not I
give you time to look after your souls? Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to repent
(...) su^m test atur, mulie^is contumaciam accusat. Paraeus.
. Did not you promise in your vow in Baptism, that you would take Heaven by
force? Fighting under my banner against world, flesh, and Devil? Why then did
you not use violence for the Kingdom? it must be either sloth or obstinacy. You
could be violent for other things, for the world, for your lusts, but not for
the Kingdom of Heav^n: What can you say for your selves, why the sentence of
damnation should not pass? O how will men be confounded and left speechless at
such a time, and God's Justice shall be cleared in their condemnation! Psalm.
51. 4. That thou may be clear when thou judge. Though the Sinner shall
drink a Sea of wrath, yet not one drop of injustice.

21. What a vexation it will be at the 21. Motive.
last to lose the Kingdom of Glory for want of a little violence. When one
shall think with himself, I did something in Religion, but I was not violent
enough; I prayed, but I should have brought fire to the sacrifice. I heard the
word, but I should have received the truth in love; I humbled my self with
fasting, but I should with humiliation have joined reformation. I gave Christ's
poor good words; I did bid them be warmed, but I should have clothed and fed
them, and for want of a little more violence I have lost the Kingdom. The
Prophet bade the King of Israel smite upon the ground, 2 King. 13. 18. And he
smote thrice, and stai^, and the man of God was wroth, and said, thou should
have smiten five or six times, then had thou smitten Syria till thou had
consumed it. So a man does something in Religion, he smites thrice, and then
states; whereas, had he but put forth a little more violence for Heaven he had
been saved. What a mischief is this but to half do ones work, and by shooting
short to lose the Kingdom! O how will this cut a man to the heart when he is in
Hell, to think, had I but gone a little further it had been better with me than
it is now; I had not been thus tormented in the flame.

22. The examples of the Saints of 22. Motive.
old, who have taken Heaven by force. David broke his sleep for meditation,
Psalm. 119. 148. His violence for Heaven was boiled up to zeal, Psalm. 119. 139.
My zeal has consumed me. And St. Paul did reach forth unto those things which
were before (...).
. The Greek word signifies to stretch out the neck: a metaphor taken from
Racers that strain every limb, and reach forward to ^ay hold upon the priz^. We
read of Anna a Prophetess, Luke (...). 37. She departed not from the Temple,
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. How industrious was
Calvin in the Lord's Vi^eyard. When his friends persuaded him for his health
sake, to remit a little of his labors, says he* Would ye have the Lord find
me (...) when he comes Quid vultis ut dominus ve^iens otiosum me inveniat, etc.
Beza in vita Caly.
? Luther spent three hours a day in prayer. It is said of holy Bradford,
preaching, reading and prayer was his whole life. I rejoice (said Bishop Jewel)
that my body is exhausted in the labors of my holy calling. How violent were
the blessed Martyrs! they wore their fetters as ornaments; they snatched up
torments as Crowns, and embraced the flames as cheerfully as Eliah did the
fiery Chariot that came to fetch him to Heaven. Let racks, fires, pullies, and
all manner of torments come, so I may win Christ, said Ignatius. These pious
souls resisted unto blood. How should this provoke our zeal! write after these
fair copies.

23. If the Saints with all their violence 23. Motive.
have much ado to get to Heaven, how shall they come there who use no violence,
1 Pet. 4. 18. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear! If they that strive as in an Agony can hardly get in at the
strait gate, what shall become of them that never strive at all! If Saint Paul
did keep under his body, by prayer, watching, fasting, 1 Cor. 9. 27. how shall
they be (...), that wholly let loose the reins to the flesh, and bathe
themselves in the luscious streams of carnal pleasure.

24. This sweating for Heaven is not 24. Motive.
to endure long, 1 Pet. 5. 10. After ^e have suffered a while (...).
. So after ye have offered violence a while, there shall be an end put to it.
Your labor shall expire with your life. It is but a while and you shall have
done weeping, wrestling, praying; it is but a while and the Race will be over,
and you shall receive the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls, 1
Pet. 1. 9. It is but a while and you shall have done your weary marches, you
shall put off your Armor, and put on white Robes.

-- (...) (...)
. -- How should this excite a spirit of holy violence^ It is but a sew months
or days and you shall reap the sweet fruit of your obedience. The winter will
be past, and the spring flowers of joy shall appear. Doctor Tailor comforted
himself when he was going to the stake, I have but two styles to go over, and I
shall be at my Father's house. Christians, you have but a little way to go, a
little more violence, a few more tears shed, a few more sabbaths kept, and then
your hopes ^shall be crowned with the beatifical sight of God. When the vapor
is blown away, then we may see the Sun clearly: So when this short vapor of
life is blown away, then we shall behold Christ the Sun of Righteousness in all
his glory, 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him as he is.

25. If you are not violent for H^aven, 25. Motive
you, walk antipodes to your own praye^s. You pray that God's will may be done
by you on earth, ^as it is done, in Heaven: Now, how (...) God's will done in
Heaven (...) are not the Angels swift in doing the will of God? like the stars
above the equinoctial, that are moved many millions of miles in an hour. The
seraphints are described with wings, to show how velocious and winged they are
in their obedience, Isa. 6. 2. Now if you are not violent in your spiritual
motion, (...) you live in a contradiction to your ow^ prayers. You are far from
being as Angels, you creep as Snails in the way to Heaven.

26. This holy and blessed violence ^6. Motive.
would mak^ Christians willing to die. What is it makes men so loath to die?
they are as a Tenant that is loath to go out of an house, why so? because their
conscience accuses them that they have taken little or no pains for Heaven:
they have been sleeping, when they should have been working, and now death
looks ghastly; they are afraid death will carry them prisoners to Hell. Whereas
the Christian that has been active in Religion, and has spent his time in the
service of God, he ^an look death in the face with comfor^. He who has been
violent for Heaven in this life, need not fear a viole^ death. Death shall do
him no hurt, it shall not be a destruction, but a deliveranc^ it shall purge
out slit, and perfect glory. What made St. Paul say, (...) dissol^, I des^re to
be disso^ved, Phil. 1. 23. Surely the reason was, he had been a m^n of violence
he did spend himself for Christ, and labored more than all the other Apost^es,
1 Cor. 15. 10. And now he knew there was a Crown laid up for him. Augustus the
Emperor did desire that he might have an (...), a quiet easy death. If any
thing make our pillow easy at death, and we go out of the world quietly, it
will be this holy violence that we have put forth in the business of Religion.

^7. If for all that has been said, you 27. Motive.
will either fit still, or keep your sweat for something else than Heaven,
know, there is a time shortly coming when you will wish you had used this
violence. When sickness s^izeth on you, and your disease begins to grow
violent, and you think God's Sergeant is at the door then what wishes will you
make, O that I had been more violent for Heaven! O that I had been praying when
I was dancing and making merry! O that I had had a Bible in my hand, when I had
a pair of Cards! how happy then might I have been! but alas, my case is
mi^erable! what shall I do! I am so sick, that I cannot live, and so sinful,
that I dare not die! O that God would respi^e me a little longer, that he would
put a few years more in my lease, that a little space might be granted me to
recover my lost hours! As one said on her deathbed, Call time again; but time
will not be called again. At the hour of death sinners will awake out of their
lethargy, and fall into a frenzy of horror and despair; and shall not all
these Arguments prevail with men to be violent for the Kingdom? what an hardened
plece is a sinner's heart! We read that at Christ's passion, the Rock^rent,
Mat. 27. 51. But nothing will move a sinner; The Rocks will sooner rend than
his heart. If all that I have said will not prevail, it is a sign ruin is
toward, 1 Samuel 2. 25. They hearkened not to the voice of their father, because
the Lord would sl^y them.

Yet this Caution I must necessarily Caution.
insert, though we shall not obtain the Kingdom without violence, yet not for
our violence. When we have done all, look up to Christ and free grace.
Bella^mine says, we merit Heaven ex congruo. No, though we are saved in the
use of means, yet by grace too, Ephesians. 2. 5. By grace ye are saved. Heaven is a
donative, ^uke 12. 32. It is my Father's good pleasure to give you a Kingdom.
Why may one say, I have used violence for it, I have wrought for the Kingdom.
I, but it is a gift that free grace bestows. We must look up to Christ for
acceptance: not our sweat, but his blood saves: our laboring qualifies us for
Heaven, but Christ's dying purchased Heaven. Alas, what is all that we can do
in comparison of glory? what is the shedding of a tear to a Crown? therefore we
must renounce all in point of Justification, and let Christ and Freegrace carry
away the glory of our salvation. God must help us in our working, Phil. 2. 12.
It is God which works in you both to will and to do. How then can we merit by
our working, when it is God that helps us in our working?

I shall in the next place lay down 5. Use, Direction.
some Rules or Directions how to get this blessed violence.

1. Take heed of those things which 1. 1. Rem^venda.
will hinder this violence for Heaven.

1. Take heed of Unbelief. Unbelief 1.
is a great remora, as it is discouraging. When a Christian is working for
Heaven, unbelief whispers thus, To what purpose is all this pains? I had as
good sit still. I may pray, and not be heard; I may work, and have no reward; I
may come near Heaven, yet miss it, Jer. 8. 12. And they said, There is no hope.
Unbelief destroies hope; and if you cut this sinew of Religion, all violence
for Heaven cease. Unbelief raiseth^ cloud of despondency in the heart. Al^,
you will never be able to go through the work of Religion; so many precep^s to
obey; so many temptations to resist; so many afflictions to bear; that you will
succumbere oneri, fall under the burden; you will tire in your march to Heaven.
Unbelief raises jealous thoughts of God, it represents him as an austere
Master, and that if we fail in never so little a punctilio, he will take the
extremity of the Law upon us. This discourageth the soul in the use of means.
Unbelief does as (...) and To^iah did to the Jews, Nehe^. 6. 9. They made us
afraid, faying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work. Oh take heed of
unbelief, it destroies this holy violence. We read of Joroboam's arm being
withered, 1 King. 13. 4. Unbelief withers the arm of the soul, that it cannot
stretch it self forth to any spiritual action. Unbelief does the Devil the
greatest kindness; it makes way for his temptations to enter, which do so
inc^ant and bewitch us, that we cannot work. Beware of this sin; believe the
Promises: God is good to the soul that seeks him, Lam. 3. 25. Do but seek him
with importunity, and he will open both his heart and Heaven to thee.

Take heed of puzling your thoughts 2.
about Election. A Christian may think thus, what should I take pains? perhaps
I am not elected, and then all my violence is to no purpose. Thus, many are
taken off from the use of means, and the business of Religion is at a stand.
Whereas no man can justly say, he is not elected. It is true, some of God's
children have said so in temptation: But as Peter in a transfiguration said he
knew not what; so these in a temptation. But no man can say on just grounds, he
is not elected, ^nless he can prove that he has sinned the ^n against the Holy
Ghost. For any one to asse^t non^ection is a sin; for that which keeps him in
^in, must needs be sinful: But this opinion keeps him in sin; it discourageth
him from the use of means, and cuts the sinews of all endeavors; do not
therefore perplex your thoughts about Election; this Book is sealed, and no
Angel can unclasp it. The Rule Christians are to go by, is, God 's Revealed
Will, not his Secret. God's revealed will is, that we should pray and repent;
by this we mak^ our calling sure; and by making our calling sure, we make our
election sure. If I see the beds of spices grow and flourish, I know the Sun
has been there. And if I find the fruits of obedience in my heart, I may
conclude Gods electing love has shined upon me, 2. These. 2. 12. God has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification.

Take heed of too much violence after 3.
the world; the world cools good, affections. The earth puts out the fire. The
world's silver Trumpet sounds a retreat, and calls men off from their pursuit
after Heaven. The world hindered the young man from following Christ: he went
away sorrowful: whereupon, says our Savior, How hardly shall they that have
riches enter into the Kingdom of God? Luke 18. 24. Demos his Religion lay
buried in the earth, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demos has forsaken me, having loved this
present world. It was a saying of Pius Quintus, When I first entered into
orders, I had some good hope of my salvation; when I became a Cardinal, I
doubted of it; but since I came to be Pope, I do even despair of it. Jonathan
pursued the victory till he came at the honeycomb, and then he stood still, 1 Samuel 14. 27. Many are violent for the Kingdom of God, till gain or preferment
offers it self; when they meet with this honey, then they stand still. The world
blinds men's eyes that they do not see the way; and fetters their feet that they
do not run in the way of God's Commandments. Mithridates King of Pontus being
worsted by the Romans, and fearing he should not escape them, caused a great
deal of silver and gold to be scattered in the ways, which while the Roman
soldiers were busy in gathering, he got away from them. The like stratagem
Satan uses, knowing what tempting things Riches are, he throws them in men's
way, that while they are eager in gathering these he may hinder them in their
pursuit of happiness. I have observed some who did once Jehu-like, drive on
furiously in the cause of Religion, when the world has come in upon them,
their Charet-wheels have been pulled off, and they have driven on heavily
Foenus pecuni^, funus animae.
. Were a ^an to climb up a steepy Rock, and had weights tied to his legs, they
would hinder his ascent. Men's golden weights hinder them in climbing up this
steepy Rock which leads to salvation. The world's music charms men asleep, and
when they are asleep, they are not fit to work. A thing cannot be carried
violently to two extremes at once. The ship cannot go full sail to the East and
West at the sametime: So a man cannot be violent for Heaven and Earth at once:
he may have Christ and the world, but cannot love Christ and the world, 1 John
2. 15. He that is all fire for the world, will be all ice for Heaven. Take heed
of engaging your affections too far in these secular things. Use the world as
your servant, but do not follow it as your Master.

Take heed of indulging any lust. Sin 4.
lived in will spoil all violence for Heaven. Sin infeebles; it is like the
cutting Sampson's hair, and then the strength departs. Sin is aegritudo animi,
the soul's sickness. Sickness takes a man off his legs, and does so dis-spirit
him, that he is unfit for any violent exercise. A sick man cannot run a Race.
Sin lived in, takes a man quite off from duty, or makes him dead in it. The
more lively the heart is in sin, the more dead it is in prayer. How can he be
earnest with God for mercy, whose heart accuses him of secret sin. Guilt
breeds fear; and that which strengthens fear, weakens violence. Adam having
sinned was afraid, and hid himself, Genesis 3. 10. When Adam had lost his
innocence, he lost his violence. Therefore lay the Axe to the root; let sin be
he^vn down; not only abstain from sin in the Act, but let the love of sin be
mortified, and let every sin be put to the sword. Many will leave ail their
sins but one; save one sin, and lose one soul. One sin is a fetter; a man may
lose the Race as well by having one fetter on his leg, as if he had more. I
have read of a great Monaroh Dar^us.
, that flying from his enemy, he threw away the Crown of gold on his head that
he might run the faster: So that sin which thou did wear as a Crown of gold,
throw it away that thou may the faster run to the heavenly Kingdom.

If you would be violent for Heaven, 5.
take heed of despondency of spirit. Be serious, but cheerful. He whose spirit
is pressed down with sadness, is unfit to go about his work. An unchearful
heart is unfit to pray, or praise God. When the strings of a Lute are wet, it
will not put forth any sweet harmony. Such as go drooping under fears and
discouragements, cannot be violent in Religion. When a soldier faints in the
field, he soon lets fall his sword. David chides himself out of his melancholy,
Psalm. 43. 5. Why art thou cast down O my soul? Why art thou disquieted within
me? hope yet in God. A sad heart makes a dull action. We use the Drum and
Trumpet in Battle, that the noise of the Trumpet may excite and quicken the
soldiers spirits, and make them fight more vigorously. Cheerfulness is like
music in battle, it excites a Christian's spirits, and makes him vegete and
lively in duty. What is done with cherfulness, is done with delight, and the
soul flies most swiftly to Heaven upon the wing of delight.

If you would be violent for Heaven, 6.
take heed of a supine lazy temper. A slothful Christian is like a fearful
soldier, that has a good mind to the plunder, but is loath to storm the
Castle: So he would fain have Heaven, but is loath to take it by storm. --
enerves animos odisse virtus solet Valor. Max.
-- Sloth is the soul's sleep. Many instead of woe king out of salvation, sleep
away salvation. Such as will not labor, must be put at last to beg; they must
beg as Dives, for one drop of water. An idle man (says So^omon) put^ his hand
in his bosom, Prove. 19. 24. He should have his hand to the p^ough, and he puts
it in his bosom. God never made Heaven an hive for drones. Sloth is a disease
ap^ to grow upon men; shake it off. A ship that is a slug, is a prey to the
Pirate. A slugish soul is a prey to Satan. When the Crocodile sleeps with his
mouth open, the Indian Rat gets into his belly, and eats his entrails. While
men are asleep in sloth, the Devil enters and devours them.

Take heed of consulting with flesh (...)
and blood. As good consult with the Devil as the flesh. The flesh is a
bosomtraitor. An enemy within the walls is worst. The flesh cries out, there is
a Lion in the way. The flesh will bid thee spare thy self, as Peter did Christ:
Obe not so violent for Heaven, spare thy self. The flesh says as Judas, What
needs all this waste? So, what needs all this praying and wrestling? why do
thou waste thy strength? what needs all this waste? The flesh cries out for
ease; it is loath to put its neck under Christ's yoke. The flesh is for
pleasure; it had rather be gaming, than running the heavenly Race. There is a
description of fleshly pleasures, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. That lie upon beds of Ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their Couches, that chaunt to the sound of the
Viol; that drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments.
These are the delights of the flesh. Such an one was he spoken of in Beard's
Theater, that did strive to please all his five senses at once. He did bespeak
a room richly hung with fair Pictures; he had the most delicious music; he had
all the choice Aromaticks and Perfumes; he had all the Candies and curious
Preserves of the Confectioner; he was lodged in the bed with a beautiful
Curtisan: Thus did he indulge the flesh, and swore that he would spend all his
estate to live one week like a God, though he were sure to be damned in Hell
the next day. O take heed of holding intelligence with the flesh! The flesh is
a bad Counselor St. Paul would not confer with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16.
The flesh is a sworn enemy to this holy violence Rom 8. 13. If ye live after
the flesh ye shall die. You have taken an oath in Baptism, to renounce the
flesh.

Take heed of listening to the voice of 8.
such carnal friends as would call you off from this blessed violence. Fire
when in Snow, will soon lose its heat, and by degrees go out. Among bad company
you will soon lose your heat for Religion. The company of the wicked will
sooner cool you, than your company will heat them. Vinegar will sooner sour
the Wine, than the Wine will sweeten the Vinegar. How often do carnal friends
the same to our souls, as infected persons do to our bodies, convey the Plague?
The wicked are still dissuading us from this violence; they will say, it is
preciseness and singularity. As Christ's friends laid hold on him when he was
going to preach, Mark 3. 21. They went out to lay hold on him; for they said,
he is beside himself. Such as are unacquainted with the spirituality and
sweetness of Religion, judge all zeal frenzy; and therefore will lay hold
upon us to hinder us in this sacred violence. When we are earnest suitors to
Piety, our carnal friends will raise some ill report of it, and so endeavor to
break the match. Galeaci^s, Marquess of Vico, being resolved for Heaven, what a
block in his way did he find his carnal Relations! and what a do ^ad he to
break through that impediment! Take heed of a soar in your bosom. This is one
of the Devil's great subtilties, to hinder us from Religion by our nearest
Relations, and so to shoot us with our own rib. He tempted Adam by his wife
(...) petit cor.
, Genesis 3. 6. Who would have suspected the Devil there? He handed over a
temptation to Job by his wife, Job. 2^9. Do thou still retain thine
integrity? What notwithstanding all these disasters that have befallen thee,
do thou still pray, and serve God? Throw osf his livery, Curse God and die.
Thus would the Devil have cooled Job's violence for Heaven; but the shield of
his faith quenched this siery dart. Spira's friends stood in his way to Heaven,
for, advising with them about Luther's Doctrine, they persuaded him to recant;
and so openly abjuring his former faith, he felt an Hell in his conscience:
Take heed of such tempters; resolve to hold on your violence for Heaven, though
your carnal friends dissuade you. It Is better to go to Heaven with their
ha^red, than to Hell with their love. It was a saying of St. Hierom, If my
Pa^ents should pe^swade me to deny Christ; if my Mother should show me her
breasts that gave me suck Si matter mihi uber^ ostendat. etc.
; if my wife should go to charm me with her embraces, I would forsake all and
fly to Christ. If our dearest friends alive would lie in our way to Heaven, we
must either leap over them, or tread upon them.

Take heed of setting up your 9.
stay in the lowest pitch of grace. He that has the least grace, may have
motion, but not violence. It is a pitiful thing to be contented with just so
much grace as will keep life and soul together Socordis a^imae est di ere
Sufficit mihi si salver, quisque autem conari debet ut in Coelo sit primus.
Corn. a Lap.
. A sick man may have life, but is not lively. Grace may live in the heart, but
is sickly, and does not flourish into lively acts. Weak grace will not
withstand strong temptations, or carry through great sufferings: it will hardly
follow Christ upon the water. Little grace will not do God much service. A Tree
that has but little sap, will not have much fruit. It may be said of some
Christians, though they are not still born, yet they are starvelings in grace:
They are like a ship that comes with much ado to the Haven. Oh labor to grow
to further degrees of sanctity. The more grace, the more strength; and the more
strength, the more violence.

If you would be violent for Heaven, 10.
take heed of this opinion, That it is not so hard to get the Kingdom; less
violence will serve turn. He that thinks he need not run a Race so fast, will
be apt to slack his pace. This has undone many. Who will take pains for
Heaven, that thinks it may he had at a cheaper rate? But if it be so easy,
what needs Christ say, Strive as in an Agony. What needed Paul beat down his
body? Why does the Text speak of taking the Kingdom by force? Is not conversion
called a new birth? Joh. 3. 7. a Creation, Psalm. 51. 10. and is that facil? O
take heed of phancying that work easy which is both above nature, and against
it. It Is as great a wonder for a soul to be saved, as to see a mill stone to be
lift up into the middle Region.

2. U^e those means which will promote 2. 2. Pro^vovenda.
this holy violence.

1. Keep up daily prayer. Prayer is the bellows that blows up the affections;
and a Christian is most active, when his affections are most violent. Prayer
keeps the trade of Religion agoing. Prayer is to the soul, as the animal
spirits are to the body; the anmal spirits make the body more agile and lively;
so does prayer the soul. That the motion of a Watch may be quicker, the spring
must be wound up. Christian, wind up thy heart every day by prayer. Prayer
fetches in strength from Christ; and when his strength comes in, it sets the
soul a working. Prayer leaves the heart in a good frame: As the morning Sun
leaves a warmth in the room all the day after. When Christians lay aside
prayer, or leave off fervency in it, then by degrees they lose their holy
violence.

If you would be violent for Heaven, 2.
get under lively preaching. The word is quick and powerful, Heb. 4. 12. It
puts li^e into a dead heart. It is both a sword ^o cut down sin, and a spur to
quicken grace. The word is a fire to thaw a frozen heart, J^r. 23. 29. Is not
my Word fire? As good almost be without preaching, as be under such preaching
as will not warm. It is a part of the Word, not only to inform, but to inflame,
Psalm. 119. 50. Thy Word has quickened me. It Is the lively dispensation of the
Oracles of Heaven must animate us, and make us lively in our operation.

If you would be violent for Heaven, 3.
get your hearts filled with love to Religion. This is like the Rod of Myrtle
in the Travelers hand, (Pliny ^peaks of,) which makes him fresh and lively in
his travel, and keeps him from being weary. When a man has warmed himself at
the fire, now he is sit for work. If you would be violent in working out
salvation, warm your selves at this fire of love. A man will be violent for
nothing but what he loves. Why are men so eager in their pursuit after gold,
but because they love it. Love causes delight, and delight causes violence.
What made St. Paul labor more than all the other Apostles? The love of Christ
constrained him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Love is like Oil to the wheels. Get love to
Religion, and you will never be weary; you will count those the best hours
which are spent with God. He that digs in a silver Vein sweats, yet love to the
silver makes his labor delightful.

If you would be violent, be vigilant. 4.
The Prophet stood upon his Watchtower Tempus excubiarum ^st vita. Erasm,
Origin.
, Hab. 2. 1. Why are Christians so listless in their work, but because they are
so careless in their watch. Did they but watch to see how their enemy watches,
they would be violent to resist him: Did they but watch to see how their time
runs, or rather flies, they would be violent to redeem it: Did they but watch
to see how their hearts loiter in Religion, they would spur on faster to
Heaven. The reason, there is so little violence in Religion, is, because there
is so little vigilance. When Christians neglect their spiritual watch, and grow
secure, now their motion to Heaven is retarded, and Satan's motions to sin are
renewed. Our sleeping time, is Satan's tempting time.

If you would be violent for the 5.
Kingdom, bind your heart to God by sacred vows. A servant will be more
diligent after he is bound to his Master. Vow to the Lord, that by his grace
you will act more vigorously in the sphere of Religion, Psalm 56. 12. Thy vows
are upon me, O God. A vow binds the votary to duty. He looks upon himself now
as under a special obligation, and that quickens endeavor. No question but a
Christian may make such a vow, because the ground of it is morally good; he
vows nothing but what he is bound to do, namely, to walk more closely with God.
Only remember, that we vow not in our own strength, but Christ's. We must
confide in him as well for strength as righteousness, Isa. 46. 24. In the Lord
I have righteousness and strength.

If you would be violent for Heaven, 6.
be sure you make going to Heaven your business. What a man looks on as a
(...), or thing by the by, he will never be violent for; but that which he
makes his business, he will be industrious about. A man looks upon his trade as
the only thing to get a livelihood by, and he follows it close: So if we would
but look upon Religion as the main business wherein our salvation is concerned,
we should be violent in it, Luke 10. 42. But one thing is needful. This is the
One Thing, to get Christ and Heaven U^um est (si salvi esse velmus) quod omni^o
nobis incumbit, cura nimirun pictatis; huic u^i im^erse vacat Maria, cujus
fructus in aeternum mans^rus est. Caet^a quae c^rantur, caduca sunt (...)..
Grotius.
. This is the end we came into the world for. If we could thus look upon the
things of eternity as our business, the One Thing, how earnest should we be in
the pursuit of them!

If you would be violent, have Heaven 7.
continually in your eye. This made Christ violent to the death; he had an eye
to the joy set before him, Heb. 12. 2. Set the Crown ever before you, and that
will provoke endeavor.

-- immensum gloria ^alcar habet -- The Mariner has his hand to the Sterh, and
his eye to the Star. While we are working, let us have an eye to that place
where is Christ the bright morning star. How willingly does a man wade through
a deep water, that sees the dry Land before him, and is sure to be crowned as
soon as he comes at shore? Every time you cast your eye up to Heaven, think,
above that starry Heaven is the Empyraean Heaven I am striving for. Thus did
Moses; the eye of his faith quickened the feet of his obedience, Heb. 11. 26. He
looked to the recompense of Reward. When Christians lose their prospect of
Heaven, then they begin to slacken their pace in the way thither.

If you would be violent for the 8.
Kingdom, accompany with such as are violent. When we want fire, we use to go
to our neighbors hearth and fetch fire. Often be among the godly, and so you
shall fetch some heat and quickening from them, Psalm. 119. 63. I am a companion
of all them that fear thee (...) Adju^xi me. Vatablus.
. Good company quickens. The holy discourse and example of one Saint, does whet
and sharpen another. The Saints never go so fast to Heaven, as when they go in
company. One Christian helps forward another. In other Races that are run, many
times one hinders another; but in this Race to Heaven, one Christian helps
forward another, 1 These. 5. 11. Edify one another, even as also ye do. O let
not this Article of our Creed be forgotten, The Communion of Saints.

If you would be violent, never leave 9.
till you have the Spirit. Desire of God to put forth the sweet violence of his
Spirit; the Spouse begged a gale of the Spirit, Cant. 4. 16. Awake O Northwind,
blow a South. When God's Spirit blows upon us, now we go full sail to Heaven.
When the Spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels, then they moved,
Ezekiel. 1. 21. The wheels of our endeavor move apace, when the Spirit of God is
in these wheels. Seeing there are so many violent winds of temptation blowing
us backward, we had need have the violent wind of God's Spirit blowing us
forward to Heaven. Let this suffice to have spoken of the means for this holy
violence.

But may some say, we have used this violence for Heaven, what remains for us
to do? As the people said to Christ, Luke 1. 13. What shall we do?

You that have been violent for Heaven (aged Christians) let me beseech you
still to keep alive this holy violence. Not only keep up duty, but violence in
duty. Remember, you have that corruption within you, which is ready to abate
this blessed violence. The brightest coal has those ashes growing on it, as is
apt to choke the fire. You have those inbred corruptions, that like ashes, are
ready to choke the fire of your zeal. How was Peter's grace cooled when he
denied Christ! The Church of Ephesus lost her keen edge of Religion, Rev. 2. 4.
Take heed of declining in your affections. Be not like a body in an atrophy: be
most violent at last. A stone, the nearer it is to the center, the more violent
it is in its motion. You have but a little time now to work for God, therefore
work the harder. Be like the Church of Thyatira, Her last works were more than
her first Egr^gia laus non modo non satiscere, sed indies proficere in melius.
Grotius.
, Rev. 2. 19. Be as the Sun that shines brightest before its setting: As the
Swan that sings sweetest before its death, Romans 13. 11. Your salvation is
nearer than when you believed. If your salvation be nearer, your violence
should be greater. How should you quicken your pace, when you are within sight
of the Kingdom! He is an happy man, of whom it may be said, spiritually, as of
Moses literally before his death, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. His eyes waxed not dim, and his
natural force was not abated. So a Christian's force and violence for Heaven is
not abated: He keeps the best wine of his life till the last.

Here is strong consolation to the Use 6. Consolar.
violent Christian; thou art in the way to the Kingdom. Though perhaps thou
have not a bunch of Grapes in the way, (I mean that joy which some meet with)
yet it is happy that thou art in the way. Bless God that while some lie in the
tot^l neglect of duty, God has given thee an heart to seek him, Psalm. 105. 3.
Le^ the hearts of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Nay, God has not only given
thee an heart to do duty, but to do duty mixed with love, which makes it
savoury meat; and do duty stamped with fervency, which makes it pass current
with God. O bless God who has raised thee off the bed of sloth, and stirred up
the zeal of thy soul for Heaven. He who has made thee violent, will make thee
victorious. Wait awhile, and thou shall be possessed of a Kingdom. When Moses
went up to receive God's Commands, he staid six days on the Mount, and on the
seventh day, God called to him, Exodus 24. 16. Though we wait long, and have not
the thing waited for, yet let us continue doing our duty; shortly, God will
call us from Heaven, Come up hither, and we shall go from the Mount of Faith,
to the Mount of Vision, and behold those glorious things which eye has ^ot
seen, nor can it enter into man's heart to conceive.

But, may a child of God say, I fear Object.
I am none of those violent ones that shall take Heaven: I find such a deadness
of heart in duty, that I question whether I shall ever arrive at the Kingdom.

This deadness of the heart may arise Resp.
from natural causes. Weakness of body may occasion indisposition of mind. Thy
prayer may be weak, because thy body is weak. A Lute that is cracked cannot
send forth so sweet a sound as if it were whole.

2. This indisposition of soul perhaps is only casual, and for a time; it may
be in a deep fit of melancholy, or in desertion. When the Sun is gone from our
climate, the earth is as it were in desertion, and the trees are without
blossom or fruit; but this is only for a time: Let but the Sun return again in
Spring, and now the herbs flourish, and the trees put forth their fruit: So
when God hides his face, there is a deadness upon a Christian's heart; he
prays as if he prayed not: But let the Sun of Righteousness return, now he is
divinely animated, and is as vigorous and lively in his operation as ever, he
now recovers his first love. Therefore thou weak Christian, be not discouraged,
so long as thou do not allow thy selfin thy distemper; a dead heart is thy
burden, look up to Christ thy, High Priest, who is merciful to bear with thy
infirmities, and is mighty to help them.

THE HAPPINESS OF Drawing near to GOD.
PSALM 73. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to God.
THis Psalm is no less elegant than sacred: It is calculated for the Meridian
of God's Church in all times; but especially it is fit for the godly to
meditate upon in times of calamity. It is entitled a Psalm of Asaph (...)
. Asaph was a Mollerus.
man divinely inspired, a Prophet; as also one of the Masters of music; It is
called a Psalm of Asaph, either because he composed it, or because it was
committed to him to sing Traditus ipsi Asaph, cantori, deca^tandus. Va^ablus.
. This holy man here seems to have a dialogue with himself concerning
providence. He was ready to call God's providence to the bar of reason, and
enquire the equity of them. How does it seem just, that they who are evil
should enjoy so much good; and they who are good should endure so much evil
Imp^i cb^ietate fortune a^ insanian usque sibi pla^ent, and miseriis pl^rumque
subjac^nt pii, Munst. Clarius.
? While Asaph was debating the case with himself, at last his faith got above
his sense; he considered that the wicked were set in locis lubricis, in
slippery places. And like such as go upon Ice, their feet would soon slide; or
like such as walk on Mines of Powder, they would soon be blownup, Verse 18.
This did both resolve his doubt, and compose his spirit.

The proaemium or entrance into the Psalm, is not to be forgotten; Truly God is
good to Israel; so the Hebrew renders it, certainly (...)
: Without dispute, this is a golden maxim must be held.

In the Septuagint it is vox admirantis, it is set out by way of admiration, O
how good is God to Israel (...)
! What Angel in Heaven can exptess! The vulgar reads it, veruntamen, yet, God
is good; as if the Psalmist had said, though the Candle of prosperity shines on
the wicked, they have not only what their heart can wish, but more than heart
can wish, Verse 7. And though the godly are sorely afflicted, mingling their
drink with weeping; yet for all this, God is good to Israel. Here is the
Fountain, the Stream, the Cistern: the Fountain, God; the Stream, Goodness; the
Cistern into which it runs, Israel. Indeed God is good to all, Psalm. 145. 9.
The sweet dew falls upon the Thistle as well as the Rose. But though God be
good to all, yet not alike good to all. He is good to Israel in a special
manner. The wicked have sparing mercy, but the godly have saving mercy. And if
God be good to his people, then it is good for his people to draw near to him.
So it is in the Te^t, It is good for me to draw near to God.

1. We may look upon the words 1.
in Hypothesi; here is something implied, viz. that by nature we are far off
from God. Drawing near implies a strangeness and distance. In our lapsed estate
we lost two things, the image of God, and communion with God, Psalm 58. 3. The
wicked are estranged from the womb. Every step a sinner takes, is a going
further from God. The Prodigal's going into a far Country, Luke 15. 14. was an
emblem of the sinner's going afar off from God. How far are they distant from
God, who have been traveling forty or fifty years from their Father's house!
and which is worse, sinner's are not only far from God, but they do not desire
to be near him, Jer. 4. 10. They have loved to wander; Sin does not care to be
near holiness. The wicked get as far as they can from God: Like Cain, who went
out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4. 16. That is the Church of God, where
were the visible signs of God's presence: he estranged himself from God as much
as he could: he sell to building, thereby thinking to drown the noise of his
conscience, as the Italians of old were wont to drown the noise of Thunder by
ringing their Bells. Sinner's think God's company may be best spared, Isaiah
30. 11. Cause the Holy one of Israel to cease from before us. Let us shut God
out of our company; let him be no more named among us. A bad eye loves not to
be near the Sun.

Let us be deeply humbled for our Life.
fall in Adam, which has set us at such a distance from the blessed God.
Heaven and Earth are not so far asunder as God and the sinner. The further we
are from God, the nearer we are to Hell. The further a man sails from the East,
the nearer he is to the West. Let us think of returning to God by Repentance.
Say as the Church, Hos. 2. 7. I will go and return to my first Husband, for
then was it better with me than now.

2. Let us consider the text in Thesi; 2.
It is good for me to draw near to God.

The text falls into these parts.

1. The Person, me. 2. The Act, draw near. 3. The Object, God. 4. The
excellency of the Act, it is good.
The Proposition is this,

That it is a great duty incumbent upon Christians to draw near to God. Heb.
10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart. For the illustration of the
Proposition, four things are to be enquired into.

1. How we are capable of drawing near to God.

2. Where we draw near to God.

3. The manner of our drawing near to God.

4. Why we must draw near to God.

1. How we are capable of drawing 1.
near to God. By nature we stand in opposition to God, Col. 1. 21. alienated
and enemies. How then can we approach nigh to God? Answ. It is through a
Mediator Ipse solus ^st ^ujus gratia De^n (...) pro^itium. Calv.
. Out of Christ God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. But Jesus Christ is the
^creen between us and divine Justice. Christ as our High Priest assumes our
flesh. Christ's flesh is called a vail, Heb. 10. 20. As Moses when his face
shone so exceeding bright, put a vail upon it, and then Israel might approach
near to him, and look upon him: So Christ having veiled himself with our humane
nature, we may now draw nigh to God and behold him.

And as Christ makes way for us into the Holy of Holies by his Incarnation; so
by his Crucifixion: he died to make God and us friends. The Divine Law being
infringed, God's Justice was provoked, and satisfaction demanded, before we
could approach to God in an amicable way. Now here Christ as our Priest s^ed
his blood for our sins, and so made the atonement, Col. 1. 20. Having made
peace through the blood of his Cross Pi^nus and pretium nostrae ^um D^o
pacificationis ^uit sanguis Christi. Calvin.
. As Joseph being so great at Court, made way for all his Brethren to draw near
into the King's presence, Genesis 47. 2. So Jesus Christ is our Joseph, that does
make way for us by his blood, that we may now come near i^to Gods presence.
Through Christ God is pleased with us; he holds forth the golden Scepter, that
we may draw near, and touch the top of the Scepter.

2. Where we draw near to God. 2.


Answ. In the use of his Ordinances. In the Word we draw near to his Holy
Oracle; in the Sacrament we draw near to his Table. In the one we hear his
voice; in the other we have his kiss. Besides, we do in a special manner draw
near to God in Prayer. Prayer is the soul's private converse and intercourse
with (...). Chrysostom.
God. Prayer whispers in God's ears, Psalm. 18. 6. My prayer came before him,
even into his ears. In prayer we draw so near to God, that we take hold of him,
Isa. 64. 6. God draws nigh to us by his Spirit, and we draw nigh to him in
prayer.

3. The modus, or ^anner of our 3.
drawing near to God. God's special residence is in Heaven, and we draw near to
God not by the feet of our bodies, but our souls Non gressib^ corpo is, ^d
anini.
. The affections are the feet of the soul; by these we move toward God. David
drew nigh to God in his desires, Psalm 73. 25. There is none in earth I desire
besides thee. He did shoot his heart into Heaven by pious ejaculations. Spirits
may have intercourse at a distance.

4. Why we must draw near to God. 4.


Because he is our Maker Psalm 100, 3.
, in him 1.
we live. He has given us our bodies; they are his curious needle work, Psalm.
139. 15. And as he has wrought the Cabinet; so he has put the Jewel in it,
the precious soul; and surely if we had our being from him: we cannot breathe
without him: there is good reason we should draw near to him in a way of homage
and observance.

God is our Benefactor; he crowns 2.
us with variety of blessings; he gives health and estate; every ^it of bread
we eat is reached to us by the hand of Divine Bounty. Is there not great reason
we should draw near to him that feeds us? Give a beast provender, and he will
follow you all the field over. Not to draw near to him who is our Benefactor,
is worse than brutish.

God is the summum bonum, the chief 3.
good. There Is enough in God to satisfy the immense desire of the Angels. He
is omnimode duleis, the quintessence of sweetness; in him all perfections are
concentred, wisdom, holiness, goodness: he has rivers of pleasure, where the
soul shall bathe its self for ever with infinite delight, Psalm. 36. So that
here is ground sufficient for our drawing near to God; he is the chief good
Bonum in quo om^ bona.
. Every thing desires to approach to its happiness.

1. See the right genius and temper Use 1.
of a gracious soul, is is ever drawing near to God; it loves to converse with
him in private. A person truly regenerate is not able to stay away long from
God, Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after God. A pious soul cannot but
draw near to God.

Out of the entire love which he 1.
bears to God. It Is the nature of love to draw the heart to the object loved.

He that loves his friend will often give him a visit: He that loves God will
visit him. The heart ascends to God in a fiery Chariot of love.

A gracious soul cannot but draw 2.
near to God, because of the intimate relation between God and him. God is a
Father, Isa. 64. 8. Doubtless thou art our Father. Does not the child delight
to draw near to his Father? No Father like to God for love (...). 2 Cor. 1. 3.
: his children shall never want: he has Land enough to give to all his heirs.
He loves his children so entirely, that he will never dis-inherit them Joh. 13.
1.
. How then can Believers keep away from their Father? they know not how to be
long out of his presence.

A gracious soul cannot choose but 3.
draw near to God, because he has found so much sweetness and content in it.
While he has drawn near to God, he has drawn virtue from him. Never did
Jonathan taste so much sweetness when he dipped his Rod in the honeycomb, 1 Samuel 14. 27. as the soul finds in communion with God. In drawing near to God, a
Christian's heart has been warmed and melted; the Lord has kindled his
sacrifice from Heaven. In his approaches to God, he has had the illapses of
the Spirit, the incomes of Gods love, the praelibations of glory: God has
given him a bunch of Grapes by the way; he has tasted that the Lord is good
Psalm. 34. 8.
; no wonder then he is so frequent in his approaches to the divine Majesty; he
has found the comfort of drawing near to God.

2. It reproves them, who instead of Use 2. Reproof. 1. Branch
drawing near to God, draw near to the world. The world ingrosseth all their
time and thoughts, Phil. 3. 19. Who'mind earthly things. A good Christian uses
the world for his necessity, but his main work is to draw near to God. Whoever
he compounds with, and paies short, he will be sure God shall not be a loser.
He gives God a daily sacrifice; he follows God fully, Numb. 14. 14. But
covetous persons make the world their treasure, and what is their treasure,
that does most command their hearts. Worldlings live by sense; and to talk to
them of drawing nigh to God, is to speak riddles and paradoxes to them. They
can no more live out of the earth, than the fish out of the water. They have
the Serpent's curse upon them to lick the dust. Things of a worldly aspect draw
away the heart from God. They are retinacula spei (as Tertullian says) they
hinder our passage to the holy Land. Had not the fall beat off men's headpiece
of wisdom, they would think thus with themselves, If there be any beauty in the
world, what is there in God that made it Quod effic^t tale, id est magis tale.
? he gives the flower its color and odor; he gives the diamond its luster; he
gives food its delicious taste; and if there be such sweetness in creatures,
what is there in God? he is infinitely better than all. Shall these poor things
draw off our hearts from God? shall the drop draw us from the fountain? shall
the light of the Taper draw us from the Sun? shall we admire the gift, and
forget the giver? Solomon speaks of a gen^ration of men, madness is in their
heart, Eccl. 9. 3. Sure they who draw near the world, and leave God, madness is
in their hear!. O how empty and insignificant are all other things without God!
they are in their matter earthly, in their procuring painful, in their frui^ion
surfeiting, in their duration dying, in their operation damning.

2. It reproves them who draw nigh to 2: Branch.
God, but it is hypocritically; they draw nigh with their lips, but not with
their hearts, Isa. 29. 13. The Jews (says one) use great shows of adoration,
and in their Synagogues burn Lamps to the honor of God Europ. Spec.
, but no inward devotion can be perceived. What is pomp without piety? Sinners
give God the worship of their bodies, but keep their hearts for something else
they love better. The heart is a Virgin God himselelf is Suitor to, Pro. 23.
26. My Son give me thy heart Cor omni nobi^i nobilius. Berm.
. To draw near to God with the body, but not the heart, is to abuse God. It Is
as if one should come into an Apothecaries shop and ask for cordial water, and
he should give him an empty glass. To draw nigh to God without an heart, is to
play a devotion, and to go to Hell covered with Religion's mantle.

3. It reproves them who in stead of 3. Branch.
drawing near to God, draw back from God: these are enegadoes; they once seemed
to put forth their blossoms, and gave good hope of their conversion, but their
Spring is changed to Autumn. Either fear of persecution, or hope of preferment
has turned them away from the profession of Religion. Such were Bolsecus,
Petrus Carolus, and others Ad Coel^m non (...).
, Hos. 8. 3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good. At Ausborough the
Papists give ten florens a year to such as revolt from the Protestant Faith.
Men draw back from God, because they never had the Spirit of God to confirm
them. Such as have the Spirit's indwelling, never take their final leave of
God. The Spirit in the heart is called an earnest 2 Cor. 1. 22.
, not a pawn. A pawn may be called for again, and taken away, but an earnest
remains, and is part of the sum behind. O how odious is it to draw back from
God! The name Judas is had in abomination at this day. Sure no Protestant would
baptize his child Judas. And how dismal was his end! he who had no bowels to an
innocent Christ, his bowels gushed out. If it be good to draw near to God, it
must needs be evil to draw back from him, Psalm. 37. 27. Thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee.

3. It exhorts us all to draw near to Use 3. Exhortation.
God. It Is more ingenious to draw near to God voluntarily, than to be drawn
near to him by affliction. God is the terminus ad quem; whither should the soul
go but to God? where can the Be rest but in its hive? To draw near to God is
as well a privilege as a duty. There are but two Motives I shall use to
persuade to this drawing near to God.

1. The first is in the text; to draw near 1. Motive.]
to God is a good thing. It Is good for me. That it is good, appears several
ways.

To draw near to God, is our wisdom. 1.
The price of Wisdom is above Rubies, Job. 28. 18. No Jewel we wear does so
adorn us as wisdom; and wherein is our wisdom seen more than in our
appropinquation to God? It Is judged wisdom to keep in with great men, Prove. 19.
6. Many will entreat the favor of the Prince. A Prince's love is mutable. How
often does the sunshine of his royal favor set in a cloud. But it is wisdom
to draw near to God, he is the sweetest friend, and the sorest enemy.

To draw near to God is our honor. 2.
It is counted an honor to converse with noble personages. What an high
dignity is it, that the great God will suffer sinful dust to draw near to him!
Surely the Apostle did speak it with an holy boasting, 1 John 1. 3. Our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus: As if he had said, we do
not walk with the Pedanticks of the world; we are of the bloodroyal of Heaven;
we live above other men; Our fellowship is with the Father. That the King of
Kings will hold forth a Golden Scepter to us, invite and welcome us into his
presence, and bid us draw near; this is no small favor, 1 Samuel 2^. 2. Every
one that was distressed and in debt, drew near to David, and he became a
Captain over them. So that we who are distressed and in debt, may draw near to
God; and that he will not only be our captain, but our Husband, Isa. 54. 5.
What transcendent dignity is this! It is a wonder God does not kick u^ out of
his presence, but that we should be admitted to see the King's face; and that
he should send us dainties off from his own table, is an honor fitter for
Angels than men.

To draw near to God is our safety. God 3.
is a strong Tower, Prove. 18. 10. (...) Meta^hora a terre^is propugnacul^ ad
Deum translata, qui asylum est eorum qui ad illum confugiunt. Cartwr.
It is good in times of danger to draw near to a Fort or Castle, Ha^. 3. 4. He
had horns coming out of his hands, and ^here was the hiding of his power. The
^orns coming out of God's hands, are to push his enemies; and she hiding of his
power, is to safeguard his people. God is an impregnable strong hold. Indeed
there is no safety, but in drawing nigh to God. If the sheep straggles from the
fold, it is in danger of the Wolf; if we straggle and wander from God, we are
in danger of Satan.

To draw near to God is our peace. 4.
The only thing which breaks our peace, is, when we do not keep close to God:
but what harmony, yea Heaven is in the soul when it draws nigh to God! Psalm.
119. 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law. This peace like Pearl in
broth is cordial. David drew nigh to God, for he was ever with him, Psalm. 139.
17. And this made his pillow soft when he went to sleep, Psalm. 4. 8. I will lay
me down in peace (...)
; As the hony-dew falls upon the leaf: O that sweet serenity which drops as
honey upon the soul, while it is drawing nigh to God! How comfortable is it to
draw near the Sun! and how sweet is it to approach nigh to the Sun of
Righteousness!

To draw near to God is our riches. 5.
It Is good drawing near a golden Mine. If we draw near to God, he will enrich
us with promises, and divine consolations; he will enrich us with the Pearl of
price, Ephesians. 3. 8. He will reward us as a King, yea, as a God. He will make
over his Land and Jewels to us; he will give us the spring-flowers of joy here,
and the harvest of glory hereafter.

If we draw near to God, he will draw 6.
near to us Jam. 4. 8.
. If we draw near to him in duty, he will draw near to us in mercy. When the
Prodigal approached to his Father, his Father drew near to him, and fell on his
neck and kissed him, Luke 15. 20. If we draw near to God with repenting hearts,
he will draw near to us with a compassionate heart. David prayed, Psalm. 69. 18.
Draw nigh to my soul. It is good to have God draw nigh to us. How sweet is his
presence! he is light to the eye, joy to the heart. How happy was it for
Zacheus, when Christ drew near to him! This day is salvation come to thy house,
Luke 19. 9. When God draws near to the soul, Heaven and salvation draw near.

2. There is a time coming, when 2. Motive.
we shall wish we had drawn near to God. We are shortly drawing dear to our
grave, Psalm 107. 18. They draw near unto the gates of death. The wicked who
care not for God, yet at death they would draw near to him. then they cry as
Matthew. 8. 25. Lord save us, or we perish; Then mercy, mercy! They run to God in
distress, as in a storm men run to a tree for shelter. But God will not shelter
his enemies. The Lord gives the sinner abundance of mercy in his life time, (as
you have seen a loving Father bribing a Prodigal Son with money to see if he
can reclaim him) but if the sinner be not wrought upon with mercy, then at
death the Sun of mercy sets, and a dark night of wrath overtakes the sinner.
They who would not draw nigh to God as a friend, God will draw nigh to them as
an enemy.

How shall we do to draw near to Quest.
God?

Let us contemplate the excellencies Answ.
of God. He is the God of Glory, Psalm 29. 3. full of orient beauty: in
comparison of whom both Angels and men are but as the small dust of the
balance (...). Merc. Trigmeg.
, He is the God of love, 2 Cor. 13. 11. who triumphs in acts of mercy. Well may
this encourage our approaches to him who delights to display the banner of
free grace to sinners. If we should hear of a person of Honor, who were of a
lovely disposition, obliging all that came to him by act^ of kindness and
civility, it would make us ambitiously desirous to ingratiate our selves with
him, and get into his acquaintance. God is the most sovereign good, the wonder
of love, ready to diffuse the silver streams of his bounty to indigent
creatures Psalm. 86. 5.
; this if any thing will make us willing to draw near to him, and acquiesce in
him as the center of felicity.

If we would draw near to God, let 2.
us study our own wants. Let us consider in what need we stand of God, and that
we cannot be happy without him. The Prodigal never drew near to his Father,
till he began to be in want, Luke 15. A proud sinner who was never convinced of
his want, minds not to come near God; he has a stock of his own to live upon,
Jer. 2. 31. We are Lord, we will come no more unto thee. A full stomach
despises the honycomb. It Is the sense of want brings us near to God. Why did
so many lame and paralytical resort to Christ, but because they wanted a cure?
Why does the thirsty man draw near a fountain, but because he wants water. Why
does a condemned man draw near his Prince, but because he wants a pardon. When
a poor soul reviews its wants, I want grace, I want the favor of God, I am
damned without Christ; this makes him draw near to God, and be an earnest
supplicant for mercy.

If we would draw near to God, let 3.
it be our care to clear our interest in God, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near in
full assurance of Faith. When we know him to be our God, then we draw near to
him. The Spouse by virtue of the conjugal union, draws near to her Husband,
Psalm 48. 14. This God is our God.

Let us beg the holy Spirit. The Spirit 4.
of God has a magnetical virtue. Corruption draws the heart from God, the
Spirit draws it to him, Ca^t. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee. The Spirit
by his O^ipotent grace, draws the heart to God suaviter, but fortiter, sweetly,
but powerfully.

Let us get our hearts fired with love 5.
to God: which way the love goes, that way the heart is drawn. If God be the
treasure delighted in, our hearts will be drawn to him. Servile fear makes the
soul fly from God, sacred love makes it fly to (...).

FINIS.

