VERA EEFIGIES EDVARDI WATERHOVSI ARMIGERI ANNO DOMINI 1663: ANNOQVE AETATIS
SVAE 44
portrait D: Loggan ad viuum sculp:



FIRMA NOBIS FIDES
blazon or coat of arms

Fortescutus Illustratus, OR A COMMENTARY On that Nervous TREATISE De Laudibus
Legum Angliae, Written by Sir JOHN FORTESCUE Knight, First Lord Chief Justice,
after Lord Chancellor to King HENRY the Sixth.

Which TREATISE, dedicated to Prince EDWARD that King's Son and Heir (Whom he
attended in his retirement into France, and to Whom he loyally and
affectionately imparted Himself in the Virtue and Variety of His Excellent
Discourse) He purposely wrote to consolidate his Princely mind in the love
and approbation of the good Laws of ENGLAND, and of the landable Customs of
this his Native Country.

The Heroique Design of whose Excellent Judgment and loyal Addiction to his
Prince, is humbly endeavored to be Revived, Admired, and Advanced

By EDWARD WATERHOVS Esquire.

(...). Oportet leges quidem acriter statui, mitius autem quam ipsae jubent
poenas sumere. Isaeus apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 147. LONDON, Printed by Tho.
Roycroft for Thomas Dicas at the Sign of the Hen and Chickens in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1663.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and truly Noble EDWARD EARL of CLARENDON, Lord
HIGH-CHANCELLOUR OF ENGLAND.
May it please Your LORDSHIP,
THOUGH the proof of Your obliging and generous Virtues has fixed in Wisemen a
confidence of Your favorable acceptance of whatever Wisdom and Worth ( under
the Patronage of Your endeared Name and Greatness) presents to the Public;
and that it cannot but be thought rather a certainty then presumption, that You
will treat those with ingenuous kindness, who are ambitious to perpetuate
Virtue, and to adorn the dead Monuments of it with all those Tropheys of
revival and amplitude, which their greatest parts and most elaborate endeavors
to that honestly-ambitious end can possibly arrive at: Yet may it ( My Lord) be
doubted how this enterprise of mine, by which I humbly ( under the favor of
Almighty God and Your Lordship) design to revive the Memory, and illustrate the
Learning of that Venerable and Profoundly-Scientifique Antecessor in the Office
of the Chancellourship, Sir JOHN FORTESCUE, may be from my hand accepted, who
am none of the first Three in adaptation to such a Service. But since it
pleased God as to impregnate me with resolutions to attempt, so to vouchsafe me
health to finish what I proposed in these Commentaryes, I trust Your Honor
will accept the Protection of them, though they be but the Umbra and Echo of
the various and transcendent Learning that the Text of the Chancellor
FORTESCUE abounds with.

For truly ( My Lord) had I not wellweighed my Reverend Original, and found in
him that Pondus and Affluence of general and well-digested Science, which would
exercise the pains and curiosity of a Gentleman and generous Artist, I should
never have ambition'd the exploration of what God would enable me to, in so
incessant a progress of study as this has occoasioned. Yet forasmuch as by the
assistance of God I have in such proportion as his merciful indulgence has
favored my humble industry with, perfected these Commentaryes, and obtained
the favor and encouragement of an Honorable, Learned, and Grave Permission of
them to the Press for public View; I humbly beseech Your Lordship to pardon me
while in pursuance of those primitive resolves of my first undertaking them
(which was above five years since) I devote them to Your Perspicacious and
Oracular Self, Whom of all His most Excellent MAJESTY'S Favorites and
Ministers of Estate, I foresaw, by the augury of a very affectionate and
well-instructed experience, the probablest to succeed to the opportunity, and
exceed in the ability to propagate FORTESCUE in all the latitudes and
advantages of his Sage, Legal, Civil, and Politic Counsel and Conduct of
Greatness, to that which is the most Royal termination of it, Justice; and by
that Impartial Arbiter of Justice, which wise and well-advised Englishmen
call, The Law of England.

And therefore ( My Lord there being so true a Parallel between my Noble
Text-Master and Your Noble Self, Both Gentlemen by birth, Both Lawyers by
breeding, Both Knights by degree, Both Wisemen by experience, Both loyal
Attendants on your Sovereigns recesses abroad, and Both honored by your
Sovereigns with the trust and state of Chancellours: these Instances of
likeness relating to, and uniting in you both, make me bold to conclude, that
to no Worthy alive are these Commentaryes so properly to be addressed as to
Your Highly valued Person, Whom I believe to be not only what the Learned
Parisian Chancellor Budaeus once wrote of the French Chancellor Deganai, In
Epistol. Dedicator ante Annot. in Pandect.
(One Qui per omnes aetatis progressus totidem honorum Civilium gradus suopte
nixu, nullo manum porrigente scandens, non antequam ad culmen honorum evasit,
scandendi finem fecit, ut non fortunae beneficio, sed suo merito pervenisse eo
credi possit, cujus ea vis suisse ingenii atque animi cernitur, ut quocunque
loco natus esset, in quodcunque tempus incidisset, fortunam ipse sibi facturus
videretur) but also what may as truly without degenerous flattery be added,
That very Happy He, Who has concentred in Him so much of the Eloquence of
Tully, the Gravity of Cato, the Justice of Aristides, and the favor of
Mecaenas, as renders You meet to obtain the utmost Honor, a Sovereign Master
can reward a faithful and approved Subject and Servant with: Which that Your
Lordship may long deserve, and live to enjoy and to bless this Nation and every
worthy Interest and Concern in it, with the rays and diffusions of that
Prudence, Piety, and Loyalty which are concluded eminent and exorient in You,
is and shall be the earnest and sincere Prayer of

From my Study in Syon- College. June 11, 1663. ( Renowned Sir) Your HONORS
Most Humble Servant EDWARD WATERHOUS.

THese Commentaryes upon the Chancellor FORTESCUE'S Learned Treatise De
Laudibus Legum Angliae, We conceive useful and fit to be published; And
therefore approve the Printing thereof.

May. 14. 1663. Robert Foster. Orlando Bridgeman. Matthew Hale. Thomas Malet.
Robert Hyde. Edward Atkyns. Thomas Twisden. Thomas Tyrrill. Christopher Turnor.
Samuel Brown. Wadham Wyndham.


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE COMMENTARY UPON FORTESCUE.
BEfore I treat on the Text, I think it convenient to write somewhat concerning
the Parties introduced, and the manner of introducing them. Dialogus est
oration, in qua disputantes introducuntur quotquot Authori libiserit. Cic. ad
Attic. lib. 13*
The manner of their Exhibition is by way of Dialogue, a form very ancient and
significant, whereby Authors, as Trismegistus, Plato, Plutarch, Tully,
Athenaeus, Aristophanes, Lucian, and hundreds of others, brought in such
persons, and fictions, as conduced to the various expression of their design,
and the useful instruction of after-Ages: and therefore (...), which is the
inward reasoning of the mind, whereby a man proposes things Pro and Con, as if
really acted, is by Ruffinian ranked inter schemata (...), and he that skills
this Art aright, called (...) so that Dialogues are proper Modes of Speech and
writing, whereby one and the same person both frames Questions and Answers,
under names and notions of Persons distinct and several. Thus does our
Chancellor act both his own and the Prince's part, laying down those Rules,
which Experience had taught him, the best Conduct and Regulation of life, and
in producing the Prince as assenting to or dissenting from them, and so
occasioning either his first adhesion to what he positively asserted, or his
further addition of such Proofs as should resolve the doubt, and make the Dose
prescribed Palatable. So that in this Text, by the help of Dialogue, there is
not only a calm and pleasant delight for Youth and Novice-wits, but grave and
pithy Direction for the most accomplished minds, who from it cannot but be
enriched; Lilius Gyraldus, Syntag. 15. De Diis. p. 425.
since, in Lampridius his words of Severus his Lararium, it contains Christum
and Abrahamum, Orpheum and Apollonium, matter of all Variety and useful
Institution both in Morals, Prudentials, and what is the most excellent in the
knowledge of Things Heavenly. This for the Dialogue.

Now of the Persons in this Dialogue, which are Two, and those under a pair of
Illustrous Names, the Prince and the Chancellor, or as here they ought rather
to be marshalled, the Chancellor and the Prince. The one apt and willing to
teach, the other prone and ready to learn; which harmony cannot but produce a
profitable and desired effect: for that heart is sure to be wise whose ear
accepts Counsels, and who turns not his eye from the Precepts of Wisdom.
Now though by the Laws of Civility and Nations, precedence be due to the
Person most dignified, and Princes of the Blood have the Pre-eminence of
Temporary Officers, where their Offices have not immediate representation of
Sovereigns, their Masters; yet I shall crave leave to treat first of the
Chancellor, and then of the Prince: because in this Dialogue, and as to this
occasion, the Chancellor is the first both Ordine temporis, as the Commencer
of the Discourse, and Dignitate sermonis, as intending to distill into the Youth
of the represented Prince what his grave Experience observed necessary to make
his Life exemplary, and his Government, when ever it should begin, successful.

The Chancellor I find described three ways, 1. By his Name, Fortescue. 2.
By his Office, Chancellor. 3. By his personal Dignity, Miles Grandaevus: which
represents him a man doubly honored, from his Title Miles, from his Experience
Grandaevus; For multitude of years teach Wisdom. Forte Scutum Salus Ducum.
Fortescue's Motte.
For his name Fortescue it is ancient and Knightly, possibly derived a forti
scuto, which some Founder of the Family was especially noted to have; either
his Integrity which covered him from top to toe from the malice of his foes,
who like cruel Archers shot at him, though his Shield, like Joseph' s Bow,
abode sure through the mighty God of his Salvation, Genesis 49.24. or else from
some more then ordinary Valor, which the many blows received on his Shield did
amply express.

I shall not here engage in the Story of Names, nor take upon me to dive into
the Well of Science to fetch thence that, which we would call the truth of
their Original. If we understand a Name, as Logicians do, Tholoss. Syntag.
Juris. lib. 36. ^. 4. ss. 1 De mutations Nominis. River. Exercit. 22. in Genes.
2.
for Vox Significativa secundum placitum; then there is no certainty of Names
but uncertainty, what pleases the Imposer, and others to give after his
Example: yet for the Antiquity of Names, we are to know that they are coaeval
with time and things, for when God created things he named them according to
the specifique nature of them, or according to some use or other purpose which
they most tended to. After whose Example the Hebrews, and Hine colligunt
Hebraei Adamum insignem Philosoplium fuisse, qui naturas ornnium animalium
probe tenuerit, ut inde juxta naturam ac proprietatem suam cuique suum nomen
indiderit. Fagius in Genesis 2.19.
Adam especially gave Names to all Creatures, which Names did evidence not
only their Nature, but their subjection to man, as Geograph. Sacrae, p. 26.
and p. 57.58. Tholoss. Syntagm. Juris. lib. 32. c. 8.
Bochartus, Grotius, Rivet, Tostatus, and all the Learned on Genes. 2. agree.
After the Jews, the Greeks followed, and the Romans were so multiplicative of
Names, that they run them out into an infinity almost; for beside their twenty
eight Appellative in Isidor. Origin. lib. 1. c. 2.
Isidore, I find De Nominibus Romany, c. 1. p. 341. Ed Sylburg.
Sigonius (out of the ancient Grammarians, Sosipater, Donatus, and Diomedes)
numbering four sorts of Names, one derived from Dignity, as Praenomen, being
therefore prefixed because Gentile, as Publius; the second of propriety
declaring their Nation and Bound, Nomen, as Cornelius; the third Cognomen, being
an additional adjoined to their Genile Name for the greater State and Equipage
of it, as Scipio; the last Agnomen, from some casual regard or remarkable
action, as Africanus: on all these he enlarges, and therefore to him I referr
the Reader. Lilius Gyraldus. Syntagus. De Mu-sis.
The Poets also took the liberty to term the Muses, Camaenae, Heliconiades,
Parnassides, and such other names to the number of thirty, Hist. Deorum.
Syntagm. 10.
and as many names had Hercules also from the several fictions they had of him.
So generally are Names given ad placitum, that it is hard to limit Names to
Natures or Actions, when even fictive occasions have been Parental of them, and
that ubique locorum, no Nation not taking the liberty so to do. And at home to
be ignorant of this would be our shame, when every days experience lessons it,
and no man that is Clerkly, but knows, that Names are occasional, and varied as
occasion serves, as Master Cambden, our learned Antiquary, every where in his
Britannia acquaints us. Amongst us therefore in England, we have only two
Names usual, the Christian given at the Font, or Baptistery, by the Bishop or
Presbyter ordinarily, as John, James, Robert, Edward: and the Surname for
distinction of the Family from whence Children descend. Both these are usually
expressed in Deeds, No^en dici putant quod rem notam faciat, sitque velut rerum
imago. Manertus apud Tholoss. Syntagm. Juris. lib. 32. c. 8.
Grants, Wills, and all other Writings whatsoever, and when ever omitted, are
either the fruits of negligence or worse; for it leaves men in the dark, and
subjects their Actions to uncertainty, which alloyes the credit and grandeur of
them. And for this cause (if no other could be added) men are obliged in
Justice to their Fames, Persons, Posterities, and Families, to own their
individual persons by those Names Christian and Familique, which they
ordinarily go by; since as many Authors, not living to publish their pains,
become unprofitable to the World, to enrich which they in their Lives and
Studies were probably ambitious, as I think amongst many others, Julius Caesar
Scaliger was in that Noble Compilement of an hundred and ten Books De
Originibus, which are lost: or else others come after the Author's death, and
thrust themselves into that praise which they never merited, and call
themselves Fathers of those Speculations, which, if they could vindicate
themselves by a Reply, Epist. Dedicatory before Fortescue. Pitsaeus p. 597.
would disown their impudent, and but Suposititious Authors. I the rather
observe this, because in the mention of my Text-Master, not only Mr. Mulcaster
a learned man, and a Student in the Law, terms him Master Fortescue Knight: but
also Pitsaeus out of Robert Record writes him only Fortiscutus, De Fortiscuto
meo hoc dicam, quod and de Thoma Cranleio Lelandu, refert, ut qui non modo
ingenio, verum etiam ^alamo, utpote bonis instructus Artibus, plurimum valuit:
so that were not Records and later Authors more punctual, the Worthy Author
might have been less certain. Selden' s Notes on Fortescue. To the Reader. Rot.
Parent. 20. H. 6. Membr.
But our late learned Seldom, who has led me the way to admire this Author,
has particularly displayed this brave Sage to be third Son to Henry Fortescue
Son of Sir John Fortescue Knight, Captain of Meaux and Governor of Bry in
France under Henry the Fifth, which Sir John was second Son of William
Fortescue of Wimeston in the County of Devon, Esquire; Fortescue' s Descent by
Father and Mother.
so that our Chancellor being immediate Heir in the eighth descent of Sir
Richard Fortescue Knight, who came out of Normandy in the Conquerours time, was
generously descended by his Father, and no less by his Mother, who was a
Daughter and Heir of Beauchamp, his eldest Brother was Lord Chief Justice of
Ireland and dyed issueless, his second Brother's Posterity in the third Descent
divided themselves into two Branches, one of which seated themselves at Fawborn
in Essex, the other was seated by Sir John Fortescue, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and Master of the Court of Wards, at Salden in Buckinghamshire,
where now the Heir of his Family Sir John Fortescue resides, who very civilly
and like a Gentleman of Honor, A most worthy Kinsman.
sensible of the service I aimed to do to the Memory of our Chancellor his
Noble Kinsman, presented me with this information from his Pedigree, and with
the Picture of our Chancellor which he caused to be cut to be hereunto
prefixed; which I purposely mention as my return of kindness and thanks to his
care to right my Noble Chancellor, whose Portraicture but for him had been
unknown and unpublique. So that he was of a Knightly Race, and of so renowned a
Gravity, that he was Chief Justice to Henry the Sixth for the latter half of
his Reign; and, as appears by Records, that he might Statum suum decentius
manu-tenere, the then King gave him an Annuity of an hundred and eighty Marks
out of the Hamper, together with 116. s. 11. d. percipiendum singulis annis ad
Festum Natalis Domini pro una Roba, and Furrura pro eadem erga idem Festum; and
66. s. 6. d. singulis annis ad Festum Pentecostes pro una Roba, and Linura pro
eadem erga idem Festum: so greatly did this Worthy Knight deserve of his
Prince, that he was thought the meet subject of all Favors. For he well
demeaned himself in all Trusts, and as he lived no shame to his Family, so dyed
he not ashamed of Fidelity to his Sovereign; for him he accompanied in his
misfortunes, and to him did he express the ardour of a just and ingenuous
gratitude, in applying to his Son and Heir, whom he hoped should inherit his
Throne and Dominions, such wholesome Documents, as best fitted him to submit to
God while a Sufferer, and to rule in the place of God when he should restore
him to his Government, and subject his people and the guidance of them to him.
Thus much for our Text-Master's Name, Fortescue,

Now for his Office, Chancellor, a great Office of Trust and Dignity, the
Prince's Conscience in a Subjects breast, the Great Justice of the Realm, in
whom the oppressed ought to find Relief, and from whom the Oppressor how
great, how popular soever he be, ought to find no Favor. The Trust of this
Officer in England, appears notably out of old Ingulphus, where Edward the
Elder, King of this Land, expresses his mind to Turktil, Abbot of Crowland,
his Chancellor in these words, Ut quaecunqus negotia temporalia uel
spiritualia, Regis judicium expectabant, illius consilio and decreto, tam
sanctae fidei, and tam profundi ingenii tenebatur, Lege Forcatulum lib. 7. De
Gallerum Imperio and Philosophia. Salmuth. in Pancirol. Part. 1. p. 316. Locus
is in quo celebrantur ludi forenses, fossis, Cancellis, aut aliis id genus
septis erde circumscriptus. Erasin. Adag. 93. Chil. 1. Cent. 1. Cui alludit
Cicero lib. 1. De Oratore. Et quasicertarum artium sorenseb^s Cancellis
circumscriptam Scientiam. Idem in actionibus, Ab his Cancellis quibas me
circumscripst, declinav^ro.
omnia tractarentur, and tractata irrefragabilem sententiam fortirentur. So
Ingulphus. The Name Cancellarius is variously understood, Grammarians make it
no more then a Scribe or Notary, as the Domestici apparitores to great
Magistrates, or as Praefectas Praetorio. The Verb Cancello, whence
Cancellarius, signifying to deface, or amend, or cross out a thing written,
having relation to a Superior commanding it, some have thought to import the
Office and Officer to be subservient, and under some limitation: which possibly
the Lattices, which are called Cancelli, whether in Churches or in Courts do
further illustrate, For as in Churches, Chancels are immured in and severed
from the Navis Ecclesiae, and the most noted Members of the Church sit there;
so in Courts, the Judges and Officers of the Courts fit within the Bars, when
the Counselors, Advocates, and Pleaders, which Budaeus calls Cancellarios,
and we call Barristers, stand and plead at the Bar.

In the Sacred Empire the Office of Chancellor is as frequent as our Steward
in Mannours, every Province almost having its Chancellor; who is but a Cipher
to the Great Chancellor, Budaeus in Pandect. p. 78. Edit. Vascos.
whom Budaeus defines, Principis praesentis Vicarius, and eo peregre prosecto,
Inter-rex quodammodo censendus; and in another place, Norma omnium jura
reddentium, cujus ore facundi Reges moribus nostris esse solent, cujus oculis
uelut emissitiis, circumspicere omnia ac perlustrare creduntur: And therefore
Cassiodore writing to one of these Chancellours, Variarum. lib. 11. c. 6.
cajoles him thus, Respice quo nomine nuncuperis, tenes quippe lucidas fores,
claustra patentia, senestratas januas.

This great Officer, France, Spain, Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, prefer above
all Officers, and so does England too, and that anciently; for Fleta writing of
the Great Officers of England, Lib. 2. c 13. p. 75; Edit. Seld.
fayes thus of the Lord Chancellor, Est inter caetera quoddam officium, quod
dicitur Cancellaria, quod viro provido and discreto, ut Episcopo vel Clerico
magnae Dignitatis debet committi, simul cum cura Majoris Sigilli Regni, cujus
substituti sunt Cancellarii omnes in Anglia, Hybernia, Wallia, and Scotia,
omnesque Sigilli Regis custodientes ubique, Glos. p. 110;
so Fleta: Sir Henry Spelman fayes much in few words, Censorem non
agnoscitpraeter Regem, nec lites ei transmittant Judices, sed inuitis ipsis
saepe adimit, so He. And in all Acts of Parliament and Instruments of State,
the first Person of Trust is the Lord Chancellor, who is counted Magistratuum
omnium Antistes; by reason of which the Chancellourship is called, Budaeus loc^
pracit.
Summum body honorum fastigium, ultra quod nibil sper are licet homini quidem
priuato and togato, quasique quod dam summa quedam ambientis animi solstitium.
By which, and what to this purpose might abundantly be added, it appears, that
this Officer is the weightyest, and of greatest import of any in the Nation,
Caput sanctioris interiorisque consilin, without which well-performed with
trust and temper, Oppression would call for Divine Vengeance, and Injury not be
more the Siu then Suffering of the Nation: thus much for the Office of the
Chancellor. Though I judge in this high and supreme sense our Author bore the
Name, Seldom Epistle before his Book. Spelman in Gloss p. 416.
had not the actual Power and Office of Lord Chancellor in England; true it is
I find him called In Introduct. Materia ante Fortescutum ex Impress. Edw.
Whitchurch. Cum Priuilegio. Temps. H. 8.
Chancellor, yea Summus Angliae Cancellarius by Pitsaeus: yet I doubt the
Grant he had from Henry the Sixth was abroad, Non nisi a uicto, and exulante
apud Scotos Rege. The Ius ad rem he had to testify his Prince's favor to him;
but the Ius in re not effectually commencing, till his Prince's suppressed
Right should invigorate, and evict his Rival's power; our Chancellor cannot be
accounted so plenary a Chancellor as otherwise in his Master's possession of
the Crown he would have been. Though then he was not, as to the State and
Possession of that Honorable and Great Trust here in England, so complete and
perfect a Chancellor: Dominus Cancellarius Angliae constitutas fucrit. Coke
Preface to 10. Rep. 2 Instir. in 1 Ed. 2. Stat. De Militibus. See my Defense of
Arms and Armory.
yet Chancellor to H. 6. of England he indisputably was, as also to his Son
Prince Edward, and in it behaved himself worthy the Title of Miles Grandaevus.

Miles] the highest rank of the lower Nobility, an Honor given to Men of Merit
(for Miles quasi Millesimus, A man, as we say, of a thousand) who being an
Esquire before (for Sir Edward Cook says, if his Authority be as good in
Heraldry as in Law, no man was wont to be made a Knight, but he that was first
an Esquire) was rewarded by his Prince, or some having Sovereign Commission for
some notable performance done, Photius in Excerptis ex Olympiod. p. 853. Edit.
Sylburg. Though I know there is more probability in that Opinion, which our
Books are of, that rise of it from the Baculus, which the Tyrones novitii, who
had suffered their Lances to be broken, which was a deviction in their
Hastiludia, and Torneaments, did bear, and thence were called Baccalaurei:
which the strenuest Soldiers after were called by. So M. Paris p. 768. l. 55.
p. 769. l. 4. p. 747. l. 51. Petrus Blesensis. Sermon. 1. p. 130.
or to be done. Now this Honor of Knighthood was an encouragement to venture,
the price of life, that which carries men sometimes beyond reason to hazard,
and beyond Conscience to detain what they get. Olympiodorus tells us, that
Honorius the Emperor rewarded valiant men with the name of (...), which I am
apt to think was our Knights Bachilors: and the Author says, (...), Not only
Citizens of Rome were so rewarded, but Strangers that deserved well in their
Wars; yea not only did they give them the Nobilitation of Honor, making the
Alchimy of base blood to become generous: but giving them badges of their
Honor answerable to those now in use. Tacitus ( Annal. lib. 18.) tells us,
that Equestri dignitate donare, and Annulis honorare, were promiscuous: and
Lampiridius, while he mentions Severus his care to exclude infamous persons
from the Equestrian Order, Ne Ordo Equestris commacularetur, tells us also, and
together with him Suetonius, That Rings, Spurrs of Gold, and Crowns, with
Chariots of Triumph, were the reward of brave Spirits. As afterAges have had
like occasion for men of Courage, so to them have they been no less grateful;
nor have extemporary Services gone without extemporary Favor. Honor being
often given upon the ground where it has been won; which makes the Knight
Bachilor in his Institution, a brave Military-esteemed Order. There is no man
but must yield to Time's Sovereignty, and to that Fate, that common Opinion,
and perhaps general Error introduces, That, That makes and marrs what, and who
it pleases; and though by its obstetrication many notable Orders of Knighthood
are produced, as our Order of Saint George, and those other, Toizon d' Or,
Saint Michael, Saint Iago, Calatrava, Saint Esprit, the Annuntiation, Templars,
Knights of Malta, Alcantara, and Montesio, or that of the Teutonick Order,
Though I say these, and the most of them, have been honored by the pleasure of
Sovereigns with especial Rays of Majesty, carrying their Testimonial in their
Badg on the outward Vest, which challenges all approachers to a more then
ordinary respect: yet bare Knighthood is not without somewhat of a dignified
luster, both as in Antiquity and universality of allowance, it is most
ubiquitive and embraced; and our Land and Law account it a noble degree, and of
1000 years age here amongst us. Since then I find our Authors make Milites
and Principes a kind of Synonyma's, Edit. London. p. 1026.
as Brompton, no rude Historian, does in his mention of David King of Scots,
his coming into England in King Stephen's time, who was met by the Northern
English, in his words, ( Milites and Principes Angliae Boreales animosi, cum
insigni Comite Albemarle, etc, viriliter restiterunt;) and since Knights
Bachilors, made by any Sovereign, are owned in all places as Persons of Honor,
and their Title less burden to them in cases of wordly vicissitude then others
by Patent are, I account them both as to their Rise, Antiquity, and Universal
respect, Rot. Patent. 20 H. ^. part. 1. in 10 Claus. 38 H. 6. in 30. Rot. in
Turr. Dorso (...). Parliamenti.
not less nobilitated then becomes worthy men and merits. And such an one was
our Knight, who was Chief Justice from the 20 H. 6. to the 32 H. 6. yea, for
ought I know, to the 38 H. 6. and after Chancellor to his Prince; to which
Offices men seldom attain till they be aged and experienced, and till they be
notable for Counsel: therefore is it added here to our Chancellour's remark,
that he was Grandaevus, a man not so much for Action as Counsel; a Knight, that
like the old Leontine Gorgias, Caelius Rhodigin, lib. 19. c. 20.
was famous in the very determination of his life, being able to say with him,
Quod voluptatis causa nibil mibi unquam facere permiserim; and having gratified
his passion with no abuse of his virtue. This, This is he that is called Miles
Grandaevus: and well may he so be, for he was a Grand-sier and Oracle of
Counsel and Conduct; Grandaevus, qui est provectioris aetatis, quasi grandis
aevi senex, faith Cerda: so Virgil, In lib. 1. Aeneid.
Et qu^e victus Abas, and qu^e Grand^evus Alethes.
So Pliny, Alios esse Grandoevos, semper Canos. Yea Grandoevus and Longoevus
the Latins promiscuously used for Old Age; in that then any thing of more then
ordinary remark was expressed by Granditas, famous Phrases, Granditas Verborum:
so Pliny writing of one rare for his time, says, Non illi vis, non granditas,
non subtilitas, non amaritudo, non dulcedo, non lepos defuit. By this
Attribution to our Chancellour's we are told, that he was a man wise enough to
make a Prince happy; Non panitendum Imperatorem egisset, si diutius illi per
Cononem and Leonem, Orientis praefectos, imperaro licuis^et. Egnatius in
Theodosio Adramiteno.
A Grandoevus who carried Time's Badg on his Head, and Time's Glass in his
Hand; that had outlived the Passions and Easinesses of heady, fierce, credulous
youth; and was grown as full of Counsel as an Age was of Moments; an Helluo
temporis, who had so measured Time that it could hardly deceive him: This is
he, who addresses himself in this Dialogue to the Prince, whom he much
conversed with, and thereby may be presumed fully to understand. And indeed the
great Experience of this Gentleman, whose former conversation with the Youth of
Honor and Note, (to whom in times past he had read the Civil and Common Laws)
gave him a more exact Method of dealing with the Young Prince, then the bare
Principles of ^ Mother-wit, or the rude notions of a life of Study would have
suggested to him, since had he been morose and humerous, as most aged men and
Artists are, he would sooner have deterred from, then exhorted the Prince to,
the Study of what he commended; for Great Spirits are not easily cajoled into
any thing by Praetorian Dictates, which smell more of a Cynique Severity then a
generous Candor: but when he, in his grave and sober address, complements the
Prince into a good opinion of him, how well received are all his Documents?
Prejudices against men's Persons end in prejudices against their Words and
Actions: and men of scandalous looks are seldom less then Beams in the Eyes of
Princes, who never look with pleasure upon figures which have torvous, rude,
and discomposed Visages. This the wise Chancellor foreseeing, frames himself
to such a Courtly Demeanor, as might not immerge his grave Design in the
danger of miscarriage; but still preserve him regarded in his Princely eyes, to
which he ever desired to approve himself worthy: Thus much for the Chancellor,
the first party in the Dialogue.

Now of the Prince, the second and more noble party. This Prince was brave
Edward, Rex long pientior, quam Imperio forinnatior. Leland. de H. 6. in
Cygnea Cantione.
Son and Heir to King Henry the Sixth of this Land, by Dame Margaret Daughter
to Reynard Duke of Anjou and Berry, and King of Jerusalem, to whom, in his
Father's Misfortunes, this Royal Stripling, forced to fly into France,
addressed, and from whom he doubted not to receive the courtesy of welcome,
being under those inevitable pressures which attend things humane, and against
the infelicities of which Crowns cannot prescribe; for could any Father have
merited his own establishment and his Posterities blessing, surely the Saintly
Father of this Prince would have been the very He: For He was a Prince of
remarkable Virtue, Holingshed. p. 691.
a Pattern of most perfect Piety, upright, far from fraud, wholly given to
Prayer, reading of Scriptures, and Alms-deeds; of such integrity of life, that
his Confessor avowed, that for all the ten years he had confessed him, he had
never committed any mortal Sin; so continent, that suspicion of unchaste life
never touched him; so full of Charity, that he thought he did never enough for
the Church and the Poor: Who on days of Devotion would wear Sackcloth, and
learned from his Savior to use no other Communication then Forsooth, Forsooth;
Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay; yea so full of Mercy, that he pardoned (when for a time he
was restored to his Crown) one, that thrust him into the side with a Sword when
he was Prisoner in the Tower. Yet this Prophetique King, who foretold from the
face of Henry the Seventh, when but a Child, That He would be the Person, to
whom both We and our adversary, Hollingshed, p. 678.
leaving the Possession of all things, shall hereafter give room and place,
could not by his Kingly Divination foresee, or by Prudence obviate, and
forestall his misfortune: but after almost one and thirty years quiet
Possession of his Government, in the fifty second year of his age, lost his
Crown by Battle gained against him, his Adversaryes being fewer in number then
his Partisans; Holingshed. p. 691.
and soon after his life was taken away by Murder, and his Corpse buried at
Chertsey, being carried thither obscurely without Priest or Clerk, Torch or
Taper, Singing or Saying, or any kind of Decent or Christian Solemnity. So
departed this good King. And unfortunate was Gallant Prince Edward his Son, who
as he was a young Gentleman of fair Complexion and comely Person, so was he of
a brave, bold, and daring courage, as appears by his valiant demeanor in
Tewksbury field, wherein he very Princelyly manned a great and puissant Army,
expressing no remissness in any point of true and generous Knighthood; yet for
all that endeavor lost the day, and became a Prisoner to Sir Richard Crofts
who took him, and for a while kept him safe and secret: but whether the fear of
Edward the Fourth, now Victor, or the love of the reward promised to the
Discovery and Delivery of him, wrought the resignation of him into Edward the
Fourth's Hands, Page 688.
sure it is, rendered he was, and as sure that upon the rendition of him he was
contrary to Edward the Fourth's Proclamation, slain. For when he came into
Edward the Fourth's Presence, and was by him demanded How He durst so
presumptuously enter into his Realm with Banner displayed, He, the Prince
Edward (Son to Henry the Sixth) boldly answered, To recover my Father's Kingdom
and Heritage, from his Father and Grandfather to him, and from him after to me
lineally descended; at which words King Edward the Fourth said nothing, But
with his band thrust him from him, or (as some say) struck him with his
Gantlet, Whom incontinently George Duke of Clarence, God an Avenger of innocent
blood. Idem loco pr^cit.
Richard Duke of Gloucester, Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset, and William Lord
Hasting, that stood by, suddenly murdered; For which cruel Act (says my
Author) the most part of the Doers in their latter days, drank of the like Cup
by the righteous Justice and due punishment of God. For the Duke of Clarence
who murdered both Henry the Sixth and his Son, Page 690.
this towardly Prince, (that our Fortescue so loved and applied himself to)
about the 18 E. 4. was accused of Treason, cast into the Tower, and after
drowned in a Butt of Malmsey: The Duke of Gloucester, Page 703.
after Richard the Third, was slain at Besworthfield, His body being naked and
despoiled to the skin, and nothing left about him, not so much as a clout to
cover his privy Members, being trussed behind a Pursivant of Arms like an Hogg
or Calf, Page 760.
his head and arms hanging on the one side of the Horse and his legs on the
other side: the Lord Hastings was accused of Treason by the Duke of Gloucester,
Page 724.
when Protector to Edward the Fifth, and beheaded: so that only the Marquess
of Dorset remained, which, what became of him I find not; but I believe he
that shed the blood of a Prince had his own blood shed, as the satisfaction of
Justice. For viler men never the World saw of Nobles then were these Peerlessly
wicked P^ers who slew in cold blood the Son of a King, whom the King in being,
promised to preserve: Thus much for the Story of the Prince, the second Person
in the Dialogue, Who being the Care and Charge of our Chancellor, and proving
notably rational and manly, may be thought to appear such from the improvement
of those Principals and Maxims which our Fortescue, His Father's and His
Chancellor, had communicated to him in this Discourse, De Laudibus Legum
Angliae, which among many other Treatises that he wrote, is accounted the most
worthy, as being not only the fruit of his solid Law-judgement, which further
appears in the Year-Books of H. 6. from the twentieth of his Reign upward; but
of his various Abilities in Philologie and Historique Learning, as in what
after follows more at large appears.

So ends the Introduction, which the Author publishes, as he does the
subsequent Commentaries, Sub Protestatione de addendo, retrahendo, Spelman,
ante Glossarium.
corrigendo, poliendo, prout opus fuerit and consultius videbitur,

DEO Clementissime annuente. E.W.

Sr: John Fortescu Knight: Lord Chief Justice and Lord Chancellor of England under
King Henry ye Sixth.
portrait

FORTE SCUTVM SALVS DVCUM
blazon or coat of arms

A COMMENTARY Upon FORTESCUE De laudibus Legum Angliae.
CHAP. I.
GAudeo vero, Serenissime Princeps, super Nobilissima Indole tua. 'Twas the
Oratour's Rule, long ago, to commend what he had to utter by apt Prefaces;
Oratoris est been incipere: and the reason being to engage the Auditors to
Attention, and thence to captivate them, the Practice proved not only
appropriate to Orators, but to Historians, and generally all Writers. This
Method, prevailing with our Chancellor in these words, makes me ready to write
that of him, which Seneca does of his Fabian, That he seems to him, Mihi non
effundere videtur Oration^m, sed fundere.
not so impetuously to multiply words, as weightily, and profitably to express
his mind by them. So count, so seasonable, so peculiar to his purpose is this
Courtly Frontispiece, that therein our Fortescue, like Seneca's Fabian, may
well be written of, as non negligens in oratione, sed securus, and his Book, to
which this is the Inlet, Seneca Ep. 100.
be termed Electa verba, non captata, etc. Choice words, not wrested, as the
manner of men is, from their proper meaning, but significant to the purpose for
which they are alleged, and expressive of an high Genius, and a Magnanimous
Soul, that uttered them.

For here the Chancellor displays both the Prince's Endowments, and his own
Affection to the Glory and Extent of them; that as, by the one, he appears to
have tutoured a Noble mind, so, in the other, does he insinuate such Tuition to
take the first fire from his Example, who loved the virtue in others, which was
first ingenerated in himself.

This Clause then, Gaudeo, Serenissime Princeps, super Nobilissima Indole tua,
relates both to the Prince, and to the Chancellor, in the Expansion of it. To
the Prince, as, Serenissimus, and Nobilissimae indolis; to the Chancellor, as
affected with, and rejoicing for the futurity of good to the Nation, over which
his Accomplishment was to be influential. This is the purport of this
Introductional Artifice, which I the rather touch upon, because it is a Course
both Christian, and artly, not to prejudicate our Success by rude Prefaces; but
to make our ends on men in honest ways, through the Mediation of Favor,
honestly begged, and readily, with Consent of those we ask it of, obtained.
And, because the Cause preceeds the Effect in Nature's Order, and it will
become us to treat of the Root, before of the Fruit, the Prince's Perfections
shall preceed the Chancellour's Affection to Him for them, even in our Comment.

The Prince is represented first, as Serenissimus. Then, as Nobilissima indolis.

Serenissimus. Anciently Emperors and Princes were pleased to be called by
Names of singular Beneficence; Pii, Clementes, Mansueti, Tranquilli, Sereni,
Felices: but, of late, they have assumed Superlatives to their Condecoration,
so that not only Jupiter had the Name of Optimus Maximus, but all Supremes are
now represented by superlative Expressions, because they challenge sole Power
within their Dominions. Hence comes it to pass, that though Princes do
communicate many Attributes of theirs to men of Virtue, and Eminency (as to
Patricians, Senators, and Ministers of Learning, and State) such as are the
Titles of Illustres, Spectabiles, Nobiles, Clarissimi, Perfectissimi, (of which
Pancirol gives us a particular Account) yet the Title of Serenissimus, In
Notitia dignitatis utriusque Imperii, a p. 3. ad p. 20. and c. 4 17. Alciatus
and Brechaeus ad Legem 100. in lib. De Verborum significatione p. 234.
as incommunicable, Princes have reserved to themselves, and to such have wise
men chiefly, if not only, given it. Thus of old did Saint Leo term the
Emperor Leo, to whom he wrote, (...), To Our most glorious, and most serene
Son, Leo the Emperor: and that, because Serenity in a Prince is that
temperament, which keeps him aequilibrious, and properly qualified to rule, and
all the Concomitants to it. And therefore though Herodian, to flatter a vile
Commodus, may call him Nobilissimum Imperatorem, and Licinius Valerianus may,
because none others will, give himself that Title; yet none deserves the Title
of Serenissimus, but he, that, in Lactantius his words, in opere misericordiae
largiter fecerit, etc. He that is merciful, generous, and has expressed in his
life, De Opi^ic. c. 15.
and Actions, Perfect Virtue. Indeed Serenity being a Supralunary may well be
accounted more then ordinarily of: nor is it so much a Courtesy, as a due
debt, and homage to Serenity, to admire it. The Catholic Rational Nature
conspires to pay a Devoir to this Deity for the Diffusion of its quality to
every thing.

Serenity is that temper, that gives opportunity to all Virtue; and then is the
Season to do worthily, when there is no Cloud, no Storm of Obliquity in the
Mind, but all the Region of it is clear: therefore all serene things were
accounted excellent, aestas serena, coelum serenum, color serenus, lux serena,
animus serenus, doctrina serena, frons tranquilla, and serena, yea, vitam
serenare, and domum largo igne serenare, are frequent in all good Authors to
express the greatest pleasure, content, and comeliness by. And therefore the
Positive being so significant, its Superlative must have a supereminency of
sense, reflecting most intense Lustres on a Prince, and prolating him, not as
only disposed to, but accomplished with the liberallest Proportions of humane
Capacity, whereby lofty Nature is reduced to such an harmonious Mansuetude, as
makes Majesty comply with Meaness, and forbear those superb and monstrous
Titles, which both intimidate men, and entrench on God's Patience provoked by
the Arrogance of them. For though Attila may glory in the Title of Ira Dei ego
sum, and Orbis vastitas, I am the Anger of God, and the World's Devastation,
and Abbas the Persian King vapor, that he is King of Kings, and Sultanies,
Lord of the Imperious Mountain of Ararat, Commander of all Creatures from the
River Corazon to the Gulf of Persia, Governor of all Sultans, Emperor of
Musselmen, Bud of Honor, Mirror of Virtue, Rose of Delight; while Sapores
vaunts himself to be King of Kings, Equal to the Stars, and Brother to the Sun
and Moon; and Cozroes will be Lord of Lords, Prince of Peace, Salvation of men,
the great Conqueror rising with the Sun, giving Luster to the Night:
notwithstanding the great Cham give out, he is the Son of the highest God, and
Quintessence of the purest Spirits; and Prester John challenges to himself,
Animosa vox videtur, and regia. cum sit stultissima Senec. lib. 2. Benef. c. 16.
to be Head of the Church, the Favorite of God, the Pillar of Faith: yet all
these, and such other Rhodomontadoes, are but the Lunacies of deluding and
deluded Opination, the Metretricious Suggestions of light, and loathsome
Eccentricity, Privations of that Serenity, which keeps the Mind in a Royal
Mansuetude, and inclines it to a fertile, and frequent Humanity, which Nerva
probably foreseeing in Trajan's temper, rewarded with Adoption of him to the
Empire: for, though Trajan were a Spaniard, and neither an Italian, nor
Italiz'd, yea, though Nerva himself had many Kindred, and none of strange
Origin were ever Emperor before Trajan, yet (...), Dion Cass. lib. ^8. p. 771.
He did not prefer the advancement of his Kindred above the good of his
Government, Trajan, he chooses. (...), etc. Making Virtue a Qualification to
Government, rather then Country. And accordingly he approved himself: for no
sooner was he in the Throne, but he gave the Senate assurance, That he should
disturb, or put to Death no good Man, which exemption of Good Men from fear,
and danger, persisted in by his other supernumerary largesses, of which that
was one Openly he honored, and preferred all Good, and Just Men, made all Men
account him an Incarnate God, and possessed them with such Eulogick gratitude,
as would have tempted any Mind, but that of serenity, to abate of its
condescension, and to affect distance. But the gentleness of his Mind kept him
in the merit of that praise, which Herodian gives to Marcus the Emperor,
Father of Commodus, (...) etc. that he did not only profess in Word, Lib. 1.
p. 464.
but practiced in Deed the Gravity and continence of perfect Virtue. In short,
what this serenissimus in a Prince is, the Lives, and Carriages of five of our
late English Monarchs, ^.6. Q. Eliz. K. J. Charl. 1.
four of which are, I believe, rewarded with the Glories of Heaven for it, and
the last yet is, and I incessantly pray long may be, the living Instance of it,
will beyond all the Oratory of Words, and Sculpture of the most Immortal and
transcendent Pen, discover, and confirm.

Our Chancellor then meant much by Serenissime Princeps, yet not all that he
had to bless God for in his matchless Pupil. To be of a towardly and pliant
Nature, to be a subactum solum to virtuous Implantations, was a blessing, which
the rough and sanguineous truculencies of some Natures abhor: but to have
nobilissimam indolem, a fertility, and profuseness of addiction to Good; to
have, as it were, Good connatural to, and radicated in the very Freehold, so
that it is, as it were, inseparable from it, This is a noble Second to the
former, nay it is the Parent of it, at least the sine qua non: for such most an
end Princes prove, as they are in the Oar of their natural Temper. Hence the
Chancellor expresses the accomplishment of the Prince by Indoles nobilissima,
as the significatio futurae probitatis; so Tully uses the Word, Caesaris vero
pueri mirifica indoles virtutis. Cic. ad Brutum 3 lib. 1. Ep. 7. c. 12. De
Consol.
So 2 De finibus 18. and he commends Lentulus as one eximia spe, summae
virtutis adolescentem. And Seneca mentions Tantae indolis Iuvenem, qui cito
Pater Maritus, cito Sacerdos, etc. Yea not only in Children is Indoles
nobilissima a notable comfort, but in Grown Men in veris signum est praesentis
virtutis, so Tully: Faec exim fuisse in isto C. Laelii M. Catonis materiam and
indolem; and Pliny says, primum nonnullis indolis dedi specimen; 5. Verse. lib.
2* Ep. 7.
and Aulus Gellius mentions Laetae indolis adolescens, lib. 19. cap. 9. 'Twere
endless to multiply instances out of Authors to this purpose: that only, which
the Phrase imports, is a natural edg both to Good, or Evil; for indoles barely
is applicable to either: for though Livy writing of Lavinia, understands her
Indoles to be generositas quaedam virtutis atque animi (1 Ab Vrbe 9.) yet, when
he uses the word of Hannibal, he makes it to Evil as well as to Good, cum hac
indole virtutum ae vitiorum sub Asdrubale meruit. And therefore the Nobilissima
here is not only a Complement, but a Characteristical discrimination of the
Prince's propension to Good, as his Choice, and that which God had so tinctured
his Temper with that he could as soon cease to be, as not to be Nobly Virtuous.
Indolem valent, quantum terrae proprietas, and coeli, sub quo aluntur. And
hence is it, that as curious and thrifty Planters, that delight in choice
Fruit, do not only preserve choice Seed, and choice Grafts, but also sow and
plant them in proper Soils; that so their Natural Indoles may have no Alloies,
and Debasements, but Additions from the Position of their Fixation: so do
prudent and diligent Parents, and Supervisours express their Affection and
Judgment in the Nurture of Youth to Virtue, that, their Natural Towardness not
being nipped and blunted, they may in time come to a virtuous Tapering, and to
that proportion of Plenitude, which their Natures and Opportunities capacitate
them to.

Which Connaturality of the fruits of Education with the Impressions of their
Birth make Virtue so habitual to them, that they may well be called theirs as
(by Divine Concession) they are the temporary Possessours of them; since by
their Coalition with them, and their Appropriation of them, as their peculiar
Treasure, they are only and properly termed serenissimi and nobilissimae
indolis. For though Titles, and Terror may cause ascriptions of Perfection to
Men, who otherwise as they deserve them not, so would not obtain them, Shows of
Virtue, or claims to the credit of Her from the real Alliances of Her, to their
Ancestors, is not current Coin to purchase the Prince's Character here. For
those remote and dubious Titles, though they derive faint and refracted lines
from the Center of Merit, yet are but the by-blows of its excellent
Heroickness. They are as Monogenes, Pompey's Cook somewhat like him, but not
very Pompey the Great: they are as Serapio Scipio's Slaughter-Man, not indeed
Famous Scipio, Africk's Master. They are Spintheris the despicable Player, not
Publius Lentulus the Grave Senator. They are virtutis umbrae, little conducing
to Princes praise, but rather the Vizzard of such Deformities as seek, and take
Sanctuary and relief from creditable appearances. That which only is worthy
Princes, is propriis gemmis coruscare, to see that the Virtue they pretend to,
be vera, non fucata; propria, non aliena. For that the Chancellor here admires
the Prince, as One that was worthy his Descent, and Degree, and thereupon He
assures him the Serenity of his Mind consorted with that Noble Towardliness,
which he undoubtedly discovered to be his Own, unstudied, unaffected, naturally
His, had so affected him with Joy, that he could not but declare his thoughts
with Gratitude to God the giver, and with admiration of Him the Subject of so
much and so rare Endowment, Gaudeo, Serenissime Princeps.

This the Chancellor adds, to show the Sense Wise men have of Princes
Worthinesses: for since they are the great Examples of their People, and have,
as it were, the power of making them Good, or Bad; the preponderation of them
to Virtue, which will be the ^urn of the Common-Scale, and make it incline to
the right, cannot but highly rejoice those, In Augusto.
that rightly conceive it. Augustus was a brave Prince, yet Suetonius writes,
he never commended his Sons to the People's love nisi cum hac exceptione, si
merebuntur, etc. but with this proviso, that they deserved, professing, that
Honor ought to be the reward of Virtue, and not the Companion only of great
Birth, and high Blood. For well he knew, that if the Wisdom and Calmness of
their Minds did not balance, and overbear their Passions, and make them tenable
against Temptation and the fierce and too often prevalent sieges of it, they
would do by their People, as that General in Cedrenus wrote he would do, in
case their Good and his Will were competitours, aut mundus pro Imperatore etc.
Either the World shall acknowledge Me an Emperor, or I will make my self ^o,
whether they will or no. Or, as Paul the Fourth, who was so great a
Selfadmirer, that he blushed not to say, that either he would have his Will, or
he would set the World on fire, and go up in the flame thereof.

Page 122.
But rather as D' Avila represents Mounsieur le Hospital the
French-Chancellour, not like the Duke of Guise all for War, but endeavoring
to compose, and sedate Differences, and to reconcile parties, though he held
the reproach of a soft Gown-Man for so doing; and Henry the third of France,
who was wont to say, that by Civil, intestine Wars Religion it self, which
received its Nourishment from Peace, was much impaired, and so that, instead of
gaining those Souls that were gone astray, by violent means, they did endanger
the loss of those, that were most Zealous in the Truth: and therefore that of
the Moralists concerning Caesar is most true, Plutarch. in adver^. Stoicos p.
1059. edit. Parisiens.
(...), no Man, but Caesar, that is in his right Wits, and is overpowred by
Ambition, will come to the Commonwealth to disturb it for his own Radication,
and Establishment. For ingenuity, that persuades a Man not to better himself as
Chrysippus did by (...) and (...), by topsyturvying all Men, and all things,
but keeps him in the Golden mean of Contentation, especially such a Jewel in
the Mind of Princes must needs exhilarate all Men, chiefly those, that have had
the Honor of their Nurture, and Tuition, and have been near them in
attendance, and affection; and such the Chancellor having, I conjecture, been,
alleges his gaudeo upon the view of such imbibings, and so pleasing probable
Fruits arising from it.

Gaudeo, serenissime, etc. As the Prince's Virtue gave, so the Chancellour's
love took, the occasion of Joy at the Prince's proficiency. For though Joy be
the proper Act of the Soul's exultation within it self, Cic. 3. Tuscul. Ep: 98
Ad. Lucil. Epist. 23.
Gaudere significat Taentam apud se voluptatem sentire, neque vulgo proferre
gaudii notas, in regard whereof Triumphare, and gaudere is joined by Tully in
lib. 189. ad Atticum, and Seneca censure him as Imprudent, qui adventitio
laetus est; adding the reason, Exibit gaudium, quod intravit, etc. The Joy that
is occasional only, and rises from imperfect Virtues, goes, as it comes, but
that, which flows from a Divine Soul, conform to God, is constant, and solid,
and increases toward Eternity. Mihi creed, res severa est verum gandium, etc.
Believe me, true Joy is a serious thing: and so Ep. 27. Aliquid potius bonum
mansurum circumspice, etc, look upon durable good, only lasting Joy is to be
attained by Virtue, so Ep. 59. Est elatio animi suis bonis, viribusque
fidentis, and Gaudium hoc non nascitur nisi ex virtutum conscientia; so Philo,
whiles he calls Joy (...), Lib quod deterius potiori insidiari soloat p. 177.
determines, Joy may be in no mind, but where grounds from Virtue are, taking
to himself, immortal delights. According to which, that expression of the
blessed Virgin, Lib. De septenar. and Festis p. 1172.
is Emphatick, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God,
my Savior.

I say, though to rejoice be properly the Product of our own good, and intern
serenity, yet has it an extent also to that good, which we opinionate to be in
any one, and for that are as much delighted, Cic. 4. Tusc.
as if it were our own. Quum ratione animus movetur, etc. When the Mind is
moved by Reason, pleasingly, and unalterably, then is it partaker of joy.
Hereupon the Chancellor reckoning upon the Prince, as Heir of the Crown, and
probable to be the Monarch of this Land, in whose excellent Endowments, every
particular in the Nation, would proportionably to its capacity and concern, be
blessed, not only excites others, but protests himself much pleased with, and
refreshed by the hopes and assurances he had of futurities blessing, in his
excellent and Royal Inclination; and this is the cause of his Gaudeo.

Videns quanta aviditate tu militares amplecteris actus.

It should seem the visible Application of this Prince to Manly and Martial
Experiments had been earnestly looked into by the Chancellor; who, not like a
Parasite of the Court, or a mendicant at the Trencher, deluded the Prince into
a belief, that Vice was Virtue and haughtiness of mind, Princely towardlyness:
but like a man of weight, Worth, and Integrity, whose Conscience led him to
enter common with his Prince in hazard, and whose heart hoped God would give
hisdead and (as it were) buried right a glorious Resurrection in his future
Prosperity (which this his Addiction to Chivalry, did in a kind fore-speak)
annexes this videns quanta, etc. as the Rise of his Gaudeo serenissime.
Princeps de nobilissima indole tua.

Videns, Men of Honor love the Warranties of Honor, Reason, and Piety for
their applauses, not daring to gratify Power and Greatness to the disservice
of Truth and Fidelity. He that has so debauched a Soul to put his probatum est
to an uncertainty, may, ere long, be accounted fit for no Honor above a
Knightship of the Post. But he that says no more then he sees, knows, and
believes, deserves the credit of a faithful Witness.

Quanta aviditate militares tu amplecteris actus. This is the materia prima, of
which the Prince's Virtue, as it is here by the Chancellor rejoiced in,
consists; and it directs us to two observables. First, Principis electio,
that which the Prince chose to be the Companion of his Time, and the Dial, upon
which, by the shadow and reflex of his present inclination, they should judge
the height of their after-hopes from him. And those were no nugatory Trifles,
no effeminate Lubricities, no childish refuse Trumperies, but the great and
peculiar Glories and Ornaments of Princes, Militares actus. Secondly, affectus
Principis erga res electas, he prosecuted them so chosen with no indifferent,
remiss, and tepid love, but with a generous insatiety, with the keen appetition
of impatience, and prodigal intentness. Quanta aviditate militares tu
amplecteris actus. His choice was optimorum; for even Nature lessons to this in
all the Emanations of her Implants; no Creature, but by its sensual propension
is vehiculated to what it apprehends best for its Conservation, and least
contrary to its Being Yea, Lib. 2. de Ben^. fic. 118.
take away those impediments to choice ( vis major and metus, which Seneca
says, do ex necessitate tollere arbitrium) and propose to their sense things,
they shall decline what they apprehend injurious to them, and accept what is
pleasing. And for men, they are usually estimated by their Company, Pleasures,
and professed Engagements. And such is the rate of their Exchange, in the
Reputation of men, as their Judgment is either dignified, or depreciated in its
choice: Moses lost himself almost in the Peoples eyes, for choosing a Zipporah
to breed upon; so course a ground they thought unmeet to draw a fair-figur'd
Posterity upon; especially Princes, as they are altioris molis, and are the
great Sea-marks, by which Subjects are directed, are to avoid indiligence
therein: Neglects in them are ominous, and of tragic interpretation, because
their Duty being (...), to adorn their Charges by Actions Kingly; Adag. 1.
Chil. 2. Cent. 5. p. 652.
their Torpor is the hazard of their Government.

Therefore Homer bringing in Agamemnon, when he says, All his Companions in War
were full of sleep, and took their rest, singles out Him, as more concerned to
wake, because he had the care and conservation of all upon him.

(...) Iliad. x. v. 3.

(...).
Care kept King Agamemnon broad awake,
No sleep, his charge in danger, could he take.
Hence is it, that all Princes have Characters according to these first
Draughts of their Choices, by which the^ are understood to be legible in all
their after Portraictures. Nero, that delighted in Butchery, and in converse
with Mummers and Juglers, was presaged to be a rude Monster: as was Trajan,
that was pleased only with worthy men, and graceful manners, a virtuous
Prince. The choice then of our Prince being actus militares, to inure himself
to hardship, and to accustom his body to toil, to fix his mind against fear,
and thence to chase all touches of effeminacy; to propound to himself certain
hazard, and uncertain Victory; by hope to provoke Attempts, and by Courage
(with God's blessing to force Success: this choice of his is the merit of true
Nobility, which Marius in Salust expressed thus. I account (said he) Nature
equally the Mother of all men, In Jugurth.
and that the bravest Spirits are in her Heraldry the noblest, and most to be
honored: that Nobility began in Virtue; and therefore, though I can show no
Statues of my Triumphing Ancestry; yet if my Military Habiliments creditably
managed by me, and the Wounds received on my Body for my Country, might be
instead of valor, and Ancestry, then I have wherewithal to render me n^ble;
thus Marius, and that most wisely: for Martial Addictions, where mansueted and
tempered by ingenuous and civil Virtues, steal into the Mind informidable
Resolutions, and instruct, by observing the Experiments of past and present,
men at Arms to learn the method of fighting, and the temper of bearing both
loss and gain, since the Issues of War, as all other things, are in the Hands
of the Almighty, who disposes them as he pleases; and often it is seen, that as
the Race is not to the swift, so not the Battle to the strong; nor are always
men fortunate, as they well design, and dexterously manage their Designs.
Marshal Memorancy was a brave man, and commanded in chief the Forces of France
many years; yet in all his Enterprises he came not off, but either a loser,
grievously wounded, or a prisoner: Notwithstanding which secret pleasure of
God, the best Prescript to a Prince's probable security is Arms. And therefore,
though true it be, that Seneca long since writ to Nero, Errat, siquis existimat
tutum esse regem ubi nihil a rege tutum est, securitas securitate mutua
paciscenda est, non opus est instruere in altum editas arces, D'Avila p. 239.
Lib. 1. do Clem: p. 626, 627.
nee in adscensum ardnos colles emunire, nec latera montium abscindere,
multiplicibus se muribus turibusque sepire, salvum regem in aperto clementia
praestabit, unum est inexpugnabile munimentum amor civium. Though instances
there are of the Oratories of Princes, who by the cogencies of their Wit, well
and aptly uttered, have wrought Subjects to despise Death, to bring their dying
Rights to life again; making them so keen and eager on fight, that they have
gone pleasantly, and with triumph, to try their Title by Combats, and foughten
Fields: yet never did I read of any, that by brave words won Field, without the
second of brave Action. For the personal Valor of Commanders makes Soldiers
of raw, and bold of cowardly men; when timorous and flying Leaders spirit their
Foes, and discomfit their Parties. And Princes, whose design it is, to appear
like Caesar, with their Veni, vidi, vici, and either to lose life, or obtain
victory over their oppositions, in a just Cause, and notable Quarrel, resolve
with our King Hen. 7th. Rather to be left dead Carrions on the cold Earth, then
to be free prisoners in Ladies Chambers. Holingshed p. 758.
Omitting no accomplishment, that Time and Affairs opportune them to. For that
Prince, who is not valiant, will never be accounted wise, since Wisdom consists
in obtaining what we affect, and in preserving such beloved seize of
ours, which Valor well managed, and spritefully expressed, chiefly conduces
to.

And therefore that Precept of Pythagoras, (...), not to taste of those things
that have a black Tail, Plutarch rightly understands to be a Command to avoid
men of dissolute souls, Lib. de Educ. Liberis. p. 12.
and infamous lives, was very good, because they taint those they breath upon,
from the corrupted Lungs of their putrid Principles, and Practices. And thence
is it a choice piece of Wisdom, as to choose the best and most every way endowed
men, to train up Princes in youth: of which Plato in 2. de Repub. and lib. 6.
and 7. de legibus Arist. lib. 6. Politic. lib. 1. Agellius lib. 9. c. 3. and,
according to which, Charles the Great educated his Children, Aemilius Probus
lib. 2. c. 16.
Sons and Daughters, as Probus informs us; and as Theodosius did Arcadius, and
Honorius, under Arsenius; and Constantine, did his Sons, Nicephor lib. 22. c.
33. and lib. 14. 6.2
Eusebius. lib. 4. de vit^ Constantini c. 51, 52. And, as Trajan was by his Master
Plutarch, who writ to him that Golden Book, De Liberorum institutione. And
Alexander was by Aristotle, and all the most excellent Presidents to the World
of virtuous Majesty have been. Schrivelius in Epist dedic. ante Iliad. Homer.
Edit. 1656.
I say, as it has been their Wisdom, to choose the choice of men for their
Tutors, so have those Tutors been conducted to their Education, from the
observance of their Natural Tempers; and, by both, animating them to good, and
deterring them from evil, as they saw they were more or less addicted to them;
especially when their Charges are of such as Portius Cato was, I am acri
ingenio ut ipsi sibi fortunam fecisse videatur, etc. Who was of so sharp a wit,
that he seemed to carry his good fortune in his promptness; Sabellicus lib. 5,
Ennead. 5.
no Art either public or private wanting in him, so great was his eloquence in
Speech, and bravery in Action, that it purveyed for him all his after Glory. In
short, so rare was he in all parts of Virtue, that he seemed to do every thing
as if he had been born only to that end, and yet was all he wished to be to a
matchless perfection Where such Princes are, they must be tended specially that
their Vestal fire extinguish not, that they turn not to Serpents hissing, which
marrs the delight of their Virtues harmony. Their Minds must be kept ever
stirring, that through inoccupancy of Virtue they constagnat not Vice, which
being habituated to men is not easily rooted out of them. Hereupon the Wisdom
of these Architects is to raise aRoof of Action upon the Foundation of sober
Virtue; to keep the Mind within bounds, and to spend its volatility on Corporal
Exercises, which are of virile invention and performance. For the Tutors and
Directors of Princes Educations, after they have seasoned their Charges with
Letters, and secured their Breedings and younger years from the Censures of
Illiterateness, prompt them to Corporal Exercises, and athletary Activities,
such as are skill in handling the weapon, for defense of their persons (a very
great ornament and security to any man of power and honor to excel in) not
that he shall need either to provoke, or be provoked the more by it: for his
Passion has no stimulation thereby, nor will his Skill betray him to Pride
over others, because true Science abhors Boast, but rather keeps it self latent
against a time of need, and proves a Reserve to his security against secret
Attempts, and false Treacheries, which seldom are acted upon Princes of spirit,
and Corporal Manlyness. Next to this, Tutors present to Princes riding of the
great Horse, and the right managing of them in all the parts and punctilio's of
Cavalry; then they allow Justs, Barriers, Tournaments, Tiltings, or such other
Manly Recreations, as are fashionable to greatness in the age of their life and
breeding. And they at last allow them to try the proof of all these preparatory
Inductions by Field-service; that is, such venture, as may display boldness,
and bravery; but be as little in the Eye and Road of Danger as may be: their
Design being not to end, but to enamel his life with all those embossings,
which illustrate the Fame, and aggrandith the Military Virtue of arising
Majesty. For wontedness, and assuscency to any thing connaturalizes it, which
Pythagoras gave us long ago the rule of, (...). To choose the best way of life
and custom, Plutarchus lib. de exilio. p. 602.
will make it delightful to us. The experience of which, even in Military
Affairs, rules the practice of great Commanders (not ordinarily to draw raw
Soldiers, and fresh men into present service, but to put them into Garrisons to
be trained, and their best men to draw out, that their Novices, by the sport
that now and then they have, may be gradually perfected in the Habit of
courageous Boldness. Those actus Militaris then that our Prince here does
embrace, may be thought those only; that are the Recreations and expressions
of their spirits in times of Peace. And to these he is said to be not ably
addicted, and affectionately acted. As well he chose, so to his choice, does he
resolutely adhere; and this displays both Judgment and Constancy. A good
Choice, and a grave Mind, not to waver in, or be cold to it: Levity is one of
the Alloys and exuberances of Youth, and that which has so great a party in
those early Flowers; that though they smell sweet, and come timely, yet they
are soon gone. And therefore, the Prince young and wise, in age probable to
choose and choose again; yet fixed to his first worthy Choice, deserves well the
praise of his Tutor while he lives; as did such another Babe of Grace and
Greatness, James the Son to the King of Scots; of whom Erasmus gives us almost
an incredible account, Adag. Chil. 2, Cent. 5 p. 564, 565.
concluding, Saetis demum dolori nostro, satis discipuli memoriae, deserve of
him. For the Prince here is commended not only amplecti, which argues
endearedness, but magna aviditate; for so the Quant a imports: it is a Note of
Magnitude and Hyperbolicism. Aviditas argues such a love, as obcaecates, a non
videndo propter nimiam cupiditatem, says Festus, a kind of Fury, that carries
a man in a Whirlwind, Lib. 3. de Finibus.
Sicut amens qui mentem suam non habet: Such an insatiety, as is in Nature's
Hunger, and Women's longing: such as Tully reports of Cato, Erat enim, ut scis,
in c^ inexhaust a aviditas legendi nec saetiari poterat: and, in Pliny, nothing
thing is more frequent then avidit as diripiendi lib. 12. c. 14. Avidit as ad
aliquem faciendum, lib. 17. c. 18. Aviditas ad cibos, lib. 20. c. 16. Aviditas
faeminarum, lib. 20. c. 21. Yea, Ad Quint. fratr. lib. 1. Very boni avi peras
^^ta est, ^ence. Ep. 23.
Tullie's infinita aviditas gloriae, and his aviditate inflammatus, which he
mentions, lib. 2. offic. c. 54. All these, and such like expressions in
Authors, makes the Chancellour's Character of the Prince by this Quantae
aviditas, to be importunate and implacable, like that of Cato, who confessed,
Graecas literas senex didici, etc. I learned Greek in my old age, and was so
eager after it, as if I should never be satisfied with any attainment beneath
the perfection of it.

There was much then of freeness and irritation in the desire of the Prince
toward Arms; so that his Mind all on fire with love to, and valuation of it,
testified itself, by hasting to, and embracing the Theory, as inlet to the
practice of it. For so amplecti signifies here. 1. De Oratore 120.
And not only cognoscere and intelligere, but vehementer amare; so Tully, Nec
quod jus civili (Crasse) tam vehementer es amplexus: so in Salust. Imperator
omnes fere res asperas per Iugurtham agere in amicis habere magis magisque e^m
in dies amplecti. So Tully, Pro Sylla.
Tanto amore suas possessiones amplexi tenehant, ut ab his membra divelli
citius ac distrahi posse diceres.

So that all the result from this of the Chancellor in portraying the Prince
to be Martial, will amount to this, that use and custom made it not only
affected by, but connatural to him: so that as Aristides could sooner not be,
then not be just, Citius Solemn e coelo, etc. Sooner the Sun could be displaced
the Firmament, then Aristides be removed from his integrity. So our Prince
could as soon deny his Stomach food, or his Eye pleasure, as his delight
Martial Exercise. And hence was it, that as to show his forwardness, avidit as
and amplecteris is asserted: so to evidence him more led by sense and passion,
then reason and speculation, this delight of his is rendered by Militares
actus. For Youth is more pleased with Corporal Traverses, then Mental
Agitations; those are introduced, when the Senses exterior are glutted, and the
wild Oats are fowed, as we say; but Bodily Feats, as they are in Youth most
seasonable and fragrant, so are they most delighted to express them, because
Sense pleases it self in its perfectest model, and vivid'st Representation,
which is that of the Body in Youth, when the Sails of the Skin are filled, and
the Veins reaking hot with lively blood, and the Joints unctiously motive with
metaled Youth, and the Spirits energically diffusive, when the Circulation is
uninterrupted, and the Violets scent in the Breath, the Roses color in the
Cheek, and on the Lip, the Lilies whiteness on the skin, when the Plushy Mantle
on the Head, and the succulent Moisture of the Bones, rouse up to agility, and
perform creditably their undertakings. Then, then, are men chiefly delighted
in, and carried to actus militares. Yea, then is the impression of Custom more
durable when it is fixed on Nature's marble and adamant, which was the reason
that Solomon advises, to teach a Child in the Trade of his Youth, that he may
not depart from it in Age; it being not often seen that virtuous Youths
degenerate into vicious Old-ages. Hence considering the Chancellor presents
the Prince as so earlily generous, and so towardly inclined in his first
Dawning as it were. I cannot but greatly admire him, and believe the
Chancellor by these Representations of him was much a Votary to him. For,
since there is nothing amiable in Man, but Virtue, because that has abundant
remains of the image God, and the primeve Sculpture of omnipotence, so without
that is there nothing less estimable then he in his degradation. And this was
the sense of David. Man in honor abode not, but became as the Beast that
perished; yea, the Heathen Agamemnon when by the Sycionian he was presented
with the famous Mare Aetha, Plutarch in Gryll p. 98^. Edit. Paris.
on purpose that he might be excused from War, accepted her (...), etc.
Thinking a brave spirited Beast more valuable then a base spirited Man. And
hereupon, when Princes in their ascents to Manhood, choose honest delights, and
honorable loves, they are highly to be blazoned for remarkable, and almost
Non-suchess, the tendencies of youthly greatness, being mostly to lubricity and
effeminateness; the triflings of time, the debaucheries of Minds, the
enervations of Strength, the neglects of Affairs, both of Peace and War, these
are too often the Infelicities, and Shipwracks of Princes as well as meaner
men. Thus was Edward the fifth of this Land made unhappy by fond delight.
Holingshed, p. 715.


Petulantium libidinem, inxu. riam, avarniam, cr^delitatem sensim quidem prim^
and occ^^lte, veiut juvenili errore exercuit. Sueton. in Nerone cap. 6.
D'Avila. p 746. Spotswood's History, Scotland, p. 259.
And if Youth abstain here, there is another snare that is apt to be caught by;
desire of gain, though by indirect means, and satisfaction of anger, though by
oppression and blood. The Duke of Guise, to maintain his Party with pay, seized
on Church* Chalices, and coined them. * Henry the Third of France, when he had
caused the Duke of Guise to be murdered, came in all haste to the Queen Mother
to tell her, He had made himself King of France, now he had slain the King of
Paris: but she replied, You have made the Duke of Guise to be slain, God grant
you be not now made King of nothing. Yea, so long as Adam Gordon, Huntley's
Deputy in the North of Scotland, stands on Record for abusing the Queen's
Authority, in revenging his Family on the Forbes's Family, their Antagonists,
one hundred and twenty seven of whom he slew, and twenty seven burned alive in
Favoy-house; there will never want an horrid instance of the danger of power in
a vicious mind. Give me a Prince like Malcolm the Third, King of Scotland, who
can defy a Conspirator, and bravely challenge him; yea, upon his sound
repentance heartily forgive him. Such Princes England has mostly had, now has
to a miracle beyond compare, and I hope ever will have such, who have been,
are, and will be nobly courageous, but not bloody; God and the King may, and do
show mercy from their own innate essential Clemency, but they are afflictive to
men not without the aid of others, whom they consult with; when they send their
Thunderbolts, and are by their Councillors often so allayed, Seneca Natural.
Quast. lib. 2. p. 856.
that their anger proves favor, faith Seneca. Quia Iovem, id est, Regem
prodesse etiam solum oportet, etc. Such Magnanimity, such virtuous loftiness of
mind, will keep all Maggots of corrosion and putrefaction off, admit no
suggestions of Vice to Familiarity and Audience, but abhor the Promoters and
solicitations to them, as valiant Grillon did, who being Captain of H. 3d^'s.
Guard, and commanded by him to kill the Duke of Guise, D'Avila. p. 742.
honestly and religiously replied, Sir, I am really your Majesty's most humble
and devoted Servant, but I make profession to be a Soldier, and a Cavalier. If
you please to command me to challenge the Duke of Guise, and fight with him
hand to hand, I am ready at this instant to lay down my life for your service:
but that I should serve for an Executioner, before your Majesty's Justice
commands him to die, is a thing suits not with one of my condition; nor will I
ever do it whilst I live: thus he. So dangerous a thing it is to give way to
any evil, that, a battery and breach being once made upon Integrity, all the
residue and remain of Virtue is in peril.

Well may the Prince then here be a person of wonder, and of the Chancellour's
love, who gives up himself to such innocent and graceful Recreations, as are
purely Princely, and become him as peculiarly such: for so it follows, Convenit
namque tibite taliter delectari.

Convenit namque tibi te taliter delectari.

This is added, to carry the Prince's praise to its true merit; 'twas not only
a good, but a graceful choice, that he made, proportionable to his quality, and
station; his delights were not like the (...), Cent. 1. Chil. 1. Adag. 30.
those Gardens of the Poets fiction, altogether vain and profitless, in quibus
semina etc. in which seeds of virtue will no better thrive, then seeds of
plants strewed up and down in an earthen pot; as Erasmus his words, are no such
delights did the Prince fix upon: for then that might be said of him, which was
said of Calvisius Sabinus in Seneca Nunquam vidi hominem beatum indecentius,
Ep. 27.
Never did I see a man less become his happy condition then Sabinus did. The
Prince, like him would have been great and rich; but in his demeanor not
admirable, no nor imitable, as neither was he; yea, had the Prince so declined
and inconsidered himself, that might have been said to him in the after-time of
his life, which Seneca writes to his Friend, E^dem loco. Ep. 27.
Numera annos tuos, and pudebit eadem velle, quae volueras puer eademparare:
Consider thy years, and you will be ashamed when a man, what ye loved and
gloried in, when a child. But when he culls out to his esteem such Recreations
as are Princely and virile, well may he be applauded with a Convenit.

Indeed delights are common to all Creatures, and the chief external good both
of their desire and endeavor; and when the object of them is adequate and
regular, when it has no inconformity to the Agent, Vnicuique nostrum padagogum
dari Deum non quidem ordinarium, sed hunc inferioris note, ex little numero,
quos Ovidius ait De Plebe Dcos. Senec. Ep. 110.
that acts to, and is acted by them, all is well, and like to be fortunate with
us. For since there is a kind of Deity in the addiction, and genius, and the
naturality of men's propensions do mostly presage their excellency, and
preoccupy their conquest of the difficulties they encounter with, according to
that of Heraclitus, (...), and according to that, which Ammian Marcellinus
makes good in all famous persons, who have been excited to do what they
worthily did, by it, lib. 21. p. 394. It conduces much to a good issue, that we
mismatch not our genius, by any base consort, or plebeian Mate of converse and
inteurness. Alcmon in Plutarch tells us, Libro De Fortuna Romanorum.
Fortune is the Sister (...), of good education, great persuasion, and exact
providence, and circumspection. Hence do the current of Authors erect the
genius and ducts of men, as Mints and Forges of their Fortunes, good or bad.
Plau. in Trinummo.
The Comoedian has it, Sapiens ipse sibi faciet fortunam; and Portius Cato is
by Livy Sabellicus, and Budaeus made one, Qui quocanque loco natus, etc. Who
would make every Country his, and every condition he was fit for come to him,
and force their courtesy upon him. Indeed it is not always the reward of
Virtue to succeed; the lines of worthy men do not always fall to them in fair
places, nor have they always goodly heritages: In Panegyr.
yet Pacatius stands to it, Sua cuique prudentia Deus; and Erasmus has
collected sundry instances to confirm it: and mostly we see, that men are happy
or miserable, as their minds are narrow or great, active or supine, industrious
or negligent, Hic Princeps suo beneficio tutus nihil praesidi^s eget: arma
ornamenti cansa babet. Senec. lib. 1. Clem. p. 625. Patrem quidem patriae
appellavimus, ut sciret datam sibi esse in potestarem patriam quae est
temperatissima. liberis consulens. suaque post illos pone^s. Idem sodem loco.
prudent or temerarious: yea, in Princes and great men, there is no choice so
noble, as that of courageous virtue, that draws forth the mind to bounty,
benignity, and a through closure with every overture of well-doing; nor is it
possible narrow thoughts should cohabite where true valor is. Men of honor,
who look upon themselves as born and bred for public good, are acted by
principles of suavity and munificence, consulting no accumulation to themselves
but fame, no practice on men but that of Justice and Obligement; their delights
are to be Patrons of Virtue, and Storehouses of munificence. This the Duke of
Guise made good to his enemy, the Prince of Could; for having taken him at
Blainville, he so gloriously treated him, that they both supped at Table
together that night, and after lay together in the same bed. So did Charles the
Fifth Emperor do by Francis the first of France, Herbert's Hist. H. 8. Yea, it
is against the hair, nay against their nature, for them to be forced otherwise,
though by reason of State, or necessity of affairs. Henry Wardlow, Lord Bishop
of St. Andrews, Hist. Scotland. p. 57.
had so noble a nature, that he thought no cost too great for a brave work; one
day the Major Domus complained of the great number of comers, who expected, and
had entertainment at his house, desiring him for the ease of all his servants,
to make a bill of household, that they might know who were to be served. He
condescended, and when his Secretary was called to set down the names of the
household, being asked whom he would first name, answered, Angus and Fife, two
large Counties. The Secretary from this understood his pleasure, and desisted.
All this I instance in, to show that what men choose as their delights, are so
commensurate to the addictions of their souls, that the one is discernable by
the other. Our Prince then by choosing militares actus, as the subject of his
embraces, may very fitly be saluted with a Convenit tibi, Princeps, taliter
delectari. For he, in thus doing, answered all, that could be expected from
him, ratione famae, familiae, fortunae, potentia, all which were either
hopeless, or hopeful, as he proceeded to the improvement of this choice. For if
the Prince fit still, and cry Leo in via, fearing to hazard his person to gain
his right, he both contemns his Government, and animates Rebellion, upon hope
of no disturbance for recovering it: and the infamy of such pusillanimity,
being a Hell on earth, makes a brave mind kindle, and engage to recuperate,
which if God pleases not to permit, yet he dies with the same of an honest
valor, and a just resentment of his injured estate, and fells the Fine and
Recovery against him at the dearest rate, resolution enraged, and desire doubly
edged, can part with it at.

D' Avila p. 237.
Famous Momerancy in Anno 1576, fighting against the Hugonots Army, was boldly
charged by Robert Steward, Momera^sy asked Steward, whether he knew him, or
not? Yes, quoth Steward, I do; and because I do, I present thee with this, and
shot him in the shoulder, so that he fell, but as he was falling, he threw his
Sword, the blade whereof he still held in his hand, though broken, with such a
violence at Steward's face, and then he was near eighty years old, that he beat
out three of Steward's Teeth, brake his Jaw Bone, and laid him by him on the
ground for dead; which shows, that men do fell their ruins, as dear as love
and rage can make them to their Ruiners.

Nedum quia Miles es, sed quia Rex futurus.

This is added, to show, that Titles employ cares of corresponding to them in
actions of congruity. Magnos magna decent. This Alexander understanding from
his Master Aristotle, or his Mother- Genius, replied to one that asked him, if
he would run at the Olympic Games: Do any Kings run there? implying, that men
must do only those Actions, that are semblable to themselves, the Actors. Of
this Nehemiah had a sense, when he resolved against flight in those words;
Shall such a man as I fly? And this that Emperor remembered, when he rouzed
himself up against sorrow for his distress, with these words, Non decet
Imperatorem mori flentem. And to this the Chancellor here is the Prince's
Remembrancer, that as he well chose, so he should fix upon grounds of Congruity
and Reason, as he was both a Knight in present, and a King in possibility.

Miles es,] This is not expressive of his profession and addiction, but in a
more press sense relates to his particular dignity and degree. For usual it was
with Princes before, and in H. 6. time, to create, by dubbing their Sons Knights
at the Baptistery, or in their Cradle, or when they were able to go. Perhaps
our Prince might not be so early a Knight, but one created either when he grew
fifteen years, or before. Whenever he was Knighted, is not much material;
that such he was, is without doubt; and that such he deserved to be, according
to the addictions of his manly mind, is plain from our Chancellour's words,
which I take to be not pompous in courtiery, but real, according to the
latitude, and very truth of its History, and accomplishment in him, Rex
futurus. This is the other Argument on the behalf of Martial Acts, as our
Princes choice. He was born the Heir of a Crown, and had Title to Regality,
when God should disseise his Father of Regality by death; till when, the Prince
was but a Subject: for the Law abhors deprivation, or resignation,
Nullaviverborum nulla ingenii sacultate exprimi potest, quantum opus sit, quam
laudabile, qu amque nanquam a memoria hominum exiturum posse hoc dicere,
Parentibus meis parui, cessi imperio little, five aquuns, five iniquum fuit,
obsequentem sub^ missumque me praebui, ad hos unum contumax fui, ne beneficiis
vincerer Senec. lib. 3. De Beneficiis p. 50.
upon any pretense whatsoever, Allegiance being indispensable, and determining
no how but by death. Now the Prince being by Inheritance, if he should survive
his Father, a King, this Rex futurus is proper, as to that probability and the
regality of a Title; but it had another sense also from our Chancellor: it is
as it were a Prophecy of Loyalty, concerning the ruin of Usurpation, and the
Introduction of H. 6. the rightful Lord, or at least of him the Prince (now his
Father is dead) King. Rex futurus is indeed the voice of Loyalty, but it has
an associated per adventure; because what we are is before, what we shall be
behind the Curtain of Providence mysterious to us. 'Twas bravely said of our
Text-Master, but he (good man) reckoned without his Host, and was not a Prophet
in the upshot: yet this he did, to keep up the Prince's spirit, to harden him
against despondency, to rivet on him magnanimity, which erects a Kingdom of
content in the very quarters of Crosses. This, I believe, he did, to lesson
him, that power lost by Battle, is by Battle to be regained; that Princes
fighting strenuously are probable bravely to succeed; that diligence makes
those fortunate, whom dissoluteness reduces to want, and, what is worse,
contempt; that if there were no other Argument to Courage, this were enough,
that Princes are impatient to be the Vassals and Tennis-Balls of Fortune, and
that their probablest Rescue and Restitution is from Resolution.

Regis nempe officium est pugnare bella populi sui, and eos rectissime judicare.

In this Clause the office of Rule, both as to War and Peace, is fet down; and
this the Chancellor appropriates to Kings, as the meetest persons to carry on
both good Offices. This was primitively familisrique, all power being vested by
God in the Heads of Families, over those that were theirs by Generation,
Emption, Compact, or Conquest. And as the power of life and death, which was
Civil Judicial power, was in them; so also was the Military and Bellatory power
in them also; for, if they were to rule their Family, they were also to protect
their Rule from inroads upon, and injuries to it. Thus did Abraham, very soon
after the World's peopling, arm his menial servants, to propel danger from
them, and redeem his captive Nephew, Genesis XIV. 14.

After when power was more public, and increase of people dwelling together
called for a Magistrate; the Sword, both to repel evil, and compel to good, was
lodged in him as well by the determination of God as the consent of the people.
This did Moses, Ioshuah, and the Judges execute, and after them the Kings, God
having written this Sapience on man's nature; according to which, generally,
all Nations, and unions of men in all places, and at all times, assented to the
position of power in one or few, for the good of their respective Combinations.
And, if the Holy Writ had been silent in this, there had been good authority
for its practice, Quis ergo magis naturam rerum ignorant, quam qui optimo ejus
operi and commendatisismo hoc ferum and perniciosum vitiu^ assignat. Seneca De
iral. 1. p. 542
merely upon the rules of civil convenience, and social necessity, which is an
original Law, and paramountly takes place, as having its warrant in its weight,
importance, and utility; nor could it be doubted, but the general compliance of
the rational nature with it would have silenced all pretensions to doubt about
it. But St. Paul, from the Spirit of God, has partly asserted Magistracy thus
accommodated, as our Chancellor describes it. The Magistrate bears not the
Sword in vain, that excludes power from being made a Cipher. If thou do
well, thou shall have praise; if evil, fear the power: that is, the authority
of God, in the trust of man, is for promotion of Justice, both in animation of
good, and repulse of evil.

Under which head, War, as occasionally necessary, is not only lawful, but
useful; and that without which, Justice cannot be propagated; since Wars are
undertaken not wisely, Dum in pace esse possumus, non arma induamus.

Egnatius in vita ejusp. 575. edit. Sylburg.

Aelius Spartianus, p. 128. edit. Sylb. Nullum Orna mentum Principis fastidio
dignius pulchrius que est, quam ella Corona, Observatos Cives. Seneca lib. 1.
De Clem. ad sinem.


not properly as choices, but as such exigents, without which peace and justice
cannot be accomplished, or enjoyed: so true is that of Valerius Martianus, who,
though a Creature of bussle, and one made by battle, yet when become great and
grave, declared it his Maxim, Let us not live War, while we can leave in Peace.
And therefore, if a Governor will prove himself an Adrian, It a se Rempublicam
gesturum, ^t sciret populi rem esse, non propriam; if he will show himself
untreacherous, by being jealous of his necessary power, he must apply himself
pugnare bella populi sui, if ever he intend eos rectissime judicare. For as the
Empire of God is not submitted to, but ratione potentiae and for midatae
vindictae in rebels; so will not humane Governments be subjected to in their
moderate, legal, and uninjurious Commands, without punishment by the edge of
the sword upon Recusants. Hence was it, that as the Jews, in times of peace,
punished Enormities with death, restitution, retaliation, according to the
diverse nature of them, so did they impede the great neighboring evils of
encroachment on them; which Nations bordering on them were ready ever to
attempt, by diversion, and making their Country the seat of War. Upon which
they were led by their Kings, and Leaders, who were Iepthahs for valor, Souls
for stature, David's for activity, chosen men, whom their people followed
readily, stood to manfully, brought off victoriously, there being a natural
love and loyalty in all people to men of honesty and valor, as appears in many
instances, but chiefly in that of the people to Jonathan, and after to David;
Quem in socordis Principis invidiam Cives facile admisere. Egnatius in vita
ejus p. 585.

Lib De Iside and Osicide p. 354. edit. Parif.

Lib. De Agesilao, p. 763.


yea, and of later times to Nicephorus Boloniates, who thrust Michael Ducas
from the Empire; and, Ignatius says, had reception by the people, as a reproach
to Ducas his Cowardice.

Hence came it to pass, that the Nations looked upon no virtue so peculiarly
and directly in the Kings, as Chivalry. Plutarch tells us, the Egyptians chose
their Kings (...), either from their Priests, or from their Warriors; and he
adds the reason, (...), as thinking those only worthy to rule, who were famous
either for Valor, or Learning. And Xenophon writes, that the Greeks were like
minded, (...). So well advised was Agesilaus, that he judged strenuity proper
for Kings. Lib 3. Memo^ab. p. 763.
So Agamemnon is commended by that Author from a Poem of him here quoted, and
approved, (...), He was both great to fight, And wise to rule aright. Yea, he
brings in Cyrus, justifying himself to be a good Governor, from that valor he
expressed against the Nations enemies, (...), as if it had become him scur^ily
to fear, and not rather to fight them as he gallantly did. And Clyt^bulus is
brought in by him, declaring, that the Persian Kings did, and they ought ever
to divide their time, De Administrat. Domest p. 827. Lib. 3. Hist. G^aecae p.
493. Aquinas de regimine Principum, c. 21.

Romani s^n^per justa movere arma, caeterae nationes odio, and malevo (...)
quod Imper^^m t^nt^ Vrbu justitia ageretur, sela in populam Romanum apiebant.
Lilius Giraldus Syntag. Deorum page 466.

Lib. 1. p. 640. edit. Sylb.


between War and Husbandry; and where ever this distribution of Kingly Office
is not, he terms it, (...), an imperfect Government. The Romans also eyed much
Valor and Military Prowess in their Kings, Consuls, Emperors, and Captains;
therefore, they chose two yearly Consuls, and purposely disposed one to the
care of Martial; the other, to the civil justicing between man and man, yea,
though they were a Nation fledged by War, and were made up of flagrant and
combustible Elements, yet were they most just in their pacts, and inviolably
zealous for indemnification of Allies; nor did they ever take a provocation so
lightly, as to proceed to revenge it on their Provokers, and right themselves
against their provocation: but, upon sullain and surly persistencies in
contumacy, and resolves of injury, memores icti foe deris cum panis non statim
ad arma prccurrunt, dum prius more legitimo quaeri malunt, faith Iornandes.

After, when they chose Emperors, and Chiefs, they looked upon the warlik'st
of men, and him they subjected to, and followed; yea, the Laws of all
Governments, as of the Empire, France, Spain, Denmark, and this Empire of Great
Britain, do therefore call Wars the 7 E. 1.1 E 3. ^.7.18 E. 3. c. 74 H. 4. c.
13.2 E. 6.2.4 and 5. P.M.c. 3
King's Wars, Coin 25 E. 3. c. 2.12.3 H. 7. c. 6. 5 E. 6. c. 19.20 H. 6. c. 19.
the King's Coin, the Navy 31 Eli^. c. 4.
the King's Shipping, the Forts 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 16.13 R 2. c. 15.
the King's strong Holds and Castles, the Laws 21 I ac. 2
the King's Laws; the Subjects, the King's Subjects; the Courts, the King's
Courts; because by these the Kings are enabled to defend themselves, and their
Governments, and that by Wars, to suppress Rebellion, or divert Invasion. And
the trusts of God and Men, vested in the King to these public Beneficencies,
have, do, and will ever produce to their Trustees, glory, riches, and serenity.
These exhalations are returned in golden, silver, Seneca in Comsol. ad Polyb.
p. 754.
and milky showers; the Via lactea of Majesty. Caesari quoque ipsi, cui omnia
licent, propter hoc ipsum multa non licent: omnium domos illius vigilia
defendit, omnium otium illius labor; omnium delicias illius industria, omnium
vacationem illius occupatio. Now if the Office of Kings be to war for peace,
and security; where, without it, they are not purchasable, or possible to be
kept; then the means of effecting these are, de debito, the King's. Every end
supposes a means. If the King be to do, he is to have wherewith to do: he is
else but togatum mancipium. Therefore our Laws do own and recognize the
Seigniory of the King, Habet Rex in manu sua omnia jura, quae ad Coranam, and
Laicalem pertinen^ potestatem, and materialem gladium, qui pertinet ad Regni
gubernaculum. Flera, c. 17. lib. 1. p. 16. edit. Seld.
to defend force of Arms, and all other force, against the peace, whenever it
shall please him. So declare the Peers and Commons, in full and free
Parliament, 7 Edw. the First. Not thereby to out themselves of all subject-like
Counsel to their Kings, in cases of War, to be entered upon: for, in those
Cases, our Kings have chosen to take their advises, before their own personal
ones: but the Law was so, and so then declared, to enable the Crown to do its
proper office, in case of emergencies, either of Rebellion, or Invasion; and
were they bound to wait the Convention of Counsels, tedious often before, and
in their Meetings, Remedies would be impossible, and Villainies unhinderably
successful.

-- sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per long as convaluere moras.
This is the rather to be touched upon, because it was once an old sore, and
through the putrefaction of this has made a many years confusion, and given
being to a Levelling Monster, and a Hydra-headed Antique, which deserves to be
cautioned against in the legal Assertions of the Truth in this Cause For the
King being caput regni and legum, all direction, protection, judgment of
discretion, and severity is in him; and as the Law says, Nihil potest Rex, quam
quod de jure potest; so is it a just Rule (saving incommunicable absoluteness)
Quidquid Iovi, id Regi licet, that is, as unaccountable to the coercive power
of Subjects are Kings, as God himself; the Deputy: as his Principal, though
that of Seneca be also true, Lib. 7. De Benefic.
Ad Reges potest as omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas. Yea, were not
Kings exempt from these Shackles of Iron, and base Metal, what glorious
Nothings, and glistering Ciphers would they be? What pitisul Mercenaries would
insolence, and Plebeian encroachment reduce them to: like that Tartarian
Prince, they would truckle under the Usurpations of their Vassals, and be
guilty of that easiness which is irregal. Quod ad Religionem attinct, de qua
inter vos disputari audio, Inlioff. Discurs. Politic. p. 91.
vester Pontifex meus Pontifex erat; vester Lutherus, meus Lutherus. So
abhorred a degradation of Majesty, that no generous spirit would take such an
unkingly Kingship.

The Law then in the Chancellour's words, Pugnare bella populi sui, has this
Interpretation, That the King is by Office to fight the Battles of his People;
that is, by his people to battle, for the adjunct of propriety, has here but a
sense of ministry, not causality; that is, it is not to fight the Wars of his
people, as they are Warranters of, and Regents in it; but of his people, as
they are those Instruments he fights by, and fights for, since the end of War
is Peace, as it follows, Et eos rectissime judicare. This the Chancellor adds,
to show the amiable, as before he had the terrible Check of Majesty. So wisely
has God provided for Order, and the tuition of the Magistrate's power, that
between Force and Law it should be intermerate. Force supports Law, and Law
moderates Force; were it not for punishments, we should be Ravilliacks to one
another, Homo homini lupus; and were it not for Laws, Property would be
determined by Might, and lame and helpless Mephibosheths be popped off with
nothing, though they are the rightful Heirs, and ought to be the real
Possessours of their Rights. So that Laws are the Rules and Monitors of Kings,
concerning their duties to God, in their demeanours to men. It Is true indeed,
Parem habere non debet Rex, nec multo fortius superiorem in justitia exhibenda,
ut dicatur de eo, Magnus Dominus noster, and magna virtus ejus. That Fleta
asserts, as the King's undoubted right: but then he subjoyns, Licetomnes
potentia praecellet, cor tamen ipsius in manu Dei esse debet, and ne potentia
sua maneat irrefraenata, fraenum apponat temperantiae, and lora moderantiae, ne
trabatur ad injuriam qui nihil aliud potest in terra, quam quod de jure potect.
So Fleta, lib. 1. c. 17. (...). Crispinus apud Stobaeum, Ser. 45. p. 324.


I know that great is the indulgence of God to Kings, and vast Prerogatives
has he vested them with. And to Kings, as the flower of men, has he given
rational principles of Sapiencie, to immure and protect his Donaries to them,
and Kings would be accessory to their own, and their Subjects woes, if they
should not employ to their preservations (in all worthy and wise latitudes)
such Intrusts, and Commissions, by God and Laws delegated to them. But yet
Fleta's counsel is from the unerring mouth and mind of Truth, Temperent igitur
Reges potentiam suam per legem, quae fraenum est potentiae, Nullius juris
ratio, aut aequitatis bonignitatis patitur, ut quae sal^briter pro utilitate
homi number introducuntur, ea nos duriore interpretatione contra ipsorum commodum
producamus ad soveritatem. Modestinus, lib. 8. Responsorum.
quod secundum leges vivant; quia hoc sanxit lex humana, quod leges suum ligent
latorem: and alibi digna vax ex Majestate regnantis est, Legibus alligatum se
principom profiteri. So he, loco praec.

It is sedition in Subjects, to dispute what a King may do in the height of
his power, King James's Speech at White Hall, 1609. p. 531. of his Works in Fol.
but just Kings will ever be willing to declare what they will do if they will
not incur the curse of God. I will not be content, that my power be disputed
upon: but I shall ever be willing to make the reason appear of all my doings,
and rule my actions according to my Laws.

Princes then must not be remiss and negligent, (...) etc. Diotogenes Pythagor.
apud Stobaum Sermon. 46. p. 329.

Lex scripta, quamves dura, est servanda. Gloss ad Pauli verba lib. 5. ad Edit.
Digest. lib. 3. tit 2. p. 344. King James's Speech at White Hall, 1609. p 537.
of his Works in sol.


but vigilant and distributive of their power to their Subjects; that is
judicare, the act of Majesty, by example of, and authority from God. The Lord
sits in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges amongst the gods. And
this impartment of their power, they must make secundum jus and aequum, as the
Laws of their Government directs and advises, and that is rectissime eos
judicare. For though Laws may be hard and unpleasing, yet, while they remain
Laws, the people are to be ruled by, and the Prince is neither cruel, nor
unjust, in exacting obedience to, nor in correcting contumacy against them.
Though his goodness and conscience, in discharge of his place and power also it
be, to cause their emendation and correction (if such they be) with all
possible speed, and to proceed with all imaginable zeal to the deliverance of
the people from the burden and influence of their rigor on them: so wisely
spoke King James of happy memory. If any Law or Statute be not convenient, let
it be amended by Parliament; but in the meantime, term it not a Grievance: for
to be grieved with the Law, is to be grieved with the King, who is sworn to be
the Patron and maintaixer thereof.

And thus all gracious and beloved Kings have ever done, ruling not by Lust,
but Law; not by absolute power, but by legal administrations: and this will
properly call him, that so does a King. 'O (...), etc. Tyrants seek their own
good, Kings the good and benefit of their Subjects, says the Philosopher; and
lib. 4. De Repub. after he has spoken much of Kings, as Keepers of those
Rights, which Nature has annexed to men, Lib. 8 De Moribus c. 12. c. 10. p.
403.

(...), Xenophon. lib. 2. De Exped. Cyri. Libro unico, De Instit. Prine. in
Argum. p. 527. Politic.

Fleta in Proemio libri edit. Seldom


and made them Defenders of, he concludes, (...), etc. that is, The Tyrant's
end is benefit to himself, to suck the sweet, and eat the fat of Subjects: but
the King's care is to profit and better his Subjects, by example and precepts
of virtue, seeing they do things honest, and of good report. And that this is
the second pillar of Government, and that which Kings are to look after, having
by the Sword procured peace; if otherwise it was not attainable, is plain from
the joint consent of all good Authors, and Authorities of Scripture, Reason,
and Practice; as learned Hopperus, and Ficinus on Plato's Politics, has
notably observed.

I know there are some Parasitique Wits, that forge Arguments, to the
subversion of legal Boundaries, as never made by God for Princes, nor
reasonably to be commended to their practice; yea, that harmless, and, as I
believe, it was intended, and is by Wisemen expounded, Rule of the Civilians,
Quod Principi placuit Legis habet vigorem, they apply to the liberty of the
King's Will, to do what he will with the lives, fortunes, and liberties of the
people under them; a Device to blow up the very Root of Kingship, God's
blessing on it, love of Subjects under it, and the content of that continual
Feast, which a good Conscience makes to its Possessour in all the vicissitudes,
and varieties of life. For Kings being but men, and so under the Law of
mutability and misery, do need, how great soever they be, the prayers,
fidelities, and assistances, both by purse, and person, of their Subjects, as
often as their legal and necessary needs shall call for them; and if they that
are to pay and serve, love not their Lord, they will part with their money but
slowly, perhaps after the season be past, and serve him but coldly, him in
show, and his Antagonist in truth: it is love, alas! mixed with fear, both
subtly, and yet innocently blinded in the gubernative activity of power, that
makes Kings secure and beloved. Take away these kind entercourses in this
politic Marriage between King and People, and all the Disdiapason ceases, and
the harmony becomes disconcented.

Indeed, the pleasure of Kings is, in a sober sense, the Law; because Kings
please to do nothing but Justice, the just Counsels of God being with them, qua
Kings, and they knowing, that they are accountable to God, for the riot of the
man, against the King, in them, ought so to demean themselves to their
Subjects, as God does to the World, Rex est (...). Fornerius ad Legem, 244.
lib. De Verb. signif. page 526. (...). Diocogenes Pythagor. apud Stobaeum,
Sermon. 339. (...). Philippus Rex apud Herodotum, lib. 3. Pythagor.
because God has made their Subjects to them, as the World is to him; that is,
since God has made them Lords, not to be disputed with, but by prayers and
tears, by patience and resignation, they should carry as even and just an hand
toward them, in providence for their good, in compassion to their wants and
weaknesses, in tenderness of their freedoms and securities, in desires to
deserve their submissions and loyalties; as God does, whose mercy is, in this
sense, over all his works, and who accounts severity his strange work. And as
God can do no injustice, because he is essentially just, and all Justice is
originally in him, and what is in us, is but by derivation from him; so Kings
are to do nothing unjust, because not only so far as they do it, they are
inconform to God, but for that they are responsible for what they do to God,
whose rectitude they ought to imitate. Caveant igitur sibi Reges and Iudices,
ne conquerentes repellant, vel perverse judicent, ob quod in judicium justi Dei
corruant, Lib. 1. c. 17. Art. 10. (...), etc. Idem loco prec.
ubi judex terribiliter discretus, and intolerabiliter severus, immoderate
offensus, and vehementer iratus, cujus sententia immutabilis, carcer
irremeabilis, tormenta sine fine, says Fleta notably. And while Kings remember
this, and bring their dignities in credit by their virtues, not resting more on
their Power to coerce, then on their Justice to invite their people to their
admiration and imitation. Hortensian Laws, that translate power from people to
them, restraining all from using it besides themselves, are no injury, but
advantages to the people; the wisdom of Kingly Counsel best knowing how to
manage dexterously, Tiraquel. in Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6. c. 24.
and to purposes of Sovereignty, such entrusts: No, nor truly are such
devolvings greater advantages to Kings, then to render them more capable to
make their people happy, by their more affectionate and watchful eye over them
for their good, nor is all the honor and support that love and loyalty in
Subjects to their Prince can express, more then the bare return of their Regal
merit, who watch, and cark, and care, that they may be quiet and orderly under
him, in order to God, the Sovereign of him and them: which makes me conclude
Allegiance and Fidelity a most religious and reasonable service of God, through
the Person and Government of the King; Calvin's Case, 7 Rep.
who, whatever he be, we ought to obey for Conscience sake, with gratitude to
God's mercy, when a David, and a Solomon; and with patience under God's
pleasure, if otherwise: considering, that as well evil men, as good in
Kingship, are to be obeyed; because obedience is due to the Office, and to the
Person in it, by reason of both the Person in the Office, and the Office in the
Person, and that inseparably, and without distinction. Yea, if Kings should be
misled by ill Counsels, and do the thing, that is not right in the sight of
God, and in the sense of the Law, because God is the only Judge of their
actions, and the Law's Head is the King: Christian Subjects have no refuge to
fly to, but Obedience, and Prayer to God, to turn his heart. They must not
curse the Prince in their thoughts, nor calumniate him in their words. For as
the former is Blasphemy and Sacrilege, so the latter is desperate Treason; the
Road to damnable and detestable Rebellion. For since God never made any other
Judge of Kings but himself, pretension to reduce their Eccentricity, by being
insolent against them, is in Gods, and the Laws account, but plausible enmity
and intention to subvertthem: the good King, our late Lord Charles the First,
(...), Seneca, Ep. 64. Quam venerationem praeceptoribus meis deboo, candemillis
praeceptoribus generis humani, a quibus tanti boni initia fluxerunt, si
Consulem video, aut Praetorem quibus omnia bonor haberi solet faciam, equo
desiliam, caput ad aperiam, semita cedam. Quid ergo? Marcum Caronem u^rumque,
and Laelium sapientem, and Socratem cum Zlatone, and Lenone, Cleanthem que in
animum meum five dignatione summa recipiam? ego vero illos veneror, and tantisi
nom nibus semper assurgo. 7 Rep. Calvin's Case.
found it so. Never were more Protestations of love and loyalty worded, then
some of his Englishmen made to him; who yet brought him to the cursed custody
and power of those, who impiously, and to the eternal dishonor of God, and the
Laws of Nature and Nations, murdered him, whom all good men venerate for a
Martyr. Power then being the Ordinance of God, and residing divinely in the
Person and Office of the King; Allegiance and Duty, in all the latitude of
them, are by all manner of rights due to the King. And as nothing can make it
cease to be due to the King, it being founded in the Law of Nature, and due by
it to the King; who, though he may die in person, yet lives in succession and
office, Rex ^unguam moritur Reg. Juris. (...). Adag. 89. Chil. 2. Cent. 7.
there being no Interregnary Chasm in England; so can no just expression of it
be denied, without sin against God, and injustice to his Vicegerent, who has
power of his Body, as Head thereof, and ought to have homage from it, as the
vital influence of the whole, and every particular in it; which I thought good
to write of here, to testify my abhorrence of those Levelling Monster
Anarchique Principles; which, infatuating this Nation of late, produced so
unnatural, and tragical effects of War, Disloyalty, and Irreligion amongst us:
in which while, some loyal-resolved, and knowing subjects, asserted their duty,
and to their eternal honor, suffered more, or less for it: more credulous
beguiled, and misconducted ones, Habeatur personarum a^ dignita^um proportio,
and cism sit ubique virtutis modus, aequo yeccaet quod excedit, quam quod
deficit. Seneca, De Benef. c. 16.
either wholly forgot it; or, in regard of the pressures upon them, did not so
vigorously express it as they ought; which since God, I hope, and the King, I
dare say, has in the majority, and well-meaningness of the seduced people
forgiven, I only remember here as a Caution against Relapse; humbly beseeching
God, that both King and People may live in unity and godly love, That as all
good Kings in their Government must imitate God, and his Christ, in being just
and righteous, David and Solomon in being godly and wise (they are wise King
James his words) as they prefer their People's good beyond their own quiet and
pleasure, as Philo says. Kings, Speech, 1616. page 551. (...) Philo, lib. De
Agricultura, paeg. 193.
shepherds of their people, do; so all good people must, and are only good,
when they do observe the Rule of Religion, Give honor to whom honor, fear to
whom fear, tribute to whom tribute is due; that is, to the King, and to all in
Authority under him, and to evidence to the World, that while others live
besides, they live according to the rule of Christian, (...) Justinus Mart.
Epist. ad Zenum, and Siren. p. 590. edit. Sylburg.
and English subjection. And this, on bothsides observed, will cashier all
jealousy; for while both respectively, rule and obey according to the Laws of
this Realm, the people will live orderly, and in peace, and the King will be
able pugnare bella populi sui, and eos rectissime judicare.

Vt primo Regum cepite octavo Clarissime tu duceris.
Here the Chancellor produces to the Prince a Scripture-instance, in the great
example of the wisest of men and Kings, Solomon; who being instructed by God
how, as well as authorized where to rule, is the best pattern for a Prince's
practice in his regal demeanor. And that Solomon here mentioned (for the
eighth of the second of Kings wholly treats of him) is not a person less
matchless, then is generally and truly presumed of him. 'Twill not be amiss to
consider, what in him may be most eminent, most convictive of our Belief, See
the most learned Bishop of Worcester's Character of him, in his Sermon, at our
Gracious Sovereign's Coronation, page 3, and 4.
of his supremacy above other men, either of his, or aftertimes. And though
comparisons are odious, and vulgarly, we say, there is no one man so
accomplished, but there is another as excellent as he; yet since the Spirit of
God, and all Authors Christian after him, has made him the Phaenix, humanae
naturae ornamentum, 'twill be not lost labor to consider him.

Solomon then was a Prince born, the Son of King David, by Bath-Sheba his
beloved Wife, a Prince Solomon was, called by this name mysteriously, in order
to his causation of peace, and introduction of the concurrent blessings with
it, Plenty and Riches. For he made silver, to be in Jerusalem as Stones, and
Cedars made he as the Sycamore Trees that are in the Vale in abundance, 1 King.
viii. 27. and in order to his being a Type of Christ Jesus, the Prince of
Peace, who brake down the wall of separation between God and Man, and brought
life and immortality to light through the Gospel. A Prince Solomon was, wise as
an Angel of God; so the Holy Text phrases him, so the Holy God endowed him: God
that gave him leave to desire what he would of him, gave him love to Wisdom and
Grace, to beg it as his choice, and to obtain it as his jewel: so wise, 1 Kings
iii.
and so understanding a heart did God give Solomon, that all Expositors do
agree him ex omni part beatus, both as to speculation, and action. Tiraquel
numbering the virtues of all Ancients, Lib. 5. De Nobilirate.
and Moderns, makes Solomon, in wisdom, paramount to them all. Pineda has made
a large and laborious. Treatise De gest is Solomonis, wherein he makes every
arome, and minute-particle of him, a Mountain of Wonder. And Turrian is not
behind him in the admiration of him. Lib. 6. De Philosoph. Princip. (...)

Aristor. Precemio Metaphys.

In Piman^o Mercurii. Lib. 3. com. 6. Dialog. 250 13. c. 3. De Vetitate, p. 214.


And no wonder: for if wisdom make a man's face to shine as it is, Prove. and as
the Heathens acknowledged to the praise of her, (...), There is nothing more
honorable then wisdom; because it is the Image of God, and that which gives
the possessour of it praelation above others; as it enables him to know those
things, that otherwise are hidden, and hard to men. So the Philosopher says.

If Socrates, whom the Greeks thought (...), the wisest of Mortals, made it his
study amongst men, and his petition to the gods, to be wise; O amice Pan, and
caetera Numina, date obsecro, ut intus pulcher efficari; O thou Pan, and the
rest of the gods, grant me, I beseech you, to be beauteous in soul, inwardly
worthy; which Roselius enlarges, Veritatis divinae cognitionem petebat; He
desired knowledge of divine truth, which God only was able to grant him, which
only a calm and well-tempered Soul was capable of. If Wisdom, which all
Authors and Ages thought God in Man: if this, I say, were in our Solomon
eminently, beyond the proportion of other Kings, and answerable, if not
transcendent, to the endowments of other men, not Moses himself excepted,
though Vatablus be of another opinion; In 1 Reg. iii. 12.
and if this mass of Wisdom be evidenced not only judicially on the Throne,
but discursively in the Chair, to the admiration of all hearers, who being at
his discourses from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyssop upon the Wall, and
other his civil Precepts in the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Solomon,
(though Grotius herein also much abates him, while he makes the Proverbs to be
only liber (...), a compilement, like those the Emperors of Constantinople
after him had, of all the select Sentences of those Heroiques that in time
preceded him, and were Proverbial amongst the Jews.) I say, Solomon's works and
words considered, will render him such an Non-such, as the Holy Spirit
characterizes him to be. So true is that of a learned man concerning his
Proverbs, Bayns in c. 1. Prove. inter Crit. Sact.
Neque ullum vel ex universo Proverbiorum numero reperias, etc. That there is
no passage in the Proverbs so inconsiderable, and ordinary in the words of it,
but if it be rightly and thoroughly understood, couches in it some admirable
piece of truth and wisdom, worthy the most wise Solomon its Penman. So great,
so wise, so much of mortal comprehension had Solomon, that, amongst men, the
sons of natural propagation, (...) as Gregory Naz. Orat. 53. in Eccles. p. 74^.
no Socrates, no Xenophon, no Caesar, no Marcus Antoninus was greater, was like
to him. He was of the quorum, quaruns, quorum, to all that preceded him, or
shall succeed him in the ordinary way of Manhood; and therefore is most to be
heeded, as he is virorum scientissimus, and exemplorum augustissimus.

This for the Dignity of his Person.
Now as to the Divinity of his Prescript, in that which our Chancellor here
instances, in the eighth Chapter of the first of Kings; which Chapter, having
many remarkable passages in it, was purposely quoted by our Chancellor.

First, In it there is Solomon's regard to, and valuation of the Ark of God
(the visible sign of God's presence) expressed in the Assembly of State, that
he summoned to attend its remove, The Elders of Israel, all the Heads of the
Tribes, and the chief of the Fathers of the Children of Israel, unto the King,
verse. 1. It Is not fit any thing of Gods should be passed over without due
honor, nor his Ark change his station, without the attendance of a decent
Equipage: Princes that serve not Religion with all their might, are not worthy
the blessings that attend it. Therefore, gracious King Charles, our late
martyred Lord, Eiconn Basilie. page 212. art. 24.
made a rare choice, Nor could I follow better Presidents (said he) if I were
able, then those two eminent Kings, David, and Solomon, not more famous for
their Sceptres and Crowns, then one was, for devont Psalms and Prayers; the
other, for his divine Parables and Preaching, whence the one merited, and
assumed the name of a Prophet, the other of a Preacher. Titles, indeed, of
greater honor, where rightly placed, then any of those the Roman Emperors
affected from the Nations they subdued, it being infinitely more glorious, to
convert souls to God, by the Word, then to conquer men to a subjection by the
Sword. Thus he.

Ver. 5.
All the Estates, that attended the Ark's remove, did it not more to observe
the King's pleasure, then to testify their own duty; for they that went before
the Ark sacrificed Sheep, and Oxen, that could not be told, nor numbered for
number.] Zealous minds think that the best service of God, which is most
costly, as desiring to show the truth of their heart in the bounty of their
hand.

Ver. 14.
Solomon blessed the whole Congregation, and the people stood.] It Is a good sign
of accord, when Passions, and Prejudices, do not obstruct between Prince and
People: when the one thinks himself not too high, to regard his meanest
Subject; the other, shows himself not too heady, and humorous, to observe and
reverence his Liege Lord.

Ver. 23, 24.
Solomon the King solemnly pours out his Soul to God in prayer before the
people, as not ashamed of the humility of a sinner, in the height of the state
of a Sovereign.] Nothing debases Majesty but sin, nor disparages a King in his
Peoples eyes, but flagitiousness: he can never miss acceptance with men, that
first gains by prayer and humility acceptance with God: nor does he ever miss
to find God propitious, who seeks him with all his heart, and serves him with
all his might.

Ver. 29.
Solomon builds a magnificent Temple, which he devotes to God, and which he
prays, that God would accept as his own.] 'Twas not the King's prayer, nor the
bounty he had expressed in the costly furniture of it, that at all advanced
those ends Solomon had in its designation: he intended it as a refuge to the
peoples distress, and an oracular repertory, in which the secret of God's power
and goodness should be (as it were) deposited, which it could not prove, unless
God ratified it for such: therefore prays he to God to grant his Petition, and
to accept those services, that he and his people should in that place perform
to him. Good Princes would willingly bring God and their Subjects to an accord,
and leave his blessing as the guard of their government when they are gone*
There is no policy like that of Religion, which ever keeps God on its party.

Ver. 55.
The King blessed the Congregation again after, as well as he had done before
his prayer.] To teach Princes, that their love to their people, should be ever
in their memory, and that Religion is the cement of their reciprocation; nor do
the Laws of Holy Church lesson ought to Prince, or People, beside love, and
duty.

Ver. 65, 66.
Solomon keeps a Feast, to satiate the Peoples stomachs with his dainties, as
well as he had spoken to the filling of their ears with pious Orisons, and
devout interpellations to God for them.] To pattern Princes, to use all Baits
to catch Multitudes, the soberer of them with the reason of good counsel, and
serious kindness; the ruder sort by bounty, and pabulary plenty, which will
make them love, and bless their Benefactor, and return to their quarters
contented, as Israel did, v. 66.

These are the main Poles, upon which this Chapter moves toward a fitness of
directive influence on the Prince, for in that he has his life and breath from
God, and even for his Crown, and Power, is but a Feudatary to the Almighty, who
deals by Monarchs, as by Pismires, and exalts, or suppresses, as he pleases, in
the Kingdoms of the World. And inasmuch as Kings have no readier way to
preserve God their Tutelar, then by securing his rights inviolate, and by
promoting the glory of his Divinity above all secular Projects, and extern
conveniences, as Solomon here did, and as Nature her self dictates to her very
own Sons not enlightened by Divine Revelation, or Scripture-Regulation,
according to that (...), The first care of Kings is that of Religion, and the
Worship of God. In that, this wife and worthy Monopoly of devoting to God the
totality of our prime and principal affection and reverence is in this Chapter
pithily and particularly set down; and that it conduces, being punctually
observed, to so much felicity and greatness in the outward state, parados, and
pomp of a Prince, it well deserves the perfection and distinct observance of
him: and the Chancellor has done wisely and faithfully to direct him to it.

Quare ut armorum, utinam and Legum studiis simili Zelo te de ditum
contemplarer.
Here the good old Chancellor wisely does not non movenda movere, Adag. 61.
Chil. 1. Cent 6. page 254. E^a*in.
as they did, who laid siege to supplant that which was sacred, as past their
reach, and so ought to have been exempt from their attempt; but he presses the
Prince to so equal a divident of himself between Arms and Arts, that neither
may have cause to boast of their engrossing him, or of his dese^tion of them;
but both being ancillary to his Regal Endowment, might indifferently be
Candidates to his favor, and to both have his love and leisure proportioned.
To love Arts, so as not to hate Arms; and to practice Arms, so as not to
decline Arts: to handle the Sword, yet not so as to suppress the Law: so to
remember himself a Prince, as not to forget himself a man; homo ab humanitate,
a Christian man, ferendo non feriendo, a knowing man, whose right commenceth
from God, and is conveyed and declared by the Laws of civil compact,
recognizing hereditary descents, and is secondarily supported by Armies, and
courage to manage them. Chrysippus libro (...) citatus in Digest. Tom. 1. Tit.
3. De legibus Senaiusque Consultis, p. 73.
'O (...), etc. The Law is the Queen of all divine and humane things, and ought
to preside over all men, good and bad, to be the Leader and President, and the
rule both of just and unjust. And thus a Prince, viewing himself, cannot more
incline to Mars, then Mercury; nor affect to be only a Soldier, and not an
Artist, but practice both Feats of Cratory, and Prowess, as occasion serves,
and as their warrantable and just advantages conducts them: which to observe,
and be punctual in argues the highest fruits of noble Institution, inclination,
and God's Amen upon them. Orat. 53 in Ecc^es. p. 763.
(...). For Wisdom (says Nazianzen) can instruct the City to do more then
arms, and strength without it can: yea, whereas the indiscreet man, by his
force, is rather presumptuous to take the first opportunity, though it be the
worst, because he rests on his forces, and that arm of flesh, he is seconded
by; Wisdom conducts him, (...), to choose worthy methods to worthy ends, and to
stay God's leisure, and not to precipitate a good cause by an ill managery. So
that Father: and therefore so concluded Edward the Fourth of this Land his
life, with the charge he gave the Lords and others, Trustees for the education
of his Children, Holingshed. page 709.
in these words: If you bring them up in virtus, you shall have virtuous
Princes; if you set them to Learning, that Governors shall be men of
knowledge; if you teach them Activity, you shall have valiant Captains; if they
practice Policy, you shall have politic and prudent Rulers; if they be
unlearned, they may, by flattery, soon be blinded, and by adulation often
deceived; if they lack activity, every Creature, be he never so base of birth,
shall foil and overthrow them like dumb Beasts, and beastly Dastards. Therefore
I desire you, and in God's name, adjure you rather to study to make them rich
in godly knowledge, and virtuous qualities, then to make parties to gratify
them with abundance of worldly treasure, and mundane superfluity. Thus nobly
that King.

Cum ut armis, ita legibus judicia peragantur. Quod Justinianus Augustus
equissima librue mente in initio Prioemii libri suo Institutionum ait,
"Imperatoriam Majestatem "non solum armis decoratam, sed and legibus oportet
esse armatam; ut utrumque tempus "bellorum and pacis recte possit gubernare.

This the Chancellor marshals in this order, to make good what he had formerly
gained: for, as in the former clause, he had made the Prescript; so in this he
subjoyns the reason, Kings, as mixed persons of Mercy and Justice, are Keepers
both of Laws and Swords, the purports of both Tables; and, being such, are to
practice the activities of both hands, to apply Law to their ordinary, and
force to their extraordinary administration; since as Food and Physic preserve
the Body-natural, (...). Synes^us lib. De Regno page 926.
so do Laws and Arms the Body-politique. Hence is it, that Synesius makes a
well-instituted Warlike Prince most inclinable to Peace; because his generous
Nature having circumvallated his power renders him (...), Not only, not
willing to do wrong; but by his power to prevent wrong from being done; yea, it
inclines him not so much to list up his head above men in self-magnification,
as his hands and heart in solemn gratulation to God; both the God of him and
his Government. For Kingship was looked upon in the World to be the Prognate of
God, and a derivative from his Wisdom: and therefore, not only the Scripture
brings in God, asserting the Patronage of Kings, By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree justice, Lib. De Providentia, page 100, 101.
but also Heathen Writers make their Gods the Proto-Kings; which Synesius avers
to be the Position of the Egyptians, who are reckoned mortalium antiquissimi:
and this they did not only to aw men into fear of their Thunder and Lightning,
but also to bespeak them to a belief, and recumbency on them, as Fountains of
Justice, Sanctuaries of Refuge, Treasuries of Benefaction, not torvous, and of
truculent aspect, but gentle and calm-look'd. Thence came those Positions of
Justinian, Regiam Majestatem, Glanvil in Prolog.
etc. and thence transplanted into our Law; because, though Kings be, in a
sort, Gods and unquestionable by any but God; which was Marcus Antoninus his
assertion seconded by all subsequent Authors, De Jur. belli and pacis. l lib.
1. c. 8.
as Grotius has well observed and as Tacitus long before wrote in those words,
Principi summum rerum arbitrium Dii dederurit subditis obsequii gloria est
relicta. The gods have given Princes supreme power. and allotted to Subjects
only the glory and praise of obeying them. And though those, whom he mentions
to be Kings in Ga^l and Germany of old, who had only power precario jure
regnandi and auctoritate suadendi, non jubendi potestate, Tacitus De Mo ^ib.
Germ.
were but improperly called Kings, Kingship being a thing absolute, by, from,
and under God; though; I say, these are, and ever will be loud truths, not to
be descryed by the Oyms and Zyms of Anarchy and popular insult; yet are they
far from inflating Princes, beyond moderate, and well-featured Bounds. (...),
Non been imperat, nisi qui been paeruerit imperio. Aristor. lib. 3. Politic.
God has indeed subjected Subjects to Kings; but has he not also subjected
Kings to himself? Surely yes, and they must give account of their people to
him; and they will never have comfort in their rule, except they have learned
to rule over their passions, and to be subject to the Prime Regent, God; who
has deputed Kings to be Pastors and Curates to his, Flock the less glorious
Creatures, on whom the Image of God is stamped, as well as on the greatest
Monarchs. And therefore, as Arms are to support Governments, so Governments are
to express themselves by Laws, as the genius of direction to those Arms. For
God never intending power to be bruta fulmina, which carry more terror then
use: the Magistrate is not to use it, Ideo Imperialem fortunam relus humanis
Deus praeposuit, ut possit omnia, quae noviter contingunt, and emendare, and
consponere, and modis and regulus competentibus trudere, and boc hon prinium a
nobis dictum est, sed ab antiqua descendit prosapia. Justinianus in Diplom. De
Confirm. Digestorum, page 16. Tom. I.
but for the punishment of wickedness, and vice, and the maintenance of God's
true Religion, and Virtue; which when they do, they are true Executours of
Christ's Will, and Bequests; lovers of him, because keepers of his Commandment;
and his Commandment is to do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with God.

This, this is the noble end, and noble expression of power, ut intelligeret eo
se loco jam esse Regem suppositum, Hopperus lib. De Vera Jurisprud. page 335.
ubi suae propriae personae oblivisci and in unum Reipub. bonum incumbere
deberet: Giving the King to understand, that in being a King, he becames a
forgetter of what is his personal advantage, to make good his public Office,
says learned Hopperus. And he that goes by this Canon shall be sure of Peace,
and God's blessing in his soul, and on his proceedings. Yea, the fruits of it
he shall reap in the love of his Subjects, Synesius, lib. De Regno. page 21.
(...), etc. the only and chief protection and security of Princes. For though
particular Accidents, and fatal Periodiques tended to in the old age of
Governments, crosses this in the experience of its safety; yet (...), and
saving those occult causes, which are not to be defeated, the Canon is sure,
that moderate Government is most durable; which is the reason, as I humbly
conceive, the Laws of England, the best tempered Laws, for an Island, in the
World, point to the Kings of England, the middle way of Government between
absolute Will, and popular dependence; because thereby it puts both King and
People into a felicitous state, which they cannot deviate from, without
mischievous inconveniences. A Political Monarch governs his Subjects, as a
Father does his Children, by equal and just Laws, made by their own consent to
them. In his Sermon at the Coronation of our now blessed and beloved King, page
36.
Despotical Government is that of the Turks, and Muscovite; but Political is,
and ought to be the Government of all Christian Kings; I am sure it is of ours:
and therefore such a kind of Monarchy as ours is not only the most just and
reasonable, but the most plausible, and popular Government of all others: they
are the words of that most Reverend and Learned Prelate the Lord Bishop of
Worcester.

The King is absolute; what then, may he do what he will? is his pleasure a
Law? As King, yes: for so he can do no wrong, because, qua such, Deum agnoscit
superiorem and Legem; but as mistaken, or seduced by passion, his Will is not
the Law, but the Law his Will; and though men are no Supervisours compulsive of
him, yet is there one greater then he, Satis est exspectet Deum ultorem: that is
his aw and Monitor, ad been regendum, the Subject is free: how? not to do what
he list; no, not with his own: for he must so use what is his, as not to
prejudice the Public: so is the Law of Reason and Policy, Respublica
praeferendae est privatis, and so affirm the Statutes, 27 E. 3. c. 3. 12. 16.
28 E. 3. c. 5. 23 H. 8. c. 16. 25 H. 8. c. 13. 32 H. 8. c. 18, 19. 33 H. 8. c.
7. 35 H. 8. 4. I Edw. 6. c. 3. and 5. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 37. 1 and 2 P. and M. c.
5. I Eliz. c. 17. 18 Eliz. 9. I Eliz. c. 15, 17. 8 Eliz. c. 3. 23 Eliz. c. 5.
27 Eliz. c. 19. and hundreds of others, which were made to restrain private
emoluments, where publicly detrimental: Yet he is free from all restraints,
21 Jac. c. 3.
other then such as the Common Law, or the consent of the Nation in Parliament,
puts upon Him, his Body, Life, Lands, Posterity, and can appeal to the King's
Court for relief, Plowd. Com. 236. 2 Instit. c. 21. M. Charta, p. 36.
against all preter-legal courses against, or oppressions upon them. And hence
is it, that the Government of England being so transacted by the Law, produces
Justice, Riches, peace, and Piety, to a wonder. For the Monarch rules in it
optantibus cunctis; and if in any thing he be incommodated, non spem hominum
excitat sed metum; yea, so filial a love have Englishmen, for the most part, to
their P^^ces, that what Seneca writes of the Prince, is true of the people,
Nihil esse cui quam tam praetiosum, etc. Nothing they have is so precious to
them, as the safety of their Governor; for whom, as they will desperately
hazard, so in his safety much rejoice: so much they hold themselves related to
his weal or woe. And therefore, though true it be, that England is by some
looked upon like Athens in Solon's time, Grocius, De Jur. Belli, and Pacis, p.
64. lib. 1.
as a mixed Government, which has much of regulation to power in it; yet is it
as true, that England's Imperial Crown being absolute, in regard of dependence
on any but God, Stat. 21 Jac. c. 3. and 4.
leaves the Monarch as well empowred with the Sword to propagate, and protect
Justice, as directed by the Law, to administer Justice to those that need, and
seek it.

The use then both of Arms and Laws, must be connected in a Prince, that he may
be indefectuous: For as Arms are like the Muscles, that move and plump out the
joints and proportions of the Body, that they are symmetrious to the beauty of
the whole; so are Laws like the Veins and Arteries vehiculary of the blood, and
succulency into all the parts, by a right orderly circulation, and
distribution. And the counsel Laws give, is not to suppress the use, but advise
to the right use of the Sword: not to condonate through easiness great
offenses, nor to punish passionately, and with severity, small disgusts and
errors of infirmity; but to give to every offense its proper chastisement, to
arbitrate the Law's Prescript, and become its Patron. This, while a Prince
promotes, he declares himself an Agesilans, a rare Prince. For of him Xenophon
writes, In Oratione De Agesilao, p. 66^
'(...) etc. That though he could do what he would, yet he d^d what only he
ought, professing himself to be under the direction of the Law, though not the
subjection of it.

Our Chancellor then had good reason for his advice, since he caressed, and
smoothed the young Prince into the love of the Law; foreseeing, with Timon of
Athens, that if he were only a Martialist, he might be as Alcibiades was by
him foreseen to prove, Patriae exitio futurus; so the Prince might, patriis
legibus exitio futurus: since what Youth sucks in, it retains, and propagates
in its Manhood, and Age: which considered, good Princes aim to do; as Justinian
says, armis decorari, to use force as a jewel for show, ad faciendum populum,
to purchase dread and estimation; but, armari legibus, to speak favor and
terror to subjects, in Law terms, per delegatos judices, non per ut legatos
milites, more curiali, non militari, By Pen and Paper, not Guns and Pikes, the
Paradoes of Conquests, not the practice of Civil Governments, except on
extraordinary occasions, and then, as necessary as Physic, in bodily
distempers.

Tamen ut ad legum studia fervide tu anheles maximus legislator ille Moses elim
Synagogae dux multo fortius Caesare te invitat. Here our Text-Master backs his
former Argument by an example; he saw the Prince was earnest, as one
through-warm with the love of Arms, and well he perceived, that his eager
pursuit, which left no vein in him unstretched, but kindled, to a height of
reaking; (for so aubelare signifies, anhelare est eum ex cursu, and quovis
labor vehements crebris quasi singultibus spiratur and respiratur. So Columel,
lib. 2. c. 3. Ante ad praesepiaboves relegari non expedit quam sudare atque
anhelare desierint. Hence anhelare scelus, for doing mischief with might and
main. Tandem aliquando Quiretes Catalinam furentem audacia scelus anhelantem
pestem patria nefatie molientem. And again, Anhelaus ex infimo pectore
crudelitatem, Cie. in Catal. 24. Author ad Hetennium, lib. 4.
is Tullie's expression for our authority.) And therefore he endeavors to fix
his mettle, and intend his earnestness on its right object, by propounding not
only a most excellent thing, Opus est alique ad quem mores nostra seipsi
exigant: wise ad regulam prava non corriges. Aliquem habeat animus quod
vereatur cujus auctoritate, etiam secretum suum sanctius faciat. Seneca Ep. 11.
but a choice example of one authoritative in the case, Moses; one of whom, no
Story mentions, but either the Holy Text, or Histories from it. The grave
Knight will not to Moab, and Ekron, not cull examples out of profane Authors,
while there are pregnant ones in the Book of God; his instance therefore is not
in Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, Marcus Aurelius, Trajan, Constantine, or his
Henry the Sixth, though all great instances of Bravery; but his man of Mirror
is Moses: For, though they all in their respective times, were praiseworthy;
yet none of them came up to the pattern in the Mount, on which Moses his face
glittered to a transfiguration, and admirableness, hardly consistent with
Manhood. For God who had provided him such a Nurse-Mother, as a King's
Daughter; such a Cradle, as an Ark of Flags, and exposed him to the ruffles,
and hazards, of merciless Waters, when but a Babe, only able to cry under the
burden of a helpless Infancy, shadowed out what he was, in time, to be, who
broke out upon the World, through such a Mist, and Cloud of Dangers; which,
when dispelled by mercy, evidenced h^^ to be what God appointed him, (...),
Lib. 2. De Vita Mosis. p. 654.
etc. as Philo's words are of him both a Lawgiver an ArmyLeader and a devont
Sacrificer for the peoples relief and supply. Now Moses being such a person is
the example presented to the Prince and asserted from the Holy Ghost to be
learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians and mighty in word and in deed;
which the Holy Text says of him not as thinking those miraculous things that he
could do worthy him or commending them in him as they were feats that the
Egyptians doted on and were superstitious about: for as Justin Martyr's words
are (...), In Resp. ad Quest. 25. ad Oithod. p. 317. edit Sylburg.
etc. they were but small things and not proper to commend a Prophet. But
therefore the Holy Ghost adds Moses was mighty in word and indeed; because
(...) etc. because for those two excellencies Moses was famous with the
Egyptians. As then the Chancellour's love to the Prince's proficiency; so his
prudence in the choice of his example to that end is well-worthy him. He (wife
soul) knew magnos magna decent that trifles became not those Eagle and
coelestiz'd souls that steer Princes, which Philip of Macedon hinted to his son
Alexander whom he found playing skilfully upon the Lute; Art thou not ashamed
(quoth he) my Son to be so skilful a Musician. And thence singles he out to the
Prince's imitation this Seraphique instance of both praecellencies A man of
Wisdom for he was Legislator to the Jews; a man of eminency above others: for
though they had other Legislators after him yet he was Maximus Legislatorum all
their Legislation was after his model and his precursing them: yea and a man he
was not of yesterday who rose malis artibus and in the declension of the World
to be a Lawgiver; but olim when the Golden Ages were; when virtues had the
upper hand of vices then had Moses the dignity to be Maximus Legislator
Synagogae Dux; and fitly so too for he had what Philo says, Lib. 2. De Vita
Mosis p. 655.
all Lawgivers and Chieftains should have (...) the gift to excel in all noble
endowments, suitable to his place and occasions.

Moses is then here mentioned in both capacities, both of a Civil Magistrate,
and a Martial Conductor. A Civil Prince, in the exercise of Legislation; a
Martial Leader, in his conduct of the people against their enemies. Synagogae
Dux, of the former, not only himself, in his books, testifies; but even our
Lord Jesus, the truth it self, who puts him in the parallel with himself: The
Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Peace came by Jesus Christ; and in
another place Moses gave them a Law. Yea, the Jews, in Religion, Lib. De Vita
Mosis, p. 602. initio.
in all Ages of the World, have testified of Moses, as their Lawgiver. Philo
Iudedus writing of Moses his life, calls him (...) etc. as the Lawgiver of the
Jews, or the Interpreter of the Holy Law to the Jews. And to be a bare
Legislator, is to be presumed great in place, grave in years, wise in counsel;
for the Ancients did ever account their Lawgivers secundi Dii, and never took
Laws from any Mouths, but those which were extraordinarily gifted: (...).
Philo libro De Sacrificiis. Abesis and Caini, p. 153.
yea, if it were reckoned a part of the policy of pristine Ages, to acclamate
Laws, as the invention and bequest of the Gods to men, then sure those that
were instrumental in their Productions, were none of the lowest of the people,
but the best and bravest of them. And of that number was Moses, Maximus
Legislator: not only because he was primus and primas Legislator, and primum
in unoquoque genere nobilissimum: For before Moses gathered the people into a
policy, they lived in diffusions, scattered; and as sheep without a shepherd.
But Maximus, as having many preparatory endowments to, and successes in this
Legislation. God that called him to, fitting him for so great a Sphere, and
making him adorn the Sparta he had appointed him to. Ficinus makes three
endowments, or felicities, in a Lawgiver. Deum, fortunam, artem; God above,
success about, art in his manageries, and constitutions. Philo the Jew, reports
Moses his first step to greatness (yea, Com. in lib. 4. De Legib. Platon. p.
821. and Moses had them all.
and to this degree of it in Civil and Martial Government) to be his
apprehensive Infancy; God made him all touch taking every sparkle of
illumination that was struck into him from his puisne institution. The Hebrews
story that one day being at play with the Crown of Pharaoh he threw it on the
ground and afterward trod upon it: the King, Gaulmyn in opere Rabinico. De
Vita and motte Mosis p. 10 etc. Joseph. A ^tiq. Judatc. lib. 2. c. 5.
and Spectators took it to have an ominous presage and the jealousy of Pharaoh
meditated revenge of the fact; but the King was advised to try by some
expedient conducing to the discovery of the rise of it whether Malice or Chance
and to forbear rigor in the interim. An Apple they say was on one side
presented him and on the other a Coal of fire to see whether he would choose;
and they say God gave him so subtle an Infancy that he chose purposely the
Coal of fire and would have put it into his mouth; which they say he was led to
do to shadow the former Instinct and under the notion of a Child to serve
himself for his future Exploits; and the Sages told the King that there was no
reason to put to death his Daughters adopted Babe for an act of pure
simplicity. For being in Egypt and the Egyptians having Greek Philosophers
amongst them whom they had leured to them by reward; Moses says he by an (...)
an aptness of nature stole all their Arts from them upon the first insight and
impartment of them: so that what other Lads were years in learning and then but
imperfectly, Lib. De Vita Mosis. p. 605.
at last obtained Moses learned in a trice and that exquisitely, ultra quam non
making good that (...), etc. so excellent Wits learn Arts, that they add to
them by learning of them. So Philo.

Another step to Moses his fitness, was his marriage to Iethro's Daughter:
Gaulmyn p. 24. De Vita and morte Mosis.
If we will believe Philo For God says he bringing Moses into his
Father-in-Lawes house; Who as a Prince and Priest had plenty of all things and
especially of Cattle Moses having committed to him the Government of the Castle
(...) was made more apt thence to rule men as acquainting their inspectors
which those observations vigilancies and discreet demeanours which will be
useful in greater charges. (...), etc. Philo lib. 2. De Vita Mosis p. 656.
But these and such like are but the less eminent lustres of Moses his
Additions; that which makes him maximus legislator was his ministration to the
Moral Laws Promulgation his Sanctification to his employment Magistratique by
being in the Mount with God 40 days and his knowledge of the mind of God in all
the latitude of his Commission and his fidelity in doing every thing according
to the preciseness of his Entrust which God rewarded with such a reverence from
the people that as he was just to God and Men so was God a zealons assertor of
his worth and an exiter of the people to an eternal Honor of him and of his
Memory in all Generations and his Laws paramounted all other Law in that they
abode the test and terror of Conquest and remain to the Jews in Nation and
Religion the same that they were even to his day. Yea as when he lived he was
the peoples Oracle from God and Orator to God a favorite who by the spel of his
faith could charm as it were with reverence I write it Omnipotence and bind the
Almighty to peace with his people as God himself intimates in these words Let
me alone that I may stay this people: so when he was dead God concealed the
place of his buryal to hinder their Idolatry for surely they would have been
supertitious to his memory and erected an Altar near his grave that was so real
a numen to them when he lived and this God knowing prevented them by concealing
it yet I say this Moses so adored by the people and so victorious in the
Conduct of them did render himself Maximus legislator by his self-denial he
made no family he gathered no wealth he commenced no regality from this
advantage but served God and his charge leaving the compensation to the issue
of God's appointment. He looked more at God's glory then his own greatness; at
the peoples peace then his Progenies preferment; Vt Deus in rebus inferio refus
procreandis non sua, sed nostra causa agit, ita and vicarius ejis Princeps
Dominum suum imitatus, apud quen omnium actionum suorum rationem red. dear
debet, non de se perticulate, sed* de tota Reipub. universe solicitus esse
debet. Hopperus, lib. De Institut. Principis.
and when God revealed to him he must die, introduced no Son or Creature of
his, whom favor, not virtue, fitted to succeed him; but generously, and
justly, deputes Ioshuah, one parted, and graced suitably to the Office he
admits him to, and him, full of the Spirit of Wisdom. He charges, in the sight
of all Israel, to be strong, and of good courage; yea, and as a Prophet,
assures him God will be with him; as it is, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 6, 7.

So that Moses, all things considered, was rightly termed by our Text-Master,
Maximus Legislator, no Lawgiver before him; no Law like his in duration; no
Justice so unspotted as his, no Justicer so venerated as he. The Friend; nay,
in a sort, a fellow-Commoner with God (as I may reverently write it) at the
Mess on the Mount; or rather the Master of Requests, admitted near, when all
were to keep off the Mount. In sum, Moses was prefigured Christ; not only as
all Types were, but as he mostly, if not solely, was in the Office of
Ecclesiastical despotiqueness, and indisputable Legislation.

Hitherto we have seen him in the Temple as the Cornerstone, and Earthly
Master Builder of the Sanhedrim, or Church-Fabrique: Now let us consider him in
Tentorio, as a Magistrate Civil. Synagogae Dux, that is a Leader of the People;
for (...) signifies any Convention of People; yea, the very actus Congregandi
is called (...): so Thucydides, Homil. 4. in Hexameron.
lib. 2. uses (...), and St. Basil calls Cumulus acervus (...), so Alexander
Aphrodiseus calls plenty of milk (...).

Beza, indeed, upon the Tenth of Matthew. 17. where mention is (...), makes a
distinction; the (...), he says, are gentium; the (...): Judaeorum, but still
he agrees, that the word (...) signifies a collection; and so Turrecremata
confirms it: Lib. 1. c. 1. Sum. De Ecclesia, Lib. 1. De Vita Mosis, p. 640.
so that Synagogae Dux, is, but in Philo's words, (...) Leader of the Hebrews.
And that this he notoriously was, the Holy ^ext attests frequently: For,
besides God's miraculous endowment of Moses, to convince Pharaoh of his
meslage, for the People's enlargement out of Egypt; upon which account he is
called (...), etc. the Friend of God initiated in the Holy Mysteries. God made
him the People's General too in the Wilderness, and at the Red Sea; yea, after
all to Canaan: Lib. De Cherubim. p. 116.
for he it was, that brought them to that promised Land, though he himself
entered not with them into it. Happy Israel, that had such a Prince as Moses,
Faithful in all Gods house, loving to all Gods people, etc. as Philo's words
are, Lib. 1. p. 626.
a circumspect man, equally virtuous in small and great affairs, not greedy of
gain, not thirsty of applause, but intent only upon great advantages to God,
and the people, Lege Gaulmyn, lib. De Vita and Motte Mosis. octavo.
and leaving the lesser practiques to lower minds. This, shortly was Moses.
Thus happy was Israel; yea, and thus happy also was Moses in Israel, God
accepted his integrity, and rewarded it with a renowned life, and a lamented
death. It Is from the wisdom of the World, that men study rather to be great,
then good; fortunate, then honest. That heart which is liquored with grace, and
has the tincture of God on it, will stand upright in the Circumvallations of
Temptations: Successes and power cannot palliate lawless liberty, where Gods
fear denies it. To deal deceitfully, and take men in the snares of their
credulity, was no practice of Moses the Chieftain of Israel, Gods Friend. For
though Moses was sole in power, yet is he no oppressor of the people: No Lord
over them against their wills, and to their out cry; but bears with their
Murmures, sympathies in their grievances, watches to prevent their annoyance,
buries his own luster, in the reputation of well-deserving, and has no other
Monument, then their Memories, in their Generations, and Gods entry of his
merits on the Record of his Scripture. And hereupon Moses being so unparalled
a Magistrate, may well be the example of the Prince, to learn both how to
govern artlily, and martially; yea, and have a cogency on the Prince, multo
fortius Caesare. For since Moses was so soft and trimmed Gown-man, Antiq.
Judaic. lib. 3.^.11.
only as some are, who yet do more by counsel in their Studies, then Armies do
in the field by action, undisciplined, and unadvised, but a valiant Warrior,
as not only his own Books declare, but as Josephus, by tradition, reports;
insomuch, that when the Ethiopians invaded Egypt, and the Oracle directed them
to have their Armies led by an Hebrew Captain, to stop their progress. Which
being observed, and Moses chosen for the man, and he so miraculously, and
mantully doing it, as Josephus at large relates*

Our Chancellor had high reason, to urge this example, rather on the Prince
then Julius Caesar's, because more energical and potent; more bold and
superative in the nature and proper operation of it. For, alas! Julius Caesar,
which I suppose he may obliquely refer to, in regard he was a Temporary Master
of the Western World, having subdued Germany, Gaul, and Britain, and dreamed,
he was uniting the Empires of Heaven and Earth together, was but a little time
Lord of those Conquests, obtained them by blood and oppression, and of them had
far less then Alexander had achieved, before he arrived at Caesar's age: yea;
what Caesar had, he held with Troubles and Conspiracies, and at last paid his
life for the revenge of his affection, wherein the Senators were Assassines,
and the Capitol the Slaughterhouse: nor did Caesar obtain ever after such a
Marble of himself by the largess of Posterity, as Constantine the Great had,
Quod instinctu divinitatis, mentis magnitudine cum exercitusuo, tam de Tyranno
quam de omni ejus factione, uno tempore, just is Rempubl, ultus est armis. No
such Trophy to his memory, but a tacit reproach of his practice, in the
Inscription under Brutus his Statue in aftertimes, utinam none viveres;
Caesar, I say, was potent, but cruel; prevalent, but injurious; and this made
him execrable, and envyed. But Moses was an Heroic that might have had what he
would, God in wrath would have extirpated Israel, and multiplied Moses into a
great Nation: but Moses interposes with God; and mediates for Israel; yea, was
contented to be only what God cut him out for, and general good would quietly
permit him to be.

And herein he was himself fortior Caesare, and his example ought to invite
more irrefragably then Caesar's did, because Caesar could not deny himself,
taking what was takable by him. No sooner had the Common wealths divisions
weakened opposition against him, every potent Patrician standing single, and the
union of them refracted and subdivided into inconsiderable nothings, but Caesar
puts in for the whole: No Reconciler he; for then he had been felo propositi,
but a subtle tent rather to keep the Wound open, till at last he and his party
marched in at the breach, Victors; and when he was in possession, then he wins
those by love, that would be made loyal by it, and destroys those that were
implacable; and in this he did in his Generation wisely: But Moses had leave to
choose, and refused; might have been the Prince, but continued still the Captain
of Israel; yea, when Fame surrounding his actions, and consolidating the People
to him, rendered him more then probable, sure not to be defeated of their
Acclamations, and complyings with his establishment, in all this crowd of
trial, which bulges and swallows down ordinary men's continencies, and
ingenuities. Moses stands firm to his veracity, and therefore in all things
excels Caesar, as a Prince, and a Soldier: yea, if Justinian, from whom our
Chancellor cites the pre-alleadged Position, be the proper, Caesar, he means;
yet Moses will still be more swasive with a good Prince then he. Justinian did
but employ his Trebonian, Lege Justinianum in confirmatione digestorum ante
Tom. 1. p. 27. Et seq.
to collect the Laws of other men famous in their Ages, that is, to bring them
into a body, and to render them useful to all occasions, of justice, and
accommodation; and in this work was, though famous, yet fallible. But Moses was
taught of God to know, and approved of God, to practice the right duty of a
King, ex utroque Caesar. And that this is so, the testimony of the seventeenth
Chapter of Deuteronomy, the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth Verses
following will demonstrate,

And it shall be, when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a Copy of the Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests,
the Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days
of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words
of this Law, and these Statutes to do them; That his heart be not lifted up
above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left; to the end, that he may prolong his days in his
Kingdom, he and his Children, in the midst of Israel.

Which words contain two parts, Actio and Finis; the King's Action, He shall
write him the Copy of his Law in a Book, which is before the Priests, the
Levites; and it shall be with him; and he shall read it all the days of his
life. And then the King's end in this, as prescribed by God, That he may learn
to fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes
to do them. This is the Analyze of them, but not to be passed over: Tradunt
Judzi circa hunc locum, qua ratione, modo, and ordine and in qua item membrane
quo demque atramente liber legis sit describendus. Fagius in Loc. Lorinus also
reproaches the Jews for this out of Munster.
for though I wave the Rabbinique conceits, that this Law contained six hundred
and thirteen Precepts, three hundred sixty five affirmative, the number of the
days of a year, and two hundred forty eight negative, according to that
computation they had of the joints in man's body, which they perhaps conceived
the King was to be remembered of, that he might know his life consisted of days,
and his body of joints, which might soon be severed from their contribution to
life, and government acted in it. To omit these, and such conceits which
learned men have, the Holy Ghost's drift is, to teach us: First, the order of
God's dispensation to Majesty. He first gives them a Throne, and settles them
in it; so it is their right. And then he shall write him the copy of this Law.
Princes duties in their Oaths, Examples, and Rules of Restraint, are subsequent
to their Titles, not to puss up Princes in a contempt and disesteem of their
Subjects, whom because they depend not upon, they may use as they list; but to
lesson Subjects to look on Majesty, as God's Vicarage, no Creature of theirs;
First, he is seated in his Throne, then minded of his Duty.

Secondly, the obligation of Princes, as they are Deo subditi, and vice
Deiregnantes. First, to endeavor their own accomplishment, in this literal
Prescript, to be able to write, that they may write this, that God commands
them to rivet on themselves by such means. I confess, possible it may be, that
a Prince may be letterless, hate, and be wholly ignorant of letters. Some have
been such, and such not unworthy Princes in their actions: For that their
Memories being vast, and their Passions keen, as by the latter they might be
impatient to write, as well as impotent; so by the former, possible to reap the
fruit of writing without writing; and the Spirit of God not so much looking at
writing, as the means; as at remembering to do the end: I confess, it is possible
much of the mind of God may be here observed by Princes void of letters: but
yet in that, Writing is the probablest way of durable fixing, and the Holy
Ghost specially enjoins it, it were good, nay best, the letter of this
Scripture should be observed, that thereby Princes may know the Laws of God,
and of their Government.

Statim inito regno sua manu Legem describat prater illam quam privatus
descripserat ut intelligat se ad observantiam legis obstrictiorem privatis
esse. Fagius in Locum.
Secondly, in writing themselves, not by Secretaries, and other hands, then
their own; but in their own Characters, the Book of the Law; that is, a Copy of
the Autographon, that lies with the Priests of God; and that so written under
their own hand, to deliver to the Priest to be kept, inter sacra Dei, as God's
evidence, signed and sealed by him against himself; if a violator of it, and
the counterpart thereof to have from the Priest, signed by him, as the Charter
of his practice. This I conceive is the meaning of the Text, and Lorinus is of
the same opinion, though I know others think the contrary; because it is said,
it shall be with him, which his Copy delivered to the Priest, they say, cannot
be. Cajetan reads this clause, Scribet sibi emendationem legis hujas a^cipiens
exemplar a Sacerdotibus Leviticae Tribus, de exemplo optimae, etiam punctis and
lineamentis emendato ad differentiam vulgarium librorum in quibus lex non
exact Scribitur, and ut ad amussim scriberetur exemplar a sacerdotibus
habendum fuisse. And Fonseca follows him, adding, that probably this exemplar
with the Priests was that, which Moses wrote; out of which, the Book found by
the Prophet Helchia, in the Reign of Josiah, was written. But I rather conceive
the former (yet with humble submission, yea, and without exclusion of the
latter) because I suppose thereby the greater and stronger testimony lies
against the King, in case of violation by oblivion, since as the Gospel says,
Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked Servant, and perverse. So
from thine own hand may God say to Princes, shall your sins be proved and
reproved; Oftendam digitum, and debitum, God marshals then our faults
effectually, when Reason condemns the violation of Religion.

Describi Carabit, v. 18. Habebat. autem test R. S duos libros legis unum qui
repositus adservabatur in archivis, and alium quem secum portabat. Drusius in
Loc.
Thirdly, in reading what they have written, and that not once, but often; but
always where duty renews, memory of it must be renewed; therefore we write that
we may read; therefore read, that we may remember. To write, and not to read;
to write on the Sand, or in Air, or Water, is to write in show, but not in
deed; for all is lost that is so trifled: those fusile, and unstable Elements,
are not adopted to tenacity, and therefore are not the grounds on which we
write. Men write on Tables, Trees, Pillars, Parchments, Papers, Metal, and on
these they are legible thousands of years, even from Moses his time till now,
above six thousand years; whereas then the Prince is to write, In c. 17. v. 19.
it is to write librum e libro, the Copy, as the Original. Cajetan makes four
fruits of his reading. First, Vt Deus timeatur. Secondly, Serventur legis
praecepta omnia. Thirdly, Non elevetur cur ejus supra alios. Fourthly,
Prorogetur imperium Regis and filiorum. God commanded the Law to be written
that it might be read, and Princes are commanded by God to write the Law, that
they may read it often, and affectionately, with resolution to do it at all
times, in youth and age, in prosperity and adversity, in Israel, and in
Captivity, and in all latitudes of impartiality, according to the direct and
pat requiry of it.

And then lastly, he must read it with a resignation of himself to the power,
and a resolution in himself to the practice of it. For so much only we know
aright, as we practice accordingly, That he may learn to do all that is
commanded therein; that is, that knowing God the Commander, and all things
accumulately, and copulatively, his command; and himself, though a Prince, not
exempt by Prerogative from his duty, may with a ready Will, and unalterable
Resolution, perform the Duty enacted by it. This is in short, the sum of this
Clause, of which yet our Chancellor has a quotation more succinct in the
subsequent words, Quod exponens Helinandus, dicit, Princeps ergo non debet esse
juris ignarus.



This Helinandus was a French Monk of the Order of the Claniacenses, Posseuinus
in Apparatu Sacro. p. 72^.
he lived about the Year, 1200. and Posseuinus says he wrote many things, as
forty eight Books of the History from the Creation; In Speculo Historiali,
lib. 30. c. 108.
of the reparation of lapsed man one Book; Sermons, Epistles, etc. Vincentius
Beluacensis also writes of him, where in his works this passage is, I know not;
nor indeed have I ever seen the Author; but that it is in them, is more then
probable. And his Exposition of Moses his Directory, I take to be very genuine
and nervous, suitable both to the Holy Ghost's intent, and his amanuensis's
Language. For a Prince being caput Regni and legum, ought to have in him those
vital and animal accomplishments, that may in the nobility of their
distribution, Quo genere obligatus es, hoc fidens exsolve. Senec, lib. 5.
Benef. vos ad speciem very componite animum. and dum h^nestum dicitis quicquid
est id quod nomine honesti ^actatur. id colite, Idem codem loco.
supply all the dependents on him. For, as where there are corporal defects,
and monstrosity of parts in them, they are thence lessened in the World's eyes,
and do all things with much disadvantage; so much incommodated are they from
their minds plebeity. It was a saucy, and insolent Satyr of the Ancients, Rex
illiteratus est asinus Coronatus: but yet it has the truth of that Moral, That
Kings unlearned are unlike themselves. Not Gods descended in the likeness of
men, but Kings descended from the best and most conspicuous of men to be their
vassals censure, and the diminutions of the very bruits of people. And
therefore Philip had good reason to bless the Gods, that his Son Alexander was
born to be bred under Aristotle, because there was great probability, under so
noble Institution, he would become worthy his Father, and Tutor. For Parents
generate their Sons, men in nature, and to be such in Title as they themselves
are; but Tutors form them, to be worthy and virtuous men, by good Precepts, and
lovely examples of virtue presented them. Ex iis autem qui sant, eligamus non
ces qui verba magna celeritate pracipitant, and communes locos volvunt, and in
privato circulantur, sed ces qui vita decent, qui cum dixerint quid faciendum
sit, probant faciendo. Seneca. Ep. 52.
And hence it is, that next divine grace, solid and rational Intellectuals
frequently actuated in Affairs, according to the limitations of Religion, the
nature of times, the coincidence of circumstances, and the Laws of Respective
Governments, declare Kings Kinglyly qualified. Omnejus aut consensus fecit aut
necessitas constituit aut firmavis consuetudo. Modestinus, lib. 1. Regul.
For knowledge of duty consists not wholly in the Theory of their Nature, but
in the maturation of their Conceptions, to a subserviency to their end. And
therefore, though Kings may have less proportions of speculative abilities, not
so clearly defining and canvassing of Justice and Courage, as professed
Doctors in Artly Faculties may; yet, they do ever in their aims, and when they
do like themselves, excel them in the noblest import of Justice, that is, in
distribution of it as a blessing, Totum autem jus consistit aut in acquirende,
aut in conservando, aut in minuendo, Ulpianus lib. 2. Institut.
resulting from their Crown, as, the Flos Solis which is enlivened and made
conspicuous by it. For the chief end of Government is Justice, and that being
Constans and perpetua voluntas jus unicuique tribuendi, Iustus non e^ nist qui
constanter, and firm animi proposito quod justum est, agit. Reg. Jur.
which refers to action, according to that of the Civilians, He is not just,
who is not actively such in the disposition and resolution of his mind and
purpose. Princes are said to be knowing in the Law of their Government when
they observe Laws, and propagate Justice, Cum lex in prateritum quid indulget,
in futurum vetat, Ulpianus, lib. 35. ad Edictum. In notis in Philonis, lib. De
Officio Judicis. Minime sunt mutanda qua interpretasionem certam semper
habuarunt. Paulus, lib. 4. ad Plautium.
according to humane possibilities, and regal prudencies; Rex, cum sit Iudex,
sententiam dicturus assumat sibitum prudentiam, etc. Since the King is Judge,
and as the living Law determins right and wrong, it becomes him to be prudent,
that he err not in judgment; and just, that be proportion punishments and
rewards, according to the natures of the actions they refer to, in which no
favor or affection must be showed, that Justice be not maimed, faith Petreius.
Now because the Laws of God and Governments are the best Magisteries of Princes
in this noble Craft, and heroic exercise of Conscience, the Chancellor here
puts the non debet upon the Prince, telling him, that whatever he pretermits,
this he must not do, knowledge of the Law; because without it, a Ruler cannot
be just, a People not be happy, a Government not be durable, a Governor not be
renowned. The Cabalists do hold, that Injustice is one of the underminers of
Thrones, and that Canker that eats out the vitality of their permanence, and
disposes them to, and puts them into Revolution and period: yea, he must needs
be unnatural to his good name and perennity, who does not labor to know his
duty, and perform it, as rightly he ought, so many being concerned besides
himself (as in case of Kings there are,) Lib. 1. c. 15. Historiae Sclavorum.
and in the rectitude, or obliquity of his actions. Helmodas tells, that Harald
was so famous a King, Vt Leges and jur a statuerit, etc. That the Laws and
Statutes he made were for the reverence of their Maker so venerable, that both
the Danes and Saxons religiously observed them. And since him, those who have
followed most the steps of serious knowledge; in strict Justice, have been most
renowned. For as to be a man, is to be endowed with Reason and Understanding;
so to be a King, is to be knowing in the Law of Nature, of Nations, of his
Polity, haec tria sunt omnia; and in these, non debet princeps esse Ignarus.

The Law of Nature is that (...), that which is implanted in all Creatures.
This, Corvinus says, is collecta ex praeceptis naturalibus, etc. collected from
Natures Precepts, A mundi origin and primordio nobiscum nata est, nunquam
interitura. Quam si sequerentur nostri jurisperiti ne rabulas dicam and
legulejos potius non profecto intersecturas, and m^andros quotidie and
identidem de ^ondcremur. Lilius Gyrald. adu literas.
taught by Naturae to all Creatures: Such as are Conjunctions of Creatures,
male and female, for preservation of their kinds, self-preservation, and all
things incident thereto, etc. These Laws of Natural Policy God has chased upon
the universal nature of the Creation, animal and sensitive, and the Characters
of them are indelible: the World must cease when they cease, Corvinus, lib. 1.
Instit. Tit. ^. Gloss, in Pandect lib. 1. Tit. 1. E. Quod natura, p. 55 Lib.
13. De Juti. Sprud. c. 2. p. ^5.
which under their prime cause, are the means of its continuance, in its
noblest end, and parts external, living Creatures. This Law of Nature some of
the Learned do make four fold, Lex Mosaica, instinctus nature, jus gentium, jus
pretorium. Possevinus makes it of a five-fold nature, Natural, Supernatural,
Mosaique, Divine, Private. Yea, they make the Law of Nature to consist in those
Precepts which are purely good, both as to doing of good, and avoiding of evil;
according to that rule of Justin Martyr, (...); and in another place, (...).
Lib. De Aristot. Dogmat. eversione 54. C. p. 116. p. 119.
Now this Law of Nature being explicated in the Law of Moses, and added to by
that nomothetique, and despotique Authority that Moses has, as the (...), (as
Diodorus Siculus testifies) he had learned from the Egyptian Priests, In
Cohortat. ad Graecos, p. 8.
as the truth of their Tradition (as Justin Martyr observes.) The Laws of
Nations, of what kind soever, are but the prudent Extracts, and divine Comments
upon this Text; and the improvement of that natural Sagacity, and political
discretion, which men of parts, place, and experience express according to the
entrusts of God with them. And this being in all places, and in all ages, one
and the same in the main, and chief tendency of it, which is preservation of
justice, and propagation of humanity in all the emergent and occasional
branches of them, which diversifie and spread out into infinities, as men and
things dilate and increase, the Learned call the Law of Nations, as the common
Principles which correspond man with man, jus gentium; and this is defined to
be in praeceptis and communibus notionibus homini peculiariter insitis, Budzus
in Pandect, priores, p. 51. Impress. Basilez, 1534.
vivindi reclam rationem continentibus. This consists in distinctions of men's
Rights, building of houses, erecting of Cities, societies of Life, judgments of
Controversies, War, Peace, Fornerius in Legem 42. p. 122. De signific. Verborum.
Captivity, Contracts, Obligations, Successions, and the like; as that
judicious Gentleman Sir Thomas Ridley has to my hand observed. Now because this
Law is the same to all, in all places, at all times being the instinct of
humane nature, and a donary of Gods, View of the Civil and Eccles. Law, p ^.
the natura naturans to the natura naturata in man, therefore it is called the
Law of Nations, since it links together humane Natures and Societies so firmly,
that there is no unluting, Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 1. De justitia etc jure, p. 56,
57.58.
or discementing them, but by a riot and fray against the peace of God's
primary position of them: nor can Wars and Animosities justify themselves of
any better Origin then by blows, and monstrous heats, against the serene and
just cognation, Florentinus lib. 1. Inslit. lege An^ not. loc. ut supr^.
and alliance of man with man, and the common principles leading them to union
and amity. But this being not the ordinary notion of jus gentium, I proceed to
honor it as the custom and observances of learned and reduced Polities, which
of rude are become civil; See K. James's Speech, An. 1616 Star Chamber, P. 554.
of his Works. Alciatus Brech. and Forner ad legem 10. p. 28, 29. Gajus. lib. 1.
Instit. c. 9. Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 1. p. 60.
of Ethnique, Christian; of discordant, harmonious. And so by the jus gentium,
the * Imperial Laws, ordinarily called the Civil Laws, are to be understood^
these being the Laws of particular Constitutions, yet are so composed by, and
conformed to the Laws of Nations, that they are deep Channels of Justice,
Wisdom, and Variety, Ulpian, lib 1. Instit. c. 6. Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 1. De
Justitia and Jure, p. 58
and are saved in the opinion of the plurality of civilized men, Ius civil est
quod neque in totum a naturali vel gentium recedit, nec per omnia ei seruit.
Itaque cum aliquid addimus, vel detratrimus Iuri communi, jus proprium, id est,
Civil efficimus, says Vlpian. Now that the aforementioned Laws do differ in
the objects they respect, the Law of Nature suits, Fornerius De Veriorum
significad legam 4^. p. 122, 123.
omnibus quidem hominibus, sed non solis, because it takes in bruits as well as
men. The Law Civil agrees with men only, but not with all men (for that we in
England, and in other parts, more or less, it is excepted against in the
Exemptions and Salvo's that are allowed against it) but the Law of Nations
suits omnibus hominibus and solis; and the Civil or Roman Laws being the
amplest and oldest System of humane Laws, are highly to be valued, and so are
in the Empire, Nonopportere jus civil Calumniari, says Paulus; and the gloss
gives the reason, Lib. 4. Epitom. Alfini. 19. Digest. lib. 10. tit. 4. ad
exhibendum.
Quia non est pecuniarium interesse, quum sit inestimabilis scientia, p. 1 190.
in marg. p. Doctior.

By the Civil Law, I mean the Law of Nations methodizd and collected into four
Tomes.

The first whereof is the Digest a digerendo, or Pandects, from (...), Budaeus
in Pandect, p. 56. edit Basil, 1534. Posseuinus Bibliothec. Select. lib. 13. c.
11, etc. seq. Nostrum autem consummationem quaea no. bis De^ admuente
componetur, Digestorum, vel Pandectarum ^omen babere sanctmus, nullis
jurisperitis in posterum audentibus commentarios illi applicare, et verbo^itate
sua supradicti codicis compendium confundere. Imp. Caesar Iustinianus in
Concil^ ante lib. Pandectatum. p. 13.


containing the Works of twenty seven original Lawyers, some of which were
before Christ's time, and the rest in the Emperor's days to Maximinus* and to
this Tome Iustinian's Institutes is added.

The second Tome, or Member of the Law, is the Code in Twelve Books, the
Responsa of the fifty six Emperors, and their Council, from the Emperor
Adrian to Iustinian's time.

The third is the Authentiques, (...), proceeding from the immediate mouths of
the Emperors, and so being of absolute and unquestionable Authority, this part
is called also Novella, Posseuinus Biblothec select, lib. 13. c. 16. Ulp. lib.
1. Instit Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 1. p. 58.59.
for that the Laws in them are upon emergencies as new matters occasioned new
Remedies.

The fourth is liber feudorum, (...), which contains Tenures of a Military
Origin. I suppose, some make this as ancient as Christ's time others later, but
all very ancient. These are the grand Records of the Civil Laws, which are
artlyly and amply expatiated upon by the Learned Doctors in that Science, who
truly have in all Ages proved themselves as great Masters of Learning, as any
the World has had, and have carried as great a sway in the transactions of
State Affairs, as any other Race of Learned men; Lege Imper. Justin. diplom. De
Confirm. Digest. p. 11, 12, 13, etc. ante Tom. 1. Pandect.

De Origin Juris p. 70.


such as of old were Tib. Corun^anus Publ. Papyrius App. Claudius Claud.
Centumna^us Sempronis, called by the Romans as none before or after him was
(...) Scipio Nasica Mutius and hundreds of others; which together with their
equals of later date such as Vlp. Bartolus Zasius Alciat Hotteman Hopper who
all of them in the words of Vlpian declare the Civil Law to be that quod neque
in totum naturali vel gentium recedit nec per omnia seruit. Itaque cum aliquid
addimus vel detrahimus juri communi, jus proprium id est, civil efficimus. And
again, Ius autem civil est quod ex legibus, plebiscitis, senatissconsultis,
decretis principum, auct^ritate prudentium. These are some of those Iura, that
the Prince here is not to be ignorant in. But the great Chancellor, as a
common Lawyer by profession and preferment, has another kind of Law to acquaint
the Prince with, as he was supposed by our Chancellor to be rightful Heir of
the Crown of England, in which there was a peculiar Manicipe Law. Filia
temporis, matter paci^, fructus sapientiae, fulcrum regiminis, decus regnantis;
Doctor and Stud. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 8.
grounded upon six principal grounds: First, the La w of Reason: Secondly, the
Law of God: Thirdly, on diverse great Customs of the Realm: Fourthly, on diverse
principles called Maxims: Fifthly, on diverse particular Customs: Sixthly, on
Statutes made in Parliament by the King, and by the Common Council of the Realm.

Such a Law as that Plato describes to be a well-constituted one, Lib. 1. De
Legib. p. 773.
(...), etc. making the Subjects happy and blessed under, and shining as the
fruits of it. This is the Law of England ancient, not only ultra memoriam
hominum, but recordorum, the fruits of experience, in the succession of time,
the womb of peace, riches and renown in all ages and degrees; the center and
stability of all Governors, and Governments, when they reduced all their
Circumferences to its punct of Justice, which is indivisible. In a word, the
amplitude and glory of its Monarchs, while they have been ruled by it, dreaded
alive, and lamented when dead, because great and good, powerful and just, men
in nature, but Gods in munificence. In these Laws, and in the emanations from
them, and the Statute-additions to them, the Prince is told, he ought not to be
ignorant, because the Law is the rule of his duty, and ignorantia juris non
excusat, neither before God in point of Conscience, or men in point of fame;
which is the reason, that wise Princes have labored to know and govern
according to the Laws of their Government, and only unhappy ones neglected
themselves in the omission of it; and the effects of swerving from the Law is
legible in the troubles of King John, Math. Paris, page 231, 245, 384. Walls. in
E. 2. Scire Leges, hoc non est verba little tenere, sed vim ac potestatem.
Coelius, lib. 16. Digestor.

Page 238. to the Prince of Wales.


Hen. the Third, E. the Second, R., the Second; who not guided by the Laws, had
Reigns of War and Tumult. The Prince then was by our Text-Master well advised
not to be ignorant of the Laws, lest he prefer Passion above Reason, and being
carried away by the Euroclydon of his Will, forget that pious, prudent,
generous Rule of practice, which our late Martyred Monarch, blessed King
Charles commended in those words, I cannot yet learn (said that martyred
Oracle) that Lesson; nor I hope ever will you, that it is safe for a King, to
gratify any Faction, with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is wrapped up
the public Interest, and the good of the Community. So renowned King Charles
the First. But I proceed to what follows in the Text.

Nec praetextu Militia legem permittitur ignorare.
This is added, to take away all Arguments of excuse, which Martial Natures are
apt to make in Apology for their artlessness; they say, it effeminates the
mind: Did it so in Moses, David, Alexander, Caesar, Julian, Constantine,
Antoninus? nothing less: nor did they allow all time to their accomplishments
as Soldiers, Scholars they knew they ought to be, and only could be by
Study, and learned institution, and the Laws of God, 1 Jacob. c. s.
and Men, as the Treasuries of that they read and considered, and this made
them calm Governors, tender Parents, prudent Warriors, politic Statesmen,
victorious Princes, and yet continues them in the reputation of Heroiques.
Divide a Prince from knowledge and action, curtail him of either of those
Diadems, and his Crown is abated; by how much either prevails against other, by
so much is he propended to the extreme, which is the overreach of virtues
mediocrity. And therefore, as I hold a Prince ought not wholly to neglect
Military Affairs, but verse himself in, and accustom himself to them, that he
may intonate fear into Neighbors, not to provoke him to War, or to contemn him
in his appearing; as vainly did the Emperor by the Swedish King, who was the
bravest Hector of his Age; no, nor ought he wholly to rely on them, contemning
Arts and Policies of Justice and Law; because they direct best how parta and
propria conservare, and are the nerves and sinews of success and honor: but
join them together, In Epift. De Justiniano, Codice confirm.

In Panicrol. Tit. 56. De Armamentariis, p. 292.


etsi milites sive arma propter leges in tuto collecantur, ipsas tamen leges
armorum praesidio conservatas Justinianus putavit. So Salmuth. And how little
Arms, without managery of Wisdom has profited their undertakers, is evident in
the fatal consequences of those brutish engagements, which have been ruinous to
Princes, and their Fortunes; as Salmuth has given us many instances to prove
the truth of it. And this renowned Queen Elizabeth resolving in her self, who
turned the Affairs of Christendom upon the Poles, of her Wisdom and Courage,
being truly furnished with both Ornaments, to a degree symmetrious to her
Majesty, made her Reign renowned, her Subjects rich and grateful, her Commands
absolute and observed, her life prayed for, her death deprecated before it
came, and lamented when it came. In a word, left none unsad, but those to whom
she justly and honorably was a terror. And she did this to the amazement of
all Christendom, and the immortal honor of the Sex, by being directed by her
learned judgment, to temper her Justice with spirit, Sapientiae noceri non
potest, nulla delebit atas praesens, nulla diminuet sequens ac deinde semper
ulterior aliquid ad veneratione^ conferet, quoniam quidem in vicino versatur
invidia. Seneca, lib. De Brevit Vitae. p. 735.
and her Mercy with competent severity, and by employing such Spectacle
State-Ministers, and active Martialists, as showed her a practical Monarch, who
as she knew how to rule supreme, so skilled the method of her supporting that
her soleness by the proper aids and shores of it, Laws and Forces; and this was
non praetextu Militiae legem ignorare. For the fundamental and ancient Laws,
Privileges, and good Customs of this Kingdom, do not only preserve the King's
Regal Authority, (but are the Peoples security of Lands, Livings, and
Privileges, both in general, and particular) are preserved and maintained; and
by the abolishing, or alteration of the which, it is impossible, but that
present confusion will fall upon the whole state and frame of this Kingdom. 1
Iac. c. 2. in the Preamble.
They are the words of the Statute,

Which considered, there is great reason Princes and Monarchs, especially ours
in England, should not be ignorant of the Laws, because they are so essential
to their own stability, and their peoples security, as nothing can be more;
nay, without them, Modestinus, lib. 1. Regularum.
known and exercised in that Quaternion of Magistratique method, Imperare,
vetare, permittere, punire, which contain the virtue of Laws, there can be no
honor to the Prince, no felicity to the People: yea, that Prince that is so
unhappy, while he intends so nobly, not to be well resented, may use Cato's
words, though in a little other sense, Nihil egisti, fortuna, omnibus conatibus
meis obstando, non pro mea adhuc sed pro patriae liberate pugnavi nec agebam
tanta pertinacia at liber, Seneca, Ep. 24.
sed ut inter liberos viverem, nunc quoniam deplor at ae sunt res generis
humani, Cato deducatur in tutum. Better for a good King to go to a glorious
reward in Heaven, then live to oblige a graceless, and ingrate people. But God
being the only Lord of life and death, is to be attended upon for the issue of
things; which if they be not to Princes, as well as other men, such as they
would have them; yet are, in whatever they are, such as God permits, and knows
best for them to have them. In the mean time, we must endeavor to do our
duties, the Prince not excepted, whose part it is, juris non esse ignarus
praetextu Militiae.

A sacerdotibus Leviticae Tribus assumere jubetur exemplar legis, id est, a
viris Catholicis and literatis.

This is added, to restrain the King for the Matters of God, to God's own
appointment and institution; the Priesthood was settled on Levi by God, Numb.
1.2, 3. and no portion had Levi with his Brethren, for the God of his
Priesthood was his portion. Now, God to put a dignity on the Priesthood, does
not only enjoin the people to consult the Priest, who had the custody and
knowledge of the Law; but even the Prince, he was to write the Law from the
Original, with the Priests, called here the Levitical Tribe; In loc.
not as Aben-Ezra thinks, to distinguish them from other Priests, which were
not of the seed of Levi: for Drusius refuses that, upon the ground that the
Priests were of the Kindred of Aaron, who was of the Race of Levi; but to keep
us close to God's Ordination, who made the Priesthood the Repertory of
Law-Learning, (...), as Philo's words are: And hence learned Grotius writes;
His vero ratio habetur meliorum temporum, Grotius in Deuteronomy. xvii. 9.
etc. Here, says he, is an account of the flourishing times of Levi; for then
all controversies, judgments, difficulties, were brought before, and resolved
by them; but afterward they declining, and the incomes of the Priesthood being
great, and inclining the Priests to sloth and luxury, it fell out in time, that
the Learning of the Priesthood was translated into other Tribes, amongst which
there were those that excelled the Priests in knowledge of the Law: so that the
people did not only wave the Levites, but even sometimes the High Priest, and
applied themselves for introduction in the Law of God, to those that were
learned, though not Levites, but Laymen; says he, out of Maimonides, lib. 2.
De Synedrio.

Though therefore the Priests misbehaviour, might eclipse their credit with the
people; yet God's dignification of Levi is plain from Scripture throughout the
whole Book of Numbers; and the Author to the Hebrews mentions it in the fifth
of the Hebrews, as an augmentation of it. Lib. quod Det. potiert insidi soleat.
p. 166.
No man, says he, takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron. Yea, and plain is it from Philo, whose words are, (...), etc. Do you
not see, quoth he, that God the great Lawgiver, did not commit the
preservation and charge of holy things to every man, but to the pure and holy
Levites. So in another place, (...), etc. The Levite has all the privileges
that pertain to a perfect Priesthood, Lib. De Sacrif. Abelis and Caini, p. 152.
by which men attain the knowledge of the great God, and are in their
sacrifices and services rendered acceptable to him. And in another place he
gives the reason, why God took such care of Levi, and made their Habitations,
Cities of Refuge, as well as their Offices, the keepers of the holy things of
God; because they deserted all that was most dear and near to them, to attend
his portion who is immortal. The Priests then were the Trustees, to whom the
Custody of God's Law was referred. And therefore Princes enjoined to transcribe
the Law from their Original, were to apply themselves to them; so under the
Law: nor is it otherwise under the Gospel. For as God under the Old Law by
Moses; so under the New Testament by who was faithful in God's Church as a Son,
has ordinated an Evangelical Priesthood, not less conspicuous, then the
Aaronick one; for, as that was ordained of God for men in things pertaining to
God, as it is Heb. v. 1. as that was an honor to those that were of it, who
were counted God's portion, as that had the dispensation of offering both gifts
and sacrifices, De differentia Mosaici sacerdotis and Evangel^i lege in Orat.
Carlerii in Council. Basil. Council. To. ^. p. 8. and Orat. Polemarii, p. 522.
and making known the Law of God to men, as none were to be of that but
Levites, persons separated to that function, as that was exclusive of all other
Worship, till the time of refreshing from its burden of multiplied Ceremonies
came: so the Priesthood or Ministry of the Gospel is ordained by Christ, and
the Ministers in it Patrimonium Crucifixi, and the Tithes in it the Ministers
right, and all parts of Ministry only is dispensable by them, and none ought
to be accounted in the Ministry, but those separated to God by Canonique
Ordination. Thus they answer each other; and in one thing the Gospel Priesthood
excells the legal. As it is a more spiritual one, so a more durable one, so a
more general one, that brought men to see their God through the Glass of Types
and Figures; this face to face, that lasted but till the substance came.
Catholicus est ille qui credit implicit, vel explicate actu, vel habitu omnia
qu'ae pertinent ad fidem orthodoxam formatam vel informem. Brulifer. Did.
59.3. lib. 4.
This shall endure, till time shall be no more; that was limited to the Jews:
This is indulged to all Nations; the Gospel brings salvation unto all men: now,
there is neither Jew nor Gentile, bond or free, but all one in Christ Jesus.

So that the Chancellor has done well to expound the Evangelique Rites by viri
Catholici and literati. Catholici] This word in all Authors is expressed to
denote Universality; the Physicians call * that which is profitable to allay and
sweeten all humors, a Catholic Medicament; and Quintilian terms universal
and perpetual Rules Catholic, Catholici then here is to exclude factious
assumption of the Office of Ministry, without admission, and confirmation in it
Apostolical, Lib. 2. c. 13.9 Instit. Orator.
that is, Catholic: for no Ministry is Catholique^, but that which is by
Church-Tradition, Catholic Reception, Apostolic Practice,
Scripture-Warrant; which for ought I know, have read, or I think is possible to
be found in Scripture-History or Tradition, was Episcopal, in the sense that
our Holy Mother the Church of England practices it from the purest times, and
piousest presidents. And then Literati, to denote qualifications of the mind
to, both understand in themselves their duty, and make others understand theirs
also. For the Catholic Church, N^ putes Ecclesiam, quae in petra est, in una
part esse terrarum, and non diffundi usque ad sines terr^, etc. S. Augustine.
lib. 11. contriter. Petiliani, c 108. Sic Tract. 32. Super Joannem, 1 Homil.
super Apocalypse. de correct. Donatist. c. 3.
which is not restrained to any part or particular of the whole Church, either
Roman, Reformed, or Greek; but the whole Complex of Christians, having Christ
their Foundation, and being the pillar and ground of Truth on him the Rock,
though it may differ in circumstantials; yet being one in unity of Faith, and
essentials of Worship, Sanctus August, de correct. Donatist, c. 30. Extra hoc
corpus neminem vivificat Spiritus Sanctus.
and practice of Charity, accounts its particular Ministry, in a true sense,
Catholic. And therefore, though the Chancellor by Catholicis mean the Romish
Priest, excluding all others, Romanae Ecclesiae abunde satis est gloria partem
esse parvam universalis Ecclesiae. Lib. De Officio pii viri, p. 388, 390.
yet it is applicable to the Priesthood, or Ministry of the Universal Church:
of which in Cassander's words, It is abundantly enough honor done the Church
of Rome, that it is a small part of the Universal Church. And no National
Church is more or less Catholic one then other, Vbi a capite non receditur
per falsam, and Scripturis sacris dissentaneam Doctrinam a capite Christo, a
corpore vero non per quamvis rituum and opinionum diversitatem sed per solam
charitatis defectionem. So he.

So that the Officer that the Catholic Church has admitted to, and empowred
with the things of God, the dispensation of his Word and Sacraments, and other
holy parts of Priesthood, is Successor to the Prerogatives of the Evangelique
Priesthood, of which the Levitical was forerunner, and no Intruder must be
hearkened unto, or admitted to participation in it, who is contrary publicae,
antiquae, perpetuae, Quisquis ergo ab hac Catholica Ecclesia fuerit seperatus
quantumlibet landabiliter se vivere existi^net, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi
unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam sed ira Dei manet super ipsum.
Sanctus Aug. Ep. 100. post collat contr. Donatist.

Nomen Caholicum fuit inventum, ut ea discriminutione nominis ab haretico cum
conventiculis cognosceretur esse distincta. Baronius, To 1. ad Am. 42.


and universali Ecclesiae consuetudini. For Saint Paul reprobates such
interposition as dangerous; we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.
This be enough for Catholicis viris. And those the Churches of God have always
trained up to be, and admitted only such as be Literati; as Learned, without
Catholic, will be but a factious; so Catholic, without Learned, a barbarous
Priesthood. The Apostle's rule is to Timothy, Study to show thy self a
Workman, 2 Timothy ii. 5.
that needs not to be ashamed, (...), Operarium inconfusibilem, one that can
hew out fit proportions from the mass of Scripture, and orderly set together
what he has apportioned for his Ministry, to make it orderly and advantageous,
Lib. 1. Contra Cresconium, c. ^
not erubescentem, as St. Augustine expresses it, as they are that boast of
more then they can perform, seeming to be what they are not, (...), recte
secantem, that is, carrying himself so, as to hold the Truth free from all
extremes, as they do that keep the Channel, and avoid the Rocks on both Shores,
Collatio er go inter Dei servos esse debet, non altercatio, says Saint
Ambrose, in loc. Grotius will have it to be similitudo ducta victimis quae
certo ritu secari debebant; and, says he, a man is said rightly to divide the
Gospel, cum cuique accomodat camonita quae cuique Maxim convenient, In Locum.
quomodo de victimis aliae parts dabantur sacerdotibus aliae privatis; which
being an act of Wisdom, requires learned breeding to direct the Workman unto,
and in his work; and upon this ground, as the Priests of old were learned in
the Law, so the Ministers of the Gospel, whose mouths are to preserve
knowledge, are to be by Canon learned, and such the Chancellor means by
Literati, not such as the Scientique Budaeus laments for being in primorum
ordinum sacerdotibus in France, Budaeus in Pandect. priores, page 186. edit.
Basil.
where virtutis doctrineque praemia in homines latin infantissimos non singula
sedbinae, terna congeri verius quam conferri vidimus, qui certe non tam bis
honoribus ornati, quam obruti esse iniquis oneribus videntur. No such Drones,
and overgrown Novices does our Text intend; the holy things of God are under
the Gospel committed viris Literatis. Cl^. pro Balbo.
So Tully expresses viri literati as studiis doctrinisque dediti literatus and
desertus. So De Clar. Orat. 4. Such, who have much in them, and much written
upon them of knowledge of books and men, and of holiness to the Lord: of the
sword in these men's mouths, In penul.
should not that of Plautus be true, In eo ensiculo literarum quid est? But
every part of their Exhortation and Reproof, their Information and Direction
should be rich and full of Argument.

This is the Chancellours scope, to inform the Nation, that the Christian
Ministry, though it had the Levitical for its president, yet not only
succeeds, but exceeds it. And that the Rites of consecrating, or crowning
Kings, and taking Oath of them to perform the Laws of their Government, and to
maintain the Rites of Holy Church, as they will answer it to God, and the
evidences of their Consciences, and the Gospels they swear by, to which the
Ministers of God, Bishops, and others, are Witnesses in the behalf of Truth, is
no lame and lazy Ceremony, made up only of extern pomp, but of necessary and
renowned consequence; which those that vituperate are Children, and those that
would overthrow are Devils; because therein accusers of ancient Piety and
Prudence, and enemies to Mankind, who generally have the Priesthood in highest
honor.

This I the rather touch upon, because we have lately been in, and are not yet
wholly purged from the Lees of those unhappy times, wherein, with many, all
Antiquity was execrable, nothing pleasing but novelty, decrescebat innocentia
in foro, justitia in judicio, in amicitiis concordia, Lib. De Abus. saculi
in artibus peritia, in moribus disciplina, as S. Cyprian once complained of
his time. No Law, but Lust; no Justice, but Arms; no Church, but a
Meeting Place; no Priest, but a High-shoe, or uncatholique illiterate; no
Canon, but Enthusiasm; no Mercy; but Ruin. So that truly in our England, there
was a kind of Reverter (at least in the menace of the Rabble, and their
Arch^Dukes) of Draydlike Ethnicism, De Nature. Deorum Syntagm, 17. p. 529.
Tun^ maxim Deos propitiari, cum per cruciatum hominem excarnificassent, says
Giraldus of the Druids, and 'twas too true of them.

But blessed be God, we are in a better state now, the exemplar legis has been
tendered the King, a viris Catholicis and literatis, and now the Echo of our
Learned Chancellor may humbly present the pre-instanced Scripture, Chap. xvii.
of Deuteronomy, as that which is the noblest Monitor of the Prince's duty, that
any where, in any Author, in any time is to be found.

Liber quippe Deuteronomii est liber legum quibus Reges Israel subditum sibi
populum, Regere tenebantur. This is added, to show the Text-Master's love to
the Prince, in his preference of Deuteronomy, Plinius in Ep. Caninio Rufo, Ep.
6.
and the xvii. Chapter of it, for his direction, to be according to much
Wisdom; for that it is Methodus regiminis quo Reges Israelis teneri deberent,
God's precise determination of the King to that, as his Oracle and path to walk
by, and in. Indeed, I am of Pliny's mind, Sum ex iis qui miror antiqu^s, etc. I
am of their minds, who admire the Ancients, but yet not so to despise the
acquirements of later men and times; for that were to accuse Nature, as spent,
and defective to a generous production of Rarities, now as well as heretofore.
I know there are Tracts of Policy, and Treatises of Institutions for a Prince,
which of late have been proposed to the World with notable art, and subtle
insinuations: nor are the later Wits less keen, nor their Writings less polite,
then those of their Antecessors: But these are but men that wrote, and what
they wrote subject-like them to errors and mistakes. Moses, the Penman of
this, was one of God's infallible Secretaries, and he propounds to the King
(that was Prophetically regulated and admonished, for Israel was yet under
Moses his Regiment) (...), Philo. lib. 1. De Creati Principis, p. 725.
etc. The noble Mean between the Iron and Leaden Extremes how he shall be,
(...), etc. An admirer of right, a judger of wrong, a propagator of truth, as
the best Pillars of a durable Regality. This, says Philo, Moses propounds
herein, as a Reward to the Prince that is led by it; and therefore no wonder,
though Moses direct to Deuteronomy, as his second, and most complete System of
the Law. For though there were many parts of Holy Writ that persuaded the
Prince to love the Law, and to embrace it as the Rule; as that where no Law is,
the People perish: or that of Saint Paul, The Law is just, and holy, and good;
and if it had not been for the Law, Rom vii. 12. Romans vii. 7.
I had not known sin. Or that of our Savior, who being interrogated by the
Jews, questions of import, answers them, by referring them to the Law; How is
it written in that Law?

Though I say the Chancellor might have illustrated the beauty and use of the
Law from other Scriptures, yet in that he waves them all here, and refers to
this Book, and this Chapter of this Book, it is a strong Argument, he thought it
the most opposite to the Prince's instruction, Partem Scripturae politicam and
legislativam; as Aure^lus his words are. In Pentateuch.
Well he knew, good Chancellor, that every word of God was good; but that
these were like those of Solomon's Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, the
only words he could artlyly use to his purpose, Deuteronomium est quasi
incensa, and perpetua concio, e^que de causa Mosis, c. 17. v. 18. jussit ut
novi Reges, elegendique describunt sibi Deuteronomium, In argumento an^e
Deuteronom.
ut discant timere Deum, etc. says A. Lapide.

It Is true indeed, every Book of Moses has his peculiar excellency, as it
answers some useful end of God in the Production of his Designs there
described: in Genesis there is description of God as the enjoyner of the Law;
in Exodus, of Moses the Minister of the Law; Lorinus in pr^fat ante Deuteron. ^
Beda In loc.
in Leviticus, of the Heads and Content of the Law; in Numbers, of the Nature
of the People, to whom this Law was given; but in Deuteronomy, there is a short
Recapitulation and Conclusion of the Law given; the last words of Moses, most
pithy, most memorable, most culled: and A. Lapide says his Book was made upon
three Causes. First, for supply of Mortality, because all the old men that came
out of Egypt, and heard the Law delivered on Mount Sinai were dead. Secondly,
because Moses was now to die, and being to leave the people of his care and
love, he leaves them instructed in the Law by this Copy, and perfect Account of
it. Thirdly, for that the words of Rulers and Princes have most sway with the
people they govern, he leaves them this Book, as the lasting Memorandum, and
Iournal of their duty, and enjoins Governors to transcribe it, that by
remembering it themselves, and ruling their people according to it, they may be
happy and beloved as Moses was. For so it follows, Hunc librum legere jubet
Moses, ut discant timere deum and castodire mandata ejus quae in lege scripta
sunt.



Well did Moses know the temptations of greatness, that Kings are but men in
nature, though Gods in sacredness; that Power is apt to arrogate a Prerogative
above Mortal Restraints, and that the nature of man frail in them, is apt to
pervert God's intention in the latitude of their Commission. Therefore Moses
claps the Clog of God on the King's Conscience, and enjoins him to read and
write over the Law of him and his Government, as he will answer the violation
of it through ignorance or perverseness to the God of that Law, in whose hand
his life and breath is, (...), etc. says Philo, Lib. De Nominum Mutatione. p.
1048.
That his corrupt Nature being awed by God's Sovereignty, may by fear and aw of
it be restrained from exorbitant rigours, and vain excursions.

Indeed, as the Law of God is the best Book; so fear of God is from the best
Lesson man can learn. No grace has more of the exaltation of God, and
depression of man, then fear has; and no man has more need to have God's fear
in him, then a King that is free from the fear of man onhim. Saint Bernard
makes fear prima gratiarum quaetotius Religionis ex^rdium est; No fear, no
Religion. Therefore the Wiseman says, Fear God, and keep his Commandments,
that is the whole duty of man. in the last of Eccles. It a est primus in ordine
gratiarum sicut paupertas in ordine Beatitudinum, De donis Spir. Sancti. c. 1.
Lib. De Abrehamo, p 351.
says that Father. Indeed fear, as it may be objected and accented, as it may
be tinctured and biased, may in Philo's words be (...), an ill adviser. It may
be Jonas in our ship cause a storm, and endanger all the serenity of our inward
peace: this his fear, the fear of man; a fear of incredulity, a fear of
inverting God's position, making God less, and man more then he is. In an evil
fear, forbidden by God, perfect love casts forth this fear; it is a fear of
servility, not ingenuity; the fear of Bastards, and not Sons: it is the nail in
our heads, after the butter and milk in a Lordly dish, which this World's
flatteries, and the Iael's of infirmity treat us deceitfully, and to our ruin.
But holy fear, to fear the Lord and his goodness, is the felicity, as well as
duty, of not only Subjects but Princes: nay, it is paramountly pertinent to
Princes, because the only object of their fear, as a Superior to them,
employs it, and as a God to them, deserves it. And this the Hebrew phrase here
(...), translated to fear imports: for it is none of those ordinary words the
holy Language has; for ordinary fear not (...), the fear of one, a stranger in
a Land that is not his own; as Psalm. cxx. 5. nor (...), a fear of tristicity:
so Psalm. xxxviii. 18. nor (...), a fear of modesty, like that of youths, who
blush for fear, when they come before men of age and worship, Job xxxii. 6.
which we call a running our heads in a hole; nor (...), a fear causing an
uproar in the mind, Isa. xxxii. 11. like that (...), charged on Martha,
Tumultuaris circa plurima, c. v. nor (...), a fear that wholly unmans us, Deuteronomy.
xxviii. 16. nor (...), a fear taking away all hope of acceptance, Esaias xli. 10.
Nor this, or any of these fears, which melt down the spirit, and make a manless
fusility in the ponderous and masculine nature of man: none of these is the
fear here. Beatus es, si cortuum triplici isto timore repleveris. ut timeas
quidem pro accepta gratiae amplius pro amissa long plus pro recuperata.
Sanctus Bernardus Sermon. 54. super Cantie. Cantie.
That which Moses lessons the King to learn from the Lord's Law, is (...),
which is a fear provoking to worship, and draw near to God; such a fear as
argues love and duty, to fear him ^so as to fear him only, him always, so as
to cast down their Crowns and Scepters at his feet, and to serve his glory with
their complete absoluteness. This is the King's timere deum, but it has an
adjunct and copulation, which makes it both appear to be what it is in truth,
and to make the principle from which it is sound in a suitable effect, keep his
Commandments all the days of his life. This is that which ingratiates the fear
of God with God, when it is seen in obedience to him, according to his declared
Will, his Law, and that in every particular, not one, but all his
Commandments; and that not sometimes, and not at other times, but all the days
of his life. This is to be upright with God, as was King David, Then shall I
not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments. This is non
currere per mandata sad ambulare in mandatis; to make God's glory the end of
Princes Lives and Reigns. And this is to produce what in our Text follows.

Ecce timere deum effectus est legis, quem non consequi valet homo nisiprius
sciat voluntatem Dei, quae in lege scripta est.

This is well inferred from the presumption of its cause; to write the Law, is
the way to remember it; to love it, the way to practice it; and to practice it,
is to be what the Law here is told us to aim at, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, fully and constantly. This our Chancellor calls an effect of
the Law, because the Law is in God's intention, and the ordinary way of his
dispensation, thus to dispose Kings, as it offers them the Rational and
Religious answering of the end of their Power, and his Prescript: for Philo
makes the Law as (...), etc. God's declaratory of his Will, Lib. De Migrat.
Abraham ^. p. 408.
both as to what man may, and may not do. And therefore, inasmuch as fear is a
postnate of knowledge, and knowledge the means of ingenerating divine fear; and
this knowledge is conveyed to us by the Law, according to that of the Apostle,
I had not known sin but by the Law. Not that the Law has any efficacy, to
illuminate man to an efficiency of Holy and Reverential Fear. For that is true
of the Law, which Saint Augustine wrote of Free Will, In solutionibus
Questionum ^i la^i. q. 1.
Valet liberum arbitrium ad opera bona, si divinitus adjuvetur, quod ^^t
humiliter petendo and faciendo, desertum vero divino adjutorio quamlibet
scientia legis excellat, nullo modo habebit justitiae soliditatem, sed
inflationem impiae superbiae and exitiosum tumorem. ^9 Epist. ad Hilar.
And so in another place, Nam and lex ipsa in hoc adjutorium data est illis,
qui ea legitime utuntur, ut per illam sciant, vel quid justitiae jam
acceperint, unde gratias agant, vel quid adhuc eis desit quod instanter petant.
Whereas therefore the knowledge of what is our duty to do, and not to do, is
said to be ^he effect of the Law, which teaches us what, and how to do our
duty, or not do; it is to be understood, not a necessary effect, such as
follows the cause, but an effect in order, that is, where ever fear of God is,
there the Law of God, known and observed, has been the ordinary means of
producing it, and not only the ^escue to point us to our Lesson, but the
instigatour of us to learn and practice it. And indeed, to this end has the
Will of God concerning man its patefaction in the Law, that man might not be
under any impossibility of knowing what he is, and is not to do; nor plead
ignorance, when his omissions and errour^ shall come to Arraignment: and
therefore as here is much mercy in God's promulgation, so is there a call to us
in it of eternal gratitude. For the Law written on the heart, and rivetted in
the created nature, would have compurgated God from cruelty to his Creature, in
punishing the breach of his Law, which they had such previous and plenary
warning of. But in that he has been pleased to write his ^aw, and our duty, in
such legible, and indelible Characters, as are learnable; not to know his Will
by the Law, is to despise God from Heaven, and to sin against our Maker, and
his Mercy. To fear then the Lord, as it is an act of service to God, so of
mercy to our own souls, because it puts us out of fear of his fury; who is a
consuming fire, who has power of soul and body; and it puts us into the
protection of his promise, that No good thing shall be wanting to those that
fear him, Psalm. 34.9. And for as much as this fear is as in God causally, so in
the Law institutionally; and Moses, by the spirit of God, directs Kings to the
Law as their Academy and Oraculary; because they being (...), etc. as Philo
calls them, Lib. ^. De Vita Mosis, p. 654.
are not only to take care that secular matters be carried on well and wisely,
but also the matters of God and his service. Kings and all in Authority shall
do well to study the Law, that they may know to do the Will of their Lord; for
that is to know God aright, to practicate his fear from a principle of
Conscience, and holy affection to God* When not to oblige him to be ours, if
any act of ours properly could so do, but to glorify him as our chief good, is
the sourse of our service, when we study to know, that we may be ready and
regular, in doing what we know we ought, to show forth the virtue of him that
has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light. This, this is to know
the Will of God, which is written in his Law; because this is perfect Charity,
which is the fulfilling of the Law; and without this all the Notional and
Grammatique Knowledge of the Law abstracted from practice of the duties
postulated, is but nothing. So true is that of Saint Augustine, Pro bonis
operibus sperastiterrenam quandam felicitatem; In prima quinquagena ex Prol^g^,
Psalm. 31.
impius es, non est is it a merces fidei, cara res est fides, vili illam
addixisti, impius ergo es and nu^^a sunt operatua, move as licet in bonis
operibus lacertes, and videaris navem optime gubernare, in saxa festinas. So
that Father; and so our Lord Jesus, If ye know these things, blessed are ye, if
ye do them.

Principium omnis famulatus, est scire voluntatem domini cui servitur. Here the
Chancellor proceeds to confirm what went before, from the consideration of
domestique Order, which is suitable to the greater Polity of Kings and People;
nay, of God and Man: for in Families there is a Lord and Servants; the one
commands, because he is Master of all, and his Will is their Law: the other
obeys, because he is bound, as he eats, drinks, is clothed, and lives by, and
under his Master. Now in this service, which the Chancellor calls famulitium,
as after Festus he does, servus famulatus, the first and chiefest thing is to
know the Master's pleasure, Ep. 47.
and to study, and actually answer it, Si^ cum inferiore vivas, quemadmodum
tecum superiorem velles vivere. And because the Will of the Lord and his humor
was best seen by frequent being in his company. Seneca tells us anciently, the
Masters did admit their Servants to eat with them; yea, and that the Masters
might see what tempers their Servants were of, and what commands could best
bear, Instituerunt diem festum quo non solum cum servis domini vescerentur, sed
quo utique honores illi in domo gerere, jus dicere permiserunt, and domum
pusillam Rempubl. esse judicaverunt, Ep. 47. Servants thus encouraged, the
Master expected a return in observance; no dispute, no delay, to be sure no
opposition: The Servant was, whatever he understood his Masters pleasure to
have him be, according to that of Philo, Lib. quis rerum divinarum. Haret. p.
482.
(...), etc. The only praise of a Servant, to think no command of his Masters
slight, but to do all to his utmost pleasure, that he thinks he wills. And
therefore God alluding to the Sovereignty of Earthly Masters, says,
objuregatively to Israel. If I be a Master, where is my fear? Vbi est
obedientia servi sub imperio domini? and the Apostle, to strengthen the
authority of Masters over Servants, says, Servants be obedient to your Masters
in all things, for this is well-pleasing, and acceptable to God. How holy Paul
obey in all things? yea, in all things: Suppose he commands Idolatry, or
Murder, or any other sin, is he to be obeyed in this? Yes, he is to be obeyed,
but not in the kind of the command he exercises, in the Servants disposition,
but not in the act of termination to such his command, Cum dominus carnis a
domino spiritus diversum imperat, non est obediendum, says Saint Ierom, and
Tertullian, who owns this Canon, yet modifies it, sed intra limits
Disciplinae, obey him so far as he obeyes God. Ideo Romanas leges contemnimus,
ut divinae jussa servemus, said the Martyr Sylvanus, Justinus Martyr in Apol.
2. pr^ Christian.
(...), etc. We worship indeed but one God, but we are loyal servants to Kings
and Emperors, praying constantly for them, that they may wisely and worthily
discharge their trusts toward their people, as we profess their people ought
to express loyal duty to them. And Seneca is positive, that virtuous minds,
contra Remp. imperata non facient, nulli sceleri manus commodabunt. Let
Stratocles flatter Demetrius never so highly, and desire the Athenians to pass
a Law, Vt quicquid Demetrio Regi placuisset, id in Deos pium, and inter homines
justum esset: yet Integrity will not swallow any unjust command, though it dare
not disobey by contumacy a just ^ower, while it acts unjustly: but in things
that are indifferent, in things civil and prudential, Philo, lib. De Confusione
Linguarum, p. 333.
there the Master is so absolute, that the servant is bound to obey thoroughly
and constantly, and has no remedy, but to pray (...), etc. that God their only
Savior would hear and relieve them.

This was the state of Servants bound to obey; yet had they also a privilege,
when they were veteranes and faithful: For then, as they were secundi liberi,
where Children were, so where they were not, they did in jus liberorum
transire. To which probably our Apostle alluded, when he made the privilege of
Adoption to consist in translation from Servants to Sonship. This is notably
set forth by Abraham, in the case of Eleazar of Damascus his Steward, Genesis xv.
3. Behold! to me thou have given no seed, and one born in mine house (to wit,
Eleazar, v.5) is mine Heir.

This Eleazar of Damascus so called, because he had possibly either purchased a
house at Damascus, or had some Rule there (not born there) is in Chap. xxiv. 2.
said to be (...) Procurator filius, or gubernator d^mus, in cujus manu
relinquam omnia quae mihi sunt, says Rabbi Joseph, filius discursationis, who
checks all under my Roof. This is he of whom Abraham says, (...) haereditat
mihi, that is, He at present possesses mine for me, and hereafter shall possess
mine for himself. Now this being the compensation of ancient and faithful
servants, that they may in time come to this, the principal familique prudence
is, to study the Master, and to let no word of his fall to the ground, no
command of his be neglected; and this is scire voluntatem domini. For since the
servant is in his body, his Lords, and has all accommodation from his Lord;
what is more reasonable, then that his Lord should be, in this World, and in
things lawful, all in all to him: so that the servant having no sphere so
proper for his actuation, as his Masters will, and that will being best
observed, by setting ones self to the exact knowledge of it, the Chancellor
has fitly made it the first knack in the van of service, and that which makes
the Master pleased with his servant, and with his service as such.

Legis tamen laetor Moses, primo in hoc edicto effectum legis, videlicet
timorem Dei commemorat, deinde ad custodiam causae ejus, viz. mandatorum Dei
ipse invitat, nam effectus prior est quam causa in animo exhortantis. That
which our Chancellor calls Legislator, Philo terms (...), Lib. De Monatchia,
p. 819.
because Laws being (...); and to sacred purposes, for order and distinction,
security and beauty, the deliverers of them to the people they ruled, may fitly
be termed (...); which, though all Lawmakers deserve not to be; because, as
they may rule solely, yet not be Kings, and People, yet by no Law: so they
having not so much of Divine Rectitude in their Titles and Transactions, may
abate in the deserts and right to such nominal Titles. But Moses was none of
these; he obtains power justly, uses it moderately, and resigns it willingly,
when God his Principal, determining his life, calls Ioshuah to succeed him.
This, this indeed, was (...), nay, (...), somewhat above the rate of men; for,
as ^^de habent quaerit nemo, sed opportet habere. So when it is had; oh! to keep
to their stipulations is death to them. If violation be more advantageous, no
swasion of Religion, no fear of losing fame, no disgust of their People, keeps
such lawless and boundless Natures in aw, they will do what Providence prompts
them to, and Prudence suggests, as a necessary Expedient, Con^zen. Politic.
lib. 5. c. 20. p. 339.
though they do perjure themselves, and confound all, that Laws and Policy has
distinguished; and all this they do, because the light in them is darkness, and
the salt unsavory. They consult with the false Oracles of flattery and
self-magnification, and decline God's fear lesson'd in his Law. Were that,
their Counselor, they would do nothing under pretense of God, but according
to God, not rule, but as he does, suaviter and fortiter; first with justice,
and then with courage, and that by and according to God's Law, which directed
by God, discovers the souls vanity, and instruct to fear God's Power, and love
his goodness, as its complete restraint from enormity. I know God by Miracle
can instruct Kings, as he rained Mannah, and raised the Apostles from
letterless Fishermen, to learned Metropolitans, and profound Doctors. He can
do by his absolute omnipotence what he will, and therefore is not obliged to
qualify Princes with fear and observance of him according to the method of
Nature or Art, his Will being the Law: it is but say, and do: so the Chaos
testified a passivity to his information; nor did in the pre-existent Matter
ought reside, that had any refractoryness in it. It did not, it could not
appeal from his Will; for that had no superior, no equal. But in that, God now
discovers himself to us in familiar and natural methods, and leaves causes to
their natural operation, ordinarily interposing no Power to suspend or impede
the production of effects from causes; and inasmuch as the effect is first in
nature of project, though last in order of time, the cause Physically
precedeing it: Therefore the Chancellor advises to get holy and humble fear
from the Law, which is God's undoubted will to us; and that which we knowing,
and doing, in such knowledge and deed shall be blessed. This is the sum of this
Clause.

Sed quis est timor iste quem promittunt leges observationibus suis, vere non
est timor ille de quo scribitur, quod perfecta charitas for as mittit timorem.
Timor tamen ille licet servilis soepe ad legendum leges, Reges concitat, sed
non est ipse proles legis.

Our Chancellor having wrote great things of holy fear, and made it, that
Lucifer which shines in the Souls firmament, as an effect of God's Law read and
practiced, now comes to limit us to a right notion of it, that we may not
mistake its counterfeit for the current and noble grace of fear; Timor filialis
oritur a duplici radice; 1. a cognitione divinae magnitudinis, and a dilectione
Dei Aragonius in S. Secundae, Diui Thomae. 919. Art. 2. De Timore, p. 264.
and this he does, by distinguishing of fear, as a nude and rude passion, from
what it is as a complex of graces, and a renovated principle, which makes us
commensurate, in such degrees as humane frailty allow, to God's requiry of us
in order to his glory, our Neighbors good, and our own personal and soulary
felicity. For as it is not every Medicine that cures, every Suitor that
succeeds, every Valor that is victorious, every Speaking that is oratory; so
is it not every fear that is this fruit of the Law this favorite of God. There
is fear that quivers through a guilty pusillanimity; there is fear that
precipitates to a desperate ferocity; there is fear that sinks men beneath
their station, into the stupidity of dull insects of senseless inanimation; fear
that petrifies, and obdurates to an immobility; fear that lethargizes the
spirits, and makes a man dead, while living. These fears may sometimes be
useful, and God by their Revulsions work great effects preparatory to the fear
of Worship and Reverence, Timor Dei est metus reverentiae, and cultus, A Lapide
in Ecclus. xxiv. 24. p. 28.
so often brings the terror into the Conscience, and thereby pricks the sinner
at the heart, letting out all the purulency, and impostumation of sin by its
Lancet; and that removed, makes a kindly Avenue to his fuller work of
Repentance and Conversion. In which sense, Saint Paul calls the Law, our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ: because as the Schoolmaster cultivates
youth, and weeds out by his Discipline all the trash, and corrects him for all
the wilful breaches of his Rules, and so brings him at last into a pliant and
regular temper, in which all after proficiencies thrive from their implantation
to a great and graceful increase: so does God by toeling the sinner to read,
and in reading to be taken with the terrors of the Law against the sin he is
guilty of; so dismount and caress him, that for ever after he is a changed man;
that as God did call off Paul from his eager Pharisaism, and Saint Augustine
from his profane Manichism, by the voice of his power and mercy effectually
touching them; so does he often do by others, through the ministration of the
Law; the threatenings of it being as so many voices, and Counsels of desistance
and abhorrence. This Saint Bernard counsels the sinner to observe, Sermon. 13.
Inter paervos Sermones* Timor servilis quantum ad^servitutem est malus, tamen
quantum ad substantiam est bonus. Aragonius in secundam. Secundae Tho. 919.
Art. 4. De Timore, p. 268.
that he may be happy; Fili accedens ad sernitutem Dei, sta in timore, si ex
timore te feceris illius servum, faeciet te ex charitate amicum suum, and sic
aqua timoris commutabitur in vinum dilectionis. But this fear, though it be
like poison, useful by the modification of Omnipotence; yet it is not the fear
of those, whom God values Jewels, and, as such, will protect, Mal. iii. It Is
not the fear of God's Elect, spuriorum timor, non filiorum; it is timor praedae,
non probitatis, a fear that preys upon the vitals of ingenuity, and like
imbibed spirits at present refreshes, but after grate on, and overwhelm them,
without God sanctify it to illuminating purposes. Therefore this fear qua such
being not of stanch materials, and loyal composure, is not able to fortify
against evil, and to provoke to good; not make the soul as complete toward
God, as the Queen of Navar's accomplishments rendered her to the World, when
she not only bore up the degree and estimation of a Queen, D'Avila, p 363.
though she had no Kingdom, but kept up her self, and built up the greatness of
her Son, in spite of adverse fortune; but it flags, and renders the man that
is acted by it mercenary, illiberal, and constrainedly only good, being so far
from enfranchising the soul, that it servilize it, and reduces it to an
angustation of perplexity.

Whereas the fear of God, Greg. Naz. Orat. 53. on Eccles. p. 756. expresses it.
which Moses magnifies as the Laws work in the sacred heart of Kings, is quasi
auriga animae, quasi nauclerus animae, quasi specula animae; It Is (...), a
salutiferous, but a rare endowment; and a good Prince applies that of Synesius
to the fear of God, makes God's fear the Philosophy he sets down to, (...), in
Ep. 45. ad Herculianum. That which carries him not Phaeton-like, furiously up
to the Clouds of Pride, but Christianly, by the safe path of Humility, steers
him to secure his immortal soul from those exitials that are occasioned by two
much either of presumption or despair, gives him a Prospect of God in his Soul
and in Heaven, in the Throne of his affections, and in the bliss of his divine
supereminency; and by this incoats glory even in this state of mortality; A
Lapide in loc.
which A Lapide, on those words of the Son of Syrach, Chap. 34.15. Blessed is
the soul of him that fears the Lord, to whom he does look, and who is his
strength. Thus descants on, parata ^st anima (says he) sapientis tum in spe,
quia per timorem, and amorem Dei sperat certoque assequetur speratam a se
Beatitudinem, tum in re, quia beatitudo hujus vitae consist it in timore
filiali, hoc est, in amore Dei, quia per eum fit amicus, filius, and haeres
Dei, and cohaeres Christi, quare ut filius, a Deo protegitur, dirigitur,
omnique bono cumulatur. Thus he. And therefore as it follows in our Chancellor.

Timor vero de quo hic loquitur Mosis quem and pariunt leges, est ille de quo
dicit Propheta, Timor Domini Sanctus permanet in saeculum saeculi, hic filialis
est, and non novit poenam, ut ille qui per charitatem expellitur, nam iste a
legibus proficiscitur quae docent facere voluntatem Dei quo ipse paenam non
meretur, sed gloria domini est super metuentes eum, quos and ipse glorificat,
timor autem iste, timor est de quo Job postquam multifarie sapientiam
investigat, sic ait; ecce timor Domini ipsa est sapientia, and recedere a malo,
intelligentia Job xxviii. Recedere a malo, quod intelligentia timoris Dei est,
leges docent, quo and timorem hunc ipsae parturiunt.

In this conclusion of his first Chapter, our Chancellor has reduced into a
compendium, all that he writes concerning the subject of Fear, as the Lesson of
the Law to the Prince. And, as in the former Clause, he showed what fear the
Law wrought not as its proper and most noble work, that is, in the effectuation
it expresses to the mind, that is taught by God: so in this does he set forth
specially what it is in the useful and proper proceed of it toward a gracious
and well-inclined person; and this he does out of that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
The fear of the Lord endures for ever: not by a duration of time; for the
absorption of Faith by Vision, and Hope by Fruition, determines all fear, as it
is in order to beatitude; for that being enjoyed, fear, the means to it, is
lodged in its end; but the fear of the Lord endures for ever, that is, it makes
the fearers of God so walk before God, while they are in the way to him; as
that he shall take them into glory with him, and give them a coeternity of
beatitude with him, which shall as little cease to be what it is, as his own
Essence shall: so that he being for ever and ever his united to him by grace,
shall in glory also have a being and endurance for ever and ever, or else for
ever and ever, (...), is an accumulate expression, denoting a constant method
of God in all distributions of his to men by holy fear, to usher in all their
subsequent services. And this is but as the way to that he wages; whether one
or both senses amounts, but to the acclamation of filial fear, which is the Oil
of Charity, the odor of a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God: so far from being
inconsistent with the Charity, that is, the bond of Perfection, that it is the
very Charity, that is, the Bond of Perfection. Since thus to fear God, and keep
his Commandments, is the whole duty of man. And this to do, though it does not
paenam non merere, Caten. Graec. Patrum, p. 439. (...). Isidor in Job xxviii
as the Chancellour's words are, which attributes too much to the opus
operatum, in the desert of it; since all our righteousness is but as a filthy
rag before God; and when we have done all, we are commanded by our Lord to say,
we are but unprofitable servants, and so no meritters, but demeritters. Yet
does the acceptance of God's mercy crown this fear so far in us, that it makes
us more then Conquerours over our corruptions, which are deservedly our fear,
and entails us to the sure mercies of David, which are emanations of fidelity,
and munificence inseparable from the fearers of God, because founded upon the
veracity of his immutable Godhead. And hence it is, that Job his determination
of God's fear to be wisdom, and to depart from evil to be understanding, chap.
28. is literally and infallibly to be understood, as indefatigble; and the same
is expressed to be, because it is the fear of the fontal and durably wise
being, and so is objectively Wisdom, and it works a practice in man suitable
to the purpose of God in his Creation and Endowment, Gregorius Theolog. apud
Caten. Graecorum Patrum in Job xx. p. 436.
(...), etc. A holy life is the first and most excellent Wisdom, and that which
is most clean and acceptable with God; which is, to abhor and recede from evil,
as God's opposite and Antagonist in his soul, and so argues understanding, and
makes him subjectively wise, because wise, 2 Jer. 13. (...), Greg. Naz. Orat.
53.
both the witness of wise actions, since sin is absolute folly, as God charges
it in his people. My people have committed two evils; forsaken me the fountain
of living waters, and dug to themselves broken Cisterns that will hold no
water. So that the Law of God, in all senses, teaching man his duty, and
quickening his endeavor by grace, imparted him to a capacitation of it, and a
resignation of him to the conduct and empire of it, may well be magnified by
our Chancellor in this first Chapter; and the Scripture he refers the Prince
to from the Book of Deuteronomy, of all other, be the most peculiar to the ends
of his Instruction in the fear of God, and to the observation of his Precepts
all the days of his life; saying of our Chancellor, as Synesius does of his
Herculian, (...), etc. If there be question, Whether there be Sirens, so long
as your Instructions remain, Ep. 145.
they will put them out of question, since in every line of them they have such
melodious notes, as wholly Fortescue, the Prince, and render him unable for
admiration to contain himself. And so I end the first Chapter, referring the
Reader for the fuller satisfaction of the latitude of holy and servile fear, to
the many Authors, whose Works have much of it; as they may be read in Fabian
Justinian his Index Universalis. Printed at Rome, Anno 1612. p. 529. and in the
Scholemen, who generally have written as largely on the Head of Fear, as on any
other common place whatever. And so I proceed to what follows in

CHAP. II.
HAEC ut audivit Princeps, erecto in senem vultu sic locutus est] because I
look upon these Dialogues, as to the Persons, as well as to the Matter real,
and not fictive: therefore I term this Chapter the Prince's Replication to the
Chancellor. And three notable things it is considered for: First, the Prince's
civility, in a speedy repay of his love; haec ut audivit Princeps. Secondly,
the Prince's preparatory pertness, to oppose his youth to this grave and wise
Chancellour's age, erecto in senem vultu, sic locutus est. Thirdly, the
Prince's pregnant and pathetique Reply in the following matter.

First, the civility of the Prince's return to the Chancellour's counsel, is
notable: no sooner had he a sense that he was obliged, but instantly he
meditates the compensation, haec ut audivit Princeps. It Is true, men may have
courtesies done them they know not of, and then their detinue of thanks, till
they have notice that they have received kindness, is their excuse: but when a
kindness is done, and so palpably, as we our own selves, are privy to, and
convinced of the reality of it; if then we either do it not at all, or not
seasonably, and while it is warm and fresh, we do amiss. For, as ingratum est
beneficium quod diu inter manus dantis haesit; so is the thanks suspectable not
to be real, when it is cold, and comes by grand paws, and tedious crawlings to
those we ow it to. This our Prince abhorring, as knowing the suspicion of
ingratitude, too great a blot for Majesty to be branded with, suffers nothing
to impede his thanks to the Chancellor, but sends by the same Post that
brought the Narrative Packet, his recoil of acceptance, haec ut audivit: no
Arrow as it were, is impelled toward the Mark; no thought ejaculated to its
object, no volubility of the eye more quick, then this courtesy of his
Princely heart, haec ut audivit, that is, non citius audivit quam retribuit;
well knowing that of the Moralist was true, qui cito dat, his dat; and that he
who makes no haste, has little good will.

It is I know, a way, of narrow minds, to defer rependments, in hope that time
may wear out the expectation in those that deserve it, as it does the gratitude
of those that are deserved of: such spirits are frequent to vulgar births and
brats of self-admiration, who are content, every body, should admire them, and
as divine, offer to them; while they in no sort divine, are immunificent; no
rain of their bounty, no sunshine of their favor falls on their adorers,
though their loves to them, make them their costly Votaries: all they sow upon
this Rock, and commit to this Cormorant, is sure to be thin come up, though
thick sown. And well it were, if such degeneracy were the botch and deformity
of men of low degree: Ingrata patria non habebis essa mea. Dictum Scipionis.
but greatness sometimes has been capable of these ingratitudes; yet the Prince
takes no president from them that are great, but not good, and have prelation
above others in body and blood, but not in mind and virtue. Therefore his
practice is to haste out of debt, to accept of what is in love presented him,
and to represent himself the owner of it: this is the first thing, the Prince's
acceleration, reddere quod recepit, cui recepit; Haec ut audivit Princeps,


Secondly, the Prince's preparatory pertness is notable; pertness, in that he
takes fire immediately upon the stroke, and kindles by his own innate candor,
and the vestal touch of his gentle mind; and preparatory, I term it, because it
was ordinated to usher in the subsequent matter, more conveniently. It was the
Preface to the Discourse, and the Porch to this Pupil-like entertainment of the
grave Chancellor. Erecto in senem vultu; he does not roughly frown, or rudely
grin, but gravely youth out his mind to his Instructor, erecto in senem vultu.
Of all the parts in man, the face we call the Marketplace, and in the face the
eye is the jewel of it. Of all the senses of man, sight is the noblest; not
only because it is the Organ even of our Clarification in Heaven, and that
which we see the face of God by, but because here in this World it is the
instrument of our Earthly Heaven, Wisdom, and Philosophy; which, in Philo's
words, have their initiation from no other thing in us, (...), etc. then from
it as the Prince of the Senses; Lib. De Abrahamo, p. 373.
therefore, though he calls it small in bulk, yet he adds, it is that organ
which views the great things of Heaven and Earth. Thus, as Phidius, to use his
words, Did out of every material, make Statues, Gold, Wood, Stone, Iron, his
Art appearing in every Figure, let the Materials be never so trite, that any
one that had artly eyes might see him the Workman: so God the great Architect
of man, though he has made him to consist of parts more and less noble; yet in
the minutest and least glorious part has he instanced his matchless power and
goodness. Alas! the face, it is but a ball of flesh, and the eye but a bubble,
which Omnipotence keeps clear and plump; yet how inexpressible is the
prevalence of these to captivate love, to search into art, nay to do actions,
second in a sort, to those of miracle and astonishment.

But I say no more of the face, for that is ipsa oris species; our Prince is
here said, erigere vultum, Lib. De Orator. ^^.3 De Oratore 12.
and that is to present his Will, quae pro motu animi, infacie ostenditur. So
Tully, Vultus qui sensus animi plerumque indicant; and Imago animi vultus est,
indices oculi; and as dejection of Countenance shows a guilt, which Cain
confirms after that fraticidial facinus, when God told him his Countenance was
fallen from his brightness to be sad: Ep. 94.
so erection of Countenance is a token of God's primaeve largess, and Nature's
innocence resting in us. Ille vultus nostros erexit in coelum, and quicquid
mirificum magnumque fecerato a suscipientibus voluit, etc. says Seneca.
Indeed, the Ancients, and men of wisdom in all Ages, have made the Countenance
the Horizontal Line, upon which the Idaea's of the Mind, and the possessions of
the Regency there, turn themselves open to a perfect view; when there is a sad
disastre, and a lugubrious uncouthness within, there will be a flag of defiance
to joy, and gentleness in the Visage; there will be ambiguus, ac consceleratus
vultus, as Horace says; Quintilians, distortus vultus, Lib. 6. c. 3. Herc. Fu^.
Ovid' s Durus, Ferinus, Terribilis, Trepidus, Tristis vultus; Seneca' s
Igneus, Tumidi and truces vultus. There will be Ovid's Countenance that covets
abdere vultus suos tenebris, Projectus and degener vultus. Tac. lib. 19.
2 De R^med. Amor. 39. Men, in these cases, will toto vultu in terram
procumbere, 14 Metam. 57. They will show, what troubles the spirit of man
hating prevarication has. And when again there is contentment, and a virtuous
habit; when all is placid, and averse to mischief: then there is on the Virgin
Visual Table, the Inscription of Decorus, Dilectus, Hilaris, ingenuus. Then
there is Ovid's Laetus and loquens nitidus vultus, and Virgil's Virgineus, and
Placidus; and Claudian's Comptus and Coruscus vultus. In short, the face and
hew of it, is an undeniable gnomon of the interns that reflect their beams of
intention, or remission, of brightness, or obsuscation, according to the nature
of them in their original: So that whereas our Chancellor expresses the Prince
as erecting his Countenance on them; he concludes him pleased within, and
evidencing of it in a conformity of looks on the visual superficies of so
composed a soul and sense; and by erecto vultu, here he means what other
Authors do by the most benign Epithites; and what Ovid, Placido vultu respice
mea munera. 2 Fastor. 4. and as one that did not addere vultum verbis only,
but praeire verba vultu amicali. He makes way for the main address of his
gratitude in the following words, sic locutus est.

Scio, Cancellarie, quod liber Deuteronomii, quem tu commemor as sacrae
Scripturae volumen est, leges quoque and Caeremoniae in eo conscriptae, etiam
sacrae sunt, a Domi^^ editae, and per Mosen promulgatae. Quare eas legere
Sanctae contemplationis dulcedo est.

These words argue the Prince both gentle of nature, and satisfied in reason
and judgment; that as by the one he accepted the counsel of age, so in the
other he owns the gratification of youth, in the firm persuasion of the
Chancellour's Arguments to be valid, and his quotations Scripture. And to make
his ingenuity more transparent, I shall first observe his Assent to the
Canonization of the Book, out of which the Scripture-counsel is taken;
Deuteronomy, that, he owns to be Sacrae Scripturae Volumen. Secondly, his
Recognization of the Laws and Ceremonies in it as sacred, because part of the
Canonique Scripture, Leges and Ceremoniae in eo conscriptae, etiam sacrae sunt.
Thirdly, his mention of the Author of them, GOD, a Domino editae. Fourthly,
his notice of the Instrument of their Promulgation, Moses, Et per Mosen
promulgatae. Fifthly, the Conclusion he subjoyns, deduced from the
preconcessions, Quare ea^ legere Sanctae contemplationis dulcedo est. These, as
the oratorious and pious Preliminaries to his weighty subsequent Reply, are
worthy notice. But yet I proceed.

Sed lex, ad cujus scientiam me invitas, humana est, ab hominibus edita and
tractans terrena: quo licet Moses ad Deuteronomii lecturam Reges Israel
astrinxerit, cum per hoc Reges alios ad consimiliter faciendum in suis legibus
concitasse, omnem effugit rationem, cum utriusque lecturae non sit eadem causa.

This Clause has the Nerves, Sinews, and Ligament of the Prince's reason in it,
and had need of athletary and masculine Arguments to resolve and repel it. No
doubt, the Law of God which Moses proposes, is that which has an (...) in it
self, and ought to have a more then moral swasion on men, nay, a divine Empire
over them, to believe, embrace, and follow the Prescript of it; the reason is,
because flesh and blood is non-plussed, and has no Rampire to raise against the
Battery of its Divinity; God does assist it with such an inseparability, that
no wit of man shall hold out siege against it; but if he be not sealed up to
the day of destruction, shall yield up his reason and prepossessions to it. No
doubt therefore, but Israel's King would hold himself concerned in a punctual
consistency to it. God, whose the spirits of Kings are, was in it, and he
dinted the edge of it, to cut through the oppositions of all argumentation
against it. And therefore it was capable to teach the fear of God in God's
method, and to the proportion of his requiry, because he fitted it to that end.
'Twas mighty, through God, to dismantle the strong Holds of Satan, and to
rescind every obstruction that adversateth that end of God. It had a mighty
Author, GOD; and a mighty Minister, Moses, and a mighty appearance with
Thunder and Lightning; and thence ought to have a mighty power with Kings, to
teach them how to rule men under God, that they and their subjects may live
with God for ever. But, Sir Chancellor, quoth he, Readiness Armor will not fit
David, nor will the Prerogatives appropriated to this one only Law, be
appliable to all, no more then the Scribes and Pharisees come up to Moses,
because they sit in Moses Chair: Moses was a man mighty in word and in deed,
his Law was written by the Finger of God; the Statutes and Appointments of it
were contrived in the Divine Mind; and no wonder, if they directed to God their
Center whence they originated: no wonder, though they taught the Kings that
were to be, what they might, and might not do, and possessed them with a fear
to do the contrary, and with a care to do their positive injunction, in
reverence to God the enjoyner, and to the injunction, as a part of his Worship.
All the scruple is, How humane Laws that are made by men, subject to like
infirmities with others: perhaps, Tyrannos, truculent, profane, per jurious.
How these so weak and wicked should arrogate the authority of God, and command
indisputable obedience to their Laws. And how Kings that are holy, pious, and
beloved, should be reasonably thought to read them, or be obliged to conform to
them; since qualis causa, talis effectus, shrewdly presumes the Laws of
violence and injurious contexture and impression like themselves. This the
Prince objects, as holding himself not so strictly obliged to peruse the Laws
of England, since they are but humane in their subject matter, and earthly in
the objects that they respect. And this concludes the second Chapter.

CHAP. III.
At Cancellarius, scio, inquit, per haec quae jam dicis (Princeps clarissime)
quant^ advertentia exhortationis meae tu ponder as qualitatem quo me non infime
concitas super inceptis nedum clarius sed and profundius quodam modo tecum
disceptare.

THese words bring in the Chancellor, acknowledging both the candor in the
Prince, and the favor of the Prince to him; which he the rather here mentions,
because good counsel, and noble Precepts, have not ever such returns from
Pupils on their Tutors. 'Twas rare counsel that Seneca gave Nero, in his Book
De Clementia, which he says he begun and continued, Vt quodammodo speculi vice
fungerer, and te tibi ostenderem perventurum ad voluptatem maximam omnium. And
yet, though it had the sublimest strains of rhetorique love, and pathetique
zeal to his aggrandization, that it might polish the roughness, and attenuate
the superbity of his nature tending him to practices, as victorious over
passion, and as obliging to subjects gratitude; as Augustus his was, whom he
brings in as justly glorying, Praestitisti, Caesar, civitatem incruentam, and
hoc quod magno animo gloriatus es, nullam te toto orb stillam cruoris humani
misisse; yet had he no other answer but death from that patricidial Monster.
But blessed be God, our Chancellor having to deal with a sweeter Nature, and
receiving from him better proofs of radicated virtue, gives him this due
Encomium in the Exordium of this Chapter. And that he does by several
Gradations. First, he salutes him as a Prince most excellent; not as great, but
good; not glittering in the Vest of Royalty, so much as in the Virtue of
Meekness and ductility; In maxima potestate haec verissima animi temperantia
and humani generis incomprehensibilis amor, Lib. 1. De Clementia, p. 624. ^. 11.
non cupiditate aliqua, non temerit^te incendi, non priorum principum exemplis
corruptum, quantum in cives suos liceat experiendo, tentare, sed hebetare aciem
imperii sui; as Seneca wrote to Nero. And then secondly, not setting light by
the grave and pithy suggestions of his experienced StateMinister, who had with
loyalty and love asserted his Rights, partaken in his misfortunes; and now for
his good, affectionately imparted himself as he was able to him. This had been
but like heady and grateless Youth, which is apt to neglect and forget great
deserts, Pettitus in leges, Atic. lib. 6, Tit. ^. p. 538.
and grave deservers, which the Attique Laws censured; as Val. Max. lib. 5. c.
3. witnesses, and which all ingenuous Natures abhorred. But in that he does
accept the counsels, and consider them, magna advertentia, intently and with a
fixation of mind, to be conducted by them, and to admit them to a regency in
him, argues him a high favourer of virtue, and one that bespeaks the
Chancellor to continue his service to him, and that not in the ordinary way of
daily astancy, and appearing at this Court; but of diligent study to consider,
and of faithful Resolution to impart, what he conceives fit for him to know and
do; yea, and to convey this to him by a method of effectuality and
perspicacity; that by delighting him with the method and pleasure of the
Congress, he may be enamoured with, and surprised by the potency of the Reason;
and thence be formed into such a composure of honor and honesty, as may for
the present make him the darling Prince; and in future, promise and perform
him, if God see fit, the renowned King of his Fathers Subjects; which, that he
may by this means come to, he proceeds to direct him as follows.

Scire igitur te volo, quod non solum Deuteronomii leges, sed and omnes leges
humanae sacrae sunt. Quo Lex sub his verbis definitur, Lex est Sanctio Sancta
jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria; sanctum enim esse oportet, quod esse
sanctum definitum est.

Here the Chancellor shows, that though the Laws of God mentioned in his Word,
and Deuteronomy as part of it, be primarily, and per se sacred, because they
immediately come a font saecro, and are the issues of explicated Divinity,
there being a kind of patefaction of God in the Wisdom and Order, (...).
Trismegist. in Pimand. 9.
the reason and necessity of them, to preserve Natural Religion, Civil Justice,
and Social Harmony; yea, and to dispose men by their economy, to glorify God,
in adoring him as Supreme, and securing his from the sacrilege of our
Insolence; and though God has implanted such Majesty in his Laws, (...), in
Min^e, p. 564.
as is not in any humane Law in the World, abstracted from it; ye^ are all Laws
which derive their force, a lege naturae (and those that do not, are no Laws,
according to that of the Schools, Sanctus Thom. Sum. prima, secunda, q. 95,
Prima secunda, q. 91. art. 2.
Nulla Lex humana habet vim legis nisi in quantum a lege naturae derivatur) and
are honest, Detrahunt leges aliquando a jure naturali, and addunt juri
natural^; nec obstat, quod ipsum jus natural est immutabile and verum, qui^
illud verum in suo genere, in certis autom capitulis mutatur, and mutetur,
quoad observantiam ipsam, tamen semper bonum, and equum est, Gloss. in Digest.
lib. 1. Tit. 1. De Jure and Justitia, p. 58.
just, possible, according to the Custom of Places and Times, advantageous to
common profit, and plain. These as regulated by the eternal Law of which they
partake, inasmuch as from it they are inclined in proprios actus and fines.
These though Humane, in regard of their Makers, and in regard of their Tether,
they respecting humane Conversation and Order, yet are sacred, and do refer to
God, as their Author and Justifier; yea, they having a respect to that which
is God's definition, Dr. and Stud. c. 19. Lib. quod Deus fit immutabilis, page
303.

Lib. De Abrahamo, p. 350.


Order and Charity, according to Philo's notion of them, (...), etc. yea, and
being nothing else but (...), The Narrative of the regular and devout Lives of
the Patriarchs, before the Law on Mount Sinai was published, there is good
reason to call and account the Laws of every Government sacred, and severely to
punish the violent and obstinate Contemners of them. Si quis adversus ^as
fecisset, s^cer alicui deorum cum familia pecuniaque esset, Livius, lib. 2.
was the Romans judgment; and Saint Paul's further, He that resists shall
receive to himself damnation, that is, shall have a sentence in his Conscience,
in praejudicium futuri judicii. That the Laws have ever been accounted in all
Nations sacred, is not only evidencible from the nature of Laws, which point
out to man his duty, both to others and himself: from whence Philo terms the
Law (...), as he does the King, (...), adding, that as it is the duty of a King
to command what is to be done, Lib. secundo De Vita Mosis, p. 654.

Lib. 1. De Legib.


and forbid what is not: so is the (...), etc. the manner and mode of doing and
not doing it, the propriety of the Law: and hence the Law (deriving its
descent, non populorum jussis, etc. not from the Peoples power, or from the
Judges judgments, but the rule of Reason and Nature. And again, Hanc
sapientissimorum fu^sse, etc. I see (says he) the Law to be the judgment of
the wisest men, not flowing barely from the conceptions of humane nature, nor
issuing from any Sect or number of men, but some thing eternal, the Wisdom that
governs all the World by commands and restraints.) Not only from this ought
the Law to have great esteem, Cic lib. 2. De Legibus.

M. Antoninus, lib. 10. c. 25.

Lib. De Mundo, c. 6.

Plutarchus, De Homero.

Plato in Minoe, p. 665.

Politic. p. 556. Ficin. Com. in 1. De Legib. p. 767. Lib. 12. De Legib. p. 997.

Aenead. 4. Lib. 3. Com. in Lib. 1. Aenead. 3. p. 226.

Reip. Gerendae. Praecepta p. 817. Lib. ad. Princ. Indoctum, p. 781. Porphyrius
in vita Pythagorae. edit. Holstenii.


but ever had amongst all Nations in all times. They called the Law (...), the
Lord of men; adding, (...), a sinner against the Law is a fugitive; and when
Craesus asked Pittacus, What was the greatest thing? (...), meaning the Laws
which were written on the Barks of Trees. Plato calls the Law, (...), the
invention of truth. Ficinus in primo leg. Platon. derives the Laws by Minos,
Lycurgus and Selon, from three Gods, Jupiter, Apollo, Minerva, Power, Clemency,
Wisdom; this argues the dignity of Laws; and Plato terms them (...), Plotinus
(...), etc. a power or faculty containing all harmony, the soul of the Body
politic; and Ficinus on him, says, Legum major est quam syderum authoritas;
and Plutarch said much of the Laws, when he wrote the Laws, (...), etc. The
Laws always gives the first place in the Common wealth to him that does just
things, and understands things profitable to Mankind. And in another place,
(...), yea, they were so exact in observing their Laws, that (...), was Gospel
with the Ancients, be their Learning and power what it would be. Pausanias
replied therefore to one that asked him, how the Laws came to be so fixed, that
no man durst endeavor their change, (...), etc. Because the Laws are Lords of
men, not men of the Laws. Hence the Laws, as (...), all men have subjected to.
Lib. De Bon. hom. libert. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1. c. 6.

Plutarchus in Solone.


The Egyptian Kings, Nil agebant propriis affectibus, sed omnia juxta legum
decreta. Alcamen refused the gifts offered him by the Messenians, Quoniam si
recepissem, inquit, cum legibus pacem habere non poteram. Pysistratus, though a
Tyrant, being accused by the Areopagitae, for violating the Laws of Solon,
submitted to the judgment of that Senate according to them. Augustus Caesar,
when he had violated the Law of Adultery, by him made, in beating the Adulterer
with his Daughter, whereas he should have delivered him over to the Law, was
displeased with himself; and when he cried out to him to forbear, because he
violated his own Law, Augustus forbore, ashamed, aequum tamen ducebat non minus
se quam alios legibus parere, Lib. 4. c. 1.
as Fulgosus words it, I might be endless in quotations of this nature; but I
refer the Readers to other places of his Commentary, where I more largely
prosecute this: Ep. 90.
concluding with that of the Moralist, Hujus opus unum, est de divinis
humanisque verum invenire, ab hac nunquam recedit justitia, pietas, religio and
omnis alius comitatus virtutum consertarism, and inter se cehaerentium, haec
docuit colere divina, humana diligere and penes Deos imperium esse, and inter
homines consortium, quod aliquandiu inviolatum mansit, antequam societatem
avaritia distraxit, etc.

Whereas then the Chancellor says, Laws are sacred, and adds, Lex est sanctio
sancta jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria; What does he but speak, what
God and Nature inspires him concerning it; for Laws being the inventa deorum,
and the universal suffrages of Nature, propagating good, and impeding evil, are
so deservedly accounted sacred, Illustres conditores legum, inventionem legum
in Deum, sed per diversa nomina atque media retulerunt, lege annumerationem
Legislatorum apud Ficmum in Argum. ante Minoe, Platon. p, 564.
as nothing can be more, because they are from the sacred being, example,
authority, and tend to a sacred issue, God's glory, and men's good. Which
considered, though the Moral Law once delivered by God be absolute, and no
dispensation by man can be allowed for the breach of it; yet is there a kind of
second power, Lege S Pettit. De Legibus Atticis, edit. Paris. 1635.
next to the positive Law of suspension, latent in the nature of man, and that
by God's permission, as it were authoritative, which may be exercised besides,
though not directly against that unalterable Law, Lib. 2. Excusationum. c 4.
Digest. lib. 1. Tit. p. 86. De Consti^. Primus.
(...), etc. Later Constitutions, that better see the defects of former, are to
be preferred before those that preceded them, says Modestinus. For else
emergent virtues would be without reward, and vices without punishment, because
they, as omissi casus, being not in the ordinary Canon; and must on that ground
be passed over, Lib. De Joseph, p. 531.
as if Magistrates were unconcerned in them. And this evil prudence, and
self-preservation, the supreme Law, next that other, obviates, and that
warrantably. Philo says Government is (...), etc. a various and prudent
adaptation of man to times. As a Sea-Master does not always steer one course,
nor put out alike Sails, but varies and alters, as the Seas and Winds, and his
Marchandizes, and men occasion; and as a Physician does not always give one
dose, but varies his prescript as the Patient changes, by intentions,
remissions, repletions, all to health: so should a Governor order his affairs,
as he sees best according to emergencies, regarding public good, and men's
profits. And this Seneca makes a most notable care of a Governor to prospect,
so that he must needs no other eyes but his own to direct him. And hence is it,
that as he proposes Laws, ad docendum, as well as imperandum, yet he improbates
Plato's long Laws, preferring short Laws soon learned, and easily remembered far
beyond them, and cries out, nihil videtur mihi frigidius, nihil ineptius quam
lex cum Prologo; yet does he suffragate to the use of additional Laws to those
that are constitutional and primaeve, according to the requiry of extraordinary
Occurrences, Budaeus in Pand. priores, p. 194. Iura constitui oportte in iis
quae (...) accidunt, non in iis quae (...), id est, iis quae plerumque
accidunt, non in iis quae nec opinato, vel praeter hominum opinionem.
which surely but for this, would be such an hiatus, as would swallow up all
Gods and Men's Constitutions. For though it may be disputable, whether the World
does senescere vigore; and many, on both sides, have variety and reason for
their adhaesions for and against it; yet is it out of doubt, that the World, in
the acceptance of it for men, the noblest part of it, do every day decrease in
virtue, and with their new fashions, new habits and diet, introduce new vices;
which, if not cautioned against by Laws, (slips cut out of the whole piece of
pristine Wisdom) all that is sacred and civil, will quickly be absorp't And
therefore as Fabius Cunctator was by the Romans called Imperii scutum, because
he taught them the way to master and ruin Hannibal by not fighting him, Lib.
1. p. 642. edit. Sylb.
and for that was called by Iornandes, prima redeuntis and reviviscentis
Imperii spes: so true subsequent Laws, woven out of the materials of
Legislative Wisdom, which the Ancients had, and we from them received the
principles in. These I say improved, are rightly termed reviviscentis
sapientiae naturalis indicia, the amputations of vice and eradicators of
pestilent annoyances, and Magistrates that carry them on to these ends
indisputably to be adored. Porphyrius, De Abstin. lib. 1. p. 6.
And therefore that King amongst the Bramins, that made the Law against the
venery of Women, by enjoining that every Wife should be burned with her
Husband, was an eternal Benefactor to the Nation whom he governed, and to the
Successions of them: For whereas their Lust satisfiable by others, Linschotten,
in his Voyages to the India's, c. 36.
better as they thought then their Husbands could, made them poison their
Husbands, to enjoy their Leachers, and so filled Families with degenerous
Broods: his Law drew them, for love of their own lives, to do nothing against,
but all things for the lives of their Husbands, that they themselves might also
live with them. And this was the break-neck of that Leachery; and so a good
instance, that even by the light of nature, there is a latent power in
Governors wisely to enact such Laws, as times, places, persons, and
occurrences shall require; and such enactions being sacred, ought as such to be
obeyed, and that upon the ground that they are sanctae, because they do sancta
jubere and honesta, and prohibere contraria, and have no name above their
nature, but answerable to their appellation, according to our Chancellour's
words, Sanctum enim esse oportet, quod esse sanctum definitum est.

This I conceive is added, to discriminate just from unjust Government: in just
Government, a just Law is the Rule, that teaches unicuique quod suum, est
tribuere, and impedes and punishes whatever is contrary to it; that makes God
and his right, men's aws, and expects their zeals to appear asserters of them;
whereas other Governments set up wickedness by a Law. Nay, are set up to be
what they are by wickedness; such a Government is that of the Turks, and was
that of the Mammalucks. Now as the Government is, so must the Laws of its
support be; for holy and righteous Laws will no better suit with unrighteous
power, and unjust manages, then old Cloth will with new in a Garment; or new
Wine with old Bottles, to use our Lord's comparison. That then, which the
Chancellor intends, is, that things ought in nature to answer their
definitions; and if Laws be defined holy from the holy Sanctions, they are
presumed to command, and the contrary to them, to forbid: Then the Laws ought
to be preserved in their account of holy, from forbearing enactions that are
diametral to honesty, and of evil report. And on this ground the Laws of
England, since Christianity, have not only eliminated foolish Laws, Plut. lib.
(...), p. 245. De his quisere a numine puniuntur, p. 550.
like those of the Argives, that Women when they coupled with their Husbands,
should put on Beards; or that of the Romans against their manumitted servants;
or that of the Lacedaemonians, (...), that is, men should not suffer their
Mustachio's to grow. Not only have the Laws of England avoided fond enactions,
but also eliminated all Ethnique Laws, and Dr^ydize Customs; yea, and the
Reformation has since refined things, which in, and under Popery, had at least
negative legality, as dispensations for Leachery; and all this upon the
Chancellour's Rule, Sanctum enim esse oportet, quod esse sanctum definitum est.
Again, Lex est sanctio sancta jubens, and prohibens contraria, is the
definition of all Authors according to truth it self; as is proved from the
forecited Authorities; Lex, not only a ligando, from the obliging nature of
it, because none are exempt from its cogency as a rule; but also lex a legendo,
quia public legatur ut omnibus notus sit. For though of late Laws have been
printed, and the Laity educated to read and practice them; yet in the elder
times, the Laws were only read and proclaimed from the authographon of their
Entry, that all might at their peril take notice of it; which was one reason, I
conceive, that Magna Charta being declaratory of the ancient Common Law which
obliged all persons, was wont to be read not only at the County Town by the
Sheriff, but also in Churches once a year at least, that all persons of what
degree soever, though they could not read, or might not, if they could read,
come safely to the sight and perusal of it, might hear to know it.

Sanctio sancta] Not consensus populi, but sanctio Principis. For, though
Plato's rule be much to favor of People in formation of Laws; yet he fixes the
sanctional power on the Prince as inseparable from him, as God's Vicar, and
under him Legislator, and so our Laws do also. For the enaction which gives
being to the Law-Statute, is the Kings; the consent of the Estates is but sine
qua non. The Divinity of the King's Unction derives a sacredness on the Law;
Subjects cooperation is but to frame them into useful methods, and to draw
them to be obeyed more willingly, because consented to by their delegates in
their passing. And to render them more probable to be just and wise, when so
many Peers, of honor and learning, Spiritual and Lay, and wise and worthy
Gentlemen, consider of, and consent to the enaction of them.

Iubens honesta and prohibens contraria. This I said was added to distinguish
between Law and Law; for it is not the outward sanction only, but the internal
virtue, and the excellency of the end and drift of Sanctions, that makes them
obligatory and cogent on men to obey them. Syntagmat. De Diis 13. p. 374.
And therefore, if a Law should be any where made like those forecited, or
like that which Lilius Giraldus, out of Herodotus, mentions among the
Babilonians, that the native women should once a year couple with forraigners,
for their recreation and content, that (as it were) they might the better bear
the company of their Husbands and Contrymen all the year after. This Law, I
suppose, being so hard and obscene, so dishonest, and so unnaturally putid,
would have no force on men and women further, then to make them suffer for
disobedience to it; for since the Laws of every Nation are to accommodate the
people of it in their way to virtue and serenity, Cic. lib. 3. De Leg. Tertio
De Legibus. Plato 9. De Legib. p. 25.
according to that of the Orator, Constat profecto ad civium salutem,
civitatumque inc^lumitatem, vitamque omnium quietam, and beatam, conditas esse
leges. That the Magistrate is a worded Law, and the Law a silent Magistrate, as
Tullie's words also are, and that his work chiefly is (...), etc. to consult
and put in execution things good, generous, and just. Considering I say this,
there is great cause to look that Laws be made as Laws ought, to the promotion
of things honest, and the impediment of immoralities. For Saint Paul, in saying
the Law is just, and holy, and good, did but point out to the natural endowment
of Law, and those three glorious Attributes of God, which the Laws emanated
from, and were regulated by.

And hence is it, that abstract these ends from Laws, and they are no remains
of God in man, but have the monstrosities of corrupted nature, and execrable
contradiction to God, in his intent and purpose of giving them to men; and
instead of being the lines of manuduction to Heaven, they are bonds of
iniquity, and conducts ^ his dishonor in Natures violation and distortion; and
some have thought the Statute of 28. H. 8. c. 7. 31 H. 8. c. 8. 32 H. 8. c. 25.
33 H. 8. c. 21. not to have been founded upon such Piety, and Justice, as Laws
ought to have been, and therefore they were soon repealed; it being a good
rule, Alteri detrahere sui commodi causa contra naturam est, and sic injustum,
(...) 6 12. De jure Belli, and (...) p. 2. lib. 1.
says Grotius out of Tully. And thereupon considering the precise rule of our
Lord's, making Justice the completion of the Law, and the Prophets, and finding
many men's actions, in administration of Law diametral to it, I cannot but bring
in here learned Budaeus his complaint, who makes some men even in their
Justicings, so far self-admirers, and self-seekers, Cum, si ad veritatis
normam, and ad simplicitatis Evangelicae praescriptum exigere jura velimus, In
Epistol. Thom. Lupseto inter Opuscula. Tho. Mori Cancel. Angl. Impress
Lovaniae, 1566.
nemo sit tam stupidus quin intelligat, nemo tam vecors quin confiteatur, si
urgeas, tam jus and fas hodie, and jam diu in sanctionibus Pontificiis, and
jus, atque aequum in legibus civilibus, and Principum placitis desidere, quam
Christi rerum humanarum conditoris instituta, ejusque discipulorum ritus ab
eorum decretis, and placitis, qui Craesi and Midae acervos, bonorum finem esse
putant, and faelicitatis cumulum, adeo si justitiam finire nun^ velis, quomodo
priscis auctoribus placuit, quae jus suum unicuique tribuat, vel nullibi illam
in publico invenias, vel (si dicere id mihi permittam) culinariam quandam
dispensatricem esse, ut fateamur necesse est, sive nunc imperitantium mores
spectes, sive civium inter se and popularium affectus. So that grave Parisian
Chancellor.

By all which it appears, that Laws are then only sacred, when they are to
purposes sacred, and enjoin what God and Nature dictates them to; when they
answer the end of their institution, and are conform to the principle whence
they actuate, which being just and good, becomes thereby accounted sacred,
because officious to man in his religious, civil, and social capacity; for,
sanctum esse oportet, quod sanctum definitum est.

Ius enim describi perhibetur, quod illud est ars boni and aequi. Cujus merito
quis Sacerdotes nos merito appellat.

Ulpianus, lib. 1. Instit. Digest. De Justitia, and jure, Tit. 1. p. 54.
This definition of the Law, ars aequi and boni, is Celsus's, and Vlpian from
him quotes it; this the gloss well explains, jus est ars. First, ut dicas
definitum jus in genere, and sic est ars, id est, scientia finita quae arctat
infinita. For art is nothing else, according to Porphyrius, but the finite
learning of things infinite. Secondly, it is called ars arcta, it is artificium
hominis, nam auctor juris est homo, justitiae Deus, that is, though God give
the rule for justice, yet man fits and disposes the method and way of its
convoy and application to men, and so it is art; and then aequi and boni, that
is, it appoints that which is aequam and utile, good and lawful in it self,
useful and beneficial to man. This the gloss.

Now this delineation of the Law of equity, which is the (...), the principle
and fountain of all good, Author incertus, De Vita Pythag. apud Photium, Bibl.
co. 269. Lib. 5. De Moribus, cap. 6.
as Antiquity terms it. It is fit, it should be further considered; the
Philosopher calls jus, (...), that evenness that intercurs the extremes;
adding, (...), etc. If Injustice be inequality, then Justice must be equality.
And he says, it consists in proportion and comparison, when both rewards and
punishments are suited exactly to the merits and demerits of men, and when
Magistrates in administration, incline neither to the right hand nor to the
left.

I know, there are learned men that criticize between jus and lex: by jus they
understand that natural obligation on man, which the Hebrews called (...), and
the Greeks (...), Jur. Belli and pacis, p. 3.
and by Lex, constituted positive Laws, which they called (...), quod justum,
ut quis accipiat ratione Scripturae aut legis aut consuetudinis. But this
learned Grotius does not approve of, but shows Ius and Lex, have a promiscuity
of use, and homonymous sense in Authors. And therefore I take Ius and Lex to
import all one; and though Gaius disjoyns them, omnes populi qui moribus and
legibus reguntur, partim suo proprio, Lib. 1. Instit. tit. 1. p. 61.
partim communi omnium hominum jure utuntur; yet there want not instances of
Lex his acceptance in good Authors, in the large sense of Ius. And so I know
our Chancellor intended it, Corvinus in Erotematibus Imperial. p. 1.
since the Laws of particular Polities, being extracts from the natural Law,
and conducing to presentation and order, deserves the definition of ars aequi
and boni.

Cujus merito, quis nos Sacerdotes appellat.
Here is a ternary of Emphasises; one, in cujus merito; another in Quis; a
third in Sacerdotes. The first refers us to the Law thus beneficial to Mankind,
as meriting from it, and having praise, as its debt, not donary. I confess, the
phrase cujus merito, though in some sense it may be opposed to cujus gratia, a
good Orators phrase; yet here it has an identity of sense with it, and lessons
us to return praise to desert, and glory to virtue. God himself accounts our
praises, a worship of him; He that offers me praise, glorifieth me: and men
are by nothing more pleased and retributed then by praise. Oh! to hear well, is
the deliciae vitae and aqua mirabilis, Lib. De Gloria. In lib. 1. Iliad Hometi.
Impress. 1538. Majoranus in proemio Eustathii Impress. Romae. 1542. 2 Lib.
Hestor.
and the aurum potabile that all brave spirits digest contentedly. M^ursius in
his Book, De Gloria, has given us a large account of the virtues of men, as
their Titles to the glory ascribed to them: and Camerarius, after he has set
forth Homer by such Eulogies as are even Hyperbolique to Rhetorique, concludes
in this superaddition, that above sixty famous men commentaried on him; and
that Eustathius, who extracted his laborious Work out of them, only is now
visible, of those many and famous Writers. And yet though near four hundred
years before Herodotus, and one thousand before ^liny he wrote, or two hundred
and seventy years after the Trojan War, according to Porphyrie; since which
there is no Author so ancient among profane ones: Yet all this Tract of time,
and variations of men, he has for his Work sake been honored. Neque tamen
magis vitam conservari, and ad juvari igni and aqua, quam omnem eruditionem
hujus poetae monumentis manifestum est, says Camerarius. Here Is a cujus
merito, with a witness, better then that of Sons and Daughters. For whereas few
men live in them many Ages; some, not an Age; the best, not to much above
twenty descents. This Homer, though blind and ignoble by Birth; yet in the
perennity of his Wit, has had praise in above twenty Centuries of years. This
is the first Emphasis facti digne memorati and descripti. Budaeus in Pandect.
priores, page 25. edit. Basil.


The second is, Emphasis personae, quis: This is not quis nescientiae, but
eminentiae, a man of name not to be triobolarly prolated. And this was Vlpian,
neither he that was a Sub-Tutor to Alexander, and Master of his Rolls, and one
of his Circuit, and itinerant Counsel: nor that other, a Tyrian born, and, for
his Learning, made the Emperor Adrian's Deputy in France, Vossius, lib. De
Scriptor Lat.
and slain in an uproar there. But our Vlpian was, Domitius Vlpian the famous
Lawyer: he is the Quis, in Budaeus his determination.

The Digest tells us, where he calls the Lawyers Sacerdotes, to wit, the first
of his Institutes; and the gloss on it gives the why he so calls them. Quia ut
Sacerdotes sacra ministrant, and conficiunt it a and nos cum leges sint
sacratissimae and ut jus unicui que tribuit sacerdos in danda paenitentia, sic
and nos in judicanda justitia.

Indeed, Mystagog. lib. 2. sect. 2. ad sinem. (...).
the Laws of old were under the custody of the Priests, as the only men of
honor and fidelity; and Cressolius gives a good reason of it, Id sapienter
machinata est divina providentia, etc. The wisdom of God, says he, in the
modelling of the Holy Tongue, has so providentially ordered it, that the same
word should signify Priest, and Prince, endowed with great Nobility; That when
the word Priest is named, the mind of man might be lifted up, and exercised
upon the thought of some excellent and truly noble person. For since the Law is
ars aequi and boni, and all Matters and men are to stand or fall by it: it is
reason, that sacred Jewel should have a sacred Servitour, and Protector, whom
neither favor or fear should be suspected to corrupt. And to preserve this
from defection, and the opprobry of it, no means being continuable more
probably effectual, then virtue of soul, Plato in Politic. p. 550.
and nobility of descent, Antiquity chose to the Priesthood persons thus
qualified. Lib. 2. Genial. c. ^.
Alexander ab Alexandro, has reported the Customs of all Nations thus to do;
and Tiraquellus, his learned Commentator, has added to him in this kind.
Diodorus Siculus confirms this, lib. 4. c. 1. and when Plato would have them
begotten in holy Marriages, Lib. 6. De Repub.
what does he but intend they should be (...), be nobly endowed with blood, and
educated, that so (...), etc. That both from their nourishment, Lib. 5. Stromat.
institution, and descent, as Clemens Alexandrinus phrases it, they may be
rendered fit for their charge.. Stobaeus, Sermon. 41.
For, according to Pythagoras, they thought (...), and that (...), that noble
note they would have upon the Priesthood, (...), says the Philosopher, Lib. 7.
Repub. p. 8.
(...) and c. 9. (...); without which to determine differences, and distribute
justice as Gods to men, Congregations of men cannot subsist, Page 436. Vol. 1.
Marsilius Ficinus on Plato's Conviv. amoris, p. 103. has told us the Office of
these Priests as Heathenly, they were venerated, (...) officia Deo amica sint,
qua ratione Deo homines amici fiant, nos deccant, qui amoris charitatisque
modus ad deum, ad patriam, ad parents, ad alios tam ad vivos quam ^d defanctos
sit adhibendus. And hence it may be the Egyptians observed for long time that
Law, Plato Politic. p. 550.
(...), etc. no King reigned but as priested. Plutarchus in quaest Romany, p.
291.
The same Law had the Greeks in some parts, as Pluta^ch confirms it.

Vlpian's appellation then of Sacerdotes, as applying it to Lawyers, was in
relation to the old Priesthood of the Jews and Heathens, who committed all
their sacra to wise and well descended men; who did not make a profession and
gain of the Law, but did rectify the peoples errors by their learned
integrity, In Pandect. p. 24.
which Budaeus, on this word of the Pandects, Edit. Basil. 1534.
thus expresses; Siquidem sanctissima res est civilis sapientia quemadmodum
autem apud antiquos Sacerdotes sui, singulis diis consecrati erant, qui de
futuris atque agendis, consulentibus responsa dabant, sic venerandi illi
jurisconsulti, omni genere literarum instructissimi, gratuitam non quastuariam
jurisprudentiam habentes, in publicum quotidie prodeuntes, unicnique civi
consulentes, se antiquo instituto praebebunt, and tanquam oracula justitiae
promebant. So he. Whereupon Athenaeus tells us, these were termed the Heroes,
and rightly too; for they were propitious to communities, and nothing studied
themselves more, then to be fitted for usefulness. But how the Chancellor
should apply this to men now a days, though Lawyers, I not well know; unless in
that sense, that they do sacra scire and docere: And if Sacerdotes they must
be, they can be only Sacerdotes brevium deorum, as Varro calls some, and
Gyraldus after him. It is true indeed, Syntag. 17. De Diis, p. 461.
learned Hopperus says as much as may be for them, when he says they were
called (...); Hopperus, De vera. Jurisprud. lib. 4. tit. 30.
and Sophoi, as Sempronius by the Romans was, because they had a concentration
of the Philosopher, the Priest, the Lawyer in them, tum quia ea scientia
praeditus est, tum quia sibi praesit ut Philosophus, Reipubl. ut
jurisconsultus, sibi and Reipubl. ut sacerdos. But as learned a man, as he,
tells us, whatever the Ancients were, and how great their deserts were; yet
though some of their Successors in time, answering them, Budaeus in Pandect.
ought to be answered in suffrage of honor from men to them; others ought not
to be; the great Parisian Chancellor is the man who reproaches some of his
Contemporaries, Disciplinarum omnium non modo ignaros, P. 14. edit. Basil, 1534.
sed etiam contemptores, (...), quasi omnem literarum elegantiam nitoremque
dicendi perosos, Doctrinis humanioribus abhorrentes, Rusticos, invenustos,
illepidos, hircosos. Thus he.

But I forbear more of this; though I think the Chancellor's Etymology will
not agree to the name, as it denominates universally the men, and is exegetical
of them; for they do not always sacra dare, nor do they ever sacra docere.
Ferdinand King of Spain knew that; for when he sent Pedrarias Viceroy into the
West Indies, Naudaeus in proemio, De studio militari.
he forbad him, Iuris consultos aut causidicos secum deducere; adding the
reason, Ne litium semina quae illis regionibus nulla erant, ab ipsis
importarentur, and pernitiosa contagione pacem illarum ac tranquilitatem
interficerent. The like is reported of the Pannonians, that when Matthias
Corvinus their King, sent for the best Civilians out of Italy to set over them,
they requested the King to send them back again, and so he did, ad lites eorum
ingeniis natas sedandum.

Nor did our Sacerdotes trulier, sacra dare, or docere, here in England; for in
H. 3 ds time William York, and Robert Lexington, pretended, as Justice
Itinerants over the Land, to reform Justice; but instead thereof, exacted great
sums of money from the Subjects for the King, contrary to the Law. So did
Thorp, 24 E. 3. Berners, E. 1. line, yea, all the Judges, except Mettingham,
and Beckingham, Qui non abierunt in consilium impiorum, 18 E. 1.) were
sentenced and executed for baseness and bribery. Gloss. p. 416. ^6 Inst.
So 11 R. 2. there was but one skip with qui solus inter impios mansit integer,
says Sir Hen. Spelman; yea, in H. 7. his time, Empson and Dudley were as
faulty as any Miscreants before them, and thereupon executed: so that the name
of Sacerdotes, as they do sacra dare and docere, in their Etymological import
is, not infallibly due to all our late jurisperiti, as to the ancient
prementioned Heroiques. Though I know many of them have, and deserve to be
remembered as brave and courageous men; especially such as Judge Hales for his
fidelity to Queen Mary, Judge Montague in Hen. 8. and Edward the Sixth his
time; yea, and before them all, many of the late Judges, Sergeants, and other
Professors of the Law, some of which yet living in great honor and dignity,
suffered for their loyalty, whatever the savageness of the late troubles, by
Fine, Imprisonment, Sequestration, and other severity, could possibly express,
to their eclipse and diminution; notwithstanding all which, their loyalty and
Consciences kept them close to the principles of Integrity, which they are now
deservedly compensated for, in the peace of their Consciences, the favor of
their Sovereign, and the love of all good men: Which is a sufficient balance
to the levities of others, as well elder as later; and gives me the just
occasion to assert a truth, to the honor of God, the King, and the Nation;
That the Laws of England, distributed by the Reverend Judges, are with more
integrity, and impartiality, accommodated to the people then in any part of the
World, Laws are: Nor is there any Nation under Heaven so void of corruption in
judgment, as England is, wherein the Judges chosen for virtue, knowledge, and
gravity, descended mostly out of Knightly Families, and endowed, for the most
part, with great Estates. Neither need, nor possibly almost can, those
circumstances considered, be suspected of favoring any thing, but Justice in
their Judgments; nor fearing any thing, but to offend God, the King, and the
Law; if otherwise then according to their Oaths they should do. And hereupon I
shall use the Psalmist's words, Blessed are the people that are in such a case,
and who do receive the Law, a Talibus Sacerdotibus.

Sacerdotes, then, in a borrowed sense, Judges and Lawyers are; but in the true
notion of Vlpian, and our Fortescue too, I suppose Laymen were not intended to
be expressed by it; for they did militiam potius quam literas administrare; but
in all parts, both of France, M. Paris. in Guliel. secundo. 2 Instit. p. 285.
on Stat. Westminster. 1. and p. 98.
Normandy, and other Nations, men in Civil Judicature were, till E. 1. his
time, Ecclesiastiques; and till then 'twas not only nullus Clericus nisi
Causidicus, but nullus Iudex nisi Clericus. And when the Judges of the Courts
of Common Law were Clergymen, they would not suffer any usurpation upon the
Common Law, says Sir Edward Cook, to their honor.

By Sacerdotes then, Vlpian, from whom our Chancellor deduces his instance,
meant the flower and prime of men, whom the Ancients expressed by names,
alluding to their employments, Syntagm. deorum 17. p. 462.
(...); the Latins, Sacerdotes, Curiones, Orgyones, and other the like, of
which Gyraldus writes; and all to show their dignity and duty, to whom the
Mysteries of Law, Justice, and Religion, to God and Man, were delegated.

Quia ut disunt Iura, leges sacrae sunt quo eas ministrantes, and docentes,
Sacerdotes aplantur.

In what sense the Laws are sacred, Oratione. Contra Aristogitonem.
I have heretofore showed, and that is as they are (...), the invention of the
Gods, and from them delivered by Wisemen, as Demosthenes his words are, as
they are so prevalent over men, that they do what is just of their own accord*
Plutarch. in laconicis Apothegmat.
without their rigor over them, as Agesilaus said, his Subjects would. And
when they have such a Reverence with the Ministers, and Dispensers of them, In
Prolog. ante lib. legum. Angl.
as Glanvil writes of in his time, tantae aequitatis, and suae celsitudinis
curia, etc. When, I say, these that do jus dicere, though not dare,)the Judges
are such) then as the Laws are holy, so do they deserve to be accounted
reverend and worthy; though not Priests, yet Priestly men, Fathers for Wisdom,
Oracles for Integrity, and Sanctuaries of every excellent thing; Pleas Crown, 4
part. p. 147.
because then they have the duos sales Sir Edward Cook mentions, necessary to
their ingrediency, Salem sapientiae ne sit insipidus, and salem Conscientiae ne
sit diabolus. And how great Jewels such men are, Cressolius has notably in his
Anthologie, p. 52, 107, ad 174. observed.

A Deo enim sunt omnes leges editae; nam cum dicat Apostolus, quod omnis potest
as a Domino Deo est; leges ab homine conditae qui ad hoc a Domino recepit
potestatem, etiam a Deo constituuntur: Dicente auctore causarum quicquid facit
causa secunda, facit and causa prima altiori, and nobiliori modo.

Which words contain an irrefragable Argument, for the sacredness of humane
Laws made by a lawful Power. For the Chancellor being to deal in a nice point,
wherein Carnal Reason, and Interests in Religion, is apt to bias beyond, and
besides the one and only mark of truth; the right fixation of which, having a
strong influence on practice, and carrying a not to be retunded Argument of
duty, to be obedient to the Laws of Powers for Conscience sake. This so
necessary to prevent Murmur and Rebellion, which first by derogation from, then
by insolency against Magistratique Power, threatens, if not enervates it, our
Chancellor backs and confirms from Scripture and Reason. From Scripture, that
of Saint Paul, Romans xiii. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
for there is no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God:
whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

This Scripture I have ever held the Magna Charta of Power, and because it has
such a pat and direct aspect on the supportation of it, Pride and Treachery
have ever discharged their witty Canon on it, to batter, or at least abate the
Obligation of it: nor were there ever more dangerous glosses, and religious
cheats, put upon the literal truth of it, then of late by some of our seduced
pretended Zealots, and their Theological Enthusiastiques. For though the
Apostle has guarded this Canon of so great concern, with all possible strength,
through which nothing but levelling fury, and Anabaptistical Treachery can
possibly break; yet have as great endeavors been made by men of more pretended
sobriety, as could well, by wit and ill will, be machinated. But this Scripture
has, and I hope, ever will hold its own with all sober Christians, as well of
these, as of the Primitive Ages; and so Saint Augustine defended it against the
Donatists, who would disobey Magistrates, upon pretense, that God was rather to
be obeyed then they; which was true, but not in their sense; and then boast,
they suffered for Conscience, Lib. De Correctione Donatistarum, c. 6. ad
Bonifac.
and so were Martyrs, I say, as he reproached them, saying, Non ergo qui
propter iniquitatem, and propter Christianae unitatis impiam divisionem, sed
qui propter justitiam persequutionem patiuntur, ii Martyrs very sunt. And
again, Potest esse impiorum similis pana, sed dissimilis est Martyrum causa. So
that diverse Orthodoxly amongst us, Dr. F^rn.
and by name, and very early, when the poison of it did but pullulate, the late
learned Bishop of Chester. So that considering, what is in the Text, and what
has been said upon it, one would wonder, what confidence of man durst own so
reasonless a Principle, as profanation of this Text, endeavors to set up to
the ruin of all Governors, and confusion of all Government. For, first, the
Apostle being to preach a Doctrine necessary for the suffering times of the
Church, under Ethnique Princes, and rigid Step-Fathers, terms them yet Powers,
and Powers ordained of God; and then knowing, men-sufferers would be tempted to
stand upon terms, when they had multitudes to back them, and so would raise a
purpresture against the Design of God in his Churches Clarification by
suffering, and on the waste, and to the nuisance of the Lords of these Earthly
Soils, publishes obedience and subjection to them. Why; they are Powers, and
higher Powers then to be coped with, or resisted by any their Subjects, while
they command things lawful and just, actively, when otherwise, passively to be
obeyed; Si contra Proconsul jubeat, Sermon. 6. De Verbis Dom secund. Matthaeum.
non-utique contemnis potestatem, sed eligis majori sevire nec huic debeat
minor irasci, si major praelata est, says the Father; yea, and as there is by
this Rule a latitude of obedience, so of persons, every soul, not one, and not
the other, but all, high, low, rich, poor, Christian, Heathen, Master, Servant.
Let every soul, says Saint Paul, hinc jam assumenda est fides tua tanquam
scutum in quo possis omnia jacula inimici extinguere, says the Father. And the
reason of Power, to be in all things, and by all persons obeyed, is ratione
ortus and authoris; it is of God, appointed and commissionated: it is of God, his
eminently; men's in Magistracy derivatively. Now this the Chancellor proving,
in behalf of Powers Constitution, extends to Powers expression. If Magistracy
be of God, and Laws be made by it, for the ends it self was constituted, then
Laws are of God, because effects of that Power which was ordained by God: so
that Scripture is an Assertor of humane Laws as from God. And Reason seconds
it, whatever the second cause does, the first cause more singularly and nobly
does: Magistrates are the second cause of Laws, and they are of God, their
first cause: therefore Laws made by them are of God; Philo. lib. 1. legis
Allegor, p. 57. Lib. De Agricultura, p. 182. Lib. quod det Potior Insidias.
Sol. p. 190.
by men his Delegates, whom he empowring, as he is (...), the soul that
enliveneth all, (...), etc. the husband and father, that begets and support
every thing, (...), the principle and fountain of original wisdom, as Philo's
words are; enables, to make wisely and exactly to see obeyed the Laws they so
make, as the Candle lightning argues the Sun, the enlighter of it much more
light, and the fountain of the Candle light; and the Earth producing food for
man, argues the Earth, the maternal cause of man so supported: so in Laws;
Seneca. Ep. 65. Haec exemplaria rerum omnium Deus intra se habet, numerosque
universorum quae agenda sunt, and modos mente complexus est; ^plenus his
figuris est quas Plato Ideas appellat immortales, immutabiles, indefatigabiles.
what Magistrates, as the second cause, do, is by, of, and from God, their
first cause. And hence is it, that the Philosopher says of God, that he is not
blessed from one good in him, (...), as he is the general nature of all. And so
far as these refer to their first cause, De Republ. lib. 7. c. 1.
God, are indispensably to be obeyed, upon penalty of that which the next verse
calls damnation, (...).

Quare Josaphat Rex Judae ait judicibus suis, judicia quae vos profertis,
judicia Dei sunt, 2 Cor. xix. and vobiscum Deus in judicio.

This is added to confirm the Preposition, for Iehosaphat was a very holy King,
2 Chro. xvii. 3, 4, 5, 6. and, by God's direction, I believe, gave this charge
to his Judges; the intent whereof was not so much to incline them to care and
integrity, from fear of his severity, and ill resentment of their miscarriage;
but from consideration that they were quae Dei sunt acturi; yet the judgments
they passed, were vice Dei: therefore they should do as God would, were he
himself on the Bench; Judge righteously, (...), says the Septuagint, that is,
ye are temporary Gods, and are such as have reputed infallibility. Take heed,
do nothing rashly, nothing contrary to evidence, nothing for favor, King James
in his Speech, 1616.
fear, or wrath. Remember Kings are properly Judges, and Judgments properly
belong to them from God; and when Kings depute Judges to bear part of the
subalter^ Burden of Government, they are taken into a near conjunction with
Kings; for the same conjunction that is between God and the King upward, is
between the King his Judge, downward, said our once English Solomon of famous
memory.

This Scripture puts a great dignity on Judges, and calls for a great
circumspection in their duty to God and the People they sit upon: For though it
was primarily and personally spoken to Iehosaphat's Judges, who judged by the
Mosaique Law; yet inasmuch as the words are, that God is with them, (...), all
Judges that have (...), are within in it, one way or other, and there is a duty
on, and a reverence to them, by virtue of this Scripture. And this wise Princes
apprehending, constitute the best of Lawyer^, both for Learning and Integrity,
Judges, such as Pomponius mentions, Servius Sulpitius, In Pandect. fo. 2. edit.
Basil, 1521.
neque enim magis ille juris consultus quam justitiae fuit, itaque quae
proficiscebantur a legibus, and a jure civili, semper ad facilitatem,
aequitatemque referebat, neque constituere litium actiones malebat quam
controversi as tollere, says Budaeus. And such as Caius Aquilius, Ita justus
and bonus vir fuit, ( Cicero writes of him) ut natura non disciplina consultus
fuisse videatur: ita peritus, and prudens, ut ex jure civili non scientia
solum, verum etiam bonitas nata esse videatur. Fond Judges are to be taught
their notes, as Nightingales are by their Mothers, and to make Music as they
do, (...), etc. Not for favor, or affection; nor for reward, or advantage, but
for pure Justice sake, Plutarchus, lib. De Solertia animalium. p. 97^.
and in obedience to God, their King, and the Laws. For the Laws are regulae
permanentes, non nutantes: and as they punish bribery, and passion, as in the
forementioned Examples is made out; so have they punished easiness, and unjust
lenity, as a blemish to Justice, and an usurpation upon her. Justice Ingham
paid in E. the First his time, eight hundred pounds for a Fine spent on
building the Clock-house at Westminster, for razing a Roll in an Action of Debt
recovered against a very poor man, and making the thirteen shillings four pence
thereupon entered, Sir Edw. Cook, 4 part Instit. Pleas Crown, p. 72.
six shillings eight pence; which Justice Southcot in Queen Elizabeth's time,
remembered Catelyn, the Chief Justice of. For when Catelyn would have expressed
such a like mercy to a poor Wretch, Southcot denied assent to it, saying, He
meant not to build a Clock-house.

Ex quibus ^rudiris, quod leges licet humanas addiscere, est addiscere leges
sacras, and editiones dei, quo earum studium non vacat a dulcedine
consolationis sanctae.

This is a good inference, and carries a great Argument to the study of humane
Laws, that they are, in a sense, God's Laws, because made by God's Power, and
to God's end, order, and justice; and therefore as study of Gods the primaeve
and original Law, whether Natural, National, or Mosaique, is the best adjument
to the understanding of those humane Laws, which are formed from them: so the
comfort, delight, and benefit, which men have by the one in such degrees,
reflects on the study of the other, as makes an ample compensation for the time
expended about, and impended on them. For though in the Laws of nature and men,
there is mysterious abstrusity, which toils and troubles the Learners brain, in
perscrutating and understanding them; the effects whereof are visible in the
morosity and separation of their Students, from the pleasures of conversation
and diversion; yet are the events and issues in comprehension of them to such
degrees, as are consectaries and rewards of double diligence, very grateful,
and perceptively congenial to the expectation of those excellent minds, who
after busy disquisition into them, reap dulcedinem consolationis sanctae.
There may God be seen in all his emanations and bounties to man, in the Work of
the World, in the harmony and consent of Creatures, in a natural Worship of
God, Quae cum se disposuit and partibus suis consensit, and ut ita dicam
continuit, summum, bonum ^eligit nihil enim pravi, nihil lubrici superest,
nihil, in quo arietet, aut labet, omnia fa^iet ex imperio suo, uthilque
inopinatum accidet, sed quicquid agit, in bonum exibit facile, and parate and
sine tergiveratione agentis. Senec. lib. De Vita Beata, p. 654.
and a noble conservation of themselves, in the various expressions of virtues
and vices, according to the differences of Climates and Tropicks, under which
Nations are, and the accidents of their Changes, Subversions, Discoveries, and
Laws, in the prevalencies of Interests, which hurry up and down, sublevate and
depress persons and things, as they are acted by the Furies and Concerns of
their Entrigo's and Composures. These, and such like particulars, learned by
study of the Laws of Nature, Nations, and Countries, do so enrich and fortify
the mind against penury and ignorance, which the divinity of it abhors; that
truly it is not possible to be a stranger to God, the chief good, and to be
ignorant of the wisdom that is above, while we study that, which is revealed of
that wisdom, in these several things, Nature. Quaest. lib. 3. p. ^67.
and in the traditions of them to us. Hence the M^ralist lays down a notable
Rule for the chief thing, a Wiseman is to propose, Erigere animum supra minas
and promissa fortunae, nihil dignum putare quod speres, quid enim habet dignum
quod concupiscas, qui a divinorum contemplatione quoties ad humana recederis,
non aliter caligabit, quam quorum oculi in densam umbram ex claro sole redi^re.
Now this attained, and a man so rarefied and abstracted from vulgar
feculencies, how can this, effected by study of the Laws of men, be less then
dulcedo consolationis; not that dulcedo consolationis is bound up in them, qua
such; for so they do merum corticem hominis tangere, as they are humane, and
have man for their scope and circumference, since in his capacity they amount
to vanity and vexation of spirit. But as they are Directions and Manuducts to
God, to whose wisdom and power all these are subject, and in whom they are what
they are, and as they enable the mind to understand it self, designed to serve
its principal, and by every exotique advantage, to be improved to its
principals, glory, and dignity; so the knowledge of them affords dulcedinem
consolationis.

Nec tamen, ut tu conjicis dulcedo hujusmodi causa fuit; cur Moses, Reges
Israel, Deuteronomium legere praeciperat; nam causa haec, non plus Reges quam
plebeios ad ejus lecturam provocat, nec plus Deuteronomii librum quam alios
Pentateuchi libros legere, pulsat causa ista.

Here our Text-Master prevents the mistake of Moses his intent in this
Prescript to the Israelitish Kings, that Deuteronomy is referred to, because
it, in the matter of it, or in the intent of God, relates to the pleasure of a
King more then other men. For God and Moses in it takes no notice of this; it is
an Argument which, by the bye, has a superaddition comes in, like that (...),
our Lord mentioned, Matthew. vi. 33. that which God and Moses from him commends
in Deuteronomy to the King, is the utile dulci associatum and conjunctum, the
holiness, the justice, the conformity to God, which a holy and divine soul
counts its chief comfort, and that peculiar erudition in the method of
Kinglyness, which from that Book Entry is perspicuous and knowable. For though
all the parts of Scripture are full of Instructions, and savoury Precepts,
directive to man in the latitude of his duty, and holy meditation will, by an
effectual Chimistry, drain from them spiritual succulency: yet none are so
fitted to a King, as those parts of it which treat of Kingly matters; These
words, in season, have the beauty of Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; all
parts alike, all parts of them beauteous. And therefore 'twas not the sweetness
of meditation, nor the particular affection that Moses had to this Book, as his
Joseph, that made him specially refer his love and direction of the Prince
thereto: but quia in Deuteronomio, plus quam in aliis libris veteris Testamenti
leges inferuntur quibus Rex Israel populum regere obnoxious est, ejusdem
mandati circumstantiae manifest nos informant, that is, as I said before;
because in Deuteronomy, as the second thoughts of Moses, the Laws formerly
delivered but in part, and, as it were, confusedly, as the emergent occasions
produced them, S^e^onius in Claudio, c. 14.
is completed and digested into a fit and formal method. And the Prince that
follows them, will know how duritiam multarum legum ex aequo and bono moderare;
for as it follows, Quo and te princeps cadem causa non minus quam Reges Israel
exhortatur, utlegum quibus populum in futurum Reges, tu sis solus indagator,
nam quod Regi Israel dictum est, omni Regi populi videntis deum Typice dictum
fuisse intelligendum est.



Still there is a perfect coherence in our Text, every thing ushers in its
fellow, every antecedent word its subsequent, and that upon a reason of order;
for in that Moses did not write this Law as a Prescript of Israel's Kings, and
determined the direction to them, in the line of their order, and succession of
their Government; but made it morally typical of all Governors, and
Governments, who thence should take pattern. Our Chancellor tells the Prince,
the direction of the Law in Deuteronomy, will reach him, as well as the Kings
of Israel; and that God having given the Law as a Counsel and Prescript to all
Kings, will require the breach or neglect of it from all Kings, as well others,
as Isreal's. Indeed, some things there were delivered to the Jews, which were
appropriate to them, and determined with their Economy, the Rites of their
Priesthood, the Judicials of their Civil Government, was literally limited to
them, though there was some fiber and string, as it were, of moral duration and
influence in them also: but for things that relate to conversation with God,
men, and ones self; that, being moral in its nature, was adapted to the Jews as
prior in time to us: but not more obliged by the bond, or privileged by the
franchise of it then others their Successors. And therefore as our Lord
renewes the Precepts of old by his Gospel mentioned Matthew. v. and Saint Paul
says, What is written, was written for our instruction. So may I say, in this
case of the King, as referred to Deuteronomy, God intended the direction there
to all Successors to the first Kings in their Kingship, and to such
enlargements of Governments, as time should discover, and power and prudence
erect; and having done this, the counsel or command there reaches all in their
duty to understand, attend, and obey it. And therefore the Chancellor proceeds.

Autunc non convenienter utilit erque proposui tibi mandatum regibus Israelis
latum de eorum lege addiscenda, dum nedum ejus exemplum, sed and ejus
authoritas figuralis te erudivit, and obligavit ad consimiliter faciendum de
legibus regni quod annuente domino haereditaturus es.

This the Chancellor concludes with as a reddition of the premises, with an
appeal to his reason, for justification of his service to the Prince's
accomplishment therein; no vain ayrie Romance, no nugatory delight, no sordid
mendication is preferred by our Chancellor; those would weaken, not fortify,
the Prince's mind; and beweed, not cultivate it to an artly trimness; that
which he promotes, is apparently worthy. It Is the Law of God, Nature, Nations,
and what is as becoming him, to observe as any of these, because these all
brought into, and become the Law of his Government. Now this so ancient, exact,
approved, idoneous esteemed, as he conveniently, so profitably presenting to
him, was a good office, without all doubt or peradventure: many things,
experience tells us, are convenient, but not profitable, (if profit be
calculated according to the common notion) many things are profitable, but not
convenient: but this being profitable for the nature, and convenient for the
season, deserves to derive an honor on the giver, and oblige the receiver to a
gratitude. And with this he ends his third Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Non solum ut deum timeas, quo and sapieus eris, princeps colendissime, vocant
te leges cum Propheta disente, venite filii, audite me, timorem domini docebo
vos; sed etiam ut faelicitatem, beatudinemque (prout in hac vita nancisci
poteris) ipsae leges ad earum disciplinatum te invitant.

HEre the Chancellor prosecutes his precedent Argument for the Laws, by
showing, that the Laws of Government, (...), Theolog. apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 210.
p. 703.
and especially those of England, the marrow of all the forementioned Laws, do
not only instruct Princes in the way of Religion to God, and of Justice to
men; but also of self-conservancy, by a well-ordered virtue, and a
through-paced prudence, to attain temporal felicity of state and mind. And the
better to possess the Prince with the opinion, that this the Law does, he
engages him to the belief and trial of them by these gradations.

First, in that he complements him, as Princeps colendissimus, he does bespeak
him to love and follow the Law as that was has all the learning of right
living, and just governing in it, De Nature. Deorum. Cic. post r^di^um.
and that which makes men submit willingly to, and venture resolutely for him,
men being apt pie sanectque colere naturam excellentem and prastantem, as Tully
has it, and memoriam beneficii colere memoria sempeterna, as the same Orator:
For though nobilissimus, and clarissimus, may make men dreaded and awed; yet
colendissimus supposes a virtue, which seises on the Reason of man, and aws his
Conscience, and thence works a divine veneration, performed to a Prince, as a
mortal God, whom Religion commands to honor, because good, just, merciful, as
well as because great, terrible, and not to be resisted.

Secondly, in that he proposes the Laws of Government, as founded upon the Law
of God, Nature, and Nations, to be prescriptive of all virtue, accumulated in
the fear of God, the beginning of wisdom, and applies that Text, which King
David spoke as a Prophet to the Law, as hers, in his mouth; Come my Children,
hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Words of weight and
wisdom, like those the Moralist calls for, Ep. 75. Senec.
Non mehercules jejuna esse and arida volo quae de rebus tam magnis dicentur,
neque enim Philosophia ingenium renunciat: for the Psalmist is no dry bone,
that lives not in pathetiques, without a miracle; his words here do not so much
se, ut res ostendere, but when others are oratorious to no purpose, but to
enchant and seduce, to cog and overreach their Auditors, by the lurch of their
own credulity, his animi negotium agitur, non quarit ager medicum eloquentem
sed sanantem, as the same Moralist goes on: and therefore these words that he
transplants to so good purpose, are much to be heeded, since they propose the
counsel, command, and practice of a prophetique divine King, to the Prince,
that the Chancellor supposes God has appointed, and the men of England ought
in due time to have accepted their King, and as such to have valued him.

Thirdly, in that he works upon passions of love and desire, which the Prince,
as man, and young, might have eager set on felicity and blessedness, as
attainable by this fear of God, wrought in him by the Law. This is to decorate,
and introduce the Law into his love, by that lata porta, which is august, and
by an entertainment of amplitude. Indeed, the Chancellor herein seems more
happy, Ep. 5^.
then Seneca thought himself, when he was discoursing of Plato, Mill res
inciderunt, cum forte de Platone loqueremur, quae nomina desiderarent nec
haberent; for whereas that Rhetorician had an excellent person to speak of, but
by exility of words failed in a reddition of him commensurate to his merit, and
his mentioners intendment and ambition, to evidence, our Text-Master, as
writing of a better subject, the Laws, then he did of a Plato, who was but a
man, passant through the Zodiaque of mutability and infirmity, neither wants
words to wast his matter in, nor matter to ballast and carry his Reason to his
Readers persuasion; but having temperamentum ad pondus, produces it to a very
serious and savoury purpose, telling him, that though life was short, and
felicity in, and beatitude after this life, was the instigation and reward of
all Endeavors in Kings and Commoners, (...), Plut. Lib. De Pythiae Oraculis,
p. 401.
etc. that Princes must devote to God Altars of Justice, Temperance,
Magnani^ty, (...), not of Gold and Silver, but of Virtue, which they rather
accept. Yet this so truly the Mistress and Minion of all persons perfections,
and persuasions, was lodged in, and acquired by the irritation and irradiation
of the Laws. For in that the Laws have the precepts of virtue practiced, and
vice abhorred, and in that, serenity of soul, and success in affairs
associates, and fame and heroique Canonization succeeds their practical
punctuality, what can be more truly asserted, nor more really assured a
sequacious and virtuous Prince, then that he living according to the Laws,
shall be made an amor and deliciae humani generis by them, and attain an
Elysium, not fictive, Lib. 6. Benef. p. 117.
but real, his hearts wish, not the multa vota quae sibi fateri pudet, as
Seneca expresses it, but the pauca quae facere coram test possimus. Such
desires he may obtain of God, by such a demeanor of, and conforming himself to
the Laws, as Solomon had granted, when he wisely asked it, a wise and
understanding heart; such as Hezekiah prayed for, Let there be peace and truth
in my days; ad hunc disciplinatum te leges invitant, says our Text.

Philosophi namque omnes, qui de felicitate tam vary disputabant, in hoc uno
convenerunt, viz. quod felicitas sive beatitudo, finis est omnis humani
appetitus.

This is brought in to complete the Laws to the purpose of putting the Prince
in possibility, and possession of felicity and beatitude, by following the
direction of the Laws: for they do not make a man guess, and look upon them by
rote, as we say, (...), etc. All men may as well do this as wise men,
Metaphysic. L^^. 1. c. 2.
says Aristotle; but give a man an exact and perfect view of, and direction to,
yea an inheritance in them. For as the mind makes the man in whom it resides,
Lib. 10. De Motibus. c. ^.
(...), as the same Philosopher lays down the position: so the Laws score out
the features of beatitude and felicity, for those are consistent only with
Virtue, and Justice, which they also specify. The Philosophers therefore who
were the ancient Nomothetae among the Greeks, acknowledged the sum of all the
wisdom revealed by the Numina, and acquirable by men, to consist in felicity
and blessedness, the adequate end of virtue, beyond which no man could, no man
did ever wish; and though Seneca condemns them, as all other things, under that
seeming hard sentence, Tota rerum natura umbra est aut inanis aut fallax: yet
in his 89. Ep. 8^.
Epistle, as he recites the various opinions and definitions of Philosophy, and
Philosophers; so does he conclude, Stude, non ut plus aliquid scias, sed ut
melius. And this to follow him in, there are two things that are to be touched
upon in this Clause; the persons produced, the actions they are reported to do
their Conclusion; Philosophers are the men, Disputation concerning felicity and
beatitude, their recreation and employment; fixation of their consistency in
virtue, that their consent and agreement.

Philosophi, these were not only lovers of Wisdom, but men, pene divini,
compared to others, Lysis. p. 506.
(...), omni-scient, as Theodor. in Plato asserts; and Socrates confirms
divine; In Sophista. p. 153.
The ground of Philosopy being admiration, (...), as it follows. In Theaetet.
p. 115.
Philosophers must needs be admired, as the only men of profundity and miracle
that were almost not understood by men, but thought Gods in the likeness of
men. And hence Ficinus makes Plato in all his works, Argum. in Repub. lib. 3.
p. 609.
proposing nothing so requisite to a Philosopher, Quam copulam ex fortitudine
pariter temperantiaque conflatam, ut per illum alta petantur, per hanc non
spernentur humilia, and utrimque nihil unquam nimis aut audeas, aut metuas.
Plotinus makes a Philosopher so complete, that he is not conversant with any
speculation beneath, Aenead. 1. lib. 3. p. 21, 22.
(...), etc. A CraftsMaster in the cause and being of them, which he calls,
(...). Plutarch accounts them so exact, that he enjoins the young man that is
but saluted such, to be careful to avoid all indecency, least the jest of
Menedemus be applied to them, That they came to Athens to School wise; after
became Philosophers; further Proficients then Orators, Lib. De Profectu virtut
p. 81.
able to utter their Conceptions with applause. (...), at last rude, Lib. De
Socrat. genio, p. 561.
and utterly vain, swollen with arrogance and pride, which was no fruit of
Philosophy, but the errors of them the Philosophers, since Philosophy taught,
(...), etc. every thing that is good, and necessary concerning the Gods. Yea,
(...). Philostr. in vita Apollonii, c. 12. p. 92.
he commends Socrates, as grave and good speaking from a right judgment of the
causes and natures of things. Philostratus tells us the Indians did much honor
to Philosophers, and tried them severely before they approved them for such;
and the Philosopher, in making a Philosopher to enquire, Topic. lib. 1. c. 14.
p. 119.
(...), What does he less, then make it Divinity, and the practicer of it
divine. So that whatever was possible to be beloved, and admired in man, being
concluded in them, we may well fix them for men of remarque; and as such, 1 De
Oratore. Budzus in Pan. dect. priores. p. 13.
record in our minds their memories, for so the Orator characterizes
Philosophers worthy, Is qui studeat omnium rerum divinarum and humanarum vim,
naturam, causasque nosse, and omnem been vivendi rationem tenere and persequi,
nomine hoc appelletur.

The Disputation is next, many men of many minds, and all men so far in love
with their own shadow, that they, from different apprehensions, proceed to
different determinations, and so to oppositions, heats, and civil Wars, which
fill the World with Contests, and Hurries; and, in the end, looses Science in
passion, and Reason in opposition.

Aristotle, he makes felicity to consist in such a satiation, as arises from
the presence of some useful virtues, Rhetotic. lib. 1. c. 6. Lib. 1. D^ Mo^ib.
c. 5.
righteousness, courage, wisdom, etc. joining with them corporal goods, as
health, strength, which some call, bona viae; but beatitude he terms (...),
etc. the greatest of goods, the perfection of acquirements, the end of action;
bonum patriae, as Divines call it: yet the same Philosopher says, that learned
and wise men have digladiated about it, and counts the rehearsal of their
varieties, Lib. 1. De Morib. c. 2.
altogether useless; yet he says, (...), etc. Well to live, and well to do, is
to be blessed. Alexand. ab Alex, gives a large account, that Philosophers
thought all bliss consisted in otio and quiet; Genial. lib. 4. c. 14. cum
notis Tiraequelli.
and surely, if all action be to rest, and rest be cessation from labor, and
that be felicity or beatitude, as our Chancellor confuses them; then our
Chancellor, and the Philosopher, lib. 10. De Morib. c. 7. are at an accord:
And though they do logomachize, to try mastery of words and wit; and thereby to
beat out discovery to greater perfection, and to spin a finer thread of art, and
give it a renovation of beauty and delight; yet are they confederate in the
main, and do not vary in the definition of the nature, but the wording of their
apprehension: for they make not felicity or beatitude, to reside in sensuality,
or visceration, in violence or depredation, in morosity or sullen
incommunicableness; but in that assimilation of nature, to the chief good, and
prime cause, God; and to those figures of his immaculate, unalterable, and
influential good, which he has communicated to excellent Creatures, and by
which they are rendered, esteemed, and unvulgar. And this I take to be the
sense of our Chancellor, in making Felicity and Beatitude tant amounts, not
that they in Logical acceptations, or in Critical examinations, are exactly the
same; for though they mostly agree, yet are they unlike enough, to admit a
discrimination; but because the main ingredients to their perfection are the
same, and the reward of both one, as to what we apprehend, the same virtue
being the via recta to bliss, the finis itineris. And hereupon those learned
men, that did disceptare de modo, disagreeing in the collateral, and less
material circumstances, coincided in the upshot, which is their determination,
quod finis est omnis humani appetitus. And their conclusion is, that beatitude
and felicity is the end of all man's desire; of his desire, as rational; not
only (...), Lib. De Congres. q^et. erudit gratia, p. 435.
a meditation of wisdom, as Philo calls it; but a wisdom, which is (...), etc.
as he enlarges, and carries a man to such a mastery of himself, and such a
magnification of his Mistress nature, and her and his Maker God, as puts us upon
desiring him as our chief good, and every thing as our happiness, in order to,
and our beatitude with, and in fruition of him; for, as the same Philo
observes, no receptacle can be fit for God, Lib. De his Verbis resipuit Noe, p.
282. Seneca, De Beata vita. p. 653. Epist. 66.
(...), etc. but the soul that is purged and prepared to receive him, the best
good. And therefore the supreme good, take it as Moralists denominate it,
animus fortuita despiciens, virtute laetans, ant invicta vis animi perita
rerum, placida in actu cum humanitate multa, and conversantium cura; or, summum
bonum quod honestum est. Ep. 71. Ex naturae voluntate se gerere, perfectus
status in quo quis summum voti sui invenit. Take it for such a Resolution, as
makes a man a free man, though in Phalaris his Brazen Bull: yet all this, if it
could be separate from virtue, were nothing; Quis sit summi boni losus, Senec.
Ep. 87.
animus, hic nisi purus and sanctus deum non capit. Alas! alas! they are but
refracted, and minute determinations of the chief good that Philosophers make;
They are strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and ignorant of the
Covenant of grace, and without God in the world of their fancy and opination.
Their wits are a wool-gathering, they seek living light in the dismal and
tenebrious Caves of their obcecated mind, where the true light is not; all the
good they can reach to, is, (...), In Epictet. lib. 3. c. 7.
as Arrianus says, to live according to Natures norm and discovery: nay, though
Porphyry be the director to seek good, (...), etc. in conjunction with the
Author of it, the soul. Though therefore they agree, the desires are carried
to beatitude and felicity; yet in that they specify it so different from the
truth of its being, they confer little to satisfaction: nor have they at all
satiated in their discourses of Philosophy about these, and other points, the
World in any age; though they have been the Patriarchs of Heresies, and
illaqueated many in snares of ill belief, Philosophi, Patriarcha Haereticorum,
E^^ clesia puritatem perversa maculavere doctrina Sanctus Hieronim. ad
Cresiphontem adu. Pelagianos.
and suffurated time and parts from other matters, (more Books being writ of
Philosopy, and Philosophers, then of any Science whatsoever,) as is evident in
Fabian Iustinian's Index, and in other Bibliotheckes. For there have none of
the great Sects of them agreed, but been, if not diametral, yet diverse from one
another. For while the Peripatetiques, Aristotelians, or walking Philosophers,
Cic. 1 Acad. c. 24 3 Tuscul.
then which sort of men, Tully says, Nihil est uberius, nihil eruditius, nihil
gravius, determined felicity, or beatitude in virtue. The Stoiques, or
Zenonists, whom their Master taught in a Porch, called in Greek, (...), and
thence are named Stoiques, though they do re concinere, 1 De Not. deo. rum.
yet verbis do discrepare, as Tullie's words are, with the Peripatetiques; for
their Beatitude is in honesty. From both these, Epicurus his followers with him
differ; for these either determined it to reside in pleasure, as reflecting on
the Garden where Epicurus is said first to principle his Clients, according to
Demetrius Magnesius his account of their Institution; or in exemption from
sorrow, and a vacuity from all passion, and the felicity of it. Now, though I
say all these, ore tenus, did differ; yet in the upshot and conclusion, they
coincided: for the Stoiques honestly, and the Epicureans pleasure, is butlin
other words, the Peripatetiques virtue, since the one and other abstracted from
virtue, as the mean and rule of them are but vana and exilia nihila; Senec.
Lib. De Beata Vita, p. 653. De Vita Pythagorae, p. 198, 199. Holstein Interp.
and so Epicurus himself is quoted by our Chancellor. To conclude, nihil esse
voluptuosum sine virture; and so Forphyrius limiteth beatitude and felicity,
(...), etc. not to be fascinating and venereous pleasure that inchants the
mind, but grave and serious pleasure, which consists in pureness of virtue:
(...), etc. exercising it self in just, good, and necessary actions of life.
And therefore Philiscus in Dion, miscalculated Beatitude, while he made it to
be in a sound body, and an avoidance of cares, which whoever enjoys, (...),
etc. has the fruit of all felicity. This, I say, is not rightly accented,
Dionis Hist. Lib. 38. Cicero Exal. p. 71.
because it terminated felicity to a self-fruition, and not to any thing
without, and above it, which Porphyry rightly called conjuction, which its
Author, and the Scriptures, make to be in the knowledge of God. This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ,
and in the enjoyment of God in grace and glory. Blessed is the man, to whom the
Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile. There is God
enjoyed by his potent presence in the soul, chasing away all corruption
inconsistent with him, and refining the soul from the impurity of its lees and
dregs. And they shall be with me, that where I am, there shall they be also,
which is the promise of Christ to his, as their compensation and beatitude;
which is the fruition of them in glory. For so said the Spirit, Blessed are the
dead, that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them.

Vnde sectae illae, ut dicit Leonardus Aretinus, in hoc concordaverunt, quod
sola virtus est quae felicitatem operatur.

This Author, In Fasciculo rerum expetendarum and fugiendarum, so. 154.
Draudius Bibliothec. Class. p. 1041, 1087, 1095, 1116, 1117, 1251, 1366.
Leonardus Aretinus, is not that Florentine, which Poggius so acclamates, in
the Epistle he writes to him about Ierom of Prague, but one of the same name
and kindred much elder: Posseuine, and Gesner, make no mention of this Author;
but Draudius does to his infinite advantage, making him the Author of many
excellent Books; amongst which, this Isagoge here quoted, containing ten Books
on Aristotle ad Nichomach is not the least worthy. It was, I suppose, a
Manuscript in our Text-Master his time; but about 1607. it was printed at Iean.
And it is a notable Discourse of Moral Philosophy, that part of Philosophy that
concerns the manners of men. Epist. 121^
Now though that of Seneca be true, Non quicquid morale est, bonos mores facit;
yet may they be called Morals, Notis in loc^^.
quae si non aperte and statim flexu, vel subsidio aliquo ad bonos mores
ducunt, says Lipsius. And of this nature are Morals in Philosophy, because
they do componere animum, as natural Philosophy does search into causes of
things, and rational Philosophy discuss the propriety of words, and structure
of Arguments. Seneca in his 89. Epistle, gives us a large account of
Philosophy, and the contrariancy of Philosophers one to another, in stating and
dissecting Philosophy: yet his conclusion is, causae rerum ex naturali part
sunt, argumenta ex rationali, actiones ex morali: so that Aretine writing of
the moral part of Philosophy, had unavoidably to do; which felicity, and
beatitude, as the end of all man's desire and tendency, in the practice of
virtue. And that which he is quoted for, Est autem secta disciplinae certa
quaedam disciplinae formula, factio, studium, ratio vitae. Cic. 1 De Orator.
Secta and ratio vita. Cic pro Caelio.
as coagulating all the Sects of Philosophers, (and Sects denoted habitus
animorum and instituta Philosophica circa Disciplinam, that is, additions to a
particular profession, according to the reverence men have of him that
institutes, and as chief in it professes it) all these Sects, I say, he
amassing, as it were, into one term of expression, declares them to own virtue
alone, the means to attain felicity; that is, in other words, no felicity is
enjoyable by man, but in a state of reduction of nature to its primaeve purity,
and in a subserviency to its Maker, in all those actions wherein his pleasure
is notified: which Seneca words more elegantly to my sense then ordinarily; Vt
quanti quidque sit, judices, that we rightly understand what everything is; Vt
impetum ad illa sapias ordinatum, temperatu^mque, that is, that we love and
hate, use and not use it, according as it is auxiliary, or obstructive to our
end, in pleasing God and our selves. Vt inter impetum tuum actionemque
conveniat, ut in omnibus istis tibi ipsi consentias, that is, that in the rise
to, and action of our virtue, we do nothing but what is rational and
proportionable to our being, who are made after the Image of God on our
reasonable soul. Laertius, p. 795. edit. Colon. 1616. Laertius in Epicuro, p.
791. edit. Colon. 1616. Gassendus Aethicae, Lib. 1. De Faelic.
This is truly to be happy, to be what we ought, and only such; all other
felicity is but nominal, (...), weak remiss felicity, but a Badgers footed
felicity, halting before the best friend it has to commend it; for so Epicurus
concludes, (...), etc. all virtue consists in pleasure, and to live
delightfully, is to be happy.

So that all Sects of Learning and Wisdom, though diversely denominated, as
those from the place of their birth, or first appearing; as the Elienses,
Megarenses, Eretrici, Cyrenaici; or of their teaching and Institutor's School,
as the Academiques, and Stoiques; or from guises and accidents, as the
Peripatetiques; or from reproaches, as the Cyniques; or from effects, as the
Endemonici; or from their height and pride, as the (...): From the nature of
their Writings, and names of their Masters, as the Socratists, In Proemio.
and Epicureans. These, and all other Sects of them recited by Laertius, yet do
all make up an harmonious suffrage, that virtue only operates felicity. And
this Aretine assenting to, and corroborating, is here quoted by our Author, in
the following words.

Quo and Philosephus, 7 Politic. felicitatem definiens dicit, quod ipsa est
perfectus usus virtutum.

1 De Morib. c. 11.
This definition of Aristotle, is the same with what he says otherwhere; for
discoursing of felicity, and aggravating the glory and luster of it, he says it
is termed by some (...); by others (...). This, or that excellent endowment, as
Prudence, Wisdom, Beauty, Strength, Riches, Friends, which were but slips from,
and diminutives of it; but he concludes it, (...), that it was a concentration
of them all in their end, (...) 5 Metaphys. c. 16. p. 196.
and noblest resolution, and an arrival at that which was the meta ultima,
ultra quod non: And hereupon he concludes it, (...), the perfect enjoyment of
the end, and that perfectly. Now in that he calls felicity the perfect use of
virtue, he means, that virtue is the means to it, and then is perfect, when it
has its end for which it was designed, and to which end it is the vehiculation:
So that felicity being the perfect use of virtue, argues its end in that
endless beatitude, which we living having not, cannot be properly said to have
the perfect use of virtue; yet comparatively we may, as we are laid by others,
who are less virtuous; and so Heathens that know not God, lodging Beatitude in
these inferior accomplishments, to any remarkable degree obtained, above the
vulgar account, that perfects virtue which is by them expressed. So the
Philopher calls that perfect, (...); 5 Metaphys. c. 16. p. 896. Virtus proprie
dicta est habitus constituens potentiam in ubtimo gradu perfectionis suo actui
debitus, Arragonius in Sanctum Thom. Artic. ^. De virtute sidei Explic. Text.
p. 110.
to which there is nothing to be expected addable, because virtue is perfection
it self. This is their notion of perfect use of virtue, when a man is so
assueted to virtue, and has such a conquest over his passions of all sorts,
that he can conform himself to his exact duty, and neither desire more then he
has, nor fear more then he ought, nor endeavor to do otherwise to God, Man, or
himself, then as perfect virtue limits. This is the perfectus usus virtutum,
which Saint Paul translates into carrying a Conscience void of offense both
toward God, and toward man. But Saint Paul's definition of it, transcending
the Heathen's notion, is not to be insisted on as Aristotle's meaning, which
went no further, then that beforementioned. More of this might be added out of
Durand, Suarez, Saint Thomas, and Arragonius, and Aurelius on him: In Lib. De
Migratione Abrahami, p. 399.
Also from Scotus, Parisiensis, Turrecremata, and others the Schoolmen, who
have created of perfect virtue, and the use of it. But I refer the Reader to
them, avoiding the superfluity of quoting them here, and concluding with that
of Philo, that God doing all things like himself in weight and measure, (...),
etc. indulges his Creature nothing defective beneath perfect, though not in the
absolute and exact act, yet in such degrees as he accepts perfect. And thus
Noah, Daniel, Job, and others have been accounted perfect by him, and been
blessed, in such the perfect use of virtue, from him.

His jam praesuppositis considerare te volo, etiam ea quae sequuntur leges
humanae, non aliud sunt quam regula quibus perfect justitia edocetur.] This is
to set forth, that as beatitude is attainable by virtue, so virtue is by
knowledge of the Law: And as all virtue, so that, which though inclusively, is
general; yet, in common understanding, one particular justice. This the Law
inclines to, and teaches a Prince so the method of, as nothing else besides it
can, or does. For Laws being the wisdom of Ages, and men having such additions,
and subtractions, as make their compilements symmetrious to their end, must
needs be the most faithful, and unerring Counselors, which has caused
Monarchs, in power and wisdom, to dye for Laws, and the (...), as well as for
Religion, because Religion and they, directing one rule of Justice equally,
call for courage and constancy in men's observance of them. Now, though it were
too bold a confidence, for any one to arrogate this rule of perfect justice to
any single body of humane Law; yet it is well-beseeming a sober man, to own the
Chancellor in his vindication of humane Laws as such; because some, or other
Laws of men, do supply what others want; and so amongst them, while yet they
are together, but humanae leges, do notwithstanding perfect justitiam edocere.
For since the Rule of Justice with men, is the Laws of their Government, and
the topique Customs of the place of their being, and those are knowable by
study and practice, and the knowledge of them in both kind; is the perfectest
acquisition, our nature is capable of. In the same sense they may perfectly be
known, may they be accounted perfect Rules of virtue; since the virtue
perfected in us by the Law, is but a conformity in practice to the speculation
we have of it. And hence it is, that, as in common speech, we call that a
perfect Copy, which is verbatim to the original; and that a perfect Child which
has all the integral parts, and that a perfect book which has no leaves torn
out: so the Law may be taken for a perfect Mistress of Justice, when it gives,
(...), Rules for Justice, and is as indefectuous in it, as integrity of method
and prudence, equity and exactness, composed by man, and generally approved by
experience, can arrive at; which Budaeus well expresses, Quod in legibus;
senatus consultis, rebus judicatis, juris peritorum authoritate, In Pandect.
Priores. p. 19. edis. Basil.
edictis Magistratuum, more, aequitate consistis, etc. This is the rather to be
insisted on warily, because all Laws, like all Lawmakers, are not always such
as virtue requires. Nay, no Laws or men, how transcendent soever, are either in
their present times so well balanced, or against the necessity of emergent
changes and accidences, so omnisciently provided for: but there will need some
either abolition of, or mitigation from, or declaration about them, Lib. 10. De
Constantino.
and their senses in them. Constantine was a brave man, and intended
splendidly, in building anew, as to the Laws and Polity of it, Constantinople.
No doubt but he had all the thoughts of perpetuity in his head imaginable, and
resolved to live in the glorious memorial of that justly ordered Government,
which in the memorial of his name, did, in a sort, immortalize him: yet
Ignatius remembers us, multas leges rogavit, quasdam ex bono and aequo,
plaerasque superfluas, nonnull asque severas, primusque urbem nominis sui ad
tantum fastigium evchere molitus est, ut Romae aemulam faceret. And Grotius,
that memorable man, then whom, I think, few have been more profitably learned,
acknowledges some Laws imperial are not just; as that of wrecks at Sea, Nulla
enim praecedente probabili causa, dominium suum alicui auferre mera injustitia
est, says he: yea, he further shows, that the Heathens abominated any thing
like this, that men should lose their lives and goods for submitting to God,
who causes, and allays winds and storms at his pleasure. Jur. Belli, and pacis,
lib. 2. c 7. p. 175.
A like hard, not to say unjust, they thought those Laws of the Nations, that
punished Children for their Fathers crimes, which God Interdicts in Israel, as
Ethnique, and irrational, saying, The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the
Father, Brechaeus ad legem. 42. Lib. De Verborum significatione, p. 121. Lib.
2. p. 377. Budaeus in Pand. p. 185. edit. Basil. Eustathius in 9 Iliad.
nor the Father of the Son, but the soul that sins, it shall die. The like
in justice was in the Laws of the Persians, and Macedonians, vowing their
Neighbors heads in sacrifice: These, (...), Laws made by men, like the Poets,
Atae, offensionis and noxae contubernalis, (...), for her enmity and spite, as
it were, to Mankind, (...), as she is set forth diule-like, (...) says Suidas.
I say, Laws so made, are not probable to have any rectitude in them; and
therefore the Statute of 1 M. 2 Sess. c. 1. censures and repeals those Statutes
of 25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 7. for though Laws they were, because the
establishments of Power; yet just Laws they were not, mistaken and mis-named
Laws only Cousin-germans to those of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. iii. which made
denial to worship the Image he idolatrously set up capital, Laws they may be,
and those accepted by great and wise Nations, as the Salique Laws are; but yet
hard, and against the opinion of Nations; yea, determination of God in
Zelophehad's Daughters cases; yea, and against the experience of Females fit to
rule, where righted to it; Lipsius in Notis ad secundum, Politic. Tom. 1. Oper.
so. 130.
witness Q. Elizabeth, and witness the judgment of our state and Law, which
establishes the Crown on the Heirs Female of our Kings, for want of Male, 1 Q.
Mary, the second Parl. c. 1. These, and the like Laws, may be unjust, and
therefore are not regulae, quibus perfect justitia edocetur, but injuries to
Governments, and unjust Usurpations upon the reasons of the Subjects to be
governed, Qui leges injustas constituit, non Dei, sed suo ore loqui disitur,
suis niti inventionibus, ex ambitionis, libidinis, avaritiae sontibus deductis
enjusmodi sunt omnes leges Tyrannorum, and Hypocritarum, qua non ad justitiam
in Rempub. Lib. 1. De Vera Jurisprud. tit. 23.
inducendam, sed ad opinatum, and falsum commodum eorum qui illas condunt,
diriguntur, says Hopperus.

Regula est plurium rerum compendiosa narratione facta traditio. Gloss. in Tit.
3. Digest. De legibus Sena^usque consultis, p. 74.
Which considered, our Chancellours shafts against this inconvenience and
mischief, are not shot at random, but prudently levelled at the mark he aims
at; satisfaction of the Prince, that the Law, as ars aequi est boni, is the
best and safest discipline of administrative virtue. And hence is it, that he
calls Laws, Rules; now Rules do not incline to things, but things conform to
Rules; because there is no ametry in Rules, but a fixed and exact rectitude,
Rules being truth adapted to ends of use, and tracks, according to Wisdoms
discovery of her self, in the practiques of Sciences and Mysteries: so the
Laws, as Rules, are not to condescend to men's mutable humors, but to retain
their majesty, and immobility, as Rules do, and ought; allowing always Reason
and Magistracy regent in it, liberty, in licitis and honestis, to alter, as
Prudence advises, and Providence, in affairs, shall overruled them.

While then Laws are Rules, and such as do perfect justitiam edocere, they
must be of high descent, From the Father of Lights, larded with virtue and
wisdom, in every part and nook of them: not framed, as if Epicurus were their
Patron, who taught, that nothing was just, sua natura sed metu: or according to
Thrasimachus his latitude, whom Plato brings in, Lib. 1. De Legib.
asserting that to be right, which is pleasing to the chief Power; but
understood, as Sulpitius intended, whom Tully reports to have referred all
things, ad aequitatem facilitate^mque; and as the ancient Lawyers directed
their learning, Tollere controversias non constituere. And that purely, Vt pax,
and inter homines, and in unius, cujusque servetur animo, In 22 c. lib. 19.
Sancti Augustini. De Civit Dei.
qua nil majus natura ipsa gaudet, says Vives.

And good reason there is, that the Law should be a Rule, by which virtue is so
perfectly taught, since it has all that can go to make a Rule, such as it
ought, and is pretended to be, Papinianus, lib. 1. Definit. c. 1. Digest. lib.
1. tit. 3. p. 73. Lib. 4. De Benefic. c. 12.
mensura aequi and boni: For besides its influence from God, Papinian in his
definition of it, Lex est commune praeceptum, virorum prudentiam consultum,
delictorum quae sponte, vel ignorantia contrahuntur, coercitio, communis
Reipubl. sponsio. I say, in this, he has published the deserts of the Law to be
received for a Rule. For besides that Seneca in the name of all wise men, calls
the Law, justi injustique regula; and writing of honesty, Ep. 71.
says, Hoc nec remitti nec intendi posse, non magis quam regulam, qua rectum
probari solet, quam si flectes, quicquid ex illa mutaveris, injuria est recti,
Passing by this, the Rule has profit, firmness, and delight in it, which makes
is accommodate to every Artist, Lib. 7. De tectorio opere.
and to every person that is concerned in it. And hence, as Vitruvius observes,
the Rule in every part of Architecture, though he reduces lengths ad lineam and
regulam; heights ad perpendiculum; and corners, ad normam, and respond they all
must to these, or else there is not just mensuration. So does our Chancellor,
in terming the Law a Rule, refer perfect virtue to it, as well to be gained by,
as protected in it. Nor is there any virtue learnable by any man, but what the
Law can, and will teach him, if he will hear, and obey it.

And as Demosthenes, Ep. 203.
whom Pliny styles, ille norma Oratoris and regula, had not been an Orator so
eminent; nor at all, if he had not conformed norma loquendi. Nor he, in Tully,
Pro Muraena, 2.
a good man, had he not resolved, Dirigere vitam ad normam rationis. So cannot
the Prince be, what be ought in charity to be; good to his own soul, nisi
servata illa, qua quasi delapsa de caelo est, ad cognitionem omnium regula, ad
quam omnia judicia rerum dirigentur; as Tully smartly.

Which considered, Lib. 1. De Finib. 97.
no wonder though the Chancellor make Justice that is in man's Law,
inseparable from the Law; because God, the Fountain of it, has instructed, and
commanded man in place and power under him, to promote and practice it, as that
which is a Ray of him, and raised by him to an esteem, as the Architectonique
Virtue that includes all others, since Consequens, est ut qui ad legem se
applicet, Iustitiae quoque tadem opera adhaerescat, Lib De Vera Jurisprud 2.
tit. 3.
nam secundum regulas Geometricas quaecunque uni, and cidem sunt aequalia,
inter se sunt aequalia, says Hopperus.

Iustitia vero quam leges revelant, non est illa quae commutativa, vel
distributiva vocatur, seu alia quaevis particularis virtus, sed est virtus
perfecta, quae justitia legalis nomine designatur.

Here our Master disclaims that narrow sense of Justice, which mistake may
impose upon him, and lays claim to the latitude of Justice, as that which is
in, and teaches men, from the Law, the practice of it. And this the better to
obtain, he premises, that Justice, as it is in font, and essentially in God,
is like God himself inscrutable, having the vail of inaccessible glory before
it, and dazzling mortal eyes to an inperception of it; which yet, through the
mediation of the Laws composed by wise men, and worded aptly to ordinary
capacity, is in such a measure revealed, as it may be learned in some competent
measure by them. And this adds much to the renown of the Law, that it discovers
so excellent a Jewel, as harmonizes the World, and keeps it in any tolerable
Concord; which because Justice does, 'twill be pertinent here to write somewhat
additional, to what is before delivered of her.

Justice, either is considerable alone, as one of the Virtues, or as complex,
and including all virtues in her. In the first sense, my Text-Master intends
her not here; nor shall I in that here enlarge on it: but as she is the Lesson,
that the Law learns both Prince and People; so she is to be acknowledged
summarily all virtue. The Schools define Justice to be rectitudo impressa
voluntati a rectitudine rationis quae dicitur veritas, Sanctus Thom. prima
secunda, 960. art. 3. O. Lessius De Iustit, and Jure.
and vast disputes they have about her: yet all agree, that she is the Aurora
of all Perfections, attended by such an equipage, as no Monarch beneath Jehovah
has. For if Solomon in all his Royalty, be not clothed like a tender and trite
Lilly of the Field, which every eye may look upon, till it have looked it self
into darkness; and every hand touch, till it has defloured its glory, and
withered into deformity: How unlike, in the pomp and grandeur of their Train,
are Solomon's Peers to this his Peerless Mistress that is to them.

Tanquam inter stell as luna minores.
Tully makes six Virtues to attend the Train of Justice, Macrobius seven,
Andronicus nine, Lib. 5. De Morib. c. 3 and 5. Lib. 4. De factis, and dictis
Socratis. Sermon. 51. p. 188, 189. Lib. 10. De Republ.
Aristotle and Theogius all virtues, (...), etc. Xeno phon says the same,
calling it, (...), etc. The greatest Art the Queen of all excellent Virtues,
Polus the Pythagorean, as I find him in Stobaeus, is so transported with it,
that he calls it (...), and adds no man, without it can be accounted wise or
magnanimous. Plato makes it so beloved of the gods, that be his condition never
so distressed, they will never forsake him alive or dead, because he is useful
to the Public, and so like the gods themselves. Epictetus makes the same
account of it, Stobaeus, p. 206.
(...), etc. every place is safe, where a just man lodges. Infinite to this
purpose are the accounts might be given of the Encomiums of Justice: but those
are but tinsel trickings to the glorious tyres, and invaluable ornaments,
Scripture puts on her, Aug. lib. 19. De civit Dei. Budaeus, in Pandect. p. 73.
edit. Basil.
Justice is the habitation of God's Throne, the exemplication of his essential
Magnitude, and illustricity to us. The Lord is known by the judgment he
executes. Justice is the whole duty of man, and that which prepares him for
every good, against every evil: it is the Establisher of Thrones, the credit of
Weights and Measures, the sweetner of Crosses, (...), as Saint Chrysostom
notes it; yea, that which is (...), round every way, universally the same at
all times, and to all persons, Methodius.
according to the differences of circumstances, which are to be taken in, in
exercitial Justice. So that the Laws of Nations being arts aequi and boni, and
administering to People under the regency of them, such just proportions of
punishment and reward, good instruction, and seasonable prevention, in good and
evil; and being straight, certain, safe, useful rules of life, both in the
ruling, and ruled parts of Societies, and the tropiques upon which Communities
are harmoniously managed, they may, in very right, be allowed Weight, according
to our Text-Master's Balance, in those words, Quibus perfect justitia
edocetur. Lib. 1. Com. Juris Civilis, c. 13.
For so Donellus also asserts them, in the intendment of his words, and in that
sense which Wisemen dispense them in, sequamur potius quod justum and aequum
quam quod strictum est, quod strictum jus nihil habet auctoris praeter verba,
efficit ut sit maxim contra ejus sententiam and voluntatem, at vero sententia
non verbis astringenda est, sed verba potius sententiae atque adeo aequitati
servire debent, quam servari, Dion. Calls. Hist. lib. 44. p. 256. Partis primae,
p. 280.
est ex mente legis; and that the performance of this is a necessary part of
the Laws Justice, Salmuth upon Pancirol, does in many examples, and by sundry
authorities, make good. This shall suffice, for what our Chancellor, out of
Leonardus Aretinus, Homer, and Aristotle quotes, to the phrase of Justice, as
it is the Parent of all other Virtue; and particularly the Prerogative, and
Royal Embelishment of Kings: For so it follows.

Iustitia vero haec, subjectum est omnis regalis curae, quo sinc illa Rex just
non judicat, nec recte pugnare potest.

In this sentence, our Master applies Justice to the King, as the Rudder that
must move and actuate him that is the Mover and Spirit of all his Government:
For in Government, the King and the Law, though two in number, yet are but one
in nature, both making but one Head; which Head, our Author says, ought to be
filled with no Proclamations but Justice, Eurypid. in Alemaeo, in Stobaeus, p.
148, 504.
and the care of it. Care did I say, yes to purpose; Princes find it so, that
rule well and justly, (...): Oh! the tortures and troubles of Crowns! what
anxious thoughts, what discomposed pleasures, what Earthquakes of popular
murmr and insolence, does greatness totter upon? Antigonus had so much of it,
that on a day, when a poor Woman admired him for his Diadem and Purple Robe; he
cried out to her, O Mother, if thou knew the guilt and trouble of these,
Stobaeus, Sermon. 148.
(...), etc. that is, thou would not take it up from the ground, if there it
lay, and thou may have it for taking up, the charge attends it. Indeed, did
people know how real deservers Princes are of their duties, what laborious Bees
they are to bring them the honey of peace; what Clouds of plenty they are, and
all to disgorge their Tributes and Customs in protection and orderly government
of them, they would make more Conscience of duty to them then now they do. Est
enim ea hominum conditio, Corda in vita Virgilii.
ut si quando justum Regem nacti sunt velint potius illi subdi quam esse
liberi, etiamsi Rex hic sit Tyrannus, quare Dominarite and tibi Orbi conducit,
was Virgil's counsel to Augustus, wen he was in a quandary, whether to hold, or
resign the Empire. In Panegyr.
For what Pliny said to one is here true, Parens tibi imperium dedit, tuilli
reddidisti, ultro dantem obligasti, communicato enim imperio solicitior tu,
ille securior factus est. People have more from Princes, in care and vigilance,
for, and over them, then Princes have from people, in tributes and perquisites
of their Crown, which they carefully wear, Dion. Cass. Hist. lib. 55. p. 557.
edit. Leunclavii.
to those purposes of public good. Which considered, that speech of Augustus
to his Livia, (...), etc. Who woman can be quiet a moment, who has so many and
great Enemies within this Government, etc. is but what all Kings and Chiefs do
in their minds speak, and have too just cause to bemoan; as that which makes
them sometimes necessarily act, what they do not applaud, as exactly just. What
then they do besides the Rule, and beyond Justice, lies on them to answer to
God; for their square and tether is Justice that's the only subject matter that
Regality should express care in; and that done, security will flow in upon King
and Kingdom. For to promote this there is a kind of necessity in a Prince to
take this glorious Mancipation on him. And did not God kindle ambitions of
glory, by public beneficencies in great minds, they would never deny
themselves the delights of private living, to take the envy and murmr of
Government and Rule upon them; for when Subjects sleep, Princes wake; when they
eat and drink to freedom, Princes are to keep cool heads, that they may be ripe
and ready in counsel and action; when they love and marry whom they please,
Princes are, and must be bound up by Reason of State, and marry to their best
Interest, and strongest Alliance; when they command hours for private
devotions, and hug their pillows as their ease, casting off care with their
clothes; Princes are masters of no privacies; hurried they are up and down in
the day, and perplexed in the night with myriads of thoughts, tumultuating one
upon another; every shadow presents suspicion and fear to them. And they
knowing not what a moment may bring forth, are in no moment hereby quiet: when
they see a Subject popular and wise, they fear his discontent, disaffection,
and the fruits of it Rebellion: When they hear of Multitudes querulous, and
parties among the people, their prudence aims to head none of them; but to
balance them both, so that neither may have the advantage of other, but the
Law regulate both. When they observe Princes their Neighbors, in warlike
paradoe, they must arm too, that the noise of their vigilance and preparation,
may prevent what is malevolently designed from abroad against them. And when
their own Subjects are in Arms, they take care, lest they should not be
distributed into their first particles without inconvenience. When they are to
court Foreign Favorites, they are dubious to trust, where they have not
tried, and found fidelity; and when their way is made, then their care is to
improve by subtilty, what prudently they have gained. For not to proceed wisely
in what is begun, is to retrograde in public reputation; and to proceed
faster then the good speed of Affairs dictates, is to be less advised then
Princes ought to be. When Affairs are on foot, they must be supplied with
Instructions, money and all other necessaries; and when they are brought to
their growth and birth, then the case is, how to produce them gallantly, and to
be moderate under the interpretation of them with men, whose bolts will be
diversely shot, and censures boldly delivered upon them. These, and myriads of
such like emergencies, discompose the lives and peaces of Princes, and great
men, and deny them the serenato's and calms that privacy delights their
possessours with. When Bajazet the Fourth had lost his Son Orthobulus, and his
City Sebastia, he could sing no Notes so cherrily as the shepherd, whom he
sighingly cried out happy, because he had none of them to lose.

Yet these cares are all but in order to the highest care of Kings; Justice,
which being the project of God, in the government of the World, calls them as
dutiful Children, wise servants, and worthy Patrons of Popularities, to imitate
him the Father, Master, and Defender of his Creation, and the Polities in it,
which they can no ways to the life do, but by Justice.

Justice is the cement and soul of all Polities, the hinge upon which order
winds it self into humane accommodation. Bibliothec. lib. 5.
Diodorus writing of the virtues of Noah, concludes that he taught them (...),
etc. Justice and integrity of soul above all. And Trogus speaking of the Golden
Age under Saturn, Justin. lib. 43.
attributes this to it, Tantae justitiae fuisse fertur, ut neque servierit sub
illo quisquam, nec quicquam privatae rei habuerit, sed omnia communia, Sanctus
August. lib. 4. De civit Dei Alciat. lib. De Verborum signif. p. 42. ad legem
15.
and indivisa omnibus fueriut, veluti unum cunctis patrimonium esset. Take away
Justice, and all that we see and read of, becomes Chaos. Take away Justice, and
what are Kingdoms but Magna Latrocinia; and Kings, but violentiae numina. Take
away Justice, and what are Laws but nudae and nugatoriae Ceremoniae; pompous
nothings, and ridiculous Gloworms. Take away Justice, and what is property and
privilege, but libidini holocaustum: and who may not by Ahabs, and sons of
Belial, be made a Naboth for his Vineyard? Set aside Justice, and all Religion
to God, and order amongst men, Lib. De Justit. Principis.
ceases. Yea, Justice being the end of Government, ( cujus quidem rei
argumentum est, quod qui primus inter mortales a Deo constitutus fuit,
Melchisedec, id est, Rex Iustitiae, says Hopperus) is so necessary, that it
cannot be removed without the dissolution of all: It Is the Sun in the
Firmament, God's Bow in the Clouds, an eternal witness of his love to man.

Quo sine illa Rex just non Iudicat, nec recte pugnare potest.
This is added, to show the necessity of the presence of Justice in every act
of Regality, Peace and War are the two hands of Government; and both these are
to be bound and loosed by Justice. And hence has it ever been the care of good
Princes to be just, that they may be beloved, and well reported of: and thus
only they knowing, they must be by the Laws of their Government strictly stood
to, has made them keep to it resolutely and thoroughly, Boni Principis est
summum honorem legibus exhibere, nec quicquam sine illis nisi ultima
necessitate tanquam tempestate cogente agere, Mopperus, lib. De Instit.
Principis.
ne si aliter faciat, in anceps periculum se conjiciat, and loco Regis Tyrannum
se exhibeat, is a Statesmans rule from the great Secretary of Nature; who,
because the Laws are respective of the good of many concerned in them, Lib. 8.
De Morib. c. 12.
makes the observation of them so important, that he concludes That a good King
more eyes his Peoples good, then his own greatness. That then Peace and War are
regulated by the Laws. Lib. 4. Reipub. c. 10.
proceeds from the justice of the King who is Head-Dispenser and Protector of
his Laws. And hence it is, that the Wisdom of Kings has ever admitted their
Laws to be of the quorum, in conclusions about them: yea, and from this is it
that mostly Peace and War has been successfully managed where Justice according
to Law, has associated them. For God having entrusted power with Princes, to
felicifie, and not ruin their people by it, prescribes Justice, as the method
of its dispensation to this end; Alciat. ad leg. 15. Lib. De Verbor. signific
p. 43.
and the Laws of God and men stating Justice in every application to them,
conducts Princes to their Prerogative, and instructs people in their Allegiance
readily and religiously; so that the Law being ars aequi and boni, and justice
the end of it, being that which Prince and people are made happy by, there is
reason that the Law, in assertion of Justice, should be adhered to.

Unde cum perfectus usus virtutum sit faelicitas, and justitia humana quae non
nisi per legem perfect nanciscitur, aut docetur, nedum sit virtutum effectus
sed and omnis virtus.

This is the recollection of the premises to produce the conclusion, which our
TextMaster makes in justification of the Law, and of the excellency of Justice
taught by it. For since the end of all active virtue is felicity, and that is
acquired by nothing more then Justice; and that Justice is specificated by the
Law, which is the Rule and Model of it, and which only can teach it perfectly,
and make the knowledge of it productive of those fruits, which are comportable
with Justice, in all the latitude of her relation to God, men, and a man's self,
it reasonably follows, that not only the Law is excellent, as it is repleat
with Wisdom, and answers the ends of Gubernative Policy; but as it implants in,
and exercises the mind that is furnished from it, with that perfect notion of
felicity by virtue; which because it is a complex of all attainable goodness,
and furnishes a man to every good word and work, is here called Justice; for so
are the next words.

Sequitur quod Iustitia fruens faelix per legem est, and per eam ipse sit
beatus, cum idem sit beatitudo, and faelicitas in hac fugaci vita.

Iustitia fruens faelix per legem est. The phrase fruens referring to the Will,
Quia frui est in voluntate, helps much to the comprehension of the
Chancellour's meaning, That the felicity which man attains by the knowledge of
the Law, arises from the delight of the subject, in which it is to Justice;
when in the Apostle Paul's words, I delight in thy Law in my inward parts; or
as the Prophet David said, I had hid thy Law in my heart, that I should not sin
against thee. In this case, the Soul that is every way quadrate, (...)
Stobaeus, Sermon. 1. p. 2.
and that looks to all God's Commandments with an indifferent and just eye,
not daring to dispense with any part of his duty, may well be pronounced happy
by the Verdict of Law. For God has given it that just confidence, that it shall
stand in Judgment, that it shall not fear evil tidings, since its principle,
which is fixed on the Rule, leads to Beatitude, and to what is the Porch of it,
humble confidence. And indeed, what can make a man happy, but that Justice of
principle and practice, which the Law justifies? Injuria semper injusta est.
Laedi etiam aliques just potest. Nam and qui jure damnantur, laduntur, sed non
injuria. Asconius Praedianus, apud Philoxenum. Lib. De Sermon. Latino, p. 747.
And what of this nature does the Law allow as a virtue, worthy its
encouragement, but that which is tending to Justice: There is a mutual
reciprocating of Eccho's, 'twixt Law, Happiness, and Justice; they answer each
other, as parts of that Line of Communication which connects Heaven and Earth
together: For when all things are at a stun, when Beauty gives way to
putrefaction, Riches, Honors, and Wisdom weep out their woeful farewell,
Righteousness delivers from death; not from death, as a debt to Nature, for
it is appointed for all men once to dye: but from death, as a terror; from the
despair of comfort in, and mercy after death. This it delivers from, thus in
Hezekiah's cafe, That Remember, O Lord, I have walked before thee with an
upright heart, was his Cordial against the cutting off of his days; it being
the course of God, to give unto all men somewhat of comfort, or terror in
their departure, suitable to the merit, or demerit of their lives.

But, I trow, there is another sense more genuine of this Iustitia fruens
faelix per legemest; which is this, he that has the benefit of Justice, is by
the Law happy; for that the Magistrate, which is the living Law, is appointed
by God to speak, and do comfortably to those that live under his charge, and
are inoffensive to his power. And truly, it is no mean degree of happiness,
which the Justice of Magistrates conveys to those under their charge, if the
particulars of it be duly weighed; To live peaceable lives in all godlyness and
honesty, to sit under our own Vine and Fig Tree, and to possess ones good
things in peace; to drink of the water of our own Fountain, and to have the
credit and comfort of God's blessing on our propagation; to keep our fleece on
our backs, and not to have them shaven, and our lives taken from us, to color
the injury. To have the knowledge of God run down in the Land like a mighty
stream, is happiness, carrying its witness with it. And blessed are the people
that are in such a case; and with this outward advantage, have the Lord for
their God. But all this is from that Justice, which the Law, by the Magistrate,
Quod sol mundo est and sanitas corpori, hoc animo and Reipubl. est Iustitia.
Nam res ad vitam necessarias non ideo quaerimus ut simus, hoc enim brutorum
est, sed ut been simus, quod est justitia, and bellum cum hostibus gerimus, non
ut vincamus, aliosque servitute opprimamus, nam hoc Tyranni faciunt, sed ut in
Pace beati vivamus, quod a justitia prostuit. Hoppe^rus. De Instit. Principis.
makes good to us. Were it not for Justice, the Laws Grnadsir, and from the
fruitful Womb of Order, which Magistracy does impregnate, who would be happy,
but those whose powerful wickedness carried them forth to drink healths in the
Bowls of the Sanctuary, to profane the holy things of God, and to violate the
sacred rights of men. But blessed be God, there is a bright Star in the
Firmament of Rule, which illuminates the clowdy face of Force, and makes us see
Justice expanding her Wings of Protection, sovency, and comfort to all her
Clients, and she can do no less then cheer all that love and follow her; for
she is a Ray of the Light sprung from on high, and is descended with a
Cornucopia of good to Mankind. And therefore the Chancellor had a good reach
when he said, Iustitia fruens faelix per legem est; for as he told the governed
their happiness, so the Governor his duty, which is to love justice in
himself, that he may administer it to his Subjects. For it is a sin not to be
just, and a greater in the Prince, then in the People, because of the eminency
of the one above the other. And that Prince that is unjust, and yet will be
owned as Custos utriusque tabuls, had need seize his Subjects reason as an
Escheat, and make a Law, that people should believe nothing good or bad, but as
it is published to be by him; for if men be left to the just latitude of their
Reason, they will conclude him no worthy Prince that is not just. Wherefore the
happiness that people enjoy under just Princes, is not only from their good
will, free concession, and gracious indulgence, but from a benefit also
drilling down from Princes by the Laws of Nations, on People, as the Valleys
which they water, and therefore Laws are accounted public Treasuries, that
buy out common slavery into Enfranchisement. And therefore the Law is called by
the Greeks (...), some say (...), which signifies, to distribute; as telling
us, that whatever happiness subjection has, is from the justice of Kings by
their Laws. Eurypides says there are but three virtues which he would have his
Child learn, Stobaeus, Sermon. 1. p. 1.
To fear the Gods, to honor our Parents, and to reverence (...) (...), the
common Laws of Greece; as conceiving the reverence of the Law to be next duty
to God, and our Parents: and whatever assurance Government has, is from the
same sourse; for the Law of Natural Justice teaches, that protection is to be
recompensed with subjection, and subjection to be maintained by protection;
both which are best kept up by Justice; which Justice makes man happy according
to Law.

Quo and per came ipse fit beatus, etc.
Well added, for no man can be sure of a good end from an ill beginning, non
habet eventus sordida praeda bonos; the just God has joined together Justice,
which is in effect, all virtue, to happiness, that men may know the way to the
one by the other. For men must pay toll at the Castle of Justice, before they
come to the Basileopolis of Happiness. And since Pairs are so beautiful in
their conjunction, the Chancellor has by an elegant Synonyma identified
beatitudo and faelicitas, at least in has fugaci vita, in the condition
whereof, we men are only meet apprehenders of them. For he supposes, that the
upshot of all man's motion in his calling and sphere, is but to attain rest;
and that rest, from the toil of life, he fixes in his Chair of State old Age,
under the Canopy of his Nightcap, and in the Robe of his Gown, having in his
hand the scepter of his staff, and his Cough as the Herald, making room for him
to the grave. Now that obtained, he accounts himself happy to live in credit,
dye in peace, leave a good name to survive him; that is all that the beatitude
and felicity of this life amounts to, and this is only attainable by Justice.
The just, says the Wiseman, shall he had in everlasting remembrance; and in
another place, the memory of the dead shall be blessed. And this blessedness
shall the Law pronounce, when it testifies, that we have lived to the true and
just purposes of life. For we were not made to study, serve, love, and delight
in our selves, but to serve our Maker, to love our Neighbor, to promote Virtue
in our selves and others. And this we ought to do, considering that it is our
duty, and we must give an account, Quid, quando, quibus, quare, fecimus; what,
for the nature; when, (...) Sophocles apud Stobaeum, p. 807. (...) Dictum
Sotadis apud Stob. p. 808.
for the time; to whom, for the persons; wherefore, for the motive to our
doing; yea, and considering above all, that the time we have to work in, is but
fugax vita, short time, slippery time, gone like a tale that is told, passing
as shadow, as a brook; time past before us, time past after us, time present,
called life, only ours: therefore we ought to be active, while the day lasts,
because the night comes, wherein no man can work.

Cujus and per justitiam ipse summum habet bonum.
The Chancellor, as one in love with Justice, makes the summum bonum of life
to consist in it; and so it must, considering he asserts it beatitude and
felicity, which is the summum bonum of any thing; for what is the beatitude of
a thing more then the perfection, and what is the perfection less then the
felicity of it: so that there being as perfect a concord in the Chancellour's
words, In Pandect. fo. 58. Basil edit. 1534.
as soul; I cannot but wish, that may be in our times, which learned Budaeus,
speaking of the Areopagitae, says of them, they were such friends to justice,
Qui quidam ordo cum invertitur, and major opum armorumque, potentiae, quam
religionis, and justitia ratio habetur, fit, ut res illae primum fastu and luxu
civium corrumpant deinde autem ipsaemet aufugiant, and pro liberate ac
opulentia, extremam servitutem, and paupertatem relinquunt. Hopperus, lib. De
Instit Principis.
that they would endure no Oratory, left their affection should be led aside
from the truth, to favor that party which had the best Language in its
defense, and did fit on Judgments in the dark, that they might not be led by
favor, or know friend or foe; yea, that their integrity might appear, he adds
out of Isocrates, Tantum priscos illos Areopagitas monumentum virtutis ac
continentiae suae, illo in loco posteritati reliquisse, ut etiam suo tempore
quo jam mores antiquos multum degenerasse conqueritur, observatum effet eos qui
moribus alioquin intolerandis antea fuisse videbantur, si quovis modo Ad
Areopagiticum forte consilium obrepserant, tum demum temperare sibi solitos
esse, and tanquam loci genio afflatos, ex ingenio suo migrare* malleque
institutis tanti consilii quam insitis sibi vitiis, aut ingenitis insistere. To
this I say, Budaeus adds, Utiream benignitate divina, in amplissima curia
nostra similis aliquis posthac genius existat. By all which it appears, that
Justice is a most excellent virtue, and that which our Chancellor both
practiced, when in office, and had the comfort of having so done, when
exofficed; and this makes me conclude, in commendation of Justice.

Tamen non nisi per gratiam lex poterit ista operari.
Herein, as in other places, the Chancellor, like a devout man, and a knowing
Christian, recalls his former extolling of the Law (as the Rule of Justice
bestowing upon man the felicity of this life) by interpreting himself, as
ascribing the main work to Grace, and to God the giver of it. For though that
be true of Laws, which Plato desires of men, (...), etc. When God intends well
to any man, or place, he raises up, and increases good men in it, which
Morellus says, has been verified in France, Praefatione in lib. Senec. De
Provident. p. 14.
wherein Reges sapienter and just regnantes ad noucis septenos concessit: yet
all that ever Art or Nature does to our perfection, is nothing, without God's
concurrence and benediction in that gracious Providence, which effectuates what
it will. Now this the Ancients called by many names, as desirous to convey it
most to the advantage of its splendor. Moses termed it (...), the finger of
God; and Solomon, (...), God's Hand; Pindar, (...), God's Palm; Plato, (...),
God's Lot; Aristotle, (...), that divine virtue which contains every thing in,
and brings every thing about to it; the old Academiques, (...), etc. Reason
moderating, and ruling powerfully in all, (...), that divine gubernation and
order of all things. These, I say, in other terms, mean the same with (...),
that special grace and favor which he bestows on man, and by which he makes
the Law effectual to this purpose in him. For though I well know the Law is
just, holy, and good, and all Laws have the most presumptions of success, in
what they undertake to teach, and seldom do lead into any thing beneath the
most exact habit and action of virtue; yet in that they do this in conjunction
with, not abstracted from divine grace, I think it just to ascribe all the
perfection in virtue that man attains to by the Law, to God's blessing which
derives energy to it. Indeed the Law can, as a System, and collection of divine
truths, and prudent Rules, method us in justice, and teach us to use virtues,
Durand. Did. 26. q. 3. lib. 2.
in order to beatitude; that is, excite the faculties apt to take and retain
principles, it can propose the rule to the understanding, and thence to the
will and affections. But it cannot persuade his ear to hear, and his heart to
embrace what is good, and accordingly to do it, Did. 27. q. 3. p. 397.
Bradward. lib. 2. c. 5. De Causa Dei.
Quia ad bunc actum Deus nos adjuvat and interius confirmando voluntatem, ut
adactum perveniat, and exterius facultatem operandi praebendo; as Durand
notably. This is solely an act of grace from God, whose Prerogative it is to
do, and not to do, as he pleases; and therefore without God, man's free will is
nothing; nothing without God's cooperation. He, he, must carry our endeavors
to their issue, or they will be abortive, Bonaventur* lib. 2 Did. 27.
Distinct. 26. Qu 3. lib. 2.
and have no figures of amiableness in them. And therefore our Chancellor has
written no more here of grace, then the Schools generally assert. And Brulifer,
though he would allow as much to man's will, and Piety's merit, as may be
presumptuously arrogated, yet brings in a fourfold grace of God indulged man,
suitable to the fourfold evil he is immersed in: The evils are, 1. Combat with
Satan's temptation. 2. The wrath of God. 3. The guilt of sin. 4. The sequel of
sin. The grace that God vouchsafes, are, Protection, Deliverance, Extraction,
Salvation. So that the triumph of a sinner over his toil and impossibilities,
is from this grace of God, which enables him to every good word and work. This
grace is therefore as the gift of God to, so the work of God in us; it is that
which excites us to, retains us in, and rewards us for well-doing; because it
is a largess of God to us expressive of eudochy, and complacentialness; it is
that which God answers men by: if not secundum identitatem desideriorum, yet
secundum aequivalentiam: if not just as they desire, yet in the best exposition
of their desire, P. Mirandul. in Hexap. c. 5. p. 30.
that is, in such good as he sees best for them. No wonder then that Heathens,
in all great undertakings, addressed to their Gods, praying their aid and
influence, since they found themselves impotent to reach any things of
remoteness without them. For God himself has declared it his Prerogative, to
bless, and curse; to raise up, and pull down. And the Law can do nothing,
either to convince of sin, or conduct to virtue, but as God's fescue in
Magistrates hand. It Is God above, that must open the eye of the understanding,
and incline the heart to good; yea, and it is God's grace only, that when the
good and excellent path of life is discovered, puts man in, Did. 26. q. 1.
lib. 2. p. 395
and keeps him on from halting or deviation; not only by an act informationis
and denominationis subjecti, presenting good to us, sed redditionis operis
meritorii; as Durand too durely phrases it, that is, rendering it accepted in
the beloved Lord Jesus.

The consideration of which brings in grace in Scripture, under so many
honorable, and useful attributes, that it is hard to think of benefits, whereof
our nature and condition is capable, which this grace and favor of God does
not accommodate us with; it restrains from sin, it excites to duty, it
conflicts with despair, it actuates faith, it erects fortitude, it debases
pride, it adorns humility, it promotes self-denial, it is victoriously valiant
against the enemies of the soul; yea, it keeps the heart equanimous, neither
presumptuous, nor despondent, but equilibrious, as a Son should be, between the
fear of duty and mercenariness. Hereupon St. Paul ascribes this mutation from a
Pharisee to an Apostle, to be of grace; By the grace of God I am that I am,
teaching us to put our selves for the fortunation and felicitous sequel of
actions on the mercy of the Almighty, wherein no man that rightly aims, and
religiously means to that end, can possibly miscarry. Non te oxistixnes donum
Dei jure hareditario possidere, ita videlicet securus de eo quasi nunquam
perdere possis, ne subito cum forte retraxerit manum, and substraxerit donum,
tu animo concidas and tristior quam opportet, fias. Sanctus Bernard. Sermon. 21,
in Cant. Cantic.
All that we have to do, is to walk regularly and humbly before God, and
thereby our inward man will be kept from predominancies inconsistent with this
grace. For, as in the body, the prepotency of malignant humors, impedes the
operation of the noblest Potions; so in the soul, till grace have obtained the
mastery over the brutal and lower Regents, there is no effects of grace
probable to appear. It must be God that first excites, then by a concomitation
crowns our endeavors with a desired issue. He gives recompense to diligence by
wealth; to patience by victory; to humility by exaltation; to penitence by
pardon. All that art and industry can do (abstracted from this grace as its
benediction, which includes it is fiat) is nothing. Lewis the Ninth of France
was a wise and pious Prince, yet he made but two Voyages against Infidels; one
into Egypt, and the other into Barbary, and miscarried in both. In the first,
he himself was taken prisoner, and his whole Army overthrown. In the latter, he
dyed of the Plague. Caesar Borgia fearing that his Father Pope Alexander the
sixth dying, the Papacy would come into the hands of his Enemy, ordered affairs
so dexterously as he thought, that which way soever they steered, he should be
out of danger: Pope Alexander shortly after dyed; and Caesar Borgia fell so
sick, that he could execute nothing he had designed; and so the Popedom came
nnto his professed Enemy: so that the Chancellour's Position is most true, Non
nisi per gratiam lex poterit ista operarii.

Neque legem aut virtutem sine gratia tu addiscere poteris, vel appetere, cum
ut dicit Parisiensis (in libro suo cur Deus homo) virtus hominis appetitiva
interior per peccatum originale it a vitiata est, ut sibi vitiorum suavia, and
virtutum aspera opera sapiant.

This is added, to show how impotent the best Prescripts of Nature are to any
excellent and certain end, in their abstraction from God's grace: neither the
whole duty of man, which our Chancellor means by the Law, in which it is
proposed; nor any part of it contained in single virtues, can be either
desired, or practiced by us, but with assistance of God's grace. First, we
cannot, appetere legem aut virtutem, without grace; for appetuntur quae
secundum naturam sunt, Lib. 3. De Nature. deorum.
deelinantur contraria, is Tully's rule. Now the nature of man is so averse to
virtue, as subverted from its created rectitude, that it opposes it self to it,
and declines it so, that if it be brought upon the love and practice of it, it
must be by a divine persuasion, and sweet compulsion, from grace moving the
Will to follow an enlightened understanding, and engaged affections. And then
secondly, man cannot addiscere, 1 Offic. 21.
that is, not only learn, as Orators sometimes use the word, but quasi
aliquid addere adea quae didiceris, as our Text intends. No man can add to what
nature instructs him in, concerning virtues divine and moral, but by grace; for
thereby only corruption is discovered, and the means of recuperation and
restitution, by improvement, revealed. Neither of these so necessary to our
compleatness, are attainable, but by the grace of God, Non dat natura virtutem,
ars est bonum sieri. Deerat illis justitia, deerat prudentia, deerat
temperantiae ac fortitudo, omnibus his virtutibus babebat similiae quaedam
rudis vita, virtus non contingit animo nisi instituto and edocto, and ad summum
assidua exercitatione perdacto Senec. Ep. 90.
which brings the light and truth of God's discovery to the Conscience, in
compunction and contrition; and then carries the convinced subject to Jesus,
the anchor, the price, the pattern, the donour of integrity, from which
corrupted nature is the lapse. Indeed, in Heathens, and pure moral men, there
may be sudden options, and passionate transports, reflected from the terrors
of natural Conscience, which may cajole a man to ingenuous confessions, and
seemingly serious protestations of amendment. But these being the products of
no solid and sincere conviction, but the fruits of God's terror, which he
often injects into, and sometimes long continues upon wicked men, are but
splendida peccata, no acts of grace, but of power: which as a Creator, not a
Father, God expresses himself to his Creature in. By these he over-wrought
Balaam to bless, whom he resolved to curse, and Abimelech, not to take Sarah,
whom he resolved to prostitute; which had they not been, neither the good words
of the one, Let me die the death of the Righteous, and let my latter end be
like unto his, Numb. xxiii. nor the chaste deeds of the other, in not touching
carnally Abraham's Sarah, had not succeeded their actions, which were praevious
and ordinated to the contrary. So that whatever these, and other Heathens did,
in order to self-mastery, magnanimity, contentation, patience, justice,
charity, though they are effects of general grace, that is, of the largess of
God the Creator, to man his creature, yet are they but imperfect works,
because they did them as lures to their own same, and as defensatives of
themselves from miscarrying in the deluge of censure and defamation, which
hurries down into the lake of dishonor all sordid, illiberal, debauched
courses; and hence they deserve to be accounted not so properly virtues, as the
umbra's of them: because, beyond the Elysium of fame, there is no reward for
these; for so, according to their calculation, is their reward in this World:
for all they aimed at, was to appear to men; God, the principle of their
activity, was superior to, though not at all in their intendment and purpose;
Bradward; De Causa Dei, lib. 20 c. 5. p. 287.
and subjected they were, to what they could not oppose. Bona ipsa opera quae
faciunt infideles, non ipsorum esse, sed illius qui been utitur malis, said
that renowned Father of our Church against the Pelagians. And therefore there
is vast difference between the Works of Grace and Nature, of Heathens and
Christians; because, though in the externity, and materials of them, they may
have an equipollency; yet in the intention, rule, Beda, cap. 13. contra
Julianum.
principle, and purpose, (which bears away the reputation with God) there is no
agreement. The righteousness of these gracious souls, exceeds the righteousness
of Scribes and Pharisees, who yet were exact and rigid in the Rites of their
Worship. The wisdom of these reaches to eternity; Male velle, male facere, male
dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aquo vetamur. Tertullianus Apolog. c. 36.
they consider their latter end, and desire God to teach them to apply their
hearts to wisdom. The charity of these, is not only to those of the household
of Faith, but to all Mankind; not only to a cup of cold water, but to actions
of heroickness, whereby Coals of fire are heaped upon their Enemies heads. The
patience of these, is not to the loss of their gods, but lives, so they may
keep their souls spotless. The perseverance of these is such, that with Job,
though God kill them, they will put their trust in him: the humility of these
is so real, that they put their mouths in the dust, the bemoan themselves with
Ephraim, If I have done evil, I will do so no more. These are the fruits of
God's Canaan in the soul, which worldly men, as false Spies misreport. These
are Jacob's hands, as well as Jacob's voice; the same in deed, as in word:
there is no tincture of Alchimy or alloy in these, they are all Gold, whereas
nature gives men but the Vermillion of seeming: this presents the Rose and
Lilly of perfect beauty. And hence comes it to pass, that God owns it as his
work, and promises himself the reward of it unto the soul, Bradward, lib. 2. c.
5. p. 487.
vide quid Christiani facere possint quorum in melius per Christum restaurata
est natura, and qui divinae gratiae juvantur auxilio, says the Father. Which
considered, it is well added by our Chancellor, that thus to do, is divinae
bonitatis beneficium, non humanae virtutis. For as it is not flesh and blood
that reveals it, so is it not flesh and blood that performs it, natura humana
etiamsi in illa integritate, qua condita est, permaneret, nullo modo seipsam
creatore suo non adjuvante servaret, quum igitur sine gratia Dei salutem non
potuit custodire, quam accepit, quomodo sine gratia Dei potest reparare, Epist.
106. ad Paulinum.
quod perdidit, is Saint Augustine's judgment. For if by the power of nature
separate from grace, the virtue of justice could by the Law have been taught
and learned, man needed no other School but that to teach him his duty, and to
make him actually perform its dictate. But inasmuch as our Lord has taught us,
that without him we can do nothing as we ought, and God will accept, and the
holy men of all Ages have recurr'd to God's grace, as the sine qua non to their
progress and success: it highly besits us to ascribe all to grace, and to
disclaim merit and self-sufficiency, that he alone may have the honor, who is
the author and finisher of all good in us. For it is one of the great and
undeniable explorations of Omnipotence, and that which argues God the Regent
and Provider of the World; that he makes every thing accountable to his end,
and subservient to his purpose, not only the proper effects of grace,
renovation of principle, and melioration of practice, but also the punishments
of grace despised and neglected, St. Augustine. Ep. 59.
Sicut mali Dei bonis male utuntur dum non corriguntur, sic contra Deus, etiam
malis little been utitur ad justitiam suam, and exercitationem suorum, said the
Father; and to the same purpose Synesius, (...), etc. that is, Epist. 57.
even the sinful liberties men take to satiate themselves with sin, work out
God's justification in their punishment, and satisfic the pious, that he must
needs be good, who gives so just rules to life, and they be out of measure
sinful, that obey them not.

No wonder then the Scripture says, obedience is better then sacrifice, because
sacrifice being a devoir of the man externally conforming, may flow from the
less noble and degenerous proposal that men make to themselves, of assimulation
to those they converse with, and are planted amongst, by complying with whom
same and advantage is acquirable, which they call humana virtus, and from
reason and experience is moved and promoted; but to obey God, in owning his
goodness the motive, and his power the Parent of what we attain to by study,
action, friends, fortune, and to account our selves and all collateral aids,
blind and passive seconds to his omnisciency and wisdom, the energy and
effectuality of the first cause God, must be divinae bonitatis beneficium, no
man can disclaim what he loves so dearly himself, but he that in the glass of
God's perfection sees his weakness and insufficiency, and by the mastery of
mercy over his corruption, ascribes all he is, or does, to his Makers good will
to him, and the enablement he has from it.

Nam tunc leges, quae praeveniente and concomitante gratia omnia praemissa
operantur toto conamine addiscendae sunt, dum faelicitatem, quae secundum
Philosophos est hic finis and complementum humani desiderii, earum apprehensor
obtinebit, quo and beatus ille erit in hac vita ejus, possidens summum bonum.

This is a good inference from the premised assertion; since all man's chief
good, by Philosophy is made to consist in felicity or beatitude, this felicity
or beatitude is attainable by Justice; this Justice taught and learned by the
Law, the Law made effectual by Gods grace accompanying it. Hence argues the
Chancellor; if such be the seize by the Laws, then the Laws of God,
Nature, Nations, are to be chiefly learned by a Prince, Indeed the Argument has
as much of cogency, as utile and decorum can give it; and while there is a tie
of grace upon the Laws, without which they are counted ineffectual, there is no
fear, supererogation, or attribution of ought to them in derogation to grace,
which is the gift of God by them; as it is not bread that supports life, nor
air that cools and refreshes the inwards, nor light that promotes order, nor
physic that procures health, but God's fiat and creative permission and
benediction, whereby not only their innate and specifique virtue, in a
beneficent exertion, accommodates it self to, but is conducted and confirmed by
the omnipotence of God so to do: so is it not the Law that can bring the mind
by understanding the definition, to affect the direction, and execution of
justice, except God incline, and circumact the heart to the completion of it;
and that by a grace of prevention, taking out of our way those rubs that imply
avocation, making us of unwilling willing; and then by carrying on those
beginnings to procedure, by breaking out the crepusculum into the bright day,
ne frustra velimus, that is, by assisting us to run the race with patience that
is set before us, looking unto Jesus. O it is a rare Prospect of the Crucifix,
that brings us to make our selves vild, and of no reputation, that we may be
obtainers of preventing grace, and do the will of God, by aid of his
cooperating grace. Our Lord Jesus gave us the president to follow him, that we
might be enjoyers of happiness with him, Gratias agamus domino and salvatori
nostro, qui nos nullis praecedentibus meritis vulneratos curavit, and inimicos
reconciliavit, and de captivitate redemit, de tenebris ad lucem reduxit, de
morte ad vitam revocavit, and hxmiliter confitentes fragilitatem nostram illius
misericordiam deprecemur, ut quia nos misericordia sua praevertit, Lib. 1
Homil. Homil. 14.
dignetur in nobis non solum non custodire, sed and augere munera, and
beneficia sua quae ipse dignatus est dare, was Saint Augustine's counsel: The
Author's Prayer to God.
And, O Lord, grant me, who am thy poor valet, and have presumed to write of
thy grace, such assistance of thy preventing and concomitating grace, that I
may neither sin against them by my pen, or in my life, but that I may so write
of grace, and so live to grace, that it may appear I covet the grace I write
of, and magnify the assistance, that in this unworthy endeavor of mine, thy
grace afford me; while my heart conscious to it self of many falsehoods in
friendship, and coolness in zeal, to the glory of thy grace, yet presumes to
cry out with Saint Ierom, Semper largitor, semperque donator est, etc. Thou, O
Lord, art always bountiful and give, O let me be an ever receiver from thee,
for it will not suffice my hungring soul, that once thou give, unless thou
often and ever give; I am covetous to have the most I can of thy gracious
bounty: as my soul is never satisfied with receiving, so let not thy grace be
satisfied with giving to it; for the more it has, the more it desires of thee.
The Author's Ejaculation.
Thus that Father, and I from him: For, without this continual, and effectual
inflex, how shall I write aright of grace, which works in us whatever is
right in the sight of thee my gracious Judge.

Without grace then, the Law is ineffectual to bring Princes by Justice to
beatitude, since it will not inform them of the excellency of virtue, nor
subdue them to its method by efficacy of conviction, which makes practique
virtue, and carries to, and ends in beatitude, but by help from above. Moral
swasions are weak Physic, to carry away peccant humors prepossessing: it must
be grace from God that vehiculates them to the parts disaffected, and by them
works evacuation and restitution to a better habit. If our righteousnesses,
that are as filthy rags, become clean garments before God: if our Salt that has
lost its savor, be savoured by his acceptance; if our darkness become light in
the Lord, through the Lord of Lights irradiation on us; if our covetousness of
the Earthly Mammon be converted into the earnest covering of the best things;
if instead of crying out against our selves, when we have done all we can, that
we are unprofitable servants, as our Lord commands us. It must be the work of
grace.

Our Lord, Quieunque est victoria dignus, non est ex se dignus sed ex Dei
gratuita voluntate, quae and dignum victoria efficit, and victorem. Bradward,
lib. 2. c. 6. ad finem, p. 490.
in room of that, makes himself that blessed Call to us, Come ye blessed
children of my Father receive the Kingdom prepared for you. This happy change
is from something of God in, on, and with us, his grace of prevention and
concomitance. This, this, is the soul, rule, guide to the Laws, wherein
Justice, as the way to beatitude, is deposited. And without this grace of God,
the Worlds Philosopy, the Laws learning, nay, Justice to the highest proportion
imaginable for man to arrive at, will be but Apples of Sodom, beauteous in
appearance, but rottenness and nullity in the proof of it: so true is that of
the Wiseman, even in this riches, as well as in any other; The blessing of the
Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow thereto.

And therefore no wonder, though our Chancellor says, toto conamine
addiscendae sunt leges, when he joins the grace of God with the Law, and makes
the Law sacred by its conjunction with, or rather subserviency to God's grace.
For this premised, nothing can be imagined more pleasing and profitable to the
Reason and Religion of a Prince, then the Laws, because they lead to the chief
good by the best aids; to God, by God. This is no other then Scripture
Divinity, God the chief good apprehended by Faith in the eye, Hope in the
heart, Charity in the hand, Humility in the knee, perseverance in the foot,
which are all but other wordings of grace, preventing and accompanying. Since
to attain these, as there is no means but that of God's grace in chief, and our
obsequiousness to it, as the consequent of it: so are those to be followed to
this heavenly purpose toto conamine, no saint, remiss, refracted, minute
desires, will do to purpose this deed. This Heaven on Earth is for the violent
and laborious Bees, that let no endeavor pass untryed to attain it, refuse no
hazard or toil to conquer and atchieve it. He that wrastles with God in prayer
night and day, he it is that toto conamine, endeavor knowledge of the Laws:
For Conamen here signifies not so much the act, as the endeavor and desire to
it, which expresses it self in a fixation and unmovableness of intention upon
it, when all the man sets to it ( conari manibus, pedibus, Andr. 5. 4. Pro
Quinto 27. Pro Scylla 56.
as Terence says,) it is such an expression as Cicero meant, when he uses magno
conatu studioque agere, to set out industry, or a conatus cum impetu, such an
one, as Beast and Bruits express, when they are carried to or fro from things
they love or hate; To do what we do with all our might, as Solomon's words are:
This is toto conamine addiscere; nor can it well be otherwise, for it is in
order to the greatest and utmost good, to Justice, the delight of God, and
perfection of a Prince: yet this, though insisted on with all imaginable
strenuity, will not be effected but by grace; and that present and concurring,
nothing can be wanting; That God has declared the true Elixar that makes what
ever it touches partaker of its virtue, and transforms it from what it was,
Theatrum Chymicum. p. 481.
to what is more excellent; not by Sir Edward Kellets mystical juggling (no
better then commerce with Satan) whereby brass is transformed to silver, and
copper-wyre into gold, as some Chemists report him to have done. For that
lightly and unlawfully come by, as lightly and loosely goes; as it is said to
do with him, who was so vain as to give four thousand pounds worth of gold wyre
away in Rings at a Maidservants Wedding; no such effect of this Elixar: Grace,
it turns an hard into a soft, a proud into an humble, an hypocritical into a
sincere heart; yea, it teaches a man to delight in the Law of God in the inward
man, and to be deservedly what Pits reports Feckenham Abbot of Westminster to
be, Erat in eo (says he) insignis piet as in Deum, Scriptorib. lic. p. 786.
mirae charitas in proximos, singularis observantia in majores, mitis
affabilitas in inferiores, dulcis humanitas in omnes, multiplex doctrina,
redundans facundia, incredibilis Religionis Catholicae zelus; and while a man
obtains this by the Law, is he not amply compensated? has he not the utmost
bliss, this state of viatoriness is capable of ^ I trow yes, and if so, then
the Laws of God and men from them are the most ready and useful accomplishments
of Kings and great men, because they put them into bliss, in their deepest
miseries, and in the unnaturallest desertions their vicissitudes can acquaint
them with. For that Princes may be unhappy in accidents of life, is but what
has been, Lib. De Exulio, p. 605. edit. Paris.
will be, must be, (...). Now, says Plutarch, the most deserving men have been
most encumbered, most afflicted, most ruined; but in that they can be cheerful,
patient, humble, and holy, under the pressures Providence permits to impend
them, argues a great enablement from God, who gives grace to those that beg it,
suitable to his own glory, and their good.

And this I conceive our Text-Master found experimentally in himself, God had
made him a Martyr for Loyalty, a Champion for the Laws, whom because they could
not bend, (who would have their wills the Law, and not make the Law their
Wills) they resolve to banish, and break in mind, fortune, body; and he, though
he had undoubtedly many friends of Henry the Fourth's party, who would, and
could have made his peace, and procured his freedom to live at home, yet he
rather chose to live free abroad, then a slave in a free Country, and under a
free Law, as England ought to have been, but was not. Hereupon his leisure, and
loss of practice by business at home, proves his opportunity to study God,
affliction, men, his own heart, more and more thoroughly. Psalm. 119.
And now he cries out, If it had not been for God's Law his delight, he had
perished in his affliction. Now he owns gratefully to God, that it was good for
him to be afflicted. Now the fruits and comforts of Justice in his profession,
place, practice, quondamly return on him the reward of their integrity: Sure he
that writes so divinely of Justice, and presses the Law as the Rule of Princes
in it, found the Justice of Laws great subterfuges to his disconsolacy, and
retreats to his once mistakes of God's dealings. The greatest discoveries men
have of God's light and truth, are from the midst of Lightnings and Thunders,
Afflictions Storms end in a calm of merciful sublevation; when the bush burns,
and is not consumed, Isaac's throat is under the knife, then the Ram caught by
the horns is welcome to Abraham, as God's provision for a sacrifice of
redemption. So often as I think of Patmos, the place of Saint John's Revelation
of, and prospect into the mysteries of glory, of which the fuller sight is
reserved for hereafter, I cannot but conclude our Chancellor, was made what he
so divinely by his being driven from house and home; for now he being taken off
from the troubles of visits, and distractions of business, which storm-like,
come in crowds, and cross waves of different import, has thereby leisure to
converse with God, and to commune with his own heart; and being removed from
the impulsion of this World's Hell, which by force and fraud either terrify or
allure men into snares. The judgment that he (in this condition of separation
being more impartial) gives, carries the stronger reason, and will be more
influential, by how much the more sincere it is presumed to be, since nothing
so embases counsel and instruction, as the prae-occupation of interest, to the
proportion and scope of which it is often experimented mercenary: Leges
Magistratus and judicia quaedam quasi sunt numina divinitus constituta in
Republ Hopperus, lib. unico, De justitia Principis.
which being not to be suspected in our Chancellor, renders his words not
only swasive but in a sort imperative, as they flow from the almost infallible
Oracle and Fountain of great Learning, grave Experience, entire Affection, and
noble Loyalty.

Vere etsi non haec te moveant qui regnum recturus es, movebunt te, and
arctabunt ad disciplinatum legis Prophetae verba, dicentis, erudimini, qui
judicatis terram.

Still our Text-Master proceeds to inculcate on the Prince a valuation of the
Law, which, though he had by many pregnant Arguments, commended to him, he yet
further urges from a higher Authority then that of Philosophers, and men of age
and wisdom: For though it were enough to youth, that antiquity found in the way
of righteousness, commended this or that to them, because multitude of years
teach wisdom, and the Spirit of God in that counsel or command, Thou shall rise
up before the Hoar-headed, gives youth to know his acceptance of respect
showed to them, then which, greater cannot be testified then to be directed and
instructed by them: yet the Chancellor brings in the irrefragable advice of
God's Spirit, by the Kingly Prophet, in the person of Christ Jesus, who being
the Prince of peace, as well as power, allures all his Delegates, to submit
themselves to his Scepter willingly, thoroughly, constantly, and to be lessoned,
that thus to do, is to advance their power, and atone the displeasure, that
obstinacy may treasure up against them: Be instructed (says he) ye Judges of
the Earth. Now this he brings in out of the second Psalm, not primarily, (for
then he might have been thought to distrust the efficacy of his pre-engagements
of the Prin ces reason, since Justice lodged in, and learned from the Law, is
of concern enough to move a man, a Prince, in order to a King, to value, and
endeavor to understand the notion and practice of it, as the sine qua non, to
his very essence and being qua such.) But the cause that this Scripture is
superinduced, is rhetorically to overbear the Prince, that all excuse laid
aside, he should as a man, and as a King, incessantly apply himself to holy
instruction in the will of God, revealed in his Law moral, and in the extracts
from it, the National Laws fitted to his Government. For though true it be,
that perhaps when our Chancellor wrote to the Prince, Henry the Sixth was
alive; or if dead, the Prince was not actually King, as in Title and Truth
after his Father the Chancellor conceived he ought to have been: yet the good
Chancellor bespeaks him, to prepare before against the time of trial, to
imitate Solomon's Pismire, that laid up in the Winter of ruins store, against
the Summer of rule, provokes him by all the engagements of Providence and
probability, to antedate his Regality, and become a King in Learning and
Endowment, before he becomes King in fact and acknowledgment. And this he does
not, by kindling in him thoughts of revenge, and flames of abhorrence to those
persons and practices, that raised War against his Father, and forced him
abroad; yea, threatened his never return, but by courting him to learn of God,
how to want, and how to abound; how to be without subject or subsistence, and
how to use both moderately, and to the ends of God's glory, and Governors
institution: which wisely, and well to learn, he directs him to attend the
counsel of holy David, a King and a Prophet, Ex utroque Caesar, a man of
valor, and a Prince of piety, to be instructed, and that because he is to
judge others: and thereupon that he may not either not do what, or do otherwise
then what he ought to do to men, as one of the Judges of the Earth, to be well
grounded in knowledge, the rule of action. Now, though I know it becomes not
any Subject to treat of the duties of Princes but with reverence, which many
men have forgot in their late Treatises concerning them: yet shall I be hold to
touch upon this subject here, as my method leads me, in the Exposition of this
Scripture, though that but shortly, modestly, and I hope with submissive wisdom
above offense. The quotation then out of Psalm. ii. 3. Erudimini qui judicatis
terram, though it was largely intended to all, to whom instruction is proper;
yet presly and primarily was directed to the great men of the World, whom the
Prophet foresaw to be industriously composed, and pertinaciously resolved,
against the reception of Christ in his Gospel, Government, and Doctrine. And
this I suppose the Psalmist had revealed to him particularly from God, whose
prescience and omniscience discovered it to be such in the Revolutions of time,
and productions of men, that both the prenunciation of it might accord with
other Prophecies in the testimony and truth of men's opposition to the Son of
God; and that as the godly might be prepared not to stumble at it, so the
wicked might be left without excuse, when their pertinacy suffers the just
indignation of God's Son against them.

Which premised, the words have respect to somewhat employed, and somewhat
expressed: The implication is, that great men, Judges of the Earth, need
instruction: not only as they are men in common with others, subjected to the
consequences of sin, which have labefacted all the Integrals of created
Faculties, and made us dark in our Intellects, averse in our Wills, dull in our
affections to good; yea, in a sort estranged us from the love of duty to, and
subjection under God, but as they are persons peculiarly elevated above others,
apt to be flattered by, and inflamed from the vain delusions of their
Parasites, that they are made believe (unless God give them more humility to
know themselves) the best and happyest of men, when (God knows) their Cedar
height, lies in the storm and heat of all temptations; and having such snares
about them, better were it for them to hear of the frailty of man, of the
justice of God, of the duty of humility. These more commemorated in their
representation of things to them, would render them more happy in their souls
and bodies, then often they are. Ahab loved not Micaiah, (...). Dion. Cass.
lib. 55. p. 552.
the Holy Ghost says, because he told him the truth, when all the Prophets of
Baal covertly betrayed him to sin and judgment; yet Augustus did not so by
Maecenas, when he was more sharp them some think he needed; for since he kept
him a favorite, as one that should bring him off anger, and cool his
enragings, he gently bore, yea, he kindly took, and accordingly desisted from
his severity, when his friend put in that rubrique, (...), etc. Arise Sir, you
have been terrible enough. It is, I confess, a happiness to serve Princes of
mild and ductile natures, whose hearts reflect on soft and virtuous friends
with candor and kindness; which Augustus was so frequent and fervent in, that
next to the indulgence of God, who gave him a good nature, and a docibleness to
be guided by love and experience, which sedates jealousy and rage; he owed as
much of his stability and glory to his noble Livia; and his prudent Maecenas,
as to any other Princely endowment, Lib. 1. De Clement. p. 624. c. 10.
or benediction he enjoyed; which that florid, and stupendiously eloquent
Moralist does incomparably mention, Haec eum clementia ad salutem securitat
emque perduxit, etc. This Piety, says Seneca, accompanied with Clemency,
arrived him at safety and security: this made him a Conqueror, before he had
actually conquered his insolent and implacable Foes: This, at this day, makes
him dead, famous above most living Princes; men voluntarily for this, not by
command, account him of a God-like goodness, descendedly a Parent, and a good
Prince to his Country; and that because he passed by contumelies, which
Princes often take worse then injuries, and revenged them not. Thus Seneca of
him. But he could not say so of Nero, though his Pupil, and one whom he put
more milk, then blood, in the principles of his education; his Quinquennium
showed what he was from his Masters tuition, before the vices of greatness, and
the luxuries of effeminacy had enchanted him, he ought to have reasoned with
himself, Ego ex omnibus mortalibus placui, electusque sum qui in terris deorum
vice fungerer, etc. I, Lib. 1. De Clem. c. 1.
of all men, am favored of the Gods, and deputed to be their Deputy on Earth;
this favor and prelation, shall not make me wrathful and cruel; nor shall
either the heat of youth, or the rashness of choler, or the vainglory of being
known in my dreadful power, provoke me to be savage: but my ambition shall be
to purchase glory by virtue, and to carry the sword as an emblem of severity to
awe vice, but to support virtue: so will I be ruled by Law and Reason, as if I
kept them within my heart, and would make use of them as I had occasion. This
ought to have been his thoughts, and according to this his Master, the
Cultivator of him, hoped he would prove. But Nero had so debauched his mind by
effeminate transports, that all the imbibings of his educations were
expectorated. Now all the Lenitives and Morals that art can prescribe, are
Apocryphal, and come too late either to be welcome, or followed. Nero was
proceeded Tiger, such a degree in inhumanity, as had no name before him. To
tell him, non regem decet saeva, and inexorabilis ira, to proclaim to him
affability, love, compliance, as that which would not make him execrable, but
adorable, was such a Solaecism to his ranting Resolution, that he counted it
melius non nasci quam inter publico bono natos numerari; Postea. adeo sui
dissimilis evasit, ut monstrum non homo dici mereatur. Sueton. De Nerone.
yea, so impatiently did he suffer his fury to be in danger of allaying, by the
mildness of his Master, and the majesty of his Reason, that he opened
tyrannously the veins of that body, the soul whereof lodging in the blood and
spirits then expiring, had impregnated him with better principles. Die Seneca
did a Martyr to Nero's rage, who endeavored to make Nero mild and virtuous? I
could tell you of Demetrius Poliorcetes, Pausanias, the Lacedemonian
Alcibiades, Agathocles, Pisistratus, Sylla, Catiline, Mark Anthony, Domitian,
Manuel Comnenus, Offa King of Mercia, Pope Alexander the Sixth: All which, and
sundry others, who had eminent vices as well as virtues, and not well observing
the Rules of practique virtue, had need to be instructed against forgetting
God, themselves, and their people. This confirms, that they need instruction,
because their plethorique fortunes and stations are subject to more predominant
vices, and their ears are less (then is necessary) suppled by virtuous
freedoms, and serious monitions, softning the heart, and lifting it up in
gratitude to God.

This our late martyred King Charles the First, considering, breaks out into
this expression, Public Reformers had need first act in private, C. 20. Eicon
Basih p. 187.
and practice that on their own hearts, which they purpose to try on others.
Christ's Government will confirm mine, not overthrow it, since as I own mine
from him; so I desire to rule for his glory, and the Churches good. So he that
was the best of men and Kings his contemporaries, discovered the teachings of
God to him in his afflictions: And as that they need instruction, is employed,
so that they may, and ought to be instructed, is expressed, and that by a King,
Peer to any Successor in Kingship, and a Prophet, which no King after him I
think was, Solomon excepted, who was his Son; if a Prophet he was, which I am
not sure of.

Erudimini, said he, to the Judges of the Earth, who was himself a Judge of the
Earth; not thereby to become an authority to insolent spirits, to reproach or
discover the nakedness of Princes, if any such there be, as Chams in all times
have cursedly done: no, nor to render Majesty cheap by these abasements, which
even suspicion of defect in some degree, occasions. But the Erudimini here is,
(...), it is to follow and imitate nature; embrace plain and naked truth, (...),
to see good Laws and right Constitutions obeyed in all parts of Government,
Lib. De Temulentia, p 2^5 p. 261.
as Philo's words are; and this to do, as to do it, is that which is insculpt
on the Table of man's heart, to obey God, who has fixed Governors to rule for
him, and will have account of their trusts from them. So is it to be followers
of God as dear children, in all those imitable acts, which as a Father, and
King of order, he proposes to them in his example. The prophetique King here
takes great men to task as their Monitor, and he bids them, (...), castigate
vos, he bids them understand, that whereas God has given them exemption from
men's castigation, yet he requires they should restrain and curb themselves; for
the root, (...), signifies such a restriction, Pagninus in Verbo.
as men in bonds and setters have, ne pro sua libidine evagetur and vivaet:
it is not barely to know; for that the Holy Ghost have expressed by (...), for
of that the wise King speaks, Prove. xxii. 6. Teach a child in the trade of
his youth, that is, as Rabbi Jonah expounds it, teach him pausatim paulatim, ut
far possit; nor is it an instruction like that of Tyro's, who learn methods
of War and Combat by exercise; for then the word would have been (...), as the
Psalmist uses it, Psalm. xxxiv. 12. Come my little children, hearken unto me,
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord: nor is it (...), such a fear as is
preparatory to God's instruction, such, as Kimchi says, implies, praeparationem
verborum cujuspiam in alterum cum rationibus, and ostensione juris; but it is
chiefly (...), that is here used. And the Prophet's sense is, Learn to know
God's mercy to you, that though he has prelated you, yet it is, that you should
deny your selves what you might, to do what you ought. This is that the holy
King invites his fellow Kings to; and the holy Prophet counsels them that
govern the Earth, in God's name to do, and that because they are judicare
terram. Indeed, the consideration of duties incumbent on men in power, should
make them as less seekers, so less servers of themselves in it: for besides
that it is a burden too heavy for the most Atlantique shoulders, which has
ever been the reason why Deputations have been so frequent, and that of old, as
Iethro counseled Moses, and as Paterculus tells us, was among the Romans, and
as is in use at this day with us, and amongst our Neighbors. Raro eminentes
viri, non magnis adjutoribus ad gubernandum fortunam suam usi sunt, ut duo
Scipiones, duob^s Laeliis quos per omniae aequaverunt sibi, ut divus Augustus,
M. Agrippa and maxim ab illo Statilio Tauro, quibus novitas familiae haud
obstitit, quo minus ad maltiplices consulatus, triumphosque, and complura
niterentur sacerdotia. Patercul. lib. 2.
Men in power had need to have extraordinary parts, and self-masteries, to know
and perform their places to a conscientious and creditable latitude. God
requires Talents for Talents, every ten Talents of power must have ten Talents
of Justice to men, and glory to God returned for it. And hence comes it to
pass, that the Erudimini here has much more in the scope, then the mere phrase
carries with it. For my part, I humbly conceive those three heads of Saint
Paul's, predicated of the Gospels Revelation, that is, 2 Titus 11.
teaches to deny ungodlyness, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present evil World, is whatever this Erudimini imports, nay, whatever God
has in expectation from Kings, the best and God-likest of men. To live soberly
to ones self, so as to have a reverence to ones body, becomes every man, but
especially a Prince, because he is (...), a diety in flesh; and if he be the
Oracle that men repair to for solution of doubts, reparation of wrongs,
preservation from violence, and example to virtue; to keep his head cool, his
affections restrained, his desires moderate, is the way to be quadrate to his
dignity, then he will not err in judgment, when he judges impartially first
his own body and soul, and keeps such quarter in them, (...) (...), etc. that
he suffers nothing to be done by him, but what is suitable to nature's rule,
Lib. 4. Sect. 12. edit Gatakeri.
and the good of Mankind. This the Emperor Mark Antoninus prescribes. This
takes off all those exuberances, that besot and lose Princes in obscenity and
dissoluteness. To live righteously, that is the joy of all Subjects; because
where it is radicated in the soul, 'twill distribute it self in all expressions
of power. The same Emperor gives a noble advice (...), Lib. 4. Sect. 22. p 27.
not to wander from the punct and indivisibility of Justice, but ever to have
justice as the Rudder that steers us, (...), etc. to watch over the
understanding, and hold it free from love of any appearance. The learned
Gataker glosses thus on the words, In lib. 4. c. 22. p. 145. Commentar. Epist.
89.
Ne aberres vel tantum, aut ab aquitate in conatibus, aut a veritate in
assentionibus. This is that which Seneca magnifies so, in that it does not
virtutem dare voluptati, sed nullum bonum putat nisi hones^um, quae nec hominis
nec fortunae maneribus deliniri potest, cujus boc pretium est, non posse
praecio capi. But to live godly, that is the top-lesson of Princes, it is
doctrina principi congrua, because it keeps all the Springs and Artifices of
action and contemplation in awe; Esaias xlv. 23.
God himself declares this use to be made of it, I am a great King, says the
Lord of Hosts, and I swear by my self every knee shall bow to me. Kings, though
compared to men, they are Gods, not to be bowed against their wills, but to be
bowed to that they may will well; yet to God, they are men subject to his Iron
Rod, and his word of mutation works on their souls, bodies, and affairs. Hence,
not only the Apostle prefixes the true fear of God to the honor of the King;
but Antoninus, according to the sense of Scripture, gives the rule to all
Kings, as well as other, (...). Fear, says he, the Gods, and then (...), Lib.
6. Sect. 30. p. 52.
preserve men. All government of men ought to be to that end, which Julian
alleadges Marcus Antoninus to answer to Silenus, (...), So to live over men, as
to be both just and merciful to them, as God is just in point of punishing
errors, merciful in point of relaxing burdens. Deus est mortalis juvare
mortalem, and haec aed aeternam gloriam via, hic est vetustissimus referendi
been merentibus gratiam mos, ut tales numinibus adscribant, Hist. Not. l 2. c.
1.
says Pliny.

So that all these considered, the Erudimini here has much in it, and a strong
force it carries to the gaining of Princes to follow it, if they would be
subject to the reason of it, the Prophet is no lax and saint Rhetorician in
this soft, yet significant language; but he does by a pathetique, arctare and
movere verbis, as our Text-Master comments on him; he does movere vigore, and
arctare ratione, and as he sets all his spiritual love on work to persuade, so
all his learned Reason to compel and overruled the Judges of the Earth, scire
institutum Dei, and sequi disciplinatum legis; for as learned King James of
happy memory once wrote.

King James to Prince Henry. lib. 1. Basilic. Doron, Sonnet before the first
Book.
God gives not Kings the style of Gods in vain,
For on his Throne his Scepter do they sway,
And, as their Subjects, ought them to obey,
So Kings should fear, and serve their God again.
If then you would enjoy a happy Reign,
Observe the Statutes of your Heavenly King,
And from his Law make all your Laws to spring,
Since his Lieutenant here ye should remain.
Reward the just, be steadfast, true, and plain,
Repress the proud, maintaining aye the right,
Walk always so, as ever in his sight,
Who guards the godly, plaguing the profane;
And so ye shall in Princely virtues shine,
Resembling right your mighty King Divine.
And this our Chancellor setting out so emphatically, makes me conclude him to
be Rara avis in terris. One in his own soul so just, and so incessant an
Orator with the Prince, for Law and Justice according to it, that to other
Acursiusses, Leguleiviliora eligentes, non juris consulti, as Budaeus words it,
he deserves to be accounted a Servius, a Pomponius, a what not, that proclaims
him a Saint of the Long-Robe: And as Budaeus wished to France in his time, (and
a learned and wise Chancellor he in his time was) so in my humble and hearty
wish to England, Vtinam vero nunc tres servos haberemus pro sexcentis illis
Accursianis, id est, tres viros justos, pios, germanosque, and ut ita dicam,
majorum gentium juris consultos; that is, say I, not as he, in the specifique
words, but in analogy of good wishes, would to God we had more good, and less
bad Lawyers then we have. And this I wish, for God, the King, and the Countries
sake, that Religion, Allegiance, Justice, and Charity, might be, by their
Learning and practice, the more and better promoted. But I return to the Text.

Non enim ad eruditionem artis sactivae aut mechanicae hic movet Propheta, cum
non dicat, Erudimini qui colitis terram, nec ad eruditionem scientiae tantum
theoreticae quamvis opportuna fuerit incolis terrae, quia generaliter non
dicit, Erudimini qui inhabitatis terram, sed solum ad disciplinam legis, qua
judicia redduntur, reges specialiter invitat propheta in his verbis, Erudimini
qui judicatis terram.

These words our Text-Master adds, as an expatiation and ornament of his main
Argument; not that he thought it not sufficient to carry the weight he
superstructed it, but to obviate any mistake of the sense of Scripture, apt to
be distorted through peevishness, or mistaken by ignorance. To rectify which
digressions, from the intendment of the Prophet, our Chancellor proposes this
allegation of the Holy Ghost's, as directly relative to Rulers of all ranks;
not only as they are men, for so they are concerned in common with all others;
but also, and chiefly, as they are the highest and most influential of men,
either to good or evil. And because they may be engaged to do good, their
Architect who has built their power so many Stories high beyond other men's,
whose foundations are more in the dust, and whose houses are of Clay, when
theirs are of Cedar and Marble; whose Companions are the Dogs of the Flock;
when these sit among the Gods, is by the Prophet more presly catechetique to
Princes, not only to call them to, but to instigate them by the commemoration
of their received bounties from God, to learn their duty, and practice their
subjection to, and zeal for him, that has so dignified them.

It Is true indeed, there is an Erudimini, which all men, at all times, in all
stations, need; the Apostle, by the Spirit of God, calls on Christians to
study, and exhibit to view that Catholicon that cures prejudice, Phil. 4.5.
and commends to peace and Charity, Let your moderation, says he, be known to
all; and there are particular Scriptures exhortative to men in mechanique and
active Callings, which are to be heeded, God has left no man without his
mortalis genius, his (...); yea, and his Monitor from above, such
Scripture-dictates as if he follow, he will please God, and pleasure himself in
the peace of a rightly informed from, and rightly conforming Conscience to,
God. To this purpose are Scriptures applicable to particular conditions: The
Priests are to read the Law, Mark 9.50. 2 Timothy 2.15. 1 Cor. 9.19. Mal. 2.7. 1 Timothy 5.17. Jam. 1.^1. 2 Pet. 1.10. Phil 3.14.
to preserve their savor as salt, and luster as light, to study to show
themselves workmen; To carry Consciences void of offense both toward God, and
toward men; To become all to all, that they may gain some; and the people are
to enquire the Law at the Priests lips. Count those that labor in the Word and
Doctrine worthy of double honor; receive with all meekness the ingrafted Word
able to save their souls; To labor to make their calling and election sure; To
press forward to the mark of the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. These, and such like Scriptures, are accommodated for instruction of
Priest and People.

There are other Scriptures adapted to other purposes of practick use, Jam 4.6.
Adag. Chil. ^. Cent. 6. Adag. 22, 23. p. 236. Jer. 9.23. Gal. 6.14.
not to be proud, for God resists the proud; not to glory in abundant
Revelations, not (...), to lift up our horn on high; not to glory in riches,
wisdom, beauty, strength, but to glory in this, that we know God; to glory in
the cross of our Lord Jesus, whereby the World is crucified unto us, and we
unto the World. To Parents, not to provoke their Children; Ephesians. 6.5, 6.
to Children, not to disobey their Parents; to Servants, to be obedient to
their Masters; and to Masters, not to be hard and severe to them; to Wives, to
submit themselves to their own Husbands; Ephesians. 5.22, 25.
and to Husbands, to love their Wives as their own flesh; to Christians, to
love one another, and to provoke each other to love, and to good works; Luke
3.14
to Soldiers, to be content with their wages, and to do violence to no man. To
Scholars, to be wise to sobriety, and not to search into the secret things
which belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but content themselves with things revealed. To people, to obey those that are
set over them. To fear God, and honor the King, and to give subjection to
every Ordinance of man, Heb. 13 17. 1 Pet. 2.13.
for the Lord's sake. These, and such like Scriptures, are inserted into God's
Holy Word, as particular documents, to particular persons, stations, degrees of
men. But this Scripture before us, Erudimini qui judicatis terram, is the
Scripture that concerns Kings and Judges, that they should consider what God
requires from them, and what their Prelacies, ex aequo, imports them to do. And
this, if ever any man did, I believe our late King Charles the blessed, was
taught by God to do: Hear him, Eicon. Basilic. ^ 19. p. 177.
I never had any victory, which was without my sorrow, because it was on mine
own Subjects, who, like Absalom, dyed many of them in their sin; and yet I
never suffered any defeat, which made me despair of God's mercy and defense:
when Providence gave me, or denied me victory, my desire was neither to boast
of my power, nor to charge God foolishly, who I believed at last would make all
things work together for my good. I wished no greater advantages by the War,
then to bring mine enemies to moderation, and my friends to peace. I was afraid
of the temptations of an absolute Conquest, and never prayed more for victory
over others, then over my self: When the first was denied me, the second was
granted me, which God saw best for me. This was the Piety and probity of a
King, vivendo nobilis, moriendo nobilior, which I believe he had conveyed to
him, through the mercy of God, by the instructions of his learned and pious
Father of happy memory King James, Basilicon. Doron, Book 1. p. 14^. fol.
the first King of England of his name, and the second Solomon in the World, as
I believe. For hear him, concerning a King's Christian duty toward God. Think
not therefore that the highness of your dignity diminishes your faults, much
less gives you a license to sin; but by the contrary, your fault shall be
aggravated, according to the height of your dignity, any sin that ye commit
not being a single sin, procuring but the fall of one, but being an exemplare
sin, and therefore drawing the whole multitude to be guilty of the same;
remember then that this glittering worldly glory of Kings is given them by God,
to teach them to prease, so to glister and shine before their people, in all
works of sanctification and righteousness, that their persons, as bright lamps
of godlyness and virtue, may, going in and out before their people, Page 156.
Book 2.
give light to all their steps. And in the second Book, treating of the King's
duty in his office, he says, A good King thinking his highest honor to
consist in the discharge of his calling, employeth all his study and pains to
procure and maintain, by the making and execution of good Laws, the welfare and
peace of his people; and as their natural Father, and kindly Master, thinks
his greatest contentment stands in their prosperity, and his greatest surety,
in having their hearts, subjecting his own private affections and appetites to
the weal and standing of his Subjects, ever thinking the common interest his
chiefest particular; which, by the contrary, an usurping Tyrant thinking his
greatest honor and felicity to consist in attaining per fas vel nefas, to his
ambitious pretenses, thinks never himself sure, but by the dissension and
factions among his people, and counterfeiting the Saint, while he once creep in
credit, Will then (by inverting all good Laws, to serve only for his unruly
private affections) frame the Commonwealth ever to advance his particular,
building his surety upon his peoples misery, and in the end, as a step-father,
and an uncouth hireling, make up his own hand, upon the ruins of the
Republique. Thus incomparably that King.

By these, and the like senses, which good Kings have had of their duty to God
and men, it appears, that the Prophet's words here to Kings, are of more
consequence, by how much they tend by the greatest project, to end in the
greatest emolument, that of Kings bettered both to God and men in their
beneficence, as I may so say to both, in that they do as Marcus Antoninus
advises, Lib. 4. Sect. 2. p. 23.
(...), etc. Do nothing rashly nor vainly, nor otherwise, then as exactly
corresponds with the rule. When they do as Artists do, Gatakeri Annotat. n lib.
4. sect. 2. p. 122.
in minutissimis quibusque artis suae, and praecepta observant, and specimen
edunt, it a and Apelles ex lineae unicae ductu solo, Protogeni innotuit, says
this learned Commentator on him.

Which considered, as good Princes are to be ever solicitous of their duties,
and vigilant over their thoughts and works, that they wander not to an
eccentricity, and dishonor themselves by the returns of the ventures they have
made unhappily on them: So are all good Subjects to pray for their Princes in
secret, and pity their temptations, rather then revile their seductions by
them. For Princes had need of great graces, and self-denials, Quod in
Caesaribus rarum comperies perpetuo sa^^s. Erasm. in Epist. ad Suetonium De
Augusto.
that remain virtuous, where every Wit, every Beauty, every Courage, is their
humble Servant, and gives themselves a free will offering to before they ask,
them. No wonder then the fear of God is called the beginning of wisdom, and
Justice the establisher of the Throne, and both pressed by our Chancellor from
Moses and Solomon, as Prescripts to Kings, because they being in excelso
positi, as they have great storms to shake them, so had need to be firmly
rooted in the love of God, and in care and watchfulness over themselves, for
their Subjects sakes. For if they that are the Guard be surprised; if the Wall
of the Vineyard be broken down; if the shepherd wander out of the way, Malos
principes faciunt nimia licentia, rerum copta, amici improbi, satellites
detestandi. Vopiscus in Aureliano.
and be lost in the Wilderness of sin, where no path of God is; Religion,
Peace, Order, Honesty, Renown, Power, all, evaporates and dissolves; Kings are
Bonds that keep all together they are nerves and sinews, veins and arteries,
that preserve strength, and convey nutriment to the body: they are Suns, and
Moons, and Stars, all Constellations of felicity to the inferior World their
Subjects, who move from them, if they keep their brightness by day and night,
suffering no sin vastative of the Conscience to reign in and over them; but by
humility, and severity of life, rescue themselves from the Eclipses of
immortalities; Vulcatus Gallic. in Avidio Cassio, p. 156. Romans Scriptorum.
All the World will love and fear them, as good, and great, and all mouths
will be filled with acclamation of them, as they did in Solomon's Case; Blessed
be God who has given to David a wise Son to reign over this great People; and
as they did to Antoninus, whom the Senate acclamated thus, Antonine pie, dii te
seruent. The like to Alexander, Lampridius in Severo, p. 208.
to Seuerus, Capitolinus in Severo, p. 221.
to Gordianus, Idem, p. 228.
to Claudius, Trebellius Pollio, p. 267.
to Tacitus, Flav. Vopisc. p. 284.
to Probus. Idem, p. 292. Ul^ichus Huttenus ad Leonem x Pontif. in Praefat.
ante Vallam.
Yea, 'twill be said of them, as 'twas of the Medicean Family. In Cosmo Mediceo
fuit hoc in primis admirandum, etc. This was most admirable in Cosmo Medices,
that though he himself were unlearned, he loved the Learned, and allured them
to him by rewards and honors; and his Father Laurentius Medices was both
himself a learned man, and loved the learned; which caused the World to say,
that the family of Medices, were the Patrons of Learning, who restored Arts
almost lost, and gave the Greek and Latin Tongues a resurrection in their
learning and bounty. Oh it is a rare Character the Princely Pope Leo the 10th
has, Tu ille orbis amor, etc. Thou, Ulrichus Huttenus de Leone x. Papa, in
Praef. ante Vallam. Isocrates, Ep. 7. Xenophon. Paedag. lib. 8.
O sacred Leo, art the Worlds darling and delight, the restorer of Peace, the
determiner of War, the author of safety, the setler of troubles, the Father of
Studies, the Nurse of Arts, the restorer of all decay in Science. For when a
Prince follows the Orator's rule, (...), etc. When he seeks rather to be rich
in fame then wealth, when he endeavors, as Chrysantas says, (...), etc. a good
King differs nothing from a good Father, as Tullius, the old Roman King, was
to his Subjects, (...), etc. when he accounts his Subjects children, Dyonis.
Halicarnass. lib. 4. Herodot. lib. 3.
and is to them a Father; when he is in his Reign not a Darius, (...), a narrow
minded Prince; nor a Cambyses, (...), a severe and violent Lord, whom no man
can either obey, or resist; but a Cyrus, a Father, quia mitis, bonus,
beneficus, benignus: A Prince that thus is taught of God to know his mercy, and
to make men bless God for the fruits of it that they find, in living peaceable
lives under him in all godlyness and honesty: such a Prince deserves to have
the happiness, which Nicoles said Physicians had, Anton. Collect. lib. 1. c 56.
(...), etc. whose virtues the Sun and all eyed men see with admiration, and
their frailties not see in charity, but bury them in grateful forgetfulness. Et
sequitur ne quando irascatur dominus, and pereatis de via justa.


This is quoted, as it is added in the Psalm, to acculeate the persuasion, to
learn to know how to judge for, as God, that is righteously. For though it be
enough to a good man, to do what is good and just, because good and just are
the properties of God, and the provisions of his Institution in Magistracy: yet
forasmuch as the servility of our nature being the effect of sin, evidences us
more driven by fear, then drawn by love, the Holy Ghost has brought up the duty
with a danger in the failer of it: And the sense is this, that the wisdom of
God is not to be perverted by us, nor the power which he has entrusted great
men with, to be abused to rage and fury, which is but the backside, and dark
Representation of that Cloud, in which Magistracy is wrapped, for its further
and fuller awe on Mankinds disorders, left God reveal from Heaven his wrath
against such unrighteousness of great men, and they perish from the right way,
that is, lest when they are too big for men to deal with, God take them short
by death, or other anticipation, and they have not the just power continued to
them, which, while they had, they unjustly abused. And this indeed, is a great
Argument, which should move men in power to study knowledge, and practice of
their duty; to consider, that God is higher then they, that they are but
dispensers of his talents; and that therefore they ought to carry wise minds,
and wary hands, in ordering public affairs. Oh! happy was that Goth,
Theodorick, and happy those people under him. In bonis jactibus tacet, in malis
ridet, in neutris irascitur, in utrisque philosophatur; when Governors are
concerned in no passion, Sidonius, lib. 1. Ep. 2.
but as it still is in subserviency to God's end in their Governments felicity,
then are they out of fear of the Son of God's wrath, and their perishing from
the right way. Nay then that is more true, then Seneca perhaps meant it, Dedit
tibi natura, Ep. 31.
illa quae si non deserveris, par Deo surges, hoc est summum bonum, quod si
occupas, incipis deorum esse ^ocius, non supplex.

Nec solum legibus quibus justitiam consequeris, fili Regis, imbui te jubet
sacra Scriptura, sed and ipsam justitiam diligere. Tibi alibi praecepit, cum
dicat, diligite justitiam, qui judicatis terram, Sapientiae, c. 1.

Still our Chancellor fills the Prince's ears with fresh Reasons; fain he
would that he should be just, who is a King's Son, and he hopes is to be a King
in God's time: And hereupon, as he had formerly acquainted him, that Justice he
must know and practice; sonow he tells him, that the must do what he does not
so much in policy, as in love to Justice: not because he would be well thought
and spoken of; not for that it is commodious to fix Government, though this is
a warrantable motive; but from love to Justice, as the imitation of God, and a
partaking of his essential perfection in such a measure as we are capable of,
and it is possible to be derived on us. And hereupon Princes are to love
Justice, and to hear the Laws that commend it; Lib. 1. De Abstinentia, p. 7.
which Laws were not made by men of force, (...), as Porphyrus's words are, but
(...), by wise and worthy men, who considered them, as they were suitable to
the reason of Nature, and the Religion of right Reason. And thus our
Chancellor presses it from the first of Wisdom, v. 1. as both a Moral
Divinity, and a Divine Morality. That which both to Heathens and Christians as
men, is commendable, and without it, whatever is seraphiquely pretended in
either, is just nothing. For whereas the Text in Wisdom is, Love righteousness,
ye that be Judges of the Earth: our Translators referring to Texts in the
Canon, suitable to this Apocrypha in the Margent, mentioned 1 Kings iii. 3. The
words are, Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the Statutes of David his Father;
and Esaias lvi. 1. where the words are, Thus says the Lord, keep ye Judgment,
and do Justice: which put together, do in their, and any good man's sense,
amount to our Chancellour's drift, That to love Righteousness, is to love the
Lord the fountain of it, and the best way to see him with his reward with him,
that is, with comfort and salvation from him, is to keep Judgment, and do
Justice, that is, to do Justice, by keeping Judgment, since no King can be just
to his own power, and peoples preservation, who keeps not the Judgment to
discern of good and evil, and diligently searches not out the conveniences
and contraries that are in his Government, and suits not Laws congruous to
them. And so our Chancellor, and I after him, conclude the fourth Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Sed quomodo justitiam diligere poteris, si non primo legum scientiam quibus
ipsa cognoscatur, utcunque apprehenderis.

IN this Chapter, the Chancellor presents the key to this invaluable Cabinet
of Justice, in which all the Wealth of Heaven and Earth lodges; and though he
has before me, and I, in all humility, after this great example, have been bold
to write of it, what to rude and loose minds may seem superfluous; yet on so
noble and necessary a head, containing under it all virtue, especially in a
Prince, as he has not sparingly invited me to proceed; so shall I not abruptly,
and with disrespect to so superior a president and command, desist, but
further ampliate the dignity of Justice, as in these words of this Chapter,
introductory to its subsequents, it is expressed to us.

Lib. De Abraham, p. 353. Lib. 1. legis Allegoria^um, p. 53.
That Justice is lovely, besides those many precited Authorities, Philo's
attribution to it, is notably confirming of it, (...), etc. Nothing, says he,
excels Justice, but it presides all other things, and adorns them all: yea, it
is (...), etc. a fruitful guest, cherishing the soul in all conditions. But how
to come at Justice, to know, and love, and possess her, is that which the
Chancellor most drives at, to inform the Prince of, and to enamour him with.

This he resolves to be the knowledge of the Laws, as the Repertory and Mine of
Justice, In the case of the Postnati.
wherein God has manifested himself to Mankind. Hopperus, a very learned
Counselor to the King of Spain, an Author, for the knowledge and use of
whom, I owe the first discovery to the Lord Chancellor Ellesmore, Lib. 1. De
Vera Jurisprud. tit. 20.
though the fuller, to my very learned and worthy friend Mr. Langford, a
Bencher of Gray's Inn, a notable Contemplatour of this Author. I say, Hopperus
calls the Law, summam divinae mentis rationem, and vocem cum bonitate and
potentia conjunctam, quae posita in Republ. jubet ea, quae facienda sunt, and
prohibet contraria, ut exhausta injustitia Iustitia particeps efficiatur:
According to which computation, all Laws are essentially the same, as they came
from one God, but differ gradually, as they came to be revealed, or as the
subjects they respect, are various. By reason of the latitude whereof, and the
denomination of things just and unjust, according to the varieties of Laws,
there was a necessity that the wisest of men, should both at first make them,
and after expound, and administer them.

And good reason, the best and bravest of men, should have to do with Laws;
since they are the Standards of Justice, and the Rules of Conscience, in
matters civil, and nor mala per se, both to Kings and People; and upon this
ground, not made by advice of raw and hotheaded youth, those, of old
assistebant curiae foribus, and concilii publici spectatores, Budaeus in
Pa^dect p. 54. edit. 1521. so^. Part prima, De Excellentia hominis, c. 59. p.
172.
antequam, consortes erant, as Tacitus teaches us, but as Justice was
specificated by nine several Laws, the divine Law, the Law of Nature, of
Nations, of the Church, the Civil Law, Customary Law, the Law of Honesty,
Necessity, Positivity, as Phavorinus has noted it, and according to all these
things are determined just; so the Justicers of these Laws had need have great
abilities to know and apply their Judgments to the severalities of them, and
their emergencies. The consideration of which, in the consequence of it, has
dictated to men, prudently to acquiesce in the judgments of learned and
well-parted men, as the competentest distributers of Justice to the rest of the
World, who being better qualified to act, yet are less exact in matters of
design and decision then they: So that the great work of enablement to
Legislation, for which Fabius and Sabinus were called the Cato's; Domitius
Vlpian, and Julius Paulus, the two Poles Vertices Legum; Pomponius the Oracle
skilled, usque ad finibriam and extrema scientiarum; Papinian Iuris Asylum, the
Prince of Law, and Refuge of distress: I say, that which proclaimed these so
useful in their times, was the universal Science they had of right and wrong,
good and evil, and the Catholic disquisition that they had made of the usages
and apprehensions of Nations, and men concerning them.

This they termed Knowledge, the door to practique Justice, and wisdom of
action: So Epictetus, (...), etc. first Knowledge enters into man, then her
sisters Fortitude and Justice. In Cebetis Tabula, p. 43.
For as in the World, the first Creature was Light; so in man, the initial
virtue is Knowledge, which is not barely the use of Reason, but a distinct and
applicative apposite use of it to persons and things. For by this method, does
God in nature carry man to improvement and action; by his speculative Intellect
he understands good; by his practical Intellect affects it; by his reason, he
discerns between good and evil; by his freedom of will he chooses, by his will
consents, by his wit finds out mediums to his end, and by a close of all, comes
to the mark he aims at. Quod sensus percipit, imaginatio representat, cogitatio
format, ingenium investigat: ratio judicat, memoria servat, intelligentia
approhendit, contemplationemque adducit, scientia est. Part prima c. 59. p.
172.
So that as Phavorinus marshals them; that which Sense perceives, Imagination
represents, Cogitation forms, the Wit searches out, Reason judges of, Memory
retains, and the Understanding apprehends, and is brought on by contemplation,
that is said to be Knowledge: So that the knowledge of the Law, that the
Chancellor ushers in here, is not knowledge of comprehension, which the Greeks
call (...); for that, though some Orators use promiscuously with apprehendere;
Lib. 2. c. 5.10.
yet Quintilian discriminates, Latior comprehensio, says he. For so to know the
Law, and Justice from it, is impossible for man, unnecessary for a Prince;
comprehension in this sense being bonum patriae non viae, peculiare Dei and
deisicorum, non hominum, according to that of Saint Paul, We know but in part.
But knowledge of apprehension is that quae ad mensuram refertur, (...). It Is to
see as far into a Millstone, as the opacity and compactness of the body will
suffer, and our optique vigor can pierce to. This mediocrity, in our knowledge
of the Law, is that which the Chancellor puts the Prince upon attaining: For
although deep speculations become Professors of Arts, who live and thrive by
the fame and gain of their procedures therein, yet to men who study for
delight, and to know how to regulate themselves to God, and to others, lesser
proportions of criticalness and profundity will serve: yea, it sometimes falls
out by God's judgment on curiosity, that our sin, in searching beyond our
tether, brings us to arrive at aversation from God the chief God, and enmity
against his Image in his adorers, and to be made up of ill ingredients, as
Porphyrie was; of whom Holstenius professes, he can give no other reason of his
hatred of Christianity, De Vita and Scripti^. Porphyrii, c. 6.
and that madness, that he vented against it, Quam quod animus atrae bilis
fermento turgens, and nimia eruditionis copia inflatus, semet ipsum non
caperet, ita and hujus exemplo patuit, mundi sapientiam insipientiam esse apud
deum. So that the apprehenderis here, is a term of restraint, wherein the
prescriber limits the universality of his counsel, the Prince he would have to
know the Law, because it is the Rule of Justice, and that the Crown of
Government, and that the Earthly Paradise of Kings: But this knowledge he would
have modest and moderate, true for the nature, but not ambitious of ultimacy,
to know ultra quod non, to boast and brave with, but as the Stoique advices,
(...), etc. to show our selves bettered by it; men that are intent upon, and
act according to reason, and are not acted by transports, and giddy
fanaticismes, which makes much of what is little, and most of what is nothing,
but folly and madness.

Dicit namque Philosophus quod nihil amatum nisi cognitum.
This the Text adds, to make knowledge of the Law, more to be affected by the
Prince, because it is the means of loves both admission and perfection. For as
there is no desire of that we know not, so no degree of desire of it and love
to it, further or other, then the knowledge of it is in us. It Is true good is
the object of love; but because good, is not to us good, but as known and
apprehended so by us: therefore the Philosopher first, and our Chancellor next
from him, tells us, nihil amatum nisi cognitum, Aenead. 3. lib. 5. p. 5.
which brings to my thought the wisdom of Plotinus, in making love the
consequence of knowledge, to be descended from the two extremes of (...)
indigence, and (...) affluence, to show, that it is the mean between their
excesses, Amor cum ex pulchro ama^^ quasi ex patre and ex pulchri cognitione
una cum ejus absentia in amante conspecta quasi ex matre ducat originem.
Phavorinus, lib. De excel. hom. Part prima, c. 7. p. 38. Lib. 6. p. 299.
and compounds want and abundance, to make a conjunct content; for as if it
were all good, and wanted nothing, 'twould not look abroad in the power of a
communicative effect: so if it were wholly void of good, and clogged with
misery, (...), it would never endeavor after good. The power and providence of
God is then notable, in so dexterously composing things, that as knowledge
occasions love, so love improveth knowledge; since as that we love we enquire
into; so that we enquire into we love: so says experience from reason by the
Philosopher here quoted, Dicit namque Philosophus. This Philosophe here is
Aristotle, the Master of Alexander the Great, called here so (...), and (...),
because no less a Conqueror of Art and Nature, then his Pupil was of People
and Countries: as the one did reduce all to his power by puissant Armies,
laying level all opposition against him, and making the inaccessableness of
their situation and obstruction plain before him, that every one might see
Alexander a Conqueror, who chalked out his quarters every where, and had no
more to do then veni, vidi, vici: so the other, in his subtle Philosophy, and
laborious History of Nature, did denude those secrecies that before him were
not known, and made men after him a fair access to the most cryptique, and
obstruse Veins and Mines of intellectual riches; which the learned World
finding, attribute to him more then mortal Eulogies, and prefer him in their
Doxologies beyond any that is mere man. I know the Greeks had high value of
Socrates, and Pythagoras; the Indians of Apollonius Tyanaeus; the Poets of
Hercules and Tully, taking this rise from the interpretation of the Oracle,
which from the Bees sitting on Plato's lips, when but in swaddling clouts,
presaged his incomparable Eloquence; 1. D^ Divinitat. Lib. 2. Denat. Deorum.
though I say Tully admire Plato so far, that he terms him, Deus Philosophorum,
Deus ille noster Plato, as he wrote to his friend, Princeps ingenii and
doctrinae, Cic. Quint. fratri. lib. 1. Exagitator omnium rhetorum in Orat. 2.4.
though he calls Plato gravissimus; Cic. Attico. lib. 4. 85. Vossius Hist.
Graec. lib. 1. p. 15. Cel. Rhodig. 1. Antiq c. 22. Dugardus in sappl. ad Vigers
Idiotism. Graec. Livy Impress. hom. 1647. p. 387.
yet Aristotle will carry the name of the Philosopher, a name given him for his
eminency in knowledge, for which the Ancients gave names of honor according to
their peculiar merits; Bion they call (...), the Rhetorician; Arrianus (...),
the lover of truth, Atheneus, (...), the Wiseman at Meals; Strabo (...), the
Geographer; Dyonisius: (...), the Describer; Stephanus Bizautinus (...), the
Writer of Nations and Customs; Julian (...), the Apostate; Hermogenes Rhetor,
(...), the writer of the state of causes; Herodian Grammaticus, (...), the
Artist; Chaeroboscus, (...), the Country Artist; Charon, (...), the Ferry-man,
etc. Yea, in our own Nation, it has, and is used thus, Bid was called the
venerable, Halensis the accurate, Scotus the subtle, Bradwardine the profound,
Ockham the invincible, Hooker the judicious. All which names were given them,
not ad excitandam invidiam, sed ad perpetuandam memoriam of their incomparable
respective merits. In like manner, as the Holy Ghost does affix reproaches on
evil men, 1 King. 14.16. 1 King. 21.26. Math. 26.
as on Jeroboam, he who made Israel to sin, and malo exemplo, and malo,
praecepto; and Ahab, he who sold himself to do wickedness, ex malo proposito,
and in malum finem, and Judas, he that was called Iscariot the Traitor, because
he sold his Master, Malo genio, and pro malo lucro; and commends the virtues of
good men, by terms of Diginity, as Abraham, the Father of the faithful; Noah,
the Preacher of Righteousness, Moses, the Lawgiver, and friend of God; Job the
patientest man; David, the man after God's own heart; Solomon, the wisest of
men; Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles; John the Divine. So other profane
Authors, in the like cases, have done, and by so doing, as they have stained
and battoon'd the Coat Armor of diverse Hectors in villainy and Heresy, so have
they adorned with all possible Trophies of virtue the memories and names of
others. Amongst whom, our Aristotle the Philosopher, is not the least nor last
to be placed; to make good which Verdict, a Jury of Authors, good men and
true, shall be produced to confirm this Title on him, not so much in the name
(...), for all Authors allow that to him, but in the merit so to be called.

Porphyrius says, Deuita Pythagorae p. 205. Incertus Author de vita Pythagorae
e Photio. p. 210.
the Pythagoreans did account Aristotle a Collector from, and a Resiner of
Pythagoras his Discoveries and Doctrine, as he was the tenth eminent person
from him, after Plato the ninth: and this must argue him, as both judicious to
be able to do it, so notably benefited in Science by so doing. Plato gives so
large a testimony of him, in calling him (...), the Reader of all Authors,
that he almost deifies him, and makes him to Books by (...), what Saint Paul
asserts God to men in his (...).

Quintilian knows not, Lib. 10. Instit. Orator. p. 156.
(though he himself be, of Orators one of the first three) what to write
worthy him, Quid Aristotelem, etc. What shall I say of Aristotle, whom I know
not whence mostly to commend, for knowledge of things and Books beyond measure,
sweetness of expression, In vita Aristot. (...). Lacitius in uita edit.
Causabon. Lib. de virtute and fort. Alexandri.
acuteness of invention, and variety of all Learning.

Ammonius records of him, that in Philosophy (...), he exceeded the proportions
of man, having gone through the exact course of that study.

And what could Laertius say more then he does of him, when he publishes him
the great Master of Arts, and sums up his Works to 445290 Verses.

Plutarch ascribes much of Alexander's Victory to the parts that Aristotle's
institution raised and enlarged in him. In Trismegist Pymand. lib. 1. c. 4. p.
36.


Averroes (as I find him in Rosselius) accounting him a Prodogie, and Blazing
Star of knowledge, breaks out into these words, Laudemus deum qui seperavit
hunc unum ab aliis, etc. Let us give thanks to God, that has separated this one
he to a perfect knowledge of all things, having appropriated wisdom to him,
whom he calls the Father of Philosophy, Historia Nature. lib. 8. c. 16. and lib.
18. c. 34. 4 Academ. In Orat. 3. 2 De Oratore.
and Master of Method.

Pliny publishes him, vir summus in omni doctrina; which is as much as if he
had said, He had read whatever was written, and digested into use whatever he
had read.

Tully extols him as the flumen orationis aureum, etc. the Golden Sea of
Speech, most admirable, and abundantly knowing. Yea, so far exceeds himself,
that he positively avers Aristoteles is the He, Lib. de Brevitate vitae.
whom I most admire.

Seneca grants him, the Captain of all good Arts, making Theophrastus his
famous Disciple beloved by him.

Vossius calls him Magnus Aristoteles, Lib. 4. c. 9. De Historicis Graecis.
non Philosophus modo summus, etc. not only a great Philosopher, but a Patron
to History and Poetry.

In Epist. ant^ Opera.
Causabon protests him, summum (bone Deus) virum, etc. the most excellent man,
the Eagle of Philosophy.

In Epist. Brulat^o Cancellatio Gal.
Duval compares Aristotle's Works, and so him, to the Purple Vest, which
Alcisthenes had to the Wonder end; for which Dyonisius the elder gave one
hundred and twenty Talents; adding, nihil hic vile videas, nihil abjectum, etc.
omnia pulchra, honesta, optima, praestantissima.

In Pandect. priores. Edit. Basil. p. 198.
And Budaeus says as much as they all in those words, Is author qui res omnes
ratione, etc. He is the man who rationally, and in a way of Science, treats of
all things; yea, even of those things, which without him, would hardly have
held capable of such treatment.

Well then might Aristotle be called (...), though he had, as Aldrovandus,
Gassendus, and even Plutarch himself make good, sundry mistakes, as no man is
without them (no not his Correctors) though after him incomparable Authors,
since he not only showed the way to all after ingenuity, but even made it so
facile, that not to exceed him, In Apologia, p. 79.
(which is not ever the happiness, though the possibility of after discoveries,
is a piece of non-proficiency,) as Picus Mirandula has at large discoursed.

This I the rather here touch upon, because the passions of men have been so
keen and virulent upon account of this Author; some crying him up as the only
he, pane post Deos Deus, and making his Philosophy, and all of him, so far
divine, that to vary from him in a tittle, has been by them censured of folly,
and to oppose and decline him, Vossins c^ntra Des Chartem in Censura Novae
Philosophiae.
condemned for a kind of Sacrilege. Others so servently acted against him,
that they thought no envy truculent enough to his person, no severity too tart
for his Writings. As when he lived, he was fain to peragrate, to avoid the fury
of destruction in his own Country, every Mom^s carping at him, and bedirting
his name with their mordacious Libels, till at last he made the Proverb good,
(...); for his learning made him welcome abroad, whom it could not render quiet
at home; which shows the benefit of breeding, whereby men support themselves
under the vicissitudes of fortunes, which Nero comforted himself with, when he
was foretold by the Mathematicians, Sueton in Nerone.
that he should be deprived of his Empire; and Dyonis^us of Syracuse, found his
only refuge, when his Tyranny left him, to take up the Trade of teaching Arts
and Music. I say, as Aristotle had these ruffles alive, so since has he been
coursely dealt with by passionate men, and the storms of their servours
impelled by interess. The whole Parisian College, in Anno 1229. decreed his
Books to be burned, Rigordus in Vita Philippi August ad Annum 1229. Campanella.
Ne quis eos de catero scribere aut leg^re praesumerst. vel quocunque modo
habere.
as ill Doctrine to men, and Blasphemy against God.

And Philo long ago, though he debacchates not against him, yet speaks with an
indifferency, which amounts to a reproach, (...), Lib. quod mundus sit
incorruptibilis, p. 940.
etc. Aristotle, says he, whom I know not how piously and soundly learned,
says so. All which tells us, that envy attends great parts, as many have to
their sorrow found it; and further more shall. And therefore, though great
parts are seldom so kept in, but time and actions evidence them: so do they
often make their havers unhappy; some in making them feared, and packed abroad,
least, as Eclipses to Favorites, they should darken them, that would be all
that luster and favor can make them, or putting them upon such thristless
searches, as waste fortune, and reduce them to need. So far are men from
admiring and loving, what God has made conspicuous, as was this Philosopher
Aristotle, Lib. 3. c. 17. in Astrol.
who had consummatam scientiam rerum omnium, as Mirandula makes good against
the Astrologers, that their eye is evil, because his has been good. So much of
this Philosophus in our Text. Now of what he wrote, Nihil amatum nisi cognitum.

Analytic prior. lib. 1. ad initium.
This Position, in terminis, as here, is not from ought I can find in the
Philosopher, but the sense, and very near the words of it, is in him, in these
words, (...), etc. that is, all Learning, and Discipline in Art, is from
antecedent knowledge, which is so necessary, that, as without the senses, no
orderly and pleasant life, if any at all, can be; Rhetor^e. lib. 2. c. 4.
Aenead. ^. lib. 5. p. 291.
so neither without knowledge can life of love be. Hence the Philosopher makes
society, familiarity, and alliance, furtherances and progresses to love, and
the height of it friendship. Plotinus confirms Aristotle; for he calls love to
be (...), etc. an implanted apprehension, Comment in Plotin lib. 9. Ennead. 3.
p. 355.
notion and cognation, on which his Commentator observes, Actus quidem
intellectus omnino immobilis est, actus imaginationis omnino mobilis, actus
denique rationis est mixtus, neque potest anima esse congruum universi mediam
nisi tria hec inse possideret, And Plato calling love Eros, and Plotinus (...)
having its substance from vision, seems to conclude love a matter of
knowledge: for though it be true, that love may not know, neither that which is
most lovely, nor all, that is lovely in the Object it loves, yet it is also
true, that where ever any degree of love is, there is some knowledge
introductory to, and obsignatiue of it; for love moves from the understanding
to its termination in the will, and before the act of the will, Lege Rosselium
in Pymand lib. 2. c. 2. p. 67. and ^. ^.
there is no liberty in the intellect; so that when, what the understanding
presents, the will complyes with, then love warms it self in the affections,
and thence communicates it self to the object of it, and the object of love
being good, and good being the object of knowledge, it follows, that as
whatsoever we desire to know, we love to obtain, so what we obtain by knowledge,
we love, as good: and nothing can be the object of love, but what is so made by
the prospect of knowleeg, which God confirms by several Texts in holy Writ,
when he promises that all his shall know him, from the least to the greatest,
and what then, they shall know him as the means to their trust in him, which is
the perfectest act of love, They that know thy name, will put their trust in
thee. And our Lord intended this in the order of those words, If ye know these
things, blessed are ye, if ye do them.

Quare Fabius Orator ait, quod faelices essent arts si de illis soli Artifices
judicarent.

This sentence of Quintilian's is some what like that of Plato's, which Marcus
Antoninus had almost always in his mouth florere Civitates, Julius Capitolinus
in vita Antonini.
etc. That Cities flourished when either Philosophers ruled them, or they that
ruled them, were Philosophers. Now this Fabius was Fabius Quintilian, (son to
Fabius Causidicus, Grandson to the Quintilian Declamator, Lib. 6. divisionum.
which Seneca makes his Contemporary, and the renowned tutor to Caelius, and
honorably mentioned by Martial, Quintiliane vagae moderator summae juventae
Gloria Romanae Quintiliane togae.
To Rome's youth learnings law Quintilian gave,
Their long Robe by his glory became brave.
yea, not only famous in Rome for notable defense of causes viva voce, but
eviden cing a Magistry in that faculty by his institutions of Oratory, and his
Declamations which to this day are of great esteem and authority, and that so
upon the account not only of parts but virtue, if he practiced what he wrote;
for besides, that he began his twelfth Book with a Chapter entitled, Non posse
Oratorem esse, nisi virum bonum; backing his assertion with nervous reasons,
Lib. 12. Instit. Orat. c. 1.
concluding Mutos ^ascere, and egore omni ratione satius fuisset, quam
providentiae munera in mutuam perniciem convertere; all good Authors do give
him Characters not contrary to the merit of such virtue and learning:
Trebellius Pollio publishes him Declamatorem Generis humani acutissimum; In
Posthumio Jun. lib. 5. Ep. 10.
Sidonius Apollinaris mentions acrimoniam Quintiliani, others term him Romanae
eloquentiae Censor, Coriphaeus Oratorum, Dempster. Lib. 3. de Finib.
Criticorum omnium (...), Optimus decendi artifex, Orator, eximius ac
necessarius. Now this Fabius is not called Rhetor (as those were, qui artem
Oratoriam profitentur, and dicendi praeceptatradunt, as Tully's words are; for
these, though by some made equivalent to Orators, I take a form below them) but
Orator of the rank of those whom Tully describes, Orator est vir bonus dicendi
peritus, qui in causis publicis, 1. De Orator. 2. De Legib.
and privatis, plena and perfecta utitur Eloquentia; such as were not only
Advocates at home but Ambassadors abroad, Faederum, pacis, belli, induciarum
Oratores, of these Seneca in his 40, and 100. Epistle writes notably. Thus much
of our Fabius Orator who, now of what he wrote here quoted, Faelices essent
arts si de illis soli judicarent artifices: by arts he means that which
Sipontinus defines esse facultatem quae praeceptis quibu^dam ac regalis
continetur, Tully makes it constare ex multis animi conceptionibus; 4. Academi.
450 4. De Finib.
indeed when all is said, it is but reason of practice and observation followed
by diligence which comes to be dux certior quam natura. As all ingenious
inventions are termed arts, so have arts attributions from Authors suitable to
the variety and diversity of such Inventions, Quintilian. lib. ^. c. 7 c. 17.
there is Imperatoria ars, armorum ars, Medentium ars, Magica ars, Palaestrica
ars, every thing that is what it is, ex cognitione and comprehensione rerum, 3.
De Finibus.
Tully allows art.

Now whereas he says, Faelices essent arts, he means as much as fortunate and
succedentes: Pro Fontcio. 1 De Divinat. 165.
so Virgil 3. Aeneid. Vivite faelices quibus est fortuna peracta: so Tully, ad
casum fortunamque faelix vir; so quod bonum, faustum, faelix, fortunatumque
esset, praefabantur rebus omnibus agendis antiqui, his meaning is, 'twould be a
gaudy time, and arts would be undoubtedly prosperous, if only they which had
art, were Judges of art.

Si de illis soli judicarent artifices, that is, if only men of Judgment in
arts might judge of arts, for though I know any man is counted an Artificer,
who exercises an art, Lib. 2.^.14.4.
yet as to this sense of Quintilian, that is required to be taken in, which he
says, artifex est qui percipit artem: and so Festus, Artifices dicti quod
scientiam suam per, actus exerceant, sive quod apt opera inter se arctent, so
Plin. lib. 22. c. 24.

1. De Orator. Quanto magis hos Anacharsis deno^asset imprudentes de
prudentibus judicantes quam immusicos de musicis. Tertullianus Apol. c. 1.
So that Artifices here are men of proficiency, Masters; so Tully calls exact
men, dicendi artifices and doctores, and suavitatis artifex consuetudo, and
morbi artifex, and generally every Excellency is called artifice; from whence I
gather, our Text-Master thought arts then only well dealt with, when they were
not concluded before heard, nor judged by injudicious men, but had a legal and
rational trial per pares.

Which if it were, arts would not hear so ill as they do, some reproach them as
the roads to ruin; breed up a man ingeniously, and a beggar by all means he
must be; that is the prattle of ignorance (...), Eras. Adag. Chil. 1. Cent. 7.
p. ^82.
etc. Art is to men the Port of misfortune: and Julius Graecinus found it so,
whom the Historian writes to be a Senator of great eloquence and wisdom in
ordering public affairs, but he adds iisque virtutibus iram Caii Caesaris
meritus. Indeed many brave men find it so through the occult providence of
God, Lib. 1. Metaphy.
and the manifest envy of men, (...), etc. Ignorance make a fortune where
knowledge only discouers art, this is the lot of scientifiquenesse often, but
not always; many multitudes of men have by learning and arts, come to riches,
honor, what not? when they have been so happy to be understood aright, and
lived in an age and place, where arts were acceptable and fairly valued; for
which Virgil was not only by Augustus, who therefore was his munificent
Patron, but also by the great wits of ages, Lib. 1. Saturnal.
Macrobius long ago gave a noble testimony of him, Est tam scientia profundus
quam amaenus ingenio, miranda est hujus Poetae, and circa nostra, and circa
externa sacra doctrina, non potest intelligi profunditas Maronis sine divini,
and humani juris scientia; Lib. 17.
so Pliny terms him solertissimarum aurium solertissimus blanditor; Cerda,
Donatus and Servius are not behind, but above all Scaliger, Resplendent gemma
in ejus carmine; Sealig. lib. 5. d^ Virgilio.
compouit mellita, and nectarea; addit tot venustates quot verba; Inest in eo
phrasis regia and ipsius Apollinis ore digna, sic puto loqui deorum proceres in
caelestibus conciliis, non si ipse Jupiter Poeta sit, melius loquatur; these
encouragements do the learned give learning by the values of them. And hence
comes it to pass that learning is so necessary for a man in power. For
learning in a man of power and place makes him unprejudiced, and cleares his
Eyesight to an Eagle-eyed clarity, it distinguishes between Subjects and
accidents, between what learning does, and what the man in which learning is,
does; and when it condemns the man, it justifies his art; hence comes
Quintilian to account arts happy, if Artists only judged of them: because,
they will not only value them as they are, but not undervalue them for some
adjunct defects; Protogenes valued one plain line of Apelles, and the foam, or
any minute and unbeautified particle of Picture from Zeuxis, or any he that
does pingere aternitatem. Or one sentence of Masculine wit boldly and bravely
worded, shall have more Commendation from a knowing and accomplished Master,
then all the Hecatombs and Pyramids of rodomontado'd Impertenances, which are
Darlings to the plebs, shall have: whereas others judge of arts as blind men
do of colors, hab-nab, hit or miss, no matter whether, crying up as the
superstitious Athenians did, a false god; nay inscribing an Altar to the
unknown God, when they decry the true one only God; so they advancing trite,
vain vile, artlesse art, decry real and regular art, reversing the Escutcheon
of rectitude, and making that vile which is excellent, as Polaemon the
Grammarian did by Marcus Varro, Petrus Crinitus lib. 9. c. 10. De honesta
discipl.
the most learned of the Romans, whom he called Porcus, when he was the Jewel
of his age; and the Jews did by our Lord, whom they made a Devil, and a friend
of Publicans and sinners, and the Ethniques, did by the Christians, whom they
proclaimed disturbers of Governments, and flagitious, when none were more holy,
humble and submiss then they; I say while men and things are thus misjudged,
and the keen edge of ill will, or the blunt of ignorance is turned to them in
their judgment of them, no Halcyon days of art can be hoped for. But when God
reduces things to rights, and puts men of art in place and power, then arts are
like to thrive, quia judicantur ab artificibus, as the Poet said of that Pope,
Excoluit doctos, doctior ipse prius.
And therefore that reproof of Tully is very appositely to be brought in here,
1. Tusc. Quaest.
Hic quidem quamvis eruditus sit sicut est, haec Magistro concedat Aristoteli
cauere ipse doceat, been enim illo Proverbio Graecorum praecipitur, quam
quisque norit artem, in ea se exerceat: Lib. 8. De. pnosophist.
for since that of the Harper in Athenaeus, (...), every man is the properest
Judge of his own harp; learning and arts are never properly judged, nor to the
proportion of their merits, till they be judged by Artists.

Ignotum vero non solum non amari, sed and sperni solet, quo Poeta quidem sic
ait, omnia quae nescit, dicet spernenda Colonus.

If knowledge be the window that lets in love, ignorance is the nuisance that
annoyes and obscures the light and luster of it, for it does not only cause an
inexpression of love, but an expression of hatred its contrary, since hatred of
good arises from ignorance of it; for did we know good to be what it is, we
would love it as we ought, which caused the Philosopher not only to light a
Candle at noon day, to seek a wise man in the multitude; but profess that if
virtue could be denuded, so that men could see her pulchritude, they would be
impatient to be absent from her, and to be in any condition without her.

Indeed it is a part of the penal pravity of our natures to be ignorant of the
life of God, and without him in our understandings, and while we continue in
this obccecation, as God is not in all our thoughts, so is nothing more the
study of our corruption then to set light by his Counsel, Commands, Rule,
Spirits, Son, all that has his Impresse on it, and the reason is only from our
ignorance of God, he is not in all our thoughts, and hereupon not before our
eyes, but instead of loving him as the most excellent, (which knowledge of him
would represent and perfectly assure to us) we postpone him to all objects we
prefer before him in love as we apprehend above him by our Knowledge; and so
the rule is in all things, so far they are loved and despised, as they are more
or less known by us.

Every thing says Solomon, has a season in which it is most gay, and in every
man, and creature there is a pleasure and grandeur which with the contraries of
them are appropriate to them, Plutarch. lib. (...).
(...), etc. said the Moralist, the horse delights in his traces, the Ox
becomes his Yoke, the Dolphin pleases himself to pass by the Ship under sail,
and to see men his darlings aboard them; the Boar loves hunting and the prey of
it; the Dog is eager on his sport according to the scent of his kind:
Athenaeus dipnosophist. lib. 8.
and so amongst men, (...), etc. The Coulter pleases the Swayn as well as the
Scepter the Prince; and the sword as highly accomplishes as the Soldier
thinks, as the book does the Scholar him, so much is the love of man tethered
to himself, and so does he philautize his own feature and the objects of his
pompous Fancy, that he is apt to make that his Canton, which Seneca lays down,
Tantum sapienti sua quantum Deo omnis aet as patet, est aliquod quo sapiens
antecedat Deum, Epist. 53.
on which Muretus writes, Impia and intollerabilis arrogantia Stoicorum, quo
non satis esse docebant sapientem suum cum Deo ex aequo componere, nisi etiam
anteponerent, and justly, for the excess of his pride ought he tobe condemned,
who thus raises a Scalade against the Knowledge of God and the humbling effects
of it.

Which alas to their just grief, if they had eyes to see and hearts to mourn
for it, not only the best of men are subject to, but even the basest; not
almost he, that is hardly worthy to be fellowed with the dogs of a wise man's
flock, but abounds in conceit of himself; not only Alexander will be a God,
Julius Caesar make a Marriage between Heaven and earth in his power over both,
Octavian reduce the metal of Rome to a Vassalage under him, beginning to dare
the Senate at twenty years of age, and keeping Roysters about him, who shall
nose the Senators, and tell them pointing to their Swords, Sueton. in Octav. c.
26.
Hic faciet si vos non feceritis, No wonder, though these Monsters in Manhood
Leviathan like, swallowing up all thought of God, Mali malorum daemonum and
fictores and Sacerdotes and cultores, Raro simul hominibus and bona fortuna and
bona men's datur. Live. lib. 30.
as the Father terms them, are so hotheaded, but to find the foex and tail of
Mankind thus (...), to smell of pride, that is somewhat strange; yet most true,
so it follows, Quo dicipoeta quidam, Omnia quae nescit dicit spernenda colonus.


This is a Verse out of some of the Poet Minors, the sense of it is, That even
the reasonlessest of men, who are but one degree on this side Beasts, have yet
the sensuality, or senselessness rather, to contemn what they know not; which
made Maro, the Socrates of Poets, say, O fortunatos nimium cives bona si sua
norint, Agricolas.
1 Georg.
O fortunate the Country Swain,
Though his life be a life of pain.


Accounting them happy in that Country serenity, which their life of exemption
from trouble gives them: though God knows, stupid souls that they are, they are
seldom thankful, or contented with what they have. This only they excel in,
that they can judge as well of utile and dulce, as any men, and make as little
use of it, beyond rude huffs, Adag 5. Cent. 3. Chil. 3.
and high-shooe insolence, in which sense the Adage is verified of them, (...)
proud and ignorant; not (...), conspicuous and illustrious in acts of
hospitality and kindness; but (...), whom their happiness affects not, because
they understand it not. This makes them think themselves the best of the pack
of men that live in Kingdoms, because they know not wherein by men of more
exact breeding and parts, they are out-gone.

2. De Oratore. Cic. 3. De Not. deorum.
What this Colonus is, needs little explication; properly it imported cultor
agrorum, a husbandman, whom Tully gives Epethites of Optimus, parcissimus,
modestissimus, frugalissimus; and as it imported a Citizen of Rome sent abroad
to plant, and obliged to live according to the Roman Laws, In Asin. 7.
so had it also a note of depreciation on it, and differed a little from a
slave: to which Plautus alludes, when he scoffingly speaks of Colonus
catenarum, for one held in prison. And Tully, when he would turn men to the
most barbarous Masters of reason, Pro C^cinna. Lib. De verborum signific. p.
490.
bids us, a colono rations accipere. Concerning these, the Digest speaks much;
and Alciate on the 227th Law. Our Law also, because they are men of narrowest
reason, and lowest breeding decryes them all offices of note; no man of this
rank can be Justice of Peace, Knight, High Sheriff, or Member to Parliament.
Yet these men having skill in Country affairs, and being ignorant of any thing
beyond the Plough, and the Utensils of Husbandry, contemn Books and Arts, as
useless and unnecessary.

Et non coloni solum vox hae est, sed and doctorum peritissimorum quoque
virorum.

Which he adds, in confirmation of the rule he gave, that nothing is beloved
further then it is known: for not only the vulgar sort of men, who covet no
accomplishments besides how to dig, delve, sow, reap, hedge, ditch, whistle,
and tend horses; yet are in love with their employments, because they know
them, and are only intellectual proficients in them, but even artly men value
Art upon no other grounds; for as their knowledge is of, so their addiction to,
and affection for them, is. For though it be common to all men, to know the
common notions of night and day, black and white, which perhaps gave rise to
the Proverb, Adag. 98. Chil 1. Cent. 6.
(...), yet to search into the abscondita of things, and thence to report the
nature of them, where men and things do as the Sepia, or Cottle-fish do, to
prevent its being surprised, send forth a quantity of black blood, which so
thickens the water, that its white body cannot be seen: to which Athenaeus
alludes, (...),
(...)
Over her fair body she can draw a Cloud,
Then lose her takers, and her own life shroud.
And Catallus describes Caesar, notwithstanding all his disguises, Nil nimium
studeo Caesar tibi velle placere,
Nec scire utrum sis, albus an ater homo.
I nothing study much, not Caesar thee,
Whether the art white or black, is naught to me.


This, I say, to do, must proceed from knowledge, and is called art in him that
knows how thus to demean himself. Hence Tully makes Rubrius Cassinas, who took
one that was little of eminency in appearance, and made him his Heir, and
thereupon minds him of his love to him; 2. Philip.
Te is quem nunquam vidisti, fecit haeredem, and quidem vide quamte amar it is
qui albus aterve fueris ignorans, fratris filium praeteriit. I say, Tully not
only in that remembers the person so favored to be mindful of, and thankful
for it, but censures Rubrius, as more doting by passion then directed by
judgment, as doctissimi and peritissimi here ought to be. For Tully has matched
these Epethites together, to set forth the double nature of art, both in
speculation and action. Doctissimi theoria, peritissimi praxi; for unless they
both go together, they make no fair show to perform the excellent end of right
judgment, and to fix love upon the foundation of Arts known, and thence
delighted in.

Nam si ad Philosophum naturalem, qui in Mathematica nunquam studet,
Metaphisicus dicat, quod scientia sua considerat res separatas ab omni materia,
and motu secundum esse, and secundum rationem, vel Mathematicus dicat, quod sua
scientia consideratres conjunctas materiae, and motui secundum esse, sed
seperatas secundum rationem, ambos hos licet Philosophos, Philosophus ille
naturalis, qui nunquam novit res aliquas seperatas a materia, and motu essentia
vel ratione, spernet, corumque scientias licet sua scientia nobiliores ipse
deridebit, non alia ductus causa, nisi quia little sententias ipse penitus
ignorant.

Here the Chancellor instances in Philosophers, the wisest and learnedest of
men, as dissenting and detracting from one another, as the parts of Philosophy,
which they are particularly versed in, and bent to prosecute, are diverse from
each other in the object of their Science, Tullius. 1. Offic.
and the reason of them. For since Philosophy is the study of wisdom, (...),
Aristot. lib. De. 6 Mundo prasat. ad Alexand.
A Study of divine and admirable Mystery: And Philosophers are not (...), men
of prate and discourse, versed in no good and profitable method of art, having
heads swollen with vapor and ostentation, but men that de wholly give up
themselves to contemplation and disquisition of nature, as Philo at large
discourses, Lib. De Vita Contemplativa, page 890.
since they are Asaphs, men that do wisely ruminate, Cum sapientes proprie
vocemus eos qui sublimia quadam, and a vulgi captu remota intelligunt, Quomodo
Anaxagoram, Thalotem, Democritum, Sapientes nominavit antiquitas, certe qui
adeae per quirenda o^* studio incumbunt, quae qui tenent, sapientes habentur,
ii proprie dicendi sunt Philosophari, Muretus, innotis ad primum Nature. Quest.
Senecae. p. 842.
and perpend what they do. This considered, (as heretofore in the Notes on the
fourth Chapter, has been larglyer written of) invests Philosophers with great
respects, and expects them men of much reason, and therefore probable to be
exact and scrupulous.

Now these Philosophers our Text calls by three several names, as they intend
three distinct parts of Philosophy; the natural Philosopher; the Metaphysitian;
the Mathematician: all which, says our Text, have principles so different each
from other, that as the one may be ignorant in, so obstinate against the
principles and practices of the other; and that from this ground, that every
one reduces Art to his own Standard, and will have all that is not what he
knows and loves, false and useless.

Here now I might ravel out into a large field, and discourse of Philosophers
and Philosophy to an infinity of needless trouble to my self, and my Reader:
but I shall study more thrift of time, and compose my discourse to those modest
limits, and soft touches, as best suit with a Commentator that intends profit
and delight to his Reader.

Certainly Philosophy is a most excellent gift of God, and ornament of man;
(...). Lib. De Mundi Opificio, p. 11. Aenead. 1. Lib. 3. p. 20. Part prima, De
excel. Homi. c. 59. p. 173. (...) Lib. De Specialibus legibus, page 806.
Philo says it is the chief ingredient into man's prerogative, above the other
works of God's hand; and Plotinus calls men learned in it, (...), prepared to
fly high even to Heaven, in the power of their mental endowments thereby, which
was the reason, that Architas said a Philosopher was (...), and Homer styles
him (...), as one, habilis ad omnes disciplinas, according to Phavorinus, which
should mind him that professes it, to live as one that has his mind divinely
endowed, and called upon to all exemplary and practical virtue, which Philo
makes so peculiarly the part of a Philosopher, as nothing more is: For as it is
not bags but money; nor deeds but lands, nor books but knowledge, to make use
of them; nor numbers of men, but discipline and courage, that declares a man
rich, learned, fortunate, victorious; so is it not the notion, but practice of
Philosophy, that derives on men the honor of being true Philosophers. This was
the cause Plato was wont to say, Julius Capitolinus in Antonino. p. 148. Edit.
Sylb.
and M. Antoninus repeat from him that saying, Then Cities flourish, when
Philosophers govern them, or when they that govern them are governed by
Philosophers; which the Ancients were so zealous in, that Seneca answers us,
Antiqua Philosophia nihil aliud quam facienda and vitanda praecepit, etc. The
ancient pristine Philosophy consisted only in rules of doing good, and
eschewing evil, and then Philosophers were most excellent plain men; but when
they came to be so critically learned, as afterward they became, Epist. 95.
all sincerity took leave, and learning was judged rather to consist in
subtiliy then virtue, in wrangling wit, rather then in a good life. So he. And
hence it is, that whereas virtue was the study of Philosophers, and their heats
and passions were lulled asleep in the pursuit of her. Now since she has been
deserted, and her professors have pretended, rather then practiced Philosophy,
she has degenerated into cavil and contest about words and forms. In notis ad
Senec. ludum. p. 936.
Rhenanus has learnedly collected a large Catalogue of dissents amongst
Philosophers, which argues only the disproportion of Mortals apprehension, and
the vehement chollers that they are upon interesses of fame and fury expressive
of, vitia^es not the reputation of art, for that still remains sacrum quoddam
and venerabile, Epictetus apud A. Gellium. lib. 17. c. 19.
as Seneca terms it. Ep. 56. Vitae lex, Ep. 95. Ultimum instrumentum and
additamentum, Ep. 17. inexpugnabilis murus quem fortuna multis machinis
lacessitam non transit. Ep. 83. Omnibus praeferenda artibus, rebusque. Ep. 29.
and the Philosophers, not being defective to themselves, (...), etc high
talkers of, while little livers to virtue, make not themselves a reproach, but
rather recover their antique reputation by such severities, as may eliminate
all vice, and stop the mouth of all detraction. Lib. 2. De Ira. 14.
So Seneca's rule is, Sapient omnia quae debet sine ullius malae rei ministerio
efficiet, nihilque admiscebit cujus modum solicitus observet.

Which premised, the divisions of Philosophy into parts, is rather a matter of
method and order, then any thing else; and since it is the contemplation of
wisdom, in preparation for action, can have no variety in it, but what is
gradual, and has a sense of ministration to the consequution of the noble end
of it, to wit, how to know to do.

Whereunto, because the several Attoms and minute Particles (making the mass
and bulk) with the variety of their use, and operation in ascent to the culmen
of it, is to be considered, Anead. 1. lib. 3. p. 21.
which perhaps is somewhat toward that which Plotinus lays down, (...), etc.
the understanding gives perspicuous principles, which done, the soul compounds
couples, and distributes them, till they come to perfect understanding. I crave
leave therefore not so much to cherish and confirm debate of words, and variety
of expression, as to write somewhat useful to the practical Philosophy, to
which the speculative is but ducent. For to little purpose is all knowledge of
essences, and abstracted notions, if they refine not the reason, and brighten
it to a perfect oriency in a life of exemplary virtue.

In Prologo art. 2. p. 57. In Sententias.
Aureolus ingenuously casts the Sciences, which is Philosophy, into this model:
the first three he calls Scientiae Sermocinales Sciences of Speech; Grammar,
Logic, Rhetorique. To speak properly and according to use, subtly and
according to rule, floridly to the height of captation and eloquence, either
in prose or verse. The second three he calls purely sensible and experimental,
Natural, Moral, Medicinal. To know the nature the virtues, vices of things, and
the adjuments to rectitude, and the restoration of declensions from it. Two
purely Mathematical, Arithmetique, and Geometry, which instruct the use of
Numbers, Weights, and Measures. Three medious between the Mathematiques and
experimental Sciences, Astrology, Harmony, Perspective; one merely
intellectual Metaphisicks. Thus that Golden Wit.

(...). Lib. De Agricult. p. 189.
Nor is Philo the Jew much, if at all behind him, who compares Philosopy to a
gallant Plantation: the Physics answers trees and plants, the Moral fruits,
the Rational to hedges and bounds; now (says he) as the fences and hedges
secures the fruits, so the rational Philosophy is the defense of the Moral and
Natural. From both which I collect, that God has made a harmony in art, the
preservation of which is the life of Science; there is then no difference in
Philosophy, but what arises by accident, and either pride, or wilful mistake of
men: For as the Fly does as well set forth the majesty and power of God in this
production, as the Elephant; so in the least principle of service, the bounty
and wisdom of God is patefied, as well as in the greatest.

The natural Philosopher he searches into the nature of compound things,
Aristot. Auscult' lib. 2. c. 2. p. 329 Volum. primo. Phavorinus. part^ prima,
cap. 95. p. 171. Vives in censura operum Aristotelis, tit. Metaphisic. Basil.
1542.
and their Revolutions, Elements, Generation, Corruption, Meteors, Minerals,
tendency of Beasts, Vegetables, and all their species; the Metaphysitian he
understands indeed substance, accidents all sensible beings, yet separate from
matter, the Mathematician he makes disquisition of those things which he can
make good the reason of, by demonstration obvious and plain to the sense; but
Metaphysiques, being the contemplation of divine and abstract beings, that is
of things separate from matter and form, is the foundation of all other things,
not the Mathematics excepted; yea, and all these improving (to that we call
practical Philosophy) makes up Budaeus his complete character of a Philosopher,
(...). Metaphys. lib. 1. c. 1. ad initium.
Is qui studeat omnium rerum, etc. He that studies to know the nature of all
things divine and humane with the causes of them, and applies his knowledge, to
produce a life of virtue and reason, suitable to such knowledge, In Pandect.
priores, p. 13.
he deserves worthy to be counted a Philosopher, are his words full of weight
and worth.

Order then is to be kept in Sciences, which will best be done by love to them,
founded upon knowledge of them; for whence come heats but upon ignorance, on
the assaylants part, and zeal of knowledge on the Defendants: the composure of
which will best be brought about by their unanimity, to credit study with
practice. For when all is done that art can witness to, and woo the world by to
love her; if it leave the man that has it like Barlaam the Monk, whom the
Historian makes a rare Critique in Euclid, Aristotle, Plato, but vitiating all
this (...), by filling a peaceable Church with discord and cavils, Contacuzenus
Hist. lib. 2. c. 39.
fireballs thrown about by his wit. Better I say, know nothing, then thus to
know any thing: better to know a little usefully, then much to no other end;
but to dishonor God, and disturb men.

As then there must be knowledge in Science to make men value them, so where
there is not, there will be contempt of them, which their followers not
enduring, proceeds to enmity at last between them; yea, and if the learned side
get the Victory by argument, yet if they have not a strenuity of practice to
consort with their learning, well they may obtain of men flashes of fame, but
real and true Victors they will not be. Philo elegantly reasons this with the
learned man in these words, Lib. De ho^inum mutatione. p. 1055.
(...), etc. What reason, says he, have thou, O man, to consider the nature of
Heavenly bodies, and vault up into the knowledge of things beyond thy reach:
What sensuality have thou by this skill purged out of thee? What mastery over
desires and passions obtained? art thou more divine, and less carnal by this
then thou wast? if not, (...), etc. as Trees signify nothing, if they be
barren, and bear no fruit; so the knowledge of nature amounts to nothing, if it
advance not virtue in us.

From all which, argued upon occasion of our Texts instance of Arts so far, and
no farther loved then known, the conclusion is, that knowledge is the key to
love, and all the fruits of it. And where it truly and soberly is, does not
heighten passion, but trims and polishes it to a serious purpose, that is, to
magnify God, accord with men, and exemplify virtue in a daily practice of it;
which well executed, will evidence to men, that God has made a connection of
Sciences, and that where any truly is, there are such degrees of universality,
Caelius Calcagninus nepoti suo. Quaestionum, lib. 2.
as make men civil to those Arts they are not Masters of, and rude Dictators in
nothing that is cryptique and mutable: so true is that of Calcagninus, Ita
juncta and copulata sunt inter se natura, ut sine piaculo disjungi non possunt;
nam sicut. in corpore humano nihil frustra positum est, quod ad suum opus est
institutum, caterisque partibus respondeat, ut non sine pernicie avelli possit,
ita disciplina, id est, humanae vitae membra inter se connexa sunt, ut seorsim
positae mancae and mutiles sunt, nemo ergo Phisica sine Logicis, nemo Logica
sine Mathematicis, nemo omnia sine orationis praesidio assequatur.

Though therefore, there may be upon various degrees of apprehension, more or
less proportions of zeal and indifferency toward Arts, and the Rules of them,
according to the measure of men's expending of themselves upon them; yet will
there ever be in true Philosophers such a moderation, as keeps from the
deridebit of our Text. For though our Chancellor phrases thus the effect of
ignorance and disaffection, yet does he uses this Hyperbole, rather to make his
Arguments more weighty, then to affirm the very specifique effect of them to be
derision. For that, importing scorn, argues enmity, and superb prevalency in
the soul against the principles of wisdom, which calm and soften it. now a wise
and virtuous man will rather pity, and pray for men's reductions from errors
prejudices and mistakes, then contemn and reproach them for such their defects
and alloys. Fictus amor oculorum nitet in lumine, sapit in ore, mulc^t in aure,
ridet in facie, placet in cute, intus autem est venenum Sardinium quod nimirum
quos peremit, risu perire facit, Cyrillus lib. 1. Apolog. Moralis. c. 19.
And hence is it seen, that those that are the merry mad Satyrists of Ages,
whose wits run to waste in pasquillous invectives, and mordacities,
Lucian-like, sprout into such prodigious excesses of folly, that they need no
Hell more then the vanity of their own actions procures them; while every calm
mind acquiesces in the serious study of himself, and in the charitable opinion
of others, whom because he knows not erroneous from pertinacy, In Apolog. per
Platone.
he uncharitably censures not to be abominated; so that though wise men may
with Plato smile, yea and laugh, which Bessarion says he never did; yet do they
not do it with levity, so as to reproach their internal gravity, or to injure
their brother in nature, whom they are bound by the Laws of civility, to
preserve in his reputation, Adag. 39. Cent. 6 Chil. 2.
as to that vanity they are (...), neither (...), that laughter which makes men
quake till they tickle again; which Philostratus renders by (...), late
diductogue ore ridere, which we call, to laugh out, and is ascribed to fools
and madmen, nor that (...) which the profuse effeminate Greeks were overtaken
with in their feasts of lubricity and compotation: Cent. 5. Chil. 1. p. 215
nor that (...), when men laugh deceitfully, and from a heart enraged and
malicious, which Eudemus understands the meaning of that phrase (...), thou
look down upon me, In collectaneis dictionum Rhetoric.
and deridest me. I say none of these laughters are good and grave men subject
to, because this is not only to profane the gravity of their own minds, but
to reproach God, who having made nothing in vain, abhors the contempt of any
work of his hands. Deridere atque contemnere, lib. 3. De Oratore Cic.
And therefore, though men of learning and charity may disapprove what some
other say and write, from the better apprehension they have of things, then
those who attend them not perhaps have; yet still will they abstain from that
which the Text says, is the too common consequent of different Judgments to
deride. Ipsos deridebit.

Sic and tu Princeps Legis Angliae peritum miraberis, si dicat quod frater,
fratri ne quaquam uterino non succedet in haereditate paternae, sed potius
haereditas illa, sorori integri sanguinis sui descendet, aut capitali domino
feodi accidet, ut escaeta sua; cum causam legis hujus tu ignoras, in lege tamen
Angliae doctum hujus cusus difficultas nullatenus perturbat; quare and
unlgariter dicitur, quod ars non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.

This Clause was that for which the foregoing was instanced in; for the
Chancellor intending instigation of the Prince to the study of the Law, as
before he had enforced it from the excellency of the Law, as the guide to
Justice, which Justice he proposes as the desert of fame, and the foundation of
duration in Government: so now does he in this Clause show how impossible it is
to love what we know not, and to be zealous for that, which our Conviction of
the excellency and use of it, does not excite us to. And this, as he does
rhetorically, by presenting the worst effect of ignorance, opposition, and that
with vehemence of whatever is unknown to, and unbeloved by us, so does he
discover the dreadful effect of that prepossession by deridere, a carriage of
contempt and vilipendency. And this he tells the Prince, if he knows not the
Law, he will make appear by his personal demeanor to men of Law, whom thereby
he will disoblige and discourage. To prevent which, he inculcates his counsel
of him to the study of the Law, which alone can make him love it, because
acquaiut him with, and sit him for the execution of it.

The great consequence of which wise men foreseeing, do so direct Princes in
their education, that next the knowledge of God, they prefer the instruction of
them in the Laws of their Polities above all other parts of breeding, as that
which mightily relievs them in all the exigencies of Government, and shows them
the Prescript of serenity, if any there be in those heights of honor and
sublimation, which Charles the 5. assured his Son he never found in them; and
thereupon in the Session at Bruxels, when he resigned up the Government to
Philip the second his Son, he thus spoke to him, Compatlor tibi, mi fili, etc.
I pity thee my Son, on whise shoulders, by my resignation of my Crown and
Government to thee, I put a very weighty burden; for in all the years that I
possessed it, I enjoyed not a minutes time of ease and joy, free from cares and
fears.

So that the Chancellour's application to the Prince in the precedent clause,
being confirmative of nihil amatum nisi cognitum, points at some
inconveniences; which unskil'dness in the Law will devolve on him.

First, the Municipe Law, which is obvious and clear, Angliae perito and in
lege Angliae docto, will be strange to him.

Secondly, he will be to seek of the Law and reason of that, which as King he
must defend, and according to which, by his Judges in his Courts, he must
determine in cases of the half and whole blood.

Thirdly, he will not know whether estates go, if they have no legal
Inheritour, and the owner of them dies, sine haerede sanguinis.

Fourthly, he will be grieved, when he sees the ill effects of them, which are
only avoided, and the trouble of them waded through by knowledge of mind.

Fifthly, a Prince will know, that if ignorance does so incommodate him and his
affairs, and art so promote and beautify them, in pure Justice this art and
knowledge, where by such advantages are acquired, ought to be promoted and
valued, since ars non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.

First, As all arts are obvious to Artists, so is it in the Laws, they are
plain peritis, and in legibus doctis, such the Chancellor calls not those
(...), who are all for prate and noise, 1. De Oratore.
Litium strepitu gaudentes; but such as p^ne omnia profitentur, men versed in
all points of Law, in no portion of its necessary Knowledge defective, rerum
divinarum, humanarumque notione, justi atque injustique scientia instructi,
according to Vlpian; I mean not, nor do I think our Chancellor did mean such an
Attainment of Knowledge, as is to a perfection so properly called; for so no man
is capable of Knowledge, the perfect God is only thus perfect, In Legem 139. ad
Legem Juliam and Papiam p. 319. lib. de verborum signifis.
but such a perfection as is haveable, Cum factum est, illud quod fieri inter
parts convenit, qui ita consummavit scientiam, ut jam in usu esse possit, as
Alciat note is, such as enables a man to give counsel and direction, what to do
in every case, and a judgment, in cases determined and adjudged.

This is the sense of peritus and doctus in legibus, Peritus coming from an old
Verb perio, or (according to Nonius) aperio, as if one peritus had not only
opened the way, but gone through the path of learning; some have made these two
words nothing discrepant, Itaque quum si docti, a peritis facile desistunt
sententia 3. Offic. 19. Pro Fronteio 14.
but Tully has given peritus the cast beyond doctus, for doctus a man may be in
point of reading, and the wisdom of the mind, who is not peritus, for that
implies doctus and a faculty to set it forth to the utmost advantage, which we
call a dexterity; so Tully mentions, Sapiens homo, and multarum rerum peritus,
and he commends Aelius as one, antiquitatis, veterumque scriptorum literate
peritus, so a good Orator is called dicendi peritus; De Clar. Oratoribus 108.
Quintil^^^ 1. c. ^. Virgil. 10. Eclog. 3. Offic. 79. Varro 1. de R^ Rustica. c.
2.
a good Soldier, peritissimus homo belligerandi; a good teacher of youth,
docendi peritus; a good Musician at the voice, cantare peritus; one that
defines things well, definiendi peritus; yea a Husbandman, that is thoroughly
versed in culture, perisissimus de Agricultura: all which are Excellencies of
action, and demonstrative Skils: so here [ peritis] intends the Masters of them
so well versed in Law cases, that not only the present Age wherein they that
thus excel, live; but after-Ages by their writing conclude them learned, and
for that cause reverence them.

Secondly, To these then, though the case may be clear, that the Brother of the
half blood, shall not succeed to his Brother, but rather the Sister of the
whole blood; yet to a man, that knows not the Law, 'twill be strange. Hereupon,
if the King knows not the Law, he will be ignorant of the reason of the Law;
which is this, The Brother of the half blood shall not inherit, because, he not
being of the complete blood, is not a complete heir: Lib. 4. p. 279. B. and
lib. 2. p. 65. 1. Instit. lib. 1. Fe^^simple. p. 14.
so Bracton says, the Law ever was, that an Heir must have sanguinem
duplicatum; and Fleta lib. 6. c. 1. de propinquitate haeredum, so Littleton
sect. 6. and so is my Lord Cook's opinion on him, not only, Quod linea recta
praefertur transversali, but because the whole blood is, pluis digne de sank,
and the general allowed Law of England, Propinquior excludit propinquum,
propinquus remotum, remotus remotiorem. Reg. I^ris.


Thirdly, Nor will a Prince without Knowledge (in some degree) of the Law, know
whether estates will go: if there be not fratres uterini, yet the law directs
to the Sisters of the whole blood; and in this case the Law is clear, a Sister
of the whole bood shall be in statu, Lib. 1. sect. 9.
as a Brother, and inherit quasi he, so Littleton, and all other Authorities;
the reason whereof is, because proximity of blood, takes of all defects, not
only in the Crown where no Salique law is good, but in particular Estates to
the injury of Sisters, whom God admitted Heirs to their Father's Estates, they
having no Brothers, Numb. xxxvi. and for defect of these Heirs, either of the
body, or the blood, or by will testamentary Heirs; though I know till the
Statute 32 H. 8. c. 1. Lands were not devisable by will. Lands are to descend
as an Escheate to the Grand Lord, either the King as the supremus Dominus and
haeres; or to the Lord to whom he has granted this Benefit of his Prerogative,
Cap. quod non absolvitur.
as his Escheat. Escaeta a word of art, Escaetae vulgo dicuntur, (says Ockam)
qua, decedentibus his qui de rege tenent, etc. Cum non existit ratione
sanguinis haeres, 1. Instit. on Littl. p. 13.
ad fiscum relabuntur, these Sir Edward Cock makes to happen, aut per defectum
sanguinis, aut per delictum tenentis, see more of Escheats in Fleta lib. 3. c.
10. What the Common Law calls Eschaeta, the Civil Laws I suppose names Caduca;
Digest. lib. 23. Tit. 2. de ritu nuptiarum. p. 2114. Virgil. lib. 1. Georg. 10.
Phil. and lib. 3. De Oratore.
so Paulus, Veterem sponsam in Provincia, quam quis administrat, uxorem ducere
potest. and dos data, non fit Caduca. This word Caduca from cadere, they apply
to all things that do casually happen, Caducas frondes, for leaves ready to
fall: Caduca Haereditas is used by Tully, and Iuvenal. 9. Satyr. 9. -- propter
me scriberis haeres
Legatum omne cupis, nec non and dulce Caducum.
And that he is called Caducarius, Advers. lib. 28. c. 15.
that is Heir to him, that has no Heir, Turnebus is Authority; see Brech^us ad
legem 30. p. 92. lib. de verborum significatione.

Fourthly, These things as they are obvious to men of parts, study, and
business in the Law, so would be very troublous and hard for a Prince to
understand, that wholly neglects the consideration of them; to prevent which,
the Chancellor conjures the Prince to study the Law, that he may be ready in
understanding of, and right judgment concerning it.

And lastly, All the precedent Arguments he presses to hinder a dangerous and
necessary effect of ignorance, Enmity to Art and Law: for notwithstanding all
the good Offices, Knowledge of Art, and of that of the Law, does, yet will it
not carry a letterlesse mind above a barbarons hatred of that which is most
beneficial; nor has ever learning been more coursly dealt with, then from those
that know it least, Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem.

For God having made man after his own Inage, in the Endowments of his
reasonable Soul, with those Perfections in remiss Degrees which are eminently
in himself, has no doubt in him, if improved to the utmost of his ingenuity, a
capacity to act to the life the specifique actions of every creature under his
Subjection, as Phavorinus very notably asserts: Part prima De Excel. Hom. c.
55. p. 160.
and that he does not effect great things by the illuminations of his
intellect, proceeds, partly from the penal accessions of sin, which have
blunted their edg, and dulled their perception; and partly from the torpor and
negligence of us, who do not put forth what of the remains of our creation is
yet upon us. From whence alone it is, that we are so ignorant of our duty, and
so unprovided to comply with the Providence of God toward us: this makes us
ignorant of and pertinacious against things, because we are at a loss
concerning them, Ep. 56.
Si bona fide sumus, etc. If we were in earnest, and answered the Prescript of
God, we would contemn the meretricious avocations of this world, no delights of
sense should interrupt our commerce with divine objects; it is a light wit that
looks nothing inward, but is wholly swallowed up in the gaity of externals. And
in his 95. Epistle, Totum mundum (says he) scrutor, etc. I search the whole
world and give my self a liberty of delight, great things rouse me up to
contemplate their transcendency, this makes me fortified against all unpleasing
accidents, which I eye not as casualties, but God's designs, which I am readily
to comply with, and cheerfully to follow, not as that I cannot, but will not
wave, because it is the best fruit of my duty. Thus does Divine learning fit a
man to deny himself, and to be free to pursue the Errand of his Maker, St.
Ierom tells us, that Hippias the Philosopher called by the Greeks Omniscius,
was wont to glory that he made every thing about him with his own hand, Ep. ad
Heliodor.
while he had a knowing head, and a contented mind, his hand was able to
supply him with necessaries to nature; and for humor and fantasy he had the
Mastery of those; his learning had made him free from all those little states
and airy Punctilio's, that ignorance affects, and now he being arrived at
wisdom, was by it manu-mitted: no wonder then Galen calls arts, (...), and
Aristotle (...), and (...), which Budeus opposes to those, In reliquis
pandectis p. 298.
(...), and (...), because when these deceive a man, and prove no subtersuges
in want; the liberal arts are a kind of portable Mines, and Magnetequ's that
draw fame and fortune to them every where, which confirms that as all knowing
men do love Knowledge in others and promote it, so none are Enemies to, and
oppose themselves against it, but such as are ignorant; which that the Prince
may not be, the Chancellor proceeds to dehort him in the subsequent words. Sed
absit a te, fili Regis, ut inimiceris legibus regni, quo tu successurus es;
vel, ut eas spernas quum justitiam deligere, praedicta sapientae lectio te
erudiat.

These words do signify some fears in the Chancellor, and those probably not
groundless ones, that the Prince being young, bred abroad, and martially
addicted, might be drawn by those treacherous lures of love and revenge, to
decline the love of the Common Law, and admire some other Law, which had more
compliance with absoluteness, and Martial rigor then our Law has: now this
the grave Judge foreseeing of evil consequence, the people of England admiring
nothing above their Laws, nor loving any Governor further then he rules
according to them; he seriously dehorts him from, and cautions him against such
humors, and that not cooly and Courtlyly, but by an amicitial vehemence, and
oratorious Pathos, in which all arguments of disswasion were couched.

Absit ate, as much as if he had said, Sir, such an error in judgment and
choice becomes you not, nay rather you are so to abominate, as men do Carrions,
and Sacriledges, Incests and Sodomies; the Hebrews express this absit by
(...), quod profane and impurae rei notionem habet, and the learned say it is
used cum rem diram atque atrocem abominamur, Masius in Josh xxii. 29.
when the Children of Reuben were charged to have built an Altar to confront
God's Altar, their answer begins with this absit, God forbid that we should
rebel against the Lord, and turn this day from following the Lord, c. xxii. v.
24. res prophana est, servis tuis hujusmodi facinus designare, so the Chaldee
Paraphrase; absit abominantis sermo est, Estius, Erasmus, and Grotius jointly
affirm, and so Saint Paul uses it, Romans iii. 4, 6, 13. vi. 2, 15. vii. 13. ix.
14. xi. 1. 1 Cor vi. 15. Gal. ii. 17. iii. 21. vi. 14. yea the Jews long before
Genesis xliv. 7. 1 Samuel xii. 13. xx. 2. 1 Chronicles. xi. 19. Job. xxvii. 5. Luke xx.
16.

To the same purpose the Latins absit procul, 2 Offic. 9.
so Cic. Vt illiberalitatis, avaritiaeque absit suspicio, and Martial, Absit a
jocorum nostrorum simplicitate malignus interpres, so Pliny, procul a nobis,
nostrisque literis absint ista: lib. 1. 29.
thus it is in its own nature to be avoided.

But absit a te, fili Regis, there is another step to the dehortation, Sir, You
are Son to a King, and a pious King, who, though he suffered, yet was more then
a Conqueror, your Father loved and lived in Rule according to the Laws, and
he has principled you with justice, according to those Laws the Standard of
it; do not stain your high blood and noble greatness by actions of meannesse,
let Peasants and men of low birth express lubricity and weakness by such
illiberal courses as inconsist with regal Magnanimity; let the Laws (Sir) have
the honor of your studying of them, that they may have the fruit of
Proficiency, your love. And truly if the considerations of (...) will not work
with men, Quod decat, honestum est, and quod honestum est. decet. Cic. 1. Offic.
what will. For since the glory and praise of every thing is from that decency,
which it carries with it, and that Conformity which it expresses to the Canon
of its regulation; Plaut. Deos decet opulentia. Decet me haec vestis, Plaut.
Decet me his verbis fabulari, Plaut.
as to fight advisedly, and with courage, commends a Soldier, to speak
fluently, and with apt tones of Elevation and Cadence, a true Orator; to argue
subtly and with nervosity, Exemplis grandioribus decuit ^li, Cic. 1. Divinat.
an exact Logician, to distinguish critically and with Scripture clearness, a
ready Casuist, to dance nimbly and with erect body, a trim Courtier; to plead
boldly and with apt strains of captivation, a good Advocate; so to love the
Laws from experience of the use, worth, and benefit of them, to the ends of
gubernative virtue, becomes a Governor, and he that reasons not with himself
from the point of honor and decency, Decentia, Convenientia quadam and
pulcbritudo Cic. 2. Not. Deod.
to the Motives of his action, will never act as becomes him: this was it that
made Abraham implead God's purpose against Sodom (as with reverence I write it)
using a Phrase of Cogency with men, Genesis xviii. 25.
when he supplicated God, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? to
slay the righteous with the wicked, that be far from thee; he takes advantage
from the nature of God, to plead for the actions suitable to it; God is the
Judge of all the world, and Judges are to do right, now says he, far be it from
the Judge of all the world to put good and bad into the same common calamity,
and to reward good with evil; that is, O Lord, contrary to thy nature as just,
to thy Prerogative as a Judge, the Judge; to thy eminency of all the world, to
that interest in thy Justice which all men thy creatures, and the good
especially, expect, To have right done; that be far from thee not to do. So
Joseph when he considered Potipher's confidence in him, and the reservation of
his wife to his own fruitions, yea the contradiction that was between a Servant
and a Paramour, and the ingratitude that his acceptance of the invitation to
his Mistresse's embrace employed to God and Potiphar, reasons thus, Gen xxxix.
9. Nehem. vi. ii.
How can I do this wickedness, so Nehemiah rescued himself from subtle
inactivity, when God's cause was so concerned, by this shall such a man as I
fly.

Indeed all the great actions of Heroiquenesse that men do, are (next the grace
of God) upon the Instigations of the congruity to do, or to forbear, which
actions have with our Conditions, professions, obligations, and such like
circumstances; Because Kings runn'd not at the Olympique games, Baffus noster
videbatur mihi prosequi se, and componere, and vivere lanquam superstes sibi
and fortiter serre decidium sui Senee. Epist. 30.
Alexander would not; because Pompey saw his affairs lost without his Presence,
he contemned the danger of his Attempt with this, necesse est ut eam non ut
vivam. Because Julius Caesar had the resolutions to be the Phoenix of his age,
he overlooked the dread of resolute Senators, eying him as their Supplanter
and vowing his death; and hence became he their sacrifice, who, had he observed
his praecautions, had evaded them; what shall I say? Non est viri timere
sudorem, huc and illuc accedat, ut perfecta virtus sit, aqualitas ac. tenor nor
vitae per ^mnia consonans sibi, quod non potest esse, nisi rerum scientia
contingat, and ars, per quam divina and humana noscuntur. Seneca Ep. 31.

Nimirum existimo praserendum non in virture trajanum, non Antoninum in
clementia, non in gravitate Nervam, non in gubernando arario Vespasianum, etc.
Trebellius Follio in Victorino.


Seneca makes this an argument beyond most, when he advises to debate with a
man's own heart, when proclive to sin, Major sum, and ad majora genitus, quam ut
mancipium sim carnis meae; which had Victorinus the fifth of the thirty Tyrants
done, he would not have left that one Record to his blemish that he has: Julius
Aterianus sets him forth as the Deputy in France after Posthumus, and second to
none in the office: not to Trajan in virtue, not to Antonine in clemency, not
to Nerva in Gravity, not to Vespasian in ordering his Treasury, not to
Pertinax, or Severus in martialling his Military course of life; but all the
glory, and same of these virtues, his libidinous desire and use of women
defamed; so that no Historian durst applaud his virtues, so stained by his
vices. And therefore no wonder though our Chancelour brings in this ( fili
Regis) to back his absit; so did the Mother of King Lemuel do to him: Trov.
xxxi. c.
It is not for Kings O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes strong drink, least they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the
Judgment of any of the afflicted.

Especially when this to do, is an Inimiceris; for to be ignorant of the Law is
not to love it, and not to love the Law the rule of justice, is to affect
injustice, and to resolve irregularity, and that is to proclaim an enmity
against the Law, and against such a Law as is the Law of your own Country, to
which your Father and his Progenitors swore Observation, in the presence of the
great God of Heaven, and the great men of your Nation. This is the force of the
Text, Absit a te, fili Regis, ut inimiceris legibus regni tui, why? it is
inimicari tibi, and tuis, it is to proclaim thy self not a Royal minded Prince,
who art a Father to thy people, but a severe Lord, who wilt rule them by will,
and rule over them by power: it is to decline the Oath in the Coronation, which
wise King James said, True Law of free Monarchies, p. 195. of his works.
Is the clearest civil and fundamental Law, whereby the King's Office is
properly defined, yea and the office of a Father, which by the Law of Nature
(as well as Policy) the King becomes to all his Leiges at his Coronation: it is
spernere justitiam, to think justice too trite a path to walk in, though it be
the path of peace and subtilty, For certainly a King that governs not by his
Law, can neither be countable to God for his administration, nor have a happy
and established Reign: and a good King will not only delight to rule his
Subjects by the Law, but even will conform himself in his own actions
thereunto, always keeping that ground, that the health of the Commonwealth be
his chief Law. Page 203.
So wrote a King that knew how to rule, and to value the Law too, learned King
James.

Praedicta sapientiae lectio te erudiat.
This refers not to the vulgar saying immediately before, Art has no Enemy but
ignorance; but to the passage out of the second Psalm, mentioned in the fourth
Chapter, Be wise, O ye Kings, and be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth, Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way. Which being the counsel
of the Holy Ghost, and penned by his amanuensis, and that to the intent of
pressing Justice on them (upon account of propitiating the chief Justice of
quick and dead, the Son of God Christ Jesus) may well be called electio
sapientiae, and justly termed illos erudire; for if any prudence be by man in
this militant state expressed, it is this, of laying up a good foundation, of
laboring for the meat that perishes not, of confirming him our friend, who is
commissionated by God with all power in Heaven and Earth. And if any method be
more indubitate and exquisite to this end then other, it is that which Justice,
known, beloved, and practiced, directs us how, when, and where to use, this
virtue therefore as the rapsody and accumulation of all excellency. Our
Chancellor does evertouch upon, as that which is subjectum regalis curae, and
without which the foundations of the Earth will be out of order.

Iterum igitur, atque iterum, Princeps inclytissime, te adjuro, ut leges regni
patris cui successurus, addiscas.

The consequence of Justice, as our Chancellor has largely explicated in the
fourth Chapter, so does he here re-intimate, by his earnest and vehement
conjuration, seizing upon all that is tender and noble in him, to love and
embrace Justice, treasured up in the Laws of England. And first he bespeaks him
to do this, as what best becomes him, as he is Princeps inclytissimus; the
first Head on a Subjects shoulders; the second in the Kingdom, because the
Heir, but one degree, as was supposed, on this side the Throne; and then he is
as Inclytissimus, one that was for endowment of mind as conspicuous, as for
external accomplishment acclamated; for so Inclytus (of which Inclytissimus is
the superlative) signifies in its bare positive notion, inclytus, insignis,
gloriosus, veluti fulgore quodam samae resplendens. Hence every thing of
remarkable and signal eminency, is expressed by this word. Livy writing of the
justice of the elder Roman times, expresses it thus, Livius I. aburts 73.
Plautus in milite Virgil 6. Aeneid. 96.
Inclyta justitia, religioque ea tempestate Numa Pompilii erat, and Plautus his
Inclytus apud mulieres Virgil' s Armis inclytus and gloria inclyta famae; and
Maenia inclyta bello. These, and such like expressions, in florid Authors,
argue our Chancellor here, using the word in the highest notion of it, to
intend the height of prevalence with the Prince, whom thus highly he prefers.
And then the Chancellour's edge to propend the Prince to the Law, as the rule
of Justice expresses it self by such rhetorical Charms as are not to be
avoided, Iterum atque iterum te adjuro, a form of comprecation, which
emphatizes it self in the reduplication, 2. A^neid. 3. Aeneid. Prolege Manilia.
Iterum atque iterum te adjuro, a form of comprecation, which emphatizes it
self in the reduplication, Iterum atque iterum, a Flower transplanted from
Maro's Garden, Iterumque iterumque monebo, iterum atque iterum fragor intonat
ingens, Iterum and saepius in Tully, Iterum as sapius in Pliny, lib. 10. c. 12.
And then to adjure him thus multiplied that is more then usual, Iurare
vehementius and gravius.
for it has not the sense of entreaty only, but of obligation by Oath, so
swear by all that is obliging and sacred: so Terence, And. 4.2. II. 2 Philip.
36. Lorinus in 19. Actorum. v. 13. Baron. Annal. To. 4. p. 103. ad. annum
Christi, ^62.
per omnes tibi adjuro deos nunquam eam me deserturum: so Tully, Adjurasque
idte invito me non esse facturum. This adjuro the Exorcists in Act. xix. 13.
used to the evil spirit, (...), say they to the evil spirit, which Lorinus
says, was a constant adjuration of the devil by certain words, in the elder
Ages fewer, after consisting of more, s the devil grew more impudent, and
adhesive to his possession. Now, though in some Authors, Orators, and others,
adjuro signifies no more then juro; yet in the Scripture and Ecclesiastical
use, it implies obtestationem ac reverentiam divini numinis, reique cujuspiam
sacrae, and is not used only by good men, to persuade to do, or not to do; but
also by unclean spirits, to set their delusion more firm on them that heat it.
Thus the evil spirit that came out of the man, Mark 5.7. uses the word, I
adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. For as the Apostles, and
primitive Worthies, did cast out evil spirits by miraculous power indulged them
for the Churches honor, and Religions prevalence, against the Heathen
Superstition; so has the devil in the World, prophani circulatores and agrytae,
Gualtperius. In. 19. Actorum, v. 13.
such as the seven Sons of Sceva were, to delude them by into the blindness of
error, and under the power of Satan to hold them: which tie he possessed the
World to be so sacred, that vengeance attended the violation of it, which made
Orpheus of old mention (...), I adjure thee by Heaven, as somewhat sacramental
in its intendment. Add to this, Vt leges regni patris tui addiscas, and then
there is as much of swasion, as wit and love can allure by. For what can bear
rule more with a Son then the president practice approbation of his Father, and
since Henry the sixth had the Laws of England for his guide, and appreciated
the knowledge of them, as the means to value and love Justice commended by
them, what can be more probable to prevail with his Son to love and allow them,
then the consideration of his Fathers doing, which when he follows and
improves, he does what addiscas imports, and what the Text thereby presents
him; for addiscere is addere ad quae didiceris; and so Tully writes it, 1 De
Oratore 32.
Quid quod etiam addiscunt aliquid, ut Solonem in versibus gloriantem vidimus,
quise quotidie addiscentem senem fieri dicit.

Ne dum ut inconvenientias has tu evites, sed quia meus humana qua naturaliter
bonum appetit, and nihil potest appetere nisi sub ratione boni, mox ut per
dictrinam bonum apprehendere gandet, and illud amat, ac quanto deinceps illud
plus recordatur tanto amplius delectatur in eodem.

This Clause has indeed the marrow of all persuasion in it; for it not only
acquaints the Prince with what is fit for him to learn from the Law concerning
Justice, as it is therein prescribed; but it presents him with solid Reasons,
why in love to himself, and in reason resulting from it, the Law ( ars aequi
and boni) ought to be known, and delighted in by him. Ea debent in historia
poni ab Historiographis. qua aut sugienda sint aut sequenda Julius Capitolin.
in Gordian. Tr. p. 238. edit. Sylb. Cic. lib. 1, offic 23. 2 De Not. Deorum 78.
And these Reasons are privative, and positive. There are inconveniences, that
a Prince by knowledge of the Law shall avoid, and there are advantages to be
acquired; for by knowledge love is gained, and by love delight in, and joy at
the prevalence of the Law over injury and disorder. This is the sum of this
Clause. And indeed what can be prescribed to a Prince's accomplishment, which
this method leads not to: For as to attain conveniences, is to possess ones
self of virtue; so to avoid inconveniences, is to shun all the diversions from
it, and from the comfort of its enjoyment. As then convenientia is an Oratour's
word for fitness and aptitude of any thing to our purpose, and that in a
measure of proportion between extremes, as wholesome and nutritive diet is
called convenient food by Agur, and a house suitable to ones degree and family,
a convenient house, and a fortune proportionable to a man's charge and
breeding, a convenient fortune, and a wind to fill out the sails, yet not
endanger the Mast, a convenient wind; so is inconvenientia the opposite
thereto, betokening exaberance, and somewhat uncomely redundant: which flaw in
the Crystal, or rather Adamant of Princes, Vide Heresbachium, lib. De
Educandis Principum liberis.
much abates them. For as in Architecture, the essential beauties of building
are delight, firmness, convenience; so in the formation of Princes minds, and
in the building of them up to their after glory, no delight in, no firmness of
their esteem, except there be a proportionation of their loves and natures to
the Nation they preside over. The best help to which is, the knowledge of Laws,
for they rightly understood and conformed to, take away wholly, or at least
lessen inconveniences in Government; so that the rule of Law, Quod est
inconveniens aut contra rationem non est permissum in lege, reduces
inconveniences of disproportion to the Law, as the firstborn of Reason, the
King is caput regui and legum; for an inconvenience it would be, that the Head
should be thought incapable to direct, judge, and order, what is to be done,
both regally and judicially. The King is, though a Child, plevae aetatis; it
would be inconvenient that his Council should not supply his corporal
inabilities, during his personal nonage. The King can do no wrong, because he
judges in curia, by Judges, and not in camera by his Will, and it would be
inconvenient, it otherwise should be. These, and such like inconveniences,
being publico malo, and injurious to the complete and indefectuous being of
Majesty, the Law supplies, by directing how they shall either not wholly be, or
be wholly compensated for. Thus as men stop up an inconvenient light, and fill
an inconvenient Pond, and repair an inconvenient way, and improve an
inconvenient house, and change an inconvenient air, and avoid inconvenient
company and diet; so does a wise Prince by the Law judge of what is
inconvenient in Government, and either wholly abrogate, or mutilate and new
form it to an improvement; and hereby does he avoid the inconveniences of
either real vilipendency, (for in that he discerns by the Law evil from good,
he vindicates his knowledge of, and affection to the means of such his
judiciousness) or reputed negligence, which being so great a fear to him, will
best be disowned by his acceptance of the Laws for his rule to govern by. For
he that governs men rationally by Laws, and justly by the Laws of their own
Government; does not only intra se vivere and addiscendo leges sapere, but
appeals to God for protection and success in his Government, and cannot easily
fall into the paroxisms and distempers, which extrajudicial courses occasion,
and in which Princes and people are unhappy. For a sure rule it is, vim facit
qui patitur, Princes that either abate their Subjects of their rights, or
suffer themselves to be abated (by their Subjects) of their Royal Rights, are
accessory to the inconveniences that follow them, and by so much the less know
they the Law, as they permit the invasion and breach of it, either in
themselves, or others. The Chancellor then that counsels, quomodo tu^ evites
has inconvenientias, is well to be listened to; for as the counsel is grave in
the conception and mind of the giver, so is it generous wise and affectionate
in its tendency and scope, which is gravem and securum reddere principem, dum
modum recte evitandi inconvenientias, and realis and suppositiae ignorantis
legis addiscit. For since the mind of man will be busy in some disquisitive
activity, and natural desires are to nothing but what is either really and in
very deed good, or else semblably, and in appearance such, which is the reason,
the Schools say, finis and bonum convertuntur, the Chancellor does wisely and
worthily, to bespeak the Prince's youth to adhere to the Law, as his choice and
pleasure, and to expect no good as a man, and a King, but such as that informs
him of, prepares him for, and only will render useful to him; as Antoninus
Pius found it, who by the Historian is charactred to be (...), etc. An honest
upright private man, but signally, and to a greater degree, honest and upright,
when made public. For no sooner was he in the Throne; but he grew the
admiration of all; terrible he was to none, bountiful to all; moderate in using
power, a preser^er of just men to rule under him. Learning then in the Law must
not only enter the Prince in the love, but confirm and establish him in such
love, to a delight in, O praeclara informatio doctrina rum munere cale sti
indulta felicibus quae vel vittosas naruras sape excolusti. Ammianus
Marcellinus, lib. 29 p. 483. in Valentiliano and Valente.
and a resolution of prelating the Law above all. For else, as in a calm, the
ship moves not though all the sails be out; and in the midst of dainties, there
is yet want where there is no stomach; so in the love of the Law, there will be
but remissness, if knowledge and valuation of its use, enhance not its
appreciation, valuation is the daughter of discovery and Science, and so far do
we esteem, as we understand: therefore all the ports of Science are to be set
open, that love and delight may enter at them; yea, and daily increase, as the
knowledge of them increases. For so it follows in the words.

Quo doceris quod si leges praedictas quas jam ignoras; intellexeris per
doctrinam, cum optimae illa sint, amabis eas, and quanto plus easdem mente
pertractaveris, delectabilius tu frueris.

This the Chancellor subjoyns by way of application, for having reasoned
before with him, that knowledge causes love, and love desires to enjoy, and
enjoyment fixes delight, and crowns it with a non ultra of felicity, he
deduces this from it, That the Laws of England being the measure and Mistress of
her Governors happiness, not to know them, is not to know how and whereby to
be happy: And therefore he advises him once and again, not only to content
himself only to know there is a Law, and to appoint men of Learning to judge
in Courts of Law according to the Law, and to see that right be done to all, as
well poor as rich, and to punish them that do contrary; though this, I say, be
a rare Princely virtue: yet is not this the very specifique virtue, he
persuades the Prince hereto; which is intelligere leges per doctrinam, that is,
to dig for the wisdom of them, as for hidden treasure: to knock early, often,
and loud at Wisdoms gate; to gain by search, and sweat, the language, terms,
books, sense, and reason of the Laws, and in search after this to be exact and
studious; not to follow Pompey who in his wars was effeminate, In castris
Pompeii videre licuit triclinia strata, Magnum argenti pondus expositum,
recentibus cespitibus tabernacula constrata, as Ammianus Marcellinus reports:
that is, not to think an hour or two enough for study, and then perhaps when
the mind is overcharged with other thoughts: but to follow that course in
study, which Julian did in the wars, Hist. bell. Civil. lib. 25. in Juliano
stans interdum more militiae cibum brevem, vilemque sumere visebatur;
according to the Laws of learning to keep close to the book, and to admit no
interruption, till somewhat toward the Helm of art be gained, this once
obtained, and the Laws and our Reasons kindly cohabiting our Minds, then they
will be loved as good, materially formally finally good, since all their
Precepts are ordinated to the bonum supra, intra, infra, circa, to God, man,
our selves, and all the things that relate to them. Nam omne, quod amatur,
trahit amatorem suum in naturam ejus; unde ut dicit Philosophus, usus altera
fit natura.

These words give the reason of the former from the mouth of Nature by the hand
of her Secretary Aristotle, whose position is, that love is of a transforming
quality, making the lover become so much what it loves, that he rather lives
where he loves, Tunde quantum vales, Anaxarchum non ranges, tunde quantum
voles, opinionem non mutabis; nihil Anaxarchus bonum esse credidit, quod animi
non esset, nihil malum quod ad animum non pertineret.
then where he lives; which is the reason, that of all the effects of love
that is mentioned by Solomon, he is the most conclusive of this, Love is
stronger then death; not only because it survives and evicts death, having
abode in Heaven where death is not, Heinsius in Orat. de Stoica Philosophia
annexa Senec. p. 48. ad^sine^^
but chiefly because death can but part the bodies, which by union of souls
were combined in a fierce and firm resolvednesse of willing, nilling, joying,
fearing, delighting, abhorring, choosing, refusing, embracing, avoiding; but it
cannot by its terror cause those latent similarities to be inexpressive or
neglectfull of keeping an unisone in touch and time: for while they continue a
capacity to love, they will express the fervor and Constancy of the
resolution they have to each other, and the reason is, because love is a
perfect surprise and conquest which rests not in a bare Sympathy, but passes
from those inchoat Novicisms to the non ultra of Con-naturality; nor is it hard
for any man or woman to be brought of to be of the same judgment, diet,
delight with those they love; for in the assimilation each to other is the
Continuation maintained, and the Degrees of love sublimated: there was no Key
to Sampson's strength till the dallying with Dalilah delivered it to her, and
taught her how to ruin him, who, but for that lubricity, had not been to be
dealt with by Philistines; nor could David's warmth so have afflicted his own
Soul, and blasphemed his God, (as in the case of Vriah slain and Bathsheba
enjoyed) it did, but that his love was the sole Provocation to that action of
Infamy.

No wonder then the Philosopher attributes so much to use, as to call it as
another Nature ((...),) and quotes Evenus his verses to confirm it. (...), etc.
What many years men are accustomed to,
As second Nature they delight to do.
This is the reason that Authors assign such Potency to use and custom, Lib.
de Amicitia. 60. in Dialog. De Oratore. Epitome Dionis in Commodo. 18. p. 374.
Edit. Sylburg. Orthographia per totum librum. In lib. 1. Enead. 3. p. 226. art.
3. Namsi is possit ab ca sese derepente avellere qui cum tot consuescit annos,
non ^um horninem ducerem. Ancyr. 4.
as amounts to a second Nature, not less effectual in her influences and
ducts, then the first; Tully tells us of vetustatis and consuetudinis vis
maxima; Tacitus makes in consuetudinem vertere, to be all one with in naturam.
Xiphilinus reports that Commod^es was what he was, (...), first, by ignorance
of what was good, then by ill customs, he at last arrived at sordid and
effeminate manners flowing from a contaminated and debauched nature.
Quintilian, Dorsquius, A Gellius, make all parts of Grammar and learning, even
to Orthography, to be ruled by use; and Marsilius Ficinus on Plotinus makes
good the force of use and custom as another nature; yea Terence when he
expresses a man's application to a woman that pleases him, and from whom he can
as soon die as part, calls it, consuescere cum aliqua. The consideration of
which should turn men to right usages and customs, if they would preserve
themselves virtuous, for if nature be by them altered and the course and
current of it diverted, there ought to be great care that we habituate no evil
to us, Scholastici.
Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, and this amongst others I conceive
to be one reason, why Solomon advises to teach a Child in the trade of his
youth, virtue, that when he is old, he may not depart from it; but of this
Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Demetriades writes at large, and Cornelius A
Lapide on Ecclus. xxx. 1. and Heresbachius de educ. Principum liberis. Page 133.
Sic ramusculus pyristipiti pomi insertus, post quam coaluerit, trahit in
naturam pyri, ut ambo deinceps merito pyrus appellentur, fructusque producent
pyri, sic and usitatae virtus habitum generat, ut utens ea deinde a virtute
illa denominetur, quo modestia praeditus, usu modestus nominatur, continentia
continens, and sapientia sapiens.

Here the Text-Master instances the force of custom and conjunction from that,
which is somewhat equivalent to it in vegetables, and has analogy in that
kind with the effects of virtues and vices on the mind; for though it be
true, that no general rule is exempt from an exception, and no second cause is
so absolute but may be overruled by its first cause, yet is it also ordinarily
true, that God leaves Nature to her work, and impedes her not but upon high
Concerns, and in notable Cases: indeed there are Instances that God, contrary
to all humane probability, has brought men and things into esteem and renown
which have been unlikely so to be. Valerius Maximus brings in Tarquinius
Priscus in the Head of these, Lib. 3. c. 4.
a man born at Corinth, and Damaratus a Hogherd his father, and a bastard to
boot, yet for all this miraculously brought to Rome, and that with such
multiform advantages to his greatness, that in short time, he grew the Love,
Dread, and Sovereign of all degrees, and the Historian gives us such a Record
of his Bravery, as eternally monuments him for a Mirror of men, Dilatavit
fines Romani Imperii, etc. He enlarged the Roman Empire by brave Conquests, he
honored the Solemnities of religion with additional graces to them, he made
the Senate and Orders of Knighthood more ample and capacious for great merits;
and besides these the great virtue in him, was, that he so demeaned himself in
his charge, that the City of Rome had no cause to repent she chose a stranger
for her Emperor, and passed by her own Sons. Lib. 2. Pop. Rom Valor. Max. lib.
3. c. 4
The like does Egnatius report of the Emperor Iustine, a Thracian born; and so
of Mahomet: Basilius, Tullus Hostilius, Phocion, Iphicrates, Viriatus, Narses,
Iacobus Paresotus, Mutius the Founder of the S-Forzan family, and sundry others
meanly bred and born, who yet have come to great fortunes, and brought about
mighty designs to the amazement of men, that beheld or read them. These things,
I say, have been and yet are at the pleasure of God further to permit, but this
extraordinary course is not God's frequent Method of his Manifestation to men;
his usual direction to Seize are by Industry and Assuescency of ones self
to labors of the mind and body, and by that he gives men the success of
facility and pleasure in that, which before they were habituated to, was
difficult and displeasing; that as in Vegetables, fruits generically the same,
are reconciled in their specifique difference by inserting them into one
another stock, the Cyons of a Pare or Apple being grasted on the stock each of
other, and Plumbs inoculated into each other will produce the fruit of the
stock and kind, into which they are let: so in the mind of men, there is a
real transformation suitable to the nature of the Company men consort with, and
the Objects they fix their delight upon; for use begets an habit, and habits
delight in suitable activity, and such as the soul and mind of man is, such
will be his delight either in good or evil, Lib. De beata vita p. 654. lib. De
Tranquil. p. 620.
so true is that of Seneca, Natura duce utendum est, hane ratio observat, hanc
consulit, idem est ergo beat vivere and secundum naturam, and surely where
virtue is in the soul, in quocunque habitu est, prodest, as he notably.

For it is the (...) of virtue habituated to, and radicated in man, that
transforms him; naturally he is void of all good, and sets himself in a
resolved hostility against whatever is divine, and may dissociate him and his
rude praepossessions by vice and enmity to virtue: but when God touches the
natural Conscience, and causes the beauty of virtue to irradiate, when there is
one Beam of discovery let into the understanding, of a more excellent way then
it has found, this causes it so to augment and dilate itself in desires and
endeavors, that at last it brings in the perfect discovery of virtue, and
releases men from their bondage to sins service, so that they once being
accustomed to be continent, just, modest, patient, liberal, magnanimous, cannot
tell how to be other, nay wonder at themselves for bruits and not men, when
they were in their pristine barbarity, this was that made Seneca profess with
truth, Nihil cogor, nihil patior invitus, I do not serve God being compelled,
Lib. De Providentia, p. 526 f.
and obey him because I must, but I am willing to be what he would have me
because I ought; I know nothing is casual but certain, as to him who has laid
out every occurrent of my life, so that whatever falls out is but the very
effect of his disposition. O this habituation of the soul to virtue is the
felicity and upshot of all acquirements, it is the viaticum, that supports the
Journey of life, and serves us with all necessaries to our conclusion. Porphyry
made it peculiar to wise men to enjoy, for while he allowed all men to die the
way of all flesh, In Sententiis Holstenio interpret, p. 221.
(...), by a departure of their bodies from their souls, yet he restrains the
departure of the soul from the body only to Philosophers, supposing them only
to live chiefly in the joy of those abstracted virtues, which they contemplated
in order to practice: this St. Paul meant more metaphysically then any
Philosopher could understand or act it, I live, not I, Gal. ii. 20. 1. Cor. ix.
last v. Phil. iii. 8.
but Christ that lives in me: I bring down my body, I account all things loss
in comparison of Christ: How so, holy Paul? the love of Christ constrained him
to deny himself for him, who had called him from a Persecutor to become an
Apostle. Thus prevalent was the habituation of sanctity to St. Paul, that he
could deny himself in all his complacencies, and in all his transcendencies, so
he might fulfill the will of his Master, whose vassal he was, and from whom he
had command so to do; yea, and no further is the Philosophy of this World
rational, and religiously moral, then it fixes us in this resolution of
training up our minds to virtue, and choosing apt helps to advance it in us,
good rules, good company, good discourse, good pleasures, that by all these, we
our selves may be good. For true is that which Apollonius Tyanaeus spoke of to
the Emperor Vespasian, Philostratus in Vita ejus. lib. 2 c. 14. p. 100.
My companions, said he, in Philosophy, (...), keep their heads cool, and
undizie, that they may see clearly what they ought to do in the course of
steady virtue; nor are they ambitious to know what is not fit for them, (...),
etc. they hourly, and every minute consider with themselves, what is their duty
to do, and intent, they are upon it, early and late. This, this is the way, to
be every way what God and Nature requires, to keep our selves up to the precise
rules of virtue and to be habitually and dispositively good, is not only the
path of being, but also of doing good: By this the Elders obtained a good
report; and through this, difficulties have been rendered facile, and
impossibilities compossible. What makes the Nightingale out-note her fellow
Choristers, in the suavity and perfection of her modulation, but her continual
singing fifteen days, Plinius Hist. Not.
and fifteen nights without intermission, till she has made her notes natural
to her? What makes the Sun to shine, and all things in their Elements to move
with vigor and indesession; but that position of natures to such perfect
actions in those spheres? And what makes Martyrs constancy not only to lie hid
in a Well six whole years without seeing light, In Athanasii persecutiones
universum conjuratum orbem, and commotos fuisse principes terrae; gentesetiam,
regua, exercitus coiisse adversus eum, Russinu^; lib. 1. c. 18.19.
as Athanasius did, but even to dye all sorts of cruel death, and that with joy
and exultation? but this contemplation of dying daily, this mortifying of their
Earthly Members, glorying in the Cross, endeavoring to have the same mind in
them that was in Christ Jesus. The habituation of themselves to those virtues
of self-denial and humility, made them not only prepared for, but Proficients
in, all excellent virtues. For knowing the nature and use of them, they
delighted in, and at last were partakers of the plenitude of them. Thus David
made the Law of God his delight, by meditating in it day and night. And thus
the Law of God made David the delight of God and Man, while it made him in
wisdom to excel all his teachers, and in integrity to be a man after God's own
heart, and to fulfill all his will.

Quare and tu Princeps, post quam justitia delectabiliter functus faeris,
habitumque legis indutus fueris, merito denominaberis justus, cujus gratia tibi
dicetur, dilexisti justitiam quo and odisti iniquitatem, propterea unxit te
dominus Deus tuus oleo latitiae prae consortibus tuis regibus terrae.

The former Clause was but illustrative of the force of Use and Custom; this
is applicative to the Prince, in the habituation of whose mind to Justice, as
the Law propounds pounds it, there will be a suitable effect: For since all
Laws that are just, being extracts out of the Law of God in nature, and the
positive enlargement of it as emergencies required them, are to all respective
Countries, and the men in them, the measures of just and unjust; and the Law of
England is such to the King and People respectively therein, his humble address
to the Prince is, that the Law he would study, and by considering of, so
delight in it, that his principles being Law and Justice, his practice may be
also such, and so he not err in Judgment, nor cause the people to wander out
of the way by his ill example, or complain of hard usage under his Government,
when God should reduce him to it. This is the scope of the Chancellor, which
he wisely prosecutes, by not only commending the Law as a study of delightful
knowledge, the Magazine of Justice, but as that which is attainable to some
kind of intellectual plenitude, I mean to such a proportion as is necessary for
him: so that from knowledge of, he shall proceed to love, delight, and take a
complacentiality in the Law, as the Scheme of Justice, that his mind ought to
be conformed to, and thence his actions. And this once had, he concludes him
not parasitically, but meritoriously just, and applies to him that of the Psalm
xlv. 7. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even
thine own God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Which the Author of the Hebrews, chap. i. 8. applies to Christ, the King of
Righteousness, whom he makes super-eminently endowed with, and superlatively
honored for it, Thou have loved Righteousness; not greatness, not victory, not
riches, but righteousness, that is the darling of thy soul, that is the secret of
thy Government. Thou have not only said to Kings, (...), as much as Laws are
not to be violated, Inter dicta Phythagorae, apud Porphyrium in vita ejus, page
199.
because they are the exemplars of Justice, the glory of Crowns; and injustice
in the Soul of a Prince, is the riot of sensuality against Reason, and a warp
of the less noble faculties from the Law of their conjunction with, and
subserviency to the more noble: but thou have (O Lord Jesus) to thine eternal
honor and admiration, Injustitia in anima, est ig^^bilium partium a naturali
lege dissidium. Tapia, lib. 9. p. 9. De Triplici bono and vera hominis
nobilitate. Grot. in Locum.
loved righteousness as thy choice, thy self, bonum tuum quiae bonum te; Oh!
but how does that appear ^ the next words confirms it, ^disti iniquitatem, as
thou love Justice, so thou hate whatever is contrary to, and inconsistent
with it. Thou hate thy Scepter which is (...), should be other then of pure
Gold, and endure the touch of all tongues, thine enemies being Judges; thou will not by that oppress the weak, nor bruise the broken, but bind them up,
because thy Scepter is like thy Kingdom, which represents all righteousness,
having no fellowship with iniquity. Here, O holy soul, thine eyes may see the
King of Saints in his beauty, far greater then Solomon in all his Royalty,
loving Justice, and hating iniquity, as never man or King did, or could do
before, or ever can, or shall do after him. Now also consider the compensation
that the Father is mentioned to give the Son for this his love to
righteousness; that follows, Wherefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee;
because thou art so qualified to rule as a King, God has called thee to
Kinglyness by unction; Phil. 2.
as he has given thee a name above every name, so has he preferred thee in thy
unction above all unctions of men. Their unctions make their heads and hearts
often ache with care, because their affairs are sometimes disasterous, and at
best troublesome: their Crowns gird their Brows, and make them bend them for
pain; but God has anointed thee, O blessed Jesus, (...), with such oil, as
chears and incandorates thy face, (for (...) signifies the same with (...),
oblectumentum, ornamentum, honestamentum.) God has put such sovereign oil into
the Springs of thy Rule, Psalm. 110 3. Cant. 1. 4.
that thy Scepter easily turns thy Subjects to thee; Thy people are a willing
people in this day of thy power, and they call unto thee to draw them, and
promise to run after thee gladly and constantly, and all this above thy
fellows; no Angels in Heaven, no Kings on Earth, are so anointed as the King of
the Church was: For whereas their unction is but the work of art, Christ's
unction was the work and spirit of God whereas theirs was but poured out in
measure, Christ's was an effluxion of divine virtue without measure, whereas
theirs was but temporary, as their Kingdoms are: Christ's was eternal and
perpetual, as his Kinglyness is; whereas theirs was but to signify their
separation and sanctification to the rule of their Subjects only, and those
only during their lives, Christ's was emblematical of his indeterminable and
capacious power, which was to extend to all persons, and to endure beyond all
time; and therefore well expressed, Prae consortibus tuis, regibus terrae;
quippe qui etiam habuit potestatem, etc. For Christ the King of the Church had
the prerogative above all Kings, to forgive all sins on Earth, and to have an
everlasting Kingdom, as he had deserved, so to have his glory be by his
purchase of it with his body on the Cross, which was an expiatory sacrifice for
the sins of the World, as Manster and Clarius both on the Text.

This Scripture thus applied to Christ, our Chancellor brings in here to his
aid, the better to prevail upon the Prince to love the Laws, that declare the
measure and proportion of English Justice: For as the end of Laws is to
determine right and wrong, Brompton in Chronicis, page 956, 958, edit. Londini.
(and the Common-Laws of England were composed and methodized so to do out of
the farrago of Laws that of old were here amongst us, and which Brompton says,
were nimis partiales; and therefore by Saint Edward the Confessor meliorated,
Legum ministri magistratus, legum interpretes judices, legum idcirco omnes
servi sumus, ut liberi esse possumus. Cic. pro Cluenti.
and by all Princes added to, explained, or subtracted from, as their wisdom
in Counsel saw fit:) so is the exactest and unerringst method of Justice to be
learned by Prince and People from these Laws; which they that addict themselves
to know, will love, and in loving be just and happy in life and death. And so
our grave Master, and after him, I conclude the fifth Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Nonne tune Princeps serenissime, haec te satis concitant ad legis rudimentae,
cum per eam, justitiam induere valeas qua and appellaberis justus, ignorantiae
quoque legis evitare poteris ignominiam, ac per legem faelicitate fruens,
beatus esse poteris in hac vita, and demum filiali timore imbutus, qui Dei
sapientia est, charitatem quae amor in deum est, imperturbatus consequeris, qua
Deo adherens per Apostoli sententiam fie s'unus spiritus cum eo. Edit. Edw.
Whitchurch.



HIc epilogat Cancellarius totius persuasionis suae effectus, says the Editor
of my Text in Hen. the 8. time on this Chapter: And not amiss, for having
prediscoursed of the excellency of Justice, and the consequentiality of its
being, and being beloved in a King, who is to distribute it according to the
Law of his Government, which Law known, will be delighted in, and conformed to
by him: He now comes to annex, by way of motive and assurance, the felicities
that do flow in upon just Princes, and do distinguish them from others, both in
life and death. And this he does; first, by telling him, that Righteousness and
Justice is so peculiarly the Garment of Kings, that they must wrap up their
whole man in it, as garments cover all the body, and the Robes of Princes are
long from top to toe, significative of their plenary power and augustness. In
which sense, God is said to put on Righteousness as a Garment, and the Saints
are said to be clothed in the garment of their elder brother, and that to
render them beloved.

So the Chancellor intimates to the Prince, that by knowledge of, and love to
the Law, he shall be so invested with, and habituated to Justice, that it shall
be his nature, and as impossible for him not to be just, as not to be in warmth
motion and sense while living.

Secondly, he presents him with another benefit, ignorantiae legis evitare
poteris ignominiam, and that is no small one: For as ignorance is the botch and
deformity of humane nature, (which God has endowed with a reasonable soul,
divinae particula aurae, and made capable by the vastness of its intellect, to
understand and judge of all things:) so is ignorance of the Law in a Prince, so
great a deformity, as no corporal one comes near in the despicableness of it.
For as he will make but an ill oration, that knows not the rules of speaking,
and he but a pitiful Seaman, that skils not the use of the Compass, and he a
rash Soldier, that considers not of the advantages and disadvantages, which he
is to provide for in fighting; and he an ill Counselor, who has never read
the Rules of Policy, nor seen the effects of them in practice, so will he prove
himself but a sost and despicable Prince, who knows little or nothing at all of
the Law, according to which he is sworn to govern. For as all other men's
eating, sleeping, fruitions, are inbeneficial to him, if he have not health to
enjoy them himself; so is the knowledge of all other things incontributive to
his real quiet and effulgency; if in the Law, which is anima regiminis, he be
unversed, and letterless, frustra foris strenue si domi male vivitur.

3. As knowledge of the Law will avoid the shame of ignorating it, so will it
accrue a complication of positive goods, contributive to the comfort of life
and acquirement of same after death, Per legem felicitate fruens beatus esse
poter is in hac vita, that is, the Conscience of just governing his people,
according to his Oath and his Laws, which are their Birthright, will give him
such a calm and stability on his Subjects love, and such an humble confidence
in God's mercy and protection, that he shall not fear the evil day that it
should come on him; or if it do, he shall be assured to overcome it by
magnanimity, and innocent Hectorism. And whereas guilt makes Kings succumbere,
ashamed and unbold to assert themselves, the Justice of a royal soul, notably
evidenced in a just Reign, shall make him that has it, more then a Conqueror
in life, and nothing less then a Martyr at death; yea, it shall go near,
(though not come home to the pitch of merit, for that is no proper phrase in
reformed Oratory and Doctrine.) to deserve a Canonization, by the favor of him
that accepts and rewards all admirable actions flowing from virtuous
principles; Quomodo justitiae vindex erit, qui expoliat alios? quomodo suam
amabit Remp. qui de Thesauris cogendis, dies, noctesque cogitat? quomodo rebus
agendis advertet animum, quilucro totus inhiat? Nihil recte geritur quod rei
privatae studio geritur, nullum facinus generosum suscipitur absque famae
existimatione. Hanc vero in pracio non habet animus vilis, abj^ctusque
avaritiae deditus. Savedra in Symbolis Politicis.
yea, inasmuch as such a procedure in beneficence, must argue an intern fear of
God, and a wisdom effected by it in the soul of the practicer; who therefore is
such to men, his equals in nature, and his inferiors in polity and order,
because Charity commands him so to be, and the love of God toward him in his
prelation above others, and in him, provoking him to crown worth in all he sees
it in, and to proportion his favors according to the Justice of his divine
office. I say these effects of Justice, resulting from the knowledge and
practice of the Law, will so exhilerate and quicken the spirits of a Prince,
that he will not only be calm within, and not encumbered with the terrors of
the Almighty, but be abundantly beloved by his Subjects, live in peace and
plenty, dye renowned and lamented, I King. iii. last v. All Israel heard of the
Judgment which the King had judged, and they feared the King, for they saw that
the wisdom of God was in him to do judgment. Yea, and be made as the
Chancellor reports, from the Apostle Saint Paul, Be made one spirit with him,
that is, not only submit to God, and follow him in all his Directions and
Prescripts of virtue, as a good Child does, who makes his Fathers will his Law;
Nemo enim Deo conjungi ullo modo potest, in cujus voluntate situm non sit, vel
illius d^sciplinam, and imperium sequi, vel ingrate repudiare, cum autem beata,
tota sit in divina conjunctione posita vita sequitur, ut astricta voluntate,
nemo possit vitam beatam adipisci, but also as a fruit and consectary of that
conjunctness, have a fameness of glory in Heaven, as they had a sameness of
sovereignty here, always understanding the sameness secundum mensuram hominis,
though secundum veritatem Dei, as true a conjunction with God in glory, as they
had here in power, a reward commensurate to their actions rightly and
religiously performed, sic autem fit ut justis hominibus regnum illud
immortale, non solum, ut merces, and praemium; sed etiam, ut legitimum
patrimonium patris sapientia, and benignitate fondatum, optimo jure debeatur:
si enim aequitatis ratio postulat, ut servis opera sua egregie functis, merces
domini benignitati consentanea persolvatur, si leges amicitiae praescribunt, us
omnia bona sint amicis communia, si jure statutum est, ut filii legitimi in
paternorum bonorum possessione collocentur, non obscurum est juris aeterni
rationem flagitare, ut summus ille omnium dominus qui bonorum amicus, and pater
est, vel servis diligentibus, vel amicis fidelibus, Lib. 1. De Justitia. p. 85.
vel filiis charissimis sempiternae gloriae fructum largiatur, says Orosius.

Sed quia lex sine gratia ista operari nequit, tibi illam super omnia explorare
necesse est, legisquoque divinae, and sacrarum scripturaram indagare scientiam,

This is judiciously inserted here to abate too much recumbence on the Law, and
too high admiration of Justice, as she is proposed by it, for as the beauty of
the sun overdoted on, proved an argument to the Eastern world to adore it, and
as the learning of Nature besotted Philosophers unreasonably to expend
themselves about it, till they despised the wisdom of God and undervalued it,
Romans i. 16.
the power of God to Salvation, beneath their delirancies and Enthusiastique
conceits, so is justice though beloved of God, and that which he commends to
man as his duty and glory, apt to be mistaken as the only acquirement of
study, and the lesson of the Law alone, if the Prince be not informed of the
proper cause, from whence only it is blessed to be what it is; and that is God
by his will in his word: indeed God permits us to own study as a means, and
that by which he ordinarily begets and expatiates virtue in man: as the mind
of man from what he reads or hears, has the principle of his actuation
excited, so arts and study so Laws and Systems of Justice may be owned by him
as great helps and methods to those excellent ends; but God endures them not
partakers in the glory of success, and prevalence, which only is his, and
theirs only by his permission, and so far as he pleases: so that though the
Laws of men, and of England may be most just, and such as can teach the Prince
how to be just actively, and that to all the proportions of Kinglynesse; yet
can it not do this ex insita vi, L^ge P. Mirandul. in c. 5. Heptapli p. 10.
or ratione i^natae potentiae, but must be helped to do this by grace, the gift
of God: which grace and favor thus to be adjuvated, is, to be obtained by
prayer; so Solomon obtained wisdom, and so every good thing is to be obtained.
And to that must be added diligent Meditation of Scripture, not a light, and
oscitant reading, but a deep and solid rumination, not now and then, but
constantly and affectively; indagare is to seek as men do at the bottom of
wells, and in blind corners, wherein, if they look not intently, they cannot
find what they seek. God will have us call earnestly and seek passionately for
his blessing on our endeavors, before he will give us our desires: were
justice an easy lesson, did the Law infallibly make the Student of it just,
there were no more to do, then to read over the Law Books, and consider the
judgments in them, and then the whole attainment of justice were had. But
because the Law is but (of it self) a dead Letter to this quickening Issue,
therefore God will have his fiat begged by Prayers, and this Method learned
from his mind revealed; and the Knowledge of these, proves ever the readiest
way to the blessing of them. The Law, says St. Paul, is holy, and just, and
good Romans vii. 12. where (...) is v. 14. explained by (...), utpote a
spirituali bono profecta, God indeed has intended the Law, holy, quoad
ceremonialia; just, quoad judicialia; good, In locu^.
quoad moralia; as St. Thomas observes: O but whatever it is, it proves not
without God's blessing, that opens the Mystery, and applies the Energy of it to
the understanding and will, and thence lets a man into the pleasure, and profit
of it: nor is God's blessing on endeavors obtainable but according to the
Enaction of his word; therein he has taught, that Prayer is the Scaladoe of
heaven, and that the violent in holy devotion take it by force, Psalm. ^. 15.
ascendat oration, ut descendat miseratio; he has invited his to call, and
promised to hear and answer them, and our Lord bid his Disciples ask, assuring
them that whatsoever they shall ask the Father in his name, Matthew. xxi. 22.
shall be given them: which the Psalmist in his own experience confirms so to
be, as promised, The Lord hears the righteous, and his ^ares are open unto
his cry. As then to beg the blessing of God on studies, not only humane, but
those of Scripture, is the way to obtain it; so is study without it as
unsanctified so mostly unsuccessefull, it is to labor for things of naught,
it is to loose time on shadows and bubbles, sapienter descendere ad infernum;
so it follows in our Text, Cum dicat sacra Scriptura, quod vani sunt omnes in
quibus non subsit scientia Dei, Sapientiae. c. 13.



This sentence is true, and collectable from Texts of holy writ, but as it is a
part of the Book of wisdom, Prafat. in lib. Solomonis. Eu^eb. Lib. 2. c. 17.
not written by Solomon, for St. Ierom says, Liber sapientiae apud Hebraeos
nus quam est, verum and ipse stilus Graecam magis eloquentiam redolet; but by
Philo probably, whom the learned think so to have named it, because Christ the
wisdom of God is therein set forth both in his Advent and Passion, because of
which, the Jews, Magdeburg. Cent. 9. c. 4. p. 111.
as the Centurists tell me, wholly rejected it; this Book I say, being written
by none of God's Penmen, ought not, as I humby conceive, to be accounted Caenon
in the Catholic Church: though I know Lorinus and generally all the Romanists
account it sacred, and part of the Canon, Praefat. in Com. in lib. Sapientiae
c. 1. but our Church rejects it, and so does Chamier. lib. 5. c. De Canone. The
learned Bishop of Durham, now one of the Reverend Fathers of our Church, has
notably vindicated the Canon of Scripture against Apochryphal intrusions, as
well as unwritten Legends, to him therefore, as matchless in that Argument, I
refer my Reader, humbly protesting against all Novelty on either extreme; for
though some wholly reject, and others fondly extol them to a kind of rivalry
with Scripture, yet our Churches moderation shall be my temper toward them, to
allow them their place, as rules of Prudence, Secundae lectionis vel ordinis,
Bellarminus De verbo Dei c. 4. King James to all Christian Monarchs p. 303.
oper. Lib. 15. De Ciuitate Dei, c. 23. In Catalog. Haeres.
and direction for manners; not as foundations of faith, and this I suppose,
has been ever the Catholic account of them; so St. Augustine, Etsi in iis
invenitur aliqua veritas, tamen propter multa falsa, nulla est Canonica
authoritas; and Philastrius, Etsi legi debent morum causa, a perfectis, non ab
omnibus legi debent, quia non intelligentes multa addiderunt, and tulerunt,
quae voluerunt Haeretici; and Angelom, when he gives the reason of their
Reception in the Church, concludes yet, Hi a quibusdam excipiuntur, In. c. 9.
and 10. 1 Regum.
non proptere a ut illos approbent, sed ^a quae necessaria sunt ad
confirmandum, recipiant.

Though therefore most true it is, that all Knowledge that leads us not to
God, Reddidit causam, quare in ea peccata de quibus supra dixit, inciderint
Aegyptii and Cananaei, ac illorum occ^sione incipit in genere tractare de
idolorum superstitione quae triplex erat; quaedam enim animalia viva cole^ant
pro diis; alia ^reaturas ut elementa, and corpora caelestia; alia vero etiam
imagines verarum rerum. Jansenius Annotat. in Loc.
in love to, admiration of, and conformity with him, be unprofitable, and
therefore vain, forasmuch as it leaves a man, short of the best good, and the
only perfection, and argues his soul unactive to the immense nature of its
Divinity in God's purpose of infusion; yet is not the book out of which this is
quoted sacred Canon: but God having made use of the Author of that Book, as a
notable Instancer of truth in that which the wisdom of the world often deceives
great Scholars by, (as it did particularly that Abel Bishop of St. Andrews,
Spotswoods History Church Scotland. p. 44.
who upon the Gate of the Cathedral there wrote, Haec mihi sunt tria Lex,
Canon, Philosophia, and was wittyly replied upon, Te levant absque tria, fraus,
favor, vana sophia.) There is reason there should be regard done it, next to
that of Canon.

His igitur Princeps, dum adolescens es, and animae tua velut tabula rasa,
depinge eam, ne in futurum, ipsa figuris minoris frugi delectabilius depingatur.

Here the grave Knight improves the Maxim of Philosophers, intus existens
prohibet alienum, for finding by experience the mind of man taken up with
action, and youth the warmest, and most vicious part of life, (being the time
from fifteen to twenty five,) carrying the man to good or evil with
impetuosity, Petr. Crinit. de honesta discipl. lib. 5. c. 9.
he bespeaks the Prince to anticipate vice by prepossession of his soul with
virtue; and that he may the more successefully rivet on, and drive home his
swasion; he not only considers the soul as the mint, and formatory of all
things, which have their rise in youth, and their ripeness in age; the soul of
man in its actions on the body being like the seasons of the year, laden with
sap in the spring, and blowings and leaves after, and then with knitting and
increase in the youth and Mid-summer of it, and then withering, and returning
to its first Principle as the sap does: but as a Virgin-Table on which there is
a space to write what a man will, and hence as one that is yet a Novice in
vice, and has a mind like the Galaxy pure and und^b^uched, he commends to him
the fair Arras and Imagery of virtue to adorn himself with, and prays him if
he would be one of Justice his Triarii, sub vexillis innocentiae subsidere, to
keep himself unarmed, (...), Dionyssus Halliearnass. lib. 5.
etc. that he may come to the succor of justice, when things are desperate and
hope of recovering almost ceases; for as in wars and Combats the bravest
Hectors are those that are so bred up from their youth, because to them courage
in, and contempt of danger is a second nature, and no need there is of
terrifying them by such a Law as the Megaritans had, who decreed, to fight
disorderly or fly cowardly, should bedeath; their resolution being (...).
Herodor. lib. 7.
etc, not to fly any disadvantage of an enemy in battle, but either dye or
overcome: so are they the most just men, whose youth is accustomed to justice,
and who inure themselves to love Laws, and orderly courses even from their
Cradles: this was Solomon's reason in his counsel, A prima adolescentia
observandis sideribus deditus Gassendus, Tom. 5. in praefat. ad vitam Tichon.
Brahe.

Zuniger. Theatrum vitae huma^ae, vol. 1. lib. 4. p. 94, 95.

Heresbachius de Instit. Principum liberis.

(...), Laertiu^ in vita ejus. Picus Mirandul. lib. 2. c. 2.


Train up a child in the trade of his youth, and he will not depart from it in
his age, Prove. xxii. 6. And the experience of the necessity, and importance
hereof has so swayed with wise Parents, that as they have omitted no
improvements of their children, which their tenderest ages were capable of: so
have they chosen the most professed Masters and Tutors, b^th in learning,
prudence and piety, to instruct them, and accounted them their Benefactors and
Parents, as to those fair fortunes of fame and usefullnesse, which those
educations have fitted them for, and admitted them unto in aftertimes.

For though natural ingenie give men great helps to excellency in what ever
they undertake, yet the main is God's blessing upon industry and diligence,
provided those be prudently directed, and that they be so, helps of exact
Masters are great furtherances, nor have any men in the world proved so noble
Lustres to their Orbs, as those that have had their youths well seasoned with
all the varieties of complete institution, as was Laurentius Medices, whom
Mirandula thus writes of, In praemio de ente and bono ad Angel. Politianum. p.
159.
Efficaci adeo vir ingenio, etc. Of so ready and generally a dexterous wit was
he, that he seemed equally exact in every kind of ability, and has this
admirable in him, that though he were ever taken up with state affairs, yet he
always either spoke or meditated some learned and scientifique thing. And our
Edward the sixth, of whom it is hard to write any thing to such a height of
Hyperbole, which his just deserts advanced him not to be represented by. Since
then it is incident to youth to be ill-principled, as he was, In Nerone. c. 16.
whom Suetonius reports, Luxuriam, libidinem, crudelitatem veluti juvenili
errore exercuit; and as Coligui, who was heard often to say, That neither
Alexander nor Julius Caesar were superior to himself, and the ill habits that
are atcheiued then, are seldom if ever receded from, but remain as dead flies
to inquinate the compositions of the most eminent virtues. It is of high
concernment to inure the mind of youth to virtue and humility, to courage and
justice, for this will so ballast and steer the afterages, that nothing will
disseise them but death, which is the great Usurper of all mortal glories and
triumphs in their determination.

Which premised, our Chancellor does most worthyly to attack the youth of our
Prince with such desensatives, as may abortivate the Attempts of passion and
lubricity upon him; for in that he commends not airy Romances, not Poetique
fictions, not parasitique drolleries, but sober reason and sacred Scripture to
his rumination: what does he less then endeavor to make his choice in youth,
an Iliads to repose his fame in, and teach him to live in the glory of a
matchless piety, far more then Homer did in his Poems; which yet Tully says
were so contributive to their Author, Vt nisi Ilias extitisset illa, idem
tumulus qui corpus ejus contexerat, nomen ejus obruisset.

And truly if the holy Scriptures, which are the most ancient record extant,
far before the Peleponesian war, Bochartus praefat. in lib. de Coloniis
beyond which Thucydides acknowledges in the Greek stories nothing is certain,
and which was but about Artaxerxes and Nehemiah's time; I say, if the Scripture
does discover to us, Moses, Job, Samuel, three notable Instances of sober
youth, and such men in their age as few exceeded, and thus probably they became
by the seasoning of their youth with piety and probity. Is there not much more
from the authority of the Book, from whence these authorities are quoted, and
the nature of the Instances hence made to persuade a Prince of reason and
religion, then from any Ethnique Author, or less credible Examples: surely I
think, yes, and so I believe the Chancellor doubted not but to convince the
Prince of; for since the word of God is a sword and a Hammer to cut asunder and
mall down all opposition against and interposition between it and its end and
drift, the Chancellor has done well to draw forth this weapon to terrify all
contradictions, that he did but fear probable; for since nothing became a young
Prince more then readynesse to learn, and ductility to take learning in that
Method his Tutors should convey it to him, it was a dexterous practice that our
Chancellor uses to implant virtue by, to wit, the Commendation of Justice from
the Law of God and the Law of England.

Ne in futurum ipsa figuris minoris frugi delectabilius depingatur, quia etiam,
ut sapiens quidam ait, quod nova testa capit, inveterata sapit.

As the former Clause had argumentum ab utili, so this has an argument a damno
contrarii; if virtue be not suprerinduced, vice will be; for natura non patitur
vacuum: so his Motive to virtue is not only a decoro from the beauty, but a
damno evitato; for if he give up himself to virtue (and abandon every evil way,
and every evil consort; then there will be no vacuity for vanity and vice to
portray it self on: that, as probably of old, Candidates in any arts had Tables
in which they wrote, or on which drew; what they had to say or do, which when
all was full, and no room left; those that had no place therein could not be
carried up to the Judges to be approved of and chosen: so from thence does he
apply to the Prince the simile, beseeching him so to fill up the Virgin-Table
of his mind with virtues of all kinds to his Princely compleatnesse; that
when the heat and vigor of youth importunes him to release that severity his
resolution has virtuously brought him under, he may deny those insinuations
admission and acceptance, conside^ing that what is once well done, ought not to
be undone: nay, there is a kind of necessity to persist in an inexorablenesse,
where to change is to become worse, and to retreat the field, to lose it.

For youth is the foundation of ages superstructure, and though it sometimes
falls out, that dissolute youths prove stanch ages, yet mostly it is otherways,
since the indications of Manhood are conjecturable even from youth, Julius
Caesar told the world what he would be man, Cuspinian, in vita ejus.
when but a boy, animum habuit semper ingentia semper infinita expetentem, and
those drowsy inactivities that many have, who do plus quiet, quam ag^ndo,
atque movendo proficere, show, that to place them in active lives is to make
them unhappy and useless, so that the great secret of institution is to know
the Genius and delight of youth, and to give it prospect and scope that way,
not to abate their courage by continual droppings of displeasure, nor to raise
their insolence by intemperate praises, but so to carry a mean in all things,
that they may be kept warm, and not put into a flame and fever of distemper,
for tantum ingenii, quantum irae, and so to be cooled as not to be chilled and
mortified; for if wisdom said, vellem in juvene aliquid amputandum, and
Politian foretold of Peter de Medices, that he was like to make a wise man, who
was so forward a Boy; then there is danger in breaking the spirit of youth by
frequent and imprudent discouragements. As barren grounds brings forth nothing
good, so over-lusty grounds too much to be good; extremes are the errors which
Mediocrity corrects: such a strength of Soil as enables production kindly and
plentifully, and no more then does enable so to do, is good in ground. The like
proportion of discretion is to be allowed to the Tillage of youth, neither too
much severity, or too great liberty, but an even hand is to be exercised here;
for hereby not only the ingenuity will be dexterously fed, and the stomach of
it kept quick and unnauseate, but the memory will also remain unbroken; and
that being the sine qua non to all learning, Quintilian allows a youth only
capable of so much ingenuity to learn, as he has memory to retain; because it
is the Crystal Glass, which has in it life's, yea arts Elixar, set that over
too great a flame, and the Glass breaks and the Elixar is lost: burden a
youths memory with immense cares and manifold studies transcending his
proportion, and he is ruined by an immemorativenesse: and again, wholly disuse
memory, and it will shrivel up into a narrowness and incapacity; the right use
of memory is moderately to exercise it, for action perfits habits as food and
motion increase life and all the concomitants of it; yea and this prudence will
exercise it self toward youth in a right disposing of it to delights, and a
real principling of it against ill manners, Alexand. ab Alexand. l. 2. c. 25.
and ill Maxims. Timotheus the Musician would have a double reward from those
Scholars, whom he took to teach from other Masters, with whom they were entered;
and his reason was, because he had a double labor with them, dedocendi,
docendi, unlea^ning them what they had been ill taught, and then teaching them
what was better: and true it is, that he that will be a good Tutor to youth,
must imitate both the plastique Artist and the Carver, add and substract as he
sees occasion, as they do; which made Michael Angelo to say, Sculpture was
nothlng else but a purgation of superfluities, which being better done abroad
then at home, the cockerings of Parents fostering an impatience in Children to
be corrected for faults, and directed how not hereafter to commit them, makes
breeding of children of such consequence; that as the women of Nombre de dios
seldom are brought to bed there, where they conceive, but choose a better air in
which to bring forth; Page 364. Of his works.
so wits (says Sir Henry Wotton) thrive better transplanted then in their
native soil. Youth then being such tinder, it is good to prevent that by care,
Page 254.
which negligence makes fatal; For as in Picture Gladness, and Grief, though
opposites in nature, are such Confiners each on other in art, that the least
touch of a Pensil will translate a crying into a laughing face: so in education
of youth, vice and virtue are so near Borderers one upon another, that it is
easy to plant either of them on young stocks; and many hopeful Persons through
the inobservance of Parents, Guardians, and Tutors shipwreck, which had their
Pilots been knowing and careful, had brought the rich Gargazon of their minds
to a Market of gain to their reputation, and advantage to the age of its
Production, which was the unhappiness of Robert de Veer, In Hypodeigm.
Neustriae. p. 146.
of whom Walsingham thus writes, Qui quidem juvenis aptus fuerit ad c^ncta
probitatis officia, si non defuisset ei in pueritia disciplina. The palpability
of which injury to Children is such, that even the grossest sort of men avoid
it, and train up their Children to courses of life suitable to their aptitude,
and probable to afford them supports for life. So in the next words it follows:
Quis artifex tam negligens profectus suae prolis est, ut non eam dum pubescit
artibus instruat, quibus postea vitae solatia nanciscatur, sic lignarius faber
secare de labro, Ferrarius ferire malleo filium instruit, and quem in
spiritualibus ministrare ^upit, literis imbui facit, sic and Princeps filium'
suum qui post eum populum regulabit, legibus instrui dum minor est, convenit.



Here the Chancellor tells the Prince, that the zeal that he has to his
understanding of, and delight in the Law as the rule of English Justice, arises
from that principle of paternal sagacity, which age and experience has brought
to perfection in him, and his duty to Henry the sixth, his Liege Lord, and the
Prince's Father, (now either in prison, or made away, could not in regard of
the troubles of his life, and the absence of the Prince from him disenable him
to) commanded from him. For though it be true, that young Princes, probable
Heirs to Crowns, are in reputation above all other persons; yet may they want
helps of instruction from their inferiors in station, who being zealous for
their good, may not be rude and uncourtly, in communicating their counsels to
them, in words pregnant, and with reasons solid. Nor will any but Rehoboam's
despise it, since whatever love offers, is not to be reproached, though
discretion may not accept it at the rate it is offered. If our Lord commended
the Widows Mite cast into the Treasury, because she gave it freely according to
the penury of her condition; surely any address that good will makes, is to be
received with kindness, especially when it comes a digno, and digne, when the
Chancellor, a Father in years, presents to the Prince, as a youth of Majesty,
his humble and hearty counsel; yea, indeed not to be concerned in the education
and principling of this Prince, according to Honor, Law, and Justice, had been
an offense against, and a breach of all the Laws of Charity and gratitude,
which called the Chancellor forth to a more then usual manifestation of
himself; that by producing a proportionation of care and zeal in Parents, qua
such to their Children, he might convince the Prince, that what other
discipline to meaner men's Children is, that, the Justice of Law known, is to a
Prince, who without it, will be to seek of one of the Flowers, and choicest
Jewel of his Crown.

As therefore it is the care of worthy Parents to provide for their Children,
fortunes to live splendidly upon, if God please to succeed them in that just
and commendable solicitousness; so is it no less their study, to instruct them
in such Arts, Callings, and courses of life, as renders honest industry, and
convenient support and reward. And this the very reason of nature, in the
lowest impartment of it, teaches Parents to do to their Children; for besides
that Brutes do teach their young how to forage, prowl, and provide for
themselves according to the nature of their kind. The most rude, as well as
knowing of men do train up their Children in Callings, that they may know how
to live another day, as the Proverb is. The Carpenter he accustoms his Child to
cut with an Ax, and a Saw; the Smith to beat with the hammer; and if a Child
prove, as that brave Butchers Son of Ipswich did Cardinal Woolsey, so spriteful
and eager after Learning, so zealous in Religion, that a Clerk, or a Churchman
he must be; then all that the Father can wrap and wring shall be expended in
Schooling, and all this that youth may be sitted to the purpose his genius
directs him to, and best furnishes him for performance of; so does it become
Princes to express a proportionable care of their Sons educations, as their
proof is of greater consequence for good or evil: nay, there is no such a
convenit, that a common Parent should be intent on his Child, to provide him
good breeding and a Calling on which he may live comfortably, as for a Prince,
because his influence being general, the care of him, in order to a general
good, concerns the generality, whom his not being virtuous, endangers to be in
no degree happy. The Kingdom of Macedon was lost by the covetousness of Perseus
the King of it. The Treason of one Count Julian was the cause that the Moors
conquered Spain, Plutarch in P. Aemilio. Tolet. l 5. c. 14. Live. De^. 3. li^. 2.
and possessed it six or seven hundred years. The temerity of Consul Varro, in
giving battle to Hannibal, was the loss of the Romans at Canna. These, and
such like evils, are produced by the defects of men in place, and therefore
great care is to be used in their education and conduct, that they appear in
their actions complete to the extent of their quality, and the proportion of
their influence. To promote which, in a more then ordinary measure, the
Chancellor presents Justice, resident in the English Law, as the aptest aidant
of him, and the thriftiest enterprise he can set upon; yea, because the pliancy
of youth gives advantage to the perfection of acquirements, and fixes attained
habits in an unalteredness to their age, he persuades him to accept of serious
and virtuous institution in his youth, and to believe that the Laws of England
are the best study he can engage in, because they are not only the effects of
reason experienced and methodized, but the peculiar Rule of right Government,
and Religious Order; the learning of which will be most facilitated, by
beginning early, and persisting earnestly in the love and study of it from ones
youth; which the Chancellor inculcates on him the rather, because he sees the
inconveniences that want of Justice in the minds of Princes, brings on them
and their Subjects, making them not meditative of their respective duties, but
vigilant to overreach and afflict each other: which evil spirit, so contrary
to God's institution, and approbation, he beseeches him to abhor and discredit,
by being the example of a just Monarch, who by a religious and righteous Reign
over Subjects, conjures them to a subjection suitable to his Government: and
this, if he does, he will not only be a Son of his incomparable Father Henry
the sixth, but of his Heavenly Father GOD, whose place he in reigning bears.
And so the sixth Chapter, and the Notes on it end.

CHAP. VII.
Silente extunc Cancellario Princeps ipse sic exors^s est, vicisti me vir
egregie suavissima oratione tua, qua and animum meum ardore non minimo, legis
fecisti sitire documentum.


THis Chapter represents the Prince, as sweetly and gratefully recoyling upon
the Chancellor, whom he not only confesses potently oratorious, but sweetly a
Victor of his Reason, into a resignation of practice to his Precept; so mild so
ductile was our Prince, that though it was not Job's handmaid, whose counsel
he desp^sed not, yet in that he was so observant of the wise advice of his
inferior, it argued him not only not evil, like him the Prophet mentions, who
hated him that reproved in the gate, but very good, whom sober suasion, and
affectionate tenderness did so effectually move, which is not ever the issue of
good counsel given, to be kindly taken, and exactly followed. For mostly good
advice is like to water spilt upon the ground, lightly set by, till it be
dearly paid for, in the neglect of timely observance, which would have asserted
the Sovereignty of it. Solon lessoned Craesus the right use of prosperity, by
preparing for its contrary before it came, Plutarchus in vita ejus.
but the Philosopher was thought pedantique, and censured of pragmatique
arrogance, till the time of Craesus his trouble rushed on him; and then in his
distress he cries out, Solon, Solon, wishing he had credited his premonition,
when there might have been hopes of anticipating his now miserable surprise:
Caesar had an intimation not to be at the Senate the day he had his stab, but
he contemned it, and lost his life by it. The Duke of Guise, in Henry the third
of France his time, was fore*warned of his being slain not only by nature,
when she swooned a little before the Duke sat at Council, Per intempestivam
libertatem and su perbam scultitiam Ar^ian^s lib. 8. de gestis Alexand. Venenum
perimentis sub pallio consulentis. Garimbertus.
but by a note sent him by a friend; to neither of which he hearkening, was
murdered; Archias had had notice of the Conspiracy against him, but he putting
off the Messenger that brought it, (...), till to morrow, and it acted on him
before he would hear the discovery of it. But the Prince here was better
instructed by our Master, who prefaced his advice, not as Calisthenes fondly
did, by freedom more bold then becoming, more rude then welcome and friendly,
bringing death in by the ushery of love, and using the cloak of counsel to
palliate the dagger of dispatch. No such Projector, and half-faced Traitor, was
our good Chancellor; a Gentleman he was born and bred, and a Christian spirit,
his piety and misfortunes by God sanctified, had begot in him; and therefore he
was not of Cardinal Prato's spirit, whom Francis the first of France condemned
to an Iron Cage, which was only able to keep his pride within compass, nor of
Cardinal Patavinus's, who rather then miss his plenty and extravagancies, would
comply with any party, In Epist. de Theodorico.
and serve any vices: no such miscreant our Chancellor, he chose (good man)
the noble attendance of his Princes Pilgrimage, before the enjoyment of his
Country, without his King ruling in and over it, and being of so Masculine a
soul, Gladiatori quam S^natori propior, Vel Patercul. l. 2.
that, as prosperity made him not to boast, adversity not complain, neither
passionate; under all calm and conscientious: this, I say, being the virtue of
our Chancellor, deserved from the Prince the Title he here gives him, to be
vir Egregius.

And justly such, for he was no Rufus Egnatius, more a Ruffian then a
Long-robeman, but one singled out to this service, Egregius, quasi ex toto
grege electus, says Festus; one, not to be pared in his age, nor to be
fellowed for loyalty, not like Nazianzens Country of Ozizala, abounding in
flowers but barren of Corn, that is a man of show and talk, but of no sincerity
and truth of wisdom; no such man was our Chancellor, but a Sage of
incomparable honor, piety and ability, whom no advantage would buy off from
Loyalty, and such he being, good reason he should be accounted, as indeed he
was vir Egregius; yea, and without dishonor might his Sovereign son say to
him, vicisti me suavissima or atione tua; for surely whatever his judgment
dictated fit, his love put him to promote to his Princes improvement; no
unprincely narrowness did he principle him in, or counsel him to follow;
though undoubtedly he had Metrodorusses enough to solicit him to accept of
treachery to a good end: for his brave soul, like that of Sextus Pompeius,
disdained to gain great things by indirect means; and thus he serving his
Prince, could not but be acceptable to him, and the only man of influence on
him; yea happy in some sort beyond the usual proportion of superlutive
meriters; for least he should have enter commoned with them in the misfortunes
that the brave old Marshal Memorancy (had by a remove from ^ourt, and Mounsienr
de Vins notwithstanding his receiving a Bullet at the Siege of Rochel into his
body to save King Henry the third, D Avila p. 25. p. 507.
to his grief found true, according to the saying of Lewis the ninth of France,
Il perd^ souuent d' auoir, trop bien serui.
too good service often undoes many men;) God called him out of life before he
came to try what compensation his loyalty would have; so that as he lived so he
dyed an honorable Victor over all difficulties, and received the testimony,
that he had not only asserted reason, but advantaged it by suaviloquious
Oratory, which is here termed, suavis oration.

And indeed if any thing have Potency in it, it is the Rhetorique of affection,
and the words of the soul warbled froma passionate and surprised lip, for its
near alliance to if not samenesse with the heart, having the merit of all
possible acceptance, can never fail of the utmost reception of kindness, and
that is, victory over the ear and heart it addresses to: this pleasing effect,
language expresses by sweetness as deleble to the ear as so also to the taste,
to both which senses it is applied in Prove. ix. 17. and xx. 17. Stolen waters
are said to be sweet, and bread of deceit is sweet. In Job. xx. 12. wickedness
is termed sweet: the influence of the Pleiades are termed sweet, xxxviii. 31.
friendly couns^l is termed sweet, Psalm. lv. 14. quiet sleep, sweet, Prove. iii.
24. supply in necessity, sweet, xxvii. 7. yea, God himself condescending to the
terms of mortal infirmity and apprehension, expresses his value of persons and
things under this notion of sweet, Cant. ii. 14. Let me hear thy voice, for
sweet is thy voice; and the Church is permitted, yea dictated to language her
holy Enamourments to Christ in that Pathetique acclamation of his sweetness,
Cant. v. 13. His cheeks (says she of Christ) are as a bed of spices, as sweet
flowers, his lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh, and Cant. ii. 3.
she says, his fruit was sweet unto my taste, the delight that God takes in his
servants and their sacrifices is termed sweet, We are unto God (says St. Paul
2 Cor. ii. 15.) a sweet savor of Christ, and Phil. iv. 18. An odor of a a
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to God, yea the sacrifice
of our our Lord Jesus is termed an offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. v. 2.

So that the Prince in acknowledging the Chancellours satisfaction of his
doubts, and delighting his ears with words of reason and eloquence adapted to
the Conquest of his understanding and will, may well be expected, to not only
honor his Chancellours gravity and learning, but to own his particular seizure
into the power of efficacy of them. As it follows, Qua and animum meum ardore
non minimo legis fecisti sitire documenta.



By this it should seem, the Chancellor baited his hooks to catch the Prince
by very subtly like a Master of the Assembly, Eras. Adaq. Chil. 1. Cent. 6.
p. 254.
not with airy notions and soft triflings of canting words, but Iovis and Regis
Cerebro, with the brain of Jupiter, with that (...) that flower of Nectar, that
(...), that milk of Venus, yea that (...), that food of Helen, which the Poets
express their Hyperbolique fancies in; for Princes being born, what Subjects
are by accomplishment, cannot be surprised with ordinary forces of reason and
quaintness, their Mother understandings and abilities being Paramount to them.
In that therefore the Text says, vicisti me suavi oratione tua sitire
documenta legis, and that, non minimo ardore, it insinuates to us that there
was somewhat above ordinary art, expressed by the Chancellor, upon which so
notable an effect followed, and it is easy to be believed, if the consideration
of the Chancellor's Origin, Education, Practice, Office, Ingenuity, all which
speak him probable to be a Master of language, as well as judgment; yea, and
if we consider to whom he applies himself, and about what Errand, to a Prince,
and for his polishing to a general after-benefit, these things premised will
easily offer a conclusion on grounds of reason, that he did speak apt words to
every purpose of prevalence, yea, and in that he bore away the testimony of
making the discovery he tended to, our Chancellor seems more fortunated by
God, then every brave Actor in his brave action is; for whereas they often
miscarry through the Inconformity of events to the latitude of their Projects,
he seems (if this language be the Prince's) to be arrived at absolute success,
and to be in the Conclusion what he intended in the Attempt: the Prince his
affection, and respect he has gained, no man has his ears, no delight his
heart more then the Chancellor and his counsel has, the only scruple resting
unsatisfied now, is to appear, which if he can resolve, he is what he would be,
and that is shortly this, Sed tamen duobus me huc illucque agitantibus animus
ipse affligitur, ut tanquam in turbido mari cymba, nesciat quorsum dirigere
pror as; unum est dum recolit quot annorum curriculis legis addiscentes^earum
studiose conferant, antequam sufficientem ^arumdem peritiam nanciscantur, quo
timet animus ipse, ne consimiliter ego praeteream annos juventutis meae, etc.



Herein the Text-Master brings in the Prince acting a part of great anxiety,
and as it were laboring against Wind and tide the swift stream of his
Masterships reason; for his Highness being but young and unfixed, and being
mismatched by such a masculine and sturdy Artist, who was to seek of no Ram,
Petar, Morter-piece, or Canon of Reason and Art, to make his way through and
through this Royal Stripling, had so distressed his Proselyte, that he
professes no Cock-boat rides more untowardly, and with greater danger of
shipwreck; then he does in the high sea, and on the superficies of those surly
doubts, and dissatisfactions, that possess him to a menace of o're-bearing him,
fain he would please the grave Chancellor, in being, as he would have him, a
Student of the Law by knowledge, as well as the probable Protector of it by
office, and to the acquisition of skill in it, any reasonable time and toil he
would allow the study of it, but he fears the Lion in the way that stands
between the Law and his attainment, he sees many men spend many years in study
of that, and that only, and the abstrusity of it infructuates all their
endeavors, their pleasure, their age, their strength intending its vestal fire
spends; yet they find no Elixar of perfection, still they are to learn, and
cases every day emerge to their non-plussing, and loath the Prince is to engage
on a long, desperate, profitless attempt, which will, after many years, and
much industry, return him nothing but unsatisfiedness, loath the Prince is to
have vanity and vexation of spirit inscribed on all his pains and time allotted
the study of the Law. This is the force of his first Argument.

His next is, An Angliae legum, vel civilium, quae per orbem percelebres sunt,
studio operam dabo. Nam non nisi optimis legibus populum regere licet, etiam ut
dicit Philosophus, natura deprecatur optima. Indeed he is willing to be
directed what well and wisely to do, and since he cannot better be by any then
this aged Knight, learned Judge, and incomparable Chancellor, to whom he
promises indisputable obedience, ( Quare libenter super his quod tu consulis,
In immenso aliarum super alias acervatarum legum cumulo, sons omnis publici
privatique juris, Livius, De x. Tabulis.
auseultaremus, are his very words.) He desires solution, which of all Laws are
the best to study to know, and know to govern by. Whether the particular
municipe Laws of this Island, which are purely strange to all Nations, or the
Laws Roman and Imperial, which are the directory of all civilized Nations, and
are as famous for their justice and reason, as the Roman Government, which
introduced them, was for its Conquest and prevalence. This is the sum of his
Argument, which because he starts not out of curiosity, as one nice and
inquisitive, but that thereby he might be skilled in the best method of Law, to
the best end, order, peace, and charity. This evidence of his choice to be of
the best, when he shall be directed to it, adds emphasis to the Arguments
scruple, Q. 1. Instit. p. 75.
and calls for the answerers care and cordiality, which the Chancellor assents
to undertake, professing, that though there be weight in the objections, and
they are worthy the Son of a King to make them: yet is not the Law under such
an obscurity of phrase and form, nor the Books of it so many and diverse, but
that as little time and toil will be taken up in the study of them, as of other
Laws; and thereupon he proceeds to answer the particulars in the following
Chapter, in these words.

CHAP. VIII.
Philosophus in primo Physicorumdicit, quod tunc unum quodque scire arbitramur,
cum causas and principia ejus cognoscamus usque ad elementa.


THis our Chancellor begins his Reply to the Prince, that he may appear to him
resolved, to give his scruples a fit and full satisfaction. The Law indeed, the
Prince very much seemed to approve, and the study of it to acknowledge
convenient, and in a sort necessary for a Prince; but that which he doubted of,
was his possibility to attain it to any competent degree, in some convenient
time; as also which of the Laws he should adhere to as his choice, to study and
govern by. To both these our Text-Master gives solution in this Chapter, and
that by such a breadth and depth of foundation, as will carry currantly all his
superstructure. To explicate which his design, he brings in what he has to
write with this Position of Aristotels, That every thing is then said to be
known and understood, when its cause and principle, even to its elements, is
considered and ruminated upon.

This sentence quoted out of the 1. Lib 2. Nature. A^scult. Tract. 3. c. 3. p.
330. C. 19, Tract 4. D^ Cognit. primorum principiorum.
Phys. is, in sense, in other places of that Author, (...) etc. Nor can we be
said to know any thing, till we apprehend the cause of it, for which, and by
which it is such. So Analytic. Poster. lib. 2. c. 11. and in other places. Yea
since God has so connected things in nature, that they depend on him, and from
him on each other, and pass through changes and degrees to their
accomplishment, there is no understanding of the World in its mass, but from
the apprehension of its (...), its efficient cause, (...), the cause from
whence, (...), the matter of which, (...), the end for which, or the exemplar
after which it is made. For since the material principle of the World is
Atoms, which amassed, makes by their infinity the Moles to swell in bulk,
Glassend. Physic. sect. 1. lib. 3. De Materiali rerum Princip^o, c. 8.
and by God's art in Natures work, to be in very deed beautiful, as it is
necessary to contemplate, and venerate God as the prime cause and efficient;
for they are both one, though nominally they differ: so is it also the readyest
and only way to conceive rationally and judiciously of the whole by the
apprehension of the minute, Lib 4. De Causis rerum, c. 1. vol. 1. p. 283.
particles, and small beginnings of them, and the advances they being (blessed
by God) make to after grandeur. Which Philosophers, as wise searchers after
nature and reason, do therefore busy themselves in, because they find the
ascent to a close view, and accurate prospect of them attainable only by these
degrees of motion from the Center, God and Nature, to the Circumference,
effects of them. Three words then here are proposed to couch the gradations of
knowledge under; the causes, principles, elements of things: which the
Commentator, probably Averroes, thus explains, Per principia intellexit causas
efficientes, etc. By the principles, he understands the causes efficient; by
the causes, the causes final; by the Elements, matter and form. Thus that
Commentator. Indeed, without these three, understood in some competent measure,
(...). Lib. 1. De partu animal. c. 2. 5 Metaphys. c. 1. De causis Analytic.
lib. 2. Tract. 3. c. 11.
knowledge of any natural body or thing, is but dark and undelightful.

The principle of every thing some say is the nature, rather then the matter of
it; so says the Philosopher, for he makes it somewhat above what is gross;
therefore he says, (...), that from which any thing moves, is called the
principle of it; and (...), this is common to all beginnings to be first in
order of time, existence and influence. Hence is it, that Philosophers call
these principles efficient causes, because they are the Parents of all
increase, and the products of all existence; for whatever is, is, what it is,
by force and actuation of its principle, God the first cause, and his
benediction on the specifique nature, to which it appertains, and is principle.
Thus the principle of all Being is in God, and the delegation of it from him to
every created form and species under him. Gassendus lib. ^ De causa efficiente
rerum, c. 2. c. 5. c. 7.
And therefore that passage of the Apostle, In him we live, and move, and have
our being, is exegetical of our dependence on God, as our supreme and sovereign
principle. The causes here termed final, are in effect, the same with
principles: Metaphys. lib. 5. c. 1. Lib. 5. c. 2.
so says the Philosopher, (...), that is, a principle whence any thing is
known: therefore inasmuch as effects discover causes, and so things, they are
principles, (...), etc. that is, a cause from which any thing is what it is,
says the same Philosopher. Now though there be variety of causes, according to
the several notion of men and things, which Philosophers and Schoolmen abound
in, to a needless extravagancy, and men lose their time and judgment sometimes,
in considering about them in the vastness and variety of their elaboration; yet
as they are soberly stated and considered* they are very useful, Causae habent
inter se ordine^, quia finis est ratio^ Agentis, Sanctus Thom. primae part^, q.
5^ a^t. ^.
and assistant to the understanding of all Science. For causes have order in
their operation, because the end is the reason of the agent, as the Schools
say, and thereupon because acts declare ends; (for knowledge is not secundum
quod est in potentia, sed quod est in actu) we are only made knowing by the
perception of causes in their actings, which we call effects, or the ends of
their regency over, and energy in things. And thus God being the cause of the
cause, is cause of the thing caused, because he gave to such causes power in
subserviency to him the chief, and what the under causes does, the upper cause
is entitled to, either as effecting, or permitting. For though reason be the
order of procession from the cause, yet the cause is the impulse producing the
act: And hence is it, that some learned men have derived causae from (...),
ardor and incendium because men are inflamed and set on fire with desire to do,
as if they could do no other, but do what they do.

Vox el^menti fuerit primili^s attributa igni, aeri, aqua, terra, hoc est,
quatuor corporibus. Gassend^s li^. 3. De Materiali Principio. c. 1. To. 1. p
226.

Q^ippe author naturae, legibus naturae non adstringitur, ac infinita pollet
vi, qua distan^iam illam quasi infinita saperet, qua interjacet inter aliquid
and nihil. Idem.


The last word in our Text is elementum, that which supposes matter and form;
this in compound bodies is so necessary, that without all the four, Water,
Fire, Earth, Air, in some or other degree, nothing can ordinarily subsist. This
is confirmed by the Philosopher in that Chapter, where he makes it necessary to
have four Elements; Lib. 4. De Caelo, c. 5.
now that which is the first discovery of every thing, is its Element; (...),
etc.
and whatever being one and little, if useful to increase, Lib. 4. Metap. c. 4.
that is an Element, in which sense, metaphorically, the Greeks call the letter
a (...), the first elemental letter, because it leads on to all the other,
Metaphys. lib. 4. c. 3.
by which words are made, and things written upon; and Priscian terms a letter,
the figure of an Element, Litera Elementi figura, elementum lit^ra vis and
potestas proprie. Priscianus, lib. 1. De Litera.
and an Element properly the force and power of the letter. So that Elements
are the sine qua non's to all composition, and the understanding of all things;
Non nim inquit ex una re sicut Thales ex humore sed ex suis prori^s principiis
quasque res nasci putavi^, qua rerum principia singularum eredidit esse
infinita, Sanctus Augustinus De Anaximandio. apud Gassend. Physi^ sect. 1. lib.
3. Tom. 1. p. 237.
which without them would be dark to, and inperceptible by us. And though there
be a great affinity between principles and causes, yet is there nothing less
then difference between principles and elements, I mean in the diversity of
their nature, (...), etc. Principles are immortal, increate, without beginning
or end, Elements are corruptible because created, and the ingredients of all
compounds. Yet even the prima literarum elementa, Suidas in verbo (...). Lib.
1. c. 1.17. Cicero 1. De Orato.
as Quintilian terms the ABC of Arts, are to be learned, because they are the
principles of Speech and Science, and lead to the greater mark, which they call
matter and form, that which distinguishes all bodies each from other, and
defines their particular Species. Thus knowledge is perfected by understanding
the principle, whence all things arose, God's power, goodness, wisdom,
manifested in natures order and efficacy. The Causes final, or end, wherefore
God reduced them to the position they are in, and has given them a Law which
they cannot disobey without Rebellion and Apostasy, that is, his glory and
praise, for which they are, and were all created. And thus to know to the least
punct of our duty, as rational Creatures, is that which the Philosopher intends
by scire arbitramur, because made up of the knowledge of causes and principles
to the very Elements, that is, somewhat of insight into the whole Chain of Art,
and into every Link of it.

In legibus vero, non sunt materia and forma, ut in Physicis, and Compositis;
sed tamen sunt in iis elementa quaedam, unde ipse profluunt, ut ex materia and
forma, quae sunt consuetudines, statuta and jus Naturae, ex quibus sunt omnia
jura regni, ut ex materia and forma sunt quaeque naturalia.

Here the Text-Master shows the agreement which is between natural Bodies,
that consist of matter and form, and politic bodies, beautified by Laws of
order and use, which have the same accommodations to the ends of their
contexture, as natural bodies have to the purpose of theirs; as the matter of
bodies natural are elementary, and the form flowing from the soulary Nature of
every species is active and energical according to the denomination of its
being, so is there in the Laws, reason, wisdom, justice, aptly worded, and
orderly digested, which is called anima Legis, and ushers in formam Legis,
which the Lawyers understand by modo and forma, and forma legalis, so frequent
amongst them.

Now the Chancellor says, these Elemenss of the Laws do give occasion to
those effluxions, which are equally correspondent in the Law to matter and form
in natural bodies, 1 Instit. c. 10. lib. 2. sect. 165.
and of three forts he makes them, (as Sir Edward Cook does also after him;)
Customs, Statutes, and the Law of Nature. Mr. Perkins makes six grounds of the
Law of England. First, the Law of Reason. Secondly, the Law of God. Thirdly,
General Customs of the Realm. Doctor and Student, p. ^. b.
Fourthly, Principles or Maxims. Fifthly, Particular Customs. Sixthly, Statues.

The Law of Nature what it is, Prima illa De^. ac naturae data sive seonna in
annis nostris insita, unde quicquid (...) orb juris est. ac legum, en ascitur
lib. 3. Tit. 7. de vera jurispro Lib. 3. Tit. 24.
is to high for me to determine, only the use of it, God foreseeing, stamped
the Characters of it on all men's minds; so that it is the seeds, and prime
bounty of God and nature, whence what ever is right and Law in the world
between man and man, proceeds, thus Hopperus; and the same learned man, after
he has spent much profitable discourse about it, concludes, That nothing is
more peculiar to man to excel in, then Justice, for the practice of which
virtue God especially created him, and appointed him the earthly Temple of it.
And hence is it, that the Scripture has not only commended Justice, and set
forth God the President and reward of it, but in the Law of Nature has so
instituted man, that if he follow it precisely, he cannot but in propriis
actionibus convenienter agere, that is, do every thing according to what God
requires, Vide Tractatum Durandi Episc. Meldonsis de Legibus circa initium.
and the Law of his makers pleasure: for though positive Laws do variate
according to diversity of men and times, yet this Law of Nature being moral and
permanent alters not, but is central and fixed, and so the main ingredient of
all obligations to virtue, and abhorrencies of the contrary. And on this ground
the Law of England is said to be built upon the Law of Nature, because it
opposes every thing malum per se, and discovers the turpitude of it, and
promotes what ever is just, honest, and of good report, which is the sum and
end of the Law of Nature, concernwhich, see the notes on the third Chapter.

Customs are the second Triangle, and these are of an high nature, so that in
the Philosopher's sense, (...). Lib. 7 de Mor^^. c. 11.
they are the great Regents in all the world, so favorable to evil, that God
charges the vanity and provocation of Idolatry to the account of Ethnique
customs learned by Israel, and reproaches them for vain, Ier. x. 3. but these
are not the Customs the Common Law is built upon, for whereas they are mala
per se, and tend to evil, setting up mischief as a Law. The Customs of the
Common Law are the harmless and approved usages of the Nation, time out of
mind, and without interruption, and these are so far from being evil, or if
they be so, from being continued such, that nothing of that nature can justly
be charged upon them, which the Prudence of Kings in Parliament have not, and
may further as they see wisely and worthyly fit, remedy. The Jews (great
doters on Customs) have several words to express them by, (...), denoting the
addiction men have to it, while they make it their path and way to walk in,
natural to and beloved by them, Ezech. xx.^0. and Gen xxxi. 35. by (...), so
Ps. cx. 4. Thou art a Priest for ever, (...), secundum morem vel consuetudinem
Melchisedec, which the Author to the Hebrews renders (...), according to the
order of Melchisedec, or as verse. 7. (...), according to the likeness of
Melchisedec: by (...), denoting a long use from the Law of Nature and Nations,
by (...), Levit. xviii. last, derived from (...), statuere, inscultere, vel
imprimere effigiem, alluding to the force of Custom, which transformes man
from what he was into somewhat which Custom makes him to be, as a Carver makes
a piece of wood rude and rough, by his art, symmetrious and lovely, or the
contrary; ^o Custom rules men to what it self in nature is, pro decreto and
statuto habetur, says Kimchi, these words so various and s^gnificant express
the Jewish notion of Customs. The Greeks called Custom (...), Suida^ in v^l^
(...).
the unwritten Law; (...), as a sign or direction to what is to be done, and
whereas Law is written Custom, that is, the mos gentis vel loci, is presumed
for the good of people, and by them as such observed: this Custom as here
understood is not, as Suidas says, (...), etc. only the invention of men, but
the act of life and time, not working (...), by force and fear as Laws of
penalty do, but by inclining men willingly to a resignation of themselves to
it, makes in time it self absolute Lord of them, and brings them under a
pleasing subjection, in which they are resolute and unwearied. Our Law under
the word Custom couches many things, 2 Instit. p. 58.
1. Common Law, 2. Statute Law. 3. Particular Customs. Rent-Services. 5.
Tributes and Impositions. 6. Subsidies.

But these are large notions of Custom, that which the Text intends by
Custom, is more press common usage, 1. Instit. p. 100.
time out of mind, and peaceable without lawful interruption; of this Bracton
a learned Judge in Henry the third his time writes thus, Consuetudo quandoque,
Lib. 1. c. ^.
etc. Custom sometimes is observed for a Law, especially where it is generally
approved, for there it is the Law, for use of ancient times and customs is not
of mean authority. This of Bracton is the voice of Policy and Gubernative
wisdom in all Laws, Inveterata consuetudo, etc. Ancient Custom is most
deservedly allowed Law, says Julian; the like say Vlpian, Hermogenianus,
Paulus, Calistratus, Mo destin^s, and all Lawyers, yea those Passages in the
Civil Laws, consuetudo dat jurisdictionem, est optima Legum interpres, That
Custom gives Jurisdiction, is the b^st interpreter of Law, that the Custom of
a place derogat legi^ in illo loco, prevails against the rule of Law in that
place: (...) jus or justitia, Homer takes also for (...) Custom, yet such a
custom, as is jure receptum. These and hundreds of such affirmations indulgent
to local customs, Lib. 94. Digest. Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 1.32. p. 81.
declare the vigor and virtue of Customs, Digest. lib. 3. Tit. 4. Gloss.
margent. p. 407. Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 3. de legibus, Senatuque consultis. p. 82.
as that unwritten Law that is ancient, acceptable, and convenient for that
place; hence is it, that the Law of England allows Customs (clothed with time
and usage, long and quiet without legal interruption) of great Authority: for
as every place almost, so every Court has its peculiar Customs, which are
Laws to it, yea the High Court of Parliament, suis propriis consuetudinibus
subsistit, has its peculiar Customs, which are called lex and consuetudo
Parliamenti; and though, says Sir Edward Cook, Ista lex ab omnibus est
quaerenda, a multis ignorata, a paucis cognita, yet such a Law and Custom that
sacred Sanbedrim has. Indeed Customs, mala per se, are void in Law, and so
are those that are contrary to National Justice; 2 Instit. p. 46. p. 654.
as were the Customs in 43 E. 3. mentioned by Sir Edward Cook, and that other
in the cafe of William of Brimington, and the Tenants of Bramsgreen and Norton,
which therefore were judged void, Consuetudo licet magna sit authoritatis,
uunquam tamen praejudicat veritati, Reg. Juris. 17 Ed. 2. c. 16. Cambden in
Gloucester shire p. 385.
because they were contrary to reason: and some will be apt to say of that
nature, may be that Custom in some part of Gloucester-shire, That the goods
and Lands of condemned persons fall into the King's hands only for a year and
a day, and after that expired, return to the next heirs: but in other cases
where Customs are reasonable, just and good, there they are presumed of great
validity, and to have a good and sage Commencement, though we know not the
precise moment and manner of it, Titles honor p. 714, 715. Lib. 3. fol. 69.
so resolves the learned Seldom in the many cases he instances in. And so is
the Judgment of Linwood, who describes the proofs of custom thus, the
witnesses are upon their Oaths and Consciences to say, Quod semper fic
viderunt tempore suo, etc. That they have always seen it so in their time, and
heard it so from their Elders, neither did they ever hear or know the contrary,
and that the common Opinion is, that so it is, and has been in all times, in
the memory of all men, and it is required, says he, that the witnesses that
depose a Custom should be born in, and dwellers near the Country and place,
where the Controversy is: thus Linwood in the case of a particular Custom,
which yet is far short of a general one: for that being the Common Law of the
Nation bears down all pleas against it, Doctor and Student c. 7. See the 7.
Stat. of Eliz. c. 23. 4 Instit. p. 25. notes on Chap. 1. of Parliaments.
for that being the Common Law of the Nation bears down all pleas against it,
that are not established by regal Sanction in Parliament, which the Text calls
Statata. These are the Laws of the King made by the Assent of the three
Estates his Subjects by his Authority called and kept together; Statutes, not
Statutes of Omri, of disloyalty, treachery, disorder, but Statutes of loyalty,
piety, probity, humbly preferred, judiciously considered, soveraignly passed;
these, and these only our Laws allows Statutes; Cook Jurisdict. Parliamenti.
p. 24.25. See the Preamble to the Stat. 7 H. 4. c. 1. Ann. Dom. 1405.
favors of the King to his people upon the presentations of their requests by
their Trustees the Commons, and the Advice and Assent of the Noble Peers, the
Lords of the Clergy and Laity, to his Majesty for his Assent and Consent, which
is the inspiration of their soul into them. These Laws thus formed and
emanating are the third Basis of our Laws, and indeed the most probable Engine
of our rectification imaginable, since by this blessed act of wise and worthy
Legislation, Laws in cases omitted may be made, in cases dubious explained, in
cases obsolete be vacated, in cases hard be indulged; in all cases be
accomodated to God's glory, the King's honor, and safety, the Peers luster and
dignity, the peoples peace and prosperity. But because, of this I should have
occasion to write in the notes on the 18. Chap. I Will desist further proceedure
on them here.

Only in that the Chancellor says, all the Laws of England do proceed from
these as their Elements, and constituent parts, there is a good Argument to
admire the Laws of England, as most useful in, and most just for the Government
of the people. For since the wisdom of God in the Law of Nature, the Customs of
People in the common consent of the Nation, the divine soul and sentence of the
King assisted with his Peers, reverend Prelates, and renowned Lay-Lords, (men
in whose Counsel, there is science, seriousness, and security.) Since these, I
say, do all cooperate in maintaining the Laws in this their Triangularity,
there is a most undeniable Argument, that the Law of England is a choice Law,
extracted from, composed of the quintessence of all Laws, and suitable to all
gubernative purposes, and in no sort defective to the carrying on of piety to
God, loyalty to the Prince, and charity to one another. And therefore, though
the Rules and forms of Law, are the marrow of the knowledge of it, yet are the
letters of which the words, and the words which make the ^ense of Law, as of
all other Learning, to be well understood by the Student, since they are as the
elements of compound bodies, the grounds and inchoat ducts to the more
consequential parts. It Is true, as in the body, the eye, brain, heart, face, as
the most conspicuous and useful parts, are first honored, yet cannot the body
subsist, nor the anatomist exactly read of the structure of it, without
knowledge of the less useful and honorable parts, and consideration of them in
their respective position and use: so in Arts and Sciences, as this of the Law,
without elementary knowledge, all other is unattainable, not possible to
subsist: therefore the Text says, Et ut ex literis, quae etiam elementa
appelantur, sunt omnia quae leguntur. What Attomes are to the Earth, Drops to
the Ocean, Rays to the Sun, Sparkles to the Center of fire, that are Letters to
Science. Nature works gradually, and her increment is by progression from
little to more, and from more to most of her capacity. And hence is it, that as
Painters that are Masters in Picture, have Pensils of all sizes and colors,
intense and remiss, in the equality of whose mixture, the vigor of colors,
mediocrities of shades consist: so is there in the Rule of Nature such a Lesson
taught us, as first to inure our minds to the smaller and less burdensome
things of Science, Letters, before we approach those that are ingenerated by
their introduction: Principles must, in this sense, follow Elements, as words
do succeed Letters.

Principia autem, quae commentator dicit esse causas efficientes, sunt quaedam
universalia, quae in legibus Angliae docti s^militer, and Mathematici maximas
vocant, Rhetorici Paradoxas, and Civilistae regulas juris.

The Chancellor pretermits no Animadversion that may adorn the Law, and make
it venust and taking, for though it has its Pendants and knots of Elements,
which trick and adorn only, yet has it also the more elaborate and becoming
parts of lovelyness and feature, which are so necessary to its operation, and
rational acceptance, that without them it would not evidence so just and
ingenuous a merit. Now these he calls Maxims, which carries a sense of grandeur
in it, as intending to dignifie the things understood by it with a note of
transcendency. These Maxims are the (...), the depths, and restorative
quintessences of Law; that from whence all inferior things have their
invigoration and spiriting. Thus the Lawyers, as the Mathematicians in their
Art call Maxims, such notions as are the best in their kind, and productive of
many excellentillations from them, and that from the authority of Antiquity,
which not only termed God the Architect of the Universe, Maximus, but all
things superlative in their kind by this Title. The greatest Overseer of the
Roman Ward, was termed Maximus Curio, and Celsus calls Land held by a high
tenure, Optimus Maximus fundus, and the Lady Princess of the Vestal Nuns, is by
Valerius and Suetonius, called Maxima Virgo, and Maxima Vestalis: so that our
Lawyer by Maximus understands, Edit. Basil. Mores certe and instituta nostra,
jusque ^mnino morib^s nostris introductam receptumque, quas consuetudines
dicimus. Budaeus in Pandect. priores, p. 314. 1 Iustit. p. 10. Plowd. Com. p.
27. b.
a sure foundation or ground of Art, and a conclusion of Reason. So says Sir
Edward Cook, and Plowden seconds him, Quia Maximae est, etc. Because great is
its authority and dignity, as that reason which is indisputable, and not to be
contradicted. So is the Authority of 12 Henry the first, N'est my a disputer
l'ancient principles del L^y. Doctor and Stud. c. ^.
Of the same nature also are the Rhetoricians Paradoxes, Suidas in ^erbo.
(...), that which is beyond the common notion of men: and admirable in their
opinion, is a Paradox. Regula est plurium rerumcompendiosa narratione facta
traditio. Marcianus lib. 1. Instit. Tit 2.
So the Civilians have their notable Observations represented under what is
equivalent to either of these, and they call them Rules, which they define, a
Rule, say they, is a delivery made of many things, by a compendious narrative
of them, that is, a short account of the substance of things of moment. And as
the Law is by Chrysippus called (...), the King of all; so the Rule is, Legis
Regina, the Queen, and most excellent part of the Law; that which there is no
receding from, but upon unavoidable necessity. It needs not to a assign any
reason, why at first they were received for Maxims, for it suffices that they
be not against the Law of Reason, Doct. and Stud. ^^.
nor the Law of God, and that they have always been taken for a Law, says
Doctor and Student.

Ipsa revera non argumentorum vi ant demonstrationibus logicis dignoscuntur,
sed, ut secundo Posteriorum docetur, inductions, via sensus, and memoriae
adipiseuntur.

In these words, the Text-Master shows the nature of principles transcending
grosseness of sense, and therefore not to be examined by, and calculated
exactly according to it. For as in matters of Faith, there is no reduction of
it to the narrow limits of humane bruitishness, but the Rule of belief is the
persuasion of the truth believed, and the recumbency of the believer on God,
who is truth it self, in the assertion of that which from him man's
understanding is informed of, and affections sharpened on to believe: So in
Maxims and Principles of Science, there is no pre-existency to be imagined to
them in the art; but all that is knowable, is emanation from them, and the
majesty and reason of their conclusion and positivity, which is the reason that
the Philosopher allows no disputer to deny a principle; for that done, undoes
all that is subsequent, and takes away the very being of Argumentation. For how
can any Artist advance an Argument in any Art beyond the first discoveries of
that Art? And how can any demonstration be made beyond the line of discovery,
and demonstrability? For the Rule and Principle being the ultra auod non,
beyond that there is no discourse or discovery. Let then Principles remain
Mysteries, not to be dived into, but adored, because of their coparcenry with
Divinity, and let the senses and memory of man content it self with such
seize, as are conceded them by God, in the right improvement of Nature,
and the religious use of her indulgencies. And as no man can define light, as
it is in its principle, because it is like God, indiscribable, being a Ray from
his essential glory: so can no wise man properly and wisely determine
principles by any common notion, or rational apprehension of them. For though
they are, and are declared to be what they are by their effects, yet are they
hidden, and cryptically reserved by God from the plenary discovery of our
senses, that we by them unknown, might be kept humble and dependant on his
Omniscience, which only has access to all things, or rather, from whose
brightness all natural things are illuminated: And this being, as I humbly
conceive, the true apprehension of Principles according to the here alleged
authorities of the Philosopher, primo Physic. and Topic, his inference is
rational.

Igitur Principiis imbuendi sunt, quiqui gliscunt aliquas intelligere
facultates, ex eis etenim revelantuar causae finales, ad quas rationis ducta
per principioram agnitionem pervenitur.

That is, as no man can regularly build without square and line, which do
measure proportion, and keep the symetry inviolate; and no man can war, except
he have knowledge of, and care to adhere to the principles of Conduct and
Battle; so no man can understand Science, unless he allows Principles, and
conform his notions to the Canon of them. For his end in study and
disquisition, being to attain knowledge in, and mastery over the difficulties
of the Art, and so subjugate them to his understanding, and to accomplish
himself by helps of them, there is a necessity (miracle not being taken in)
that Reason operating, by the Principles yielded to, can only bring him, and
his end together. For Principles are the advances, to the end knowledge; they
are the single numbers, by which the numerals of Art are made up; they are the
guttulae, which in their Musters, and Rendevouzes, amount to a Sea of Art. And
those that contemn these steps of ascent, will never mount the Throne of
Science. Take away the knowledge of these, and Arts will be under as great an
Eclipse as the Earth would be, when the Sun were routed the Firmament: dispute
these, and deny them to be their own testimony: we shall be all Sceptiques, and
seekers after what we know not, nor shall ever find: and as he that builds
without a foundation, will be but a foolish builder; so he that studies,
without acquainting himself with these fundamental universals, shall bring his
study to a vain issue, and prove ridiculous; for as by the pregnancy of the
soul, the faetus is fomented and invigorated to birth, and from the life thence
commenced, takes augmentation by the nourishment of its Mother; so Art is
quickened by the principles of observation and experience, which imbibed, render
the means study (next under God) able to produce something toward perfection
of knowledge. And as where there is not a hailness of constitution, and the body
is not prepared by the common good habits of health, to nourish the ^mbrio to
quickening, and after to assist it in birth, no complete vigorous Infant comes
forth, but rather a Chix, or a lump of flesh and blood, appearing articulately
perfect, but not complete, as to the integrals of internal soundness; So where
there is an unsavouriness of Conception, and the mind, by being vitiated by ill
prepossessions, cavils at, and is carried with a leaven against old Rules and
Maxims received, there the greater pains is taken, to know the further
perplexity, and mental fury is contracted, and men grow rather averse and
obstinate, tetrical and opinionative, then sober, civil, useful, and learned.
For true knowledge begins first at our selves, (...), and proceeds to know
others aright, by valuing their virtues, and pitying their infirmities, then
it comes to view in the glass of a pure speculation, what it may possibly,
ought rationally, and does effectually know; and because it finds its
knowledge, is but as a point in the latitude of the Universe, it more
endeavors to search, then boasts of attainment.

And hence it comes to pass, that the great boasters are not the great gainers,
nor are men of singular ways and expressions, always of soundest judgment, and
sincerest hearts: For as Creatures that are of wild and ravenous nature, affect
devious paths and avoid the ways of conversation; so men of design, to be
tragical, and ruinous to any cause or profession, forsake the old way, the good
way, and in just return, are often forsaken; for as the truth makes men free,
so error leaves them in bondage. And therefore the old Chancellor has drawn
herein to the life the portraicture of a good Artist, while he presents him
oculo ad calum, manu ad clavum, calling on God for a blessing, and expecting it
from him, while he keeps in his way. God has an especial favor to order, it is
himself, and what of it is in us, is of him, a drop from his Ocean, a Ray from
his Sun, a beam from his light, an emblem of his infinite perfection. And those
that go the way of God and Nature, may expect the reward of both. For minds and
bodies are so near of kin, that a roving head seldom keeps a healthy man; and
none are so apt to lose all that is in this world of value, time and health of
body and mind, as those that are inquisitive after more then is fit for them to
find, or appointed for them to know. God has confined study to his Rules; and
the principles of every Art, are to bound the Artist; for they are necessary to
the knowledge of it, necessitate medii. Therefore (faith the Chancellor)
Principiis imbuendi sunt, etc.

Ex eis enim revelantur causae finales, ad quas rationis ductu per principiorum
agnitionem pervenitur.

Now that a Pythagorean, (...), may not bind up the Prince to a rigid
conformity, and implicit belief, without any conviction of his own reason,
which is a kind of Divine Judicatory in him, the Chancellor here shows the
necessity of knowing the principles of any Science from this consideration,
that they are the Lines of Communication, which reach to the end, center,
tendency, and drift of every Profession; for the Rule and Principle is of the
height and marrow of every Constitution, and the end is the perfection of
every thing. Since it is that, for which every thing is; and therefore because
it is to be advanced to with much consideration and resolution, notwithstanding
the impediments to proceed, and not to be hindered, the Chancellor adds, Ad
quas rationis ductu per Principiorum agnitionem pervenitur. For as there can be
no motion without life, no augmentation without motion, no sensation without
organs of sense; so there can be no apprehension of principles without rational
organs: for it is Reason which apprehends and improves every rational Creature,
not only by directing it to what is good, but fore-warning it against what is
hurtful. And therefore no man's procedure is less or more then his reason; nor
his reason other then suitable to the organs prepared for them. For the soul in
the formatory of all our Reason, and the emanation of it, and the actions of
rational Creatures are so far praiseworthy, (...) as they are directed to a
good end, which ever is carried on by good means.

Vnde his tribus Principiis, causis, and elementis ignoratis, scientia de qua
ipsa sunt, penitus ignoratur.

That is, the Science consisting of the knowledge of the efficient cause, the
final cause, and the elements. If these be not known in their command,
subserviency, and congruity each to other, all that is thought to be known is
but Babel, Rubbish and Mortar to the noble structure of Art, a Chaos of notions
or omniformity of fancy, no polished or trim fabrique of Learning. For example,
In the point of Law, and knowledge of that, the efficient cause of the Law are
Governors and People excited by God, out of ends of good to civil society, to
make Laws by consent, or obey good Laws made by command of their Superiors,
though against their wills, yet for their good; For Laws are the effects of
Power, and have the stamp of Empire before they are owned such. And again, Laws
are in remedium and tutelam, and therefore are ever acknowledged to be made for
good, or at least so apprehended, therefore I term them made for ends of good,
and I consent to them, as made by men excited by God: for since Laws are
advantageous to good, and hindrances of evil, and man naturally is evil, and
inclinable to evil. What he is an efficient of good, must needs be by the
overruling of the supreme cause God, who is the author of every good and
perfect gift, and who emphatically is called (...), the Lawgiver. For Kings,
Princes, Parliaments, and all the learning of men and ages, are but feskues in
the hands of God to point us to duty; and if he does not sit in the Assembly
and Judge among the Gods, Laws will be ligule non regulae, Withs to bind the
Poor, but not able to hold Sampson's, whereas Laws ought to be regulae ad omnes.

Then the causae finales of Law are Order, Justice, Concord, Peace. These were
in the mind of God, when he thought upon making man, and politizing the World;
and these he works in the hearts of men in place and power, to propagate and
effect, as they have opportunity. And therefore the Student of the Law must
endeavor to know what Justice is, and how it respects not only the peace of
his own soul, but of the whole Nation, and how it has regard also to for reign
correspondency. For Justice is indeed all virtue. Hence was it that Athenaes
tells us, that Antiquity represented Justice to have, Deipnos. lib. 12. p. 547.
(...), etc. a golden face, and golden eyes, tokens of amability, and purity;
yea, the first Altars they erected were to Justice, as the diety subsidiary of
all. And he that is deservedly an Aristides (...), may well be prayed for, that
his Children may be numerous, and that they may in Justice be like their
Father; since Justice is like the Cement, which keeps the parts of the
structure together under the common bond of union; and by such connection,
prevents scissure and fraction, which in time, effects dissolution. And
therefore as Divines that preach sanctity of life, and likeness to God, that
call on the people to be mortified, and to be subject for Conscience, should
themselves, of all others, be most holy, most pure, presidents of piety and
patience to others; not heady, high-minded, effeminate, disturbers of order
because they have daily Lectures of preciseness herein from the severity of
their profession, and the effect it should have on their own lives: so of all
men none should be so averse to injury, so free from strife, so gentle in
bearing with the follies of the plebs. so resolute to propagate order, honor,
and learning, as men of Law. For their profession is jus dicere and docere,
Right is the genius of their study; and to prevent wrong, ought to be their
practice. Since the end of Laws, is to keep men in government by the contexture
of Law, and the distribution of Justice according to it; and they who profess
the Law, and use it only as a decoy, to call fortune to them, by overreaching
weak men, and suppressing right by power of argument and favor, are Lawyers
per Antiphrasin, as Richard the third was Heir to his Nephews, of whom the
Bishop of Carlisle said, he was malus haeres, they are possessours of the name,
but not virtues of those pristine Lawyers, Pomponius, Cajus, Aquilius, Servius,
Papinianus, Bracton, Glanvil, Littleton, Gascoyn, and others since, who were
not temptable to injury, neither by favor nor frown.

Vnde his tribus, videlicet principiis, causis, and elementis ignoratis:
scientia de qua ipsa sunt, penitus ignoratur.

That is the media and passes to perfections being obstructed, or rather not
made; there is no possibility of the perfection to be attained which they are
ducts and convoyes to; as without eyes and ears man can see or hear no
Letters, without reason not judge, without Memory not retain, so without
consistency and sobriety, not submit to Principles, and be ruled and swayed by
them; the want of which rational passivity causes all the pedantry and
skepticism that is in the world. I or though it be a brave daringnesse of
reason to consider and search into things, and perfection, as it is attainable
by man, is thus advanced to, yet is there danger in too far ventures, to be
immerged and in the depth of new discoveries to lose all footing of pristine
science; for laxation of Principle once assaulting new Discoverers, brings them
to such a levity and itch of Progress, that they acquiesce in nothing but
uncertainty, and grow unnatural to the pristine Principle of their fixation,
which if they would as to the main adhear to, would encourage them to many
rational advances, by which from the concluded root and maxim of art, many
notable slips of science might be attained, which would make a pleasant show in
the knots and borders of arts implantation: tho I well know it is a very hard
matter to form with nobly ingenious des Carts a new Philosophy, and not with
his transcendent Genius to resolve to do it by a declension of all former
preconceptions, and a pleasure to unlearn whatever he has before learned. Thus
as the civil Law accounts a house or ship, that has been so much and so often
mended, ut nihil ex pristina materia supersit, Tit. De legatis. 1, lib. 65 si
^a ss. 2.
that it is nothing of what it first was, but all new; yet the same it first
was, notwithstanding all its changes; so is it to be accounted possible, that
men may find out new discoveries, Doctor Harvy. Mr. Boil and others, most
worthy Honor.
as has been abundantly by our famous Country men in Physic and Mathematiques
of late, yet be still loyal to the Principles, Elements and causes of science,
which they overturn not, but understand more rightly, and apply not contraryly
but diversely, as their notion and indagation directs them to.

For since all the knowledge and discovery our nature can make, is but confused
and dark, by effects to know the causes, so far as they explicate themselves,
and are served by proper instruments. As it becomes the reasonable soul of man
to actuate it self proportionably to the Divinity of its constitution, so does
it also import it to keep close to truth, and to be conducted by sobriety to
the search and service of truth, least while it peepes into the secrets of God
to see what there is, (which it ought only to admire, contenting it self with
what God has revealed as its boundary) it fall into a phrensy and raving in
which it loses its self, and gives too just cause to censure, that not desire
to know, as knowledge is the Image of God, and in the rectitude and sanctity of
it is useful to man to inform him of his duty to God, his neighbor and
himself, was the Motive to disquisition, and the unctious liquour that fed the
Lamp of its persistency, but pride and sacrilegious ambition to exceed others,
and thereupon to brave with, and boast against them: that I say these were
sinister proposes of their minds, which kept them in this fruitless toil. But
it follows, Sic Legem divinam nos nosse judicamus, dum fidem, charitatem, and
spem, sacramenta quoque Ecclesiae, ac Dei mandata nos intelligere sentiamus,
cetera Theologiae my^eria Ecclesiae praesidentibus relinquentes.



This is added to show, that all men in the Church called Christians, as they
have not alike in place and office, so have not like endowments, nor ought
necessarily to be alike knowing and scientifique. All men without doubt that
believe there is a God, and are baptized into the name of Christ, and have
resigned up themselves by Baptismal vow to be God's, in knowing his will that
they may do it, and deny all ungodlynesse contrary to, and inconsistent with
it. I say all Christians within the Pale of the Church and Cruce signati, are
without dispute to know the Elements, Principles, and Fundamentals of Religion,
which (though all may not) yet are chiefly and in their vividst representation
brought in here under the ternary, that St. Paul makes the sum of all Religion,
Fides, spes, and charitas sunt virtutes theologicae, proprie in mente sita,
sicut in intelligontia fides sit, in memoria spe^, in voluntate charitas,
Hopperus lib. 2. de vera Iurisprud. Tit. 5^ p. 36.
Faith in God as, He is, and is a rewarder of all that seek him, as all the
promises of God are in Christ Jesus, yea and Amen. As it is the evidence of
things not seen, and the substance of things hoped for. Love to God for his own
sake, as the infinite, eternal good, and to men for God's sake, since he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen,
and hope, as the soul's Anchor, that keeps the heart from breaking of from God
by temptation or despair, and knits it to him according to that of King David,
I had verily fainted in my affliction, but that I hoped to see the goodness of
the Lord in the Land of the living. I say, these graces as the principles of
adhaesion to God, discretion and religion toward men, support and comfort to a
man's own soul, ought to be the study, and diligent intentnesse of every man to
get, not only to talk, and in the notion and superficiality of their
apprehension to understand, but plenarily and affectionately to know that they
may apply the comforts of them to their souls; for Theology being an affective
and practique science, is then only rightly known, when it is applied in the
comfort and practice of those excellent graces it speculates and professes.
Then we know and understand what faith is, when we live not by sense, not by
the impulses of pu^id reason, but as seeing him that is invisible, as having an
eye to Christ the president of sanctity, who calls us in our desires and
delights from this world, Quid non invenit fides? attingit in accessa,
deprehendit ignota, comprehendit immensa, apprehendit novissima, ipsam denigue
aeter^itatem vastissi. mo suo sinu quodammodo circumcludit. Sanctus Bern ard.
Sermon 76. in Cantie. Pr^cepta qu^ Deus per scipsu^^^, mandata qua per alios
mandavit. Aquin. prima secunda Quaest. 99. art. 5. Conslus.
in which we are but strangers and Pilgrims to our Country above, the
Inheritance amongst the Saints in light. Then we hope upon good grounds, when
our Conscience witnesses with God's Spirit, that we are God's purchase, and
thereupon may expect and hope for his promise: that we are those that live to
God, and having this hope in us, purify our selves as he is pure. Then we love
God as we ought, when his love shed abroad in our hearts, makes in love all his
Commandments by keeping them, and not thinking them grievous, all his Servants
for his likeness in them and love toward them, all his Ordinances for his
impresse upon and glory from them. For though the Schools and after them the
wits of men may distinguish Praceptum and Mandatum, making those only
Precepts, which God by himsel f commanded, and those Commandments which by
others he gives to his people: and hold themselves obliged to know and practice
the former when they dispense with the latter, which surely is of equal
Authority; and so our Lord says, He that hears you, hears me, and he that
despises, you despises me: though I say these partialityes and haltings in
duty to God, according to the measure of our enlightening, may hurry some
unstable minds into Precipices in which they will find no Comfort. Yet this
is, Mandata Dei intelligere; when the intellect officiates in order to
practical piety and devout zeal, when it puts a man not so much upon Myriads of
accumulated notions, and ingenuous speculations, as upon the one thing that is
necessary, parting with all we have and are for God, counting all our parts but
as filthy rags and prostituted loathsomnesses in comparison of his glory.
Indeed if a Christian reaches but this note, he bath voice enough to beg heaven
with, and obtain it by, no nee d of the vast learning, subtle arguments, quaint
strains of seraphique Philosophers, and potent Orators; these graces in truth,
will bring heaven down into the soul of their Possessors, and carry their
Possessors into the Mansions Christ has purchased and prepared, which if so
they will in a competent measure enworthy us for the right use of the
sacraments of the Church, which, they only know comfortably, who live in
faith, hope and charity: for suppose a man could discourse of the Sacraments
not of, but rather in the Church (for the two, Baptism and the Lords Supper are
Christ's Sacraments, instituted for the Churches edification) though Baronias
tells us the Apostolic times expressed some other things by the term
Sacrament, Tom. 1. p. 249, 440, 248.245, 596. Bellarminus lib. De Sacramentis.
Fides sine open charitatis non justisi cat. Bellarminus lib. 1. de Iustific: c.
5.
the other five being the Romish Churches, shall be no part of my Discourse.)
Suppose, I say, a man could dispute and write of them, as never man did,
rather, as the best of men have done; yet if the power of them appear not in
his life, all is to no purpose. Christ will never own men for their Knowledge
but Practice, nor shall any man have a place in glory as a reward of his
ingenuity but virtue; wits make men sometimes favorites here, but grace only
is the object of ^acceptation with God: The Author's application to himself.
Be, O my soul, a good Christian in the holiness of an humble life, and live
up to the bond of thy Baptismal vow, examine thy self of thy sincerity, resolve
against that sin, which makes and continues thee unworthy of the body and blood
of thy Savior in the Sacrament, and thou have learning enough to make the
happy, and outshine all this worlds Lucifers; thou shall not need to envy the
greatest parts, or the gravest years, or the goodlyest growth of learnings
splendour; thou have all in thy unfeigned devotion, and in thy firmer affiance
in God for the reward and interpretation of it.

Caetera Theologiae mysteria Ecclesiae praesidentibus relinquentes, etc.

This is subjoyned, to teach us, that there are many things in knowledge
appendicious, and exploratory of compleatness, which are not fundamental, and
requisite absolutely to make us secure from the wrath to come. God, as he has
not made all men of one mould and stature, of one likeness and capacity, so has
he not in his Wisdom and Justice appointed one and the same proportion of parts
to be in all men; nor will he judge all men according to one and same
expression of themselves. Fides gignitur and nutritur per scientiam extrinsece
tantum persua dendo. Sanctus Thom. 1. part. art. 2 q. 22.
Indeed, the chief extrinsique Wheel of Faith is Science, which through
persuasion blessed by God, works the soul into a submission to God; but God
alone is the first mover, and the intern cause of our motion toward him; and
therefore there needs nothing to our security, beyond our humility before God,
our sincerity to God. This will avail for our happyness, as much as we shall
need; yet are there accomplishments, which men in place and extraordinarily
gifted attain to, which are not only Ornaments to them, but influences of good
to others. The Church of God has her (...), and her (...), as well as any other
society of men, and the Bishops and Governors of her are the proper Oracles of
them; men of years, learning, piety as they are and ought to be, are the
probablest to know, and the meetest to handle those sacred Rites, and renowned
Mysteries, which are then perverted and distorted, when the discourse of
ignorant and impudent men; wherefore Antiquity (to make Religion venerable
with, and influential on the people) kept the plebs at a distance from the
s^ght and audience of the mysteries of Religion, (...), Suidas in verte
etc. because the hearers of them were by the Law of their constitution, to
shut their mouths, and to tell what they heard to no man. Of all the Religious
Rites and Mysteries, none were among the Heathen like the Eleusinian ones;
those were so serious and solemn, that none who were not sacris initiati, were
to be present at them, and while they were (...), which was a twelve month,
for their probation, they were kept at distance; after that, they were admitted
to the greater mysteries, and were called (...); to which Saint Peter alludes,
2 Pet. 1.16. but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty: yea, so much further
reverence were these (...) enjoined, that they had an oath given them, not to
reveal any of the great mysteries to the (...), those that were but entered.
These devoted to the service of Ceres and Proserpina, Cicero alludes to, when
he enjoins the Orator to conceal what his Clyent has committed to his secrecy,
Tantum tanquam mysterium tenere aliquid. 3. De Orator. Ad Attic. lib. 4.87.
as if it were a mystery. Of these mysteries, Alexander ab Alexand. Agellius,
Iul. Caepitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, Ammianus Marcellinus, Xiphilinus in
Epitom. In Alexand. Sever. p. 213. lib. 19. p. 364. and 481.407.
Dionis, p. 356. In Adrian, Herodian, lib. 3. p. 527. and particularly Lilius
Gyraldus, these, and multitudes of other Authors, In Symbol, Pythagoric p. 493.
Titulo Silentium, and p. 413. Histor. Deorum Syntag. 17.
have written of the trash and trumpery of these devotions; which here to
mention, were to abuse the Reader, and to misuse time. The mysteries of
Christianity are no such silent nothings; God has indeed committed to his
Churchmen, the Oracles of God, the Word of Reconciliation; and the Church, as
the Spouse of Christ, Civitas est Ecclesia, vigilate ad custodiam; sponsa est,
studete ornatus; over sunt, intetidite quastus. Sermon. 76. in Cantic. 7.
is to be conducted in her march toward Heaven, by these Prasidentes Ecclesia,
who are Guard to her, which is a City by them watched, the Spouse of Christ by
them adorned, the sheep of Christ by them fed, as Saint Bernard notably; and
therefore it being their duty and office, Se^m. 77.
ornare spons um nou spoliare, To adorn, not rob, to keep, not ruin; to
institute, not prostitute the Church; God has given them power suitable to
their trust. They are now lifted up above the meaner degrees of men sacrated to
God, and are made Watch- men and Overseers of their Spiritualities: and the
presidency God has invested them with, being for edification, not destruction,
deserves from them double honor, who by their care and conduct are kept from
wander and error; yea fed with the sincere milk of the Word, and may, and
ought to grow spiritually thereby. Though then all men are bound to know the
things of God which are revealed in his Word, as matter of their duty, and
which by reason of God's postulation of them, he has given them possibility,
and convenient helps; to their indoctrination, such as are the grounds of
Faith, the Law of Conversation, the Institutions of Christianity, which are all
couched in those words, Dum fidem, charitatem, and spem, Sacramenta quoque
Ecclesiae: Yet are those whom he has made his Ambassadors and workers
together with him, secondary Apostles, not stinted to this proportion. There
are Caetera Theologiae Mysteria to be studied, and understood by them, over and
above those, mere necessaria, which other Christians are obliged to. They are
to be salt and light, furnished with greater proportions of illumination and
discretion, then the people are; because the people are to enquire the Law at
the Priest's Lips, therefore God has promised those, their lips shall preserve
knowledge, and chiefly sure, that knowledge that is peculiar to their Calling.
For though it be commendable in Divines to know every part of Science, and the
more accomplished they are in the universality of their reading, the probabler
they are to show themselves Workmen that need not to be ashamed: yet for them
that are in Holy Orders, Catholiquely, Apostolically, Can^niquely ordained, for
these to be Goliath and Apollos's in other skills, and rude and unstrenuous in
Divinity, for them to know least in that which they profess, and by reason of
which they have care of souls in the Church, is very much a blemish, and I had
almost said, a Blasphemy: Sure I am, it is a botch and spot, which is not the
spot of God's people in the Priesthood.

Whether then the Presidentes Ecclesiae be here meant largely, for such as are
in the Order of Evangelique Priesthood, which Lib. 1. cap. 2. Sum. Eccles.
Turrecremata affirms to be instituted by Christ in his Holy Supper, when he
himself Priested all his Apostles: whence In Psalm 86. Qu. 2. Disput. 1. p. 225.
Benzoniu^, out of Saint Tract. Perri De Palude, De causa immediata Eccles.
Potestatis.
Chrysostom, as he alleadges him, calls them Vicarios Christi, immo ipsum
Christum; and out of others, Sacerdotes Deos quosdam esse inter homines, etc.
Or for the Fathers of the Church, the Episcopal Order, which he says Christ
instituted, when he consecrated Saint Peter, and in him, all his Successors in
that Superior Order. Or if not so ordered, yet of Apostolic Origin, and
Catholic approbation, as is evident in all the Histories of the Church,
Durandus Epise. Meldensis, lib. De Orig. Jurisdiction^m, art. 5. De potest
Episcoporum. Tom. 1. Annal. p. 435, 497, 498, 567. Sanctus Cyprianus apud
Baronium. To. 1. Annal. p. 134.
which do unanimously give testimony to Episcopal Jurisdiction and
pre-eminence. I say, whether the Text be understood in the lax sense, or rather
in this more press one, for Governors in the Church, (called by the Statute of
the 13. of Eliz. c. 12. the Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualities: by the 8.
of Eliz. c. 1. the State of the Clergy, one of the greatest States of this
Realm, Archbishops and Bishops; who by reason of their dignity, deserts, and
influence, are termed the Church; and so also are expressed in the Statute of
25 Hen. 8. c. 21 and which Baronius tells us the honorable account this Order
had, being early after Christ called Apostles, which perhaps Saint Cyprian
might allude to in these words, Vnde scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia est, and
Ecclesia in Episcopum.) The Rule is very good; that the more copious and
curious knowledge of Religion is proper and peculiar to them to know, that they
may be able Ministers of the New Testament, and be meet to every Ministerial
purpose.

Quare Dominus Discipulis suis dicit. Vobis datum est nosse mysterium regni
calorum, caeteris autem in Parabolis, ut videntes non videant.

This Scripture, in Mark iv. 11. comes in patly to confirm the Proposition;
God's Ministers, Bishops and Presbyters presiding in the Church, are to know
the mysteries of Religion beyond the proportion of other men: Why? because they
are set apart to that work: Eruditio and Scientia Pontificis in Ecclesia
Evangelica, tanta esse debet, ut and gressus ejus and motus, and manus, item
digiti, and universae parts corporis vocales sint ita, ut veritatem mente
concipiens, and t^to eam habitu resonet and ornatu, Benzonius in Psalm. 86.
quest. 17. p. 348.
how? by God specially qualified to such accomplishment, not as men, for so
they partake in common with others, and are more or less apt, as they are more
or less endowed with natural parts, and noble acquisitions; but as they are
haereditarii Christi Apostoli, as they are set apart to God, and have renounced
this World; so they seem to be entitled to greater proportions of
illumination, even by virtue of this Scripture, which though spoken to the
Apostles on a particular occasion, yet has a kind of promissory benediction in
it, which is descendable on all the successions of men in the Ministry of the
Church. And because this Scripture is alleged here so pertinently, and
carries so much of the pregnancy of divine reason in it, I shall take leave to
touch upon the particulars of it so far, as they illustrate the purpose of our
Text-Master.

(...) To you,] who were they? not the (...) the multitude spoken of v. 1. who
sat on the Sea side to hear him, and to whom he taught (...), many things by
parable, v. 2. but the (...) refers to the tenth verse, when he said when he
was alone (...), those that were about him with the twelve; That is, Hoc autem
(...), veteres explicarunt (...) laxiore notione. Grot. in Mar. iv. 11.
some candidate Disciples that had given Testimony of their extraordinary
sincerity, in resigning themselves up to our Lord; These with the twelve
Apostles, who were of our Lords Family, and stood daily before him, his
Reverend Privy Chamber-men, who had daily access to, and acceptance with him;
to these is the (...) intended, for these being the persons that took a welcome
confidence to seek solution of their doubts from his infallibility, he assures
this Privilege to of knowing plainly what others do but in shadows, darkly
and imperfectly.

(...).] It is given, It Is not gotten by your Industry, nor deserved by your
Excellency, nor purchased by your Wealth, but given; God bestows his largesses
as fruits of his Bounty, and tokens of his Munificence, and his word to lesson
us humility phrases all our receivings as matter of grace and gift, the gift of
God is eternal life; so God loved the Word, Romans 6.23. John 3.16. Luke 11.13.
Phil. 2.13. Jam. 1.17.
that he gave his only begotten Son; if thou knew the gift of God; I will
give you another Comforter; he will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it;
it is GOD that works in us both to will, and to do of his good pleasure; and
every good gift, and every perfect gift comes from above. These are the
Scripture phrases, and in this tone does our Lord convey the impartment of his
Indulgence to his Disciples above others; To you it is given, freely without
your merit, fully without his restraint.

(...) To know,] not only to hear and to see, by which two senses the
intellect has great additions; but (...), as much as (...), to judge and
discern, which is the knowledge of a practick understanding, and a discreet
judgment, to know so as to be able to make others know our knowledge, to know
with assurance and demonstration far beyond the reach and certainty of pure
rational Evidence; this the knowledge of Faith, the Evidence of things not
seen, is that which is the (...) here, Christ had wrought faith in their hearts
which drew the from them world to the love and relyance on him; and he tells
them that they had received an ample reward for their service, to wit, the gift
to know the mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven.

(...);] The mystery of the Kingdom of God, that is a singular expression to a
plural sense; the knowledge of the Apostles was of all the necessary matters to
their comfort and compleatness, God is one and all that is knowable of him, he
teaches his the mystery of; Thus complex is the word (...) Romans xi. 25. I would
not Brethren that you should be ignorant of this Mystery, so 1 Cor. ii. v. 7.
We speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery, Ephesians. iii. 4. whereby when ye read,
ye may understand my knowledge in the Mystery of Christ. Coloss. ii. 2. unto
all the riches of the full assurance of understanding, (...), to the
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God, to you it is given to know the Mystery,
that is, God calls you into the Mount to a close view of him, when others see
in dark and uncertain proportions, and through thick cloathings of Divine Glory
interposing between them and their seeings. When they hear but part, and not
the full mind of God in the latitude of an affectionate bounty: ye shall know
the Mystery of the Kingdom of God, Non communicandum prophanis, In Mat. 4.11.
says Erasmus, in the Sacramental efficacy of it, ye shall have the Kingdom
of God in the graces of your hearts; which shall by a Mystery of love and
goodness change and refine you.

(...). But to th^se without.] This alludes to the people and plebs of
followers, so is (...), taken, 1 Cor. v. 12, 13. Col. iv. 5. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 12.
and so Grotius says, St. Clem^nt, In Lo^^
and the Ancient Christians held all that were not professed Disciples who
heard Christ non discendae pietatis animo, to profit by his Doctrine, and to be
in a Conformity to it, but as the Athenians are said to spend their time, Acts
xvii. 21. In hearing and telling news; These who are only eye servants, and
hearers for fashion sake, whom the loaves and the miracles, and the sublimity
of our Lords Divinity, made to follow him as a satisfaction of their curiosity,
necessity, or such like self gratification, such who were touched with no
zeal, inflamed with no ardor, ballasted with no judgment in their following of
him: our Lord feeds only with the Crumbs, somewhat these dogs of the Flock must
have from the Lords bounty, and that they have, is but hard food, which has
such an Incrustation in it as the power of nature will hardly break thorough.

(...),] All things are propounded in Parables, that is, whereas Christ to his
Family speaks familiarly, though he show these his followers, and as it were
fellow-Ambassadors, all the Treasures of his Wisdom and Knowledge, though he
make them privy to all his secrets, (...), sine ^arum apertiore explic^tione,
Grot. in Lo^.
and give them the Key of his Cabinet, in which are locked up his Receipts and
Prescripts, for pleasing God, and following him accurately and acceptably,
though these patefactions of the mystery of his Eudochy be the Childrens bread;
yet to those that are without, all that he discovers to them, is only in
Parables.

(...). Suidas in verbo.
Now Parables were dark and mysterious speeches, which in few words carried
large senses, and truly profitable; anciently these were much in use, (...), a
Parable is the explication of words of Antiquity, the discovery of what wisdom
in the beginning of time thought. Sampson in Holy Writ, is first that I
remember mentioned to use them, Judge. xiv. 12. I will now put forth a Riddle to
you, says he, (...), I will deliver my dark saying to you. So the LXX. Heb.
(...), comes from (...) to speak smartly and mystically, as we use to say, with
a guard upon our words; and the learned make it synomous with (...), to speak
acutely, and with all the dexterity that oratorious emphatiqueness can advance
to and arrive at. This form of Speech, God not only in nature taught man, but
expressly and by the positivity of a command, put the Prophet Ezech. upon
using, for in the 17. of his Prophecy, v. 2. God bids him put forth to the Son
of man a Riddle, and speak a Parable to the house of Israel, where (...), to
speak a Parable parabolically, is read oftener by dominari, and (...), then by
any thing of a soft sense. God would have his Prophet speak to them in a form
of speech, that had authority and majesty in it, that could command their
attention and obedience, like those words of our Lord in the Gospel, which were
by his Adversaries testified to be spoken with authority, and not as the
Scribes. Hence it is, that learned men say, Adages, Sentences, and Parables,
which Principatum in sermon tenent, none used, but those that were eminent,
and far above the vulgar, Thus our Lord Jesus here uses Parables, to convey to
the Jews, what he saw they were capable of, and fitted to improve. He knew they
were a rough and fierce people, whose ingratitude had obliterated all the
memorials of mercy, and that divine favor had not bettered them, but yet they
were settled upon their lees, and were under a confirmed obduration; and
therefore, though he could not but propose his love and light to them anew, and
usher it into their acceptance, with all advantages of probable success; De
Parabolis l^g^ Hieronimum De la Rua Tole tanum c^n^rovers. non^ de Psalmis, and
sensib^^ S. Scriptura, p 814. Imp. Ma^riti, Anno. 1620.
yet he sore-saw their obstinacy would reproach his goodness, and thereupon he
reveals himself to them in Parables; to tell us that whatever God conceals of
himself from us, is in condescension to our weakness, and in punishment of our
wantonness. For if there be any Scalado to the secrets of God, it is that of
humility and holy fear; the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him.
And if the eyes of men be blinded judicially, it is penal of their Primitive
sinful choice; because they would not see when they might, God has concluded
them under a Sentence of irreversible blindness, ut videntes non videant. So
dangerous obstinacy, against God's conviction and approaches to us, is, that it
is just with him to suffer us not to know at all the things of our peace, who
will not know it in his time, and by his means, and according to his
proportion; which they do not, that abound in their own sense, and limit not
their studies to sobriety; as the Apostle in the first of Romans 22. and 12.16.
cautions, and our Text-Master after him.

Sic and tibi, Princeps, necessarium non erit mysteria legis Angliae longo
disciplinatu rimare, sufficient tibi ut in Grammatica tu profecisti, etiam and
in legibus proficias.

Here the Chancellor applies the Premises, and makes the Prince to apprehend
the substance and drift of them, which is, that in every Profession, the exact
and utmost notions and possibilities of Science, are not so usually the labors
of men of fortune, and speculative pleasure, as of Artists that intend to live
by, and to be exact in them; and that from their progress, fix a reputation and
advantage to themselves from them: So in knowledge of the Law, though Lawyers
may toil and travel to apprehend every nicity, and take view of every punctilio
in their Profession; yet the Prince being so great a Personage, and having
others in substitution under him, to judge according to the Laws, shall not
need to search year Books, view Records, turn over Presidents, and toil in the
varieties of these many mysterious nicities, that is not necessary, nor what the
Chancellor judges correspondent to his state and degree. For as in Grammar a
man may be competently learned, so as to deserve the name of a Grammatian,
though he be not able to answer the nice questions Tiberius put to the
Grammarians he delighted in, Suetonius in Tibet. c. 70.
Quae Matter Hecubae, etc. Who was the Mother of Hecuba, of what account
Achilles was among Virgins, what was the subject matter of the Sirens ^otes.
Yea, though he attain not to the exactness of Erotemata Impr. Paris.
Calcondylas. 1547.
Chrysoloras, De ecto partibus orationis.
Lascaris, Introductiones Grammaticae. Basil, 1529.
Gaeza, Institutiones Graecae Linquae, Basil, Imp. per Sebastianum Henric.
Petri.
Vrbanus, Instit. Gram. edit Wolmarii Basileae.
Calcondylas Minutius, or other later, not inferior to the best of them,
because the excellency of their knowledge, was rather in the curiosities and
nicities of words and speech, then in the necessary rules which are
indispensably to be known; and therefore those that know the (...), and make a
right use of them to all the four parts of Grammar, and the issues from them,
may with credit enough to themselves, and benefit to others, rest contented in
their acquirements: So in the Law, though the Prince be not a Littleton, a
Cook, a Dyer, a Plowden, yet if he be but acquainted with the terms, language,
and maxims of the Law, that will be enough to accomplish him, without any
further travel into obstrusities of discouragement.

Now the Chancellor urges Grammar knowledge, as the Introduction to all that
is Technical; Ars caeterarum omnium veluti fons and origo, cujus fundamentum
nisi quis fideliter jecerit, quicquid superstruxerit, corruet, lib. 1. c. 4.
Instit.
so Quintilian terms it, and he adds, That unless a good foundation be laid in
that, all after-superstructures will totter and fall; and judicious Praefat.
Epist. ad Grammat. Suidas in verbo. Necessariae pueris, jucundae senibus,
dulcis secretorum comes, and quae v^lsola, omnium studiorum genere plus habet
artis quam ostentationis, Fab. lib. 1. c. 4. Institut. Orator.
Melancthou seconds him, The other Studies succeed according to Grammars
tyrocinie; for Grammar being not well grounded in, all other Institutions are
to little purpose; and the use of it being taken, (...), to teach the first
Elements: thereby it becomes necessary to Youth, and in its progress delightful
to the greatest proficiencies of age, prescribing the method of reading and
pronunciation, of understanding and explication, of distinction and emendation,
of judgment and discrimination; which are made by Varro, and others after him,
the parts of practical Grammar, under the names of (...), I say, the
Chancellor producing this, as the chief strength of his Argument, makes me
think of that of Tully, the great Master of Language, whom Quintilian calls ex
actor asperrimus, so rigid to his Son, in keeping him to the punctualities of
Grammar, and not dispensing with any omission in the exactness of it, because
he best knew the ill confequences of neglects in it, Lib. 2. c. 2 Instit.
Orator.
which wise Grammarians are by Quintillian instructed to avoid, as that which
will render their Scholars little credit, or comfort to them.

Grammaticae vero perfectionem, quae ex Etymologia, Orthographia, Prosodia, and
Syntaxi quasi ex quatuor fontibus profluit, non s^ecie tenus industi, and tamen
Grammatica sufficienter eruditus es, ita ut merito Grammaticus denomineris.

These words are a representation of Grammar, as a Paradise that is encompassed
with a fourfold fountain of delight and variety, as God's Eden was with four
Rivers; the first whereof is Orthography, Antiqui novique Orthographica Impr.
Tornaci, Anno. 1633.
the art of writing aright: concerning which, Claudius Dorsquius has most
ingenuously, and floridly written large Books, and mentions 57. particular
Authors, who have preceded him in that Argument. That which I shall add, is,
that use and custom of time and men famous in their Arts and Ages, is the
Standard of Rectitude herein: Victorinus Afer. lib. De Orthographia.
For in every Age and Author almost is there somewhat exempt from the common
road, which yet is not accounted improper, but obtains by the users fame, and
the favor of usage, an adoption into propriety, Veram Orthographiae consuet
udini seruit, idco que s^pe mutata est, lib. 1. c. 7. etc.
and an enfranchisement from the bondage of censure, as Quinilian grants, and
as by the perusal and comparing of Priscian and other ancient Grammarians with
latter ones, frequently appears: Sylburg. Rudiment. Graec. ling. p. 13. and
seq.
for as fashions in clothes, and cookery of meats, and figures of building, and
words of language, change with men, as their humors or the accidents of their
lives, or other contingents rule them; so does Orthography alter, that being
practiced by one age, that is distasted by another, as Page 31, 38, 41, 43. etc.
Melancthon in many places of his Grammar makes good, Lips. De recta
pronunciatione Ling. Lat. ad finem Vol. 1 Oper. Orthographiam, id est,
formulam, rationemque seribendi a Grammaticis institutam non adeo ^ustodiit, ac
videtur sequi potius opinionem, qui perinde scribendum ac loquendum existiment.
Suetonius in Octav. c. 8^.
and as both A Gellius, Lipsius, and others make appear.

Though therefore there be a rule in Orthography, which (...), be to be
observed, yet where it is capable of Correction, and Improvement, the nearer
writing comes to the tone of speech, the more proper and useful seems it to me
to be, nor are, as I humbly conceive, the omissions of superfluous vowels, or
the addition of Letters supernumerary, errors or beauties in writing.

Etymologia,] As Orthography marshals Letters into words, so Etymology
presents the true Notion or Notation of Letters in their word: the Latins call
it Veriloquium, Quo verborum explicatio probatur, etc. Etymology the Greeks
call the Explication or the reason, why things are called so as they are: after
him, Quintilian 1. Academ. 46. lib. 1. c. 6.
says the same, this, Aristotle calls (...), that which carries the indication
of every thing in it; Aut enim Etymologia est, aut allusio, aut allegoria, aut
caetera hujusmodi. Brechaeus ad Legem 180. lib. De Verb sig. p. 387. Alciat. ad
legem. 183. p. 3^2.
for names being significative of Natures, and conform to somewhat Relative to
that they are called by, no better a Calculate can be made of any thing, then
that, which is deducible from the Notation of its name. Though Rualdus takes
upon him to censure Plutarch, Varro, and other exact Grammarians upon
Etymologies by them given, and concludes them vain: yet as (...), import much
in Crittiques, so does Etymology to, which Carolus Sigonius, and Beckman,
assisted by all florid Suffrages make good; for though I know that Etymologies
are not always to be depended upon, but that sometimes the uncertain tie of
them occasions loss of truth, Continet in se multam eruditionem, sive illa ex
Graecis orta tractamus sive ex historiarum veterum notitia, nomin^m, locorum,
homin^m, gentium, urbium requiramus, lib 1. De Orat. c. 6.
as well as of smartnesse of Notion, yet for the most part whatever is
discoverable either from the Greeks or latter Historians, concerning places,
men, Nations, Cities, is much the effect of Etymology. This is Etymology in the
general and large capacity of the word; yet in Grammar, Etymology is taken for
the ratio cognoscendi casuum discrimina, having relation to all parts of
speech, and so it is here to be taken as our Chancellor refers it to Grammar,
and makes it a part of it.

The third part of Grammar is Syntax, the Concord and Regimental Order of parts
of speech, whereby they are made to coincide, and mix together in the harmony
of propriety and exactness, Grantus in Gr. Ling. spiceleg. p. 13^. ^.
Grammarians define it to be the fit Connection and absolute comprehension of
perfect speech; that which does afferre sermoni venustatem gratiamque, gives a
grace and Majestique order and consent to speech, and indeed this is that part,
that rescues speech from Barbarism, Lilius in Gram.
and that which they call (...) disproportion. For Syntax making a Concord of
words each with other in Gender, Number, Case, manner, time, person, introduces
convenience the Companion of delight, which is an harmony, Prosodia e^^ quae
rectam vocum pronunciationem tradit, Idem.
and reaches the fourth and last part of Grammar which is Prosodia from (...),
and (...) a musical consent, which keeps exactness in all notes of speech,
whether loud or low, shrill or soft, whether those that are distinquished by
labor and care, either to extend or depresse the sillables, or appear in the
production or correption of them, by which, time is regulated. This no less
necessary to a graceful and good Orator and Poet is to be diligently observed,
as the other parts are; and whosoever has any competent skill in them, will
deserve the name of a well instituted Scholar, though not to the proportion of
Erasmus (whom Crittiques allow the restorer of curious learning, and as it were
their second Genius:) but to such a degree as will in a good sense merit the
title of a Grammarian.

Consimiliter quoque denominari legista mereberis, si legum principia, and
causas, usque ad elementa discipuli more indagaveris.

Still the Chancellor proceeds to animate the Prince in his persuit of the Law
by the example of success in elementary learning, for as in Grammar a man may
attain enough to be termed a Grammarian, though as I said before, he be none of
the first three, so in the Law a man may have credit of Proficiency, though he
be none of the profound ones. Indeed to be exact a Papinian, a Pomponius, a
Plowden, a Dyer requires a whole man in his best expense of time, and with the
best of Divine blessings on his reading and rumination; and that no man can
reasonably have ambition to attain to, or greive in falling short off, but he
that by length of time, eagerness of study, strength of memory, sharpness of
conception, approaches it: but to be entered into and have a superficial
knowledge of the Law by which the Student (suppose the Prince) may have (as I
said before) insight in the language and common Notions of it, will give the
Prince as great a title to the praise of the knowledge of the Laws of his
government, as he shall need to have; and in having them will abundantly find
himself accomplished; Seldom notes on Fortescue, p. 20. K James speech
Whitehall, 1607. p. 513. Of his works in folio.
For as they are the best Laws for any place, that most suit with the
disposition of the State and Manners of the people that there live, so is it
the best knowledge that a Prince can acquire, to know Gods mercy and indulgence
to him in the Method and Prescripts of the Topique Laws of which h^ is
Guardian, and according to which his prudence and piety makes him conformable;
the degrees of which knowledge are not necessary to the latitude of the
Continent, but to such Ascents as are in order to Regal Enablement.

Non enim expediet tibi propria sensus indagine legis Sacramenta rimare, sed
relinquatur illa judicibus tuis, and advocatis qui in regno Angliae servientes
ad legem appellantur, similiter and aliis peritis quos appretisios vulgus
denominat.

This the Chancellor expresses, to take of all doubt in the Prince, of more
expected from him, then is probable for him to attain to with convenient
industry: For though he press upon the Prince love to, and skill in the Law;
yet it is not such a skill as is irksome to get, or takes up all his time to
arrive at; it is not Sacramenta legis rimare, but it is to know what is common
and introductional to knowledge of use, and credit of conversation. For though
necessary it be to know Legis Sacramenta, the all that is to be known of the
Law, the rise, reason progress, variation, policy, and interest of the Law,
and what in all these Notions is couched, and how these have beneficial
operations on the minds of those that know them, to enable them to every
scientifique and practique purpose, yet is this not fit for Princes so far to
engage them, least it take up their thoughts too strictly, and possess them
too fully to give way for other regal Offices to be thought upon and beloved by
them. Ipse jus dixit assidue; and dixit autem jus non modo summa diligentia,
sed and lenitate Sueton. de Octaviano Aug c. 33. Cook 2. Instit. on c. 151.
W^stmin. p. 186.
To get a pregnant use of reason and to use it according to the prudence of
Government tempered by Law, which rectifies all violencies; this is enough for
a Prince to know when young, the rest that is more perplex and burdensome, the
Chancellor says, relinquetur Iudicibus tuis, etc. For the King being a
Body-Politique, as he commands by matter of Record ( for Rex praecipit, and Lex
praecipit; are all one) and judges not propria sensus indagine, but according
to the Law distributed in his Courts; so he knows in a Politic sense the Law
by his Judges whose Judgments are so politiquely the King's, that
intentionally, and in the virtue of it, it is his. And hence comes the
relinquatur judicibus tuis. That is, let others whose particular study and
skill it is to intend it, ease you of your burden, and distribute the Laws of
which you are Head and supreme Governor to your people: Nor is this late and
lazy counsel, but grave and great, as old as Moses, and given him from Iethro
his Father in Law, Priest and Prince of Midian, as an expedient to prevent
Moses his toil, and overmuch trouble of himself. For Moses having told Iethro,
how he behaved himself to the people, and in what capacity he was apprehended
by them, Exodus xviii. 16. and Iethro having wisely weighed the employment, and
compared it with the condition and temper of Moses his mind and body, does not
confirm him in his laborious, and not to be endured toil, but friendly, and in
a way of pathetique kindness reproves him, ver. 17. The thing that thou do
is not good. Not thereby meaning the Act of Legislation to Israel, or his
standing in the place of God for Isreal's accommodation, was politically or
morally not good: For good it was, that people should be kept in order by a
good Magistrate, and the prudence of nature dictates this: But in that he says,
the thing that thou do is not good, that is mode and forma, in the way and
kind of thy doing it. Thou art indeed Moses, kind and useful to the people, but
cruel to thy self, and to the people too, if what thou do beyond thy
strength, shorten thy life, and leave them, without thee, miserable: so ver.
18. Thou will surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee;
for this thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to perform it thy self
alone. This is the reason of his dehortation and argument, ab incommodo; it is
injurious to thee first, and then reflectively to Israel, therefore cease to do
what would be better undone: yet that he may not seem to loosen, what he cannot
fasten again, and more usefully he annexes an affirmative direction, how to
accomodate himself, and his government by a more mediocrious method, Hearken
now (says he) unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with
thee, etc. ver. 19, 20. And after all he adds, ver. 21. Moreover, thou shall
provide thee out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
hating covetousness, and place such over them, and let them judge the people at
all seasons.

This Scripture is the grand Record of Judges, both as to their antiquity,
qualifications, and power, which is worthy to be written of, because the
subjects of it are (under supreme Princes, and their great Officers of State)
the most considerable in any Nation, especially in this of England; where,
though they can not jus dare, make Laws, yet they can and do jus dicere,
interpret the Laws made, according to the true sense thereof. And therefore no
wonder, though this Scripture be the glass through which the Kings of this Land
have seen the portraictures of those excellent persons, whom they have worthily
in all Ages, chosen to, and placed in those Offices. Judges have been ever very
ancient in all the civilized World, and those chosen men, not forward to prefer
themselves, not men of Absalom's spirit, that are swollen with ambition and
populacy; 5. De Morib. 6.7.
but men picked, and by experience found fit to be deciders of controversies,
who will, as the Philosopher expresses it, (...), etc. be so just to divide
differences into equal shares, and give every one his portion, as Parents do
the matter of brawl between their Children, and thereby appease them.

Now because men of brave spirits are set in their proper Orbs, when in places
of Judicature, (...), Rhetor. l. 2. c. 17. Grot. in loc.
and then have the opportunity to show the virtues God and Nature have endowed
them with; the Holy Ghost directs men by the dictation of Iethro, approved by
Moses, to begin with men of virtue, (...), our Translators render it, all men,
which is seconded by Grotius, who makes this ability to extend as the Rabbis
lesson him; and the notation of the word will bear it to all kind of ability,
of body, mind, fortune, in which sense we call usually those that excel, able
men, (...); so the LXXII men of courage, that will go through stitch with the
work of Justice, that will not fear the face of any he, that offends, and the
better to keep courage, (besides innocence and the fear of God, which makes men
bold and brave,) Fortune and estate is a great muniment to a Judge, and Rabbi
Selom, as Munster quotes him, makes this able men to be meant of rich men, Viri
fortes sunt divites quibus non est necesse, ut adulentur, and accipiant
personas. R. Selo. apud Munster, iu loc.
able to subsist themselves and their charges, without dependence, flattery,
and the acceptance of men's persons in judgment; which truly is much (no doubt)
of what the sense of Iethro, and of what the Holy Ghost means in (...), for
though it be true, that integrity will preserve a man from desires, yea and
admissions of corruption, yet it has a shrewd assailant, when need or shortness
of tether beleaguereth it. For though a vicious mind will never permit a rich
man to be just or good, where he is tempted to be otherwise by the vice he
dotes on; yet it is probable the fear of censure, fine, and imprisonment, may
awe him that has an estate solvable in that case, from attempting, or
accepting, what on other grounds he would be more inclinable to. In Pandect.
priores, p. 62. edit. Basil.
And since that of Budaeus is true, Ad judicem ire, ad jus est ire, etc. The
Judge addressed to, is an address to the Law, since he is the living Law. It
concerns Princes, whose all power within their Jurisdictions legally is, to be
exact in their delegations to meet persons, men of ability in wisdom, courage,
fortune.

(...), Fearing the Lord,] This is added, as that which knits the knot of the
former abilities so fast, that it will be indissolvable. Tiraquel ad lib. 5.
Genial. dic^um. c. 14. p. 687, 688
Hieronimus Procarius (whom Tiraquell terms a most knowing man in the Law, and
expert in Government) has observed, that there are four things that subvert
Justice; hatred, favor, bribery, fear; and against all these, this fear of God
is a preservative; for it will put a man upon hatred of every evil way, and
observation of God's eye intent on him: and his judgment impendent on his
wandering, it will make a man watch and ward his ways, that he offend not in any
defect of duty. For when the word (...), is put absolutely, as here it is, the
Learned say it signifies Curare, Psalm. xlix. 17. Be not thou afraid, when any
one is made rich, (...), ne cures, Be not solicitous and anxious, do not fret
at the prosperity of wicked men. Iethro's meaning then is, choose men fearing
God, that is, that are solicitous, and thoughtful to do their duty, in
obedience to his declared will, and according to the notions they have of his
pure nature, and provident appointment of Magistracy, to preside over men for
their good.

(...), Men of truth,] Who having knowledge, conscience, and sincerity, which
King James declared requisite in Judges, Speech in Parliament. 1609. fol. 494.
of his Works.
dare to do nothing unworthy their places, or the Laws Prescript. For men of
truth are opposed to loose and lewd men, in whom there is no thing but
falsehood, and to whose words there is no heed to be given. From this censure,
as too great a blemish for Innocence to bear, the Sons of Jacob sought to free
themselves; for when they were charged to be Spies, and Joseph, in Genesis xlii.
16. appoints them to discover (...), whether truth were with them, they join
issue upon his own terms, and having ver. 11. alleged, (...), recti nos, and
proceeded in their justification, ver. 19, 31, 33, 34. They avoid the just
reward of perfidie, which those corrupt Judges in Herodotus had, Lib. 5.
one of which Cambyses caused to be slead, and his skin to be set over the
Judgment Seat, and the other Sandoces by name was by Darius suitably proceeded
against. Lib. 7. Polymn.
For since the Law of God commands neither to look upon the person of the Poor
or of the Rich in judgment, but to fear the Lord and his punishment: the Laws
of all Religions and Governments, look upon irrectitude in a Judge, as that
which can have no penalty transcending the demerit of it, because it is an
abusion of God's power, and the Sovereigns grace, while both those royal
purposes direct the use of that expedient to the divine end of righting wrong,
and animating virtue, Drusius in loc.
it follows (...), hating covetousness: the Greeks render this by (...), which
is a word, importing desire of having plenty above others. The word (...),
signifies all manner of evil desire, be it by what means it will, or in what
degree it can, whether the way to accomplish it be calumny, force, flattery, or
which way soever, Hall and Fox, in H. 6. ad annum, 1471.
that is inordinate. And because Covetousness obstructs every good sincere
action, which is nor subsidiary to some advantage of the covetous person, as is
e^vdent in many examples, but especially in Henry the seventh, who had a desire
to Saint Henry the sixth, but that the Pope asked too much money for his
(Canonization; which Henry) the seventh not willing to part with, omitted Henry
the sixth's Canonization as loving money better then the honor of his
Predecessors memory and piety; therefore God by his Prophet Habbakuk
pronounces a woe to him that covets an evil covetousness that is, Chap. 2.9,
vae qui congregat avaritiam malam, says S. Ierom. So Prove. xv. 27. so Exodus
18.21. this very verse of the Text is understood by the learned, to be meant of
those who follow not the desires of the World nor are unlawfully acted by the
love of riches or power, Qui non sequuntur mundi disederia, nec divitiarum
amorem, aut dignitatem; atodio habeant, abominentarque opum congregationem nisi
quatenus ad vitam sunt opera pratiam. Pagninus in ver^o. (...)
but use them, and endeavor to possess them so far only, as they are comforts
of life, and may be illustrations of virtue. And thus to limit covetousness,
being to ^ate it, is to avoid the Judgments threatened against the intemperance
of it, Isa. lvii. 17. Ier. xxii. 17 Ier. li. 13. Mic. iv. 13. In all which
places, (...). Menand.
the very same sin, by the same name, is most highly menaced, and the great
severity of God in the wasting of Nations, attributed to it, as the procuring
and meritorious cause of it.

Judges then being by the Prescript of God to be thus qualified, Preface to the
4. Rep.
they that are such, and so endowed, ought to have high value from the people,
as they have received the token of it in their trust from the King; and since
this place is so precise in the requiries of a Judge, and the Kings of this
Land have ever been so careful, to promote thereto persons, Caveat sibi, ne in
sede judicandi, quae est quasi Thronus Dei, q^enquam loco suo substituat
insipientem, and indoctum, contemptibilem, vel severum, ne pro luse ponat
tenebras, and manu indocta modo furioso, gladio feriat innocents, etc. Fleta
c. 17. De Iustitiariis substituendis.
not only in presumption, but in very deed so qualified. And in regard our now
most Gracious Sovereign, whom God long preserve, our pattern of virtue, and our
parent of peace and piety, has fitted the Benches of Law with such learned,
serious, and renowned Judges, as answer the best of times, and the most
renowned of their Ancestry. Not those excepted in Edw. the third's time; of
whose Chief Justice Sir Ed. Cook Preface to the 8. Rep.
Thirning, 12. H. 4. gives so honorable testimony; which truly I write not to
flatter, for I despise it, as beneath the candor of a Christian, and the honor
of a Gentleman; but to give my humble attestation to their super-excellent
merit: since I say so grave, so wise, so worthy men, are now the King's Judges,
I thought fit to illustrate this place, which they are so genuine a Comment
upon, by those few Notes which precede; beseeching God, that they that judge
the people for God, and under the King, may so continue, ever to demean
themselves, that when they be superseded by death, they may give up their
accounts with joy, and not with grief.

This considered, the Chancellor may well advise the King, for the main of the
Laws knowledge, to refer himself Iudicibus. For as the Sea abounds in Water,
the Sun in Light, the Earth with Atoms, and no vacuity is in nature; but God
has completed the World to all intents of Providence, in the circumaction of
his purpose, and the sustentation of his Creatures; so are the Judges, as men
of years, reading, and experience, so plenarily, and critically versed in the
Law, that there shall need to be no doubt, but that with our Savior's good
man, Out of the good treasures of their hearts, Cum vix possint omnes casus,
qui quandoque inciderint, certa lege, edicto, senatus consulto comprehendi,
prudens judex n^gotium, quo de agetur, ex simili aequitatis regula de finiet.
Fornerius ad legem 52. p. 139. De verbor. signif. Speech Star Chamber, 1616. p.
556.
they will bring forth treasure old and new, that is, be able to give Solutions
to all doubts, upon old and new Laws, and that not according to men's conceits,
but according to the true meaning of the Law, as Interpreters of the Law, as
those that find out the reason of the Law by Books and Presidents. So true is
that of King James the wife, Though the Common Law be a Mystery and a Skill
best known unto their selves (speaking to the Judges) yet if their
interpretation be such, as other men which have Logic and common sense,
understand not the reason, I will never trust such an Interpretation. So he.
And, if in the multitude of Counselors there is safety, as the Wise-man's
words are, and the Judges many in number, and learned in nature, are
serviceable to the King to counsel him as their Lord and Master, and according
to Law and Justice, which he in the execution of the Law solemnly has sworn
them to, and to perform which, they are upon penalty of God's Curse, and the
Laws impartiality, bound to observe; the graviora legis may well be left to
them; for in this case, that rule is true, Quifacit per alium facit per se, and
the King that thus knows the Law by them, may in a good politic sense be said
to know the Law as becomes him, which is part of the sense of doctina principi
co^grua, often spoken of by the Chancellor. But here no more of Judges,
because I shall have more occasion to discourse of them in the 51 Chapter.

Et advocatis, qui in regno Angliae servientes ad legem appellantur, similiter
and alii^ peritis quos Apprentisios vulgus denominat.

This Advocatus, is a name of office and employment, comprehending all those
personal honorary distinctions of men, which are gradual in the Law; for though
every man that is called to the Bar, and has read, be an Advocate, yet every
Advocate is not a Sergeant, nor an Apprentice of the Law: (for under those
names are comprehended the choice veteran eldest Sons of that Science, who do
proprie and quato modo advocare,) when others, Advocates in name sometimes, are
nothing less in deed.

Ascon. Pedianus, l^b. De Divinat. ^re^haeus ^d l^ gem 52. p. 139. De verb.
signif.
An Advocate then is a Patron, who undertakes the cause of men in Judgment, and
pleads the Cause juridiquely before the Judges that are to determine and judge
of it, and he acts diverse parts, that of an Orator in proper wording it, that
of an Attorney, in diligently watching and observing, that no advantage be
taken against the Cause; that of a Lawyer, in producing Arguments from the
Text, to maintain and support it. Now, though in all Causes, one Advocate at
least is necessary, no Court ordinarily allowing parties to plead their own
Causes, especially in Civil Causes: nor is it for their advantage so to do, who
being ignorant in the Laws, may by that pragmatiqueness injure their right in
the Judgment of the Court upon it: yet in dubious Ca^ses, and those of more
then ordinary consequence, Antiquity followed now adays, allowed two or more
Advocates, Brech^eus ad Leg^^ 52. p. 139. De Verb. fig.
that by their joint counsel and assistance, they might the better go through
what they have undertaken with solidity and success. These Advocates so useful
and frequently employed, the Law allowed great Dignities and P^iviledges to
them, Ludovicus Bologninus has counted them to be 130. Grand ones, besides the
many additional, Digest lib. 3. Tit 1. De Postulando in Gloss. D. p. 333.
which is confirmed by the Gloss on the Text, which says, Esse Advocatum,
honor est; and our Law capacitating them to great Offices and honors, thereby
still keeps up the Rate and Honor of Advocation, yea so long as our Lord Jesus
is owned to be the Advocate with the Father: the calling and honor of
Advocacie, as it is the Prestation of good Offices of Charity and Beneficencie
to men, will be in high repute; but of this I shall speak more on the 50
Chapter.

Iudices, and Advocati Regis, qui in regno Angliae servientes ad Legem
appellantur,

These Fleta terms Milites and Clericos locum Regis tenentes in Anglia: which
alluded to the use of making Clergy men anciently, as well as Laymen, not
only great Officers in the State, Cum igitur non sit possibile, quod sulus
[Rex] ad omnia terminanda sufficeret per Iustitiarios, and Comites, and alios
ministros viros sapientes, Deumque timentes etc. De necessitate oportebit cum
his subveniri. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 17. T(...), Athenaeus. Seldens titles Honor,
p. 833. M. Paris, p. 312, 393, 396. Hypodigm Neustriae, p. 118.
but also Judges in the Courts of Law in which the Kings Lieutenancy resides,
who therefore were called Locum tenentes, because they did locum Regis in
judicio tenere, the office of Judicature being originally and fontally the
King's, and his Judges only by delegation, as commissionated to, and entrusted
by him with that dispensatory power, so that serviens ad legem is no term of
diminution or base office, but of hunour and dignity; that as in ^eraldry the
term Esquire in Latin ( serviens as well as armiger) is given to the best and
bravest of men under the degree of Baronage or Knighthood, as a token of their
Portage of the Arms and Ensigns of honor, which they, or those whom they
descended from, personaldly bore in War before the Princes and Peers, they in
that way officiated to: so is the term Sergeant in the Law's import, the title
of one who does attend the service of the King and his people in study and
profession of the Law, and by carrying the Emblems of his Proficiency in his
habit, supposing a judicious head and heart, uttering his acquisitions with a
ready and well-languaged Tongue; and the not only common Civility of the
Nation attributes dignity to him, but the King, the Fountain and Sovereign of
Honor, dignifies him, as one of those Patricii, out of whom the Senators, the
Judges are chosen, Preface to the 10. Rep.
so says Sir Edward Cook, Ex servinentibus his ce tanquam e seminario
Iustitia, etc. From amongst these Sergeants, as the seminary of Justice, the
Judges are called: for none but a Sergeant at Law can be either Judge of any of
the Benches, or chief Baron of the Exchequer, or claim place in either of the
Houses of Sergeants; because those Inns are properly the Lodges of Sergeants,
not of Judges. So that Oracle of the Law, which learned Mr. Seldom confirms,
and seconds in his Preface before the Scriptores Anglici, p. 44.

Sergeant at the Law then is a Title State and Dignity of great respect, Lib.
28 E. 3. fol. 18 ^ Seldens Titles, Honor. p. 832. Preface 10. Report. Quid
aliud est Iuruconsulis domas, nisi Ora^ul^m C^vitatis. Ci^.
so that it is counted next degree to a Knight; yea, there are many arguments
from the Writ of his creation, which Sir Edward Cook directs me from him to
collect for the honor of the Sergeant: that he is no Sponte nascens, nor
self-Creatour, but arises from the Womb of the Morning honor, the King
majested, a Rege de auisamento Concilii inde evocatur; and so is a fruit not
only of the King's affection, but of his choice by Counsel, Secondly, it is non
nutu capitis, nec ictu gladii, nec verbo oris, sed brevi sigillato, but by his
Writ somewhat issuant from his politic Wisdom, and of kin to matter of
Record, a dignity in Nature of a Patent, brevi regio, by a Writ of summons.
Thirdly, the Writ is plural in the expression of the Person serjeanted,
vocabulo vobis dignitatis argumento singulari, as if the King in the honor did
convey and intend him some participation in the rays of Eminency with him.
Fourthly, he is called ad statum and gradum, Prefa^ce to the 10. Rep.
which, the statutes not of 8 H. 6. c. 10. but of 8 E. 4. c. 2, 24 H. 8. c. 13.
doallow and insert them in, as if the King incorporated them into the Tyrociny
of Nobility; these and such like parts of their dignitye is by that worthy
Author observed: nor had they these without great duties expected from, and
performed by them, Populo ad actiones suas pronunciandas, and defendendas usque
ad sententiae examen pro Honorario suo deservituri, Specul. Iustitiariorum.
as Narratores and Counters, for (so they were anciently called) and they did
stand as Patrons to the People throughout all their causes, to plead and defend
them according to equity and right. Mirror des Justices cap. 2. sect 5. des
Counters.
The Mirror says also, Chescun Sergeant est chargeable, etc. Every Sergeant
is bound by Oath not to defend wrong or falsehood, if he know it so to be, nor
assist his Glyent any longer then he perceives his cause is just: Lib. 2. c.
37. p. 87. Edit. Seld.
the same Fleta writes, with this addition, under pain of imprisoument a year
and a day etc. By which wisdom of our Law, so advising the King to imitate the
Athenian Areopagus, the Band of Sergeants have been the learned Brotherhood
whence the brave Judges have ever since been chosen. The Kings of this Land
being by their learned Chancellours, and chief Justices advised of the Worths
of men, though their own Modestyes consented to their temporary obscuring of
themselves. Rot. Parl. 5 H. 5
In the 5 H. 5. Martyn, Babington, Pool, Westbury, June, Rolf, were called by
the King into Parliament for refusing to take the state and degree of Sergeant,
to which they had been by Writ called, which they persisted to refuse, as
counting themselves not fit for the state and degree, but in the end with much
ado, 2 Instit. p. 214. In Stat. 1. West.
they took it, and diverse of them (says Sir Edward Cook) afterward did
worthyly serve the King in the principal Offices of the Law.

And these being Sergeants Counters, so called, because they recite and count
in actions appointed by the Judges before them at the Bar, are distinguished
from other Sergeants, which are of less honorable degree then these at the
Law are. And though these are the prime of those periti in Legibus mentioned in
our Text; yet there are others who pass under the name of Apprentises at the
Law, Apprentisis.
who yet are not Learners and Novices, but Antesignani Standard-Bearers of
science; no Dupondii, youths entered into study, A Dupondio nummo quasi duorum
assibus aftimaerentur: Alciat. lib. 4. De Verborum signific. p. 579.
of no more honor in their Art, then those we proverbially call Two penny
Lads, Pupils who are under Discipline and Coverture, Freshmen; no Students of 4
years standing, which the Digest terms (...), In proemio Digest. p. 49. Gloss.
D. ut legum enigmata possunt subtiliter and acute dissolvere. Alciat. loco
pracitato.
( quae vox solutores significat, importing a proficiency in explicating and
resolving the knots and difficulties of the Law terms;) but (...), those who
are complete apprehenders of the Law, and want no competent Perfection in the
knowledge of it. These who have been near twenty years or above at the Inns of
Court, and done all the Exercises that the House, of which they are, requires;
and having read openly before the Society upon some Statute, or point of Law,
as the probation of their Judgment, and acquisition in their Profession, by
Lawyers are called Apprentises: and these so grave, Stat 24. H. 8. c. 15. 1 Ed.
3. fol. 17. Kitchen. Finch. De Atturnatis, and Apprentisiis, Dominas Rex
injunxit, etc. 20 E. 1. rot. 5. Dors. Fleta lib. 2. c. 37. Notes on this 8.
Chap. o f Fortescue, p. 2. Spelm. Gloss in verbo Apprentisii
so learned, are often mentioned in year-Books, and their judgments and
arguments therein much to be valued; yea when they have written any thing in
the Law, they have subscribed their names as Apprentises of the Law. And though
in E. 1. time anno 20. Attourneys are named before Apprentises, after which
Fleta so also marshals them, yet are those Attourneys not to be named in a day
with Apprentises (unless Attourneys were more then now adays they are, which
I know not,) for Sir Edward Cook, terms these Apprentises Sages Gents, intended
in the Statue of 28 E. 1. c. 11. and so declares them in his Preface to the
tenth Report. And the learned Seldom produces a notable Record out of the
Tower, wherein King E. 1. directed his Judges to select a certain Number of
these Apprentises to attend the King's Courts, who perhaps were hence called
Apprentisii ad B arras, of which, Andrew Horn makes menion in those ridiculous
verses, as Mr. Seldom calls them before his Mirror.

These Apprentises then of the Law were men of note, as not only appears by
the forementioned Instances, but from their wonted separation from the Inns of
Court, (where they spent their younger studyes) and their locations in hostles
proper to them. For as the Sergeants had their Inns, Hospitium i^ quo
Apprentisis legis habitare solebant. 23 E. 3.
so had the Apprentises theirs, Tavies-Inn in Holborn was one of them (and
others no doubt they had, though the memory of them is lost) yea and as is
concludable from the Roll of 5 H. 4. when that thing, meaning to make good his
Title, and fearing least the Lawyers in Parliament should obstruct it, directs
Writs to the Sheriffs of all the Counties, 2. Par. Claus. in Dors. n. 4. regni
5 H. 4. Hinc Parliamentum illud La^coram. and indoctorum qu^ and jugu. lum
Ecclesiae utrocius petehae. tur. Spelinan in verlo. See Sta^ 24 H. 8. c. 1^.
Rastal at large.
That they should not suffer any Apprentise, or other learned man in the Law,
to be returned to Parliament. Hence says the judicious Sir Hen. Spelman. This
Parliament was called, The lack-learning Parliament, and that Convention which
put a hard yoke upon the Church. Whereas then our Chancellor says, Quos vulgus
Apprentisios denominat, He means not to disclaim the term Apprentise (as not a
word of legal honor, but a nickname originated from the mistakes or
malevolence of the Rabble) but he uses the phrase vulgus, to show the community
of its approbation, and the willingness of the most knowing men in that
Profession, to derogate from themselves, so they might arrogate the Law; and to
lesson also men to put a value on Lawyers, whose travel and pains in the
abstruse study of the Common Law, is such, that when they have studied as long
as their bodies will endure, or their eyes assist them; yet after all, do not
arrive to be Doctors, Professors, Exprofessours; but in the most accumulate
advances are but Apprentisii and servientes ad legem.

Melius enim per alios, quam per teipsum judicia reddes, quod proprio ore
nullus regum Angliae judicium proferre usus est.

This Clause resolves two doubts; First, why the King need not Legis Sacramenta
rimare, not toil himself in the intricacies of the Law, but leave those to the
Judges, because it will be better to do it by others, then by himself.
Secondly, why more convenient and better, because so used to be done by the
Kings of this Land, whose practice was upon weighty grounds: for melius here is
not strictly and Grammatically to be taken, for then it would have a sense of
diminution, and reflect on the Prince, as if any thing might be better done,
then he that ( qua Prince,) is perfection it self, and cannot be out done;
because he is the fountain of politic action, and Judgments cannot be
presumed to be justlyer judged, then by the Prince, who is Justice it self, and
by his accession to the Crown, is under no presumption of defect. But melius is
to be taken for aequius; so Tully. 3. Offic. 80. Convenientius, that is, it
will be more comely, in relation to their State as a King, and proportionate to
the indifferent and equitable nature of their Justice, to determine matters by
Judges, men unconcerned in the loss and gain of Causes, then by their selves,
to whom in all Capital Causes, the forfeitures of Peccants Escheats; and in
Causes between them and their Subjects, they may sometimes be Judge, who are
Parties. Yea, and melius, because also their Sergeants and Judges, being more
versed in the mysterious parts of the Law, are more likely to extricate the
truth, perplexed in the heats and covins of contention: this I take to be
somewhat of our Chancellours mind in Melius. Thus Authors expound Melius,
Anima melior in Virgil; Aeucid. 5. Terent. Adel. Lib. 3. Offic. 10.
Servius terms aptior men's, melior. Donatus renders bona and tolerabilis, and
natura bona, by Plena, Magna, Pinguis. Melior pars diei, by Major and prima
pars; and Tully coupling melius with aequius, as he does, makes the sense
plain, according to the strictness of Oratory, as well as Law.

Per alios, quum per te ipsun^ judicium reddes] All Judgment is the Kings,
though by the dispensation of the Judges; and of old, Kings and chief
Magistrates did personally decide Cases, and dispensed Laws, as it is evident
in the Case of the Judges, and Solomon, and all Kings, both in holy and
profane Story; Philip of Macedon, Demetrius, Poliorcetes, Augustus Casar,
Claudius, Charles the Great, and Charles the Eighth, as is confirmed by I
Lipsius, Seldom on cap. 8. art. 3. p. 4. Mirror cited by Sir Ed. Cook 2 Instir
on the Stat. Quo Warranto, p. 498.
in monitis Politicis, c. 9. p. 241. And in England, the Sons of the Kings of
this Land have sat personally in the Courts of Law; as by name, E. 4. secundo
Regni. And Prince Arthur rode from shire to shire in Circuits, to hear and
determine Causes depending between man and man. And others of them have by
Charter exempted certain persons from being drawn into Judgment before any
persons, Nisi coram nobis, vel capitali justitia, which seems to reserve power
to themselves judicially to judge. In monitis and exemplis Politicis, c. 9. p.
240. Qu. t.
Yea, though Lipsius is positive, decere, expedire, debere, that Kings ought,
and may personally hear and judge Causes: yet the more agreed Rule of our Kings
legal pleasure and practice, is to judge in curia by his Judges, whose
Authority his personal presence in Courts (I humbly conceive) does not
dissolve, though in other Cases the Rule be good, Cessat potestas minoris, in
praesentia majoris. Reg. Juris.
The power of the less ceases, in the presence of the greater. Now this the
King has yielded to, and established in the practice of Law, that all passion
and prejudice to Justice might be avoided; and that the Judges may be
indempnified, they are sworn to do Justice according to Law, without
consideration of any thing in obstruction of it; 18 E. 3. juramentum Iustitiar.
L eum quem 79. ss. 1. ff. De judice. Novel. 115. c. 1. Bocerus, De Bello, c 24.
5. Speech, Star Chamber, 1616. p. 556. of his Works in fol.
though Prudence dictate to them, in arduous Cases, to consult with the Prince,
qui ipsis de jure respondere solent, as the Civilians say; and in matters of
State and concernment to the Crown, prius consulere quam constituere, and
declarare. So did that wise Monarch King James admonish his Judges to do;
Incroach not (quoth he) upon the Prerogatives of the Crown; if there fall out a
question that concerns my Prerogative, or Mystery of State, deal not with it,
till you consult with the King and his Council, or both; for they are
transcendent matters, and must not be slubberly carried with over-rash
wilfulness, for so may ye wound the King through the sides of a private person.
So that Oracle. And so have, and do the wise Judges always; that so the King
being rightly informed of the nature of Causes, may voluntarily, as the
Sovereign of our National Justice, honor Justice above himself; if those can
be imagined distinct which the Law seems to me to have made one and
indivisible. And this blessed effect of Majestique Condescension to humble and
loyal subjection, have the Subjects of England experimentally found from their
Princes almost always: not only Edward the first manifested it in the Statute,
De Iudaismo, whereby though the Kings of England had from 50 H. 3. to 2 E.
1.420000 li. 15 s. 4 d. profit to their Chequers, when the ounce of silver was
but 22 d. yet Edward the first, though he had a great need of supply by money,
Sir Edw. Cook on the Stat. De Iudaisme, 2. Instit p. 507.
his expenses being great, did, for the honor of God, and ease of his
Subjects, banish the Jews, and all their Usury, by the Statute in the
eighteenth of his Reign; and Edward the first, in the Statute of Treason of the
25. regni, c. 2. but also the late martyred King Charles the first, of blessed
memory, in sundry Acts of Grace by some of his graceless Subjects abused. And
above all, our now Royal and renowned Sovereign, has to a wonder, and an
eternal obligation of his Subjects admiration and gratitude, made appear in
that never to be forgotten Act of Oblivion and Indemnity, whereby all his
Subjects not excepted therein, are remitted all penalties both for life and
estate: Both which, thousands in the Nation, bad in rigor of Law forfeited to
him. This shall be written, that the Generations to come may know it, and the
people that are yet unborn may praise the Lord for those admirable restraints
of anger and indignation in him. The consideration of which magninimity, and
royal fidelity, as it entitles his Majesty to the superlative love, and
resolute assistance of his Subjects, cordially as well as politiquely his, and
to the blessing of God, who only fortunateth all undertakings: so does it
censure to Hell, as ingrate and horridly inhumane, all thoughts of treachery,
or malevolence to his Royal Person, Posterity, and Successors in Government:
the punishments of which, if any should be so wicked and wretched to deserve,
not only will be grievous in the legal terrors, but in the regrets, that
Conscience will give the deserved sufferers. My prayer shall be, that God would
make us fear him, and honor the King, and not meddle with them that are given
to change; ever remembering that Power is best and safest, when in its proper
channel and center. And that God, whose Vicars Kings are, has given that
greatness of mind to them, that as they are above mean thoughts, so will they
not alloy the glory of their Thrones, by actions of narrowness to their
Subjects. Lib. 7. De Monitis and exempl. Politicis, p. 232.
Lipsius has quoted rare professions of piety, and love to Subjects from
Emperors, Tiberius, Trajan, Vespasian, Henry Son to Frederick. To which may be
added the words of that late martyred Majesty, Those victories are still
miserable, that leave our sins unsubdued, Eicon. Basil. c. 19. p. 178.
flushing our pride, and animating to continue injuries; nor do I desire any
man shouldbe further subject to me, then all of us may be subject to God.

Tamen sua sunt omnia judicia regni, licet per alios ipsa reddantur; sicut and
judicum omnium sententias Josaphat asseruit esse judicia Dei.

Here the Text not only asserts the Kings propriety in the Land, people, In
urbibus, aut noviter structis, aut bello acquisitis, effecit ut essent Judices
32. Qui de causis civilibus, and capitalibus non exceptis cognoscerent. Grot.
in 2 Chronic. cap. xix. v. 6.
strength, and Law of England, but confirms the judgment of the Judges
appointed by the King, to be the King's judgment from a Text of Holy Writ, 2 Chronicles. 1.6. wherein Iehosaphat, a famous King of Judah, charging his Judges to
be exact, calls their Judgment, the Judgment of God. For as the Judgment of
Iehosopat's Judges, is called the Judgment of God, because it was in execution
of the design of God's Justice in the World, and by the authority of the
Magistrate, the Minister of God; who being set by God to govern, makes by his
Delegation, the just actions judicial of his Judges, the judgment of God, In
judicando estis vicarii judicis summi, sio and Rex in regnando; and a Deo
authoritas and potestas judiciaria derivatur. Ideo judices sicut and Princip^s,
d^i in scripturis vocantur, Carthusianus in loc. 5 Report. De Jure Regis
Eccles. p. 8. b.


because judged by power derived from God: so the judgments pronounced by the
King's Judges in his Courts, are the King's Judgments, because they are from
those Benches that he erects, and protects to that purpose, and from those
persons that he commissions so to do. For causa causae est causa causaeti. If
the King empower any man to act for him, his Action is in reason and
reputation, while within the Verge of his Commission, the Kings; King James's
Speech, Star Chamber, 1616. fol. 550. of his Works.
and the contumacy that is expressed against that Power or person, the King and
the Law expounds as done against the King. Dicehatur autom curia, primo de
regia seu Palatio Principis, inde de familia and judiciis in ^a habitis, ut
ostendit Spelman in verbo.
And hereupon, as the Person and Palace of the King is to have no force
expressed in it, under grievous penalties; so the Courts of Law, in which the
King's Judges sit, are to have no action of violence or riot expressed in the
view of them sitting. He that strikes a Judge sitting on Judgment, or that
strikes any other, the Court seeing, and sitting, Ioseth his hand, and shall
suffer fine and imprisonment at the King's pleasure. He that appears not at the
Summons of the Court, is in contempt of the King, and may be outlawed, and so
be out of the King's Protection. These, and infinite such like Cases, argue the
Judges in the King's Courts to be Ministers of the Kings, and the Actions they
legally do, Speech at White Hall. Anno 1607, p. 517. of his Works in sol.
authorized by him. And hence, in reference to the Judges, King James of
blessed memory told the two Houses of Parliament their dignity, in those words;
Beware to disgrace either my Proclamation, or the Judges, who when the
Parliament is done, have power to try your Lands and Lives; for so you may
disgrace both your King, and your Laws.

Quare tu, Princeps serenissime, parvo tempore, parva industria sufficienter
eris in legibus Angliae eruditus, dummodo aedejus apprehensionem confer as
animum tuum.

This inference is very proper from the premised matter: for since the King's
of England are furnished with learned Judges, Sergeants, Apprentices, and other
men of learning in the Law, whose life is spent in study of the Anatomy of the
Law; and since they, how well versed soever in it, or any part of it, are
obliged to serve the King by their Counsel, and otherwise with such their
parts, whereby the King is politiquely completed in all points of his Regal
Function. Since these things thus are, they do excuse the King from that pains
and care to understand the legal distribution of Justice in his person; which,
but for these supplements, he must have held himself obliged to: so that now,
all the King is in this case to do, is, to give his mind to love and comprobate
the Law, and in that delightful humor to please himself, such minutes as he
can spare from action and pleasure. For though a Sergeant at Law, whose glory
and grace it is, Vt serviendo discat, Selden's Notes on Forteseue, fol. 56.
and discendo alios perdiscat, as men of that degree did at their Parvise; of
which Chaucer speaks, A Sergeant at Law, wary and wise,
That often had been at the Pervise.


Though I say such men are to know whatever can be known in the Law, because it
is their Profession, and they do illud agere; yet the Princes work being that
of an Architect, not a Labourer, calls him accomplished, when able to oversee
others due discharge of their duties. To do which, he is presumed to be knowing
and intent; Munus regiu^ Architectoricum esse, sic, ut non tam ipse agere, quam
altis agentibus prasidere, and ad offioiu^^ eos compeller^ debeat. Hopperus,
lib. 1. De Instit. Principis.
and those will direct him so well to choose Judges, that having chosen them,
he shall have no cause to repent his choice. Sufficient^r eruditus then is to
be taken restrainedly, not for a sufficiency of possibility, the how much a
Prince may attain to; but a sufficiency of convenience, and creditable use,
such a Learning as may suit with the state, dignity, and opportunity of a
Prince. Ulptanus in 1. sed and si quid ss. 1. ff. De usu fruct.
Thus Vlpian expresses Sufficienter, sufficienter alere and vistire debet
secundum or dinem and dignitatem mancipiorum. For as Saint Paul was a most
learned Preacher of Christ, even to the conviction of Ethnique Philosophers,
who had all the art of evasion and dirision of his Ministry imaginable, which
yet he through the grace given him overcame, though he professes, He was not
sufficient for these things; Omnes qui ex omni aetate, hac in Civitate
intelligentiam jurts habuerunt, si unum in locum conferantur, cum Servio
Sulpitio non sunt comparandi, Budaeus in pandect. priores, p. 9. Edit. Basil.
and as many men are sufficiently learned Lawyers, that arrive not at Sulpitium
his height, whom Budaeus makes the Phoenix of his profession, and more a
Fountain of Low, then an Age of Lawyers put together. So sufficiently quaint
Orators, though they have not what Tully requires in an Orator, In Oraetore
inquit, acumen diaelecticorum, sententia Philosophorum, verba prope Poerarum,
memoria jurisconsultorum, vox Tragaedorum, gestus ^oene summorune aertificum
est requirendus 1. De Oratore.
The subtlety of Logicians, the Wisdom of Philosophers, the words of Poets, the
memory of Lawyers, the voice of Tragediaens, the gesture of the most excellent
Persons in all Pr^fissiens. And a man may be sufficiently a man, having all the
integral parts of manhood, and being able conveniently to express them, though
he be not a Goliath or a Sampson for strength. Besides your Education, it is
necessary you delight in reading, and seeking the Knowledge of all lawful
things, but with these two Restrictions: first, that ye choose idle hours for
it, Basilicon Doron. ^. Book p. 175. fol
not interrupting thereby the discharge of your office; and next, that ye study
not for Knowledge nakedly: but that your principal end be, to make you able
thereby to use your office, so was the Counsel of King James to his son. So a
Prince may be sufficienter eruditus in legibus, that does give his mind to
skill the language, read the lesser and more methodique Authors of the Law, and
by conversation with the practice and Enactions of Courts, dispose his mind to
enquire into them. In short, Doctor and Student, the sour parts of the
I^stitutes and the Statutes, which are to be read, parvo tempore and parva
industria, will instruct a Prince so, as to make him, in legibus sufficienter
eruditus, but these Authors being written long since, our Text-Master his
suficienter eruditus may be supposed relative to another Method. Reseripta
Originalia, fundamenta esse and totius legis quasi Cardines; and quam recte ab
illo Iuris Principia appellantur, firmat casus illud quod sentit, Bractonus
lib. 5. fol. 413. ubi dicit, Breve formatum esse ad fimilitudinem regula Iuris.
In Prafat. ante 8. Rel. Cook.
The Iura Coronae, the Rights of the Crown, the brevia Originalia, which being
grounded upon some original Law, for the violation of which, that is the way to
bring the offense to trial and judgment: the Maxims of the common Law, which
are most obvious, and the Statutes, these in any competent measure read and
understood, will make the Prince sufficienter eruditus in legibus: for it will
declare him a friend to Justice, and one that so highly promotes it, Strobaeus
Sermon nono, De Justitia, p. 105.^
that he yields himself a servant to it, and that Diogenes was wont to call
(...), a pleasure, and as it were sufficiency or perfection of life. Not only
as he does judge and distribute the Law by his Judges, who are Oracles in this
learning, but if Lipsius a most learned man, may be the Judge, in all causes
upon the account of these, and beneath these abilityes, Da Simplicem, da
Prebum, etc. Let but the Prince set himself in the sinserity of his heart, and
with the utmost skill of his prudent seize, Da simplicom, da probum,
affectuum expertem, audeo dic^re, rara causa erit, in qua verum aut junta verum
non videbit, immo Deus plerumque inspirat, and talibus mentem movet, etc. J.
Lipsius n monitis Politicis, cap 9. p. 240.


to do his judicial duty, and I dare say, (so are his words) there will rarely
be any cause, wherein he will not find out the truth, or near the truth; yea,
God often inspires Princes with wisdom beyond other men, when he sees their
hearts are set to serve him conscionably in their office, according to that of
the wise man, A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, therefore he shall
not err in Judgment, thus Lipsius.

Rhetoric. ad Alex. cap. 1. p. 609.
The Consideration of Law and Justice as the (...), which the Philososopher
makes the rule of every one; and which is only to be distributed by the Prince
and his Commissioners, so wrought upon King James of happy memory, that though
he came not to the Courts of Westminster, yet he, in a very great Presence in
the Star Chamber, did wisely and Christianly declare himself a King of parts as
well as power, Anno 1616.
and of piety as well as of both, or either: for there, he not only showed
what he understood, his duty to his people, and what his desert of the people;
but he also gave such a Charge to all his Judges, and other Ministers,
concerning all the points and parts of their duty, that it is hard to say
wherein they could possibly err, if they composed themselves only to the
Conduct and Observance of those rules; Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 11. de Offic. Praf.
Praet. p. 126. A Test.
which makes me take notice of that Passage of Baldus, where writing of the
Judge, his words are Non aliter judicaturus, etc. That the Judge is for his
wisdem and luster of Justice so to manifest himself to the honor of his trust,
and dignity, as the Prince himself is to do^, if he were actually in the Seat
of Judgment; whence I think I may properly infer, that the Law supposes a King
to be sufficiently wise and worthy to endeavor his accomplishment in all the
Parts of his Regal Duty, that he may appear to be a Pattern as well as Precept
to all his Judges.

Sufficienter eruditus then, must have a soft and sober sense allowed it, for
in the latitude of the Notion, no mere man, no Prince but Solomon ever had
sufficient learning in the Laws of Nature and Government; for fince art is
long, and the well out of which truth is fetched, very deep, and the life of
man, though inched out to the utmost period of David's computation, be a long
time, compared to lesser portions of living; yet in order to Art, and the
expatiations of Art to be inquired into in that time: nay, though the whole
time should be spent in the one only study of the Laws, the Student would
notwithstanding be o're-taken, before he were an attainer to his meta ultima.
For if consideration be had, how many years of life are lost in Childhood, in
Youth, in mistake, which we are to rescue our selves from and retrograde, what
casualties of sickness, necessities of life, pleasure, friends, avocate and
steal away time, what treacheries, Punctam e^ quod vivimus, and adhuc puncto
minus. Senec. Ep. 49.
unexperience in the conduct of studies and converse, betrays us to; and how
various the notions of men are in the passes of them through the several ages
of their life. These, and sundry other leaks to the vigor and virtue of study,
and men's accomplishment by it, proclaim sufficienter eruditus in the latitude
and utmost sense of attainment and possibility, not to be here meant, because
that cannot be gained parvo tempore, or parva industria, as this sufficienter
eruditus proposed by our Chancellor is said to be. The true notion then of it
is, that which I said before, then the Prince is sufficenter eruditus in
legibus, when he knows the key and language, the reason and phrase, (...).
Epicter in Enchyrid. lit. 2:6.14.
the rule and maxim, the more useful and common Laws called the Statutes;
because by this knowledge he shall be able to know his own, his Ministers, his
Subjects duties; and this is sufficient learning in the Law for a Prince; nay,
this is able to make him as an Angel of God to discern between good and evil.
For as in Soldiery, he may be said to be sufficienter eruditus, who knows all
parts of Soldiery, Horse and Foot, Field and Garrison, the Laws of Command and
Obedience, the use of all Machins, the Enemy he is to fight with, the ground he
is to fight upon, the forces he is to fight by; and so in other Arts and
Mysteries, as I say, an Artist thus able to perform his undertaking, may be
said to be sufficienter eruditus in it, though he be not an Hannibal, a
Porphyrie, an Aristotle, a Drake: so he may be a Prince sufficienter eruditus
in legibus, who does know what he himself is, and other under him ought to do
according to the Laws of his Government, of which he is the maintainer and
defender. For as Budaeus says of Tully, In Pandect. priores, p. 18. Edit. Basil.
Quid non explicare potuisset illa vis ingenii, etc. What cannot so rare an
apprehension make plain, what so quaint a tongue express, what so wise a heart
conceive, as resides in a Prince, to whom the Laws of his Government is
pleasing, and the study of them his delight.

Parvo tempore, and parva industria.
This is that which in another place he expounds by anno uno, a small time to
so gainful a purpose: But I suppose the Chancellor either tols him on by an
engagement of facility and possibility of attainment, a harmless trepanning to
study of the Law, or else looks upon his Princely Wit, which the Greek call
(...), which makes a man, as Socrates was said to be, (...), dull to nothing he
was set upon: but as Pythagoras is by Apuleius written of, Holstemius in notis
ad vitam. Pythag. a Por. phyrio script. p. 66 in Florid. De Pythag.
supra captum hominis augustior, capacious above the proportion of man, as that
which will accelerate, and bring about that in a short, which ordinarily is a
long time in operation and circumduction. This he concluding, may be justified
in his prefixing sufficienter eruditus to parvo tempore and parva industria.
For well did the Chancellor know, both what was sufficient Law-learning for a
Prince, and how to perfect youth in that. For he had, as Pitsaeus tells us,
instituted many young Noblemen in the Elements of Law: and therefore being
himself so learned, and having instructed others in the incoate and necessary
knowledge of the Law. I conclude him able to perform his promise in instructing
the Prince, Apud Budaeum in Pandect. priores, p. 12.
parvo tempore, parva industria; brief and curt methods being useful to
Learners, when to know the Law, as ars aequi and boni, that is, to set the mind
upon the Law with might and main, proprium est juris consultorum institutum, is
the proper breeding of Lawyers, and that which they are to intend. The
Chancellours sense then is, that intentness and addiction to any thing, will
perfect that in short space, which otherwise will be more tedious in
compassing. As the Fish Aphia (which gave occasion to the adage, (...)) is no
sooner showed the fire, but it is broyled, ^rasm Adag. 12. Chil. 2. Cent. 2. p.
460. Athenxus Deip. nos. lib. 13.
being naturally of so unctious a nature, that it yields to the warmth of the
fire, and takes its impression straightways: so does some men's Wits capacitate
them to any thing that is imparted to them; which is the meaning of Parvo
tempore, and parva industria. Though then ingenuity in the Prince, and method
in the Chancellor, may make the Prince's learning in the Law, not so long in
the time, nor so laborious in the toil of attainment, as otherwise it would be:
yet time and industry there must be in some measure, ere ever there be
attainment of learning the fruits of God's blessing on the Prince's time and
industry, which two time and industry are fit to be considered.

Time is the measure of life, and the opportunity to every action: Pythagoraes
called it (...), the Globe of a moving Body; Plato, (...), the moveable Image
of Eternity; Plutarehus, lib. 1. De plac. Philosoph. c. 21. Physic. lib. 4 c.
10. Eccles. 3.1.
Eratosthenes, (...), the motion of the Sun; the Philosopher, (...), the motion
of the Universe, (...), the Sphere of all motion. Suidas renders it, (...), all
one with Aristotle. And Solomon above all says, it is that which is given by
God, as the punct in which we are to perfect every duty, and in which the glory
due to his Sovereignty is returned to him by every created Being. From which,
because the time of action is that of light, which we call day; the English
word, for present time, Day; To day if ye will hear his voice, is derived from
the Hebrew (...), which is one word they express time by, which (...), they
make to have the sense of (...), sufficit, as accounting it that which
answers every purpose under the Sun; unto which, perhaps, our Lord alluded in
those words, Math. 6. v. ast.
sufficient to the day, is the sorrow thereof. The Hebrews also calls time,
(...), which in the root signifies, to pervert; insinuating, that the
prevarication of man distorts the provision of God, while he gives us time to
serve him in, and we turn it to his disservice: though I know, (...), has also
a sense of preparation and seasoning, which the Greek' render by (...). So
Eccles. iii. 2. Hag. i. 4. Judge. xxi. 14. Eccles. ix. 12. There is also, (...),
in the Holy Language, for time, as it is the series and ordo, of things and
actions: so Esth. ii. 12. Cant. ii. 12. sundry other words have they for time.
Time then being either past, present, or to come, though known to God, yet is
only ours in its present punct. Psalm. 39 5.
That which is past, is gone; that which is to come, is uncertain; the present
is only ours, and that is parvum tempus. Thou have made my age as a span long:
every man therefore in his best estate is altogether vanity, says King David.
Industry that puts upon time its due burden, and improves it to its utmost
fertility. This is that which provokes men to labor and motion with
cheerfulness and placidity, (...), says Suidas, In verbo.
(...); to be industrious, is to be carried to any thing with an indignation
against whatever hinders and obstructs it. (...). Salmuth in Pancirol p 192.
Stobaeus, Sermon. 118. p. 374.
This was that which carried Alexander above his discouragements to his
Conquest. Niciaes was famous for this; for by his intentness on his study, he
grew so immemorative, that he was wont to ask his Servants, (...), whether he
had washed, or eaten. Many are the promises and praises of Industry: The
diligent hand makes rich; see thou a man diligent in his business. He shall
sit among Princes. Both Solomon's Aphorisms. And the Son of Syrach counsels,
(...), Be diligent, and no Disease shall hurt thee.

The Fathers appropriate much to industry; Saint Chrysostom advises to it,
(...), that we fall not short of eternal good things, (...), etc. the time of
labor is but short, and the reward in rest eternity: the Be is but a small
Bird, but the Parent of all sweetness, she alone brings honey. So is Industry,
but a small time to be expressed in, but always to be rewarded in the fruit of
it. So true is that of Democritus, (...), etc. men attain to great and good
things only by industry. And therefore the Hebrew word is (...), coming from
(...), signifying, cogitare, computare, ratiocinari, implies the intention of
the whole man, which Solomon calls, doing with all our might, that is,
actuating our reason to design, and seconding it by the subserviency of sense,
leaving no stone unturned, to effectuate our projection. This industry is made
up as it were of Joints and Ligaments, of strength in order to action. Rabbi
David terms it, ars supputandi, and Arithmetica Philosophia; because in it, men
do bring all the ref^acted particles of their toil and search into a mass, to
make it more conspicuous, and to be regarded as the wise Builder in Luke xiv.
8. who before he lays the foundation of his structure, sits down, and
counts the cost. The Hebrews knowing the consequence of this Industry, have
according to the variety of its nature several words to express it by (...), a
word of large extent, primarily denoting riches and substance, but translated
by Industry, because thereby riches and substance is gotten. It also signifies
Pecus, Angelus, Nuncius; because as the Eastern riches consisted in Cattle, and
those nourished to increase by Industry, as was remarkable in Jacob; and as an
Angel is the Guardian of man, and watches over him by God's Command, to keep
evil from him; so Industry is the probable means to keep the Woolf from the
door, to prevent poverty and want, which ever follows Idleness, (...), also is
a word for industry, and that denotes such a vigilance, as is that of a
Commander, who keeps a Garrison in an Enemies Country, he is ever on his
charge, diligent to consider every useful occurrent, and to improve it, no
person, no moment is out of his eye, but his thought is bufied about it, and
careful to make it commodious to his purpose. This word is opposed to (...), or
(...), which signify incogitancy, and vain levity; such as the Holy Ghost
reproaches in the Ostritch, Who lays her Eggs in the Sand, and considers not
the foot of the Traveller may crush them.

The sense then of our Chancellor by industry, is to commend such a proportion
of time, Basilic. Doron. 2. Book. p. 177. Works in fol.
as the Prince can spare from the more important things of his office, to spend
in the study of the Law. As for the study of all liberal Arts and Sciences, I
would have you reasonably versed in them, but not preassing to be a Pass-Master
in any of them, for that cannot but distract you from the points of your
Calling. So wise King James; which he probably might thus intend, that he in
his industry in the study of the Law should aim; first, scire linguam, to know
the Language of it, that he may understand what he reads; then scire libros
legis, that he may, by knowing Authors, and culling the most pithy and
methodique of them, improve the most he may, the time that he spends in
perusing them. Then thirdly, scire regulas legis, for they are the Tropiques
upon which the Law moves. Then fourthly, scire rations legis, for that is of
the form and constitution of it, and declares the mind of the Legislators of
it. Fifthly, scire fines legis, for the end of the Law, is the motive to, and
the merit of the Law: so that when he does think of little time, and little
toil, there must be a vigorous and thrifty expense of that little, and that
will make it go a great way. For all time is lost, and all travel in study to
no purpose, if there be not a close application of the mind to the thing we
prosecute; and that once vigorously set a work, carries all to the desired
upshot; not only lets a man into the secrets and abstrusities of knowledge, so
that he knows good and evil, and employs his time and diligence in obtaining
the one, and avoiding the other; but it prevails against even the morosity and
untractableness of wild Beasts, as Plutarch in his excellent Book, Page 599.
etc. edit. Paris. Acts 2.
De solertia animalium, has made good. Therefore dummodo ad ejus apprehensionem
tu animum conferas, is the indispensable limitation. For though by Miracle God
can, as he once did, give learning imbre linguarum in a moment, without any
contribution of man's, previous to the collation of it, as was plain in the case
of the Apostles, on whom the spirit descended in fiery tongues: yet the
ordinary way of God is by those steps and assistances of time and labor, that
bring about Conquests in Arts, as stupendous as Alexanders in Arms, and that
parvo tempore, and parva industria, that is, while the searchers into, and
after them, are young, and their pains is in the nature of expression of a
pleasure; that as extraordinary fire, aptly conveyed through meet conducts,
intends more to the liquefaction, and rarefication of any thing in a day, then
otherwise it would in a longer time; and apt Moulds prepared, and reflections on
Fruits and Plants maturateth them in three or four Months, which in the
ordinary course of season would be a much longer time in production: so in
study, intentness of mind, and earnestness of labor, brings about that in a
little time to great perfection, which but for it, would not be so circumacted.
For here the Proverb is true, Faint heart never wins fair Lady. Time and toil
will never bring to the Port of Learning, except the addition of the Students
mind, proceeding from a love of Learning, accompany opportunity and endeavor:
love and labor do sweeten each other, and promote their consequent success; it
being pleasure, not labor, to follow our loves, though we lose our lives and
wits in the chase and pursuit of them, and bury our beings in the Mine where
her Oar lies even Archimedes, and Eudoxus, will both lose their lives to
illustrate the Art they were enamoured of; and Aristotle not think the
compiling of his History of Creatures tedious, because he loved to search and
know what was to be found and known. O this application of the mind, is that
which has all natural potency in it; it is the door to all speculation and
action: This makes men excellent and general, because indefatigable in study;
the praises of Miltiades, the renown of heroic acquisitions, rewarded in those
that have preceded them, stirs them up to an emulation, which draws off their
eyes from sleep, and keeps their hearts musing upon their darling. This is that
holy charm, that Moses prays God to bestow upon his people, Psalm. 90.12. So
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, (...) ut
adducemus cordi sapientiam, which is ad verbum, that we may bring to our heart
wisdom, that wisdom and our hearts may be one and the same, the root (...), in
niphal, signifies (according to Rabbi David) vaticinari, receptionem a Deo and
sermonem quem jubet Deus ut loquatur, and then the sense may be, that our
hearts may have wisdom, as truly and fully revealed to them, as the Prophets
had Visions, and that by considering the nature of our days on Earth, we may
foretell our future condition, either of weal or woe, and endeavor to make us
friends of this unrighteous Mammon, that when we fail, they may receive us into
everlasting habitations. So that dummodo ad earum apprehensionem tu animum
confer as, imports a delight in, and an endeavor after the knowledge of the
Law: for animum confer ad aliquid, is as much as to ponder on, and steer all
ones actions to a thing, to make it the mark we aim at, and the Goal we make
to, and the Center we acquiesce in. This, though the Chancellor did not in the
strictness of the notion persuade the Prince to, since he had other
employments, which did more immediately take him up, the intrigoes of State,
and secrets of Policy, the interests of his Crown, and the conducts of
Counsels. These being the more weighty matters of Regality, and requiring more
of the personal intention of the Prince, were in order of concern and prudence,
to be the chief and main of his study. Though I say in the severity and height
of the notion, the Prince is not here pressed animum confer ad earum
apprehensionem, yet in such a competent and convenient measure, as he can, and
his other affairs will permit, he is, and the more he is, (other things not
being neglected) the more accomplished is he like to prove; since as Lucius
Crassus, that great Lawyer said, Omnia sunt posita ante oculos. etc. Every day,
and with every man there is good use to be made of the Law; which may be
understood not only as in the bulk and greatness of the Author, containing the
Ocean of its variety and learning, Cicero Dialog. De Oratore, dictum Livii
Crasii. Budaeus in Pandect. page 15. edit. Basil. 1594.
but as its practice in ordinary administration patefies it.

To conclude this Head then, I presume our Text-Master well knew what knowledge
in the Law was necessary to accomplish the Prince, and that it was acquirable
in that small time, and with that pleasurable industry, that a year well and
profitably spent therein, may in a good measure perform; Nil est quod pertinax
opera, and diligens cara non ex pugnat. Seneca.
and thereupon he says, Parvo tempore, and parva industria, Because there is
nothing which constant endeavor, and diligent care will not attain and
overcome.

Nosco enim ingenii tui perspicacitatem.
Here the Chancellor by a Courtly Concession, tempts the Prince to a rendition
of himself to his swasion; Qui vel Roscinm illum histrionum decus, hypocrisi
and art mimica superare etiam possunt. In Pandect priores, p. 608. edit.
Basil. 1534.
and this he does not as one of those, Pseudo Catones perniciocissimi, etc.
which Budaeus says, Study men's humors rather then their virtues, and pimpe to
the one, while they subvert the other; exceeding even Roscius, the Phoenix of
Actors in their Theatrique Impostry, as Budaeus sets them out; but as a good
and grave Gentleman, who considering the mercies of God to the Prince in his
endowments of mind so ripe and pregnant, calls him to gratitude to God the
giver, and to a good and virtuous employment of them so given. Indeed, this is
the best construction Christian ingenuity can make of extraordinary mercy; not
to abuse it, but to fix it upon the noblest object God, and to be satisfied in
no sphere beneath, or besides his glory promoted, and charity to man auxiliated
by it. It was undoubtedly a noble Proposal that Tully made to his mind, Budaeus
in Pandect. loco prae^ttato, p. 17.
or rather his mind to him, when he thought, Iuris civilis disciplinam in artis
rationem formamque redigere; And that by these steps, the whole body of the Law
he would refer to several common heads, then reduce every general head into
members, then determine the state, use, and operation of every of them. Every
brave and generous mind should do so by the memory of the mercies of God
considering them in the latitude, as they are effluxions from the sovereign
bounty of the Creator to his Creature and then applying them to his condition,
and affecting his soul with the obligation of them, and exciting himself there
from to a proportionation of every virtue, which God requires to be performed,
and when performed, he promises to accept.

Now this being the duty of men endowed with such rare perfections, as ripe wit
and ready apprehension, which the Text calls, ingenii perspicacitatem, the good
Chancellor remembers the Prince in the excellency of the blessing, to perform
the requiry of the obligation; Xenophon, lib 20 De Sociat. Dict.
for that he had a ready and acurate understanding, whereby he could (...),
etc. whereby he could easily learn whatever he would, and retain what so he had
learned, and distribute those good parts of learning he had, to public good,
is plain from what the Chancellor, who best knew him, intends hereby to
publish of him; yea, and his choice of Arms for his love and study to excel in,
which his condition told him was properest to aid, restore, and adorn him, unto
his expected Kingly condition, does sufficiently confirm to me. For to the
amazement of all his Contemporaries, he not only boldly came in the head of an
Army to fight the Usurper; but when he by misfortune of War was a Prisoner,
justified his fact to the teeth of his Opposite; which declares, that he had
ingenii perspicacitatem, and saw that it was his interest above all things, to
be in his addiction Martial; and this he accordingly being, is said to be
perspicacissimi ingenii, as being a man in wisdom, while a youth in years; yea,
a Prince, who had a complication of all the promising excellencies of prudence
in him. And this the Chancellor thus charactering in him, informs us, that a
Gentleman he was above his years: For perspicax implies Prudence. 1. Offic.
142. 2. Offic. 132.
Tully writing of Palumedes, says there was in him perspicax prudentia, and the
Greeks calling this by (...), which Suidas expresses by (...), and intends such
an insight into things, as men have who look with not only both their own
eyes, but with all the other men's eyes they can be helped to see through things
by. And the Chancellor seeing in the Prince a more then ordinary Princely
smartness, Such another was our Edward the sixth.
(I say Princely, for God ordinarily does qualify them above others, as he
designs them for greater charges then others have) the Chancellor I say,
perceiving by the first appearance of the Sun in the Morn, and the early
appearance of his life, calls upon him to direct his ripeness to a right
object, and by right and proper means, to wit, the Law, which he may
sufficiently, to credit himself to men, and to answer comfortably to God, learn
knowledge in parvo tempore and parva industria; since as quick and intense
fires, Patriclus Instit. Reipub. lib. 4. p. 147.148.
make that warm through in a moment, which slow ones will be long in piercing;
and Birds fly that ground in an hour, which feet will not carry horses and men
to in three: so readings, and forward parts, will furnish aYouth plainly to
perform that, which others with great labor, and long intentness on it, cannot
bring about. And this is the reason of all the admirable masteries in Learning,
and sagacity that some young men arrive at, and are made famous by. Not only
in Arts; as Papinian and Celsus, who publicly read the Law, Salmuth in
Pancirol. Tit. 10. partis secundae. p. 222. Capitolinus in vita ejus. Drusius,
Centur. 1. Miscellan, p. 45.
before he was 17 years' old; Marcus Antoninus, who in the 15th year of his age
did virilem togam Philosphi sumere; that son of Ianus Drusius, who began to
learn Latin and Hebrew at five years old, and within less then two years had
learned them, with the Greek, Chaldee, and Syriack: at seven he so rarely
interpreted David in the Hebrew Tongue, that a Rabbie then at Leyden heard him
with admiration: Franzius de modo legendi S. Bibl. p. 15, 16, 17.
two years after he read Hebrew without puncts, and found out the reason of
their use: like performances to this he made in the Greek and Latin Tongues,
etc. dying in the 21, year of his age. Yes, in our own Nation we read, Pitsaeus
ad annum, 1230. p. 307.
that Glanvil began to be famous for Learning in the Law, in ipsa adolescentia;
while but a young man, he was famous for his judgment in the Law. Sir Thomas
Frowick, Chief Justice to H. 7. was renowned for judgment in the Law, and a
Judge of it before forty years of age dying, florida juventute. Add to these
Grocinus Lupset, ^uller Worthies England, in Middlefox, p. 183.
whom Epist. ad Lupset Inter opera The, Mori, Imp. 1566.
Budaeus terms juvenum doctissimus, Sir Philip Sidney. These, and many others,
dead and alive, not inferior to them, are Benefactors to Arts, and to a
Miracle, great Proficients in them, and beyond their years. So in Matters of
action, youth has strangely been prodigious; Alexander subdued the World
before he was 27 years old, Plutarchus in J. Caesare.
which made I. Caesar rub his head with indignation, breaking out into that
Pathetique, Nos vero quid! Cnejus Pompeius in 18. and Octavius in the 19. year
of their age engaged eminently in the Wars. Salmuth in Pancirol. p. 222. Lib.
2. c. 2.
Severus, before he was 20 years old, rendered himself egregium militaris
disciplina exemplum, says Fulgosus, M. Manlius Capitolinus before 17 years of
age, took two spoils from the Enemy, Eques omnium primus, etc. the first
Knight, says Pliny, who wore the Mural Crown. Count Guido Ranjone is by
Giraldus set out as a Mirror of youth this way: And all this by the blessing
of God on the pregnancy of Nature, In Epist, ante Catalogum senio. rum
poetarum, hiboriam partis secunda, p. 229.
which excites to, and perfects them in these projects so early. For though it
be not infallible, what is conjectured in order to the futurities of youths
proofs from the present lines of their faces, and lineaments of their actions;
but that it may not, as well as sometimes it does, fall out according to
judicious prognostications, Lib. 2, c. 6. p. 27. edit. Savil.;
and judgments on them: yet mostly it is too true, that the vices as well as
virtues of men, appear in their Cradles and Infancies. Malmsbury tells us,
Alfred embraced his Grandchild Athelstan, looking upon, and seeing in him
grounds to believe excellent things of him. And Saint Bernard seeing our H. 2.
when a Child, and at Nurse in the Court of France, looking on him, said,
Monkishly and mischievously, In H. 2 p. 1046. edit. Land.
De Diabolo venit, and ad diabolum ibit, says Brompton. And all this, from
that impression, which in Natures order and method has been fixed on them in
the principle of their Generation, which has for the most part so direct and
vigorous an influence on them, in all the after choices and expression of their
lives, that they are what is more suitable to that, and mostly abhor what is in
contradiction to it, unles^ by divine grace and natural prudence, they are
preponderated. Hence is it, that Children and Youths of great wits and
forwardnesses, are either the comforts or griefs of their Parents, the joys or
terrors of their Governments. For they being rasatabula, whatever is first
written in them; they retain with a vehemence assisted by their acumens. And
since whatever they undertake, they perform with much pleasure, and
persistency, Particius, lib. ^ Instit. Reipub. p. 147, 148. De Themistocle, and
De libris Xeniadis.
they may be pressed upon to perform that parvo, tempore, and parva industria,
which others not being so happy in a perspicacity of Wit, must without remedy
be longer about it. And so this nosco ingenii perspicacitatem, was the reason
why he tells him, he may be sufficienter eruditus in legibus, parvo tempore,
and parva industria.

Quo audacter pronuncio, quod in legibus illis licet earum peritia, qualis
judicibus necessaria est, vix 20. annorum lucubrationibus acquiratur, tu
doctrinam Principicos gruam in anno uno sufficienter nantisceris.

This is added, to evidence the Chancellours judicious experience of his
assertion, and it extends not only to noscoingenii perspicacitatem, but to the
whole scope of his words precedent, that he could by God's help, and would by
his submission to his Prescription, make him undoubtedly sufficiently learned
as a Prince in the Laws of England, parvo tempore, and parva industria, which
he limits to one year. Now though it be a small time to so great a task, yet
may with method suffice to instruct the Prince in that part of the Science of
the Law, which he calls Doctrina Principi congrua, that is, in the common
notions of Law, and elementary rectitude, in the skill of preserving the Iura
Corons, and the rights of the Subjects from clashing and interfering, in the
Sanctions of Parliament, which either explain and clear, or add to, or abridge
the Common Law, or remove new obstructions, which incommodate Government. These
may be sufficiently read to, and riverted into a Prince, anno uno, and (I
humbly conceive) are sufficient knowledge for him, according to the sense of
the Chancellor. Nor does the Chancellor in this, audacter pronuncio, speak
hyperbolically, but according to that gravity and truth, which the Judgments
and Reasons of his, in the Year-Book of H. 6. from the 22. of his Reign onward,
record of him, and the experience that on other young men whom he had in his
time instructed to some such proportion, made good to him, he could to the
Prince perform; yea, and if this he did do, he did nothing but what others
since him may be presumed to attain to, or what is equivalent to it. Hopperus,
a learned Civilian and Counselor to Philip the second of Spain, undertakes
the like in the Civil Laws. Lib. 4. De Vera Jurisprud. tit. 12. De Speciali
Juris interpretatione.
His words speaking of the institution of a Prince, are these, Ad quam rem
plurinoum juvabit tractaius Pandectarum, and c. To which end, the reading of
the Pandects, in which are the rules of the old Law, conduces much to the
preparation of a Student toward his procedure, so as he begin with the
institutions; then the books that expound the words and rules of the Law; and
lastly the rubriques of the Pandects, Code and Novel, which he calls the labor
of the Student the first year. Thus that great Master; whom my learned and
religious friend Mr. Langford, heretofore mentioned having thoroughly studied,
and that with design upon these very words of our Chancellours, has attained to
much (I believe) of that which the Chancellor and Hopper intend the work of
one year in either Laws; for, having in the comparing of these two Authors on
this head, made a kind of symphony between them; the nosco ingenii tui
perspicacitatem in our Fortescue, with natura, ingenium, labor, diligentia in
his Hopper. And our Doctrina Principi congrua, with his ars Regia; and our
sufficienter eruditus with his ne quid nimis. And our in anno uno with his
primi anni studiorum labor. He concludes, that the Chancellours audacter
pronuncio, is no boast, but what the Chancellor himself very well knew how to
effect, and what he after him, by God's help, is able to instruct youth to do:
which that judicious Author of Doctor and Student promoted, Doctor. and Stud.
Book 2. c. 46. p. 148. b.
as to the utility of its design, and the profit of its consequence, in these
words, If the Noblemen of this Realm would see their Children brought up in
such manner, that they should have learning and knowledge more then they have
commonly used, or have in times past, specially of the grounds and principles
of the Law of the Realm, wherein they be inherit, though they had not the high
cunning of the whole body of the Law, but after such manner as Mr. Fortescue in
his Book that he entitled, De laudibus legum Angliae, advertiseth the Prince
to have knowledge of the Laws of this Realm, I suppose it would be a great help
hereafter to the ministrations of Justice of this Realm, a very great surety
for himself, and a right great gladness to all the people. So Doctor and
Student.

These things I note, to show that smaller degrees of learning in the Laws are
sufficient to the accomplishments of Gentlemen and Princes, then Professors
and Judges; and that the twentieth part of that Science, which is but unius
anni filia, the fruit of one year will suffice for the one, when the study of
twenty years will vix judicibus sufficere, scarce serve to the necessary
accomplishment of a Judge: which eminently sets forth the eminency of Learning,
which a Judge ought to have, who after three Apprentiships of years, one under
the Bar legendo and scribendo; the second at the Bar, audiendo and practice
observando; another, ruminando and mature judicando: yet how well soever he
improves them all, arrives but at the title of Serviens ad legem: For since the
Text says, Vix viginti annorum lucubrationibus, the skill of a Judge is
attained, there is great reason the judgments of them so perfitted, should be
in high value. For since the Judges have no power to judge, according to what
they think to be fit, but that which out of the Laws they know to be right, as
is the resolution of all the Judges in Calvin's Case; it becomes the Judges to
be men of great standing and study, as blessed be God and the King, they are,
that they may distribute Justice to the glory of God, and content of the King,
his people, and their own Consciences.

First, then this time of study presumes great parts attained, and grave
experience in the practice, as well as Theory of the Law arrived at. For the
Rule being, (...) Phocylides apud Stobzum. Sermon. 4. De Imprud.

(...)
Men judge of things as they are in mind endowed,
To Kings in art, judgment of art's allowed.
And the Judge being a Representer of the King, ought to be so qualified, Ita
jus reddi debet, ut authoritatem dignitatis su^ ingenio suo augeat,
Calistratus, lib. I. De Cognit. Digest. lib. ^.tit. 18. p. 150.
that his place may from his indis^ration have no disparagement. And thus to
do, will require vast knowledge, not only in Laws of all sorts, but in men and
things, and in the conversation with, and operation of them, the knowledge of
these must not only be, (...), have a part in him, Lib. 5. De Morib. c. 7. p.
47.
but be the (...), the whole of him. For a Judge ought to be the living Law,
and the speaking Justice; so says the Philosopher. And this to be to all
intents, and in all Cases, calls for not only great assistance from God, but
great industry and intentness on study, and all little enough to carry the
weight and burden of his place, and creditably to execute it. No common
Custom of the Nation, no Entry or Year-Book, no Judgment, no Writ, no Title,
nothing that may make to the dilucidation of causes, must he be ignorant of:
Nay, if he will rightly execute his Office, he must be seen in Arts, Histories,
Mechaniques, and all occasions of Conversation, that so he may know how to
unriddle the abstrusities of Cases, and know where Frauds lie, Lib. 51. ad
edictum Digest. lib. 3. tit. 3. p. 403. H. Arbitratu in Gloss.
and obviate them: for since that of Paulus is true, Omnis qui defenditur, boni
viri arbitratu defenditur. And that the gloss renders, by boni judicis
arbitratu, a Judge is to be a most accomplished man in the gifts and graces of
his Intellect and Mind; and this he cannot attain easily to be, nor continue to
practice, till the heats and temptations of youth are over, and the solidity
and indiversions of age and maturity be arrived at, which is seldom attained
under the age of forty, Jornandes, lib. b. p. 641, 642, edit. Sylburg.
or above, by which time they may have a full twenty years time to store
themselves. I know there have been some young men, who have lived little in
time, but long in fame; Scipio Africanus the Master of Atrick, was but a young
man when he obtained that Title. Parum aetatis multum gloriae. Malmsbur lib. 2.
De Gestis Anglor. c. 6. Plin. lib. 7. c. 41. Lilius Gyrald. Dialog. 8. Histor.
Poetarum Vopiscus in Tac. Theatr. Vitae Humanae, p. 3142.
So was Fabius Cunctator. Athelstan was such an one, whom no man before him did
excel in the majesty and prudence of Government, and others heretofore I have
quoted Presidents of it; but these have been but rare, as rare in men, as
successions of brave men are in Families; in which, though one Family of the
Curio's in Rome, produced three Successions famous Orators, and one Family of
the Fabii, three chief Senators one after another; and the Annaei of Corduba,
three Brethren famous for Learning, and exactness of Morals; and Tacitus
Augustus continued the honor of his Family, even unto Cornelius Tacitus his
time. Yet have more brave men and Families been degenerous, and abated the
splendor of their Ancestry by their vicious imparities to them, as Zuinger in
many examples confirms. And so, though in the Law some may be culled out, that
extraordinarily profit, and are for learning, temper, grace, and integrity, fit
betimes for Judges, perhaps some time within the space of twenty; yet such are
but rarae aves (one Phoenix perhaps of this kind is in an Age) generally the
rule is peremptorily true, that a Judge's Knowledge and Learning is hardly got
in twenty years time, if then.

A Judge then therefore is so long attaining his qualifications, because not
only they are many in number, and different in nature, but depend upon some
masteries of self, and intuition into the mysteries of things, which are the
product of great years, and much wisdom collected from them: while youth is
warm, and passion keen, when the apprehension is not fixed, nor experience has
corrected the volatility of fancy and humor, there is no room for
unmoveableness, and a rectitude equally distant from the extremes. Non enim aut
severitatis, aut clementiae gloria est affectanda, sed propenso judicio prout
quequae res expostulat, est statuendum. Hopperus, De ver Jurisprud. p. 22. Tit.
15. Stobaeus, p. 547.
Now such an equilibriousness being the perfect mean of virtue, and Justice
directing a Judge, not to seek and affect the glory of clemency or cruelty, but
to keep himself to Evidence, and to the truth of the Law, in censure and
judgment of the fact: Is it probable, such and so great Masteries of Nature and
Corruption will be in young men, who are all fire and tow, all tinder and
quicksilver, as in those whom twenty years study have cooled and settled on the
solid and serious Basis of Prudence and Piety, which only fits men to be of
the Sages gents, Gods to men, (...), Servants to Justice, not Engines of
oppression and extravagance? Which considered, our Chancellor has done well in
giving twenty years to the accomplishment of a Judge; not thereby outing earlyer
seize of the fruits of God's blessing on their studies, and the King's
favor in Calls to the Bench, if sooner the attainers of them are thought fit;
but to let the World know, that the most of learned men are in no competent
measure qualified for that trust and dignity, under that standing; and
dangerous it is to call men to that preferment sooner, unless for extraordinary
deserts, least they should sub gravitatis purpura nepotari. And this, as I said
before on the 8th Chapter p. 134, 135, 136.
justifies the Kings of England in all times, and our now Liege Lord at this
time, not to make any Judges before they have emerited, and exceeded the
Chancellours limitation, which I am sure the youngest Judge now has almost
twice, if not altogether over, and which is the reason that the Courts are so
learnedly filled with Justices, and the people so satisfied with the justice of
their Judgments. Plutarch in lib. an seni sit gerenda Resp p. 789. edit. Paris.
So true is that of Plutarch, (...) Youth is the season of obedience, but old
age best befits Rule, and best carries on Government.

Ne^ interim militarem disciplinam, ad quam tam ardenter anhelas, negliges,
sedea recreation^s loco, etiam anno illo tu ad libitum perfrueris.

Here the Chancellor applies himself to the Prince by a wise insinuation,
adapted to the humor of youth; which being delighted with actions of pleasure
and gayety, is frequently kept from other more serious and useful
accomplishments, by the prejudices it has, as if they were inconsistent with
the other things of recreation, and externity of pomp; which because the
Chancellor knew a dangerous anticipation of his counsel, he endeavors to
remove by a calm and swaviloquious grant of Recreations, and a competency of
time to Military Affairs, without any frustration of his sufficient
accomplishment in knowledge of the Laws in the proportion, and within the time
aforesaid. And to good purpose does he do it, for had he told him, that the
recreation he had chosen, was to have been refused, that learning in the Laws
alone could make him good in his person, and good to his Government, had he
kept him to the rigid and austere Rule of Study, and not given him some
relaxation, and allowed that best spent, in what he most delighted in, and
would really find a great ornament to him, Military Discipline, he had wholly
lost his ear and heart; which done, all the reason he could speak or write,
would have been ineffectual, because coming from a Tongue and Pen unfavoured,
and therefore suspected; but in that he does so comply with the Prince's youth,
and yet follows on his intendment, argues him to be both a man of civility and
sageness: For as labor is wearyness to the bones, a punishment of sin, and the
waster of life; so is Recreation, and cessation from it a re-invigoration, or
second enablement of Nature to bear her burden. Lib. 22 c. 23.7. Lib. 12. c.
1.2. Ad Attic. lib. ^. II. Pro Planc. 5. Verr.
Thus Pliny uses recreare for instaurare, Si enim defecta long is
aegritudinibus corpora recreantur. Afflictos bonorum animos recreare, So Tully.
And amicorum literis recreari; conspectus vester reficit; and recreat mentem
meam; afflictam and perditam provinciam erigere and recreare. By then
recreationis loco, he intends that he shall not be kept that year he is
proposed to set apart for instruction in it, close like a prisoner, or an
Apprentice, but he shall have his play-times; and those not only as often as
he profitably and ingeniously may (study also being conveniently considered)
but in that specifique delight, which he does above all others choose as his
Mistress and Darling. For as the eye, always intent on reading, will at last be
weak, though its composition and visual Organ be never so strong, and the Bow,
if always bent, will grow weak, and the Treasure always drawn from, will in
time be exhaust; and as shades are made of many colors, which any one color
will not perfect: so is the mind not only pleased with, but refreshed by
variety; and therefore, as wise Physicians prescribe no physic to the body,
but such as it will bear, nor no oftener to repeat it, then they find morbid
matter adhering, and then the strength and spirits of the Patient will permit,
but prescribe intervals by which the body is restored, and the strength in some
measure recuperated: so do wise Tutors gratify their Pupils with such
refractions of them from their intentness on study, as may make them come to it
fresher, and continue at it willinger, since by them they are made more
apprehensive of their reading, and more emulous to deserve well, which they are
so kindly dealt with. Though then our Chancellor did press vehemently for the
Princes training up in the knowledge of the Law, and that by an intentness of
mind for one year, in which he (so ingenious and docile) might be by the
Chancellours method taught it; yet did he not desire all that years time to the
Law, but allowed him part of it to matters of Arms and Chivalry, part to
Devotion and Piety, part to Food and Necessity, and part to Friendship and
Courtesy; which he I suppose did in a method, A Bencher of Grays. Inn,
much like that my worthy Friend Mr. Langford has imparted to me, and he
himself has profitably disciplined young Gentlemen in Gray's Inn. The natural
days 24 hours he thus distributing.

From 5 in the morning to 6. Ad Sacra. Begin with God by reading and prayer.
From 6. to 9. Ad Iura. Read the Law carefully and understandingly. From 9. to
11. Ad Arma Carry en harmless acts of Manhood, Fencing, Dancing, etc. From 11.
to 12. Ad Arts, Forget not Academique learning, Logic, Rhetoric: From 12. to
2. Ad Victum, Eat seasonably, moderately, and allow time to digest. From 2. to
5. Ad amicitias, Visit civilly your friends, and repay kindness in kind. From
5. to 6. Ad Arts, Read History, Poetry, and Romances. From 6. to 8, Ad Victum,
Take food often, but not much, nor heavy. From 8. to 9. Ad Repetitionem and
Sacra, Repeat your Parts, and say your Prayers. From 9. to 5. Ad Noctem and
Somnum, To Bed be times, and rise betimes again.
Which Proportion of the days of a year exactly kept, will not only allow
every part of life its due share; but determine to the Princes Comfort and
Content that Engagement, and the possibility of performing it, which was by the
Chancellor made in those preceding words, parvo tempore and parva industria.
And so concludes the eighth Chapter.

Chap. IX.
Secundum vero Princeps, quod tu formidas, consimili nec majoxi opera elidetur.
Dubit as nempe, an Anglorum Legum, vel Civilium studio te conferas, dum Civiles
supra humanas cunctas Leges alias, sama per orbem extollat gloriosa.


AS the first disanimation of the Prince was taken from the perplexity of the
Laws study, and the supposed impossibility of conquering it to any tolerable
perfection in short time and with moderate study; so the second is, whether Law
the Prince shall choose as the subject of his Study, whether the particular,
Insular, Municipe Law; which no Nation knows or owns but England alone, or the
civil Laws which are the Laws of the Continent, and to which almost all
Nations, and the learned men of them generally subscribe.

This I confess is a rational seruple, and that which in point of choice, a
man of parts and single eye who unengaged seeks truth, and would bottom his
actions thereupon, would be diligent to seek, and rejoice in the obtainment of.
For Good being the end of man's desire and action, and it being deposited in the
Laws of God and Nature, whence all active good, that of Prudence and Conduct
is extracted: to choose the best Method of them is the highest Act of
Concernment, next the souls affairs, man can be employed in. This the
Perspicacity of the Prince diving into, conveyed such doubts into him, that he
could not jurare in verba Magistri, and take his Chancellour's choice till he
had concocted the Arguments he proposed to his Solution, and Satisfaction
therein. And truly, if it be considered what Tully says of the civil Law, O
rem praeslaram vobisque retinendam Iudices, Apud Budaeum in Pandect. priores p.
23. Edit. Basil. 1534. Fabianus Iustinianus in Indic. Universal. ad lit. Ius,
etc. a p. 270. ad 272. Possevinus Bibliothec. selecta lib. 13. c. 10. and seq.
ad sinem p. 150.
etc O the Divinity of that Law, which ye, O Judges, are to keep, as your
Jewels and life; such it is, as neither savor will bend, nor power break, nor
money corrupt, which if removed, all right and propriety ceases, and all things
fall into Confusion, thus Tully: And if what infinite other Authors, and the
wisest Nations of the Continent have of honor done to this Law, be here
rehearsed, it would make many Volumes, and extrude the series of my intention
in this Commentary, and may well stumble a young Prince which of the Laws to
choose, at least to refuse the civil Laws, which so great Governments do admit
to their regulation: and this effect, I suppose by the words of the
Text-Master, this debate, and irresolution of the Prince in his choice
(supposing him free) had on him; for else the Chancellor would never have
dehorted him from perturbation, which he calls mentis evagatio, a wander of the
mind from its rational Basis, and its station of Consistence against passion,
and the distortings of it. For since the Prince had long, and fruitlesly (as he
thought) waited God's return, which the height of his forward youth would
ripen sooner then Omnipotence pleased, since he saw another in his Father's
Throne besides himself, and was greedy to contend and evict that which was
supposed his right; this considered, I say, may give us shrewd suspicion, that
the Grave Chancellor saw him impatient, like that ill-advised man in 2 King.
vi. last verse, This evil comes from the Lord, why should I wait for the Lord
any longer; and in a hurry and storm of passion meditate to be revenged of the
Laws, the sacredness of which seeming to shrowde his Antagonists possession,
made his accession upon him more difficult. This probably the old Chancellor
sadly considering, occasioned his Counsel of recollection to the Prince, not
only to allay the present servor of his youthful Metal, but to convince him,
that when he had bussled all he can, and fretted his mind into a tempestuous
heat, hazzarding all the serenity of his hopes and the comfort of God's
Reverter in mercy to him, he could do nothing Princely, but what must and ought
to be legal and just: and this he tells him is in the Laws Case resolved, past
doubt or alteration; As a man that is married cannot use his Wise as he please,
but according to the Nature of Marriage, and the right of the Privileges
thereof; so the King of Eugland cannot salvo Sacramento, salvo iure, salva
Conscientia, change the Laws of his Government at his pleasure, but does and
holds himself obliged to do nothing regally, but what legally he may, which he
not being able ( salvis his) to do, the Question is answered in the Negative,,
Non potest Rex Angli^.

Nam non potest Rex Angliae, ad libitum suum Leges mutare regni sui. Principatu
namque nedum regali, sed and politico ipse suo populo dominatur.

This the Chancellor wrote not to assault or lessen the King's power, but to
render it by its soft and gentle Edge not only less terrible, but more
obliging to the Subjects, toward whom it expresses it self so merciful; and
truly did I not humbly resolve by God's grace assisting me, to be just to
truth, and modest to the great power of my dear and dread Sovereign, it would
have become me rather to do by this subject, as Patroclus did by Achilles his
Spear, (...). Plutarch, lib. De Adulat. and amici discrimine, p. 59.
not meddle with this of any to comment on, because it is so easy to err about
it: But as I humbly implore the wisdom of God to direct me to write the words
of truth and soberness; so do I in all humble reverence to the Majesty of my
Lord the King, beg his pardon and ^avour, that what I write may be esteemed to
proceed from a Justice and Loyalty, which aims at nothing but the real
explication of the truth herein; to which, since the Text leads me, and a truth
there is much to the illustration of the excellency of the Monarchy of this
Nation reported in it, I will, with all ingenuous modesty, write a few words of
it. And the Clause analyzes it self thus.

First, there is the subject matter, or the noble thing he speaks of, that is a
King, and a King of England. Secondly, there is the negative predicate, what
this King, and King of England cannot do, non potest ad libitum suum leges
mutare regni sui. Thirdly, here is a production of the reason, why thus he
cannot do, he is Rex Anglia, that is argumentum ab officio, and then they are
leges regnisui, and thence arises the Subjects interest in them. 1 Eliz. c. 3.
The Kings, with the consent of the three Estates his Subjects, has accepted,
and in Parliament made them; and though he could have denied his consent, and
so not have made them Laws; yet having once passed them, they are not to be
altered at his will, because the subject, for whose good they are, is
concerned, and nihil potest Rex quam quod de jure potest. These Heads take up
the sense of the Clause.

Rex Angliae; 25 H. 8. c. 19.26 c. 1.28 c. 16. 24 H. 8. c. 12.25 H. 8. c. 22. 1
M. 2 Sess. c. 4. 1 Eliz. 1. 1 Iac.c. 1.5. Report de Iure Regis Eccles. p. 40.
b. Stobaus Sermon. 40. Philo lib. De Monarchia. Crockier in These. Aphoris.
Politic. lib. 1. c. 3. Contzen. lib. 1. Politic. c. 21. Lipsius in Politic. c.
4. p. 29. Arist. 8 Moral. c. 12. Ficinus in Platonis Politic. 8 Moral. c. 12.
This is the Title of the mighty Monarch of England, whose Imperial Crown is a
Monarchy independent on all but God: And as it is a Monarchy the best of
Governments, because the Government of God over the World; so is it the best of
Monarchies, not only in regard of temperateness, but succession: A Monarchy it
is, in which the Image of God's glorious Sovereignty resembles its protoplast,
being made such as it is by his mercy, and by the clemency of the Monarchs of,
and the Laws in it. A Government it is, not such an one as the Philosopher
calls (...) the blot and blemish of Kinglyness; but such an one as answers
every end of God and Man, a Kingdom wherein (...) the King is the Keeper of
Order and Religion, peace and property, and the people kept by him are his
faithful Lieges, to defend his Title in, and to the said Imperial Estate,
Place, Crown, and Dignity, in all things thereto belonging at all times, to the
uttermost of our possible powers, and therein to spend our Bodies, Lands and
Goods, against all persons whatsoever, that any thing shall attempt to the
contrary. They are the words of the Nation in Parliament, Stat. I Eliz. c. 3.
confirmed by I Jacob. c. 1. Thus happy is the King of England, that he rules
the valiant'st people, the richest spot, by the renowned'st Laws, and in the
religiousest method of any Monarch in the World. For it is a principle
congenial to our Kings, In the true Law of free Monarchy. p. 203. Inter oper.
in sol.
not only to delight to rule their Subjects by the Law, but even conform
themselves in their actions thereunto, always keeping that ground, that the
health of the Commonwealth be their chief Law. So faith King James.

Since then the King has the power of Arms, Courts, Coin, Justice, both in
criminal and judicial matters; for they are all by, and under him, administered
and actuated; that yet notwithstanding all this, he should keep himself within
the bounds of Justice and Mercy, argues him highly blessed of God, and
deservedly beloved of men. Since as a King, Ide^ cod. loco.
he is above the Law, as the author and giver of strength thereto: yet as a
King of England, bears the limitation of Laws of his own free will, though not
bound (as others) thereto. Which considered, the Chancellour's negative
predicate, is a truth, in a qualified sense, Non potest ad libitum suum, etc.
For non potest does not respect the absolute and strict power of a King, for
then who of his Subjects shall dare to withstand his pleasure, and impede his
resolutions any more then a Whippit dare ruttle and enrage a Lion, or a Smelt
contend with a Whale. As God over the World, so Kings over their Subjects, have
an omnipotence not to be disputed with, but adored by them. If David will eat
the shewbread, which is only the viands of the Priests, and take the Wife of
Uriah, which is the proper treasure of her Husbad, Cook 2 Instit. Notes on 29.
Chapter, Magna Charta, p. 47.
there is no opposing him. But the non potest is with respect to lenitive
Concomitants of absolute Kingship, reverence to God, veracity to the Coronation
Oath, valuation of Justice, and honor with men, Peace in the Prince's
Conscience. All these come in to modifie the non potest, and to put weight upon
it, so as to make it as the Center of the Earth unmovable. And this is that
which the Kings of England have not only consented to themselves, and such
their consent confirmed by Oath, C. 6. Upon his Majesty's retlrlng from
Westminster. Iuramentum Iustittariorum, 18 E. 3.
I think my Oath fully discharged in that point, by my governing only by such
Laws, as my People, with the House of Peers, have chosen, and my self have
consented to. So the martyred King Charles; but sworn also their Judges to
observe in their delegations of power to them; Ye shall swear, that well and
truly, ye shall serve our Lord the King, and his People, in the Office of
Justice, etc. and after, and that ye deny to no man common right by the Kings
Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause, and in case any Letters
come to you contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by such letters, but
certify the King thereof, and proceed to execute the Law, notwitstanding the
same letters, are the words of the Statute, 18 E. 3. and if the King cannot
rationally and politiquely command his Judges to judge against Law, because
they are discharged by the Kings own Laws from such commands, sure he that is
the fountain of Justice, can not reasonably and plausibly approve that in
himself, which he condemns in his Ministers, For the King wills that right be
done, King's Answer to the Petition of Right, 3d Car. Puston's Stat. p. 432.
according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and that the Statues be put in
due execution, that his Subjects may have no cause to complain of any wrong or
oppressions, contrary to their just rights and liberties; to the preservation
whereof, he holds himself in Conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative.
So that our Chancellours non potest, is but in other words thus much, since the
King rules by Law, and Parliamentarily makes and repeals Laws, etc. the King
cannot lawfully, ad libitum leges regnisui mutare. And the reason is twofold;
First, Quia Rex Angliae, King Iame's Speech, 1609. p. 531, of his Works in sol.
he is a King, not a Tyrant, and all Kings that are not Tyrants, or perjured,
will be glad to bound themselves within the limits of their Laws; a lawful
King, not an Usurper, King of England, a Land of freedom and riches, God's
Earthly Western Canaan, Regnum Angliae regnum Dei, was an old saying, and he
ruling as God does, by a Law, Cook 2 Instit. on 29 Chapter, Magna Charta, p. 47.
and that a just convenient and wise Law, which answers all purposes of
Government, cannot change that Law, that is, bring in another Law in room of
that by his Will and Prerogative; nor shall he need to do it, or have any of
the Kings of England, that I have read of, attempted to do it. The Laws of
England being so fitted to the people, that the Oracle of Monarchy spoke and
wrote it, That the grounds of the ComLaws of England, are the best of any Law
in the World, either Civil or Municipal, and the fittest for this people, and
so subsidiary to the honor and security of the King, that no Law can be more
favorable and advantageous, and extends further his Prerogative then it
does; Speech, 1669. p. 532.
and for a King of England to despise the Common Law, is to neglect his own
Crown. And thus the non potest refers to Prudence, prudenter and utiliter non
potest, quia Rex Angliae, and ought to advise what is good for him and his
people. Secondly, Conscienter non potest, because they are Leges Regis, in
regard of emanation, fontality, and sanction; and Regni, in regard of
application, appropriation, and interest: by all which, subjects are so
inserted into the propriety of them, that they cannot be illegally taken from
them, (and illegally they must be, if without their consent altered) without
great dishonor to their Violators, and great provocation of divine vengeance
upon it; which the piety of our Monarchs considering, ever abhorred. For though
in some times, and upon heats and cholers, there has been somewhat interpreted
like a tendency that way; yet has it ever been but an embrio, and soon turned
into ruin of those that advised it. For the Common and Statute Laws of England
are in the mass and bulk of them unalterable, being Fundamentals of all English
Order and Authority, which is the cause our Text says, non potest Rex Angliae
ad libitum suum regni leges mutare.

Which words are not rigidly to be taken, as if the Chancellor by them fully
disseised Regality of Nomothetique and Regal Power in their legal sense; and as
according thereto our brave Princes have juridically expressed themselves, for
then the Majesty of the Crown would not be such and so Imperial, as the
prealleadged Authorities assert and confirm it to be; Nulla leges it a seriti
possunt, ut omnes casus qui quandoque inciderunt, comprehendantur. sed sufficit
ea, quae plorumque accidunt contineri; si quid extra ea accidat, de ea
interpretatione aut jurisdictione certius statuitur 'vel eriam novis legibus
secundariis, qua ex primariis deducumur. Hopperus, lib. 4. De Vera Jurisp. Tit.
27.
or as if the Chancellor thought the System of the Laws in his time, so
complete, that no addition could be made to them, no explication be made of
them: for to dream of that had been altogether absurd, since no wisdom of
Lawmakers was ever so exact, no method of Laws so absolute, but some casus
omissi have been discovered in them, to which Additions and Declarations have
been in supplement, as appears not only by all Acts of Parliament, made in
succession of time, but is also in words set down in the Statute 25 H. 8. c. 1.
No such intent had the Chancellor in his non potest mutare leges to assert;
for unreasonable it had been so to have written, since Laws, as Garments, are
good and comely in some Ages, and in some temper of Affairs, which in others
are ridiculous and cumbersome: yea, if this latitude were not allowed Princes
politiquely to do, no obviation could be of emergent mischief, no provisions be
made for reward of occasional virtue. Both which power has occasion to apply,
as to its judgment seems fit. And therefore the Chancellor, as a man of State,
and Law knowledge, intends not his non potest mutare leges, etc. thus to be
understood: no, nor does he by non potest Rex Angliae, Ad dominium non est
necessarium, quod possit quis uti re cujus est dominus, in omnes usus.
Ariagonius, Quast. 62. in secundam secunda St. whom. Tit. de domimo, p. 83.
take upon him to infirm the Crown, and make it detectuous in any point of
necessary and just dominion over the Subjects of it: For as in Divines disputes
about God's power, though it be usual for them to say, God cannot do any thing
that implies contradiction; yea, that it is impossible for God to lie, because
he is truth it self, Grot. in Heb. 6.18.
yet they mean the impossibility to be, ex part rei, non ex part Dei, not
from any dif^ct of divine power; sed ab ipsa rerum, (...), but from the
incompatibility between truth and a lie. For God, Lege Arragon, in Sentent.
Quast. 22. D Praeceptis spei, and Timotis. art. 1. p. 290.
can by his essential absolute power, do what he will; and when it is said, he
cannot do any thing, it is not ex defectu potentia ejus, sed quia repugnat sacto
in quantum sactum, vel in quantum tale, as the School say. So in this case of
the Kings, non potest leges regni sui mutare, our Text-Master intends not to
dispute what the King in the height of Majesty and absoluteness, qua God's
Vicar, may, or may not do, for that is between God and him, and to that God
only sets bounds: but that which the non potest refers to, is such a power, as
he himself that is King, has in the Law admeasured out to himself, and sworn to
observe inviolably, and to cause others to see observed. Concerning this,
Speech to the Bill of Attainder, F. Str. May 1611. Reliquia Caroli, p. 10.
glorious King Charles writes thus: I never was counseled (quoth he) by any,
to alter the least of the Laws of England, much less to alter all the Laws:
nay, I tell you this, I think no body durst ever be so impudent, as to move me
to it; for if they had, I should have made them such an example, and put such a
mark upon them, that all Posterity should know my intention was ever to govern
by the Law, and no otherwise. Thus he. And therefore, as the Kings of England
are Fountains of Justice and Law, and from them, with assent and consent of
their Subjects in Parliament, Laws of public good, and private restraint are
made, in which the King is pleased to ratify that Maxim, Nihil potest Rex in
terris quam quod de jure pot^st. So I say, these things considered, the
Chancellor makes bold to say, Galvin's Case, 7 Rep. p. 17.
and I from him, both of us in all humility, that the King of England cannot
alter any or all the Laws of England, by his own power, because there is no
power but Parliamentary, can alter any one Law, much less the whole Laws (as
was the design of William de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, in our Chancellour's
time; ^ Instit. Chapt. Flattery, p. 208.
to have done, and in room of them, to bring in the Civil Laws, which Sir Edw.
Cook says was the occasion of our Chancellour's writing our Text in the
commendation of the Laws of England.) Because when Laws be altered by any other
Authority, then that by which they were made, Speech to the Country of
Nottingham, 1642. Reliq, Carolinae, p. 29.
your foundations are destroyed, said our once noble King. Now if Foundations
be out of order, what shall the righteous do, is a Scripture phrase. implying
good men's sad condition, then surely to keep them in order, is the way to make
them happy, and that is by the good old way of making and repealing Laws by
King, Cook 4. part, Instit. c. 1. p. 25. 2 Instir. p. 334 on Stat.2. Westmin:
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in
Parliament: all other new Doctrine is Apocryphal. For other foundation then
this of making new Laws additional to the common and customary Laws, or
repealing any of the common or customary Laws, I humbly am bold to say, I know
no man can safely or learnedly lay. And therefore if the non potest be here
applied to the King, it is not in diminution of his power, God forbid, (that is
sacred, and not to be spoken of but with reverence;) but in declaration of his
justice, condescension, and piety to his people, who in thus restraining
himself, 33 H. 6.55. 13 Ed. 1. Stat. 1.
does like a kind Father for his Children Subjects good: and thus are to be
understood the words of the Statute of Acton Burnel, The King by himself, and
by his Council has ordained; and the words of the Statute, Qui Warrante,
wherein de gratia sua speciali, 18 E. 1.
is said by Sir Edw. Cook, to bind the King in this particular of his
Prerogative, Quod nullum tempus occurrit regi. So are the words to be
understood, I. Westminster 15. where the Act being penned, in the name of the
King, and the King commands, therefore the King binds himself (says Sir
Edw. Cork) not to disturb any Electors to make free Elections; and so is to be
understood that Speech of Sir John Markham to E. 2 Instit. p. 157.
1. That the King could not arrest any man for suspicion of Treason, or Felony,
as any other of his Subjects might, because if the King did wrong, the party
could not have his Action. Not by these could nots or cannots, to lessen or
abate, but to magnify him that thus denies himself to do good to his people.
For the King and his Subjects make one body, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus
tractari debet, Reg Iuris.
and the Laws concerning the whole, are to be considered of by the whole, the
Head as well as the Members; and thus conjoynedly Laws, may regularly and
Parliamentarily be altered; and without this Authority, to do any thing to
alter Law, has not been the practice of our Kings: For since to draw the
Freeholds, Sir Tho. Smith, De Rep. Anglor. lib. 2. c. 2.3.
Inheritances, etc. of the Subject, ad aliud examen, and to make them judged by
any Law then the Common Law, is termed a disherison of the King and of his
Crown, the disherison of all his people, and the undoing and destruction of the
Common Law at all times used as in the Statute 27 E. 3. c. I. appears, its
safe to keep to the common warrantable use of making and adnulling Laws; Answer
to the Petition of Rightad Caroli. Poulton, p. 1433.
for the peoples properties are hereby preserved, and that said our late
martyred Master, strengthens the King's Prerogation, and the King's Prerogative
is to defend the Peoples liberty.

Principatu namque nedum Regali sed and politico, ipse populo suo dominatur.

This is the reason why he cannot salvis praeconcessis, salvo jure, and salva
conscientia, alter the Laws of England, other then by Parliament and National
consent, because he has himself owned and established the Law, as that by which
he will rule, and not otherwise; and that also, because he is a King by right
of inheritance and succession, according to the Laws of his Government; (...)
etc. Stobaeus, Sermon. 41. p. 248.
and this the Text calls, though in other words, yet to the same purpose, that
Solon said was the best of state of Government, where the Subjects obeyed their
Prince, and the Prince the Laws: and this one of the bravest Kings that ever
the World had, thought so just, that he says, A continual Parliament I thought
would but keep the Commonwealth in tune, by preserving Laws in their due
execution and vigor, wherein my interest lies more (says he) then any man's,
Eicon Basil. c. 5. upon passing the Bill for a Triennial Parliament.
since by those Laws my Rights as a King would be preserved no less then my
Subjects, which is all I desired; more then the Law gives me, I would not have,
and less the meanest Subject should not. So he: And truly, the consideration of
this every way beneficient Government both to King and People, has so wrought
upon the consideration of all of the Kings of this Land, that they have
disowned all Titles of Conquest and absoluteness (as in opposition to Laws) to
adhere to the mild and lasting ones of regal and politic Contexture; which
though the wife of The^pompus reproached, telling her husband, he would leave
to his Children a diminished Empire: yet he told her, it would by it be more
stable, and lasting: for when Galba's, O. ho's, Vitellius's, whom Apollonius
Tyaneus called Theban Emperors, because undurable in their Offices; when those
soon were buried in the oblivion of their desamed and execrable names, Princes
like ours in England, who of free would voluntarily engage themselves to rule
by their Laws, and not otherwise, have not only the glory to say, and that
truly, Omnia peregi meipso imperatore, as Pompey did, but also the just
confidence to fly to God for custody, against Treason and Rebellion; yea, and
when God is said to give salvation to Kings, may well hope to have salvations
multiplied in their number, Eicon Basil. c. 5.
and heightened in their nature to such gracious and serene Kings, as recede
from the extremity of what they in grearness might claim, to express themselves
in a gracious and qualified Sovereignty, Sovereignty like Gods of mercy as well
as power. This is our Text-Master calls Principatu nedum regali, sed, and
politico dominari. For though its Government has whatever is incident to
Regality in the proper and just latitude of its notion, See King Charles's
Message for Peace from Holmby, 1647. fol. 118. From the Isle of Wight. p. 128.
and p. 170. Reliq. Carolinae.
according to God's allowance; nor does, or can aim to abate any things of the
sacredness of the Kings unction, or his powers divinity in his person, which
being instituted by God, retains ever the nature of its Institution; yet does
it so mitigate, See Preamble to the Statute. I Maria, c. 1.
and render Majesty informidable, that subjects love the Princes, who thus
appear to them, rather then fear them, and by their loves are so affianced to
them, that they count all they have as it were too little to supply their
wants, to propagate their honors, to support their Governments, and really
give themselves up to them, as Children to their Parents, in obedience free
from all dispute. By these words then Principatu nanque nedum regali sed and
politico, ipse populo suo dominatur. The Chancellor concludes the Government
of England a Paternal Regality, 2 Instit. p. 454. on Wesimin. 2.
as I may so say, that is, a Monarchy mixed with love and tenderness, in which
absolute power is regulated by Law, and legal Order protected by regal and
legal Power: so that as the King can do nothing but what is just, because he
does only as just what the Law directs, which is the rule of Justice: so
cannot the King suffer any injury from the Subject, but what the Law will right
him in, King James's Speech 1609. p. 531, of his Works
who is caput regni and legum; which considered, though there be a recession in
this Contexture from what Kings in their original power might do in individuo
vago; yet is there no frustration of the end of God in setting up Kings, or
mutilation of them in their happy advantages, to serve God's glory, and benefit
men in subjection to them, but an advantage to both; as all the temptations of
passion and partiality are removed, and the clearer and readyer way advanced to
public benefaction and endearment. And this I humbly conceive was the reason,
that the Laws of England have carried on this mediocrity, having both Justice
and Mercy, restraint and liberty; yea matter of captation and allurement both
to good and bad, both to Prince and people, and leaves checks on all degrees,
to correct their mistake, and to conduct them into the Channel of safety, 3
Instit. c. 87, p. 183.
both in point of obedience to the King, and of protection from the King; The
Law and its Prescript, 21 Jacob. 2. That the King's Majesty, 'his Heirs or
Successors, shall not at any time hereafter, sue question, impeach, etc. for
as absolute Regality would be too much under the Line and Solstice of power,
sub zona torrida, which made the Martyr King say, Let your liberties,
properties, privileges, (without which I would not be your King) be secured.
Speech to the Parliament at Oxford. 1643. Reliq. Caroli. p. 46. See Sir Thomas
Smith, De Rep. Angl. c. 4.
So mere politic Government would be too far North to have any vitality to
subsist upon, because sub zana frigida, the conjunction of them both in a happy
tertian, which is the mixture of them, makes the rational religious moderate
durable polity of this Kingdom, in which the Sovereigns do not only, regaliter
sed politice dominari, that is, are to all men, as their virtues or vices
deserve they should be to them; to the pious and peaceable encouragement,
protection, promotion; to the persidious and profane terror corporal
pecuniary; nay, if cause require, death: for that as the Law allows the King to
have two Capacities, a personal and politic one, (though not in the
Dispensers and others traitorous senses,) Resolute Judges in Calvin's case, 7
Rep.
yet in a sense of truth, annexing Allegiance to both the Capacities, and in no
sort severing them: so does the Law allow of two several presences of power in
the King of England; the one of luster and glory, which is (as it were) not to
be looked upon, this is that of the King, as he is armed with terror, and has
the power of life and death; and this he has in common with all Kings. The
other of amiableness, (...). Jamblicus in ^pist. ad Agrippam, apud Stobaeum,
Sermon. 44. p. 315.
as it has wisely shrouded its astonishing brightness by some interpositions of
condescension; this is that our Text-Master calls Politic Dominion, such an
admission of regulation in rule, as sweetens men to obedience, by working upon
their reason and good nature, and gives their indulger a security from the
lenity of his Government over his Subjects, whom because he is good and
gracious to, he is beloved and defended by them. This is capable of
mis-interpretation, unless the Law be the Arbiter, and that has recognized the
King only under the power of God, if he violate his Oath. But the Subject is
under an indispensable tie from God to the King, underwhose allegiance he is;
and the reason is, because the person and fortune of the subject is under the
legal dominion of his Prince, but the Prince is under the only dominion of God.
The consideration of which has notwithstanding wrought great effects of restraint
on Martial minds, and that (even then when they meditated the greatest
inundations of restraints) not only abroad in the World, Theatr. V. Ham. Vol.
14. lib. 1. Tit. Reges Principes qui se legibus subjecere. Suetonius in
Tiberio, c. 21.
the instances whereof are in Zuinger collected to my hand, but also in this
Realm of England, when it had a Prince in it, that promised not much better
then Tiberius did, of whom the noble Emperor Augustus said, Miserum Romanum
populum, qui sub tam 'lentis maxillis erit. I mean the Conqueror, who though
he came in fiercely, and won the Field by Battle, yet did not only suffer
himself to be admonished by Aldred Archbishop of York, Ita ipsum loco patris
colebat, ut cumille Rex cateris imperabat, ab illo Archi-Episcopo voluit
aquaminiter imperari, J. Brompton, p. 962.
Whom he honoring as a Father, suffered to mollify and cool him, and by him
was restrained from those fiercenesses, that otherwise he would have expressed.
And therefore before he was solemnly crowned, he renouncing his Martial Title,
and entering as a Politic Governor, did before God, and the good Archbishop,
Nobles, S. Dunelm in W. 1. p. 195. Brompton, p. 562. Stubbs, p. 1702. R. De
Dicet. p. 480. edit. Land.
and the people there present, take Oath; That be would defend the Holy Church,
and the Governors of it; that he would govern the people subject to him
justly, and as a Prince prudently should do; that he would settle right Law,
forbid Rapts, and all unjust Judgment. Yea, he made up a confirmation of his
love to the Laws of England, In prooemio confirm. Legum D. Edvardi, Anno Reg.
4. Spelman Gloss. p. 398.
and his resolution to be swayed by them, by swearing 12. men of every shire in
England, to report the truth of the Laws without concealing, adding, or in any
sort varying from the truth. This, and much more Ingulphus, Abbot of Crowland,
tells us; and Sir Ed. Cook from him, Pref. to the 8th Rep. W. Thorn, p. 1787.
edit Land. Dicet, p. 487. P. Brompton, p. 982. Simon Dunelm, p. 213. Knighton.
p. 2344. p. 2354.
and others. And though I know the Conqueror little regarded this Oath, but
disseised Natives of their Estates, and gave them to his Normans, making havoc
of all that was preyable, and made the English his base Vassals; so that before
his death, there was scarce in England an English Nobleman left, it being a
reproach to be called an Englishman, as Knighton's words are. Yet that such
things he submitted, and swore to do, when in full power, argued more a
conviction, that so religiously and prudently he ought to do, then any fear
upon him; and that sufficiently answers my purpose, to confirm that Regal and
Politic Government, joined in our Chancellours sense, makes a good legal
English administration, and that when heats and humors are assuaged, all high
and martial Princes fall into it of course, to save their own troubles, and
their peoples lives and fortunes; yea, as by the just judgment of God, men's
opportunities are their discoverers, and show them bad at heart,
notwithstanding all their external and flattering good appearances (so Diagoras
Milesius was known to be an Atheist; for being in an Inn, and wanting sewel to
dress his dinner, he took the Image of Hercules, reputed in that place for a
God, and cast it into the fire saying profanely, Tertium decimum, Salmuth in
Pancirol, tit. 10. partis secunda, p. 181.
etc. Perform now the thirteenth labor, O God Hercules, and boil the broth of
Diagoras the Atheist.) As God, I say, does by these acts discover some men's
follies; so does he qualify the vices of some notable persons with great
virtues, that makes them not so enormous and truculent, as but for them they
would be: Hipparchus was a Tyrant, but yet a great favourer of Learning; his
first work was to institute his Citizens in Letters: Zuinger Theatr' p. 89.
Lib. 2. De Princ' Roman. Dicet. p. 482. Brompton. p. 961, 982. Knighton, 2354.
so of Cleomenes the Spartan, and Francis the first of France, Historians
write. Ignatius that tells how Phocas reduced all the Roman freedom to Persian
Vassalage, yet reports one thing worthy praise in him, Romanum Pontificem
principem omnium jure declaravit; so did this our Conqueror deserve some good
words, and he has them: Authors tells us, he built Abbeys, Monasteries, and
religious houses, ut esset expiatio quaedam effusionis tanti sanguinis
Christiani; but above all, Tantae pacis author fuerat, etc. he was the author
of so great safety every where, that a Maid might have carried a load of Gold
all over England. Dicet. p. 488.
These and such other actions of public influence are lustres in Princes, who,
under favor of their Greatness, ought to improve God's preferments to his
Glory; considering that life is but short in men, and the greatest actions in
probability have expired even with the lives of their Actours, which often have
been then running the last sand, when they thought of nothing but diuturnity
and paramountship. Alexander the Great, when he had conquered the East,
resolved to march into Africa and subdue that with Europe, Sabellicus lib. 10.
c. 13. Morbo inopinato praeventus in nihilum sunt redacta omnia, Cuspin.
sed festinata mors tantas spes abrupit, Alexander dies, and his Journey is
hushed. Majoranus Emperor of Ravenna would forsooth make an onset upon Africa,
but a Disease prevented that Enterprise. Our brave H. 5. of England, when he
made Cock-sure of France, dyed by Poison. Hen. 2. of France, when he had settled
his Affairs with Spain and thought to enjoy quietness, was slain by a pass at
Tilt in Paris; so Francis the 2. not long after, when he meditated fierce
things against the Hugonots, was prevented executing them by an Impostume in
his head, where of he dyed. No wonder then that wife and worthy Princes study
calm Methods of rule, and look upon their Subjects as Children, and as such
preserve them free, since they have an account to make to God above other men,
and may as soon make it as other men; which our Kings perhaps especially
considering, though they eyed Monarchy as the most excellent form of Government
(nay the only, (others being but wanders from it, as it is the prime and
essential Government) yet they consented to such a temperament of it, Plutarch.
in lib. De Monarchia. Aristocrat. and Oligarch p. 826. Lib. De Creatione
Princip. p. 725.
as Philo calls (...), etc. the mean between the two much, and too little of
other Governments, which the King of England ruling according to, is by the
Chancellor said, Principatu nedum regali, sed and politico dominani, that is,
so to respect himself a King over, as to respect his Subjects as free and
felicitous under his Government.

Si regali tantum ipse praesset eis, leges regni sui matare ille possit.

This rationally follows, for if absolute he were, as Nimrod, Ninus, Belus,
and the Eastern Monarchs to this day are, then his will were the Law and would
work upon change of the Laws as they regretted him or he them, or as he
observed more use might be made of other Laws then them, every absolute Ruler
either dictating Laws or suffering those only to be distributed as did lacquy
to his absoluteness: (...). Libanius in Ulyss Declam 2. p. 220. Britannia 1040.
annos litera, suos Reges habuit; tandem per Julium Caesar. Cassemulano
Principe, Romano Imperio facta est vectigalis, lib. 2. hist. Angl.
but in that the King is said not to can a change of the Laws at his pleasure;
it argues him not less absolute, but more kind and conscionable in not trying
what he can to the injury of what, as a father of his Country and the people of
it, he ought to be. God can do what he will, but yet he suffers Abraham to
interpellate for Sodom, and Moses for Israel, and till those potent
intercessors were answered, God gives us leave to think in kindness he could
do, what in greatness by his power we know he could: so likewise it pleases
serious and sober Princes to be told, they cannot do that as Lords, which they
cannot be pleased in doing as Parents, as Husbands to their Governments: Nor
does any boundary trouble a virtuous Monarch, where his generosity consents to
fix it for the reward of Loyalty or an allurement to it.

This politic dominion then is no effect of force on, but of love and
grandeur in the Kings of this Nation to their people. For Kings we had and were
free under them above a thousand years before Caesar came upon us, if Polydore
Virgil misinform me not, and thus we have continued down all the Reigns of the
Princes almost six hundred years, (the Common and Statute Laws of England,
with the allowance of Customs local,) yea, and the super addition of
Ecclesiastical Laws not contrary to the Laws of God and the Laws of the
Land, 12 H.8. c. 26.3 and 4 E, 6. c. 11.12.
Civil Law in the cases of Matrimony, Probate of wills and Maritime affairs,
serving all in their respective places to the continuation, and convenient
carrying on its administration, and to the prevention of any thing that might
justly be suspected contrary to the same. Yea, when the happy accession of King
James to this Crown, whereby in his Person, and the matchless and incomparable
Descendants from him, the Crown of Scotland was united to this, when, I say,
his wisdom thought upon an union of Laws as well as of Empire, and took so
much pains in it, that he prevailed to have the Stat. 1 Iac. c. 2. passed to
empower Commissioners to consider of it; yet this endeavor, though professed
by him to be far from his Royal and sincere care and affection to his Subjects
of England, to alter or innovate the fundamental and ancient Laws, Privileges
and good Customs of this Kingdom^, and apprehended by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament to intend no more, The words of the Stat. 1 Jac. c. 2.
or seek no other changes or alterations, but of such particular temporary or
indifferent manner of Statutes and Customs, as may both prevent and extinguish
all and every future question and unhappy accident, etc. Notwithstanding the
Union had this Declaration concurrent with it; yet because the resolution of
the English were to prefer their Laws and Customs above any others, and to
yield to no title of Alteration in them, thereupon by the 3 Iac. c. 3. the
things which were to be done by force of the Stat. 1 Iac. 2. were capacitated
to be performed in any other Sessions of the Parliament of 3. and by the 4
Jacob. 1. all Laws of hostility between Scotland and we were repealed, and the
Stat of 5 R. 2. c. 2. included, and that was all that came of the desired
union: for it was resolved by the Judges (Sir Edward Cook being the King's
Attourney-General then, 3 Instit. e. 74. p. 346.
and being then and there present, reporting their resolution) that Anglia had
Laws, and Scotia had Laws, but this new erected Kingdom of Britannia should
have no Law. Since then, the Assent of the Subject is necessary to change
Laws, not only common and Statute ones, but local Customs and Tenures; and
without it the Kings of England have given their Subjects leave juridiquely to
say, they cannot by the power the Law understands them to have, at their
pleasure alter them; it follows in confirmation of our Chancellours words,
that the Government of England is a paternal, as well as a regal Government,
and that the Laws of it cannot be altered, but by the King with Assent of his
Subjects in Parliament.

Tallagia quoque, and caetera onera eis imponere, ipsis inconsultis; quale
dominium denotant Leges civiles, cum dicant, quod Principi placuit Legis habet
vigorem.

This follows unavoidably from the premised matter; if the King cannot change
the Laws other then by Parliament, then the Laws not allowing any charge on
the Subject, other then is laid in Parliament on them, Cook on Magna Charta. p.
61. Preface to 8. Rep.
as Sir Edward Cook our Law-Oracle makes good, Tallages are out of doors and
illegal to be laid upon the English Subject. And therefore all our good Princes
have disowned and disclaimed, as other fierce and grating ones have imposed
them: An. 1404. Walls. Hypodeig. Neustriae. p. 164. In H. 4. p. 412.
hence some think those granted in the Parl. of H. 4. were hard; for Walsingham
says, there was Coucessa Regitaxa insolita, and incolis tricabilis, and valde
gravis; and he tells us he would have described it, but that Concessores ipsi,
and Auctores dicti Tallagii, in perpetuum latere posteros maluissent; yet he
says, though they did what they did, they cautioned it should never be drawn
into example, nor the evidences of it be in the Treasury or Exchequer, but
after the Receipt of the income of it, all the memorials of it should be
burned, nor any Writs or Commissions be revived or sent out to enquire the
value of it, thus Walsingham: this I confess is a Matchless President, but
usually it is otherwise; for they being presumed never to grant without cause,
in their so doing, the people are to submit and pay willingly; for Princes ever
acknowledged pecuniary supports from their Subjects, the fruits of love; and
their Subjects declared ever themselves in reason, religion, and gratitude
obliged to yield them. And therefore as wise Parliaments have ever calculated
Prince's affairs and supplied them with Counsel, and Money to carry them
through with honor and success: so gracious Princes have been thrifty and
sparing of Receipts from their Subjects, being willing rather to pinch in their
personal and pleasurable Accomodations, then either spare from the public
Concerns, or press their people beyond their good wills and reasonable powers;
and regular Princes have had Reliefs by the pleasing ways of Subsidies, See
Cook 4. Inst on c. 1. p. 34. High Court of Parliament.
Disms, Quinzims, and the like, generally consented unto. And the Subject
sometimes having found Privy-Seales good security, has lent money on them as
men do on other securities; and when its a voluntary act, there is no injury
done, volenti non fit injuria. But Tallages or loans of compulsion, or such
things not laid by Parliament more majorem, See Cook 2 Instit. on c. 29. Mag.
Charta on the Statute 34 E. I. De Tallagio non concedendo p. 533, 534. where
our Text is quoted by Sir Ed. Cook, so p. 584.
the Subjects of England have ever regretted. And of this nature were these
Tallages here spoken of, a word made Latin from the French Taille, quod
vectigal significat; this word Tallagium, is in Historians ranked with
Exactiones, to show the execrable nature of them. In the Council of Lateran
amongst other Complaints made by the Clergy to the Pope against the Laity, this
is one that they did tam Ecclesias ipsas, Gervas. Tilbur. in Chronic. p 1452.
Edit. Land. 1456.
etc. Burden the Churches and Churchmen with Tallages and exactions.

Tallage then as it was an imposition, so an Imposition on Land, called
otherwise Hydage; Chronic. Thorn. p. 2006. Gloss Twysd. annex. legib.
Saxonicis, p. 218. Gervas. Tilbur. c. penult. Spelm. in Gloss p. 352.
anciently it was taken by some Kings of England upon all Land, where not
exempted by Grant, as the Lands of St. Augustine in Canterbury was. It was a
charge on every Hyde of Land; which Hyde contained not 20 Acres of Land, as
Polydore Virgil mistakes himself, but 100. which they in those times called a
Plough land, that is, enough to employ a Plough; so H. 3. in Anno 1083. sent
out Justices of Inquiry into all Shires, who, upon the Oaths of men were to
inquire Quot Iugera, etc. What quantity of Acres of Land in every Village,
employed a Plough; and M. Paris adds, and how many Cattle would till a Hyde of
Land, and their return was an 100. Acres. So that this proportion of Land was
upon all occasions the subject of this Charge; sometime many Hydes of Land were
jointly charged, so Etheldred in Anno 1008. to oppose the Danes, charged every
310 Hydes with one ship, and of every eight a Coat of Mail and a head piece;
Huntington lib. 6 Hist. Wigorniens. ad Annum 1084. M. Paris ad An. 1083.
the Conqueror charged every Hyde with 6. s. So Rufus to enable him to hold
his right in Normandy laid 4. s. on every Hyde; Henry I. toward the Marriage
of his Daughter charged every Hyde with 3. s.

These and the like, as Danegeld, Lestage, Stallage, are by Historians called
Exactiones, Brompton p. 957. Greg. Tolossanus Syntag. lib. 8. c. 7.
and never had acceptance from the people of England when they were not
consented to, and charged on them by Parliament, Cives Londinenses iterato ad
quingentas marcas Talliati quasi servi ultimae conditionis ad regis arbitrium,
non obstante aliqua liberate jugum subeunt servitutis, M. Paris. p. 929.
but things of foreign President; and therefore put upon them contrary to the
Laws of their freedom, and not suitable to the calm Government of their
Princes, who have delighted more to be accounted indulgent fathers, then
rigorous Lords: yea that Tallages may appear odious, (as un-Parliamentaryly
imposed) that Answer of the Clergy of England to Pope Innocent, Anno 1246. is
remarkable; for when the Bishops were by his Command to exact of their Clergy
Tallage, they were commanded by the King to resolutely and unanimously answer,
That no such Tallage or Aid could be or had been accustomed to be laid without
great Prejudice to the dignity of their Sacred Sovereign, M. Paris. p. 708.
and the dignity of his Crown, which they would not, nor could not siffer to be
disparaged or injured, as thereby it would. And when H. 3. so ruffled his
Subjects, that they thought not fit to deny him in Parliament a Grant of
unusual loanes and Tallages; yet so unwillingly did they do what they did, and
so against their minds, M. Paris. p. 581.
could they have avoided it, That they made a saving of the Subjects Liberties,
and inserted it into his Charter, Quod illa exactio vel aliae praecedentes non
traherentur in consequentiam.

Eis imponere, illis inconsultis.
This is added, to show that the Law cannot be reasonably such as ties up
lawful power from alteration of it, if it appear to be useless or inconvenient;
yea, be the Law what it will, if it be such as I will not take benefit by, and
in so doing am not injurious to others, the Law intends not the restraint of me
by it. The Law is, the King cannot take my goods without my consent, or rate my
Land, but by a legal rate: yet if I will freely pay the King out of my estate
so much, and give him such of my goods, I may do it notwithstanding the Law,
for that and this are consistent; that being made for my benefit, if I will
accept it; this being a testimony of my love and consent, which abates the
injury, and makes the acceptance a courtesy. Hereupon, though the King cannot
by his own pleasure lay Tallages upon his Subjects, yet by their consents he
may, and no grievance is it, no oppression in it, since volenti non fit
injuria, and nothing being more free then gift: 2 Instit. on c. 29. Magna
Charta.
if they in Parliament consent to it, then it is a legal charge; and this the
Chancellor mentions, to tell Prince and People, that extraordinary courses are
not to be practiced, where legal and warrantable ones may be brought about; and
to tell them further, that the way to serve Princes affairs, and the just ends
of Parliaments, is to compose Parliaments of religious, sober, sincere, and
knowing Members, who will be diligent during the time of their service, who
will be sober, that they may serve the King and satisfy the people, and who
look for no result but God's blessing, the King's honor and safety, the
peoples good, in which their and their Posterities goods are involved. These so
fitted to every proper judicial purpose (as they will lay no charge, but ex
praevisa ratione, On Westminster 1. 2 Instit. p. 156.
as did the Parliament of 3 E. 1. on which words of the Preamble, A son
Parliament General, Sir Edw. Cook has this Note] So called, because all the
Laws then made were general, and that great and honorable Assembly were not
entangled with private matters, but with such only as were for the greatest
good of the Commonwealth; for the end of this Parliament is, Pour le common
profit de Saint Esglise and del Realm:) so in their so doing, the people will
rest satisfied and the Crown have its dues willingly, and in good time paid and
answered; otherwise it comes like drops of blood, which a generous Prince cares
not to have come into his Coffers: for as God loves a cheerful giver, so do
Princes love Presents offered them freely, as well as fully. And therefore the
Provents of Tallages, 2 Instit. on 29 Chapter. Magna Charta, p. 46.
and alia onera, such as are all preterlegal charges, not warranted by
Common Law, Custom, and Concession of Parliament, have been little addition to
the real Grandeurs of their obtainers, because what they gained by them, they
lost in the good will of their Subjects. Hereupon H. 1. made a Charter to his
people in these words, Math. Paris. p. 55.
Quia regnum oppressum erat injustis exactionibus, etc. He promises to take
away all ill Customs, by which the Kingdom of England has been oppressed. For
there is nothing that has sown such Cockle and Tares of trouble in this Nation,
as unusual Taxes, Sir Tho. Smith, lib. 2. c. 2. De Republ. Angliae.
I mean such as are not granted more majorum. For though the Commonalty may be
wary whom they send to Parliament, to represent them; yet when sent they are,
the charge they consent to lay, must be paid by them: nor is it violence to
exact it, but right to the Law of its Constitution. And since no wise
Representatives can be presumed to give more then they are in their principals
able to answer, supposing the Granters wise men, and if not so, the more unwise
their Choosers and Impowrers; and supposing the grants in such a proportion, as
is suitable to the rational motives of them to grant it, the matter and kind of
the grant must be made good, and this they are charged withal, ipsis
consentientibus, and that is non invitis.

Quale dominium denotant leges civiles, cum dicant, quod Principi placult,
legis hab^t vigorem.

Lib. 1. Instit. Digest. lib. 1 tit. 4. De Constitutionibus Principum.
This Sentence cited out of the Civil Law is Ulpians, and the application of it
is thought to fix the power of absolute Regality, upon whatever is of Subjects
for it to take hold of, which perhaps is not the Lawyers meaning, but with some
restriction; that Kings do not make Laws upon their own Wills, but as assisted
in Council by their learned and sage Counselors, who advising them what to
declare Law, accompany them also in a mild interpretation and execution of it.
For so the same Law qualifies the generality of this rule by that omnia sunt
Principis quoad jurisdictionem and protectionem, Digest. p. 42. in gl. ad
Prooem. C.
non quoad proprietatem; and therefore though in absolute Regalities, where no
Laws of modification are, this rule is made use of to warrant high courses; yet
may this have a calmer interpretation in the nature and intendment of it. A
Woman is under her husbands plenary power, he may do with her, so he destroy
her not, as he please; her person is at his pleasure; her fortune subject to
his dispose; her allowance and manner of living solely to the quantum and quale
of his proportioning them: yet no wise man will hence conclude, that Husbands
do, where good, improve this to a Tyranny over, or a vexation or diminution of
their Wives; rather wise men know, and worthy wives find, that from deserving
Husbands their Virtues have all the Compensations and Rewards that this
Prerogative of the Husband over them can devolve upon them, and though the
nature of Marriage favor the man, yet the Courtesy and nature of man retorts
the fruit and kindness of such favor and prelation on the Wise, because she is
willing to obey, she rules, and by resigning to her Husband, has assignation of
his right to rule by him all he has and himself too: so in the case of absolute
Kingship, though Kings may by the high Sovereignty of their Dignity curb their
Subjects, that they dare not deny whatever they ask, or refuse what they
command, because God has made their Swords of straw, against their Princes of
Steel; and their hands are bound, when their Sovereigns are loosed, and only
can be bound by God: yet that by virtue of this position, and the sacredness of
it, they should so do, is no necessary consequence, though too often true. And
truly, we in England have cause to sweeten this hard Exposition of this Rule,
when we consider our Princes, as true Monarchs as any, and as independent on
any but God; yea, as well protected against the insolences of Subjects, as any
Monarchs, yet have for the most part been very calm, considerate, and ruleable
by the Laws of the Land, and not laid yoakes upon us, but such as either, some
of them, have been ill counseled to, 2 Instit. p. 152 on Stat. W. 1.
or by necessity of affairs put upon, and have remitted, with a kind promise of
not so doing hereafter. And if they have obtained consent in Parliament to any
thing of extraordinary advantage to them; 11 H. 7. c. 27. 2 Instit. p. 158 on
W. 1.
yet it implying National consent, ought to be accounted no pressure upon their
people. Kings may have necessities more then ordinary upon them, and they must
have suitable supplies for them, which if they have by Parliamentary Levies,
they have them by undoubted Legality, and the Subject repines not against the
Prince for it, but owns the Law, which by his own consent has bound him from
repining, and to the payment of his proportion toward it. Such a favorable
interpretation then being given of this Quod Principi placuit, legis habet
vigorem, it follows, that the rigidness of the general rule may be allayed by a
particular instance of goodness. And therefore the Kings of England having never
made Laws but in Parliament (Courts that they call not only modestiae ergo
antiquam consuetudinem servare, as a Forreigner falsely writes, as if they
signified no more, then to do whatever they were commanded to by the King; so
that (in his words) Thesauro Politico Impress. Francofurt. Anno 1610. De Regno
Britannico, p. 216.
Parliamenta regiarum magis cupiditatum larvae quaedam sint, quibus in rerum
dubiarum consultationibus laborem and incommodae, in periculosis autem rebus
damnum subterfugiunt, quam ut per ca potestatem suam moderari veliut, as that
malevolent Romanist slanderously reports. I say the truth of things being
examined, and the Kings of England using such wisdom, temper, and regularity in
their proceedings) though quod Principi placuit, Quod Principi placet legis
habet vigorem, eas scilicat, quas super dubiis in concilio desimendis, procerum
quidem consilio and Principis authoritate accordante, vel antecedente constat
esse promulgatas. Fleta in Proemio.
legis habet vigorem, p^imitively had a sense of asserting Kingly absoluteness,
his pleasure being the Law, and his Word the Warrant, without any abatement
from Princely Grace and Justice; yet in as much, as in the Regal Government of
England, tempered by the Politic, there is no prerogative of just Regality
usurped upon, but the Crown remains Imperial, notwithstanding the politic
composition with it. There seems to me reason to conclude, that quod Principi
placuit, legis habet vigorem, may be interpreted of the legal and virtuous
pleasure of the King, the Will of him counseled by his Sages about him, though
not so (perhaps) in Ulpian's meaning, or the common intendment of Civilians by
it, which is the reason why our Text-Master applies it as here he does.

Sed long aliter potest Rex politice imperans genti suae, quia nec leges ipse
sine subditorum assensu mutare poterit, nec subjectum populum renitentom
onerare impositionibus peregrinis.

This the Chancellor adds in the positive, as before he had in the negative
asserted the indulgence of the English Government, which he was the more bold
to write upon. The King of England being not a Prince of rage, Papinianus
jurisconsultus ab Antonio Caracalla securi percuffus est. Caracalla enim cum
interfecto fratre Geta, ei mandaret, ut in Senatu, and apud populum facinus
dilueret, Papinianus respondit non tam facile parricidium excusart posse quam
fieri. Ira commotus Caracalla. Sanctissimum virum occide jussis Spartianus in
Caracalla.
as Caracalla was but a Father of mercy, who delights to hear his duty modestly
remembered him, does not do by his Papinians, as Caracalla did, destroy them,
because they will not destroy Conscience and truth, the Image of God in their
souls; but cherishes and considers their counsels, and steers his course by
them; which lenity, makes the Chancellor, and me by this example, humbly bold
to proceed in the modest explication of the words; Legibus astringuntur
rectores Politici, nec ultra possunt procedere in prosecutione justitiae, quod
de Regibus, and aliis Monarchis Principibus non convenit. Quia in ipserum
pectore sunt leges reconditae prout casus occurunt, and pro lege habetur, quod
Principi placet sicut jura gentium tradunt; sed de rectoribus politicis non sic
reperitur, quia non audebant facere aliquam novitatem praeter legem
conscriptam. Sanctus Thomas, lib. De Regimine Principum, c. 1.
Sed long aliter potest Rex, politice imperans genti suae. In which words, our
Text-Master joins political power to absolute regal, and sweetens the potest,
that is solely voluntatis and placiti, by that which is politic, and secundum
dictamen juris. For whereas by absolutenes of power, a King is understood to do
what he pleases with the Laws, and people of his Government, as the Eastern
Monarchs at this day do: By this the King can do only, quod de jure potest.
This King James of blessed memory sets out notably in these words: The one
(says he) acknowledges himself ordained for his people, King James's Basilicon
Doron, 2 Book, p. 155. Works in fol.
having received from God a burden of Government, whereof he must be
accountable; the other thinks his people ordained for him a prey to his
passions and inordinate appetites, as the fruits of his magnamity. This is a
long aliter potest, no degradation of Majesty, but an attenuation of greatness
to a more placid, and less terrible representation of it self. While as God,
though he can do what he will, yet is pleased to give us leave to say, he
cannot do what is contrary to his nature, not often does contrary to his
declared Will: so Princes, though by that men call the incircumscriptions of
their boundless authority, they can do extraordinary acts of greatness; yet God
so deals with them, that the Laws of their Governments are the usual methods of
their administration, and contrary to, or beyond them, they do not (as goed
Kings) pass; and Contzen makes it good, that it is not only advantageous to the
people, but also to the Prince, or public Magistrate, to have no power to do
some things of himself, without the consent of his inferiors, and he makes the
first thing to be, that he put no new Charges, Tributes, and Tolls; and the
second, that he make not new Laws, nor abrogate old without them. And this, had
it not been for the quiet and interest of our Princes, as well as of us their
people; they who knew so well the arcana imperiorum, would never have been so
zealous imparters of the power, and so faithful maintainers of it in its right
channel, no one King of England, that I remember, ever claiming absolute
Regality separate from politic infusion. His Majesty's Protestation in the
head of his Army at Stafford, Septem. 1942. p. 38. Collect. Speech to the
Members of both Houses at Oxford, 1643. p. 44. Collect. Contzen. Politic. lib.
1 c. 21. p. 48.
( I do solemnly promise in the sight of God to maintain the just privileges
and freedom of Parliament, and to govern by the known Laws of the Land, to my
utmost power; and particularly, to observe inviolably the Laws consented to by
Me this Parliament. Let your Liberties, Properties, Privileges, without which
I would not be your King, be secured and confirmed, and there is nothing you
can advise me to, I will not meet you in:) But acknowledging any think like it
an error in him, through the suggestions of ill Counsel, and cautioning
against its being brought in president for time to come. And therefore as the
Law has secured, that the King should not be diminished, and made praecario
regnare, sed ubi just and secundum leges imperarit, summa illius sit potestas;
making him in his great Council and Courts Judge of all, (and requiring the
Allegiance of all his Lieges to his person, as the Living Law.) So has the Law
obtained from the King, leave to modifie things between Will and Law, and to
make them both a Composition of Harmony, and kind understanding between
Sovereignty and Subjection. Sir Edw. Cook on Stat. Merton, c. 9. p. 97. 2.
Instit.
The truth of this is collectable from the words of H. 1. surnamed Beauclerk,
in his Letter to Pope Paschal, Notum habeat sanctitas vestra, etc. Your
Holiness (quoth the King) knows, that by God's blessing on my life and Reign,
the Prerogatives and Usages of Our Kingdom of England, has not been diminished
or usurped upon: And if I (which God forbid) should consent to mine own, and
the Nations Eclipse therein, my Peers and the whole People of my Realm, would
by no means endure it so to be. And so in the Letters of the Nobility of
England, by assent of the whole Commonalty assembled in Parliament at Lincoln,
the words to the Pope are, We are bound by solemn Oath, to the observation and
defense of the Liberties, Laws, and Customs of the Realm of England, which
with all our power we will ho'd fast, and secure with our utmost vigor;
neither do we permit, or will we permit; neither will we, or ought we to pass
any unwonted, undue, and prejudicial things to our King, though he would pass
by them, and should favor the same. And the reason they give of this their
adhesiveness is, because the premises do manifestly tend to the dishonor of
the Crown and Dignity of the King of this Land, and to the subversion of the
State of the said Kingdom, and to the prejudice of the Liberties, Customs, and
ancient Laws of the same. Thus in that Letter; which shows, that the Kings of
England have yielded their Subjects a non-assent, if they should attempt to
alter Laws, or make them contrary to the legal Establishments; and this comes
up to the Chancellour's words, Nec leges ipse sine subditorum assensu mutare
poterit. And * Carrarius makes it plain by all authorities and acknowledgments,
Lib. De literali and Mystica Iuris interterpret. q 4. art. 3. p. 312.
that Princes are bound by the Laws of their Governments. And as it is not
Kingly in them, contrary to those Laws, to take away any thing that is their
Subjects, Lib. 3. c. 3. De eruditione Principum.
as Saint Thomas plainly proves, so especially not their Laws; nor, as I said
before, has it ever been justified by any King of England so to do, but the
contrary, and that in relation to the Law, which says, No Law in being, whether
Common Law, Statute Law, or Custom, Speech of King James, 1605. p. 506. Speech
of King Charles, pass. Bills in Answer to the Petition of Right. 3 Caroli. Sir
Edw. Cook, on 1 Westminster, 3 E. 1. p. 15.
upon which Inheritances depends, can be changed by the King alone, or by the
Lords and Commons alone, or by the Lords Lay and Commons, excluding the
Spirituality; but by the King, as the Head of the three Estates, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in the
Commons House in Parliament. These must cooperate to the change of a Law; and
without they do, no Law can be changed; 3 Instit. p. 165. 1 Instit. Sect. 97. 2
Instit. c. 30. on Magna Charta, p. 60, 61, 62.
nor can any Custom, though but local, upon which Title of Land or such like
interest of the Subject depends, be destroyed, or be legally taken away, or
made null, but by Act of Parliament; which how to pass (besides the
prementioned Authorities) the 11th Chapter of Doctor and Student sets forth.
And hence it is, 2 Instit. on 29 Chapter, Magna Charta, p. 56.
that in all Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, etc. these words are in the
King's Commission to his Justices, Facturi quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum
legem and consuetudinem Angliae; which shows, that the Laws are, as enacted, so
commanded by the King to be executed according to Law and Justice, and this
makes the Chancellour's next words true.

Nec populum renitentem onerare peregrinis impositionibus.
This expatiation of the former non potest, produces this Clause, as full of
emphasis's, as words, Populum] that is a word of capacity, more then gentem; for
gens signifies a kindred and relation; Alciatus and Brechaeus ad legem, 238, p.
508. De Verb. signific.
but populus imports a whole people; not only the plebs, and obscure part, but
the best, noblest, and most honorable; and the intent of the Chancellor, is
to show in the generality of the phrase, the extent of Impositions to all, high
and low, noble and mean, Church and Laymen; all are under the term populum
renitentem] as supposing, that naturally men reluct charge, and subjects
usually public ones: if the people be willing to pay what is laid on them,
the Text does not reach their willingness, nor debar them of it; Volenti non
fit injuria.
but it privileges them, unwilling to be compelled otherwise then by Law. For
as no man can be compelled to serve against his will any command, extra
patriam, because that is to exile him, and make him perdere patriam, which the
Law so makes his, Stamf. Pl. Coron. 116, 117. Instit 2d part on 29 Chap. Magna
Charta, p. 48. Poulton, p. 91.
that he cannot be, other then by judgment of Law, without his consent severed
from it, as was determined in Sir Richard Pembrugh's Case; so in his Country
can no man be imposed upon, either in person or estate, other then as he is
willing, or according to Law, Stat E. 1. c. 1. And the reason is, because that
is onerare] and burdens, the Law eases, lays not on any shoulders. And for our
Kings, the Law otherways provided. 1 Eliz. Dyer, 165. Cook 4 Instit. of
Parliaments, p. 29. Page 33. Page 34.
They had their Custuma antiqua sive magna granted to Edward the first, and
their Custuma parva and nova. They had their Butlerage, Prisage, and Tunnage
and Poundage, from the latter end of H. 6. to King James, to whom it was
granted for life. They had Quinzims, Fifteenths, Tenths, and these were
accounted truly theirs, and no burdens, because legally founded. For as
whatever the Law lays on the Subject, is in our Texts sense no burden: So
whatsoever is without, and against the Law laid on him, is nothing less then a
burden; and that he submitting to unwillingly, and wishing no good with the
obtaining of it from him, it often appears little advantage to the Princes that
acquire it. Walsingham tells us a notable story of the Lack-learning
Parliament, which gave so great a Wound to the Church, that when (possibly by
their irritation) Sir John Cheyey, and his Military Comrades, desired of the
King the Lands of the Norman Abbeys in England, Anno 1404. Temps H. 4.
in recompense of their service, God gave the then Archbishop of Canterbury
such a successful zeal for the prosperity of the Church, That he (Prelate-like)
courageously obtested against it, Si Rex quod absit vestro satisfecisset
execrando proposito, non esset opulentior uno quadrante sequenti anno. Et cerie
prius hoc caput exponam gladio, quam Ecclesia destituatur minimo jure suo, p.
415.
telling them to their faces, that they did it to satisfy their covetise; and
assuring the King, that if that their execrable desire were accomplished, he
would not be richer one farthing the next year; and sooner will I (said he)
have my head cut off, then submit to lose the Rights of the Church. And the
reason was, because it was imposition, not concessio, a fruit of their
importunity and ill advice, not a grant after Judgment, considering what, and
why to do; and peregrina, not more majorum; and hence relucted, as dangerous
and of ill president. For, Resolution of all the Judges, 4 Iac. See 3d Instit.
c. 24. of Purveyour, p. 84.
the Common Law has so admeasured the Prerogatives of the King, that they
should neither take away, nor prejudice the Inheritance of any; and these
Monopolies being malum in se, and against the Common-Laws, are consequently
against the Prerogative of the King; for the Prerogative of the King is given
him by the Common Law, See the Preamble to the Stat. 13. Charles 2d, for the
1200000 li. per annum.
and is part of the Laws of the Realm. So that the sense of the Chancellor is,
that no charge, but what for its nature is usual, and for its authority is
legal, is by our Text to be laid on the Subject contrary to his consent, that
is, other then by Parliament, which only can naturalize these impositiones
peregrinae, Parvi dejectique animi est, de subdutis non profectum quaerere
subditorum, sed quaestum proprium Sanctus Bernardus, lib. 2. De Consid.
and make them passable; and without which, as lewd women of pleasure, are by
Donatus termed peregrinae, and Valla opposes Peregrinus to Hospes: so do the
Laws of England brand Impositions of this kind, as spurious and rejectitious,
and all good Princes have abhorred to exact them, after they have been informed
the ill nature and consequence of them.

Quare populus ejus libere fruitur bonis suis legibus, quas cupit regulatas,
nec per regem suum nec quemvis alium depilatur.

This follows, to show the benefit of good Laws,. by which just Princes suffer
themselves to be bound. 2 Instit. p. 534.
All Tallages, Burdens, or Charges, put upon the Subject by the King, either
to, or for the King; or to, or for any Subject, by the King's Letters Patents,
or other Commandment or Order, is prohibited ( by 25 E. 1. and 34. E. 1.)
unless it be by common consent in PARLIAMENT. And hence, because the Kings of
England do not claim power over their own Laws, or their own Subjects purses,
but according to Law; it comes to pass, that the Laws of freedom, in both the
former Cases, and all the Descendants from them, remain firm, and are not
attempted to be violated; nor can by the wit of man a safer way be found out to
preserve the Virgin purity of Laws in these points, other then by settling such
Revenues upon the Crown, as well husbanded, will amply satisfy the necessities
of it. If the King wants, King James's Speech, 1605. p. 540 of his Works.
the State wants, and therefore the strengthening of the King is the
preservation and the standing of the State, and woe be to him that divides the
weal of the King from the weal of the Kingdom; and as that King is miserable,
how rich soever he be that reigns over a poor People (for the hearts and riches
of the people, are the Kings greatest Treasure) so is that Kingdom not able to
subsist, how rich and potent soever the people be, if their Kings want means to
maintain this State; for the means of your King, are the sinews of the Kingdom,
both in War and Peace. For since Princes have great cares, charges and sluices
of expense, and want of money is such a dishonor to a Nation, and defeat to
the politic affairs of it, as nothing can be greater: It well becomes Princes
in reason, as it is commendable in policy, to supple their Subjects to such
settlements, and Subjects of loyalty and wisdom (to such unquestionable good
ends, as preservation of peace, and interest abroad and at home) will easily
consent to it, and think they do God and their Country, as well as the King,
good service in so doing. And by this means do they prevent all attempts of the
King by his Agents and Ministers, to supply himself extraordinarily when he has
of his own, whence he shall be enabled to defray the expenses of his Crown. By
the Stat. 12. and 13 Car. 2.
This, I suppose, is the reason of the establishment of that constant Revenue
of the Customs on our now Gracious Sovereign during his life, and the other
additions, See Preamble to the Statute 1 E. 6. c. 13.
to make up a constant Revenue of 1200000 li. a year. For though by the Stat. I
Iac. 33. rehearsal is made of Subsidies on all goods, which H. 7. H. 8. E. 6.
Queen Mary, Queen Eliz. had and enjoyed by Authority of Parliament; yet the
Grant of Tonnage and Poundage, etc. for defending the Seas, was even then
thought a small Revenue for so expensive a purpose, and this was but during the
life of King James. After I find no perpetuation of it, but 3 Caroli, c. 7.
four entire Subsidies are granted by the Temporalty, to supply the King's
weighty occasions, more then his constant Revenue can supply; so are the words
of the Statute. So that Tonnage and Poundage, being as some thought before our
troubles, not settled by Act of Parliament, but taken away by the Statute 17
Car. 1. in Anno 1641. by which Act (more says the King in his Speech the 22 of
June 1641. was granted of his right then ever was by any of his Predecessors)
the Revenue of the King was but meanly provided for till this settlement; which
truly all things considered, will appear to be, though a great, yet a wise and
worthy one, and as is by wisemen believed, no more then the necessary expenses
of his Majesty will require. And if it do prevent the inconveniences of
neediness, (one of the most worrying mischiefs to greatness) the Subject will
have great cause to pay willingly, and joy in the prudence of so convenient a
settlement, as will prevent what follows, Peeling and polling of Subjects.

Nec per Regem suum, aut quemvis alium depilatur.

This follows, to show that though the King, qua King, can do no wrong, yet
necessity may make him so give way to the injuries of his Ministers toward his
Subjects, that they may in a sense become his, Sanctus Thom. lib. 1. c. 5. De
Erudit. Principum.
since qui non prohibet peccare cum possit, jubet. Now though true it be, that
our Kings have ever considered; first, an liceat; secondly, an expediat;
thirdly, an deceat, in what, for the most part, they have done, and have never
been of Aemilius Censorinus his mind, Plutarch in Parallelis, p. 315.
who was so grievous to his Government, that he would reward those that
invented new and unheard of punishments for his people: yet is it also true,
that in some of their Reigns too much advantage has been given to discontent by
Monopolies, and new courses of raising money, which (good Kings) they have made
little profit in the end by. Walshingham in E. 2. p. 62. edit. Land.
Of these illegal courses, Walshingham relates in E. 2. that he did ponere
maculam in gloria sua, and that his rage against Walter Langton, his Fathers
Treasurer, was such, that he seemed to be erectus in Tyrannidem, unde mox
contraxit infamiam perseveraturam temporibus diuturnis. This the Law frowns
upon, as contrary to the nature of English freedom, and thereupon by the
Statute of 21 Jacob. c. 3. it is declared a grievance and inconvenience to the
Subject, contrary to the Laws of the Realm, etc. and remedy is given against
it; yea, our Kings have taken great pleasure in releasing grievances: Malmsbur.
lib. 5. in H. 1. p. 88. M. Paris, p. 55. and 56.
so did Henry the first, edicto statim per Angliam misso, injustitias a fratre,
and Ranulpho institutas prohiberet, aliquarum rerum moderationem revocavit in
solitum. For they remembered, that a wrong it was to oppress Subjects that are
bound to obey, and that God, whose to do right is, would be the helper of those
in distress, Lib. 4. c. 5. De erudit Principum.
and the punisher of their Distressours: so true is that rule of Saint Thomas,
Multum timenda and cavenda est rapina Principi, and in se and suis
collateralibus inferioribus, multum enim est Deo, and sanctis exosa, diabolo
placida, homini nociva, etc. and dreadful are the effects of God's Judgment on
evil Princes, as the same Saint Thomas makes out in the particulars of its
misery. Boni pastoris est tondere pecus, non deglubere, dictum Tiberii apud
Sueton. in Tiberio, c 32.
Now depilari signifies, in our Chancellour's sense, a diminution, or taking
off the good nap and rich covering that an Englishman has, and not only
shearing, but shaving him to a baldness of poverty and servility. For depilatio
was the dishonor of slaves, as covering the head was token of enfranchisement:
and truly, to reduce the Subject of England to such a condition, as to be naked
of Law and property, was too much for the stout stomach of the men of Kent to
bear in the Norman William. Holingshed, p. 2.
For when they were begirt by his Army, they then resolutely told him, and his
Normans, That they would wage a fierce War with him, being resolved rather
there to die the valiant Assertors of their Laws and Liberties, Plutarchus in
Orat. De Fortitud. and virtute Alexandri, p. 340 Knighton. p. 2353 Chronicon.
W. 1. 910. Brompton.
then to submit to the loss and antiquation of them. And sure such an Aegon, as
had an Eagle greatness in his Kingly Breast, would not aim at so mean thoughts,
as to dishonor his own people, by depilating them: yet fierce man as he was,
he did depilari, both in France and here, and he paid dear for it on his
Deathbed: And justly deserved he to be bereaved of a Subterfuge in the mercies
of God, who had so much of mercyless savageness to men, himself in nature, his
subjects in relation, and his vassals in misery. The Chancellor then uses
depilatur, to express the cruel nature of Kingless exaction, which ought to be
so much the more inveighed against by a Subject to the King of England, because
it has been much against his Dignity, (so no Princes ever in the World have
been more merciful, less pressing on their Subjects, then the Kings of England
(for the most part) have been. And therefore depilatur is brought in here, as
that which is looked upon to import dishonor, since hair is an ornament to the
head, the noblest part, and it is the emblem of the vigor of nature, which some
lose upon decay of succulency; or as a punishment for some enormity. Among the
Jews, the Nazarites men sacrated to God, were not shaven, no Razor came on
their head, and Absalom's hair so large and thick was his ornament, rendering
him acceptable with all Israel. Quod poena genus ipsis fuerit coma detensio in
vilspendium, and opprobrium delinquentis constituta, in ss. De pace tenenda in
Usub. Fendorum.
The Lombards thought shaving of the head the greatest and most opprobrious
punishment, says Alvarotus. Among the Saxons, to shave off the hair, and make
a man ball'd, was the punishment of Theft; Spec. Saxonic, lib. 2. c. 13.
and if a Woman were incontinent, she was shaven; so if any one pulled off
another Beard, he was punishable, and Baldus gives the reason, Quia barba est
membrum in homine; and he that considers, that Julius Caesar took it for a
favor from the Senate, that he had a Crown granted him to wear, by which he
covered his baldness; and Carolus Calvus was named so, not only for
distinction, but in a sort of reproach; and the Mother of the Sons of
Clodoveus, the first Christian King of France, chose rather to have their heads
cut off, then their hairs polled. He that considers this, will easily grant
that baldness, this depilati^ here, intends such a peeling and polling, as
amounts to not only poverty, but dishonor; thus the Jews took baldness. As
this is collectable from that scoff of the Children to the Prophet, 2 King 2.
23.
Come up you Bald-pate. The Hebrews therefore rendered this by (...), a word that
signifies to pull by the roots, radicitus evellere, and it implies not only
enmity in the doers, but pain in the sufferer, Isa. 50. 6. I gave my back to
the smiters, and my cheeks (...), to them that pulled off the hairs, that is,
to violence and cruelty in the high actings of it. Thus this Text is applied to
Christ as Prophetical of his sufferings, and fulfilled in them: so that the
Chancellor by his depilatur, means such an impoverishing of the Subject, as
renders him naked of all plenty and beauty, and exposes him to be in the nature
of a Villain, Cowel in verbo Theme.
under the lash and pleasure of his Lord, as horses in a Team are. For so Cowel
interprets the word Theme, Regale privilegium est, quo qui fruitur, habet
villanorum, id est, servorum and mancipiorum intra feudum sun^^ propaginem and
potestatem de illis, ut de caeteris suis seu liberis seu bonis mobilibus vel
immobilibus, pro libito disponendi: so he. And this I am sure has been so
unlike the Royal mind of our Princes to endeavor, that they rather have
desired to add to our freedom and riches, then detract or impair them.

Consimiliter plandit populus sub rege regaliter tantum principante, dummodo
ipse in Tyrannidem non labatur.

Here the Chancellor shows, that where Regalities own no National Laws; yet if
they restrain their power and wills, to prize Justice, and gratify not their
passions above general good, and so tyrannize over their Subjects, making their
lives grievous them, there also people cannot choose but be happy. This the
grave Historian Xenophon notably confirms, Lib. De Memora bilib. Socratis.
To (...), etc. That Government which is over men, willing and readily
submitting to the same, and wherein the Laws are the measure of Rule, is called
a Kingdom; but where men are ruled by no Law, but by the will of their Ruler,
against their own wills, this is a Tyranny. For there being no Governor, or
Government, but acquiesces in those common notions of Order and Justice, which
interfere not with power, but cooperate with it; it must needs follow, that
Subjects under such a Government, though never so tart and severe, yet if it be
just, shall not (while they continue wary and worthy) find any grievance of the
power, but find a blessing in, and from it. For it is not greatness of power,
that betrays men to abuse of it, but their own corruption, which thence takes
occasion to vexatiously exercise it. And this is the Rise of all Tyranny, when
men obtain power to eliminate virtue, and that once discarded, to become
Monsters and Tigers in man's flesh, (...), Plutarchus ad ingentem ducem apud
Stoboeum, Sermon. 44. p. ^19.
etc. For Reason and Wisdom residing in a Prince, and being (as it were) the
keeper of his soul, whatever in his power is dangerous, it sweetens and allays
and leaves only the kind and useful parts of it for him to express. Against
which abuse of God's bounty in Princes p^elation, there is no more expedite a
Cordial and defensative, then to consider God the Lord of all, as a resister of
the proud, and a giver of grace to the humble, and take a resolution to
practice such a dominion over ones own mind, Apud S^obae^m firm. 44. p. 3. 5.
as may reduce it under the Empire of reason and justice (which Bias expressed,
when he wept upon condemnation of a man to death, and one asked him why he wept
for what he had occasioned, his answer was, (...), etc. because 'twas necessary
that the affections of nature should give way to the directions and Commands of
the Law) so to do to others, as they would have others do to them, and then to
propound such Presidents of equanimity or rather Magnanimity, as are famous in
their kind in men of great place and opportunity. 'Twas a rare demeanor of
Aelius Pertinax which we read of, when the Roman Senate besought him that he
would call his Queen Augusta and his son Caesar, his reply was, sufficere,
inquit, debet quod ego ipse invitus regn^vi quum non mererer, nimis
aequissimus, omniumque communis; yea if so great ingenuity be in the soul of
power, Jornandes lib. 1. De Aelio Pertinac.
it will not express it self to any height, but what is consistent with general
content and common advantage. I do not read that Solomon's Reign had any thing
but plenty and blessing of the King, Logibus namque regni and consuetudinibus
de ratione introductis and di^ obtentis, and quod laudabilius est talium
virorum (licet subditorum) rex noster non dedignatur consilio, Quos morum
gravitare, peritia juris, and regni consuetudinibus, sua sapientia and
eloquen^ia praerogat^va aliis novit praecellere, etc. Glanvil in Prolog. ante
Tractat. De Legib. and Consuer. Angliae.
yet Solomon's power was in a sense absolute; nor that Constantine, Marcus,
Antoninus, or Trajans Reigns were branded with ought oppressive to their
Subjects, though they had all the absoluteness, that just Kings could have. So
long as there is a noble heart and a vice-less mind, which to gratify
greatness descends not beneath it self, there is no danger: nay so long as
Laws of mitigation, gagged by Religion, have only the force of remembrances
to Princes; Subjects are more to pray for good Princes then good Laws. For
there may be good Laws in a Nation, 'O (...), Stobaeus sermon. 9. de Justitia.
p. 101.
where under a bad Prince the Subject may be miserable, but under a good Prince
bad Laws seldom do hurt; for his goodness prevented their ill influence, and
wholly annihilated them by superinducing laws of remedy and relaxation. And
hereupon Conscience being under the aw of religion, and the Law of God binding
Subjects from capitulation and violence, to prayers and tears; if the Laws be
good and the Prince so too, all is sure to be well; but if otherwise, and they
must be parted, better a good Magistrate over bad Laws, then good Laws under
a bad Magistrate: for so it follows.

De quali Rege dicit Philosophus tertio Politicorum, quod melius est civitatem
regi viro optimo quam Lege optima.

This Maxim of the Philosopher, is, I suppose to be accounted, true upon
Consideration of two things. First, That good men were more ancient then good
Laws; for good Laws were invented by good men, instituted by God in Providence
to the declension of men from rectitude, as conversation and discovery of the
world occasioned their warp: for in Patriarchal times, and in the Innocence of
the golden Age, Nations and Continents submitted to one or few in whom they saw
most Divinity and Heroiqueness, and from those did they willingly receive the
rule of life and all the Prescripts of their public and private Concern; and
when to such Rulers and Lawgivers there was no Law but their own wills, no
question of their Commands but presently they were obeyed; yet even then did
the virtue of these Chiefs and Patrons keep them from Tyranny, and affectation
to themselves with injury to the public. But when once Vice had boiled off the
grain Color of virtue, and there was adoration given by men to the Idols of
Pomp, Power and Magnificence; then there was a necessity to limit
Encroachments, and to impede Advantages against popular Credulity by politic
Sanctions, and to make those accessable to rule, who were most demonstratively
just, and had the most generous and open latitude of epidemique Justice in
them, which policy made all men of Emulation Candidates to Government, and
those only sure to have it by public suffrage, who had the most pure and
public Spirits in them. Secondly, Better good Kings and Rulers then good
Laws, because good Laws are nothing without good Kings and Rulers that
execute them; Alas; the Law is but a dead Letter, it is the Minister of it that
quickens it, without him the best Laws are but like Medicaments in the
Apothecary's shop, unavailable to the sick man, who dies notwithstanding them.
Indeed as Demosthenes said, (...), etc. Laws are the soul of Governments; but
what are souls without bodies in which they move: Israel had good Laws in
Ahab's, Rheheboam's and other ill Kings times, but the Nation was never the
better but the worse for them, because God was more provoked by them, as they
were not improved aright under evil Kings, and thereupon all people are to pray
earnestly for good Governors, That under them they may live peaceable lives in
all Godliness and Honesty. For as it is not fire in the hearth that makes warm;
nor air in the sky that carries to the Port; nor light in the Candle that
enables to read; nor money in the purse, that feeds man, unless they be adapted
to us; and we within the sphere of these, whereby they may properly effect
their end upon us: So is it not good Laws that felicifies a Nation, unless
they be made happy by a good Guardian and Defender of them. Isocrates calls
Evagor as such an one, for his Empire was so moderate and just, Isocrat. in
Evagora apud Stobaeum sermon. 46. p. 329.
that all his life time in it he led (...), etc. without injury to anyone,
honoring the good, ruling over the bad, and punishing evil men only according
to the Laws; for such an one will not only execute good Laws in being, and
suspend the rigor of ill ones, till they can be repealed; but festinate the
substitution of good Laws in room of ill ones, and remove the snare in which
Subjects may be harmfully caught; and hence good Kings are called Fathers of
their Countries, because as they do ignoscere delicta, (...), (...), Arist.
lib. 5. De Rep. c. 10. Excellentia rei est in actu non in habitu, Scholastici
Stobaeus sermon. 4^. p. 247.
so do they agnoscere debita; and if iheir Children ask them bread, they will
not give them stones: if fishes, not scorpions: and this the Philosopher said
was the end of Kingdoms, which were to preserve virtue from the rapine and prey
of multitudes,. the Extravagance of which ends in Tyranny. For if all things
followed the suffrages of popularities, there would be more Jews in vote to
crucify truth and depose its regency in the mind, then cryers out for it;
because the whole world lies in wickedness. And hereupon though good Luwes are
rare blessings in themselves, yet compared with good Kings, they are less
blessings; because Kings are the Executioners that make them what they are in
their exercitial goodness, and upon this ground I suppose that of Pythagor as
is notable, (...), etc, that was the best of Cities, which had most good men in
it. It is then a truth, That good Rulers are better then good Laws, because
they make good Laws, and execute good Laws when made, and that with such
moderation as argues them wise and worthy Masters of their own minds, and
thereby not tempted to injustice; which Dioclesian eminently made good, for
though he were no friend to Christianity but a vehement impugner of it, yet he
was successful and great in esteem with his Soldiers, Subjects and
Confederates, and the first of all the Roman Emperors that resigned the Empire
to lead a private life; (...), Eutropius in breviario, lib. 9. ad finem.
and the Historian says, he had a suitable honor done him for his temperance,
Of all private Persons of his time he only was deified. For surely, he that
could leave so great a Command contentedly, without doubt used remarkable
justice in it; for had he delighted in making his will the law of his
Government, he could not have willed his diminution, and proposed alone when
none other did or durst, his own discharge from that Royalty into the
degradation of a privacy: but God dealing with the haughty nature of man, does
by his distillations of restorement, and through the liquefactions of virtuous
candor, so incline great minds, that they can deny themselves contentedly, to
benefit others certainly. Thus did a matchless Monarch, whose words were but
the report of his deeds, Eicon. Basil. c. 27. To the them Pr. of Wales, now our
dread Sovereign.
I studied to preserve the rights of the Church, the power of the Laws, the
Honor of my Crown, the Privilege of Parliament, the Liberties of my People
and my own Conscience, which, I thank God, is dearer to me then a thousand
Kingdoms. And this is the cause of the Philosophers position, That better it
is to be ruled by good Men then by good Laws.

Sed quia non semper contingit Praesidentem populo hujusmodi esse virum,
Sanctus Thomas in libro quem Regi Cypri scripsit de regimine Principum, optare
censetur, regnum sic institui, ut Rex non libere valeat populum Tyrannide
gubernare, quod solum fit, dum potest as Regia Lege politica cohibetur.

This Book of Saint Thomas, is amongst his Opuscula, and it is a most nervous
and pious tract of policy, which he, or as some think, Aegidius Romanus, wrote
to the then King of Cyprus, Lege argumentum operis.
to manifest his love to him, in a right conduct of him through all the
passages of Government, and the duties, that as a Governor he was to express
to his people: and the sense of this passage, here by the Chancellor quoted,
is out of the second Book, the eighth and ninth Chapters; and it is according
to the suffrage of reason: for because the will of men in power was found to
degenerate, by the temptations they in their prosperity had; and the impatience
of men under rule, made them fly out into furies against their Governors, by
reason of his severity toward, and absoluteness over them: therefore Nations
did treat with their Governors, not always as a pre-contract to their
acceptance of them, Lege lib. 3. c. 11. De Regimine Principum inter St.
Aquinat. Opuscula.
but often as a favor from them to their people; that they obeying them so and
so, should be free from such and such expressions of their power. And this
mutual understanding, being formed into a Law, makes the politic alloy to the
absolute regal Sovereignty, which he here (as considering it inconsistent with
Laws) opposes to it. And truly, if there be any probable means to preserve
Majesty and Mercy, it is surely by Laws; which, though they do not oblige under
humane penalties, Princes, as they do private persons; yet do remember them of
a Justice and Veracity, which they are ever to prefer, before their passion and
bare pleasure; and that not only in order to God, who requires truth in the
inward man, but also in order to reputation, which Princes are to value above
other men. For, as far as a King is in honor erected above any of his
Subjects, King James's Speech in Parliament, Anno 1603. fol. 497. of his Works.
so far should he strive in sincerity to be above them all, and that his tongue
should ever be the true messenger of his heart; and this sort of Eloquence, may
you assuredly look for at my hands. For the word of a King is the sacrum
quiddam, which ought to be held inviolate: since a King that governs not by his
Law, can neither be countable to God for his administration, nor have a happy
and established Reign: In the Law of Free Monarchies. p. 203. of his Works.
so said King James. And hereupon if Kings that do own Laws, do violate them,
and not rule according to them; they do somewhat unlike the lenity and grandeur
of their Office; for in that they imitate God, who is just and good, and in
this they contradict the Attributes, which illustrate and besplendour their
Crowns: for set aside the good that results to Governments by Kings ad.
ministering them, and their power will be terrible, and more feared then
rejoiced in; which that it may not be, 2 Instit. c.1. on Magna Charta. p 4.
the exercise of it by, and according to Laws, is by them admitted, and the
King's power and goodness exercised in his Courts of Justice, which are called
libertates (says Sir Edw. Cook) because in them the Laws of the Realm, quae
liberos faciunt, are administered: And in the practice of it, there is no easy
degeneration into extravagancies, since Laws are made by public Spirits to
public purposes of virtue, justice, and freedom; but Tyranny is the
exaltation of a private peculiar humor, and will, in contradiction to, and
destruction of the good of all others besides him, which Eutropius says Trajan
so much abhorred, Eutropius, lib. 8. edit. Sylburg. p. 113. Aelian. lib. 2 c.
2, Variatum Histor. Omnibus fere natura animique dotibus vacuus, ut monstro
similior, quam homini videretur, Guicciardinus, lib. 1.
(...), etc. He overcame his Military Renown by his Civil Administration, and
made his Government as a Prince, excel his dread as a Soldier. So just and
true did he approve of Antigonus his monition to his Son; An ignoras fili
regnum nostrum gloriosam esse servitutem, and qui aliter sentit neque regius
nec civilis homo, sed Tyrannus judicabitur. And therefore, though success, may
carry Princes aloft, and by them they may be happily accounted of, though they
little deserve it, as did Charles the eighth of France, deserve the same he had
by his successes in the Kingdom of Naples. I say, though these may sometimes
befriend Princes; yet the durablest, and most lovely stability they have, is
the love of Subjects, made theirs by their goodness, kindness, Conscience, to
govern by their Laws. The old Emperor Marcus is highly for this, mentioned in
Stories. For so beloved by the people was he for his virtues, Herodian, lib. 1.
p. 467. edit Syl. burgii.
that they called him not only the Poor man's King, but (...), etc. a bountiful
Father, and a brave King; a fortunate Captain, a moderate Governor; and added,
that all this he was from integrity, demeaning himself so, that his death was a
common sorrow to all Mankind. And such another was St. Ericus, King of Sweden,
about the year 1150. who made such just and good Laws; Vt non a rege in cives,
Jo Magnus. 419.
etc. That one would think they were not made by a King to his Subjects, but by
an indulgent Father for his most dear Sons: which they may with Reason and
Religion punish the violation of, in the treason and enormity of their
Subjects, when they themselves do not transgress the Law, but keep close to the
Directs of it, which a gracious Monarch so thinks upon, that as he desires to
govern by the known Laws of the Land, Protestation at the Head of his Army,
betwixt Stafford and Wellington, September. 19. 1642. Collect. p. 38.
and that the liberty and property of the Subject may be by them preserved,
with the same care as his own just Rights, so when he willingly fails in these
particulars, his integrity says he will expect no aid or relief from any man,
or protection from Heaven: so was the protection of glorious King Charles the
first. Which considered in the Kings of England, as parties voluntarily
consenting to their own obligement, with reverence I write it, to their eternal
honor, the subject is bound to return them a most faithful and just subjection
and loyalty in all things, according to the duty of subjection by the Laws of
God and men. And he that is persidious and disloyal to his Sovereign, who thus
lets him be free under a just and merciful Law, the free execution whereof he
impedes not, Aquinas, lib. 1. c. 10. De Regimine Principum inter Op^scula.
but defends to that end, yea submits to in all things wherein the Law concerns
itself. I say, he that is other then loyal, loving, and cordial to such a
Prince, is a Varlet ingrate, unnatural, a sinner of a Cham-like unnaturalness,
and thence the more abominable, 3 part Instit. c. 2. petit Treason ad finom, p
36.
because such without all provocation. And it is a very sage Oracle of the Laws
observation, Peruse over all Books, Records, and Histories (says he) and you
shall find a principle in Law, a rule in Reason, and a trial in Experience,
that Treason does ever produce fatal and final destruction to the offender, and
never attaineth to the desired end, (two Incidents inseparable thereto) and
therefore let all men abandon it, as the most poisonous bait of the Devil of
Hell, and follow the Precept in Holy Scripture; Fear God, honor the King, and
have no company with the seditious: so he.

Gaude igitur Princeps optime, talem esse legem regni in quo tu successurus es,
quia and tibi and populo ipsa securitatem praest abunt non minimam and solatium.

This is well subjoyned, to excite the Prince to a just return to God for his
favor, in giving him the reputed Title to so fair a Crown, and so flourishing
a Law as it was held by. Indeed, every mercy should oblige a man to gratitude,
and he is not worthy the Air he breaths in, the Earth he treads on, the meanest
indulgence he enter commons with the Creation in, that does not express his
gratulation to the fountain of his enjoyment: but Princes that have Crowns put
upon their heads, and are to rule by just and wise Laws, have myriads of thanks
to return God for their prelation, and ought to be paramount to others, in
returns of service suitable to their predignification. And this is the sense of
the Texts Gaude; not to kindle in the Prince a joviality, arguing levity, and
youthful froliqueness; but to raise him to a comfortable demeanor under so
great an indulgence: so to be affected with the mercy, as to think of King
David's quid retribuam; for it is a mercy to have a Law; and gracious Princes
think it so, that they may testify, that they fear: if their Wills were the
Law, the Law of God and Justice would not command their Wills: (...) etc.
Archytas Pythagor. apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 41. p. 268, 269.
But to have such a Law as England has, that has the marrow and best of all
Governments in it, and that establishes Prerogative and Privilege in a
consistency each with other, that asserts the King a free Prince and his
Subjects free People; that bounds the Crown not to swallow up property and
privilege; nor property or privilege to justle with, or oppose themselves to
the Crown. This, this is matter of joy to a Prince, probable to succeed his
Father to it; and that because where all parties concerned, are agreed in their
respective stations, to promote the noble ends of this politic Harmony, both
peace will be to the Prince in soul and body, and comfort to the subjects in
their enjoyment of their good things in peace; which thing, in other words, was
notably declared, to the satisfaction of all sides. For the then King Charles
the first declared this to his Parliament, That those things which have been
done, whereby men had some cause to suspect the Liberties of the Subject to be
trenched upon, 3 Caroli, Pulton Stat. p. 1433.
shall not hereafter be drawn into example of our prejudice; and in time to
come, in the word of a King you shall not have the least cause to complain. And
this he calls severitatis and solaminis praestatio, both as it begets a right
understanding between Prince and People, and makes a Gordian knot of their
mutual confidence in, and corroboration each of other; and also as it
strengthens them against all the counterblasts and discomposures, which are
occasioned by emergent evils; the sense of which is unpleasing and
insupportable, where guilt and envy is predominant; which since the Laws ruled
by, and subjected to, do anticipate; the Chancellor, had good reason to write,
as here he did, Quo and tibi, and populo ipsae non minimam prastabuxt
securitatem and solatium. For as fortunate courage gets dominion, so politic
circumspection settles it and secures it against its retrogradations; which
Severus made provision against, by that wall which he built in Britain,
Eutiopius, lib 8. p. 118. To. ^. (...) Sylb.
(...), etc. that he might preserve his Conquests, and be secure against their
relapse. For nothing in prosperity is desirable, but grace to use it well, and
a perpetuation of it; whence only arises the comfort and content of it. And
therefore as security falsely grounded, is the road to ruin, because it is
exoculate and lulls men asleep in confidences of fallacy, till they be
irreversibly ruined; which is the reason that prudence detects it, and ranks it
amongst those defects that argue fatuity and incircumspection; whereas in the
Chancellour's notion it is the fruit of diligence forethought, and the upshot
and compensation of all right conduct, and of all real wise design; which the
word (...), in the Holy Language represents, when it, in the conjunction of its
import, signifies boldness and confidence, past all fear, Prove. 10.9. Prove.
1.23. Quod confidentam sequatur securitas, Pagn. in verbo.
and is opposed to fear, because it is that boldness which is rationally and
prudentially so, upon the ground of all the lines of virtuous endeavor
conducting to, united in it. This is that which the Wiseman calls, The wisdom
of the Prudent is to understand his way; Prove. 14.8. Prove. 13.10. Prove. 24.3.
With the well-advised is wisdom; through wisdom is a house builded: by all
which are employed the delight of security, (...), says Suidas. And therefore
as all men endeavor to secure what is dear to them, their Wives from force,
their houses from robbery, their lands from waste, their evidences from
purloining, their children from seduction, their reputation from suffering,
their lives from treachery: so ought Princes to secure all they have, and are
by good Laws and a right and reasonable execution of them; which when they do,
their subjects are sure to be quiet, and their power established; yea, their
persons so contributive to public serenity and order, modestly deifyed; for
as no man can choose but think that Prince worthy pity, who with Censorinus has
the Character to be falix ad omnia, infaelicissi^us imperator: so no man can
choose but account him an object of veneration, 3 Instit. c. 99. p. 208.
who makes himself a numen of preservation to Mankind. And happy is that Prince
who turns his ears from Parasites, such as were Hubert de Burgh, Pierce
Gaveston, the Spencers, Tresilian, William de la Pool, Lord Hastings, Sir John
Catesby, Empson, Dudley, Woolsey, who all injured their Princes by their
praeter-legal counsels; and happy is that Prince that hearkens to the Laws and
to such brave Spirits, as with Charles Brandon, the valiant Duke of Suffolk, do
good to all, and harm to none. Oh! such Counselors, will make a King beloved
and adored, if he will hearken to them.

Tali lege, ut dicit idem Sanctus, regulatum fuisse totum genus humanum, si
inparadiso Doi mand^tum non praeteriisset.

This Clause I do not, in terminis, find in St. Thomas; but the sense of it I
do, in these words; Lib. 2. ^.^.
wherein he does prefer Politic Government with Regal, to only Regal
Government, and that he does, 1. Si referamus dominium ad statum integrum
humanae naturae, Quamvis in statu innocentia nulla esset mise ria nullaque
ignoran^ia, non tamen essent futuri omnes homines aquales in sapientia
andvirtute and in altis dotibus anima, tam naturalibus quam supernaturalibus;
and ideo. qui inter eos sapientia and virtuto praestarent dowinarentur aliis
absque aliqua tamen molestia. Arragonius q. 66. in secunda D. Thom. p. 89.
qui status inno^entia appellatur in quo non fuisset regale regimen, sed
politicum: for God having so ordered man in that state of innocence, that he
might not have sinned: had he continued upright, there would have been no
distinction of states and degrees of men, which are the effect of man's fall
and sin, nor would any have usurped over each other: but though there would
(perhaps) have been degrees amongst men, yet there would have been a sweet
harmony and condescension each to other, according to the congruity of their
common and sinless condition. This I suppose, Si homo non peocasset nulla
fuisset agrorum divisio, sed omnia communia Bonavent. Ser^. 18 To^ 1. p. 55.
and humbly conceive, is the sense of St. Thomas, which the Chancellor takes
from him, and applies to the Laws of England, to display in the Oratory of his
Conception, the grandeur of his love to the Laws. For no man can imagine, that
these words are less then hyperbolique, though they have in their pathos a
neruosity of truth, pointing out to the Laws Medicinality, in that it rectifies
all ill humors in the mass of the Policies constitution, and preserves the
head in its vital pre-eminence, and the members in their loyal subserviency, in
which two necessary offices of distributive efficacy, it makes a correspondency
to God's Institution, and carries on his order in a regularity of method: and
this I take to be the all that is deducible hence. For as no man knows what
form of Law God would have prescribed Man, had he continued upright, because
then he had needed no Law, Nomen and conditione^ servitutis culpa genuit, non
natura; and prima hujus subjectionis caput, est peccatum. Sanctus August. lib.
De Vera Innocentia, c. 164.
but that on his heart. For in the formality of it, Law was added, because of
transgression: So to say what Law would have been, or not have been, is besides
the meaning (I suppose) here. The only use of the instance is, to show that
Regal Power, mixed with Politic, as in the temperament of Englands Polity,
is the best Government to make both King and People secure of God's mercy, and
their mutual aid and affection each to other in order to their joint and
several capacities and conditions, happyable thereby: Nor is there any
Government in the World so true a Paradise to its Enjoyers, as this of the
Municipal Laws of England, accompanied with such supplements of the Civil Law,
as are legitimated with us, yea surely, if Paradise must be in an Island, as
Lindschotten will have it, this Island of Britain must be the Seylon where it
is, In his account of the Island of Zeylan. c. 14 Voyages to the WestIndies.
and the Laws of England must be the Paradise in it; for from them does flow
that quaternion of streams, Piety, Order, Riches, Renown, which render us the
admiration of all our Neighbors. And hereupon methinks, I may say of our
Chancellor, as Quintilian does of Julius Caesar's Commentaries, Tanta in illo
vis est, Hottoman in Praesat ante Commentar. Julii Caesaris.
tantum acumen, ea concinnatio, ut illum codem animo dixisse, quo bellavit,
apparuit. So much does my Text-Master say in few words, that I know not what to
add to him, in commendation of the Laws. For as he likens them to those of
Paradise the best state; so to those of the Lives under the Judges the next:
For it follows, Tali etiam lege regebatur Synagoga, dum sub solo Deo Rege, qui
oam in regnum peculiare adoptabat, illa militabat.



Hac autem politia codem modo temperata videtur, qua dicitur Lacedemonum illa
perfectisuma ita, ut Moses regiam quodammodo potestatem habuerit, sub Dei tamen
very tunc and unici Israelitarum regis auspicris. Corn. Bertrum, De Politia
Judaica, c. 6. Exodus 12.9. Prove. 29.1.
This relates to the times, from Moses to the end of Judges; a government of
about 400. years; and in all which, God used the ministration of men to rule
under him, keeping the Monarchy over them to himself, and entituling no man to
it; and in all this dispensation of God's goodness to Israel, the people of his
love and delight, whom he carried upon Eagles Wings, and made the head, and not
the tail of Nations; not absolute Sovereignty, but a politic dispensation of
himself by Laws of moral equity, and prudential convenience, did God carry
Israel in the Wilderness, and into Canaan, with a mighty hand, to the
consternation of all their Enemies: yea, and so did he qualify all men in
deputation under him, during that tract of time, and those tedious variations,
that they did not affect any usurpation upon God's indulgence to the people,
but bore with them, and prevailed against the roughness and choler of their
nature (for they were people (...), of a stiff-neck, not bettered by reproof)
by their ingenuous mansuetude, knowing well that God would have it so, whose
the people were, and under whom they had the conduct of them. This Economy of
God's, our Text-Master proposes, as the pattern of ours in England, and ours he
likens to it, similitudine vestigii, Cunaus, De Reipub. Hebraeorum, lib. 1. c.
1.
though not imaginis; for though every thing answers not, yet in the main
integral parts, in the composure of the smartnesse of absolute Regal, with the
bluntness of politic Government; there is that aimed at which makes somewhat
near the lovely figure of God's Government, while he ruled Israel as their
King, and besides him they had no visible humane King. And this speaks more
then all Arguments for politic Government with Regal: for in that God
allowed, nay established it as his choice, it appears to have all those
integrals of perfect Government, aiming at righteous ends by righteous means,
and to be equally adverse to all extremes, either of defect or nimiety.

Sed denoun^ ejus petitione, Rege homine sibi constituto, sub lege tantum
regali ipsa deinceps humiliata est.

This our Text-Master brings in, to show how God's establishment had its
Supersede as not by force; for he was a King neither to be deprived by power,
or deceived by falsehood, or overreached by subtlety, or flattered by oratory:
no such artillery could impeach his Regality, no nor could the Moth of time or
periodique fatality, which determins Governments and transfers them from one to
another, work on his Government, that was from everlasting in the root, and
would have been to everlasting, not only in a sense of divine Perennity and
essential Indeterminateness over the whole world, as Lord of the Universe, but
as to such a proportion as the sense of his temporal exercise over the Jews
was applicable to, over them: but by condescension to their desire, and in
punishment to their murmr and machination, which rather aimed to gratify
their curiosity in being like other Nations, then to acquiesce in a grateful
submission to God, and a willing subjection to his Deputies set over them. And
the Chancellor not only sets down their sin in desiring man rather their
King, then God, but the Instrument of their Prevalence, and the Engine they
employ, which is Prayer to have their Government passed over to a King of flesh
and blood, bone and bulk as themselves, yea and the effect of their desire they
begged inordinately, and God gave them their hearts desire to their
after-terrour. This does the clause set forth, not to depreciate their desire
of a King, but to blemish their inordinate Principle in desireing a King in
opposition to and declension of God their King; and therefore God, though he
gave them their desires upon their requests, yet he so imbittered his gift,
that it should ever carry the memorial of their sin with it. And this shows us
both the corruption of nature, which delights in change, and the danger of
change by reason of such corruption. Not only, Man being in honor abode not,
but in his prevarication became se ipso humilior, beneath the beast that
perishes; so that not only the Principles of which Nature consists being
changeable, incline to change, but even the tendency of man in the lubricity of
his will inclines to it, and that by a Judgment of God on his understanding,
that takes evil for good, and is restive in loveing and improving it to his
ruin and annihilation. Nor is it ever seen that changes in this Militant
State, without great grace from God, are for the better, but most an end for
the worse; of all the changes of Israel it is said, They changed their glory for
shame: their freedom for bondage, first, to the Egyptians; then to the
Babylonians; then to the Romans, and now to the Turks; and of all personal
changes, little can better be said then was in that, That of all the Caesar's,
Solus Vespasianus mutatur in melius, yea when people are fond on change, what
products do such incests bring, but tyranny and confusion, unless God be in the
change by a gracious influence on it, as he was in David's change from a
Shepherd to a King; in Ioseph's from a neglected younger Brother to a Father
to Pharaoh and all Egypt, in Readiness change from a Persecutor to an Apostle; in
Time's change of Iulians for Constantines.

I say, unless God be the effectual mover of changes, and fortunates them to
their blessed and lawful issue, Changes qua such are dangerous, and when they
are gratifications and holocausts to popular levity, become plagues and
torments to their promoters; who because they are Children in discretion and
are led by hurry and eddy are to be resisted in such Attempts, and the rods of
severity are by Laws made for such fools backs. Thus then it came to pass
with Israel, God was their King, and another they would have as the Nations
had; the Contumacy of Israel under God's gentle Empire had provoked him to
conclude a punishment for them, and now their corruption gives the occasion to
its operation upon them; God gives them their hearts desire, but not to their
end but his own, To be his Punisher of their Perverness; and thus that which
they intended the Display of their Triumphal Banner, and a Trophy of their
National Grandeur, becomes their breaking a pieces; so that no Grain of their
pertnesse and mettle remained unpounded; broken they were under the Iron Mall
of their own designation: and just it was with God, that since Liberty caused
Insolence, Oppression should compel Duty, and the Law of God dictating to
Duties, moral and religious, being contemned, the will of man contrary to
these, even when it commands contrary to these, as a Curse on people, be in
place of a Law, and cheerful obedience to a lawful Government being stomach'd
at; if not denied, a lawless smart and severe one should be introduced, for the
justice of God punishes sin in the kind it is committed; because People are
voluntarily rebellious against good Princes, God makes them necessarily subject
to bad, who trample them and thei^s under foot.

Sub qua tamen, dum optimi reges sibi praefuerunt, ipsa plausit, and cum
dyscoli ei praeessebant, ipsa inconsolabiter lugebat, ut Regum liber haec
distinctius manifestavit.

Here our Chancellor uses a double Dichotomy of Persons and Things. Of
Persons, Reges optimi, and dyscoli Of Things, ipsa plausit, ipsa
inconsolabiliter lugebat. It is concluded that good Kings are better then good
Laws from this; that while good Kings were over Israel, the severity of regal
power was not injuriously felt by the Jewish people, though transferred from a
mild to a sharp Government; for the Text says, Plaudere (...) manibus pulsare
and strepit^^ facere, quod vel latitia vel derisionis causa steri solet quoties
alicui pro re been ge sta congratulamur, laetitiamqu^ oftendimus. Cu. ad Q.
Fratr. lib. 1, 2, 9. Priorum autem sane regum merita, in libris Regum non
parvalaudantur, in Israel autem reges, alios magis, alios minus, omnes ta men
reprobos legimus. Lib. 17. De Civit. Dei. c. 2.
sub ipsa plausit Synagoga, now plausus is opposed to planctus, and as by the
one the heart's sinking into the heel (as proverbially) is deciphered, so in
the other the Capreols and vaultings of the heart, the plaudite's and Eccho's
of exaltation and approbation are intended. When then the Chancellor says,
ipsa plausit; it is as much as Pliny expresses by sibi blandiri and placere, seu
nimium amare, Ep. 91. and declares the People to be highly satisfied with their
Enjoyment, and hugg themselves as happy in their acquisition of a Governor
that is good, and to them the best, because their own. For there are two fold
Kings mentioned in the Clause, 1. Regesoptimi; who are those? not any had
Israel properly so; for if there is none good but God, then no Kings, at least
none the best but God, who has no equal but is super-superlative; the answer
is, they were the best Kings who were better then the worst, who were most good
compared to others less good; and those the book of the Kings mention to be
David, Solomon, Asa, Ahaz, Hizechia, Josiah, these the holy Ghost records To
do that which was right in the sight of the Lord; and these, when ruled by the
Law of God with his sacred Priests, though absolute in power, yet were so
conscionable in the use of it, that the people were happy under them to their
hearts wish. They ruled as Octavian is said to rule, Though long in time, yet
little in account of people, Ex maxima part Deo similis est putatus, neque
antem facile ullus, aut in bello eo felicior fuit, aut in pace moderatior,
nullo tempore ante eum Res Romana magis sloruit. Eutropius lib. 7.
who were so happy under him, that they thought the time run away too fast, and
his Government would too soon end: for all the fifty and six years he reigned
seemed but as one day, because his virtues made him so beloved and desired. O
when Princes are like Vespasian, Builders, Beautifiers, Restorers of ancient
paths to walk in; His Romam deformem incendiis and ruinis, permissa. si Domini
deessent, volentibus adisicandi copia, Capitolium, aedem pacis, Claudii
Monumenta reparavit, Autelius Victor. in Vespas.
then, as Vespasian, they deserve eternal Memorials: yea, they will never die
in the Records of stories, and on the tongues of Subjects blessed by them, nor
will any power be begrudged them to have, who know how moderately to use it,
and mercifully to manage it; for under this plausit illa, people that are so
happy, need not care for Laws and Courts of appeal; Virtue, Rectitude,
Magnanimity have set up their Thrones in the breast of these Princes, and they
are thence propitious to all men; and their Subjects are so grateful to, and
tender of them, that they cry out, Quodillum, and Senatus, and populus ante
Imperium, and in Imperio, and post Imperium sic dilenit; ut neque Tra janum,
nec Antoninum, nec quemquam alium Principem sic amatum. Trebellius Pollio ad
sinem. Speech in Parl. 1603. p. 495. Of his Works.
as they did to Claudius, Habeas virtutibus tuis, devotioni tua Claudi statuam,
etc. O Claudius may thou ever have as thou have deserved a Statue to thy
Memory, may thy virtues be ever alive in that. He that loves the Common Wealth
will love thee, and applaud thee as we do; Happy art thou Claudius by thy
virtues, happy thou in the Senate's Suffrage, yea happy thou both before, and
in, and after thy Government and life, as no Trajan, no Antonine, or other
Prince ever was, so he; while then they are such, they may well be accounted
Optimi, and their people may well se plaudere under them. Hear the incomparable
Humility and Condescension of wise King James, As the head is ordained for the
body and not the body for the head, so must a righteous King know himself
ordained for his people and not his people for him; for although a King and
people be relata, yet can he be no King if he want people and subjects; but
there be many people in the world that lack a head; wherefore I shall never be
ashamed to confess it my principal Honor to be the Great Servant of the
Commonwealth, and ever think the Prosperity thereof to be my greatest
Felicity. And that is the first part of the Dichotomy, Optimi Reges, ipsa
plausit. The second is dyscoli. and under them they are said inconsolabiliter
lugere, by this dyscoli he means the wicked Kings of Israel, such as were Saul,
Rhehoboam, Jeroboam, Ahab, I^horam, Manasses, Iehu, and the rest; who involved
the people in Wars, and by bringing the Curse of God on them, made the
Government under them grievous; and these he calls dyscoli, because lawless in
their wills, and not reasonably to be pleased, since their humors were their
Rudder, and their sensuality their Compass, and this has so inordinate a
swinge, that it is not restrained or regulated by God's Laws, which only
sweeten the temper, De vitiosa Monarchiae forma, quae Tyrannis dicitur, lege
Contzenium, Politic. lib. 1. c. 16.
and plain down the rudenesses of Princes, under which subjects do
inconsolabiliter lugere, and though this often be but a slow remedy, yet is
all, the Laws of God and men indulge grieved Subjects to relieve themselves by;
which the Scripture calling, possessing our souls in patience, refers us by
prayer to God to turn the Prince's heart, or else to endue us with patience to
endure what is God's pleasure, because he often punishes popular wantonness,
and seditious murmures against good Princes, with real burdens, and yoaks of
torment from evil ones; and by this affliction on them works their preparation
for, and engagement in national repentance.

Tamin quia de is it a materia in opusculo, quod tui contemplatione de natura
legis nature ae exaravi, sufficienter puto me disceptasse, plus inde loqui jam
desisto.

In this Clause, the Prince is referred for further satisfaction, and the
Chancellor excused from further procedure on this Argument, in relation to a
Tract which he has designedly wrote about it, which our Chancellor the Author
calls Opusculum, because a short and not bulky tract, and then shows his
impulse to the writing of it, tui contemplatione, that is, for the Prince's
institution and satisfaction; and then the matter of it, 'twas de ista materia,
that is, the nature of absolute regal with legal and politic Government. This
Tract (I confess) I never saw, but am informed it is in Sir Robert Cotton's
Library, which his noble and learned Son Sir John Cotton promised to
accommodate me with when he could find it; which he not yet having done, as I
have not seen it, so neither can I give any account of it. I hear also it is in
Oxford too, as also in other hands, In vita ejus.
and I conceive it goes under the name of De Politica administratione, which
Pits mentions to be one of his Works, and he here remembers: so much was the
Prince, and the age, yea our age, beholding to this sage Chancellor, that he
refused no travail of mind, to clear the doubts that might arise in active
minds concerning Government and subjection. Jus tum civil tum municipial^
public docuit, habuitque auditores nobil^ssimos juvenes quamplurimos, Pitsaeus
in vito ejus. Nota been.
In both which cases he was as well able to give solution, as any his
Contemporary; for besides that he was a profound Lawyer, as his Judgments in
the Year-Books of Henry the sixth, his several judicious Tracts on serious
Subjects, and the opinion of that time of him confirmed, he was also a most
just man, who in all his actions went (as he supposed) according to an
enlightened and rightly informed judgment and Conscience; and Record gives this
testimony of him, that in hoc summo officio (of his Chancellourship) tam pie,
prud^nterque se gessit, ut omnem illam quam consequi poterat authoritatem, ad
Reipublica referret utilitatem: yet, good man, he had the hard fortune, or
rather the honor in an ill time to be banished, or rather to banish himself,
that he might keep himself loyal, and be near the young Prince to do good
Offices to him. And though he was born, bred, and long lived honorably in
England, yet dyed he abroad, as many brave men have done before him, and was
ill treated of his Contrymen as they also were: it being not only the fate
of Scipio to have an ingrate Country, the grief of which made him lay his
bones abroad; and of Tensira, whom Giraldus pourtrays as the noblest man of his
time, yet repudiated by his Citizens, and thereupon dying privately; Dialog.
secundo, De Poetis, p. 403. partis secundae.
but also of infinite others, whose not only lives have been checquered with
party colorings of both good and bad fortune, but have been led one where, and
expired another where, Nasoentem Aeneans vidit Simois in Asia, raptum absorbuit
Numicius in Italia, which though Aventine crosses, in the example of Lodwick,
the first Count Palatine of Rhene, Anno 1294. who was born, and dyed in one and
the same Chamber at Heidelburgh; yet is confirmed in more that dye otherways.
Dido was born at Phenicia, but dyed at Carthage; Pythagoras born at Samos, dyed
at Metapontus, Alexander first appeared at Pella, extinguished at Babylon; the
Decii all born at Rome, Zuinger Theat^r. Vitae Hum. Volum. 17. lib. ^. p. 2677.
but all dyed abroad; Cato had his first breath at Rome, but drew his last at
Vtica; Mantua saw first Virgil rising, but Brundusium entombed him; yea, the
famous Earl of Warwick, Beanchamp, whose Character is parem sibi in armorum
strenuitate and regis regnique fidslitate superstitem minime derelinquens,
though born in England, dyed at Calice, 43 E. 3. and this our Chancellor dyed
in Berry, and there desisted from his labors; as I shall now from the
Commentary on this^ ninth Chapter of him, which here ends.

CHAP. X.
Tun^ Princeps illico sic ait. Vnde hoc Cancellarie, quod Rex unus plebem suam
regaliter tantum regere valeat, and Regi alteri potestas hujusmodi denegatur,
equalis fastigii cum sint Reges ambo. Cur in potestate s^nt ipsi dispares,
nequeo non admirari.


THis Chapter is spent in maintenance of the Dialogical Continuity, and it has
that spirit of reason in it, which keeps the Chancellor in preparation for an
answer of what is therein interrogated; the common Rule is, ubi cadem ratio idem
jus, and why the politic, mixed with regal Government, since it is a real
Kingship, should not have so much Privilege as its brother Kingship no more
divine, nor no trulyer instituted of God then it is? Is the scruple now to be
resolved. For since Regality in both is of, God, the Condescension of it in the
one and not in the other is no alteration of the Essential dignity, but an
adumbration of it for ends of good; which since God does seem for our sakes
often to do, when yet he retains his absolute Sovereignty; why the King so
doing should seem less then otherwise he would be, is the question to which the
Chancellor frames an answer in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Cancellarius. Non minoris esse potestatis Regem politice Imperantem, quam qui
ut vult regaliter, regit populum suum, in supradicto opusculo sufficienter est
ostensum. Diversatamen Authoritatis eos esse in subditos suos ibidem, aut jam,
nu^atenus denegavi, cujus diversitatis causam ut potero, tibi pandam.


THis Chapter is the pithy breviary of the Chancellour's Response to the former
Chapters Proposals, and it is by way of Concession, that the power of both
Kings is the same as his arguments and reasons in the formentioned tract
purposely thereupon written, do make good: all that is of diversity in the
powers is not fundamenti sed exercitii, not in the nature of the power; for
that being God's in the trust of Kings qua such, is equally God's, and equally
in the Dignity and Majesty of it. Theirs; but the emanation or rather
modification of it, is diverse upon diverse reasons, which in the twelfth
Chapter be enlarges upon. For as there is no general rule but admits of some
Exceptions, and the same Sun melts wax that hardens Clay, so the same power and
prerogative variously expresses it self in the one and in the other, according
to the subjects it is conversant about and the juncture of affairs it has to
cope with, which, because the Chancellor has discoursed upon before, and now
remembers, frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora, he in that
part referrs to what he had formerly resolved in it, and for what is
undiscoursed of, promises additional Information, and that he makes good, not
by a bold braving, but a modest veracity, cujus diversitatis causam, ut potero,
tibi pandam.

CHAP. XII.
Homines quondam potentia praepollentes, avidi dignitatis and gloria, vicinas
saepe gentes sibi viribus subjungarunt.


THis Chapter explicates the Origin and Rise of absolute and lawless Monarchy,
as men in nature and Gods in power obtained first, and since have in their
successional lines held them. Now though he says the greatest Monarchs were
but men in nature, yet by the stimulations they had to great actions, and the
successes they had by them, they appear to be more then men, because stirred up
by desire of glory and honor to contemn danger and hazard, which in contest
with, and conquest over men their fellows in nature and station, they must
resolve to cope with. Now this so patiently works in the nature of great
minds, that it makes them set upon Nations to Master and Lord it over them,
and our Text-Master calls it the rise of great Empires. And if all the Heroiques
of the world were asleep, and the memory of them perished; the truth of this
would be confirmed from the actions of one only Alexander, (...), Plutarchus
in lib. an Seni sit gerenda Resp. in Notis ad lib. 3. polit. cor. c. 3. p. 145.
who was not only the worlds Master before he was thirty years of age, which
he did by Counsel, Eloquence, and the art of Rule and conduct, but envyed any
Commander of his own that was successful: yea Lipsius is my Author for it,
That he was more wrath with his fortunate and well-deserving Commanders, who
did things with merit of glory resulting there from, then with those that
executed his Commands, infeli^iter and ignave, unprosperously and with
dishonor, which perhaps is the reason that ambitious Princes disfavour great
Merits, least they themselves by them should be lessened, and have Rivals and
Competitours in that power, which they would have solely theirs, and which they
can attain to by no readyer an Artifice, then reputation of bold and fortunate,
which as it was a serviceable Harbinger to designs of rule and Sovereignty, so
made Subjects admire the obtainers of it beyond reason, and arrogate to them a
participation of Divinity; so that men no sooner heard but feared, and no
sooner saw but submitted to them, as thinking every frown a thunderbolt, In
Notis ad c. 6. lib. 3. Politic.
and every angry word a Hellfire for their torment and terror. Learned
Lipsius professes, that he often laughed (as well he might) to read the follyes
of men in their random admirations of those in power. For when the Mexicans
swoar their King, E Lopezo and Gomara.
they exhibited to him these things in his Oath, That Iustise he would do,
oppress none of his Subjects, be valiant in war, hitherto well; but at last
comes, That he would cause the Sun to shine and not let it be interrupted in
its course, Et ritu veteri potestate deposita removetur, si sub co fortuna
titubaveri^ belli, vel segetum coptam negaveri^ terra lib. 27. in Valentin. and
Valente p 479. Edit Franc. Wochelii.
that the Clouds should rain, the Rivers run, and the earth bring forth. And
Ammianus Marcellinus tells us, the old Burgundians who were wont to call their
Kings Hendini, did depose them if either they were unfortunate in war, or the
earth failed its fruit. These and such like follyes men are sometimes
irrationally guilty of, as Preparatory to their shackles and the setters of
their bold and daring Coverers Conquest of them. And thus comes it to pass that
Nimrod, Julius Caesar, and the mighty Chieftains of the world have subdued
Countries, wasted Continents, prostrated stately Edifices, rent asunder goodly
Libraries, dissipated well compacted Combinations; yea in sort uncreatured the
world by the Prodigality of their furies, and the tragical effects of it;
which though God has often turned to good, and most of the good Laws and good
Magistrates that the world and every part of it has seen, be the issue of this
original Grandsier Cruelty; yet was the Commencement of it altogether roystrous
and savage, and in this (...) was there no aim at any thing at first, but to
Master, and to have all at the Conquerours pleasure, which was the Government
mentioned Daniel v. 19. where it is said of Nebuchad-nezzar. That all people,
Nations, and Languages trembled before him, whom he would he slew, and whom ^e
would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom be would he plucked
down; and which the Turks and Muscovite practices to this day, Contzen.
Polltic. lib. 1 c. 16.
and which was the Government of Inga in Brasil, where no man had any thing of
his own but every man at the pleasure of Inga and no longer, nor did any thing
go to any man's Heirs: which is so hard a Tenure, that it may well be accounted
Conquest, and the Subjects under it slaves beneath slavery. This the Gyant-like
Monsters of Ambition and Pride did not only to get them a name, as did the
Babel-builders, who built potius ad pompam quam adusum, for they built even as
high as Heaven, and in the eighth story which Saint Jerome makes about 4000
paces, and the Jews make 27000 paces, if any truth be in their fictitious
Talcuth; but also to intimidate and lurch men into a dread, that, by the
dispiriting of them, should betray them into submission to whatever they
please; which the Chancellor words as follows.

Ipsis servire, obtemperare quoque jussionibus suis compuler^nt, quas jussiones
extunc leges hominibus illis sancierunt.

Indeed therefore many men have endeavored to get names of fear and reverence,
that thence the dread of them falling upon men, they may be obeyed in whatever
they design and prosecute. These the Holy Story called Giants in the Earth
(...), men of name or renown. Some would have (...) to come from the word (...)
signifying d^s^lare, or stupefacere, hinting thereby how renown or a name is
gained by the fear and terror men are possessed with, when they hear it. Thus
God is said to get himself a glorious name, Isa. 63.12. (...), a name of glory:
By what? By dividing the waters before Israel, and leading them through the
Deep, which was an act of divine and unimitable power. Now this, men of
ambitions and prowess knowing available to their ends of puissance, In illa
oppressio multitudinis, essu s^o sanguinis, ordinis confusio, legum violatio,
rerum omnium perturbatio. Casus de Tyrannide, lib. 4. c. 2. Sphae^a Civit.
endeavor as much as in them lies, to make their Actions as dredful and cogent
to those they had designs upon, as possible they can; and when once they are
dunn'd and cowed, then they will submit lowly, and obey universally, then they
will take their curbs into the mouth willingly, and ride at what rate under
them they will have them. For dominion is obtained over no people, but by
either wisdom admired, or power feared prepossessing them; either or both of
those are the sure, if any be the forerunners of power. These will make people
not only servire, become their subduers slaves, Sed mihi sexoper obtemperaevit
tanquam Filius Patri Cic.

Ammianus Marcell lib. 22. p. 406. edit. Francof. and lib. 25. p. 438.


but obtemperare, as a Son does his Father, whom he will obey and be faithful
to, because he loves and esteem his desires as Laws; yea, and not dare to do
other then the reverence of Laws to them. This opinion the World had of Julian,
which made him so successful every where; and of Julius Caesar; and all that
have been Victors, who have become absolute, by the awe their virtues either
Togal or Martial have prevailed by. And this in time has been the Ancestor to
all after calmness; for when the stomachs of men have come down, and both the
Ruler and ruled have had enough of force and fight; to prevent it for the
future, both of them have consented to terms of civil order and quiet, which in
time has antiquated and eliminated all fierceness, and brought in credit,
mutual kindness and politic conscientious respect and fidelity each to other:
for so the Chancellor proceeds, Quarum perpetione divina subjectus sic
populus, dum per subjicientes a caterorum injuriis defendebatur, in
subjicientum dominium consenserunt.



Here the Chancellor shows, that though Conquest possessed the great Monarchs
of the World of their Commands; yet consent of the people conquered, recognized
and ascertained them peaceful to them, and hereditary to their Heirs and
Successors; and that not only upon fear and necessity, because otherwise they
could not help themselves, but upon choice, and as we say in Law, a valuable
consideration, the Conqueror was to protect them from injuries, and to warrant
(with his utmost hazard) their security, against all persons that would annoy
them, and they were obliged to be loyal to him, and to live subject-like under
him. So that there is hence a reciprocation of advantage; the Governor is
secure from treachery and mutiny, the governed from rapine and cruelty: for
there is a double rule of the Law that makes to this purpose, subjectio trahit
protectionem, R^^. Iuris.
and protectio subjectionem, and quibus modis aliquid acquiritur, iisdem and
conservatur. In both which respects, the joint concord to so noble and
beneficial ends, appears to be wise and worthy, since security from danger is
one of the great blessings of life, and that is not to be purchased but by
submission to power, which is able to compel, but is willing to comply, and by
adhering to that power, to those profitable issues of peace and order. This is
the Golden Chain of power, by the Links of which it is made conspicuous, durable
and communicative; and this composition being so athletique and virile, so
rational and effective of good to all parties indifferently, makes it so
beautiful, and so lasting. For as it commenced through the wise project of both
sides, conspiring to make each other happy in a respective conjunct fatiation;
so it cannot be dissolved, but with the dissolution of all that is lovely and
desirable. For as it follows, Opportunius esse arbitrantes se unius subdi
imperio, quam omnium cos infestare volentium oppressicnibus exponi.



Indeed here is the marrow and motive of all subjection, it is ration^ boni inde
proveni^ntis. For as God the Proto-Monarch is not made happy by the Worlds
obedience to him, but the World made happy by his defense and preservation of
them, whom as a King he protects; as a Lawgiver he directs; as a Father he
feeds; as a Husband he tenders; and as a Benefactor he will reward: so Kings
(just and worthy) are not more happy in the subjection of their Subjects, then
their subjects are in the watchful eye, powerful hand, subtle head,
affectionate heart, and every way expressive largeness he discovers toward
them: Nor is there any so compendious a way of peace, as for the Subjects
readily and freely to submit to their Prince for Conscience sake; yea, and for
the goods sake that thence results to them. For when one takes the duty, and
expects the subjection, he puts an end therein to all those pretenders, whose
injurious spirits flatter them into a right of doing wrong; and whether it be
not better to obey one then many; and a King noble by birth, blood, and
endowments, then fellow subjects, let not only men in the experience of all
Ages be Judge, but even God, who in the universal inclination of all Nations to
Monarchy, Tolossanus Syntagm Juris, lib. 47. c. 15. tit. 6.
has sufficiently determined the dignity of it, as a Ray from his Oriency, who
is King of Kings. But of this I have written heretofore, and shall refer here
my Readers to that nervous and ingenious Discourse of Monarchy asserted, Mr.
Matthew Wren.
by a most polite and accomplished Gentleman; who truly (I think) has said as
much on that noble Argument, as well in so few words can be said, and more then
(I dare say) can be answered by any Contrarient whatsoever.

Sicque regna quaedaem inch^ata sunt, and subjicientes ilti dum subjectum
populum sic rexerunt, a reg^ndo sibi nomen regis usurparunt, eorum quoque
dominatus tantum regalis dictus est.

This the Chancellor, like a wise Master Builder, lays down to a breadth
proportionable to the intent of his intended superstructure: for being to
convince the Prince, that some of the kinds of Governments that were in the
World, were according to the compacts of Princes and People in ancient times;
and that the first subduers of Nations sound their tenures by the Sword
troublesome, without the consent, and contrary to the mind of the people under
the power of it, Valdesius, J. C. De dignitate Hispaniae, c. 18 p. 367.
Monarchiae nomine administratio illa contmetur, quae ununstantum habet dominum,
qui superiorem non agnoscit. Tolossa^us S^ntagm. Juris, lib. 18. c. 2. tit 6.
he lanches out into the discourse of the Titles of those that so acquired and
exercised power, which he lays down to be that of Kingship; and though latter
times have seemed to give the prelation to Emperor, as couching Kingship under
it: an Emperor, in the strict sense of late Lawyers, being the Sovereign of
Kings, and having a King his Subject; yet our Law accounting its King an
Imperiael Monarch, according to the Stat. of 25 H. 8. c. 22.28 H. 8. c. 7.35 H.
8. c. 1.1 Eliz. c. 3.1 Iac. 1. before mentioned reduces the word King to the
pristine honor which Antiquity gave it. For King being the Title of God, who
governs and preserves the World, and who deserves the service and love of all
his Creatures, honors sufficiently in that Title all that by delegation of his
power, are Governors and preservers of men in civil concord, (...) Diotogenes
Pythag. Apud Stobaevm, Sermon. 46. p. 328.
and religious agreement. And that Kings may become their Kingdoms as God does
his, it becomes them to be just as he is; and that they only are, when they
are such as the Laws of their Government prescribe them to be. Indeed, in
absolute Governments, such as a e founded upon Conquest, and the pleasure of
the Victor, here Laws have no force: But Justice ever ought to rule the wills
of such prevailers, if they will be worthy and beloved. What Cotys the Thra^ian
King told one that censured his sharp Government to be (...): to whom he
replied, (...) etc. This severity (quoth he) which you censure, though it be
sharp Physic, yet it makes healthy bodies, and renders my Subjects wary not to
offend that they may be safe from punishment. I say what he replied is very
much a truth, but not so much to the luster of Governors, as the practice of
Evagoraes in his Government, which I mentiond before out of Isocrates, Isocrates
in Evagora.
who testifies it to be such, (...), etc. That his Subjects were more happy in
him, then he in the government of them, for he gratified no passion of his own;
he studied no greatness, Principatum dol^ partum magna virtute poste^
administravit, rexit ille summa cum laud, and pietatis studiosissimus.
Egnatius, lib. 2. Romans Princip.
but the good he preferred and honored, and the evil he punished according to
Law. And therefore, though Rule may at first be acquired by ill means,
depredation, violence, and injury; yet after, may this stinging and deadly
Serpent become a Brazen one, not only durable, but sanative and beneficial. So
the Historian says the Emperor Iustine did, who though he got the Empire by no
good means; yet when he was in it, ruled exemplarily, making virtue and every
thing worthy praise his design, and according to the project every way doing.
By which art, what Oblivions have been of fury and injury, and what sodrings to
future stability, stories and experiences do abundantly furnish the presidents
of. For if the black Achievements of the quondam Hectors, who founded
governments, should not be shrouded with the Lawn and Tiffany of Candor, and be
sweetened by the forgivenesses of those rudenesses: 'twere impossible to make
Panegyricks to their Successors memories, and to pay the duty of subjection so
contentedly as Subjects, by this courtesy of time burying the stanch of it,
and the goodness of Kings deserving it, do yield it. Sic Nimbroth primus regnum
sibi comparavit.

Here he descends to particulars, in proof of his assertion, concerning the
truculent rise of the old absolute Regal Governments: And the first example he
produces is of the Assyrian Monarchy, Rivet Exercit. 65. in Genesis 10.
the first that ever was, and that in the person of Nimrod, who not following
the president of Noah and his Sons before him, who all were moderate and gentle
Governors, tendering their people, as Fathers do their Children, brake out into
rage and resolution, Bertram. De Politia Judaica, c. 3
to make himself terrible, and upon the awe and dread of his force, for which
he is called a Giant ( ratione sevitiae, non staturae) he founded his Tyranny.
And so Bodin confirms, Morcarus, in Genesis 10. c.
all the Asian Empires did after him; yea, and the Roman too, which makes
Glareanus, writing on the lives of the Caesar's, to extravagate, Quid si dicam
12. Lib. 1. De Republ c. 6. Glareauus, Orat. in Suetonium. p. 718. August.
Scriptorum.
Latronum, Mentiarne, in Nerone, Tiberio, Caligula, 12. Monstrorum, etc. I am
(says he) to write on the lives of the twelve Caesar's; what if I say the
twelve Thieves, the twelve Monsters. Oh! but good words, Glareanus, they are
Deities, divine honors are given them. His Reply will be, What did they do to
be de^f^^d; if Cruelty, Covetousness, Tyranny, Murder, Madness, Pride, Luxury,
L^st, Envy, Rapes; if these can make them divine, they are divine; for such
only are their virtues: so he. But though the first Monarchies and Kingdoms
long ago might have this foundation, as to the persons of men first fixing
them; yet is this no Argument against the divinity of power, and the duty of
men, as such, to obey them. For though the Anabaptists and Phanatiques do hence
make a doubt of obeying Governments that had so ill a foundation; yet this
principle of rottenness is easily prostrated, when consideration is had, that
Power in it self is instituted of God, though in the Subject using it, it may
not always be just and lawful, Saepe res ipsa a Deo instituitur ad quam
nonnulls aspirant and aliquando perveniunt, per cos modos and rations, quae
Deo minime probantur, says learned Rivet. Marriage is instituted of God, and
lawful it is for a man to endeavor gaining of the woman he loves, Exercit. 65.
in Genesis 10.
to be his wife; but yet God does not legitimate the sinister means that some
men corruptly improve to obtain Marriage by, as Force, Fraud, Theft of Children
from their Parents; though when the Marriage is completed, the fruits of it
may be good and excellent: So is it in Empire, though it might at first be
gained by ill Artifices; yet had, it may produce excellent issues, and become
in time and by common approbation, just. So that the sic here is a black note
only on the first demeriter of his fellows, on Nimrod, whose name says Philo
signifies, (...), transfuge, or running away, because he deserted his Brethren
and went to their Enemies, Lib. De Gygantibus, p. 293.
and with them tock Arms against them and overcame them; and so had Babylon his
Royal Seat, (...), which signifies transposition and being besides his place.
Thus Philo. And in this Nimrod did but do like himself to be sole, not social
in the Earth. And therefore he was called Nimrod, a name from (...), which
signifies, to oppose, oppress, and rebel; and this name this person had by
special appointment of God, who foreseeing him to be a man of violence, terms
him by that he most delighted in. This word (in this man) is near of kind to
the Chald^e, (...), signifying a Tygre, for such he was incarnate, no bounds
would keep him within them; he would over all that God and Men made sacred. A
proud and elate mind he had, and all others, he looked upon as vild and
contemptible; and being in confidence and courage above others, he brake the
yoke, and despised the common kindness, which Nature had settled in her Family,
and upon that violence he erects a Kingdom. What this Origin was, the Holy
Story tells us, he was the Son of Chush, Son of Chaens, the cursed Son of Noah:
some will have him to be Ninus; of this mind is Eusebius, but that is generally
disclaimed: But that this Nimrod did first exercise Tyranny over Mankind,
Rivetus Exercit. 65. in Genesis 10. Turrecrem. Summ^ Eccles. lib. 1. c. 27.
is the assertion of the Holy Text, and all Authors according to it; which the
Holy Ghost willing to stigmatize as the first Luciferianism and insolent
instance after the flood, permitted the Character of him to b proverbial. That
as we call cruel Tyrants Nero's, and desolate Monsters Sardanapalus's; so men
of prowess and irresistible ferocity should be called Nimrods: for though he
was but born and bred as other men, yet as Florus said of Andriscus though a
Slave, Regiam formam, Regium nomen, Regio animo implevit; and by this
daringness did he set up the earlyest and greatest Government of the world.
Lib. 2. c. 14.
Some have thought this to be the He that the Poets called Hercules, a name of
valor and puissance, which the great Hectors of the world so doted on, that
Alexander of Macedon, Commodus, Maximinian, Heraclius, called themselves by his
name and built Cities after this name. Lilius Gyraldus in Hercule.
They called him, as is thought also, Bacchus the God of wine, because as wine
makes men forget danger and despise it, so his valor made him contemn the
discouragements to rule; for he being (...), By nature warlike and studious of
renown, did make his way to his desire by his sword, and by this did primus
sibi regnum comparare.

Tamen non Rex ipse. This is added to show that men's humors and mettles will
carry them often beyond their births and probable obtainments. A man of a great
courage he was, and his body bore not patiently others less vigorous then he,
to be Compartners in degree with him; and therefore as he was active and
potent, so does he manage such his Excellencies beyond others, and becomes a
terror to men as well as to beasts, thereupon whatever he originally was, the
Holy Ghost affixes this on him, that he had obtained to be accounted robustus
Venator coram Domino.

Robustus Venator] This sets forth both his activity of body and mind: of
mind, which chose hunting of beasts to discipline him to hunt men: of body,
which was athletique and Masculine able to follow the course, Erat fortis and
corpore and animo, qui auderet feras invadere. Vatablus in loc.
and to weary out the nimblest foot, and pull down the sturdiest body. Aben
Ezra will have him called a mighty hunter, and successful in his endeavor,
quia partem praedae Deo dabat; but Mercer reproaches this in him, and says,
only Aben Ezra of all Interpreters magnifies this Varlet. A man of courage no
doubt then Nimrod was, and of violence too, for hunting and hunters in
Scripture signify so much, Mercerus in 10. Genes.
thus Esau, Genesis xxvii. is said to be a cunning hunter, a man of the field: and
the malice and vehemence that wicked men have against the godly, is expressed
by terms of hunting, Lament. iv. 18. They hunt our steps that we cannot go in
the Street; which Saint Hierom renders Lubricaverunt vestigia nostra in Itinere
platearum, so Lament. ii. 52. Mine enemies chasten me sore; the Vulgar reads
it, Venatione caeperunt me inimici mei, so Psalm. clx. 11. where it is penally
said, Evil shall hunt the violent man to overtake him; R. David adds, Ve^abitur
illum ad impulsiones, adeo ut impelletur a malo ad malum, so Prove. vi. 26.
Ezech. xiii. 20. and in other Scriptures violence is expressed by hunting.

Now this hunting of Beasts, the Giants of old did not use for recreation, as
our Gallants now adays do, beasts of prey and Venery; but to accustom their
Natures to cruelty and irrelentingness, and to enter them thereby into a making
nothing of violence and life, which they found they should the better execute
in earnest, when in jest (as it were) they were trained up to it; that as
Gamesters begin with pinns and farthings, and Leachers with obscene words, and
blasphemers with random and broad speeches, and drunkards with sipping great
quantities of small liquour, and thieves with robbing Orchards and steeling
Deer, till at last they act all wickedness in the height and improvement of
it: so did the heroique Bravado's of the world, who meant to wast Countries and
subdue Governments to their wills, discipline themselves to ruffle and butcher
men by doing the like first to beasts. Cyropaed. lib. 1. Geogr. Sacr. lib 4. c.
12.
Thus Xenophon tells us that the Persian Kings instituted their sons to
hunting, and Bochartus from him produces Theseus, Castor, Pollux, Ulysses,
Diomedes, Aeneas, Achilles, all which were (...), trained up to hunting,
Chirone illos venandi artem summa cura edocente tanquam ad bellicam disciplinam
non parum profuturam; Lib. 2. De Not. Deorum.
Tully seconds it, Immanes fer^s bell^^ as nanciscimur venando, and exercemur
in venando ad similitudinem bellicae disciplinae; In Panegyr.
yea, Pliny is in the same tone, His artibus futuri duces imbuebantur certare
cum fugacibus feris cursu, cum audacibus robore, cum callidis astu; these and
sundry other authorities, Flavius Vopise. in Procl.

Herodian. lib. 1. p. 484. Edit.

Sylburg.

Aelius Spartianus in Adriano.

Lib. 24. p. 417.


as of the Emperor Proclus, given to feats of theft; Commodus so cunning to
snap beasts, that where he would he could have them; Adria^ the Emperor bred
to hunting, all which, with many other Examples do show, that activity in
contemptible things may in time grow to great success. Ammianus Marcellinus
tells us the Parthian Kingdom grew from these small rudiments to great things,
and Lib. 6. c. 40.
Fulgosus remembers us that Spartacus the Thracian headed an Army of men that
put the Romans in fear, and made them send out Licinius Crassus the most potent
man of Rome against them, and all little enough to repress that whiffling
Thracian, who originally was but a sordid person, yet active and bold. And he
that considers what Viriatus the Lusitanian did, ^ulgosus lib. 3. c. 4.
who was initio venator, and post a laetro-factus, and yet did such a fourteen
years service against the whole power of the Romans, must yield that great
things in issue depend upon small and unthought of beginnings; yea, the most
warlike people of India, the Caeffares or black people of Mosambique, become so
terrible and active as they are, by living upon what they get by hunting, the
prey of which they feed upon, and thereby are not only able and bold to
grapple with Elephants, but even with all men that come in their way as
Linschotten informs me. Cap. 41. Of his Voyages to the India's.
This suffices to make appear that Nimrod took a good Method to his purpose, in
making hunting of beasts inductive to his hunting of men. In which regard he is
termed by the holy Text, A great Hunter. And that as it follows.

Coram Domino, before the Lord. This is added (...) the more vividly to set out
his Monstrosity; Coram Domino fi^ri dicuntur, aut quae Deo pergrata sunt, aut
qua ei displicent. Grot. in loc.

Rivet. in loc. dissert. 65.


for it has an import of somewhat emphatique, not only in Grotius his sense,
which makes the phrase to extend to things which are both pleasing and
displeasing to God, but also and chiefly in that which Rivet understands the
Holy Ghosts meaning, coram Domino vel contemptive, vel simulate; for Nimrod
being a self-admirer, and having found his spirit bold, and his boldness
successful, may well be conjectured to resolve what he was to do, with an
intent of despite of God, and in opposition to him, as valuing no eye seeing,
no tongue censuring his actions; so audacious was he, that he, in the
effrontery of his attempts, seemed to pick a quarrel with God, and to challenge
his purity and justice to clash with his lust and violence; or else coram
Domino implies his subdolous Hypocrisy, which he conceited so much to prevail
against God's omniscience, that he could intend violence and yet pretend only
order, and to make men more devout to him. One of these probably was the cursed
Artifice of this Tyrant, whom therefore the Holy Ghost dissects by the Phrase
before the Lord, to teach the world, that whatever the hidden Hypocrisies, or
open Blasphemies of Men are, God sees and censures them as before his eye and
under his power, and will make their Babylons of strength, by which they think
to eternize their greatness, Bochartus Geog. Sacr. lib. 1. c. 11. and lib. 4.
c. 14, 15.
nothing. Thus did he by Nimrod, who though a mighty hunter and a subtle
provider against an evil day; for strong Babylon he built as the non-such of
the world, which should perennate his Empire, and him the first founder of it:
yet God in a short time brought him into the dust. And so we leave this mighty
Hunter before the Lord humbled and reduced to lesser terms then an Empire, all
amort in the glory and terror of his wonted activity.

Quia ut venator, feras liberate fruentes; ipse homines sibi compes^uit
obedire.
This is explanatory of the precedent words, and the Chancellor by it shows
how he exercised his strength and activity, to wit, in chasing beasts as a
preface to his Tyranny over men. Wild beasts are the subjects of the hunters
pursuit, because they being ferae naturae, and nullius in bonis, and God
creating nothing in vain, made them not only as tokens of his power and
omniform wisdom, but as exercises of man's industry and sageness, and as helps
to his luster and accommodation of life; and should not man by hunting and
slaying wild creatures lessen the increase of them, not only would the world
be overlaid with them; but man himself the Lord of all creatures, of whom
naturally the dread and fear is in all Creatures, be overborne by the number of
his rude and ravenous Subjects, and be less able to master them then comported
with the order and absoluteness of his Empire. Therefore God has implanted in
man a spirit thus active and daring, that the Creatures void of reason might
(though in bulk and strength excelling man) be by the reason of man brought
into subjection to him; and this being the secret implant of God in order to
man's Dominion over the Creatures, the corruption of man extends further then
God originally intended, though not beyond the bounds he has successefully
permitted, and in a sort, ex part post, blessed. For though he loves not
Tyranny as it is the lustful and insolent rule of one over many; yet as one
good Governor may by his rule over many bad, meliorate them, so he is not a
disapprover of it: order and subjection he wills, though the irrectitude of the
means, and the truculency of the Subject, who transacts this, he approves not.
That which then was reprovable in Nimrod, was, that he did violently and
savagely hunt men, and suffer them to be quiet no where, till they had taken
his yoke and would answer his spur and lash; which our Chancellor expresses by
compescuit obedire. Because, as Beasts of prey that use to be at liberty and
not fettered, are not got into Ginns and Snares, but in order to their
destruction, either for the skin, horn, flesh, feathers, or some other parts
sake about them; so men are not compelled to submit and obey, but sore against
their wills: Herodot. in Ca^liope.
for though all men dare not do so much for freedom as Hegesistratus Elaeus
did, who taken by the Lacedaemonians and put in Iron Chains, cut off half his
foot to be at liberty, and after that leaped over the Wall and escaped his
Imprisonment; yet all love freedom as well as he, Xiphilinus Epitom. Dio^is, p.
194. in Augusto Caesare.
and are loath to obey basely, till they cannot shift it. In that therefore our
Chancellor says, homines sibi compescuit obedire, he intends to declare that
obedience is the Child of power, either that which is obtained over Subjects
by love the Engine of mild Princes, or by force and anger the Method of angry
and savage ones. And such were the following men he writes of.

Sic Belus Assyrios, and Ninus, quam magnam Asiae partem ditioni suae
subegerunt.
This Belus is diversely thought of among the Learned. Servius says this name
did not ratione carere: Lilius Gyraldus Syntag. 2. De Nature. deorum, p. 108,
109.

Bochartus Geogr. Sac. partis secundae, lib. 1. c. 18, p 478.


it is thought by some that this was the Jupiter of the Poets, whom the Nations
worshipped as a God, because he commanded whom, and what he pleased. Others say
'twas Bacchus, (...), and Hercules, and I know not who: probablyest he was the
same whom the Sidonians, and Phaenicians called Baal, so often spoken of in
Scripture, who was not only a (...), as the Father of Tyranny, but as he did
tyrannize over the souls of men, in making them give him divine honor; for so
Geograph ^. 10. p 471. edit Causab.
Strabo tells us, that to Bacchus, which was Baal, (...), etc. All Asia was
consecrated to Bacchus; and how much he daily devoured to satisfy his Luxury,
Bochartus has to my hand set down. Now this power of Belus is here set down to
be over the Assyrians, that is, over that tract of ground near and about
Babylon, as appears not only from the 51 of Ier. 44. where God says he will
punish (...) Bell in Babylon; Lib 16. Geograp. ad initium Bochart. Geogr. S
lib. 2. c. 6. Herodotus in Clio. lib. 1. p. 78.
but also from the agreement of Interpreters, Historians, and Geographers,
Strabo, Herodotus, Pliny, who all make Assyria to be that very place now called
Syria, having on the East of it India; on the West, the River Tygris; on the
South, Media; on the North, Caucasus; which to distinguish the better, men
divide it into Syria, Assyria, Leucosyria, Caelosyria: others into Syria of
Palaestine, and Syria of Antioch. This was the plain and pleasant Country, in
which this Tyranny under Belus was acted, Rivet. Exercit. 65. Genesis 10.
called Assure, not from Assure a man's name, as some will have it, but from
(...), blessed, because it was a Land commodious for life, as the Scripture
testifies, A Land of Corn and Wine, a Land of Bread and Vineyards, a Land of
Oil Olive, and of Honey, 2 King. 18.32. This was Assyriae, which was and is so
noted to abound in delicates, that every thing of rarity was termed Assyrian;
the Citron, a rare fruit called Malum Assyrium; the Rose of Jerusalem Amomum,
named Gramen Assyrium; the Drugs of which, choice Perfumes are composed, termed
Assyrii Odores; the Garments of State, which Emperors and Princes wore of
Purple and Scarlet, V^stes Assyriae; yea, the Learning of the then World, was
limited to Assyria. And hence we read in Pliny of literae Assyriae tanquam ibi
primum repertae; and high noted Orators that traded in pompous words were
called Asiatici Oratores: Geogr. lib. 1. c. 19. part^ primae, p. 273.
yea, many have made Eden the Garden of God, to be in Assyria: so the Chaldee
Paraphrase, on 27 Ezech. 23. as Bochartus well observes.

Et Ninus, quam magnam Asiae partem.
This Ninus was the Son of Belus, A^up (...). Suidas in verbo.
and Husband to Semiramis: Nimrod built Babylon, and Belus expatiated his
Empire over all Syria: but Ninus was the notable Monarch of Asia; for his
Empire was the first of the fifth Heathen periods of time; Ninus his Empire,
Ogyges his flood, the Trojan War, Olympiads, Vrbs Condita; Lilius Gyraldus,
lib. De Annis, and mensitus ad mitium, De emendat. temporum.
these were the five. I know there are other Periods and Aera's in Sealiger and
Gassendus; but the Ethnique Accounts was from these: and this establishment of
Ninus's, as it was a great one for Power and Territory according to Diodorus,
so was it a durable one; Ninus primus omnium, veterem and quasi avitum gentium
morem nova imperii cupiditate mutavit, primus bella finitimis intulit, ad
Libyae terminos usque perdo^uit, domitis proxximis, cum accessione virium,
fortior ad alios transiret, and proxima quaeque victoria, instrumentum
sequentis erat, totius orientis populos subegit. Diod. Sic. lib. 2. Biblioth. e
Cnidio.
for the Assyrians commanded the upper Asia near 520 years, so fortunate was
his small beginning, that after he had entered a League with Ariaeus King of the
Arabs, in 17 years he subdued all Asia, which is the third part of the World,
as big as Europe and Africa, and contains in it Mysia, Phrygia, Caria, Lysia
and Lycaonia, the pleasantest and richest part of the World. This was the
subject of Ninus his Empire; and of this, Babylon was the chief, Trogus, lib. 1.
and Ninus the second City. Yet Ninus, as great a Conqueror as he was: was
conquered by his cruel and false Wife Semiramis; to whom, he able to deny her
nothing, granted an one days only Empire, which he intended only to honor
her; but she treacherously misusing, caused her husband to be slain, and so
usurped his Empire, and was not only vild and vain in it, Lilius Gyraldus,
Hist. Deorum Syntagm. 17.
but when she was to dye, caused her effigies to be cut in stone near the
Mountain Bagisthenes in Media, and appointed an hundred men as Priests, daily
to wait upon it, and present it with gifts and offerings.

Sic and Romani Orbis Imperium usurparunt.
As the Eastern Monarchies, so the Latin was founded upon force. Man had made
a Babel of his soul by confusion of that divine order and integrity that was in
it, and God made all the designs of his ambition and Earthly eternity,
indurable. The Monarchies of Nimrod, of Belus and of Ninus, were great and
lasted long; but yet they had many vicissitudes and several Masters, and at
last their greatness was eclipsed by the Wester^ Monarchy under the Romans
(which Plutarch says, Lib. De Fortuna Roman, p. 319. edit. Paris.
(...), etc. Came upon the stage of fortune, and appeared gloriously in the
Wain of the Assyrian and Persian Empires; for so great and brave a Government
it was, that (says my Author) it may well be called the Sister of Justice,
and Daughter of Providence.

Vrbs oritur, quis hinc hot ulli credere possit,
Victorem terris impositura pedem.
When Rome from small beginnings rose to give
Laws to the World, who could it then believe.
To write of Rome at large, has filled already the World with great Stories,
Dionysius Halicarnass. Plutarch, Pliny, Tacitus, Livy, Suetonius, and all the
Scriptores Romani, together with the exserpta out of them, Brissonius,
Dempster, Lazius, and above all Lipsius have so largely and exquisitely done
it, that to aim at any thing besides them, were a monstrous folly. As therefore
I do decline all prolixity, and refer my Reader to the ingenuity of those
originals; so I judge it fit for me shortly to write here of the Romans
Empir'd, Lib. De Magnitudine Romana.
to bring them into a proportion with the other instances of our Text-Master;
Rome therefore of old, the Seat of the Roman Empire, was founded, according to
Authors, by Romulus the first King of it; a man infamous for his birth, being
spurious, the product of Mars and Ilia the Vestal Nun, Daughter of Numitor King
of Albany, who left him (as Stories say) to the Nursery of a Woolf, which
educated him in a bestial ferity; the infamy of his birth and nurtriture, he
willing to be relieved from, meditated some heroique work, in the merit of
which, he might by common consent of men make some addition to himself; and
confederating with his Brother Remus, Sigonius de fastis and triumphis
Romanorum. Annals Armachani e Fabio Pictore.

Imaginem urbis magis quam urb^mfecerat. Florus, lib. 1.

Messala Corvinus.

Lib. De Augusti Progeny.


built Rome, calling it after his own name. This was (I suppose) done a little
before the eighth Olympiad, and according to computation about the year of the
World, 3256, before Christ 748 years, Sigonius places it about the first year
of the seventh Olympiad: when it was certainly built, I am not Chronologer good
enough to state; hut that it was built, and that by Romulus, as aforesaid, I
question not for the joint Authority it has to that purpose. When he had laid
the Platform of it, and beautified it with all necessaries to the presence of a
Regality. Primo co^stitutis sacris legum jura sanxit, fecit and seregiis
insignibus augustiorem, circa se lictores instituit, asylum aperuit complendae
urbis gratia Centum Senatores creavit Reipub. consilium; equestri Neptuno ludos
finitimis gentibus indicavit. Thus Messala Corvinus tells us he began, which
new model the neighboring Nations gazing upon and becoming Spectators of the
Recreations there instituted, gave occasion to the Roman Planters, to seize
violently the Sabine Virgins, and them to wive, and on them to get a succession
to their after-greatnesse. These Rapes dictated by necessity of State, brought
Enemies upon the Romans, and the enraged Sabins, thus spoiled of their
Daughters, resolved to give Romulus and his Subjects sower sauce to their sweet
meat: Romulus defends himself and his acquisitions bravely; and Fortune (to
speak in Roman language) so favored new founded Rome, In Iuvenem eractus and
virum e^ o^ni plaga, quam Orbis am^it imme^sus, reportavi^ laureae triumpbos;
and in senium verge^s and nomine solo aliquoties vincens, ad tranquilliora
vitae deces^it. Ammianus Marcel. lib. 14.
that all things answered the Grandeur of its Founders stupendous Project. And
as the Infancy of Rome was venust, so was its Manhood notably strenuous. To it
all people of Prowess and art resorted; in it they stayed; to its glory they
contributed their seize, and so it ampliated its renown, that all the
world grew Rome, and Rome almost had no bounds beneath the Universe; this was
the orient Giant, that run his Race into all Quarters, and the Helen that
bewitched all Loves, the Lap into which all the lots of Conspicuity were
concentred. There and there only was the City of Kings, the Paradise of
learning, the office of honor, the Campus Martius of Manlyness; nothing was
there wanting that could advance life to an Envy and endanger its Luxury: yea
though it were nothing but a pile of violence, inhabited by the Desperado's and
Debauchers of all Nations, Florus lib. 3. c. 18. Sigonius lib. 2. De Nominitus
Romanorum.
Latins, Tuscans, Phrygians, Arcadians, which Florus says made one compact
Roman Corporation: yet did they, upon the interest of common Concern, so cement
and cooperate, that they fortified themselves against all incursions,
subversions, or earthquakes, which the Magnetiqueness of their external success
and increase might reasonably occasion them, and prevailed against all mankind
to their Mancipation under them, which made the Writers of them not only call
them, The People only worthy of the Worlds Empire, and of all the admiration
of all both Gods and men, O Populum dignum Orbis Imperio, dignumque omnium and
admiratione hominum ac Deorum, Jornandes lib. De Regnorum and Temporum successi^
but aggravate them with all imaginable Eulogick Hyperbole's, The Treasury of
all Lands, the common Castle of the earth, the head of Dominion and of the
world, Salmuth in Pancirol. lib. 2. p. 5.
the Center and Academy of arts, the Sanctuary of Justice, the Orb of
eloquence; these were the Tributes the flatteries of men paid to rising Rome.

Rome thus replete with a Miscelany of Nations and diversities of
Constitutions, Vives in lib. 1. De Civitate Dei, c. 4. Alciat. ad legem 9^.
lib. De verb. signific. p. 225.
producing a ferocity of manners and conversation; Numa the second King
appears, and as he to the ten Months instituted by Romulus, began from the
Month of March, added January and February, which make our now twelve, so did
he add to the glory of the Government and structure of the City and its
appurtenances; and so did after him Ancus Marius: but prosperity made the
people luxurious and prodigal, and there was a necessity of breathing out these
peccancyes, least for want of it, the Constitution kindles and flame to its
exinanition. Corvinus Messala in Augusti progeny.
Therefore in Tullus Hostilius his time to action they must, and did, first
against the Albanians, then the Latins; and after once they were fledged, and
had drawn their Neighbors blood, their singers itched to be in arms, and since
they could find none, resolved they were to make an enemy with whom to
quarrel, which because Servius Tullius their King saw to be their temper, and
necessary to his subsistence; he formed his Subjects into Methods of War, and
acquainted them with the dexterity of right encamping: yet as exact as he was
in the skill of Soldiery, he lost his Government to Tarquin, and Tarquin,
proud with his Prevalence, brought Regality not only out of date in Rome, but
thence banished, where it first was most conspicuous. After him the Romans
proved fortunate under every Government, and in the Parthian War had so much of
divine benedictive Providence concurring them, Florus lib. 3. c. 10
that when the victory was ten to one upon the Parthians side, the Romans
rallying afresh and refighting made it theirs, which caused one of their dying
Enemies to cry out, Ite and been valete Romani, God speed you, and much good
may the Mastery of the world do ye O Romans, whose valor is such and victory
so great, that ye can resist and beat down the Darts of the Parthians,
Breviatii. lib. 1.
so that Enemy. So true is that of Eutropius: that the memory and eloquence of
man will hardly serve to commemorate and set forth the flourishing State of
Rome, Condita est Roma velut altera Babylon, and velut prioris silia Babylonis,
per quam p^ac^^t orbem debellare terrarum and in unam sociotatem Reipub,
legumque perductum, long lateque pacare. Sanctus Augustine, lib. 18. De Civit
Dei, c. 22.

Aelius Spattianus, in vita ejus, p. 118. edit. Sylburg.


what vast Conquests they made, how renowned Laws they established, what a
terrible name they transmitted far off, how rare Examples of Veracity,
Fortitude, and generosity they were, Histories abound in. Hence was it, that as
to be a Citizen of Rome, was to be noble; so to be a Senator, was supra quod
nou, which Adrian the Emperor insinuated in that his Speech upon the
senatorizing of Titius, nihil se jam amplius habere, quod in se conferri
possit. But Rome, as a piece of Elementary mutableness, Quae enim res alia
furores civiles peperit quam nimia faelicitas.

Florus, lib. 3. c. 12.


stood not always thus fixed, and really enviable for her virtue and happiness.
For as her Pride made her invade Neighbors; so her Conquests over them, made
their vices and pleasures Victors over her quondam virtues; Syria and Asia they
got, but by them they were effeminated, and the manners of the Age being
inquinated with foreign vices, made Rome a Sink of Lubricity, not a Theater of
Masculine Puissance, and Heroic Bravery: for which the Poet, not untruly,
reproached it. Flaccus, Ep. lib. 2.
Seditione, dolis, scelere atque libidine and ira,
Illiacos intra muros peccatur and extra.
Sedition, Fraud, Lust, Wickedness, and Rage,
Have Rome devoured, made it the Villains Cage.
So Juvenal, Satyr. 13.
Quae tam festa dies, ut cesset prodere furem,
Perfidiam, frauds atque omni ex crimine lucrum
Quaesitum est, partos gladio vel pyxide nummos.
What day so sacred is, which cannot discover
Theft, Perfidie, with Fraud, 'bout Rome to hover,
In thee Gold is the Goddess men admire;
They it by hook or crook resolve to acquire,
Thus is the Roman virtue dun'd in the mire.
Yea so just occasion there was for this declamation against Rome's Apostasy,
that the grave Philosophiz'd Emperor Antoninus upbraids it, Is this (quoth he)
Rome, in which in elder time, Hanccine esse Romam credis illam ^ by priseis
temporibus and in aureo illo saeculo senes erant honestissimi, Juvenes optime
morati, exercitus disciplinae observantissime, and censores senatoresque
justissimi? non est haec Roma, nullum habet Romae vestigium, nullum decus,
nullam similitudinem. Epist. ad Pollionem.
and in the Golden Age, there was upright old men, civilized Youth, valiant and
well disciplined Soldiers, most just and wise Censors and Senators? Sure this
that is now Rome, is but the Picture of that real Rome; for now Paterculus,
lib. 2.
the Citizens are from watchful, slothful; from men of agility, become vicious;
from industrious, become a City of idle and inoccupyed men.

And now the Roman name cripples and declines; all the East defects from them,
and of the West they hold but a small part; their Wealth refunds it self into
those quarters whence it effluxed, and every ambitious and popular party rends
and tears a limb from her symmetrious body, and that figure which was the glory
of all its Architects and Statuaries, becomes now disfigured by the Triumph of
time, and the tyranny of change in her ruining voracity. So that as Nimred,
Ninus, Belus, Tyrants all, had but a Temporal Consistency; no more had Rome in
the grandeur of that position, wherein, as Queen of Nations, she gave Laws to
the Continent.

Quare dum filii Israel regem postulabant sicut tunc habuerunt gentes omnes;
dominus inde offensus legem Regalem eis per Prophetam explanari mandavit, quae
non aliud fuit quam placitum Regis eis prae-essentis, ut in primo Regum libro
before edoceretur.

1 Samuel 8.11.
This instance the Chancellor produces, to show that the Customs of the Nations
had infected the people of God to symbolize with them, in desiring the
government of a King, rather then that that God guided them by, when he says,
He was their King, whom in their choice of a King, as the Nations had, they
declined, and for which, the severity of their Kings should be a punishment;
not that God disapproved Kingly Government, for that is his own Government over
the World, and that which his Son our Lord Jesus is expressed by, Eusdem ego
sicopinor atque id asserere non dubito, Deum immortalem non charttate, atque
Reipubcura imperium Sauli dedisse, sed quoniam arrogantiam saevitramque ejus
introspexerat comparatione deterrima gloriam Samueli quaesivisse, ut tali
successore desideratior ille quandoque foret. Cunaeus, De Rep. Hebr. lib 1. c.
14,
I have set my King upon my Holy Mountain; but because he knowing the hearts of
Israel, set on it with a depreciation of him, made it therefore terrible to
them, as a punishment of their disesteem of him. In these words therefore the
Holy Ghost does exemplify their condition in the fruition of their desire. And
though Lorinus, and other learned men largely discourse of the particulars of
this their temper of affairs, as penal from God; yet a better and shorter
account of it, can no where be produced, then from the Pen of The true Law of
the Monarchies, p. 193 of his Works upon the 1 Samuel 8.15.
King James of happy memory, who in his Discourse of the Law of Free Monarchy,
treating on it, has comprised all that the words import, in this Breviary, The
best and noblest of your blood, shall be compelled in slavish and servile
Offices to serve him, and not content of his own Patrimony, will make up a Rent
to his own use of your best Lands, Vineyards, Orchards, and store of Cattle; so
as inverting the Law of Nature, and Office of a King, your persons, and the
Persons of your posterity, together with your Lands, and all that ye possess,
shall serve his private use and inordinate appetite: thus he. And th^s makes
good our Texts Description of it to be placitum Regis eis prae^essentis.

Habes nunc (ni fallor) Princeps clarissime, formam exordii regnorum regaliter
possessorum, quare quomodo regnum pelitice regulatum primum erupit, etiam jam
propalare cenabor, ut cognitis amborum regnorum initiis causam diversitatis
quam tu quaeris, inde elicere tibi sacillimum sit.

This Epilogique Sextence has much of comprehensive smartness, and oratorious
brevity in it: the Prince is gravely, and with due obeisance told what the
Chancellor aimed at, and accordingly has performed in the preceding words,
Habes nune Princepsclarissime formam exordii regnorum reg^liter possessorum; as
if he had said, Great Sir, I have not boasted, of what I could not perform to
your satisfaction; you have it (ni fal^or) as far I hope as satisfies you, or
is discoverable by man, the original of high mettalled domination. Secondly,
the Chancellor rationally promises solution as well as he can, how politic
Government came in use, and the effects of it, and this as a piece of right to
justice, that the Sentence may not be passed upon either, but after Audience
and consideration of both, Quare quomodo regnum politice regulatum, etc. as if
the Chancellor had proceeded to say, Your Grace knows, that the fore-described
absolute regality, was a fruit of popular fervor, which delighted in change
and assimilation to the most received custom of men; aad Sir, you are also to
understand, that politic regal government, such as Englands is, did not come
into approbation by chance, as a by-blow, with all the disparagements of
ingloriousness upon it, but it did erumpere, as that which was expedient and
necessary, to prevent both the Rulers disturbance, and occasion the ruled's
peace: 'twas such a mixedness of temper for common good, as was equally in the
issue of it compensative to King and People: for such a sense I conjecture our
Chancellor to have, when he says of it erupit, which is as much as cum impetu
exiit; erumpo being a word that argues and implies vehemence and importunity,
not to be almost denied, like the breaking out of a Spring, which importunes
passage, and where it finds, continues it. And I suppose our quondam Kings,
under whom it first appeared like indulgent Fathers, seeing their Subjects as
dutiful Children, prostrate before them to beg the blessing of kindness and
freedom from them, did in paternal commiseration and regal condescension,
vouchsafe their desires: and thus they did erumpere gaudio propter concessum
regimen politicum. For the Chancellor does not novum dogma propalare, not make
the freedom and relaxation of our government to be a fruit of War, or (as it
were) a trophey from the spoil of Princes, but he makes it an acquisition of
favor, a reward of duty, a stimulation to obediential perseverance. And then
lastly, he shows the reason why he does thus produce the governments in their
respective nature and fruits, to wit, that his Reason might be satisfied, that
Antiquity was herein found in the way of righteousness, and therefore to be
honored, and that as well King as People consented so to rule, and so to obey;
and this takes off all the acrimony of People against their Prince, and all
rage and severity of the Prince against his People; which a Commodus would
never have consented to, for he laid aside the gravity of a Roman Senator, and
appeared like a Fencer, using no companions, but such lewd Roysters; and the
reason was, his design was, (...), etc. The grave men and all his Fathers
friends he meant to slay, that they might not see the wickedness he was to act,
nor reproach him for such villainy, as became rather a Butcher then a Prince;
but our Princes have abhorred such courses, and consented so to govern, Est in
Monarchia Rex, aut consilio admissus, aut successione designatus; est vero in
Tyran^ide Truculeietus Leo; in Monarchia proponitur virtus, in Tyrannide
triumphat scelus; loges in Monarchia aperte loquun^t, at in Tyrannide oracula
civitatis silent; in regno communi bono (...), ac is it Tyrannide populus
opprimitur. Casus Sphaer. Civit lib. 4. ^. 2. p. 217.
and so to be obeyed, as the Law mentions and prescribes, declining all
excesses, as equally dangerous. This their moderation therefore our Chancellor
persuading him to follow, introduces the Discourse of Politic Government in
the next Chapter, in those words.

CHAP. XIII.
Sanctus Augustinus in lib. 19. De Civitate Dei, c. 23. dicit quod populus est
catus hominum, Iuris consensu and utilitatis communione sociatus.


In Epist. ad Ta pam Clement. Octav. ante Tom. 4 Annal.
SAint Augustine is one of the four Latin Fathers, whom Baronius calls
occidentalis Ecclesiaeculmina, etc. The Spires of the Western Church, the
Pillars of the Catholic Faith, the great Lights and Miracles of the World; a
Bishop about the fourth Century of the Church, and one so learned and famous,
that though he had be dirted his life and name with Immoralities, Heresies, and
other Turpitudes, which not only he in his own Confessions laments and
detests; but also Possidonius, Baronius, Erasmus, Vives, In vita ejus.
and other Authors, do not spare him for: yet did the grace of God so
effectually rescue him at last, that he grew the great Bulwark of Faith against
the Goths, Donatists, Manichees, Pelagians, and all other Heretics, and
deserved that testimony that Erasmus, that witty and oracularly learned man
gives of him, Quid enim habet orbis Christianus hoc Scriptore, Episiola dedicat
Oper. edit. Frobenii, ad Card. Fonsecam.
vel magis aureum, vel augustius, etc. What (says he) has the whole World
more valuable and magnificent then this Father, who wrote, and spoke not by
rote, but as it were divinely inspired, aptly, and in a not to be confuted
dialect, who had the excellency of all the Fathers concentred in him, as if the
ample gifts of the Holy Spirit were in him above humane proportion, and as if
his Soul were the Table on whom the grace of God would exemplify it self in
the lively picture of an Evangelique Bishop every way complete: thus he. And
not without reason, for God had given him great Wit, solid Judgment, experience
of Converse, prospect of the vanity of the World; and having directed these by
Conversion, to their right object, and by a preponderation of grace, made his
accomplishments Gods, in the intent and devotion of his soul; so to use them,
God brought him forth to a Masculine purpose, and placed him in the forefront
of the battle of danger and opposition. Lib. 3. ^. 'I. contra Petilianum. In
vita ejus.
As a Champion of the Church he stood vigorously and successfully, writing so
much, that Possidonius strains the truth to commend him, Scripsit plura quam
quisquam legerit; but one wittily observes, Is decipi cum opinione credidit,
qui omnia quae Augustinus scripsit, arbitratur se legisse. True it is, His
tanta authoritas, ut nullius Scriptis post Evangelicam Historiam Tarsensis que
Pauli, major hominum consensus accesserit. Sa bellic. lit. 1. c. 7.
that much he wrote, and to excellent purpose, for so great a name gained he by
his excellent Learning, Life, and Devotion, that his Writings, next to Holy
Scripture, were reverenced and owned. And on this ground did the Church Saint
him, not by Popish Canonization, for I think that was not in use then, but by a
publication, and recognition of his sacred endowments, and the service he as an
Instrument of God's glory in the Church, did. Now as the Author was an
excellent person, so is the Book here quoted by our Chancellor a rare Book,
both for the occasion, argument, and zeal of the Author, In Argumento Sancti
Augustini ante lib. De Civit. Dei.
in the composing and publishing of it; Roma Gothorum irruptione sub Alarico
Gotho paganiblasphemare Deum caeperunt, etc. When Rome (says he) was
incommodated by the Goths under Alaric their King, and I saw and heard their
blasphemies against God, and the magnification they uttered of Ethnique
Fopperies; the zeal of God against them, In Vives Prafat. ante Commenta rios,
made me vindicate the truth against them, and hereupon I wrote the Books of
the City of God: they are his own words. On these Books, learned Vives, by the
help of incomparable Erasmus, commentaried, but with as much discouragement as
a painful Commentator could have from an ingrate age; but notwithstanding all
that, he perfected his Work, and dedicated it to our H. 8. Out of these Books
of the Father, to wit, l. 19. c. 23. our Chan, quot. is also c. 24. Populus est
caetus multitudinis rationalis, reram quas d ligit concordi communione
sociatus, which is almost in terminis our Texts here, Populus est caetus
hominum juris consensu and utilitatis conjunctione sociatus; which sentence
sets forth the subject, the rule, the end of Government and Order in all
Societies. So then Societies are made up of men not beasts, for though number
may be of beasts, Est quidem Respub. ordinata hominum multudo, Hoppotus ver.
Jurisp. lib. 1. tit. 12.
birds; and fishes; yet Society, arguing amicitialness, presupposes reason,
which only men and Angels have. And as they are called caetus for the number,
Civitatem appellandam esse censeo collectam hominum multitudinem ad jur^
vivendum. Patricius lib. 1. tit. ^. De Instit. Reipublic.
so hominum for the nature. This catus is a word of a large extent; for it not
only imports ten in Company, as the Code has it: but any great number. The
Common Law makes three unlawfully met together a Riot, or a Multitude
punishable, and though Sir Edward Cook says, ^ Instit. p. 257. sect. 431.
that upon the Statute of 5 R. 2. 6. 7. the word Multitude must be ten or more,
yet he adds, I could never read it restrained by the Common Law to any certain
number, and therefore since the Statutes 17 R. 2. c. 8. 13 H. 4. c. 7.2 H. 5.
c. 8. 19 H. 7. c. 13. do none of them specify the number that shall positively
make an unlawful multitude or assembly but leaves them to the exposition of
time and practice, which interprets three or more a number within those
Statutes, that Exposition is the Law of a multitudes consistency. By Caetus
then is understood a number united having some capacity for action. And though
Caetus in Authors has some times an ill acceptance as Suetonius uses it,
Caetu extraneorum prohibuit silias. In August. c. 64: Quid enim necesse est
tanquam meretricem in matronarum catum, sic valuptatem in virtutuus consilium
adducere, Cic. lib. 2. De Finib.
Qui caetum fecerit capitale sit, and Augustus forbad his Daughters to be in
the Company of Strangers; yet it having a good sense also not only in Tully,
but in our Text there is good use to be made of it, as it is directive to the
Conjunction of Societies, who by meeting personally together, become one in
affection and soder into an oneness of all common Conditions; hence the Greeks
by (...) express any Society either sacred, civil, martial, corporal, Job. xvi.
7. Job complains to God of his misery in these words, Thou have made desolate
^all (...), Congregationem meam; as if he had said, Thou O Lord have withdrawn
thy merciful indulgence from me, and dissolved the Polity and Contexture of my
Nerves, Sinews, and Arteries, which carried vigorously about the motions and
operations of nature, and now I am the subject of reproach and abhorrence, I am
as it were nothing, all the venust figures of thy Impression on me are defaced
and desolated, so might Job be thought to say. Our Chancellor then out of St.
Aug. understands Caetus in a good sense for a Company of men met together, not
vagely to do mischief, but prudently to preserve themselves in a justifiable
way, Iuris consensu, Iuris consensu, Certa ratione asque ordine Rempub.
cons^itui.

Hopperus de ver. Jurisp. lib. I. Tit. 62.

Lib. 2. c, 6. De Jur. bell. and pac.


not casually and by accident as birds and beasts do, but upon moral and
durable Principles, by common agreement and Concord; and this either, cum totus
coiit populus: or when part representing the whole accord and consent, and then
facimus quod per alium facimus, says Grotius. And this consent of a Law for
Regulation, and such a Law, as according to the common Principles of honesty
and prudence, takes off the combination of men from all injurious intendments,
because it supposes them so to love and practice charity and justice, that they
will not as Enemies to mankind be praedatorious, but make the Law their Judge,
and of their actions the Arbiter; Lib. 4. De Legib.
which Plato declares the end of Law, (...), etc. To us the Law has this
import, that under it the Citizens may be most happy and most friends one to
another: Lib. De Sanctitat. apud Stobaeum sermon. 41.
so Dictogenes the Pythagorean, (...), etc, The Law is the President and
Author of all things that tend to civil concord and virtue of conversation.
For God has so riveted Principles of justice into man's mind, that as he knows
to practice it is his duty, so to understand it is his delight, where
corruption by a prevalency has not besotted him. And hence is the general
suffrage of men for a Law, and zealous they are for the reverence and
observation of it. Stobaeus sermon. 41.
Archytas the Pythagorean says, (...), It ought to be that that Law and
Government be accounted the best, that is the Marrow of all Forms and regulates
every action by just Laws.

Et utilitatis communione sociatus, this is the noble end of all society, love
arising from the common fortune they resolve to partake in. Sin alas made a
very great gapp, between not only God and man, (...), Arist. lib. 4. De Repub.
c. 11. (...) etc.
but between man and man, letting in such a Sea of vice and torrent of
ataxicall Principles, and all those in depravation of the Image of God and the
candor of humane nature; that did not virtue, ordinated by God to be the balm
of cure to it, interpose, and express it self in civil offices and kind
inclinations to mankind, and thence conquer the depraved rudeness, no
reconciliation would possibly be, but that coming in as a Reconciler and good
Angel, closes the breach and makes men agree to rule and obey to ends of common
convenience. For as in the body-natural, the one head rules all the members,
because the noble faculties of Regency are there seated, and the lower and less
noble parts willingly submit to its guidance and Dominion; so in the state-body
the noblest and best are fittest to rule and probablest to rule well, and one
is the best to rule, because after the Model of God and the manner of mankind;
Corporis hujus certum debere esse caput, and quidem divinum; quoniam homo
natura sua non sui generis animantibus paret. (Nam non Oves ab Ovibus, sed a
praestantiori natura Homme nempa reguniur) sed um Principi Deo, cujus Vicarii,
and quas^ viva imago sunt. ^qui inter homines regnum obtinent, Nopperus lib. 1
De vera Jurisprudenti^. It Is. 12.
and though I know many have carried on and kept up Government worthyly among
the Greeks and elsewhere; yea, and that under their Aristocracy common good has
been promoted: yet all Experience tells us, that the least inconveniences to
common good arises from just and well-composed Monarchies, wherein Princes rule
for God as God, justly and mercifully, and consider their Subjects as under
them to order, not to destroy; to discipline in virtue not to president to
evil. And who so considers the Inconstancies of people in the Roman's state,
who after they rejected their Kings fell to Consuls, thence to Decem-virs, th^^
to Consuls again, Tholoss. Syntag Iuris Civilis lib. 43. c. 34. p. 1010.
after that to Tribunes of the people, those sometimes annual, then changed
into Dictatours, from thence to short-lived Emperors; till at last they came
to perpetual Emperors. Whosoever I say considers the versatility of the People
in their influence on] Government, will have cause to bless God for God's
Laws to rule them and good Princes to execute them.

Nec tamen populus hujusmodi dum Acephalus, id est, sine capite, corpus vocari
meretur. Quia ut in naturalibus, capite detruncato, residuum non corpus, sed
truncum appellamus: sic and in politicis sine capite communitas, nullatenus
corporatur.

Here the Chancellor shows, that no Societies of men but have Superiority and
Inferiority by common consent amongst them, and that from President of God and
Nature in the Constitution of the body of man, the little world after the Model
and Polity of which the greater is made and to it conformed: now his argument
is as a body, nothing can be said such to be, that wants a head on it, for then
it is monstrous and deformed, ^^sus in Sphae^a Civitatis p. 8. l. 1. c. 1.
^dead and invivid, a Block and Carcass not a perfect figure of life and
luster; so in Societies of men where some do not rule above others, and the
others obey them, there can be no reasonable appellation of a Society, no
expectation of joint and several advantage and peace resulting from the glory
and guidance of the head. For as that rescinded from the body ceases its
soulary influence and actuation, so the Societies of men not subservient to
their head are full of confusion, and in no sort regular nor durably
successful in any their actions, but as soon may a wise man hope to see a
Post stir without help of Lifters, as these politiquely transact without an
head. The head is the seat of life, and the region of the spirits, and nature
of man; indeed the heart first lives, Hist. Animal. lib. 2. c. 10.
but when life is in the heart, then it distributes its energy to the whole
mass of Nature gradually, for the Cistern of the spirits, into which they all
flow, and where they concentre, Lib. 2. c. 6.
is the head: so that though the people be first in order of time, yet the
Ruler is in order of Dignity, the chiefest and best part of all Societies; for
he is the living Law, and makes them he rules either happy or miserable, as his
virtues or vices are: And therefore, as, a Ruler cannot be without his People,
so not a People without a Ruler, they are relata's each to other, and do
necessarily imply each other, and are but nuda nomina in their separation. For
as in the consideration of the World, there is God the Creator, Man his
Creature, the World his Work; so in the Commonwealth, there is (says Hopper)
quod praest caput, Lib. De ver. Jurisprud. c. 1^.
the head that rules, the foot that obeyes; and that which is a partaker of
both Rule and Subjection, the community and society of the People: So that as
the end of life is not obtained, but by the heads being upon the body; so not
the end of Government, but by the safety and proper fixation of the Prince in
his Prerogative and Seat of Rule. Which all wise people, in their respective
Governments, have ever in such a degree promoted, as was approved necessary to
their subsistence and peace: and the people of God so far propagated, that they
told David plainly, that his security was so important to them, that hazard his
Royal Person against rude Philistims (who would bend the heat of the battle
against him as King of Israel) he should not; and they give the reason, Thou
art worth ten thousand of us, that is, thou puts a spirit into all of us, Nam
nunc tu potes roborare si^ut nos december milia Chald. Paraphr.
who without thee should signify nothing: and whatever betide us, thy courage,
wisdom, and influence, will either bring us off when in danger, by sending a
convenient and timely rescue, or revenge our deaths and losses, by a brave
return of resolution in revenge of injuries. Oh! but why so? one worth ten
thousand: Yes, thou art the light of Israel, and one Sun is more available,
then millions of little farthing lights: Thou, O King, art a good of
communicativeness, all our darkness is brightned, our dullness sharpened, our
disorder regulated, our diffusions recollected and united in thee: therefore we
are bound in love to our selves, to secure thee as the fountain of all our
good, and the life of all our peace. For though it is agreed on all hands, that
People were before Princes, and Families before Kingdoms, (for Government was
in Families from the Creation to the Flood) and from Families to Divisions and
Neighbourhoods, Lipsius, 2 Politic. c. 1. Monit. ^. p 207. Casus Sphaera
Civitat. lib. 1. c. 1. p 8. King James's true Law of Free Monarchies, p. 207.
thence to towns, thence to Cities, and thence many Towns and Cities being
united made Commonwealths; yet Princes, the most excellent of them, being set
over them, and recognized by Act of State, no reassumption of the Primitive
Power, and liberty of People lies, any more, then it lies in the power of a
Woman once married, to dissolve the Marriage Bond; for though it were at her
choice, to consent, or not, while she was sui juris; yet having once consented
to the act of Marriage, she becomes her Husbands, and he has power of her, and
all her single liberty is determined.

This then considered, the Chancellor has done wisely to consider Bodies
Politic by Bodies Natural, as God in the Fabrication of man made him the
Epitome and little Model of the World, so our Chancellor makes the head in the
body of man the thing by which he sets forth the state of Kingdoms, and their
bodies governments. In the body though there be two feet, two hands, two arms,
two ears, two eyes, two sides, yet is there but one head: So in the
Commonwealth, though there be many ruled, yet but one alone rules; which one
is called emphatically a Head, because the Head is sacred, Sacrum caput (says
Varro) a capiendo, quia inde capiunt originem sensus omnes, etc. all the senses
internal, external, are there lodged, as in the noblest part of the body. Hence
is it, that not only Christ is called in Scripture, Head of the Church; and
the man the head of the woman: Phavorinus, Lib. De excellencia hominis, partis
primae, c. 7 p. ^9, etc. Omne quod est perfectum, vocari caput. J. C.
but every thing of perfection and excellency is set forth by the head.
Gergitius, whom Pha^orinus calls no mean Author, says, that Rome was of old
called Cephaleon, betokening her Empire to be over all the World, and the chief
place in her was called the Capitol; ye^, all safety was expressed by the heads
safety, if that were out of danger, the body could not be unhappy; which was
one reason, why the Egyptians venerated the Head; and Paulus, the famous
Civilian, has published for the honor of the head, Locus ille in quo humanum
inhumatur caput, religiosus efficitur, etiam absque aliis corporis partibus.
Blemmyis traduntur ca^ita abesse, ore and oculis pectori assi^^s. Plin. Na.
Hist. lib. 5. c. 8.
Although therefore Monsters in Africa may have their mouths and eyes in their
breasts, yet most of the World knows no place for them but the head, and that
on the shoulders of the people, who with gladness bear it up, and are made
happy by their support of it: for Princes are to States, as Heads are to
Bodies, Beauty, Life, Regulation, which three make that one Divine Harmony,
which the Scripture calls, under the name of charity, the Bond of Perfection.

First, In unaqua ^ue facie similir^do magnifi^eti^, a(...), pro^itatis, (...)
ignav^ae (...) ac vitiorum omnium extat. Plin. Senior. lib. 11.
Beauty, that is conveyed to the body by the head, in which the face, the eyes,
the nose, the seat of all the senses, both soulary and bodily, are. Hence is
it, that Philosophers say, vultus animi Index; for all the resemblances of
virtues and vice are hereby made known: nor is it often seen that men are
better or worse; but mostly that (to wise men) they seem to be; which Socrates
justified Zopyrus the Phisiognomer in, when he censured him for a bad person,
and was derided by them that stood by and knew Socrates his worth. Oh, says
Socrates, he rightly judged, for such as he described me, I had been, had not
Philosophy reformed me. So may all men say; such we are as we seem, unless we
are other by miracle, which none can tell but the author of them: when
therefore the head is separated from the body, all the beauty ceases, all the
prerogative of man above other Creatures expires; a Carcass he is, and no more
like what he was, Lib. ^. De pa^^^ Animal. c. 10. p. 1014.
then a Truncheon is to a Scepter (though Aristotle tells us of Jupiter
Hoplosms Priest, that spoke after his head was cut off) yet a rude inform
contemptible thing it is, passive under every insolency, attractive of no
respect, hardly worthy of civil Ceremonies. So is it in the State, if the head
be from the body, there is nothing but deformity and tyrannous monstros^ty, the
feet and hands will rule, who are Masters of misrule, and good for nothing, but
aut humiliter servire, aut superbe dominari. And woe be to that Land where the
Government is headless. The Holy Ghost records it for an ill time in Israel,
when every man did that which was right in his own eyes. Hoc dicit Scriptura
quasi super hoc ingemiscit, Fet. Martyr, in 17 Iudic. c. 6. 18 v. 1. ^. 10 v.
1. c. 21 v. last.
says Reverend Bishop Andrews; and Peter Martyr is positive, that nothing is
more pernicious to humane society, then lawlessness, when the itch of popular
levity, and the scurvy of their insolent success, makes them trample down Laws,
and rebel against the Lawmakers. God sets it down so often, There was no King
in Israel, then did every man that which was right in his own eyes, as the
great aggravation of the peoples penal infelicity. God had removed their
Governors, Cum ^^bitis mutationem Reipublicae, Deus non ^lect^^ur; nam Rex
semel inauguratus vi^^tur esse loco Dei, immo appellatur Christus Domini. P.
Martyr. in 1 Samuel ^. 18.
and now they by their sins, being without the staff of beauty, God for their
sins broke the staff of bands; for a Magistrate is the band that holds all
together. God gave them Magistrates, and those they murmured under, and God
took away their Governors, and with them the luster of their government. So
fares it often with brave Aurelians, though for their good ruling, Aurel.
Victor Epitom. Hist. August, Sanctus Thomas, Lib. De Regim. Principum, c. ^.

R^tilius Benzonius in. Psalm. 16. Quast. 4. Prop. 2. p. 200.


they deserve inter divos referri; yet they feel, as he did, the force of
treachery and treason in their deaths: So that Kings are as Heads, beauties to
their Politic Bodies, and it is as comely that one should rule, and the rest
obey in the body politic, as that the head in the body natural should preside
over the rest of the members, and they observe its rule, and submit to it. So
the Text is out of Aristotle, 1 Politic. Quandocunque ex plurimis constituitur
unum, inter illa unum trit regens, and alia erunt recta. For as Music is made
up of deep Bases, shrill Trebles, and grave Means; so is beauty in government
composed of those symmetrious correspondencies that are between Power and
Obedience.

Secondly, the head in the natural body is regimen, the directive part; for
though it be lesser then the trunck, Hist. Animal. lib. 1. c. 15. p. 773. edit,
Paris.
or lower parts; yet it is in figure and nature correspondent to the sublime
part of the World, the Heavens; Because man is made to be Lord of the World,
God has given him senses suitable to his dignity, and lodged them in a
repertory sublime and secure. In the head is the soul with all her faculties,
if materially any where, or rather circumscriptively, which I do not say; but I
mean there; if any where the soul and her faculties be, it is in the brain
lodged in the head; there are the senses, which subserve the reason, and all
the distributions of it. And hence, because the Court of all the noble
Constellations is there, it rules, for that government becomes it best: so in
the body politic, the Prince, as the caput regni and legum, does the offices
of the head to the community, Probi mors satis perdidit; omnia pro^e passa est,
quae patitur in un^ homine mortalitas. Flav. Vopisc. in Caro Numeriano, p. 299.
he directs what is to be executed, and what not; how, in what proportion, when;
he prospects what is good and evil, and is the Author of both, according as his
example inclines to either; which Plutarcg apprehending aright, admonished
Trajan of, notably; and that not only as he loved him, but also as his own
credit was concerned in the goodness and prudent demeanor of his Pupil; Tuae
itaque virtuti congratulor, etc. I congratulate thy virtue, its good fortune
and mine too, if thou show thy self worthy the Institution I have given
thee; otherwise, sure thou will be the subject of detraction, Rualdus in vita
Plutarchi cap. 15.
and involve me in the censure with thy self; for as Rome will not applaud a
slothful Prince, so will not they forbear reproaching me as thy remiss Master,
who did not timelyly pluck up the roots of vices, whence such weeds now spring;
but by sparing them in thee, am accessory to the ill effects of them. Thus wife
Plutarch, other words, but in analogy of sense to those of our Lord to his
Disciples, Ye are the salt of the World, have salt in your selves, that ye may
season others; for if salt has lost its savor, it is good for nothing: ye are
the light of the World, let your light so shine before me^, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Lights are not to
be put under a bushel, but upon a hill, that all may see by them: so are
Princes to be examples of good, and directors of others to be good; heads are
parts of government, instruction, and conduct, as well as beauty; so is the
Text, Quare populum se in regnum aliunde corpus politicum erigere volentem
semper oportet ^num praficere tetius corporis illius regitivum, quem Regem
nominare solitam est.

Thirdly, as the Head in the Body Natural is the life of it; and separate that
from the Trunck, and it becomes a Log, terra inutile pondus; so is it in the
Body Politic, the King is head, all the life and luster of the Commonwealth
is in him and from him. Hence the Hebrews called Kings by names indicative of
the good Offices they do to people; they called him by (...), so the King of
Tire is called Exech. xxviii. 14. Thou art the anointed Cherub that covers,
Quod in morem Cherub alas suas extendat long and ditionem proferat, says a
Gloss on it. And by (...), a word denoting a King lawfully reigning and not a
Tyrant, Prove. xxiv. 21. 2 Kings xi. 12, and thus God declares Christ is set by
him Psalm. ii. 6. yea as the Greeks called those that ruled well (...), Gyrald
De Diis Gent. Syntagm. 11.

Hopperus lib 7. De vera Jurisp. Tit. 9.

Zuinger Theatr. Volum. 14. lib. 2. p. 2065., 2067. and seq.

Bonfinius lib. 3. c. 4.


and the Latins Deos tutelares, so did they give almost divine Honors to them.
And the Persians to show the benefit Kings brought to their Governments by the
peace and order of their Reigns, made a Law, that upon the death of every King
there should be five days inter-regnum, by the disorders of which they saw
their debt to their Prince, who brought a redress of those Mischiefs, which
sadly thought upon, makes all wise men of Michael Orsagh the Palatine of
Hungary's mind, who, when the Peers of Hungary would depose Matthias, opposed
them with this ever in his mouth from his loyal heart, Quemcunque sacra corona
coronari videris, etiamsi bos sit, adorato, and pro sacrosancto Rege dicito and
observato. To separate those then whom God has joined together, Prince and
People, is therefore treasonous; because tending to the Destruction of both.
For though the people are the Embrio whence God enlivens and makes powerful
the King, yet they are not any thing but ciphers and Embrio's, dead lumps,
without the soulary influence of him, Ex populo erumpit regnum, Benzonius in
Psalm. 86. Q^oest. 6. p. 315. 316. and seq.
quod corpus extat mysticum uno homine ut capite gubernatum. And that Monarchy
is the most ancient and just, the most peaceful and durable, Lipsius 2.
Politic. c. 1. p. 207. and deinceps.
the most safe and communicative Government, all Politicians agree; so true is
that of King James, The proper office of a King toward his Subjects agrees
very well with the office of the head toward the body and all Members thereof.
Johannes Casus in Sphaera Civit. Lib. 3. c. 7. p. 180, 181.
For from the head, The true Law of free Monarchs, p. 204. Of his Works in fol.
being the Seat of Judgment, proceeds the care and foresight of guiding and
preventing all evil that may come to the body or any part thereof. The head
cares for the body, so does the King for his people; as the discourse and
direction flows from the head, and the execution accordingly thereunto belongs
to the rest of the Members, every one according to their Office, etc. Even so
is it betwixt the Prince and his People; and as there is ever hope of curing
any deceased Member by the direction of the head as long as it is whole; but by
the contrary if it be troubled, all the Members are partakers of that pain, so
is it between the Prince and his People: So that King.

Et sicut in naturali corpore, ut dicit Philosophus, cor est primym vivens,
habens in se sanguinem, quem emittit in omnia ejus membra, unde illa vegetantur
and vivunt: sic in corpore politico, intentio populi primum vividum est, habens
in se sanguinem, videlicet provisionem politicam utilitatis populi illius, quam
in caput and in omnia membra ejusdem corporis, ipsa transmittit, quo corpus
illud alitur and vegetatur.

Still the Chancellor follows the Parallel according to the position of
Aristotle, making the head, Lib. 4. Physie. De Gener. Animal. p. 276. Tom. 2.

De Excellentia hominis, Partis prima, c. 12. p. 48. Lib. 2. c. 6. De Gener.
Animal. lib. De Respir. c. 3.

Lib. 3. c. 4. De part. Animal.


though the first in place and dignity; yet, not so in the order of nature. For
notwithstanding that Gassendus tells us of some that held the head was first
generated; Phavorinus is for the Liver first, the heart next, and the brain
after, Gassendus resolves nothing peremptorily, that it is, he knows, but the
order he is not positive in; but the Philosopher is through paced, that the
heart is the first and last of life in man, and his reason is, because the life
of every thing is in the blood, and the blood in the veins, and the heart being
(...), the Principle of the veins; (...), and the Lord of the senses. The heart
from which the activity of life flows, must according to him be the first and
last: but the dispute of this will be needless, all that is alleged by it,
is, that the life and vigor of the head is by the assistance of the heart. As
in the body-naturall, so politic, head and heart must go together to make
regular and noble life in both, and as the head will be dull and inactive
without the heart; so the heart faint and overwhelmed without the distribution
of its self by the head into other Members: so, that though the similitude may
in most things hold true, Regia potestas caterorumque Principum civiles
authoritas non hominum est inventum; sed ab ipso Deo per Legem naturalem, qua
sua semp^ernae Legis participatio est, sanctissima fuit ordenatio Covarruvias
practic. quaestio. lib. 1. c 1. Conclus. 6 p 420.
yet is there somewhat of prudence to be used in the condiment of what is truth
in it. For though this that our Text-Master calls Intentio populi, may ex
natura sua be the external Rise of power; yet ex jure naturae, multitudes may
transferr it, Benzonius in Psalm. 86. quaest. 4. Propos. 2. p. 199.
and having transferred it according to the Law of nature for the improvement
of order and civil convenience, it becomes by humane Laws and Customs
recognized and irrevocably fixed, and as the power is of God, so the exercise
of it is by and under God only; and Kings that use it are not accountable to (
Popes as Benzonius will have the Ceremony of an Emperors receving the sword
from the Altar to import, Ad significandum illo debere uti ad nutum Pontificis
qui altaris est Dominus Quaest. 3. p. 24^.
That he should use it at the pleasure of the Pope, Si Principes exinutu
sulditorum and adhue singularium quorumcunque penderent potestate; ^erte non
Reges, sid insaeli^issima esse^e mancip^a, nec Monarchia sed Democratia ofset,
pejor regno Spartarum. Tholossanus. syn tag. Iurls univers. lib. 6. c. 20. p.
140 Tit. 15.
Lord of the Altar, under the punishment of deprivation: no nor to people in
the greatest representative and most august sense of them;) for still ^hey
being but Subjects are not Judges of their betters, nor can make the Law but
must be subject to it, as legally impressed by the King to be the rule of all
actions. For though true it may be allowed to be, that the particular forms of
Government were of old, and in the first times by God indulged men to order as
they saw most convenient, yet did God in the Law of nature (his mind made
known to mankind) promulge Government to be safest in the best men who were
appointed thereto, and who from being in person and mind excellent, Philo lib.
De Creatione Principis p. 713.
and of great deserts from the Community they governed, had the Government by
general Suffrage settled upon them and their descendants, the credulity of the
people probably persuading them to believe their issue in a line of successive
endowments, would rule suitable to those their excellent Sires, which collation
of power by the act and deed of the temporary Possessors of it in the name of
themselves and their Successors recognized by the acts of succeeding
generations, makes the head absolute, and the intention of the people but
precary to the head's ratification. For the head once placed, and furnished
with perquisites to its proportion; the intention of the people is no efficient
cause of liberty, Sacramentum five intention ministri non conficitur,
Bellarminus lib. 3. c 8. De Justific. p. 264.
as the Church of Rome makes the intention of the Priest of the Essence of the
Sacrament; but declares them to have had thoughts of public good in their
consent of settlement of Government on one, to prevent many Competitours, and
in a line of descent to anticipate uncertainty; yea and may be well thought to
produce kind intercourses of friendlyness between King and people, the King
being civilly (with reverence I write it) obliged to let them be free from the
edg and sanguinary sharpness of his power, who had both presented him the
sword of his rule and sharpened it by an edge put on it by themselves; and by
which they are outed of all claim to reassumption, power of repulsing, or
judgment of mal-administration.

This then, that is here called politica provisio, is not referrable to any
terms or compact antecedaneous as some may suppose; but the security which
Kings do give to God and their people by their Coronation Oath, which having
respect to the national Laws as extracts from the Law of Nature and Nations,
requires that Princes exalt justice as the reason of their Institution and
dignification; that as the Subjects must obey in and for the Lord, so the King
should command according to and in the Lord, that is, things just and lawful;
of which though he be the only Judge on earth, that is, by matter of Record
and in his judicial Courts: yet is the Judgment of God superior to it, which
always is according to truth. Lib. De Creatione Principis, p. 725.
The Consideration of which has softened Princes as I said before, to take
(...), etc. as Philo's words are, The kingly middle way between both extremes;
and to reason and resolve with themselves as Moses brings in the King he
instructs in the Law to this purpose, (...), etc. When other Kings use their
Scepters for terror making their Wills the Law, this Directory from the Law
shall be my Will; in this Diadem I will rejoice, this shall make me victorious
and virtuous, a follower of the great Iusticer of Heaven; By this I shall learn
the Rule of equality by which I shall keep my self from pride and insolence,
which God resists, and by this shall I procure the love, prayers, and
fidelities of my people, and by this shall I show my self a Conformist to the
divine Law, which enjoines the mean as that which is equally distant from both
extremes, thus Philo. For as Philo says, Though there be a Principality in
every thing; Page 728
the Lord in the Village, the Master in the House, the Phi^itian among his
Patients, the Commander among his Soldiers, the Master of the Ship among his
Mariners:: yet none of these do act so to the rigor, but that their underlings
are happy for the most part under them, God restraining the nature of men in
power, and giving some qualities to Persons under power to be come gracious
with power, and so to mollify and incline it to goodness: so it is in
Princes, though they can do by the height of their power what they please, yet
they considering themselves Parents and Husbands to their People, treat them
with all kindness and conscience, as parts and Members of their mystical body;
and so the power and (...) that they have by the Law to which their peoples
assent is given, enables them to be what Princes ought to be, (...), etc.
Aristot. Hist. Animal, lib. 2. c. 17.
just and merciful. And therefore what the Philosopher observes concerning the
position of the heart in man's body, wherein only it inclines to the left side,
whereas in all other Creatures it is placed in the middle, that I apply to
Kings, the hearts as well as head of Commonwealths; because the living Laws,
as they are to have justice on the right side so mercy the affections of
tender-heartedness on the left-side, that they may as well know how to indulge
their peoples freedom, as to heig^hen their own Prerogative; and then there
will be a pleasing and orderly Circulation, no part of the body will consume by
the aggrandization of the other, but all motions will be orderly, and a just
distribution be to all parts; and this the Text-Master calls artlyly, by alitur
and vegetatur.

Lexvero sub qua caetus hominum populus efficitur nervorum, corporis physici
tenet rationem.

As he had resembled the King to the Head, and the intention of the People to
the Heart: so now he does the Laws to the Nerves, which are a part of the Body
near allied to the Heart, as partaking of the strength that it enables it with
to all purposes of activity and motion; (...). Hist. Animal. l. 3. c. 5. L^b.
2. Gener. Animal. c. 6. (...). Lib. De Spiritu, c. 5. Metereolog. lib. 2. c. 8.
and generally it is held to be commaterial with the bones, and arising from the
same origin therewith. For though Nerves receive no spirits as Arteries do, yet
are they extendable, which Arteries are not: therefore because the motion of
the spirits, is according to the convulsion and distention of the Nerves, it
makes good, that the nerves are of great consequence to the vigor and manly
performance of any act^on of life; yea. the later Anatomists, that make the
nerves to arise from the brain, do not thereby lessen the vigor and
consequence of the nerves. Hence is it, that in Authors the nerves are counted
the compago corporis, that keeps and girds all together. So Quintilian tells us
of Astringi ussa suis nervis debent; In Prooemio, lib. 1. 18.

2 De Not. deorum, 8. 4. Pro lege Manilia Philip. 5.


and Tully in those words, Nervis and os sibus dii non continentur, intends to
attribute to the nerves much of strength, as well as to the bones. Yea, as sine
nervis esse is a phrase for debility; so to be nervous, is taken to be valid
and strong: so Soldiers, Navies, and Tributes to support them, are called
Nervi Reipub. by Tully, and Frangere nervos ^^ ment^s and corporis, is by
Quintilian expressed to undo a man's self. By which and such like instances it
appears, that the nerves are of the strength of the body, and so are Laws the
strength of Polities. Take them away, and multitudes of men are numerus, non
populus; for it is the Law that brings the plebs and rabble-rout into order, and
entitles them to the honor of being a people. For Lex a ligando, because as
the Iron Band, which the Ancient called a Nerve, kept the prisoner to the
punishment he was adjudged to; so the Law binds every man to the peace and to
consist in his station: its that which directs, protects, compensateth,
ascertains every man and thing. And therefore, though it may be extended and
made to serve every ingenuous and politic purpose; yet take heed men must of
abusing the Law, Reg. Iur. Caterum in omni corpore civili, quemadmodum in
humano, and caput and membra sunt. and quaedam alic quibus illa colliguntur,
veluti nervi, quibus membra singula, moventar, and m^nus proprium exequantur,
and quemadmadum illi a cerebro, and capite manantes per iotum corpus
diffanduntur, sic etiam in corpore^ivili a been disposito capite robur in
societatem subjectam permeat, and status ejus fit legitimus, qui nervus
disciplina dicitur. Tholoss. Syntag. Juris, lib. 3. c. 2. art. 2.
least it be a swift witness against them, Et merito juris beneficium amittit,
qui contra jus aliquid volenter and violenter facit. And therefore the
Chancellor has aptly compared the Law to Nerves; for as Nerves are of the
strength of the natural body, so are Laws of the politic body; as nerves are
connected with the heart or brain, so are Laws the fruits of the love, and
wisdom of Princes and their wise Counsel; as nerves are adjuments to corporal
activity, so are Laws the hinges on which politic bodies act and move, to
what they wisely and worthily incline to; yea all the progress and augmentation
that virtue has, is from the Laws: so says the Text, Sicut per nervos compago
corporis solidatur, etc.

Et ut non potest caput corporis physici, nervos suos commutare, neque membris
suis proprias vires and propria sanguinis alimenta denegare, nec Rex qui caput
corporis politici est, mutare potest leges corporis illius, nec ejusdem populi
substantias proprias subtrahere, reclamantibus eis aut invitis.

Here the Chancellor proceeds to assimilate the King to the head of man, as
before in what the head could; so now in what it cannot, qua such, do: For as
in the Apologue of Menenius Agrippa, wherein the members of the body conspired
against the belly, till at last they were all by the bellies emptiness
debilitated, Zonar. Annal. Tom. 1. p. 22.
and not able to do their proper offices; so in the practice of experienced
things it is seen, that where the Subjects rebelliously rise against their
Sovereign, all is going to ruin. To prevent which, the safest way is to keep
within the line and tether of the Law, which is the wise Arbiter under God of
all things that come under question: God has placed the head over the body, but
it is to act according to the Law of its nature, for the good of the body. The
head, while found, will part with no member willingly, command no member
contrary to the Law, and order of its position. Hitherto shall thou go, and no
further, is said to the Head as well as to the Waves; and so is it in the Body
mystical, the Prince is the Head, solo deo minor; he can do nothing, but what
he justly and legally may do, because he is a Father of comp^ssion, Haec est
voluntas Regis, viz. per just^ciarios suos and per legem. 2 R 3. ^ol. 11.
Statute 9. R. 2. c. 1.

Sir Ed. Cook ^ Instit. p. 146.


and a husband of dearness, as well as a Head of Sovereignty; and all these
importing interest and tenderness, fix the non potest (against all
contradictions to these) beyond ^emove. See the Notes on the 9th Chapter,
concerning what is pertinent to this purpose.

Habes ex hoc jam Princeps, instituti omnis politici Regni formam, ex qua
metiri poteris, potestatem quam Rex ejus in leges ipsius, aut subditos valeat
exercere.

In this our Chancellor makes a conclusion from the precedent matter, to wit,
that politic Governments, were by prudence contrived to respect public
good, and general convenience; and that as people intended to reverence, obey,
and secure their Princes, as Defender of the Government, and Laws of his
Government; so Princes intended and looked upon themselves bound those to
defend and against them in any ordinary case not to rule. For that the King has
power of his Laws, and of his Subjects, is most true; but the line and
proportion of his so exercising this power on either, is laid out by the Law of
his Government, Viri boni and sapientis est parere ra tioni, and ad eam se
accommodare, haud aliter atque prudens nauta ad maris ac venti tempestates se
accommodas. Hopperus, De ver. Jurisp. lib. 4. Tit. 5. Delegum mutatione.
to the observation whereof he is Religiously sworn. And therefore when in
Instit. p. 559.
34 H. 6. the King did make another Sheriff in Lincolnshire, then he that was
chosen according to Statute, our Chancellor, and his Brother Chief-I^stice, in
the name of the Judges, said, that the King did an error. For since every
rational action tends to some end, and is so concerned to act, as tends to the
scope of its intention; the desires of people consented to by Princes in favor
to Laws, as the method of administering power, are of the very being of the
peoples felicity and comfort: for in the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. these words
are, That this your Graces Realm recognizing no Superior under God, but only
your Grace, has been, and is free from subjection to any man's Laws, but only
to such as have been devised, made, and ordained within this Realm for the
wealth of the same, or to such other as by sufferance of your Grace, and your
Progenitors, the People of this your Realm have taken at their free liberty, by
their own consent, to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long
use and custom to the observance of the same. Which Princes considering, do not
endeavor by any means to anticipate, defeat, or impair, by either using their
Power and Prerogative, as Anarcharsis said the Greeks did their money,
Plutarchus, lib. De profect. virtutis, p. 78. edit. Paris.
(...), only to count it, and make themselves great by it; but to show
themselves willing and able to promote their Subjects goods, and to protect
them in their honest and just endeavors; which Severus dying, asserted himself
to have done worthily; In turbatam Rempubl. ubique accepi, etc. I did (quoth
he) enter on my Government, when it was disturbed and in confusion, Spartianus
in Severo.
and I now leave it settled at home and quiet, even in Britain, though I am old
and lame, incapable of action; yet the same of what I have done, shall preserve
my Empire firm to my Successo^rs, if they be good; but if they be dissolute and
negligent, then they will find it not lasting to them: for they who found the
benefit of my care and circumspect Government, will, when they see my
Successors not such, be desirous to change, in hope to find such a Governor as
I was, who made it wholly my design to have while I lived, and leave when I
departed, a happy People. Which never can be done, unless Laws be considered,
as Tully delivers them; Not only as the Decrees of Princes; Non populorum
jussis, non principum decretis nec sententiis judicum constitui, sed naturae
norma. Hanc video sapientissimorum suisse sententiam, legem neque hominum
ingeniis excogitatam. nec scitum aliquid esse populorum, sed aternum quiddam,
quod universum mundum Regeret, imperandi prohibe^dique sapientia, lib. 1. De
Legibus.
not as the Injunctions of People; not as the Judgments of the Judges; but also
as part of the Law of Nature, and the wisdom of God conveyed to them by the
experience of wise men in all times and places, who stirred by an extraordinary
spirit, framed them to the purpose of order and civility. And if thus Laws be
venerated, and Lawmakers provide, that Laws be not so many in number, as good
in nature; not dark and mysterious, but plain and perspicuous; nor sharp and
vexatious, Hoppetus, De ver. Jurisp. lib. 4. tit. 3.
but just and prudent; then will they deserve to be the measure of power, and
no Prince will desire to rule other then by them, Praetor quoque jus reddere
dicitur, etiam cum imque decernit, relatione scilicet facta, non ad id quod ita
Praetor fecit, sed ad illud quod Praetorem facere convenit. Digest. lib. 1.
tit. 1. De Orig. Juris. p. 61.e Paulo, lib. 14. ad Sabinum.
who will deserve the name of good and wise. And other then such, no Prince as
such duly considered, ought to be thought, because he being God's Vicar, is
presumed to be just as his principal is, and as the mortal Representative of
the Immortal God he ought to appear accomplished.

Adtutelam namque legis subditorum, ac eorum corporum and honorum, Rex
hujusmodi erectus est; and adhanc, potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet.

This passage has primarily regard to the first Ages, and to the contextures of
politic Governments in them; in the language whereof, as our Text-Master, so
his humble Commentator sometimes phrases things, the better to set forth the
luster and scope of this Argument; Cic.pro Dejotaro Ad Attic. lib. ^. Livius,
lib. 2. ^^ ^rbe 276.
which here considers, 1. The person of the Magistrate by his name Rex, by his
dignity and conspicuity erectus, which is a term of magnification, joined in
Tully with Celsus, Liber, Magnus, which surely was typified in Saul, who is
said to be higher by the head and shoulders then all the people, not only
corporally, but officially. 2. Tutela, jus and potestas in capite libero
constituta, ad tuendum cum qut per aetatem sua sponte se defendere nequit.
Paulus, lib. 1. De Tutolis.
By the end of his title and advancement, that is said to be ad tutelam, Kings
are not only honors and ornaments, but Fathers and Defenders, in Lib. 1. De
Rustic. c. 14.
Varro's words, Tutelae and septa, and the people do as Tully expresses it,
latere in tutela ac praesidio regis. 3. By what is the subject matter of this
their beneficence to the public; tutela cor u^ corpor u^ honor u^ legis
subditou^, not only of the Law as the rule, and of the subjects, as the persons
to be ruled by it, which is a truth; but legis subditorum, so conjoined, and so
specified, pointing to them as the antique origin of the forms of power, and as
they are the persons that do assist the King in the carrying on the
effectuality of power, whereupon the Text says, Vt enim tutela, sic procuratio
Reipubl. ad eorum utilitatem, qui commisii sunt non ad eorum, qui^us commissa
est, gerenda est. 2. O^^ fic. 121.

Interest Reipubl. ut pax in regno conservetur, and quaecunque paci
adversentur, provide dealinentur maxima juris,

2 Instit. p. 158.32 H.^. c. 9.


a populo effluxam habet; and then lastly the modus in quo, this tuition of the
Law and Subjects appears, it is in keeping the peace, and punishing the breach
of it in the harm of their persons and goods, the felony of which is contra
coronam and dignitatem domini regis. These things are considerable in the Text;
but because I have treated of the severalties of them heretofore, I shall only
vindicate our Chancellor from any intendment here to approve popular
Governments or the insolences of them, Plutarch in Laconic. Apothegmat. p. 227.
which God wot he knew the ill effects of, in the carriage of the people to
Lycurgus, and others; but to do right to the truth of Antiquity, and to make
the wise composition of Politic with Regal Government, not favor of
arrogance, or encroach upon the due Majesty and august Sovereignty of God in
the trust of his Deputies Kings. For though the Laws should be granted to be
lege s subditorum; yet is it not in any sense as if they were makers of them,
or might dispute them with their Prince, other then in his Courts; or by a
supplicate celsitudini on their knees. No such authority gives the Laws of God
or men. No such mistake is in the Chancellor, or would I after him be for all
the World guilty of (for so they are only the Kings, (the power of enaction of
them being his, as he gives soveraignly Royal life to them) but legis
subditorum, as they are the persons, who by their Delegates in Parliament
assent to the fitness and justness of them, and so are obliged by them; yea,
and so interested in the privilege and security they have by them, that they
are called by a Master-Lawyer, The Birthright, and the most ancient and best
Inheritance that the Subjects of this Realm have; Sir Ed. Cook Preface to ^
Rep. 1 part.
for by them he enjoys not only his inheritance and goods, in peace and
quietness, but his life and most dear Country in safety. So he. And so are the
Laws called legis regis, not only because he is the Head of them, and the
Parent and Protector of them for the public interest, in which his Paramount
interest is couched; but also because the Subjects and he are not to be
divided, being mystically united: 21 E 4.39. b. cited in Calvin's Case, 7 Rep.
p. 10.
and as King James wisely once spoke to the Parliament of 1603. Page 488. of
his Works in sol. 8 Report.
What God has conjoined, let no man separate; I am the Husband, and all the
whole Isle is my lawful wife; I am the Head, and it is my Body; I am the
Shepherd, and it is my Flock, etc. Answerable hereunto also is the Resolution
of the Judges in the Prince's Case, Chescun subject ad interest en le Roy, and
m^ldes Subjects q' ^st d*^ins ses leyes sont divide de l^y esteant son test
and Sovereign. And therefore the Chancellor here by these and the like phrases
of potestatem a populo ^ffluxam ipse habet, is not to be understood, as
applying these words in their strictness to the Government of England, which is
an imperial Crown, and is not alloyed by the politic admissions into it, but
that it, 11 H. 7. p. 12. 3 Instit. 234 Ingram's Case.
as to the integrals and essentials of Regality, retains its independency: but
as before I noted, where such expressions, as do qualify the terror and
servour of Regality are used, they are with relation to the first Ages of the
World, and no otherwise applicable to this Crown, then to testify its consent
to such provisions, as are for the quiet, honor, and renown of it. And
therefore the Law of England being formed to take in the good of all
Governments, to carry on the Dignity of the Head over, and the security of the
Members under the Head, must needs hence be evinced a most excellent wise and
worthy Government, both in order to King and People.

Quare ut postulationi tuae, qua certiorari cupis unde hoc provenit, quod
potestates regum tam diver simode variantur, succinctiu^ satisfaciam. Ferme
conjector, quod diversitates institutionum dignitatum illarum quas propalavi,
praedicta^ dis^repantiam solummodo operantur, prout ex rationis discursu tu ex
pramissis p^teris exha^rire.

This the Chancellor adds, to show whence, and whereupon he entered the
discourse of the Originals of Government. 'Twas first p^stulationi Principis
satisfacere, the Chancellor knew that every good man is bound to serve his
Prince, ultimis viribus, in body and mind, 3 Instit. c. 69. p. 149.
with his best accoutrements of both, and that according to themture of his own
condition and the legal necessities of his Prince. Now the Prince being young
and unfix'd, ready to evaporate his resolution with the next humor of
instability, that took this Youth not yet radicated and well principled, his
Chancellor runs out into this Discourse of Governments, that he might upon the
good foundation of universals introduced, make this particular instance a more
advantageous Superstructure. For as he will make an ill Seaman, that
understands only one part of the Compass, or how only to use the Compass to
one Port, from whence, it by distress of Weather he be diverted steerage, he is
lost, because out of his knowledge. So will he be but an ill adviser, who does
not understand how to distinguish of things and men, and from them to deduce
his inference. The premises considered, our Text-Master next makes a
concession, that as Democracies, so Regalities do vary in some less consequent
appurtenances to them, and such variations he asserts not only as contingent,
and so the act of time and emergence not foreseen by the first Designers, for
of such nature some of those differences in them are; but as diversitates
instituti^num dignitatum illarum. No doubt but the Monarchies of France and
Spain were in the first Founders absolute, Imperatorem quae vocas in quem
populus omne jus and authoritatem suam lege regia contulit ^^de and dominus
^erra^. and Lex
as those of Asia now are, after they admitted regulation, especially the
Kingdom of France, (the three Estates and Parliament, wherein were instituted,
to sweeten the rigor of the Monarch, and to preserve a serenity of
refrigeration against the Solstice, under the direct piercing line of absolute
power.) No doubt, I say, but so it institutionally (in a good sense) was though
now it proves otherwise. But England was ever a Monarchy so temperate, maris
dicitur pene^ quem nen solum tam tutius Re^pub. quam (...) and pacis est
arburu^m. Hopperus, lib. 7. De ver Jurisp. Tit. ^.
that the Monarchs in it have ever gloryed in the non-positivity of their
wills, where not according to, and in affirmance of the Law. So much have they
(the more blessed Princes they) abhorred the pernicious and atheistical
president, and profaneness of the Emperor Frederick, Shute Hist. Venice. p
108. Solum vitium crudelitatis excusans. Spartianus, De Severo. p 275 Flavius
Vopise* p 292. edit Sylb.
Who being displeased with the Venetians, told them, that to prosecute them, he
was resolved to o^erthrow all divine and humane Laws; and the rigidnesses of
Severus's, who though he would do many excellent things, yet excused cruelty,
because his practice: that they were rather of Probus his temper, whom Vopiscus
calls, Dignus fortis and justus, etc. A good Leader to War, a good Governor in
Peace, an Example of Order and admiration in both. So that not Aurelians, not
Alexanders, not Antonines, not Trajans, not Claudius 's, are to be wished for,
because all excellencies of them several, have been united in many of o^r
Princes, who have been every way furnished with virtues to admiration; Which is
the prescript that Seneca gives Princes, as the means to deserve the love of
their people, Debent prosecto Principes sive Reges praeter justitiam, etiam
puta^i impr^mis studere, ut Tutores status public^ nominari mereantur, liB. 1.
De Clem. c 4.

Tales and dicemus reges qui a been regendo nomen La^ent. Tholossan. Syntagm.
Ju^, lib. 13. c. 2. Tit. 6.

Basilicon Doron, 2 Book, p. 175. of his Works in ^olic.


and to obtain the same of most heroic Mortals. For though in the Convulsions
and Apoplexies of time, when Allegiance is prevailed against by the ill habits
and vicious defilements of Faction and Disloyalty, Princes are necessitated and
warranted by Prudence and Religion, to use severity, where lenity is despised,
and the Laws of love are wholly undervalued: yet gracious Kings do rather
choose methods of calmness, then those that are rigid and funest; and because
rigid Government has been sometimes as churlish physic, necessary, and good
Princes have delighted rather to be loved then feared; such sweet Princes have
those, rather to resign their Governments then be truculent and secure, as in
such junctures of affairs they must have been. Timol^on and Sylla did, and
Augustus would have done it, if he could. Which our Chancellor endeavoring to
commend the example, and persuasion of a just temper to the Prince, proceeds to
present the illustration of the following examples, in words full of modesty:
yet having an affirmative vehemence, firm conjector, says he, as not
positively affirming what is not in palpable proof (as all things of so remote
antiquity are not) but fairly proposing them as probable, and offering what
sober reason may be averred for them, and leaving the belief of men at liberty,
to take or leave as they see cause.

Sic namque Regnum Angliae quod ex Bruti comitiva Trojanorum, quam ex Italiae
and Graecorum finibus perduxit, in dominium politicum and regale prorupit.

Here he particularizes the institution of Politic mixed with Regal, as he
had before of Regal Government alone; and the first he sets upon, is this of
England, which he makes to be Kingdomed by Brute, Basilicon Doron, ^ Book, p.
173.
as King James since him has done. Bu^hanan, a learned, though violent Scot,
has mordaciously taunted this tradition, making Gyrald^^ Cambrensis the Author
of it, a doter, delyrant, and I know not what; Quanta illa est stultitia,
existimare magnificum vel illustre, quod a magno setiere vel flagitio est, Lib.
2. Hi^t Scotic. p. 15.16.

Cambden in Britannia, I. clandus in Indice annex. Assert, Arthurii, ad vocem
Britannia.


yea, accusing all men of folly that believe Brute, other then a fiction: but
Cambden and Leland (both incomparable Antiquaries) as they do not cry up a
story of that Antiquity for infallible, so do they not disparage it as
mendacious, but leave it to be believed or not, as men please, though they
themselves are satisfied of the probability of it, Hist. ^tat. tertiae. p. 14.
so does Math. Westminster; yea surely, E. 1. would not have owned the story as
matter of truth, as he does in his Letter to Pope Boniface, Knighton, p 2482.
edit Land.
which Knighton, Canon of Leicester, at large mentions, had not it been a
received story, and not to be reproached for fabulous. I shall then take the
story of Brute for more then a bare bruit, notwithstanding Buchanan's
invective: nor shall I hold it any more a dishonor to our Nation, Fu^^^n and
alit ( praeter Herculem) complieve^ ex adulterio gemti, ^t ex veteri constat
Historia, quorum virtus dome militiaeque eximit clar^it inter nos. and noster
Arthurus Bri^an^iae ornamentum maximum and sut saeculi miraculum umcum
essloruit. Lelan^us in Assert. Arthurii.
to have Brute the first King of this Isle, whom they say to be of no
legitimate Origin, then if he were otherwise, since Brute was not the first nor
only Famoso of that Race, whose Military bravery has enfranchiz'd and redeemed
all their alloys into gemms and ornaments; yea, so long as the Norman William
is remembered, there will be some abatement to the dislu^tre of them even from
him the once puissant Lord of this Nation in that predicament.

Brute then I take to be a Trojan by the surer side, living after the
destruction of Troy, about the time of Ely and Samuel, who when his Father had
trained up in Hunting and therein made him expert, did unfortunately, mistaking
his Father for a Beast he aimed at, slay him: which Parricide, so contrary to
the Laws of Nature, the people of Italy resenting, expulsed him thence. He thus
exposed to his shifts, casts about with himself what best and most advisedly he
was to do; necessity tempted him to action, and resolution despising the danger
of any attempt, made him in his own mind a Victor before an Undertaker. In his
wander, (straights being the Womb and Sier of all desperate Atchievments; which
though at first improbable, yet many times have glorious events (as in the case
of the Turkish Empire, Egnatius, De Origin Turcanum, D'Avila. Hist, Et. p. 5.
and the Fraconians coming into France) having no direct aim, but taking the
best Road he thought proper for a booty, to Greece he comes, and there meets
with some trusty Trojans, miserable and discontented like himself. Them in
servitude to Pandrasus he commiserates; and as their concerned Countryman,
whose blood boiled with disdain to see Trojans of stoutness reduced to
Vassalage, promises either their redemption, or his own mancipation: yet he
wisely concealed his regret, and served his masculine intendment by such
silence, as gave no mistrust to Pandrasus, or in any degree defeated the
feasibility of his intendment. Finding therefore, that Prowess and Martial
Activity was the Darling of Pandrasus and his Peers, he presents himself the
Challenger of all comers to those manly Engagements; wherein he deserved to be,
and justly was accounted the first of all the Youngsters. Being thus fortunated
to a Military Grandear, he looks upon Envy as a Foe probable enough to advance
her fatal Standard against him; and knowing that the invisible, though for
midable power of that Tyrant, as to others she had, so to him might be, the
ruin and mar of all his possibilities, immures himself as wise and subtlely
as he might, against her. As he taught his Companions valor by his example,
and order by his Discipline; so did he gratify their merits by the spoil of
his Atchievments, endearing himself by that munificence to them, that they were
but eccho's to his voice, and vassals to his commands. His first Rendezvous was
in Greece, whither all the roving Trojans and disbanded Debauche's, resort to
him. ( Asaracus of the Race of the Trojans, living in Greece, giving
entertainment to them on Brute's account) when in a Body they were, they
complement Pandrasus for leave to march through his Country; but with
resolution to force, what they could not be granted. And though their pretense
was to return to Troy, and to recover their Native Land; yet their design was
to seize on whatever their power could master, and their Lust and Avarice be
satiated by. Pandrasus looking upon armed entreaties, but as modest Treasons
and silent Threats, answers them with an Army well appointed, and martially
com^ilionated, doubling also Guards upon the prisoners, whom he thought
confederate with armed Brute and his Trojan Hectors. But alas Pandrasus the
King being in possession of plenty, was becalmed with Luxury; and Brute being
indigent and watchful, soon found an advantage to let him and his Army into
their hopes, suddenly surprises the King and his Army, and seizes on the Town,
and for himself fortifies it, loosing his imprisoned Companions from the
servitude they were in, and enlarging them to be Compartizans in his
prosperity. The released Trojans, who had smarted under Pandrasus his severity,
call upon Brute for Justice against the King; but Brute knew the meaning of
those clamours, and unwilling to violate the sacred person of Kings or to pull
down vengeance on him by so sacrilegious a fact, thought of some expedient
diversive of their clamor, and propitious to his original design of
acquisition and perpetuation. Thereupon he proposes in his Council of War, what
course they would advise him to steer, that their cooperation being in the
Council, the consequence, if evil, should not be only attributed to his
precipitance and ill conduct, but to that public spirit that was the genius
to it, and to that Fate, which (as regent) commands (under God) the issue of
adventures. Amongst all the Sages of that Senate, none in this exigent, gave so
oracular counsel, none so obstetricated the birth of the expedient to answer
both Brute and his Trojans advantage, and King Pandrasus his freedom and
restoration to his Crown (thus fraudulently and hostilely evicted from him) but
old Memprisius; who being of great experience and grave courage, gave Brute and
his Companions the swasive, not to violently come near the intemerate person of
the King, whom the Gods, tutelars of their Vicars, do propitiously tender, and
whose injuries they return in violent and tragic Vengeances on their insolent
Annoyers; but in as much as the vigor of his youth and the glory of his mind
suscitated by those hopes that are seconds to brave and victorious
undertakings, receive no content beneath their either obtainments, or the same
of miscarrying in attempting those difficultyes. His counsel is that Pandrasus
be treated with for the Marriage of his Daughter to Brute, and that in lien of
her (and supplies to Brute and his Trojans transportation) Pandrasus be
released and restored to his Kingdom, and Brute with his Lady and armed
Company, left to try and take their fortunes, and to disburden Greece both of
their force and fears: this as wise and seasonable, neither beneath the spirit
of Victors, nor insolent beyond the proportion of those that were under Mortal
mutability, and might be shortly where King Pandrasus was, had the universal
Concurrence. And according to it King Pandrasus was appointed to be treated
with.

Pandrasus no sooner hears of it; but as one that blessed the Gods who had
given him a Daughter, not only able to redeem her Genitor and Nation, but
worthy to be Wise to the rising Son of valor, Brute; accepts the offer, closes
with the motion, promises supply of shipping and victuals for their common
support, and gives his Daughter Wi^e to Brute. No sooner was the Marriage over
but Brute importunes dismission, and Greece as eagerly hearkens to it. To Sea
the Trojans set, and resolved they were to stay where ever they set their foot;
as Exigence brought them out and Fortune put them in, so only force should
compel them from their chance where ever it was, Brute, that had a mind
congenius (as it were) with Jupiter, is said to dream that an Island he should
ere long discover worthy his inhabitation, and fitted for trial of his Manhood;
his undaunted courage wished for nothing more then to see the place, and find
the Inhabitants that durst oppose his Landing. Now all the powers of his Soul
are become desire and resolution, and as one agog to be nibling at the Prey, he
bids his Oars cheer up and pluck vigourously, that the sooner they may
discover their freedom and enjoyment, In Closs, ad n^m^n B^uti.
and bring their floats to the foreseen fortunate Island, which is the vision
he had, was thus represented as Leland records it.

Brute sub occasu Solis trans Gallica regna
Insula in Oceano est, undique clausa mari, etc.
Brute on the West, not far from France is placed,
An I stand by the Sea on all sides faced;
Which Giants did inhabit heretofore,
Now have abandoned to receive thy store;
Make to it, for it is thine, and doomed to be
The Royal Throne of thy Posterity.
Though Old Troy ruined is, yet here it is new
The World with it will subject be to you.
Upon this Brute and his accomplices were more then ordinarily animated and
using all endeavor to accelerate their recovery of this Island at last
effected it, and finding none in Possession of it, obtained it without blood
and quietly founded a Monarchy in it; which the Chancellor calls politic:
because though probably there were no Laws precedaneous to Brute, since no
people in it when he came to it; yet by his consent to reward the valor and
fidelity of his Companions by whose cooperation with him he acquired it: it is
probable Laws were made both touching his Regal Prerogative, and their civil
Security in life, member, goods and Laws, and thus according to this account,
Dominium politicum and regale prorupit.

Sic and Scotia qu^^ ei quondam ut ducatus obedivit, in regnum crevit politicum
and regale, Scot. enim illud dicitur, quod ex diversis rebus in unum acerumm
congregatur M. West. p. 102. ad Ann. Christi, 78.


Scotland is that part of Great-Brittain which has Ireland and England on one
part, and the Sea on the rest of it. M. Westminster will have it called
Scotland because it was a Land compounded of Scots, Picts and Irish; though
this Tract of Land had much people and many Governors in it, Hist. Scot. lib.
4. p. 33. B.
Insulanorum duces cum pene pari dignitate ess^^t, are Buchanan's own words,
all in Hubbub one against another; yet had it no complete formal King before
Fergus; Lib. 4. p. 34.
which Buchanan conjectures was about the time of Alexander's Conquest of
Babylon about 330. years before Christ. From this Fergus the Kings of Scotland
have derived themselves, King James's Sp. White Hall An. 1607. p 521. King
James Law of free Monarchies p. 20^. Oper.
and he coming in wi^h the aid of the Irish, made himself King and Lord as well
of the whole Land as of the while Inhab^tants within the same, So Scot^and has
continued a warlike and puissant Nation, Goads in our s^des and thorns in our
eyes, between whom and us much blood has been shed and hostility acted; as in
Hoveden, Matthew Paris, Walsingham, and latter Histories appear, and till they
were reduced to be Homagers to this Crown, which perhaps is the meaning of our
Text's ut ducatus obedivit, we could not be quiet, no not then neither, Lib. 6.
and 8. Hist. Scot.
for out they flew upon all occasions, but still we reduced them to terms:
which though Buchanan deny against the evident Records of the truth of it,
which the most learned ^.r. See his Notes, on c. 13. of our Text, p. 5.
Seldom on this Text has to my hand produced, yet sure it is, that Scotland was
for many years and many Kings Reigns held of this Crown, and the Kings of it
then Homagers for it; so tes^^^ies besides the prealledged Authorityes,
Knighton lib. 3. De Eventib. Angl. c. 4. p. 2483. Edit. London. Brompton. p.
1026.
E. the ^* in his Epistle to Pope Boniface. And though true it be that Scotland
never had an utter ^^lip^^ of its ancient Crown, ^ Instit. Iurisd. Courts c.
75. p. 345.
but that it enjoyed its own Laws; which Laws Sir Edward Cook makes much
alike to our Laws both in the kinds and parts of them: Common-Lawes, Acts of
Parliament and Customs, in the books of Law, in the descent of the Crown, in
the High Court of Parliament, in the degrees of the Nobility, in the State
great Officers, in the Ministers of Justice, in the like Customs, Writs, Laws
^ccordant with M. Charta, in Wardships with Charta de Forresta, c. 11. the
Proclamation of the laws of the Sheriff, Sheriffdoms in Fee there as of old
here, Merum Imperium publici judicii principali^er vindicat sibi tantum
corporales panas; est enim merum Imperium habere jus gladii Bocerus lib. 1. De
bello, c. 14
in the same vocables of art, in all which that Reverend Sage is punctual,
therefore to him I referr therein my Reader. Whereby it appears Laws they have
a long time had, and exercised them within it self, which was enough to declare
it ever a Royal Kingdom; yet the Chancellour's words, ^ Instit. p. 343. c. 74
ut ducatus obedivit, are most true, if respect be had to those services that
some of the Kings of Scotland did to this Crown as its Tenurers, as did the
Kingdoms of Navarr and Portugal to the King of Castile, Proximum a Diis
immortalibus honorem memoria ducum-praestitit, qui Imperium Populi Romani ex
minimo maximum reddisiet, Su^^on. in Octaviano Augusto, c. 31.
of Granada and Leons to Arragon, of Lombardy, Sicil, Naples, and Bohema to the
Empire, the old Kingdom of Burgundy to the King of the Fre^^^*^en: which is
according to the practice of Subjects who have Military Charges as Dutchies now
are, Seldens Titles Honor, p. 292, 299.
which though in time they may e^franchise themselves, yet originally were
dependencies. And this is that which the Chancellor intends by ut ducatus
obedivit.

In Regnum crevit politicum and Regale. This has relation to the Laws by which
Scotland has been time out of mind governed. Laws not antecedent, to but
subsequent to Kings, and therefore by their power enacted; For the King being
by the eldest fundamental Laws, Dominus omnium honorum, and Dominus directus
totius Dominii, the whole Subjects being but his Vaessals, and from him holding
all their Land as their over-Lord, who according to good Services done unto
him, changes their holdings from Tack to Few, True Law of free Monarchies p.
202 Works in fol.
from Ward to Blanch, etc. they are King James his own words. That they
notwithstanding this, have the freedom of Laws arises from the King's
Permission, that so the Law shall be, and that so he swears to observe and
protect it to be; and this is to make the Government crescere in regnum
politicum and regale. Because God's grace working on his kingly nature inclines
him not only to regard his own greatness but his peoples happiness, not how
to continue himself a powerful Lord over them, Dictaturam quam pertinariter
populus ei de ferebat, tam ^^^stauter repulit. Sigonius in Comment. De sast,
and triuraphis Romans p. 328. Edit. Syl.
but to make them rich, thriving, and contented Lieges under him. So did
Augustus carry himself, That when he might have been more then a Dictator, he
declined so to be, ref^sing the peoples importunity to crowd the highest
honors upon him, with a pertinacy equal to that of their courtesy.

Yea if ever Scotland had cause to bless God for an increase, it was that
Union which was made with England in the Person and Accession of the wise King
James, Grandfather to our now beloved Sovereign; in whom not only England
remembered the Union of the white and red Rose in the person of H. 7. from whom
he was lineally descended: but the Union of these two ancient and famous
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which God having so mercifully again made
happy in the Person of our gracious Sovereign, who now blessed be God thoroughly
commands them both. May they, I beseech God, never be disturbed or severed
while Shiloh comes, but let O Lord the throne of thine anointed be established
for ever and his seed and succession prosper in thy sight.

Aliae quoque plurima regna nedum regaliter, sed and politice regulari, tali
origin jus sortita sunt. Unde Diodorus Siculus in secundo libro Historiarum
priscarum de Aegyptiis sic scribit. Suam primum Aegyptii Reges vitam, non
aliorum regnantium quibus volunt as pro Lege est, traducebant licentia, sed
vel^ti privati, tenebantur legibus, neque i^ agree ferebant, existimantes
parendo legibus, se beatos fore. Nam ab his, qui suis indulgerent
cupiditatibus, multa censebant fieri, quibus damna periculaq^e subirent, and c.

Our Chancellor brings in here a Quotation in Confirmation of his position
from the Egyptians the eldest of mortals, as they both call themselves and are
by others believed to be. Pompon. Mela lib. I.
A people seated in the first part of Asia divided into the lower Egypt, and
that upper about Nilus extending to Aethipia South toward Sienc, generally
very superstitious and addicted to their Gods, Kings and Laws. Now because he
would press home this argument from Antiquity, Demens Aegyptus ob vanas
superstitiones and Deorum portenta ab ipsis excogitatae, Juvenal. Satyr, 15.
and President even of those that were readiest to supererogate in their
venerations to their forementioned Trinity; he singles out the carriage of the
Kings of that people, as the instance of the power and prevalence law and use
had with them, and by the efficacy of which their power continued less terrible
then otherwise it would have been, and the Author he makes use of is Diodorus
Siculus, a Greek by birth and an Historiographer by excellency; Suidas says he
lived in Augustus's time or before, Suidas in (...) Lilius Giraldus Dialog. 8.
De Poet. Histor. p. 309. Sape ejusmodi rixis oculorum and vitae periculum adut,
Sueton, in Ne^one.
which gives credit to Gyraldus his account of him in Julius Caesar's time,
when ever, a man of sore travail and pains he was; for his Bibliotheca cost
him thirty years journey of his life, for though he wrote other facetious
discourses, yet this History was the marrow of his brain, and that wherein he
yet chiefly lives. Out of the second book of this History our Text-Master
collects many Instances of the Continence and Moderation of the ancient Kings
of Egypt, who were not only not Nero's, deba^ched, till they endangered their
own lives and prostituted the glory of their Governments; but even Tiberius's
beyond the proportion of man in greatness, humble, not only to every
particular as he was to Haterius, whom he cried pardon from, for dissenting but
in Vote from him, but also to the Senate in general; Et nunc, and saepe alias
P.C. bonum and salutarem Principem, quem vos tanta and tam libera potestate
instruxistis, Sueton in Tiberio. c. 29.
Senatui servire debere, and universis Civibus, saepe and plerumque etiam
singulis, neque id dixisse me poenitet, and bonos and aequos and faventes vos
habui Dominos and adhuc habeo, and not only so self-denying, though it is so
far a degradation of Majesty, that I am not willing to believe it ought above a
Complement, but much beyond it (...), Diodot Sicul. Bibl. p. 63. Edit. Rhodani
Imp^. Hanoviae, 1604.
etc. Their first Kings did not form themselves as exempt from Law and reducing
all to their absolute pleasures, but in all things and for all actions were
acc^untable to the Laws; but what was (...), more remarkable they could do
nothing either of mercy or severity but just in the Method of the Law, p. 41,
45 and c^
yea he proceeds to tell us, That the ancient tradition was, that Egypt was
governed 800, or 1000 years by Gods and Heroiques; and when those ceased, the
best and most public spirit of the Nation was chosen King; Kingdoms being
erected says he, as rewards of those that were most usefully qualified: yea he
tells us of one Sabaco an Egyptian King, Pa^ ^^
who being told by the Theban's God, that he should not keep his Government
long and sure to him and his, unless he put all the Priests to death, marching
through their dead bodies with his Troops; chose rather to quit his Government
(...), etc. then either to offend the Gods by a nefarious fact, or to make
himself great and stable, or defile Egypt with their innocent and sacred
blood. This was the pious temper of pristine Kings as Fathers and Sheepherds to
tender their people and not to raise themselves on the ruins and oppressions of
them; which stories least any virulent spirit should think fabulous, let him
consider the Author Diodorus, whom Pliny sets forth, as he that brought the
Greeks in credit for truth and solidness; Apud Graecos nugari desiit. Plin. De
Diodoro Siculo.
and Cap. 13. In vita Plutarchi, p. 2^. c. 19. p. 39.
Rualdus, the learned Commentator on Plutarch, terms Celeberrimus Historiarum
conditor; of whose Bibliotheque, though many Books are perished, as are sundry
other most excellent Works there specially named: yet this our quotation is
still in being, by the benefit whereof these Stories came here to be instanced
in, wherein there is confirmation given, that the true end of Government is
likeness to God, in beneficence to Mankind, in propagation of virtue, and
suppression of what is immoral, which is to do, as Philo says Kings, that
consider themselves God's Deputies, and accountable to him, should and do,
(...) etc. Let who will laugh (says he) I will not be ashamed to say, he only
can every way be a complete King, Lib. De Vita Mosis, p. 612.
who has gained the Pastoral Skill, and by demeanor of himself in those
lesser charges, learns himself what to do in the other greater. And who in the
method of this observes the Laws of his Government, not those sensual ones of
his corrupted will, which carries him on to all riot and truculency, but those
of Justice, Reason, and common approbation, with the people he is set over, is
both a worthy man, and a wise and noble King. For it is a dangerous thing to
give way to any start from the precise Rule of Law and Justice: no man knows
where his heart will stay, who permits it in the least from Equity and Justice
to wander, Iovian was a brave Emperor, Armatae rei scientissimus, etc. a rare
Soldier, a notable civil Governor, knowing how to keep distance to prevent
popular insolence, and the c^ntempt of familiarity; more grave in mind and
manners, then years; of a long ear to reach grievances, and as long a hand to
redress them, severe in manners, a despiser of riches, liberal to a miracle, an
excellent Lawmakers. Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 25. in Joviano, p. 439. edit.
Sylb.
Oh! but Ammianus records it of him, that he was an enemy to Christianity, and
testified it in that severe Edict, that he would not suffer the Christian
Rhetoricians and Grammarians to teach openly, and the reason was, left they
should withdraw Youth, a numinum cultu, from the Ethnique Idolatry. So
dangerous a thing it is for Princes to give way to their unlimited Wills, and
not to be ruled by the just Laws, which are stanch and inflexible, that it
endangers the defamation of all their good deeds. Therefore King James the wise
spoke the mind of himself and all good Kings his Successors; Speech at
WhiteHall, 1609. p. 540. of his Works in folio.
A King that will rule and govern justly, must have regard to Conscience,
Honor, and Judgment, in all his great Actions; and therefore you may assure
your selves (says he to the Houses of Parliament) that I ever limit all my
great actions within that compass. And thus to do, will not only procure the
blessing of God on him and his, but prevent those damna and pericula, those
oppressions that make wise men mad; those Treasons and Rebellions that are the
issues of popular poverty and discontent; and those are worthy wise Princes, to
defend themselves, and their loyal and peaceable Subjects against: and that not
only by the force that subdues them, but the justice and equitable
administrations of Government, which shames and reproaches their opposition to,
and detraction from the merit and justifiableness of them. Though therefore it
be impossible to give satisfaction to ill will and resitive prejudice; and
Princes are not to hope to do that, but still they shall be by refractory
spirits clamoured against; yet to endeavor all ingratiation with their
Subjects, is their ease, advantage, and security; and that done, a watchful eye
over Dissenters, and implacable Contrarients: will satisfy the Prince's
Conscience, that he does not neglect his duty. And let obstinate Disturbers
abide the peril of their Contumacy both to God and their Prince; for so long as
the Law is the Arbiter, and the Judges are Interpreters of it, there is no
danger to the Subjects while loyal and orderly.

Et in quarto libro sic seribit. Assumptus in Regem Aethiopum, vitam ducit
statutam legibus, omniaque agit juxta patrios mores, nique pramio neque pena
afficiens quemquam, prater per traditam a superioribus legem. Consimiliter
loquitar de Rege Saba in felici Arabia, and aliis quibusdam regibus, qui
priscis temporibus faliciter regnabant.

This is added, to make the instances confirmatory of politic Government more
plural; for as the Egyptian the eldest and religiousest (in the sense,
superstition is taken for Religion) of men; Plin. Lib.6. c. 30.
so the Ethiopian Magistracy was of this kind. Now Ethiopia is that part of
Aphrick under the Torrid Zone, between Arabia and Egypt, called first Aetheria,
then Atlantia, and after Ethiopia, from Ethiops the Son of Vulcan. This
Country also, as Egypt, is divided into the part of it on the East, and that
about the Sea in Mauritania, near the Red Sea, therefore by Lactantius the
Inhabitants are called Rubendtes Aethiopes. Geograph. Lib.I. p. 3. edit.
Casaub. (...). Strabo Geog. lib. I. p. 39. Lib. 16. p. 769. Lib. 17. p. 823.
The chief employment of these poor Heathens (as black in vice as in face, and
as far North from virtue, as they are from the World in situation, being as
Strabo says, the utmost men to the North Pole, and beyond whom there is nothing
but Sea and Sky) is hunting of Elephants, the Teeth of which are their chief
Merchandise; though they live rudely, yet have they a great veneration of
order, and a willingness to be subject to their King, the first of whom was a
Conqueror, Sesostris by name: after the people fell into a milder way of
Regiment, and chose their King by common suffrage; and while that continued,
(...) etc. they chose him King, who either excelled in beauty and goodlyness of
body, or skill in Cattle, or strength or wealth, but some superexcellent their
King was. Their Priests of old had power over their Kings, and would be so
rigid and superb toward them, that they left nothing of Majesty uninsolenc'd:
But one of their Kings dissolved that humor by force, and recovered Supremacy
to the Sovereign Power. Which had, to consolidate him in his acquisition, he
and the people consented to Laws, as their security, and his boundary; the
particulars of which Laws, though the Chancellor sets not down, yet he
specifies some special parts of them. First, concerning the King's manner of
life, that was to be according to the Canon of Law, vitam ducit statutam
legibus, that is, he was to live regularly, according to that notion of
regularity the people of Ethiopia in their Laws have established: Which though
it may be as unlike virtue and justice with us, as their faces are unlike ours;
yet is the rule of it, as to them, takable from the Law of that place and
people over which they are set. Which Law, because it is not always, (...).

Menand. apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 9. De Justitia. p. 100.

Morum legumque regimen recepit aque perpiinum. Sueton, in Octav. Augusto c. 29.


if at all written, those Barbarians being ignorant of Letters; yet inasmuch,
as it consists in use, custom, and practice, which are patrii mores, he is
said further to be directed to do, secundum patrios mores, Secondly, concerning
his Civil and Judicial Administration, that is also to be according to the
direction, and not against the Prescript of that; neither in reward, nor in
punishment can he go beyond or beside the Law, which was a superioribus
tradita. Which is to be noted, because the Scripture seems to affirm much to
the honor of Antiquity in that expression, To strive earnestly for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, as intimating, that the spirit of ingenuity and
sincerity dwelt in pristine men and times, when divine and heroic men were
Legislators, who stirred up by God to rule, had no design of their own separate
from public good: but did all they did with eye to the luster and ampliation
of the people they ruled in and over. For Tyranny and self-aggrandization came
in with the loose and dissolute manners of gross Ethnicism, and Apostate
Christianity, hodg-podg'd, and made up into a body of rough pride and
self-magnification, which prostrates all Laws and dissolves all Justice before
which men's minds were so sincere, Ex Orphei hymnis justitiae, Stobaeus, Sermon.
9. p. 101.
that with Orpheus they attributed to Justice all imaginable praises, (...),
etc. O most just Goddess to Mortals, blessed, desirable, which always do by
they equity rejoice men, etc. and when vice began to shoulder in, then 'twas
necessary to restrain by Laws, what otherwise would be without them dangerous
in the liberty of using; which was also the wisdom of the Country of Saba in
Arabia the happy: in which, as in the other, pre-cited Princes ruled moderately
in old times. And thus the Chancellor, as having said enough, and no more (I
conceive) then was true concerning the old Kings and times, ends this 13th
Chapter; and so end also my Notes on it.

CHAP. XIV.
Cui Princeps. Effugafti Cancellarie, declarationis tuae lumine tenebras,
quibus obducta erat acies mentis meae.


HEre the Prince is brought in compendiously abridging what the Chancellor
has in the preceding Chapter discoursed of, which account he prefaces to by a
candid and Princely Concession to the Chancellor, whose arguments,
oratoriously pressed, had made a plenary Conquest of his reason. And that the
Prince may appear a true Son of mild H. 6. his Father, and an Inheritour of
all those bountiful ingenuities and heroique Grandnesses that do adorn and
belustre the minds and discourses of Princes; Sabinum consularem virum ad quem
libros Ulpranus scripsit, quod in urbe remansisset, jussit occidi; removit and
Ulpianum Iurisconsultum, ut bonum virum, and Sabinum rhetorem quem Magistrum
Caesaris secerat, Lampridius De Heliogabalo p. 202. Edit. Sylb.
he does not only not vilipend and not injure his Chancellor for his good
counsel as Heliogabalus did Sabinus the Consul, whom because he was a brave man
and not avoiding Rome, that Monster Emperor caused to be put to death; or
remove him from him, as the same Emperor did Vlpian the famous Lawyer, and
Silenus the famous Rhetorician, who were both good men and must not be endured:
no such treatment has our good Chancellor from his young Prince; Tacitus.
for the Chancellor was no Togonius Gallus called: Os ferreum and cor
plumbeum, Suetonius in Nerone. c. 2.
(...), because he was nothing but words; nor a Cneius Domitius, of whom
Licinius Crassus said, He had an iron mouth and a leaden heart, but a man of
deep reason and learned judgment, the Dulcimer of whose eloquence did so
ravish his noble ear and heart, that he professes himself not only satisfied
but surprised. Effugasti, etc. A word not at all oratorious, for I find it in
the verbin no good Author; but a word which our Text-Master his Authority has
brought into propriety to signify a plenary Conquest, which appears in a
routing all opposition and making it quit the field, having no root nor branch,
fiber or string of hopes and retreat left, untaken off; the Prince is brought
in, telling him the darkness and ignorance of his soul was such, that many
prepossessions and false Principles he had imbibed and was destructively
seasoned with, which rendered him prejudiced against the truth of the Laws
Excellency, and the influence it ought to have on him. But now the Chancellor
having considered and soberly answered his doubts and dissolved his agregated
mistakes; he gives the Chancellor the honor of his Atchievment, Genus
eloquendi secutus est elegans and temperatum, vitatus sentemiarum meptiis alque
inconcinnitate and in conditorum vorbo rum fatorilus Sueron. de Octavian. Aug.
c. 86.
Effugasti, etc. And well he might, for the Chancellor was one of a Genius
elegant and temperate, free from the levities of language and the wander of
reasoning, no lax persuasions did his prudence engine by, all the ascents that
he made to the judgment of the Prince, were upon the advantages experience
gave him. And being so arrayed with power of words to chase away opponents
(Sciences, falsely so called, the pre-engagements to aversation) and with
strength of matter to confirm him in the real solidity and ground of his
transmutation from darkness of mind to light of, not only discovery, but
apparent satisfaction, which he is brought, in expressing, no wonder though, in
the following words he prosesses as he does.

Quo clarissime jam conspicio, quod non alio pacto gens aliqua proprio arbitrio
unquam se in regnum corporavit, nisi ut per hoc, se and sua quorum dispendia
formidabant, tutius quam antea possiderent.

This is added as Induction to the subsequent matter, and it has many notable
particulars insinuated in it. First, The subject matter, as I may so say, of
great Governments in their Rise and Ascent, E Gente aliqua.

Gens is more then a Family, for it contains agnatos and cognatos; for whereas
Familia referrs to the C^gnomen or superadded name; Alciatus, Forner. and
Brechaeus in legem 53. ib. De verb. signific. p. 141, 142.
Gens takes in the surname or original name as it referrs to the common
Ancestry, Inter Gentem and familiam illud interest quod gens ad nomen, familia
ad cognomen refertur. Sigonius Do nominibus Romany, p. 352.
whence all the particulars of the family issued; so Festus defines it, Gentem
esse quae ex mul^is famil^is conficitur. Gens then, though it be largely taken
for a Nation, yet primarily it signifies a kindred in nature: Sueton. in
Nerone. In Jul. Caes. p. 5.
so Suctonius mentions ex Gente Domitia duae familiae claruerunt; thence is it
that all things belonging to Families are called Gentiliita, the badges of
their honor Insignia gentilitia, the Memorials of their Ancestors riches
Gentilitae haraeditates, the Solemnities kept by families Gentile sacrum and
Familiae solenne, to go habited after the manner of a family was to be Gestu
gentili, and to be near of a name is termed Gentilitas nominis. This notion is
involved in Gens, which is that of which politic Bodies consist. Then
secondly, this Clause sets forth by way of predicate what these Kindreds did
do, that was, corporare in regnum; nature taught them that united force was
preferrable to single, that the weakness and dislustre of the single parts of
the body was provided for in the union of their situation in the body, where in
their conjuction they were both fair and comely, and this lessened them to seek
the comforts and conveniences of life in Combinations and forms of living
together in civil Society: Qui sinul habitant, unum corpus faciunt civil, and
universitati and corporal dies dicuntur, qui in communione aliqua conscripti
vel admissi sunt. Tholossan Syntagm. Juris lib. 3. c. 1. and lit. 1. c. 8. Tit.
1.
and when these Rendezvouzes are the Lodges of peace, order, arts, piety, and
do not harbor treason and faction against Government, they are in policy and
as staples of trade, riches, and learning to be encouraged and ampliated.
Plurimae factiones titulo Novi Collegit ad nullius non sacinoris societatem
coibant. Sueton. in Octav. c. 32.
It Is true Octavius Augustus is mentioned by Suetonius to dissolve some
Corporations and that justly, because they were factions and they made a party
on purpose to disturb Government; but even then, he did not meddle with the
Collegia antiqua and legitima; those that were settled by time and Law were
kept up in their beauty, Tholossan Syntagm. Juris lib. 1. c. 8. Tit. ^.
because they had a care to give no just suspicion to their Governors, but
showed themselves forward in fidelity, and thereby secured themselves from
Eclipse, which otherwise they could not have done. For Governors are to use
prudence both in order to their own establishment and their peoples peace,
which Corporations are least of all to endanger because they have the most to
lose by trouble and turmoil. Choppinus De Domanio Franc. lib. 3. p. 593.

Corpora omnium constitusit, Lampridius in Severo. p. 215. Edit. Sylburg.


Cities and Towns then being governed under Princes by prudent Magistrates, to
whom they legally approve themselves loyal and dutiful, are no doubt the
strength, glory, and riches of any Monarch; which Numa first apprehending, put,
as did Severus after him, all the Arts-men of Rome into Companies, Vintners,
Victuallers, Cooks, etc. setting Wardens over them and appointing them their
Sphere and Motion: and whether from this Roman Example, or from the same
spirit in British Magistracy, C. 9. Magna Chapter 8 Rep City of London's Case.
this way of Incorporation first began in England, I know not; but sure that it
has been and is continued with great advantage we see and know: and from them,
have in all times come many of the great Estates and Families of Honor in the
Nation, But this is the Honey that Jonathan mast not taste of. And therefore I
will proceed to the Text's Corporavit in regnum, which is the noblest
Corporation, because the bringing of all the pettite and distinct Corporations
into a joint Stock or public Mass which is called a Kingdom; The Government of
one over, all, independent on any but God, to whom only personally he is to
give account. And this is so noble and necessary a Corporation, as I have
heretofore made good in the Instances of the Dignity of Monarchy, that nothing
I can add more, but to remember men that in this Corporation there are all the
ends that reason can aim at for the comfort of conversation, Nota been.
concentered. 1. To live. 2. To live pleasantly. 3. To live safely. 4. To live
profitably. 5. To live peaceably. 6. To live blessedly. These are all the
fruits of this corporare in regnum, Casus, Sphaera Civit. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 155.
but our Text referrs only to the third safety, which it makes the cause of
this corporavit in regnum.

Thirdly, This Clause discovers how this corporavit in regnum came about not vi
cogente, sed ratione eligente and dirigente, proprio arbitrio says the
Chancellor; for though I know, as before I have touched upon, some Nations
being victor'd, have been forced to take the Impressions the power over them
would force upon them: yet many of the elder Governments were the effects
proprii arbitrii, or at least actu postliminio they confirmed such popularibus
arbitriis. Now that which the Text calls proprium arbitrium was not the vage
giddy humor of the people as they were in face actuated by faction, humor and
lawless Impetuosity; but it was their judicious, sober, and religious consent
according to the Dictates of prudence for self preservation and public
advancement. For if in the latitude of its corrupted sense the peoples consent
and will should be regent; as probably they would choose a bramble-Government
rather then sit contented under their Vine; so their actions would be so far
from Order and Religion, that their proprium arbitrium would be Blood shed,
Confusion, Anarchy; yea, were not Kings and Magistrates better to Popularities,
then they do often wish, or they would in some humors have them, had they the
power to hinder them, there would ere long be no Corporation in the World. Such
Tigers and Monsters are men become, through the mistakes of Religion, that it is
rare to find order in Communities, nor more civility then is the effect of fear
and force. Hence the Text subjoyns the end, why Nations did incorporate, Vt per
hoc se and sua quorum dispendia formidabant, tutius quam antea possiderent.



When man by sin had broken his peace with God, then not only the Creatures
were let loose to great degrees of insolence against him; but the powers of
man's soul that before were orderly and restrained, then rioted one against
another, and all against him that rebelled against his Maker. And then the
security that men had each with other, while they were at truce with God, gave
up its Charter and Privilege. Now every man grows a Cormorant to his fellow,
the weak the prey of the strong, and the fewer the spoil of the more in number.
This keeping men in terrors, lesson'd them recollection of their dispersion.
And therefore of old they did gather together, and make a common pact to defend
each other; and to method their common defense, Covarruvias, practic. Qu. lib.
1. p. 419.
appoint a Head by whom they would be led and ruled. For Nature teaching
self-conservation as a primitive lesson, found out no better or other method,
then that of Government; nor any Government so peculiarly safe and contributive
to peace and security as that of one. For besides, as I said before, Monarchy
is of God, and generally approved the perfectest of Governments; it has been
found, that more often and fatal disturbances have fallen out in Aristocracies;
or Democracies, then in or under Monarchy. Antoninus Pius was so happy and wise
a Prince, Vt per annos tres and viginti nullum sub eo bellum fuit, amor enim
and timor gentium in eo concertarunt bellum movere timentibus his adversus
principem, quem ut numen aliquod venerarentur.
that Egnatius writes, That for 23 years under him there was no War, because
love and fear strove for mastery in his time; and as the one permitted not his
friends: so the other affrightned his enemies from attempting any thing against
him, whom the Gods so favored, Nisi enim hic pracfuisset. Majestas Romans
Imperii facile hinc concidisset. Egnatius in vitis little, p. 564. edit. Sylb.
and they ought as a God to venerate. And the same Author tells us, that if
Antoninus Philosophus had not been in the Empire, when he was; then the Roman
Empire had undoubtedly fell. Whereas it is rare to find such security and peace
under other forms, though I confess the Venetians are a noble State, and
prudently successful: yet in many Dukes times they have been shrewdly threatened
subversion, partly by their homebred Emulations, and partly by their foreign
Assaults. When men grow great and popular, they prove often Earthquakes to
Nations and places; for do but discontent them, and all is in a flame. Thus
Rome felt Caesar and Pompey, Catiline, Mark Anthony, Sylla, and who not, that
had a name and would thereupon be sure of an Antagonist. So in Italy, between
the State of Venice and Genoa upon point of Rivalry; so great were the
animosities between those two States for 100 years together, that they never
met one another but with the mettle of Furies and the spite of Devils: Hist.
Venice, 1 Book. p. 163.
yea, though they had the Trevisian sports to dandle them into a calmness; yet
even there, their Jest became a fatal earnest; and so much did their stomachs
disdain Captivity each to other, though upon merely the contingence of War
(which ebbs and flows Victory, by an unsteady and blind event to men) that
Andrea Dandulo, one of the Venetian Generals, being taken in a fight, and
carried to the Genoesse's Galleys a Captive, Page 165.
rather chose furiously to beat out his own brains against the side of the
Galleys, then be a prisoner of War to his Countrey's Enemies: and amongst the
Venetians themselves, Page 166.
what Plots have the Governments of many Dukes been endangered by? witness that
of Marino Baconio, who plotted to kill Pietro Gradonico, the Duke, Page 168.
and such of the Senate, as pleased him not; and that more fatal one of
Bajamonti Tepulo, who assaulted the Duke and Senate in the Palace; That of the
Rabble in Giovanni Dandalo's time. Page 160.
These and such like do show, that as all Governments are upon prudencies
tending to conservation, so are those probablest best effected, when the
Multitude are anticipated their mad fits, which ordinarily they are, more in
Regalities then other forms. But however in all forms, the intent is to live
peaceably from spoil, assault, depredation, and oppression; which in
singularities or lesser numbers, not being either so probable or possible,
Incorporations into Kingdoms were thought upon and effected. For Kings for the
most part have so much of divine Magnanimity in them, that as they were in the
first time of the first ages chosen Governors, and since are justly become
Lords of their Countries to do good offices, as Fathers, Shepherds, husbands,
See Law of Free Monarchs, King James, p. 201. of his Works. Gothos censuit
prius aggrediendos, quod ^^ Reipublicae hosts, Tyranni principis essent.
Egnatius in vita ejus, p. 568.
Pilots, Numens to them: so do they delight (some particulars only excepted
generally to express grandeur of mind, in order to this design of their
dignity, which Claudius, no very good man, but a brave Prince, showed himself
clearly and generously in. For when it was debated in the Senate, whether he
should first resist the Goths or the Tyrants, both which threatened him and his
Empire, gave counsel, that first the Goths should be encountered with, because
they were Enemies to the Government and Roman Commonwealth, whereas the
Tyrants were only Enemies to him, as Prince and Head of the Empire.

Quali proposito gens hujusmodi frauderetur, si exinde facultates eorum eripere
possit Rex suus, quod antea facere ulli hominum non licebat.

This is the Argument that the Chancellor brings as inferential from the
precedent reason; for posito, that Governments were of old by consent of the
people, and that such their consent was to better their condition, to defend
them from the rapes and violencies of men of fierce spirits, who came upon them
with sword, and over-powring them, took away their goods, forced their Wives
and Daughters, and sometimes took away their lives, to prevent the clamor of
their fact. These things yielded, it will (says the Chancellor) rationally
follow, that if the Governor they put themselves spontaneously under, do with
their bodies, goods, and souls, what he pleases, they do not avoid the
inconvenience against which they intended their subjection a muniment, but are
under the same misery under another name, and so are little less then
miserable, through the incorrespondence of the actions, with the intent of the
Designers of them. For though true it be, that casualties may alter cases, and
sweeten demeanours, which but for them would be tragical and barbarous. Which
the Historian offers in Vespasian's defense; Avaritiam ne culpes in eo, and
temporum calomitas and laudabilis ejus usus facit. Egnatius in Vespas. p. 562.
In whom Avarice was either no vice, or not so great an one, if either the
Calamities of his Reign, or the good use^ he put his exactions to, be
considered. Yet truly it is below Princes to be unmindful of God's mercy,
Providente ipso Domino Rege ad Regni sui Angliae meliorationem, and
exhibitionem justitiae (prout regalis officii exposcit utilitas) pleniorem,
etc. Provisum est and Statutum. Prologo Statuti De Marlbridge, Anno Dom. 1267.
52 H. 3. Instit. 2 part p. 101
and the Laws lesson to them: and seldom are they happy, that resolutely and
through design forget either; nor can they by the strictest Edicts, or the
subtlest blinds, hinder people from observing, when so they do: but yet if some
Princes may, others recompense their omissions by supererogations. Observe well
this Law, 2 Instit. p. 161. on Westmin. 1. c. ^.
Good King Edward the first spoke what the mind of all his good Successors
have said, and done, En primes voet le Roy and command, que le peace de Saint
Eglise and de la terre soint bien guard, etc. First the King wills and commands,
that the peace of Holy Church and of the Kingdom, be inviolably kept and
maintained in all things, and that Justice be done to all, as well poor as
rich, without respect of persons. Nor are the actions of Princes so
eccentrique, when they are driven by the greatest and most enraged
impetuosities, but that even then they have many sparks of Justice in them, at
least are much better to be interpreted, then popular insults or the Lordings
of fellow subjects; yea, one time with another, there have been more Heroicisms
acted for public good by Princely spirits, then other men, and less real
mischiefs by them, then by men of meaner origin have bin introduced. What may
we call the action in Giovanni Soranza the 51 Duke of Venice his time, but a
miracle of love to Venice: for whereas the City and Territory of Venice had
been a long time, Shute's History, Venice, p. 173.
and then was under the Pope's interdiction, which caused unspeakable loss to
them, and crossed their Affairs in all parts of their correspondence. And Pope
Clement took the business of Ferrara so hainously, that he would hearken to no
relaxation, though often and earnestly solicited thereto, but obstructed any
further audience of them. Which Francisco Dandalo, a Nobleman of great honor
seeing, came into the Pope's presence, and lay prostrate on the ground before
the Pope's Table, with an Iron Chain about his neck like a Dog, until his wrath
being appeased, he took away that note of infamy from his Country. I say, what
can this be called less then a notable instance of great love to ones Country,
which only could come from a Princely spirit: which action had its reward, for
not long after he came to be Duke and procured a Constitution, That his Country
should never be excommunicated by the Pope, for such like action, or any other
action whatsoever. It follows.

Et adhuc multo gravius populus talis laderetur, si deinde peregrinis legibus,
etiam ipsis forsan exosis, regerentur.

Inconveniences seldom come single: when Princes are other then they ought to
be, Laws will signify little to mind or manage them; and ever it is seen,
that as virtuous and pious Princes reverence Laws, and will do nothing
knowingly and designedly to the affront and denigration of the credit of them,
but let the Law have a free passage, and countenance the modest and legal
averrment of it: so the contrary Princes take pleasure in nothing more then in
despising the Laws and making them truckle under their Contempts and
Violations; this the Chancellor calls laesio populi: Sit vox legis terror, sit
legis paena fulmen; Draco non sum Atheniensis ille, neque leges sanguine
conscriptas volo, sed hoc velim, ut voce panaque legis deterreantur omnes,
Casus in Sphaera Civitatis, lib. 4. cap. 8. p. 246.
and that because the Laws are the asylum and refuge that Subjects have, and
if that be no shelter to them, they count themselves miserable; for some Law
must be, and if the native Country Laws do not rule, foreign exotique Law must;
and that, the Prince is brought in acknowledging too heavy for their stomachs
to bear. Nor have any Princes well advised ever endeavored so to tempt the
people to wince and kick, Haud sane improbandum Principem numina terris
dederunt, si quantam literis and militari disciplina vacabat a^ venationib^s,
tantam curam ad Rempublicam cognoscendam impendisset, Egnatius De Gratiano, p.
572. Edit. Sylburg.
as they ever have done, against Laws introduced in rivalry with, or supersedal
of their Country Laws: and Princes are never so accomplished for their
Governments, as when they make the knowledge and skill of right conducting their
public affairs, the that of their Excellency. Which that brave King Edward
the first, then whom no man was more sad in Counsel, free in utterrnce, secure
amidst dangers, cautious in prosperity, constant in adversity, this Prince I
say, whose Justice made his Laws renowned, and yet continue for the most part
to this day; He was a great Admirer of the Laws and directed them to the good
of the Kingdom, 1 Westminster. 2 Instit. p. 158.
as he expresses in the Act 3. Regni, Que nostr^ Seignior le Roy ad graund
volunt et desire del Estate de son Realm redresser, etc. For thereby shall they
understand at the first hand what the people love and hate, wish and fear, are
pleased with and grumble under; and by this shall they make the Law their
Guide, and not listen to foreign Guises and Customs, which are often more
dangerous then advantageous to them; yea, saving that mutual Correspondence
that Nations have each with other, and saving that necessary pass and repass
that men have to and from every part of the world, wisdom of Government has
exterminated foreign things as much as civilly could, especially in Laws
Preferments and Fashions. Not but that there may be good use made of some
foreign and unwonted things when urgent occasions require them, but to prefer
them in love and esteem, because foreign, has been ever avoided by wise Princes;
yea, and that because they are execrable in Natives eyes, who generally love
their Country usages, Customs, Laws and Fashions, with a zeal that speaks a
kind of scorn of what is unlike or contrary thereto, that look as the
Athenians were so zealous, Fornerius in leg. 139. ss. p. 514. De verb. signif.
that they enjoined a severe punishment to any, who being a stranger took
benefit of their Law, by an Actio peregrinitatis, which brought the Offender
first into Bands, then caused him after proof thereof to be sold, and that at
so high a Rate, Sigonius lib. De Fastis and triump. Romans p. 274. Choppinus lib.
1. De Domanio Franciae Tit. 2. De bonis advenarum. p. 99.
that this Buyer should use him cruelly to have, as we say, his Penny-worths
out of him; and Lege Papia Foreiners were to quit Rome; so in France, Spain and
all Countries, Strangers and their Influences are disfavoured by their Laws,
as Choppinus has collected to my hand the Instances thereof; and all Nations
looked upon strangers (other then upon travail and business) with no good eye,
but made them incapable of public offices, and with us the Chronicles tell us
the complaints against them and the Domination of them in H. 3. time, in E. 3.
time, in H. 8. time, in which they have been ever forward by their Counsels and
Assistances to further unusual and illegal courses, and for it have been Exosi.
Not that our Nation is naturally uncivil, but because has found the experience
of it; and therefore the Text joines to peregrinis Legibus exosis: Holingshed.
p. 216, ^65, 840, 893.
since even all unusual and not beloved things have been accounted countd
foreign, and thence in our Chancellours words Exosi, that is, perfectly hated;
Psalm. 139. 21.22 Pagnin. in (...).
hated as David did the haters of God with a hatred (...) of compleatness and
universality, at all times in all degrees; Rabbi David expounds it by
magnoodio, imo maximo odio odi illos, so is the sense of Exosi among the
Latins, the Preposition ex adding vehemence to the notation of the word, to
which prefixed. Thus in the very word Tholossanus uses it, Syntagm. Iuris lib.
18. c. 2. Tit. 10.

Adversar. lib. 22. c. 40.

Nota in sueronium p. 657. Edit. Sylburg.


Nomen Regis Romany summopere esset exosum, and in the like words other
Authors, so Turnebus notes Pliny to use exalbidus; and Pulman on that passage
of Suetonius where Caligula is said to be pallido color, translates it
expallido, adding ex enim prapositio, vim and potestatem verbi amplificat, thus
exanimo is rendered by perterrere, exardere by valde inflammatum esse,
exarescere by sole and vento penitus siccari, exaturare by that we call a
glutting a man's self, exaudire by perfect audire; and so our Text when it said
eisque exosis, means such a hatred of grievous and illegal burdens, as makes
Subjects complain to God night and day in their prayers for relief from them,
yea and so perfectly hate the ill Counselors of them, that they seldom or
never have better ends then Gaveston had, or then Michael de la Pool and
Cardinal Woolsey had, whose high and illegal actings were by the Lords and
Judges articled against as high and notable grievances, 3 Institutes c. 8.
Title Court of Chauncery p. 89. art. 19, 21, 26.
and offenses; misusing, altering and subverting the order of your Graces
Laws,) and otherwise contrary to your high Honor, Prerogative, Crown, Estate
and Royal Dignity, to the instimable great hindrance, diminution and decay of
the universal Wealth of these your Graces Realms, they are the very words of
the Preamble to them, Et maxim si Legibus illis eorum minoraretur substantia,
pro cujus vitanda jactura ut pro suorum tut la corporum, ipsi se Regis Imperio,
arbitrio proprio submiserunt.



This is added to show, that as nothing discourages people more then not to be
answered in the end of their loyal confidence, so nothing is more to be admired
in and valued by Princes, then the practice of doing what they are by office
and conscience bound to do; that is, ruling by Law to the prosperity of
themselves and their Subjects. For as the King is then said to command, 2
Instit. p 186. on Westminster. 1. c. 15. Resolution of the Judges loco precitato, p.
^87.
when he wills by the Law any thing to be done; and the King cannot do it by
any Commandment, but by Writ or by Order or Rule of some of his Courts of
Justice, as Sir Edward Cook's words are; according to which the Statute
Marlbridge c. 1. says, Dominus Rex de aliquo contemptu sibi illato alium
Iudicem in regno quam curia sua habere non debet; so the King is then said to
act like himself not only to his Subjects, but even to his own souls health
and happiness, when he does what he does precisely according to rule and
prudently according to seasons: for this is that which will best comfort him in
his sickness and death, That he has walked uprightly before God, and done that
which was right in his sight, yea if a King should put the day of death, as a
day of evil, far from him, and fancy (as I may so say) a temporal Eternity,
generous and patronique actions to Subjects are the only way to accomplish it.
Augustus made his Subjects happy and rich by governing them, (...), according
to Law and prudence; looking upon them as reasonable Creatures and treating
them with no more rigor, nor no less goodness then the paternal Charity and
Magisttatique care he was to express toward them required, Xiphilinus Epitom.
Dion. p. 192. in Augu^^c.
and this so abated the sowerness of the Romans against Sovereignty, which
before they were prejudiced against, that they by decree of Senate thought fit
to trust him to do even what he pleased (...), Idem p. 197.
etc. That he should be absolved from the Band of Law, and that he might do and
not do what he would. For since the end of Society is preservation, and of the
best Society, politic Monarchy is to render the Subjects of it happy and
secure, which our Text makes to consist in that by which non minoratur
substantia, Terrae certe Itala sub Gallorum principatu adeo floruit ut vetera
Romanorum Princpum tempora non desiderarent. Egnatius in vita Arnulphi p. 596.
Edit. Sylburg
and in that which furthers corporum tutelam, there is good cause for Princes,
as ours (blessed be God and them) mostly have done to regard the effecting of
this common and commodious intent. For the nature of Subjects is, let them but
be free in their persons from slavery, and enjoy their fortunes according to
God's blessing upon their industry, and the Laws fixation of them in it, and
they will not only loyally observe and cry up their Prince as the most
deserving Darling of their hearts, but will bear up his person on their
shoulders, and his dominion and regal title on their swords points; yea, they
will make him terrible to his Foes, who is thus a Father to his Friend, and a
Savior to his Lieges.

Non potuit revera potestas hujusmodi ab ipsis erupisse, and tamen si non ab
ipsis, Rex hujusmodi, super ipsos nullam obtineret potestatem.

This Clause relates to the Laws of Nature, and the Institution of Government
according to it, and that giving no one man a superiority over another (unless
by the consent of men, who do in themselves give the general Law a restraint;
which is (as I conceive) lawful, Est quidem servitus libertati contraria, ita
constitutio quadam de jure gentrum, qua quis domino alieno contra naturam
subjicitur. Fleta, lib. 2. p. 1.
and has been the Mother of all Constitutions.) The Chancellour's deduction
will be rational, that supposing in the first Ages and first Constitutions the
forms of people politiquely living together, Civilis eteni^^ potestas, naturae
and Dei ordinatio est, ad humanum convictum and humani generis conservationem
necessaria omnino; nam enamsi Respubl. and populi, jus habuerint naturali
notione creandi principes and reges, quia tamen haec focerint divinitus
erudita, publica haec and civilis potestas, Dei ordinatio dicitur. Cova ruvias
Practic. Quaest. c. 1. p. 420.
to be in the people, either they must act to their own injury, or else design
such a Government as much preserve them and theirs: which politic government
joined with regal doing, it follows, that such a Kinglyness as was not
originally violent, but entered upon by the will of the Subjects, and continued
and carried on with suitable goodness in the successions of it, must be that
which originated from God by them, who by submitting to one, proposed to
themselves security to themselves, according to the Laws and Agreements of
their politizing, which Cunaeus says was the cause Moses did command from God
the people to choose a Prince over them of their own people, (not only (...),
etc. to signify, Lib. De Creatione Principis, p. 723.
that there ought to be a free choice of the people, and after a confirmation
by God's Lot, as Philo's note is) but even that Government might be the more
firm, Quo firmior Respubl. foret. ita sanuit edixitque, omnia uti ex legibus
fierent, etc. De Republ. Hebraeorum, lib. 1. c. 1.
and apparent^y beneficial, he appointed that all things should be done by Law,
and nothing besides, or against it. And therefore as it cannot be supposed,
that all Communities of men were hostilely conquered; Law of Free Monarchies,
p. 201.
but though some were, others were compaginated and grew into Kingdoms by
consent. So can it not be thought but those that so did, Lex quae Magistratibus
imponitur, est ut legum cusiodes and al^i non ipsi modo rem been. gerant. sed
and alios qui idem faciunt post se relinquant, non aliud ob oculos habentes,
quam justitiam, and parati potius mortem obire, quam ut hae^ patria adimatur.
Hopperus, 1. 2. De ver. Jurisprid. tit. 11. p. 49.
did in their so doing, design as a dignity to their chief in consideration of
the erection ue had, and the good offices he did in the just and wise
management of himself in it; so a benefit to themselves and their Successors
in subjection, which they do no otherwise find, then as their Laws, persons,
and goods, are kept free and secured, according to such their constituted Laws.
And therefore it was a most savoury and christianly wise counsel of the once
Phoenix King; Regenti imperium omniae nimia velut praerupti scopuli sunt
devitanda. Ammian. Marcellinus, lib. 30. p. 500.
Eicon Basilic. c. 27. To the then Prince of Wales, our now gracious Sovereign,
whom God long preserve.
Never (says he to his Son) charge your Head with such a Crown, as shall by
its heaviness oppress the whole Body, the Weakness of whose parts cannot return
any thing of strength, honor, or safety to the Head, but a necessary
debilitation and ruin: your Prerogative is best showed and exercised, in
remitting, rather then exalting the rigor of the Laws, there being nothing
worse then Legal Tyranny: thus he. But it follows, E Regione aliter esse
concipio de regno, quod regis sol um authoritate and potentia incorporatum est,
quia non alio pacto gens talis ei subjecta est, nisi ut ejus legibus, quae sunt
illius placita, gens ipsa a quae eodem placito regnum ejus effecta est,
obtemperaret and regeretur.



Here our Chancellor asserts the Law in absolute Monarchies of
Conquest-Foundation, to be other then the former, and that upon no less valid
grounds. For supposing the Victor to be a Vassal to Justice, which restrains
from violence and irrectitude, even when there is the greatest advantage and
provocation thereto. I say, allowing this the wills of Victors over them, whom
they have manlyly overcome, ought to be as effectually binding to obedience and
contentedness under the Providence of God in the pleasure of such Princes, as
in the former case; for as here people provided Laws of regulation and
preservation of them, in what they had against the abreption of it from them:
so in this, they wholly are at their Prince's pleasure for their regulation and
preservation, because they have nothing of their own, but what is his, ex opere
operato of his Conquest. Nor did Nimrod, Ninus, Belus, of old; or do the
Leviathan Monarchs of the East at this day, make any bones of swallowing all
their Subjects have to satiate their pleasures; nor do they think they do
injury thereby, because their Dominion is absolute, and all their Subjects have
is theirs, in what sense he pleases to interpret it, who is the Lex loquens,
even when the Laws he utters are illius placita; not inventa deorum, but
retenta pravorum principiorum. And if this be the liberty of those Monarchs, 2
Instit. on c. 29. Magna Charta. p. 56.
how much is the Subject of England to bless God, and magnify his Prince, who
permits, and what is more, protects the Law, to warrant the Subjects while loyal
and dutiful, the free use and benefit of the Law; yea, and who does not hold
himself free from the directive and conscientious obligation of the Law,
wherein it has a tongue to utter its sense to those purposes. Yea, that the
words of a King may make us Englishmen, either very grateful, King Charles the
Martyr. Eicon. Basil. c. 23.
or the contrary, hear them from the Prince I delight to quote wisdom and
goodness from, No condition, says he, can make a King miserable, which carries
not with it, his Souls, his Peoples, and Posterities thraldom.

Neque Cancellarie, a mea hucusque memoria elapsum est, quas alias in tractatu
de naturalegis naturae, horum duorum regum equalem esse potentiam doctis
rationibus ostendisti; dum potestas qua eorum alter perperam agere liber est,
liberate hujusmodi non augetur, ut posse languescere morive, potentia non est,
sed propter privationem in adjecto, impotentia potius denominandum.

This the Prince is introduced to mention, not only to insinuate to great men,
that their duty it is, gratefully to remember fidelity and love of counsel to
them; but in Preface to the memory of an excellent Treatise of the
Chancellours, in which the fuller debate of the matter in Argument is handled.
The Title of the Book is here mentioned to be De vigore legis natura, a Book no
doubt of worth and weight, not only because the work of the Author, who in
all things was a very great Master, but also of the consequence of the matter,
and the testimony it has to be backed by learned Reason. Pitsaeus mentions it,
Ad Ann. 1460. p. 650.
as no doubt there is but it was common in his time: but most of his Works,
besides our Text, are lost, at least in such private hands, that they are as
good as lost, which I ingenuously profess, I should be loath, if I could help
it, any line of our Text-Masters should be: but it fares with Books as with
Pictures, that pass from their first to after and other owners, till at last
they are unknown almost whose they are, Tametsi quid libris commune cum
pictura: pascit illa tantum oculos, hic animum mentemque instruunt; illa mutam,
nanem, and plaerumque falsam descriptionem continet, libri, viventem
praeceptionem, atque exactam spondent; Tabulas ctiam imperiti pingunt,
literarum monumenta non nisi ductisumi consiciunt. Baptist. Egnatius in Epist.
ad Minutium ante Caesar.
or kept to the solitary use of their Proprietors by purchase from those, who
would admire the lineaments of them as much as their Impropriators. That then
there was such a book is certain, and that he is only honorably remembered by
this our Text, is as certain. For that herein he has a Monument far more
durable then any of Marble or Adamant; nay, when his body interred I know not
where, and inscribed with I know not what Epitaph, is a secret to most of the
Nation; this that he has done to the honor of the English Laws, and the
consolidation of a wavering Prince, is public to his name and glories,
perpetuation and augmentation. That while Herostratus was remembered for his
villainy, in burning the Ephesian Temple the Worlds Wonder, Philostratus in
vitis Sophistarum p. 493. in Phavorino.
and Phavorinus for three strange things which he acquired; That being a
Frenchman he learned Greek; that being an Eunuch he was thought guilty of
Adultery; that being an opposite to the Emperor Adrian, he yet lived and
evaded his fury: and the Roman Emperors are monumented by Suetonius, and
others for their deeds of Prowess, Liberality, Lubricity; and the like things
our Worthy is mentioned in the Pyramid of his Wit, and has his own hand both
the Pen and Epitaph to him; which I the rather note, because many not only
ignorant, but lazy, morose and capricious learned men, transported with a fret
against the high Tide of Learning that is at this day by the over float of the
Nilus of divine blessing on industry and ingenuity, (which they would tether to
themselves and straiten as to its diffusion) are so virulent against writing
more Books, that they cannot but censure with mordacity the labors of Writers,
and contemn them as far as they civilly dare therefore, which I dare call so
great a weakness and vanity in them, as deflowrs the merit of all their other
excellencies. Nor do I believe there is any true art in any man that envies the
good eye of God on others, in making them instruments of addition to men and
ages Science. Yea, I know there can no inglorious principle raise men that
write to deny themselves the pleasure of life, as they must therefore
necessarily do, if they were not excited to, and kept in the resolution of it,
by that inclination that virtue works to beneficence, and that testimony they
would give to men and times, that they did not live unprofitably, Q. Hatetius
familia Senatoria Eloquentia, quo ad vi x^^, celebrata, monumenta ingenii ejus
baud peninde retinentur, scilicet ^^pot is magis, quam cura vigebat; utoque
aliorum meditum and labor in posicrum valesc^t, Sic Haterii Canorum illud and
prosluens ingemum cum ipso simul extenblum est, (...). lib 4.
as all they do, that die in person, and bear their Learning out of the World
with them. And for my part, I think Tacitus his commendation of Haterius, to be
as much a reproach as eulogie to him. Haterius (said he) was a Senator by
family and wisdom, noted for eloquence in speech, but died intestate as to any
Records of it. What the age he lived in accounted him, was more Natures bounty
then his care; for he did all on the sudden, as inconsidering aftertimes, so
becomes his immortal wit mortal, and the main of his Eloquence inaudible to us.
Thus fell it out with Haterius, and thus will it fall out with those negligent
and incontributive souls, which treasure up (Miserlike) for no purpose, but to
be said to be learned; Not considering, that there is no wisdom nor counsel in
the Grave whither they go; and that it is a kind of self-felony to abbreviate
the life of God's gifts in them; which they do, that make themselves, though
learned, die and be forgotten, who by their Works of Learning would live as
long perhaps as Homer, or Virgil, or any Authors, which do out-last Lands and
Conquests, Families and issues. This premised, I return to our Chancellor,
concerning whose learned Work the Prince is produced in testimony. And that to
which he speaks is to this assertion, that the Power of both absolute Kings,
and Kings by politic constitution, are equal; not as they are in actu
exercito, for so they do evidently differ, but as they are in actu primo, that
is, as they are proper exercises of power. For power as descending from God,
and a Ray of his luster accompanied with Justice, are in Confort with Equity,
which environs and circumvallates it. And as God can do nothing but what is
just, because every thing that is in God is God, and every thing that proceeds
from God is as God, good and holy and just in its cause and foundation: so
every proper act of Power supposing an ordinateness to a good end, Derivativa
potetesias est ejusdem jurisdictionis cum primitiva. Reg. Juris, 2 Instit. p.
71.
and by right and suitable means thereto, cannot exceed the bounds of such
restraint, without a forfeiture of its nature and denomination; which makes,
that vice and excesses are no proper expressions of power, but rather
privations of power, sin having defaced the Image of God in Man, and rendered
him naked of that ability and exercise of a right understanding, and a
conformed will to the rule of rectitude, and standard of power. For the abusion
of power in its conversion of itself to one man's accommodation, with the injury
and vexation of millions of others, as well the Image of God, as that one, is
not the true tendency of power; nor does dare formam to power, qua such; but is
rather the absence of power, in which Lust and lawlessness, as Master of
Mis-rule, rants and rages to an excerebration, which is the reason that Laws of
modification are taken in, to qualify the distemper of surprised power. For if
the soul of man were emancipated by virtue, it would not need any regulation or
monition, besides that of its inward Tribunal, which because sin does usurp
upon, has some relief from those extern adjuments. Otherwise, suppose a Prince
so tender conscienced as David was, when himself, that he durst not cut off the
lap of Readiness garments. Suppose his heart so soft and flexible, that with
Josiah he melts before God, and dare not abide the hearing of the Law, which so
represents his own sins to him, that he is ashamed to make his returns so
unsuitable to God's indulgencies to him. Suppose a Prince so chaste, as was
restrained Abimelech, and upright Samuel, in whom there was no immorality
visible. Here the great indulged power to such a Prince, would be no other then
what expressed itself in just, holy, and good actions, because the power of
them is in being and full oriency in the soul: but when the inundations of
justice, kindness, and equity breaks out, Nobis ergo qui de jure disputamus qua
sit in principe potestas, non licet nec licebit unquam in principe, constituere
potestatem, qua ejus libidine and liberae voluntate absque recta rationis
limitibus ducatur. Covarruvias, lib. 3; Va^resolut. c. 6. p. 261.
then is not the height of power to be accused, but want of power by a
prevalence of weakness against it. Moses was as mighty a Monarch as ever was;
his Will was the Law with Israel: yet do we not read, that ever he did that to
Israel that they complained of (excepting only in their petulant and frenzy
fits) and the reason was, he proposed to himself no by-end; no
self-aggrandization to lacquy whereto he was to express lubricity and weakness.
This is evident not only in Scripture, Ad prudentiam semina prastari sanguine,
quare molles carnes aptires ad disciplinam, sane spiritus subtiliores agiliores
lucidioresand ut ita dicam (...). Caesar Scaliger in lib. 1. c. 1. Aristot. De
Hist. Animal. p. 37.
in the example of Joseph, who had opportunity, and probably personal power
enough, to have unlawfully enjoyed his Mistress; but because God brought into
the presence of his mind, tampered with by her fond solicitations, the power of
integral nature, telling him it was an immorality, which he as a man was not to
hearken to, and a turpitude; which as a Saint he was to defy, his Mistress
rested untouched by him, notwithstanding all her resignation to him. For though
true it be, that God's restraint on men be the superadded Curb to exorbitancy;
yet true also it is, that there are laid from Nature, though lapsed according
to the good Constitutions and habits of some men, or the particular extemporary
or premeditated Resolutions of others, such restraints visible and emanant, as
make the opportunities they have to the contrary, frustrate to all ends but
those of virtue and power, as in contradiction to turpitude. Thus though
Tarquin's weakness may force Lucrece; (...), Dictum Alexandri apud Stobaeum,
Ser^^. 5. p. 65.

Plutatchus in Alexandro, p. 6^0.


yet, Alexander his power over his passion may preserve Darius his Wife, and
Mother, and Brother, though under his Martial power. And though Attila may come
with fire and sword, and salvadge-like devour Countries; yet an Antoninus may
preserve his Conquests, and do the conquered no harm but good. While a
Belteshazzar may riotously drink in the bowls of the Sanctuary, a Cyrus may
preserve God's interest intemerate: Aristot. Lib. De virturib^s apud Stobaeum.
Sermon. 106.
(...), etc. ' It Is (says the Philosopher) a main evidence of Magnanimity, not
only to bear all conditions, but not to admire delights, applauses, power, nor
victorious successes, but to look upon ones self as concerned to do more noble
acts, by how much the greater opportunities we have to effect them. For the
mastery of Nature in her unjust postulations, is the true specimen and evidence
of power; Vices and esseminacies are but privations in adjecto, the absences of
impedients, Privatio quantum ad illud quod significatur per nomen, est non ens,
and praesupponit sabjectum and habilitatem subjecti ad formam cujus est
privatio. Sanctus Thom. prima part qu. 17.
and the presence only of what is a member of the conspiracy. And this is the
reason why absolute power is so formidable, because it has the temptations of
almost impossible refusal, unless there be a resolution of dethroning self in
the irregularity of its absoluteness. Nor will any man in power be good in his
office, except he resolve not to make the King of France revenge the quarrels
of the Duke of Orleans. Caesar Borgia that could not command his revenge, but
act it must against his nearest relations. And Herod that had no power to
abstain from Herodias, nor to deny her, though she sensually by her Daughter
asked the head of the second bravest man of the World John Baptist. Alphonso
that King of Naples, who never made men fair weather and good cheer but
betrayed them, Fitz-Herbert's Religion and Policy, p. 203.
murdered Ambassadors against the Laws of Nations, sparing none whom to ruin
was his advantage, forcing Subjects to sell their commodities, and buy them
again of him at his own rates; fell Church-Patrimonies to Jews, and count
Religion a thing of nothing. Men and Princes that do thus are no Princes of
power, but vessels of weakness. For let their Titles be never so absolute, yet
powerless Princes they will evidence themselves, that thus are vassals to
Lusts, and impotencies of soul, privationes in adjecto, such privations of true
power, as no privation besides it, is. Agesilaus, King of the Lacedaemonians,
being asked what were the chief and most requisite qualities of a King,
Plutarchus in lib. an Sevi administr. sit respub.
replied, (...), etc Courage against Enemies, Kindness to Subjects, and Reason
in Counsel to improve opportunities aright, and not to go against the intent of
Providence in them. And therefore the Chancellour's assertion, that both the
Regal and Politic King are equal, amounts to a truth; not only as both of
them are equally from one Fountain, GOD, and to one end, IVUSTICE; but also as
the power of the absolutest is but such, while it keeps within just bounds; nor
is the expressions of the Regal Politic King, though never so restrained less
then power, because it acts in conformity to the Law of its institution, which
is to the preservation of the Prince's own Conscience from violation, and his
Subjects bodies and goods from oppression and injury, which the Chancellor
commends in all Princes, to love and value, considering the end of power, which
is as it follows.

Quia, ut dicit Boethius, Potentia non est nisi ad bonum,

This Sentence out of Manlius Severinus Boethius is much to be regarded as well
for the truth of it as the authority of the Author who was a most noble Roman
Senator, for learning and art the glory of his age and time, which was under
the Empire of Zeno; Theodorick the triumphant Goth had so great a value of him,
that he knew not how (as he thought) to write enough of him, Quascunque
disciplinas vel arts foecunda Graecia per singulos viros edidit, Cassiodor.
variar. lib. 1. Epist. 45.
Te uno Auctore, patrio serm^nt Roma susc^pit, are the least of his words to
him: yet even this incomparable Patrician, whom any man but a Goth would have
valued as a nonesuch ( agnoscant per te exterae Gentes, tales nos babere
nobiles, quales leguntur Authors, are the Goths very words;) even this man was
with Symmachus his Father-in-law a Patrician too, In Prolegom. ad vitam Boetii
p. 898. oper.

Quod in libertatem populum Romanum viderentur velle vindica re. Lilius
Gyraldus dialog 5 De Poet. Historic. p. 219

Impress. Basiliae Ann. 1570.


and many others of right virtuous parts and noble Extract banished Rome, and
after Put to death, upon bare suspicion of inclining to Rome's Enfranchisement;
or as Murmelius has added to it, Because he was bold against Arianism, with
which the Emperor was infected and Plaque-sick of; which quarrel purposely
picked, and offense unjustly taken at his learning, eloquence and integrity,
endowments too manly to pimp to base and illiberal Projects, robbed the world
of his excellent life, and that Orb of the luster of his transcendencies, whom
Julius Martianus Rota in his Prefatory Epistle to his works does more at large
set forth, and Murmelius also in his Prolegomena, this was the Author. The
sentence here out of him quoted is no less ennobled by its alliance to truth,
then to him the utterer of, it is no doubt out of his Books De Consolatione
Philosophiae, which he wrote when in Banishment at Ticinum, five they are in
Number, according to Tully's five Books De Finibus bonorum and malorum, and
though all his large Volume, on Parts of which Murmelius, Impress. Basillae
Ann. 1570. Henricpeter.
Agricola and Porretas have commented, are Manifesto's of his transcendent
learning and most Christian Accomplishment; yet his Books De Cons^latione
Philosophiae are the flower and dainty of them all; and though he was put to
death about the year Ann. 524. after Christ, yet do they survive to render him
remembered even to this day. Prosae secunda lib. 5^
I confess, yet I have not found the very words here quoted in him, but I have
found what confirms them, Extrema vero est servitus, cum vitiis dedit a
rationis propriae possessione ceciderint. For he finding that power originally
God's and part of his Essence is not exercised by him but to the good purposes
of Creation, Conservation and Glorification, and knowing that the trusts of
power, his peculiar, which he graces men with, is in ordine ad bonum, and is
only such while it is so, and when it is not, ceases to be power and is the
privation only of it, and as it were a non ens, no creature of God's, no
derivative from him but an usurpation of man's upon the permission of God, as I
may so write. He I say, knowing this and that by the sad experience of his own
suffering under the undeserved rage and implacable fury of Theodorick, who was
only powerful in the multitude of vices concentring in his soul, and rendering
the faculties of it weak and opposite to good, gives this Monition to him and
to all men in condition like him, that there is no power but ordained for good:
And therefore that either great men must be good and use their greatness to
promote goodness, and discountenance the contrary, or else they have no power
in them; for that is only to good, which vice and truculency is opposite to.
And hence he inferrs, that to be able to do wickedness is only the power of
sensuality, which being proper to beasts is unproper to men, whose power is
ordinated only to good.

Quo posse male agere, at potest Rex regaliter regnans, liberius quam Rex
politice dominans populo suo, potius ejus potestatem minuit, quam augmentat.

This sentence supposes, that the more Princes are left to their wills, the
more temptation have they to inordinancy; and the more invitation they have to
it the more probability have they of surprise by it; and the more surprised
they are, the less will they boggle at the sin and folly of the lust that
victors them; which danger so really p^rillous to the interest of God in us, he
lays down more probable to seduce and prevail upon absolute Princes then
politic ones. ^rimus homo nibil omnino brutalitatis habuit, hoc est, nihil
omnino brutalis desipientia aut temeritatis sive praecipitationis habuit, sed
rationalis and modestus erat in statu illo and erectus ad bona spiritualia, and
aversus ab infimis suis. Gulielin Parisiensis, De universo partis primae, c.
59. p. ^52.
And then next he concludes, that the prevalence of such temptation is so far
from declaring the effects of it, the creature of power and expatiating the
fame of him for it, that it is on the contrary an argument not to be refuted,
of Impotency in the soul, wherein Vice alone has the Command, and man being
under the Tyranny of the Beast, Malus autem s^ regnet se^uus est, ner unius
bo^inis, sid quod est gravius, tot dominorum guot v^t^o^um. lib. 4. De Civii
Dei. c. 3.
the body is made a non ^ns as it were to all impeding of this abusion of
power. And hence it is, that I am so far from fearing men for their Fortunes,
Armies, Titles, Favors in the World, when they are vicious, that I cannot but
despise their fury as weaknesses, their favor as danger, their gi^s as poison
to integrity; and conclude them in the Hell of misery, while in the height of
their jollity, and amidst the pomps and gaities of their Attendants. It was a
brave Character Eutr^pius give Anteninus Pi^s, Eutropius, lib. 7.
(...), etc. A most honest man he, while a private man was; but more, if
possible, then an honest man he was when in the Empire: then he was as good as
all the opportunities to goodness co^ld make him, and no more evil th^n the
presence and predominance of virtue would permit him. Oh there is no vi^tue
more Kingly, Spo^swood. p. 31. p. 342.
then generous greatness of mind, and Royalty of Humor. Malcolm the third of
Scotland, was famous for this; so was King James in the Case of Bothwel: Eico^.
Basilic. c. 27 to he then Prince of Wales, our now Sovereign.
and so was the late King Charles, whose words were; For those that repent of
any defects in their duty toward me, as I freely forgive them in the word of a
Christian King; so I believe you will find them truly zealous to repay with
interest that loyalty and love to you, which was due to me. So again, I have
offered Acts of Indemnity and Oblivion to so great a latitude, as may include
a^ that can but suspect themselves to be any ways obnoxious to the Law, and
which might serve to ex^l^de all future Iealousies and insecurities: I would
have you always (meaning our now Sovereign) propense to the same way: when ever
it shall be desired and accepted, let it be granted: and so blessed be God and
the King it has been, c. 17.
not only as an Act of State-^olicy, but of Christian Charity and choice. Thus
that brave Prince made good his power, in Boethius his sense, Non caret regia
potestate qui corpori suo noverit rationabili^er imperare, vere enim dominator*
est terrae, qui carnem suam regit legibus disciplinae. Sanctus A^gustin. De
Offic. Magi. stratus, c. 1. contra Epist. Manichaei.
Potentia n^n est nisi ad bonum. And that the greatest Monarch in the World is
not great in his actions of lawless cruelty, and rigorous severity, but in his
virtuous, kind, and conscionable expressions of the power God has given him,
which he so far benefits himself and others by, as he makes them good and
happy, by his example and exercise of it: Nor needs such a Prince to be limited
by Law to do, who voluntarily limits himself by that Law which he allows in his
Government, as the common direction and rule to all persons; and to the
observation of which, he holds himself obliged in Justice and Prudence. And
hence is it, that all the happiness that lawless and injurious Power promises
it self, is but in Parisiensis his words, Somnialis faelicitas, the power of
fancy and opinion; Somnialis faelicitas, ex necessitate maxima mi^ seria est,
quia qui magis amat luxuriav^, magis captus est in ea, and magis servus ^^sius
magisque impo^ens ad a^^a ^ona acqui^endae. Cap: 10 De legibus, p. 52.

Consuetudinales habitus affuefactione operum acquiruntur, and quodam modo
generantur, partis secundae De Vniverso. part prima, c. 149. p. 940.


it is no real power, because it is power which leads to misery; since by the
love of it as irregular, a man is made more and more unable to good,
assuescency in evil making it natural to him, and impossible for him, without
extraordinary power from God to be recovered from it. And hereupon it is, that
all the mis-employments of God's favors to men; (and such they are, when by
them disservice is done to the giver, and as far as in the receiver is, a real
design against him managed) are not only sins in God's account, but real
weaknesses in their own nature, Omnes virtutes erunt in actis in gloria, Parif
Lib. De Retribu^ionibus Sanctorum c. 1. p. 306.
because arrived to be what they are by the inactivity of the true presence and
power of virtue in them. For as that of the school man is true, that all
virtues in glory will be in act: so is it in a sense true here, that all power
of virtue will be active in a virtuous mind, Potentia non conjuncta actui est
imperfecta. Durandus, Quaest. 1. lib. 1. Disti^ct. 42. p. 2^3.
while virtuous it is, and deserves the glory of being, and being accounted
such; and where the contrary is, there how great soever the ex^ern power is,
there the actions will declare no power but weakness, because separate from
virtue, and disposed to a contradiction thereto.

Nam sancti Spiritus jam confirmati in gloria, qui peccare nequeunt,
potentiores nobis sunt qui ad omne facinus liberis gaudemus habenis.

This is brought in to prove the Argument, Potentia illa est m^^^^ ^^era, er
q^^^ ha^emus principa^tus do number Du^^^^^, lib 2 D^sunct. 24, q 3. p. 387.
that the least power to do good, is greater then the greatest to do evil;
because power exercised in well doing, a^^s properly according to the
institution of power, which is to a virtuous activity: but power expended upon
evil, is not power but weakness. The privation of power, which ^he Chancellor
makes good, from comparing the glorious Angels with us men, which sin by reason
of the converse we have with, Status gloriae nihil habet imperfectionis aut
carentiae, seu desiderii cujuscunque rei non habitae Parisiensis, secundae
partis De Universo, part. 1. c 6. p. 769.
and the addiction in us to irregularity, and a latitude of choice and love
(which the glorious Angels confirmed against and undesirous of, being in
plenary glory and under no carency or desire of what they have not) are said to
be and that most truly potentiores nobis.

This Clause then is thus to be considered. 1. The subjects of it are Spirits
and holy Spirits, dignified from their state-Glory, from their stability in
that state, confirmed, from their purity and impeccancy as a fruit of their
Confirmation, peccare nequeunt, from their endowment or privilege thence
resulting; because they cannot sin, therefore they are more happy and valuable
then we who can do nothing but sin, Aequalis erit gloria Sanctorum Spirituum
and Angelorum. Guiliel. Paris. part. 1. De Universo. c. 43. p. 609.
potentiores n^bis sunt, qui ad omne facinus liberis gaudemus habenis.

Sancti Spiritus.] These are the Angels not excluding the Spirits of just men
made perfect, for they are both admitted to one and the same glory; These are
the Peers of the upper house of glory, who continually behold the face of God
and are ministering Spirits for the good of God's Elect; these in their nature
state and condition are abyssalis latitudinis and profunditatis, Partis
secundae De Universo, part. 1. c. 153. p. 946.

Quia conjunctio vel applicatio animarum hu^nanarum ad Deum altissimum,
Deificatio ea. rum est, quod tibi dubium esse non debet. Idem c. 152 p. 944.

Parisiens. c. 153. p. 946. Tom. 1.


as Parisiensis his words are, and therefore I shall not engage in those
Inquiries which the Schools have curiously about them, which some of them do
aggravate almost to a blasphemy. That which is pertinent here is to to consider
them as the glorious Instances of divine goodness and power, that though they
are creatures, and as spirits laps^ble, as appeared by the fall of some of
them, Lucifer and his Apostate confederates; yet those that stand are to be
admired for the illumination of their Intellects, the purgation of them from
corruption, the perfection of them in their state, by the help of all which
they are made fit for the Service of God, for the performance of his Commands,
and for the expression of benevolence and charity to the Militant Heirs of
glory, according to that sevenfold good office which Parisiensis says the
Angels and Saints in glory do to us here. Secundae partis de Universo part. 1.
c. 149. p. 940.
Spirits then they are by nature, holy by donation and Charter of Royal
Endowment, which our Text calls Confirmatio in gloria; Glory as that is a state
of perfection and incarency, visio maris, the fruition of what ever the height,
breadth, leng^h and depth of mercy has to give, yet is it advanced by the
impossibility of abbreviation, decay or dissolution of it. And this depends
upon the security the Saints and Angels have for their indetermination, which
is in the word ^^^firmati, whereby they have not only all joys for the kind
but the ultimityes and quintessentialities of them according to the true and
furthest notion of glory; not barely passed, as I may so say, the Sovereigns
grant, but ratified irreversably, God has set to the Seal of his truth,
invariable, inviolate, that the glory they have, they shall hold so long as he
himself lasts, and this is that act of goodness and power which the Sovereign
and Bishop of all creatures both in heaven and earth, has fixed on his Vessels
of glory for their Seal of certitude and continuation, which they cannot either
by their own defect, Durandus. lib. 3. did. 3. p. 492. b.
lose, or their desertion of their state deserve to have taken from them, since
not only ex adjutori^ sibi co-assistente but ex dono inherente, they cannot
sin peccato commissionis aut ^missionis, as the Schools speak, but they being
once confirmed in glory are for ever tenable of it and in no sort separable
from it; their Confirmation being not viae sed patriae, Angeli ob permanentem
in natura stabilitatem nomine columnarum in Scripturis appellantur. Benzon. in
Psalm. 86. c. 3. p. 2.

In Cap. 3. Sapientiae Tom. 1. p. 352.


not in order to completion but the very completion, of their glory in the
present possession of it: and because of this says Be^zonius is it, that the
Saints and Angels are set out in their state of stability by a pillar in
Scripture, Revel. iii. 12. To him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the
h^use of my God. And hence Bonaventure pleases himself and me much in advancing
glory by these three steps of Meditation. 1. Cogitatio veritatis, the soul
shall not only not harbor error but meditate on truth the subject of all its
delight. 2. Inhaesio bonitatis, there shall be in the glorified Saint an
universality of goodness, which shall so overshadow it and adhere to it, that
it shall not be separable from it, for God who is all good shall be the object
of its love and admiration. 3. Perfectio Comprehensionis, it shall fully
comprehend what God is, and what the glory in which it is, is. And all this by
its confirmation in glory, which considered, the Chancellour's consequence is
most direct, peccare ^equeunt; Sin is the desertion of God and adhesion to his
Creature, a Lapse from his Constitution into somewhat of contrariety to him;
but this the Saints and Angels being passed possibility of, because they are in
glory where no temptation to sin, no nature serviceable to sin is, they are
well said, non posse peccare; not as Creatures, for so they are peccable: but
as confirmed against degeneration and lapse; from whence, as God's powerful
indulgence to them, arises their impossibility to sin, as also their prepotency
to us: for in that they are sinless, their created power is in its pristine
vigor and oriency, immaculate without spot, regular without any
inordinateness, Omnis virtus generaliter, and omnis potestas e^^peditior and
^otentior and efficacior ad id, quod potesi per se^etipsam, quam ad id quod non
potesi nisi per aliud; similiter omnis virtus, and' omnis potent^apotens per
se, hoc est, essentian^ suam, vel per id quod est, apud came and in essentia
sua, quam quaevis alia, quae non potest nisi per id quod extra ipsam esi.
Guiliel. Parisiens^ secundae partis, part secunda, c. 152. p. 544. De Universo.
plenary without any abatement; so that as they have glorious states, so
proportionable natures, delights, activities, and operations, and transcend us
as well in what they can do, as in what they are. For where as we men can do
nothing, but by assistance of things, without our selves, and to such
proportions as are suitable to finite beings, and under such restraints as may
interpose, and if they do, will defeat us. The glorious Angels, as Spirits of
power, activity, and purity of essence, can from the energy of their essence,
Angelus perficte cognoscat perfect omnes causas naturales necessa^tas, and
contingent^s, ac per hoc sciat, quae causa aliam impedict vel non. Durandus,
qu. 7. lib. 2. Did. 3. p. 315.
as it is indulged by God, and privileged to purposes of ministration to his
glory, and his Saints good, effect stupendous things, and by hidden and secret
methods, which the wit and enquiry of man by not discerning is so far from
ability to prevent, that he cannot penetrate the intent and purpose of them,
till they discover themselves in their effects. Sanctus Hieronim. lib. 2. in c.
3. ad Galat. Tom 19.
Hereupon our Lord Jesus is set forth in the Old Testament, under the name of
the Angel, Exodus 14. 19. and much of the expressions of Divine Power over the
World, either for tuition or destruction, is from God manifested by Angels: As
his Angels are ministering Spirits, and gather his Elect from the four corners
of the Earth; so are they the Dissipaters and Ruiners of all pernicious persons
and practices, which are antipodique to God, and enervative of his Glories
progress and augmentation. Genesis 19.
'Twas an Angel that d^^ stroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. 'Twas an Angel that
destroyed Senacherib.'s Ho^ in on enight; Genesis 31.11.
'Twas an Angel that comsorted Jacob; and an Angel that went before Israel;
Exodus 14.19.
And an Angel that was to destroy Jerusalem, 2 Samuel xxiv. 16. And thus they
are potentiores nobis; they are indeed more excellent then we, as they cannot
sin corporally, because they are spirits, as they cannot sin voluntarily,
because they are sancti spiritus, and their Will is wholly conform to Gods, in
the purity of it, as well as in the glory they partake of by it; Angelus non
potesi demereri, quia peccatum seu demeritum non potes^ esse in voluntate nisi
praecedente aliquo defectu in cognitione. Durandus qu. 2. lib 3. did. 1^. p.
546.
and then by sin they cannot demerit of God, and so be deprived of the glory
they are invested with, because they are confirmed never to be other then they
are; and because they are inflexible to sin, and defy that which we call
desire and delight, being wholly taken up with the Vision of God, and
dis-ingaged from this World's Enthusiasms, and the captivations of sense, they
are well said to be potentiores nobis.

Indeed the power of man is little but vanity and vacuity; as this life, the
time of power, is but a span in length, so but a flower in duration; and all
the sphere wherein mortal power acts, is but this vain and vild World, and no
further is it capable of Regency, then by, and under God, and according to the
Commissions of his permission. And when in the exercise of it we cons^der it,
there is more cause to weep then rejoice, that so fair a beauty should be
courtezan'd to pleasure sin, and by it to work iniquity with greediness, which
is that the Chancellor means by liberis gaudere habenis, a phrase purposely
used, to express the licentiality and excess of men's use of power. Adam used
the power of his free will, to disobey God in eating the fruit he was
forbidden; and Cain, Genesis 4.8. ^ 9. v. 21.
the natural power of an advantage credulously given him to murder Abel; Noah
had a power of sense, and he abused it by the intoxicating delight of the
grape; David had a masculineness, which he deturpated, by impregnating Vriah's
Bathsheba; Herod had a power of tongue, even to the stupefaction of his
Auditors, and he listened too much to vainglory, and thereby abused his power;
Nimrod had a power in his Arm, and art of cajouling men into his politic Net,
but he abused it by cruelty. These, and thousand of examples of the
incircumscription of power, and the vanity of its excess and eccentricity,
every Story, every Age, every Man almost confirms: And all this proceeds from
this of our Text, liberis gaudere habenis. We would all be Originals and
Independent, loath we are to be under the yoke of restraint, though it be lined
with the velvet and shag of Ease and Innocence. We would Phaetonize, till we
hurried GOD out of the Throne of Rule, and brought Heaven and Earth into a
Gallemaufre; and this comes from our Pride and Presumption: our Tongues are our
own, they said it, who told no truth with them; and to bind the hands of men to
the peace, makes them stark mad of revenge. The sturdy Stallion does not more
^re^ when he is curbed up, nor more riot, to the danger of his Rider, when let
loose, and the rein given him: In 12. Aeneid. 101
then men do rise in spirit till they have power, and rage with madness when
they have it. Therefore the Chancellor understanding Habena, as Servius does,
Pro potestate and facultate, intends, that men by being glad of a free reign,
hold themselves priviledg'd and at liberty to do what they list, which the
Scripture calls, to work iniquity with greediness, and to do what is right in
their own eyes, which is impotency in the (...), and non ultrality of it. For
then all fear of God and Man being rejected, the brutality of sense evicting
the ingenuity and sovereignty of Reason, man becomes beneath the Beast that
perishes; Lib. De R^tribut. Sanctorum, p. 310.
that like as that Fornax and caminus charitatis, as Parisiensis phrases it,
That love of good men to God, swallows and drowns all self: so that nothing is
now Competitor with it, but it acts in ultimo fortitudinis. So in the error
and misplace of love on our selves and on the practices we are in our opinion
aggrandiz'd by; the swallow and gulf of the whole man is to gratisie his
sensual project and libidinous apprehension; and this is libere gaudere habenis.

Solum igitur mihi jam superest a te sciscitandum, si lex Angliae ad cujus
disciplinatum me provocas, bona and efficax est ad regimen regni illius; ut lex
civilis, qua sacrum regulatur imperium, sufficiens arbitratur, ad or bis
regimen universi. Si m^ in hoc demonstrationibus congruis indubium reddideris,
ad studium legis illius i^i^^ me c^nferam, nec te postulationibus m^is s^per
his, am^lius fatigabo.

This conclusion of the Chapter presents the Prince both rational and
tractable; and in the one an acknowledger of the Chancellour's learned
assistance: so in the other an expecter of his further satisfaction, in what he
yet rests uninformed in: having therefore from the prealleadged Arguments found
relief, he subjoyns an insinuation o^ a restant scruple, which his oracular
Head is to salve, Solum igitur mihi superest.

This solum igitur mihi jam superest] tells us the Prince's ingenuity, that
though he was of perspicacious wit, and knew all that his years and education
could advantage him to; Singulariter vero notandum est non infrequens esse, ut
heroum and principum liberi, etiamnum adolescentuli, ardua and consulta negotia
faeli^^ter exptevis^e leguntur, sunt quippe occulta quadam virtutum semina
regibus ingenita quae si aaolescere sinantur, repent fructam ferunt industriae
and gloriae supra aliorum mortalium facultatem, and ante tempus naturae legibus
praestitutum, quasi praecoci fr^ge. In Panci^ol. Tit 43. partis prim^ p. 154.
yet he is free and noble to confess, that something is wanting, which he
requests his Chancellor to supply to him. For notwithstanding it cannot be
denied, but that God does give often those that are born to greatness, wits and
minds suitable thereto, and paramounting the ordinary indulgency to other men,
as far as their hopes and fortunes are beyond them, as Salmuth makes good in
many notable examples: yet are the highest accomplishments in them but rude and
dangerous, if not polished, pruned, and regulated by grave and virtuous
tuition: nor is all the knowledge Youth has, any true ornament, if it reduce
not the mind under the Empire of virtue, and settle it not on the appetition of
useful knowledge; for as the body may be without delicate food, and thrive well,
yet will have no grand strength without bread, which is the staff of life: so
the mind may be variously adorned with studds, and embroideries of art; and yet
being void of true applicative Wisdom, need its Habeas Corpus to remove it from
imprisonment of error and ignorance, to have benefit of the solum superest,
that necessary, proper, and prudent knowledge, which it is losingly wanting in.
And this is that, which because the Prince is in his own opinion without, he
endeavors from his learned Chancellor to be supplied with, a ^e sciscitandi^.

A te sciscitandum] The supplement of this knowledge he will have, a digno, not
from any that obtrudes himself upon him, The Chancellour's Character.
nor from any that on other accounts come not before welcome to him; but a te
scisvitandum, as the properest and pregnant'st Resolve^ of them, and one who
having faithfully attended the misfortunes of my Father and my self, and
thoroughly digested the Providence of God, the provisions of the Law, and the
intrigo's of Government, art able to reconcile my prejudice to their prescript,
and settle my wavering by their stability. From thee, O good man, and grave
Chancellor. do I alone desire direction and resolution of my doubtings. This
is the sense of a te scis^^ tandum; which being the voice of a great mind,
lessons us to conclude the fixation of brave and Princely Spirits, who as they
never settle but upon premeditation, so alter and remove not their favors, but
upon great and apparent provocation; and that not only for fear of the
detection of their secrets, which being under the covert of their Confidents,
may by the spleen and choler of their discontents, take air and be vented to
their Principals dishonor; but also because levity and futility thence
chargeable on greatness, indisposes it for the future, to be relied on by those
Ministers of State, who are unquestionably necessary to carry on public and
sovereign Designs; which the Prince considering and judging, to avoid the
suspicion of such Princeless versatility, points to our Chancellor as the very
very person of whom he only would enquire, and from whom alone expect an
account of what he was in suspense and doub^ of. this for what in the clause is
presational, the singularity of the thing, and the person whom he singles out
to be enquired of in those words, Solum igitur mihi jam superest a te
sis^itandum. Now for the matter and substance of the Quaere, that is Lex
Angliae, no trite or vulgar subject, but a Princely and noble one; a Law, the
fruit of justice collected from the Divine and Natural Law, and digested into
useful forms and methods, fit for this Nation, the Queen of Islands, and the
luster of Europe, Lex Angliae.] Then, why this Law is so searched into, that is
by reason of the Chancellour's solicitation of the Prince to love, embrace, and
study it, [ ad cu^us disciplinatum me invitas,] says he; since Sir
Chancellor, your gravity directs me to it, as the subject of my minds love and
engagement; that mind of mine requires me rationally to search, whether the
choice be worthy it, before I own my self a Disciple to, and put my self under
the Discipline of it. For as I would not refuse your provocation with rudeness,
so neither would I embrace it without satisfaction, that fit it is I should.
This makes me enquire for satisfaction, that having found it, I may submit my
self to the learning of it. Then thirdly, what of the Law of England it is,
that the Prince would know, that is contained in those words, bona and efficax
est ad regimen regni illius, a shrewd question worthy the Prince to ask, and
the Chancellor to answer. For England being a Kingdom of consequence, and
governed by a Law, it is fit it should be a good Law, respectu justitiae, and an
effectual Law; respectu prudentiae, every way commensurate to the
superstructure that should be laid upon the foundation of Law. For bona here is
not only taken for propitia, as Servius takes it; Adsit laetitiae Bacchus
dator and bona Juno; but pro existimata and virtute praedita, and efficax is
that which ad aliquid agendam maxim conducit, efficax adversus serpents, 1
Aeneid. Plin. lib. 245.
efficacissima auxilia, used by Pliny, Tully, and others, to express energie
and fitness, thoroughly to perform any thing. By which two words as referring to
the Law, the Prince intends the interrogation of his Chancellor, whether the
Law was such for the justice and wisdom of it, as would answer the end of
Government over the people, and make the people happy and contented with it:
Whether the Concerns of the Crown and Subject in Peace and War, in Civil and
Ecclesiastical Matters, was duly provided for by it: this is the sum of bona
and efficax, that not only the Plaster should be broad enough for the Sore,
but the matter of it be well composed, to the end of its application, to
assuage tumors, and congregation of ill humors, and to keep the parts of the
politic body hail and thriving. 'A(...). L^^ ad ^^gustum, apud Xihil in
Epi^om. Dionis, p. 212. edit. Sylburg.
For as undoubtedly, that is the best diet that enables the body to be
vigorous, and keeps the color from decaying; so is that the best Law that is
proper to keep Government in a prudent medioc^ty, because it takes away all the
occasions of misunderstanding and disaffection. And this the Prince would know,
whether the Common Law does or no; Why? Because he is now in debate, whether
Law to adhere to and study, and resolved he is to choose the best, that is the
most proper and suitable to the people of England: that ever being the best Law
to rule by, that is most adapted to the nature of the Subjects it is to rule:
which because the Law of England is to the people of England, is to be
therefore allowed the best Law for England: so the Law thinks, and has
published of it self, and its testimony all wise men are to believe and take,
according to the Maxim of Law, N^minem oportet legibus lapientiorem.

The like may be said of the Roman Civil Law; Dr. Wiseman in his Book. Lex
legum. printed 1657.
which I account with that very learned Civilian and prudent Gentleman, Lex
Legum, above all humane Laws whatsoever. (For the sacred Empire, allowing it
the particular Salvo's from the common rule of it, which all Nations allow with
the use of it,) it being not only for the most part the Law of it, but that
which is suitable in its capacity and concern, to the vast requiries of the
Empire and Continent; and that by the Justice and Wisdom whereof, no doubt but
great expa^ation and luster has been given to it. For since the Roman Civil
Laws were the quintessences of the Greek Laws, and improvements of those of the
twelve Tables, which a learned man says thus of, Fremant omnes licet, di^am
quod sentio; Bibii^thecas me bercuie omnium Philosophorum, unu^ mihi videtur
duodecim ta^ularum libellus, si quis legum fontes and capita videru, and
authoritatis pondere, and utilitatis ubertate supe^are. P ^ ri^us Senens. lib.
1. Instit. Reipub. Tit quinto, p. 21. b.
Let men rave and rage as they list, the Book of the Laws of the twelve Tables,
are in my opinion not only as the Fountain Laws, and heads of inchoat order,
to be preferred before all the Libraries of Philosophers; but also for the
weight of authority, and abundance of profit, to the Wisdom of life that thence
resulteth. And daily supplies have been made to them as emergencies require,
and the prudence of experience has solicited, and accordingly has effected.
Even our Chancellor, though he were by profession a Common-Lawyer, and by
choice a Champion of it against the introduction of the Civil-Law, in
competition with, (or what he thought rather) in subversion of the Municipe
Law; which time beyond Record, and success beyond parallel, has radicated here;
yet is even in this designed remora to that projection, a Confessor by the
mouth of the Prince, that the Civil-Law (with the reserves of particular
Customs, which in every Country is used, besides the Texts of the Law,) is the
Law that governs the Roman Empire, Lib. 1. Instit. Reipubl. tit. 5 p. 22.
and is sufficient to distribute Justice by it to the Continent. So true is
that of Patricius Senensis, Ex ill is namque dignitas omnis expetitur, etc. For
from them every Dignity is derived, since all industry and honest labor is by
rewards, splendor, and glory herein encouraged, and all the vices and frauds
of men punished with fines, disgraces, bonds, stripes, banishments; yea, even
death. Thus he. And this does not only merit for it the honor of good words,
Observe well this.
from men of learning civility and gratitude, who must and ever will (passions
and private concerns laid aside) express it to her, as the Mistress and
Magazine of Learning, Wisdom, and Order, suitable to the Universal Nations she
is oracular in, and accordingly furnished for; but also apologize for, and
obtain from this Nation of England, a high respect to her learned ^ons the
Civilians, whom I shall delight to see encouraged according to their merits,
and that modesty, which their Prudence will dispose them (I know) to express to
the Muni^ipe Laws of this Nation, which in the allowance of the Civil Law, in
the Cases usual and as wonted before the late distractions, will so I trust
satisfy the Professors of that Law, that as thereby they shall see a fair
field for their display, and a plenteous harvest for their encouragement, so
they will in no sort hold themselves neglected. And this will (I think) content
the wise men on both sides; the learned Civilians being restored to what they
were forcibly put from, and the learned Common-Lawyers confirmed in the
enjoyment of what they now and ever had. For that both Laws are necessary in
their respective allowed ^pheres and proportions here in England, no man of
learning can deny, no more can any man of worth deny to the Civilians of this
Nation the praise of their great Learning, and deservedly to be encouraged
usefulness. Which considered, the Prince here is personated as resolving a
conformity to his Chancellours Prescript, which he judges will be closely
rational, such as shall satisfy his perspicacity and Princely judgment, and
take him off from all uncertainty and doubt of distraction. This he intends by
( si me in hoc demonstrationibus congruis indubium reddideris.) And to this he
assu es an hoped for reward, in a resignation of his Princely self to that
study, which has the most of rational swasion, and ought most to lead him; and
this he tells the Chancellor he will ( ilico) instantly do, all delays and
further debates laid aside, and all further troubles by his enquiry and
irresolution being abandoned.

CHAP. XV.
Cancellarius. Memoriae tuae Princeps optime commendasti, quae huc usque
suggessi, quare and quae jam interrogas, meritus es ut pandam.

HEre the Chancellor gives the Prince the just acknowledgment of his pupillike
ingenuity: to remember what Youth is told, and to observe the Precepts of
communicated Wisdom, is a virtue amiable in all; but in Princes prodigiously
commendable and obliging. And this the Chancellor finding the Prince
profitably to do; not only by the Commemoration of it, encourages the Prince:
but by the Civility and good consequence of it whets himself to add all the
helps his experience and love can to his improvement, not thinking any thing
too much to bestow upon a just Valuer and a grateful Acknowledger. For since
the high conceits of men of Dinon Tarentinus his mind, carries them to ascribe
more to their single selves, then to all o^ her besides them. Adag. 28. Chil.
1. Cent. 6.
And they cry out, (...), that their opinion is more weighty then thousands of
other men's; and with Francis the first King of France, make nothing of their
words but content themselves with Ie suis Roy, Herbert. Hen. 8. p. 192, 194.
let Charles the fifth say what he can of a violated promise; the gentleness
and gratitude of those that are more modest and memorative of their duty,
carrying them to the virtue of acknowledgment to those they are obliged to;
cannot but be kindly expounded a merit, as the oblivion of it would be branded,
a disobligement. And therefore the Prince so frankly reciting the Chancellour's
impartment, is well said to by our Chancellor, Meritus es ut pandam.

Scire te igitur volo, quod omniae jura humana, aut sunt Lex naturae,
consuctudines, vel statuta, quae and constitutiones appellantur.

Here the Text describes the kinds of humane Laws to be three, such as are
effects of God's Implantation on all men and things. This Law of Nature is the
Law of all places, all persons, all times, altering not, but is one and the
same Inscription of God's power and goodness, Ius natural esse, quod natura
omnia animalia docuit; atquo jus istud non humani genetis esse proprium, sed
omnism animalium quae in terra, qua in mari nascuntur, avtum quoque commune
esse. Seldenus De Iurs Naturae and Gentium, lib. 1. c. 4.
wherein he makes manifest, himself to be the fountain of being and to preserve
his Creatures in the Law and rule of it. This Law I have in some kind treated
on in the Notes on the first Chapter; that which I shall here add is but only
to show the obligation of it. Calvin's Case 7 Rep.
For though Moses the most ancient of Writers and Lawgivers does not write of
it, Doctor and Student. c. 5.
yet undoubtedly it was the Directory of Mankind and Nature in all the Forms
of Creatures long time before him, and was contained in the seven Precepts of
the Sons of Noah; and the learned say, Vis illarum tam late ad omnes pertinuit.
ut qus nescirent ea, interficere in bello atque ex hominum communione tollere
jussi sunt Israelitae, Cunaeus De Rep. Hebraeorum lib. 1. c. 1.
God commanded the Israelites to kill all those they overcame in Battle, that
were ignorant of them. This Tully suffragates to; for having said much of the
obligation and extent of it, he concludes, Cui qui non parebit, ipse se fugiet,
etc. To which Law whoever obeys not, Lib. 3. De Republ.
avoids himself and becomes not man, but as a Runaway from his Station deserves
utmost punishment. Fornetius ad legem 42. p. 122. De Verb. signify.
Hence is it that all Laws of men are deduced from this, and so far only are
just, Obligatio juris vinculum est quo necessitate astringimur. Instit. D. ti^.
De obligationibus l. 3. etc.
as they are conform to this, and in what they contradict it, are no Laws of
justice; and hence as the Law of Nature is the Law of God, so an obligation
lies on the Creature to observe it. Concerning these Laws of Nature, our most
learned late deceased Countryman Mr. Seldom has most incomparably treated; so
has Decretal. Did. 1. 5. and 8.
Gratian; and Carraria who says, Iuris naturae violator est, qui Legem justum
non observat; Lib. de literali and mystic Juris Interpret. quaest. 4. art. 3.
p. 311.
the sum of all, grave Hopper expresses pithily, Prima vera Lex ab uno Deo, a
quo deinde ad mundum profluit, and post deinceps ad hominem, ubi Lex humana a
Lege divina and naturali deducta; and this suffices for the first sort of
humane Laws, those of Nature, Catholic for both time and Persons.

The next are Consuetudines, Dr. ^ Student. c. 7.
These have been (says Doctor and Student) of old time used throughout all the
Realm, which have been accepted and approved by our Sovereign Lord the King and
his Progenitors and all his Subjects, because the said Customs be neither
against the Laws of God, nor the Law of reason, and have been always taken to
be good and necessary for the Commonwealth of all the Realm. Hence these are
(secondly and in a kind) sovereign Laws; 1 Instit. p. 113. p. 110, 11, 52.
69, 140.
for they do rule men and things: Consuetudo praescripta and legitima vincit
Legem, says the Rule of Law; and not only in the Laws common, Customs are
the Laws of places and things, as in Manors and Tenures, in which there is no
Law without them, lies; but in the civil Laws, Mores recepti sunt Legum nervi,
Tholoss. Syntagm. Juris. lib. 26. c. 25.2. p. 532. lib. 47. c. 25. ss. 20. lib.
4. c. 21. ss. 6. Pandecta Iur. Civil.
and consuetudo dat Iurisdictionem, etiamsi agatur de causis meri Imperii, and
consuetudo observata Legis instar est; In Antiquitatis causa, and
praescriptiones, longusque usus and consuctudo considerantur: Sive lex jubeat
sive consuetudo dum vetustissima, and post hominum memoriam sit, ca enim
prjvilegii jus habet and qualis nunc est, presi^mitur semper retro fuisse.
Alciat. ad legem 214. lib. De significatione Verborum, p 465.
these and such like Rules are in the civil-Law, Texts: yea Tertullian averrs
the prevalence of Custom, making it a Law upon rational and religious Grounds,
which Saint Augustine confirms in his Epistle to Ianuarius; of which I shall
have occasion to write in its due place. All that I shall add is, that Custom
so prevalent, ought to be reasonable or else it cannot be good, Consuetudo
antem, etiam in civilibus rebus pro lege s^scipitur cum deficit lex, nee
dissert S^^tura an ratione consisut quando and legem: atio commendat. c. 4.
lib. De Corona ^ili^is.
the Rule of Law being, Consuctudo contra rationem potius usurpatio quam
consuctudo appellari deb^t. Let this be enough here for the second kind of
humane Laws, Customs.

Reg. Iuris. Choppinus ^^. 2. De Domanio Franciae, ^ ^^
The last is Constitutiones, the same in the civil Law that Acts of Parliament
under the name of Chartae Regis, 9 H. 3. Ordinationes 27 E. 1. and 31 E. 1. 33
E. 1. 17 E. 1. 34 E. 1. articuli, 9 E. 2. 35 E. 3. these under what Titles they
of old variously went, yet being made in Parliament according to the
Constitution of our Government, (...). 47. c. 27. ^^. 1.
are that which is here called Constitutions, because being made by the King,
not as in France, where Tholossanus says, Princeps noster Monarcha solus,
^^lius addictus Principis vel Legum Imperio, Iura subditis, and Magistratus
ipsos praeseribit, jurisdictionisque cujusque modum ex sententia distribuit;
but with the assent of the Lords and Commons, they are to be obeyed as wise and
worthy Acts of Government: for in that the King corroborated with the counsel
of so many brave Lords Spiritual and Lay, and Commoners as a Parliament of
England affords, makes Laws, they must needs being so pondered upon and
passed, carry the presumption of convenient and suitable to the nature of
affairs. And Tholossanus so far approves of this, that like a wise man as he
was, Syntagmat. Juris universi. lib. 47. c, 29. p. 1016.
he, after he has discoursed of the French Kings absoluteness in making Laws,
concludes, Melius tamen non diffiteor Rempublicam se habituram, etc. I do not
doubt to say, 'Twould be better for the Commonwealth, if our most Christian
King would take the Counsel of his Senate in making Laws, by which means they
would be more mature and advised, then by the Counsel of few they can be hoped
to be, for men of parts and loyalty to the stability of his Throne, would
sooner quit their places and preferments under him, then sin against God and
him by Counsels of flattery. Thus he.

Sed consuetudines, and legis naturae sententiae, post quam in Scripturam
redactae and sufficienti auctoritate Principis promulgatae fuerint ac custodiri
jub^antur, in constitutionum five statutorum naturam mutantur.

Here our Text-Master shows how the ternary of Laws pre-mentioned, become
regularly and effectually Statutes, which all persons are to take notice of, as
that which has an obligation on them, and they are to express a duty to: For
though Customs do bind, and the Laws of Nature do bind men, in foro Dei, and in
foro civilitatis and decoris, as they evidence men intelligent of their duty,
Ius natural per positivum quandoque specificatur, quandoque determinatur
Carraria de literali and mystic. Jur. Interpret. partis secundae Reg. 2. art.
1..48.
and obsequious to that which has upon so just grounds a regency over them; yet
they seem not in the sense of our Chancellor (as I concceive) in foro poena
externae, and by an intitling of the Civil Magistrate to punish the
non-observance of them, become obliging, till they are transferred into a
positive Law. For as where there is no Law, there is no transgression; so where
the transgression is not breach of a published Law, there ought to be no
punishment; for punishment is the effect of a sin committed, and by a known Law
violated, the Magistrate provoked and despised; which in this Case not always
being, since there are many offenses against these Laws, which men may not
know. Our Text says, that whatever the offense of not observing Customs, and
the Laws of nature, be in themselves; yet as Humane Laws, they are not in
Magistratique Construction, till magistratically they be made such; and that
they can only be made, by being formed into the method of Statutes, and passed
as such by the Royal Assent, which chiefly gives the life and noble energy to
them. And this the Chancellor sets down pithily and orderly; Antiquitus leges
Solonis axibus ligneus inscriptae and Romanorum in are 12 Tabul. Tholoss.
Syntag. lib. 48. c 10. art. 3.
they must be in Scripturam redactae, that they may be not only durable, but
also certain, and entered on the Parliament Re^; for the Law being the Extract
of Justice, leaves nothing to discretion and uncertainty, because it knows
danger and inconvenience may come in at that door; but as it requires that Laws
be had in honor when made, so does it deserve such honor from men, by being
no snare, but a security to them, leaving nothing arbitrary, or under the
exposition of any man's will or pleasure, Cook 4 Instit. c. 1. p. 41. and p. 26.
but as declaring the penalty, so appointing of old, before Printing came in
dace, and men might have the Laws of them printed) that they should be
proclaimed by the Sheriff in his County, and the Acts were often enrolled in
other the King's Courts, that the Judges might take knowledge of them,
accordingly to administer Justice to the people: all which argue the care of
the Law. ^ or when Laws are once, Doct. and Student. c. 8.
in Scripturam redactae, then they are by the Rule of Reason, and by the Judges
men of reason and conscience, to be interpreted; and this is no small
privilege that Laws which reach all men, are reduced to writing, that all may
read and consider them, and plead them for their defense and indemnity. And
surely the writing of Laws the Holy Ghost mentions as a blessing in this
regard, when he commanded Moses to write the Law, and the Kings of Israel to
write the Law; yea, when God wrote the Law (which omnipotently and primarily he
had written on the Tables of man's heart) in Tables of Stone, to be a Monument
of the perpetuity of its obligation, and the inexcusibleness of his breach, who
knowing the will of God, and Law of his duty, yet does it not, but is
rebellious against it; He exemplified to man the greatness of the blessing, to
have not only a Law, according to which he was to live, but a Law written; the
sanction and imperation of which he might certainly know, by having it penned
under his eye, and within the reach and capacity of his reason. And therefore,
though as I have before noted, Laws there were probably before Moses; yet none
of those Laws' were published in the form of them to the people, that were to
live by, Ante Mosis tempestatem Scripta jura non agnovit orbis. ^tsi enim amca
profecto haud sane sine legibus gens hominum aguaverat, tamen neque publicis
tabulis cae, neque ullis monumentis erant consecratae. Cunaeus, De Repub.
Hebraeorum, lib. 1. c. 1.
and be judged according to Law by way of writing. From the mouths of the
Dictators of them, did Nations of old receive their Laws. In allusion whereunto
it is said in Scripture, That the Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and the
Law be enquired at his mouth. From Moses his lenity and tenderness only, was
the first reduction of Laws to writing. And being so, they must further before
they can be Laws, be sufficienti authoritate principis promulgata. For as no
Laws can be such in the sacredness of them without Authority, so no Authority
can make them Laws, but that which is sufficient to that end; and because none
is so sufficient to that end but that of the Prince, the Text says, sufficienti
authoritate principis promulgatae; for Legislation being the act of Majesty,
excludes all exercise of it besides, or without it, and so not only says the
Civil Laws, as Tholossanus quotes Authorities for it; Sicuti and leges quidem
ra^one jurisdictictionis in s^o territorio Parliamentum facere potest, and de
quibus constitutio regia diversum non inhibet, at sine consensu Principis leges
statuero non potest. Tholoss. Syntag. Juris, lia. 47. c. 17.21.
but also the Common and Statute Laws, as I have abundantly heretofore proved:
contrary to which there is no one good Authority rightly understood in all the
Law Books that I have met with; yea, because the first Statute of 15 E. 3. was
made without the King's consent, the Statute of the same year did repeal it,
and the Title of it says, Poulton's Stat p. 141.
The last mentioned Statute was repealed, because it was made without the Kings
consent. For though Subjects in Parliament may prepare and humbly offer to the
King their requests, and assent as much as in them lies to the passing of Laws;
yet he gives by his pleasure of passing them, the quickening word to them; and
therefore they are said to be a sufficienti authoritate principis promulgatae.

Ac custodiri jubeantur, in constitutionum sive Statutorum naturam mutantur,
and deinde panalius quam antea sub ditos principis ad earum custodiam
constringunt, severitate mandati illius.

This our Chancellor adds, to show that Laws (like Physic) must have some
potent ingredient, to carry them to a right working on the part affected; and
this he calls, Fear and dread of displeased greatness; and the consequence of
it, Fine, Imprisonment, and as the cause may be, Death: For as God himself is
not known, but by the Judgments he executes; nor feared, but for the command
he has over the bodies and goods of men, which he can blast and ruin in a
moment, and for the Hell that he has in the other life, to cast the body and
soul of implacable and impenitent men into: So Kings are not observed in the
Laws of their declared Authority, further then they do Iubere custodiri leges,
and that paenalius quam antea subditos constringunt. For in England I suppose
every Law, either common or Statute, has a certain duty and penalty, and as the
duty is rewarded with the favor of protection, for so signifies the words of
King Ed. 1. in the Stat. 15. regni Stat. 2. where speaking of the Laws and
Customs of the Realm of England, See Sir Ed. Cook, c. 86 of penal Laws, 3
Instit.
and his Prerogatives and Rights Royal, he adds, We considering how that by the
bond of our Oath, we be tied to the observance and defense of such Laws,
Customs, Rights and Prerogatives:) So is the violation of it with the proper
penalties, therein expressed, accustomed to follow such transgressions, and no
other, the Law of Engl. leaving little to discretion or pleasure, especially in
the penalty of Statutes, wherein nothing being expressed penal, the Subject
that will be refractory thinks himself more safe. For the Laws of England, by
the Kings in their Parliaments made, were ever intended to be mercifully
medicinal, Physic of evacuation, not excoriation. Hence tart Laws have been
observed ever short-lived, as was that of boiling men to death for Treason, 32
H. 8. c. 9. which was repealed by ^ E 6. c. 12. (which Statute of repeal says,
Nothing being more godly, more sure, more to be wished and desired betwixt a
Prince the supreme Head and Ruler, and the Subjects whose Governor and Head he
is, then on the Prince's part great clemen^y and indulgency, and rather too
much forgiveness and remission of his Royal Power and just punishment, then
exact Severity and Justice to be showed; and on the Subjects behalf, that they
should obey rather for love, and for the necessity and love of a King and
Prince, then for fear of his straight and severe Laws. Every good and loyal
Subject will hold himself obliged to conform to his Prince's pleasure in things
not mala per se, and not fear a penalty more rather then love a duty; but where
the contrary is, Princes are furnished with power to order Contumacy, and their
Proclamations commanding the observance of Laws, are very strong to not only
invite good, but terrifieevil Subjects to Conformity; and this the
forementioned Statute also hints in these words, Yet such times at some time
come in the Commonwealth, that it is necessary and expedient for the
representing of the insolency and unrulyness of men, and for these foreseeing
and providing of Remedies against Rebellion, Insurrection, and such Mischiefs,
that sharper Laws as a harder bridle should be made to stay those men and
facts, that might else be occasion, cause, and Authors of further
Inconvenience,) so he: and that of 37 E. 2. c. 5, and 6. which was repealed by
38 E. 3. c. 2. the very next year; these and others might be instanced in,
which confirm what is the all, I conceive, our Text intends in these words. It
follows.

Qualis est Legum Civilium pars non modica, quae a Romanorum Principibus in
magnis voluminibus redigitur, and little auctoritate observari mandatur. Vnde
Legis Civilis, ut caetera Imperatorum statuta, jam pars illa nomen sortita est.

Lib. 1. Tit. 4. De Constitutionibus Principum.
This is made good from the Digest, which is authenticated in all parts of it by
the Emperors, who set it out as the body of Laws Civil; Ex Ulpiano Instit. 1.
p. 84.85.
and in that Vlpian is quoted, thus saying, Quodcunque igitur Imperator per
Epistolam and subseristionem statuit, Cum Principis Interlocutio redacta est in
corpore juris. Gloss. p. 85. interlocutus est.
etc. Whatsoever the Emperor by his Letter or Subscription appoints, or
knowing decrees, or advisedly and Thronally utters, or commands by his
Proclamation, that ought to be a Law. That these Constitutions of the Emperors
of Rome in their successive Ages, and the sayings of famous Lawyers book'd into
the bodies of Civil Laws, make up as really the Civil Laws as the Original
Laws do, is as plain to all knowing men, as that the Statutes are part of the
Laws of England, and so ought to be accounted, Omne jus aut consensus fe^u aut
^e ^es^^a constituit, aut consuetudo fir me^. Monestin li^^ regularum Digest
lib. 1. Tit. 3 p 84 Lib 2 Excusationum.
as well as the Customs and Records of Courts, and the Entryes of
Law-Judgements in the year-Books. For since all Laws are gradually made, being
by one and the same power, they are owned with equal Reverence as well the
later as the elder; yea, Modestinus considering that all Law is either such as
Consent made, or Necessity introduced, or Custom has settled, says plainly,
(...) etc. later Constitutions are more prevalent then former.

Si igitur in his tribus quasi omnis Iuris fontibus, Legis Angliae praestantiam
probaverim praefulgere, Legem illam bonam esse and efficacem ad regni illius
regimen etiam comprobavi. Deinde si eam ad ejusdem Regni utilitatem, ut Leges
Civiles ad Imperii bonum, accommodatam esse lucide ostenderim, nedum tunc Legem
illam praestantem, sed and ut Leges Civiles electam (ut tu optas) etiam
patifeci.

This is the Method which the Chancellor proposes to the Prince's Solution, he
being in suspense; whether of the Laws he should study, as in the
forementioned part of the Comment on this Chapter I have further signified.
And the Chancellor being, as an Englishman, zealous for the Law of his
freedom; and as a Master in that Science, concerned to promote the honor of
his study and delight, finding the Duke of ^xeter's Daughter, the Rack; Rot.
Parliamenti 28. H. ^ Number 30.2 (...) Peter Trea^^. p. 35
brought into the Tower John Holland then newly created Duke of Exeter, being
made Constable of it, and intending it as a Preface to that Law which allows
the use of it, which the Common Law does not. I say, the Chancellor advertised
of this, applies himself to the Prince to prevent any rival Law; showing, that
not only the Rachel of England was beautiful and well-shaped, but fruitful
of all that amounts to Order and Ornament; and that as the civil Laws are very
fit for the Empire, and every way correspondent to the Magnitude of that vast
and Gyant-like body; so are the Laws Common and Munic^pe such, as set out
livelyly and preserve healthfully the beauteous and lovely Constitution of this
British Empire: which though the truth of it be evicted by the Judgment of the
Law in all Ages, 3 Instit. p. 121, 122.
and the experience of the order and renown of the Nation by reason of it, the
violation whereof, in the Laws undervaluation, has ever been the Nations
hatred and vehement Prosecution; yet the good Chancellor not contented to pack
upon the Prince heaps of Presidents and infinities of Quotations, (which are
most Historique, that such the temper of the Nation has been, then rational
that so it judiciously ought to have been) here proceeds to satisfy him
argumentatively; that there is no favor showed therein to the Laws, but that
which her deserts have made the Subjects her Debto^s by, and that the Sun is no
more useful in the firmament for the invigoration of vegetables, then the
Commonlaw, as it was in his time used, is for the well-being of this Nation to
which it is every way helpful, both as food, exercise, and physic. And so
concludes the fiteenth Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
Leges Angliae in his quae ipsae sanciunt Legis Naturae ratione, non meliores
pejoresve sunt in Iudiciis suis, quam in consimilibus sunt omnes Leges
caeterarum Nationum, etc.

THis whole Chapter is but a Transition to what he had preasserted as his Proof
in behalf of the English Laws, as flowing from that Trinal Fountain of Law,
Nature, Customs, Constitutions, the first whereof being the Law of Nature, and
the same with all Laws, he passes over without any stay upon it, as conceiving
no necessity to enforce that by argument, which already is in grant; and so do
I, after the example of my Text-Master, In Stat. Merton^ c. 9. p. 98. 2 Instit.
pass over it with a Testimony of Sir Edward Cook's pertinent hereto. Our
Common Laws (says he) are properly and aptly called the Laws of England,
because they are appropriated to this Kingdom of England; as most apt and fit
for the Government thereof, and have no dependence upon any foreign Law
whatsoever, no, not on the Civil or Canon Law, other then in Cases allowed by
the Laws of England; and therefore the Poet spoke truly hereof, Et penitus
toto divisos orb Br^tannos: So, as the Law of England is proprium quarto to
the Kingdom of England, therefore foreign Presidents are not to be objected
against us, because we are not Subjects to foreign Laws, thus that Sage: And
with his Justification of our Laws as good and effectual to the Government of
England, I end my Notes on this Chapter.

CHAP. XVII,
Regnum Angliae primo per Britones inhabitatum est.

HEre our Chancellor enters on the second head of his Argument on behalf of
the Laws of England, Customs, and those he not only proves to be most
ancient, but used and accepted as good by five several Nations, all which ruled
successively in Britain. The first whereof were the Britons, a people whose
name and origin many have diversely descanted upon. Mr. Gambden knows not what
to say, but concludes, that in these cases it is an easier matter to impeach the
false, Britannia, p 5. Britanniam circumstuam Oceano, Abo ^g^n^ tenuere
Pomponius Le^^us. p. 526. edu. Sylb. p. 10.
then to teach and maintain a truth. Many count them Aborigines: Mr. Cambden
thinks Gomers Posterity to be the Cimbri which might come to this Island, as
the uttermost Quarters of the World; Gomer signifying utmost bordering. But
this, as all other such like opinion, I take with respect to his great name, to
be but conjecture. Time having lost us so irrecovably in the dark of its not to
be regained discovery, that to be positive in any thing is not only fond, but
a phansiful madness. That Britains were very ancient Inhabitants here, and
primo, Page 14.15. Holingshed's Description of Britain, p. 4, 5, 6, etc.
as our Text has it, that we can read of, Stories confirm, and that their
Druids and Priests were the great men of Learning and Law, is also known of
old. Of these many Authors are quoted by the learned forecited Author, which
I will not enlarge upon: these Britains were also the same with the Gauls of
old, and had one Language and Custom, which the W^lch, the remaining Britains,
hold to this day, as they do their Christianity; for to their eternal honor
it is recorded, that from the time of their first Conversion, which is said to
be 1500 years ago, in Anno 162. after Christ, they never after wholly defected
from Christianity, 5 Book Hist. Britain, Holingshed, p. 126.
but as they held their little spot of Land, (if their own Authors do not
deceive me) from Brute to Cadwalladar, which they compute about 1820 years
under 102 Kings; so do they continue also very resolute in retention of their
Language and Customs. And as British Language they at this day speak; so do
they please to be called by the name of Britains, which name of old was the
general name of the people of all these Islands, wherein as the King of it was
^^iled, Insularum Britannicarum Monarcha, and did in right of his Imperial
Crown, Quatuor maria sibi vendicare: so the Laws of it were called the British
Laws. But about the year 600. the Angles, a people of Germany came upon us; and
about Anno 827. Egbert being crowned King of all Britain at Winchester, made an
Edict, that all Saxons should be called Englishmen, Vide Chronic. August.
Cantuariensis, page ^^33 Qui prius vocati sunt reges West ^a^^num, abhinc
vocandi sunt reges Anglorum. Dicet, p. 449.
and Britain, England; and Dicet confirms it, that about the year 829. that
those that were heretofore called Kings of the West Saxons, were for the future
to be called Kings of Englishmen. So famous ever since has England been
accounted of, ^ornalensis p. 909. edit. Land.
that not only Pope Gregory called its Monarchs, Domini liberorum, Lords of
free Subjects; but the Kingdom it self, Regnum Dei, the Kingdom of God. But
concerning England's Kingdom, I have in part written heretofore, and shall
hereafter in another place: therefore that which I shall add, shall be an
accusation of my own Nation, as at this day, so of old, as ingrate to God for
his mercies; not only in a good Land every way a Canaan of plenty, and to all
intents of Peace and War accommodated; but in the discovery of his glorious
Gospel to us, in the power and purity of it, though the fruits whereof is
little seen in our lives For as it was in the days of old, they were eating and
drinking, and taking and giving in Marriage till the Flood came, and swept
those secure merry madmen away; Page 909.
and as before the Norman Conquest, there was a man of God (they are
Iernalensis his words) foretold that God would send a scourge on the English
for their beastly and cruel vices; not only Murder and Treason, but
Drunkenness, and despite of the house and service of God; but also for their
antique fashions, which showed the instabil^ of their minds. Note this.
I say as these Omens were then on the Nation; so truly it is to be feared, that
some heavy misery impends us, who have not learned obedience by the things that
we have suffered, who abound in secret hatred, each to other; who are proud
beyond our fortunes, prodigal above our proportions sloathful beneath
ingenuity, envious to great merits, censurers of grave manners, contemners of
Native Customs, Affectors of vicious pleasures, intollerably peevish,
mercylessly savage, brutshly voluptuous, Sunt enim infirm and tepidi amatore;
justitiae quibus aus vigor, aut servor deest, aut fortassis uterque; cum
uterque sit, summopere necessarius. Sanct. Bernardus in Declamat. in verb.
dixit Simon Pe^ tius ad Iesum,
zealously profane, and frigidly religious, amongst whom, the Son of man when
he comes on the earth, will not find so much faith as a grain of Mustard seed
in bulk, nor as a bubble of air in solidity, all complement, all boast, no
truth in word or deed. Sed auferat oblivio, avertat Deus malum Omen, Let peace
and truth, O Lord, be in our Hezechiah's days; for he has by his
Proclamations forbidden p. ophanenels: and whatever befall us, let us say, The
Lord is just, and we have reaped but the fruit of our own Deservings. For never
was there a Nation more beloved of God, and saved from the hands of our Enemies
then we have been; and never was there more turning of the grace of God into
wantonness, then has been amongst us, who yet do not know the things that
belong to our peace.

Deinde per Romanos regulatum.

This is added not only to show the succession of Conquests, but the
accidental Benefit of them; for the Romans being a people of universal Empire
and Civility with their power, brought learning and manners hither, which is
part of the notion of regulatum. Under whom the Romans came (for without a head
and order they did nothing) is evident in Story; Aggressors est and Britannos
ignotos antea. superatisque pecunias and obsides imperavit. In Jul. Caesare, c
22. p. 5.
Suctonis tells us Julius Caesar did visit Britain to their cost, the pearls,
as some say here, indrawing him hither, and the money here given him appeasing
him, and keeping Natives in the possession of their Estates and Laws: Augustus
would no Voyage to Britain, thinking the Empire would be neglected at home,
when it had such affairs to do afar off; but Clauatus was of another opinion,
and therefore be sent Plautius hither, Cambden. p. 62. Aelius Spartianus in
Adriano p 129. in Severo 175. Jul. Capitol. in Antonino, p. 138*
who did many great matters tending to the Romans advantage; which Domitian
seconding, settled to the Romans a great part of this Land, placing Garrisons in
the most proper and tenable places, and by them awing the subdued Natives:
Adrian built a Wall to keep the Roman Conquest from inroads, so did Severus and
M. Antoninus make high Walls, and Ways, together with other laborious
Monuments of order, not purposing ever that the Roman power should ravall off
in Britain. But as low and victored as the Natives seem to be, their stomachs
were not lessened, nor did they so much submit to, as repine under the
insolence of their Roman Rifllers; as design made them watchful, so resolution
bold, to take the first occasion they saw to their own restitution, and the
interition of their Usurpers: In Severus his time, they flew into Arms and so
incensed him, that he ordered Execution of the Britains they took Rebels; but
Death determined his tragic Edict, and his Successors vice made the hopes of a
better time more probable and near. In this juncture Constantine, a Britain by
the Mother, becomes Emperor; then Britain had ease, but his Reign expiring,
with Valentinian his Successor new troubles arose; till the Natives, resolving
the last and most desperate thoughts in Theodosius his time, acted them and
were emancipated by them; which though then they little knew how to manage
moderately, yet happened to be the abolition of the Roman power after a 476.
years Continuance in a great and heavy measure here. Yet as bad as the Romans
were, they never afflicted the Nation like the Northern Cormorants, which
followed them, nam finis unius mali, gradus est futuri. So it follows.

Iterumque per Britones and Saxones.

The Romans being disseised of the most of their power here, the Britons think
themselves in a good degree possible to become free; but alas, the Romans
strongly planted and Garrisoned, having Wives, Children, and improvements in
the Nation, would not easily quit them, nor be driven out from them: yea, so
did they adhere to their acquisitions, that for forty years after the
Resurrection of the Natives, these domineered, and held their own making
excursions and inroads; yea, endangering a rally again of their dispersion, and
that to the Britains re-Eclipse if not extirpation. In this straight, the
Natives call in Auxiliaries, and those the Saxons, a poor, hardy and Pyratique
people, who were modest at first, and came in such numbers only, as the
Natives suspected not, but after drew by degrees more and more out of their
Country, till at last they tyrannized ten thousand times worse then the Romans
did; the particular whereof, Britannia, p. 110. and seq.
and the misery of the Nation under it, our Cambden has most fully set forth.
These subdued the Britains and made themselves Lords of this Land; the Angles,
a people between Iuit-land and Holsatia joining with them, and being powerful
amongst them, by reason of which the Nation was termed England, quasi
Anglesland; according to which venerable Bede styles his Saxon History,
Historia Gentis Anglorum: during all whose times, in a Heptarchy of Government,
which lasted for a long time, Britannia, p 138.
there was nothing but civil War and bloodshed; till Egbert, King of the
West Saxons, prevailed over the other Kings of the Saxons, and so had for a
time the whole Government to himself.

But not long was it before the Danes, who many years by Pyracy had infested
the Coast, now enter the last by force of Arms. So it follows.

Et tunc per Danos idem Regnum parumper dominatum est, and iterum per Saxones.

About the year, 800. Britannia, p. 142.
This is the fourth variation of the Lords of this Nation, as it was conquered
by the Dane a pitiful deboist Nation, bordering upon the Baltique-Sea, wholly
living on Pyracy, and by reason of lust and promiscuous use of women,
multiplied so numerously, that their own Country not being able to contain
them, they were forced to seek abroad for habitations where they could find
them out, and force themselves into them. Hither they came, and here they made
such hurly burlyes, that it surpasses the Penalmost of all Historians to aptly
express them; so that one that considers them well, would conclude them to have
been of the Race of those Devils, that entered into the Saxon swine, and run
headlong into the Sea, and were overwhelmed and drowned in Lubricity and
Effeminateness: Alfred and his Son overcame them, and restored the Nation to a
fifty years freedom from their Tyranny; till Sweno the Dane, taking advantage
of Ethelred's softness and invigilancy, entered England with a mighty Army, and
over threw the English, but they re-enforcing their right, carried it and
lodged happily in Edward the Confessor, who was the Son of Ethelred by his
second Wife: thus was the Crown again in the Saxon Race, till the Confessor
dyed issueless, which being by the wise disposition of God, made way for the
Norman Conquest, which was the last and durable one. As it follows in our Text.

Sed finaliter per Normannos, quorum propago, Regnum illud obtinet in presenti.

This was a Conquest with a witness, not only of plenary prevalence, but also
of duration and successional Continuance; for it was not over a part, the rest
unsubacted, nor yet for the life of the Conqueror, or the same and terror of
him continued in his Son, Brompton in Will. 1. p. 960. Vix aliquu Princeps de
Anglorum progeny esset. p. 980, 981.
or to the proportion of that Vision, which is reported to be seen by the
Conqueror, telling him, That his Posterity should enjoy his obtainments 150
years but it was such a through one, that it rooted out all the English Nobility
and Gentry; yea it carried all so torrent-like before it into the black Sea of
dismallness, that all kind and show of justice, was for a time perverted.
Concerning therefore this, as amply and ingeniously discoursed upon, Britannia
p. 141. and seq.
I referr the Reader to that particular discourse, which Mr. Cambden has
written of it, whereby it appears that the Saxon Empire, which had continued
about 600 years, determined; which though some take upon them to say, Page 152.
was for a Judgment of God on the base avarice of the Magistrates, and
superstitions lazyness of the Prelates, as Mr. Cambden's words are; yet was not
only for the past and then present sin of the whole people: but to induce the
purpose of God in the after felicity of our Nation, which we have long enjoyed,
upon the account of what follows in the Text.

Quorum propago, regnum illud huc usque obtinet.

This our Chancellor annexes, to show the secret pleasure of God; who though
he be altogether goodness, yet for a punishment of Nations sins, suffers evils
to come on them; and when his glory is thereby righted, converts the ill
designs of men to the good of those, to whom the Actors therein least intended
it. The Norman Conqueror he came into England fiercely, and changed the British
Government, and in a great measure their Laws, extruded the English out of
their Possessions, and placed Normans in them yet in few years his Successors
restored much again, Law of Free Monarchies. p. 202.
the English revived, and his Successors, says King James, have with great
happiness enjoyed the Crown to this day. So that Quorum relates not to the
Britains, Romans, Saxons, or Danes, but to the Normans only, because their
Issue only had the Crown, and so were the Quorum propago within the words.

Quorum propago] Not quorum filii, or Successores: but propago a word adapted
to the intent of continuance, dicta quod porro pangatur, id est, long figatur;
and the Chancellor intends the Conqueror to be a Vine, which planted in this
fruitful Soil, would shoot out many branches of regality to not only an
illustrious, but a durable purpose; and as they should influence ( regnum
illud) this English Kingdom; so should they do it huc usque, not only
historique, from the first prevailing to the time of the Text, but Prophetical,
of a longer continuance, even to the times, when time shall be no more: which
later huc usque reaches only to in the exposition of good will, the Text
chiefly limited the huc usque to its own time, which was about 356 years thus
calculated; William the Conqueror came in about the year 1066. from thence to
Henry the sixth coming to the Crown, which was in Anno 1422. in the succession
of 13 Kings, See vet. M. Charta, p. 143. sub titulo, nomina Regum,
there was 356 years; and if we add thereto 30 years at least, that he reigned,
before perhaps our Text was published, it makes the huc usque to be 386 years,
which was a long time. For thus it pleased God to fortunate not only the first
attempt, but to continue the Majesty and memory of it, even to so many
Successions, notwithstanding the sundry intercurring varieties. So true is that
of the Wiseman, No man knows good or evil by what he sees under the Sun. For
though Hannibal lost the day, and was overthrown at home by a Roman, a young
man inferior to him in reputation, experience, and forces; and that when he
and his affairs were most important, and he endeavored most to show himself a
Carthaginian veterane: yet Charles the eighth of France, though a young man,
destitute of money and counsel, came to invade Naples, strongly guarded, and
amply furnished, yet obtained all his desires with ease, and became Master of
them, Fitz-Herbert, Religion and Policy, p. 204. Prove. 16.33.
which made Pope Alexander say, The Frenchmen came as Harbingers into Italy
with chalk in their hands, to make and take up their Lodgings where they
listed, not having occasion so much as to put on their Armor in all their
Voyage. So true is that of the Wiseman, The Lot is cast into the Lap, but the
disposition thereof is of the Lord.

Et in omnibus nationum harum and regum eorum temporibus, regnum illud eisdem,
quibus jam regitur, consuetudinibus continue regulatum est.

Here our Chancellor uses a pleonasm; and to show his love to the Law, and his
constancy in asserting the credit of it, tells us, that whatever the
alterations of the Masters of it Kings, and their people of several Nations,
were, yet the Customs of England stood firm under them; by reason where of
those words, consuetudines, and continue regulatum est, are to be qualifiedly
understood. For if consuetudines be taken complexly, either for the Laws, or
for all those usages that were topique, then undoubtedly there will not be (as
I humbly conceive) a precise historique truth in consuetudines, no more then in
continue regulatum. Ad caput 17 p. 7.
For as the learned Seldom observes on these words, The Saxons made a mixture
of the British Customs with their own; the Danes with the old British, the
Saxon and their own, and the Normans the like, the old Laws of the Saxons
mention the Danish Law (Danelage) the Mercian Law (Mercenlage) and the
West Saxon Law (West-Saxonlage) of which also some Countries were governed by
one, some by another. Yea, the Common Law, which is the general custom of the
Nation, when it is attributed to Saint Edward as the Compiler of it, yet is so
to be understood, as hy his command it was framed out of the three
pre-mentioned Laws. Brompton, p. 956. 957.
So says Brompton positively; Furthermore, when the Romans had their Colonies
here, they governed them by the Civil Laws, as well as they governed other
parts by British Laws, dispensed by Romans, and when the Normans prevailed; In
Praefat. ad leges W. 1. ^dit. Twisd. p. 138.
though the Conqueror is said to call Anglos nobiles, sapientes, and in sua
lege eruditos, etc. The noble, wise, and learned English Lawyers, that of them
he might have an account of the Laws and Customs of England, according to which
there were chosen twelve men out of every County, who were sworn before the
Conqueror, that to the best of their power, they should justly and
indifferently make known the truth of their respective Laws and Customs,
passing by none of them, neither adding to or diminishing from any of them;
Spelman in Gloss. p. 437.
I say though this was done, yet who knowsnot for all this, he chopped and
changed them as he pleased; such as served his turn, he confirmed others he
rejected: and though he retained the figure and Mould of the Nation, Rapes,
Wapentaks, Jornalensis p 818.
Hundreds, Countyes, with the little Jurisdictions and Manors in them, also
the Councils, Wittenagemots, Shiremotes, Wardmotes, though mostly under Norman
names; yet did he either put Normans into place and possession of them, or else
made such additions to or subtractions from them, as Conquerours use to do,
whose will is the Law: nor can it be expected it should be otherwise, so long
as God has appointed time to ebb and flow with uncertain vicissitudes, to bring
in and carry off the temporary Inhabitants of the world, and with them their
language and manners; which is the reason, Bochart. Geogr. sacr lib. 1. c. 15.
p. 65.
that at this day language is so confused and mingled; as that nothing of the
primaeve idiom almost subsists, and Nations, yea even our Nation has been so
party per pale, as that the people of i^ have been at one time one, and another
time another; when the Romans were in power, they were Roman in Laws and
Manners; (yea, Hic denique populus Colonias in omnibus Provineiis misie,
ubicunque vivit Romanus habities, Senec ad Albinum. c. 7.
though they did at first Romanam linguam abnuere, could not endure the Roman
speech) yet by the Roman's civility of nature and conversation, they did not
only Romanam eloquentiam concupiscere, Inde habitus nostri honor and frequens
togapau atimque decessum est ad delinimenta vitiorum, porticus, and balnea, and
conviviorum elegantiam, idque apud imperitos humanitas vocabatur, cum pars
servitutis esset. Tacitus in Agricola.
but grew to be Romanly vain and vicious, not only in habits, but in perfumes
and bathings, in lawlessness of ayet and luxury of entertainments, which even
the meaner sort of men called civility and kindness of hospitality, when 'twas
part of their Slavery. so Tacitus: to which Gildas assents, when he says,
England was called by the prevalence of the Roman power, Caesar Com. lib. 5.
and 6. Bell. Gallic.
and Customs in it, non Britannia, sed Romania, which prevalence was not only
over the Laws and Language, In Claudio c. 25.
but Religion also, which the Romans changed by abolishing the Druids, Lib. 15.
in vita Constantii Tom. 2. August Scriptur. p. 327. Edit. Sylb.
whose nesarious carriages Suetonius tell-us, the Romans would not endure;
though I know, they long after were here: yet, as Mr. Seldom says, not as the
potent Inspirers of the Nation, but as Students of Mysteries; to which, Am.
Marcellinus gives Authority. The like also was the issue of the prevalencies of
the Saxon, Danes, and Normans, to which as Conquerours, the same Methods are
ascribable; Morum and linguae gaudentes similitudine Leges passim triumphatis
populis inferebant, patriarum suarum ritus, and vocabula plurima retinentes.
Spelman in Gloss. p. 435. De Gothis. Saxonibus, Longobard, etc.
it being the inseparable companion of Conquest to be altered in language and
in Laws, if not wholly, which seldom is: yet in a good measure which never is
otherwise. And therefore though it may be true, that the Conqueror did confirm
the good Laws of the Confessor; because they were just and honest, Preface to
the 8 Rep.
and extracted out of the very bowels of natural justice, prae cateris patriae
Legibus, before any other Laws, because he thought it hard to judge by Laws
he know not, Est enim sciendum; quod consuetudo Regni No wegiae est usque in
hodiernum diem, quod omnis qui alicujus regis Norwegiae dignoscitur esse
filius, licet sit spurius, and de ancilla genitus, tantum jus sibi vendicat in
Regnum Norwegiae, quantum filius Regis conjugati, and de libera genitus, R
Hoveden. parto poster p. 425.
those of the Confessor probably being only the written ones; yet did he also
allow, out of a private respect to the ingloriousness of his birth, the Norwey
Laws, they allowing the base Son of any King of that Kingdom, equal
privilege, though he be born of a Bond-Mother, with the Son and Heir born in
lawful wedlock and of a free Woman; and that being his Case, he did the honor
to those Laws to introduce them, though as to that end they never had any
credit here; all which Premises considered, the Text's universality of Language
in the behalf of the Law, is (as I said before) to be understood with
limitation; for neither were all the Customs or Laws of England by them
reatined, nor were they constantly used to govern by them: but every one of
them as they saw most advantageous to them, took and left the British Laws and
Customs or some of them, and in so doing were but wise in their Generation, and
both served themselves of, and secure themselves by, the Providence God gave
them auxiliarly to them, which if they had not done, (justice and honesty
thereby being promoted) they had done weakly and (as their omission might have
been causal of blood and cruelty) wickedly.

Quae si optimae non extitissent, aliqui Regum illorum justitiae, ratione vel
affecti^ne concitati, eas mutassent vel omnino delevissent.

This, flowing from the precedent Clause, will also be dubious, as it
Historically was: For though our Text-Master, and Sir Ed Cook after him, make
this an Argument for the Paramountship of the Common Law; yet as it here
stands, it makes little for it, since that which is urged for the stability of it
under all Powers, Preface ^0 2. Rep.
is rather a flower and fruit of the Chancellour's love, then that which I can
warrant from History. For although I cannot say any of the Kings here
mentioned, Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes, did change the Laws universally; or
that those parts that they changed, were by them so changed upon reason of
Justice (which is a rare Jewel in a Conquering Ear, and not often the Companion
of Prosperity; especially in Assaults and Successes of Foraigners, whose access
being only to gain their success, is mainly seen in luxury and voluptuousness,
associated with cruelty and oppression) yet that some of them were changed by
the affection of the changers to their own stability, better forwarded by
foraign Laws then these, is as true even as Gospel: yea, and that those
Changers were overruled by God for the Natives betterance, is also most plain.
For since we cannot but believe, that the Prudence of all Governments tended to
honor and order, which were probablest soonest arrived at, and sadliest
maintained in, by the reason and justice of Laws, Iste Edwardus postquam Rex
coronatus fui^ cum concilio Baronum and eaeterorum regni* fecit renovare and
stabilire, and confirmare bonas leges, quae sucrunt per 68 annos inter
dormientes soporatae, and quasi oblivioni traditae* leges istae voc^ti sunt
leges Sancti Edwardi non quia ipsas primo invenorat, sed quia quasi sub modio
positae, and in oblivione derelictae, a tempore regis Edgar avi sui qui primo
manum suam misit, ad ipsas inveniendas and sta^^enda^* Knigh^on, De Eventibus
Angliae, lib. 1. cap. 15. page 2338, 2339. edit. Land.
made up of the quintessences of all collections and bodies of Laws. It is most
likely, that the Laws in use amongst our Ancestors, which are in the
forementioned sense to be understood, were the Laws which for the most part
and longest time were the Laws here under all Governments. For though Saint
Edward's Laws, which were but the Laws of Edgar revised, were here; and the
Conqueror set (as I wrote before) a seeming value on them, and braved as if he
should have them the standing Rule: yet when he found they would not fit Norman
Interests, he either so wholly suppressed, or else so gelded them, that Norman
they seemed rather to be, then British, or English; and diverse Norman Customs
were in p^actice first mixed with them, and to these times continue; as
succeeding Ages, so new Nations (coming in by a Conquest, although mixed with a
title, as that of a Norman Conq^erour is to be affirmed) bring always some
alteration. Notes on this Chapter, p. 9.
By this well considered, that of the Laws of this Realm being never changed,
will be better understood: thus Mr. Seldom.

Et maxim Romani, qui legibus suis quasi totum orbis reliquum judicabant.

This Note on the Romans chiefly is, not from any secret antipathy they had to
the British Laws, qua such; but refers to the method that scientifically they
as the best bred and politiquest Nation under Heaven, exerted themselves and
their dexterity by. Livy terms them a Nation, Natam instauraudis reparandisque
bellis, and being such in a height beyond others, it is likely they would
introduce all the instances of Conquest for their own aggrandization, and the
suppression of all hopes of reverter to the Conquered; Dominus nolentes, and
invitos vasallos jure communi feudorum, and exceptis consuetudinibus privatis,
non potest in alium alienare, nisi necessitate adigatur ad venditionem.
Tholossan. Synt. Juris, li^. 6. c. 19. ss. 24 p. 138.
which Conquerors cannot more signally do, then by change of Laws and Language:
both which were done, and from the Romans possibly is it, that our old Laws,
and Records of Courts yet are in Latin; as from the Normans, that our
Pleadings and Books of Law were, and are yet in French.

The Romans then, Subsidium adversus rebels and imbuendis sociis ad officia
legum. Tacit. Annal. lib* 12. De Coloniis Romans
who first by the Law of the Twelve Tables, made the Civil Laws, and by their
Emperors added daily to them, as they expatiated their Empire, cannot be
thought to give way, when Conquerours, to our British Laws; so as to cause the
Civil Law to cease exercise here, because it was their own Law; and therefore
did they carry on their Martial and Civil Government every where, as well as in
the Mother City by it. This must be granted, though it somewhat impair the
drift of our Text, because amicus Socrates, See the Notes on this Chapter, and
also on Fleta, p. 531.532. and Seq.
amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. And therefore Mr. Seldom yields it; and
the sense of the Text-Master here is only to be understood with ingenuous
allowance.

Neque vero tantorum temporum curriculis leges civiles in quantum Romanorum
inveteratae sunt neque venetorum leges, quae super alias antiquitate
divulgantur, etc.

As the former, so this is a kind of seraphique instance and argument, not
exactly accountable to the plain tenor of History. For though our Chancellor
were a most honest and exact man, well versed in all Learning; yet dare I not
assert, or make a defensive Comment on this his Chapter barely upon his
Authority. And though Sir Edw. Cook is, and shall be much my Oracle in other
matters; yet in asserting the Common-Laws antiquity from Brute, and I know not
what antique Ancestry, for which he says he has only our Chancellor, Preface
to the ^ Report.
whom he rightly terms of profound know edge in the Laws, and an excellent
Antiquary: yet in this I shall not (under favor) subscribe to him, because not
only it is impossible almost if not altogether, to find truth at that distance;
but because the consequence of that uncertainty, will be certain blemish to
mine own Judgment, and import a kind of arrogant vapor over that which my duty
and ingenuity rather bows down to and venerates, then in any thought or word
will or dare disesteem; nor is there any fruit from such vain and profitless
digladiation, as the heightning of one, Preface ^o the ^o. R^^^^. S^ Im^^^m
Pro^ Glossary.
and depreciating the other Law, occasions; but the forfeiture of the
adventurers credits, and the display of their choleric passions Let these
heats then die with Hottoman, and Cook the first and fierce Combatants.
Comparisons between the Laws are as odious now to revive, as are the
Precedencies and Antiquities of the two Universities; which though some think
they do well vindictively to renew, is no true part of gallantry. Observe this
well.
For my part I do own equal honor to, and so I hope do all Cambridge men to
Oxford, as to my Mother University; and I would have all Oxfords worthy Sons so
to profess and evidence to Cambridge my Mother, and that considering them as
the two only Nurses of good Learning in this Realm. They are the words of the
2 and 3. ^hil. and Mary, c. 15. And as these are the common Breasts that
nourish the men of both Laws; The Author's Impartiality.
so would I have the nutriment they therefrom receive, evidence it self in all
the fruits of common kindness, which their growth gives them opportunity to
show each to other: To promote which, as I a person equally obliged to the
merits of the Professors of both Laws; and in neither my self a Professor,
shall Christianly pray for their accord; so shall I in this Discourse willingly
write nothing that may ^ffend either, or both of them, but keep my Pen steady,
as near as I can, to truth, and to that sober peremptoriness in it, which
becomes humility, and the consciousness I have of mine own weakness: Which
digression I think hither to necessary; yet not further to be prosecuted: I
return therefore to the Text, declining all comparisons between the two Laws,
and resting in the grave Judgment of King James, concerning both their use,
Speech Anno 1609 p. 532. of his Works.
here. For a King of England to despise the Common Law, it is to neglect his
own Crown; and I think if the Civil-Law should be taken away, it would make an
entry to Barbarism in this Kingdom, and would blemish the honor of England.
And after the King enlarges, My meaning therefore is not to prefer the
Civil-Law before the Common Law, but only that it should not be extinguished,
and yet so bounded, I mean to such Courts and Causes, as have been in ancient
use; as the Ecclesiastical Courts, Courts of Admiralty, Court of Requests, and
such like, reserving ever to the CommonLaw, to medd^e with the Fundamental Laws
of this Kingdom, either concerning the King's Prerogative, or the Possessions
of Sub^ects, or any questions either between the King, and any of them, or
amongst themselves, in the points of meum and tuum: So that King. From all
which I conclude, that though it cannot, nor shall not need to be averred, that
the Common-Laws and Customs of England, have been the only Laws and Methods of
Government, which all the several Lords of this Nation, have constantly and
precisely kept themselves to (the Romans using the Civil-Laws here above 350
years, Seldom on Fleta, c. 4.
and the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, abolishing and introducing what of their
Country Laws they pleased) yet may it very confidently be said, that the
Common-Laws and Usages of England, have not only been very ancient before the
^onquest, Preface to the ^ Report.
and very much approved by the several Lords of this Land; but are such for the
nature of them, That there is no humane Law within the Circuit of the whole
World by infinite degrees, so apt and profitable, for the honorable,
peaceable, and prosperous Government of this Kingdom, (...)te well (...)
excellenc^ ^f the CommonLaws.
as these ancient and excellent Laws of England be. And hereupon, since the
Kings and Parliaments of England from the Conquest, have given reverence to the
Common-Laws, and by their additions of Statutes strengthened and beautified it,
making the wilful and obstinate violation and subversion of it, not only penal
pecuniarily and by imprisonment, but also as the Case may be, capitally. It
does (I say) from hence appear, that the Wisdom of the Kings and Parliaments of
England, and of the Reverend Judges, who according to their declared Judgments
have judged, did concur in Judgment with them, and with our Chancellor here,
when he calls them bonae and optimae Anglorum consuetudines. And so I conclude
the Notes on this Chapter, being in no sort desirous to enter upon com^arisons
between the Laws: but as I said before, to acquiesce in the pre-mentioned
modest explication of the Text, and to avoid all dictatorian confidence, which
in no sort becomes any man, leas^ of all my self, who do write, non ut instruam
eruditos, sed ut excitem paratos. And who, if I offend in any thing, shall not
be ashamed, but be most ready to acknowledge it, crave pardon for it; and in
the next Edition, if God shall let me live to it, and it be worthy of it, make
amends for it. This be enough for the Notes on this Chapter.

CHAP. XVIII.
Statuta tunc Anglorum bona sunt necne, solum restat explorandum. Non enim
emanant illa a Principis solum voluntate ut leges in regnis quae tantum
regaliter gubernantur, ubi quandoque statuta ita constituentis procurant
commodum singular, quod in ejus subditorum ipsa redundant dispendium and
jacturam. Quandoque etiam inadvertentia principum hujusmodi, and sibi
consulentium inertia, ipsa tam inconsulte eduntur, quod corruptelarum nomina
potius quam legum, illa merentur,


IN this Chapter the Chancellor comes to the third part and proof of the
goodness of the Laws of England, as the Statutes of them are enacted by the
Sageness, Wisdom, and Justice of the Government of England; and to make his
foundation more solid, he first proposes what the Statutes in their origin are
not, and then proceeds to show what in their rise, progress, and nature they
are; by both which he aims to make the Nation of England more splendid, (...).
Plutarchus. lib. De Fortuna Romanorum, p. 318.
then Rome ever was: for though it had many Temples to Fortune, yet to Wisdom,
Temperance, Justice, or any of the Virtues, it had none: Whereas England in the
Wisdom, Temperance, and Justice of her Laws, devotes magnificent piles of
praise and power to her Princes, whose Attendance, with their Prelates, Peers,
and Commoners, as assenters to their Piety and Paternity therein, raise an
immortal Pyramid of regular liberty, just subjection, and symmetrious order. To
the explication whereof, our Chancellor advances, 1. Negative, that they do
not emanare a Principis solum voluntate. In which words, the Chancellor
implies, that Statutes do emanare a Principis voluntate, for he is the Fountain
of Statutes; and as Water flows from the Fountain, Fons emanat. Cic. 2. Divin.
lib. 2. De Juven. t 621.
ex impetu naturae, so Statutes flow from the satisfied judgment, and prudent
omniscience of the King, ex impetu gratiae and regalis providentiae: nor can
there, or ever has there been any Law made, but by the King willing thereto,
which we usually call his passing the Bills, or giving his Royal Assent. Whence
is the life of the Law; Eicon Basilic. c. 11.
yea, and the duration of it too. For since Princes may exceed in wisdom, as
much as in place and power they do any of their Subjects, no man can seek to
limit and confine his King in reason, who has not a secret aim to share with
him, or usurp upon him in power and dominion. Thus said the good King when he
was hardly pressed. The Chancellor then in this Clause, Eicon Basilic. c. 11.
acknowledging the Prince to have a freedom and power of Reason to consent, or
dissent: As he advises him not to deny Laws that are pro bono publico, for the
joint good of King and People; so advises the People to be quieted with such an
answer, as the will and reason of their Superior thinks fit to give. And in
thus doing, the Laws that are statuted, will emanare a voluntate Principis,
which saves the King's Honor and Right, Giving unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's, and unto the power of God in him that which is God's, Reverence and
obedience. Whereas then our Text says, Non enim emanant i^a a Principis solum
voluntate; as it does not suppose the Lords and Commons excluded Assent, so not
the King denied his Royal Assent, and Consent; but shows that (as before I have
said) the King is pleased to have, and have the Laws to be remembered to be
such, that the endearment of F^ther and Child, Husband and Wife, being
insinuated in them, there may reciprocations of love and duty be enterchanged
between them; the King's Will may be the Law, because the Law is the King's
Will, and the Peoples Rogation be his Concession, because they ask nothing
amiss, nor would have it, but with submission to their Princes freedom;
Remembering that at best they sit in Parliament as my Subjects (said the King)
not my Superiors; Eicon. Basilic. c. 11.
called to be my Councillors, not Dictators; their Summons extends to
recommend their advice, not to command my duty. Thus wisely he.

Vt leges in regnis quae tantum regaliter gubernantur.

This is added, to show the privilege that Kings and People have, and the
obl^gation they owe to God, and their Ancestry: Kings and People thereupon;
because by it as Kings are delivered from the temptations of lawless Will,
concerning which, King David cried out to God, Who does know his own errors,
keep me from presumptuous sins. So are people kept (unless they will be mad to
p^ovoke God, and mischief themselves) from all temptation to disobedience: (No
subject of England being possible, under the legal government of his Prince, to
become a Traitor, but by the instigation of the Devil, and premeditated
malice.) I confess, in the most absolu^e Governments, when such as Augustus and
Theodosius are in power, who were by their natural piety so restrained, that
they did not only not put men to death for their pleasure sake, Cuspinianus in
Theodos. Neque aliud ex imperio sihi cons^quuta est, quam justum bonumque nomen
apud omne^. Tacitus, lib 18.
but cry out, Vtinam mortuis vitam dare possumus, when they do use their power,
as ^extilia the Mother of Vitellius is said to use her interest in her Sons
power, only to gain her love while she lives, and tears when she dies. When I
say such as these spirits are in rule, there is no fear of truculent Laws and
Administrations, be the absoluteness of what they may do what it will, they
will do but what is fit and gentle; but when the licentiality of the Will is in
full carear, when they may make what they will, Law; then there is danger of
what follows that, Statuta ita constituentis procurant commodum singular, quod
in ejus subditorum ipsa redundant dispendium and jacturam. For therefore is
(onquest endeavored, and absolute Dominion arrogated, because there is in the
obtairers of them an aim to confound and lodge all their Subjects have in their
own despotiqueness; the severity and partiality of which endeavor, contrary to
the Laws of Nat^re, and the Rules of Equity, is that which the Chancellor
calls here singular conemodum in subditorum dispendium and jacturam; which our
good Monarchs hating to once look toward, or be in any degree deservedly
suspected for, thereupon are justly accounted Fathers to their Subjects, as
well as friends to their own peace both of mind and State, I will only here
add the words of one of our Chroniclers; Hooker and Vo^el in 1 Volum. of
Description of Britain, p. 8.
Diverse other Conquists, says he, also have been pretended by sundry Princes
f^thence the Conquest, only to the end that all pristinate Laws, and tenures
of Possession might cease, and they make a new disposition of all things at
their own pleasure; as one by King Ed. the third, but it took none effect;
another by Hen. the fourth, who nevertheless was at the last, though hardly,
drawn from the Challenge by William Thorington, then Chief-Iustice of England:
the third by Hen. the seventh, who had some better show of right, but yet
without effect. And the last of all by Queen Mary, as some of the Papists gave
out; and also would have had her to have obtained; but God also staid their
malices, and her challenge. Thus that Author. By which appears, that though
some of our Princes have been solicited possibly by ill-disposed Favorites, or
mistake of the Laws matchlesness, to all intents of governing this Nation: yet
none of them have been resolute, in following such dangerous solicitations and
prejudices; but having looked upon their duties to God, themselves, and their
Subjects, avoided those Rocks of danger, which by embracing them they had fell
upon. For the Oracle of Kingship said it, everlastingly to be in the memory and
mouths of his Successors, Kings: If the divinest liberty be to will what men
should, and do what they so will, according to Reason, Laws, and Religion; I
envy not my Subjects that Liberty, Eicon Basilic. c. 15.
which is all I desire to enjoy my self: so far am I from the desire of
oppressing theirs; nor were those Lords and Gentlemen which assisted me, so
prodigal of their Liberties, as with their lives and fortunes, to help on the
enslaving of themselves and their Posterities. Iactura, proprie damnum, dicitur
quod fit praecipue in mari quum quis magnas mer. ces, quas secum velut
tempestate ingruente cogitur in mare conjicere, ni navis obruatur.
Thus he. Which amply sets forth the truth of our Chancellours Character of
Conquerours, who do aim in their absoluteness to effect dispendium and
jactaram, the not only immoderate and unadvised loss of their Subjects, but
even to cast them and theirs overboard, in the storm of their passions, to an
irrecoverable subversion; or at least do, by making Laws in a huff and height
of humor, without and against counsel of any but themselves; which our Text
calls, Principum inadvertentia, and sibi consulentium inertia] and make Laws,
which in regard of the novity and incongruity of them, to the Reason of
Government, and Justice of Law, deserve rather to be blushed at, J. Consulti.
then promulged; which is also the sense of corruptelarum nomina potius quam
legum illa merentur. 'Twould be infinite to particularize the instances of
those Stories bound with them: But this shall suffice for our Chancellour's
sense, what Statutes are not: come we to discuss his positive assertion what
they are, and how they come to be what they are, in the following words.

Sed non sic Angliae statuta oriripossunt, dam ^cdum Principis voluntate, sed
and totius regni assensu ipsa conduntur.

Herein our Text obstetricates to the Statute-Laws, and shows them to have a
celebrious origin, Epist. ^5. 2 Aeneid. 137. ^. De Amicit. ^.
Oriri est nasci vel surgere, says Festus; and therefore, as Pliny says,
Oritur fons in monte; and Virgil, Monstrum mirabile oritur, and Tully Oritur ab
his sermo; and nothing is more frequent then dies eriens, lux oriens, stella
oriens, and the like: so is it a propriety of speech that our Chancellor uses,
when he says statuta oriri, intimating, that they rise up from the people, and
being exhaled thence by the influence of the King, who is the Sun in the
Firmament of Rule, do, from his consent to, and approbation of them, appear
orient and replete with vigor and authority; and this concurrence makes the
legal, as well as rational harmony in Laws passed, according to the English
Constitution: the contrary to which, (only practiced in heat and have, but
repented of at leisure) makes work for the emendation of them by calmer
tempers. For God has so joined King and people in their concurrence to the
passing of Laws, that where any seemingly public Act is otherwise then more
majorum passed; there it not only wants its weight and esteem, but is also
soon recalled and accused to boot, of defectuousness. For there are three that
bear record to the legality of passing Acts of Parliament in England, the Lords
Spiritual, Lay, and Commons; and these three are one in Assent under one Head,
where the life of all the excellency of Power resides, and that is the King;
Whom God long defend, the Defender of the Faith and the Laws.

Quo populi laesuram ipsa efficere nequeunt, vel non eorum commodum procurare.
Prudentia and sapientia, necessario ipsa esse referta putandum est, dum non
unius aut centum solum consultorum virorum prudentia, sed plusquam trecentorum
elector^m hominum, quali numero clim Senatus Romanorum regebatur, ipsa edita
sunt, etc.

This Clause enter; us upon the very weighty consideration of Statutes, as they
are passed by the Wisdom and Council of the Nation. And the word quo, relating
to the Assent of the whole Realm, that is, King, Peers, and People, makes the
consequent words true, that they cannot be reasonably presumed to be grievous
to either, but advantageous to all; since all have made them what they are, and
what without them jointly, they could not have been. And this the Chancellor
mentions, not more to bedignifie the Parliaments, 5 Eliz. ^. and by Oath of
Allegiance.
that are consistent of so many, and so rarely accomplished Members, then to
illustrate the augustness of the Crown, to which all these are sworn, whose
Lieges these are, and to whose Sovereignty they do not only bend the knee, but
the heart, and ought to venture all they have and are for it; and so declared
the Parliament of the 42 E. 3. 4 Instit. p. 14. Chap. Parliaments. Temp. E. 1.
and 40* E 3.
That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
disherison of the King and his Crown whereunto they were sworn. Yea, when the
Nation owned his Holiness of Rome, (as they then called the Bishop of Rome) for
their sacred Spiritual Father; yet even then did the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, by consent of the King, declare a denial of what the Pope demanded,
because it tended to the detriment of the Crown and Dignity of the King, and to
the liberty of the People. Which wisdom and zeal of Parliaments, is by our
Text-Master therefore said to amount to a cannot of injury to the People, and
to a can and will of their emolument. And hence has it ever been, that the
opinion amongst us holds good, that Null chese dishonorable, etc. No mean
thought is to be had of Parliaments. For of it is that famous Rule uttered, Si
antiquitatem spectes, est vetustissima, etc. If you regard the Antiquity of
Parliaments, 4 Instit. p. 36.
it is most aged; if the Dignity, it is most honorable; if the Jurisdiction,
it is most capacious. For there is no cause so abstruse, but it can dive into;
so litigious, but it can period and judge; so important, but it can state and
regulate. And hence is it, that Parliaments consisting of the King, and his
Subjects environing him, are by the Chancellor said to do such notable
Beneficencies to this Nation, because they are not only many, above thrice as
many as Romulus instituted; his number being but 100, Messul^ Corvinus, Lib. De
Augusti Pro^ (...) ^7^* 377.
which after, in the declensions of the honor of the Senate, was multiplied
into a thousand. So that the Historian says, (...) Him p 676.
the Senate so overgrown in number, and so mean in accomplishments, needed an
Augustus to restore it by a moderate number to its wonted veneration; (...)
momerum deformi and (...) enim super will, and (...) etc. Suetonius, in (...)
35. 4 Instit. p. 1.
and so Augustus did reduce them to 600. which Sir Ed. Cook computes our
Parliaments, not much to exceed calculating them thus: Of the Lords Spiritual
24. Of the Lords Temporal, about 106. Of the Commons, 493. 623.
And made the Members of the Roman Senate to be men of worth and worship,
Seminarium Senatorum equestrem locum esse. Sueton. to Augusto, c. 39, 40.
Magn^m virum esse oportere, quem saceret Senatorem. Aelius Lamprld. in Severo,
p. 211.
worthy the trust they judicially had, and were expected judiciously to
discharge: Which as for the number, so for the nature of the persons, members
of it, our Laws do follow this Roman President; for though Cyclopique times
may, to make up a Faction, In Senatum legit sine diserimino aetatis, census,
generis, pecuniae merito.
as Heliogabulus did, admit any person that was but a Consider, though he were
of no fortune, says, blood, nor, of orderly Principles: yet as by the Decrees
of that wise State, no man was to be a Senator, but a rare person, wise, noble,
and able to live to the height of the state of it: So in our Parliaments,
there are Statutes of Regulation to Election of persons, both in Counties,
Cities, and Boroughs: No Yeoman be he never so wealthy, is capable to fit in
Parliament. By the 1 H. 5. c. 1. he must be some Knight or Esquire, resident,
dwelling, and abiding in the Shire, and Cities, and Boroughs: so 8 H. 6. c. 7.
the reason whereof is, for that it was presumed, that men of blood, fortune,
and breeding, will have more knowledge in, conscience to, and honor by, which
they will faithfully do their duty, and hold themselves concerned therein, by
the great pledges they have at stake; and will be most probable to secure by
good Laws, the public Interest, then those that have none of those
obligations and ties. And this the Chancellor specially points out in those
words, Prudentia and sapientia ipsa esse referta, because as multitudes of
Counselors promise safety; so chiefly when those many are of such as are
Spiritual Lords, men of all Arts and hours, Lords of the Laity, who are versed
in secular Affairs, and accomplished with travails, and Knights and Esquires
out of the best Gentile Families of England. All these, together with the most
intelligent and wealthy men of Trade, sent to Parliament from Cities and
Corporations, and in Parliament consulting, may well be presumed to pass Acts,
Sapientia and prudentia consulta; especially when consideration is had, that
these Gentlemen and others, ought to be plenae aetatis: no young men, whom
pleasures or vanities will avocate, whom passions and emulations do incline
from the via lactea of Counsel; but grave, staid, and well-advised sad men,
Virorum consultorum prudentia, says our Text, where prudentia virorum been
consultorum, is opposed to levity and versatility, prudence being that pondus
that settles the mind in all worthy persistencies, against that rashness which
precipitates all good intendments. Lib. 31. p. 507. Lib 14. p. 315. Consulto
valeriani frairis sui in Gallien^. p. ^52.
Thus Lupercinus in Marcellinus is said, Properation: tumultnaria coactis
militibus temere magis, quam consulte progressus; and the same Author writing
of men of approved worth, calls them consulto consilio cognitos; and Trebellius
Pollio puts consulto for consilio; Aliud in impera tore quaeritur, aliud in
Oratore, vel poeta flagitatur. Idem codem loco.
For in any great Affair the Heathens had their consulta numinum: and therefore
Members of Councils, whatever they want (as no men have all blessings aboard
their Vessels) they should not want Counsel, for that is of the very essence of
their trust: which because sometimes men chosen to Parliaments have wanted; or
if they have not, have wanted courage and integrity to show themselves; Acts of
Parliament have sometimes passed, which have not been as wise E. 1. says he
intended his Confirmationes Chartarum Anno Regni ^5. to be, 2 Instit. p. 526.
al honcur de Dieu, and des seinct Esglise, and au profit de n^stre Realm:
which Sir Edw. Cook says, is, or should be the true end of all Parliaments. And
by how much short of this end Parliaments fall, by so much are they less then
they truly ought to be: To prevent which miscarriage which tends in dispendium
and jacturam subditorum, it is good that the Rocks and shelves, upon which of
old shipwracks of Parliament-honour have been made be modestly remembered. For
as the note of a wise Father is, that in five cases Parliaments succeed not
well: 4 Instit. p. 35.
so is it observable, that in sundry cases the Statutes of Parliaments succeed
not long in credit or duration, Rastal. p. 150.
as when they are effects of mere power and advantage, separate from legal
Reason and Justice. By the 11 K. 2 c. 3. and 4. no person was to attempt
revocation of any Ordinance made in that Parliament; but that Clause was
repealed, 1 H. 4. c. 3. as against the Jurisdiction and power of a Parliament,
the liberty of the Subject, 4 Instit. p. 42.
and unreasonable. By the 21 R. 2. c. 16. the power of a Parliament is
committed to a few. By the 1 H. 4. c. 3. this is declared against the dignity
of a Parliament. So by 11 R. 2. c. 3. No man against whom Judgment or
Forfeiture was given, should sue for pardon or grace. This was repealed by the
2 H. 4. and judged unreasonable, See Rastal at large, p. 752.
and without example, and against the Law and Custom of Parliament. Thus were
many Acts passed in Henry the 8ths time, which were hard; as that 33 c. 21. 31
c. 8. Which Acts, together with others of like nature, were repealed by the 1
E. 6. c. 12. Deliberatio omnibus rebus necessaria. quae homjnum indis^ussos
colores possit refraenare: Temporeque indignius, ut aliquid maturius agamus.
Tholoss. Syntag. Juris, lib. 46. c. 2. tit. 28.
And also when they are hudled up in have, without due rumination of what they
intend a remedy of, and rightly penning the Acts to that purpose. For Laws are
like all things that have not due concoction and proper maturation, indurable,
and not beauteous in their figure and acceptance. Which evil to avoid, it was
wont to be the Wisdom of our Fathers, to premeditate Acts before they were
preferred, scan them well when they were preferred, and pass them only for a
candidateship, to see how they will approve themselves in experience; yea, and
to be sure to make them as short, and as little dure as might be: and when in
these things failer has been, the Acts made were either inconvenient, or but
short-lived; witness the Act 11 H. 7. c. 3. which is called by a man that knew
what he said, 4 Instit. p. 41.
A most unjust and strange Act; and therefore was repealed 1 H. 8. c. 6. which
that brave Chief Justice said, he recited and showed the just inconveniences
thereof, to the end, that the like should never hereafter be attempted in any
Court of Parliament. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c 4.
And therefore if Statutes be made according to our Chancellour's Legal
Standard, they must answer precisely their Prescript, and not want their
plenary counsel, as did that Parliament 7 H. 5. held before the Duke of
Bedford, Guardian of England, wherein of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
there appeared but 30 in all, who passed but one Act of Parl. and that of no
great weight. 4 Instit. p. 43.
But those that appear in full number be rightly poised, to perform unto King
and People due benevolence, that is, to evidence conjugal designs of advantage
to conjunct felicity. If the men which make the Court, what it in our Text is
asserted to be, a seminary and repertory of wisdom in mind, and prudence of
action, conform to which the expressions of them in the Statutes of their
enaction will be. If the Members, I say, be men of honor, experience,
integrity, fortune, 7 H. 4. c. 15. N^que sunt praecipitanda opera nostra, aut
consilia, nec ordo corrumpendus. Cantela and illa laudabilis in quae totum agit
ratio, and furor nihil sibi vendicat, agendumque nihil prius, quam concitatae
men's ad tranquilitatem redcat. Tholoss. Syntag. Juris, lib. 46. c. 2. tit. 28.
5 Eliz. c. 1.
and do propose no private emolument, but as they are freely chosen, and
thought free from all pre-engagement of ambition, popularity, or
perfidiousness, and bound in fidelity to the King, zeal to the Religion, honor
to the Laws, reverence to Parliaments, and integrity to the people; so will
they be very loath to do any thing for fear or favor, which may either
prejudice their trusts, or engage their credits in aftertimes censure; but
having the fear of God and the King, and the love of themselves, their
Posterities and the people, before their eyes, will take heed of new ways, and
enquire for, and keep in the old way, the good way. The declension from which
has ever cost the Nation dear; and when it has been unhappily misteered that
way, given the Nation just cause to say to their treacherous Pilots, as Fulvius
did to his Son, whom he took in the Conspiracy with Catiline, Non Catilinae te
gen^i sed Reipublicae; for sure the Laws of England, and the people, intend and
expect Parliaments to be Oracles of Order, Repairers of Breaches, and
Sanctuaries to Oppression; which because they have mostly been, as
institutionally they were designed; not only people have doted on them, but
even Princes, and by that occult prudence engin'd those affairs with a
successful popularity, which otherwise would have stuck in the Birth, and not
found a safe exition from the Womb of their Conception and Nutrition. Thus
Adrian courted the Roman Senators, by being present constantly at it, In Senata
etiam excusatis, qua facta erant. Iuravit se nunquam Senatorens nisi Senatus
potentiae puniturum. Spartianus in Adriano, p. 128. August. Script.
and excusing to them all irregularities; yea, complementing them so highly,
That he assured and swore to them, that he would never punish an offending
Senator, but with their consent and approbation. And this Henry the eighth did
so practice, that he made them so supple to him, Herbert in H. 8. p. 475.
that what almost he pleased was a Law, and so did Queen Elizabeth: For if the
Power and Jurisdiction of Parliament for making of Laws, in proceeding by Bill,
is so transcendent and absolute, as it cannot be confined, either for causes or
persons, within any bounds: Which Sir Ed. Cook makes good, as far as it is
maintainable from many notable Presidents how much are we the people of this
Land to pray to God for good Parliaments, and to praise God when we have them;
when Parliaments are not black with fury, The very words of the Preamble of the
Statute. 1 Westmin. 3 E. 1.
and desire of change; but when they are like that of 3 E. 1. For the common
profit of Holy Church, and of the Realm; and because the state of Holy Church
has been evil kept, and the Prelates and Religious persons of the Land grieved
many ways, and the people otherwise entreated then they ought to be, and the
peaceless kept, and the Laws less used, and the offenders less punished, then
they ought to be, the King has ordained and established those Acts, which he
intends to be necessary and profitable unto the whole Realm. Then is there
cause to bless God for Parliaments, wherein gracious Princes make happy noble
Peers, prudent Gentlemen, and obsequious Commons, by the good Statutes of
Religion, Peace, and Prudence, that emanates from them. And when ever the
contrary has been, wise and pious men ought to he humble under God's
corrections by them; for it is for the sins of the Nation that many are the
Princes of it, and that he makes Oracles err: Witness the Parliament of 21 R.
2. which though it have as glorious a Prologue to its Statutes as words can
make, To the honor of God and Holy Church, and for the preservation,
salvation, and surety of this Realm, and good governance of his people, of the
assent and accord of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons of his
Realm there assembled, etc. Yet this whole Parliament was by 1. H. 4. c. 3.
repealed. 4 Instit. p. 52.
So says Sir Edw. Cook, a Parliament holden at Coventry, in 38 H. 6. is wholly
repealed by 39 H. 6. c. 1. and the whole Parliament of 49. of the same King,
Gracchus legem tulerat, ut equites Romani judicarent; judicaverunt per annos 30
fine infamia: post victor Sylla legem tulerat, ut Senatorius ordo judicaret,
and judicavit per annos december turpiter; Nunc Aurelius Cotta legem fert, ut
Senatores, and equites Rom: and tribuni aeraru simul judicarent Budaeus in
Annot. reliquas, in Pandect. reliquas. p. 240. edit. Basil.
is said also to be repealed: but I confess, I find not these in the printed
Statutes. These, and the like, which may further be produced, show us, that
Councils and Senates of men, though never so wise, yet may at some times, and
in some cases err, and ebb and flow with partialities, the avoidance whereof is
a great blessing; for when no extreme frustrates counsel, and no private
concern supersedes Justice, then are the Statutes of Parliaments, constant,
standing, and durable Laws, Establishments: as were those of the Parliament of
E. 1. whom Sir William Herle Chief Justice, called, Le pluis sage roy que unque
fuit. All which considered, the Chancellor did not without cause write, that
Statutes in England, Populi laesuram efficere nequeunt; because Parliamentarily
no injury can therein be done: not only because what is therein done is
juridice factum, and so not laesura populi (the Law being the Arbiter of right
and wrong) but also because the wisdom of apprehension and action is such in
the severals there conjoined, that they cannot reasonably (unless God causes
Wisdom to cease from the Wise) be suspected, either to be deceived, or
willingly to deceive the peoples expectation; and so the nequeunt refers to
their politic, as well as natural capacity. The like sense is to be given to
non eorum commodum procurare; which if literally understood, would be confuted
in the pre-mentioned Authorities. But with allowance of humane infirmities, and
politic encumbrances is mostly true, as is the rest of the Clause, which
makes them prudentia and sapientia necessario referta: but enough of this;
they, that concerning the method, manner, and form of Parliaments, and their
passing Acts, would know more, Cook 4. Instit. Chap. Parliaments, K James's
Speech 1605. and 1609. p. 506. and p. 538. Cambd. Britannia, p. 177. Sir Tho.
Smith, De Repub. Anglorum, lib. 2. c. 2. Description of England, c. ^ Hooker
and Vowel, p. 173.
may turn to the Authors quoted in the Margent; which amply can satisfy
(search being also made into Rolls of Parliament) in what the useful curiosity
of men can with advantage direct them to enquire after. I will conclude this
with a rare expression of King James, Speech 1609. fol. 539. of his Work.
who treating of the Members of Parliament, says thus to those of the Commons
House; What you give, says he, you give it as well for others, as for your
selves, and therefore you have the more reason to eschew both the extremes; as
the one part ye may the more easily be liberal, since it comes not all from
your selves; and yet upon the other part, if you give more then is fit for good
and loving Subjects, to yield upon such necessary occasions, ye abuse the King,
and hurt the People, and such a gift I will never accept; for in such a case
you might deceive a King, in giving your flattering consent to that which you
might move the People generally to grudge and murmr at it, and so should the
King find himself deceived in his Cal^ule, and the People likewise grieved in
their hearts: A good Kings value of Subjects love.
the love and possession of which, I protest I did, and ever will account the
greatest earthly security (next the favor of God) to any wise and just King.

Et si statuta haec taenta solemnitate, and prudentia edita, ^fficaciae tantae
quantae conditorum cupiebat intentio, non esse contingant, concito reformari
possunt, and non sine communitatis, and procerum regni assensu, quali ipsa
primitus emanarunt.

This Clause is as a reserve to the inefficacy and inconvenience of some
Statutes: For as it is in all actions, the success crowns and commends them; so
is it in Legislation, that is accounted wisdom of Government, and those Laws
most prudentially compiled, which are most generally accepted, and by reason
thereof longest last in their vigor; which because all Laws are not thus
befriended by God's blessing on them, and peoples resentment of them: therefore
is this remedy here as the help at a dead lift, by the Law of our Government
settled, and by the Discourser upon it introduced. And the Chancellor, that he
may make this Clause appear suitably considerable to the real nature of it,
sets it forth by these gradations; 1. It sets forth the equipage and
concomitants of Statutes, which are commenced by prudence in the intent, and
associated with solemnity in the method of their procedure to accomplishment;
and is expressed in those words, tanta solennitate and prudentia edita. 2. It
rehearses the defeat that all humane things, and so Statutes are subject to;
while as they possibly may, so they as possibly may not answer their makers
intent, si efficaciae tantae quantae conditorum cupiebat intentio, non esse
contingant. 3. The remedy and cure for this anticipation, and as it may prove,
state and statute-evil, concito reformari possunt. 4. By what means this
mischief is expelled, and cure effected; even analogous to the origin of it,
una cademque manus, vulnus opemque tulit. That our Text sets forth in the last
words, and non sine communitatis, and procerum regni assensu, quali ipsae
primitus emanarunt.

Si statuta haec tanta solennitate and prudentia edita.

This has reference to the nature of the Editors, 4 Instit. page 16. Chapt.
Parliaments. Satius est in tempore occurrere, quam post vulneratam causam
remedium quaerere. Tholoss Svntag. lib 47. c. 7 tit. 9.
and the Court of their Convention, or the Mint whence they have their
Statute-stamp; which being the head and vital spirits of the Nation, endowed
with a kind of Omniscience and Omnipotence, are in a legal sense understood to
do all things like themselves providently and with an Argo's eyed
circumspection, as not only intending that for good, but as so ordering them
by a divinely-sovereign genius inspiring them, that nothing almost shall appear
enormous or improlifique in them to those ends, for which they are contrived
and published. For Prudence being a virtue of foresight, as Solomon specifies
it, Prove. 22.3. A prudent man fore-seeth the evil, and hides himself, does not
only in our Chancellour's sense, direct the Co-operators in edition of
Statutes, to be so subtle, as to hide themselves from the evil of detraction,
in the wisdom of their enactions, from the devices of the crafty; as the phrase
is, Job 5.11. where (...), the crafty is rendered by Saint Ierom, Malignorum, of
those that watch and look for their haltings, Prudentia non est tantum in
intellectu sicut scientia and ars. sed habet aliquid in appetitu sicut
rectitudinem. Sancius Thom. partis primae qu 22.
and would be glad to find and blaze abroad their mistakes: but it tells them
also, how they shall evict their malignity, and defeat it, by a rectitude of
aim both at God's glory, their own discharge, and their peoples emolument; and
this sapience therefore it called prudence, Prima secundae q. 66. art. 1.
because it flows from a principle, etc imperat de ordinatis ad sapientiam, as
the Schools say. And hence is it, that wisdom and prudence expresses it self in
a vigilance and parateness, to not only expect, but to provide against, and to
encounter with whatever is insidiary to it; which, so necessary to greatness in
every mo^ion of it, as well as in relation to Laws, seems to me some reason why
Tully calls it a kind of Divination, the wisdom of experience leading men that
are obsequious to it, to an introspection into not only the nature, but the
probable, and almost infallible operation of things. 2 Samuel 16, last.
By this did Achitophel get the reputation to be accounted an Oracle; and the
Holy Ghost says, So was all the counsel of Achitophel both with David, and with
Absalom, that is, he was so ponderous and considerate, weighing every
circumstance, that he hit every thing in the white which he aimed at, and
pierced in^o the bowels of every thing he designed to know. Prove. 13. Prove 2.6
1 King. 7.19.
This was wisdom and prudence rightly ordinated not only Solomon's (...)
wisdom of understanding, and (...) h^s superexcellent wisdom, but his (...)
prudence of action 14 Pro 15. And this Wisdom ^tatute-Makers abounding in, will
not only shine in the face of their Laws, as the Scripture says, Wisdom makes
a man in the face of his fame as body to do, but render them secure and serene
in their consciences, whatever the sequel of things be; for as their integrity
will endure trial, so their wisdom will foresee and prevent what is harmful in
it. Thus did Publicola his eclipse, by the envy that attended his credit with
the Soldiery and people of Rome; for he having built a stately Palace, which
the Romans looked upon as too august for a Citizen, and thereupon had some
jealousy whispered into them, as if he intended to improve his influence on
them to a contentment of admiting his (bruited to be) affected Tyranny. Flor^s,
lib. 1. c. 9.
He, I say, fearing the City would rise upon him, Nocte intempestiva, etc. One
night when all the City was quiet, and not aware of it, pulled down his
building to the very foundation, which when the City, in the morning,
perceived, they both admired his prudence, and be moaned their own groundless
jealousy. And thus did the great Lawgivers of the World not only bring, but
continue their Laws in credit, by the real, or at least opinionated wisdom of
their rise and design, which not being questioned, but made good by the
conformity of their enactions to Justice and ^quity, made them obeyed and not
disputed, adhered to and not exclaimed against. Which considered, our Text
having an eye to the wisdom, honor, power, and state of our Nation, concentred
in that Court, wherein enactions of Statutes is, tells us, that they are
prudentia edita, and that not only as they respect the Editors of them, who
are ever constitutionally and cathedrally wise, and also mostly personally
such; but as they do evidence and exert this internal excellency in a method
proper to it, expressed by tanta solennitas, which relates to the care that our
great Council takes, in formation of a Statute, when either upon petition to,
or motion in either of the Houses of Parl. a Bill prepared is proposed to be
read; the Speaker of either House signifies the nature of the Bill, and it is
thrice distinctly read three several days; Sir Tho. Smith, De Repub Angl. c. 3.
Every Member of the Houses speaking upon any reading what he judges fit, for,
or against it; If when after the third reading it be carried by the Major vote
to be an enaction, then it passes in the respective Houses, and after all comes
to the King who has the creative power, and either assents to its being a a
law, or denies its passage, by all which as there is time to consider, and
digest the consequence of it, so is the deliberation called by the Text a
solemnity, tanta solenn^tate says he. And that to denote the consequence of
Statutes which are set for the fall and rise of many; And here upon have their
solemnities in the passing of them, as all things of extraordinary nature in
all times had, The Jews had their solennitates, their (...) 10. Exodus 9. their
(...) 81. Psalm. 4. where the word signifies a Throne wherein Monarchs do use to
set in robes when they pass Statutes, so are the words verse the fifth. For
this was a Statute in Israel; And they had their (...) which signifies not
only Solennes conventus, Ierem. 9.2. Ierem. 2.2. but also a solemnity of time
in which no common work was to be done 23. Levit. 16. All these kind of
solemnities they had upon fundry unordinary occasions; so had the Heathens
their Solennia, and their Festidies, which were Stativae feriae, Conceptivae,
Imperativae, and Nundinae: of which Lili^s Gyraldus gives us an account; so
does Suctonius, Ammianus Marcellinus, Flavius Vopiscus, Lib. De Annis and
mensibus, partis secundae, p 593.
and multitudes of others; yea, our Law allows many ^^lemnities, In Vespasiano,
p. 111. in Nerone, p. 84.
and performs them to 2 Instit. p. 264.
non-^urid qu^ days, and on Festivals, In Juliano, lib. 22. p. 407. and lib.
14. p. 320.
the Judges when they sit, sit in their R^bes of State: In Aurel. p. 271.
so does, I suppose, our Lord the King and his Peers sit robed, when they
consent to enaction of Laws. Thus we see the Chancellor's pregnant use of tanta
solennitate, as well as prudentia, and this argues the dignity of Statutes.

Si ^fficacie tantae, quantae conditerum cupiebat intentio, non esse contingunt.

This is the second gradation or rather degradation, the possibility of
abatement; for as all Sublunaries known but in part by us, and in but some
remote and partial degrees subject to us, are miscarriable; so are Statutes.
Men that are Earth, and have their own foundation in the dust, cannot six
pillars of perpetuity here. The World is materially mutable; and God has made
it Globular, that it may be more apt to not only motion, 2 Samuel 18.18.
but monition to us, to fancy no Absalom's Pillar here. And if the World it
self be thus, what can be better expected from the Men and Laws, the Polities
and Governments in it, but that they should alter, and often do not if at all,
Vrbis Romae parentem Romulum Senatus in amplissimo dignitatis gradu ab eo
collocatus. in ^uria lacera vit; nec duxit nefas ei vitam adimere, qui alterum
Romano Imperio speritum ingenuerat, rude nimirum illud and ferox saculum, quod
conditoris sui cruore maculatum ne summa quidem posteritatis dissimulare pietas
potest. Valet. Max. lib. 5. c. 3.
answer their first Constitution: Romulus enobled Rome, and made a Senate in
it, assistant in Council to his Kinglyness in Succession; but that very Senate
that he established to Kingly honor and aid, was the bane and boutefeu of
Regality. Julius Caesar thought himself secure in the Senate, and thence he had
his deaths wound, and that first from his Son Brutus. Scipio brought the Roman
power triumphantly into Africa; yet was so mistaken in the Romans gratitude,
that he denied them his bones when dead, who had dealt by him living, no better
then they do by dead bones, which they cast out. Charles the fifth of France
was very wise in the greatest part of his actions; yet he mistook policy, in
passing by Margaret the Earl of Flanders only Daughter, whom he might have
had, and with her the Netherlands and Bu^gundy; and in the Act he made, that
the Kings of France (though Children) should be crowned, and be under
Protectours, which became the misfortune of his own Son; and Lib. 9. and 10.]
Immortalitate dignus Scaliger, in Ep is it. ad Manilium Citiusenim arcus caelesti
variis coloribus sine nube apparebit, quam multiplex virtus sine invidia.
Forcatulus, De Gallor. Imp. and Philosop. lib. 4 p. 497.
Aemilius says, filled France with infinite troubles. Columbus that discovered
the unknown part of the World, instead of being rewarded with the government of
his discovery, was made nothing of by the Don's of Spain. Thousands of
instances are producable to this purpose. In cognoscendo ac decernendo magna
animi varietate fuit modo circumspectus and sagax, modo inconsultus and
praeceps, nonnunquam Frivolus amentique similis. Sueton. in Claudio.
The same defeats have Lawmakers had in Laws; people are of Claudius his
humor, as by vice or virtue agitated, so are they in or out of love with Laws;
yea, as in some junctures reasonfull Laws may hear ill, so in others reasonless
ones may be declared and approved good. Though therefore Lawmakers are to wish
the blessing of God, and the popular approbation of, and benevolence to their
enactions; yet are they ever as to eye, that by the justice and piety of their
administrations they may deserve it; so to comfort themselves, that if they be
not valued by the obedience given to them, they have but that measure meeted to
their Laws, Nota been.
that they themselves meet to God's Laws. He gives them Laws and Statutes that
are good, and they break them, and put his Law behind their backs, which they
should set before their face to observe and do; and God suffers his quarrel to
be revenged by their peoples disobedience to, and non-approbation of their
Laws. And God that accepts their virtuous intentions, the integrity of their
wills, instead of the virtue of their actions, and upon their repentance turns
an eye to mercy to them, will also turn their good intentions to the people,
which they desired to testify in wholesome Laws for the government of them
will in due time make acceptable with the people, which ought to encourage
Princes to be gracious and worthy, as Theodosius was; of whom when some asked,
why he did not pu^ some of those that were declared Enemies to him to death,
replied, Vtinam mortuis vitam darepossem. Culpinianus in Theodos.
Would to God I could give life to those that are dead, meaning those that were
dead with ingenuous grief for their Rebellion and contumacy against so good a
Man and Prince who so only used his power, as to make him beloved while living,
Neque a'iud ex imperio filii consecuta est quam Tacit. lib. 18.
and lamented when dead: Which is the Character Tacitus gives of Vitellius his
Mother Sextilia, which those that follow, will be sure to be happy, whatever
the success of their endeavor in government be. For to desire to rule well, and
to make Laws providently, for the matter, manner, and season of them, is all
that Princes and Parliaments can be expected to propose, and as far as they
may, effect: God, whose the event of them is to know and rule, can only and
alone do more, and do better then this: but under men there is one only remedy
for what is in the proof of Laws amiss in them, that is, concito reformari
possunt] Statutes or Common-Laws are not then irremediable evils, but
accidental and curable ones; not by amputation only, as in Gangrenes, but by
attenuations, as in Diseases of less danger. There is a power by the Law in our
State-Physitian, and his College, not only plastique, but in a sort creative,
whereby not only form and being is given by making that Law which was not Law,
but alteration of that from what it is, to what it better ought and may be.
This reformari is that not of Root and Branch, but of such Wens, Monstrosities
and Excrescencies, as may be abated and taken off without danger to the peace
or disfigure of the beauty of that they adhere to. Thus reformatio and
reformari are honest, loyal, and useful words, leading to necessary works, if
they be rightly bounded. So the Civilians use reformant, id est, qui formam
aliam conventioni dant; vel eandem substantiam conv^ntionis alia forma
retraectant. Tholoss. Syntagm. Juris universi, lib. 21. c. 7. art 4.
Thus they also intend by their reformatio monasteriorum, sabrogatio in locum
little, qui eo titulo indigni sunt; Lib. 15. c. 15. tit. 17.
and so vectigalia sine imperatorum praecepto, Hermogenes, De Public. and
Vectigalibus.
neque praesidi, neque curatori, neque curiae constituere, neque praecedentia
reformare, and his vel addere, vel diminuere licet. And so the best Authors
take Reformation to be the reduction of a thing into its old or a better form.
Vt ostendam quam longa consuetudine corruptos d^pravatosque mores principatus
parens noster reformet, and corrigat, in Panegyr. 85.
Thus Pliny uses it, when he calls ^he Prince, He that like a good Father
reforms and corrects the ill manners of his Children, and brings them back by
the steps they have gone astray, So 165 Epist. Lib. 8. ad Minucianum.
he terms him he admires, the very reducer and reformer of expiring and even
dying art. Rhodi rursus reformandum ac v^lut recoquendum se dedit. De Cicerone,
Quintil. lib. 12. c. 6.
Nor does Quintilian intend less, when he makes reformare to be velut
recoquere. For as boiling and burnishing Plate, renews it; so does Refo^mation
of Laws recuperate their respect, and re-ingratiate them. Thus the Statute of
Marlbridge mentions Reformation, Statute Marlborough, 52 H. 3. Anno 1267.
It was provided (says the Preamble) agreed, and ordained, that whereas the
Realm of England of late had been disquieted with manifold troubles and
dissentions; for Reformation whereof, Statutes and Laws be right necessary,
etc. Thus, in sense, Nemo prudens sin^ justitia, sine temperaentia, sin^
fortitudine, nec prudentia ignava esse potest, aut injusta, aut intemperans;
quia si aliquid little in se admitteret, prudentiae non esset. Jacob. Mausacus
in judicio, De Plutarchi Scriptis, p. 27. edit. Paris.
is the meaning of the Preface to the Stat. 2 West. and in other Statutes,
where the words redress, amendment, and the like are, which do show that
Reformation is always intended for the better, though not alike in the extent
of it; for that it sometimes wholly repeals, and at other times but in part, as
according to the wisdom of the King and his Parliament seems meet; which
because it is festinum and certum remedium, the Text says concito reforma^i
possunt, intimating, that these politic Potters have power of the Clay-Laws,
and can make them with their breaths vessels of honor, or of dishonor. For
it is not con^ito reformari debent, but possunt; because there is not so much
necessity of state, as conscience of duty to God and Men, which makes them to
do what therein they can, and with all the speed and convenience they can, in
this Reformation, which is to be only by them. So is the last part of the
Clause, Et non sine communitatus and procerum regni assensu, quali ipsa
primitus emanarunt.



This is the unalterable method of enacting and repealing Laws by the King, as
Head of the three Estates, the Lords of the Spiritualty and Temporalty, with
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, all assembled in the two Houses of
Parliament. Now because enaction is only in strictness of Law and Policy, the
Act of Majesty, it is only said here assensu communitatis and procerum regni,
since to them Assent and Consent is ordinarily ascribed. And though the word
communitas is as much as needed to be said to include a Parliament, 2 Instit.
p. 526.
(which is the common Assent of the Realm, and signifies an Act of Parliament,
for it cannot be per communitatem Angliae, but by Parliament.) Yet our Text, to
show how great honor the Law does the noble Peerage, and he, as a worthy
English man would do to that Honorable Order, mentions them particularly as
the great props and instances of every dignified excellency. Which Peers are
tither temporal men, King James's Speech, 1605. p. 506.
who are hereditable Counselors to the High Court of Parliament, by the
honor of their Creation and Lands; or Bishops, Spiritual men, who are likely
by the virtue of their place and dignity, Counselors, Life-Renters, or ad
vitam, of this Court. Concerning these, many have so copiously written, that I
forbear to ad any thing, because all men that know any thing, Spelman in Gloss.
p. 80, 81, 82.
know these are so essential to a Parl. and so estated in it by all Laws,
Customs, and constitutions of this Nation, and their places settled by 31 H. 8.
c. 10. that notwithstanding we have heard voted these late unhappy times the
contrary; yet as true as truth it self it is, that no true English legal Parl.
can be without them; and therefore the Text puts the non sine communitatis and
procerum assensu; for the rule is quorum est instituere little est etiam
destruere, as without the Lords and Commons both, and each of them, no enaction
can be made; so without them can no enaction be discharged. But of this enough,
because I have every where in this Comment, asserted their necessary
cooperation to enaction of Laws, according to what the Books of Law, and the
Law of use and practice warrants me; passing by the rest of the Chapter, as
only matter of recapitulation and abridgment, together with application to the
Prince by way of complement, and prayer; that having in the Scale of Justice
weighed the Arguments, and being thoroughly satisfied, that what the Chancellor
had undertaken in behalf of the Laws of England, he had conveniently, and to
his expectation satisfied him in, he would conclude, that the Laws that have so
just, pious, and well-setled a Foundation, may be accounted of him not only
effectual and good to promote Order, Piety, and Wealth in England, but also the
best and most commodious to those, and such like ends, for this Nation, of any
Laws in the World; and so I end this Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. Solum igitur unum de his quibus agitatur animus tuns, restat
explanandum, etc.
THis Chapter brings in the Chancellor proposing the method of his Discovery
to the Prince, how Judgment is inoffensively to be made of the two Laws; and
thereupon how his promise to satisfy the Prince's mind in the scruples it has
about them, will be accomplished. Now because the question was, Whether the
Common-Laws were as good and effectual to the wise and orderly Government of
England, as the Laws Civil were to the Empire, he seems in this Chapter to
premise something antecedent to the main of the Arguments; as first that it is
digna and nobilis quaestio, and such as will deserve his diligence to be
informed of, and concerning it Princelyly to judge. For that I take to be
insinuated in those words, etiam and accomode judicari mereantur: then
secondly, that in disquisition and dijudication of them, there ought to be
solid judgment, and modest delivery, because comparationes odiosa sunt, that
is, Accusatorem alicni comparare. Cic. pro Cluentio.
Comparisons are as they are mostly managed, make baits and ventings of
partiality, rather then inductions of reason into a method of proof and trial
of things, Comparare canem ad rixam, ad pugnant, ad cursum. Columella, lib. 7.
c. 12.
upon the good and evil of them perpended. And this the Text-Master the rather
mentions, because he would not only show, In ^stentationem comparare
declamationem. Quintil. lib. 2. c. 10.
that he does not enter on this Argument upon choice, but necessity, has
aggredi non delector; but also to show, that there may be a profitable use of
comparisons, and that in the sense they might and ought to be used, Parium
comparatio nee elationem babet, nec submissionem; est enim equalis. Gic. Topic.
37.
they are amiable, useful, and not odious. For besides, that comparisons are to
the judgment, as light is to the eye, the medium of discerning; and that by
them, In comparatione vis rerum cernitur. Idem.
under the rational sense, appeal is made to the gravity of that Tribunal for
judgment: even God, after the manner of men, uses comparisons, to reproach the
stupidness of mortal madness, when he compared, as a fountain of living water
says, he is deserted by his ingrate Creature, for broken Cisterus that will
hold no water. And thus he proposes his Controversy; God had delivered Israel
from many evils, and many times interposed his power and goodness to their
danger, upon which he expected duty from them in some proportion to his
indulgence to them; which they not affording but the treasures of wickedness,
being in the house of the Wicked, Mic. 6.2.
ver. 10. and violence being in the rich men thereof, ver. 11. from the
incorrespondence between the venture of God with Man, in his voyage of life,
and man's return to him for his talents credited to him, he deduces this
resolution to make them sick in smiting them; as directing in his method the
true use of Comparisons, to learn by the result of them, after consideration of
their circumstances, what is good or evil, best and worst of them compared, Sed
cum lego, ex comparatione sentio, quam male scribam. Plin. Ep. 150.
and to choose the best, and refuse the worst, non ex meo judicio, says our
Text, sed ex his in quibus earum differunt sententia, efficacius capere poteris
argumentum. 3. That there ought to be a due understanding expressed in the
preponderation, and delivery over of a man's practice and choice to one and not
the other: for comparisons being to an end of equality, the true nature of
rational comparation is not attained; if wherein things are what they are, be
not thoroughly considered, Vbi convenient leges, and in casibus ubi dissentiunt,
says the Text: this is necessary to the proper apprehension of the Laws, as
they are the subjects of choice, and as choice is made upon that digna
pensatio, which is the refulgency of well-applyed reason. The drift of the
Chancellor in this Chapter then is not to make, as Tully's words are, Lib. 1.
Offic. 83.
contentionem and comparationem de duobus honestis, to contentiously compare
the two Laws; but to compare them so, as to understand whether of them is upon
trial fit or unfit here for this public use Laws are designed for. Thus did
Salust compare Caesar and Cato, and Julius Capitolinus Balbinus with Maximus;
yea, thus did Plutarch the noble Romans with the Greeks, Alterum severum
clementemque, bonum illum, istum constantem, illum nihil largientem hune
assluentem copiis omnibus dicerent. Julius Cap^^olinus, p. 345. August.
Scriptor.
and with others of their own Nation. And thus does Wisdom instruct to do, to
make the choice of what men like and adhere to, more rational; for were it not
for comparison, and the view Wisdom' takes of things and men in the glass
thereof, how would Polidorus, the Son of Aicamenes, Vir summae sanctitatis and
temporibus suis frugi dictus ^rebel. Pollio. p. 261.
whom Pausanias reports to be one, who neither said, or did any thing, to the
injury or reproach of any man, but joined humanity with justice; Sigonius
^riumph. Romans p. 204.
and Piso, the only and humble moderate man of his time; Nemo nostrum frugi
esto. Strabo. lib. 14.
and Hermodorus, whom the gaddy Ephesians banished, for that he was a grave and
well-pois'd man; and such as Trajan, Antoninus, Qui luxu and flagitiis alter
fuit Nero, Foris C. o, totus ambiguus, ut ex contrariis diversisque naturis
unum monstrum novamque bestiam diceres compactam. Sanctus Hieronym. Ep.
and others, be discovered from Nero's, Plautianus's, and Corocotta's, who were
Beasts in men's bodies, and who make all where they come, worse for them and
weary of them. This good then comparisons occasioning, when they are used
soberly, and according to the intent of our Chancellor, they are of excellent
use; and will, (as our Chancellor hopes,) make good to the Prince, that the
Laws of England are not only bonae and efficases, as he in the former Chapter
calls them; but frugi and efficaces, that is, effectual not only to punishment
of evil, but benign in the frugal and moderate expression of themselves, to
encourage goodness; and thence deserve melius praeconium, then by their rigor
they otherwise would: And so ends the 19th Chapter.

CHAP. XX.
Si coram judice contendentes, ad litis perveniunt contestationem super n^teria
facti, quam legis Angliae periti exitum placiti appellant.


THis is the first instance of the dissimilitude of the proceedings of the two
Laws, and it is in the enquiry of the truth of the matter of fact which is in
controversy, upon which duly cleared, the Sentence of the Laws is given: for
though both Laws aim at the discovery of truth, and in both Laws the Judges are
to proceed, secundum allegata and probata, and to deliver righteous judgment
according thereunto; yet in the manner of the proof, not in the end whereto it
tends, arises the discrepancy.

Si coram judice contendentes] Here is set forth the parties pro and con called
contendentes; not that always there actually is, or religiously ought to be
enmity of mind, where there is legal difference: for then the power of God in
the Magistrates hand, would support a breach of that Commandment, which says,
Love one another, and thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; because
where ever there were rancour of mind, there would be a subterfuge to that
distemper, in the pretense of legal justice; which though it too often be, yet
is it not always, nor necessary to be so charged on all Contenders at Law;
since sometimes that course is unavoidable, and may consist as well with
habitual Charity, and amicitial integrity and fervor, as did Lots and
Abraham's parting upon the contention of their servants; notwithstanding which,
their friendlyness was full and cordial: but they are called contendentes,
because the parties in course of Law are in a politic battle, wherein
juridiquely they draw forth their Forces each against other; Contendere pro
defendere and affirmare. Celsus, in Praesat. lib. 1.
the Plaintiff affirming, and the Defendant denying the matter he is accused
guilty of; and because what men either love or hate, desire to have, or are
loath to lose, that according to the impetuosity of their passion they apply
themselves to the obtainment of. Therefore all Authors, to express eagerness
and intentness of mind on any thing, Grave agmen ad Euphratem contendit.
Curtius. lib. 3. Cic. 9. Philip. 5. verrem 10.
render it by contendere. Thus contendere cursum ad aliquem, is to set with a
good will to any one; contendere agmen, to lead a force of men to the relief of
a party, or to gain a pass. So Tully, contra vim gravitatemque morbi
contendere, and omnibus nervis contendere, and plurimis verbis aliquid ab
aliquo contendere. This and the like show, that the parties that would legally
evict one another, are therefore thus called, because they do manage a civil
Combat, and try a juridique mastery, upon which they are said, coram judice
contendentes.

Coram judice] This makes contention lawful, in foro saeculi, because it is an
appeal to the Civil Magistrate, as the Oracle and Judge; and it supposes him to
have power, because it appeals to him for trial and sentence, which it could
not reasonably do, if it did not allow him cognizance of the Cause, which it
doing, takes off all private revenge, and all contumacy against the Ordinance
of God: for the Magistrate is set by God to settle debates, and thereby to
prevent disorder, injustice, and confusion. Hence is it, that by the Law of
Nature and Nations Judges are every where, and in all times, set up and
repaired to, and all Contentions settled by them. And that this Office was
Patriarchally in the Heads of Families, after in the Priests, after in Judges,
civil Magistrates, and so is to this day, no Nation affords not testimony to
it, no man can be ignorant of it.

Ad lit is perveniunt contestationem super materia facti] That which the
CommonLawyers call (after the Arrest or Appearance, Lege Digest. lib. 22. tit.
4. p. 2085. in Gloss.
and Declaration upon it, to which the Defendant pleads) the issue of the Plea
is by the Civilians termed litis contestatio; because the Citation summoning
the parties to appear, their appearance, and the legal testifications of their
minds is termed litis contestatio; and lis we know is so called, a limite,
because the first quarrels that were, are thought to be about bounds: and hence
because the grounds of this variance were things solid; Lites were accounted
other gates matter then Iurgia, those we call Brawls; for they may be among
Neighbors, Si jurgant ^enevolorum concertatio, non lis inim^corum. Tullius, De
Rep. lib. 4.
without breach of friendship; but these Contentions are things of Hostility:
and therefore though they may be lawful, Jurgare igitur lex putat inter se
vicinos, non litig are. Nonius.
and are so; yet because they are perilous to, and minacious of the
extirpation of Charity, not only does ingenuity decline, but Christianity
reproach it, as a spot that is none of the spot of God's people, Non
differendarum litium causa, sed tollendarum, ad arbitros itur. Celsus, Digest.
lib. 4. tit. 8. p. 655.
but a smack of the old Serpent in the leaven of his imparted enmity, and
disaffection to man, whom he would make as unlike God, in good, as his malice
can plot and effect: yet so far is the prudence of government necessitated to
give way to it, that to prevent the ferity of humane nature; Litis contestatio
est hins inde, apud judicen^ negotii principalis facli narratio una cum
petitione ab actore facta and re^ contradictione. Corvinus in Enchiridio, Tit
De Litis Co^test. p. ^82.
which if it could not this way vent it self, would do it more butcherly: it
allows Suits at Law to determine what otherways cannot be determined, the
partialities of the respective contrarients, rendering them incompetent Judges.
Quintil. Lib. 12. c. 8.
And this the Law Civil calls litis contestatio. Quintilian names it litis
productionem, the Libel or Roll in which the grievance we have from any one, or
more, is at large specified. And the Lawyers makes contestation to differ from
protestation, Alciat. in legem 40. Lib. De Verbor. Signific. p 109, 110. Litem
in judicium deducere est litem contestari Lib 3. tit. 5. p. 448. Lib. 3. Tit.
3. De procurationibus Contestatum, in Gloss. p. 361.
attestation, detestation, as Alciat has at large quoted Authorities; by which it
appears, that this contestatio litis is the solemn production of the matter in
contest before the Judge, with intent of affirming or denying the truth of the
fact. For the fact being that, upon which the Law arises, the proof of that is
the carriage, and the disproof of it the defeat of the cause or contention,
Testes dicuntur quasi superstites and antistetes, qui stant dictis, In Leg.
238. tit. 1. De Verb. signify.
vel factis: so Alciat. So that Witnesses being necessary to prove matter of
fact, the Law requires that they be legitimi and idonei, Digest. Lib. 22. tit.
5. De Testibus, p. 2084. and Seq.
those which in some sense were present, either by sight, hearing, or some
other lawful way, by which they are enabled to give positive and indubitate
testimony; Digest lib. 22. tit. 5. Dignitas H. p. 2087. Digest. lib 2. tit. 11.
p. 225. Domestici Mag.
which they the more unquestionably do, when they are assidui, as the Law of
the Twelve Tables is: that is, says a gloss, Locupletes, men of worth, who do
not testify by their testimony to make a gain, Tholossan. Syntag. Juris, lib.
48. c. 13. tit. De Testibus.
but are omni exception^ majores, which some are not, whom the Civil-Law
therefore excludes. For matter of Fact being the ground of Contention, Fotnerius
in legem 99. ss. 2. De Verb. signific. p. 233.
the Judge is to see the proof correspondent to the averment, or else the litis
contestatio will fail in the proof, and appear rather matter of malice, then
zeal for justice.

Exitus hujusmodi veritas, per legos civiles testium depositione probari debet,
in qua duo testes idonei sufficient.

All contestation is to some issue, and that issue must be determined according
to the proof of Witnesses; Duo ad minus requiruntur testes in plena probatione.
Tholoss. Syntagm. Juris. lib. 4^. c. 13. ss. 9.
so is the Text of Civil-Law: for though in some Cases single Witnesses are
allowed; yet in full proofs of facts two at least, and those spotless and
plenary Witnesses are required as sufficient; Corvinus Enchirid. Tit. De
Testibus.
and this the Civil-Laws had from the Mosaique-Law, which undoubtedly was
according to the Law of Nations equity, Grotius, in Johan. 8. v. 17.
wherein God has so instructed Mankind, to minister thus to justice, Vbi
numerus testium non adjucitur, etiam duo sufficient; pluralis enim electio
duorum numero contenta est. Ulpianus, lib. 31. ad edict. Digest. lib. 22 tit.
5. p. 2091.
that no less, nor no other proof for the main should be, then this of Witness,
and for the most part of 2 or 3 in number. For in Deuteronomy. 19.15. One Witness
shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin that he
commits; at the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of three Witnesses
shall the matter be established. Sapientor lex divina exigit testes in quaque
causa binos aut ternos, primum rejiciens singularia testimonia, deinde
oftendens came posso esse viri alicajus famam, ut facilo non uni tantu, sed and
duobus testibus sit (...). Tunc igitur tertius non exigetar testis; nam
probationum pondera, angustis ^inibas circumscribi non possunt, sed pro
personarum rerumque circumstantia boni viri arbitrio astimanda veniunt. Grot in
Ma^th. 18.16. Bartolus, Digest. lib. 1. tit. 18 p. 143.
In which words, God has put much weight upon Witnesses, provided they be
(...), such as witness de re vera and certa, in their own knowledge; and that
which they knowingly and truly making known, and publicly standing to, are
therefore by this Law to be believed, and the Judge justified in Sentence
giving according to this evidence; yea, though in his own Conscience he
believes the testimony is not good and just, he is bound to declare according
to the testimony of two or three Witnesses; for God has said that (...), shall
stand as a Pillar that is not to be removed, Si lis aut accusatio confirmata
fuerit, duorum aut trium testimonio rata erit. Vetabl. in Deuteronomy. 19.15.
but bears the weight of truth on it. The truth of which is not only made good
from the Texts of Civil-Law, but from the Expositors of this Text, and by the
most unerring Doctor, who not only lay in the bosom of the Father, but knew
the heart of man: yet even he our Lord Jesus in the 18. of Math. 16. confirms
this: so Job. 8. 17. and the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.1. and Heb. 10.28. These
Authorities show the descent of two Witnesses for proof; In Cap. 10. ad
Hebrzos. v^. 28.
and therefore Ludovicus Capellus, a learned man, does not without good ground
reproach that Papal Sanction, juri tam divino, quam humano contrarium; which
for proof, against a great Churchman, will have 72. Witnesses, against whom no
exception can be: for since, says he, God says, every word shall be confirmed
in the mouth of two or three: so much super addition is to make the proof
impossible almost, and so to continue the sinner unpunished. Only the Text
here puts in a word, which well explains the sufficiency of this number, when
they are idonei; which what that is, the Laws mention, as I have quoted
heretofore in this Chapter: yet it is worthy addition, that as the rule is
praesumitur quis non idoneus nisi probetur idoneus; so by contraries,
praesumitur quis idoneus nisi probetur non idoneus; for there is a good gloss
to this purpose, Approbatur quis eo ipso quod non reprobatur. And surely,
Digest. lib. 22. tit. 3. p. 2072. De Probatioaibus. Digest. lib. 2. tit. 8. p.
109. in Marg. gloss.
where no just attaint can be made of a persons understanding, fidelity and
privity to that he swears, his testimony ought to be taken as from a fit
Witness; since no honest man will put himself upon the attestation of any
cause, Digest, lib. 4. tit. 3. p. 513.
which he is not, by knowledge of, a fit Witness in.

Sed per leges Angliae veritas is it a non nisi 12. hominum de vicineto, ubi
factum hujusmodi supponitur, Sacramento judici constare poterit.

This is brough in, not to prove that the Law of England does not allow proof
by witnesses, one in some cases Crotius in Deuteronomy. 19. v. 16.
unus testis sufficit non ad damnandum, sed ad inquirendum and in pecuniariis
ad deferendum reo jusjurandum purgatorium, but not in Treason, 5 and 6 E. 6. c
11. 3 Instir. c 2. Petit Treason, p. 25. E. Lumly's Case. Probationes
oportetesse lu^e clariores. Reg. Juris. 1 Instit. p. 155. 28 E. 1. c. 9. 34 E.
3. c. 4. 42 E. 3. c. 11. 11 H. 4. c. 9. 2 H. 5. c. 3. stat. 2. Regist. fol.
178. Vicinus facta vicini praesumitur scir^ Reg. Jur.
here two must be; and so in other cases, the more Witnesses are, the clearer
probably is the cause to go; but to show, that over and besides the two
Witnesses, the Law appoints the Sheriff to summon a Jury of twelve men in
number, and those liberi and legales homines, and those de vicineto, dwelling
about the place where the fact in controversy is, who being presumed to know
best the truth, are to pass upon their Oaths their Verdicts, upon hearing of
the Evidence or Witnesses deposing, what upon their Oaths they believe to be
the truth, etc. In all which Cases within the trial of Juries, there are
special qualities of Jurymen limited by Statute, according to the nature of
their enquiry. Thus Jurors in Indictments are by 11 H. 4. c. 9. Jurors within
the County or without, 21 E. 1. upon life and death, 2 H. 5. c. 3. 8 H. 6. c.
29. upon forcible Entries, 8 H. 6. c. 9. before Escheators, 1 H. 8. c. 8.
before the Sheriff in his turn, 1 R. 3. c. 4. to enquire of Felonies in
Corporate Towns, 23 H. 8. c. 13. on Attaints in London, 11 H. 7. c. 21. 4 H. 8.
c. 3. 5 H. 8. c. 5. These, and the like, the Statute. Law provides for Juries,
without which no trial of fact can be. Which use of Juries, however some have
been pleased to affirm, Polydor. Virgil.
that they were introduced by the Conqueror, mistaking (I presume) his taking
of twelve men, who out of every County were chosen Reporters of the Country
Customs for these Jurors in matter of fact between man and man. I say, however
mistakes may herein be; yet sure it seems to me, and to others more wise, then
I dare presume to think my self, Cook Preface to the 8. Rep. Duodecimvirale
istud judicium altioris est originis, and ab ipsis Anglo-Saxonibus. Spelman in
Gloss. p. 398. Inter LL. Ethelrecii, c. 3. and 4. Lib. 2. c. 7.
that Jurors are very ancient here even from the Saxons times. For in the Saxon
Laws mention is made of them, and that as a peculiar set of men, that were in
matter of fact to judge the truth, as in matter of Law the Judges are. And by
Glanvil it appears, that when Duel was banished, Clementia principis de
consilio procerum populis indultum, then the more frequent use of Juries begun
for trial of Causes; which H. 2. did, to discard the uncertainty of that trial,
Cum enim^ ex unius Iurati testimonio procedat Duellum, duodecim ad minus
legalium hominum exigit ista constitutio Iuramenta. Cambden Britania, p 153.
For the number twelve, it should seem to be one of those Scripture sacred
ones, which the Law delighted in. The Tribes of Israel were twelve, and the
stones and the names written on them on the Breast of the High Priest were
twelve; Rev. 2^.12.
our Lord chose his Apostles twelve, and their glory in Heaven is denominated
by twelve Thrones; yea, the Heavenly Jerusalem is said to have twelve Gates,
and twelve Angels to guard it; so the Patriarchs were twelve. Acts 7.8. and
Solomon's Officers were twelve, 1 King. 4.7. So 2 Samuel 17.1. The thousands of
chosen men were twelve, and the sealed thousands in the 7 Rev. were twelve;
twelve Bullocks, and twelve He-Goats were an offering for all Israel, Ezra
8.35. So with us here the Judges of old were 12, the Counselors of State of
old twelve; 1 Instit. p. 155.
and he that wageth Law must have twelve, that is, eleven besides himself to be
his Compurgators; yea, Secundum mittit quidem Jupiter, sed ex concilit
sententia; duodecim enim Deos advocat. Natural Quaest. lib. secundo, c. 41.
it should seem that twelve was very much a valued number, especially in great
matters; for Seneca tells us, that Jupiter sends his lightnings by advice, for
he calls twelve Gods to Council about it; and Tully sure intends something by
it, Cicero, secunda legibus 93.
when he writes, Discebamus enim pueri duodecim and carmen necessarium; and the
famous Greek Laws, after the Parent of the Roman Laws, was called the Law of
the Twelve Tables; Choppinus. De Domani^ Francia, p. 331.
the number 12. is famous in France, which has 12 Peers. These, and such like
things may prevail with us to believe, that something our Ancestors held
fortunate in the number twelve.

De vicineto] This is a word from vicinus, signifying the Neighborhood, any
place within the County or Hundred, which is in a large sense the
Neighborhood, the stat. 27 Eliz. c. 6. enacts a Writ to the Sheriff, Quod
venire facias duodecim liberos, and legales homines de vicineto; Reg. Juris.
and I suppose the reason is, Quia vicinus facta vicini praesumitur scire;
which the Statute words in the Preamble somewhat otherways, as the reason of
the Writ, For the returning of more able and sufficient Jurors for Trials, and
for reformation of abuses by Sheriffs and other Ministers, who for reward
oftentimes, do spare at home the most able and sufficient Freeholders, etc.
And because Jurors by the Law have great trust, they ought to be liberi and
legales homines; for that is included in hominum de vicineto, that is virorum
fide dignorum, nere locally, sufficient intellectually and fortunarily, sincere
unsuspectedly.

1 Instit. p. 155. b.
Sacramento] This word the Law uses to put a dread on men that are under the
obligation of it; because it is not only an Obligation as an Oath, but as
called a Sacrament memorative of us, with what integrity men ought to enter
into it. They are understandingly, conscienciously, and resolutely to give
Verdict according to their Consciences, and that not only because the Oath of
God is upon them; and if they do otherwise then justly, God's vengeance impends
them: but also because the Law has put her power into them in point of Fact.
And if they have not the greater fear of God, reverence to the Law, and charity
to their Neighbors, as well as to themselves, they may turn judgment into
gall, Amos 6.12.
and righteousness into wormwood. And if they do not perversely, but keep
themselves within the limits of their Oaths and Verdict according to Evidence,
neither for favor or affection: so help them God, and the Contents of the
Testament; I say, if according to this they do, undoubtedly they will quit
themselves like men, sacramento astricti, and do in their demeanours clear to
the World the wisdom and care of our Ancestors, to provide such a remedy
against falsehood and partiality. The truth of this I know by what I have seen,
and found by mine own personal service in Juries with persons of quality,
Knights and Gentlemen of the County of Middlesex, my worthy Neighbors, and
that in causes of very great moment, and on grand Enquests; for only with
such, and in such causes, have I been engaged: and I am further humbly boldly
to say, that if Juries be kept up in their credit, and Gentlemen of the best
quality be by no means excused, except where Law and necessity excuses them,
there is no such way of trial for the justice and integrity of it in the World.
For who that is by birth a Gentleman, and by breeding and fortune kept up
worthy that degree, will charge his soul with the guilt of perjury, The credit
of Iuries h^w preserved.
for the pleasure or fear of any man? Nay, I further will, under the favor of
my betters presume, to add, these great Freeholders being thus in service,
will do the Crown all right, in presenting encroachment upon it; and the people
in presenting all common nusances or entrenchments upon them. And this the
Sheriffs shall do well to take notice of, that the King's Courts of Justice are
never (to my observation) better pleased, then when they see Pannels and
returns of Knights, Esquires, and Gendemen, of rank and quality before them.
And our Text gives the reason, because in matters of fact, Nonnisi 12. hominum
de vicineto, ubi factum hujusmodi supponitur. Sacramento judici constare
poter^t. No Jury returned, and appearing, no trial can be, so no Sentence; for
matter of fact must be tried by Juries, ad questionem facti non respondent
Iudices, Reg. Juris. 1 Iustit. p. 155. b.
ad quastionem Iuris non respondent Iuratores.

Q aritur igitur, etc.] The difference of Trials by the two Laws being
patefied, this is ^he reddition and application, as it were, to its close
order, that the Prince may see how the Chancellour's Arguments answer the end
of their Production. The thing he was enquired about, and undertook to satisfy
was, that the Common-Laws of Eng and were bona and ^ffica^es for England, as
the Civil Laws were for the Empire. Now this he supposes he has done in part,
by showing that the proof of matters of fact, is by the English Law to be by
the Oath of two or three Witnesses, as the Civil Laws require; and because he
supposes in the Engl sb Law there is a super-addition of strength to the
validity of proof, and the p^evention of falsehood by the Juries, which are on
their Consciences to judge whether they think the matter of fact is deposed ^o
and in its evidence clear, he ^hinks this the rationabilior and efficacior
(via) ad veritatem, then otherwise. But of this enough; and if by any thought
too much, which (under favor) I think has all imaginable modesty in its
assertion. Let that excuse the Chancellor; and his humble E cho my self, the
Law of England has thought so, and neminem oportet esse legibus sapientorem.
Reg. Jutis.


CHAP. XXI.
Per leges civiles pars quae in litis contestationem affirmativum dicit, testes
producere debet.


THis is suitable to reason, and the method of all Laws, for those that
commence a Suit to make good their Action by proof. For besides that, the
Lawyers say, in his quae pertinent ad litis ordinationem, favemus actori
potius, quam reo, which makes the Plaintiff have the advantage, as he is the
occasion, and so may move fast or flow as he sees his advantage: Actor est qui
alium prius, ad judicium evocavit. Digest. lib. 5. tit. 1. Gloss. in Tribus, p.
680.
there is reason so it should be, because the Action or Contention either
justifies or abates, according to the Actors testimony valid or not. For though
the Law Civil de require of an Actor oath, that he has not begun his Suit
injuriously, Tholoss. Syntagm. Jutis. lib. 43. c. 6. tit. 8.
or on purpose to disquiet his Neighbor, but upon assu^ance that he has a good
cause, and the reus or Defendant do likewise swear, that he shall make a just
defense; yet does the Law require testimony be given by such persons, Datur
actori Sacramentum propter enormitatem criminis. Digest. lib. 12. Tit. 1. p.
1294. Gloss. A.
quos ipsemet ad libitum s^um nominabit, that is, by such idoneous persons as
he shall produce, and shall be allowed, and not excepted against. This is the
tenor of the Law's direction in affirmative Contests, wherein the opinion is,
Digest. lib. 4. tit. 8. Closs. K. consenserunt. p. 644.
Duobus adserentibus affirmativam magis creditur, quam etiam december negativam
proponentibus; and therefore our Chancellor has rightly said, that pars quae
in litis conte statione affirmativam dicit, testes producere debet. For so,
besides the other Authorities, Paulus adds, Lib. 79. Ad edictum. Digest. lib.
22. Tit. 8. De Probationibus, p. 2069.
incumbit probatio, ei qui dicit non qui negat; on which the gloss says, Duas
ponit regulas haec lex prima, qua dicitur affirmantem probare, etc. From all
which appears, that the proof lies upon the affirmative party, for the reason
that follows.

Negativa autem probari non potest direct, licet possit per obliquum. All
affirmations are opposed or weakened by negations, and negatives are either
facti, juris, or qualitatis; of all which negatives, the hardest to prove is
that of fact, Baldus in Marg. Gloss. Titul. De Probationibus, and Praesumpt. p.
2069. Digest. lib. 22. tit. 3.
which our Text intending, therefore says, it cannot be directly proved, though
indirectly, or obliquely it may, that is, negativa coarctata loco and tempore
potest probari; otherways the proof of it must be indirect: as for example, A.
accuses B to have been at York, and there to have committed such a facinus, in
proof of which he produces C. D. E. B. cannot prove that he was not at York,
against the positive testimony that he was; but he can prove the negative by
collateral testimony, to wit, that at that very same time, B. was at Exceter,
in such a house, and with such company; which admitted true, proves the
negative obliquely, to the improbation of the affirmative peremptory;
Digestorum, Lib. 3. Tit. 4. in Gloss. B. Debet, p. 377.
for the rule is, omnis enim res sit dubia negatione; which I understand in a
good sense applicable to affirmative testimonies, which are so far weakened in
their credit, as the negative of them seems, and is most strongly supported by
circumstances, introducing belief, that the affirmative is not true, medo and
forma.

Exilis quippe creditur esse potentiae, minoris queque industriae, qui de
omnibus quos noseit homin bus, duos reperire nequit ita conscientia and
veritate vacuos, ut timore, amore vel commodo, omni velint contraire veritati.
This is written, to show the danger that the positivity of two Witnesses that
do affirm, may do to the right of a cause; for if two in number assert upon
oath what must stand, and the Judge must accordingly judge upon; then industry
to seek out, and influence to persuade for love, compel by fear, or bribe by
reward, may do what it pleases with two, that it may find out for its purpose:
Which done, be the Judge never so learned and just; yet by the Civil-Law, he is
supposed by our text to give Sentence according to the fullness and positiveness
of the Evidence; which though it be a reason urgable against any thing, which
is mortal and mutable; yet is thought by our Chancellor an Argument of
strength here, when the Text says, testes producere debet quos ipsemet ad
libitum suum nominabit; which advantage given to the Actor in a Cause, is so
great a favor to him, that if he be not felo de se, and desert himself, he
cannot but succeed in his cause. Now this wanting to ones self, as here it is
brought in, is said to be ob exilitatem potentiae, that is, by want of wit, and
inaptness to business; which is a sense Pliny puts on exilis, when he opposes
plenus to it, making it the absence of what is vivid, vigorous, and masculine:
so exilis aper gracilis and male saginatus in Varro; Epist 114. Cic. 2. De
Divinat. 46. 3 De re Rustic. c. 2. 9. Cic. 4. De Finibus. 2 De Orator. 87. Cic.
2. De lege Agtar.
exilis copia; and genus sermonis exile, aridum, siccum, cui opponitur
liquidum, fusum, profluens; and exile solum and exilia dicere de virtute, which
arises from either a natural defect, or a desuetude and stupor of nature that
makes men impatient to be troubled with business, and unhappy in it. They being
as much to seek of wisdom to manage it, as the Psylli, a people of India, Ac si
unum aliquem hominem, ac non rem incorpoream peterent. Sabellicus. lib. 4. c.
9. A. Gellius, lib. 6. c. II.
are mopish and superstitiously ignorant, who because the Southwind is harmful
to them, go to war with the South Wind: or the Thracians, who when they see
their Governor make many high Ladders, pretending to mount up by them to Juno,
Theatrum v. Humanae. (...) 5. lib. 1. p. 668.
and before her to accuse them of contun^acy and stubborness, hereupon they are
so terrified, that presently they do whatsoever they are commanded to do. This
easiness of reach, and softness and indigestion of reason in the mind, will
make a man key-cold to action. And so may Minoritas Industria, (as I may so
turn the Chancellour's words) make a man not improve what he may to the
uttermost; whereas industry has a notable effect, and almost an omni
potentiality attending it, which I have in part heretofore showed in the Notes
on the eighth Chapter, p. 144, 145. and will further in sundry Presidents,
wherein Industry has served men to high and fortunate purposes, not only as it
is (...), that which makes men crafty to lie in Wait, but bold as hunters, are,
to venture on the greatest design they have a mind to; which Rabbi David
glosses on the words of David, Psalm. 19.14. Prohibueris ne de industria peccem;
but as it is (...), Esth. 8.5.
that which is the Net that encompasses whatever we have a mind to, and the
girdle under which we bring all our aims; yea, that (...), which makes us enjoy
what we obtain with the good will of all men, who account it rightly placed,
and us not unworthy of it. This is the industry of Providence, that strikes
while the iron is hot, and the spirits warm; and that by providing for a
foreseen evil day, makes the evil of it abortive, Lib. 6. c. 2.
and conducts the havers of it into their Meridian. Fulgosus tells us of a
notable young Don that was a pregnant spirit, and thought nothing too good for
himself; who one day came to Alphonsus the eighth of Castile, to ask of him the
government of Toledo; the King looking upon this Youth, as unmeet for such a
charge and trust, refused his request: But the young Gallant would have no
denial, but persisted in assertion of himself to a kind of courtless
impertinency, telling the King, That he saw many young Nobles about him, who
because they were his Companions in play, were also made happy by him when he
was in earnest in a Throne; and that he found in himself great excitations to
brave actions, which he desired to express in his service, if he might be
honored by a trust and command therein. Which Alphonsus hearing so boldly and
so bravely uttered, granted his request, and a brave man he proved, fellow to
any his Contemporaries. The like is reported of Hannibal, whose industry was
such, that though he were many years in an Enemies Country with an Army of men
of different Nations, Sabellicus. Aenead. lib. 5.
Language, Habit, Manners, who were differently religion'd, armed, addicted;
yet so did he unite them to him, and to one another, by the justice and
strictness of his Discipline, and the industry he expressed in circumspection,
that in the utmost straights of War, he never was disquieted with Sedition. So
that by this it appears, that industry and diligence in business, has so much
of the plenarty of worldly felicity entailed to it, as God permits; and that
nothing in ordinary to the effection of extern means, is restrained from being
the Trophy of its Conquest, and the sacrifice of its vigilance. Which
emphatizes the Chancellour's Argument to the end he prolated it; for since
industry is thus prevalent to good and to evil, as is evident in the examples
of both, in which, especially the latter and worst of them it is more
frequently and indefatigably expressed; witness Satan, who is said to go about
like a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. Micah 7.3.
seeking whom he may devour; and wicked men his Emissaries who work iniquity
with both hands, whose fect are swift to shed blood, and who design mischief on
their beds, to whom wickedness is pleasure. I say, since thus it is; who that
is industriously wicked, and wittily industrious, can miss of what he aims at,
as it falls under an Earthly notion, and is the consectary of prudent
endeavor. For as by this in good things, Vives, iib. 3. De Concordia, etc.
Discordia.
Augustus evicted Salvidenus, Lepidus, Muraena, Capio, Ignatius, and even Cinna
himself, whom when he had in his power, he so reasoned out of his enmity, and
laid his offense so home to him, that Cinna was ashamed of his insolence; and
having all his Lands and Honors confirmed on him, ever after lived a most
loyal Subject to his Prince: Nor did Augustus repent the prudence he thus
fruitfully expressed, because never after he had any trouble from any he had
condonated. That look as Mentor Rhodius Admiral of Asia (by sending Hermias the
Aternensian Tyrant a subtle Message, by the belief of which he was cogg'd into
his power; whom Mentor being once possessed of, so prevailed upon by fear and
fallacy industriously applied to him, that he got his Signet, and then wrote
Letters to the several Towns, that Hermias had entered upon, and for him were
held, signing them with his Seal; whereby he (without blood) gained delivery of
all his Masters losses, with his Enemy also: and all this Diodorus says he did,
Lib. 16. Bibliothec.
by the prudence and industry of a Warlike Soul, which preferred secure Policy,
before dubious War, and subdolous stratagem to manly encounter. As he, I say,
did do this great service to his Master, by industry, in knowledge of Hermias
his humor and weakness, and accordingly thereto framed his applications: so
may any man of power and diligence, wind himself into either an admirer of his
parts, or a fearer of his power, or a flatterer to his favor, or a vassal to
his purse, and them makes his servants to any pleasure he will command them.
For men are to the soveraignties of love fear and advantage, such Vassals; that
they make rendition of their integrity to them, D. Siculus Bibliothec. lib. 17.
as readily as the World did to Alexander, Whom no Enemy encountered with
(says Diodorus) whom he overcame not; no City besieged he, which he carried
not; no Nation came he near, which he victor'd not: Which I do not mention, as
only the extraordinary pleasure of God to have it so, as it is evincible in
sundry cases: but as it seems to be the consectary of Martial Prudence, and
active wisdom; In Vita Iphicratis.
which Probus methinks puts out in a notable example of one who was ever in the
head of his armed men; and as he attempted no great thing without them: so did
he no grievous thing by them. All his enterprises had the ballast of counsel;
and because they were once well done, as they needed not to be repented of; so
did they not miss of his end, which was either to reform what was amiss, or to
introduce what was expedient. In consideration of all which, supposing men be
knowing, and will be active, what may they not accomplish; and especially in
testimonies, where if they go by number, they may be so contrary to truth, as
nothing more can be. For Witnesses a man may find enough; and if they be
conscientia and virtute vacuos, they will depose anything they are cajouled to
depose. For Conscience is that sweet noted Siren; that makes a man have all
delight, while it witnesses integrity and clearness; it is that which is (...),
(...). Antiphon apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 106. p. 350.
which will render a man bold end fearless; free in captivity, joyful in
sorrow, abundant in want, glorious in rags; it is that, which when good, is a
continual feast, which holy men have rejoiced in, and evil men only made
shipwreck of. The excellency of a good Conscience is known by its companions,
Faith and Charity, 1 Timothy 1. v. 5. and 19. and c. 2. v. 9 by the study St. Paul
expressed to keep it, Act. 24.16. and the use he made of it, and the defense he
had by it, 1 Pet. c. 3. v. 16. and 21. Indeed, what a good Conscience is, the
contrary can tell; for a bad Conscience is, (...), as Gregory Niss^n expresses
it; (...). Stob loc. praecit. Psalm. ^17.1. Philo lib. De confus. John 14.6.
Linguarum, p. 337. John 8.32. John 17.17. (...). Olympias apud Stobaeum, Serum.
59.
and Philo, that every evil man is condemned by his evil Conscience. And when
truth is not regarded, which God so highly values, that he calls himself a God
of truth: and his Son calls himself the truth, and says of truth, that it shall
make his free; that it is the means of their sanctification; That it is a fruit
of the Holy Spirit. If truth be a Denizen of Heaven, and a Fellow Commoner with
God at the Mess of Eternity; and if the reward of it be (...), as Epictetus
says, If God loves truth in the inward parts, and will be served of those that
draw near unto him in spirit and in truth: Then, Tthen, to be void of truth, to
have that kept from its office in informing Conscience, and so keeping a man
free from the great offense, is to lie open to all mischief; it is to be
beautiless, and without all form of virtue. Thus the Earth is said to be
without form, and void, Genesis 1. Thus the wanton young man is said to be
deficiens cord (...), Prove. 7.7.
which our Translators render void of understanding; yea, and void has a sense
of perishing and adnulling, Deuteronomy. 32.28. It is a Nation void of counsel; So
Psalm. 10.16. Jer. 43.36.
the word is (...), periens consiliis; and thus the Lawyers use the word,
making void, for nulling, cancelling, unsaying, undoing.

So that when our Text says, conscientia and veritate vacuos, it intends such
prostigateness and debauchery of soul, as has no tincture of God, no grain of
restraint to the utmost degree of vildness; no not to such a measure of
impiety, as the Apostle calls working iniquity with greedeness; insomuch, as
what God says of Israel turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto
him, Jer. 2.2. and is expounded by the Prophet Hosea in the 10. of his
Prophecy and the first, to be an empty vine, is but what this passage imports,
in those phrases of detraction and abasement, conscientia and veritate omni
vacuos, and is what the Wiseman says of the lewd Woman, She forsakes the guide
of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God, that is, she is as vild, as
voidness of truth and conscience to God and man can render her.

Vt timore, amore, vel commodo, omni velint contraire veritati.
This follows upon the former vacuity, when God is not in the terrors of
Conscience, and in the conviction and light of truth in all a man's thoughts,
then he lies fit for all occupants, and hangs out a bush, to toal in all
comers; vice as well as nature, in a sense, endures no vacuity Hence is it,
that it says to God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy Law;
Job 21.24.
but it complements Satan and his Creatures in, and bids them welcome. Those
Lovers, it has strewed its bed with Roses to entertain; and all this is done,
to gratify the combination he is head of against truth: Truth is the Queens
Daughter, all glorious within; and he only delights in her whose she is, and
who only knows thoroughly what she is. Dulcis veritas in interiorem melodiam.
Sanctus Bernardus. in Cont.
And so far are only men aimers at, and prosecuters of her, as they are
partakers of defecated reason. The Soul while it fits at home contemplating
truth, it seeds on Mannah Celestial Viands; but when once it wanders abroad,
and will find truth, where God has not bid man to seek it, nor promised he
shall find it; then there is danger of Dinah's misfortune amongst the Daughters
of the Land, Innocence and Integrity have no Mines and Snares so corruptive and
ruinous to it; as fear of power, love of favor, hope and desire of profit:
these are in most the price of conscience, and truth with them.

Fear, it is a fruit of sin; and therefore the fear of man is a snare, because
the fear of God is not made the guard: he that has commanded not to fear man,
whose breath is in his nostrils, has dictated, why he dehorts therefrom,
because such fear has a snare and a ^it attending it; it is timor absorptionis
non cautionis; it is a fear that disables to opposition, and leads man a captive
to all mischief, Ier. 48.43. This was Moab's fear, timor exantlationis; Matthew
8.25.
it is a fear that makes men desperate to venture, and helpless in miscarriage:
No, save us Master we perish, when the storms and winds engage those our
embarquings, Christ is not a friend at hand in this trouble. And therefore no
wonder this base fear wrought so on the Cardinals, In Platina in vita Julii 2.
Papae.
when Pope Julius secundus stood to be Pope, that they knowing him to be a bold
and daring spirited man, and impatient to be crossed, Platina in vita Julii 3.
were so awed by him, that they durst not but choose him Pope, because they
consulted more how to wave his displeasure and purchase his favor, then
discharge a good conscience.

O amor, quite appellem bonum an malum, dulcem an ama^um; ita enini utroque
plenus es, ut utrumque esso videaris. Salvianus. Lib.
Amore] Love that is the next fury, a passion, like the Apples of Sodom; if
good, very good; if bad, very bad. When its by a kind of Miracle from Water
become Wine; by a prepotency of Reason and Religion, reduced and bounded: then
it is like the precious Spickna^d, which Mary Magdalen anointed our Lord's head
with, odo^iferous, very costly and amiable: no ingenuity and (...) of Art or
Nature, but superlatizeth it self by the touch and tincture of this; it is the
rapsody of all transports; and if the magnetiques and cabalistique Charms of
Nature be any where, (...) Eurypid. in Antigone.
it is here in love. The love of every man is his weight, that he is that he
loves: there is a fixed truth in the Poets fiction, the Moon will forsake her
Orb to kiss her Endymion. Thus Cir^^an is love, that it leads Creatures
madding, without Reason or Religion; which causes, the Holy Ghost to cry to us
by the Wiseman, Prove. 4.23.
Omni custodia, Keep thy heart (the fountain of love) with all diligence; (...)
Theophrastus apud Stobaeum, Ser. 185. p. 626.
for out of it are the issues of life and death. And because love, which way
soever it byasses, is so potent; therefore St. Paul when he recounts what a
Christian should do for Christ, who has done so much for him, mentions this as
the motive, The love of Christ constrains: 2 Cor. 5.14.
no influence of the Pleyades is so sweet and so effectual as love; it has a
magnetism, that when it relates to art, will persuade an Eudoxus to be a
Mathematique Martyr, and pass his li^e away to the Suns flames; so he may
purchase the dimensions of tha^ fiery body, for the benefit of Posterity; and
when it is set on worse objects, it is as heroique and impetuous. I Joh. 2.153.
For which cause our Lord leaves no Antidote more commended to his followers,
then that Amulet against love of the World; because there is danger any love
rival with Christ, will be prevalent against the love of Christ in us: Christ
is spiritual, and we are carnal; Christ is holy, and we are wholly averse to
it: and because Amor est inter pares, and quic quid impar dissidet; therefore
Christ, and the World, and our selves, cannot be Coparceners in love: Love,
like the Rainbow in the ^^orm, is no^h^ng but every thing, save what it should
be: it is David, white and ruddy, the Victor of Goliath: But the Victory of
Bathsheba, which I note, to usher in the specifique Worm, that corrodes and
eats out the vitals of pure love; this World and the lusts of it. This then
stronger then death, because it carries men beyond the fears of death, to
gratify the pleasures of sense, being the mist before Solomon's eyes, that he
could not see what his amorous wander after knowledge would penitentially cost
him, is that in which every man almost miscarries: as it is that Fogg and Gloom,
in which neither Sun or Moon, or Star of Religion or Reason is visible.

Vel commodo] This is the third Traitor to Integrity, and a terrible one it is
too; the Poet could tell us so, Munera, creed mih, capiunt hominesque deosque;
the prevalence of this with most men, made Satan apply it to our LORD; though
as subtle as he was, he missed his aim: For the Prince of the World had nothing
in him; there was no soul or faculty in him seducible; no lust of the flesh, no
lust of the eye, no pride of life to gratify: he was all pure, he was
altogether sinless; which if he had not been, Satan would have tried him with
an Omnia haec tib^ dabo. This, this advantage is the bait to every sin; it
seduces the Priest from his zeal, Platina in Act. 6.
the Statesman from his integrity, the Soldier from his honor, the Lady from
her modesty, Guallo, Legate. temp. King John. Holingshed, p. 193. p. 120, 145,
128^.
the Servant from his fidelity: it is the great Apollyon of Souls: this made
Banister betray his Master the Duke of Buckingham, Holingshed, p. 744.
in R. 3. his time. This made the Wiseman call the love of money, the root of
all evil. Oh! the trea^hery of rewards! it has blinded the eyes of the Judge,
and hardened the heart of the Father, and rebelliously lifted up the horn of the
^on, and heightened the ambition of the Servant: yea, it has made the
Philosopher a mer^enary, and the Threasurour Apostle a Traitor: and therefore
Severus that loved money so well, Xiphil. in Epitom. Dionis. p. 404. edit. Sylb.
that the H^storian says, (...), etc. Though he gathered money from every
Project, and loved to have a full Chequer; yet he never spilt blood, or put any
man to death to get money by it. Which considered, our Chancellor has well
accented the contraition to truth, to depend on the seduction of these, or some
of them. And the rather because not only the seduced's own soul may be
endangered by it, but even the souls of others, who by the oppression of this
may become desperate; for the Law being, that the testimony of two must stand,
Hos potest tunc ipse producere in testimonio in causa sua, says the Text.

Hos potest tunc ipse in testimonio producere in causa sua.
It Is not said hos debet, but potest, because that he does discredit his cause;
by such inidoneous Witnesses is his own folly, and his causes loss: the Law
Civil is not hereby chargable with neglect of justice; for as by that, they
that are blemished, are incapable to give testimony; so by that the Judge is
allowed to refuse it: that testimonies are accounted, as their persons are that
give them, is plain by that of Modestinus: Lib. 8. Regularum.
In testimoniis autem dignitas, fides, mores gravitas, examinanda est; and ideo
testes, qui adversus fidem suae test ationis vacillant, audiendi non sunt.
Digest. Lib. 22. Tit. 5. page 2085. 2088.
And Calistratus, after he has notably told the qualifications of apt
Witnesses, concludes, Nam si careat suspicione testimonium, Lib. 4. De
Cognitionibus. Digest. Loco Praecitato.
vel propter personam a qua fertur, quod honest a sit; vel propter causam, quod
neque lucri neque gratiae neque inimicitiae causa sit, admittendum est. And
that there are many Causes that do invalidate testimonies, Tholossanus. Lib.
48. c. 13 art. 4, 5, 6. p. 1052. De Testibus.
Tholossan, has to my hand collected. To whom I refer the Reader; which clears
the Civil-Law from admitting testimonies, qua such, without consideration of
the persons, and circumstances of the Deposers of them: yet further, as the
Text is thus clear; so the Judges of that Law are required to see to Witnesses,
that they be stanch, and their testimonies clear and pregnant. For Bartolus
writes on the Texts pre-mentioned this, Digest. Lib. 22. Tit. 5. p. 2085. B.
Rubr.
Nota quod potestate judicis conceditur utrum debeat adhiberi fides testi vel
non; Digest. Lib. 3. Tit. 3. A. B. in Marg. p. 375.
and Iudex potest refraenare numerum testium; for though the Judge cannot
arbitrari in determinatis a lege, Digest. Lib. 22. Tit. 5. p. 2086. gloss
inimicus.
yet can he by the Law judge of testimonies; an fides ^ sit adhibenda, judicis
mandatur officio, says the gloss: and in matters of Fact, Lib. 12. Tit. 2 p.
1281. ss. B.
the Judge may not admit impertinent Articles. So that all things considered, I
do not understand our Chancellour's meaning, to impeach the Civil-Law of any
defect; but to commend the Common Law, which to that way of proof by Witnesses
which it allows also, superadds the trial of Juries as a remedy, if any
subornation of Witnesses should be; which because it is easier done with two
Witnesses alone, then with them and 12 Jury men, which are, and ought to be men
of fortunes and integrity, when Witnesses are not required to be so strictly
such. The Chancellor applauds the way of trial in England, upon this
consideration, that it is less probable to be tortuous, then that of bare
Witnesses is. Concerning the stoutness of Juries, Holingshed, p. 1105. and Seq.
in keeping close to their Evidence in point of Fact, and not to be tempted or
threatened therefrom, see the carriage of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton's Jury,
primo Queen Mary: And by reason of the sufficiency of the Jurors returned, and
the penalty in their corruption, there is (1 dare say) less error in Justice
with us in England, then in any part of the World: yea, our Justices being such
learned and grave Gentlemen, as they ever have been, and are, do so rightly
inform Juries, in the right method of digesting their Evidence, that a nobler
and braver trial can no man desire, Note this.
then by a Jury of twelve men, Good men and true.

Et si contra eos pars altera dicere velit, vel contra eorum dicta, etc.
This is added, to show that every Action consists of two Parties: and as it is
the Affirmants, or Libellers part, to impeach; so the Libelleds, or Defendants,
to justify themselves against it. This the Text calls in the Defendant, or
Opponent, contra eas dicere, a crimination of their persons; or contra eorum
dicta, an impeachment of their Evidence. For as the Law does not allow an
infamous person to bear witness; so not his witness to be believed, but
excepted against, if he be rationally presumed not to be upright in it: only
that which seems hard, is, Non semper continget eos eorum mores, eut facta apud
contradicere volentem agnosci, ut ex eorum faeditate, and vitis testes illi
possunt reprobari. It Is true indeed, it were to be wished, that Witnesses might
be enquired into, what fashion they are of, and where they live, and how they
behave themselves, before their testimony pass in a Court of Law. It were also
to be wished, that men's hearts were so far knowable; that the fruits of them,
in the faedity of their actions, and the contagion of their practice, might be
public and they not pass for Cato's, who are Nero's; nor for Saints, who are
Devils: but that not being possible, nor any humane Law usurping cognizance of
the good or evil intent of men, but as they are manifested and visibilitated in
the practice. How are the Civil Laws to be blamed, which when it appears, do
provide against it, and by reason thereof, account the testimony weakened in a
great measure. For though the Judge cannot arbitrate in the positive Rule of
Law; nor in a civil Cause, deny the affirmatives of two Witnesses that
plenarily swear: yet may he defer Sentence, till the party oppressed by false
Witnesses, Cur enim ad arma and rixam procedere patiatur Praetor, quos potest
jurisdictione sua componere. Julianus. Digest. lib. 7. Tit. 1. p. 889. in
Textu. C.
may find some expedient, either to disable the testimony; or the Judge seeing
the perverseness of the Prosecutor's end, persuade them to agreement; which is
somewhat of probability to the effection of reparation to the injured, and
disappointment to the injurer, Opprimi aliquem per adversarti sui potentiam non
oportet. Digest. Lib. 1. Tit. 16. B. in Text.
though it be not such a curb, as that in trial by Juries is. For there, though
positive Evidence is the trump that ruffs all before it; yet that positive
testimony is scannable, and having so many eyes upon it, may have a hole picked
in the coat of it; and though the Jury cannot take notice of a negative oath,
to balance an affirmative; yet they may see such cause of doubting the
clearness and veracity of such affirmatives, and they may hear truth, denying
the charge against it by such circumstances, as if true, are inconsistent with
the affirmative Depositions. And frequent it is with Juries to verdict, as they
think in their Conscience, the truth of the Fact is, upon consideration of the
Evidence on both parts; and if so they do, they do (as I humbly conceive) what
they ought. For they being Judges of the Fact, are to determine, what their
Consciences judges clearly proved concerning the Fact, and no more: and the
Fact once stated and fixed, the Sentence of Law is pronounced by the Judge. So
that all that hence, can be argued, is, that still falsehood seems to be put
upon a harder task, and amore inextricable labor, and to grapple with (as it
were) an impossibility, which it cannot so easily overcome or evade, in the
evidencing before Justices and Juries, as before Judges alone; where they do
but deal with two Witnesses, and one Judge, (who are a less number then the
Electors of the Empire were, who yet by Richard Duke of Cornwall, were so made
pliable, that they chose him King of the Romans, who was no German, and who was
only Brother to our Henry the 3d; Tum propter ej^s fidelitatem and sapientiam,
tum propter sui thesauri abundantiam. M. Paris. in H. 3. ad annum 1257. p. 940.
which occasioned a Poet of that time to say, Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia
Romae,) and the work is done, and the cause carried: Whereas in our Courts of
Justice, where there are 3 or 4 Judges, and twelve Jurymen, of fortune, blood,
breeding, and conscience, (for such the Law requires they should be, and so
often I am sure they are) it is a Hercules labor to attempt this; yea, and
'twil be that, by which the attemptor is sure to be deceived: for if but one
honest unengaged person be in the Panel, no Verdict can be, and so no
judgment; which is the reason that the Chancellor here reasons so titely for
Juries, and against the sole Evidence of two Witnesses; for though a Conslave
of Cardinals may be bribed, as Platina confesses, in the choice of Pope
Alexander the sixth they were, and names Cardinal S. Fortia for the Merchant;
In vita Alexandri 6.
who drove the bargain emptus pro^uldubio profusissima largitione; yet Juries
are not so to be dealt with, which makes the credit of them so much in England.

Quis tune poterit suorum aut sui ipsius, sub lege tali vivere securus; dum
cuilibet sibi inimicari volenti, lex tali praestat subsidium.

This is to be understood moderately; not as if our Text did make the Civil
Laws subsidiary to injury; for that were to cast an odium upon the sacred Law
of the Empire, which so great and so many Nations have in all Ages been
governed by, and as strenuous Patrons as himself, do defend to be a very noble
and learned Law, and conform in the greatest part of it to natural equity. But
in that the Chancellor says, Quis tunc poterit esse securus, etc. both in body
and fortune, when such may be evicted by two Witnesses of dissolute condition,
who may be Sons of Belial, and for swear themselves, to act a malice against
him. His sense is, that to him it seems a greater latitude is left thereby to
such sinister courses, then in England by the Common Law trials are. For I take
the words not to be verba approbatoria, but oratoria, and to have no further
intent, then to make the Common Law more popular, and applicable to general
security, then he would have the Civil-Law accounted. Nor is this thus
interpreted piaculary in our Chancellor; considering, that the Municipe Law of
England, is the Darling of the Nation, and to speak well of what is Native, is
much the honor of an Englishman; though always it be a generous man's
quality, to praise what he loves, with no reproach to what is rival with it, at
least with as little reflection, as his fidelity to what he prefers, permits
him. To sweeten then what has been charged, as somewhat too sower in my Great
Master, I humbly premise this, That though the Civil Law requires direct and
positive proofs; Par est probationi prasumptio quod quidem ad effectum attiner,
quia probatione habetur. We senbechius.
yet does it not reprobate presumptions wholly; but if they be strong and
forcible, whereby the certainty of the cause may be illustrated, admits them;
Digest. Lib. 21. Tit. 1 in Marg. p. 1980:
it being a rule amongst Civilians, Argumentum sumptum a praesumptione valet;
and praesumptioni statur donec probitur in contrarium; Lib. 4 Tit. 2. p. 501.
F. Presumptioni. gloss. Lib. 23. Tit. 3. p. 2146. X. contrarium in gloss.
which the gloss thus explains, That though these presumptions do not
transfer probationem, yet they do durius onerare actorem probatione tam alias
apertiore, quam in civilibus, etc. For though praesumptioni levi non est
standum, is a rule with them: yet where presumptions are firm and violent,
where they have poize and conviction of reason, Digest. Lib. 4. Tit. 4. p. 533.
in marg gloss.
there they are leading; as Tholossanus has in his 48. C. ^1. Lex legum.
Chapter at large made good; and as Dr. Wiseman has very soberly and solidly on
this matter defended his Laws. Only let me be excused, if I (notwithstanding
all) do in my apprehension conclude the trial in a Court of Justice, by twelve
men indifferently chosen, and to be excepted against, if there be legal cause,
who after hearing Evidence, and considering the nature of it, give their
Verdict upon Oath, according to what they hear really proved before them, as by
the Common Law is used, to be the best and most probable trial to be equitable,
of any in the World. And though men may possibly be secure in body and goods
under trials by Witnesses, according to the Civil-Law, as we suppose men are
abroad: yet do I not question, but that the security of an Englishman, under
the Common-Laws defense and administration, is equivalent to any, if not
paramount to all. And I pray God, as born I was, and have ever lived under the
good government of it; so I and mine may live and die by the direction, and
under the favor of it.

Et qui iniqui duo tam incauti sunt, quod facti de quo ipsi examinabuntur in
initio non antequam in testes producantur, occulti fingant imaginem and
figuram, componant quoque eidem omnes circumstantias, quales sibi fuissent, si
illud in veritate constitisset.

Et qui iniqui duo] This sets out the number two, and the nature, iniqui. Now
iniquus, the Learned know is one that does any thing, contra aequitatem,
against right: Terence couples iniquus with inimicus, In Prol, Adelp a Sermon.
Satyr. 7. Ovid Epist. 14. ^1 Aenead. Plin. lib. 12. c. 19. Cic. Pro Roscio Amer.
and Horace with iratus. And hence every thing of displeasure, we are said
inique far. Thus iniqua conditis in Tully; Praecium pictatis iniquum in Ovid;
Pugna iniqua in Virgil; and Iniquitas loci, iniquitas hominum, iniquitas
temporis, is frequent, to express the straights, difficulties, and miseries,
mem suffer in them. So that iniqui here, are such as are made instruments, to
make an innocent cause suffer by their villainy.

Tam incauti sunt] The Text in this interrogation, strongly affirms the temper
of men set on mischief; not to do what they do rashly, but with advice, that it
may succeed; or in the Scripture phrase, appear done with both hands, with all
their might; which they seldom do, who run hand over head, and incautelously
about it. Nature has taught us this even in her instinct in Beasts; the most
harmful and spiteful of which, are the sub^lest and least-nois'd Creatures: who
by project as it were, and infidiarily steal upon their prey; and as they
design their rove and rapacity in the night, so they come gingerly and softly
to it. This our Text calls in the contrary of it, incautien, a frailty that
innocence is often guilty of, and as often smarts for this its Dove-like
credulity: But that which men of the World think in themselves inexpiable,
because its the loss of their design, and of that opportunity, which as it may
happen, they may never have again. Thus did Flaminius lose himself by engaging
with Hannibal neglictis comitiis) as it were before his Commissions were
dispatched into all parts of his Quarters; Collatis signis exercitu amisso
excisus est. Sigonius in Fast and trumph. Romans p. 136, 137.
who for want of Conduct, Hannibal every where circumvented; which was so great
an error in a Commander, Neque imperatori bono quicquam minus, quam
temeritatem congrui^^ satis celeriter fieri quicquid commode geratur, Aurelius
victor in Augusto.
as nothing can by him be acted more nefarious to his cause, more proditorious
to his Soldiers lives, then so to do. And thus do all men of passion, who are,
as Varro terms Paulus, temerario and prae propero ingenio, lose themselves. And
therefore Satan chooses no feathers for his Cap of Seduction, no men levis
armaturae for his Triarii; he carries on his Designs by the Achitophels, the
Goliahs, the Saul's, the Iulians, that are men of might, that bark not before
they bite; that roar not, before they have their prey in their clutches; as he
himself comes crawling on his belly into our paradise our souls by ill
thoughts, sins of pleasure, fanciful dalliances, and pleasing dandlings, till
he has engaged us to a nonretreat; so does he institute his Instruments by
sophistry and subtlety, by pretensions and fictions of seeming good to the most
portentuous evils. And all the prevalency he has (next the permission of God)
he ows to the liquour he pickles his projects in; he steeps them in
high-seasoned counsel, and the darkness and indiscernable night (as it were) of
death. No eye he suffers to peep into his projects, but that which is sworn to
secrecy: no Emissary he sends forth to act it, but such as has drunk down
greedily the potion of his intoxication, by which he being lessoned to, and
confirmed in sin, works it with greediness: not only is pleased so himself to
be, but zealous to proselyte others, and make them as bad as himself. And all
this Satan effects by counsel and deliberation, by advice and pre-appointment.
The Pharisees had a mind to destroy our LORD; they would not rudely and
unthoughtly enter upon him, and then consider what to do with him: but they
took counsel against Jesus; and because they found his words might soonest be
carped at, they sought to entangle him in his words. Matthew. 12.14. Chap. 22.15.
Mark 12.13. Luke 20.20.
So in the other Gospels, The chief Priests and the Scribes watched him, and
sent forth Spies, which should feign themselves just men. This was the wile and
forlorn of these Caitiffs, Quoniamque ut bona naetura appetimus, si^ a malis
natura deslinamus, quae declinatio sicum ratione siet, cautio appelletur eaque
intelligatur in solo esse sapiente. Cic. 4. Tulcul. 2 De Oratore 166.
by which they sought to express the malice of their hearts, by bringing him
into trouble: which shows, that Satan arms his with caution; they seldom do
exire incauti: he lessons them too well to be surprised; they have all the
stratagems implanted on their mind, that may both enable them to supplant
others, and keep themselves free from apprehension and suspicion. Prudens and
qui sibi probus, and negotiis suis scit eavere. Terenc. in. Phorm. 4.5.
These Faux's and Catesby's have the Cellar and the Night; yea, and the dark
Lanthorn, whereby they can see, and not be seen. And hence is it, that they
being not incauti, are uncaught, till God bring the fear, the snare, and the
pit on them, which in his good time he does: but till then, they do not forfeit
their prudences by rashness, but do not only lay low in counsel, what they are
to act but do fix on their minds the manner and circumstances of their action,
which the Text here terms ^cculte fingere imaginem and figuram, etc. they do act
what they are to execute. Thas did the execrable Murderer of H. 4. of Fran by
reading Mariana's damnable tract, De Regis and Regni institutione.
act in his mind the form, and inure his hand to use that Instrument, that he
sacrilegiously murdered that brave Prince by. And thus undoubtedly did Faux,
by being in the Cellar, in sight of the Match, Powder, and combustible
Materials, with which he was to do that execrable villainy, See Stat. 3 Jacob.
c. 2.
meditate in his mind, and in the externity and figure of the action, embolden
himself to the real acting of it: that look as a Painter does, fingere figuram
and imaginem of the picture he intends to draw; and an Orator does contrive in
his mind the speech he will utter, and a Soldier does design the method he
will fight in, and a Lover does fancy the beauty he could love, which seeing he
loves for nothing, is in the intellect embraced for good, but such as the sense
admits such: so when an evil Witness is resolved on an Evidence, and will
desperately depose in a Cause against any one whom thereby he would overthrow,
Qui testibus pecuniam dederit, ut falsum testimonium dicent, vel certe, quod
setunt taceant, aut non exprimant venitatem, vel judici praemium dederent, ut
sententia contra justitiam dicat vel non judicet; humiliores capite puntantur,
honestiores bonorum suorum amissione multentur. Edict. Theodori Regis, c. 91.
Annexum Cassiodor. p. 366.
he does premeditate what to do, and provides what to say in all parts of his
Deposition, which may more then ordinarily conduce to his end. Thus wise are
the Creatures of this World to carry on their Work, though they have Hell for
their wages: whereas the only way to express honest wisdom, is to engage in no
fordid action; but to make the answer of a good Conscience, which will comfort
in all conditions. Contra singulas objectiones it a luculenter, and argumentose
respondens peroravit, ut omnibus admirationi and venerationi haberetur, ita ut
nulla suspicio de his in quibus accusabatur, in cordibus audientium ulterius
remaneret Math. Paris. in R. 1. p. 173.
This our King Richard the first found relief in, when in the Emperors hands
he was charged with injuries done to the Sicilians, He made so pithy and direct
answers to them, and excused himself in every point so thoroughly, that the
Emperor much marvailed at his high wisdom and prudence, and not only greatly
commended him for the same, but from thenceforth used him more courteously.
Prudentis viri intellectus quorundam generosum animalium assimilatur, qui die
tanquam caliginosi ac somnolenti dormirant, sed noctu acutissime vident, hosti
aggrediendo praedaque intenti. Inter instructiones Cardinal. Montalti, p. 429.
Thesauri Politici.
And indeed, difficulties are the proper touch of prudence; for as every man
can sail in a calm, when in a storm he must be a good Pilot, that can keep by
steerage his Vessel from danger; so every man that is not a Drone, can give
answers in easy and ordinary matters; but to give them ripely and readily in
difficult Cases, that is the trial of prudence. Upon which consideration, vae
soli is a truth in this sense, which is one of the Wise-man's sense. For be one
never so wise and dexterous; yet he is but a semiplene Witness, and nothing
will be carried by him; but when two are in joint testimony, and the Devil to
back and breast them, with steels that are of proof, when he has obdurated
them, and turned them loose as sinners that will not shrink or give back, then
his work goes on with all possible caution. D' Avila, p. 350.
Thus warily did he steer Charles the Ninth of France, to set Villoquer to
murder Lignerols, who from the Duke of Anjou knew of the Massacre; and yet
though he had set the assassin about it, yet when he heard it was done, showed
great trouble for it, and committed Villoquer and Mansfield, that jointly did
it by his command, to Prison. Thus did he further lead the same Prince to some
seeming favor to those of the Religion, till his designs were brought about,
and they were mastered; Page 361.
which while he was effecting, as he endeavored by corrupting Cardinal
Messandeino to misrepresent better then it was, and to put a fair gloss upon it
to Pope Pius the Eighth; which he honestly would not do, telling him plainly,
That by his Majesty's unexpected falling from the zeal of the Catholic
Religion, all his most valued and precious Jewels, were no more then dirt in
his estimation. But also when he had effected them, then he sets on the King of
Navarre, and terrifies him from his Religion, and then tells the Prince of
Conde, that there was no more ado, but he must turn from Calvinism, Page 379.
or else expect Mass, Death, or Bastile: which three words so wrought on him,
that to Mass he came publicly. Nor much of a better nature, but sure a like
work of darkness, was that of the persuasion of Poltrot to murder the Duke of
Guise; if a truth it be that is reported, that Coligui the Admiral proposed him
infinite rewards. And another told him, (which I believe to be but a mere
fiction, Page 176.
and malevolent calumny) that he should merit of God, by taking out of the
world so great a persecuter of the Faith. Lord! what Hellish advisedness is
this, to make darkness a withdrawing room to such villainy of plot and
contrivance; which makes me often think of St. Paul's Aphorism, as of that
truth, which will one day be visible in the punishment of it, when the Judge of
quick and dead shall come, The wisdom of the World is enmity with God. For as
that Spanish Proverb is, He is a King that never saw a King, that is, he is the
happy man that contents himself with moderate things, and can sit at home with
short commons. So is he the wise and wary man, that is aware of these wary men
of the World, D'Avila, Lib. 10. page 820 of H. France.
whole unhappiness it is, more often then they think, to have their Religion
counted Hypocrisy, their prudence a wicked craftiness, their policy meanness
of spirit, their liberality licentiousness, their affability contemned, their
gravity suspected, their name detested, their private conversation imputed to
enormous vices, and their deaths extremely rejoiced at. It Is a good account of
the use of power indulged to great men, Quanquam potestati nostrae Deo faverte
subjaceat omne quod volumus, voluntatem tamen nostrum de ratione metimur, ut
illud majus existimemur elegisse, quod cunctos dignum est approbare. Theodoric.
Epist. 12. ad Eugenium Cassiodor. variat. lib. 1. p. 7.
that Theodorick gives, not by it to accomplish wicked, but worthy things, and
instead of making their will the reason their subjects should walk by, bring
their wills to the reason God will judge them by. To apply this then to our
Text, the Chancellor by these words, Qui iniqui duo tam incauti, etc. means
that wickedness in Witnesses, two or more having designed what they will act,
and prepared for whatever can come upon it, are but in so doing true
descendants from Satan their Ancestor, who from the beginning was a liar, and
who principles his to carry on his design by any means: which two thousand
thousand that are, iniqui, shall not prevail to effect further then God pleases
to permit them; for he takes the wise in their own craft, and the counsel of
the froward is carried headlong, as Job's phrase is, Chap. 5.13. maugre the
prudence they think to express in it, who are as it follows. Prudentiores
namque, ut dicit Dominus, sunt filii hujus mundi quam filii lucis.

This scripture is in the 16 Luke 8. uttered upon occasion of the parable of
the unjust Steward, which while he had opportunity feathered as we say his
nest, and in the Halcyon of his gainful Steward-ship, provided against the
winter and storm of his Eclipse and disfavour, the wariness and sovereignty of
which providence benign to the futurity of his condition, and preventive of the
disfavour of his indignated Lord, Our Savior not only commends, but transmits
it as a rule for his to practice spiritually, so to use the day of grace and
life that the day of desertion and death may be sweetened by the provision laid
in, for and against it, For the children of this world so do, And therein are
more wise in their Generation then the children of light. Which scripture
because it has much of concern in it to a Christians erudition, in the wisdom
which concerns both direction of himself, The Authors humble Prayer to God.
and detection of his rival, the worldling. I shall humbly and shortly write a
little of Beseeching God that he would assist me as a child of light, to
understand the wisdom that is from above, which is pure in principle, and
peaceable in practice, and that he would by his Grace keep me, in that happy
ignorance of the children of this world, whose wisdom though it be notable in
its Generation, yet in God's account, is earthly, sensual, and Devilish.

(...)] These are one of the parties in comparison so called, not only because
they in (...) those of which the world is built and inhabited, Or, (...)
darlings and infants which the world suckles, but as they are (...) unhappily
so the worlds as the world is theirs, by a complacency and inseparableness, or
dearness of love, Pagnin. in verbo.
qui volunt esse filii mundi, aut quorum desiderium est in mundo, says R.
David. The Holy Language expresses every thing that is more then ordinary, by
the name of son, he that is condemned to die, they call a son of death, a lost
man, a son of perdition, those that are married sons of marriage, Qui nihil
aliud curant, quam vitae huju, commoda, filii mundi appellantur. Grotius in loc.
and so the sons of this world, worldly men, because they are conformed to the
fashion of it, and not transformed in the spirit of their minds, as children of
light are, but do M^ndana sapere; relish only the cookery of this world, and
not savor the things of God; They do mundana quaerere, all their love is so
to, and their labor after the world, that they think no toil too hard, no
self-denial too great, so they may grasp the world, and Ioyn land to land, and
house to house, till they be alone in the earth, and then they do gaudere
mundanis, having acquired the world, they acquiesce in it as their portion, and
sing that requiem to their souls that they have enough, when as they are in
Gods account miserable, and poor and blind and naked. These Saint Bernard
compares to Oaks and Elms, which are Great in bulk and of a procerous growth,
but they are not planted in the noble Garden, Sin^ arbores infructuosae, ut
quercus and ulmus and arbores silvestres aliae; sed hujusmodi nemo plantat in
borto suo, quia non faciunt fructum and si quem faciunt, non humano sed Porcino
usui aptus est. Sanctus Bernardus, Sermon. 1, De Sancto Benedicto.
wherein the Master of them delights to walk, because they yield no fruit, or
if that they do, it is fruit for swine, not men, Tales sunt filii hujus seculi
agentes se commessationibus, says the Father, And hence it is that because
they bring fruit only to themselves; and none to God, they are called not
only by John the Baptist a Generation of Vipers, but by God in a vehemence of
indignation rebellious children, Matthew. 7.
30 Esaias 1. lying children verse the ninth, children of transgression, chapter
the fifty seventh verse the fourth, backsliding children 3 Ier. 14. and chapter
the fourth verse 22. children of whoredoms; 1 H^seah 2. children of Iniquity 10
Hosea 9. children of the flesh 9 Romans 8. children of disobedience 2 Ephesians. 2.
and of wrath verse 3. children of the devil 1 John 3 chap. 10. These are the
men denominated here, the children of this world. The Nimrods, and mighty
hunters of the world, who sail in seas of blood, to ports of power, who waste
Countries, deflower virgins, violate matrons, dissolve polityes, and turn the
world topsieturvy, that they may be known to be powerful, The Achitophel^ of
this world, who poison ages and persons with fraud and falsehood, being
Proteus's and Polypus's, and to save themselves cannot only be willows, and
not Oaks, bend rather then break, but become Malls, and Axes to dig up their
own foundations, and to ruin others body and soul, to secure themselves; who
can curse with Balaam, for a reward those whom God has blessed; and are so
pertinacious in their wickedness, that they neither fear God's Angels of
terror, nor regard the miracles that he admonishes them by. These are the
Herod's of this world, who are so in love with what they should not be,
themselves, that they study to be applauded vainly, and in the elevation of it
forget God impiously: the Iudas's of this World, whose kisses have more harm in
them, then the staves of Caitiff Jews, or the swords of Butcherly Assassines;
the Simon Magus's of this World, who will be trucking for every spiritual
thing, and will, with our Cardinal Wolsey, let nothing pass, unless it pays
tribute to them. These are they that our Lord calls the Children of this World;
and whom the Prophet David calls the ungodly who prosper in the world, they
increase in riches, Psalm. 73.3.
and from whom he prays de^iverance: and why? because they imagine mischief in
their heart, continually are they gathered together for war. And who by reason
of this, Psalm. 140.3. Sanctus Bernardus, Sermon. 6. in quadrages.
are not only a grief to, but the terror of God's little Flock, which made
the Father cry out to God, Heu, heu, mihi domine Deus, quoniam undique mihi
bella, etc. Oh miserable man that, I am, O Lord, who am every way beset, and
have snares on all hands of me, whom the darts of envy, and the open war of
fury threatens; Woe is me, who am insecure in my pleasures, in my delights, in
my sleep, in my sustenance; against whom, both labor and rest are combined:
thus that Father. This is the notion of ^he Children of the World, whose
malice, power, and policy, would dishearten the Children of Light, Were it not
that they were but Children of this World, sinful in what they do, changeable
notwithstanding what they do, miserable after what they do: for all that they
do, God either undoes, o^ undoes them, that they shall not see their projects
in the plumes of their pride, and in the spread sails of their success. These
Achans get the Wedge of Gold, and the garments of gaudery, but they have God's
curse with it. They get Children, and name Lands by their own names, but God
condemns their Children to obscurity; so that they are in genitorum vituperium
and laesuram, or else die, and they leave no name on the Earth, no heir to
inherit their acquisitions. They think themselves admirable Architects, that
can pyramidize their names and governments, in some durable Monument of
strength, and admiration; but God tumbles down in his fury these mis-instructed
Structures, and makes his counsel stand. And therefore the power and policy of
the World had need to look to its foundation, that it be upon the Rock against
which no winds or waves shall prevail, and into which no moth of God's curse,
or canker of times injury, will work it self; were it not for this damp, and
this handwriting to the World's Nebuchadnezzar's, What a Bochim* what a
Golgotha, would this World be to God's hidden ones; to his Jewels whom he
renders as the apple of his eye; there would be no lighting on the Earth for
these Doves, though it were to but pick up the Crumbs that are the offals
worldl^ngs live upon, but God has in wisdom made the world, and all in it
versatile, that there may be some serenato and brize under its solstice, and
that the greatest felicity of man might be even by its own sentence imperfect,
Galienus the Emperor came a youth to the Empire (...), Eutropius in Brevia^o,
lib. 9. edit. Sylb. p. 121.
etc. His first years were prudently and quietly reigned, after, he slackned in
his Gubernative happiness, and at last he was wholly a bad man and a bad King,
Severus was a victorious Emperor, and of austere discipline in his Army,
military rudeness he endured not even in Britain, though here he had many
intolerable provocations; yet as successful as he was, who was the glorious
Phoenix of his time, He did not only say when he lived and looked upon his
life and actions Omnia fui and nihil sum, but he caused his urne to be
inscribed with this, (...). Xiphilinus in Epitom. Dionis, p. 424. edit. Sylburg.
Thou shall contain the man whom the whole world could not, thy narrow bounds
shall conclude his body, whose ambition the world was too straight for. Thus
does God furl up the flying Colors of the Sons of this World, and put them
into a storm, in which they are forced to strike their Sails, and level their
Mast, that they may live and ride out his fury; which if they do in this World
to such a degree, as Portius Cato did, in spite of all the envy that attended
him, which only injured him to his aggrandization, polishing his prudence, and
making his tried virtue more truly standard and defecate, then otherwise it
would have been: which is not often, yet their Deathbed terrors and their
after-torments, declare them children of the world, who are only more wise in
their Generation, then the children of light, who are the other part of the
Subjects opposed to Children of this World.

(...)] Here light is opposed to the World, as it is the region of darkness,
not in the natural and ma^hematique notion of it; for that is illustrated by
the light of that great Taper the Sun and its Celestial Peers, that do beday
and belustre it, but in the sinful and penal notion of it. Thus as the world
lies in sin, so the state of sin is termed darkness, 1 Pet. 2.9.
thus S. Peter uses it, who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous
light; ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord. So that
look as Children of the World, suck the milk of the World, sin and pleasures,
and cry after the World as their Parents, and play with the toys of the World,
as their senses and labors are gratified and expended about worldly things, 1
John 1.5.
so are the children of light, intent on light; they love God as light of
perfection in himself, John 8.1^.
and communication to them; they love Christ as the light of matchless Charity
to die for Enemies, and to example his to a suitable goodness; they love
holiness, as the light of irradiation, kindled in the heart of God's Elect,
Ephesians. 5.8.
by a spark from his essential holiness; they love heaven, as light of
clarification, Colos. 1.12.
wherein their vile bodies shall be made glorious, and they shall see God face
to face; in his light they shall see light. These are children of the light,
that lucem amant are not delighters, in surfeiting and drunkenness, in
chambring and wantonness, but put on the Lord Jesus; and in his robe appear to
men in the light of shining, and reformed works, works fruits of repentance,
worthy of the light of God's countenance, manifestation of the Gospel's
prevalence and prescription, and of holy men's practice and approbation. These
are children of light, qui lucem quaerunt, they seek whom their soul loves;
light is their joy, and they search after light, to know and prize it, that
their joy may be full, in plenitudine lucis internae, quae luci aeternae est
praefatoria. And this is much of their happiness, that God in this instinct of
theirs to seek light, does not let them seek in vain; they seek not the living
among the dead, light in the darkness of this world, which is wholly obfuscated
by the incredulity of Jews, Cum pene totus ipse mundus nox sit and totus semper
versatur in tenebris, nox est judaica persidia, nox ignorantia Paganorum, nox
Haeretica pravitas, nox Catholicorum carnalis animalisve conversatio. Sanctus
Bernardus* Sermon. 15. in Cantic. Cantic.
the ignorance of Heathens, the obstinacy of Heretics, the carnal and sensual
sinful lives of Catholics; may I not (says the Father) call that night, ubi
non percipiuntur, quae sunt spiritus Dei, where there is a clear sight into all
policy of project, all mystery of mechaniques, but a darkness to the simplicity
that is in Christ, where men see not the holy spirit in his addresses, nor feel
him in his operations on them. No these Seekers, (far from the Phanatiques, and
Enthusiastiques of our age,) do not seek light out of levity and skeptical
unsatisfiedness, which keeps them lax and unfixed in every principle of truth;
but they seek light as it is coelitus data, as it comes from the Father of
light, to direct his Children to walk in the light; and they seek it as it is
res simplex and aperta, as it is that which will make them walk honestly as in
the day, and let every eye into their Cell and Closet. These illuminates no
Heretics, Dan. 1.10.
are Heavenly Daniels, that will have their Conversations open, that they being
transparent all may see them. And this they do, quia luce gaudent, the more
light they have, the more are they justified; for as they pray, that God would
make them lights in a crooked generation: so when they are hea^d in this, that
according to the will of God they have requested, they acclamate the light by
which they are illustrated to be what grace has made them, O quanta amaritudine
adveniens, liberasti adveniens bone Jesus, etc. Sanctus Bernardus, Sermon. 32. in
Cantic.
burning and shining lights; and they assault their Lord with many grateful
tears, O blessed Jesus, (say they) how many sorrows and sighs has thy presence
in my soul rescued and resolved into comforts? How many mists and foggs, in
which all sense of thy blood my ransom, thy spirit my guide, thy advocation my
security, has thy manifestation to me despelled, and thy balm anointing my
galled and oppressed Conscience, assuaged and calmed? How have thou caught and
saved me sinking, comforted and satisfied me despairing: How, O Light of
Lights, have thou lightened my heart, when it saw thee in it the hope of glory.
Thus that Father. These are the Children of light, who have all the properties
of light; Light is res pura, so are these pure in heart; Matthew. 5.^. Genesis 12.2.
Prove. 12 26. Ephesians. 5*15. 1 Cor. 10.32.
Light is res commoda, so are these useful to the age, and time, and place they
are in; Light is res decora, so are these the beauty and glory of their
dwelling; Light is res placida, so are these. And hence they are said to walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, giving no offense, neither to the
Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of GOD. And are not these thus
qualified rare Jewels? Do not these whom God accounts his jewels, and over whom
he extends his everlasting arms? whom he hides in the evil day, and whom he
hears for thousands of sinners, that reproach the holiness of their lives, and
would but for them have Hell out of Heaven soon pou^ed on them. I say, do not
such, rarae aves in terris, deserve to be favorites? And ought they not to be
prayed for, that they may fructuose uti luce, that they may, while they have
light about them, not be in darkness, and complain of want of light, running
into Factions and Pharisaical follies, by which the true light of Religion is
blemished, and for which blasphemed, but that they keep themselves free from
Faction, Schism, Heresy, Separation, and walk by God's light in his
Scripture-Candlestick, which the Catholic Church faithfully sets forth in its
useful posture. And I pray God my soul may have the light of its conduct to
Heaven, The Church of England.
by the Ministry of our holy Mother the Church of England, whose humble Son, I
ever (I bless God) in the worst of times, have conscienciously and convictedly
been, and hope ever to continue, beseeching God to visit with his light and
truth her many seduced ones, and to make her Doctrine and Discipline sweetly
effectual to their reduction; whose wander is not more her blemish, then their
own danger. This shall suffice for my observation on our Lord's Description of
the Subjects he speaks of, Children of the World, Children of Light.

Now of the Praedicate, or our Lord's Sentence, Prudentiores sunt, (...); this
is a word which Critics make to import not barely a wisdom of mind and
speculation, but chiefly of action and dispatch; not only a knowledge how
matters are to be done, and to give the rule of them, 6. Ethicor.
but an exercitial and effective knowledge of them. And thus Aristotle uses the
word, and thereupon says, that Anaxagoras Thal^s and others, were called (...),
who were not (...), utpote (...); and therefore to the complete knowledge of
this word, we must take in that sense that not only Xenophon does, when he
terms one (...), that is, a dexterious Warrior: but that in which even our
Lord uses it, in Mat. 25.7, 8. where he calls the Virgins that had their oil in
their lamps, and their lamps ready trimmed, (...), and those that had their oil
to seek, when their lamps should have been l^ghted, and they ready for their
Lord, (...), because they wanted expression of more wisdom to make them
acceptable, as the other that were punctual in their duty arrived at.

This prudence then is of three sorts; the prudence of the Serpent, which when
he supposes any danger, Nervus prudentiae est conjectura, quae futurum quod
o^s^urum ^st prosp^tens, as^imilatur itineri, quod ^o^t^^ aggredimur Instructio
ad Cardinal. Montaltum. These. Politic. p. 427.
will secure his head, and observing where he may mostly be injured. Secondly,
the prudence of circumvention, and a wittiness of defraudation. And lastly, the
true wisdom, which Saint Basil calls the knowledge, what is fit to be done, and
not to be done. (...). Sanctus Basilius, Homil. 12. in princip. Prove. Tom. 1.
p. 461.
The two former were the wisdom of this unjust Steward, he would be sure to
keep himself from want; and that to do, he thinking nothing more expedient,
then to make him friends of unrighteous Mammon, his Master's goods under his
power, (he having a value of his corporal worth, and the security thereof from
disesteem for (...) Budaeus makes to have a sense of ^fferri, Commentar Gr.
Lingua, p. 891.
and animo tolli) he gives occasion thereby to our Lord to say, The Children of
this world are more wise, etc. Which words are not to be understood absolutely,
but secundum quid; not as if there were a more real wisdom in the worlds choice
and practice then in holiness and her ways* for then the wisdom of the world
would not be enmity with God as it is; nor then would the fear of God be the
beginning of wisdom, as it is, and a good understanding have they that do it:
but it is meant to those ends that their worldly and sinful actions conduce, In
rebus suis agendis, nam actiones Hebraei vocent (...). Grot. in locum. Sanctus
Bonaventura in locum.
as they are children of the world, and only desire to approve themselves to
the world (...), As Owls and Cats can see better then men in the night to catch
mlce, and vermin, but not to read books, that is in their kind and according
to the actions that are proper for them; so are and no otherwise the children
of this World, wiser in their spheres, to gain their temporal ends, then the
children of heaven are to eternal and spiritual ones. This then, I humbly
conceive, our Lord uttered* not to approve sensual and sinful diligence, but to
exprobrate spiritual sloth, and by this Cock of Worldlings vigilance, to awake
his drowsy Peter's. And methinks our Lord in saying they are wiser in their
Generation, then the children of light, provokes his to rouz themselves to holy
activity, from this that worldly men show Prudence. And in three things
manifest their Prudence, Probitate electionis, ardore prosecutionis, constantia
adhaesionis: The first evidences the legitimation of Prudence, as no hand
over-head, and extemporary sudden thing; but that which is cum avisamento
consilii and rationis, a fruit trial and experience; Wisdom dwells with
Prudence, dictating to it, right time, right method, right instruments of
actions. The second propalates the activity of Prudence; it is no Dormonse that
lies snudging, and creeps softly, or appears cooly: no, when it has well
chosen, what, when, and by what means, and to what end it is to act; it
vigorously, and with a masculine fortitude executes them, aut vincere, aut
mori, is the Motto of Prudence. The third discovers the fortitude of Prudence,
it is big of a generous indefession, and a noble heroiqueness; what it has
chosen it prosecutes, and in the prosecution is weariless and undiscouraged:
these are the gradations of Prudence. Our Lord then does not in the first sense
strictly predicate this (wiser) of the children of the world, in this place.
For according to the examen of defecated and primitive reason, as the World is
under sin, and the wisdom and tendency of it folly of sin; so the wisdom of the
World is (...), a very senseless choice; it is the choice of Leah before Rachel,
darkness rather then light, Belial with refusal of Christ: but our Lord says
they are wiser in their Generation, because in the choice of the world, they do
choose what is more quadrate to their sensual selves, a sensual world will best
please a sensual heart, and sensual affections; and because the world is so
consanguineous and proportionate to corrupt reason, will, and affection,
therefore all the sails and streamers of endeavor are flying, to take the
Worlds full wind in them; they make the World only their choice, and admit
nothing in competition with it; they have no other Diana Valentina, no other
Mistress they value and apply to; they rise up early, go to bed late, and eat
the bread of sorrow, that they may obtain the world, and that had, care not
what they miss: and herein they outstrip in generation the children of light.
For though they have a more transcendent object, in whom are concentred all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and though the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
righteousness of it draw with it all superadditions; yet the whole thoughts of
the devout soul fix not upon God, but scatter and remit their intention to
couple with other objects, which makes them miss the mark of having God always
ready to be their help in trouble, because they tempt him to punish their ^rail
inconstancy with some temporary withdrawings. O how rare is it for a soul to be
of David's temper, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: the desire of
my soul is to thee, and to the remembrance of thy name. Where are the Saintly
Merchants, that sell all they have to purchase God's pearl? and the Mary's that
forsake all the trash of the World to sit at their Lord's feet? where are the
Mary Magdalens that prefer to be mourners in the Sepulcher of a crucified
Savior to the theaters of mirth and the rooms of state and pleasure. The
world, alas! has these Minions and Zealots for it, that will adieu God, a good
Conscience, Relations, yea, even life for it; and all this with an heroiqueness
and cheerful gallantry, as they say, when God's Clyents come to him with cold
zeal, and serve him with refracted and divided affections, looking aside upon
the world, when they seem to look direct upon God; like those of old, whom God
reproaches for their prevarication with him, and requires them to cast away
their abominations, Ezekiel. 20.8.
and not to defile themselves with the Idols of Egypt; Zeph. 1.5.
and those whom he detects for worshipping and swearing by the Lord, and by
Malchom. Such parcel guilt Christians, his Holiness cannot endure; because
their project is to serve themselves of him, not to serve him with all their
might: when a storm they see, they consult evasion of it, though it be with
abnegation of the truth of God deposited with them, and professed by them. Let
holiness shift for it self, they are of Judas his company, when they are most
and successfullest: so much do good men often give way to corruption, that,
with Peter, they dare not venture the least trial; whereas the World's
Creatures, as they mind earthly things, so they exert their addictions with
vehemence and indefession, as if they meditated the success of it. As God does
every thing in weight and measure, that is, to the perfection of its kind, and
as comports with so matchless a Master; so do these comply with whatever may be
auxiliary to them. Fit objects to work on, fit subjects to work by, fit methods
to work in, fit time of production, fit rewards to instruments, fit menace to
opposites: so great masters of diligence, and so cunning enquirers are they,
that they serve times and men, till their Mine be ready, and then their arrows
are at the mark before the blow is prevented: what posting^ for intelligence,
See my Discourse of the Piety, Policy, and Charity, of elder times, and elder
Christians, Printed Anno 1653.
what pensions to false servants, what subornation of Cabinet-counsel, what
prostitution of confessions, what depredations of territories, what, in fine,
Satanique subtilty does the men of this World act, to bring to pass their
desires? Let the facts of Caesar Borgia, Rich^lie^, and other the great
Cormorants of Christendom's policy discover; Hypodigm. Neustriae. p. 175.
Holingshed. in H. 4 p. 536.
yea, surely the carriage of that terrible Duke of Burgundy, who collected all
the venom and poison, that was in the filthy matter of dead Serpents,
Scorpions, Adders, and other mischievous Creatures, and threw them in barrels
into Calice, on purpose to poison the Soldiers that held it against the
French, and by poisoning the Inhabitants render it intenable. I say, let the
prudent love of children of the world to the world, be calculated by this, and
'twill appear to be prudence with a vengeance, though it be but that of their
generation, in which they only are wiser; O my soul enter not thou into their
secrets; O my God give me not a portion with these men in their delicates; let
me be none of those wisemen, The Authors Prayer.
who do go down into Hell, because they forget thee; but vouchsafe me that
prudence of the Serpent, that may protect me from being harmed, and that
innocence of the Dove, that may keep me from harming others; and let my soul
ever prefer honesty to policy, and to save my self with thy fools, rather then
to perish with the Worlds wisemen; whose Deathbeds have no comfortabler notes
then those of Despair, D'Avila, p. 365.
which Walsey uttered, O that I had served my God, as faithfully as I have done
my King, then he would not have forsaken me in my distress as the King does: or
as those in Wisdom are brought in groaning for anguish of spirit, and saying,
This is he whom we had sometime in derision, and a proverb of reproach. Wild.
5.3, 4, 5.
We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honor. How is
he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints? This I
no further prosecute, though it were worthy some further Discourse, because it
is the Gangrene of the Age, which has so prevailed against the severity of
piety, that there is nothing seems more to be a man's reproach, then to be of
pristine simplicity: so far are men declined from that Christian candor, and
plainness of meaning, that they seem to say that to Religion and honesty, which
Popili^s did to his friend King Antiochus, when by the Romans he was sent
Ambassador to him. Facessat privat^ amicitia dum publica agitantur negoti^.
. While we have to do in business, let us do that without either thought of God
seeing or hearing us in our Counsels, and lay Conscience behind our backs,
while this that so highly concerns us to effect, be continually before our
faces. But God undoubtedly will meet with this, when he besieges with his
terrors these Worldlings, and reduces them to such straights, that they shall
be glad to release all their confidences, to obtain a minutes ease; and when it
is too late, cry out despairingly, as Lysimachus did; O for how small and short
a pleasure have I lost a Kingdom, for how vain an humor have I passed away
Heaven. This shall be the portion of these Politico's, if they miss temporary
disgrace; which some of them have not done, as in the following words appears,
which returns me to the Text.

Sic Jezabel sc^leratissima testes duos filios belial, contra Naboth in judicio
produxit, quo ipse vitam perdidit, and Ahab Rex ejus vineam possidebat.

This Clause is quoted out of 1 Kings 21 and it has a notable Narrative of an
innocent Subject oppressed and murdered; and that not by assassination, but
judicially, and according to the preciseness of the appearance of Justice; and
three things are narrated in it; Who was the prosecutour, That the Text says
was Iezabel, a Woman by Sex, and a Queen by Dignity; but no honor to either:
for it adds, she was sceleratissima: Then quomodo, how she brought this
artifice about to reach Naboth's life, duos filios belial, contra Naboth in
judicio produxit: thirdly, in quem finem, she did this; that is double, first
that Naboth might die a Malefactor, and then that Ahab might have his Vineyard,
as his Escheat.

1 Kings 16.31.
Iezabel sceleratissima] This Lady was Wife to King Ahab, a Woman of a busy
humor, and masculine spirit, as appears in the impiety of her life,
Instrumentum erat diaboli accommodatissimum, and plus quam dict possit
maliciosum, P. Martyr. in Reg. c. 21.
and the tragickness of her Counsel, whom Satan (of all her Sex) culled out, as
the most accommodate Engine for seduction and cruelty, that the World in her
time, or in any time after incarnate had. Rev. 2.20.
In allusion to which, the Holy Ghost charges upon the Church of Thyatira, that
she suffered the Woman Iezabel to teach, Hic impia mulior prius vitiavi^ Dei
cultum introducendo Baalis Idolatriam nunc^^ tiam leges politica^ ^^ntaminat in
republica; (...) duabus partibus corruptis, sani quid potest super^sse. Per.
Martyr. in 1 Reg. c. 21.
and to seduce his Servants to commit fornication: the allusion being to this
very woman, who because she was a Sidonian, and a worshipper of Baal, brought
in the worship of Baal into Israel, and stirred up her husband to prosecute the
Prophets of God, whom by his authority she is said to cut off. Now this woman
being so tart and subtle, whom nothing would content, but Tyranny in the State,
as well as Idolatry in the Church, having always in her mouth that of
Caracalla's Mother-in-Law, Imperatores dare leges non accipere, and willing her
husband should rule over, rather then rule by the Law, is here termed by the
Text sceleratissima.

Sceleratissima] Not as an Epethite of dedecoration to Women, the most tender,
delicate, delectable, obliging; yea, the only Phoenix part of the Creation;
that which the Father of men, innocent Adam, upon God's first presentation of
Eve, (...). Dictum Athletae apud Plutarchum, Lib. De Cu riositate, p. 521.
termed bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, himself in another, and I had
almost said better Sex; and ever since his Sons and Male-Posterity have, when
they have done manlily, and virtuously, doted on. No such opprob^y then is our
Text-Master guilty of: nor were he would his Commentator suffer such his
mistake, if he could be guilty of it, to go uncorrected. So much a valuer am I
of that incomparable Sex, My two dear Wives, Mary and Elizabeth, buried and
lying in St. M. Magd. Milkstreet, London; to whose memory, I intend this a
second and more durable Monument.
in gratitude to those excellent Pair of Virtues which once in that Sex I
successively could have called mine own And the memory of the last of which, I
shall mournfully carry to my grave, as the SHE, whose person alive was my
delight; and her memory, now dead, my joy to have had, and my grief to have
lost. Ravisius, De claris mulieribus. Richardus Dinothus, De rebus and factis
mirabilibus, lib. 7. c. 2, 3, 4. Fabianus Justinianus. in indice universali.
Plutarchus, in Lib. De mulierum virtutibus. p. 242.
I say no such Epethite has the Woman here in the Text for her Sex sake; for
that has produced matchless Heroicks, divine Prophetesses, seraphique
Illuminates, perspicacious Oracles, harmonious Sirens, what not, that has been
Heaven on Earth, Spirit in Flesh, Merit in Mortality, as the Authors that have
honored themselves with treating on them, have abundantly evinced. But she is
by our Chancellor called so, as she is degenerated; of sweet become sour, and
of gentle and soft, perverted by Satan into a turbulency and bloudiness of
nature. As she is another Tarquinius superbus a Tullia incitatn^, advocato
Senatu regnum paternum repeter^ caepit. Aurel. Victor. De Vir. Illustri. p.
491. Aug. Script.
Tullia, Messalina, and another Maritum suapte natura crudelem ad omne facinus
procliviorem reddidit. Cuspinianus.
Constantia, whose influences are to confirm in evil, not withdraw from it.
This Lady so ingeniously savage, and zealously terrible in the designs of her
mind, and execution of her Ministers, is by our Text called Sceleratissima.
Sceleratus in quo scelus sit constitutum, Ea erat fervidis admodum asperisque
moribus. Jovius. De Elisa matre. M. Sfortiae, in vita Sfortiae. Scelerata
castra, Sueton in Claudio. c. 1. Vicus sceleratus Aurel. Victor. in Tullia. p.
491. Aug. Script. Et scelerato signatur nomine, quae proficiscentes in praelium
porta dimisit. 1 Florus, lib. 1. c. 12.
sed commissum, says Donatus. Tully couples Impurus with Sceleratus; and if in
the positive the word be so significant, what degree does the superlative
import? Surely no less, then that she was nequitiae antesignanus; or as the
Holy Ghost brands her, when he says, Ahab sold himself to do wickedness. He
adds, whom Iezabel his wife stirred up, and made the cause of multiplied
mischiefs. For this Sex, as in its integrity, it is the Womb of all sweetness
and tractability; and not only civility, but also Christianity, has been
ushered in to Nations by their fair hands, Messalinae quoquo amorem
flagrantissimum non tam indignitate contumeliarum, quam periculi metu abjecit.
Cum adultero Silio acquiri imperium credidesset. Sueton. in Claudio. c. 36.
and at their influential entreaty: so in the degeneration of these, are the
darkest nights of turpitude, and the deepest Woads of malice tinctured. We say
there is no murder, but a Woman is in the company of it; and when all the
instances of a cruel she were lost, one might draw the portraicture of it most
livelily from this sceleratissima here, Plutarchus. Lib. De sole^^ia animalium
p. 972.
who like that Aetolique Woman in Plutarch, was as cruel as if she had
accompanied with a Dragon, from whom she learned all truculency. For she was
not only an active and busie-spirited Lady in discourse and influence on every
person, and every thing, but she was one that thought her wit more regal, then
that of her husband-soveraign; whom when she sees dejected, because modestly
denied, what earnestly he desired, she caresses increpatorily, Art thou my Lord
Ahab, quoth she, a King, and will thou be denied? Is there any thing that
Israel has, which Israel's Monarch shall not command. Let me but use thy name,
and thou shall have thy pleasure, and make the Contrarients to thee pay dear
for their insolence. Grotius in (...).
Do but now, my Dear, own me, and I Will fetch the vineyard and his life with a
vengeance that holds it against thee. Has thou his Lord and Master asked it on
exchange or purchase? and gives he thee no better answer, Lev. 25.15.
then a God forbid, that I should sell the inheritance of my Fathers; a Law
indeed good against private persons, but not against the King, whom, because he
knew not how to obey, he shall ere long be ruined by. This is the sum of her
speech and design. But this is but the apertura to her wickedness: that which
confirms all she does, is the King's Seal, with which she seals Letters to the
Elders or Heads of Iezreel (...), the Candidates or Nobles that were clad in
white. For so of old they were (white being a token of Dignity.) To whom, so
soon as the Regal Mandate comes, all obedience is given. And so Naboth enters
on danger by a wicked Woman, wickedly designing her revenge in his ruin. So
are the words,

Testes duo filios Belial contra Naboth in judicio produxit.

A formal trial it must be, and but formal; for Naboth's vineyard had made him
criminal before accused, and Iezabel's malice condemned him before found
guilty; Witnesses there must be, and two; three Josephus will have, which
Grotius says was usual upon a person of note, Nam adversus insignis famae virum
tres requiruntur. Grotius in loc.
as Naboth was: but alas, they are loose profligate men, that know not what
they ought, nor care not what they do swear; something they must depose to
convict him, and they boggle at nothing Iezabel will put them upon. These
Ruffians and Monsters that defy all Conscience, Seducers, Deuteronomy. 13.13. 2 Samuel
21.1. men of violence and hubbub, Judge. 19.22. Chap 20.13. of uncleanness and
beastly ignorance, 1 Samuel 2.12. despisers of God and his appointments, 1 Samuel
10.27. churlish and rude Monsters, 1 Samuel 25.17. 2 Samuel 16.17. These are the
(...), the men at large, that say their tongues are their own; these are the
Witnesses. And they are said, in judicio produci; because they, in due form of
Laws, as the pretense was, do accuse and evidence against Naboth. The word
Witness, comes from (...) depredari and expoliari; not to right him, if Justice
he had on his side; but to spoil him of his life and fortune. 'Twas before such
a High-Court of Justice, as David the King complained of, Psalm. 119.61. the
Bands of the wicked (...) have robbed me. But Rabbi Himmanuel reads it, dolores
impiorum, id est, quibus me officiunt impii, expoliaverunt me boni^ mundi. For
what Iezabel had contrived, these were to make oath of, and that with boldness,
and in affront of Naboth's innocence; for so our Text says, they were produced,
contra Naboth in judicio. And that not to fine and imprison him, as a man
disaffected to Ahab, and as one who was rustiquely stubborn, and contumacious
to Majesty; but as a Miscreant, neither fearing God, nor regarding the King.
For of blasphemy against both they do accuse him, and such by oath make good
against him; and thereby that of our Text is confirmed.

Quo ipse vitam perdidit and Achab Rex ejus vineam possidchat.

Iezabel gave the counsel, to falsely impeach him, and by Witnesses of
ratification to sentence him; so is the Holy Text, ver. 10. And therefore the
murder of Naboth is attributed to Iezabel; God saw she made use of her
husbands name to color her violence and oppression. And he that hates
wickedness, though he suffered it for a while to prevail; yet punished it
thoroughly on the injurer. It Is true Naboth lost his life, for Blasphemy was
ever capital, Lev. 24.14, 16. and that the Sons of Belial witnessed against
him, and to entitle the King to the vineyard of him, when in law defunct they
depose also his Blasphemy against the King, which being made good, for the
blasphemy against the King, Posside vineam] Titulo consiscationis, quae apud
Hebraeos locum habebat in omnibus delictis adversus Regiam Majestatem. Grot. in
locum. Luke 7.
is a blasphemy against God, (whose Vicars Kings are, and by hos^^e power they
reign) all Naboth had becomes forfeit and seizable into the King's hands, as
escheated to him, since capital offenses corrupt blood, and leave no heir, but
are casualties to the Crown. Thus is Naboth ruined in person and possession,
and that by Iezabel, who may well be termed a Woman, laboring with an
infirmity of blood, not in the Gospels sense, but in a worse sense, prae
gravitate peccati de orsum ^ergentem, and depressam, as Nicet in Nazianzen
comments on that of the Gospel; In Greg. Nazian. Orat. 42. H.
a Woman who had no temper; no compassion in her, but was made up of
fulminating and fiery principles, thinking power not worth the having, if it
might be in any thing capitulated with or denied; wherein by the Law of its own
constitution it denies it self; and those not worthy to live, who would live
happier then tyranny would allow them to do. So true is that of Tacitus,
Trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus imperium appellant. But alas! fond Lady
that she was, who spurred Ahab to such cruelty: Better be no King, then a King
of terror and trucidation, better have no desire gratified, then to have it by
the spoils of innocence, Aerarium sub Domitiano spoliarium cevium cruentarumque
praedarum saevum receptaculum. Plin. apud Grotium, in c. 21. v. 19. 1 Reg.
and the preys of cruelty, as Domitian had, and as Ahab here had; for which God
foretold a plague on him, her, and their Family, and that of extirpation and
death, even in this very portion, that thus injuriously was evicted from
Naboth, v. 19, and 23. of the 1 Kings 21 and fulfilled by Iehu God's Executor,
2 Kings 9. So true is that of the Poet, De male quaesitis vix gaudet
tertiushaeres.


Sic duorum etiam Iudicum testimonio, mortua fuisset pro adulterio uxor
castissima Su^^nna, si non ea^ miraculose liberasset dominus inexcogitabili
prudentia quam a ^atura non habuit puer junior non dum aetate provectus.

This instance is out of that part of Apocrypha, entitled Susanna; which
though some prefix to Daniel's Prophecy, Hunc Historium Judaei non plane
negunt. Grot. in loc.
upon design probably to impair the credit of the Canon, by adjunction of
somewhat to it, dubious: yet others, as our late Reverend Translators also, See
the Title of this Book in our Bibles.
set this History apart, from the beginning of Daniel, because it is not in the
Hebrew. Our Chancellor here uses it, to make good this charge against two
Witnesses, where no other circumstances or presumptions are admitted, Hi duo
Senatores multas mulieres Hebraeas adulterassent Susannae, etiam pudicitiam
(...) tas^ent. Grot. in V, 1.
to invalidate the testimony of that number, and where it is maliciously
contrived; and as in the former quotation he discovered two Witnesses, suborned
by a lend Woman, against an innocent man; so here he alleadges one chaste
Woman, accused by two lewd men, and like to die upon their false testimony. The
Story has many passages in it, opprobrious to vicious and caytiff old age,
laudative of chaste and innocent youth, attributive of the miraculous detection
of both, by God, who only judges righteously. The persons concerned in this
story, are of three sorts; the contrivers of the Plot, those are ver. 8 said to
be the two Elders: the person against whom the Plot is contrived, that is
against Susanna: the conviction of the false Evidence, and accusation of the
Elders, by the wisdom and integrity of one more righteous then those, whose
spirit, though a youth, God stirred up to discover the impostry, v. 45.

Duorum senum etiam Iudicum testimonie] Two for number to make the testimony
legal, Hebraei nunquaem judicis brer^ annals, aut birios ^ sed poterant hi
esse astessores ejus, qui crat (...). Grot. in loc.
Elders by quality to make it credible, and pass unsuspected: Of the number
two, I have written heretofore, and now shall only touch their quality Senum
etiam Iudicium) In the fifth verse it is said, There were appointed two of the
ancients of the people to be Judges, where ancients or elders do not always
signify such in years but mostly men of dignity, place, power, worship and
wisdom who are said to be seniores, quia presumuntur esse saniores: Thus the
word (...) coming from (...) barba, signifies a man of years; because such
usually are bearded, and wore it very long, as yet persons of degree do in the
Eastern Countries, and anciently did with us here; yet it also, and ordinarily
denotes place and respect, so Genesis 50. verse the seventh Joseph went up to bury
his father, and with him went up (...) The Elders of his house and the Elders
of the ^and. The Elders were the Peers, heads of Tribes and leading men of the
land, by reason whereof in all great affairs they were consulted with, hence
those scriptures Joel 1.14. Ruth 4.9. Exodus 3.16, 17 c. v. 5. Lam. 1.19. and
others in all which the Elders were sine qua non's to all affairs of import.

The Greeks called these (...), which is the cause the 70 read (...) by it and
Suidas terms (...); and hence was it, that when the expressed any one of
ancient extract and noble quality, (...). Hellen 4.
they termed him by this word. Thus (...), one that was so disposed to public
spiritedness, that he with Codrus spend and be spent for it, thus Xenophon
takes the word, and thus the term Presbyter is attributed to the consummate
order of Ministry called Priesthood, which we know is conferrable on men of
thirty years old or under, Spel. Council anno 750. Christi, p. 266
which is no old age, though I confess, more usually it is taken for men of good
and great years, and as a notation of Antiquity; and Plutarch uses the word
(...): so in those words, In Symposi ac. Philo, Lib. 3. De Vita Mosis.
(...); and Philo, when he calls the fire (...). And so I take the phrase here
to intend that like, as v. 5. Wickedness is said by God to come from Babylon,
Temporibus Saxonum vocabantur Aldermanni, non propter aetatem, sed propter
saep^entiam and dignitatem. Inter LL. Edvardi Confess. c. 35.
from ancient Judges, who seemed to govern the people. So here were two ancient
Judges, Alder men, not in the Saxon sense, men chiefly of wisdom; but in the
Scripture sense, men of years, old enough to be wiser and honester, then herein
they proved themselves, since age is chiefly honorable, ^ when it is found in
the way of righteousness. Which it was not, God-wot, in the persos projecting
these villainies; for though God had weakened nature in them, and they were
rather like deserted Castles, Monuments of Nature's declension; though the Sun,
and the Moon, and the Stars, were darkened in them, though the Keepers of the
house trembled, and the strong men bowed themselves in them, Eccles. 7.12.
and all those juvenile ornaments, which by ages assault, do suffer eclipse,
were on them, as the description of Solomon elegantly sets it forth; yet are
these fully set on fire by the lust of their minds, and the turpitude of their
speculative lubricity, to attempt that on the chaste person of Susanna, which
was vild and vicious in men of youth, and roysters of deboistness, but in aged
and judicial gravity is abominable, (...), etc. A wicked old man, as a worn out
light, is good for nothing, said Plutarch: Apud Stobaeum, Sermon 270.
yet where Youth has been villainous and deboist, (...), etc. Custom in sin has
made even the Winter of old age bud afresh with lustful Blossoms; Sanctus
Basilius, apud Eundem.
though they have been incalid, and so not arrived to any perfection of
naughtiness active; (...). Evagrius apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 163.
yet have they been the same sins before God, as if acted, and greater too;
because forethought, and applied to, by all the experience and counsel many
years life administers to. For then only are men of old age worthy reverence,
when exemplarily, and not to the scandal and seduction of youth they demean
them; (...). Sanctus Chrysostom. apud Stobaeum, 165.
which if they do not, they are the more ridiculous and absurd, as were the
Elders here, who plotted against Susanna: and thereby not only sinned against
God, their office, their years; but also did a folly like him in Seneca, who
did exacta via viaticum quaerere, In Libelle, De Moribus. Adag. Cent. 4. Chil.
3. Adag. 45. p. 8^6.
which Erasmus wittily applies to old Age's covetousness; which the less time
it has to live, the more solicitous it is to provide to live. Tullius in Caton.
Major.
And I apply to Lust, and carnal follies, which had the same fatuity in the
reign of these besotted and luxurious Elders, who plotted the execution of
their villainy on a chaste Woman, and worthy Wife Susanna, who is the second
person in this story.

Vxor castissima Susanna] Three words of our Text pointing out her persons
name, her minds virtue, her relation and state of life. Concerning names, to
write at large, would be endless; diverse Authors have purposely done it, and
somewhat I have touched of it in the Introduction to this Comment; That names
were used ever, and are at this day every where, is plain; and that by the
wisdom of the humane nature, to distinguish persons and things, and to nourish
order, converse, and society, is plain also. And I suppose, as plain it is,
that Susanna is not an Heb but a Greek, or exotique name. There is in all
Scripture but once besides here mention of it, and that is Luke 8.3. where
amongst those Women, that had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities,
Susanna is one; by which I may conjecture, that as probably the name was given
to persons of excellency, and bodily beauty; so were such named persons,
troubled with impure solicitations, the usual temptation and attendant of
rarity and transcendency. And if they are not injured by, and prevailed on from
those subdulous and captivating insinuations, it is by miracle of mercy, that
reserves them to their future conspicuity, as in the case of the two Susanna's,
the first whereof is the she of our Text, who is set forth in the story of her
to be fair, (...), a beauty, (...), says Suidas, to have no disproportion in
her. Hence the Septuagint render that place, ( God saw every thing that he had
made, Genesis 1. last.
and behold it was good,) by (...), that is, it was such as answered the
perfection of its kind. That then in Susannah, here termed good or fair, (...).
Suidas in (...).
is a beauty of body and gate, of speech and utterance; a Jewel she was in
flesh, and one that feared God, and as a chaste Wife, made her husband the
covering of her eyes.

Vxor castissima] As she was honestly born, the Daughter of Chilchias, and
virtuously bred, ver. 3. taught according to the Law of Moses: So was she
wealthily married to Ioachim, a very rich and hospitable man in Babylon. And as
to him, she was obliged by vow; so to him did she keep by resolution, and from
him could she not turn, without blemish to her virtue, and loss to her
happiness, for he was more honorable then all others, v. 4. These Charms
notwithstanding on her, their lust endeavors to entice her to avoid; and that
by such occult and dexterous methods of design, as were propitious to their
end, and but for the impediment of a miracle could not but succeed. First, they
consider what she takes pleasure in, and mostly frequents as her retreat of
safety and pleasure, her husband's garden; and there, Jews as they were, they
would have made the sepulcher of her modesty. There where the senses are most
pleased and satiated with the favor of scents, and the sight of colors, the
melody of birds, the taste of fruits; there, where are shades against heat, and
springs to relieve thirst, and retreats for contemplation; there, are the liars
in wait to work mischief; as our Lord had the bloody Agony in the Garden: so
had Susanna her trial in the garden. And secondly so impudent are these
Var^ets, that though the garden were near the house, and in the close view of
her husband; yet there would they have raped the only lovely flower of his
garden, Qui suasione plectenda matrimonia dividere nititur aliena, ipsius
conjugium habeatur illicitum. Edictum Alathar. Regis, lib. 9. c. 49.
his Susanna. As no fear of God, or love of the husband; so no prudence
persuades them to choose another place, then that, which they thought least
suspected, because adjoining to the house. Oh the impudence of vain desire! it
hurries men of age and wisdom into actions of folly and madness: no Sampsons of
fortitude, no David of piety, no Solomon of wisdom, but lies open to the
temptation of his flesh. If he give way to its wander, and foster its
suggestion. Oh danger! thou attempt us from all quarters; from men of high and
low degree; from things lawful, abused; unlawful, used. Thou art on the earth
of covetousness, in the air of ambition, upon the waters of tumult, with the
fire of lust, in our beds of pleasure, in our shops of profit, in our studies
of Learning, on our Benches of Justice, in our fields of labor, in our
journeys of business, in our pleasures of retreat, in our Assemblies of
Devotion. Thirdly, this fact was aggravated, by the advantage they took of her
constant hours, as well as place to walk in, ver. 8. they saw her go in every
day. Because use creates delight, Satan watches to take us napping where our
delights are, and if he cannot one day, hopes another to prevail: so did he use
Potiphar's Wife, to subvert Ioseph's continence, Genesis 39.10. she spoke to him
day by day, (...), dietim, (...), the word here. Poor soul! she took the garden
to prevent temptation, and there she finds it; she walked there to see no body
with desire inconsistent with chastity, and a wively fidelity, and there she is
lustfully looked upon, and tempted to be made unchaste. Oh! how studious ought
we to be to please God, that being at peace with him, he may direct our paths,
and keep evil from us, since our ruins are so often involved in our contents.
How careful ought we to be to prevent evil, by denying the occasions of it, who
are so watched by, and so stolen upon, by the many disguises of its Avenue. If
a light dress, and a loose gate, and a bright active eye; let Hamor lose upon
Dinah, and the harmless disports of marriage seen by others, then the married
enjoyers of them provoke Abimelech to attempt Sarah, whom thence he thought
provable the same to any Courtier as to her Abraham. If Caesar's Wife
prostituted her name by intuition of only pictured naked men; and if David's
eye lost him body and soul in the lust of Bathsheba, and the murder of Uriah,
how much care ought to associate our repasts, and the least appearances of us;
considering, that the frequency of Susannah's repair to her husbands garden to
walk, proved an occasion of their des^gn on her there. Fourthly, their lust was
aggravated in the combination and unity of it, v. 14. they made one joint stock
of counsel, and to one purpose of action. Wickedness knows union carries on all
enterprises, and therefore it is ever for agreement and conjunction. The Kings
of the Earth are said to set themselves and the rulers to take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed, Psalm. 2. And by this that of Job is
true of these Leviathans; One is so near to another, Job 41.16, 17.
that no air can come between them. They are joined one to another, they stick
together that they cannot be sundered. Thus they conduct their designs to their
issue, fortiter and suaviter. No eye, as they think, seeing; no tongue
censuring them. And if they fail of that, and discerned they be; then by their
union are they more plausible in their defense, more pardonable they think in
their guilt: as many hands make quit riddance, so many heads form deep counsel:
then they machinate how to put a creditable gloss on their putidness. O how
glad are these Misereants of a Zoar, though it be but a fig-leav'd Palliado.
Thus Hectorean madness, they call generous valor; Absalomish Treason,
high-metled discontent; Tarquinian lust, kindness of nature; and high-bred
civility, Solomonique lubricity, A Springtide of reason, covetous to know
infinity of objects: And to this the unity of sinners inclining them, makes
their union destructive to God and a good Consciences interest in us.

Fifthly, their lust was aggravated by the effrontery of it; they come upon her
not with Pirates colors, not with the soft and modest pretensions that win on
credulity, and steal under the vizards of kindness, the monsters of lust; but
rush open-mouthed, like Beasts of prey that are in haft, and must do what they
do on the sudden, v. 20. We are in love with thee, lie with us. O courtless
rudeness! O mercyful mistake! by which they were prevented to win, whom they
were resolved to ruin. O the mercy of God, Jer 5.6.8, 12.
that guards innocence! by its assault reversed, and its temptation disarmed;
because they were not ashamed, when they endeavored these abominations,
therefore God counter-courted them, and undermined their machination. If the
Lord be on his Susanna's side, she need not fear what men, old in sin and
counsel, can plot, to act against her.

Sixthly, their sin was aggravated by the reserve of their malicious revenge,
in case of her consent denied, and their plot defeated, v. 21. If thou will
not, we will bear witness against thee, that a young man was with thee, v. 30.
And therefore thou did send away thy Maids from thee. Deprehendimus ipsam
(...), ut est, Joh. 8.4. Draco dixit, (...), Solon, (...). Pomponius, in ipsis
rebus venereis. Ulpianus in ipsaturpitudine. Grot. in loc. v. 38.
Lo the true character of lust, mischief in the act, and no less in the defeat.
Hist. H. 4. of France, Grimst^n, 1132.
The most deplorable confirmation of this is from the horrid project of one
La-Mot, who being an Ensign, pretended love to a Virgin in Metz in France,
entices her by an old Woman, he employed, to frequent his company, he gets her
into a prison, and there ravishes her, her Parents running up and down
bewailing themselves for her: the Governors finding her not by search, sent
for the Captain of the Soldiery, thinking some of them might have got her, and
commanded them to deliver her untouched. When thus they were charged, Mot the
Ravisher stood by trembling, but not discovered. When he saw, if he should
restore her, she would appear ravished, he meditated, to hinder the discovery
by murdering her, and that he does; and that done, cuts the body in pieces,
puts it in a sack, and casts it into the next River. Behold! the bloody event
of lust! Nor much unlike was that intended by the Elders. What defense has
innocence against calumny: poor soul! she innocently went to cool her self in
the Water of her Husbands garden; out she sends her Maids, probably not having
confidence enough to be seen naked by her own Sex, whom she seen, could have
been but the reflex of their own bodies, shut they must after them the doors,
that no one may enter, but she alone may be private; this was her chaste care,
this her innocuous modesty, and sincere zeal to her Ioachim. But see how all
this is by malice and intended rape frustrated of its purpose on her, turned as
they think to her disadvantage. They misrepresent her sending away the Maids,
and shutting the doors, to be in favor to the Courtship of a young man
appointed by her, and concealed there, to enjoy her by their furtherance, and
under the umbrage of those contrivances; and they not only vow to detect, but
to depose it in all the circumstances. This is the carriage of the Elders, to
subvert her chastity, and loosen her confidence to, and interest in her husband.

But honest soul and wife as she was, she trusted in God for the right of her
wrong, and the asserter of her innocence; no Amazonian raving, or masculine
indignation, shows she to them; no Lucretian violence to her self; no forcible
entry makes she on her tender skin, True Chastity.
through her veins to her blood; nor did she with a Iael-like fortitude
dissemble her anger, till she had them under the perpendicular of her fatal
revenge; she did not endeavor her defense by arguments impotent to it, weeping
without calling out, and wailing without resolving their defiance, like that
great person the story tells us of, who pretended a surprise; but when she was
taken away, and the Lords of the Nation sent her word, that if she were
surprised, they would come with an Army and set her free. She answered,
Spotswood History Sco^l. p. 202.
That it was against her will that she was brought thither; but that since her
coming, she had been used so courteously, as she would not remember any more
that injury. No such actor of a part was Susanna; too modest and well-meaning
was she to express these fasts and looses, which are rarely the figures of any
thing better then falsehood and wantonness; but she trusts to the alarm of her
innocence, which she knew God would take, who was all ear and eye; though her
husband at that distance could be neither to her rescue, and aloud she cries,
and so do the Elders to drowned her Poor soul! what a straight was she in,
whose modesty in assenting, or life in denial, were at stake, or at least must
be candidates to the judgment of the Law and the charity of her Neighbors. But
God gave her as well the wisdom to choose to suffer innocently, as the courage
to defy the temptation to sin bravely; consent she will not, but put the issue
on God she will, and does; and the guilty Elders amazed and discouraged, recede
from tempting, and apply themselves to defamation of her, as their Inchantress
and the contriver of their seduction; Elders they were in years, Judges by
place; and to be accused by such persons, was too much for ought to contest
with, that had not lived unsuspected; but Susanna being such, as no report of
ill had passed upon, Ver. 43. (...), Dicitur falsus and iniquus testis, qui
crimen fingit ad opprimendum alterum. Grot. in loc. Badwellus in loc. To. 5.
Crit. Sacr.
was the more comforted under her impeachment: yet as guiltless as she was, the
Law must pass on her, the two Elders depose stoutly and falsely against her, and
Sentence passed on her as guilty, and to execution she was leading.

God who had all this while permitted the progress of this mischief, for the
greater defeat of it when it was discovered miraculously (as says the story)
raised up the spirit of a young man called Daniel, to improbate this testimony,
and by cross interrogation to denude the impostery of it, ver. 45. and so
forward. And then Susanna, and the Elders change turns in the Bail-dock, and
that divine endowment that was by miracle fermented in him, takes to task those
Hellish Sophisters, whose artifice it was, both to be tempters to sin, and
accusers for sin. Thus much of the Elders, and their false testimony, which had
took effect, if somewhat had not interposed; which the Text thus phrases, viz.

Si non eam miraculose liberasset Dominus inexcogitabile prudentia, quam a
natura non habuit puer junior.

Here our Chancellor ascribes the patronage of innocence to God alone, whose
the peculiar care and love of truth is, and who by a wonder of mercy and power
does dissipate the contrivances of wickedness, and provide salvation for Walls
and Bulwarks. For though our Master well knew, that Daniel, whom tradition and
general consent makes the young man here, was Magically and Astrologically
instituted. I hope I may use those phrases without offense; because I suppose
those words, skilful in all wisdom, Et Deus quidem hanc suae legis
observation^^ ministris suis rependere volens, locuyletavit hos quatuor
adolescentes multa rerum prudentia, atque intelligentia. Ita, ut q^osvis.
Libros intelligerent, multaque sapienti praestaren^ caeterum Daniel is
praecaeteris ha^ praerogativ^ claruit, atque insignis fuerit, quod omnium
visionum ac som^orum intelligentiss. fuerit. Tossarius, in c, 1. Danielis.
and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, whom they might teach the
learning and tongue of the Chaldeans, Dan. 1.4. import so much. Though I say he
knew Daniel ten times better then all the Magicians and Astrologers, even in
their own art; yet does he piously ascribe this heroiqueness and divine spirit
in him, to the special efflux of God's spirit on him, who had qualified him
signally for this service above, and beyond the possible attainment of his
years, or the extent and energy of his breeding; which I the rather note,
because many atheistique minds, and bold asserters of natural causes and the
influences of them, are not content to publish the great and mysterious
operations of nature, and to reduce every thing to her norm; but to detract
from the extraordinary instigation and assistance of God. Which though I
believe not to be in the bravado's and mad frenzies of giddy Enthusiasts, and
sanguine Phanatiques; yet I doubt not but to be in very notable degrees on the
spirits of all great and good actors, and to appear in their grave and orderly
actings; yea, and as God does sometimes permit an evil spirit from him to
kindle great and grievous flames, as his execution on sinful Nations: so does
he by a mercy of miracle, rouz up the souls and senses of Instruments proper
for him, to assist and effect his purpose, in his time, according to his
instinct on them. And therefore, though some holy, or rather some unholy
Pirates, when they would subvert the faith of God's Elect, hang out false
Colors, pretend Scripture, Revelation, Spirit, impulse from God to do deeds of
darkness, derogatory to the pure God, and to the peaceable Gospel; yet are
there holy and serious impulsions on men, which I doubt not to aver, to have
the image and superscription of God on them. Note this.
And that because nothing but the finger of God can inscribe them with the
perfection and to the prevalence they arrive at. This was in Joseph, when he
was presented to Pharoah's favor, Genesis 41 38, 39.
which he so merited by his discretion and wisdom of carriage, that Pharaoh
calls the spirit of GOD in him, (...) not only one in whom the spirit of God,
but (with reverence be it written) the will, and as it were a part or angle of
God, is; that is, in whom is an excellency of spirit to discern, and of will to
discover what he knows, good for men to do, or evil for them to avoid: so is to
be understood those passages in Scripture, which entitle God to men's
extraordinary endowments, and make them that have them, eminent in their times.
So its applied to Bezaleel, Exodus 31.3. Chap. 35.31. so to Moses, Numb. 11.25.
and to Caleb, Numb. 14.24. to Ioshuah, Chap. 27.14. so to our Lord Christ, Isa.
42.1. By this Spirit God came on Balaam, and made him prophecy, Numb. 24.2, 5.
By this made Othniel deliver Israel, Judge. 3.10. Iephtha, Chap. 11. v. 29.
Sampson, Chap. 13. ver. last. By this David was enabled to his Royal Office, 1 Samuel 16.13. yea, by this (I believe) is God with his Haereditary Apostles in
the order of Ministry, whereby he casts down the strong holds of Satan, and
notwithstanding the mighty oppositions of the World, accomplishes the number of
his Elect. To which, alas the foolishness of Preaching, and the frailty of
those Earthen Vessels, in which the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are
conveyed, would be but despicable means, if they were not made mighty by God,
and by his spirit and cooperation pointed for, and prevalent to those ends.
Nor do I think they are ceased wholly in the last Ages of the World; but that
God upon sundry occasions, stirs up the spirits of men to great works, and
makes them fortunate and prophetique in them. And that not only as they may by
the divination of experience, foresee and fore-warn danger, and be directed in
the seasonable preparation for it; but as they may be awakened by God to know
and foresee; and by being armed and fronted with courage, to despise
discouragements, and encounter with seeming impossibilities. Thus God stirred
up the spirit of Athanasius, and St. Augustine, against the Arians, Donatists,
and Novatians, who had prevailed over Catholicism. Thus God raised the spirit
of our Bradwardine against the Pelagians; Bradward in Praefat. lib. De causa
Dei.
of Wickliff and Luther against Popery; and thus he stirred up the spirit of
our Reformers, not only the Kings, the Nobles, and the Commons in Parliament,
to reform Religion, but to enable the Father-Bishops, and Presbyters of our
Mother Church, and other learned men of this Realm, to contrive a form of
service for the Church: concerning which the words of the Statute are, 2 and 3 E.
6. c. 1.
The which at this time, by the aid of the Holy Ghost, with one uniform
agreement is of them concluded, set forth, etc. a very godly order, agreeable
to the word of God, and the primitive Church, very comfortable to all good
people, desiring to live in Christian conversation, and most profitable to the
affairs of this Realm; as the judgment of Parliament is in the fifth and sixth
of the same King, c. 1. I say this Book so framed and owned, by so wise and
religious Parliaments, 1 and 2 P.M. c. ^.
yet God stirred up a contrary spirit to defame and extrude; which spirit,
notwithstanding its fierceness long continued not, but another spirit came on
the Nation stirred up by God, and cast out that spirit, and censured the
rejection of that Book, as a great decay of the due honor of God, and
discomfort to the Professour's of the truth of Christ's Religion; the first
Eliz. c. 2. says so expressly; and the 8. Eliz. c. 1. calls it, Ezra 1.5. Jer.
51.11.
a godly and virtuous book. And as God raised up the spirit of the Builders of
Jerusalem in Ezra's time, and the spirit of the King of the Medes against
Babylon; so God raised up the spirit of Queen Elizabeth, and all our Monarchs
since her, In the Office for the 17 Nov. Qu. Elizabeth's day. The 3d Prayer.
to deliver the people of England from danger of war and oppression both of
bodies by tyranny, and of conscience by superstition with liberty both of
bodies and minds. They are the words of Authority; yea, and when an evil spirit
came from the Lord upon this Nation, to divide and scatter it; and we were all
like water cast upon the ground, that could not (without a miracle) be gathered
up again: even then when the fury of war fanned us, and the wind of animosity,
rage, and unfixedness, was carrying us away, Isa 41.18.
Then the Lord opened rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the
valleys; then he gave the Nation his eye salve, that they should look upon him
whom they had pierced; The Duke of Albemarle.
then he put courage into the matchless memorable General and Parliament then
sitting, to beseech our absent See the Common's Letter to the King. 2 May 1660.
Pylot to commiserate our Naufrage; then he by a Miracle, second to none in any
time or story, Verse. 19.
planted in our wilderness the Cedar, the Shittath-tree, and the Myrtle-tree,
and the Oyl-tree; that is, the King (not only the highest Cedar for altitude,
but (...) the Cedar for excellency. For so that Shittah signifies, for its wood
is lignum imputribile nitore and pulchritudine facile caetera superans; of
which the Ark of the Covenant, the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of them were
made.) This Cedar of Affliction and Circuit, Pagnin. in verbo.
who was exposed to prey and contempt, when he was off his Majestique Mountain,
did God, notwithstanding the Ord. Feb. 1648. c. 16, and 17. O stupendous
Providence! Myrrhae virtu^ est ut corpora imputribilia reddat. Plin. lib. 12.
c. 15.16.
Ordinance to the contrary, which God concurred not in, refix, and with him
(...) the Lords, whose reduction into their Orb, wherein they with the Myrtle,
do strengthen and assist the Crown, and keep evil from it, makes good that
Prophecy of Gods to his Church, Esaias 55. last; Instead of the Thorn shall come
up the Fir Tree; and instead of the Bryar shall come up the Myrtle-tree; yea,
and with them the (...), the wood of the Olive; that which not only
flourished, but that which is arid and cut off: so (...) signifies; and it
admirably answers the expansion of the mercy. God brought to life not only the
Lords, whose House was wholly voted down; but even those Commoners, Members of
the then Voters, who were secluded, and by their prevailing fellows cut off and
cast out. And by this mercy to the Pia Matter of our Order, Luster, and
Grandeur, has deserved of us everlasting Eulogies; and what exceeds Vocal,
Vital Doxologies. And oh that God would once more stir up the spirit of this
Nation, not to animosity, dissension, disloyalty: No (God forbid that evil
spirit from the Lord should penally burry England any more; No Holy, humble,
penitent Spirit in the Nation but from God.
we have too fatally felt the fruits of intestine War, to return (I hope) again
to that folly and ferocity;) but the spirit of humility, moderation, charity,
this spirit stirred up by God, would sedate our spirits in our own, and inflame
them only in God's quarrel, with those regnant sins that are in their tendency
and pride Deicidiall: Such Adders are we to the loud voice of that never to be
forgotten Miracle and Mercy, of the 29 of May, 1660. That nothing seems less to
be heeded, then the stupendiousness, and almost incredible transcendency of it.
But Lord lay not this sin to our charge, our deliverance is as it were dead
and buried; and since no man regards the work of the Lord, Psalm. 29.5. Ier.
39.23.
nor the operation of his hands, how just may it be, that God's Whirlwind
should go forth with fury, continuing whirlmind, and should fall with pain upon
the head of us wicked ones. Like as his judgment did in a good measure on the
wicked Elders here in the Text, who maliciously combining against innocent
Susanna, were by the spirit of Daniel excited by God to discover their
impostry, denuded; and as false Witnesses, and perjurious Villains put to
death, and that Lege Talionis. For as they would have brought Susanna to the
flames, which amongst the Chaldees was the punishment of Adultery, (for Grotius
says the Jews had there no exercise of their National Civil Polity, but were
adjudged by the Topique Laws of Babylon) though the 62 verse of the story
says, they put them to death, according to the Law of Moses; which is most
probable, and so understood by our Text-Master, who thereupon brings in the Lex
talionis, according to the Prescript of God by Moses, Deuteronomy. 19. v. 19. So did
they by that machination cusnare themselves, and remain an eternal shame to
lewd and treacherous Elders. But enough of them, I return to the Text.

Nosti and tu Princeps divine qualiter jam tarde, Magister Johannes Fringe,
post quam annis tribus sacer dotali functus est officio, duorum iniquorum
depositione, qui cum antea juvenculam quandam affidasse testati sunt, sacrum
presbyteratus ordinem relinquere compulsus est, and matrimonium cum faemina
illa consummare.

In this Clause he does not only bespeak the Prince's attention, by a
compellation of highness that he owns in him, and a duty thereupon, that he
knows he and all men ought to testify in word and deed toward him; but to
this Divine Prince, produces a ternary of instances, wherein the mouths of two
Witnesses have been wickedly produced, and made use of to matchless and
monstrous villainies. This then is the third instance; and the person mentioned
to be the ingenious Contriver of this Delinquency is one John Fringe, of whom,
as he is here charactred, no either English or Latin Story, that has come to
my view, makes mention; probably either because what he did was in the time of
Combustion in England, when many things passed in the crowd unnoticed; or else
because it was done in France (especially the Treason) where the Prince then
lay an exile hence. That there was a truth in it is not to be questioned, but
the Circumstances I cannot supply, nor cloth this naked Narrative with such
varieties of art and ornament as would make it symmetrious to the other parts
of the Comment, that which is notizable in it, is first the quality of the
person, a Priest, and such not only by the Confirmation of his Order, but the
continuation of him in that Confirmation, three years. Secondly the
degeneration of him from what he ought to have been, but was not, to what he
ought not to have been, but was; Gladium perimentis sub Pallio consulentis
gestabat, He had Judas his heart with Judas his kiss; he did currere ad sacros
Ordines sine reverentia, sine consideratione, etc. By all means he would have
holy Orders (those Entrusts that even Angels do admire and adore) without
consideration of that humility and divine zeal that ought to reside in the
mind of him that has them and the honor he should pay that honor done him,
by a holy life suitable to them; whereas no man ought to offer himself to those
Mysteries in whom covetousness reigns, Lib. De Conversione ad Clericos. c. 29.
ambition rules, pride rages, iniquity sits, and luxury commands, as Saint
Bernard says to the Clergy of his time. From this our Fringe should have been
free, but he was not it seems, but though by order he was sacred to God, yet by
devotion of soul he was nothing less but like Paulus Cremensis the Pope's
Legate here, while he was inveighing against the Clergy's Leachery, himself was
taken abed with a common Strumpet; so did our mentioned Presbyter, while in his
Orders he pretended a Dedication to God, he in the profusion of his vicious
life devoted himself to his Mistress, which was his shame and his sin. For
though I would be a Constantine to him, and referr his Case to his last Judge,
De Sacerdote nihil mala aut foeda natura est temere presumendum. Reg. Can.
with silence of whatever may be written against him, as reflecting on his
Order; yet in as much as the vices of him were flagitious and to the
vituperation of him and his Profession, to both which they were scandalous;
it is no breach of Charity to follow the Text with a Commentary as well here as
in other parts of it.

That then which he is in our Text detractingly charged with, is first, that he
was libidinous; and notwithstanding the restraint of Orders, and the assiduous
seeming continence in them, he did meditate effeminacy; and to make way to his
freedom, contrived the annihilation of his Orders. Secondly, That to effect it,
he plotted to procure and confirmed two in their perjurious resolution, who
should depose that which ipso facto if true, as it was not, should dissolve his
Orders. Thirdly, That the sacrilegious Combination between him and the
Witnesses to so execrable an end should not be confessed by him till he came to
dye. Fourthly, The Justice of God in punishing one sin with another, sacrilege
with treason, and perjury with perdition.

Spelman Council. p. 266.
Post quam annis tribus sacerdotali functus est officio.] As three years were
according to some Canon, though five as other Canons appointed to intercurr
between Deaconry and Priestshood; so this Priest is deposed to consist
undetected three years after his Presbyterating, not that he was not probably
under a hot lubricity before, but because the depositions instructed by him
were to commence date thence: Sin has gradations, no man is at first bad to the
baddest degree; but first there is levis and pudicus tastus, a Virgin
blushingnesse as it were, and after more confidence, till at last a confirmed
effrontery. No man knows where to stay, that stops not at the first appearances
of evil, and does not obviate the pullulations and first glimmerings of them; 2
Kings. 8.12; 2 Kings. 13.22.
Let Hazael be a warning to all confident Presumers, who think themselves not
so bad as mercy foretells them to prove, time discovers them to accordingly be;
and Peter who when the Lord told him he would be the signallest starter from
him, made a bold bravado of holy valor; but by peeping into the high Priest's
Hall, in curiosity to see what became of his Lord, was so overtaken with
pusillanimity, that he not only denied in the Palace to the Maid that taunted
him as a follower of Jesus, that he understood not her language, but called
them all to witness that she mistook him; Matthew. 26.
v. 70. but even in the Porch when accused by a second Maid, he denied not
only that he was his follower but that he knew him, and forswore both with an
Oath, v. 72. yet again when a hotter huy and cry came after him, and more and
confidenter suspicions came upon him, to evade them and extricate himself he
falls afresh to curse and to swear that so far was he from owning his person
and cause, Ver. 74.
that he knew neither, or would justify either of them. Here was a parum
abfuit, to utter abnegation: so probably was it with our Priest Fringe, at
first may be thought to dabb^e with this Iuvencula, by a kindness of Courtship;
after by the engagement of speculative tu^pitude, pressed her to more
familiarity; thence was provoked to that desire, which to accomplish, neither
his orders, or her condition would permit. At last he resolved, being hurried
headlong into the torment of lubricity, to quit his Orders, rather then to
desist his Courtship, and he contrives to do it by subornation of Witnesses:
and thus, as much as in him lay, damned their souls, to be pleasure his own and
h^s Paramours body.

Qui eum antea juvenculam quandam affidasse testati sunt.] The Witnesses were
two, and those to give legally a testimony of an untruth. He knew there was no
discharge of his Orders, but causa professionis; for the Councils of the Church
were much against Marriage of Priests, 'O (...) Council. Naeo Ca^sar. Sub Sylv.
Tom. 1. c. 1. p. 234. Synod 2. Romans Tom. 1. part 1. p. 260. Tom. 3. par.
secunda, p 414. Tom. 1. par p. 195, 612, 642. and Tom. 4. par. 2. fol. 232.
Council. Romans 1. Sub Greg. 7.
as that which they accounted dangerous, full of encumbrance, derogative from
the zeal of men, temptative of them from their studies, and the like. This
Fringe wickedly takes hold of; not as he found Women, stealers away of the
heart and their society scandalous to Priesthood, especially those that do
blazon their wonts with them, notorie and public, as the words of the Council
of Saltzburg are; Temp. Martini 5. Papae, Tom. 3. Council. p. 996.
for this had been venial, nay heroique in Fringe: but no such motion had he,
Orders he had taken, and in them long and loosely continued; and to be quit of
them, as too severe Reins for his base mind to be restrained by, he contrives a
false accusation against himself, and raises up an evil testimony to confirm
it, and thereby to occasion his Ecclesiastical: Censure and Deprivation. Which
was, that before he took Orders, he was betrothed to a young Woman.

And herein he makes himself censurable; first, of levity, that he took Holy
Orders before he had a settled mind, and had some assurance of that self-denial
and humility, that becomes that Calling. No man is to rush on that, chiefly as
a lift to preserment, A good Memento to those that take Orders in the Ministry.
o^ a relief to necessity of life, or as an occasion to a popular appearance;
the parts and pomps of men are not to be consulted with in this undertaking.
The design men have to glorify God, and the enablement from him to deny
themselves, to please him, in a serious, zealous, and painful course of
Ministry, is the best evidence of fitness, and call, and the hopefullest title
to success in it: this had Fringe attained to, he would either not have entered
into Orders; or when he was in them so long, not so have profaned them. But if
corruption had so prevailed on him, he were better have directly married, as
Saint Bernard's counsel was; Esset autem sine dubio melius nubere, quam uri;
and salvari in numero fidelis populi, quam in cleri sublimitate and deterius
vivere and destrictius judicari, Cap. 29. De Convers. ad Clericos.
and as Epist. 307.
Aeneas Sylvius, after Pope Pius the second counseled John Freund, a Roman
Priest, to do; then thus to contrive a remedy of sin and shame to himself and
others: But, poor man! in a sinful storm he was, and he took the next course
his corrupt nature presented him, and that was but a tortuous and tortious one,
not only accusing himself of levity; but also, secondly, of lubricity, by a
predominancy of sinful passion, which made him n^n apt nubere, that is, not
marry See a^ rare wife Arch Bishop Parker^ Fuller Church History, p. 108.
a grave and decent person, that might keep his piety steady, and dispose him
the more to the sober prosecution of the things of God; Luctuosa des^riptio
carnaliter viventium Sacerdo^um E. Prospero, apud Council. General. Tom. 6 c.
32. p. 257.
as I am sure fit Marriage does beyond all singleness, that has not a very
strict gift, and does not abate the edge of Nature by low and moderate Diet,
devout and religious severities, laborious and incessant studies, frequent and
intent devotions of soul, Marriage upheld commendable in Churchmen.
evidenced in resolved avoidances of all opportunities of aversation; I say,
and that knowingly, let who of the Batchellour-Pretenders to seraphiqueness be
offended that will, there is no such ordinary help to piety and sanctity in the
World, (the gift of perfect chastity only excepted,) as fit Marriage is. But
this our Fringe is willing to be thought not to choose; Bract lib. 2. ^^ 11.
Constit. Siculae, lib. 2. tit. 37. Spelm. Gloss. p. 25
for the accusation is, that he did only affidasse, which is as much, as
contract himself in order to Marriage, Fidem dare, fidei vinculo se connectere,
as the Canonists say, that is, he fairly promised, that marry her he would;
which affidavit he confirmed by oath (in which sense, our Lawyers call a
Deposition an Affidavit) that thereby he might not so much assure her of his
fidelity, Episcopus Wintoniensis in manu Archiepise. Gantuariensis coram
Episcopis affidavit tempore Stephani Regis, Brompton. p. 1039.
as entitle himself to the command of her upon the presumption and assurance of
her, that the marriage was good, in foro Dei, and legitimated them to the
consent, which they had affidavited between them. This he only is represented
to do, which was no more but the security that men do give each to other for
performance of pacts; Brompton, p. 1182.
as Richard the first, and the French King, are said, in propriis personis
affidaverunt firmiter and fideliter.

Iuvenculam quandam] Wisdom, as it is seen in the actions of life, so chiefly
in promising what we can and will perform. No man ought to say, what he will
not swear, nor swear what is not true; yet the Priest is contented to not only
own himself guilty of Affidation to a Virgin, (and probably no pure one,)
according to the Deposition of his Accusers; not as a testimony of his sorrow,
for his unworthy mind in that holy function, and for his profane life,
notwithstanding his holy vow; but purely he prostitutes his name and calling,
to bring about a Disfranchisement, and to procure his Vows unvowing. An vero
gravior ullaphrenesis, quam impanit^ntia cordis and peccandi obstinata
voluntas; siquidem manus nepharias injicit sibiipsi. nec carnem, sed ment^m
lacerat, and corrodit. Sanctus Bernardus Capitul 4. De Conversione ad Clericos.
For though Charity conjure me to believe, that he confesses that this
subornation of Witnesses to accuse him, was only to make way to his Marriage;
yet I do verily believe, and I hope not in any degree uncharitably, the sparks
that kindled this combustible matter in him, was too intimate conversation with
this young Woman, whom here our Text calls juvencula, (...) Quod esset privata
and occulta viro, Hebraei.
a tender and taking Creature, florenti atate, not yet sub maritali capistre;
for to such as are fresh and excellent in their kind is this word given. And
such he concluding her, Meditates the Marriage enjoyment of her, though with
the violation of his vow, and the abjuration of his profession; for upon the
oath of the Witnesses it followed.

Sacrum Presbyteratus ordinem relinquere compulsus est] That is, the Canons of
the Church being transgressed, as by concubinacy or marriage they are, (as by
the pre-mentioned Authorities, with sundry others every where in the Tomes of
the Councils appears) under the grievous pains of Excommunication, and Censure
of Schism and Sacrilege, he is to desist not only from the exercise and
benefit as a Churchman; Tom. 1. p. 642, Tom. 4. part secunda fol. 232. Tom.
1. part prima fol. 195, 612.
but even ab honor clericuli. Which resolution of Gregory the seventh, as I
take it, being made known by the German Bishops, Council. Roman. 1 sub Greg. 7.
Anno 1074.
to their Clergy, upon their return from the Council at Rome, so offended them,
that they resolved rather to relinquish their Benefices, then their Wives. So
did also the French Clergy in Pope Hildebrand's time; Anno 1051. Inter Canones
Aelfrici. Canon. 5. Spelman in Conciliis: p. 573.
nor before I think Elfrick's time was it ever enjoined our Clergy in England,
but long before the contrary practice was legitimated by our Councils. In Anno
456. ordained it was, Synod. St. Patricii, Spelm. Council. p. 52.
that the Wife of a Clergyman should be veiled; and if they were not, they
were without honor from the Laity, and to be removed from the Church; Nota ad
Prove. Afric. Spelman, p. 43. p. 99.
and before that Anno 314. Deacons were allowed Marriage upon their craving it,
and yet to continue their Ministry; and so Gregory's resolution is to Augustine
the Monk's Interrogatory. P. 434, p. 443.
See more in the Marginal Quotations. I know in the General Council of Aenham,
Anno 1009. Calibat is commended to the Clergy, and they reproved, for having
two or three Wives, which least they should prefer to hold before their Orders,
the Council concludes, Qui antem ordinis sui regulam abdicaverit, omni cum apud
Deum tum apud homines gratia exuatur; Spelm. Conc. 514. Page 530, 574.
notwithstanding all which the Seculars had their Wives, which the stricter or
looser Clergy called their Mynecenae; probably those we call to this day
mincing Dames; for when any one goes lightly, we say, she minces as she goes.
But Priests had not, nor were permitted to have any Women in the house with
them, Spelman Council. p. 592.
ne eos ad peccandum iliiciant; notwithstanding all which, the Clergy that were
not Votaries in England did marry, and their issue was legitimate and enjoyed
Lands; and this probably was that which moved Fringe to be the more eager to
marry, Cook Instit. p. 687. Fox Martyrol. p. 1138, 1140.
because as he knew by discharge of his Orders, he might enjoy his Iuvencula,
his young Wife; so by the Marriage his issue should be legitimate. And this was
that which made him will the severity of the Law upon himself, as it follows.

Et Matrimonium cum faemina illa consummare.] Here is a change, Plutarchut in
conjugialibus praeceptis.
his Affidatio being consummated, becomes Matrimony, and ^his Iuvencula in
years, is become famina in state of life; Matrimony is a state of life, which
the Heathen calls the safest boundary of Youth; and though it be not inhibited
Priests, neither by the old Law, or the Gospels Sanction, or Apostolic
Authority, but merely ex statuto Ecclesiae, Lib. 4. Distinct. 37. quaest. 1. De
Conjugio Cleric. capite cum olim.
as Durand determines, to which agree St. Thomas, and others; yea, though
Cardinal Cajetan confesses, that Marriage entered into by a Priest is good, and
the Children legitimate; and though true it be, (...). Plutarchus in Amator. p.
752. edit. Paris.
that it is the Seminary of Immortality to Mankind, not only in Plutarch's
sense, as it peoples the World, and makes a kind of eternity in it, but also as
it delivers men from sin, and keeps them by the remedy of it, in the love of
God, and practice of virtue, which tends to a Heavenly Immortality. Yet for all
this, marriage in Priests, is the mark that many (who may themselves doubt, as
well as doubtlesly others do, whether they have any continence above that which
is the lowest step to it) level at, and discharge much more of their malignity
and defamation upon it, then becomes sober or religious men to do. The late
renowned Bishop Hall.
But these being answered by a most holy and learned deceased Father of our
Church, much to the honor of the undertaking, and the shame of the opposite
Tenent, I content my self to forbear; only let me ingenuously profess, as I
honor highly those Seraphique Virgin-persons, who in the office of Ministry
keep single, and notwithstanding it do enjoy that calmness and content in their
single life, which is the gift of God, the blessing of continence, and the
absence of those provocations that are in virtuous persons troublesome, and in
loose scandalous, the probable avoidance of which, being (in the Martyr's
words) honest Marriage, Dr. Tailor Temp. Q. Mary.
I am bold to judge as meet for Clergymen, as for any: And more, for as I
persuade my self, the Devil more designs to undermine these the eminency of
whose calling casts the blacker shade on the conversation unsuitable thereto,
and the World greedily appetiting the denigration of their reputation, who are
most signal in the fruits of Learning and most sacred in the opinion for
religions: so do I believe, if there be any help to heaven, next to divine
mercy and power, Tholossanus, Syntag. Iuris, lib. 9. c. 19.

Exhortation to the Solemnization of Matrimony.


it is this of Marriage, which is the Manifesto of them both; which our Mother the
Church of England, according to the old Doctors and Authors, says, was
instituted of God in Paradise, in the time of man's innocence, for a remedy
against sin, and to avoid fornication, that such persons that have not the gift
of Continence might merry, and keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's
body; and for the mutual society, help, and comfort, that the one ought to have
of the other, both in prosperity, and in adversity. So our Church; whose
judgment and favor to the Clergy's Marriage, I prefer, before the humors of
any private Opinionists, especially since it is not with any diminution of the
just honor and praise of devout chastity and singleness, but in supplement to
it, as a refuge to the non-attainers of it, and an honest help to a sacerdotal
blamelessness. Hear the Judgment of the King, Nobility, Clergy, Commonalty in
Parliament, 2 and 3. E.6. Although it were not only better, for the estimation
of Priests, and other Ministers in the Church of God, to live chaste, sole and
separate from the company of women and the bond of Marriage, etc. yet for as
much as the contrary has rather been seen, and such uncleanness of living, and
other great inconveniences, not meet to be rehearsed, have followed of
compelled Chastity, and of such Laws as have prohibited those (such persons)
the godly use of Marriage, it were better and rather to be suffered in the
Commonwealth, that those which could not contain, should, after the counsel of
Scripture, live in holy Marriage, then feignedly abuse with worse enormity
outward chastity, or single life. These are the words of the Preamble to that
Statute, which makes void all Laws, prohibiting spiritual persons to marry, who
by God's Law may marry; which Statute mistaken by some stubborn Votaries, who
stood more upon blind obedience to the Pope, then to the liberty Christ had
endowed them with; and choosing rather to truckle to turpitudes, (I am modest)
Quam contra Papae mandatum inire Matrimonium. I say, some mistaking our Church
and State's meaning therein, were so bold, to the high dishonor of Almighty
God, the dishonor of the King's Majesty, and his High Court of Parliament, and
the learned Clergy of this Realm, who have determined the same (Marriage of
Priests) to be most lawful by the Law of God, in their Convocation, as well by
the common assent, as by the subscription of their hands, as the Statute words
are; That the State saw great need to make a further Act of corroboration and
vindication of their meanings, from their injurious glosses; and thereupon
passed the Statute 5 and 6. c. 12. which though by the first of Mary 2. it was
repealed, yet that Repeal was repealed by 1 Jacob. 21. and so by that the
Statute of E. 6. being in force, the judgment of Parliament is for the
Clergymans, continence and singleness, if it may be; but to avoid inconvenience
for his lawful Marriage.

Our Fringe then did not amiss to marry, he not having the gift of singleness,
In Matrimonio annulus arrba loco saepe daretur, ut vir atque uxor invicem se
coemerunt. Salmuth in Pancirol. lib. 1. p. 294.
and having betrothed himself to a Woman, in order to Marriage; for fit it was,
that he should perform it; but that which was faulty in him, was, his
dissimulation and sacrilegious contrivance of falsehood, with a subornation of
Witnesses to depose it; in the complication of which, all the fruits of the
flesh, which make up the deadly sins, and oppose themselves to the Cardinal
virtues are visible. But I pass to what succeeds.

Cum qua post quam annos 14. Moratus, sobolem septimam suscitaverat demum de
crimine laesae Majestatis in tuam celsatudinem conjurato convictus subornatos
fuisse testes illos, et falsum dixisse testimonium in mortis suae articulo
coram omni populo fassus est.

This clause declares Gods vengeance on the first sin by the second, and the
consequence of it; The patience of God had long been provoked, and the mistaken
pleasure of his (as some think) Apostasy as well as Leachery, were for a long
time permitted him, not for an earnest of Impunity, but to show him the
obduration of his heart, and to tell the world that there is no man so perfect
but may slip, none so peccant but ought to amend and return to his Loyalty by
prayer and penance, to pardon and acceptance. Yet for all this Fringe
recollects not, but as one swallowed up in the pleasures of his wife, and the
prebends of his marriage, Persists in Impenitence not only one year as did
David, but fourteen years, Grimston Hist. H. 4 p. 1134. 1135 and Seq.
and all perhaps to maintain his young wife. Thus did Fava, who having a wife,
children, and family, and being unable to subsist by honest means, entered upon
the most notable cheats that ever was; and when he was detected, and Judgment
passed on him, poisoned himself to avoid the shame. So did Mussardus, a valiant
man in Picardy, during the combustions in France, who because in peace he could
not live so high, Page 1138.
as he was wont, falls to ill courses to maintain himself. First, he kills a
Gentleman his Neighbor; then despises the King's mercy, takes a Castle; and
when he and his Partisans could defend it no longer, they shot one another, and
were burned in the straw they had environed themselves with to that desperate
purpose. So also our Fringe was so far from being mindful of his
misacquirement of his wife, that he more doted on her, and on his issue by her,
then divined the abbreviation of his life and happiness, by a Treason which
should determine both, and leave them corrupt in blood, and poor in condition.
So just is God, that though he seems to permit the inordinacy of men's desires
in the manner and measure they propose them to take effect, though their
projects be what they would have them, and their prosperity what they can most
secondarily wish, yet at last they determine, Bonam conscien tiam, optimam fa
mam, maximam authoritatem* praterea familiam, uxorem, nepotes, sorores,
interque totpignora veros amicos. Plin. Ep. De Corellio Rufo.
One Corellius Rufus who had a good Conscience, a good fame Great authority, a
wife, daughters, nephews, sisters, all good and with them good Friends is
enough for an Age, most men have the contrary, or at best but viciffitudes, yet
God has left some Instances of it, that men might seek to, and serve him who
can curse and bless whom he pleases, and not always suffers it to succeed
virtue and industry least it should be ascribed as a fruit and consectary of
them, and not a blessing of his He it is that fortunates some families and
Eclipses others, that makes some worthy men obscure, and other worthless once
eminent, he it is that inclines the hearts of Queen Elizabeth's, to stoop for
her Cecils sake, that would not stoop for the King of Spaine's sake. The only
way then to prosper, Fuller Worthies of England, p. 160
is to procure god our aid, and to preserve him our ortion, which they will
never do that make lies their Refuge, and that work by il and mischievous
Engines. If men would be rid of their Faustina's as Anteninus couldl have been
contented to be, they must reddere dotem, vomit up all their ill getting by
them, God will not clear the soul of guilt, that does not part with all that is
sacrilegious, a depredation on his son's purchase, which if Fring here had
done, he might have been a longer liver with his wife and Children, For some
blessings his marriage had, which no wise and worthy man can choose but value,
as First a larg^ time of continuance 14 years, Time enough to make a man
comptus and moratus, well trained and thoroughly polished, and assueted to the
nature and temper of marriage, that is the Orators sense of moraetus, though
our Chancellor use it as a term of duration for commoratus (the noun being
mostly taken in the former sense, and the verb morari denoting stay; So Virgil
long a ambage aliquem morari; and Pliny ne pluribus moramur in re confessa and
Pomponius uses moraeri apud aliquem, vel cum aliquo, to stay with any one,
morari solutionem, or praesidium, to defer payment or aid.) In this sense
Fringe had more happiness then many most excellent husbands, and high valuers
of their wives have had. Who though they both prayed for, and delighted in the
enjoyment of them, yet had them taken from them, in much shorter time then our
Priest held his. Besides, secondly, He had Children, which the Wise man calls
the gift of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb, his delight, and these he had
not sparingly, but in number, and in that sacred. Number seven, which of all
numbers the Ancients thought most divine; For though all numbers being
adjutants to memory, are ascribed to the invention of Minerva, ( quasi quaedam
Meminerva, Lilius Gyraldus lib. De Annis and Mensibas, p. 5^5. part secunda.
which Minerva, they say was de capite Iovis nata, and therefore they ascribe
all parts of Ingeny to it; (...), Idem codem loco. p. 530.
As to counsel well, to judge rightly, and to do justly,) I say, though all
numbers thus devised, Part prima Syntag. 11. De Not. Deotum.
and for this purpose intended are useful; yet some certain ones were more
Cabalistique, and esteemed Chryptick then others were. Pythagoras valued the
number Three, because sacrated to Hecate, who was called (...). Others think he
did it upon other grounds, Also to Apollo the number three was devoted, as 6 to
Venus, and 12 in scripture as I have heretofore noted; but this 7 is the only
number conducing to the life and body of man, Quod per came Ternionis numeri
mysterium col^ret, eum quando numerum in sacris adhibendum putavit L. Gyraldus
in Aenjgm. part secunda p. 479.
Hence probably is that of the Civilians from the Physicians, septimo mense
nasci persectum partum jam receptum est, and of the seventh son's
fortunateness; But greater honor is yet done this number, God himself rested
from Creation on the seventh day, and sanctified it, and the Jews counted it
numerus quietis and felicitatis, In allusion to which, King David may be
thought to mention often praying, 1 Revel. 11.13. 16. c. 4. v. 5.
by seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments, and
how often shall I forgive my brother, unto seven times, c. 8. v. 2. c. 15. v. 1.
so we read of seven Churches, seven Candlesticks, seven Stars, seven Lamps,
burning before the Throne of God, which are the seven spirits of God, seven
Seals, and seven Angels with Trumpets, seven Angels having the seven last
great plagues, These do set out the number seven, which applied to our Text's
purpose, declares Fringe happy as well in the number, as in the children; God
had not only more blessings then one but even seven in store for him, and
those he had by his wife in a fourteen years marriage, Now see the danger
involved in this pleasure, the Priest had lost his Church income, and had
contracted a charge which he probably knew not how to maintain: And that evil
heart of his that made him to desert his Orders, and that by an imposition upon
the Law as well as upon his own name and his seduced Witnesses Conscience, now
tempts him to seek to support his pleasant life by Perfidie and Treason by
which no man long advances himself. Guevara Horol. Princ. p. 94. Censuit
justias fieri si inter perfectos Christi quam si inter perfectos Caesaris
constitu^retur. Sidonius lib. 7. c. 12.
For though God often blesses sincerity with the gain of greater blessings then
men lose, to preserve it, as he did Valentinian, who hated by Julian and
discharged his trust in the Army because he was a Christian and retired to a
private life, was upon Iulian's death in the Persian War chosen to be
Emperor; yet he mostly recompenseth one successful sin with a sin of ruin:
thus did he, the Priest here, after a fourteen years prosperity.

Demum de crimine laesae Majestatis in tuam celsitudinem.
This Clause shows the just return of God on Fringe his falsehood; Mercy had a
long time waited for Repentance, Eccles. ^.11.
but because Judgment was not suddenly executed on this Sinner, therefore his
heart was fully set to do evil; and that no ordinary one, but such an one as
shall pay all the Arrears of his own and his other men's sins: That look as
Montgomery (by being casually the cause of all the troubles in France which
followed upon the death of Henry the Second of France, whom he unhappily killed
running at Tournament with him) I say, as he was thought many years after
punished therefore by being taken in Rebellion in Danfront, D. Avila p. 406.
and by judgment of the Parliament of Paris executed as a Traitor: Page 818.
And as Henry the Third of France, who caused the Duke of Guise to be
murdered, was himself after murdered by Clement: And as Henry the Duke of
Guise proud in the Excellency of his mind and body, so that he boastingly
would swim in a strong currented River against the stream in his complete
Armor, and all this to tell the World his strength; whose pride God punished
his by permitting him to side with a Faction against the Crown, Page 753.
which brought him to shame and to ruin: I say, as God was revenged of these
men's former sins, by the latter punished, so was he with Fringe. Into a Treason
he is led, and probably leads others, and by it is brought to a shameful End,
and worthily and without pity; for Treason is as the sin of Witchcraft against
the Law of Nature and Nations, Note this.
a falsehood to the Pater Patria, who ought to be adored and defended. Treason,
God himself very early punished in Lucifer and his Comrades, in Corah and his
Company; neither did Heaven bear the one, or earth brook the other. And hence
was it that of old Tribuni Sacrosanctum corpus attingere capitale fuit, for
Treason is that which has so much horror involved in it, that it denudes a man
of all Comforts, (...), etc. When one man rejoices in his family, Plutarchus
lib. De animi Tranquil. p. 469.
another in his house, a third in his Wife, in his friends. This Treason
rescinds all those, and dismantles him of all but sad thoughts and deep
despairs, which makes all Nations to abhor it, that they think no punishments
too dreadful for it; Crimen in hos (Vicarios Christi Reges) commissum proximum
sacrilegio est. Ulpian. ad legem Jul. Majest.
For it being a diminution of Majesty, for which cause Tholossanus lib. 35. c.
1. and 22.
Civilians call it Imminutae seu laesae Majestatis crimen, there is as much
done by it as Malice can do to disarray the glorious Majesty of God, of that
resemblance, of his sovereign power, which he has clothed his Deputies
Supreme Magistrates with, for the good of Mankind, and the preserving of
Justice, Order, and every thing that is praise worthy amongst men. Hence comes
it to pass that Treason being as much as in man is the defeat of these Glorious
ends, is by all Nations and all Laws severely punished, Non tautum actor sed
and conscius adjutor, Minister gladio puniatur. Corvinus Enchyrid. Juris. p.
679.
not only with death in the Actors but in all the Counselors, Abettors, or
Concealours; and not only against them but against their Posterities, Families
and Allies, all which for Treasons have been unfortuned, Tholoss. lib. 35.
Syntagm. Iuris universi. Grimston in H. 4. Decianus Consult. 18. number. 315.
Corvinus Instit. lib. 4. p. 678.
banished, yea put to death, and that with all the exquisite torments
imaginable; not only to tell men the horridness of the fact but to deterr
them from acting the like wickedness. Amongst us the Laws have ever been most
severe against Treason, as that which is contra celsitudinem tuam, as the Text
says, against the life, Government and being of the sacred person of the King
in the fixation of his Throne; and therefore accounted inter scelera jure
humano inexpiabilia. Hence the Law of Canutus made it death and loss of all;
so King Alfred confirmed the Law with many Additions c. 4. Inter leges Canuti
c. 61.
and so the common Law punished it with death, Si quis saluti Regis aut Domini
sui insidias tetenderit, vita and rebus suis omnibus plectitor. Inter L. Canuti
cap. 54. Edit. Twisd.
loss of all both fortune and family. And because the crime was so deep dyed
and contracted such a penalty of non-ultrality in this World, the Parliaments
of all times have not only ascertained Treasons and given men definitions and
characters of their consistencies, Bracton. lib. 3. fol. 11^. Britton. fol. 16.
Fleta lib. 1. c. 21. 4 Instit. p. 5, c. 1. Glanvil. lib. 1. c. 2. l, 14. c. 1.
(preventive of expositions that power may be tempted to make, and mischief in
the committer^ pretended ignorance of;) so that those consulted with, cannot
but let men see their duty, and their danger, and leave them wholly causal of
their dishonor and ruin if they observe them not: thus did the Parliament of
25 E. 3. in the Statute of Treasons, which Act made by that blessed Parliament,
Sir Edward Cook pleas Crown, c. Treason p. 2.
for so it is called as it well deserved; not only for the many good Acts, but
for this Law, For except it be Magna Charta, no other Act of Parliament has
had more honor given unto it by the King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons of the Realm. for the time being in full Parliament, then this Act
concerning Treason has had. For whereas in the Statute 21 R. 2. the twelve
first Chapters of the Statutes of that Parliament were spent upon Inquiries and
Treasons, according to various Opinions and Successes; by which, the 1 H. 4. c.
10. says, No man knew how to behave himself to do, speak or say, for doubt of
such pains. Sess. prima.
Those Statutes of 21 R. 2. were repealed, and Treason only stated according
to the 25 E. 3. confirmed by 1 E. 6. c. 12. and 1 Mar. c. 1. which grave and
gracious Statute of the 25 E. 3. was promoted by the renowned Judges then
living; as were the Statutes of Confirmation, which Sir Edward Cook mentions,
and I here from him, 3. Instit. Chap. Treasons p. 3.
To the Honor of them, and of their Families and Posterities, who were not by
those expressions of public spiritedness, more just to own their profound
knowledge in the Laws, and merciful to their own Nation and Posterities, then
to their Sovereign's Honor and his Crowns stability, Observe this well.
in promoting the fair Lillies and Roses of the Crown to flourish, and not be
stained by severe and sanguinary Statutes; For as much as the State of every
King, Ruler, and Governor of any Realm, Dominion, or Comminalty, stands and
consists more assured by the love and favor of the Subject toward their
Sovereign Ruler and Governor, then in the dread and fear of Laws made with
rigorovs pains and extreme punishment for not obeying of their Sovereign Ruler
and Governor: In the Preamble
these are the words of the Stat. 1 Mariae sess. 1.

The consideration of which, as it induced our Kings in their Parliaments to
make no more things Treason, then necessarily were such to be, and as such to
be punished; the particulars whereof are in a great measure specified in the
Statute of the 25 E. 3. which Statute is so commentaryed upon by Sir Edw. Cook,
3 Instit. pleas of the Crown, chap. Treason. Tholossanus Syntagm. Juris lib. 35.
that I referr the Reader to him, who as to those things does give abundant
light to the understanding of the Statute; the particulars of which are for a
great part Treason by the Law Civil; yet have there been additional Laws to
make offenses Treasons, which by that Statute I think would not have been, for
that did but declare what the common Law was, and what they discovered then
necessary to be made Treason; but it was never intended to be the universal
Standard of Treason, since that Parliament which made it, knew well there would
be the same power in subsequent Parliaments that was in the present one, and
they reasonably might, and prudently ought to employ that power of theirs to
the provision for all emergency, as well of Treason as misprision of Treason,
as in 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary c. 9, 10. 5. Eliz. 11. 14 Eliz. c. 3. 18 Eliz. c.
1. 13 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Instit. chap.
Treasons c. 1.
these and other like Acts declare Treasons as occasion shall be; which makes
good, that Treasons being high offenses are not left at large to be vagely
expounded, but when any Treason is not within the 25 E. 3. or subsequent Acts
unrepealed (unless by common Law it be) no Treason I think ought it to be
accounted, although I know sometimes power (though Quo warranto God only can
question, Dion. Cass. lib. 67, p. 765. De Mesio Pompusiano. Ecce serenissimus
Dominus Imperator fieri simiam Leonem jussit; and quidem provisione illius
vocari potest, fieri autem Leo non potest. Sanctus Gregor. in Regest. lib. 1.
Ep. 5.
who is paramount power) makes that called Treason, which is not so really; but
as the King of Navarre told Henry the Third of France when the Pope had
excommunicated him (about the Duke of Guise, and the Catholics cause, as they
were called) and complained of the Pope's violence against him; D. Avila. p. 811
O Sir, said he, let your Majesty endeavor to conquer, and be assured the
Censures shall be revoked; but if we be overcome, we shall all dye condemned
Heretics. According to this calculate, I say, power has ever in the world
made strange Treasons, witness the late Declarations of that Nature, which
England these 700. Scobel's Collections, 2 part. fol. 3. 7. 15. 175. 372.
years never heard or read the like of, that by name of January, black and
blew, fatal January 1648. c. 4.16. that of July, 1649. c. 44. that of August,
1651. c. 14. that of September, 1656. c. 3. these were Declarations of
Treasons, not known in Books before, nor according to the Books I read in more
majorum authorized: but to this our Text has no respect, for the laesae
Majestatis in it was in tuam celfitudinem, not only against a single person,
but the best, or at least second best of persons in England; if not against the
King himself, yet against him, whom our Chancellor thought the Heir-apparent
to the Crown. For truly when, or where this Treason was committed, or in what
manner, I am altogether ignorant; though the word conjurato makes me believe it
to be by treachery and secret practice, either to betray his Prince or reveal
his Counsels; it probably being not recorded, at least in History, as I before
wrote: but sure that it was our Chancellour's Authority gives me undoubtingly
to believe, and that the judgment was according to Law, upon either his
Confession or proof by Witnesses; for the Text says, he was conjurato
convictus, which I conceive he could not have been but by trial and judgment
upon it: since (the rule of Law says Res non ideo vera est, Reg. Juris.
quia asseritur, sed quia probatur,) which being done modo and forma, he
remains an infamous Traitor, and so adjudged to shame and death, yea to shame
after death, the Quarters of whom are Monuments of terror to all such
Successors in Treachery: For surely he must be seduced by Satan and his own
evil heart, who can be treacherous to a King of England, who governs by the
settled Laws of his Kingdoms, Eicon Basilic. c. 27. In his advice to the then
Pr. of Wales now our most gracious Sovereign.
Which are (said the wisest and worthiest of Kings and Men of his time) the
most Excellent Rules you can govern by, which by an admirable temperament give
very much to Subject's Industry, Liberty, and Happiness; and yet reserve
enough to the Majesty and Prerogative of any King who owns his people as
Subjects, not as Slaves; whose Subjection as it preserves their property,
peace, and safety: so it will never diminish your Rights nor their ingenuous
Liberty, which consists in the enjoyment of the fruits of their industry and
the benefit of those Laws, to which themselves have consented. I say, who dare
be treacherous to such a King, deserves the severity of the Law as Fringe here
had; who Fox-like dealt under ground, and, privily conspiring against his
Sovereign, was conjurato convictus, and put to death therefore. And now it
behooves his disguise to be taken off, and him nakedly to appear what indeed he
was, who had masked so many vices hitherto under the covert of Religion and the
gravity of his profession; and he having but a Moment (as it were) to live, in
ipso mortis articulo, when the abjuments to his dispatch were sitting, Josh.
7.19.
then he follows the Prophet's counsel to Achan, Confesses his sin and gives
glory to God; in not biting in the lip, but openly publishing, that not only
as a Traitor he now dyed: but that God had brought this guilt on him to shame
his former prevarications, and to display his occult desultoryness and
theatrique personation of what he was not: Seneca, Ep. 31.
And he that should have followed the Moralists Advice; subsilire ad coelum ex
angulo; though he failed in that, yet did exsurgere modo, and se Deo dignum
fingere. Now outcomes Confession, the second best thing to innocence, and he
penitently acknowledges that he did suborn Witnesses to depose his Contract
with the woman he married; whereas there was no such thing in truth, but that
he did it to procure his legal release from his religious Calling and severe
single life. O how happy are afflictions and deaths to those who by them are
made penitent sinners! how great cause have God's Ionahs to bless God for a
storm, Illud pracipue salutem impedit quod cit^ nobis placemus; ideo mutari
nolumus quia nos optimos ^sse credimus. Senec. ^p. 69. M. Antoninus Edit.
Gatakeri, p. 378. (...). loco praecitat. Lib. 6. Ep. 13.
and a Sea, and a Whale to swallow them, to prevent the swallow of the
bottomless pit? How merciful is God to men in love with themselves when
prosperous, bringing them to see themselves miserable and to look for a better
State above themselves. O it is happy when afflictions are (...), the discipline
and exercises of virtue and goodness; when men by them are, as that Laconian
said Children were by teacking them, made more accustomed to and more delighted
with virtue; when God by them brings our sins to remembrance which we had
forgotten, and which we would have stifled and buried till we had for them been
buried in the pit out of which there is no redemption; thus benign was God to
our Priest here, who was sub temporaria gravitate, vel potius sub gravitatis
imitatione, as Pliny's words are; and seemed to deserve some praise for his
faithfullness in performing his troth to his Mistress, which is the part of an
honest man; nor is any man just or worthy that does it not (I mean not to a
Mistress of pleasure as Gallants call them (for they neither keep nor deserve to
have faith kept to them (but of virtue in order to a Wise) who so, I say, to
these keeps not faith, will have it one way or other punished notably; as
Fringe had for those sins which were as bad as bad could be, contriving a lie,
suborning Witnesses to depose it, Apostasy (as it were) from his order and
habit (for God accounts Fringe a voluntary desertor, not under compulsion of
Canon because he contrived his own degradation, and the Law was as to that
blameless) and what makes all the rest appear? Treason: which had it not been,
and by it death, the Priest would probably have not at all confessed this his
sin, or not so publicly and so amply as he did; but God that saw in secret did
reward him openly, not in the sense those words were uttered but in the sense
they were threatened against David's sin, 2 Samuel 12.12. Thou did it secretly,
but I will do this thing before all Israel and before the Sun. By which God
made Fringe conspicuous in the penance of his death, who was not so in the
innocence of his life; so true is that of the Emperor Antoninus, Though the
Cedar be lofty and beautiful to behold, yet the coal thereof is nothing the
whiter for it; Licet Cedrus alta and pulchra sit, nihilo praeterea candidior
est illius carbo; and licet ilex humilis deformisque sit, nihilo propterca
nigrior est illius cinis; saepe Deorum pormissu honoratiora sint ossa pauperis
Philosophi, qui vitam duriter egit quam Principum qui delicatissime vixere.
Marc. Anton. in Epistola ad Egelippum Nepotem.
and though the flint be vile and under-foot, yet the dust of it is nothing the
blacker for it; often God makes the dissolution of mean men, Who are bred hard
and live nearly, more signal and remarkable then that of Princes, who feed high
lie soft, and are full of pleasures, thus that Emperor.

From which notable example of Fringe, we should all learn to make our lives
referential to our ends, and to do nothing in health, prosperity and life,
Certus sum. ei qui'in vit^ nulli hominum male fecit in morte Deos neutiquans
malefacturos. Cuev. in Horol. Princ.
which shall upbraid us in sickness, distress, or death. For as dying Bruxillus
comsorted himself, Sure I am, says he, to him, that in life has done no injury
to men, the Gods will not be unkind at his death, Psalm. 118.14. Psalm. 16.5.
Psalm. 37.4. Psalm. 22.11.
that is in Scripture Phrase, He that has made God his song, his portion, and
his delight, in this house of his Pilgrimage, will find him not far off when
trouble is near and there is none to help him. And so I leave the consideration
of Fringe.

Qualiter and sape per verti judicia, faelsorum testiam medio, etiam sub
optimis judicibus, non est tibi inauditum nec in^ognitum mundo, dum soelus
illud (proh dolor) creberrime committatur.

These words are the conclusive deduction from the Premises by which the
Chancellor is not to be understood to lay blame on the Law-Civil, which allows
deposition of Witnesses, to cast causes, and rules Judges to sentence according
to them; though they be, as in the prealledged Cases, never so unjust and
perjurious: but serves only to commend those Laws most, where the greatest
care is expressed to prevent them; which though the wit of man cannot do,
without the Grace of God restrain; yet there is most probability of obviating
it, where the severest scrutiny is of the Witnesses, and the most material
Exceptions to invalidate them allowed: which for as much as the Civil Laws do
their part in the Empire, and the Common and Statute Law performs its part
here; there is no cause to charge either of them for the Mischief of ill
Accidents in their respective Orbs. God has condemned all under Sin, and under
the fatal effects of it; and Errors will fall out sub optimis Iudicibus. No
Magistrate so holy and wise, no Law so severe and punctual, but may be
defloured with evil men and evil practices under them; Non est tibi incognitum,
nec incognitum mundo, says the Text, with regard to the Community, and so not
to be wondered at appearance of such Monsters. All that rests to good men is, to
take heed of their Ways, that they ^ffend not with their Tongues, and to hate
every evil way and work; which is the sense of proh dolor:] and to have the
Motto of the Family of Momorancy fiducially in their eyes, D. Avila p. 12.
Deus primum Christianum servet, which the Wiseman translates into other words
to the same sense, Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace, so shall
God come unto thee; and thus if they be guarded, They shall not need to fear in
the evil day: Nor shall the Sons of Violence do them harm: but that God, whom
they serve, will not reward them with disfavour, as Henry the Third of France
did his old, noble, and wise Marshal Momorancy, whom he re^oved from Court,
because he pretended he knew not how better to reward for his great Merits,
then with easing him of the trouble and toil of Affairs; Psalm. 91.11. Esaias.
26.3. Prove. 15.15.
but he will keep him in all his ways, in perfect peace; which is the portion
only of those, whose hearts are stayed on God; who, to his, is the only
continual Feast in life, and after, receives his to Glory: where, to praise him
shall be their Delight, and to enjoy him their Eternity. And so we conclude
this Chapter.

Chap. XXII
Non igitur contenta est Lex Franciae in criminalibus, ubi mors imminet, reum
testibus convincere, ne falsi dicorum testimonio sanguis innocens condemnetur.
Sed mavult Lex ista reos tales torturis cruciari, etc.


HEre the Chancellor takes off the asperity of some Civilians against the
proceedings of the Common Law by Juryes as well as Witnesses, upon
consideration that even France, where the Civil-Law is the National Law; yet
does allow the Rack to prevent false witness in criminal Causes, which is
besides the ordinary Prescript of the Civil Law; whereby deposition of
Witnesses is only allowed to Conviction. Nor surely is it amiss that Laws
should be framed according to the Natures of the people over which they have
influence, but very prudent and just it should be so; yea inconsistent it would
be if it were otherwise. For as all people have clothes, Tortura quantitas and
qualitas statuetur seoundum morum regionum. Tholosl. Syntag. Juris universi,
lib. 48, c. 12. ss. 25.
diet, pleasures, company, and all enterprises, means, and instruments peculiar
to them; so have Kingdoms exercise of Legislation according to the Vices and
Virtues regnant in them. And as there was reason that led our Ancestors to try
matters of Fact by Juryes; so was there no doubt like reason in France for the
use of the Rack, not only the Purgatory, but the Hell to torture falsehood, and
by confession of latent mischiefs to prevent innocent bloud-shedding. For
though we in England have a Rule Nemo tenetur seipsum accusare, and in
Judgment of Law he is no offender that is not proved such; yet in France,
because perjury has brought many to death that have not deserved it, but only
had a charge from malevolence, and the effect of it, At in Gallia promiscue
omnes cujuscunque dignitatis and nobilitatis fuerint cum luculentioribus
delicti indiciis torquentur si indic^a duorum idoneorum testium fide constent.
Imbertus lib. 3. Instit. Tholoff. lib. 48. lib. 12. ss, 24.
subornation of Witnesses: Therefore the Law is there, that if a man be
criminally accused, the bare depositions against him shall not condemn him,
unless he himself confess the fact either voluntarily without compulsion or
terror; or upon the Rack applied to him. Imbertus, and Tholossanus after him
allow this the Law in France, and without this, Non contenta est Lex Francia,
says the Text. For since the end of torture is punishment for indagation of
the truth, it is thought fit there to do it by this means, which is
Quinquepartite, and consists 1. of threats of Racking. 2. In leading to the
place of Torment. 3. Uncloathing and binding the Party. 4. Lifting him up upon
the Rack. Lastly, Adding weights to his feet, etc. These and Circumstances of
them, the French Civilians abound with; and this the Law of France does, as not
finding the proof by Witnesses (who may be suborned or maliciously acted) the
very infallible way to discover truth and prevent innocent bloud-shedding? and
though by the common Rules of Law even Racks and Torments are not allowed in
certain Cases; yet even in them Cases the practice of France enfranchises it,
and the reason is, Quia interest Reipublica delicta manifesta esse, and detegi
ut puniantur; and this is no new Law, Idem eodem loco ff. 32. ad sinem.
for the Author adds, Atque it a majorum more inductum est, ut delicta quae
clam committuntur semotis Testibus per tormenta appareant.

Reum Testibus convincere.] Witnesses ought to be by all Laws, and without them
no conviction ordinarily lies; now the person to be convicted by them the Text
terms Reus. The Greeks called this: (...); Fatetur facinus qui judicium fugit.
Reg. Juris.
whence our Common Law has the practice to charge the Inquest upon criminal and
capital Offenders, Ye shall inquire whether he sted for it, since (a) fuga
praesupponit reatum: (a) Reg. Juris.
the Civil-Lawes by Reus understand the same thing in Qui accusantur Rei
criminis, qui conveniuntur Rei, that is in Tully's words, Rei sunt dicti quorum
res agitur; and so again 4. De Orat. Reos autem appello, 2 De Oratore.
non eos modo qui arguuntar, sed omnes quorum de re disceptatur; and
Tholossanus when he makes Reus to be a Relative term, Syntagm Juris universi,
lib. 24. c. 2. ff. 2.
understands judgment at Law to consist of three parties, the Actor, the
Judge, Lib. 22. ad Edict. Text. Digest. lib. 12. Tit. 2. p. 127.
the criminal person, that is Reus. Thus Ulpian, Eum cum quo agetur, (a) Lib.
23. Tit. 2. p. 2112. Reuss] Gloss.
accipere debemus ipsum Reum; and the Gloss on (a) Ulpian, lib. 3. ad L. Iuliam
and Pap. makes Reus Accusatus.

So then the sense is, that whoever is accused of a Crime which forfeits his
life and Estate, must be convicted of it by solid proofs of two Witnesses, or
by confession or flight. So is the Law of God, so the Common Law, and no new
courses has the Government of England ever introduced; for if any one guilty of
Treason, be slain in it and cannot be brought to Trial, which is, Testibus
convinci;] the course is to attaint him by Act of Parliament: so was it in Hin.
6. time, Stat. 29. c. 1. whereby Jack Gade was attainted; and so has it been
deservedly often since. So that though our Common or Statute Law has not,
thanks be to God, our Kings, and Parliaments, enfranchised and made legal the
odious torture of the Rack to discover Conspiracy or secret Villainy by; though
perhaps in some high Cases, and upon supposition of Martial Exigencies, high
punishments such as the Rack either threatened or executed has been used: yet
has it a very grievous punishment for Conspiracy, and that by a Writ of
Conspiracy, and an Indictment at the suit of the King; 3 Instit. c. 66. Of
Conspiracy.
the manner, punishment, and extent of it, Sir Edward Cook sets forth. But the
Law of France is not contented, says our Text, to take this accusation of
Witnesses for infallible, therefore mavult Lex illa tales Torturis cruciari,
Neque pertinaces, neque nimium timidi unquam, vel vix verum fateantur. Tholoss.
lib. 48. c, 12. ff. 6.
which choice of France, thus to subjoin Tortures to come to the discovery of
truth, yet for all them, is fallible, and the Trials of them to be eluded. For
since they are to join with presumptions and so far are only practicable in
France, severed from them tortures must not be, and the reason is, Quia ex
praesumptionibus solis nemo damnandus est capitaliter. Which considered, though
the Tortures in France may be intended to search out truth and secure
innocence, yet are they no otherwise available thereto, then other milder
courses are with us. Truth depends on God, and if he do not lighten men into
the discoveries of it by an extraordinary sagacity, and open the dark cells and
vaults of its recess by his co-operations with men's endeavors, violence will
do little. How many do we read in story whom tortures worked not upon to
declare what they knew of Secrecy, by name Leaena Aristogiton's Mistress;
Chariton and Menalippus; Polyaenus lib 8. Valor. Max. lib. 3. c. 3. Egnatius
lib. 8. c. 4. Val. lib. 8. c. 4.
Theodorus, whom Jerome the Tyrant of Syracuse so in vain tortured; Anaxarchus,
Aretaphila, Alexander, Fannius his Servant; Philip Servant to Fulvius Flaccus;
the Servants of Mark Anthony and Plotinus Plancus; that famous Mother Lygus,
whom Tacitus mentions as despising death to conceal her Son; that woman Hector
Ephicaris, privy to the Pisonian Conspiracy against Nero; Quintilia, Polyaenus
lib. 8.
privy to the Conspiracy against Caligula; that famous Servant in Spain, whose
Master being slain by Hasdr^bal the Carthaginian, he on Hasdrubal revenged by
killing him, and when he was tormented, ridens, gestiensque laetitia, in medio
dolor expiravit; Fulgosus lib. 3. c. 3.
add to these Bonetus of Verona, Bardilo, Viucentinus, Pontanus lib. 2. c. 7.
De Fonitud. Domestica.
Vincentinus, that Servant of Mauritius whom Pontanus writes of: these and many
other like Examples may be produced of the ineffectuality of torments. That
cursed Raviliack, who had the exquisitest torments that art and severity could
invent, acted on him to make him confess his Companions; yet confessed nothing,
but that he was instigated to it by the Devil. For Sin is of an obdurating
nature, and he that has been so wicked as to design, is not often terrified by
punishment from acting it; Conscience indeed may work much toward confession,
but death and tortures work often nothing, which surely is one cause (besides
the Christianity that is expressed in avoiding inhumane torments) that the Law
of England, Serres in life H. 4. Lib. 3. fol. 105, and 137.
though it allows Prisons ad detinendos, non ad puniendos, as Bracton's words
are; yet it allows not Prisoners in them to be durely used, not to be bound in
shackles, nor to be beaten: for whatsoever is of pain to prisoners, other then
to keep them from escape or mutiny, is criminal in a Jailer: And therefore
there is no present Law, that I know, to warrant tortures ordinarily in
England, nor, says Sir Edward Cook, can they be justified by any prescription
being so lately brought in, Cook pleas of the Cro^n p. 35.91.
and never heard of with us till 26 H. 6. when John Holland Earl of Huntingdon,
and Duke of Exceter, being Constable of the Tower, brought it in; but to little
purpose; for it never had, as by Warrant of the Common or Statute Law, place
(God be thanked) here; for it was a new punishment here, and such Tholossanus
says, Syntagm. Juris universi lib. 42. c. 12. ss. 25. Fox Acts and Monuments.
p. 1512, 1516, 1536.
Quae magis ad Carnifices immanes, quam ad Christianos Iudices pertinent; and
as the Holy Martyrs found inhumanely exercised upon them in Queen Mary's days,
when their hands were burned off, and their bodies abused, not by Order, nor
according to Common, or Statute but upon some pretense of Canon Law; the which
I the rather note to show the happiness of the Reformation, which determined
cruelty of persecution to death simply for opinion, (except it be for Heresy
within the Statute of 1 Eliz.) and leaves men secure from that while they are
not Traitors, Heady, high minded, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God.
And if the Statute of 1 and 2 P. and Mary, c. 3. called by a great name A
dangerous Act, Sir Edward Cook 3 Instit. p. 218. chap. 101.
was but a probationer to the 4 and 5 of the same Reign; and then only to
continue to the end of the next Parliament: which being the 1 Eliz. was by that
confirmed to Queen Eliz, and to the Heirs of her body, which failing, This Act
has lost its force as, says the aforesaid Author, it was well-worthy. I say,
If the Nation were so sparing to endanger one Limb of a Subject, how much care
did they intend to express to the whole body, which the Rack disjoints: but of
the care of our Government, 3 Institutes chap. 101. Of Executions and Judgments.
to exclude Foreiners greatness, and foreign Customs hence, read Sir Edward
Cook, and the Statute 4 Iac. c. 1. about Trials of Scotch-men and Englishmen.
In all which this mavult Lex illa reos Torturis cruciari, is, as I humbly
conceive, by the Law of England left out of its Allowance and remains purely
French.

Quousque ipsi little reatum confiteantur.] This is one end of the Rack, that
they, that are accused, may be brought to Confession; that is, that they may
make that known which is strongly suspected and sworn against them: not that
Confession in torture presently makes a proof, Tholoff. Syntag. Juris. lib. 48.
c. 12. ff. 26.
for that it does not, nisi reus ratificet eandem a tortura remotus, in juris
auditorio, as the Doctors say, idque express apud acta extra carceres and
tormenta; and if he shall deny what he is accused of, the first and second
time, and that a day after every of their torments, when he is in cool blood;
then the third time he denying is absolved, ne in infinitum procedatur ad
Tormenta; for thus suffering and denying his guilt, videtur purgasse indicia:
so that the Law of France, in requiring Confession by so terrible punishments,
supposes there is something to confess; and it may be feared to press some by
terror to confess that against themselves, (to please the Judge or the State
by whom they are prosequuted) which never was in thought or intendment. And
thus that danger which tortures are intended to prevent, may be incurred,
Passiones iniqua! What more such then base fear, and what subornationes ad
perjurium are there more dangerous then Revenge and Reward, to conceal others
by accusing a man's self: these may be, and have been; notwithstanding
Confessions on Racks, and have been as injurious as per jurious Witnesses; and
therefore our Law here, though it had purgations by Ordeal and Battle; yet
because they were cruel, and God did not ever, for reasons best known to
himself, determine Innocence and Guilt by the Events of them; but that many
innocent persons perished when nocent ones escaped by them: therefore has the
Law obsoleted them now. And where Offenders are not by clear evidence cast,
there they are not to be sentenced and executed; notwithstanding which favor
of the Law, as few great Offenders in England lie hid, and avoid their deserved
punishment, as in any part of the World.

Quali cautione atque astutia, criminosi etiam and de criminibus suspecti, tot
Torturarum in regno illo generibus affliguntur, quod fastidet calamus ea
literis designare.

Quali cautione atque astutia.] This is brought in to show the formale
internum, of Laws penal and provisional, wisdoms forms them with such
warynesse, as that theremedy shall neither prove the disease, nor shall the
Probe be too short for the bottom search of the wound; but there shall be every
grain of virtue and vigor that is necessary to the effection of its
intendment. And thus composed Laws are worthy their name, Omnino omnium horum
vitiorum, aetque incommodorum una cautio est, atque una pro visio; ut ne nimis
cito deligere incipiamus, neve von dignos. Ad Attic lib. 1. 14. 11.
and operative to their end. Hence cautio is ranked with provisio by Tuuy; and
astutia coming from (...) the old word for a City, in which men are made wise
and wary by experience and conversation. Our Text predicates these endowments
of the Law even of France in the case of Racks, which no doubt but were
invented by the wisdom of worldly men to carry on their Terror over their
treacherous Subjects; whom they can punish, if either they really be guilty, or
be only suspected to be guilty: for so the Text says.

Criminosi vel de criminibus suspecti.] These tortures are appointed for both
parties, whether they are actually or suspectedly criminous; the former of
which are called criminosi euphatiquely; for words terminating in osus have an
import of augmentation, Ebriosus, gulosus, famosus, bellicosus, formosus,
furiosus, imperiosus, seditiosus, so Tully uses it: and when Bonosus the
Emperor is defamed by the Historian, Hic Tribunus plebis, modestus, prudens,
non modo non seditiosus, sed and seditiosts adversarius; ille antem a^erbus,
criminosus, popularis homo (...) turbulentus. Cic. pro Cluentio. 75.
as one born ut bibat, non ut vivat, there is somewhat of Analogy hereto
intimated; it being part of the Triumph of Wit's liberty to express the
grandeur of things by words of altess, which, having a sharpness of accent and
syllabique pomp, are understood either expressive of excellent virtue, A.
Gellius. lib. 4. c. 9. and 10.
or execrable vice: so that our Text by criminosus intends a noted Offender,
patens crimen; and as it were fine test probatum, whose guilt is not so much
necessitatis as voluntatis; not such, because he cannot avoid it, as he will
not, because he being wicked delights in wickedness, to whom it is a second
nature, and that which gratifies him. Such pride some men take in their
combustible and sinful humors, that they cannot account themselves happy, but
when they are in some criminal singularity; like our Proto-Brownist Master
Brown, who made so little account of his Schism from the Church, that he would
glory He had been in 32 Prisons, in some of which be could not see his hand at
Noonday; Fullet's Church History 2 part. p. 16^.
yea when he was above eighty years old, his obstinacy is said to be such, that
for breach of the peace he was committed to Northampton-Goal, wherein he dyed,
but this by the way: that which I mainly note is, that criminosus here in our
Text is such an Offender as is willingly and designedly a breaker of the Law
and that with obstinacy.

Et de criminibus suspecti] These incurr the Rack too; for there being in the
Law vehementia indicia, which are, Tormenta fine presumptions non sunt
instigenda. Gratian. Decret. secunda part. Cause. 1. qu. 1. c. 10.
though not full proofs, yet seconds to it; they are therefore said to draw a
man into question, In criminibus serutandes quastio adhiberi solet. Tholoss.
lib. 48. Tit. 1^. De Quaetionibus. Art. 1. Genesis 4.9.
because in canvas of crimes, questions are propounded for them to answer, and
just it is that before men be punished they should be examined: God presidents
this in his question to Cain, Where says he is thy Brother Abel? And reason
dictates this Method. For since there may be offenses dangerous though
indiscernable, there must not only be a study of not being openly guilty, but
of avoiding whatever may justly give suspicion; for of all things suspicion is
the most prying and cankerons encumbrance; it is a fruit of envy, tenerity,
subtlety, and hatred amassed, and it has all the spawn and venom of them in
it; it in Ely made Hannah a deboist lewd woman, Crimen, falsa suspicio. Donatus
in Virgil. 11 Aen.
who was a vehement Zelot, and who in the bitterness of her soul begged of God
his own Glory in a blessing to her self. Suspicion is crime enough, as good
before men be guilty, as suspected so to be; only in Nullum tormentum
conscientia majus est, illa incellumi hac externa despicite, intra te est
consolator tuus. Petrarcha in Dialog. 65. De Tormentis.

Tunc demum ad torturam deveniendum est. cum suspectus e^ rens, and cum multis
argumentis urgetur. F. Pegna Schol. 11^. in tertiam partem Directorii Inquisit.
lib. 2. p. 22^. Edit. Eimerici. Impress. Romae, 1528.

1 pensieri stretti and il viso sciolto. Sir Henry Wotton's Elements
Architecture. p. 396. Of his Works.


Conscience suspicion without ground finds Relief. Much suspected may be,
Nothing proved can be, was the Motto of our Virgin Queen when she was enough,
and more then she deserved, suspected; but God cleared her innocence: and so
will do if men walk circumspectly, keep good company and good hours, use
moderate pleasures and live in moderate expenses. That in fine will best secure
from suspicion which comes nearest to Albertus Scipioni his stage Advice for
Travel, Your thoughts close and your countenance loose, will go safely over the
whole World; that is, keep a good tongue, and an unbusie spirit, and suspicion
of crime will be a non ens.

Tot Torturarum in regno illo generibus affliguntar, quod fastidit calamus ea
literis designare.

This the Chancellor adds, not to raise a wonder that offenses should be
variously punished in different places and Nations; Eadem scolera in diversis
Provinciis gravius plectuntur, et in Africa nessium incensores, in Mysia
vitium. Ulpianus apud Digest. lib. 48. c. 16. Text.

Guido De Suzaria. Tract, De Tortuza cum notis Bolognini.


for nothing is more ordinary and convenient then that it so should be: but to
evidence that the French as they are a very ingenious and nimble fancyed
Nation, so do they express it in all things that they do either of word or
Action. And indeed, as I am not ashamed to own my disaffection to their
fashions, P. Pettae De Castro. Tract. De Tonuris.
much as I humbly conceive to the dishonor of our pristine Gravity introduced
amongst us, and to the waste of our wealth which was wont to be expended on
hospitality, and now is lavished in toyish baubles and airy nothings; so is our
Chancellor as much out of love with their Method of discovering truth in cases
of great consequence and of latent nature; though it is said they are intended
not to explorate cruelty, but to penetrate truth and to avoid all danger by
malevolence. For since reason supposes a man will not willingly, if at all,
affect himself to be guilty of what he is not, Fr. Pegna Schol. 118. in tertiam
pa^tem Directorii. Inqulsit. lib. 3. p. 225. authore Eymerico, Impres. Romae
An. 1578.
the Canon Law (for I suppose it first to allow tortures) enjoins that where
vehement suspicions are, and the Indicia are proved by two Witnesses, there, if
the accused party will not confess, racked he must be; because by his
obsticunning, the fact can be no otherway proved; for torture is subsidium
quoddam extremum ad inveniendum veritatem; and where any other way can be taken
to discover, torture is not to be used; and wherever the contrary is, the
learned Spaniard says, it is De consuetudine sanguinariorum hominum. And this
to prevent, I humbly conceive to be the cause why the Law of England is so
sparing to leave any thing to discretion in punishments, because men are so apt
to prefer passion before Justice; therefore are all opportunities of passion
rescinded and the positive Law is prescribed, which the Reverend Judges do
observe precisely; and were it otherwise, that inconvenience might be with us
that is abroad, where much of judgment is arbitrary; for though in the Civil
and Canon Law the Rules are straight enough, Pldem eodem loco..226, 229.
That no man is to be tortured when there is other proof; only by Report no
man is to be tormented; that the Indicia ought to be proved by two Witnesses;
that only fame is not sufficient to bring a man to torture, except the man be
of ill life, ill belief, and ill conversation, etc. Yet because in these Cases
the Judge is to determine, nothing is more usual then to act something like
cruelty under the pretense of Justice. And therefore though all Doctors agree,
that in case of Treason, ubi criminaliter non potest probari, tortures are
necessary, Gratian. Decret. part secunda Causa 159. c. 6. gloss. 1. p. 1079.
and no person is exempt and privileged therefrom; and the like in Heresy:
yet do even they who are most for it conclude, that they must be by wonted and
known Tortures, which Grillandus and Julius Clarus make five in number, Pegna
loco praecitato.
and Marsilius improves to fourteen, and boasts he had invented another per
somni substractionem: Dicam quod sentio, hactractatio de novis tormentis
excogitandis; carnisicum est potius crudelium quam Iureconsultorum and
Theologorum. Loco pracitato.
but Pegna so far abhorrs this wicked ingenuity, that he parley says, That
Invention of cruel Tortures to afflict men by, is rather the work of Hangmen
and Cannibals, then of Lawyers and Divines; which calls to my mind a speech of
that mild Spanish Father Alfonsus, Confessor to King Philip; who, when he saw
the Protestants so hurried to the flames for their Religion, professed,
Purpurensthic imber monstrosos producit foetus. All which considered, though
France do abound in various Tortures, such and so many as is tedious to
rehearse, and troublesome to think upon; yet blessed be God these tortures are
restrained to that Country. For in Arragon ( Pegna's noble Country, and semper
Catholice regno, as his words are) torture cannot be inflicted by the Judge,
but only in Case of Heresy; nor in England, so far as I can find, can any
man suffer death upon religious accounts but in case of Heresy upon the
Statute of Eliz, 1. which Heresy is also there limited to prevent the danger of
misinterpretation. And though with us we have many different punishments for
Felonies, as Infalistatus a Felon was at Dover, Seldom notes on Hengham. p.
153. 154. Hengham parva, c. 3. p 87.
Demembratus of his eyes and stories at Winchester and Wallingford, at
Southampton drowned, at Northampton, beheaded (and so I think at Hull and
Halyfax, the suddeness of which gave occasion to that speech, From Hell, Hull,
and Halyfax, Good Lord deliver us,) and so in sundry other places; yet have we
no such tortures for Malefactors as France has. For such the tenderhearted
Chancellor, who had long attended his noble Prince and his hard misfortunes
there, knew the tortures to be, so various in their number, and acute in their
nature, that he says plainly, Fastidit calamus literis designare; Ame fastidit
a^^^^ Ovid. (...) alium, si in his fastidit Alexis. Virgil. in Bucol.
that is, he thinks it pity to propagate the memory of them, and refuses to
give them the honor of ought, but his abhorrence; for fastidire is as much as
recusare: and the (...) which he uses to express his mind (...) by, tells us,
that his stomach rose much against them, and his tender soul did penance, while
he remembered what dreadful accounts the Engineers, that invented them were to
make to God. I confess 'twas a most hellish, execrable, monstrous, unpardonable
Parricide, that Raviliack committed on that brave and puissant King H.4. and no
torment was great and grievous enough for it; but yet to read the Narrative of
it, Serres in his life.
is a terrible torture to a meek and merciful spirit: and the tortures that
James the Grand-Master of the Templers in France was put to, when they
tormented him to death by peicemeales to make him confess such things against
the Order (which they had a mind to extinguish) as they were in no sort guilty
of, Paulus Aemilius in vita Philippi Pulchri.
which he confessed he did to be rid of the pains, and in hope of life, though
he craved God and his Order pardon therefore. These, Shutes Hist. Venice. p.
287.
I say, are great tortures; so also were those that the Venetians executed upon
Calerio, assassine to the Venetian Gentlemen in Candy, who being by the
Venetians taken, was thrown down from the top of the Palace on swords points;
and Mossolerico his brother, being convicted for sending Letters into Padua;
while besieged by the Venetians, was with two Priests consederate with him put
alive into the ground between the two Columns with their heads downwards. But
yet these are such as France affords, for so in the particulars it follows.

Quidam in Equuleis extenduntur.] This is one of the kind of tortures France
has, and a grievous one it is. The extension of the body on a wooden Horse, on
which the hands and feet are so fastened and the body stressed with weights,
that as it follows, Eorum rumpuntur nervi and venae in sanguinis fluenta
prorumpunt, Haec etiam in Equuleum conjiciuntur, quo vita non aspirat beata. S.
Tuscul. 19.
this was a Heathen Roman punishment, Tully mentions it: Of kin also it is to
the Rota or breaking on the Wheel, which the Germans of old used. Of these
punishments that is true which the Historian says of the extraordinary
punishment of Metius Suffetius drawn in pieces with wild Horses, I^ud veluti
immite praeterque Legum immanitatem, in exemplum deductum non est, Al. ab
Alexand. lib. 3. c. 5.
which is the reason, I suppose, I find no mention of it in the Digest, either
in the Title Quaest. or poenarum. From which acuteness of the pain and rape of
the violence of this torture, Lib. 49. c. 11, 19.
our Text's says, Rumpuntur Nervi, that is, that is, it breaks in upon the
main Battalia of the body, and that it must do by a violence of assault, and a
not to be resisted force; Galen. lib. De Motu Musculorum, ad initium.
for the Nerves which the Greek, call (...), from (...) nutare vel flectere,
are the motive instruments of the body, of a spermatique and bloudless
substance, endowed with sense and motion; and therefore as the Arteryes and
veins, Lib. 1. De Elementis.
so the nerves are reckoned, Inter prima and simplicissima elementa humani
corporis; and so available are the Nerves, that by them are expressed the most
necessary furtherances to motion. Hence it is that Galen by (...) understands
not only that genus totum, quod a cerebro and spinali medulla est, or that
which arises out of the Muscles, and by Hippocrates is called the Tenon; but
also that (...) or Ligament which Physicians call (...), Lib. 15. De usu
partium.
the binding or holding together Nerve, which having according to the old
Philosopy its Rise from the heart; or as the later Anatomysts referr it to the
brain; from either whereof, as the noblest parts of life, is argued, the Nerve
to be a choice instrument: and this the learned understanding so, express every
thing of excellency by it, as the Notes on our thirteenth Chapter do declare.
So then the Text by this rumpuntur nervi,] understands a total subversion of
nature, such a Rout in the Microcosm as is unrallyable, and with Sampson's
strain of strength, carries the foundation from underpropping the
superstructure, that which disseises life and enters death as a forcible
Possesser, and vena in sanguinis fluenta prorumpunt,] that is, by a breach of
those china ampuls in which are the liquids of life reposed, not only their
wonted circulation is impeded, but all its spirits evaporated and substance
lost. Fluentum signifiing a small River, and the blood being by breaking of the
veins, which are tenuous and lucid, moved, all the contents of them flow out;
and that is true of Job, We are all as water spilt upon the ground, that cannot
be gathered up again.

Quorundam vero, diversorum ponderum pendulis dissolvuntur compagines and
junctura.

This is another kind of Torture, that of disjointing the body, and that by
Weights which are too heavy for the joints to bear up, by the weight of which
the body is torn a pieces. Alex. ab. Alex. b. 3. c 5,
This is worse then that punishment in Aethiopia, where those that are
criminous, are forced to drink the Herb Ophiusa, Ophiusta, or Ophinea, which
will so terrify the mind of those that take it, and present to them such
terrible views of things, that they shall choose rather to make themselves away
then endure it. Or like that Persian torture called Disphendomena, whereby men
are tied to the bodies and tops of trees deflected; which when they let loose,
rends the body, with its forcible return to its natural position, into pieces;
this is that, which in another sense then S. Paul declares the two edged sword,
the word of God to do, divides between the Marrow and the Bones, not only
beats up but blows up natures Quarters into Nullity, dissolutione continui:
Such a like cruelty as this was in Richard the Seconds time butcherly and
barbarously here, by the L. Holland and others, acted on a Carmelite Friar, Who
accusing the Duke of High Treason, which the Duke (great in power) excused, and
his Excuse by the King being excepted, Hollingshed in R. 2. p. 442.
he thereupon prayed the King that the Lord Holland, the King's half Brother,
might have custody of the Friar, till the day that he should come to his full
Trial; the Night before which day, the said Lord Holland and Sir Nicholas Green
Knight, came to the Friar, and putting a Cord about his Neck, tied the other
end about his privy Members; and after, hanging him up from the ground, laid a
stone upon his belly, with the weight whereof and poise of his body withal, he
was strangled, and tormented so, as his very backbone burst in sunder
therewith, besides the straining of his privy Members.

Et quorundam gaggantur ora, usque dum per illa, tot aquarum infundantur
fluenta, ut ipsorum venture montis tumescat more, etc.

(...) aramentum est quo ora filentinm ^bturantur and laxantur cum opus est.
Budoeus in Pandect. p. 687. Edit. Basil. 3. 1534.
This is another Torture, to apply to the mouth the Gagg, called (...), so fast
clasped to the extended orifice of the mouth, that it not only hideously pains
it to be kept at the height of extension, but also impedes all speech or
complaint; as also gives opportunity to exercise utmost fury upon the Intrals,
by infusion either of scaldding lead or any metal into the body, or such vast
quantities of water as the Trunk cannot contain, but must break with the burden
and stowage of it. This surely was an Ethnique punishment; to which Tit. 1.11.
Vitruvius lib. 9. c. 13. De Hydraulicis Organis.
S. Paul alludes, (...), speaking of false Teachers. And the Gagg is only here
used by Thieves, who to hinder out-crys, whereby they may be detected, gagg
men: and so when some obstreperous Offenders have been brought to punishment,
to prevent their blasphemy against God, and the Authority they dye under, some
Powers have made use of this, though never that I read of in England, there
being a better way to prevent such raving, speedy execution: for though the Law
does, as I think, allow the Sheriff liberty to give the condemned and to be
executed person, freedom of speech upon presumption that he will testify some
remorse, or declare somewhat of sober exhortation to the people; yet when his
concession is abused to raving and vehement execrations, to insolent and high
justifications, which are derogatory from the honor, authority, and justice of
the Magistrate; the Sheriff is, as I think, to hinder that by executing the
Law; for Reason as well as Religion directs not to abuse Liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness.

Piget (proh dolor!) jam penna exquisitorum ad haec cruciatuum enarrare
immania. Nam eorum variatus numerus, vix notari poterit magna in membrana.

This the Chancellor adds to show his abhorrence of the wicked ingenuity of
these torments; and his vehement abjuration in ( Proh pudor) is first
observable; for any thing that affects the heart with grief or the face with
shame, Authors have expressed by Proh dolor, prob pudor: and though pro be
used sometimes and but rarely, yet Prohob aspirabilem literam plus afficit, say
the Critiques, perhaps doing respect to H out of that Rabbinique reason,
because 'twas a Letter of the name of God, and so dignifiing what ever it was
conjoined with. The sense is, that our Chancellor thought these practices
rather matter of sorrow and shame then joy and triumph, adding, that there can
be little love and pity where these tortures are insultingly practiced. Our
Lord Jesus when he prophetically beheld the City near to those exigencies, that
the Romans soon brought it unto, wept over it; saying, O that thou had known,
eventhou, in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, etc. And the
Prophets, when they had burdens to disgorge on the people, did it, as it were,
beshrewing themselves to be the Messengers of it. Holy Moses, when God would be
let alone to destroy Israel, and bids him desist his prayer for their
salvation, interposes with God thus, Blot my name, Deuteronomy. 32. 32.
O Lord, out of the Book of Life rather than destroy Israel. Passions, if ever
they are religious and commendable, are, when they are exercised about grief
for sin, and shame for want of sorrow. O what a disanimation and amazement was
there in Luerece, when Tarquin had raped her chastity, she wounds her self to
be revenged on the insolence; yet heals her reputation of chaste, by the reason
that accompanied the blow: O Petus, quoth she, the Wound, I thy forced Wife
h^v^ made in my heart, Vulnus, Pete, non dolet quod ego feci, sed quod iu
fecists.
does not afflect me; but the wound thy love has made in me, who ought, and
would only have enjoyed and been enjoyed by thee, but am violently against my
soul and power made disloyal to thee: This, This, was her Proh Pudor.

Piget penna exquisitorum.] This Metonomy the Chancellor rhetoricates his
preterition of these things by; not, but that he could enlarge on them, but
because he would rather bury and obliviate, then brighten and perpetuate the
memory of them. When a man is writing, as David says, The things that concern
the King; Of the piety of Constantine; the mildeness of Trajan; the gentleness
of Marcus Antoninus; the strict discipline of Severas; the Justice of
Aristides; the temper of Augustus, who lived a renowned Lord of an Empire,
Nible Livia.
and of a Lady, whom he more grieved to leave then he did his greatness: Dion.
Cass. lib. 56. in August. Caesar.
I say, when a man's pen is thus nobly employed, It Is the Pen of a ready Writer,
Viget tunc penna; but when it is to gild over dirt, and make a Blackamore white,
when it must commend Lais for modesty, Heliogabalus for continence, Pompey for
temper, Caesar for self-denial, Nero for p^obity, Julian for piety, Origin for
fixedness, Severus for lenity, when thus it is to serve fordid ends to the
disservice of truth, then piget Penna:] especially if it be exquisitorum. No
figure so torvous and tragical can Apelles draw, his Pensil cannot artisie such
foam and filth of putidness; Noble wits and penns are not parasitique, they can
serve Princes and Ages in display of Virtues, and Record of Truth; but they
cannot call evil good or good evil, there piget penna exquisitorum. For as it
follows,

It Is Cruciatuum enarrare immania.] God has condemned sin to shame, and the pen
of exquisiteness is not to reverse the Reverse of the Escutcheon of State that
wickedness hangs forth; what the great Marshal of heaven and earth has
stigmatized, and charged with a Battoon of Alloy, no wit of man must plead for,
no pen honorably character: Justice gives to every thing its just Essay, and
art to every figure its symmetrious lineament. Devils in practice and invention
must be pourtrayed savagely, and the ferity of their deeds be dreadfully as
they deserve, represented. This me thinks was notably done by Roger Bacon a
witty Preacher in Henry the Third his time; for there then being one Petrus de
Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester, whom the Nation disgusted; He, the said Roger,
told the King, that Petrae and Rupes were most dangerous things at Sea, Speed.
p. 521.
which facetious Counsel the King following, called a Parliament, took counsel
of his Peers, and was ruled by them. Here was that which did answer penna
exquisitorum; and, blessed be God, it did not spare to speak but was accepted
to speed; which had it, the Nation had been under Cruciatuum immania.

Nam little variatus numerus, vix notari poterit magna in membrana.

This is added Hyperbolically to signify, not only the malignity, but also
the multitude of them; these Devil like inventions are Legion, not terminable
to those persons that invented them. For happy were it, if only (as sometimes
it is) those that were this way ingenuous, might taste first the fawce of their
own cooking, and die with Haman, by the Engines they had invented for others. --
nec Lex est justior ulla,
Quam necis Artifices art perire sua,
but extendible to others who are often taken in their snare: For many they
are, so many that they cannot be crowded close, not contained magna in
membrana, that is, says Pliny in a sheet of Parchment: Membrana charta
Pergamena ^ pellibus animantium concinnata. Plin. lib. 13. c. 11.
the Lawyers using to ingross all in Parchment, which they call a Membrane from
(...), whence melbrum or membrum, thence Membrana quae circa membra; the Greeks
call membrana by (...), because it clothes (as it were) the body; for the
Arteries are covered with Membranes, which (I humbly conceive, and if I err I
crave pardon) is the superior pars membri, which we call the pellis: so that by
this exstatique expression, there is that intended which may make the sense of
the Chancellor to be figurative, and denote largeness, and capacity, like (in
a sort) that which the Evangelist uses in those words, There are many other
things which Jesus did, Last St. John. last verse.
the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose, that not the whole
world would be able to contain the Books that should be written of them: which
elegant Clymax and height of Hyperbole is to have no other construction but
that very many they are for number; which also, according to its proportion, is
the import of, vix notari potuit magna in Membrana.

Leges Civiles deficiente testium copia, in criminalibus, veritatem
consimilibus extorquent tormentis.

Lib. 48. c. 12. Digest. lib. 19. De Poenis.
This, I suppose, cannot be denied, for Tolossanus quotes abundant Authorities
for it; and though they have in that Law other punishments for capital
Offenses, either death or banishment or servitude: yet does that Law in high
Cases, where it seems it is not to be avoided, (Conspiracy being heinous and
secret) allow torments to detect and thereby prevent it. This leave of God's
absoluteness Government takes, to try all means for preservation; and as things
are hurryed together, and precipitated in some places and Ages of the world,
Tormentum (...)(...), non recti, seu curvi and inflexi Etymologiste.
all little enough: no violence, no torment, though it be such as bends a man
together, and breaks the silver Cord and golden Ball of his life asunder, will
work on him; it is God only must persuade to confession, his torments in the
sinner's Conscience make him discover the accursed thing. Experience of this,
though it has not persuaded quamplurima Regna; yet our Nation it has, to
punish legally Treason and Conspiracy with Death, Quartering, and Corruption of
blood with Forfeiture of Estate. Indeed there was a time when poisoning was
frequent with us, then the Stat. 22 H. 8. c. 9. made the punishment boiling to
death; but the Nation judging it too severe and un-Christian an infliction
repealed it by 1 E. 6. c. 12. Such a Phoenix Kingdom is England, so merciful
are our Kings, Parliaments, and Laws, that all savage punishment heretofore
used, either have been by Act of Parliament repealed, or obsoleted by disuse:
of old, grievous Offeners were hanged in chains alive, M. Paris. p. 490, 584.
Gloss. in verbo.
where they, farnishing, uttered dismal moans so to the terror of passers by
and of women with child, that use reduced it to hanging them in chains when
dead. So in the isle of Scilley there was a punishment of Felony very tragical,
Felons were let down in a Basket from a steep Rock, with the Provision only of
two loaves of Barley bread and a pot of water, to expect as they hang the mercy
of the Sea. Notwithstanding these terrors have been in use, and our Nation has
been branded for fertility of Tyrants, Porphyrius apud Holstenium, lib. De
Scriptis Porph. c. 4. p. 17.
though we have had high and jarring spirits which have made way for Attempts
and foreign Successes against us; which Tacitus long ago observed to be the
Romans Key to Conquest of us: Olim Regibus parebant, nunc per Principes
factionibus and studiis trahuntur; nec aliud adversus validissimas gentes pro
nobis utilius, quam quod in communi non confulun^. In vita Agricola.
though, I say, this was our keenness and high stomach; yet has God brought
liberty to us out of the steel and flint of servitnde; and we are yet free from
the Rack and those torments which quamplurima Regna have admitted. And as my
continual Prayer is, that From 'all Treason and Rebellion, Sedition and privy
Conspiracy, from all false Doctrine and Heresy, from haraness of heart and
contempt of God's Word and Commandments, We may be delivered: This Prayer
becomes every true English Subject.
So do I also pray, From Fire and ^Fagot, from Rack and Torment, from new Lords
and new Laws, Good Lord deliver us, and make us thankful that we see the King
in his beauty, and that our Judges are as at the first, Isay 1.26.
and our Counselors as at the beginning; This shall be written that the
Generations to come may know it, Psalm. 102.18.
and the people that are yet unborn shall praise the Lord. But it follows.

Sid quis tam duri animiest, qui semel ab atrocitanto torculari laxatus, nou
potius innocens ille omnia fatertur scelerum ginera, quam aserbitatem sie
experti iterum subiretormenti.

This is brought to confirm that Tortures are apt to work on some men to
confess any thing, if by such Confession they may be released; and this I take
so far from being a justification of Torments, as subsidiary to truth, that as
it may fall out in coping with either pusil or resolute minds, nothing may
less by it appear then truth, weakness alleging that for truth through fear,
which is nothing but fiction, and wilfullness luring up all in silence and
resolute secrecy. And therefore the Chancellour's Quis tam duri animi, is not
only a questionary speech, carrying a vehement affirmation in it; but is a
flower of Oratory, which has a kind of persuasive assertion in it; that most
men are so terrified by pain and torture, that any thing they would rather do
then undergo the pain they have once acutely felt: though there have been
Examples of men, who not innocent but criminous, have so resolved the contempt
of tortures and torments, that they have even consolidated themselves to
suffer, and by a bravery of courage to out-dare them. How resolutely did that
Villain Olgiat, one of the Murderers of Galeatius Duke of Millan, who seeing
some of his Comrades in that Assassination, fear and begin to faint as they
drew near to behold the Torture they were to undegoe; he, though but twenty two
years old, desired the Executioners to begin with him, ut suo Exemplo Comites
patientiam discerent; being laid upon the Rack naked, and fastened that the
Torture might more work on him, he with a very audible voice and bold
Countenance, even when he was half dead, was heard to say, Confide Hieronime,
etc. Be of good cheer Jerome, Death is terrible but Fame is durable; Fulgosius
lib. 3. c. 3. Egnat. lib. 3. c. 3.
yea, and when he was just dying, be ended his life, praying to God most
devontly. Nor have we been at home here without instances of Malefactors, that
have dyed justifying themselves, and without all show of terronr; Michael
Joseph the Black Smith, taken in Perkin Warbeck's Insurrection, being executed,
comforted himself, That by this he hoped his Name and Memory would be
everlasting: Temps. H. 7. Speed. p. 754.
But an honester Blacksmith, and of juster courage, because more innocent, was
he of Burntwood in H. 3. time, who being sent for to make Shackles for Hubert
de Burgh, Earl of Kent, then apprehended; when he heard it was the Earl of
Kent, fetched a deep sigh, and said, Do with me what you please, and God have
mercy on my soul, but as sure as the Lord lives, Speed. p. 52^.
I will never make Iron shackles for him, but will rather dye the worst
death'that is; for is not this that worthy, loyal, and courageous Hubert, who
so often has preserved England from being destroyed by Strangers, and restored
England to England. I say, it is less wonder to see innocence courageous; but
to see Guilt on the Conscience yet so steeled that it can boast of confidence
in God and implore his mercy when it justifies Murder, Parricide, Sacrilege,
and all upon cold blood and under pretense of Justice, this is strange; but not
so strange as true: the eyes of many have seen, and the ears of more heard it
to their consternation and amazement. Indeed when men have suffered for
righteousness sake, nothing has been more common with God's Hectors, then
Huperhumane Fortitude: Look into the Stories of the Martyrs in Heb. 11. and in
Ecclesiastical Authors, and you will find death their joy and torture their
ambition, constancy their renown and charity their Coat of Mayland Armor of
proof; they knew God valued more fidelity then any thing else, and therefore
they persevered in it to the death; Iudex seculi plus deferet Clerico
continentu quam diviti, and magis sanctitatem tuam venerabitur quam opes.
Sanctus Hieronimus Epist. ad Heliodorum. De vita solitaria.
and as they suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods and bodies, so they
would be sure that in such their suffering they had a just cause and were
innocent. O they knew the spirit of glory restson the In^^censille, in our
Text, Nihil Christiano felicius, cui promittitur regnum coelorum, nihil
laboriosius que quotidie do vita periclitatur, nihil fortius qui vincis
diabolum, nibil imbecillius que a carne superatur. Sanctus Hieronymus. Epist,
ad Rusticum.
who will go through much triumphingly; This has made Christians offer
themselves to torments, and turn the edge of their Persecutours swords with the
glut of their blood. This has made men forsake their noble Mansions, their
pleasant Companions, their profitable professions, their beloved Countries, to
preserve their innocencyes. Indeed this innocence will carry God's Jewel not
only to deny subscription to sin, but embrace proscription on for not
committing it. Job. 27.5.
This Job so kept close to him, that he resolved not to part with it till he
dyed. This Innocence is the best defense the soul has against all temptation
to, and tribulation for sin; it is that which few value because few have it, and
few have it because few pray for and prize it; O Innocence where art thou?
Whether art thou fled? In what order or profession of men art thou resident,
that we may seek after thee to find thee out? Thou art in Angels, and thou
have been in Prophets, Apostles, and primitive Martyrs, though not in the
brightness of thy divine Oriency; yet in transcendent proportions, making them
burning and shining lights, spiriting them to despise tortures, resist
violences, insult over conflicts, embrace poverties, deny favors, glory in
sufferings: but in the world now thou art not, we are all now adays decocted
and abated in our holy servours. No need of Racks and tortures to bring off men
now from innocence; make but a motion at the Bar of Power, and threaten to
enter judgment and take out Execution upon them for their singularity, and
all is hush. It Is well with the world, as now it effeminately is modeled, that
Ethnicism is over; for if such times should have been now as was then, the
Text's innocens ille would have been a nemo scit. No courage can be in any soul
but in the soul that is sincere; which because men are not, therefore God gives
them up to fear fordidly, and deny the truth shamefully, as those Carpet and
Outside Reverends did I Mariae, who were zealous Protestants in King Edward's,
and as zealous Papists in Queen Mary's days: yea in the Convocation of 1
Mariae, there were of all the Clerks but six, Fuller's Church History, 2. part.
p. 11.
that withstood the reduction of Popery; and the Goodly Prolocutor Weston, told
Master Philpot one of them; that because he stickled so against
Transubstantiation, which was against the Doctrine of the Church of England'
constituted in Edward the Sixth's time, That he was a Madman, meeter to be
sent to Bedlam then continue there: Lo a taste of innocence which will never
cope with flames and tortures. That which enables to endure, notwithstanding
all, must be faith in God and frailty supported and sublimated by him; this
will make a man not only dye daily by mortification, but die strenuously and
suffer patiently for a good cause: and that not from a durities animi the
effect of sin, but from a resolution hardened by the fire of holy zeal, which
none has but that innocens ille which our Text speaks of. Who will do by the
cause of God, Shutes History of Venice. p. 250.
as Matheo Fasceolo did by his Country? He being a Citizen of Chioggia, when
the Genoesses wann it from the Venetians, lost a great Estate in it; after
which he repaired to Venice, and finding the City in a great strair, went to
the Senate, and told them he was willing to serve his Country with all he
could; his Estate he had lost, and had nothing left but his Wife and Children,
and them he tendered to serve the State, though it were to be sold to raise
money for the States use. So if God's glory be concerned, a good Christian,
Innocens ills, will part with all that is dear to promote or rescue it.

Et non semel mori mallet, dum mors sit ultimum terribilium, quam toties
occidi, and totidem gehennales furias morte amariores sustinere.

This our Tex-Master adds as the reason why an innocent man would rather choose
once to dye, then long and often to be tormented; because in death there is but
one short brunt which over, all terrors are past: but in tortures and
torments, as there is scarce perfect life; so neither is there complete death,
but an interpendance of the miseries of both, and the mercyes of neither.
Whereupon the Chancellor concludes, 'twere more eligible to an innocent man to
dye for ado as we say, then to be tormented, which is protracted death: And
that the Chancellour's intendment may more signally appear, it is fit to
consider his order in that he proposes; 1. He concludes that a good man's
choice is always De re licita and possibili; if he had his choice, he would
desire nothing but what ought and is to be, semel mori mallet. Sin requires
natures punishment by death, and God has appointed that all, that do live,
shall dye. The Canon is, Dust thou art in nature, dust thou shall be in
dissolution by death; To dust thou shall return: Genesis 3.19. Heb. 9.27.
and Saint Paul declares this the second time, It is appointed for all men once
to dye; not for all Creatures, for good Angels live eternally, yet they are
Creatures, But for all men, once to dye: not that all shall dye but once, for
there is a second death mentioned in Scripture, which is the punishment of sin,
and which wicked and impenitent sinners are condemned to; but once to dye as a
payment to Nature, which the best of men are to make then, this the innocent
man chooses, because he knows it is God's appointment and Nature's order; and he
yields to it, not only as it is inevitable, but as certainly it is lucrosum
quiddam. For Death to him is ultimum terribilium, that is, of natural
terribles; his pains, his terrors, his wants, his defects, which in life pinch
him, then adieu: and therefore to be rid of those incommodations, (...).
Sophocles apud Stobaeum, sermon. 125.
he chooses rather to die then live; for as the Poet says, Better not to live
then to live wretchedly: and Aeschilus, Death is preferrable to a sor did life.
O but no man can call death the last terror, but he, that has Christ, the
Victor of Death, (...), Aeschil.
and him that has the power of Death, his Portion. No man can choose to dye,
who has his Heaven here, and must have an Hell hereafter; (...). Philo lib. De
praemiis, and poenis p. 921.
and therefore because no man delights in terrors (and death affords such to
all but innocent and holy men) there can be no mallet mori, as death is the
ultimum teribilium in any: but a virtuous soul, who knows, when his earthly
tabernacle is dissolved, he shall have a building made of God, not made with
hands but eternal in the Heavens; this makes him choose rather to dye then to
live so encumbered, as men in nature are, and in sin more: for their life is
nothing but a file of sins. (...). Sophocles.
And therefore no man can account death the last Physician of diseases; and as
he in Aeschilas prays death not to refuse him but to case him, as that, which
alone cures incurable diseases, (...), because no grief follows the dead. No
man, (...). Stobaeus sermon. 274. p. 883.
I say, can, as the Causians in Stobans are said to do, weep when men are born
and laugh when they dye, but those that are either holy or that believe souls
are mortal and leave the body without account of what in conjunction with it
they were guilty of; for if they believe that body and soul must conjoinedly
stand in judgment before God, Ea victoria habet glorians placendi Deo and
praedam vivendi in aternum. Tertullian. in Apologet. c. 50. De Martyrio.
then, if they be not holy men that dye, death is not ultimum but primum
terribilium: for death is then only a victory over terrors, when, as
Tertullian's words elegantly are, It has the glory of pleasing God, and the
prey of everlasting life, this made Jacob salute his death with this fiducial
calm, O Lord I have waited for thy Salvation; Cur non (bone Jesu) ducis sponsam
tuam in hortum tuum. Sermon. in Cantic. Cantic.
and Saint Paul, I desire to be dissolved; and Hilarion importunes his souls
exition from the body; and Saint Bernard to long, and to utter his longings,
Why O Lord Jesus do thou not lead thy spouse into thy garden, and entertain
her with thy delicates after life, Nos dolendi magis qui quotidie stamus in
praelio peccatorum, vitiis sordidamur accipimus vulnera, and de ocioso verbo
reddituri sumus rationem. In Epist. ad Theodoram.
whom thou exercisest with thy sufferings in life? A good man, faith Saint
Jerome, may be pitied in his life, God hedges his way with thorns, he calls him
to combat against Principalities and Powers; he has a Law in his Members that
rebels against! the Law of his mind, he is for God's sake killed all the day
long, he has a fountain of evil thoughts, and must give account to God of them.
These things make their hearts heavy, and mingle Vinegar and Gall with their
Nectar; but their Liberata, their emancipation and manumission by death, is
their gaude-day: to these death is ultimum terribilium, God has given them a
release by it, it is their rest from their labors, and their pass to their
happyness. But death is not so to all; Joseph, lib. 17. c. 8. Sabellic. lib.
10. c. 13. Cuspinianus in vita Theophili.
not to Herod who lived in Adultery and dyed in Murder; not to Marius, who
desired life only to revenge himself of Silla his Enemy; not to Theophilus the
Greek Emperor, who expressed he could not depart life, till Theophobus his
Deputy in Fersia, whom he was displeased with, were murdered; which done, he
dyed, uttering this, Neither shall thou hereafter be Theophobus, nor I
Theophilus; Vae illis quibus praeparatur dolor vormium, ardor flammae, sitis
sine e^inctu, etc. Epist. 111. ad Julianum.
such as these that dye impenitently and are without hope in their death, do
but, when they dye, begin their terrors, their great woe is to come: For them
is prepared the never-dying Worm, the inextinguishable flame, the unquenchable
thirst, weeping and gnashing of teeth, utter darkness, and so forth; as Saint
Ierom sadly characters it. Therefore these are not those whose to dye is
choice; but he that can do that, is alone Innocens ille, God's Lazarus, whose
fores shall have balm, and whose soul shall have comfort in Abraham's bosom.
This, This, This is the Innocens ille, who cries to the World and the Devil as
his Lord did, what ye do, do quickly; do your utmost, in spite of your rage I
shall be more then a Conqueror. He can not but be victorious, whose faith,
with reverence I write it, has overcome that Jesus, whose passion and merit
overcame this, and purchased the next world. By all which it appears, that to
dye once is natural to all; to dye happily, so, as to have death the last of
terrors, is peculiar to innocent men, who therefore choose death rather then
miserable life, beause they shall avoid those torments in life which our
Chancellor terms Gehennales furias.

Gehennales furias.] Tortures are well set forth by these: For as the Furiae
were Acherontis and noctis filiae, as Jupiter by them turned a King into a
Wolf; so do tortures act savageness upon the noble body of man, Psalm. 139.14.
which David says is fearfully and wonderfully made: and because as the
furies, so tortures by either, wrath desiring revenge, Poela tres furias
dixerunt qua mentes hominum exagitant, ira ultionem desiderat, cupiditates
opes, libido voluptates. Lactantius, De vero cultu. lib. 6. c. 19.
covetousness aiming at gain, or lust gratifying pleasure in such cruelty, are
cruel to men exposed to them. Servius also has made three sorts of these,
assigned to three several Orbs, Lib. 3. De Nature. Deorum: Orat. pro Roscio.
Dirae to Heaven, Eumenides to Hell, Furiae to Earth; Tully, after he has
smartly treated of these, concludes, He sunt impiae, assiduae, domesticaeque
furiae, que dies noctesque Parentum poenas a consceleratissimis filiis
repetant; Pro Sestio.
which considered, the Ancients did well to term every thing of dread and
unacceptableness by Furiae: thus Tully has his furiae ac pestis patriae: and
Claudian his Tristes furiae: and the Poets express the eagerness of love by it,
Malis furiis actus, furiis agitatus, concepit furias, are Epethites, that
Virgil, Horace and Ovid give love; and Suctonius tells us of Verberibus
furiarum exagitari, and so do other Authors of Arma furialia, I^ Nerone.
ausa furialia, saedes furiales, ignes furiales, caput and virus furiale; which
warrant our Text's resembling of tortures by them: yea, in that our Text has
added Gehennales furias to display them, it has abundantly set forth the
terror and direful nature of them. And our Text seems to make tortures by
this, a local Hell, an Engine of cruelty, and that not to be endured. Gehenna
is a word adopted into the Greek and Latin tongues from (...), a Valley South
of Jerusalem, in the possession of Hinnom an eminent Iebusite; it is called also
the Valley of Tophet, Judges 15.8. 2 King. 23.10. Ier. 19.6. Ier. 7.3^.
because abused to Idolatry and cruelty, For there they caused their Sons and
Daughters to pass through the fire alive to Molech; for which God cursedd its
fertility and changed its name: so that at last it became the lay-stall of the
City, and every filthy thing was cast on it, this was Gehenna in the History.
Now the sense of our Chancellor was, I conceive, to set forth the
sanguinariness of Torments, not only by furies, but by Hellish furies; which
none, but he that is the Prince of darkness, and whose odium is versans circa
totum genus humanum, could invent. And therefore I repeat my thanks to God and
the Laws of England, that though Offenders do deservedly die, when guilty; yet
that their bodies are not Resolut. of the Judges in Felton's case. Difficile
immo and impossible est, ut and praesentibus quis and futuris fruatur bonts,
ut and hic ventrem and ibi mentem impleat, ut de deliciis transeat ad delicias,
ut in^ utroque saeculo primus sit, ut and in coelo and in terra appareat
gloriosus. Sanctus Hieron. Epist. ad Julianum.
tortured, but they left to that repose that Conscience will afford them, this
is Christian-like in the Law: nor shall they need to be tortured here in their
death, who are to be tortured (if they dye impenitent) for ever after death.
Nor surely does the God of nature design to it an Hell every where, for since
the good man's Heaven is hereafter, he may bare with his Hell here; and since
the evil man's Heaven is here, it seems not just to add to his affliction, to
torment him before his time: this the Devils cried out upon, Art thou come, say
they to our Lord, to torment us before our time. And this, God, I am apt to
think, did insinuate to men in the Patriarchal and pure Ages, Tholoss. Syn.
tagm. Juris. lib. 31. c. 13, 14. and seq. Idem c. 17.
yea and to the Jews his own people; for though dye Malefactors did by God's
own judgment, either by stoning or by the Sword of the Magistrate, or by some
immediate hand of God: yet those deaths were quick and dispatching, not
protractive of time and augmenting torture. And when the Romans brought in the
Cross, which was an Ethnic and torturous death, which the Jews in token of
malice executed on our Savior because of the torture of it which was inhumane,
I suppose they are, in the Prophecy of their Conversion, and the sorrow that
then should seize on their natural obstinacy, Zachar. 12.10.
said to look upon him whom they had pierceed; which is prophetical not so much
of the spear that pierced his side, as of the nails that fastened his hands and
feet to the Cross: By all which I humbly conceive the deaths of Malefactors by
tortures may be thought not so Christian, as dispatches of them more calmly, by
a quick stroke or sudden throatle, are. But it follows.

Et nonne Princeps tu novisti criminosum quendam, qui inter tormenta hujusmodi,
militem nobilem, probum, and fidelem, de proditione quadam, super qua, ut
asseruit, ipsi duo insimul conjurarunt, accusare.

Still the Chancellor multiplies instances of the invalidation of torments to
discover truth, and the uncertainty of proceeding according to them; and as
before he quoted Fringe for suborning Witnesses to depose falsehood, so here now
he produces an Example, in the Prince's own knowledge, of one that accused a
man of Honor of Treachery; which he after Racking ratifyed to be so, and being
racked again, when he found himself unable to live, confessed his Accusation
false and himself only guilty. And this the Chancellor does, not more to show
the danger of relying too much on frail man, who in his best estate is
altogether vanity, apt to be seduced by his corrupt heart to deal falsely,
Shute's Hist. of Venice. p. 292.
and not to be pityed in being punished therefore, as Pipus the Florentine was,
who being sent by the Hungarian with great forces to invade Italy; was bought
off from that War, and betraying his trust returned, whom, the King of Hungary
punished by causing him to have poured down his throat Molten Gold: I say, not
only does our Chancellor produce this example to show mortal Villainy, Si ego
latens in caverna and quasi sub modio non quidem lucens sed fumigans ventorum
quidens impetus, nec sic declinare sufficio, sed continuis tentationum
variisque fatigatus impulsibus instar vento agitatae arundinis huc illucque
circumferor; quid positus supra montem, supra candelabrum. Sanct. Bernardus,
Epist. 42. Ad Archiepis. Senonensem.
but also to admonish all men that stand, to take heed least they fall. For if
obscurity of condition is prone to Temptations, what are the Ruffles and Trials
that Mountains, Cedars, and Grandeurs of men meet with; O they have need of
many prayers that are in high places. The Text here tells us of a brave person
a Knight, Miles quasi unus e millibus, a man of a thousand, nobilis ordine,
probus mente, fidelis corpore, who is impeached; probus quasi prohibus, See my
Discourse of Arms and Armory printed March. 1660.
qui se a delinquendo prohibet, as Festus descants on it, a Gentleman spotless,
so wary that he undergoes not the desert of suspicion, whose mind is so
moderate and passions so calm, that he seems a pattern of all excellency; (for
so Probus imports, and so Authors use it, witness probae Matronae for chaste
Women, not to be drawn aside to wantonness, probus Artifex, Occasio proba,
Facinus probum, Ingenium probum, mores probi; yea Tully joins sanctus with
probus:) Pro Cluentio.
I say, though thus stanch this person accused is said to be, yet he is the man
impeached, and that of Treachery, who is termed fidelis;] Fidelis cord, found
at heart, all Loyalty; Fidelis ore, found in speech, one that regards his
words, who will not speak evil of his Prince, no, not in his Bedchamber, when
he is most alone; Fidelis opere, that does every thing that a loyal Subject
ought, and nothing which a loyal Subject ought not: Nobilitas nihil aliud est
quam cognita virtus. Cic. Epist. ad Herennium.
even this man, though thus firm and fixed as that he is notable therefore,
(for nobilis here is quasi notabilis, God having given him virtue and blood
which has made him eminent;) yet this man with all these accomplishments is
accused.

Accusare] is a forensique word well known to Lawyers; (...) est aliquem ad
causam dicendam urgere: and Tully defines the nature of accusation pithily,
Accusatio crimen desiderat, Pro M. Caelio. Syntag. Juris. Lib. 32. De
Accusationsbus.
rem ut definiat, hominem ut notet, argumento probet, test confirmat.
Concerning accusations and the nature of them Tholossanus treats at large.
Accusers the Bulgarians held of old so dangerous, that their Legislator
appointed no Accuser should be heard nisi vinctus and tortus. This I suppose
was the condition of the Accuser in the Text, who yet did so much the more
vehemently falsely accuse Militem nobilem, probum, fidelem, and that only to
evade the torment; so ready often is the Devil to suggest evil to us, that to
ease our selves of one evil we will bring on others greater, which is every day
visible, when men to right themselves care not whom they wrong. Those two
Florentine Families of the Medices and Pazzians are examples of this; for the
Medeceans having surprised the Pazzians, they were so enraged that they vowed
revenge though they seemed friends; and so it was, that the Pazzians had
contrived Assassination of the Medicean's even in the presence of the elevated
Host. This makes me think of an holy life as the best guard, and a self
visitation as the safest employment. He that lives at home and detracts from no
body, gives his life much serenity; Speed. p. 503.
which had the Wife of the Lord Bruise done, she might have had H. the Third's
good favor, and spared her Present of 400 milch Kine and one Bull all
milk-white, except only the ears red, which her lavish tongue of the King
made unacceptable to him.

De proditione quadam, ut asseruit ipse, duo insimul conjurarunt.
Proditio] is a falsehood in friendship, as it were, datio veritatis pro
mercede; and it consisting in betraying a trust is execrable amongst all
Nations, and deserves extermination from Mankind: Lib. 35. c. 5.
Tholossanns has a whole Chapter about it which I referr the Reader to. That, I
suppose, which this Knight is accused for, is either holding correspondence
with the Prince's Enemy, (...), etc. Philo lib. De specialibus Legibus, p. 801.
or promising to deliver up some strength that by Commission from the Prince he
held. This Prodition, however it was, all Laws make capital; and therefore the
Ac^user, in torments, confesses it against him, that by engaging a person of
more note then himself he might have the more liberty: yea, and to possess them
with a belief, that he both knew the nature and would discover the truth of his
knowledge concerning it, he accuses himself Consederate with the Knight; this
the Varlet did once and again in hopes to evade the torments: but when he saw
the torments would end his life, and he ought to be in earnest with death that
was in earnest with him; then he turns his Tale, then he begins to be real,
Sed demum cum ex poenis illis laesus, usque ad mortis articulum infirmaretur,]
says the Text, then he does right to the wrongfully accused person; and his
Accusation acknowledged by the very Accuser to be malicious and false, makes
the Knight that was eclipsed ten thousand times more orient. So God often
rewards oppressed Innocents, that he makes their Cloud their Luster, and their
misfortune their advantage. Famous is that story of Nicholao Rucino, who was
set to Sea over many Gallyes against the Genouesses, a Tempest arose which cast
him into the Haven of Cariste toward the Negropont; Shute's History Venice. p.
198.
there he thought his design lost, but there he unexpectedly found fourteen
Gallyes of the Genouesses, richly laden with Merchandise and provision of War,
lying at Anchor; and knowing them to be the Enemy he was to encounter with at
Sea, he set upon them and overcame them. Pisani was cast into Prison for his
misfortune at Pola, Tag. 246.
but God so distressed the Venetians after the loss of Chioggia, that they were
fain to court their Prisoner, and put all their strength under his Conduct.
There are infinity of these examples, Joseph, Iephta, David, Daniel, Mordecay,
and others, who, had they not seemingly been defeated, had never arrived at
those notable advantages that God designed them to be aggrandized by. Cosmas
the incomparably learned Italian, when taken by the Saracens, and wanting any
man of learning to converse with, or any lad inclined to it, bemoaned more that
want then his captivity; Cressolius Mystag. p. 203.
yet God so ordered it, that he was brought from his servitude by one who set
him to tutor Johannes Damascenus, by making whom so great a Scholar he got
renown enough: whereas in ways of wickedness God gives no opportunity to
advantage, unless he intend to bring the soul off from it by his mercy to
repentance; and that sometimes he does in the last gasp, in ipso mortis
articulo, not only when the body is brought low with torture and
restlesseness, but in ipso mortis articulo, in the very (...) and the entrance
of death on life's quartars, (for so articulus is by Plautus understood,
Articulus pro momento and tempestiva rerum faciendarum hora sive puncto, seu
alienjus rei aut temporis particula. Etymolog. Cic. pro Quinctio. 10.
Opportunitatis omnes articulos scio: so Tully, ut eum suis conditionibus in
ipso articulo temporis astringeret.) Then, Then, does the truth find being in
the breath of our dying Varlet, Tum demum, etc.

Ultimum quoque viaticum, Christi videlicet corpus, sumpserit.
This is well added to show the custom the Ancients had of giving the
Sacramental Elements to dying persons, which they called Viaticum, because the
manner was when Travelers were entertained in the Eastern Countries, where
vast Deserts were, and they were to carry their Provisions with them, there
being no Inns in the way, there this Provision was called Viaticum. Hence
Plautus mentions the Viatica caena quae datur abituro, like those parting meals
we call Foye's, as I take it, which men give their Comrades when they go to
travel. Yea Viatica signified every thing necessary to Journey, money as well
as meat and drink, so Tully, Velim videas quid viatici, and quid instrumenti
satis sit; Cic. ad Attic. lib. 12. Horat. 2. Epist. 2
and Horace tells us of collecta viatica multis aerumnis, and of largum and
liberale viaticum. Now this Notion spiritualized, our Chancellor makes use of
to show the practice of the Church, who considering the Journey from this to
the next World, required Provision for it, and that there was nothing so proper
thereto as the Sacramental Elements, did mind the party dying to repent and to
cast of all confidence in the World or in himself, and to rest only on the
mercy of God in Christ; and to beseech Christ Jesus to make him worthy of his
acceptance, and to own that Sacramental body of his, which the humble and
contrite sinner has taken into his body toward the preservation of his body
and soul to life eternal: for sure to a worthy Receiver great is the benefit of
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Saint Bernard thought so when in
those words he said, Et sensum minuat in minimis, and in gravioribus peccatis
tollit omnino consensum. And hence was it that the Church, Sermon. In Caena
Domini.
when the Minister was satisfied a sinner was penitent and had confessed
ingeniously his offense, did for his comfort give him the Sacrament called here
Corpus Christi; Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 6. p. 134.
and a purgation of any one from suspicion by solemn taking of the Sacrament to
oblige the truth of a thing was quittance enough: this was done in the case in
hand, the Knight, that was by the person racked accused, is upon the Sacrament
taken at his death, Innocens dicitur, non qui nocet leviter, sed qui uihil
nocet. 5 Tusc. Quest.
declared innocent and free from the crime he was accused of; Innocentem
militem illum and immunem, that is, he is not only not so much as not at all
guilty, but as free, as we say, the unborn child is. Every good man not only
being careful not to be guilty of evil, which David calls, Keeping from the
great offense, but from the appearance of evil; for though with worldly men and
loose livers, not to be grossly and actually facinorous is as much as they look
to: yet a Christian should, Exasmus in Adagiis. Chil. 2. Cent. 5. Adag. 57
as that Heathen did say, though in the Corynth of this world, to be not so had
as the worst is an happiness, yet (...), I am a child of Light, I must walk as
in the day, wisely and virtuously. This is Innocens worthy to be mated with
Immunis.] Immunis qui nullo fungitur officio, liber ab onere publico, qui vel
aetate vel alio privilegio praestare omnia non tenetur, says Festus, and this
admirablely reaches the Purgation of the Knight to be free from all temptation
to, or advantage by crimes of Treachery; he was a man of Honor and Fidelity,
who had no putid Principle which would truckle under sordid profers: he was
where he would be, God had bounded his mind within the verge of Providence,
and content he was with his station; and thereupon though he was falsely
accused, yet is now worthy to be purged, as one innocent and free from the
malice of the charge.

Tamen ait, poenas in quibus ipse tempore delationis suae fuerat, it a atroces
exstitisse, quod priusquam eas iterum experiretur, etiam eundem militem ille
iterum accusaret, similiter and Patrem proprium.

This Clause notably shows the disarmation of not ^onely manhood, but even of
integrity by fear, the terror of which, in the penalty that the bodies of
offenders feel under Racks and Tortures, is not only probable at some times,
but even apt with most to make them say or do any thing, though never so untrue
and unjust, to avoid them. This, there is evidence of in this example, where
not only the fear of Peter, but the falsehood even of Judas seem concentred. An
innocent person he accuses, stands to his Accusation in Tortures, then having
no hope to outlive them, confesses the Knight innocent and free, and seals his
vindication with the Sacrament to confirm the truth of it; yet, for all this,
publishes his so great dread of the Tortures, that rather then suffer them, he
would accuse any innocent man; nay his own Father. O self-love, what a
corrasive art thou to holy Courage and Martyr-like Constancy! How much do
thou abase the Nobility of manly minds, when thou courtest to save the shadow
to lose the substance? How treacherous art thou to truth to secure the trash
thou valuest above it? Peter, Peter, Thou Pillar of Apostles have left a blot
on thee for this, Ego te. semper Simon, plurimi feci, and tu, Simon, dormis.
Ego te tot modis honestavi, and tu dormis, etc. Diserrissimus, and
Strenuissimus Morus Equ. Aurat. in Exposit. Passion. Inter opera Impress.
Lovanii, Anno 1566. p. 121. B.
never Mortal more obliged by a Master then Peter; yet never a Master more
dishonored by a Servant then Christ by him was: thanks to thy merciful look,
O blessed Savior, for Peter's tears and his after-Constancy. 'Twas bad enough
with Peter while he was Peter, and it had never been better with him while he
had been Peter; but that thou, O Lord, had some future work for to which thou
preservest him by thy courage in him. It Is a rare advice that the Knight that
dyed courageously according to his Prescript (for that, which charity would
persuade me to judge, he believed he ought to do, though the Law and State
judged otherwise) Quos in id pati vocat Deus intendant prospere, In
Commentariis Pass. Impress. Lovanii, Anne 1566. p. 119.
etc. Let those says he, that God puts resolution into, suffer for him, buckle
to their work manlyly; for they serve him that has times and seasons, men and
means at his beck, and will rule and intend them sweetly and effectually to
serve his glory. O this playing fast and loose, this being neither hot nor
cold, this plannetaryness is the preparatory to tergiversation, it is
prevarication which ends in cowardice; what a wretch does our instance show him
to be; that, to avoid bodily torture, would torture his Conscience, and incurr
Hell by an impenitent and unnatural sin. O, self-love is the dangerousest Aqua
fortis to penetrate, that Satan works by; Congratulor quidem tibi quid sis
exoneratus, sed vereor ne Deus a te quantum in te exhenoratus sit. Epist. 86.
Saint Bernard thought the Abbot of Saint Theodorick in danger by it, when to
save him some trouble, or to gratify an humor he quitted his charge: but the
Father tells him, he had best look to it, that his own ease was not God's
burden. And how ill God took his carriage, Spotswood History of Scotland. p.
194.
who consented to the Murder of Davye, and under-writ the instrument of the
combination; and yet had the confidence to cause it to be proclaimed at the
Cross in Edenborough, that He was innocent and never consented to the Murder,
let the Records of Heaven in due time tell. For though it may have warrant from
reason of State for the Venetians, who kept Treveso forty years, and lost it
most unwillingly to Leopold of Austria; yet when their Enemy had it, History
Venice. p. 273.
the Venetians so dissembled their regret, that they sent Ambassadors to
Leopold upon Congratulation of his welcome and entering into it: yet truly it
is in the nature of the thing, but a worldly bubble, which being insolid,
teaches men not to rest on the favor, or dote on the felicity it promises.
Give me the stanch virtue that will not do a sordid illiberal act to better it
self, but had rather have Cato's Chains in Prison then Nero's Scepter on the
Throne; for when a man is more led by sense then justice, what does he not dare
to do that is facinorous, so it be but accumulative to his ends: He Will not
only accuse innocent persons, sed Patrem proprium,] the sacred Genitor, who
did, to give him being, patefacere semen, impart himself. Servius in voce
Patris, in 2. Georgic. 2.
His Father, that religious name, unde omnes Dii Patres vocabantur, faith
Servius; Father, a name of Honor, to which is entailed every dramm of duty and
respect imaginable, to the honor of which, the first Commandment of Promise is
made: De poena patricidii, lege Turneb. Advers. lib. 13. c. 13. Edit. Basil.
yet, even this Father, not only for age, but even in nature, fear of the
Rack, and hope of avoidance of torture, would induce to accuse.

Nec vero ipse mortem quam tunc metuit, evasit. Sed demum suspensus, tempore
mortis suae ipsam militem purgavit ab omni crimine de quo dudum defamavit.

All that I observe from this Clause is only, I. Curse of God on cowardice;
many think to avoid tortures and death by fallacious complyances with
wickedness: and God when they have showed their naughtiness, has indurated the
bowels of those they thought thereby to oblige, so that though they have loved
the Treason yet they have hated the Traitor. For though confession of guilt be
a due from every Christian at all times, and at death especially, that those
that hear may be warned and admonished to live better that they may dye better;
yet, when a man is near death to be so yarc of life, as to confess or rather
fancya nothing and set it up as something, to lengthen out a few minutes of
ease and life by what is indulged to it, as supposed truth, is to dishonor God
and deserve no attainment of so cursed ends. 2. That though life conceal much
of truth yet death often reveals it, demum suspensus, tempore mortis suae
militem purgavit. It Is time to speak truth to men when men cease to a
Malefactor, as they do when he is judicially dying; then cries he for his
Confessor, and decryes his sewd Companions; then he execrates his debauchery,
and exclaims on his costly idleness which made him facinorous, and for the
punishment whereof he is a sufferer. It Is good and welcome news to charity,
when a sinner converteth, and concludes well an ill life; and therefore the
Angels in Heaven rejoice for a sinner that repents, because not only he by
repentance puts himself into the arms of mercy, but also desists from that
enormity which illaqueates and makes unhappy the life of many innocent holy
ones, whom he traduces and misrepresents. There was not in all Scotland a more
brave and pious noble man then Archibald, Spotswood. p. 371, 372.
Lord of Angus, in his time was; yet he dyed by incantation and witchcraft: nor
was there here a braver Knight then this in our Text, yet he was accused of
Treachery, and not acquitted by his Accuser till at the Gallows, and then the
false Accuser had his reward; not that which the Priest by order of the
Star Chamber in Anno 1544. had, who was set on the Pillory and burnt in both
Cheeks with an hot Iron with the letters F.A. which the paper over his head
expounded for false Accusation; Stow's Chronicle Sum. p. 257. 312.
or as the other in 1556. was, for accusing one of the Court of Common pleas of
Treason: but by hanging at the Gallows by the head while dead, and then cut
down and buried without Christian Burial.

Taliter proh dolor and quam plures alii miseri faciunt, non veritatis causa,
sed solum urgentibus torturis arctati, quid tunc certitudinis resultat, ex
confessionibus taliter compressorum

This Clause affirms that which i affirmable of all relating to erring man, to
wit, that nothing he fayes or does, is infallibly to be concluded upon further
then it is regulated by a divine Principle, which regards truth and fears
falsehood as a provocation of the pure God, who is the revenger of it. Nor is
the Argument here applied more strong against tortures then any other trial
wherein men are instruments, who by being possible to be corrupted, may so be
under Juryes as well as tortures; only this it shows that then the excuse of
the invention of torments is detracted from, in the ineffectuality that they
prove to the discovery of truth, which, notwithstanding them, is concealed; and
justifies lighter punishments (though mortal) to be both less barbarous, and
as much, if not more effectual then those. For whereas in France, where
torments are, trust is altogether to the acuteness of those sufferings, as if
the terror of them would work enough without any softer applications; With us
in England because our kinds of punishments are lighter, we do apply religious
Arguments to the Conscience, and lay home the terrors of God to sinners; and
because the Magistrate comes not to encounter this Goliath of Desperation in his
own strength, in which no man shall prevail, but with spiritual weapons which
are mighty through God; therefore God makes them prevalent to work contrition
and confession. Piety is the noblest and nearest way to politic permanent
Issues and Successes, Nor are Statists ever more wanting to themselves then
when they neglect the spiritual weapons of the Church to second the carnal ones
of the State. The bottom of any villainy will sooner be founded by an holy and
serious Divine's humble Prayer, serious conviction, prudent encounter with a
wicked Conspirator, then by all the terrors and allurements whatever; because
Satan and his own corruptions incrust him against the one, but against the
other which is God's Engine and Key by which he turns all the springs and wards
of resolution and secrecy, they are invalid: this is evident in experience, not
only in many examples with us, Shute, p. 209.
but also abroad; the History of Venice has a notable story of Beltrand a
popular man in that State, who was privy to the Conspiracy of Phalerio against
the Government, whose Conscience so troubled him that he revealed it, brought
the Conspiratours to execution and delivered his Country. And yet how hard is
it to persuade the world that Piety is the best Policy; when as, if men would
observe it, there is no folly like that of the worldling, who serves a Master
which cannot support him, Quam misera hominis conditio quae quasi mercenaria
aliis laborat, sibi indiget, and nisi aliena misericordia sustineri nequit,
quotidie sub timidine sub timore gravem tolerans servitutem, etc. Sanctus
Ambrosius, lib. De Interpell. c. 3.
but leaves him as Saint Ambrose says, in an helpless and hopeless misery. And
yet the world is a goad in holy men's sides, and often a snare to them; nay,
ever so, when they love it above their boundary, when they take it as their
friend, and delight in the repasts and umbrages of it, when they suffer it to
corrupt their moderation, and to tickle and hallucinate their passions, and by
them surprised, to engage them to foedity. There is a notable instance of this
in Master Mountgomery the Minister of Striveling in Scotland, who was a fierce
a man against Episcopacy as any his contemporary; yet shortly after this man
accepted the Bishopric of Glascow, Spotswood Hist. Church Scotland. p. 316.
which he fordidly came to by making over to the Duke of Lenox (who was his
Patron thereto) the Land of the Sea, which the Duke had a mind to, and by
taking in liew thereof a thousand pound Scottish, to be paid by the Duke and his
Heirs; to which, I had almost said sacrilegious, Condition, no Clergyman in
Scotland would yield, and by yielding have the Bishopric, but only he. In
which frailty we are taught to mistrust our selves, and to look on men, as
temptable and various; and therefore the Text's inference is good, Quid tunc
certitudinis ex confessionibus taliter compressorum.] For men not being
themselves when they are in pain and under pressure, the Oppression of it often
making a wise man mad, there is little heed to be had to what is said or done
under the torture of it. Nor has God given certitude to any thing that is
extrinsique, for every thing being subject to his interposition, there is no
certainty to be concluded, but that he will rule all for the best of his glory
and his Saints good; but as to outward things, alas they go cross, and are
vicissitudinarious, and that by the special appointment of God; nor can any
thing be depended on in them, or collected from them, but what is subject to
contingency: Men intend one thing and God disposes another; States make Laws
to one end, but God nulls those Enactions by his occult pleasure, which alone
must stand: yea, if Counsels and Laws are never so well made and laid, if God
do not reveal the seasons and opportunities when to set them on foot, and
whereby to improve them; all the wisdom of Lawmakers is defeated. Doria the
Genovesse was a brave General and got a mighty victory against the Venetians in
Phalerio's Dukedom, Shute's History, p. 237.246.
which had he prosecuted, as he might, and come directly to the City, he had
utterly determined the Venetian Government and Power: so had the Genovesses
after the taking of Chioggia, but God gave them no certain knowledge of the
event; and so they missed the improvement of the victory. No more certainty is
there of the truth of that which a tortured person confesses to avoid his pain,
then there is of that which may, and may not be. Tortures are like Physic, on
some trinid and easy natures they work fully and readily; but on others they
must have notable acuteness to stir them: and when sink they do, it is their
bodies and nature, not their malice and venom that yields; confess truth they
may, but as often they confess nothing at all; or if any thing, not that they
should: And therefore the Text says, Quid tunc certitudinis resultat, ex
confessionibus taliter compressorum.

Caeterum si innocens aliquis non immemor salutis aternae, in hujusmodi
Babilonis furnace, cum tribus pueris benedicat Domino, nec mentiri velit in
perniciem animae sue, quo Iudex eum pronuntiat innocentem, nonne eodem judicio
Iudex ille, seipsum reum judicat, omnis saevitiae and poenarum quibus
innocentem afflixit?

This Clause is brought in to show how instrumental some Powers of the world
are to torment Christ's Innocents, who are for the most part the only
sufferers in the world; at least in those exquisite torments which are the
effects and instruments of the implacablest Malice. For as lenity in man is a
ray from God's oceanal Mercy, so the contrary is a con sectary of God's absence
and retraction from man; and when the spirit of man is simply natural, and has
no adjunct good which sweetens and abates the tartness of its peccant rage;
then is it virulent and demoniacally rapacious to make others as unhappy as its
malice can, and to oppose its self to whatsoever is not as impetuously depraved
as its self is. This being the Rise of Antipathy, the Road to Persecution,
Tortures, the Emanation of it, fall to no Lot more directly then to God's lot,
whom the world is said to hate, because it hated me (says Christ) first, and
because they are not of the world; therefore they do not only speak all manner
of evil against, Non exhibemns ullum gestam honorisicum coram statua obstante
Decalogi praecepto seeundo. Grot. in locum,
but act all manner of evil to them, specially that of making their lives
unquiet and their deaths bitter to them. The proto instance of this in the
latitude of its inhumaneness is here borrowed from Daniel 3.13. where the three
children, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, more timorous to sin against God
then to incurr the King's displeasure, refuse the adoration of the Idol, and
accept the punishment that Nebuchadnezzar annexed to the recusancy thereof: And
that it may appear, that not humor and singularity, but zeal and conscience
led them to this resolution; it is remarkable that they do not revile the
Decree, nor reproach the Power under which they suffer, but as Christ their
head is said, Acts 8.32.
like a Lamb led to the slaughter, not to open his mouth either in complaints,
or denunciations of judgment: so these Confessors, his Members, showed no
renitency, but willingly embraced the suffering, trusting in God, whose
Champions they were, for the issue. Alas! they knew the Jews were envyed by
their Chaldaean Masters, Viri Chaldaei accusaverunt Judaeos] invidentes
Judaeis, and ad eos opprin^ndos aut suasores hujus edicti aut na^a occasionis
seduli aucupes. Grot. in locum.
and that they had purposely invented this trap to catch them in; whom having
ruined, they thought the Hebrew Religion with the chief Assertors of it would
cease and all become Ethnique, as Chaldaea was: but God's thoughts were
otherwise, he suffered his to be led, not only to, but put into, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
Lev. 26.26. Ier. 43.9.
not (...), the Iron furnace, so rendered ab excidendo, seu fodiendo, because
the Iron Oar is dug out of the earth; nor (...), the Baker's Oven, wherein
bread is baked; nor (...), the Tilekill or Brickill; nor yet (...), a Founders
furnace to melt metal in; though these all are exquisite fires and intense in
the torment they put those, Poena non infrequens apud Chaldaeos. Grot. in locum.
that are cast in them, to; but it is (...), a Chaldee word emphatique to
express a Chaldee punishment, into a furnace of fire seven times hotter then
ordinary fire, that is, into fire purposely hightned by the Materials of
subtility that feed it; into this fire, which was the creature of ingenious
cruelty and sinful Malevolence, were the three Children cast; Ex ipso eventu
statim liquebit non sine arcano Dei impulsu hoc totum suisse factum Galvinus in
locum.
yet for all this, they neither prayed mitigation nor relucted the cheerful
acceptance of it, but having a clear Conscience of their innocence and a just
confidence in God's power, they put themselves upon the flames, and in the
mercies of the Almighty they did not miscarry; but not only had security from
the flames exustion, yea or accession to them, but had also the association of
Christ Jesus to assuage the fury of the fire, and sweeten that intended Cross
into an honor by his compartization with them; as the story read at large will
more accurately inform the Reader. Now this our Chancellor makes use of to
show the force of passion, however it be objected; for as love to Idolatry, and
indignation not to see it propagated, moved Nebuchadnezzar to make the Decree,
and the Chaldaeans to inform against the three Children as Contemners of it,
and criminal for so doing; so love to God, and confidence in his mercy and
power, kept the three Children from complying with the Text's terms, mentiri in
perniciem animae suae,] and made them choose rather the fiery furnace then to
worship the Image: Whence our Chancellor collects, that to sentence an
Innocent is so great a crime that it not only deserves from God a sentence of
retaliation, Matthew. 7.2.
according to that of our Lord, For with the same measure ye meet to others, it
shall be meeted to you again; as befell the busy Informers in Daniel by
judgment of Darius; Dan. 6. v. 24.
but it also makes such a torment in the Conscience of a Judge that condemns
him, that he never or very hardly sedates and abates it; but in the Text's
words, Seipsum reum judicat omnis saevitiae and poenarum quibus innocentem
afflixit. And how much a prudent natural man will decline the guilt of blood,
innocent blood, we may see in Pilat's case, who though he was cunning enough to
make the best of his Deputy-ship, and knew the way to cajoul the Jews, and to
render them supple to Acclamation of him; yet, when his Wife sent to him word
of her Dream; wherein she had discovery from God, that the Prisoner to be
brought before him was a just man, and that the Jews thirsted after his blood;
which judicially they could not come at, Matthew. 27.19.
but by Pilat's sentence and delivery of him to them to be crucified: when, I
say, in the 21, 22, and 23. verses, Pilate had done as much as he cunningly
could, to blunt the rage of the prosequuting Jews, and to weaken and evirtuate
their evidence; Verse. 20.
and yet for all this, obstinate they were, being set on by the chief Priests
and Elders: when all this, I say, was done, and yet they would not be
discouraged, then he took water and washed his hands before the Multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person, see you to it, v. 24.
which, though I take to be no absolution of him, yet declares that he thought,
that to judge Innocence to death is to draw judgment on ones self, and to
bring Hell into a man's own Conscience; which David felt so sore, that he cryeh
out to God, that of all Mercies he would bless him with Delivery from
bloud-guiltyness. Psalm. 51.1^.
And therefore our Chancellor, in terming cruelty Pernicies animae,] writes
emphatiquely here, as every where; for pernicies comes a pernecando; and the
Latins to show the direful nature of it, couple it with pestis: so Lucilius,
Satyr. 2. Adelp. 1 Offic.
Hostibus contra pestem perniciemque; and Terence, Eripite hane pestem
perniciemque mihi; and Tully, Pernicies omnium adolescentum perjurus pestis; so
of Cataline, Cum tua peste and pernicie; I say, the Chancellor in this
applause of honest recumbency on God, rather then to provoke him by lying in
perniciem animi,] does commend, the not only holy constancy, but wisdom of
good men, who thereby save themselves much horror; which, their lukewarmness
would occasion in the remorse of their conscience for it. O there is no danger
men run into like that which they occasion themselves by forsaking the truth,
and trusting to lying vanities, it is the Fog in which all Confidents miscarry,
and bring themselves by sin to shame and sorrow. Religion, Scripture, and the
Laws of the Land, are the only Guides of our duty to God, men, and our
selves, and he that walks according to these in the moral Duties and just
Prescripts of them, shall neither err in judgment or sink in reputation; but
shall dare to do as that generous, learned, pious, prudent, stout Bishop
Brumrigg, late L. Bishop of Exon. See my venerable friend, the eminently,
storid, generous, painful, and pious Doctor Gauden, late L. Bishop of
Worchester, his Memorials of him. p. 1^7.
Zamzummim, as learned D. Collyns termed him, did, to a person, and in a time,
when to counsel to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are God's, was to bid him undo all that he had unduely done: I
say, he, that is thus innocent, shall have from God the grace and favor thus
to do, and not himself be undone for so doing. Whereas, when men are led by
private Spirits and tickles of vain glory, vile ambition or vage covetousness
they must expect pernicien^ animae: Thus a Prophecy and a Vision, which two
Priests, jointly averred they saw concerning the Duke of Buckingham in Anno
1521. Speed. p. 783.
His obtaining of the Crown lost the seduced Duke, and the like lost others.
And had that Reverend Chief Justice (for so, Holingshed. p. 677.
while he was himself, he was) Sir William Hancksford, Temps. E. 4. not more
feared men's wrath, then trusted God's power and mercy; he would not have
contrived his own murder to avoid the danger of difficult times: Holingshed. p.
1092. Tu, inquit, testis Domino Jesu, cui occultum nihil est, qui scrutator
renis and cordis; non ideo me negare velle, ne peream; sed ideo mentiri nolle,
ne peccem. Sanctus Hieronym. Ad Innocentium.
nor Sir James Hales in Queen Mary's time. It Is a good rule Saint Ierom
practiced, Thou, O Lord, the searcher of the reins and heart, know, that I
did not therefore deny, least I should suffer; but therefore I would not lie,
least I should sin; for if once truth grow cheap, and men learn the sinful
subtlety to own her no further then she may serve their ends, and credit their
designs and enterprises; then they care not to make lies their refuge, L.
Archb. Laud. In his Epistle to King James in answer to Fisher the Jesuit.
and to blemish innocence rather then suffer the abortion of their Project.
It Is a rare passage of the late Grand Arch-Prelate of our Church, who in many
things was prophetical, Where the foundations of faith are shaken, be it by
Superstition or Profaneness, he that puts not to his hand, as firmly as he
can, to support them, is too wary, and has more care of himself then of the
cause of Christ; and it is a waryness that brings more danger in the end then it
shuns, for the Angel of the Lord issued out a curse against the Inhabitants of
Meroz, Judges 5.13.
because they came not out to help the Lord against the mighty: thus
incomparably he. It Is good therefore to do all things with respect to justice,
for the day of retribution will come, and then the lex talionis will be
revived; which, they need not to fear who do righteous things, and they shall
be unable to abide or avoid who do the contrary; the consideration of which
wrought so with Antonio Venieri the 62 Duke of Venice, that he did a notable
Justice on his own Son when an Offender; Shute's History Venice. p. 271.
for Ludovico his son being in love with a Senator's Wife, there happened some
cause that he and her Husband fell out, and Ludovico caused Horns to be hung up
at the Senatour's Gate; the insolence of that injury coming to the Dukes ear,
so offended him, that he caused his son to be imprisoned, where he remained
till he dyed, a rare President: and such, as if all Judges would follow, they
would not need to be strictly tied up, which they being not in the Civil Laws,
View of the Civil and Eccles. Law. p. 17, 18, 19, 20.
wherein much is left arbitrary to them, as the learned Doctor Ridley has very
judiciously collected the Instances to my hand; I presume there may some reason
be for some to doubt whether Judges in that Law may not be men and err in
judgment by having the opportunity of that latitude; but that they have
transgressed that way is no part of my charge to inquire, or of my work to
blazon: I am a great honourer of the learned Civilians, and shall ever in my
Orb further all Civility to their renowned Profession; as owing my self much
enriched from the light I have had and Collections I have made out of
Tholossanus, Budaeus, Hopper and Grotius, four matchless Civilians, which I
think fit here gratefully to remember: But I proceed.

O Iudex, quibus in Scholis dedicisti, te presentem exhibere, dum poenas luit
reus? executiones quippe judiciorum in criminosos, per ignobiles fieri convenit.

This Apostrophe our Chancellor uses to show the tenderuess of his soul,
which, though it can serve justice in pronunciation of its sentence on
Malefactors, yet cannot abide the view of that execution it judicially awards
criminals to; and this the good man thus sets forth to call men to trial,
whether they have bowels of compassion to Manhood, when they have resolutions
of vehemence against vice the abusion and dishonor of it. For since it is
tragical to behold sanguinary executions, and custom is apt to naturalize
cruelty to men, the Chancellor dehorts (as I think) in this expression all
Judges from seeing Execution of their sentences; least they should lose that
softness and lenity which the Law intrusts them to express, where not
derogatory to Equity and prudence. And therefore what Saint Ierom said of
Hylarion in another case, Mirentur alit signa quae fecit, mirentur incredibilem
abstinentiam, scientiam, humilitatem, ego nihil it a stupeo, quam gloriam illam
and honorem calcare to nisse. Sanctns Hieronym. De Hylarione.
I shall apply to this; The profound Judgment of the Judges, the diligence,
impartiality and calmness they express in their hearing, examinining, and
judging of cases, I admire not so much, as to see and hear them do this;
because they know not to do it is to derogate from God and the King, whose
Delegates in judgment they are: yea, not to do it is to contemn the glory of
doing good to Mankind. And thereupon our Chancellor looking upon cruel Judges
as great Monsters, calls them to account to him whence they learned their
terrible Principles, and how they thought they should give God their answer for
such misuse of his indulgence. O Iudex, quibus in Scholis, says he.

Quibus in Scholis] All learning was in Schools from the teaching of the Master
or Professor in them; and Schools were the repose of learned men, where they
did seat themselves to Meditation, and institution of those that applied
themselves to them for learnings sake. Etymologists say Schola comes from the
Hebrew (...), vacavit, or otio vixit; because when men had wearyed themselves
with travel and peragration, their quiescence from that toil was called their
Schole, that is, they sat down to distribute to others their Collections, and
to propagate their acquirements to the good of succession. Athenaeus
Deipnosoph. lib. 1. c. 17.
The Holy Text tells us of the Schools of the Prophets; Berosus and
Middendorjuus story the Assyrians and Egyptians to have Schools; the
Phoenicians also who had Colonies of Trade and Correspondence all the world
over, traffiqued also for letters, Berythus amongst them was famous for it and
termed pulcherrimam and l^gum nutricem; and among the Grecians Schools were so
frequent, that all Greece was almost nothing but a great Schole, Caelius
Rhodigin. Antiq lib. 18. c. 25.
though Athens was called Civitatem linguatam, (...), the eye and choice center
of Science, because the notedest Masters resided there, and from thence
dispersed themselves into all the World: so that Schools were the Darlings of
all Nations. Hence read we of the Corinthians (...), where Dyonisius the
Syracusan Tyrant was Professor after his banishment; Laertius lib. 6. in vita
Diog^n, Cic. lib. 5. Tuscul. Sabellic. Enn^ad. 6.
the Rhodian Gymnasium, to which Pompey the Great was so great a Benefactour;
the Strabo lib. 14.
Schools of Alexandria which Strabo remembers, and from whence some say the
name (...) by way of eminency was given to Alexandria, as those of Athens did
the name ^ As^ to that; the Carthaginian Schools in which Tertullian was
Professor, Saint Cyprian a Rhetorician, and Saint Augustine a Student; the
Constantinopolitan Schools which brought up Saint Basil the Great, and Julian
the Apostate; these, added to Plato's Academas, Aristotle's Lyceum, Zeno's
Stoa, the Cyniques Cyrosarges, the Academiques, Peripatetiques, Stoiques, and
Epicurean Schools, make a large Muster of learned forces, and a strong Battalia
against Barbarism. But if to these the Schools of later times be added, there
will be such an appearance of learned Liberality and Princely Greatness, as but
to mention them will be the work of a life; Lib. 2. De Trad. Discipl. In Platea
universali Discurs. 14. Ad finem To. 2. Operum.
I shall therefore referr my Reader to those excellent Authors that have
written on them, as Middendorjuus, Hospinian, Sturmius, L^dovicus Vives,
Gatzonius, and multitude of others, which Fabian, Justinian, and Dra^di^s, in
their Bibliotheces mention; yea, as not the least of all to Iunius his
Academia, and hold my self excused in writing no more of Schools here, because
the sum of what I can briefly think of pertinent hereto, I (though very
unworthy, yet I thank God I dare say it with a very great and just love to
learning and Religion) did See my Apology for learning and learned men.
Printed Anno 1653.
Apologetically publish in those tragic times, when they both were in hazard
of Strongly pressed in the Commons House that University Lands might be sold
and the Colleges discolledged.
Naufrage; and to the prevention of which, God knows, I therein did my utmost
endeavor: To that Mite then, which God (I am assured) accepted into his
Treasury, from my humble and honest zeal, for those then Orphans, do I referr
my excuse for no further enlargement here, humbly beseeching God, that as he by
his Grace then excited, and in that weak measure enabled me to that service,
which no man can think had any Advantage attending it, unless it were that
matchless one of being Valiant for the Truth: And, This was my Message with the
Apology sent to D.C. by Doctor Bernard, who honestly delivered it in my words.
Expressing it by conjuring him, that then had the Power, as he was a
Gentleman, to do by the Counsel and Information of the Address, as he thought
in his Conscience God expected from him, that had the opportunity to do good
or evil, as he had;) so He would graciously assist me in this humble
undertaking, that from him I may be blessed with Deliverance from the strife of
Penns and tongues: This I here introduce not superbly, as if therein I thought
my self to have deserved of learning, nothing less, (for I know, that my
undertaking was but my duty; and that which God required of me, whose
uninterestedness in the actuality of Contests rendered me less subject to the
exception of any party then some others were.) But to notify to those
honorable, learned, and worthy persons abroad, that though England had too
many Furies in it, who breathed out ruin to all that was sacred; yet, that
there were many in it also, that were true men to the King, his Crown and
Dignity, faithful to the Church of England her Order and Discipline, and
cordially affected to Learnings Luster and Increase: But of this, if I have
said too much I crave the Reader's pardon, and proceed to what our Chancellor
prosequutes, to wit, the redargution of those persons, not only that fatally
invent, but that judicially promote tortures and torments.

These, the good and grave Oracle interrogates where they learned that
Incompassion to be present at Tortures, and to see their fellows in Manhood
tortured, Te praesentem exhibere, dum poenas luit reus? For though the
Judgments uttered by them against Offenders be the Laws Justice languaged by
the Judges who are called the Lex loquens; Shute's History Venice. p. 288.
yet the Executions of them, says the Text, per ignobiles fieri convenit.]
Since though such Greatness, as Carrario's, was delighted in giving those he
was offended with to wild and ravenous Dogs, which he kept on purpose to
devour them; and others, whom he called to his Hall to speak with him, he
tormented with two Scorpions which he had for their dispatch; Though Parasites
'the Mother of Cyrus the younger, Quoad corpus miserabiliter i consumptum
mortem lentius admitteret. Sabel. lib. 3. cap. 3.
pleased her self to give men that which should breed worms in their bodies,
which by degrees should eat them up, and yet protract their miseries upshot;
Pontanus lib. ^. De Immanitate.
And Volesus Augustus his ProConsul caused three hundred men in one day to be
slain by his Command, Fulgosus lib. 9. cap. 2.
and walked through them all agore, crying out, O Kingly sight; Cael. Rhodig.
lib. 10. cap. 5.
And Macrinus tied dead and living men together till both were alike by the
stench and Vermin; yea though butcherly Claudius's can look upon tortured
persons and take pleasure in their afflictions, Tormenta quaestionum ac poenas
parricidaerum coram aspiciens, glad^atoriisque ac bestiariis spoctaculis
plurimum delectatus. Sueton. in Claudio.
and those lamentable outcryes, that by reason of them, they express; yet none
but Monsters can thus do. Executions, though things as necessary in bodies
politic, as Cuppings, Lancings, Scaryfyings, Amputations in bodies-natural,
being the delight of those that are not of relenting bowels; which God himself
expresses to us in that representation, which his wisdom, by the Prophet's pen,
records to our Learning: when He complains his people were bent to backsliding
from him, Hosea 11.7.
and though his mercies called them to the most High, yet none of them would
for them exalt him; what provocation would be greater then this, yet He
expresses himself by a pathetique of undelightedness in afflicting them
proportionably to their demerits; How shall I give thee up Ephraim, Verse. 8, 9.
how should I deliver thee Israel, how shall I make thee as Adnah, how shall I
set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to
destroy Ephraim for I am God and not man, etc. And if the Good Angels do
rejoice in Heaven at the good of man, surely their Philanthropy does indispose
them to be instruments of his evil on earth any further then God's glory and
his Saints good are concerned therein: 2 Samuel 24.16. Revel. 16.
although therefore we read in Scripture of Angels of the Lord that execute the
Viols of his wrath, and express the grandeur of his power over the
contumacious and refractory world; yet are we not presently to conclude they
are always the good Angels that do it but mostly the contrary, Executiones
quippe Iudiciorum fieri convenit per ignobiles, says the Text, that is, by
lapsed Angels that hate God and every footsstep of his image, and by men who
are unworthy to live, and therefore are made the Dispatchers of other wicked
men out of life. Hence is it that the Law both Common and Civil make those
Executioners or Headsmen, who are condemned persons, Tholossan. Syntagm. Juris.
lib 31. c. ^^.
and who purposely have their lives given them that they may serve the public
in that necessary though infamous office; which how hateful it is all men know
that know any thing; as, not only the common taunt gives us to understand,
when rude men say scornfully of any man, they call him an Hangman, but also all
Authors testify: Sunt enim exosi vel natura ipsa humana hujusmod^ homines.
Fornerius ad legem 42. p. 123.
whereupon they are called ignobiles, which Authors conjoin with vilis,
ignotus, abjectus in contemptum; so Tully mentions 1 Tuscul. 164.
Peregrina facies videtur hominis atque ignobilis; so inglorius and ignobilis a
little after; Ignobilis profaece populi, says Servius; and Virgil mentions
ignobile gramen for that which is a weed and grows in every ditch; so that not
without cause is that office Carnificis, quasi faecis carnis, of execution said
to convenire ignobilibus, for they are only fit for it, and them it fits as
directly as a Thief does the Halter or the Halter the Thief: for persons of any
whit raised spirits and sublimated Ingenuities abhor employments of vexation
and violence, to which the curse and reproach of Vulgarities is appendant; and
therefore some of the Emperors made Laws to secure the public Executioner
from that violence against, and detestation which the people had of him. And
if, notwithstanding he were the Executioner of justice, they had such an
abhorrence of him, how greatly would they have banded against him, Shutes
History of Venice. p. 218.
had he been as Calergo that base Greek was, who murdered with his own hand
all the brave Venetian Gentlemen in Candia; and how joyfully would they see
such an one rewarded as he was, who being taken by the Venetians was thrown
down from the top of the Palace upon the point of swords, and being rent into
diverse pieces was cast upon the Dunghill. For if the Sun in Heaven did retreat
its oriency, as ashamed (as it were) to lend its light to deeds of cruelty, as
in the Case of our Lord on the Cross; If a tender spirited Vespassan justly
adjudged no Malefactor to death but with tears and in compassion to virtue,
Sueton. in Vespas.
which otherwise could not be defended; If Frederic the Second made a Law
against wrecks at Sea, as thinking them not fit to be Royal Boons, Si quo casu
rupta fuerant navigia, vel aliter ad terram pervenerant, tam navigia quam
navigantium bona, illis integre reserventur ad quos specta^ant. Titul. De Statu
and immunitate locorum Religiosorum.
when the owner was ruined by their Naufrage; If our Henry the Sixth of England
was so mild and merciful that he could not endure the Quarters of a Traitor
to be hanged up for him; If these Executions are so displeasing to brave
Spirits and Christian generous minds, those, that take content in acting them,
and show a more then ordinary readyness to accept the office of execution
(though a very necessary one in any Government) may well be accounted ignobiles
quasi non notabiles, unless in the sense Herostratus was for his wickedness.
For as it follows.

Non enim per Angelos sed per Daemones exequi facit Dominus judicia sua reddita
in damnatos.

This Clause confirms the former, for Angels are Philanthropique, and by reason
of that do not only convey to the souls of those they inspect discoveries,
secundum intellectum illuminationis, which they are capable of, but they do
serve man, and the elect chiefly, by an exact vigilance, non ex debito
servitutis, sed ex effectu charitatis and ordine Legis Divinae. Now these which
are described to stand before God, and to do his will, the Pursivants and
Jannisaries of his Puissance, these are never instruments of torment to the
damned, for they are without their Pale and Charge; the evil Angels being the
Plagues of evil men: but sometimes they are commissioned to reveal to evil men
good things from the Counsel of God, good to them which in his good time he
will discover; and to the opposition of which, he, by it, blunts the edge of
their malice and vehemence. For though the knowledge of Angels is too
mysterious for our viatory State, and the Ambition of the Schools has displayed
it self somewhat too curiously therein; yet this, I hope, I may safely add to
what heretofore I have delivered of Angels, that, They are favorites of God,
and have, (...), the first Discovery of God, Dyonisius Areopag. D^ Coelesti
Hierarchia, c. 4. p. 18. Edit. Paris. Anno 1615.
and make known to us, (...), the things that transcend our nature, and are of
consequence for us to know; and being so beneficial to us, ought to have an awe
in us toward them; as those impure spirits, the Apostate Angels, which are
called here Daemones, have over those on whom they are said, judicia reddita in
damnatos exequi.

Daemones.] This word, in the latitude of its Criticalness, is subject enough
for a whole Volume, many having taken great pains and showed much learning
concerning them, by name Investigatio Peripatetica.
Andre as Caesalpinus, Steuchius, Crespeti^s, Pselius, In Militia Christiana.
Gomez, and may others; my humble aim shall only be to make way to the
Chancellour's intendment, by a short consideration of Daemones as Antiquity
notioned them. The Greeks by (...) from (...) quasi (...), Lege Boissardum lib.
De Devinatione.
understand Plato's gnarus, sciens, intelligens; the Pythagoreans thought the
Air full of souls, and those they distinguished into Daemones and Heroas; and
Ficinus tells me, that they had an opinion, that to every one a Demon is given
for good, In Plotin. lib 3. Ennead. 2. p. ^2.
which occasioned the Pythagoreans precary sonnet to Jupiter, that either he
would be graciously pleased to deliver them from the evils they were subject
to, or direct them to that Demon they should depend on for their Tutelar; the
Stoiques called these Demons (...), and Saint Augustine out of Plato divides
the rational soul into three partitions, that of the Gods, Plutarchus lib. 1.
De plac. Philosoph. cap. 8.
that of men, and that of Demons; to these Demons he reserves the middle
residence, Lib. 8. Civit. Dei. c. 14.
Nam Deorum seeds in Coelo est, Saint Thomas ont of Apuleius defines these to
be corpora aerea, animo passiva, mente rationalia, tempore aeterna, part. 1.
qu. 51.1. prim. and qu. 115.5.
Daemonum in acre, hominum in terra, perhaps resting on the literal sense of
Saint Paul, who calls the Devil the Prince of the Air; to which Ficinus
suffragates in those words, In Daemonibus positum est propinquum corporei mundi
hujus Imperi^m; which does not only point to that notion of their power as
they are superior, but of their influence as they are the Genius that
inlive^s, Plotinus Ennead. 3. lib. 4. p. 286.
propends and inclines Nature to its proper specifique expression of it self,
Porphyr. lib. 2. D^ Abstinentia, c. 36. p. ^0. Edit. Holstenii.
as that (...), which carries to good and evil; which Epicharmus intended to us
in those words, Apolog. c. 32.
'O (...); and Tertullian in those words, Lib. 2. c. 14.
Nescitis Genios Daemones dici; and Lactantius when he says, Hi Spiritus sibi
Geniorum nomen assumunt; these, and infinite such like passages out of the
Ancients do inform us, Sunt enim Carnifices and lictores in hac Dei Republ.
improbi Damones vilissimo ministerio addicti in poenam antiqui sceleris. P.
Mirandula in Heptap. lib. 5. c. ultim. p. 28.
that as the Eudaemons were tutelary of men, so the Cacodaemones (which are the
Daemones of our Text) are the Executioners of God's severity on the Godless
world, who are not only pestered with their ill motions here, which Porphyrius
expresses by calling them, Lib. 2. De Abstinent. ^. 40. p. 83.
^ (...), etc. The Causers of Plagues, Barrenness, Earthquakes, Drougths, and
other evils in this world, but shall be hereafter with that fire and torment
which they are condemned to with them under the name of the Devil and his
Angels, so says our Lord, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; which confirms the Chancellours positions, that the
Executions of God's judgment in damnatos, Non naturaliter mali Daemones sed
propria voluntate Aqu. part prima qu. 63 art. 4. Lib. 8. c. 16. D^ Civit. Dei.
that is, on impenitent Malefactors, whom Justice has doomed to an eternal
Exile from God's comfortable presence, is by these Daemones performed, which
the Scripture calls the Devil, who is not only himself an evil spirit, but the
cause of all the evil in our spirits, which by his temptations and craft he
lurches into his power; and therefore Saint Augustine's advice is very good,
Magna Dei misericordia necessaria est, ut ne quisquam cum bonos. Angelos amicos
se habere put at, habeat malos Daemones amicos fictos eosque tanto nocentiores
quanto astutiores ac fallaciores patiatur inimicos. For as there is no good
Action that men, whether Christian or Ethnique, do, but is, as Phavorinus
says, By God's leave, Iuvante Deo, hoc est, favente Angelo Impulsore,
suasoreque ^ egregia gesta, admirandaque visu. Phavorinus, De Excel. homin^s.
Part^ prima, c. 53. p. 151.
and by the concurrence of some good Angel impelling and persuading to the
performance of it; nor did Curious, Fabricius, Coruncanus, Calatinus, Metellus,
L^ctatius, Cato, Scipio, Laelius, or the rest, do any Heroique deed but by this
Motive; and as that seeming Mariner, who Anno 1291. took the charge of above
500. Fuller's Holy War. page 228.
Matrons and noble Virgins upon the Siege of Ptolemais, and was by them offered
all the wealth they had, and which of them he pleased to take to wife, so he
would transport them any whether from the Sultan's rage, which he freely did,
landing them in Cyprus, and that done, could not be found; as, I say, I can
judge this to be no less then a good Angel, that officiated in so charitable
and Christian a work; so do I verily believe that the contrary works are often
the deeds of Demons, Devils or evil Spirits, whom God permits to afflict the
world with disasters for their Rebellions against him; and who, in the
tormenting of them, are the more diligent, because they are desirous to make
others unhappy as they themselves are, as Daemones esse credendum estnocendi
cupidissimos, a justitia penitus alienos. superbia tumidos, invidentia lividos,
fallacia callidos, qui in hoc quidem aere habitant quia de coeli s^perior^s
sublimitaete dejecti merito irregressi^ilis transgressionis in hoc sili congruo
velut carcere perdamnati sunt. lib. 8. De Civit. Dei, c. 2^.
Saint Augustine well notes: which gives me occasion to mind my self and
others of that duty which our Lord enjoins us to, Matthew. 26.41.
Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation. Demon est caput omnium
malorum, non insluxu interiori, sed gubernatione exteriort, in quantum
avertuntur a Deo. Sanctus Thomas part. 3. qu. 8. art. 7.
For though Satan has a direct power over the damned, and God gives him a
latitude of Commission against them, exequi judicia,] to thoroughly torment
them; Tentare ad nocendum est proprium daemonum, sed mundus and ^aro tentant
instrumentaliter. Sanct. Thom. part. 1. and qu. 114. art. 2.
yet he can do little or nothing to the Godly without special Concession from
Him whose Jewels they are, whom he tenders as the Apple of his eye, and against
whom he will succeed no power that is laesive in any degree, but only what
advances his own Glory and their good.

Nec vero in Purgatorio cruciant animas quamvis praedestinatas ad gloriam
Angeli boni sed mali.

This our Text-Master brings into imponderate the argument he uses, that
Executions are by ignoble persons; since not only evil Angels or Devils do
torment the damned in Hell, but even they, and they only do do what is of
terour and torment in Purgatory to the souls of God's predestinate. This is his
sense, which I lift not much to write on because it seems to me an (...) of his
religious mistake more then any serious matter on which to ground an argument.
For though I honor Baronius, Volum. 1. ad Annum Christi 34. p. 242.
who makes the Doctrine of Purgatory Ex Apostolica Traditione; and Bellarmine,
who undertakes proof of it from the Scripture of the Old Testament, De Nomine
Purgatorii.
c. 3. from the New Testament, c. 4. from the Councils, c. 9. from the Greek
and Latin Fathers, c. 10. of Catholic Consent, c. 15. yea though Centiloqui
part secunda sect. 4 p. 70. Tom. 6.
Bonaventure, Volum. 2. in 1 Cor. c. 3. p. 95.
Cajetan, Lib. 3. Did. 22. qu. 4. resp. ad 4.
Durand, In Supplem. quaest. 69. art 2. in Conclusione.
Aquinas, Par^e quarta quaest. 5. De Sacram. Paenitentiae.
Alexander Halensis, Partis primae de universo pars prima. c. 60, 61, 62. p.
640. Impr. Venetiis. Cent. Magdeb. Cent. 8. p. 549. Chemnitius in Historia
Purgatorii. part prima, Examinis Council, Tridentini, p. 78. etc. Tom. 2.
Isaiah 1.18.
Guilielmus Parisiensis, and multitudes of other do assert it; yet truly,
saving their learned and venerable names, Purgatory to me (in their sense)
seems but a fiction, or rather a politic Engine to bring the gold and silver
of credulous and well-meaning men into the Pope's Crucible. I do readily and
humbly own my Lord Jesus the true Purgatory, he it is that purges us by his
blood from all sin, and presents us spotless to his Father; he it is in whom
that promise of God, Though their sins be as red as Scarlet, they shall be made
white as snow, is yea and Amen to his Saints; and under him I bless God for
another Purgatory, Afflictions, which God in this life mercifully sends His,
and by the merits of Jesus this Purgatory leaves us better then it found us.

These Purgatoryes the reformed and glorious Church of England, my Holy Mother,
will acknowledge, and I according to her Declaration of the truth therein; but
Purgatory in the Romish sense, for a third place between Heaven and Hell, and
for a detinue of those that depart hence between the joys of Heaven and the
torments of Hell; this I cannot understand: for our Lord, who knew all things,
delivering it so plainly, Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed Children of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the World; Verse. 41.
and, Go ye cursed into Hellfire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Nor
in the Apostles days is any mention made of Purgatory. Cent. Magdeb 1. lib. 2.
c. 4. p. 353.
I say, these being the only two States after life by him mentioned, Magdeb.
Cent. 6. c. 10. p. 370. Cent. 6. c. 4. p. 134. Cent. 8. c. 6. p. 166. Cent. 9.
c. 5. p 116. Cent. 5. c. 4. p. 262. Cent. 13. c. 4. p. 214. Cent. 11. c. 4. p.
103.
the third is by me suspected, in their sense, for an invention of subtlety, to
trepan the world into a purchase of Pardons and Indulgencyes, and with the Gain
thereof to support the State of that Papal Hierarchy, as well in the Head of
it, the Pope, as in the Toes of it, the Priests; both which find a great
advantage from this Doctrine, and the popular Assent to it: for, As the Case
now stands, says our incomparable Jewel, and as most men think, Defense of
the Apology of the Church of England, p. 358. part. 2.
the Pope could be contented to lose both Heaven and Hell to save his
Purgatory. Waving then the belief of the place, there is no cause to write much
on the Cruciant animas non boni Angeli sed mali. For though I yield the souls
of evil men have a cruciation wherein their souls really are tormented, poena
damni and poena sensus, both in the loss of God's vision, and in the sense of
inexpressible terrors, and intolerable and unendable torments; yet can I not
see ground to believe the souls of holy men, who are the purchase of Christ's
blood, should be deprived of the felicity, that is the fruit of it, Habent
omnes anima cum de^saeculo, oxierint diversas receptiones suas, babent gaudium
boni and mali tormenta, sed cum facta fuerit resurrectio, and bonorum gaudium
amplius erit, and malorum tormenta graviora, quando cum corpore torquebuntur.
Sanct. Aug. Tract. 49. in Johannem, lege lib. 1^. De Civirate Dei, c. 8.
one moment after their dissolution: nor would our Lord have said to the Thief,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, had there been any interstitiary
State as Purgatory is made. In the mean time if the souls of the godly are in
this life tormented, it is by the permission of God without which no evil Angels
can accede them; nay, not only does God keep the souls of his under his
Sovereignty, as that jewel in their bodies which has the oriency and is the
center of reason, 'H (...). Sentent. col. 17. p. 225. Edit. Cantabrigiae, 232.
which Porphyrius allows it to have; and Trismegist tells us God loves, (...),
as his own issue, (...), the character and representation of God; the Oracle of
Apollo, (...), part of God, (...), and such like expressions, Lib. De
Excellentia hominis, c. 43, 44, 45.
which Phavorinus has collected to the souls aggrandization: I say, God does
not only reserve the souls of his to himself, as exemptions from evil Angels,
but even the bodies in which these souls are. For though I know the Saints of
God are afflicted in this world by Satan and his Emissaries, evil men, and all
the imaginable practice of their rage they execute upon them; yet is this both
for the kind and measure only so far as God by it appoints consequence of
good to his; and therefore good men are by mortification and abnegation,
cruciare animas here, and then they shall not need the Purgatory that is
attended by evil Angels: nay, God that has predestined them to glory has so
manifested his benignity to them, that as they have no cause to love him less
then the most they can, Aureolus in 1 Sent. Did. 40. p. 910. Alex. Alensis.
qu. 26. art. 2. p. 155. Sanctus Augustine. c. 14. lib. De Praedestinat. and
gratia. Lib. 6. Hyponostic.
so need they not fear his gracious conduct of them (humbly and holily
demeaning themselves) to their eternal accomplishment. Concerning which
Predestination to Glory, though much may be wisely and worthily written, yet I
forbear to venture on it, the knowledge of it being too wonderful for me;
Nunquam nos verecundiores esse debere, quam cum de Diis agitur, si intramus
templa compositi, si ad sacrificia accessuri vultum submittimus togam
adducimus, si in omne argumentum modestiae fingimur quanto hoc magis facere
debomus cum de syderibus de stellis d^ Deorum natura disputamus. Not. Quaest.
lib. 7. c. 30.
that being my Rule which Seneca cites from Aristotle, That we never ought to
be so modest in any thing, as in that which concerns the counsel and secrets of
God, which this Predestination being, I dare only adore it, remembering the
Sovereign command and counsel of Authority, which sober Laymen as well as
Clergymen ought to observe, Since secret things belong to the Lord our God,
His Majesty's late Letter to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to be sent
into every Diocese.
but the things revealed to us 'and our Children.

Maligni enim Spiritus sunt per quos Dominus in hoc mundo miseris tribuit malum
poenae.

This the Chancellor proceeds in to fortify his Argument, That Executions are
convenient to be done per ignobiles; and as he in his believed Purgatory makes
the evil Angels to be there the Tormentors, so here, says he, evil men are the
Plaguers of Mankind. Now these evil Instruments he terms Maligni, a word that
has Emphasis in it, gnus the termination implying so much as from been
benignus, from digne indignus, so likewise male from malignus, which carries
not only the sense of malus which Critiques derive from (...), debilitavit or
infirmavit, as if the evil represented by it were malum defectus only;
Exercit. 30^, sect. 3.
in which sense Sealiger tells us, Soldiers that were cowardly and had not
heart to face and fight the Enemy were called Caculae militares from (...),
whence (...) is used in Authors for that vitium in malitia cum amittunt locum
in acie, I say, Malignus does not only import this, but also a superadded
asperity and delight in Mischief and Malefaction, when men do mischief totis
viribus, Epigram. 63
which Catullus expresses by mente maligna facere aliquid; Malignus qui asper,
difficilis, invidus, avarus est, says Donatus, when men are peevish and short,
not to be dealt with by dehortation from their touchiness; for Pliny ranks
malignum and breve together, Lib. 7. c. 50.
when men are as barren of good, Malignus ager agricoli illiberalis and minus
ferax. Nonius. Plinius Ep. 4. F lib. 2.
as Soil is that eats up all the Dung and Compost that is put into it, and yet
brings forth nothing but weeds, such is Pliny's phrase in maligna terra; when I
say a man is malignant, a malo Genio, and prava atque per versa voluntate, then
no wonder that he is said by our Chancellor to be an ill Neighbor, A Spiritu
Sancto Satan vocatur adversarius, Angeli vero vocantur silii Dei, quo
significatur Angelos sponte obtemperare and ultro servire, Satanam vero invite
and coacte. Calvinus 1. Job. 1.6.
a Tormentor of mankind: for as Satan is called (...), the Malignant, and we
pray to be delivered (...), from his temptations, because they are the effects
of his hatred and subtlety; so ought we to deprecate wicked men as the
Instruments of punishment on the World, for as much as the Instruments to
torture, execute, and dispatch Malefactors are such as are as bad as those they
dispatch; who are therefore excused the Halter, that they may serve Justice in
that ignoble and execrable, though necessary office, which better principled
and less vicious men will not undertake.

Nam cum dixerit Deus 3 Reg. 22. Quis decipiet mihi Ahab? Malus erat Spiritus
ille qui respondit, Ego ero Spiritus mendax in ore omnium Prophetarum ejus.

This Scripture is brought in to confirm the prealledged Instances, not that
Historically there was any such conference between God and any Spirit, or that
really any Spirit made such answer to God; Tostatus in l^^, Quaest. 37.
for I humbly conceive with Tostatus, that it was solum Visio imaginaria,
whereby the sacred Penman introduces (by Authority from God) Ahab deceived by
his own sin penal upon him; and thereby the just judgment of God, for his
matchless Impiety, severely passed upon him: for here we are to take in that
Rule of Divines, Those things that are spoken of God (...), are to be
understood of God (...). And whereas in the Text it is said, Quis decipiet mihi
Ahab? It is not to be understood as if God properly could be the Author or
Incourager of deceit qua such, for that being the defect of veracity is
inconsistent with his Attribute and Essence; but then he is said to decieve
(with reverence be it written) when he does that per effectum which turns to
wicked men's disappointmens, when he frustrates the counsels and enterprises of
their Wisdom, takes them in their own snare, and withdraws that prudence from
them which should stand them instead to their Conduct, Deus permittet mala
fieri ad ostentionem potentia divina vel sapientia vel benignitatis vel
justitia. A. Halensis, part. 2. qu. 94. Numb. 4. art. 2.
and the fortunation of their counsels; and when he suffers Satan's
implacability to exestuate against them and to work effectually upon them; for
though true it be, that God does not (as I humbly think) indulge Satan more
power then naturally he has, yet in not giving him restraint to that power,
nor men defense by his grace against it, Satan and his Instruments have power
of deceiving men how potent and wise soever they be: And thus Ahab comes to be
deceived by Gods permission of the evil Spirit to be a deluder of his Prophets,
and they of him, Malus erat Spiritus qui respondit.] An evil Spirit or a Demon
is here visionally meant, Quaest. 37. in locum.
some have been curious to inquire what Demon it was; Tostatus says Rabbi
Solomon thinks it was the soul of Naboth, for the blood of which innocent
Subject, slain, this penal delusion and ruin on Ahab was brought; but he will
not allow, as I think he has reason, this conceit: First, Because Naboth was a
just man, and his soul being in Abraham's bosom could not come thence to
deceive any one. Secondly, Because Naboth as a just man died in charity, which
would be inconsistent with this revenge of his soul. Thirdly, Because the souls
of good men have no desire to harm any either good or bad, but to benefit them
the most they can. Fourthly, Because his question presupposes a real
Congregation of counsel, and yet the thing here mentioned was but a Visio
imaginaria; whose soul then this was, if a soul it were, matters not; a Spirit
the Text says it was and a mendacious one, and therefore I think the Devil,
who is said to be a Liar from the beginning: And probably it was that Demon or
Daemones which used to answer Ahab's false Prophets in their Inquiries of
unlawful things: This Oracle that they rested upon as their strength and
stability, God makes to be their seduction, and that not only to Ahab, but to
him by his sycophanting and Idolatrous Prophets. So it follows, Ero Spiritus
mendax in ore omnium Prophetarum ejus. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Job. 1. Zach. 3.1.2. Luke
12.32.
] As God suffers Satan himself to tempt some good men for their trial, as he
did David, Job, Ioshuah the High Priest, and Peter, so does he let loose Satan
on evil men to bring to pass his displeasure against them: thus not only by
the immediate Accesses of Satan to them, but by the mediate Applications of his
instruments no less prevalent to his ends, such here as the Prophets of Ahab,
men of influence and popularity, of reputation and credit with Greatness,
Ahab's bladders that bore him up, his favorites on whose breast he leaned, and
to whose fidelity he impiously attributed more then Kinglyly he ought: These
Satan undertakes to suborn and by these to make the delusion strong and
inextricable. Ero] It Is not sum or esse possum, not I am or I can be, but, I
will be whatever I mischievously have been or possibly can be to draw a mist
over the eyes of Ahab's counsel, and to intenebrate his Prospect into the
consequence of this Ginn of ruin to him; so fatally will I steep my subtlety
to overreach him, that whatever of extraordinary Injury my long experience and
accurate malice enables me to, shall be discharged against him, Ero;] and that
unawares to him I will be Spiritus] a mischief secret and indiscernable, he
shall not know whence his bane arises; it shall be latens malum that shall
provoke him to his ruin, Ero Spiritus mendax,] he shall account himself most
happy in that counsel which shall at once prostrate his life and his glory: and
this I will do not by any Instruments but those unmistrusted ones, his sacred
favorites, Ore Prophetarum, The mouth of his Prophets: Ier. 22.32.
] O that is poison with a witness that comes wickedly from the mouths of
deluding Prophets, therefore God sentences those as causers of his people to
err; when those mouths are not seasoned with sanctity, but have the poison of
Asps, and vomit out the mire and dirt of falsehood and fanaticisme, Princes and
people are in danger. No times so tragic as those are in which such
dealbatores Potentum are, nor do any Leathergies so possess Nations, 'as when
they are lulled asleep by blind Guides and unseeing Seers; when Prophets are
fools and spiritual men are mad, then is the Day of a Nations Visitation:
Israel found it so in Ahab's time, in which, not only one, but all of Ahab's
long-robed Favorites were tinctured with demonical mendacity, Etiam ab
exemplis malorum sacerdorum vitiorum labes fuit dimanant in populum quandoque
minus ii idouci sunt ad impetraudam gratiam ad quos vigilandi and orandi populo
spectat officium ranto in mirum magis opus habet populus ut vigilet, sargat and
impensius oret, ipse pro se, nec pro se tantum, s^d and pro Presbyteris
ejusmodi. Tho Morus Equ. in Euposition^ Passionis, p. 126. Impress. Lovan. 1566.
not one of them excepted; for such was the Daemon's confident Affirmation to
God, That he would be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets; that it
seems to carry a Warrant to our belief, that he had taken Livery and Seison of
them to be his own, jurare in verba Magistri, to be such and only such as he
would have them, who being himself the Author of seduction, and the great
Imposter that by his gulleries out-wits this worlds Politic^es, and by his
frauds deceives, as far as God permits the possibility of it, the other Worlds
wise men, the very Elect, according to that of our Lord, Matthew. 24.24.
which he left his Church (in those Ages in which these feats should be acted)
as their premunitional caution against them, and their Lesson to intend the
defeat of them, which they can no ways better do then by Faith in God's Power
and Promise, the Victory of which overcomes the World, and Satan the Prince and
Arch- Malignant of it.

Non enim decuit Spiritum bonum exequi talia, licet a Domino prodiit judicium
quod Ahab mendacio deciperetur.

Here our Text-Master shows whence it comes to pass, that Ahab was thus
seduced and that not from a contingency or a fortuitous casualty, but from a
just and sovereign preappointment of the penal act of Justice upon him, a
Domino prodiit judicium. He that made the World with a word can with a word do
what he pleases in it; He it is that commands times and seasons, men and
Angels, creatures and Elements: the whole Regiment of Nature is his, to order
and disorder it as he pleases; from this matchless Potentate, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, comes Ahab's final and fatal Period, a Domino prodiit
judicium: and that not only that Prophets should be the men, by a lie in their
mouths, the means of his deception; but that as God permitted the thing to be
effected by Instruments proper thereto, so did he employ none but such to those
ends, because non decuit Spiritum bonum talia exequi.] If holy Spirits cannot
in respect of their purity and charity condescend to those derogatory Acts of
seduction and fraud, and such Artifices must be practiced to effect the
punishment of sinners demeritings; then either those that are proper for it
must do it, or it must not be done, which omission not being allowable, for
God's will must succeed, the deduction will be, that evil Spirits must be the
Instruments; for the non decuit relates to the nature of good Spirits which is
to do good, which execution of punishments quaa punishments and laesive to
nature are not, nor is it suitable to the office of good Spirits (who are
tutelars; to keep off) not Executioners to intrude upon men perplexities and
discomforts. And therefore I conclude, that be the Demon never so smooth,
faced and beauteous, let his pretenses be never so fair and obliging, let his
pompous Inscription be Holiness to the Lord, or, The Everlasting Kingdom, or,
Behold my Zeal, let him have in his Banner the quinque Vulnera of our Savior,
and profess to set him upon his Throne; yet all these are but splendida
mendacia, but varnishes of a purid and diabolical Villainy, which can no more
excuse it self by these sucacious trickings and meritricious Ornaments, Huic
prorsus mulieri cuncta alia fuerunt prater honestrum animum, opes splendori
generis sufficiebant, sermo comis, nec absurdum ingenium, erat prudens,
magnifica, liberalis, sed and lasciva. Aeneas Vicus, invita ejus.
then Poppaea Sabina could to the Age she lived in, who knew her to be
well-spoken, witty, generous, and sweet natured, defective in no natural
perfection, but that which is the only Glory of a Woman, Chastity.

Sed dicet Iudex forsan, Ego nihil egi manibus meis in cruciatibus istis; sed
quid refert propriis facere manibus, an presentem esse, and quod factum est
iterum atque iterum aggravare.

This is well here objected, that it might as well be answered; That God weighs
not so much the Act as the Motive and Principle. Matt. 26.3. c. 27. v. 1. and
25.
The Jews were the Cryers-out for Christ's crucifying, yet in as much as the
Scribes and Pharisees, the Elders and Priests, set the people on and by their
subtlety modelled his death, God's omniscience imputes to them the malice of
the actual execution of him; Urijah was slain by the hand of the Enemy, though
Ioah was accessory because he connived at the Plot, which tended to his
murder, 2 Samuel 11.14, 15, 16, 17, etc.
yet David that willed and wotted it was chiefly charged by God with it. It Is
not enough not to be openly evil, for that may be the Act of Policy not
Innocence, abscondore vitia non abstindere, as Tertullian's words are: but he
that will have a good footing, and lay a clear Title to God's Protection and
Blessing, must be free from having any thing to do in evil. Ad impietdtem
perinde valet unum obulum confer ac si omnia conferas.
Marcus Arethusius gave the Rule, One Farthing subsidiary to wickedness
beguilts the giver as much as Pounds to that sinful purpose; no posting it off
to others when they are what they sinfully are by our Authority. If qui nou
vetat peccare cum possit, jubet, what a Mountain of Impiety do they lie under,
that will, direct, command, compel men to evil Actions, and are not satisfied
till they commit them; certainly God has great reckonings to make with men in
Place for this, because the errors of all underlings will be charged by God on
the negligence, if no worse, of Superiors, who are not only to look, that they
themselves are not personally evil, but that no evil has countenance and
corroboration from their Authority; all unrighteousness acted in a Nation, by
the Governors privity, is the Governors in the account of God, because God
has given them the sword, and that which is done by the color of that, is, in
God's account, done by them whose the Sword is; which if the Judges of the
World would rightly consider, they would not think they should be excused by
the darkes and shades that they abstrusely wrap themselves up in, who are the
chief Engineers in that which is torment to some and temptation to more: yea,
were it not that greatness has some unavoidable naeves and flaws in it
inconsistent with that durable peace and continual feast which nourishes an
endless Jubilee in the soul, wise and holy men would not so little seek it as
they do shun it; and bless God for Agur's Portion, Food convenient for them:
but good men knowing the corruption of their hearts, and the dangerous
influence of temptation in Greatness, 2 Kings 4.13. Neh. 2.1. 2 Samuel 7.12. 1
King. 13.21.
have as well blessed God for the happiness to dwell among their own people,
as, to be buried in the Sepulcher of their Fathers. I know the number of these
modest unwilling ones is but small, but yet some there are, and those not the
least excellent in their Ages and Places; Of all the Fathers of the Church,
none merited more then Athanasius, yet no man shunned Governmens in it more
then he; Shute's History of Venice. p. 225.
Of all the Dukes of Venice, none a braver one then Contareni the 60 Duke, yet
he fearing to be chosen Duke left the City on purpose to avoid it, the Senate
sent Letters to invite him to the City, but come he would not till they had
chosen a Duke, at last the Senate concluded to confiscate his Goods, and for
ever banish him the City if he came not to the City, which dreadful sentence
brought him thither, and by his return brought the Dukedom with it to him; and
the reason is, because Power does engage men to delegate that to others to act,
which they must answer for to God as the Commissionators of it: for the rule is
good, Qui facit per alium, facit per se. And therefore the Chancellor says in
the following words.

Credo quod vulnus, quo santiatur animus Iudicis paenas hujusmodi infligentis
nunquam in cicatricem venict.

Here the Chancellor shows, that in justice pronounced by a Judge has often a
Return upon him in the dismal effects of it, Terror and torment of mind,
which he calls vulnus, which is not a light superficial scratch or a shrewd
dry rub and bruise, but a deep wound fixed in the quick which discovers its
laesion in emission of blood and expiration of Spirits; this is the nature of a
wound which the guilty Conscience of a cruel Judge is said to labor under; and
a sore torment it must needs be, for it is said sauciare animam, which denotes
such a galling as is in the tender parts when they are rawed and tortured with
scourges of rodds, In Ruder 18. Cic. 3. verr. 47. Idem in Fato 55.
so Plantus, Quid causae est, quin virgis te usque ad saturitatem sauciam; and
Tully, Servi nonnulli vulnerantur, ipse Rubrius in turba sanciatur; from this
grievous pain, which the Jews probably learned from the Nasions, the torment of
a guilty Conscience is metaphorized, for that it makes the life of man turbid
and uneasy by it, which the Greeks hinted in that Adage, 'H (...). How these
terrors of God in the souls of men have afflicted them, the examples of Cain,
Manasses, David, Judas, make appear in holy Writ, In his Chapter of God's
punishments upon Persecutors and Contemnors of the Gospel p 2106, 2107, 2108,
2109.
and the like other Stories afford: Master Fox has many Collections in his
Martyrology to this purpose, and were all the instances of the affrighting
tristicity of it perished, that notable one of Spira would inliven the memory
of them all; nor are the Stories of Bonner, Judge Morgan, Thornton, Arundel,
with others, much behind it; but declare notably, that when there is a
sanciatio animi, as in these notable returns of God upon presumptuous sinning
there is, Non delectatum esse cum Iure illo acro. Cic. 5. Tuscul. Respiciendum
est judicanti ne quid ant durius ant remissius constituetur, quam causa
deposcit, nec enim aut severitatis ant clementia gloria affectanda est sed
propenso judicio prout quaqn^ res expostulat statuend^^m. Bractonus, lib. 3. c.
6.


then there is but a black night of horror and despondency in the soul.
Therefore as all men are hence admonished to look to themselves, that they
provoke not God to chastise them with these Scorpions, so are Judges
especially, because they are God's delegates, and they doing unjustly in the
place of the just God, and to his vituperation and scandal, are by his just
judgment, so much the severelyer handled, as there crime is more enormous: for
this is crimen lasa Majestatis coelestis, since it is sacrilegiously to entitle
the just God to unjust sentences, which indignity to him he recoyls in that
fatal judgment of setting men's sins in order before their faces.

This is that which makes the wound nunquam in cicatricem venire,] that is,
never heal; for when a wound tends to a scarr, which is the sign of it on the
superficies of the skin, then men reckon the festery matter is outed and all
the noxiety removed, by reason of which nature closes its orifice and shuts its
mouth from craving further aid from art, leaving only the scarr as the
testimony of its danger being over and escaped; but when the Conscience of a
prodigious cruel sinner has got a wound from God's stroke upon it, and the sins
of a cruel life, with all the aggravating circumstances are marshalled and set
in rank and file before a man, then he sees nothing but despair and horror,
terrors and amazements, such as Cain and Judas had, and such as all bloody
wretches shall find to their consternation, for God who is good and does good,
cannot away with evil men and evil actions, but brings them home upon the
Actors in all the tragical fruits of them. Had Iehu peace that slew his Master?
Had Bonner the comforts of God on his deathbed who made Hecatombs of Triumph
to his deluded zeal with the bones and bodies of burned Martyrs? Fox. Act. and
Monuments. p. 2096.
Had Benefield, the butcherly Keeper of Queen Elizabeth, who thirsted after
nothing more then that incomparable Ladies blood, and not only suborned
Witnesses against her, but joined with others (purely upon the account of her
being a Protestant) to persuade the Spaniards at Court, either to dispose of
her abroad or rid her out of the way? Had these, I say, any comfort, was their
wound ever healed? O it is much to be doubted they had not; though Repentance
has indeed a balm that can do all that is needful, and if God give it and
accept his gift, much may be done, but otherwise Vulnus nunquam in cicatricem
venict, and the reason is, the humors that poison the wound are not rectified,
sweetened or diverted, but there is a continual flux of them to the malade part
which is harmed thereby, and still continued a wound. For as it follows.

Maxim dum recolit acerbitatem poenarum miseri sic afflicti.

Indeed this is God's terror by which he gores and batters wicked men, and by
the pelts and ramms of which he forces open the recesses of their fancyed
content, and galls them in their tender parts; so that they have their torture
ever before, because ever within them: This was evident in Judas, who when he
remembered 'twas a Master that treacherously he had betrayed, and an innocent
blood that he had contracted to shed, how raving and perplexed is he? so that
the hands, that told the silver, tied the halter by which he hanged himself:
Fox. Acts and Monuments. p. 2112.
Famous to this purpose is the story of Olivier, Chancellor to Henry the
Second of France, a fierce man he was and had condemned certain Protestant
Gentlemen for taking Arms against the House of Guise, being instigated
thereunto by the Cardinal of Lorrain, sick the Chancellor fell, and troubled
in Conscience, casting forth many sighs for his unrighteous sentence, at last
on a sudden he skreeked out with a lamentable cry, saying, O Cardinal thou will
make us all be damned.

The Consideration of which makes good men wary not to be Instruments of Injury
and Cruelty. Scutum reliquissa praecipuum flagitium, nec ant sacris adesse aut
concilium inire ignominioso fas. Tacit. Do Morib. Germanor.
Whatever a Soldier parts with he should not with his Arms, but if he have by
cowardice lost them, he ought with Cato's Son to enter the thickest strength
and menacing'st storm of the Enemy to recover them: and so a good Christian,
whatever he be forced from, should not be from his integrity, and from a calm
and peaceable Conscience, which they cannot have that are delighted in envy,
malice, and mischief to all but their own party. Remember this all ye that
prefer this world before your Consciences, and to please a passion break out
against Innocence, who care not who sink so ye swim, nor who is your
footstool so you mount the Bucephalus's of your Ambition; Remember this ye
that ride Post, and switch and spur to reach the Babels of your Contrivance,
though the Cry of the oppressed, and the Groans of the famished poor be in the
stone mortar land materials of your Superstructure; Not, O unhappy men, your
Counsel but God's shall stand; Sir Garret Tryers found it so; Acts and
Monuments. p. 2108.
he, for a Grave-ship promised him by the Spanish Regent, undertook the
destruction of the Protestant Professors in Flanders, but God struck him with
such a blow as left him dead in his bed as he was just entering upon it, which,
methinks, should make men study in all their advantages and actions, moderation
and temper to express their worth by; which John of Austria not kenning, in
eight hours caused the death of 14000. Citizens of Antwerp, who were put to the
Sword, and above 3000. Anno 1576. Dinothus lib. ^. De bello civili, p. 208, 209.
perished in endeavoring escape, together with the loss of the City to the
value of three Millions, besides all the wars and cruelties on the Belgic
Provinces which were merely in hate to the Natives, and to introduce the
Inquisition there contrary to the Laws of the Country. For when all the pudder
they that are fierceest have made comes to the moment of death, then they will
be forced to say to their fiercenesses, I have no pleasure in them; then the
memory of one good deed done charitably and piously, will be more refectional
then all their superb huffs and ranting pitilessnesses: yea in this worlds
account 'twill appear in the issue most prudence to be mild and kind, where
men may do it without Injury to Justice and Order. 'Twas a very memorable
moderation the Venetians expressed to the Zaratins who had seven times revolted
from the Venetians, Shute's History of Venice. p. 195.
and in all those revolts been reduced by sharp and terrible wars; yet for all
that did not the State raze or sack the City, though delivered unto their
mercy, but put a new Governor into it, and the chief Authors of the seventh
Rebellion were for ever banished the City; this was the Method of that wise
State: Dinothus lib. 3. De bello Belgico civili. p. 194.
of a good temper was that famous Requisinius, one of the valiant and noble
Governors of the King of Spain's in the low Countries, who coming thither
found it all in flame, yet He, though a valiant and expert Soldier, was a
lever of peace, grave rather then severe, and more studied the public
settlement then his own glory; this made some airy persons detract from him:
but God so honored his bravery of mind, that he ever had the better of all
his opposites; and moderately used the advantages he had to shame their enmity
and not to ruin them for it. This was the praise of that Grandee, and the
contrary had not only lost him the luster of that glory, but engaged him in
that internal torture, that the memory of truculent and barbarous actions
infelicitate their actors by, whose conscience is never healed but continually
terrifies them, maxim dum recolit acerbitatem panarum, etc.

CHAP. XXIII.
Praeterea, si ex contractibus, illatisve injuriis, vel haereditatis titulo,
jus accreverit homini agendi in judicio, si testes non fuerint, vel si qui
fuerint moriantur, succumbet ipse agens in causa sua, nisi jus suum probare
valcas inevitabilibus conjecturis, quod facere crebro non contingit. etc.

HEre the Chancellor offers something in seeming extenuation of the
Proceedings of the Civil Law in Cases of Contract, Reparation of Injury, or
Title of Inheritance, which are three chief Subjects on which the justice of
any National Law ought to work; and the main Argument he brings hereto is, the
necessary presence and testimony of Witnesses to the maintenance of those
Actions and the recovery of right by them, which he would make, as it may
happen, defective to that end that Laws are made. Ius unicuique tribuere. This
is the sum of this Chapter, which I shall no further write upon, then to show
that in these Cases Witnesses are required, and without them, by that Law, no
Action lies so as to be recovered upon it.

Ex Contractibus.] Contracts are the first of the Ternary, and matters of
capaciousness they prove, and in the ordinary notion we account them those
Accords and Agreements of men upon which Actions for nonperformance of them
valuably arise; Inventa sunt pacta and conventiones ut alium obligemus ad
dandum vel faciendum quippiam. Tholossan. lib. 21. c. 7.1. Lib. 21. c. 8. p.
407. Bracton lib. 3. c. 1.
Erant hamque Actiones praescriptae verborum agendi formulae pro natura
cujusque negotii, say the Civilians, hence is it that because man is a sociable
creature and lives in the light of his reason, turning and winding things to
his politic accommodation, which is the Principle of contract, the Laws of
Nations allow him his jus prosequendi in judicio quod sibi deb^tur, which if he
rightly manage and punctually observes, he cannot fail of the Laws equity in
them. These Contracts then, to discourse at large of, would be the work of a
life, for there is no end of them since they take in not only those of
Merchandise, but even of Economy and Martialness; hence is the Agreement of
two to be man and wise called Contract of Marriage, of Master and Servant, a
Contract for service and wages: yea the Military art has its Contracts too, as
appears by those mutualities of accord that were ever between the Soldiers and
their Leaders, to which the Apostle is thought, and that not improbably, to
allude in those words, I bear in my body, (...), the marks of the Lord Jesus,
which Phrase is borrowed, as I suppose, from those military Compacts that were
of old, (...). AErius Medicus apud Lipsium. De Militia Romana, lib. 1. p. 45.
when Captains put on their Soldiers faces or hands, their Brands or Stamps of
dignoscence, and without this they were no lawful Soldiers: so to this day
all Soldiers either are entertained by Indenture, or entry on the Band-roll,
and have the Colors of their Regiment as the Badge of their Contract with
their Chieftain to do him service according to the Laws of War, Bracton lib.
3. De Actionibus. c. 2.
and the performance of his promised pay; for reciprocation is absolutely
necessary in Contracts, and where the persons that contract are not fit and
proper, Non valet donatio nisi tam dantis quam acciptentis concurrat mutuus
consensus and voluntas unda enim donatio and pactio non obligant, nec faciunt
aliquem jure debitorem. Idem lib. 2. c. 5. lib. 3. c. 2.
Contracts are insignificant, but if such they be as they ought, they are
actionable to procure the performance of them, and not to fulfill them is to
do injuriously; and that the Text says the Law does allow an Action for: ^o
are the words, not only si ex Contractibus, but illatisve Injuriis.]

Illatis^e Injuris.] So the old and true Text is, the later, illasisve
Injuriis, is corrupt; for the Chancellour's intent is to show that the Law
being ars aqui and boni, looks upon all departure from it as wander, and all
measure beside it as Injury, quicquidenim non jure fit injuste fit. Now
Injuries within the Text are chiefly those violences and uncharitable Actions
which flow from an ill will and a pravity of Principle, which because it
appears in some signal violation of social kindness and politic order,
Voluntas and propositum distingunt malesicia. Bracton li. 3 c. 2.
is made to entitle the Magistrate to not only see the Law executed upon it,
but to interpret it a stroke of Malice (though at a distance at him. Bracton
lib. 3. c. 4. p. 103.
) And therefore is it that in Teespasses, Assaults, and Batteries, the
Declaration is vi and armis, the Trespasser, etc. did do what he did; because
injury persisted in, and not satisfied for, is inchoate Rebellion, or a
defiance of the Custos Regni and Legum, which aggravates the guilt: so the
Romans accounted small offenses, which simply were nummarily penal, to become
in their repetition capital; and Lipsius gives the reason, Quod talem pravo
ingenio censebant and factum ad peccandum fortasse, and contumacia iis visa
punienda, and quod quasi per contemptum ludibriumque legis peccares. lib. 5. De
Milit. Romans p. 345.
Because thrice to repeat a fault is to reproach the Law of which it is a
breach, and to dare it to severity against such a blushless effrontery. By this
then it appears, that Injuries are the warps of man, seduced from his primaeva
rectitude, and a recess from charity and righteousness, which is the only
noble endowment of humane Nature: Quia affection ^sa nomen imponit operi tuo,
and crimen non contrahitur nisi nocendi voluntas intercedas, nec furtum
committitur nisi ex affectu furandi. Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 2.
the proneness to decline which, through the prevalence of passion regnant in
us, and the fruit of Satan's influence on us, whereby our wills, wonn by him to
a delight in unrighteousness, does that to another which is against Justice and
that civil right, which God and Nature has vested in men, is that which is
termed Injury: to avoid which, Lewis the Hungarian King being come down into
Italy with great forces against the State of Venice, (who were so weakened by a
Plague that they were forced to declare, Shute's History of Venice. p. 197.
That whosoever would come to them, after two years abode there, should be
accounted a Citizen) and being informed of the Act of God, causal of their
distress, and applied to with entreaty not to take advantage of it,
condescended so far as to promise them, that during their Adversity he would
make none attempt against them, which was a great Command of himself; and which
had he not done, Syntagm. Juris universi. lib. 38. De Injur^is and Con.
he would, in my mind have been injurious: but enough of him and of Injuries,
for which there is remedy appointed in all Laws according to right reason as
Tholossanus abundantly makes good.

Vel Hereditas Titulo.] Haereditas est successio in universum jus quod
defunctus antecessor habuit ex quacuoque causa acquisitionis vel successionis
eum seisina sua sine, etc. lib. 2. c. 29. p. 62.
This is Title of Land, that which is patrimonial and successive, donative or
testamental, acquisitive or emptional, of this Bracton treats: this the learned
called anciently (...), Tholoss. Syntag. Juris lib. 16. c. 5.
though since that term is restrained to the Patrimonium Crucifixi, those that
are God's Portion, Evangelick Levites, as I may so say, who are there by in
their Order understood, but more ordinarily Inheritance; Haereditas] was that
which was the Portion of the Children of the defunct Possessor, which were
termed Haerdes necessarii, and to whom it came by the Law of the twelve Tables,
sive vellent sive nollent: after these the next of the Blood, or such as by
Will they would appoint, whereof the Civil Law gives us much Learning every
where in the body of it, Tholoss. Syntag. Juris. De acquienda vel amitrenda
Haeredit. lib. 46. ^Pandect.
and in the Doctors upon it. Now in all these Cases either of Contracts,
Injuries, or Inheritance, the Laws Civil requiring lawful Witnesses both for
Nature and Number, or such prevalent conjectures as are Tantamounts, do but
what, I humbly conceive, is rational, religious, and worthy them, and
thereupon I conceive them justifiable in so doing; nor can they well be said
deficere in Iusticia, because they do require that which is for the most part
haveable if the Cause be just, and if a just cause once in an Age sink for want
of it upon the Act of God who calls the Witnesses away before they have given
their testimony, the Law is not to be charged for that it could not provide
against, for God is to do with his Creature what he pleases whose he is; but
rather the Law is to be justified which wisely provides for Witnesses to be
examined in perpetuam rei memoriam: and the Parties, whom the want of Witnesses
most prejudices, are to be blamed for omitting the indulged opportunity, the
rule of Law being, Currit tempus contra desides and suitemporis contemptores.
And if Laws should be branded as defectuous in point of Justice for what thus
may happen, no humane Law ever was or ever will be just; for as there may be
some high Tides and strong winds that may force a breach upon the best Walls
and Mounds of art imaginable, so may there also be some casus omissi which may
be too extraordinary for ordinary Rules and Provisions to remedy: nay the
Common Law it self will be in most Cases thus defective, since in most,
Selden's Notes on cap. 21. Tholoss. Syntag. Juris universi. lib. 47. c. 11.
or all Cases, Witnesses are necessary, and that heretofore in the beginning of
every Action, and if Witnesses fail before a Trial come, the suit were as good
not proceed as fall for want of Proof; so that with favor to my learned
Master, the Civil Law in requiring witnesses or inevitable Conjectures, without
which it judicially determines no Action, does but what is just; and may be
said, unicuique quod suum est tribuere, since that which is not made out by
witness or presumptions of equivalency thereunto, is as if it were not at all
any thing above a bare allegation; the rule of Law being to proceed to
judgment, secundum allegata and probata. And so I end this Chapter.

CHAP. XXIV.
Reguum Angliae per Comitatus, ut Regnum Franciae per Ballivatus distinguitur,


THese words are initial to what is of materiality in this Chapter, and
thereupon I begin with them, the preceding Clauses being only matter of form
and transitional coherence to maintain the continuity of the discourse; which,
though it be very comely, and proper to display the venust proportion of this
Creature of the Chancellour's, which he himself could not but love (because
'twas his own, and so like his learned and pious mind wherein it was formed,
and I cannot but admire for his sake; whom to serve I have herein spent some
pains, and through the goodness of God I hope not unprofitably,) yet do I not
think those things that are so ordinary as Prefaces and Flowers of Oratory are,
fit to seize me from persuance of more ponderous passages, therefore proceed I
to these words, Reguum Angliae per Comitatus, etc.

Regnum Angliae.] This is the Subject, a noble and Imperial one; but of it
because I have written in the Notes on the seventeenth Chapter, and shall
further in those on the twenty nineth Chapter, I forbear here: only all men
are to know, that England was ever a Monarchy and Imperial Crown, and though in
regard of the Community of its Subjects, whose goods in all the latitude of
felicity was aimed at by the just Monarchs and Laws of it, 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 6.
the name Commonwealth has been given it: so Stat. 3 Jacob. c. 5.2 and 3 E. 6.
c. 21.1 and 2 P. and M. c. 5.21 H. 8. c. 16 yet that Name, Sir Ed. Cook on
Little on p. 168.
in contradiction to Imperial Crown, Monarchy, State and Kingdom, was never
allowed here, May 1649. Scobels Collect. c. 27. p. 30.
nor attempted in any Change till the year 1649, when by an Ordinance it was,
as far as God permitted that strange Engine to operate, new modelled and named
a Commonwealth, or Free State; but as ab Initio non fuit sic, so blessed be
God now it is not such in a sense of opposition to its Sovereign, The Authors
Prayer.
but loyally returned to, and enjoyed by Him: Whom, God preserve long, our
Gracious Protector and Great Encourager in virtue; and to Whom, God preserve us
Christianly subject and Englishly loyal.

Per Comitatus.] This is the Predicate what the Kingdom is in its politic
Scheme, to wit, Shyre quasi Share Vowel. Descrip. Britt. part. 1. p. 153.
a Pack of Shires or Partitions of Government for the more apposite and orderly
regulation of them and of the whole Island in them; now the main and superior
parts of this Division is called Comitatus, possibly because it contained a
Circuit of ground and people which was under the charge, Caesaris Comitatus, of
some one that was of its Kings and Masters near Attendants and bosom-friends,
Totius Anglia Pagos and Provincias in Comitatus primus omnium commutavit.
Ingulphus. Gloss ad vocem Comes. Cambden Division of Britain.
who was Companion of his War and of his peace: into this Model of Counties,
Alfred is said to cast England about the year 871. and as Dutchies were the
Charges of Dukes, and thence took their Names, so Counties of Earls who
presided them; it being usual with Antiquity to honor every Dignity with
somewhat of trust Martial, or if not with the thing, yet at least with the Name,
as Sir Henry Spelman, and Master Cambden with others assure us by most clear
Authority. Comitatus then being the name of Offices had various Acceptions, of
old it signified the Senatus Imperatoris domesticus, as we may say, The Court
of the King's House; after, they were extended to that we call the 9 H. 3. c.
35.2 and 3 E. ^. c. 25.
County Court, which is the Court of the Earl or Count, now the Sheriff who
has the Custody of the County. These Charges are also called Shires from scype
the Saxon word, to part or divide, because they are those limits and bounds of
ground which our Ancestors, from the Germans, learned to model Government into,
for its more secure and expedite carrying on. Cambden's Britannia. Division of
Britain. p. 159. Vowel. Descrip. Brit. p. 153. 1 Instit. on Littleton. p. 109.
The Number of these of old, says Mr. Cambden, were accounted by some 34, or
36. but at this day are reckoned at 40. and 13 in Wales settled in Henry the
Eight's time, as appears by the Statute 27 H. 8. c. 6. and 34 H. 8. c. 26.
though Sir Edward Cook makes 41 Counties and 12 in Wales. And within some of
these is every part of England, Ita ut non sit locus in Anglia, qui non sit
infracorpus Comitatus.] For because every County is under some Sheriff who has
the Custody of it in times of Peace, (as the Come sanciently had In War, and
as our Lord-Lievtenants at this day seem to have) and who is responsible for
every legal judgment to be executed in it; therefore is every place in England
under and within the Precinct of some County; yea though a privileged place it
be, yet is it within the body of some County, though it may have a special
Officer to whom the dispatch of judicial matters belongs. The Consideration of
which was the cause that made the Isle of Wight to be declared in the Satute of
4 H. 7. c. 16. to be part of the County of Southampton; for that it being a
rich Neck of Land and having many Inhabitants in it, as it might have the
Privileges and freedoms, so also should pay the Duties and Service to the
Laws that other parts of England does.

So then by all this it appears, that as France was divided into Baylywicks,
when, I think, the Capets reigned in France, which is but the same Cook on
Littleton. p. 168.^.
Charge under another name; Ballivus coming from Baillar tradere, committere,
and a Bailiff being nothing but a Commissary to execute another pleasure; in
which sense we read of Ballivus Provincialis, Glossar. in verbo Ballivus.
Ballivus Franciae, Ballivus Libertatis, Ballivus Burgorum, Ballivus Manerii,
and Ballivi Vicecomitis, of which Sir Henry Spelman says, Hoc illud hominum
genus est, etc. This is that sort of Bailiffs, that while they torture and
catchpole men, do so dishonor the Name of Bailiff, that all the honorable
Notion of it is by the Infamy of these Bailiffs Errand disgraced: I say, when
we 'read of Bailiffs, I mean Chief Ones, we read but the Name. of the same
Office and Officer with our Sheriff, whose Office is termed Balliva most
frequently; 1 Instit. on Littleton. p. 61.^.168. B.
so that the sense of the Text is, As there is in France no place but is under
some Baylywick or other, so neither is there in England any place but is within
some County or other.

Comitatus quoque d^viduntur in Hundreda qua alibi Wapentachia nancupantur.
Vowel's. 1. part. Description of England. c. 4. Inter LL. Sancti Edw. c. 32.
De Hundredis and Wapentachiis. p. 143. Edit. Twisd. Mr. Selden's Notes on the
Text. p. 25. Fleta lib. 2. c. 61. Lib. 1. c. 50.
As Counties were Lunches out of the whole Loaf of Land, so Hundreds or
Wapentakes are Morsels from them; now though these are differently named, yet
are they really the same, for the Laws of Saint Edward revived by the
Conqueror say so expressly, Quod Angli vocant Hundredum supra dicti Comitatus
(to wit, Warwick, Lincoln, Nottingham, Leicester, and Northampton Shires)
vocant Wapentachium; and as Hundreds some called them, because they were the
tenth part of a County, in which dwelt Centum Pacis Regiae fidei jussores,
(which I rather believe then that random conjecture of Ralph of Chester, who
makes the Hundred to be Procinctus centum Villarum,) which is so ridiculous,
that the learned Nescio an Medietas, magni habeniur, qui vel 40. vel 30.
numerant, etc. Gloss. in verbo 365.366.
Knight says and that truly, that There is no Hundred that he knows in
England has 100 Villages in it, no, not one half, many great ones have but 40,
or 30, others not 10, some not two, thus he. Concerning Hundreds fee
Malmesbury, De Gestis Anglorum, p. 24. Selden's Notes on this Chapter,
Tugulphus, p. 495. Cambden. Brit. p. 158. Cook on M. Charta, c. 35. And of
Hundredors to be returned on Juryes the Stat. of 35 H. 8. c. 6.27 Eliz. c. 6.
make mention.

See Stat. 33. H. 8. c. 10. 4 Carol. c. 7. Brompton Chron. p. 957. Edit.
London. Fleta lib. 2. c. 61.
Wapentachia.] That this is the same with the former, though otherwise called,
as I have written before: Generally this is acknowledged to be derived from
wapnu, arma, and tac, tactus est, alluding to that Honoratissimum genus
assensus armis laudare, which Notes on this Chapter. Hoveden. Annal. part
posteri. p. 346. Sumner in Gloss ad verbum Wapentake. Inter Leg. Conq. p. 145.
De Hundredis and Wapentachiis. Edit. Twisd.
Master Seldom quotes from Tacitus, it being usual with them to give
Approbation in their Convents Military by touching their Weapons as token of
Assent, and joining their utmost Power to assert it. Amongst the Laws of the
Conqueror I find this recorded, when any new Governor or Judge of the
Wapentake first came to take his Charge, he called together all the chief men
within his Bounds, Et descendente eo de equo suo omnes assurgebant ei, ipse
vero erecta lancea sua, ab omnibus secundum morem foedus accipiebat, omnes
autem quotquot venissent cum lanceis suis ipsius hastam tangebant, and ita se
confirmabant per contactum armorum pace palam concessa.

Hundreda vero dividuntur per Villas, sub quarum appellatione continentur and
Bargi atque Civitates.

It should seem Villae were in our Chancellour's time terms of Comprehension
not Diminution, else he would not have shrouded under the term of Villae Cities
and Buroughs; or at least Villae were Tantamounts and equivalent to Burgi and
Civitates: This promiscuity of expression the learned Seldom gives president
of, On this Chapter. ss. 10.
and all to this purpose, that no place should be exempt from being pars
corporis Comitatus; either part of the County in which the City, Ville or
Borough stands, or a County of itself, for rare is it to have any place
privileged as Battle-Abbey was, to which the Conqueror gave Grant, Charta
Conq. Abbat. De Bello. in Commit. Sussex.
Leugam circumquaque adjacentem liberam and quietam ab omni Geldo and Scoto and
Hydagio, etc. andomnibus auxiliis and placitis, and querelis, and Shyris and
Hundredis: And therefore though Vills, Cities and Buroughs are commonly used
one for another, De Gestis Pontific. lib. 4. p. 161.
as Malmesbury writing of Claudia or Gloucester, called by the Britains
Airchala, as a City devoted to the memory of Claudius; (of which Seneca makes
mention in those words, Barbaros in Britannia cum pro Deo colere, and in
honorem ipsius Civitatem edificare) whereas he terms Bristol but Vicus
celeberrimus. Lib. De Morte Claudii.
Though, I say, these three names were of old confounded in use, yet now adays
they are distinct, Cook. Instit. upon Littleton. p. 109. B.
Vills being open under Officers of the Crown as parts of the County; Buroughs
are particular Governments and Corporations by Prescription or Charter, sending
Members to Parliament mostly though not always: but Cities are accounted such
as are Shire-Towns, most an end Walled, having Sessions and Courts in them, and
a Bishop's Seat; and these, requiring great Circuit and Jurisdiction, may
uninjuriously be said to be contained under Vills, which our Text makes
capacious as appears by those words.

Villarum etenim meta, non muris, aedificiis, aut stratis terminantur sed
agrorum ambitibus territoriis magnis, Hamletis quibusdam, etc.

Hamletis quibusdam.] A Hamlet is some part, or member of a Ville or Town, so
says the Text, Seldom notes p. 27. Dyer. fol. 142.
Vix est locus aliquis in Angliae qui non infra villarum ambitus contineatur;
For, Ham in Saxon signifies a Circuit, or Compass. Whence the word Hemme, for
the edge and limit of any Garment; Sir Henry Spelman says, the ancient word
Haga, Sire (I think to our Hedge) to signify a Trench, (Hedges being bounds, as
Trenches, as Ditches are,) or rather little residencies for security and
livelihood; Ham quasi Home, Gloss p. 328.
which, because many habitations conjoined eminently are great Towns, are
called by names ending in Ham: Buckingham, Walsingham, Notthingham. And
Demivills are termed diminutively Hamlets, Gloss p. 330.
see the Stat. of 14 E. 1. which I find not Printed, though Sir Henry Spelman
mention it.

Praeterea in Quolibet Comitatu est officiarius quidam unus, Regis vicecomes
appellatus.

This Praepositus, or Deputy of the King is here set out by three terms; that
of Office Officiarius; That of honor Vicecomes Regis; That of number, unus
Officiarius.] This word comes from officium, and the termination Rius being
personal, directs to the He that executes it; thus from The-saurus
Thesaurarius; from Camera Camerarius; from Registrum Registrarius; from
Cancellum Cancellarius; from Praebendum Praebendarius; from Ostium Ostiarius;
from Ianua Ianuarius; from Beneficium Beneficiarius; and so in Infinitum.

Quidam Vnus.] Many men, but One Governor, or Principal: God put a Dignity on
One; Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one. And Reason and Policy has also
given the Suffrage to One; 6 Dentr. 4.
Vnus in coelo sol, unus in regno rex, Deus est unus and maxim unus, Sanct.
Thom. 1 Part. Qu. 11. art. 3 and 4. Deus est unus secundum quod unum
convertitur cum ents, non autem quod unum est principium numeri. Idem Eodem
loco.
una in regione religio is the rule of all Policy: and therefore the Kings of
England it should seem by our Chancellours word, appointed to every County one
Sheriff; yet till the 8 Eliz. 16. the Statute tells us diverse Counties were
pared, and had but one Sheriff between them (as I think yet some have) but by
that Statute those Counties were parted, (...), Eusebius Orat. de laudibus
Constant. Tom. 1 p. 457.
and one Sheriff appointed to each of them, as by the 13 of the same Q. Eliz.
c. 22. was appointed to others; Casus in sphara Civit. p. 70.
the Nation probably filling more with fit persons, and the charge being better
borne for one then two Counties; And because his office was Iudiciaria dignitas
as well as Ministralis, Cook upon Littleton, 1 Part. p. 168. Stat. Lincoln 9
Ed. 2. 4 H. 4. c. 5.
and like to that of the Romans Consulage, therefore as the Law committed to
this Officer, and required his residence thereupon, so did it not put
Pluralities, or supernumerary duties upon him more then those he could
reasonably be thought in his 7 R. 2. c. 6. 9 Ed. 2. 4 Ed. 3. c. 9. 5 Ed. 3. c.
4. Tholossan. lib. 47. c. 15.
Proper Person to perform: Nor did our Kings and their Counsel appoint anyone
to this place of Dignity, but such as was proper thereto, Milites vel
Armigeros, men of blood, breeding, and estate; And to these one by one in their
office has he committed great trust; For, since every man's business is no man's,
and many in an office are authors, rather of confusion then orderly action. The
Laws of Nature and Nations prefer Oneness in most things before Manyness, as I
may so say. And as God by one soul in the body rules all the senses and
faculties to a rational and orderly purpose, so does the King in the Law carry
on wise and worthy Government in Counties, by this one (though not only) yet
chief officer in it: and as the Romans were wont to make their Equities of
select men, Nunc pocunia judices tribuunt, Plin. lib. 37. c. 1.
who had their horses appointed them, and were accounted to decline when the
conditions and fitnesses of men were more calculated by their purses then
minds; Longa pax militem incuriosius legit, Veget de milit. Romans lib. 2.
so is it in any place, and Government a great defect to choose persons to
offices, who are not nobly qualified thereunto, it being a rule with me, that
the Kings Authority is never contemned, Quotiescunque and aliquis militia
crediderat offerendum p^atim, de natalibus ipsius and de omnis vita condition
examen habeatur, and ad militiam nullus adspiceret nisi quem penitus liberum
aut genere aut vita condition inquisitio tam causa depreheuderit, lib. 7. Cod.
Theodos. Tit. 6.
but when it is managed by weak men. And certainly, what the Emperors
Theodosius, Gratian, and Valentinian decreed concerning Soldiers, That no man
of mean birth, fordid breeding, ill carriage, poor nature, or of illiterate
mind, should be admitted to the noble company of Soldiers; but the best, and
every way braveliest accomplished of men, is applicable hereunto, and practiced
in a great measure by our State, as in the hereafter Treaty hereof will appear.

(...). Hallicarnass, lib. 11.
Regis Vice-comes appellatus.] This puts a dignity on the Sheriff, that though
he be not as the Roman Legates are by the Historian described to be, whom he
terms of all the most honorable and sacred; having the power of an Emperor,
and the sanctity of a Priest. Yet may this officer be allowed many, not only
grains, but ounces and pounds of honor, for his derivation from the King, by
the Count, or Earl of the County, to whom he succeeds; who therefore was called
Comes, Cook on Littleton, p. 168.
because probably he was either of the blood, or by merit inoculated into the
stock of Princely greatness, Ex limitaveis ducibus Comites ordinis primi
creavit Constantinas, Comites a principis Comitatu, quod ipsum soleant
comitari. Pancirol in notitia Imperii, p. 118. c. 74.
to which he was a companion: Now this compartization in command (as I may so
say) Time wearing off, and the wisdom of Princes disallowing Great men's
rivalry, or potency, to prevent the irruption of it to Princely disturbance,
Plin. Epist. 176.
has committed this trust to a hand where it is acted less formidably. And this
Person or Officer, the Law calls Vice-comes; where vice pro loco accipitur,
Lib. 8. c. 46.
as Pliny phrases it, so Bos in Aegypto numinis Vice colitur, Epist. 101. lib.
7. Sueton in Nerone, c. 31.
that is loco, so Cartias uses vice alicujus solicitus, and Suetonius vice
mundi circumagi; which is as much as ad similitudinem mundi, and Livy has pungi
aliena vice: so that this Officer being successor to the Earls of Counties,
Inter optimas lectissimorum militum turmas neminem e numero serverum dandum
esse decernimus, neve ex caupona ductum, vel ex famosarum ministris tabernarum,
aut ex coquorum aut pistorum numero, vel etiam eo quem obsequii deformitas
militia secernit, nec tracta de ergastulis nomina. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 13.
who originally had the charge and Government of the Counties, their Honorable
Titles were called by; Is hereupon to be accounted a great Officer, and to be
chosen out of the most select band of the Shire-Gentlemen. And such, not only
England apprehends them to be, but also some other Countries: For, to this day,
in Sweden Albergatus in Thesaur. Politis. Relat. de stain Reg. Suecia, p. 317.
every Territory has its Vice-comes qui alter fere prator and qui jus dicit;
Above whom is the prefect, Lipsius lib. 1. de Milit. Romans p. 44.
or Lamem, with us Chief Justice, who rides Circuits, and by these Vice-comites
are attended, which probably was the rise of our Circuits and Sheriff from some
Northern Ancestry of ours; the Danish Laws (with help of the Saxon) affording
us much of Institution, and Law-Method.

Qui inter caetera officii sui ministeria, omnia mandata and judicia curiarum
regis in Comitatu suo exequenda exequitur.

This the Chancellor brings in to the fuller blazoning of the Sheriffs
dignity, which is, not only Ministerial, but Magisterial, and Judicial as I
humbly conceive it in some cases is, and as before the c. 17. of Magna Charta
much more was; before which it is probable Sheriffs did arrogate to themselves
Pleas of the Crown, by which they being ignorant of the Law, gave ill Judgment
in the Case of Man's Life, which is a tender thing, and requires the Learning of
the great and Grave Judges to the cognizance and consideration of it: Cook on
c. 17. Magna Charta.
I say, I humbly conceive there may be some thought that this inconvenience
occasioned this bar of the seventeenth Chapter. And, the maine drift of the
Chancellor is, to represent the Sheriff; as properly the Hands and Feet of
Justice, the executor of the Law, that carries its wisdom and Justice to a
thorough execution, and vital energiqueness. Hence is it that he has power both
in Iure and in sero, and has committed to him according to Sir Edward Cook, a
threefold custody, vitae Iustitiae, For, no suit begins, or process is served
but by the Sheriff; Vitae legis, he is after long suits, and chargeable ones to
make execution; Vitae Reipublicae, he is the principal Consevator of the Peace
within the County. Page 168. Instit. 1 Part.
And thereupon the Text says right, that he is omnia mandata curiarum regis in
Comitatu suo exiqui: For, in that he is said mandata curiarum regis exequi, Is
employed Execution of the Kings Commands, because the King Commands by matter of
Record, and Rex praecipit, and lex praecipit are equivalent, as heretofore more
at large has been discoursed.

And now I seem to have a fair Challenge to write of the Courts of Westminster
Hall, which are the Curiae Regis Ordinariae, The honorable Courts and
Jurisdictions planted in this Kingdom, Speech 1609. p. 534 Institutes of the
Juridisdiction of Courts
as King James's words are; but Sir Edward Cook writing of them, not to the
elaboration of their nature, nor any before him that I know of, warns me to be
modest and not to meddle with such intricacies, which I am very easily
persuaded to avoid, because I know the learning of them more various then to be
abridged as here it must, and mistake so easy, that truly I should be very
prodigal of prudence to engage in it; Sir Rob. Forster. Chief Justices. Sir
Orland Bridgman. Chief Justices. Sir Hales. Chief Baron.
Fleta lib. 2. c. 26, 27.
it shall only content me to profess my duty and reverence to the King's
Majesty's Courts and to the most Reverend and Learned Chief Justices, with
their suitable Companions the Justices in them; to whom, as I can do no less
so I will be excused in applying that to their worthy Master-ships, In Epist
Petro Aegidio, Inter Opera Mori, Impr. Lovan ii. 1566
which Paludanus, upon the view of Sir Tho. Moor's Works, wrote to his friend,
Nec satis scio majorene cum voluptate an admiratione felicem Britanniam, quae
nunc ejusmodi floreat ingeniis, ut cum ipsa possit antiquitate certare. But I
proceed.

Cujus officium annale est, quo ci post annum in eodem ministrare non licet,
nec duobus tunc sequentibus annis, adidem officium reassumetur.

Before this, Sheriffdoms were granted for term of life, terms of years, or in
Fee, but by the Stat. 14 E. 3. c. 7. it was restrained to one year; 12. E. 4.
c. 1.
yet, how it come to pass I know not, but sure so it was, that Sheriffs did
continue many years in their Offices, and, did many Oppressions to the people
and evil Service to the King and his people, 14 E. 3. c. 7^ Rastal Statutes
larg.
so are the words of the Statute: therefore by the Stat. 23 H. 6. c. 8.
Provision is made against their Enormities, which are called, Many and diverse
Oppressions to the King's liege people, unduely, evilly, and falsely to serve
the King and his people. And hence comes the limitation which our Chancellor
terms annale officium, though by the 12 E. 4. c. 1. some relaxation is given,
yet still is it annale officium; for the wisdom of our Ancestors looked upon
longer time as too great an opportunity for mortal weakness and wickedness to
evict: and therefore it anticipated the occasion of such temptation, it being a
wise Proverb which we have, Opportunity often makes a Thief; thus was Achan
lurched, Ioshuah. c. 7.21.
I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish Garment, ane 200 sheckles of
Silver, and a wedge of Gold of 50 sheckles weight; then I coveted them and took
them and hid them in the earth. O it is a rare thing to be a David and see a
Bathsheba and be in love with her, and yet let her rest whose she rightfully
is; nor is any sprigg in Octavius his Plume more Imperial and matchless then
that which was rare in the Caesar's, to be perpetuo sanus; to have an Empire and
to be so little in love with the greatness of it, as upon serious and moderate
thoughts to think of choosing a private life and resigning that is an Argument
of supern Magnanimity; which truly if it be thick sown, as I question, yet
that it comes up thinn, I question not. And if all the Instances of the danger
of opportunities were obliviated, yet in the survival of two, which our own
stories do and will mention, the first of which was that of the Protector after
R. 3. and that later ( O tell it not in Gath, Administrationem eorum (Regnorum
Angliae and Galliae) duntaxat mecum duco. jus vero fructumque as proprietatem
omnium vestrum haud dubie publicam, qaem ego animum quo dic habere desiero
precor u^ superi mihi hoc Regnum, nec vestrum modo, sed vitam quoque ipsam ut
indignam qua retineatur, abripiant. Hist. R. 3. per Tho. Morum. Equ. Aur. p.
56. Edit. Lovanii, Anno 1566.
declare it not in the streets of Ascalon, least the uncircumcised rej^yce:)
That, That, (which by abuse of a gracious Law, and to the destruction of a
Gracious King, engaged us in War and Wickedness) would more then enough revive
to us the danger of Opportunities. So that all things considered, in as much as
the Sheriff is an Officer of great power and trust, and many temptations attend
it, yea much evil has been done under the umbrage of it, the wisdom of our
Kings in their Parliaments has been great in limiting them as by the
prementioned Statutes and as by those further ones, 1 R. 2. c. 11. 6 H. 8. c.
18. they have done; for in that it is lest to be Annale Officium, there is time
enough to discover the virtues of fit persons in their service to the King and
Country. (...). Plutarch. Quaest. Romans p. 282. Macrob. 1. Saturnal. c. 14.
Capito in Gloss.
For a year (which is a time of 12 legal Months, ordinarily said the Measure of
the Sun's march through the Zodiac) the Heb. called it (...), a mutatione,
from its revolution; the Greeks (...), and (...), because as a Circle it turns
into it self: the Learned make many Notions of Annus, they tell us of Annus
civilis, naturalis, Annus magnus, and under these of Annus Solstitialis,
Isidor. De Originib. p. 248.
Lunaris, Embolismus, Bissextilis, Iubileus, Olympias; and In Hortensio.
Tully sums up all in that great year which contains 125^54 years, but most
ordinary is that Lunary year of 30 days, and the Solstice year of 12 Months,
Brechaeus ad legem 134.
according to which our Law computes and our Chancellor is here, I suppose, to
be understood. All Nations then agreed in a year as the mensuration of time,
Lib. De verborum signific. p. 311^
only they variated in Commencement of this time, Lib. De Autro Nymph. p. 269.
Edit. Holst.
Porphyry tells us the Egyptians made Aquarius (...), The Leader of the year,
others Cancer; Isid. De Orig. p. 248. Plutarchus in Quaestionibus Romany. p.
268.
the Christian account is with January, (...), the Door-Month, because it lets
men into a Method of Computation; but many Christian Nations compute the year
from March as we (because of the Reigns of our Princes) do with us; (...).
Plutarch. libro praecitato, and post illum.
which I can say no more to, then that it seems to follow the Constitution of
Romulus, who instituted but ten Months to the year, Alciat. De verboram
signific. in legem 98. p. 225.
whereof March was the first, January and February being after added by Numa,
which makes up our year of 365 days which I humbly conceive to be that time
which our Text intends by, Annale Officium.

Id licere dicimus quod cuique conceditur. Cic. 5. Tuscul.
Quo ci post annum in eodem ministrare non licet.] This is added to show that
whatever Administration is beyond the allowance of the Law, has a non licet
upon it, and intitles the Actor, not only to the penalty of 200. l. for every
year, but to be in misericordia: Now seeing that the Law by Acts of Parliament
says, 23 H. 6, 8 Rast.
He that is Sheriff shall be in that Office but one year, nor be reassumed to
that Office for the next two years after; and this it does on purpose to break
off the Officers insolence over the people, and the peoples dread of the
Officer, after the years expiration he being defunct as to all power, and
(unless there be no other sufficient within the said County) acquiesce he
ought, Peccaere nemini sicet. Cic. 1. Tuscul. 78.23. H. 6. c 8.1 R. 2. c. 11.
ministrare non licet, so are the words of the Statute; and hereupon, when as
the under Sheriff of Bristol doubted concerning his capacity to hold the place
from year to year, as the under Sheriff of London does, the Statute 6 H. 8. c.
18. did declare, that notwithstanding the Statute of Inhibition he might, 42 E.
3. c. 9. 23 H. 6. c. 8. Erasm, in Adag. Chil. 2. Cent. 5. Adag. 61.
or else those Statutes being in force he durst not; so well the later Laws
remedyed the inconveniences of former times, that the old Proverb, Aeginenses
neque tertii neque quarti, may be said of English Sheriffs: no man can
ordinarily continue in it any time beyond that of a year, which is time enough
for an honest man where such choice of them is, as in England blessed be God
there are, and beyond it would be too much time for any that is not worthy to
have it.

Officiarius iste sic eligitur; Quolibet anno in Crastino Animarum convenient
in Scaccario, etc.

This shows us, that as there is one Officer, so he to be chosen, and so, and
so only (ordinarily) as the Statute of 14 E. 2. c. 7. appoints, which our Text
is but an enlargement upon. And the first thing that is remarkable, is the Note
of time, Greater, Quolibet anno, an annary Officer to be chosen annarily; The
lesser or prefixed day of the year, in crastino Animarum. Crastino Animarum.]
This was a day set apart upon Papal ends, before and in our Chancellour's time,
but at this day is a Festival by virtue of the Statute of 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 3.
which I do not assert to decline Canonical Compliance, or as thinking the
Church of England may not harmlessely, as she does, symbolize in these little
externities with the Romish Church where she has any footstep or print of
unsuperstitious Antiquity for her Color or Warrant; but to satisfy the
scruple of some tender spirited persons, that they may make more Conscience of
contemning Authority herein then hitherto they have, for in that some Saints
days and other Festivals are called Holy Days, our State does not call them
such, For the matter and nature either of the time or day, Note well.
nor for any of the Saints sakes, whose memories are had on those days, for so
all days and times considered are God's Creatures, and all of like Holiness,
but for the nature and condition of those Godly and Holy Works wherewith only
God is to be honored, Religiosum est quod propter sanctitatem aliquam remotum
ac sepositu^ a nobis est, verbum a relinquendo dictum. Massur. Sabi^us apud
Aul. Gell. lib. 4. c. 9. and 10.
and the Congregation to be edified, whereunto such times and days are
sanctified and hallowed, that is to say, separated from all profane uses, and
dedicated and appointed not unto any Saint or Creature, but only unto God and
his true Worship, these are the words of the Statute, which shows that pure
prudence and piety destinated these to the respect that with us they have,
which our Ancestors were not only directed to do by the light (as it were) of
nature, which dictated the Commemoration of notable persons and Actions by a
more then ordinary solemnity, but also by Example, and Authority of God,
Positively commanding it: And therefore there has never been any Nation so rude
but has observed it; nor any so Religious but has been awed into the Conformity
hereto: which made S. Bernard declare him unworthy of the Joy of the Festival,
Indignus quippe solenni laetitiae est qui states tum vigiliae abstinentia non
observat, Sce^^ in Vigil. S. Andreae.
in the sacred comfort of it, who does not observe the Injunction of Fasting,
in preparation for it.

Now, though I know there may be, and is abuse of Holy Days, as of the best
things there may, and diverse times is: yet do I not thence see any excuse they
have that defy Holy Days from this accident; but, methinks it would rather
become their greater Zeal, and Knowledge, to Celebrate them so, as to rectify
that aberration, and to method and credit the reduction of its eccentricity:
For, if great mercies and notable achievements be remembered on these Days, I
see no reason but our Customs to Feast, and wear our best Robes, and do every
thing most Triumphingly on these Days, are applaudable: The Heathen-Herald
taught Clytemnestra this, when he tells her, That sad looks, and narrow
austerities do not become a freeday, which is devoted to the Gods, Petrus
Victorius, lib. 28. var lectionum c. 5. ex Aeschylo in Agamemnone.
the best of beings: and S. Bernard highly encomiating the Feast of All Saints,
says to his Friends and Auditors, Non ignoratis fratres, etc. Know ye not,
that men of the world do on Festivals, Sermon. de fecto Omnium Sanctorum.
Feast splendidly; and the Higher the Day is, the most dainty fare have they.
This shows, that Festivals were ever in account, Bios (...). Stobaeus Sermon. de
avaritia.
because they were the relaxations of Life from its constant portadge,
imprisonment, and toil; but, concerning the institution, nature, and qualities
of this, Tholossanus gives a very great and good account, Lib. 2. Syntagm
Iuris, c. 16.
as others also do, whom I shall mention in the Notes on the 35 Chapter. That
which I write this for, is, not to magnify Holy Days, as they gratify any
Carnal Principle in vain men, which by them is pleasured; or, in any
opposition to Tender Spirits, whom some delight to grieve and contradict: God
forbid any of these should prevail with Me, who, I hope, have not so learned
Christ; but, my Enlargement herein is only to allay (if I might) the animosity
that Ord. 1641. c. 81. Scobels Collect.
some have against Holy Days, whereof that Omnium Animarum is one: and to
show, that Crastino Animarum is therefore set apart (as I suppose) by our Law,
to choose this High Officer in, because it supposes, the minds and souls of the
Great Men, then to nominate, being lesson'd with piety the day before, will
have a great tructure of it the morrow; and being convened there, before they
have let the severity and honor of the precedent day evaporate, come big of it
to the Nomination of this Officer; who, Glossarum ad M. Paris. in verbo Hokeday.
by being Elected on this day, gives name to Crastino Animarum; as the massacre
of the Danes by the Women did to Quindena Paschae, another Law day.

Convenient in Scaccario.] This is the place where these Great Ones meet to
choose, in the Exchequer, Originally the Court of the Revenew; whereupon
Polydore Virgil would have it written Scattarium, from the German word Schats,
or the Saxon Scacca, thesaurus, impositio, taxatio; Probably it may be so: For,
it is the Sea, into which all the Rivers of Public Revenew run; Fleta, lib.
2. c. 25.26.
every Sheriff accounts for his Office into it: and therefore, when in Edward
the sixths time, it was found, that the Sheriff of Northumberland for a long
time had not accounted for his Office to the Exchequer, as other Sheriffs did,
but converted the profits of it to his own use, the Statute of 2 and 3 of that
King, c. 34. ordered redress of it; and brought in that out-lying-Deer into the
Herd, 4 Iinstt. Chapter Exchequer. and 1 Instit. p. 304 B. ex Ochamo, p. 17.
making him responsible as others were. Concerning this Court Sir Edward Cook
has written of late, as Nigell is said of old to do, who had incomparabilem
Scaccarii scientiam and de cadem optime scripsit; of this Court therefore no
more.

Thirdly, As the Time and the Place, so the Persons Electors are admirable to
be noticed, Regis Omnes consiliarii; That is, such of the Lords, 21 H. 8. c.
20. 31 E. 3. c. 9. 27 E. 3. c. 26. 1 E. 3. c. 14. 14 E. 3. c. 5.
and others of the Privy Council as will: For, this Omnes is not Necessitatis
and coactionis sed capacitatis and juris. All of the Kings Council may, Qui
propter prndentiae opinionem ad concilia principium suggerenda destinantur.
Alberg. Thesaur. Polit. c. 2. p. 2.
if they please, and some of them must, and many will; and with them comes the
Policy, and Gravity of the Nation. Tam domini Spirituales quam Temporales.]
This is added, to show the variety of our Princes Counsels, which, as they are
of things that concern Religion and Policy, so are furnished with men oracular
in both Provinces Subjects, divided in Terms, and by Names, of Spiritualty and
Temporalty, so says the Stat. 24 H. 8. c. 12. not that physically there is any
difference between a Bishop, and Abbot, and a LayBaron, for they are alike men,
and subject to like infirmities, possible to deceive, and be deceived; and
alike are the Votes of their Baronies in Parliament: but, the distinction is,
to import a kind of metaphysical difference; as the Clergy Lords Calling being
Circa res Sacras; imports, their minds to be in Sacris, Holy men, Having their
Conversation in Heaven, whence they look for the High Priest of this Profession
to visit them with an Euge serve bone; These then who are men set apart to God
in their Order, and Dignified above, and distinguished from vulgar men in
Priesthood, are called Domini Spirituales; not that they pretend the Pedigree
of their Honor from Christ Jesus: 25 H. 8. c. 20. 1 E. 6. c. ^. 8 Eliz. c. 1.
39 Eliz. c. 1. ^5 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 1. Cook 5. Rep. de re Eccles.
For, they knowing his Kingdom not being (in this sense) of this World, their
Prelacy in that sense also is not: but, that by reason of which, they are
Spiritual Lords is their Baronies, which they hold Iure Ecclesiarum; and by
which, the Kings of this Land have erected them as Homadgers to them for such
Baronies; and the Law and Custom of the Nation has incorporated them into the
Baronage inseparably: whence, though several Ordinances mounted against them
for a time, battered them sore; I mean not the Act of 17 Carol. 28. but that of
1646. c. 64. of 1649. c. 53. of 1647. c. 124. c. 94. and 109. of 1648. c. 117.
and c. 122. that of 1650. c. 29, 30. yet God has brought them into their wonted
Right, to the free enjoyments of their luster, See the Act of Parliament for
their Restitution.
with all the perquisites of it; which, as they are never to forget, but to
make their lives (though not) pillars of Gratitude; for, that has too fixed a
name for so fixless a thing, as the life of man (in his best estate) is; much
less in old age (which is the state of most of our Reverend Fathers) but
burning and shining lights of holiness, and exact conscience; which, when they
do, and as Bishop Jewel, one of them, once said Heroickly, Can deny their
Parts, and their Relations, and their Honors, but the Faith and Truth of
Christ they cannot deny. When thus I say the Fathers of the Church do adorn
their Order, Preaching frequently, Living holily, and Dying comfortably: There
are no oppugners of their credit and greatness; but must-blush at their peevish
opposition against them; And such, since to the height of this Character, this
Glorious Church of England, from the Reformation, abundantly has had, and I
trust has; and ever (I hope) by Gods mercy will have: There will be no cause
for any ingenious and noble Tongue and Pen to disown it, as it is held Prelacy,
for since the honor that is attending on it may, and has been subsidiary to
Piety, and may and has contributed much of its luster to the bedecking thereof,
I must be humbly bold to declare, my Prayers shall rather be to God that he
would sanctify and preserve in all exemplary Piety and Charity this Order,
then to highten it above, or abate it from, what now it is; for it is well where
it is, and may God ever supply it with pious and learned Successions; and may
they ever continue in the Kings and Peoples love, as Domini Spirituales.

Et Temporales.] Of these I have written in the Notes on the Chapter; and the
Titles of both Lords Spiritual and Temporal has been the language of so many
Acts of Parliament, and for so long time that to be ignorant of it were to be
sottish: for though in many Authors, specially Scripture, Carnalis be opposed
to Spiritualis, and Mundanus to Coelestis, and Temporalis to Aeternus, yet in
the Rolls of Parliament and Books of their Statutes, Spiritualis and Temporalis
are matched.

Quam alii omnes justiciarii, omnes.] This is to be pressely taken, All may,
but do not, nor are necessaryly to come, but chiefly the two Chief-Justices of
the Benches, if they be present, 14 Ed. ^. c. 7.
so says the Statute; and though lib. ^. c. 26. and 27.
Fleta calls the Barons de Scaccario Justices, and use intitles them to the
Power and Honor of Justices or Judges, yet is not our Text content to couch
them, but positively says, Omnes Barons de Scaccario; 14 Ed. 3. c. 7.
though the Statute prementioned nominates only the Chief-Baron, making him
one of the three prime Regents in this Choice, for the words are, By the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and Chief-Baron of the Exchequer, taking to them the
ChiefIustices of the one Bench, and of the other if they be present: see the 33
H. 6. c. 1. where these are also joined.

Clericus Rotulorum and quidam alii officiarii.] Because the Officers of Courts
were often Clergymen, therefore the term Clericus was given to Officers, 9 E.
2. c. 8. But this great Officer, called here Clericus Rotulorum, and so in the
Statute 11 H. 7. c. 725. is, as I think, (and if I err I crave pardon) in later
Statutes termed Magister Rotulorum; so in the Satatutes 14 and 15 H. 8. c. 8.
21 H. 8. c. 13. Gard^in des Rolls de nostre cancellarie, Veter. M. Charta part.
2. p. 47. B.
so says the old Instrument, De forma mittendi extractas ad Scaccarium.

Et quidam alii efficiaerii.] Though mention is made of other great Officers of
the Realm in the Statute 2 R. 2. c. 5. yet more probably other then these, and
perhaps some Chief-Officers of the Exchequer who are necessary to be used, but
who our Text-Master means I am not able to resolve, nor is it much material;
for the greater Persons being ascertained the less may pass as of less
consequence, for that they meet, and by common consent nominate and agree upon
the names of certain Gentlemen in every Shire, and them present to the King to
prick whom of the presented he please, is the main work, and that the
Chancellor says according to the now practice they annally do.

Nominant de quolibet Comitatu tres Milites vel Armigeros.] Tres for the
Number, Milites vel Armigeros for their Quality. Three is a sacred Number, Tria
sunt omnia was a saying of old, not only for that Three charactred the
Trinity, according to which the Apostle says, 1 John 5.7.
There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit, and these three are one, but because this Number consisting of even and
odd contains (...), Lib. de animae procreat. E. Timaeo. p. 1017.
which are the rise of Plains and referential of the Superficies, as Plutarch's
words are; and sure when Plautus calls a Thief, Hominem trium literarum, he
intends such a subtlety and reach in him, that he can be even and odd, play the
Jack alone or in Company; being like Alexis, not this nor that, but having
utriusque temperamentum. Lillius Gyrald. in Aenigmat. p. 464. Philo lib. De
Profugis.
As some other Numbers have been noted extraordinary by Antiquity, as Twelve,
Seven, so this Three, not only, (...), (alluding to the manners of three
Nations whose Names began with Cappa, the Cappadocians, Cretians and Cilicians;
or as others, betokening those three men whose Names began with that Letter,
Erasm. Adag. Chil. 3. Cent. 6. Adag. 82.
Cornelius Sylla, Corn Cynna, and Corn. Lentulus,) or not only (...), alluding
to a custom of old, for the Judges to allow condemned persons before
Execution, being filled with Wine and good Cheer, to speak their minds to
three things freely, but also the Notation of three is prefixed to three
exoptable things which are called tria saluberrima, To eat so moderately as to
rise with a stomach, Chil. 4. Cent. 4. Adag. 64.
To comply with reasonable labor and not decline it, To keep Natures vigor
uninjured, these are the three Saluberrima. These are Conceits of the Number
Three, but not the reason of our Law, that pitching upon the nomination of
three, does it probably as there is plentiful choice, submitting to the King,
who is absolute herein, if he find two that are equally worthy and neither of
whom he knows how to wave, because he cannot choose both, to choose neither, but
take the third to the displeasure and disfavour of neither.

Milites vel Armigeros.] These are the Names of the Flower of the less Nobility
or Gentry, In my Defense of Arms and Armory. 9 E. ^. Stat. of Sheriffs. 4 E. 3.
c. 9. 1 E. 3. c. 4. 14 E. 3. c. 7. 1 R. 2. c. 11.
what they Heraldically import I have elsewhere showed, that which they are
here expressed for, is to necessitate the Sheriff to be a man remote from the
Plebs; no high Shoe or bloudless man as we call men of no extract, but as the
Statute of Lincoln requires, He shall have Estate, that is, have sufficient
Lands within the Shire to answer the King and his People and not to be in
Service: but as Justices of Peace are to be men of the best Reputation, with
other wise and learned in the Laws, so in other words says the Statute of 18
E. 1. c. 2. The most worthy in the County; 34 E. 3. c. 1. The most sufficient
Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen of the Law; 13 R. 2. c. 7.18. H. 6. c. 11. if
such must be Justices of the Peace, then sure much more such should the Sheriff
be, who being praefectus Comitatus, ought to have nothing of disparagement upon
him, which he will have that has not a fortune to bear up the Port. And hence
was it that though by 1 E. 2. men were compellable to take Knighthood that had
Estates, yet if any were summoned that had not they were discharged; nor were
then any made Knights who were not before made Esquires: therefore Kingston
combatant with a French Lord 13 R. 2. being no Gentleman, 2 Instit. p. 595.
was, that he might perform it, made an Esquire but no Knight; so careful was
the State to preserve the Reputation of great Officies, that they designed,
none to them that were not of Ability to keep up the Port of them, which
because men of breeding and Estate can best do, therefore the Text says, the
Persons nominated to be Sheriffs must be Milites vel Armigeros.

Quos inter caeteros ejusdem Comitatus ipsi opinantur melioris esse
dispositionis and famae.
Herein appears, that as they must be Knights and Gentlemen of the County, that
(truly I think) primitively was intended resident, dwelling, and abiding
there, as the words of the Stat. of 8 H. 6. c. 7.10 H. 6. c. 2. in the Case of
Elections to Parliament are; though I know use interprets it, having Estates in
the County, which is a kind of fortunary residence. So, as they are to be men
of Blood, Birth, and Estate, so, of Fidelity and Intelligence, knowing men in
the duty of their Place, and faithful men according to what they know they
ought to do; for this I take to be the sense of melioris dispositionis and
famae in general, and to this sense incline the words of the Stat. 42 E. 3. c.
4. where men fit to be entrusted with Commissions of Inquiry are called, The
most worthy of the Country as well for the King's profit as the Commons, and
the 23 H. 6. c. 8. calls him that is to be a Sheriff, a meet and sufficient
man. But the specifique sense of melioris dispositionis and famae here, I
suppose is, Men of sober and regular life, Men of orderly Conversation, that
walk worthy of their places and conspicuities; for so dispositio is ranked with
ordo in Columella, Columell. lib. 5. Ep. 101. Epists 45.
Quis enim dubitat nihil esse pulchrius in omni ratione vitae dispositione
atque ordine; so, disposita hominum vita pro been constituta, and quae non
fluctuatur is in Pliny. Thus we say a man is well disposed when he does keep a
good guard upon himself and lives virtuously, Cic pro Muraena. Cic. in Orator.
35.
which Tully terms, disponere studia sua ad honorem, when he speaks and lives
in print, which is, verba disponere, ut pictores varietatem colorum,
disposition here being not so much the intern principle, as that which appears
in Conversation, the fruit of it; and that this is the sense, appears from its
adjunct or copulation, and famae, which is exegetical of it, for no man can
live with credit that does not keep orderly Hours, Hane dispositionem
amaenitatemque tectorum late longeque praecedit. Hyppodromus. Plin. lib. 5. ep.
101.
orderly Company, and orderly Methods in his Station, as a Christian, as a
Gentleman, as a Master, as a Neighbor, all which concentring in a person of
worth, makes him as conspicuous for a man, as that house, which has Art, Use,
and Pleasure in it, is for a Building.

Et ad Officium Vicecomitis Comitatus illius melius dispositos.] Well affixed,
for Gentlemen may be well-fortuned, well-affected, well-reported, and not be
dispositi ad Officium Vicecomitis, for this Office being an Office of Trust,
requires the residence of the Offices thus trusted within the County, that he
may be ever at hand selvere debitum; 4 H. 4. c. 5.
and this seems to me to in reason exclude out-lyers, unless in Case of
necessity, when that is admitted which otherwise is not, as in the Statute of
13 E. 1. c. 38. where the Statute says, It shall not extend to great Assizes,
in which it behooves many times Knights to pass not resident in the County,
for the scarcity of Knights, for in all Cases of necessity Exemptions are void,
52 H. 3. c. 14. Then it is an Office wherein use of discretion and reason will
be frequent, and so it excludes weak and insolid men, for since experience
tells us, that this Office calls for wisdom of mind, Momentis quaedam grata
and ingrata sunt, Senec. De Beneficiu. c. 12. Lib. 3. Instit. Orat. 8.
when to do, and what, and what not; that being sometime true here, which
Quintillian in other Cases said, Est utilitatis and in tempore quaestio
expedit, (...). De Carminibus Homeri.
sed non nunc. This, I say, being the Case of Sheriffs in their Office, men
that have not their wits about them, and cannot disponere unicuique munus suum,
as Tully's phrase is, will be very unfit for it; Cic. De petit. Consul. 14.
for it properliest becomes one that is, dispositu, provisuque rerum Civilium
peritus, as Lib. 18.
Tacitus phrases it: for the Sheriff being the Minister of the Law must answer
in his disposition the notion of disposition in Rhetoric, Cic. 1. De Invent.
13.
Rerum inventarum in ordine distributione, and thus when he does he is melius,
that is legalius and potius dispositus, which in my apprehension excludes
letter-lesse or unbred men; yea, in as much as the Sheriffwick is an office of
action, sickly, decrepit, or other infirm men, are not Melius dispositi, which
in the Case of Jury men is expressed, in the Stat. 13 E. 3. c. 38. For the Act
of God infirming them, either the office must be done by deputation, or not be
done at all: for, personally to perform it, they that cannot ride or move, are
not to be expected, so that to be Melius dispositus ud officium Vicecomitis,
seems to me to intend a man able and willing, to know and do the duty in the
latitude of it; which, only men of wisdom, experience, and activity,
personally can execute: But, because that of Clemangis is in some degree
applicable here, Non perfectis vivitur hominibus, sed cum iis in quibus
praclare agitur si sint simulacra virtutis; and the Law allows the supplement
of Under-Sheriffs, who are (I will not say Melius,) but dispositi ad officium:
having oftentimes to them, committed by the HighSheriff, the whole, or part of
the exercising and executing of the office of the High Sheriff;^ herefore less
punctuality in these particulars is necessary: For, the Law knowing what
dispositions under-Sheriffs are of, has required two Oaths of them before their
Execution of their office, see the 27 Eliz. c. 12. which if they shall make
conscience of, they shall do well.

Ex quibus Rex unum tantum eligit, quem per literas suas patentes constituit
Vicecomitem comitatus de quo eligitur pro anno tunc sequente.

The Choice of the officer is the Kings, because the office is the Kings; the
People and County the Kings; the Law which he is to Execute the Kings; And he
calling out the single one, makes him ipso facto ponderous melius dispositus ad
officium, and melioris dispositionis and famae; then, to be below the
endowments it deserves. Supposing then the Person Pricked, or Elected, out of
the three presented, the next and great Expression of the Kings pleasure, is,
by the signing of Letter-Patents, to which are affixed the Broad-Seal, for his
Authorization to be Sheriff of the Particular County, for that year then next
following: Officium Cancellarii est Regis sigillum custodire. Fleta lib. 2. c.
29.
which Commission, or Letter-Patents, sealed by the Broad-Seal, or Great-Seal
in the custody of the Lord Chancellor, compleats his Authority as Sheriff.
For, no Authority in the Kings Dominions is assumeable by any subject, but that
which either is warranted by Common, or Statute Law, or prescription, or by the
Broad-Seal, Sigillum tantam probet Authoritatem literis quantum vult is qui
auctoritatem concedere potest, and proinde si persona sit publica, publica erit
ejus sigilli consignatio, Tholossan. lib. 48. cap. 14. Sect. 6.
which is so effectual an Authority, that Honors, Offices, Profits, Pardons,
all the great things of the Nation pass by it; which was the reason that Edward
the First caused both the Charters, of Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, to
be sent, Stat. 25 Ed. 1. c. 1.
under the Great Seal, to all Persons, and Places of Note, there safe to be
kept: The Great Seal of the King importing his High Good Will and Pleasure, to
have those darling Laws inviolable; yea, for that the Broad-Seal is so lively a
Print of Sovereign Majesty, the Statute of 28 E. 1. c. 6. says, There shall no
Writ from henceforth, that touches the Common Law, go forth under any of the
Pettit Seals, but under the Broad-Seal: and the Statute of 25 E. 3. makes the
counterfeiting of it Treason. Good reason then has the Sheriff to see that he
have the Great-Seal for his Authority, which before he has the Text suggests.

Sed ipse antequam literas illas recipiat, Iurabit super Sancta Dei Evangelia
inter alia, etc.

This shows the wisdom of our Princes, Plowden, Fol. 20. Dyer, Fol. 50. 132.
161. B. Hanes Case. 2 Rep. Fol. 16. Pages Case, 5 Rep. p. 52. B.
that before they will Empower any Subject, though never so great and good, by
their great Seal to do any thing, they will bring him under an Oath, to do his
duty faithfully and conscionably, according to their Royal Intendment, and the
Law to that purpose: Now this security antecedent to this possession, the Text
terms Iurabit super Sancta Dei Evangelia;] which words denote both the Matter
of it, Oath; and the Method and way of its Administration, super Sancta Dei
Evangelia; Oaths are the sacred bonds that determine all Controversy: Not
only God himself is said to swear by himself, and to swear to his People his
love to, and care of them: but, the Saints of God, in Holy Writ, confirmed, and
assured any truth by oath, 5 Matthew. v. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
from which the Nations learned the Religion of oaths; That as the Jews did
swear by Heaven and Earth, and by the Temple, and the Gold, by Jerusalem, and
by their own heads, which our Lord increpates them for prophanating; and after,
per caput Regis, and per Legem, sic and sic: so the Heathens had their Rites
and Ceremonies in swearing, which obsignated the Majesty of that part of
Religion. Tholossanus has collected the several Ceremonies of Nations, Syntagm.
Juris universi. lib. 50. per totum.
and the security they took to reside in Oaths; and because Oaths principally
and properly are made to God, Et lib. 6. c. 14. and multis aliis locis.
the Scripture accounts Oaths a part of Holy Worship, and accordingly the later
Jews did swear by putting their hands upon the Books of the Law, Lib. 2. De
Tribus Sectis Iudaeorum. Tit. De Form. Jurandi.
and this Oath only they held valid, says Drusius, adding, He knows not
whether from this example comes the Christians custom of swearing on the
Gospels; which the Christian World has embraced ever since Christianity: (in
the Gospels being contained the life, death, and preaching of that Jesus who is
our Savior and shall be our Judge, and to whom God the Father has committed
all Judgment of whatsoever is done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil.)
Now this Book so serious, so sacred, being that upon which the Law of England
appoints all men in England Witnesses and Officers to swear, adds to the
Emphasis of the Oath, and brings it under a closer tie of Religion then
otherwise Oaths would be; Erasm. Adag. Chil. 2. Cent. 9. Adag. 31. Matthew. 6.
for though Socrates swore by a Dog and a Goose, and others had their (...),
not only their Oaths that exclude every thought of God from them being
Rhodomontado'd to express their internal putidness, yet Christians should
either have the Grace, not at all to swear, which is the Letter of Christ's
Charge, or when they do swear before the Magistrate, which is their duty to do
being required thereto, to swear in Judgment, righteousness and truth, that
is, secundum as well as super Sancta Dis Evangelia.

Quod been, fideliter, indifferenter exercebit and faciet Officium suum toto
anno, illo neque aliquid recipiet color aut causa Officii sui ab aliquo alio
quam a Rege.

Vet. M. Charta. part. 2. p. 166. Cook on cap. 35. M. Charta. p. 74. Deus plus
delectatur Adverbiis quam Verbis.
This Clause contains the sum of his Oath, the form of which according to the
Common Law is set down in the Books, and the Confirmation of it in this double;
That he shall do his duty in his Office, been to God, bonum been, perform a
good office goodlyly, that is, piously; fideliter to the King whose Officer he
is, indifferenter to King and people, high and low, rich and poor, according to
the Mandats of the Law and the duty of Charity: Been as a Christian, Fideliter
as a Servant, Indifferenter as an honest man; who does what Justice enjoins,
unicuique tribuere, this is to be melioris dispositionis and famae then those
are that care not what they are or do, so they may live brave and dye rich:
but this being a backdoor to Integrity, the Common Law provided against, by
that appointment of the Sheriff to take nothing for the exercise of his Office,
but of the King, the Master of it whose it is, and whose Servant and Bailiff
the Sheriff is, see the Statute 3 E. 1. c. 26. And when the Statute of 23 H. 6.
c. 10 confirms the 3 E. 1. c. 26. it adds only some small fees that the
Sheriff might take; But after that this Rule of the Common Law was altered, and
that the Sheriff, Coroner, Jailer, and other the King's Ministers, might in
some Case take of the Subject; it is not credible what Extortions and
Oppressions have thereupon ensued, so dangerous a thing it is to shake or alter
any of the Rules or fundamental Points of the Common Law, which in truth are
the main Pillars and Supporters of the Fabrique of the Commonwealth, Loco
pracitate p. 209. on Stat. Westminster. 1.
they are the words of Sir Edward Cook; who, as very an Oracle as he was, did
not decline this very Authority of our Chancellor in both those parts of his
learned Comment quoted in the Margent, but gives him a most noble testimony as
in the Notes on the subsequent Chapter shall appear.

CHAP. XXV.
Quotiescunque contendentes in curiis Regis Angliae, ad exitum placiti super
materia facti devenerint, etc.


THis Chapter treats of Juries, In his Preface to the 8 Report.
which Sir Edward Cook terms The most exact and equal means of producing truth
of any in the World; and because, what our Chancellor in this and the
following Chapters delivers of them, is said by that Sage, to deserve writing
in Letters of Gold, Therefore will I beg of God the Grace, and of men the
pardon to endeavor some dilucidation of it analogicall to it.

Contendentes.] Plaintiffs and Defendants, Actores and Rei, are in all Laws
said to contend, not Malitiae, Consestatione facta and statu causae composito
prosecedendum est ad probationes. Tholoss. lib. 48. c. 6. Matthew. 11.12.
sed Iustitiae causa, not so much from anger and choice as necessity. This
phrase Contendentes is used in all Actions of Vehemence, Rivalry and
Competition, and it imports not only a preoccupation of that we are carried
toward by the velocity of love and rage, which gives wings, and speeds
seizure, in which sense our Lord seems to intend those words, the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, (faith putting men,
while on earth, in a fiducial or second real possession of it) but also a
prostration and annihilation of that we strive against, Genesis 13.8. Gal. 5.20.
contendere quasi contundere, not only to alarm and storm, but to raze the
Walls and Foundations of that we assault, this is the nature of contendere,
which, when it is the fruit of uncharitableness, is to be deprecated and
avoided; so did Abraham with Lot, Let there be no contention between me and
thee, for we are Brethren, for thus it is a fruit of the flesh, displeasing to
God and exclusive of Heaven: thus contendentes Christians ought not to be, but
as it is the trial of truth before the Minister of God the public Magistrate,
in curiis Regis Angliae, so it is lawful and necessary. And therefore the
King's Courts are always open for Administration of justice to all persons,
and this the Law has wisely done to express its care of Christian Charity and
humane Justice: Propter curam locum quoque quo quisque domum Senator confert
curiam appellat, lib 2. De vita Pop. Romans In Aul.
Hence Curiae (Varro derives) from curae, and Festus seconds him, Curiae est
locus ubi publicas curas agebant; whence Agnus curio in Plautus, a
carrion-Lamb, quasi confectus curis, says Becman: this I note to show how much
Magistracy deserves of subjection, that it thus carks and cares for remedy of
evils, and appoints Sanctuaries against Violence; and does that not partially
and by piece-meales, but fully and to all purposes, ut nullatenus esset
defectus Iustitiae, for all the chief Courts are contemporary, So that no man
can say this is elder and that is later of them, Preface to the 8 Report.
says Sir Ed. Cook.

Adexitum placiti super materia facti devenerint.] This Exitus placiti is the
same with the Civilians causae status compositio, and it is previous, and in
potentia proxima to trial. Cook on Littleton. p. 125.
Concerning it, see the Notes on the twentieth Chapter, where the materia facti
is to be tried by the Jury of twelve men, who are to try the fact, as the
Judges, I humbly conceive, are the quastio Iuris, either upon demurrer, special
Verdict, or Exceptions, for cuilibet in sua art perito est credendum.

Now as the Justices are always ready in order to hear causes, so do they of
course send out Writs to empannel Juries to serve, for the most part, on those
causes, and that concito, so are the words, Concito Iustitiarii per breve Regis
scribunt Vicecomiti.] This is according to the rule of the Common Law to which
our Text relates, and which the later Statutes illustrate and make addition to;
Cook on Littleton. sect. 234.
so says the Statute 35 H. 8. c. 6. And therefore the Text says, the Writs
preparatory shall issue forth concito, because the Law allows time enough to
prepare, and abhorrs surprise; the design of the Kings Courts being to promote
Justice that it may run down like a mighty stream; therefore Copies of Pannels
are to be allowed the parties six days before the Sessions of the Justices, 42
E. 3. c. 11. 6 H. 6. c. 2.

Iustitiarii.] Of these I have written before, and shall do in the Notes on c.
51. yet I crave leave to write, that within this word are contained not only
the Justices of the Courts at Westminster, On Littleton, p. 263.
but also Justices of Assize, so is my authority from Sir Edward Cook.

Per breve Regis seribunt Vice-Comiti] The Venire Facias issued forth according
to the Common Law, and the Statute 35 H. 8. c. 6. is called Scriptum
Iustitiariorum, because it issues forth of the Office of the Court which they
preside in: 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 32 4 and 5 P. and M.c. 7. 27 Eliz. c. 6.
This instrument of Authorization to the Sheriff to summon a Jury, is termed
Breve, as much as Breviarium, not only in the Common, but even in the Civil
Laws, Rationum libri seu nominum and debitorum breviaria nominabantur; Tholoss.
Syntagm Iur's, lib. 22. c. 3. Sect. 29.
Thus Lampridius tells us Alexander knew all his soldiers so well, Vt in
cubiculo haberet Breves and numerum and texapora militantium, Lamprid. in
Alexand.
that he had the Breves, or Notes nominally of them all; so Flavius Vopis. in
Aureliano, Budaeus in Pandect. p. 559. Edit. Basil. A. 1534.
Aurelian is said to have Breve nominum; Hence comes the Breves in
Ecclesiastical Tholoss. lib. 17. c. 12. Sect. 34.
Writers, especially the late Papal ones: Many Breves and Bulls from Rome we
have had mentioned in Acts of Parliament, and Historians; Thus it grew in use
with Lawyers very anciently here, to call the Summaries of the Cause Briefs, or
Breves, and in English Writs, because written; so Bracton, Fleta, and Sir
Edward Cook Breve quidem cum sit formatum ad similitudinem Regula Iuris quia
breviter and paucis verbis intentionem pr^fer^ntis exponit and explanat.
Bracton lib. 3. fol. 419.
discourse at large, of both Original, Judicial, Real, Personal, Mixed; and
other Writs, and especially Fitz Herbert in his Natura Brevium, Fleta, lib. 2.
c. 12. 1 Institut. p. 73.
and the Register, all which point to the knowledge of Writs, as a great piece
of Law Learning.

Quod ipse venire faciet coram iisdem Iustitiariis ad certum diem per cos
limitatum duodecem probos and legales homines de viceneto, ubi illud factum
supponitur.

Venire Faciet.] This is to be understood, not compulsive, but declarative: the
Sheriff is not by the posse comitatus raised on them to compel them, but by
summons to notify to them their return, and to show them the Panel; 42 E. 3.
c. 11. 6 H. 6. c. 2. and if any Juror be returned that is not summoned, Cook
Instit. 1 P. page 158.
the Sheriff is finable: 35 H. 8. c. 6. 27 Eliz. c. 6. and, in case the
summoned have no just excuse which the Law allows, they loose issues by
nonappearance; 5 Eiiz. c. 26. but the Act of God or other just detinue shall
excuse them, provided it be made out to, and allowed by the Court.

Duodecem probos and legales homines, etc.] See my Notes on the twentieth
Chapter, and concerning the number Twelve, see Lorinus in 1 Actor. v. 13.
Salmeron 1 Part, Tract. 28. Tom. 4 p. 251, 252. Tostatus in Matthew. c. 10
quaest. 24, Brentius Homil in 6. c. Lucae, Spelman Gloss p. 399. where the
number 12 is notably instanced in, as esteemable in all Laws, especially when
together, with the numbers there is weight in them; For, that is the Import of
probos and legales homines.] as much as Sacramentales, men that know, and make
conscience of their Oath; Liberi and legales, men that are engaged to no Lord,
so as not to use the freedom of their reason, and integrity; nor are lureable
by rewards, or pliable through need: but, such as may dispend 40. Shillings by
the year, at least of Estate of Freehold, out of ancient demesne; so says the
Statute 35 H. 8. c, 6. Men that are de vicineto, next Neighbors, most
sufficient, and least suspicious; 28 E. 1. c. 9 but all the Learning of those
being most elaborately discoursed upon by Sir Edward Cook, Idem loco pracitat^.
I forbear writing further here of it.

Qui neutram partium sic placitantium ulla affinitate attingunt.

Though there be many just exceptions against Jurymen, when summoned, which
not only daily practice, Sir Ed. Cook. Sect. 1^4. in Littleton.
but good Authors justify; yet the most of them are omitted particularizing
here, and only this of affinity is alleged, to be a bar to the Sheriffs
summons of any who is so related to either party; For, affinity being
contracted by Marriage, Cum dua cognationes inter se divisae per nuptias
copulantur and altera ad alterius si us accedit, Inde decitur Affinis, J. Cti.
and Women being potent Orators with their Husbands, who naturally and wisely
indulge their Wives; the Common Law wisely excludes these alliances, left their
relation should preponderate their love to justice, and they forget to do
right, when so to do, is to wrong (according to the vulgar notion of wrong)
their Kinsman: And if this were part of the cause (as I believe it was) of the
Statute 8 R. 2. c. 2. that no man of Law should ride Judge of Assize, or
Jail-delivery in his own Country or where he dwells, confirmed by 13 H. 4. c.
2. and by the 33 H. 8. c. 24. where the words are, Whereby some jealousy
(speaking of some that contrary to the 8 R. 2. had obtained to be Justices in
their own Counties) of their affection and favor toward their Kinsmen, Note
this.
Alliance, and Friends within the said County or Counties where they were born
or inhabiting, has been conceived and had against them by the King's most
loving Subjects of the same Countries and Counties. Therefore the Enaction is
in the negative, and because Justice ought not to be deferred or denied to any
man, nor ought any man to be condemned but by the Laws full trial 9 H. 3. c.
29. that is, by good and true impartial Juries, consisting of men neither
indigent, nor biased; for so the Common Law intends, 4 Instit. p. 68.
against which no Judge is to go, 2 E. 3. c. 8. 5 E. 3. c. 9. good cause is
there that Juries (without which trials and judgments cannot legally in
ordinary be) should be compact of such as may verdict Justice, which they will
readyliest do, when they are uninterested as well in point of Alliance as
Profit.

Ad recognoscendum super Sacramenta.] That Juries are to be sworn before they
are empannelled I have heretofore wrote of, what they are to do in these their
Gears the word recognoscendum makes forth, Budaeus in Pandect.
and that is taken in Authors for aestimare, considerare, to heed and observe
so, as to give a clear and sad judgment of the nature of that they recognize;
Epist. ad Attic. lib. ^. Tholoss. Syntag. Juris lib. 3. c. 3. ss. 3.
so Tully, Literas tuas libenter legi recognovi enim tuam pristinam virtutem,
thence dona, amorem, vetera recognoscere is in good Authors frequent to
express the lively Characters and great Impression of any thing in the mind,
and the value of it. Sipontinus by recognoscere understands, Opus compositum
emendandi, aut limandi, aut reprehendendi causa revidere, to review, peruse,
and ponder before we pass it, as Pliny says He did four times at least every
thing he wrote, and that at some Intervals, and to consider it as if it were
more concerned pro Regina justitia and veritate, then pro Domina Phantasia
Regina, Decretum recognoscere. Cic. pro Balbo 8. Palam adempto aquo quibus aut
probri aliquid aut ignominia inesset. c. 16.
so to look narrowly into it, as that we spy every title and cranny of it;
thus Suctonius uses the word of Caligula. Equites Remanos severe curioseque nec
sine moderatione recognovit: the sense of our Text then is, that the Jury are
so to follow the cause with their attention through the whole manage of the
Evidence, and after when they are from the Bar by themselves, so to revive and
make use of their Memories, Notes, and Observances, that they recoming to the
Bar, and being demanded by the Court whether they are all agreed, shall
plenarily affirm their Verdict and answer cheerfully by their Foreman what the
common Conclusion of them all is. And this the Law calls Verdictum from the
presumption it has that those that are Judges of it do therein consider the
Allegations, Defenses, and Proofs, and after poising them give the downright
to that side that has truth on it, whether Plaintiff or Defendant, which is the
Sum of our Text.

Quo adveniente die, Vicecomes returnabit breve praedictum coram eisdem
Iustitiariis, unacum Panello nominum cornndem quos ipse ad hoc summonuit.

This is according to the Common Law and the prementioned Statutes upon it
seconded by the subsequent ones, 35 H. 8. c. 6. and others; and the tenor of
the clause is exegetical of the Laws punctuality. Injury is done which the Law
must right, a Complaint or Declaration is entered in the Court, pleaded to,
Issue joined, and to complete it a Writ is directed to the Sheriff to summon a
Jury of twelve able and honest men to try the matter of fact; the Sheriff
observes it, considers, and frames fit men into a Pannell, summons them to the
certain Service upon the certain day of the return of the Writ; the Writ with
the Pannell he returns to the Court, iisdem Iustitiariis, from whom he had his
Writ to summon, and this brings the cause to trial by twelve, or the failing
Jurors to lose their Issues: so exact is the Law that it leaves nothing
uncertain, but requires an account of all its Intrusts, Returnabit coram iisdem
Iustitiariis breve praedictum.

Vna cum Panello.] This is a word of art applied to that piece of Parchment
which is Table-wise, in figure oblong and narrow, being the diminutive of a
Pane, which is large and square Cook. 1. Instit. on Littl. p. 158. B.
so Panel is the name of that habiliment which Horsemen use, the Panel of a
Saddle, and Pannells of Waindscot, and Panes of Glass are frequently
understood by us; probably this name was given to the Parchment from the
Tabular figure of it, it being frequent of old to write in Tables or Panes and
Pannells of Stone or Wood before Parchment or Paper came in use, yea here in
England it was usual heretofore, and yet in some places is, to write in Panes
or Tables of Slate. This is the rise of the word, which, as it relates to
Jurors, may admit of an Etymology, which though it be not genuine, yet may be
harmonious to the sense of the Text. Panel quasi Pan-all, a word parted
between Greek and English, borrowing from Pan the God of Rusticks its more
frequent use (for Country-yeomen ride most upon Pannells,) and from all, as the
twelve in the Jury make but one body with one heart to try, and one tongue to
deliver judgment on the fact in Issue, that which (according to this) is ts
legal import, sed hoec obiter and leniter.

Sir Ed. Cook Sect 34. in p. 58. Littleton.
Quos ad hoc summonuit.] This whole Subject of Iuries is so learnedly written
on by the prementioned Oracle, that it is arrogance almost to endeavor
Addition, as 'twill be to little purpose to offer the learned Reader a
Repetition; that therefore which I enlarge on is that which by him is omitted,
the Grammatical Notation of the word, whence the legal follows. Summoneo is a
law word, not of the sense that moneo or admoneo is, for that is the Act of
ones equal or friend, and a branch of charity, which the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
directs to, and which Heb. 8.5.
Moses observing grew the man he was by it, as it declared the regularity of
his soul, which knew obedience became it, not this sense has summonitio barely,
Cum in minimo Imperium contenmitur ex omni part violatur. Regul.
but an aggravated one, summonitus quasi submenitus ( m being doubled for
Euphony and b rejected) admonished under the pains and detriments that the
Contempt of the King's Writs and Courts can and will inflict, which though it
be not high, yet is enough to punish the purse, Legitimam summonitionem
recipere in propria persona uli^unque inventus fu^rit in Comitatu, in quo
fuerat res petita, qui quidem si non inveniatur, sufficit, si ad domicilium
fiat, dum ^amen alicui de familia manifest fucrit rela^a. Bracton. lib. 5. p.
333.
and declare also the displeasure of Authority, even as much as those words, As
you will answer the contrary at your Peril: which to avoid as the summons is
to be punctual, and that if need be upon Oath, so the Issues lost are certain
to be levied, except the Court do alleviate by admitting the Defaulters excuse,
as by the Law they may.

Quos si veneriut utraque pars recusare poterit,
This is done in pure favor to Justice; for, though the Sheriff be a sworn
officer, and ought not to return men partially called, but to take them
promiscuously, where they topically are (admitting there be sitting men in the
hundred to serve, as every where in England diffused there is) yet, least the
Sheriff should by a bribe, which exoculates Justice, or for favor or envy pack
a Jury, the Law allows exceptions, and admits a scrutiny of the Pannell, Sir
Ed. Cook. ^ sect. 234. on Litt.
the manner of which I refer to the grave Judge, whom I often herein quote,
most highly applauding the wisdom and Justice of the Law, thus to obviate a
michief, so out of measure mischieveous, as but for this there would be in all
causes, and against all persons. For, were the Sheriff left to a latitude, and
what return he makes must serve, though never so tortious, partial, and
impotent, that partiality would be found in Juries that has been found every
where, where sidings and packings are to promote parties, and suppress Justice,
which, because the Law hates, therefore it allows these checks to all
exorbitances, which, had that peevish Melvile in the Presbytery of St. Andrews
in Scotland considered, as reasonably he ought, he would not have endeavored
boysterously to carry the Choice of the Minister to the Church of Lockhart,
Spotswood Hist. Scotland p. 386.
when he had but six only of the Fraternity with him, against Mr. Bachanans
side, with which there was of the same body nineteen or twenty, blustering
against the Major number (which every where carries it) with that impudence,
suffragia sunt ponderanda non numeranda; the pride and injustice of which
partiality is so much the more detestable, as it pretended better then it
practiced. To prevent which, the Text says, Vtraque pars recusare poterit, and
that alleging their reason, Dicendo quod Vicecomes panellum illud
favorabiliter fecit pro part altera: viz, de personis minus indifferentibus;
concerning this fee Sir Edward Cook on Littleton, p. 156, 157, etc. and to
remedy this, Sect. 234.
by a sit return, was the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 6. made; and that Juries
excepted against, might not occasion the Causes non Trial, the 4 and 5 Philip
and Mary, c. 7. grants a Tales cum Circumstantibus, the great end of the Law
being to promote Justice; all proper means thereunto is promoted by the Law,
which this being, the Statute was very rightly made, and very worthily
continued.

Qua exceptio si comperta fuerit vera per Sacramentum duorum hominum de codem
panello, ad hoc per Iusticiarios electorum, mox illud panellum quassabitur.

This is the Common Law, in case of exception, which yet is appointed to be
approved just, 6 Heb. 16, 17 Deuteronomy. 6.
by that which is by Gods declaration an Oath, the diremption of all
controversy: and by the Oath of two; That in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word might be established: Now this the Law does, as well to
prevent levity and spleen against the Sheriff, as to repress his partiality and
injustice to the cause; since, as if it be an exception on good grounds, it
must stand; so if it be not, it must not be allowed for such: therefore the
exception must be exceptio, not prolata, but comperta; not alleged, but made
good by matter found after enquiry; comperta vera, that is exception indeed,
when it is not only words, but truth; not furmise, or slander, but reality made
out by discovery of the motives and methods of it: and vera per sacramentum;
not by the belief or persuasion, but the Oath and veracity; not of one, or all,
but of two: nor of any two, but duorum de cadem panello ad hoc per Iustitiarios
electorum; the best and most accomplished of the Panel, whom the Judges
suppose least privy, or pliable to partiality, these are to consider the
exception: and, if upon the oath they have taken, they judge the exception just
and true, Mox panellum illud quassabitur; not only shall the Pannell be shaken,
and under a harrass and suspicion, but shall be totally nulled and evacuated.
Quashed quasi Ashed, reduced to its first nothing, void, and of no effect.

Et Iustitiarii tuns scribent Coronatoribus quod ipsi novum faciant Panellum.

The Sheriff having forfeited his credit once, the Law trusts him no further
with the return of the new Pannell, but a Writ issues forth to the Coroner;
Coroners were anciently officers of great credit, but time discrediting them,
their rate was fain to be raised by the Statute 3 E. 1. c. 10. which says, It
is provided, that through all Shires sufficient men shall be chosen to be
Coroners of the most wise and discreet Knights, which know, will, and may best
attend upon such offices. The office of a Coroner, the Statute 4 E. 1. De
Officio Coronatoris.
exemplifies, and Fleta, lib, 2. c. 18. but more particularly the Statutes of
28 E. 3. c. 6. 3 H. 7. c. 1. 1 and 2 Philip and Mary 6.13.1 H. 8. c. 7.52 H.
3.24. 28 E. 1. c. 3. 33 H. 8. c. 12. 23 H. 6. c. 11. 2 H. 5. c. 8. And the
dignity of this officer appears in that he is the most ancient officer of the
Crown, Apud nos Corona officialis pervetustus est ad tuendam pacem and
dignitatem regiam, universis praest Capitalis Iustitiarius Baci Regis qui and
ideo summus Angliae Coronator habitus est. Spelman in Gloss p. 192.
and was wont to be of Knights, and the best men of the County; yea, and the
greatest Judge of the Common Law Courts, The Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
is the chief Coroner of England: Regist. fol. 177.
whereas then it is said, scribent Coronatoribus. It Is intended of the Coroners of
the Shire, or the Hundred, that they being officers as well as Sheriffs, and
under-Sheriffs, 23 H. 6. c. 11. and being men of Estate in the shire, according
to the Statute 14 E. 3. c. 8.1. shall make a just and indifferent return of
persons, omni exceptione majores, and that is no novum facere panellum; id est
return men to serve in it, that fear God, and love truth, and that will do
nothing for favor or affection against them: which, it they shall not do, as
fall out it may, that corruption may go thorough the warp and wooff (as men
proverbially say) of these officers ministerial, etiam and illud quassabitur.

Et tunc Iustitiarii eligent duos de clericis curiae illius vel alios de codem
comitatu, qui in praesentia curiae per little sacramentum facient indifferens
panellum.

This is the third remedy of partiality in return of Juries, the Justices may
for default fault of the Sheriff and Coroner chose two Clerks of the Court; now
Clerks and Clerici have diverse acceptations, generally all men literate were
thus called, and because Church men were mostly of old such officers, therefore
all men that are Bookish are said to be Clerkly. Cap. 24. p. 407. 2. Instit.
Thus in the Stat. 2 We stminst. those there called Clerici were of old
Magistri Cancellarii, and says Sir Edward Cook, were associated to the Lord
Chancellor: Lib. 2. c. 13.
Eleta calls Clerici, honesti and circumspecti, and in Stat. 13 and 14 H. 8. c.
8. mention is made of the six Clerks of the Chancery, who, because they were
Clergy men (1 suppose) and were not marriable according to the Canons, are by
that Statute allowed Marriage; so in the 9 E. 2. c. 8. the Clerks of the
Exchequer are allowed non-residence from their Churches (for Clergymen they
were) and the reason is given by the Statute, And such things as be thought
necessary for the King and the Commonwealth, ought not to be said to be
prejudicial to the liberty of the Church.

Clerici then in the utmost of the Notion is not meant here, but only for
Attendants in the Court, Clerici olim fuerunt legales and brevia dictitarunt,
scribebant, signabant, M. Patis. p. 207. Addit. p. 190.
who are honest knowing men and will do their duty being sworn and called
thereunto. Thus mention is made of Clerks in the Statutes 33 H. 8. c. 24.27 H.
8. c. 11. 2 H. 4. c. 10.34 and 35 H. 8. c. 14. Gloss, ad M. Paris. in verbo
Clerici.
and many other Statutes, and these notwithstanding the Law couples; not to one
of them does it commit the Reformation of antecedent errors in Pannells, Solus
omnino est quisine amico est.
but to two Clerks the Law commits it, Two, because Two are better the none,
less probable to be biased and corrupted; (...) Euripides in Heracl.
vae seli is true even in this sense, for as the Comedian says, That which one
hand does is seldom effectually done; our Lord therefore sent out his Mark. 6.7.
Apostles by Two's, that they should comfort and assist one another in the work
of their Ministry: as Natures perfection is made up of two, so the Laws
execution (which is the life of it) in this case of Juries, is accomplished per
duos Clericos, and therefore Here is provision made for the continual, On Stat.
1 Westmin. c. 47 p. 479. 2 Instit.
due, and speedy execution of the Law, says Sir Edward Cook. This being done
and the Panel not being exceptable against, the Law, that abhorrs corruption,
avoids also delay and progression in infinitum, thereupon a proceeding is to
trial, and the impannelled come into Court.

Sed cum venerint sic impanellati, etc. Still the liberty of exception against
the Jury is allowed, and that not vagely as expression of humor or design of
protraction may aim at: for the Law being ars aqui and boni hates and declines
that, but as the exception is rationally grounded, and as it has a more then
ordinary right to carry it to the center of credit and approbation with the
Court.

Dicendo quod impanellatus ille est consanguineus.] This is to be understood of
kin by the whole blood, ex utroque Parente, and that this nearness may have
great influenceon men is clear in the Examples of Melampus to Byas, Zuniger in
Theatro v. humana, p. 3342. Lib. 14. c. 2. Anthrop. Fulgosus lib. 5. c. 3.
Xerxes to Mas^stes, of Scipio Numantinus to Fabius, of the two Brothers, one
in Pompey's Army, the other in Cynna's, which Volateran mentions, of the two
Brothers banished whom Falgosus writes of, of Tyberius to Drusus, Commodus to
his sister, Leopold Archduke of Austria to his Brother Frederick the Fair,
with hundred of others, but above all there are three that I read of most
remarkable, The first, Iazates King of the Adiabenes, who, though he had four
and twenty sons, yet left his Kingdom when he dyed to his only Brother
Monobazes; Fulgosus lib. 5. c. 3. Propter quam rem alsentes ambos Pop. Romanus
adiles creavit. Idem codem loco.
The second is of Lucullus the Roman Senator, who though much elder then his
Brother Marius in love to him would not be a Magistrate, till his Brother came
to years to be a Magistrate also; The third is of Antony Corarius and Gabriel
Condelmarius Venetians, and Nephews to Gregory the Twelfth, who were so
endeared one to the other, that they became Monks in one House, Anthony being
called first by his Father to Rome would not go without his Brother Gabriel,
Garimbertus lib. 3. De vitis Pontific.
nor would he accept the Bishopric of Bononia, till his Brother were Bishop of
Siena, nor would he be Cardinallated, till his Brother had the Cap also, both
of them were Legates a latere in the Council of Constanse, at last Gabriel was
called to the Popedom by the name of Eugenius the Fourth, when Anthony saw his
Brother had given him the slip, he returned to his Cloister at Venice for
grief: these and the like Instances of the vehemence of Consanguinity, give the
Law occasion to make consanguinity an exception to a Juryman.

Vel affinis parti alteri.] This is Kindred by Marriage, of this I have written
heretofore, Syntagm. Juris universi, lib. 9. c. 9.
see Tholossanus and the many Authors in him, and the Law is exclusive of this
because it is such a nearness, Non cogi possunt contra proximos and affines qui
proximi Yunt testari, lib. 43, c. 13. ff. 27.
that, Those that are next of Kinn cannot by the Civil Laws be compelled to
witness against one.

Vel amicitia quacunque tali sibi conjunctus.] That is, not friendly at large,
but intimate and strict, for nescit nomen amicitiae qui metuit, he that has a
friend of a Jury does not mistrust his inclination to, and endeavor for him
and his cause. Indeed Friendship is the potent Magnetique that charms all,
Agellius writes a whole Chapter of what a man ought to do for his friend, and
Tully penned a whole Book De Amicitia, (...). Erasm. Adag. Cent. 3. Chil. 1.
Adag. 8.
and Seneca, Plutarch, Plato, and all Moralists reckon Friendship Inter suprema
vitae munera. Friendship the only riches and happiness of life is that which
ought to be admired above all, (...). Plut. lib. De Adulat. and Amici discrim.
p. 51. Edit. Paris.
for it makes the haver of it more rich then Phoenix the Thief that did by it
so great Robberies. Friendship is an union of souls and senses to a through
compartization, to become as Blosius was to Gracchus, obsequious in all things,
to sympathize in the worst of conditions, to make them partakers of our
advantages, to consult them in our straits, Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 1. cap.
26.
to live theirs, yea to dye theirs; this is Friendship, to be a Member (...),
this is to be a friend, as the Proverb is, more necessary then food or fire;
indeed the friendship of Lucilius to Brutus, (...). Adag. 75. Chil. 2. Cent. 2.
of Coelius to Petronius, of Ticinnius to Cassius, are great, examples of
cogency to men under the like engagement, and hard it is to extricate Blosius
Cumanus from Graechus his obligation on him, Maluit consulatu cadere quam
amicum perdere. Plutarch, in Apothegm. Romans
which has him so fast, that he would burn the Capitol to please his friend.
Friendship is such a catch and device of hold fast, that Scipio Africanus would
not stand Competitor with Pompey his friend for the greatest Honor. (...),
and. Plutarch in Amator. p. 758, Edit. Paris.
There are few Rutilus's who can withstand their friends importunity to do
injustice, and reply to them, your friendship is not worth keeping if it tempt
to unjust things; Nor can the Athenian Cleon be matched in that more then manly
self-Mastery, for before he took charge of the Commonwealth, Valor. lib. 6. c.
4. Tanquam quae in administratione Civitatis rectum ac justum institutum
emolliat, and transversum agat, Partis secunda, sermo. 1.
he called all his friends into one place, and returned them their friendship,
quitting all relation to them on that score. All these Examples show the reason
why the Law makes intimate Friendship a cause of challenge to a Jury-man,
because it is apt to enervate Integrity, and to make a man incline to that
Scale that his love lodges in, which is the cause that as men of Alliance and
Friendship, Page 156, 157, 158, 159. I Instit. on Littleton.
so of unindiffereny are challengeable: see concerning the latitude of this Sir
Ed. Cook in the forementioned place.

Sic quoque fiet de omnibus nominibus impanellatorum, quousque duodecim little
jurentur ita indifferentes.

While the Jury are swearing, Exceptiors or Challenges, may be made till
Twelve, which are the Number of the Jury, 17 Eliz. c. 6.
be filled, against whom no challenge has been; these empannelled, (of which
four are to be Hundredors) that is, of the same Hundred where the fact was
committed, and all of them of the value of 40. s. the cause is tryable and
concludable by them: these things the Law requiring is punctually to be
persued, Non observata forma infertur adnullatio actus. Reg. Juris. Adag 55.
Cent 2, Chil. 2.
not that it hearkens to calumnies impertinent, for in all times there has been
experience that ill will seldom speaks true, and partiality delights to make
worth Theonino dente rodi, the mischief of which by the effects called Succum
loliginis and nigrum salem, is so aspersive that it does cum morsis addere and
famae maculam; not that the Law desires hereby to deferr the trial of the cause
to the injury of justice, for that it abhorts, allowing exceptions no further
or freer then to make the Jury indifferent men, who, when they are impannelled
to their Number, are recorded, then stabit Panellum,] provided they that are of
it be of 40. s. in Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, As, Et Quilibet
Iuratorum hujusmodi habtbit terras vel redditus pro Termins vitae Sua ad
valorem Annuum 40 s.



a H. 5. c. 3. Statute the second.
This is added to prevent poverty and necessity, by which men are apt to be
taken off by fear and favor from Integrity and Justice; which the Law intends
to pronote in Trials by Juries: Now, though in places where Juries are not to
this proportion haveable, challengers of Reins deins le guard, were remora's to
Trials, the Statute of 7 H. 7. c. 5. took that away in London, but yet, for
ought I know, retains in Countries (where Freeholders of value are numerous)
the limitation to men of 40 shillings a year, ^1 E. 1. Stat. de his qui ponondi
sunt in assisits.
which, though it be but a small fortune now, yet was of old much more
considerable: For, silver in the Saxon time at 12 d. an ounce, though it was
risen to 20 d. and so continued as Vorvel's description of England, p. 218.
one faith, till Henry the Eighths time; yet then it was but the third of what
it is now; and all things else were but low rated to what now: in the 33 Ed. 3.
c. 10. mention is made of 200. Marks per Annum for an Esquires value, and c.
12. of Knights of the same value, and 400 Marks accounted Knights of great
Estate; in 36 of the same King c. 8. no man was to give for the hire of a
Priest above 66 s. 8 d. a year; and if he had his board, but 26 s. 8 d. in
money: but by the 2 H. 5. c. 2. a Parish Priest had 6. l. for his board,
apparel, and other necessaries; so stood the rate by this Statute till the 21
Jacob. and then c. 8. it was repealed: and 25 E. 3. c. 3. Rust. Stat. Larg.
wages of Workmen was very low, a Master Carpenter 2 d. a day, a Master
FreeMason 4 d. other Masons 3 d. Servants 1. d., Tylers 3 d. and their Knaves 1
d.; Coverers of Fern and Straw 2 d. and their Knaves 1 d., without Meat or
Drink; when in the 15 of H. 6. Wheat was at 6 d. and 8 d. a Quartar, and Barley
at 3 d. 4 d. when 20 l. a year was a Justice of Peace his value; 15 H. 6. c. 2.
23 H. 6. c. 6.
18 H. 6. c. 11. (not long before the time our Text was written in) and five
Marks per annum a man of values Estate, 22 E. 4. c. 6. and 6 d. 8 d. the price
of a Horse; 11 H. 7. c. 13. Not to mention the Prises of Corn in the Statute 51
H. 3. nor that in E. 1. time, 20 l. a year was a great Estate; Assisa Panis 51
H. 3.
and 1 E. 2. Knighthood was to be taken upon it. Not to insist on these, even
in the Memory of our Great Grandfathers Charges aad Rates are incredibly
enhanced, by 4 H. 7. c. 8. it was penal to sell the finest Scarlet Cloth in Grain
for above 16 s. a yard, and the finest other Cloth for above 11 s.; In the 23
H. 8. c. 7. French Wine was not to be sold above 8 d. a gallon, nor Sack above
12 d. and in the 24 of the same Reign, Confirmed by 7 E. 6. c. 5.
c. 3. no man was to take for a pound of Beef, or Pork, above a half penny;
of Veale, or Mutton three farthings: and less where sold for less. The manor
of Burlew in Cambridge shire containing 200 Acres of Arable, 34 and 35 H. 8.24.
100 Acres Meadow, and 100 Acres of Pasture, was at a Rack rented but at 100 l.
a year; When these, and all other things were at the prementioned Rates, which,
in a good measure they have been since our Chancellours Writing; forty
Shillings a year was somewhat considerable, as a convenient support to life,
and a delivery of the Possessor from temptation to perjury, and a determent of
him from all kind of unjust and fraudulent demeanor; since upon his offense
the Law will take hold of his Estate, which he having, is thereby solvent; And
therefore this value of the Jurors probably being a good help to the honesty
and honor of Jurors and Juries would do well (if the wisdom of the State think
also so, and please to consider it) to be sutably preserved by enhansing the
value of Jury men's fortunes, according to the value of Rents, and Prizes now;
(40 l. a year being as little for a Freeholder now to have in Estate, as 40 s.
then.) And, if ever Justice had need to be provided for, and that in this very
point of Juries, Note Well.
never more cause that the best men of fortune and breeding should be returned
and serve on them, then in this Age, when Forgery is so rise, and Knights of
the Post so audacious, and against which there is no so sovereign means of
anticipation, as brave and knowing Juries, who neither will slubber over the
consideration of the Evidence given them, nor be mealy-mouthed to request the
Courts Interrogation of such scruples as they are inquisitive about, and judge
material to the dilucidation of the Fact they are serving upon the Trial of.

Et hic ordo observatur in omnibus actionibus and causis criminalibus,
realibus, personalibus, praererquam abi debitum vel damna in personalibus non
excedunt quadraginta Markaes monetoe Anglicae.

Hic Ordo observatur.] This is purposely set down to signify the Laws
reverence of Order, as that great favorite of God, by which he rules the
Commonwealth of this World: Hence is it that the Humane Nature attributes to
Order a kind of Divinity, Vbicumque est aliquid principium oportes. quod sit
aliquis ordo, quia ordo includit in se modum prioris and posteriorii S. Thom.
1.20. quest. 26. art. 1.
not only as it is Essential in God, but as it is quiescentiall of all those
disasters and tumults, that but for it would be every where, and in every
thing; which the Heathen observing cries out, Confusion and the trouble of
settlements is every where mischievous: (...). Plutarchus, lib. 1. Sympos.
Quoest. 2. p. 618.
because as the order of Nature is of God, so the order of Reason is from Man,
who regulates and disposes his endowment by fit and proper modes of operation
and convenience, to both Inferior and Superior purposes, of Politic and
Christian Life: Hence is it that not only Order is ascribed to Creation of the
World, but to the continuation of every particle, and thing in it; yea, take
away Order, and nothing remains but nonentity, or that which is next to it,
confusion. What Seneca said of Solitude, is true of Order; Take that away and
ill Counsels are busy, Tune mala consilia agitaniur, tune aut aliis aut ipsis
futura pericula struunt, tunc cupiditates improbas ordinant, tunc quidquid aut
metu aut pudore celabat animus expromit Senec. Epist. 10.
then mischief to mankind is Machinated; then evil desires and coverings are
set on foot: then the minds of men (however before modest) show themselves in
all their villainous licentiousness. For if Order be (...), etc. as Philo's
words are, The consequence and series of things preceding and following; (a)
Lib. de Mundi Opificio, p. 6.
then without Order no account can be given of any thing, so as to make it
appear beauteous and useful: This made Life and Death, Peace and War, Law and
Trade, Arts and Sciences, Religion and Policy keep its Order; Yea, of all
Orders that concern this World, none more then the Hic Ordo of our Text, which
is Ordo of Judgments, for deciding Rights, and punishing Offenses. For, though
the Romans took care of their Ordines (of which Brissonius gives us a very
notable account, Lib. 2. Select. Antiq. Juris. c. 1.
and of which too much can hardly be said; the Ceremonies, and extern part of
them, Constat foelicem esse Rempublicam quae multis civibus resplendet ornata,
nam suut coelum stellis redditur clarum, sis relucent urbes lumine dignitatum,
non quia fiat home alter honoribus, sed quia modestior efficitur a que
conversationis ordo melior postulatur. Theodorick apud Cassiodor. Varr. lib. 6.
Formoe Illust. Vacaniis 11. p. 100.
couching the most substantial and consequentiall nerves and ligaments of
Civil Society: according to that of Theodorick That Commonwealth is most happy
which does abound with conspicuous Subjects; as the Firmament is illustrious
which has the Embossery of glistering Stars; Not that dignity qua such betters
men, (for that is only the gift of God, and the work of Virtue) but it renders
men more discreet and circumspect, as they are prescribed by it, the most
excellent and exemplary Order of life.) I say, though the Romans loved Order,
yet the care that the Civil and Common Laws have circa Ordinem Iudicialem
Civilium causarum, Syntag. Iuris universi. lib. 32, c. 26.
as Tholossanus his words are, is most notable, as that immovable method from
which there is no recess but with danger and inconvenience; therefore the Text
says not hic Ordo suadetur, or hic Ordo observari debet: For, many things are
fairly commended by Power, that are not embraced by Practice; and many things
ought to be done, that are not accordingly done as they ought: but the words
are hic Ordo observatur, as if the Chancellor intended satisfaction of the
Prince, and in him of all men: that in all changes and vicissitudes which
Crowns are (in Common with all sublunaries) subject to; the same Order yet
remains in the midst of them unreversed, all men in this Nation being
concerned, how various soever they are in other matters, to carry on this very
way and method of Trial, and no other.

Praeterquam ubi damna vel debitum in Personalibus non excedunt quadraginta
Marcas Monetae Angliae.

This is a Salvo to the general Rule: For, the Law proportioning the quality of
the Jurymen to the quality of the Matter in Trial, as it requires more Estate
in those that try Title of Land, which is called realty; so, less in that
which is of lesser value, as personally esteemed. The value of Juries in great
causes heretofore has been observed 40 s. per Annum of Freehold out of ancient
Demesnes, or what is equivalent to it; and by the 27 Eliz. c. 6. it is advanced
to 4t l. Land, because Sheriffs were found to spare at Home the most able and
sufficient Freeholders, and to returned poorer and simpler sort, least able to
discern the causes in question; and most unable to bear the Charges of
Appearance and Attendances in such Cases. For reformation whereof the value of
Jurors was enhanced, which though it be not applicable to Corporations where
men of such value are not ever to be had, by reason of which there is a
Provision in the said Statute; yet is it for the most part, and where it may
(as in Hundreds and Counties it may) to be practiced: for as the Law compells
not to impossibilities, so does it not allow neglects or obstructions to
justice, which, as they are occasioned by peremptory Challenges without showing
cause, Cook on Littleton, p. 156. B. An Ordinance for Enquests. 33. E.. 1. Anno
Dom. 1305.
which was the indulgence of the common Law in the King's Case, till by the
Statute of 33 Ed. 1. it was otherwise enacted; so does it favor Trials in
places where men of such value cannot be had. Like Law because like reason
there was for that Enaction in the Statute 21 Ed. 1. for though therein was
required that every Juror that passed in trial out of his proper County should
have Land to the value of 100. s. at the least; Stat. de his qui ponendi sunt
in Assisis, Anno 1293.
yet is there a saving of the Law's former requiry of 40. s. Lands, and of such
other value in Towns, Cities, and Buroughs as has been accustomed, which
shows, that the aim of the Law is to promote justice, and to prescribe nothing
but what is possible and feasible to that end Quia tunc non requiritur quod
Iuratores in Actionibus hujusmodi tantum expendere possunt, faith our Text.]
What then may the promiscuity of men try the cause, shall any he that has a
face be admitted without challenge or exception? nothing less; For, as the
Common Law required men well-to live, as we say, such as having Estates of
their own, know what it is to get and keep, and so are likeliest to be sparing
of casting away another man's by rash or heedless Verdict; and hazard their own
by attaint for Perjury: as I say, the Common Law limited who and who not should
be returned; so diverse Statutes subsequent to our Text has Enacted, especially
in the City of London, where, by reason of the great confluence of People, and
Trade, personal actions abound; by the 11 H. 7. c. 21. no person is to be
empannelled in the Courts of the said City, except he be of Lands, Tenements,
or Goods and Chattells, to the value of forty Mark; and, that for Lands,
Tenements, or Actions Personal, wherein the Debt of Damadges amounts to the
sum of forty Mark, or above, no man be Empannelled except he have in Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattells, to the value of 100. Marks; which the Statute
of 4 H. 8. c. 3. seems to make analogous to the 40. s. per annum required of
Freeholders in Counties by the Law; and thereupon enables them to do what they
can in their condition by the Law: so, that the Law being intent upon Justice,
and the equal and impartial conduct of right means to that important end,
provides for every circumstance, as well of men as things. And in men, that
they shall be of value, properly English: that is, of intrinsique worth, whose
Estates shall be valuable, as if they were Bullion, for that is the sense,
Monetae Angliae.] England being a Noble Kingdom, whose Sovereign Stamps no
Coin but what is Standard; not only made Passable by 1 Mariae c. 6. 1 and 2
P. and Mary, c. 11
Statute, (for so Power may make Money of Leather or Metal; as the King of
Spain frequently does to be Current Money) but Passable" "because Gold and
Silver; Passed the Kings Mint" "and returnable thither with the loss only of
Coynage; And this is called the Money of England: 2 H. 4. c. 5 and to preserve
this from abasement and undervaluation were the Statutes of 19 H. 7. c. 5.17 R.
2. c. 1. yea, 25 E. 3. c. 12 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 19.
on this ground was" "and is adulterating of the Kings Coin Counterfeiting
Lushburgh.
the Current Money of England made High Treason 25 E. 3. diminishing of it High
Treason, 5 Eliz. 11.18 Eliz. c. 1. all which I instance in to explicate the
Term Monetae Angliae.] to be indigitative of real value; and applied to the
Juror, for that it intends him really worth, pecuniis numeratis, a legal value,
which in this Case is left to the Justices discretion, according to common
reputation, and the judgment of wisdom, which is presumed (and that not
groundlesly) to be in those Venerable Sages; therefore wisely left to their
discretion.

Habebunt tamen terram vel redditum, ad valorem competentem, juxta
discretionerae Iastitiariorum.

Habeburt.] That I conceive to be as much as praesumuntur habere; for judgment
of discretion is charitable where it knows nothing to the contrary, and
Justices when they have no cause, will not seek a cause of doubt against a man
where he is reputed to live in fashion and to pay scot and lot as we say.
Terram vel redditum,] that is Lands, or Houses called Candle-Rents, or
Annuities, or Rent-charges, I suppose, to a proportion of equality to the
matter in Issue is corapetens valor, within the Text. And so, I think, the
Reverend Justices will declare it, and their judgment must stand; for the Law
says, according as the Text quotes it,

Iuxta discretionem Iusticiariorum.] That is, according to that natural and
learned judgment that their Years, Discretio est discernere per Logem justum.
Reg. Juris.
Study, and Place enables them to and presumes them of; and this is not that
vage discretion, in better English Arbitrariness, which Empson, and Dudley
obtained to vex the Subjects by in Henry the Sevenths time, and for which they
suffered deservedly; Dr. and Student. c. 52.
but the discretion of the Justices that the Statutes of 23 H. 8. c. 3.35 H. 8.
c. 6. intend, which is the proportion of the qualification to the drift and
scope of the Law.

Alioquin ipsi minime jurabuntur, ne per inediam and paupertatem Iuratorum
hujusmodi de facili valiant corrumpi and subornari.

This is the reason why the Law requires ability of Estate in Jurors, not that
it thinks Poverty inconsistent with Integrity or Wisdom, the endowment of those
that have no inheritance besides it; or that it expresses thereby an evil eye
to poor men, because God's is not good to them in a fortunary way: nothing
less, the Chancellor is of a more pious and prudent Genius then thus to
precipitate, for he knew, That a poor man by his wisdom delivered the City;
Eccles. 9.15.
so the Wiseman has told us, and we may know that many mean estated persons
have been very contributive to the good of their Countries, as by name Sarbolla
that mean Candiot, who, when Bressia was besieged, and the Venetians knew not
what to do to relieve it, made offer to the Senate to undertake the succor of
it, which they accepted, and he by his art did bring over Land, and over
Mountains and Hills, Shure's History of Venice, p. 360.
mighty Vessels from Venice to the Lake which kept Bressia from Delivery; the
like did the poor Centurion when Mellito and all the Venetian Gentlemen were
surrounded in the Valley of Sabia; Page. 355.
these, I say, and thousand such instances would confute the rashness of that
position, that men are not to be trusted because they are poor, (for they that
are poor in estate may be rich in virtue, and so accomplished to actions of
integrity and Heroicisms:) but the intent of the Law is to supersede and
undermine that common pest of poverty, Sordidness and illiberality of Spirit,
which makes men open handed to receive any thing that is put into it, that may
answer a want and supply a need; thus is Perjury imputed to Gifts by Jurors
received, so 11 H. 6. c. 4.11 H. 7. c. 21. And that the more sufficient men be
of Lands and Tenements, the more unlikely are they to be driven or moved to
Perjury by brocage, power, or corruption, they are the words of the Statute of
15 H. 6. c. 5. which is the very same with what is the reason in the Text, Ne
per inediam and paupertatem Iuratorum hujusmodi de facili valiant corrumpi aut
subornari, for since necessity has no Law, and hunger breaks through stone
Walls, there is no better a prevention to the sordid effects of need, then thus
to provide as the Law has. Livius Drusus was a brave man, Cum pecunia egores
multa contra dignitatem feci^. Aurel. Victor. lib. De viris illustribus.
so generous and liberal in mind, that, he left nothing unobliged by his
bounty, but Heaven and the Sea; yet the Historian says of him, when he grew
short of money, he did many things unbeseeming him: and Agur when he beggs of
God neither poverty nor riches, but food convenient for him, teaches us the
danger as well of the left hand, extreme poverty, as of the right hand, riches;
the one making a man forget God, the other forget a man's self.

Et si per tales exceptiones, Iuratorum nomina in Pannello cancellentur, quod
non remantat numeras sufficiens, etc.

There is no need of much enlargement herein, for this is but enumerative of
what has been heretofore asserted; Juries of twelve sufficient men of the
County must be summoned, and before they be arrayed may be challenged. If
twelve of the array be not unchallenged by whom the cause may be tried, then
must more and more Jury men, omni exceptione majores, be summoned by the
Sheriff, according to a Writ directed to him to that end: For there must be no
defect in Justice; while the County has solvent men, and those not legally
challengeable, there must be returns of them, quod and soepius fieri potest,
faith the Text; and that to prevent injustice in the Nation, which then is
chargeable on it, when causes hang undetermined: ob defectum Iuratorum, which
to prevent, the Law grants Tales, not only of other persons in the Shire 35 H.
8. c. 6. Confirm by 2 and 38.6 c. 324 and 5 P and Mary, c. 7.
but of the next adjoining Shire-men, if none in the Shire there be fit. So in
the Case of attaint, wherein perjury has been committed, as Neighbors may be
partial, the Statute of 23 H. 8. c. 3 appoints.

Et has est forma, qualiter Iuratores and veritatis hujusmedi inquisitores
eligi debent in curia Regis, similiter and jurari.

It Was hic est Ordo before, and hac est Forma now, both to one purpose, to
notify the exactness of the Law to keep it self in a Method, and to walk by
Rule: Forms are the prescripts of God in Nature, and of Nature to Polities for
avoidance of consuon. The Jews, the first People and Polity, had their Forms
in all things; in their Sacrifices, Drusius, lib. de tribus Sectis Judzorum.
Worship, Dedication, Solemnization of Festivalls, Oaths, Marriadges Tuneralls,
making Peace and War, in their Enfranchisements, Jubilees, in every thing. And
from them the Nations learned Forms; Tully speaks that with an Orators
confidence and a Good Man's Truth: Pro Quintio 14.
Iura and formae de omnibus rebus consittutae, and as things had their Forms to
distinguish them by; in which sense we read of Forma dicendi, bonestatis,
scribendi, Temporum and Reipublica forma, scelerum formae, provinciae forma,
and forma edificii, and such like in Authors; So also had persons their Forms.
So among the Romans, Aulus Gellius, lib. 3. c. 18. lib. 1. c. 9.
there were Forms for every Order of men, which Brissonius tells us of, and no
Authors of theirs omit mention more or less of. And these Forms, though we look
upon them as accidental things, which may adesse and abesse sine interitu
subjects; yet are not to be innovated, or forcibly entered upon without great
consideration: Because they couch great mysteries in them, which are necessary
to be cherished for the advantage they give to the more essential parts of
Truth and Policy: which is the reason that both the Civil, Canon and Common
Laws do insist much on Forms. Has est forma says the Text, and so ends this
Chapter.

Chap. XXVI.
Iuratis demum in forma praedicta, and.

THis Chapter begins with an Exegetique Recapitulation of what had passed
concerning Juries in the preceding Chapter. For, there the number of a Jury
being twelve, and those twelve not trivial, but probi and legales homines; that
is, such as are of good Conversation, and Morally Civil, and have besides
their Goods, Moneys, Leases, and other less-fixed Subsistences termed Mobilia:
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments which are called Possessiones a post
sedendo; (because they give being to those that come after the present
enjoyers, Posideo a potis vel porro sedeo; possessiones sunt agri late patentis
publici privatique quos initio no^ manucaptione sed quisque ut potuit occupavit
atque possidet. Isidor. O. rig. lib. 15. c. 13.
being descendible to either Corporal or Testamentary Heirs, and sufficient to
conserve them in their condition without dependence or necessity of fortune,
which betrays men to bycourses, to the prejudice of Honesty and Justice) I
say, the Chancellor having Premised this, Proceeds now to the further
Narrative of what such qualified persons are by the Law expected to do, in
discharge of that great confidence it has reposed in them; and that he does by
Enumeration of several Particulars, wherein their Exactness and Sincerity is
required: Concerning which, before I Write further, I think fit to touch
shortly upon that Motive to the Laws choice of Men of Fortune for this
employment, as is couched in those words, Vnde statum suum ipsi continere
poterint.] By which I collect the Judgment of experience resident in the Law,
and in the Compilers of it, to be, that all Perjury and unjust Dealing proceeds
from a Departure, and Discard of Moderation and Contentment with the Condition
God has designed men to bear, and requires them to be patient under. And
indeed, there is no account of sin more rational then that which refers it to
incontinence: Men derogate from Gods Wisdom and Power, and aggrandize
themselves beyond what God has fitted them for, and will carry them thorough;
and this makes them steer a course to extremes, which is, seipsos non
continere: For, as it is in Valor, there is no excuse admitted by that Person
that is willing to fight; (...) Adag. 62. Cent. 3. Chil. 3.
but when all the discouragements imaginable are presented Magnaminity replies
as Pompey did Necesse est ut came, non ut vivam: so is it in Modesty of Mind,
nothing will tempt it to go beyond its boundary, or trespass on the Peace of
its intern calmeness: Its true, Valor in the best men will tempt to venture
hard for the Master-Prizes in this Worlds Lottery; and hard it is upon mere
Worldly grounds to withstand the Irritations and Impulses of their cogent
Interest: but, for all this, where God gives Continence of mind, the virtue of
that endowment will reply to those fusurrations, Phanorinus did to those that
reproached him for flattering Adrian, who loved to be accounted a Learneder
Person and Prince then he was; Car non cedam huic qui triginta habet legiones.
Saballicus Tom. 2. Ennead. 7. lib. 4.
Why should I not admire and humor him who commands thirty Legions: so says
Continence, when Ambition solicites to comply with base and by-ends to gratify
sensuality, Cur non cedam buic, etc. Why should I not observe the Command of
God and Nature, which learns me to live of a little, and to be sober in keeping
my self in mine own Orb: For, while men do, as one told Cleon, Intra suam
pelliculam se continere; Adag. 92. Chil. 1. Gent. 6. p. 264.
and are desirous of nothing more then they enjoy honestly, and can use
temperately, they avoid delight in Riches of Violence, and Honors of Fraud and
Usurpation; which Romulus deserved, and had accordingly Renown for: For, though
he had the choice of all the 800. Sabin Virgins, yet kept he himself to his own
(though old) Wife Herfilia: and though he might take the freedom of high
feeding, and Martial Compotations, by the visceration of which Men grow
Valiant, and heady, Memoriae traditum est 500. fere annos post Roman conditam
nullas rei uxoria neque actiones cautiones in urbe Roma aut in Latio fuisse, A.
Gellius, lib. 4. c. 3.
beyond Measure and Mercy; yet, the Historian says, he kept himself free from
taint: Ego quantum volai bibo, non quantum potui, was the account he gives, and
surely it was a solid one, and tuitive of Virtue, beyond all curbs beneath
effectual Grace. When I read of that Athenian Young Man, who to preserve
himself against the lust of Demetrius, cast himself into a Cauldron of boiling
water and dyed: and of that Roman General that refused Presents, and contented
himself with a few Roots for his Meal, and them sorily Cooked by his own hand,
and cried out, in defiance of the Importunity of his grateful Presenters; Dum
his omnibus imperare scio non opus est pecunia vestra.
I have no need of your Gold, while I can command my Senses, and they not me, I
shall never want that which satisfies the luxury, not necessity of them: I lay,
when I read this, and consider the defects and excursions of Christians, I
blush to find Christ so often in the Mouth, where he is so much an Alien from
the Heart and Life: Men ought to live as they of old did, though they speak
daintily, as the Neoteriques do. Vivere diseas moribus praeteritis, l^qui
verbis praesentibus, A. Gellius lib. 1. c. 10. Erasm. Chll. 2. Cent. 7.
For, no shipwreck is so terrible at Sea, as this wrack to the Soul and Sense
of Man is when they are intemperate; Intra statum suum se continere,] is not
only to avoid Marsya's Insolence, in Challenging Apollo to Pipe with him, whom
when Apollo overcame (as soon he did; for the Presumer was no Musician, but a
bravado) he hung him on Pine Tree: I say, to be Moderate, and affect nothing
beyond our Station, is not only to avoid one, but all Evil, which the
contrary prompts to, confirms in, and ruins for: so long as the Registers of
Lucifer's Pride, and Corabs Conspiracy, and Absoloms Rebellion, and Reubens
Incest, and Iehu's Murder, and Achans Covertuousness, yea, and of Judas his
Treachery are in being, and Mention of Holy Writ; the danger of not keeping in
one Station, and not compling with Gods pleasure, will be lively testimonies
against that humor: Intra statum suum se no Continere. It Is good to remember
the Fable of the Crab that left the Sea, and would feed in the Land, where the
Woolfe met with it and devoured it: the Crab bewailing his condition when, it was
too late, was told, Being thou wast a Creature of the Sea you should have kept
there and not affected the Land, but your trial of Conclusions has concluded
your Security. (...). Adag. 11. Chil. 3. Cent. 5.
And when God lets the Reins lie loose, and men have latitudes penal as well
as peccant; then, there is no mean for them to rest in, but they go from one
wickedness to another, till they be the shame of men and the curse of God:
Picenino the Italian General is a notable example of this; Shutes Hist.
Venice. p. 133.
For, he having defeated Antonini at Novara, resolved revenge on his Enemy by
any means he could invent, and effect, he slew great numbers of the Inhabitants
of Novara in heat of blood, and those that escaped he Executed by the
Common-Hangman, and being at last glutted with blood, and not knowing almost
which way to be further vile, he sets to sale young Children, Matrons, and
Reverend Priests; And all this he did by not heeding se intrastatum suum
continere, which the Law soreseeing, prescribes such valuable proportions of
Estate in those that are to serve on Juries, that they by it may se intra
statum suum continere: For, if once passion predominate, and men sinfully look
abroad, then they court unlawfully, and attempt desperately the accomplishment
of it. In Anno 1494. one of the Bishops of St. Andrews did Enshrine the bones
of St. Palladius, who first Converted Scotland: This Shrine being Silver was
the Eye sore of a Gentleman near Fordon, in the County of Meruis, who when
Times were disasterous seized upon the Shrine because it was Silver, and made
away with the Relic, but his family soon after decayed, Spotiswood, p. 7.
which was probably a Curse of God on his Sacriledg and Profaneness. And so I
have done with this passage, Intra statum suum se continere,] because though it
be necessary to be inculcated, yet it must not court me to extravagate.

Now then I return to what is to be done previous to, and conductive of their
service to a just and worthy issue. Totum recordum and processus placiti quod
pendet inter parts.] That which I think the Civil Law calls Libellus
accusationis, Tholossanus Syntag. Iuris, lib. 32. c. 7. de Accusatione Solenni.
the Common Law calls Recordum; a word from Recordor; the Record being the
summary and substance of the Suit or Cause, and therefore the Text says it is
appointed to be read as the process of the Cause is here also: Critiques make
this word lib. 3. c. 5^.
Recordor to be the most Emphatick word that comes from Cor, Valla confounds
memini with Recordor, because Records are a kind of immortal memory; Quia per
scriptum vecurdatur, quid factum.
the Lawyers also call the Entry of things in the Books, or rather Rolls of the
Court a Record, and this was called a Roll, because entered on a Parchment that
was rolled up: so Statute 9 R. 2. c. 4. but 8 H. 6. c. 12. it is called a Record;
and a Process, or Record, 14 E. 3. c. 6. 9 H. 5. c. 4. 4 H. 6. c. 3.

Ac dilucide exponetur eis exitus placiti.] What the exitus placiti is see the
Notes on the twentieth Chapter. That which is phrased here dilucide exponetur,
is in sense, the Jury shall hear distinctly in their Mother Tongue the true
sttate of the Contention, abstracted from all those disguises and pretenses,
that craft and vehemence impose on it; to prevent which the Law appoints, that
it shall appear plain and unmysterious: dilucide exponere is as much as (...),
Intra lucere, as I may so say, to search into, and perambulate the bowels of a
Cause; yea, it is as much as to tell the Jury what Points the concernment of the
Cause rests upon. This then, as to do it shortly and pithyly, requires ability,
so declares honesty in the doing of it; For, it is almost sine qua non, to
Right Judgment: therefore the Text adds, De cujus veritate Iurati illi curiam
certificabunt,] that is, they shall give their Verdict according to their
Evidences and the Righteous Instructions of the Court; both which if they
follow they may be said curiam certificare de veritate.] For, the discreet
Verdict of the Jury is a Certificate to the Judges, how they find the Cause to
be, and accordingly are led to dispose their Verdict upon it.

Quibus peractis, utraque partium per se and Consiliarios suos in praesentia
Curiae referet and manifestabit omnes and singulas materias and evidentias,
quibus eos docere se posse credit veritatem exitus taliter placitati.

This remembers the method of Pleading Causes; per se and Consiliarios.] Of old
probably men that knew how, and would venture the Cause upon their own Memory
and Judgment to manage it, were permitted to Plead their Cause; but laterly it
has not been in any degree so: but as the Courts to encourage the Study of the
Law, expected Causes before them should be Pleaded and prosecuted by Juridique
men; so have all Parties in Suit chose rather to take the cooperation of a man
of Law, whose Profession it is to know the Patriall Laws, then to hazard his
Cause to save a Fee: And for as much as Counsel and Strength is for the War
(not only the Field, but the Court-Warr) and Causes are best defended by the
Truth of their Cause, and the prudence of the Parties carriage in it: The Text
says, per se and Consiliarios suos in prasentia curiae referet and
manifestabit; That is, as the Plea is framed by Counsel, so is the defense or
stabilition of it to be made by Counsel, and that vocally, in praesentia
Curiae; and this the Text terms refer and manifestare; that is, referendo
manifestare: and this insinuates great accomplishments in Counselors;
Prudence tempestive referendo; this (...) is the wisdom of a man exactly to
observe, if he would succeed in what he attempts. Counsel that speaks
overmuch, and beyond the proportion of the Courts liking, or that interposes
when the Court is declaring its Judgment, is not favored by the Court:
therefore a man of Counsel, as he expects not to recall what is past and gone,
(...). Prove. Graec.
nor seeks the Rose out of its season, so will he watch, and catch at every
opportunity he worthily may to accomplish his purpose. Not that wise men are
ever fortunate, or that their Counsel is ever valued; (...). Epictetus, lib.
4. c. 8. lib. 3. c. 23.

Quamdiu videbatur furere Democritus vix recipit Socratem fama. Quamdiu Catonem
Civitas ignoravit, respuit, nec Intellexit, dum perdidit. Ep. 79.


For Socrates, though the Wisest of men, was obscure and unknown to most of the
Age he lived in, as was Epictetus his saying, which Seneca suffragated to in
his 39th Epistle: but, though a Wise man does not ever succeed, yet in doing so
he does as a Wise man ought, been consulere; and that no man can, who does not
regard the Times and Seasons, the humors and passions of prevalent and potent
Parties, and carry himself wisely in all Affairs: Homo virtuti simillimus and
per omnia ingenio diis quam hominibus propior, qui nunquam recte fecit ut
facere videretur, sed quia aliter non poterat. Patercul. lib. 2.
which Cato doing, is by Paterculus Charactred to be liker a God then a Man,
who did not virtuous things for applause, or advantage sake, but because he
could not bring his divine soul into servility to his brutish sense, nor
account anything worthy his reason that did not excite him to Justice.

Secondly, As the Counselor must refer, which implies prudence, so he must
manifestare eisdem Iuratis omnes and singulas materias and evidentias;] and
this implies Memory, Art, Elocution: For Manifestare is a word that argues a
rescue of any thing from its shade and obfuscation, and a reddition of it apert
and visible. This potency of Oratory, and strenuity of Memory and Invention, is
that Engine which from the Cannons and Sacars of Language discharges such
batteries on the ears of Auditors as makes them intenable against them:
which, when Counselors abound in, and by it express the learning of their
minds, they prevail in all Causes, and over all Persons they are retained to
Plead in, Adeo negligitur Oratoria ab horum temporum dyscolis ut in actionibus
eorum faex quo que quotidiani sermonis fada ac pudenda vitia deprehenduntur ut
ignorent leges, non teneant senatus consulta, Ius civitatis ultro derideant,
sapientia vero studium and praecepta prudentium penitus reformident. Quintill.
Dialog. de Oratore, p. 4^5.
and before: which being the defect of many men of the Long Robe, makes them so
rude in speech, and ingrate to the ears of their Hearers, that nothing seems
more defective in them then good words, and a graceful delivery of them; which
they that want cannot Manifestare within the Text. For, though they may
apprehend Materias and Evidentias, yet if by proper words they cannot
Manifestare Materias and Evidentias causae to the Jury, they are short of what
they ought; yet further that of the Text referet and manifestabit Iuratis,
etc.] points us out to the double duty of a good Counselor after hearing of
the Record read; First Referet, that is, he shall be a Monitor to the Jury to
observe what they have heard: thus ( Referendarius Papae is put for the Popes
Remembrancer, or Master of his Requests, to put him in mind what supplicants
presented their requests to him) and Manifestabit] to satisfy them that what
they have heard in the Record, Pancirol in notitia.
was necessary so to be insisted on for the assertion of Right, the cause of
their Suit.

Omnes materias and evidentias.] That is, all Points of Law in the Case, and
all Testimonies in Confirmation of the Fact, which the Law so and so adjudges
to be proved; or else materias per evidentias. That is, a good Counselor will
so manifest the Cause full of matter and moment, that he will omit no Evidence
that may clear it to be what he explicates it; And this to do is to be as
notable a Patron to a Cause as Barbaro the Bressian Governor was to that City
of his Charge, Shutes History of Venice, p. 368.
which though it were miserably straightened, and the People in it disanimated,
yet he kept against the potent assaults of it, by his noble courage and
obliging demeanor; being such an Argos in every part of his Government, that
he kept up his own Honor and his Masters Interest against the force and rage
of those who were enemies to both: Thus, if our Counselor do, he will not
carry a Leaden Sword in a Golden Sheath; that is, (...). Diogen. in Apothegmat.
no Law under his Barr-Gown, evidence no Oratory in his Pleading and defense:
but be such an one as will refer and manifestare omnes and singulas materias
and evidentias.]

Et tunc adducere potest utraque pars eoram iisdem Iustitiariis and Iuratis
omnes and singulos testes quos pro part sua ipse producere velit.

As before there was an Ordo in the Summoning of the Jury and Arraying them, so
here is there an Order expressed in their work, the end for which they were so
called and empannelled, Tunc adducere potest: when the Record is read, and the
Counsel have evidenced for their Clyent, then the Witnesses are produced to
confirm what points are necessary to be sworn to; That as there is Vtraque
pars, and Iidem Iustitiarii, Quid facias in is^o suffragiorum impiorum astuarto
deprehensus, dubitas enim illo in momento quo in diaboli ecclesia fueris, omnes
angelos prospicere de coelo and singulos donotare, Tertullianus lib. de
Spectacul. c. ^7.
and Iurati, all pluralls: so there is to answer these in the plurality of
their constitution, Omnes and singuli testes; All, if they can speak to all
parts of the Fact, which is rare, every one to what part he can depose. For the
Law expects no Witness should evidence any thing but what is just, and known to
him: and to the deposition of which it admits him not before he be charged by
the Gospells with all fidelity, to utter his knowledge: and, if the Justices do
lay the load of Gods Power, Omniscience and Mercy, the great discoveries of the
Gospells, they do what the Text words by Qui super Sancta Dei Evangelia per
Iustitiarios onerati.]

Qui Super Sancta Dei Evangelia per Iustitiarios Onerati, etc.

Why the Gospells are, that upon which men lay their hands when they Swear, I
have shown in the precedent Chapter: now, the expression of the Common Law by
the mouth of our Chancellor, when Juries are said to be Onerati by it, is to
be enquired into; And an Oath upon the Gospel is called a Charge, or Burden,
because it presses the Soul to performance of it upon penalty of the Gospel
violated, being evidence against the violators, as a heavy weight presses the
body down, and fills the Porter with care and fear till he be discharged of it:
1 Zeph. 11. 2 Chronicles. c. 2. v. 2. Zach. 12. v. 3.
This the Hebrews expressed, not by (...), nor by (...), nor yet by (...),
though all these words are used to signify Presure: but they expressed it by
(...), or (...), a word that is lifted up in its import above other words of
the same seeming sense: For this word is used Metaphorically, for any Office,
Charge, Numb. 4.15. Zeph. 3.18. Isai. 21.11.
or Ministry that is committed to any one; because these intrusts require care
and intentness, which makes Nature in those that bear them heavy, and droop:
Thus the Prophets denunciation against People is called their Burden; and
Dumah's Charge and Penal Menaceis termed the Burden of Dumah; and thus all care
is called a Burden: Cast thy Burden upon the Lord; Psalm. 55.22. 1 Pet. 50. v.
7. Terent. And. 5.1.^. 3. De Not. Deor. 10.
which S. Peter renders, Cast your care upon him for he cares for you: so do
the Latins use Onus and Onerare for any thing grievous: Malis onerare aliquom,
and Catenis onerare aliquem, Injuriis, maledictis onerare; and Tully Argumentis
quamplurimis onerare Iudicem: and Livy, when he speaks of one that did
vehemently commend his friend, Lib. 4. ab urbe 63, lib. 18.
writes, he did laudibus illum onerare; and Tacitus, Onerabat paventium curas
ordo Mutinensis; these, and thousands such like expressions, show, that to
charge a man upon the Gospels, as here, is to lay load upon his soul cogent to
his performance: and this the Law purposely does to keep men servile to
Justice, that they should not dare to do contrary to it, least they burden
themselves with God's curse and their Conscience's rebuke.

Et si necessitas exegerit dividantur testes hujusmodi, donec ipsi deposuerint
quicquid velint.

This the Common Law and the practice upon it does to prevent combination and
injurious Confederacy; for since it may fall out, that Witnesses, like sons of
Belial, may agree to depose one and the same falsehood, and by dexterity, helped
out by Satan, contrive Testimony to such an harmony, and sameness of Note, that
they may, that give it, sing one song, as we say; the Law has given not only
the Direction, but the Mandat to undermine this Artifice, by honest policy,
dividantur Testes, says the Text, but that only, si necessitas exegerit,]
which is the great Regent of the World; which made the Comaedian cry out,
Necessitas plus posse quam Pietas: for all men do allow Necessity to be of the
quorum quarum quorum in all Cases and things, which though it may be pretended
by many, who naturally are mutable and politickly are Proteus'd, as the people
of Chios are spotted for versatility by that Proverb, (...). Adag. 60. Chil. 2.
Cent. 2.
Not one of Chios by birth, but one of Chios in nature; yet is no further to be
the temper of Wisemen, then it is inevitable, sinless, and cogent: in which
sense Tully uttered that Aphorism, Tempori cedere, id est, necessitati pare^e
semper saptentis habitum est. Cic. 4. Epist. Famil.
To give way to Time, that is, Necessity, that carries all down before it, is
the part and property of a Wiseman, which Truth, apt to be abused the same
Orator qualifies with, Cic. pro Balbo.
Quicquid non licet certe non oportet; and Saint Bernard yet restrains more, in
his applications to Pope Eugenius, Certe in Christiana Philosophia non decere
nifi quod licet, nec expedire nifi quod and decet and licet, lib. 3. De
Consider.
Certainly (says he) in Christian Philosophy, and by rule of the Wisdom that
is from above, nothing is comely but what is lawful, nothing expedient but
that which is comely and lawful; Potest aliquid licere and non expedire,
expedire autem quod non licet non potest. S. Aug. De Adult. Conjug. c. 15.
and Saint Augustine confirms it, A thing may be lawful which may not be
expedient, but expedient that cannot be which is not lawful. Though then
Necessity be to be harkned to, yet it must only be such an one in judicial
Affairs, as that is in Martial ones, Vt qui sub vexillo consedebant pugnare
debent. Adag. Chil. 1. Cent. 2. adag. 23.
cum res ad Triarios rediit, when things are so urgent that there is no
avoiding it, but either Witnesses must be heard and examined apart, or else
they will out-swear, or rather forswear truth and misguide the Court; when the
Justices see they are resolved to carry their design by resolute and agreed
deposition, tunc dividantur testes; and yet that only, donec deposuerint ipsi
quicquid velint] the Law searches out truth only, and to do that, may examine
suspected evidence apart, but that done, and the testimony made, the Witnesses
are in statu quo; for the Law ordinarily takes evidence as it is given in open
Court, all that will being present, and the Court asking the Witnesses in the
hearing and view one of another, and if it do separate Witnesses, and take
their testimony severally, it is upon jealousy of legerdemaine dealing: for as
that of Seneca is true, Lib. De Tranquil. c. 1. Sermon. 24. Hoc Calciamentum
consuit Histiaeus Aristagoras induit. Chil. 3. Cent 4. Adag 42.
Aculeos subdunt exempla nobilia, so is it on the contrary, one scabbed sheep
infects a whole flock, Conciliant inter se impii inimicissimas amicitias, says
S. Bernard, and if there be one Villain in a pack, he can design what others
act, as Darius said of the Ionian defection, Histiaeus, was the Shoemaker
though Aristagoras wore the Shoe. Therefore our Law to prevent mischief
provides to catch these false Witnesses in a net, dividantur testes,] that so
they, being ignorant what each other depose, may by their contradictory
depositions invalidate the credit of that they depose, Ita quod dictum unius
non docebit aut concitabit eorum alium ad consimiliter testificandum, says our
Text.

Quibus consummatis, postquam Iuratores illi deinde ad eorum libitum, etc.

This is only matter of form, and declares the Laws order in Proceedings;
every Article of proceeding is by steps and degrees proportionable to the
nature of the cause, and the Judgment the Law is expected to give in it. As
therefore the Jurors do hear and observe the Record, the Evidence, and the
Direction of the Court, so in their retreat to debate and consider of their
Verdict, as they are not compelled by the Law to come before they have
considered and agreed their Verdict, so are they not favored in their
unreasonable Cunctation; a Verdict must be given before the Jury can be free, 6
Ed. 6. Term. Paschae. Cook 1. Instit. p. 227. Dr. and Student. c. 52.
and the Court whose legal Prisoners they are, (for they are in Custodia
Ministrorum Curiae,) not allowing them fire, candle, or drink, till they have
given up their private Verdict, and after that, when they have all those
conveniences, yet they are not discharged, till they have given their Verdict
in Court. I say, all this considered, the Law does wisely to allow convenient
time to debate, but none to unnecessary delay; and as it keep^ them from food
and fire, that necessity may drive them to dispatch and agree, so does it keep
them under the eye of the Court from conference with any (the Ministers of the
Court, being sworn men, servants to the Court, and so in this sense the Court)
least if they were at liberty they might be solicited and bribed by the parties
in Contest, to the overthrow of right. And this discovers the exactness of the
Law, that it leaves no stone unturned to promote discovery of truth, which when
it has found, then it appoints, that those that departed the Court to consider
in order to a Verdict, should return orderly with it, reveniet in Curiam says
the Text; Fleta lib. 4. c. 9. De Veredicto Juratorum.
and then modo and forma they give their Verdict, and according to that
Verdict, Iustitiarii reddent and formabunt judicium suum,] that is, as I humbly
conceive, the Sentence arising from the matter of fact verdicted, the Justices
before whom the Verdict is given, supposing the Jury just and untampered with
(as the Law concludes them to be when they follow their evidence, and the
direction of the Court according to it) do give judgment, Note this.
that is, suffer judgment to be entered according to it. And this argues Juries
notable promoters of justice in trials of fact, because the Law, which is ars
aequi and boni, has appointed that its judgment shall be entered according to
the Verdicts of them; which if the Gentlemen and men of Fortune in this Nation
do rightly consider, they would be more punctual to serve on Juries then they
are. For besides the notable experience it begets in men, and the parts in them
it displayes; it not only advances distribution of Justice in the Nation, but
it facilitates and makes more current the judgment of the King's Justices in
his Courts, since all the burden lies not on them, but the matter of fact
passes the Verdict of Juries, compacted of Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders,
who are considerable men in Counties.

Tamen si pars altera contra quam veredictum hujusmodi prolatum est,
conqueratur se per illud injuste esse gravatum, persequi tunc potest pars illa
versus Iuratores illos, and versus partem quae obtinuit, breve de attincta. etc.

Still the Law by our Text affords remedy against injustice. For though
Verdicts are not as the Law of the Medes and Persians irreversible, 52. H. 3.
c. 20. 1 E. 3. c. 4. 1 Instit. p. 355.289, etc.
yet as Judgments pronounced in the King's Courts they must stand, till they be
reversed by Attaint or a Writ of error, 4 H. 4. c. 23. 9 R. 2. c. 3. 31 E. 3.
c. 12. 27 Eliz. c. 8. 31 Eliz. c. 1. 5 E. 3. c. 2. 10 E. 3. c. 3. 3 H. 7. c.
10. 27 Eliz. c. 5. 3 Jacob. 8. so may the Jury be attainted for their
partiality and perjury 3 E. 1. c. 37. 1 E. 3. c. 6. 5 E. 3. c. 6, and 7. 28 E.
3. c. 8. and 34 c. 7. 23 H. 8. c. 3., and so in sundry other Statutes.

Breve de attincta.] This is an ancient Writ at the Common Law called a Writ of
Attaint, Attinctos quasi victos. Spelman. Gloss. p. 58.
because it referrs to persons vanquished in judgment, weighed in the balance
of Justice and found too light; the word seems to come from ad and tango,
attingo, as much as to overtake, Cic. pro Caelio*
and to guiltily reach, though it be extremis digitis: the word in Orators
signifies less then in Lawyers; Attincta and attinctura pro istius modi reatus
manifestatione and haereditaria successionis quae per eam sublata est
coinquinatione. Spelm. Gloss. p. 58.
for the Lawyers make Attaint and Attainder, to be the highest dishonor,
Felony, Treason, Perjury; the ancient books call it, Breve de Convictione, that
is, a Writ to summon an honest Jury to attaint a perjurious one, Idem eodem
loco. p. 294. B.
which false Jury, after Conviction and Attaint, contracts a very sore
punishment, Glanvil. lib. 2. c. 19.
the particulars whereof, collected out of the Antiquities of the Common Law,
Sir Edward Cook has furnished me with, the first whereof is, Amittat liberam
Legem in perpetuum, that is, let a Jury-man, that has contrary to the fear of
God, the reverence of the Law, the charity to his Neighbor, and the peace of
his own soul, been sordid, and for gain, fear, or love given false Verdict in a
cause; let such an one (I say) be out of the Laws protection, as he extruded
the Law his affection; let him lose the Law of a Freeman, and become lawless as
a Villain: hence, I suppose, the Book 24 E 3. fol. 24. calls this, The
villainous Judgment, not to reproach the Judgment of the Law, but as to the
persons meriting it, who thereby of Freemen become villains. Secondly, As his
Person should be out of the Law's favor and protection, so Forisfaciant omnia
bona and catalla sua, let his Estate, that consists of Money, Plate, Debts,
Leases, Annuities, be forfeit to the King, as a Compensation to the King's
Honor for the blot that it has suffered by his perjuriousness. Thirdly, Terrae
and Tenementa in manus Domini Regis capiantur,] while he lives, let his real
Estate be another, and not his to enjoy or command. Fourthly, Quod uxores and
liberi extra domos ejicerentur,] The innocent Wife and Children that are at
home in the House, harmlessly associating each other where their security is,
are to be cast forth to the contempt and injury of cold and want; which, how
dolorous that condition is, let Haegar's tears speak, who, extruded by her
Mistrisse, Genesis 21.16. Genesis 4.12.14.
sat like a forlorn in the open Wilderness; to which perhaps as well as to the
punishment of Cain, the Psalmist might allude in that imprecation he
Prophetically makes on wicked men, to whom his Person for his piety was an
eyesore, Let his Children be Vagabonds and his seed beg their bread, Psalm.
109.10.
that is, let them be men that have no home, but wander here and there as never
out of their way. Fifthly, Domus suae prostrentur,] Let not only they and
theirs not have being in their own House, but let their own House not be in
being, but become a Monument of the confusion that is penal on perjurious
falsehood. Sixthly, Arbores suae extirpentur,] Let not only the Building and
Ornament, Trees the Beauty, Profit and Honor of it cease; and his rich laden
Meadows, which filled his Dairy, and stalled his Oxen, and supported his
Plough, let them all be ploughed and broken up; and to the compleatment of his
punishment, when his Wife, Children, House, Lands, have been sorely harressed,
Fleta lib. 1.26. etc. 42.
let his Body be imprisoned without Bayl or Manisprise, and this touches the
Offender to the quick, when he is restrained, and can stir no further then the
Bar and Lock of a thick door, or the length of a strong Chain, or the narrow
bounds of a loathsome strait Room will permit him, then it is misery with a
witness. Antiquit. lib. 17. c. 9.
Imprisonment is one of the punishments that all Nations inflict on Offenders,
and though Caelius Rodiginus tells us of other ends of Prisons then punishments
of gross Crimes, yet certainly the chief ends of Prisons was to keep them
bound, who would abuse Liberty to injure and ill-principle others. Thus we read
of the Cretan Labyrinth, Sabellicus lib. 6. Ennead. 1. Adag. Centur. 1. Chil.
1. Adag. 89.
and the Messenians Thesaurus, the Carians Termerio, whence the use of Termeria
mala, the Cypriots Ceramon, the Boeotians (...), Alex. ab Alexand. lib. 3. c. 5.
and the Persians Lethes, the Attamans Barathrum and Melita, Cic. in Verrem.
Live. lib. 6. Belli Punici Caelius lib. 17. c. 9. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. c. 6.
Caelius Rhodig. lib. 17. c. 9.
the Spartans Decas and Carda, the Latomius built by Dionysius the Tyrant of
Syracuse, the Roman Sceleratus Campus, their Gemonii Graechus, their
Spoliarium, Tullianum Ancon. These, and others such like afflictions on
facinorous men, are equalled by this severity of our Law in the imprisonment of
perjurious Jurors bodies, which judgment of the Common Law, the Statute of 23
H. 8. c. 3. does mitigate the severity of, and therefore to that I refer the
Reader.

Nor is the Common Law only so severe in this Case of Perjury, but even all
National Laws equal them in severity. Diod. Sicul. p. 69. Edit. Hanoriae.
Syntagm. Juris universi. lib. 50. c. 6. Digest. lib. 4. tit. 3. c. Nam Perjurii
poena in Marg. p. 523. lib. 3. tit. 2. p. 354. D. in Marg.
Tholossanus has to my hand collected the severity of many Nations against
Perjury, and the Digest seconds all severity against it; for when Lib. 11. ad
Edict. 22.
Paulus says, Sufficit Perjurii poena, the Gloss adds, Perjurii poena divina
exitium, humana dedecus, which it has out of Tully, that Helluo of Law,
Language and Wisdom, lib. 2. De Legibus. (...). lib. De Decalogo. p. 756.
And therefore is it that an Oath being (...), no trivial customary thing, as
Philo's words are, but a citation of God to bear witness of it, if it be false
it provokes God, because it makes truth it self witness of a lie, is so
punished by God and men, as in the subsequent words appear, which are.

Virtute cujus si compertum fuerit per sacramentum viginti quatuor hominum, in
forma praenotata returnatorum, electorum, and juratorum, qui multo majora
habebunt patrimonia quam Iuratores primi, Quod idem primi Iuratores falsum
fecerunt Sacramentum, etc.

Virtute cujus.] That is, Brevis de Attincta; for this is the Warrant for the
Sheriffs Summons: For, compertum it cannot be, if not quaesitum; and quaesitum
it cannot be, sine mandato Regis, and that can be no otherwise then Brevi de
Attincta. So, that if attaints be necessary to punish Perjury in Juries, that
punishment must be discovered due to the Fact, by the Fact legally proved, and
that the Text says must be by the Oath of sour and twenty men, this is the
direction of the Common Law: For, neither in the Statute 11 H. 7. c. 24. or 1
H. 8. c. 11. which are expired: or of 23 H. 8. c. 3. do I find the direction
for it other then as by the Common Law; in affirmance of which, so much of the
Statute of 23 H. 8. c. 3. as concerns the number and value of the Jury on
attaints was made; For, in as much as an attaint, when proved, contracts great
infamy and punishment, the Law before it adjudges and inflicts them, expects to
be notably satisfied; and this appears from the enhansement of the number of
the Jurors to try this, whereas twelve serve in other cases, four and twenty
must be in this: and whereas men of the value of 40 s. Freehold, or 4 l. in
some cases, here the Law requires that the Jurors shall have every one 20
pounds by the year Freehold, etc. 15 H. 6. c. 5. 18 H. 6. c. 2. and thus stood
it when our Text was written, 13 Eliz. c. 25.
though the Statute 23 H. 8. c. 3. reduce the quality to 20. Marks, and this
confirms that of the Text, Multo majora habebunt patrimonia quam Iuratores
primi.] These then returned, elected, and sworn in due Form of Law, are to
enquire whether or no that be true which is suggested; Quod idem primi
Iuratores falsum fecerunt Sacramentum.] In what sense Oaths are termed
Sacramenta, Sacramenta militaria apud Romanos. Sueton in Caligula. Turnebus
Advers. lib. 27. c. 20. 3 Instit. c. 74. p. 163.
I have written in the Notes on the 20. Chapter. That which the Law aims at,
is to prevent false Oaths by punishment of those most severely that are guilty
of them, That Deuteronomy. 17.13.
others may hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. For, the Law having
indulged Trial of the Fact to Juries, and the Court charging them to make true
enquiry of all things in evidence before them, and not to give Verdict for
favor or affection, so help them God, They for favor or affection going
maliciously against their evidence, deserve not only infamy, but all the
consequent punishments of their seduction: And, although Bracton says favor
may be showed quo ad infamiam, yet is there none quo ad poenam redemptionis:
for, Lib. 4. Tract. 4. c. 5. p. 299. Homieida perjurus and adulter ni ocyus ad
se redierint and compensarint una cum his flagitiosis sceleribus patria
exterminantur. Inter L. Canuti. c. 6. p. 108.116. Edit. Twisd.
as God is a hater of false Swearers, Zach 8.17. and a swift witness against
them, Mal. 3.5. so have ever the Laws of this Land been eager against them: by
the Laws of Cnute it was Banishment, and to forfeit his Land: by the Laws of
P. 52. c 25.
Ethelstan to want Christian Burial: and so by those of St. Edward P. 58.
to be as it were un-Christian'd. And because they that were perjurious were
not Oaths-worth, therefore were they never to be believed afterward: which is
in our Texts words, nec aliter recipientur in testimonium veritatis.] for, the
reason is by Bracton added, Quia qui semel convictus de perjurio praesumitur
quod iterum velit perjurare, Lib. 4 Tract. 4. c. 5. p. 292.
according to which the Books are cited by our Judicious Seldom, in his Notes
on this very Chapter.

Et pars quae succubuit in priori placito restituctur ad omnia quae ipse
perdidit eccasione ejus.

This conveniently follows, for if a Detriment be befallen a man upon false
Oath, the evacuation and disproofe of that Oath, and the attaint of the person
foresworn by it must infer Restitution of that which the improbated Oath
occasioned: For, as that of Glanvil in point of the punishment, Lib. 2. c. 19.
Dyer fol. 250.
is true, Quae poena adeo recte instituta esset ut quoslibet ab illicita
praestatione Sacramenti in tali casu coerceat similitudo supplicii; so in point
of Restitution, that implies the Nature of the recompense, to have what they
lost, and their reasonable costs and damadges: so 23 H. 8. c. 3. confirming 11
H. 7 c. 4. and the same was the Common Law before in point of Restitution, of
what was lost by the false Verdict; for so says our Text, Restituitur ad omnia
quae ipse perdidit occasion ejus.]

Quis tunc igitur, etiamsi immemor salutis animae sua fuerit, non formidine
tanta poena and verecundia tantae infamiae veritatem non diceret sic juratus,
etc.

This Clause is inferentiall of what the Chancellor collects from the premised
severity of the Law toward violated Faith, and abused Justice; and its
interrogative vehemence having the Oratory of a positive negation, minds us,
that no man that is wise and worthy will pawn his Soul to fill his Purse, or
hazard his Good Name to accept a petty Bribe. For since God would have every
man a Caeneus, to be armed with innocence from top to toe, (...). Adag. 25.
Chil. 3. Cent. 4.
and in no part or point void of its Muniment, but wholly invulnerable by
wilful and notorious sin; Adag. 62. Chil. 4. Cent. 1.
No man that will have the hornam messem of Heaven, and obtain his vessel as
top full of glory as it can contain, and a good Conscience preserved, will have
from the righteous Judge; no man I say, that strives for this, Chil. 2. Cent.
9. Adag. 24.
must or dare make his soul a (...), sordid to sin and vice, which God abhors,
and for which he has prepared terrors in life, and torments after death. For
since the Holy Ghost has told us, Revel. 22. Ephesians. 5.5. Romans 21.27. Psalm.
50.23.
that without shall be Dogs, and Enchanters, and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, and into the new
Jerusalem no unclean thing must enter: but unto him that orders his
Conversation aright the salvation of God shall be showed, The good and grave
Knight here confirms his own and his Readers minds in the belief of this, That
no man can be false to the Law and the King in violating his Oath, and
injurious to his Neighbor, in parting with his right, which he ought to
justify; but he that neither fears God, nor reverenceth Man, he that is
Immemor salutis, and cares not whether he sink or swim, as we say, and is
desperate, not valuing Reputation, or Personal dishonor, but rest sine
formidine tantae poena, and sine verecundia tantae infamiae.

In that then the Text says Quis enim tametsi immemor salutis suae fuerit;] it
points out to us the piety of the Law that Swears us on the Gospel, that we
might remember the requiries of the Gospel, to love truth in the inward Man,
and to do as we would be done by, as the God of the Gospel exacts from us, and
to fear to do the contrary upon the Curses that the violated Gospel threatens
upon its violators; so does it mind us that some there are that as they put
the evil day far from them, Amos. 6.3.
so do they in their actions demean themselves, as unmindefull of all those
glorious remains that the image of God in them is capable of, and has deposited
for them: which profaneness (for it is a vilipendency of a birthright no less
noble then Esau's was, and sold no less trifflingly then was his) if it should
prevail in a seduced sinner, to promote or give way to, and he throw away his
Eternity as a thing of naught, yet is there in the legal censure of this
Perjury in Jurymen attainted, somewhat that the Chancellor thinks being more
effective of the sense of Man, will more work with him then his Heaven will;
For that few understanding aright do not sutably value, but this every ion of
Adam can judge of, and will endeavor to avoid disgrace to his Name, and
punishment in his Body. For surely, of all things cogent in man, fear is the
first and firmest; Primus in orb Deos fecit timor: and the Prophet, who well
knew what the power of mortal passion was, cries out to God to affect his
enemies with this one of them, as that which would reduce all the rest to
terms; (...), as Aquila reads it: and our Translators after it, Psalm. 9.20.
Put them in fear O Lord, that the Nations may know they are but men. Fear, O
it is that which brings men into servility and compliance, which makes Lapide
read these words by Pone legislatorem super eos; and Cajetan by pone dominum;
and others by Pone jugum vel dominium; because all these, being terrible, cause
fear and dread in the objects of their terror and fury, and that our
Chancellours expressions may have their allowance of weight, this formido is no
transient fear, which does not cadere in v^rum constantem; Cic. 4. Tuscal. 33.
Pavidus formididine p^na Virgil.
but it is metus permaneus: such as does not only make the heart ache, and the
joints to tremble, but such as therefore is such from the prospect it has into
all the arcana and dimensions of that which it fears: hence Scaliger derives
formida a formis id est spectris; not only for that men by fear take
appearances for more then they truly are, Horribiles formidines ex ignoratione
rerum existunt, Cic. 1. de Finibus. Isa. 26.9.
accordingly to that of the Orator, Horrible fears arise out of the ignorance
of things: but because fears soften and cajoule men into obsequiousness. Even
God himself prevails mostly on men by fear; When thy Judgments are in the
World, says the Prophet, the Inhabitants of the World will learn
righteousness. What, no otherwise, nor before? will not the love of Christ
constrain? no, not the World; the little Flock only are so tender and
mouldable: It is the fear of Gods Sovereignty that brings the rebel World to
crouch. If men do Lityersam cantionem canere, Lib. 4. De rerum vocabulis Cap.
(...).
as Julius Pollux his words are, it is against their wills: The sense then is,
Perjury being so great an offense in the Jurour, and the Law not leaving men to
that liberty in point of Oaths, Erasm. Adag. 75. Chil. 3. Cent. 4.
that Corcyra left men in other things, according to that Sarcastique adage
Cent. 1. Adag. 21. Chil. 4.
Lybera Corcyra caca ubi licet; but requiring not only that no Jury man shall
be an ambidexter, but if he be such punishing him according to the Statute 5
Ed. 3. c. 10. and the other prementioned Statutes; but also that he be
inculpable, and know no party in Judgment, as he will avoid that sore judgment
of attaint: the Chancellor does well to urge, that if a man lay aside all
Religion and Moral virtue, yet in the bare formido poenae there is enough it
self to deter him from provocation of the Law, and procuration of his own
punishment according to it; especially when there is verecundia tantae
infamiae] added to it. For this offense does not only afflict the person,
Fortune and Relations, but bespatters, yea deturpates and dishonours the good
Name of any man; and to be infamous Men naturally hate, to be odious and
contemptible is the plague sore of life, which every man shuns: This God
himself humbles man by, when he tells him, That he being little lower then the
Angels, Psalm. 8.5.
and crowned with Majesty and Honor, abode net, but became as the beast that
perished: For this of suffering diminution is the great Crest-fall to all Manly
minds, when men are ranked with the dogs of the flock, they are no company for
any but persons of disregard; and to such do they only incline who are
infamous. Generosioris arboris statim plantae cum fructu est. Adag. 74. Chil.
1. Cent. 3.
Whereas brave and virtuous minds are like generous Trees, that will not only
bring forth fruit, and that quickly, but will thrive in no soil that is not
generous like themselves: This then the Chancellor considering, arraigns the
perjurious person, as not only stupid, in not fearing the punishment of his
Crimes, but phrantick, in contemning all modesty and care of his report and
esteem: Metellus in Vnus quisque debet agere secundum quod sibi ipsis decet. A
Gellias lib. 1. c. 6. p. 3.
Agellius tells the World, Impetu quodam currere ad mortem commune cum multis;
sed deliberare and causat ejus expendere utque senserit ratio vita mortisque
consilium suscipere vel-ponere, ingentis est animi. Plin. secundus in Epist.
That the brave mind holds himself obliged to do every thing like it self. And
if ever any man would have a fair autumn, he must have a tender respect to his
spring and solstice; Reputation once lost is not regained but by something
stupendous, next door to Hyperhumane, which considered, the Chancellor
brings in the dearness of a good name, and the avoidance of the contrary, as
pregnant motives to avoid Perjury; If the thoughts of Heaven and bodily freedom
would not prevail, yet the care of avoiding disgrace should make a man that is
Sworn to do right, fear to forfeit his oath.

Et si unus forsan tantus sui honoris prodigus esse non pepercerit, aliqui
tamen Iuratorum tantorum famam suam non negligent, etc.

This the Text adds to show, that as one scabbed sheep may be in the flock of a
Jury, so in that there may be others sound and good, that infected and seduced
one can do no injury to Justice, if the rest or any part of them hold their
own: For though that may, in a sense, be true in Juries, which was
reproachfully spoken of the discordant Carians, Multitudo Imperatorum Cariam
perdidit; Adag. 7. Cent. 7. Chil. 2.
yet so long as there is any limb of that body hayle, all the others
subversions signify nothing: For the Enquiry of the Court is, Are ye all
agreed of your Verdict? if any one says no, (holding his own against the
others perjurious seduction) the combination comes to naught. So that the Law
considering that men here are set inter sacra and saxa, inter malleum and
incudem, in acie novaculae, that they have many temptations to conflict with,
bids them in this storm (...) put forth their anchor, Cent. 1. Chil. 1.15.16.18.
Integrity: and rather expose themselves to the utmost hazard, though it be to
be Liberide nudiores then to devide the spoil with the wicked: For, though
most men may be Versatiles Artemones, and turn and wind every way as the gust
of their advantage drives them; Adag. 9. Chil. 4. Cent. 1. Adag. 23. Chil. 2.
Cent. 2. In Anno 1554. Hollingshed, p. 1105.
yet a good and well Principled Man will walk sure, and know his footing before
he will trust his body and fortune upon it, crying out with him in the Adage,
Pedibus ingredior, natare enim non didici: and this to do, and to be fixed to
Justice, is Famam suam non negligere, which the Text mentions, and which Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton's Jury made good, and have immortality of same for.

Neque bona and possessiones taliter distrahipatientur.] This relates to the
reward of integrity, security to a man's person and fortune; For, as the Law
easily bears down whatever is a perjurious Jurors, and sinks all of him and
his in a bottomless contempt, and an irrecoverable loss: which the Text terms
bona and possessiones distrahi. Yet, upright and true men non patientur talia,
because they do not forfet their rights by wrong doing: And therefore of all
the bladders and supports to Estates, none like those of Justice in an
Ancestor, that gives a durable basis to all that is built upon it, and to
endeavor to sink it, is (...). Adag. 32. Chil. 3. Cent. 4.
to sink a bottle full of wind: O it is a rare custody in the worst time that
innocence has, when men walk in the Circle of the Law, they do Adag. 13. Cent.
Chil. 1.
(...) duabus nixus in portis sedere ancoris, and they that seize their
fortunes contrary to Equity and Law, are public enemies; For they that suffer
for righteousness have the Spirit of glory resting on them: That only being a
comfortless suffering which is the fruit of busy-hodiing, and evill-doing
against the Laws of men, and the Vicegerent of God.

This then being the circumspection of the Law to prevent Perjury in Jurymen,
the Chancellor is by me to be considered, not in opposition to the course of
other Laws, but as recollecting his precedent arguments for the trial of truth
by Juries; as that the Act of God and Nature determine not the remedy of
Justice, that Witnesses are not taken hab nab, as we say, Ignoti] such as no
body ownes, but are their own affirmers; whose condition, life and way men are
unsatisfied in, because secret and subdolous; Men never known in their own, nor
ever known out of other men's way: nor Conductitii,] bought, and made Witnesses,
as Plautus's Fidicina Conductitia was, who played what Tune his Company called
for: and Varro calls all works of Pay Conductitiae operae. Epid 6.8. Lib. 1. de
Re Rust. 17. Omnia conductor solvit, Ovid 1. Amor. Eleg. 10.
No such buyers and sellers of Innocence in the Temple of Juries does the Law
suffer, but overthrows the Tables of these Money Changers, and all this it does
to make way for upright Judgment: Tunc canunt Cygni cum tacebunt Gracculi. For,
(...).
when men are sordidly set on gain, if their houses and estate be (...), and
they have (...), heaps of Gold; Chil. 1. Cent. 3. Adag. 34.
yet, if they be venal, they will truckle to Perjury, as every Workman that
will be well paid, Nemo Iustus esse potest qui mortem, qui dolorem, qui
exilium, qui egestatem timet, aut qui ea qua sunt contraria aquitati auteponit.
Cic. 1. Offic.
learns to humor and please his Imployer and Play Master: and this the Law
looking upon, as the Moth and Canker of Integrity, decries and punishes it, and
that with the concurrent acclamation of all honest men; who, because they know
not the deceits and lurches of their own hearts, Fides sanctissimum humani
pectoris bonum est, nulla necessitate ad fallendum cogitur, nullo corrumpitur
praemio; ure (inquit) occide, coede, non prodam, sed quo magis secreta quarit
dolor hoc illa altius condam. Senoc. lib. de Constable. Sapient.
are pleased to have these Mandative Preventions put upon them; For Faith
untainted, and Truth pure and defecate, says Seneca, is the most sacred good
thing in the divine soul of man, compellable to evil by no necessity;
perswadable by no bribe or leure; resolute against all terror, constant in
retaining its innocence: so, that acceptance of rewards being punishable, the
Law has done wisely to see, that witnesses be not conductitii, such as either
need for want of fortune, and will take for Covetise any gratification to
elude justice, and become false.

Vagi inconstantes. Vagabundus essusus in voluptates, ac vagabundus semper and
ebrius. Senec. lib. de vita Beata.
] These are ill qualities which the Law abhors in Witnesses who under this name
are accounted loose persons, though perhaps not such as the Statute 39 Eliz.
17. calls Vagrants, or the 1 Jacob. 7. Vagabonds; yet little better, Vagus qui
passionem manifesto ostendit, says Festus. This the Greeks call by (...), qui
sine negotio, modo huc, modo illuc, inutiliter discurrit, An Erratile and
Planetary piece of Manhood carried up and down by the impetuosity of vice to
this and that, without settlement in any thing. The Ancients, as they accounted
consistence and stability the all, almost, of Virtue and Wisdom, so levity and
vagenesse the complement of all evil and infamy; Tully mentions aliquem vagum
and exulem errare, Pro Gluentio. Pro Milone.
and aves vagae, errores vagi, and fortuna vaga and volubilis; and in Martial
there is, Iuvencus vagus, and Gressus vagi, Lumina vaga, and Murmura vaga; and
Pliny writing of the name of the herb Ambrosia, terms it, Nomen vagum,
inconstans, and multis opinionibus obnoxium, by all which the Laws Wisdom is
apparent, for therefore does it exclude necessitous persons, or such as have
habituated themselves to shift and shark, from all credit, as Witnesses;
because Custom has made it a second nature to them, and they cannot but be
almost such in all cases, who do apply themselves to be such in any.

Aut quorum Conditiones, vel Malitiae ignorantur.] That is, they are so well
known to be reputed honest and upright, Si careat suspicione testimonium vel
propter personam a qua fertur, quod honesta sit, vel propter causam quod neque
lucri, neque gratiae, neque inimicitiae causa sit, admittendus est, Calistratus
lib. 4. De Cognitionibus.
that, if such they be not, their testimony is abated in the credit, for the
Law requires stanch Witnesses, and presumes them such where they are not either
convicted or violently presumed, and the Law being so Argus-eyed, and giving
liberty to all well-grounded information, and it so importing the adverse party
to inform against the Witness, if cause and justice there be for so doing:
this considered, occasioned the words, Aut quorum conditiones vel malitiae
ignorantur. These are the infamous persons that the Laws exclude Testimony,
the allowed ones follow to be touched upon.

Vicini sunt Testes, de propriis vivere potentes, famae integrae and opinionis
illaesae.]

This added to the former perfects the Parallel, there 'twas non ignoti, here
vicini sunt; there 'twas non conductitii, here de propriis vivere potentes;
there 'twas pauperes, vagi, inconstantes, here it is famae integrae, and
opinionis illaesa; so that the variation adding to the Emphasis still directs
us to our Authors Excellence, which is to render the Law considerate in every
particle and point of its Justice; for it aiming at the great end of
Government, Right-doing, imployes every instance of its power and reason to
minister to that; and that it doing, by impeding the contrary as well as by
advancing the proper tendencyes thereto, arives at that compleatness therein,
that denominates England the Throne and Center of Justice; and that not only
for the exactness of Witnesses, and impartiality of Juries, but for that the
Returners of Juries are not men mercenary, ill to live, but of great fortune,
blood and breeding, per officiarium nobilem and indifferentem electi,] and,
when served they are to testify their knowledge in a Cause; it is not
arbitrary, whether they will or will not, but they are fineable if they do not:
yea, and as the cause may be, I think, the party that suffers damages by the
absence of a Witness legally summoned and served to appear, and not appearing,
being well and no act of God impeding him, may bring his Action against such an
Absenter, and recover in it against him, which is perhaps the cause that the
Text says,

Et coram Iudice venire compulfi] That is, the obstinacy of such absence being
penal, both from the King whose Laws are contemned, and to recompense of the
party who by it is damnified, the Witnesses may be well said to be coram Iudice
venire compulsi. This then the Law doing, and to that end which is only
propitious to Order and National Charity; the conclusion of the Chancellor is
to good purpose, Quid ultra vere nihil est, meaning this the Hercules Pillar
and the Meta ultimae of all politic prudence and Magistratique care: for,
when that is done to further virtue, which the wit of man can devise or carry
on, what more can be thought endeavourable then is aimed at in this proceedure;
which, how the Laws of England effect, let those judge who consider, Quise non
opinari sed scire, non audivisse sed vidisse, non interfuisse, sed egisse
dicunt. Cic. ^yo Archia.
that such are only allowed to serve on Juries as are fide digni, and are men
of Estate, and those to give testimony unto them, Who are not only
unblemished, but are positive, and not by hearsay, Witnesses. So tenacious is
the Law of its just Spirit, that it abates not one Iota of it to gratify any
Greatness or Prevalency, but gives this Motto, Fiat Iustitia and ruat mundus;
which Constancy, upon so divine a Basis, displayes the rectitude of its
Principle, and bespeaks the great reward of honor from God and men. For when
men of wavering minds have played all their prizes, and had a venture in every
Lottery of Levity and Change, that will be the indeleble Mark of a Wiseman,
Praebeo me non aliter quam rupes aliqua in vadoso mari destituta, quam fluctus
non desinunt, undiquaque moti sunt, verberare, nec ideo aut loco eam movent,
aut per tot aetates crebro ineursu suo consumunt. Seneca lib. De beata vita, c.
27.
which Seneca commends Socrates for, whom he brings in justifiing himself
immovable, notwithstanding popular tumults, as the Rocks are for all the high
Seas that dash against them. And therefore though Maro may commend Latinus as
he deserved, for being, as he publishes him, Ille velut Pelagi rupes immota
resistit; and Agellius lib. 1. c. 23.
Papyrius may be cried up as the only Roman. Youth that could keep a Secret,
and be constantly resolute against the sieges of love to discover it:
Malmesbury Hist. Novel. lib. 2.
Though Robert Earl of Gloucester, Manner debet apud nos frater fidei robus
immobile, and stabilis, atque inconcussa virtus contra omnes incursus and
impetus obl^trantium fluctuum. etc. Sanct. Cyprian. Epist. 7.
Son to H. 1. have the praise of our Historians for adhering to a good matter,
and being zealous in it: And that Christian Rule in Saint Cyprian should be
owned Gospel by us, which is not to be hoped it should in this degenerate Age
be, wherein Gold and Greatness are the only Numens; I say, should all these
be amassed into one, yet would they not come up to the Laws Constans and
perpetua voluntas Ius unicnique tribuendi. And therefore it is a good Rule that
a wise man, Monarch, and Christian gave us, That the Law was the surest
foundation of happiness that any man could rest upon; which when the belief of
it evidences it self in practice, will prevail with me to admire the graduates
in this Perfection, as Contenders with the Venetian Senate for Mastery in
Constancy, of which, truly I think, they gave a matchless President in the
case of Carmagniola their General, Shute's History of Venice. p. 334.
who, though openly suspected in the Senate, wherein Execution of him was
concluded, yet in all the eight Months that passed between their Conclusion and
his Execution, though he had many friends in the Senate and some of them poor,
who might have received great rewards for discovering his danger to him; none
of them discovered it to him, nor did he know of it till it fell fatally upon
him; which Justice, to the honor and success of the Senate, argues them, that
were Members of it, ambitious rather to honor their Government, then advance
themselves; which if we of this Nation would do, we should better deserve then
we do, the freedom of such a Law and Government, as we, blessed be God, have
constituted. By all then that has been written it appears, that a readier way
to justice no man can go, then by those stepps that the Law has chalked out.
And so I take leave of the Text, and proceed to the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII.
Sed quomodo in criminalibus Leges Angliae scrutantur veritatem, etiam rimare
pernecessarium est.


HEre the Chancellor, like an exact Master, observes Method to the clear and
kindly attainment of his end, which was to endear the Law to the Prince, and
the Prince to it; and that upon conviction that it is the most expedite way to
govern English men by, and has the best means of discovering offenses and
providing remedies for them in England, that can possibly be found out: to
which end considering, that causes relating to justice are either such as are
civil, or criminal, having fully in the two forgoing Chapters treated of civil
Actions with their remedies and manner of prosecution, he now comes to
Criminals, as they are tried and proceeded against in England by the Common Law
or by the Statute Law, which come under the title of Leges Angliae. And this he
thinks not only convenient to explorate and detect, sed peruecessarium, as
that which unles removed will obstruct his after and more effectual passage;
for his Errand being to the Prince, whose soul and reason he would conquer to
and confirm in, so just and behovefull a thing both to King and people, as a
good opinion of the Law of England is, he judges it peruecessarium thoroughly
and absolutely requisite to evidence to the Prince, that the Law is not more
defensive of privilege, then Prerogative; nor a stouter Bulwark to civil
Rights between man and man, then of the Sovereign's Person, Honor, and
Prerogatives, the violation of which endowments of Sovereignty it judges
criminal.

And that the Chancellours intentness may more illustrate it self, I shall
crave leave to touch upon two things in this transitionall clause. 1. The
Epithet he gives the Laws Enquest after Criminal Offenses, Scrutantur
Veritatem: the Greeks express the Verb Scrutor by (...), Ab (...) vel (...)
Becman, lib. de Orig. Lingua Lat.
quod proprie est interrogando aut colloquendo scrutor, elicio, indago: and by
this the Chancellor informs us the means and way of discovery of Treasons,
Felonies, and Breaches of the Peace, which are all Criminalls, to wit, by way
of Enquiry, Examination, and following offenses by a wise and diligent persuit,
while the brute of them is fresh, and the stinch of them warm and reaking; Not
but that the truth of some Facts lie a great while unfound out, because either
secret, or not ripe for vengeance in their discovery: But when ever the Law has
intelligence of offenses and offenders, by the Ministers of Justice, and
Officers of the Crown, it eagerly pursues them, and dives into the Nature,
Circumstances, and aggravations of them; and this to know is pernecessarium,
because it implies zeal to Justice, and gubernative severity; which by
prosecuting offenders is tender, and conservative of well doers: and this the
Chancellor intends by Scrutantur Veritatem.

Secondly, The Chancellours drift in bringing Criminals to be discoursed on is
notable, rimare pernecessarium; it should, I think, be rimari, for the Verb is
deponent, and has no active, because it is of active signification; the Nown
Rima signifies a Cleft, Chap, or Chink, which is not close joined: and by
allusion plenus rimarum is by Terence the description of a babbler, who has such
wide chinks and chops in his mouth between his lips, that all secrecies pass
thorough them: Plautus also uses invenire rimam to find excuse, or means to
escape, as little Vermin do at the least crevise, or chinke. Hence one sense of
the Verb Rimor is to cleave, (...). John. 5.39. Rimari est quaerere valde,
Festus
as Timber that is shaken by the wind does, though the usuallest be to search
out narrowly in every corner and cleft; so Claudian uses Iuga rimari canibus,
for to Hunt with Hounds in every corner, to which our Chancellor without doubt
has respect: telling the Prince, that as the Law is very exact in its
appointment of all things that concern King and Subject, and is defective in no
point of regimentall prudence; so is it his care to find out apt words to
carry his ardent affection to the Laws of England, pleasingly to the Princes
ear, and from thence to his love and affections.

Vt in cis plenaric aguita ambarum legum forma, quae earum efficacius latentem
revelat veritatem certius agnoscamus.

Here the Chancellor intimates to us three things; First, The end and use of
good Laws, latentem revelare veritatem. Secondly, The modus, by which Judgment
is rightly made, and in what manner the Law does this, that is plenaria
agnitione ambarum legum formae. Thirdly, The danger of civil broils to render
National Law odious, and foreign Laws amiable; This I collect from the
expression of ambarum legum: For our Chancellor would never have so eagerly
asserted the Common Law of England, and debacchated against other Laws, had he
not seen them probable to be competitors with the Municipe Laws, the love of
which exotique Laws probably he perceived, either stealing into the Princes
heart, or whispred into his ear by Adulatorious Forraigners in the time of his
Exile.

The end and use of good Laws he makes to be latentem revelare veritatem:
Truth is the precious Jewel which does latere, and is not come at but with
toil and hazard; which made the Pythagoreans say, veritas in puteo: indeed
methinks Solomon had some meaning analogick to this, when he bids us get wisdom
rather then gold; now both Wisdom and Gold do not lie on the surface, Prove.
16.16.
nor are they obvious, but obtained with difficulty. Since therefore her luster
has such damps, and her price is so invisible, (...), etc. Dyonisius Areopag.
apud Stobaeum Sermon. 60, 61.
the work of us mortals is to prosecute truth so hard, and follow after her so
earnestly, that we give no rest to our eyes, nor recreation to our lives, till
we apprehend her Dulcis veritas in interiora melodia; (...). Evagrius apud
eundem.
This therefore the Chancellor here publishes to be the labor of the Law,
Latentem revelare veritatem: to rescue the beauty and virginity of truth from
the rape and force of pretended virtue, but real falsehood her antagonist.

For, such is the craft of the World's Polycrates's, that they do omnem movere
lapidem; to bury truth in the heap of fallacies, and to make Justice set up
somewhat as a Law, which should bastardize her, and, in stead of her,
legitimate that spurious product of villainy, in justice. This makes the Law so
exact to try, so vigilant to avoid trapanning, and from this are often delays
occasioned, which are real advantages to truth, not (as is supposed) methods
purposely studied to enhance gain: For as Mariners, when they have but a bad
wind often shift sails, and waft from shore to shore, that they may make some
way to their Port, and not lose all progress because they have not a full gale:
so are Lawmakers necessitated to use all means to right Truth, and use all
instruments to her clarification, rather then lose one grain or atome of her.
For all truth qua such is mysterious, and to be sought after till it be found,
if ever it be; and the least dram of it that we attain as the consequence of
our acquisition, will be welcome to us; and we shall account our selves to be
recompensed for all our labor by it.

The truth then that the Law seeks for here, and having found reveals, is the
truth of Fact; that is, whether a Malefactor be so bad as he is suspected, and
accused to be: For it sometimes falls out, that the clamor is greater then the
offense deserves; and if the punishment should be in have executed, the
Magistrate would be artifex injuriae non opifex Iustitiae: therefore Policy,
that is well advised, cautions that a just assay should be taken of every man
and thing, and that such Arts should be practiced as may sever the precious
from the vile, and the Gold from the dross; and that is done by examinations of
Witnesses upon such heads as may best conduce to knowledge of what they
understand in the cause: For Laws are intended to settle the rule of equal
distribution both of mine and thine, rewards and punishments: and being
directed to so useful an end as is the decision of debates by the line and
plummet of Truth, what more useful benefit to humane Societies, then Laws?

But how shall good Laws be fitted to answer these good ends, or how shall men
make use of good Laws to the latitude of these good ends. That the Chancellor
resolves in the second place, Plenaria agnitione ambarum legum formae.] For
knowledge of the forms which do dare esse, makes a man capable to judge of their
fitness and conducibility to those ends. As it is not a trite skill in simples,
and a bare book learned speculation that makes a good Physician; but the
knowledge of the operation, and the view of them in practice upon Patients that
makes an expert practicer: so is it not a light and oscitant touch in the study
of Law that makes a man capable to judge of the Law, but an accomplished
Mastery of the reason of it, and a coylification of it into ones Mother reason,
rectifiing it thereby, that entitles a man to judgment of what the Law is, and
is not. For Forms, as they are modelled and fixed to the freehold of the Law,
are not purprestures that are destroyable without great inconvenience, but they
are so fastened to the maine Principles of Polity, that with them they endanger
the ruin of Government: For we must reasonably imagine that the setters up of
them, wise, (and in their times) worthy men, had solid reason for what they
did; and thereupon doing it, we are to conclude there is some inconvenience
will ensue that demolition, which was on purpose raised as a Sanctuary to
Order: The consideration of which may lead us into the reason, why judgment of
Forms, Methods, and Regulations of Government in the World, is not committed
usually to young and green-headed men, whose brains are too Mercuriall to fix,
and too Sultanish to deliberate of things; but to grave and sad men, who are
above the levities of youth, and beneath the dotages of old age. Byas that wise
Lawmakers appointed no man to be Governor of his People till forty years of
Age; (...).
and the reason was, Youth is light and heady, Age is sour and infirm: and the
usual saying was, consilia senum hastas esse juvenum; pointing out no doubt at
this, that Experience the fruit of years is the season of Judgment. And
therefore as to the Case in point, he that will judge of whether Laws
Proceedings are best, must know the forms of both, which few fully do that are
not of years; and spend not their years in study and search into both Laws.
Yea, suppose a man had the Law-learning of Volufius Metianus the Master of that
renowned Marcus Antoninus, Epist. ad Pollionem.
who gives this testimony of him, that he was in legibus interpretandis
experientissimus; yet if he be as Volusius was, in iisdem violandis long magis
exercitatus, what is he profited by it? Such a Volusius who asks, whether one
thinks there be any Law in the World which he knew not, may be answered as he
was, Dic mihi, estne ulla lex in mundo quam praestes and observes? That then
which must give a man a right judgment of Laws, will be consideration thoroughly
of the Forms, Steps, and Marches by which they move; and how suitable they are
to the People, they are to Order: For our Chancellor now speaks to the Prince
as solicited by his breeding and conversation abroad, to close with Foreign
Laws, under which he saw People Obedient and Loyal, and Countries in peace:
when in England where the Common Law had, in pretense, its course, at least
where no other Law but the Common Law was admitted, Rebellion prevailed, and
Civil Wars continued (a mote or beam in the Princes eye, which made him look
as it were a-squint, or unpleasingly on the Common Law, and delightfully on
other Laws) the Chancellor Courts him to continue the Common Law his darling,
though the other Law had some, yea much respect, as, in its kind, it was
worthy to have of him.

Si reus quispiam de Felonia aut Proditione in Anglia rettatus crimen suum
coram Iudicibus dedicat.

Concerning Treason and Felony somewhat has been written heretofore, yet this
Chapter being purposely designed by our Text to the treaty of it, I crave leave
to add further what I humbly conceive pertinent to this place. Reus de Felonia
aut Proditione] This referrs to the two great capital Offenses punishable by
Law; Felony] which anciently was the offense of the Vassal against his Lord,
Very Felons and Thieves, words of Stat. 8 Eliz. c. 4.
perhaps for little Thefts and slight of hand, whence it may be that sore on
the finger called a Fellen may come: since, Felony was punished with forfeiture
of the Estate and Goods of the person offending, which though they were
redeemable by Mere and Mergild, Spelman Gloss: in voce.
yet now are not; for Henry the First made Theft, the most ordinary Felony,
punishable with death: and though the Common Law brought off Felons by their
books, yet since many Statutes, 8 Eliz c. 4. 1 Jac. 8.12. 25 H. 8. c. 6. 32 H.
8. c. 3. 5 Eliz. 17.4 and 5 P. and M. c. 4 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 2. 5 Eliz. c. 5. 19
Eliz. c. 7. 5 Eliz. c. 20. 39 Eliz. c. 9. 23 H. 8. c. 1. 32 H. 8. c. 3. 5 and 6
E. 6. c. 9, and 10. 27 Eliz. c. 2. 1 E. 6. c. 12.
taking away Clergy, leave Felony to the punishment of hanging the body and
forfeiture of the Estate. The crime of Felony is a grievous one, and to call a
man Felon, is to entitle him to all the opprobry and danger imaginable. At this
day then Felony is the great brand of every offense against the Peace, Crown,
and Dignity of our Sovereign Lord the King; for, all Treason, though it be more
in the punishment, Stamford. Pleas of the Crown. Cook 3. part. Instit. Pleas of
the Crown. and on Littl. p. 391. Spelman in Gloss.
yet it has in it felleum animum which makes the atrocity of it. To discourse
of Felony at large is needless, since both Stamford, Sir Edw. Cook, and others
have abundantly done it, therefore I referr the Reader to them.

Vel proditione.] This in the latitude of it signifies any falseness, but
chiefly that which concerns the Magistrate, and his charge, to deliver up whom
or which into the enemies hand is capital by all Laws. Lib. 35. Syntag. Juris
universi:
Tholossanus gives us an account of all Nations abhorrency of it, and severity
against it: but this proditio here is alta proditio, or laesa Majestas; which
being an offense against the great God, thorough the King, who is Deus post
primum secundus, and is Solo deo Minor, the Minister of God for our good, and
the dispenser of the power of God to the foecundation of Order; the Laws of
England makes capital, as in the Notes on the 22 Chapter I have shown; Only
as in all Cases, not the accusation but proof makes the guilt; so is it here,
and thereupon in order to proof, the offender, or presumed so to be, is called
by our Text Rettatus.

In Anglia Rettatus.] I confess, at the first view of this I thought it was a
fault in the Copy, and that Rettatus should have been Rectatus; the word used
in the Statute De Bigamis, Cap. 5.2 Instit. p. 273. 2 Instit. p. 285.
Quando de felonia rectati fuerunt: but when I considered the word had another
sense there, then this must have here, I searched to find the proper notation
of it, and found it to signify Arrested, or Accused, so Gents rettes de Felony
Stat. 1. Westminst. c. 15. Page 250.
so in the Statute Marlbridge, c. 28. Si clericus aliquis pro crimine aliquo
vel retto quod ad Coronam pestineat arrestatus fuerit; and so Westminst. 1. c.
2. Pur view est ensement que quant Clerk est pur rette de Felony; Page 163.
and so c. 15. Gents rettes de Felony: and methinks rettatus may come as well
from raptatus as from the other Etymologies, Accusations and Arrests for
Treason being things of violence, the party that is guilty of them being not
willingly apprehended for them.

Crimen suum coram judicibus dedicit.] If the Felony be confessed, then the
Trial in form of Law is needless: but if he do dedicere; that is, deny it, and
stand upon his integrity as not guilty, then it must be tried modo and forma;
which the Law therefore provides for, because it meets with few offenders that
take the Prophets advice, to confess their sins, and give glory to God: for
they are so far from that, that they have contrived a Proverb, in bar of that
ingenuity, Confess and be hanged. The Law therefore thinking fit to search into
all offenses of this nature, as intolerable, provides for the Trial, as well
as the apprehension and detection of it, which is, by empannelling of a Jury to
try it.

Mox Vicecomes comitatus ubi facinus illud comissum est, venire faciet coram
eisdem Iudicibus viginti quatuor probos and legales homines, etc.

This Jury is but to consist of twelve, but the summons is to be of double as
many, that there may be room for exception: and this the Law does to prevent
all surprise, especially in Treason, which being a heinous guilt, and having a
heavy doom; all the Justice that can be done in favorem vitae and relationum,
is herein showed: These then good men and true, Stat. de his qui ponendi sunt
in assessis.
of the Neighborhood, as in actions real and personal, returned, having in
Estate 5.1. a year in Lands and Rents, as appoints the Statute 21 E. 1.
appearing in Court, the Fact is Triable: If the Prisoner interpose not by
challenge of them, or some of them, which the Law allows him to do, Rettatus
ille cos calumpniare potest, etc.] says the Text.

Et insuper in favorem vitae calumpniare potest triginta quinque homines quos
ipse maxim formidat.

This shows not only that an offender may challenge, but also why, and how
many he may disable to serve against him: The freedom that the Law allows him
is calumni^re, which we translate challenge; and so our Historians use the word
as well as our Lawyers: Quanquam perante Dominum Baldwinus Frevil, idem
officium calumniasset sed minime obtinuisset, p. 195.
so Walsingham uses it when relating the famous Coronation of Richard the
second, and the pretense the Lord Frevil had to be Champion to the King: and
the men he may disable are such of the Return as he does Maxim formidare;
that is, Spelman Gloss in verbo Calumnia, p. 116.
such as he fears, as well for their Justice and Impartiality as for their
Enmity: Resolution of the Judges in the Case of Sir Walter Rawleigh, 1 Instit.
p. 156. B.
(For a Traitor has as great spite against Loyalty in the Jury as any thing
else) and this he may do to the number of 35. not to three full Juries, for
then there may be a Progressio in infinitum, and no Trial easily be, but to as
many as may be within three whole Juries, that the Law may be known to favor
life, and avoid cruelty. It Is true, I know by the 22 H. 8. c. 14. these
peremptory challenges were reduced to twenty, confirmed by 28 of the same King
c. 1.; and by the 32 H. 8. c. 3. made perpetual: but the Statute of 1 and 2 P.
and M. restoring the Trial by the Common Law, offenders are indulged challenge
peremptory to 35. as the Text says, Qui ad ejus calumpniam cancellabuntur in
panello, etc. Licet ipse nullam causam assignare sciat, etc.

Quis enim tunc mori possit inique in Anglia pro Crimine, cum tot juvamina
habere ille poterit ob favorem vitae suae.

This the Chancellor infers to show the Prince how much the Laws permit to the
favor of life, even in those Cases wherein the Law is most provoked; and the
Quis inique mori possit in Anglia, etc.] Is not to be expounded as if it were a
challenge to the bitterest foe to our Laws, to instance in one that
injuriously had died, or to boast of no naeve or Scarr in the administration of
Justice, nothing less: For this Livia (...) Dictum de Livia Erasm. Adag. 39.
Chil. 1. Cent. 7.
of our Law may be in some things too speedy to be justified to her own
Augustus. Some instances will not be denied to be produceable, wherein there
may have been more have then good speed: there may be such an offender as many
Freeholders in a Shire, condemning in the Sessions of their own judgments, and
that upon perhaps a brute, or mistake; may in persuance of that prepossession
verdict guilty in Trial upon him: And there may be Iniqua Tempora, wherein
such bloody Usurpers as Richard the third, and such Parasites as Sir George
Rutliff his creature domineering. Many may ^nique mori in England, Ingenii
magni, malignus, sermon rudis habitu rusticus, ad quaelibet-atrocia facinora
suscipienda princeps, ab omni aut erga homines misericordia aut erg^ superos
reverentia alienissimus. Tho. Morus Cancellar, in R. 3 vita p. 52. Impross.
Lovanii.
these Times and things have been elder and later in England, therefore the
Chancellours Quis tunc, etc. is not rigidly and absolutely to be taken, as if
it imported an affirmation, excluding all instance to the contrary: but it is
interpretable as an inference of prudence which from means judges of ends; and
so we must apprehend the Chancellor, to intend that through the punctuality
required by Law to the Trial of Causes, there is as much as art and conscience
can contrive to extrude corruption, and to favor preservation of Right, Life,
and reputation: And that if the sins of the Nation have not provoked God to
give up the Subjects to Irreligion and falseness, there is safety to all that is
dear to an Englishman in his Trial, nor does often any good thing that is his
suffer by them; yea, if Juries be but knowing, honest, and resolute, nothing of
injury can judicially be done in England, and, especially in Case of Life: and,
when in such Times and Cases things have been handover-head injuriously
carried, Times of better temper and Restitution have reversed the judgments,
Hollingshed. p. 339.

Cook. 4. Part Instit. Chap. Parliament.

Act of 13 of the King Entitled an Act for Preservation of His Majesty's Person
and Government against Treasonable, Seditious practices and attempts.

See the Act Entitled an Act for the Attainder of several persons guilty of the
horrid Murder of his late Sacred Majesty King Charles the first. Anno 12. Car.
2. confirmed by 13 of our most gracious King.


and dishonored the practices of them: so did the Nation do by the Murder of
Thomas the good Duke of Lancaster, who was not put to death per legem terrae;
and therefore was declared unlawfully Proceeded against, by Parliament. And so,
though our eyes saw, and the hearts of Wise and Worthy men in the Nation
mourned for, the Extrajudiciall Proceedings of High Courts ^f Justice, and
Courts Martial, as they were called; wherein not only many of the Loyal and
brave spirited Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Commons of England were Sentenced,
and by Order of it Executed: yea, and what is ever to be rivetted into the
abhorrence of an Englishman, the Sacred and Divine Person of our then Wise and
Pious Sovereign King CHARLES the first; forced within the Power, and Martyred
by the violence of that execrable Usurpation: though, I say, this Nation has
had such Monstrous impieties acted in it, yet has it obtained from God the
Mercy and Opportunity of Nationally disclaiming, and Nobly abhorring the
Sacrilege and Truculency of it: yea, and to perpetuate the Antipathy of the
Nation against it, has by Act of Parliament, not only censured it, but set
apart the 30th. of January: (If any such day ought, as but for that Dedication
to Penance, it ought not to be allowed in the Month for ever after) to be a
Day of Humiliation, Nigro Carbone notandus, and of expiation for that Nefarious
Fact; which I will no further censure because the Sentence of Law has past on
it: I return then to what follows.

Mallem revera viginti facinorosos mortem piet^te evadere, quam unum Iustum
injuste condemnari.

This vehemence of our Chancellour's well becomes his pious and divine soul;
which knew, that to err on the right hand, by too much lenity, was safer, then
to err on the left by too much rigor: And as I am bound to believe that his
afflictions had brought God and him into intimacy, so does he in his actions
resolve to follow God in all the actions of Judicature his Providence shall
interest him: And hence it is, that as Gods delight is Mercy, Isay. 28.21.
and Judgment is declared by him to be his strange work; so does our
Chancellor here profess his alienation from injustice, and that if he must be
a Judge he had rather rid the World of many Miscreants, then be accessory to
the oppression of one Righteous Person unrighteously adjudged to death by him.
And good reason he had thus to prefix his Mallem to that truth, because not
only the righteous man is better then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26.
and the best is to be preserved; and the destruction of one good man is
afflictive to God, according to that of the Psalmist, Precious in the eyes of
the Lord is the death of his saints: Psalm. 116.15.
but also as one good and just man may be more worth then a World of dissolute
(and God Damn Me) sinners; so is the testimony of God himself, who, Genesis 6. v.
12.
when he looked upon the Earth, and beheld it was corrupt, for all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth: yet in the seventh Chapter v. 1. God says
to, and of Noah, Thee only have I seen righteous before me in this Generation:
and as for the sake of this just man, God reserved some men alive, who were
with him in the Ark, so for the unjust cruelty of the Jewish Nation against
that Holy One, and that just One our Lord Jesus, whom they barbarously and with
high contempt crucified, did God bring the fierce and puissant Roman upon them,
who rifled the Temple, sacked the City, carried away the Nation captive, and
determined the account of Jews and Judaism all the World over. These examples
tell us, there is reason for the Chancellours Mallet; nor are the instances
only in Scripture, whence the prepollency of one to many may be confirmed, but
in other Authors also. Aristides is represented to us so just, that the
Grecian Judges would prefer his word to many other men's oaths: and Socrates
so matchlesly wise and exemplary, that after his Countrymen put him (the eye
and soul of Greece) to death, they never did any brave action either at home or
abroad; but dwindled away, Vnus ille vir ipse consul Rempublicam sustinuit.
Livius lib. 2.
as if God revenged in their infamy the death of that Heroic. Among the Romans
there is honor done Fabius Coeso, as the only conservator of the Government.
And Quintinus Coeso, Vnus impetus trilunitios popularesque procellas sustinuit.
lib. 3.
by opposing the Agragrian Law, is counted a Patriot more worth then all the
Plebs. So Fabius Cunctator; these and such like are famous above many. And if
one worthy man whose Justice has the oriency of a Carbuncle, and glisters in
the night of degeneration, to the dislustre and eclipse of those whose
interests in the domineering follies of Ages make them dark as Hell, and
dismal as those subterraneous labyrinths that the fiends of Satan retreat to:
If thus, I say, one just person may be corrective of a multitudes exorbitancy,
and reduce them from the evil of their ways; good reason is there for this
choice of our Chancellor, in desiring rather to pardon twenty evil doers,
then punish unjustly with death one just man. Since in the one he contributes
time (if God will give grace) to their Repentance, who by living longer may
live better: Psalm. 51.
but in the other he draws innocent blood upon himself, which David
deprecates, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation.

In hoc equidem processu nihil est crudele, nihil inhumanum, nec laedi poterit
Innocens in corpore aut membris suis.

As the guilty being impeached cannot ( salvis legibus) go unpunished, so
cannot the innocent be charged in his body, or any member of it; for the Law of
England is a merciful Law, and says, disclaimingly as to cruelty, as Perseus
in a like nature did, Neque enim mihi cornua fibra: for the Law has nothing of
the Adamant, Flint, Steel, which are said Cornu in pectore gestare; Satyr.
Prim^.
but it is composed of sweetness where it may allure, and of pity even when it
is forced to correct: and he is not a true Judge of this Law who condemns
offenders without remorse for their sin, and obduration the cause of it: Nor
are our Punishments, Racks, Torments, Making up between Walls alive, inhumane
Butcheries, such as in other Nations are wont; those cruelties are no methods
of our Law: If the offense be light, suitable to it is the punishment: if
criminal, then death: and if men deserve neither, by judgment of their Peers,
innocent they are: and as such cannot suffer in their whole, or any part of
their body; For as no man can be put to death but secundum legem terrae; Cook 1
Instit. p. 126, 127, etc.
so not lose any limb nisi per legem terrae: For Mayhem is an offense against
the Law, and actionable, unless where the loss of a Member is permitted by Act
of Parliament: For, though of old the privities of men for Adultery, and their
eyes and hands for Theft were avitable; yet since Christianity, and the more
illuminate times of it, loss of members of the body has been allowed, but in
very few Cases, as in striking a Judge in executing his office, or any other
man in the face of the Court, the Court sitting: and loosing of ears in case
of Cheating and Forgery. So that considering that punishments are upon such
just grounds, and that no person has permission in England, through the
greatness of his power, to oppress any man, nor may any man justly dread
Calumniam Inimicorum; because ( non torquebitur ille ad arbitrium ipsorum) but
they can no otherwise be revenged of him (except perjuriously and murderously,
which the Law will severely punish them for) then the Law allows, and the guilt
deserves: since, I say, the Law of England is so tuitive of the Estate, Stat.
3. H. ^. c. 1^.
Life, and Member of men, as it (to the admiration and acclamation of all our
neighbor Nations) is known and confessed to be. The Chancellours inference is
most true, Sub hac lege vivere quietum and securum est; And so with a Prayer to
the Prince to choose (upon these things premised, and the reason of them
weighed) whether either the foreign or patrial Laws he will best approve and
adhere to, he concludes this Chapter.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Cui Princeps. Arduum ambiguumve Cancellarie, non conspicio, etc.
THis Chapter personates the Prince, as ingeniously suppled by the Chancellours
application and reason, into a plenary concession of his Allegations, and a
subjection to the prevalence of his learned Arguments: and as the several
passages in it proclaim the Prince generously ductile, Sunt quidam it^ natura
muneribus in iisdem habiles, ita ornati, ut non nati, sed ab aliquo Deo ficti
vid^rentur. Cie. lib. De clar. Oratoribus.
(for I make no question but the penning of it is exploratory of his addiction,
and rather historically true then parasitically fancied) so the account he is
personated to give, is amply Masculine in the vigor of its reason; for as the
Chancellor did not present him, Rebus palestrae and olei, as light things are
called by Tully, but with the great things of the Law, and grave Arguments to
work upon his judgment and affections, to love and follow it, so the Prince
did not show himself morosum titubantemque to such wise offerings; for that had
been to browbeat his age, and to dishearten his loyalty. Yea if such
unsetledness of humor caused the desultory Satyr, when invited in time of
Frost and Snow into the Country Swains house, seeing his Host blow his hands
before there was a fire for cold, Valebis, neque enim mihi ratio est cum
ejusmodi homine haber^ hospitium commune.
and when there was a fire for heat, to cry out to the Swain, Farewell Sir, I Will
have nothing to do with them that are of so uneven a temper; (...), Adag. Chil.
1. Cent. 8. Adag. 30.
I say, if this Owl (as it were) of the Desert could not away with hot and cold
out of the same mo^th, much less could the good and loyal Chancellor have
borne the peevishness and obstinacy of youthy greatness, if it could have
deserted its native Majesty so far as to have showed any thing unlike love,
gratitude, and resignation to his constant duty, unshaken loyalty, and
matchless learning expressed toward him in his education and travel; but the
goodness of the Prince was such, that he was resolved never to try the patience
of his Chancellor by doing any thing of contradiction to him: and therefore he
is brought in here (as I believe he truly carried himself) gently yielding to
what is insinuated to him, and protesting aversation to morosity or
waveringnesse in the choice of that he commends to him; for every man desires
to live long, and see good days; and this to obtain is to be secure, to live a
safe life secura quasi secutura mala rescindere, to dock all reversional
pretenders to annoyance, Et pro hac suspicione constitutum est, ne quis
extraneum hospitetur nisi de clara die, ne^ permittat eum recedere nisi
declarata die. Bracton lib. ^. De Corona c. 18. p. 137. Chil. 3. c. 15. p. 134.
and that by a fine and recovery of obedience to that Law which provides
muniment for such a darling as life, and security in it, is. And this the Law
of England yielding all the Subjects under it, by preventing all occasions and
improvements of malice, and by allowing refuges to those that are prosecuted by
it, to wit, innocent persons, who may in the King's Courts, and by the King's
Subjects, Ad accusationem hujus criminis admittitur quilibet de populo liber
homo and servus, etc. dum tamen sit is ille qui accusat integra fama, and non
criminosus quia criminosi ab omni accusatione repelluntur, Bracton lib. 3. De
Corona. c. 3. fol. 11^.
Juries, in trial of the Causes be preserved and quitted; since it is not the
fair plea, nor the numerous evidence that the Law is seduced by, but the
justice of the cause made out by clear and honest Witnesses, omni exceptione
Majores, that it is led by; when, I say, in this happy consistency, it regards
the body of man, that little Digest of Omnipotency, wherein there is a perfect
correspondency to the Method of our English Polity, In uno homine, velut in
Archive quodam celeberrimo, perfectio^^s and proprietates, creaturarum
reponerentur, quorumque ipse and complementum esset, and thesaurus velu^ omnium
uberrimus, sic Luscinias cantu, Elephantos memoria, prudentia. Simi^s
gesticulatione, canes sagacitate. etc. Aldrovand^s, Ornith. lib. 11. p. 639.
the Heart Sovereign, the Brain Chancellor, the Faculties Peers, the Blood
Laws, the Veins and Arteries Officers of ministerial destribution; the Parts
and Members the Commoners in this Commonwealth; and all congregated in the
Parliament of the Body: when I humbly conceive all these are orderly preserved
secure from laesion and confusion by the Laws, not only of our civil society,
but national function; and with these, the Goods and Fortunes which are
appendant to these. There is great reason to acknowledge the Laws of England
the most deserving Darlings of Englishmen: Let me be free, I care not who
knows this English Humor in me, I value the English cooking of Diet, making of
Clothes, Note this.
way of Housekeeping, friendliness of greeting, fidelity of word, steddyness
in counsel, zeal in Religion, boldness in the field, and matchless
administration of Justice beyond any of these of foreign Extract, and I hope I
write herein more Majorum, and if I err, it is ex amore Patriae, Cui deesse (to
use the Historians words) aliis turpe, Camillo nefas esset. And so I conclude
this Chapter under pardon of my TextMaster for writing no more; and, of the
enamourated with foreign things and Customs, for writing so much; and if this
little be to be vile in their eyes, I shall venture to be yet more vile, in
those Chapters that particularly are explorative of the Laws and Modes of that
Country where our Chancellor was then an Exile; yet no otherwise or further
then becomes a modest and generous Ingenuity, and the necessary vindication of
my Native Country, and her Customs, Laws, and Sovereign (to whose Honor I am
an humble Valect) does require of, and I hope will take kindly from me.

CHAP. XXIX.
Cancellarius. Iuvenis recessisti Princeps, ab Anglia, quo tibi ignota est
dispositio terrae illius, etc.

HEre the Chancellor minds the Prince of the necessity his youth has to be
instructed in the Country of England, who is to judge of the Laws of England;
for in as much as the wisdom of Legislators is seen in conforming Laws to the
nature of the people they are to regulate, and the Laws of England being thus
suited to it and the Subjects of it, the right judgment of those Laws will
best be presumed to be, where the best knowledge of the Country, where they
rule, is had. Now that not being possible to be in the Prince, whom the fury of
what the Chancellor thought Rebellion, drove away; the good Man, who had long
been a man of Law and Prudence, applies himself to supply that to him, which
the force of his Father's Extruder denied him to be accomplished with.

Iuvenis recessisti] This Youth is one of the six Ages of life, Linwood lib. 1.
De sacra unctione, p. 18. B. K. adultus in Gloss.
being the time from 28 to 40. for these Ages learned men thus destribute, 1.
Infancy, from the birth to 7 years old; 2. Childhood, from thence to 14; 3.
Adolescentia or the adult-age, thence to 25 or 28; 4. Youth, thence to 40; 5.
Age, thence to 70; Old age, quod n^llo annorum termino finitur, and this they
call the ultimate part of old age, and terminatur in morte. Amongst these Ages,
Youth, by reason of which the Prince is termed Iuvenis, Iuvenis a juvando, quod
ea aetas maxima sit apta ad laborem tolerandum.
is the sturdy and pleasant part of life, that which has evaded the Meridian of
Adolescency, and grows toward the Afternoon of age; A Iurisconsultis juvenes
dicuntur, qui adolescentium excesserunt aetatem quoad incipiant inter Seniores
reputari. Plin. lib. 7. c. 56.
this was amongst the Romans the Military age, (...), and Vlpian the Scholiast
upon Demosthenes tells us, there was a Law among the Athenians that men only
should go to war from 18 to 40. which though Incipientem pubertatem ad
dilectum v^cari, lib. 1. c. 4. Lipsius lib. 1. p. 12.17.
seems to confirm, yet Lipsius denies or at least suspects, because the
Gracchian Law was, which was direct against so young admissions; Lex a
quinquagessimo anno militem non cogit. Senec. De Brev. vitae. c. ult.
and if consideration be had to those passages in great Authors, that 50 years
old was the boundary of men's warring; and that 30 years service was the utmost
time the Romans required men to, Fabius Instit. lib. 9. Live. lib. 42.
as Sigonius, Tacitus, Salust, and many other Authors agree: then about 20
years of age must this youth for War begin, Lipsius lib. 1. De Millt. Romans p.
1^.
though I know Tubero in Agellius affirms the time from 17. but I dispute not
this, that which I am to urge is, that in some time from 17 or 18 our Prince
here was, when he left England, or else our Chancellor would not have said,
Iuvenis recessisti, and that it was then when perhaps the gaities of life did
so engage him, Quemadmodum in minore corporis habitu potest homo esse
perfectus, ^sic and in minore temporis modo potest esse vita perfecta, Senec.
Epist. 93.
that he was not for love to them at leisure to consider the more consequent
parts of intellectual accomplishment. For, though it cannot be denied but that
some there have been of rare perfections, young in years, as I have heretofore
showed, and as further I might in the examples of Tholoss. lib. 17. c. 6. c.
18. and lib. 18. c. 2.18.
Daniel, Solomon, Josiah, Damas that famous Magnesian Bishop, of whom St.
Ignatius writes honorably, and Timothy the Bishop of Ephesus, whose youth St.
Paul gives a glorious testimony to, as that which was exemplary, and not to be
contemned but imitated; yet for the most part it is otherwise: men do sero
sapere; not ponder and gravely weigh things till they have great abatements of
passion, and aduances of calmness, which is the reason that Seneca, a great
lover of the florid and sparkling times of life; Complectamur illum and am^mus,
plena est voluptatis si illa scias uti, Quam dulce est cupiditates fugasse ac
reliquisse. Epist. 12. and sic Ep. 6^.
yet gives his vote for Age, That men ought to bless God for it, as that which
affords the one only comfort, if we know how to use it; which considered, the
Chancellor minds the Prince, that in regard he came away so early from
England, before he thoroughly understood it, he should bethink himself what he
did before he banish the English Laws his love, Iuvenis recessisti.

Recessisti.] Mannerlily and softly expressed; that which after-Ages would call
force, the Chancellor calls leaving England: the Chancellor knew nothing more
unpleasing to Princes then to be compelled, Shutes History Venice, p. 334.
and therefore though compelled he was (for he would not sure have left this
Land had there not been danger in staying in it, where another was more in
favor then he, and in Power then his Father,) yet though on these terms he
betook himself to France, in hope to find a Sanctuary, which some Princes have
not found; though the Marquess of Mont-Ferrat did among the Venetians: whom
when he was beaten out of his Country, they so courteously entertained, that
he was, in the return of his Country to him, unwilling to leave Venice: I say,
though this Phoenix courtesy was his happiness, yet no Prince has cause to
hope for it: and therefore this Prince may reasonably be thought unwilling
enough to go, but when he was there, bravely bore this misfortune, as his
attendant and wise instructor here expresses it in this word Recessisti.

Ab Anglia Recessisti.] Concerning England something I have wrote on the 17th
and 24th Chapters, yet am bold to add what follows: Recessisti here imports not
the choice of the Prince, but a fate upon him; such an one, as though he bear
because he must, yet he delighted in no more, Plin. lib. 3. c. 23. 1 De Remed.
Amor. 400.
then great Spirits do to retreat, Recedere quasi retro cedere: which because
it is mostly a token of worsting, has some term of diminution affixed to it.
Turpiter victa Venus saepe recessit is Ovids. Thus when a man changes his
condition of life, and being ashamed as it were, or forced by necessity of
Affairs to seek somewhat better then he at present has, De statu dignitatis
recedere Cic* Attic. lib. 1.15.3.
he is said Recedere a condition, a persona, a statu; and Tully uses recedere
ab usitata consuetudine, and recedere ab officio for non facere officium: Cic.
pro Quintio 3. Offic. 34.
This considered, the Chancellours words here argue no more desire in the
Prince to depart England and take refuge in France, Vivet eni^ vivetque semper
atque etiam latius in memoria hominum and sermon versabitur, postquam ab
oculis recessit, Plin. Ep. 15.
then men do when they die which is to recede life; not because they think
death better, but because life can no longer be enjoyed. For, alas, what was
it not that is desirable to get and hold, which he parted not with in parting
with England? a Country one of the best and largest of the Islands of the
known World; Brompton in regno Cantiae, p. 728. Edit. Land.
the glory of Britain: called England from Angela the daughter of a certain
Saxon Duke, who Ruling it, and loving her, called his Government after her
name. Anciently it was called Albion, after Britain; famous it has been in
antiquity for its fertility: Bochartus Geograph. sacrae, p. 729.
Onocritus the Athenian Philosopher, whom Tatian and Clemens Alexandrinus think
was Author of those Poems ascribed to Orpheus, relates it to have so fruitful
a soil, Vt Cereris sedem ibi fuisse videatur, furnished also it has been
thought of old, Lib. 1. c. 39.
and is yet, with those accommodations which toaled hither the Phoenicians to
us, and with the Lead and Tinn that they came to fetch returned us Learning and
Arts, (many Greek Philosophers coming hither in their floats,) and calling
Sylly, a part of this Island (...), the Cassiterides; yea so happily situated
is it, that it seems to be the Eden of the World, subject to no extremes,
either of vehement heat or violent cold; so that it is no Carrhamitis, or house
of death, as Northern Countries are, that hardly ever see day, or feel warmth;
nor is it in the Center of the Sun, or under its direct perpendicular; but
temperated with heat and cold intermixed, that it may truly be called Regnum
Dei, a place that God has peculiarly blessed with all comforts for life, Water,
Flesh, Fish, Herbs, Fruits, for medicine and delight, abounding in Cattle of
labor, profit, chase, but none of prey, furnished with goodly Cities, famous
Churches, religious Houses, charitable Hospitals, noble Seats and large Parks
about them, Ex Alfr. Rhevalensi.
beyond most, or all Christendom in so small a Circuit, which made Charles the
Great call it the Storehouse and Granary of the whole Western World, and Henry
of Huntingdon begin his History with its praises, calling it Beatissima
Insularum, after whom a Poet says thus, Anglia terrarum decus, and flos
finitimarum
Est contenta sui felicitate boni,
Externas gentes consumptis rebus egentes
Cum fames laedit, recreat and reficit;
Commoda terra satis, mirandae fertilitatis
Prosperitate viget cum bona pacis habet.


Which I thus English, Blessed England, Europe's Crown, in neigbours eye
Twixt groundless envy had and admiration,
To wants of whom thy store's a granary,
And yields abundance to the famished Nation:
Ah fertile soil, Ah earthly Paradise,
Where life's delights abound, where dainties flow,
On which Jehovah's mercy sets such price
By peace preventeth plenty's overthrow.


It is famous for its ancient reception of Christianity from Joseph of
Arimathea, Simon Zelotes, Cambden's Remains.
etc which was here propagated before the year 200. Four Englishmen converted
eight Nations of Europe to Christ, Winfred the Devonshire-man converted the
Germans, Saxons, Franconians, Hassians, and Thuringeans; Wilbred the
Northern-man the Freisians and Hollanders; Nicho. Breakspear of Middlesex the
Norwegians; and Tho. of Walden the Lithuanians.

It is famous for pious Princes, of whom it has had more then any Nation,
besides the Kings of it are anointed, 5. Rep* De Iur^ Regis. Eccles. p. 16.
and hence are capable of spiritual Jurisdiction, according to that of our Law
Term Hilarii, 33 E. 3. Reges sacrosancto oleo uncti sunt spiritualis
Iurisdictionis capaces. Its Crown had and has very large Territories, for
besides Ireland they have commanded from the Isles of Orkney unto the Pyrene
Mountains. Its famous for its beauties and features, Cambden's Remains. p. 4.
no Nation affording men and women so generally handsome and proper as it does,
which made Goropius say, Angli quasi angle, quia omnes caperent sui
admiratione, what the Poet said of Chios, taking its name from Chione,
signifiing white and clear, may be said of her, -- Quae diutissima forma,
Mill procis placuit. --
Who being of a specious hue,
A thousand Captives to her drew.


It is famous for its valor, its Inhabitants being Lions of courage and
generosity, equally brave both on Horseback and on foot, with Sword, Target,
or Bow and Arrow, or on Sea, where it has ever appeared with Navies, not so
numerous and rude as Due^^ius the Roman led against Carthage, Vowell's
description of England. p. 200.
which were growing on the Stub and sailing on the Sea in 55 days; or those
220 tall Ships led against Hieron, which bare leaf and sail in 45 days; nor
like the Ships Scipio led in the 2 Carthage Wars, which were felled in the
Wood and floating on the Sea in six Weeks; nor were they 700 in number, as
Polybius says the Romans lost in one fight that number when the Carthaginians
accosted them; but with tall brave warlike Ships, of vast Bulk, great strength,
laden with Robinet, Falconet, Falcon minion, Sacre, demi Culveriin, Culveriin,
demi Canon, Canon, E Canon, Basilisk which carry shot from 1 to 60 pound
Bullet, and were manned by great quantities of men.

It Is famous for its wealth, hence called by some of the Pope's puteus
inexhaustus, and had it not been so, M. Paris. p. 890.948.
their avarice had drawn it long since dry, and the days of H. 3. so vainly
and prodigally expensive had undone it.

It Is famous for its learning, there being no Nation to which it leads not the
dance, its Clergy have ever been pious and learned to a Miracle, and Arts have
hence had great Founders and Benefactors, here were born Alexand. Halensis
Aquinas his Master, Scotus the subtle, Bradwardine the profound, Ockham the
invincible, Bid the venerable, and Burley the perspicuous. It Is famous,
renowned and envied for its Common Law, and peculiar privilege from the
Injuries of great men, and depredation on property, the people of it being no
Villains but Freemen, and the Laws being not arbitrary, but settled and fixed,
and not alterable without consent of King, Lords, and Commons in full and free
Parliament assembled. This, This was the fair Paradise of beauty and bravery,
from which this noble young Prince, notwithstanding his Father's present and
his own probable future right, was forced; -- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis. --
and from which, all things considered, he could not but be unwillingly driven,
since if he knew so well what England was as he might have done had he longer
stayed in it, and learned more experience from the prospect into it, he would
account it the Phoenix of Lands and Laws: so, in short intends the Chancellor
to represent it in those comprehensive words, Quas si agnoveris, and caeterarum
regionum emolumenta qualitatesque eisdem comparaveris, non admirareris ea
quibus jam agitatur animus tuus.

Anglia sane tam fertilis est quod quantitate ad quantitatem comparata, ipsa
caeteras omnes quasi regiones exsuperat ubertate fructuum.

This is the first instance of the excellency of England, Fertility of soil
and Plenty of fruits; for though he could have instanced that it was Ethnique
and barbarous, that the Inhabitants were a kind of Canniballs, and without God
in the World, and sub hoc malo Lemnio latuisset Anglia, Chil. 1. Cent. 8. Adag.
27.
if God had not rescued us; yet he reserves that for a fitter place, and comes
in first with that instance of the goodness of a Land, plenty, which the Holy
Ghost, in Canaans case flowing with Milk and Honey, calls the glory of a Land;
and as the sterility of a Land is the curse of the Inhabitants, A fruitful
Land turns he into a barren Wilderness for the iniquity of those that dwell
therein; Psalm. 107.34.
so an unctious and fruitful Land is the blessing of any people: now this
fruitfullness men usually impute to three causes, supra, intra, extra, God's
blessing above in making the Clouds to drop fatness, and giving rain and
fruitful seasons; Intra, in the depth and fatness of the Womb and Soil which
receives not the dew and seed in vain, but nourishes and gives it rooting and
extension; Extra, in man's endeavor of labor and ingenuity to improve what God
has endowed to the reasonable latitude of its capacity: In all these, and
whatever can rationally be couched under them, England is fertilis regio.

1. The mercy of God has seated it under a calm and temperate Heaven; (...).
Adag. Chil. 2. Cent. 2. Adag. 99.
it is to Britain what Alabanda was to the Carians, The most fortunate Island:
For it has neither extremity of heat or cold, but a mixture of both, to keep
the constitutions of its Inhabitants interpendent to the extremes, either of
remissness or intentness; And this temperature working upon the People, Laws,
Customs, every thing of it, renders it Beatissima Insularum: and we of England
may say gratulatorily to God in the Psalmists words, Non taliter fecit omni
genti, For had he not distinguished us from other Nations as he has, Leones non
omnes sunt ejusdem temperamenti; qui montes inc^lunt minus habent caloris and
ferocia and vicis^im quanto plus os^ive participant tanto sunt calidiores and
audaciores veluti colentes desertum Angua qui totius Africae sunt
tru^ulentissimi. Aldrovand. lib. de quadrupe. p. 10.
we might have been as savadge in Manners as we ethnically were, and
out-beasted the beasts of Africa, then whom the men there are little better:
For as all beasts of the same kind are not alike in all places, but some Lions
are more mild (such as live on mountains) not having that fury of heat in them
which the desert Lions in Africa have, as Aldrovandus instructs me, so is their
difference of men according to the temperaments of their constitutions, which
are regulated by the aires and clymates under which they are born, bred, and
live; and therefore God having suited the Air, Earth, Men, (...) Homerus apud
Erasm. Adag. 22. Chil. 1. Cent. 2.
Laws, all to each other, and made them all fruitful of encouragement,
riches, liberty, there is just cause to bless God for his mercy, that is the
maine ingredient to our National and Personal fertility: It Is Gods Word of
Sovereignty that impregnates the Earth, and makes it bring forth seed to the
sower, and bread to him that eats: that increases the breed of Cattle, and
blesses the increase of our Flocks. For, though we in this Land have no Mines
of Gold and Silver, no Quarries of Diamonds, no Beds of Pearls, no Wombs of
Spices; yet we have Treasuries of Lead and Tin, Lodges of Wool and Hides,
Magazines of Clothing and Drapery, Nurseries of Cattle; and we have blessed
be God, Noble Marchant-Men, who ship out Native, and return for them Foreign
Commodities, and this makes England an Indies, a Spain, an Italy, a Germany,
full of the Wealth of Sea and Land: This is the sourse of Fertility, supra, and
in the Psalmists words, Psalm. 144.15.
Blessed are the People that are in such a case, yea blessed are they that have
the Lord for their God; And I pray God the Mercies God has showed us of this
Nation do not make things Mandrabuli more succedere; that is, not make us do by
our benefactor as Mandrabulus did by Juno, Mandrabuli more res succedunt, Adag.
58. Cent. 2. Chil. 1. Deur. 32.6.
whom the first year he offered a golden sheep to, the second year one of
silver, the third one of brass: God forbid that we should so requite the Lord,
O foolish people and unwise! God ^orbid when he has not been a barren
wilderness to us, we should abuse our mercies to his dishonor.

Secondly, As the fertilitas coeli is the blessing of England, so fertilitas
soli is that with which the Nation of England is happy in also, Plus apud
Campanos unguenti quam apud Cateros olei fit. Adag. 45. Cent. 2. Chil. ^.
Our Land is another Campania, all marrow and fatness; There is no Shire or
Angle of its compass but has much of fruitfullness in it: See Doctor Ridley's
View of Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, p. 174.
Here there is Corn, there Grass, in one part Wood, in another Mines, on this
quarter grows Timber for building, on that Cattle feed for increase; In this
there are no deserts, no unimproved grounds to speak of, but every part as it
is fitted for some specific purpose, so is by the Inhabitants well and wisely
improved to the end it is most correspondent to, by reason of which there is
not much bad land in England, as in other Nations: For England for the
Seacoasts and middle part of it is all fertile, and (as it were) for the most
part deep soyled, either fit for Gardning, Feeding, Plowing, or else Wood-land;
and were there no other argument of its good soil then that it nourishes so
many Inhabitants, and that so affluently, in so little a Tract, and gives its
Inhabitants such succulent nutriment, that makes them of bold, brave, warlike;
daring and manly courages, that no Nation does pleasingly face, or willingly
abide Battle with them: yet, even this alone were an argument of a rich
soil. For that patch which brings forth much in a little, must needs have the
potentiality of much in it: And when to it the benefit of Navigation is
considered, what it has of Native growth more then it consumes, it exporting
fetches in return what foreign Commodity it wants. So that, what with its own
fertility, and Trade, (Blessed be God,) it has Breasts enough to succle its
numerous brats at; and if we be sequacious of our good King, whose extremities
have taught him experience and sagacity to direct Trade, as well as to lead
Forces, and Administer Justice; for he is Ex utroque Caesar: I believe we shall
carry the staple of Trade and make our maritime force comfortable to those in
amity, and formidable to the rest in enmity with us. For if England had not
been the Granary of the western World, if it were not the Phoenix Kingdom, if
it were not Tanquam inter stellas luna minores, neither the Romans of old, nor
the Picts, Saxons, Danes, Normans, Spaniards, had invaded us, had we been a
hungry, vast, and improlifick Soil, and nothing would have grown without much
cost, labor, and hardship, no Nation would have been eager after us: but when
every conquering slave that could not live in his own Country but miserably,
lives here bravely, and with ease; this made those attempts on us, which some
times were repulsed, but when prevailing, took the season of the Nations
dissension, and the Nations dissociation into Parties. So that God having
indulged the Land of England with a brave Soil, nobly planted, pleasantly
watered, inhabited by Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Yeomen, with Artificers,
Laborers, and Common people in abundance: though this nineteen years here has
been a fierce Civil War, in which funest Battles have been fought, and
multitudes of men of all ranks, ages, and artifices; yet is there almost little
sign of a War, no want of men, no visible depopulation; so fruitful has God
made this time of Captivity, that though many of the wealthy Subjects have been
beggered and diminished, especially such as had personal and portable estates,
yet Forraigners went not away with the spoil of it, the Nation still kept it,
it is but transferred from men to men; England yet, blessed be God, holds its
own. And therefore if it please God to give us, that are Natives, duty to our
superiors, and love to one another, the ruin of England by these Wars may yet
be its making; For there is a third way of Fertility, and that is Man's
industry, which is in the effect a nemo scit; for it brings impossible things
to pass: This industry, O! it can almost do any thing, it has (as it were)
removed Mountains, or at least made ways thorough them, so did Caesar over the
Alps, and Alexander in his voyage to the Indies: it has dried up and diverted
Seas and navigable Torrents: it has erected Hecatombs and Pyramids from little
attoms of principal materials; it has made glass malleable, instructed in all
Arts, Languages, Sciences, Professions: found out the use of Simples and their
Compositions; of Mettalls, and their digestion; of Mineralls and their use; of
Peace, War, Justice, Religion: nothing has been too hard for the industry of
man to cope with and conquer. Yea, so far has it usurped upon Gods peculiar,
that it has found out many secrets: and if Archimedes did not delude himself,
could move the Center of the Earth if it might fix its Engine.

Now though I do not believe industry can do all that is boasted of it, yet I do
advisedly conclude, that in the industry of man there is such a latent power
and life of actuation, that it comes near the verg of miraculous: thus have men
devised engines of battery and Military use, whereby the strongest Castles are
surprised and won, and which seconded by diligence can do every thing: and
hereupon have sundry noble achievements and notable been performed; yea
industry has formed politics, and founded Empires; Vt ingenium adhiberetur ad
turrim. M. Paris. p. 301. l. 57. hinc machinam reticulum vel aliquod hujusmodi
vocamus an Engine, Gloss. ad M. Paris in verbo Ingenium.
and the Roman one, so vast in circumference, so venerable in its edicts, so
formidable in its Armies, so consultive in its Senate, so fruitful in wise
men, so conservative of it self, so victorious over the Universe, was but the
industry of a Romulus, a Numa, etc. of those numinated Heroes that succeeded
them: so successful have men's industries been, that they have grown by it like
fishes that have had no equals to feed on the nutriment of vast seas but
themselves, and to whom alone the lesser fishes have been preys. And if man's
industry have besides all this tamed Lions, Panthers, and Tigers; charmed
Serpents, enamored Dolphins, civilized Barbarians, reformed debauches; nay
even joined, as Julius Caesar dreamed he had done, the Empires of heaven and
earth; it may well be a notable improvement to fertility of soil; if it have
discovered the globe of earth, and the path of safety and knowledge in the
undiscernable waters, reducing all ports and Nations to such points of the
compass as the compass directs the Mariner by steering to reach, and to know
what latitude he is in, and what degree he must make too; if it have subjected
the seas Leviathans, and the earths Behemoths: yea, leur'd the Eagles of
loftiness, Towering Bajazets, and warlike Belisariuses into cages of restraint,
and straits of nullity; If it put life into dying and almost extinguished
interests, and them recalled to life, and as it were after their interment,
suscitated them to their wonted or improved glory, t^^n is it a thing to be
encouraged in all, which is the reason that all Governments have encouraged
industry, as that which has a Cornucopia attending it, and that which is most
seen in the trade of our late Monarchs Reigns, and has been most productive of
the wealth of England of any thing else, for by reason of it we have Europe in
a fort in England: Now every wast ground is built upon, every incult and
overgrown field tilled; every bogg dreigned; many parks by the owners
converted from parks of pleasure to mines of revenew (though I am no friend to
disparking, where men's fortunes will bear, and their Children be provided for
without them) and all this by the industry of man, finding supports therefrom
for the increase of people and charges of living, which good and frugal minds
consider, and therefore to it submit; so that add to home-Industry foreign
Trade, (which is but the former diversified, and by the Changes too and fro,
incredibly advantageous to the Nation) and there can be no fertility thought of
in a Land but England has, which God preserve to us and make us worthy of it;
yea, and may they ever be accounted Enemies to all that is good in the Nation,
that do bear ill will to the Industry of it, for they do, Taurum tollere qui
Vitulum sustulerint, as the Adage is.

Though therefore much might be spoken of the furtherances of Fertility from
addition of Compost to the soil, M. Paris. in viti^ p. 155. 7 R. 2. c. 4.
or quickening it by Marle, Chalk, Earth, Salt, Rags, Horn, Leather, Shaving,
and all overflowings, with restings, and lying fallow, and equal to them all
folding of Sheep, the breed and profit of which has enriched many Families to a
proportion like that Corinthian Cydon, Semper aliquis in Cydonis domo. Adag.
15. Cent. 2. Chil. 2.
who was so full and free* that he kept open house all the year long; as also
by substraction, when the succulency of the Mother may be such that it ^^ifles
the child in her Womb, who is not able to take it off* rank Soyles parching up,
through inordinate heat and height of nutriment, the Grain that is sowed in it,
or at least running it up all into blade and straw without ear or berry: Or
lastly by Diversion, when it has been worn out by one Grain or burden, employ
it to another purpose, that being prudent in ordering grounds, which is so in
greater matters, all things not being alike practicable in all times, but
changings in those lesser things being convenient to avoid evils, as Augustus
did, who in following Scipio Numantinus* in whose time Praetorian Cohorts were
set up for defense of his person, De M^litia Romana, lib. 2. p. 60
which after, from being Firmamentum Imperii, became in Lipsius his words,
Pestis Imperii; I say, though on all these there might be profitable
enlargement, yet I contract my self, not to disserve my Country, whose Glory I
am ever willing to advance in prayer, and practice: but to return to the
Chancellours position, that comparing England Acre for Acre with any other, it
gives place for fruitfulness to no Country; Politic. lib. 6. Cassan. Catalog.
Glrr. Mundi. p 468.
nay, in that it has those seven endowments which the Philosopher makes the
glory of a Land, 1. Nobility of Vegetables. 2. Wholesome fountains and
fruitful Rivers. 3. A benign influence of the Sun. 4. Abundance of
conveniences of Cattle and other things to the use of man. 5. Pleasantness of
situation in the Landscape of it, having Woods, Rivers, Springs, Meadows,
interwoven. 6. Plenty of healthful victuals and fruits: and 7. Temperateness
of Air and Climate. It may I humbly think in these and the foregoing respects
be accounted fellow to any Country in the world; and this the Chancellor
intends at least when he says it does, Ceteras omnes quasi regiones exsuperat
ubertate fructuum,] and adds, Etiam suum ultro ipsa profert vix industria
hominis concitata, which I take not to be altogether Hyperbolick to show his
pathos to his Native Country, which probably he loved better carendo quam
f^uendo, but to have such a truth in it, as, heartily expounded, directs the
Reader to the true estimate of England, which in no Corner, and in no Hill
almost of it, no not in Wales or Cornwall, the dryest and steelest parts of it,
is void of herbage, but carries a green Coat upon it, which breeds and raises
young Cattle of all sorts; and by reason of which not the peasantry (as France
terms them) but the Yeomandry and Farmers, as we in England call Country
Occupiers of Land, are the happiest of any Swains in the World; for whereas in
other Lands they are shoelesse, spoonlesse, dishlesse, except accommodated with
wooden ware, which is the highest of their furniture, those poor Laborers
being the prime and nobler Beasts, laboring to make themselves miserable, and
their Lords luxuriant, and to them merciless. These with us in England (and
blessed be God and the Law for it) while they continue to know themselves and
their betters, Note this and be thankful.
the Nobility and Gentry rejoice to see it; the Yeoman and Country Corydon is a
great Proprietor of Land (Freehold, and Socage Tenure of Inheritance) served in
Plate, attended with Servants, clothed in the best Cloth and Silks, trimmed
with silver and gold, full of money in his purse, and ready upon all occasions
to lend on Bond, or lay out on Purchase; yea, generous to his Wife, Children,
and Family, who eat and drink in great plenty and variety; yea many Yeomen are
so grateful to God and the Gentry, under whom they have grown rich and lived
happily, that they breed their sons to Learning and Callings of Worship, and
having well-bred and well-portioned their Daughters, married them into generous
families, and unto men whose Merits make their way to Honor and Eminency; and
all this while the Yeoman labors little bodily, but looks over his servants,
and by prudent ordering the ways of his family and husbandry, attains great
advances in fortune: and I think it may very truly be said, that mostly by
this means the Yeoman does live more free from care, and give his Children
better Portions then the younger brother Gentry, and this he does by God's
blessing on his labor from the soil and the fruits of the ground; the
fertility whereof, to the proportion of the Chancellour's Expression, is hence
in a good degree confirmed, and I think by no judicious man will be, in such
degree, denied.

Nam agri ejus, campi, saltus, and nemora, tanta faecunditate germina
ebulliunt, ut inculta illa, sape plus commodi afferunt possessoribus suis quam
arata, licet fertilissima ipsa sunt segetum, and bladorum.

Having before in general commended the fertility of the Nation, he makes good
the luster of the whole by the dignity of the particulars which complete it.
Brechaeus ad leg. 27. p. 77. de verb. signific.

De Agro, aratione, and aratoribus, lege Turnebum. Adversar. lib. 1. ^. 6.

Becman. De ling. Latina.

Varro lib. 4. Elegant.


Agri ejus] Donatus and Varro derive Ager ab agendo, quia in illo multa
aguntur; the Learned largely take it for any neighboring Territory to great
Cities, thus Ager Campanus, Leontinus and the like is read in Authors; but
strictly they take it for that place in the Country wherein Country men live
and do Country Affairs; and therefore they derive from Ager, peragro, peregre,
and peregrinus, as one qui multos agros pererrat. The Latins make Ager
fourfold, Seminalis, Consitivus, Pasenus, and Floriger, or Restibilis and
Novalis; our Law-language calls open common fields Agri, and men that live in
remote places with little Neighborhood Agrestes: thus in Deeds and
Conveyances, arrable Lands in the fields is understood for the common fields,
where no man's particular right is enclosed though bounded.

Campi] Valla terms Campus Planities terra amplae and grandis, ideo spatiosae
plate^ arcave, Vnde Roma Campus Mortius. Caesar. 3. Bell. Civil. 144.
campi nomen acceperunt, and hence is it that Geographers when they describe
any Country that is plain and open, Siculi circum aut Hippodromum (...)
vocabant, a flexu quadrigarum quae ibi certabant. Becman in verbo.
call it campestris Regio, I take this word Campus as Lipsius does Promotus and
Promotio for a pure Roman word, and as that is given to one that is famous ob
strenua facta multasque cades, so is this term Campus proper to vast and roomy
places, where there is convenience to stir and act business; Fields to fight
in are called Camps hence, because the men in them are not couped up, but can
fight with numbers and in variety of figures.

Saltus] The Translator renders this Groves, and some think, how probably I say
not, in these occult places they did in Ethnique times celebrate Idolatry, and
in that were merrily mad in dancing and capering, not only to show their joy
to serve their Idol, but to sacrifice their Activity to the worship of it:
hence the Scripture tells us of Idols in the Groves, and David's dancing before
the Ark in the sight of Israel, may be thought to show, 1 King. 15.13. and
16.33.
that though he were a King, 1 Chr. 15. yet he would express as much of
Exultation and Activity to the service of the true God, as the Worshippers of
Idols did to their false ones: but this is too high a Capre from the truth of
the word's notation, Saltus densior silva and invia, quod ibi arbores saliant
in quo pasci and astuare pecudes solent. Valla lib. 4. Et Brechaeus ad Leg. 30.
p. 87. de verb. signifi^.

Saltus est ubi sylva and pastiones sunt, Ca jus Aelius, lib. 2. signifi^.


Saltus is a Lawn in a Park or Forest, wherein Beasts of Venery and Chase do
shade and repose themselves, and from thence, because Hares and Hearts are
saliant Creatures and the inhabitants of Woods and Groves, the Woods and Groves
are called Saltus; thus Ovid uses apti saltus Venatoribus, and Virgil magnos
canibus circundare saltus, Saltus pro magna possessione magnum agri modum
conjunctarum quatuor Centuriarum in agris divisis appellari Saltus. Varro De re
Rustic. lib. 1. c. 16. Turneb. Advers. lib. 26. c. 9. Idem. lib. 3. c. 22. p.
99.

Alciat. in Leg. 30. p. ^6. de verborum signific.


and thus Saltus signifies a great Tract of ground, where there is scope enough
for the nimble foot of those beasts of chase; Livy tells us of saltus Pyrenaeus
and saltus Grajus, here our Text calls the Coverts and Lawnes of Deer, cubile
and lustrum eorum, as Pliny's words are, lib. 8. c. 32. Saltus, as much as
Philosophers mean by (...).

Et Nemora] These Festus calls, Sylvas amaenas, where Cattle feed in the shade,
free from the heat of the Sun, or biting of the Breezes that in the heat sting
and disquiet them; Cic. in Attic. lib. 15.322. 6 Aeneid. 128.132. Lib. 1. De
Divinat. 185.
and they are called Nemora from (...) pasco, because they afford pleasure to
the eye in the greenness, and food to the creature who feeds upon the gripe of
them; Authors ascribe pleasure to them, Virgil, Fortunatorum nemorum amaena
vireta odoratum lauri nemus; Tully says much of these in those words, Nemora
and sylvae multos commovent; and the Romans when they called that place which
they consecrated in the Aricine Territory to Diana, Nemus, are thought to do no
dishonor to the word. Our Law accounts Nemora Woods the Treasuries of Timber,
and though true it be that feeding under them is not sweet where Timber
over-shadows it; Sir Francis Barrington's Case. Cook lib. 8. p. 138. 1 Jac. 21.
1 Eliz. 15. 23 Eliz. c. 5.
yet the Law does take special care to preserve Timber, that is, such wood as
is fit for building of Houses and Shipping, and as the Common Law makes the
unseasonable and unreasonable felling of it, wast, so do sundry Statutes for
bid it, or at least express how, and how not, it is to be felled, so Stat. 35 H.
8. c. 17. made perpetual by 13 Eliz. c. 25. And in regard of the late liberty
of destroying and wasting the lusty Timber of this Nation, there may (I humbly
think) be very further useful Prohibitions and Penalties on Offenders added
for the future, for our Ships are our Walls, and of our well-grown, and sturdy
Iron-sided Oak are our Ships made; and if they be wanting, and wanting they
will be if Providence be not the better Steward, what shall become of our Trade
abroad and our Security at home: but because Rome was not built in a day, nor
is a Reformation in the true Law-sense effectable presently; it becomes me to
be silent any further then to remember those that have Power and Opportunity,
that this is of no less consequence then other things, which in former times
have been made, as is this, penal to misuse them; Aspe-wood was in H. 6. time
used for Shafts, the Statute of 4 E. 4. c. 9. permits Patten-makers only to
make Pattens of such Aspe as was not fit for Shafts; English Horses were Felony
to be delivered into Scotland, 32 H. 8. c. 6. 1 E. 6. c. 5. 5 Eliz. c. 19.
Bell-mettal, or Brass to cast Ordinance not to be transported, 2 and 3 E. 6. c.
37. Sheep not to be carried out of England, 8 Eliz. c. 3. Corn not to be
transported but upon some cases, 13 Eliz. c. 13. confirmed by 21 Jacob. 28. and
3 Carol. c. 4. Leather not to be transported 18 Eliz. c. 9. Timber not to be
consumed by new Iron-Mills, 27 Eliz. 19. and why (God and good men forgive my
zeal to Englands Navy) should it not be made almost Treason to sell Timber for
shipping to Foreiners, or to build shipping here, and abroad to sell them to
such, as either actually are, or upon any reason of State may be the Nations
Enemies. But this is a Digression, for which I both do penance in my self, and
crave pardon of my betters, whose wisdom I do praise God for, and humbly submit
to, not arrogantly censure

I return then to the Text-Master's meaning, that is, to the praise of Englands
fruitfulness, even in the herbage under the shades of trees, and growths of
Timber, which he says does not only keep Cattle alive, life and soul
together, as we say, but nourish them to a rankness and lusty increase of
flesh, insomuch that the profit of their feeding equals the proceed of
tillage, all charges considered; for though these Groves should be fertilissima
frugum and bladorum, which they reasonably cannot be expected to be, which ly
in the shade and under the dripp; yet so great is the charge of the plough, and
so little that of feeding, that there is not in the conclusion much difference;
yea, I believe as great Estates have been gotten by Timber and grasing, as by
Tillage, though the Law affords great privilege to Tillage, and generally (I
think) all Covenants made against Tillage are void, Fleta lib. 2. c. 77.
and several Laws have been made in favor of Tillage, that of 4 H. 7. c. 19.
6 H. 8. c. 5. 7 H. 8. c. 1. and others, though expired and repealed by 39 Eliz.
c. 1. and 21 Jacob. c. 28. but the Common Law favors ploughing as the way and
means to procure bread, the staff of life, and to nourish Cattle for the
service of man and portage of commodities: and therefore when in H. 1. or H. 2.
times Tillage was much decayed, Mr. Fabian Philip's Tenures p. 5^
I read that great numbers of Husbandmen came to the King's Courts, offering up
their Plough shears to him in token of their Calling ceased, and they undone,
which was occasioned by Lords and great men's turning their Demesnes, Woods,
Forests, and arrable Grounds into Pasture, and a very good effect followed it;
for many good Laws came in use which encouraged Husbandry, and when the Stat.
12 R. 2. c. 5. was repealed by 5 Eliz. 4. and 21 Iac. 28. 'twas not to
dishonor and dishearten plowing, but to release those that had geniuses to
higher things then the plough from the rigor of the Statute; since many men
may be of a calling for some years, who after may be fitter for other things
then it: in as much then as that Statute tied those that were in the calling of
Husbandry for twelve years not to alter, it was by the 5 Eliz. c. 4. (as to
that) repealed: but still the patronage of Husbandry is in the Law, 1 Instit.
p. 85. 2 Instit. p. 860. the Stat. Merton. 4.
which highly favors it, and that in consideration of six disadvantages that
accompany the abatement of Husbandry: First Idleness. Secondly Depopulation.
Thirdly Decay of one of the greatest Commodities of the Realm. Fourthly, The
destruction of Churches and the Service of God. Fifthly, Injury to Patrons and
their Clerks, Gods Ministers. Sixthly, The defense of the Land against foreign
enemies enfeebled, the bodies of husbandmen being strong for War.

These and sundry other reasons are the cause our Law favors husbandry, and so
do all Laws and Nations: Tempore Agriculturae nullo pacto agricolae debent
molestari; Cod. de Agricult and Cens. lib. 11. L. Colonus nunquam.
yea, special Laws contra juris rationem, are there to exempt husbandmen, and
Mutua caede grassantur, agricolis nulla in re nocent, sed intactos relin^uunt
tanquam communis utilitatis ministros neque hostium agros urunt neque arbores
caedunt. 3. Antiq.
Diodorus Siculus reports, that the Indians before the Trojan War, Luc. de
^enna lib. 1. c. eodem.
did use to War without any injury to them: Cass. Catal. Gl. M. p. 43^.
and Philo in his Book purposely written of it, sets forth the useful and
excellent benefits of it; and Patricius says plainly* Unless men will grow too
dainty to be of that sex, and will invade the delicacy of females, they ought
not to hold themselves too good to be husbandmen, for it is a course of life
becoming the most excellent minds, and persons of greatest gallantry have
delighted in it: All which, Instit. Reipubl. lib. 3. Titulo secundo.
and much more, might be said in commendation of it, if need were so to do,
Pancirol in notitia Imperii de Magistr. Municipal. c. 9.
but when it commends it self, as it so much does to our bodies, in bringing
us bread, and flesh, to our purses, in filling them with money, to our glory,
in manning ships and camps. There needs no more to be added then the suffrage
of King Solomon, who in the person of the Preacher says, The profit of the
earth is for all: The King himself is served by the field. Eccles. 5 9.


And therefore when the Chancellor tells us, England has Nemora segetum and
bladorum fertilissima, he says much to the pleasure and plenty of all estates:
Seges proprie fruges eorum seminum ex quibus conficitur panis Valla. lib. 4.
For, in that the fields are fertilissima segetum, he means there is bread
enough, because Corn plenty; For Seges is that grain that is ground for bread.
Plin. lib. 1^. c. 17.
Et Bladorum.] Which is a synonomus word; ^loss ad M. Paris. in verbo Bladae.
Bled in the French being thought by mutation of l for r, to be Bred our word,
which the Latins call Panis from the Greek (...): because it is the all of
life, Men in distress calling for Bread Bread for the Lords sake; and hence
this word Bladum is taken, as Seges, for all grain that is makeable into bread,
and used as such to be eaten; Not only Wheat and Rye distinct, or together
called Mesling Bladum Hybernagium, but for all; as well the former as Barley
and Oats, Fleta, lib. 2. c. 82. de exitibus Grangiarum.
of which bread usually is made: And may be extended also to Beans and Pease,
of which for need bread may be made.

Item notandum quod sub nomine Herbagii non continetur Glans, Bracton lib. 4.
p. 226.
Though, I know, Bracton excludes them from Herbage, or Blade, making them
Swines food, not Man's: For as the best tempered piece of steel is called a
Sword blade; and the keenest mettled Man a notable blade; so the best Herbage
of the Ground is called here Blade: and of this England is said to be most
fertile.

Includuntur quoque in terra illa pasturarum arva fossatis and saepibus.
The Riches of Englands Land is much occasioned by Enclosure, not of Commons,
for truly I question whether that be not within the Curse, of removing the
ancient bounds, Deuteronomy. 27.17.
and grinding the face of the Poor, for whom I persuade my self only the piety
of our Princes, and the charity of their subjects (the quondam proprietors
under them, left them free) but of men's distinct estates, which no one but
themselves had common in: For where any had right to enclose without their
consent, and leaving them a fit proportion, Cook on Stat. Merton. 2 Instit. p.
^^.
was forbidden by the Common Law, and confirmed by the Statute Merton. 20 H. 3.
c. 4. and 13 E. 1. c. 49. which, though it gave leave for great men to approve
against their Tenants where they left them sufficient common of pasture, yet
did not enable them to enclose as they pleased; for if they leave not
sufficient Common in the residue, the Commoner may break down the whole
enclosure (says Sir Edward Cook) because it stands upon his ground, Idem
loco praecitato.
which is his Common: the same Law of preserving Tenants Right, as indulging
Lords in point of enclosure is reserved by the 3 and 4 of E. 6. c. 3. and by
the 43 Eliz. c. 11. Persons undertaking to dreyne Marshes, and keep them dry,
must be by approvement made between the Lords and Commoners of those Marshes
and the undertakers: and when Burwell in King James's time did Winn and Inn the
Marshes of Lesnes and Faunts in Kent, that were drowned, he was feign to agree
with the Lords and owners of the same surrounded grounds before he could do it;
so says the Statute 4 Jacob. 8. and c. 13. These all show that the Texts
Includuntur is not Enclosure of Power only, but of Law; of right rather then
might: And this so done enhanses the common profit of the Nation, and the
particular profit of the owner; because it makes dry and lean grounds well
fenced and fat.

Pasturarum arva.] That is, by having cost bestowed on them (which when they
lie open the owners will not) to become lusty and succulent, and by being
delivered from the constant harrass of the plough, which rips up the heart of
them (for arva comes from aratrum, Quia in arvis osserebantur Festus. Varro
lib. 1. de Re Rust. c. 29.
whence ambervales hostiae, because offered for the fields, our Harvest quasi
arvi festum and their arvi-pendium) become walks for feeding of Kine and
Beefes: For that which Varro calls Arvum agrum necdum satum, our Chancellor
terms Pasturarum arvum; Lib. 4. fol. 222.
^eeding, or Pasture grounds: so Bracton uses the word, Est enim communia in eo
quod dicitur pastura de omni quod edi poterit vel pasci.

Fossis and sapibus.] Hedge and Ditch is the word of our Law and instruments of
conveyance, which some Books call defensa, M. Paris. 143. in vita Sancti
Albani. l. 11.
and we at this day in some places, Fences; which, as every owner is bound by
Law to keep, so, being sufficient to break thorough them, and lay open any man's
ground is a Trespass, and an Action lies for it: the Statute of 1 Mar. Sess. 2.
c. 12. made the casting down, or digging the Pales, Hedges, Ditches, or other
enclosure of any Park, or other enclosed ground, by the number of twelve or
above to be Felony; but the 1 Eliz. 16. limited it only to the Queens life, and
until the end of the Parliament then next following, but the Trespass still
remains for breaking Fence, Hedge, or Ditch, the conveniences of which Mures or
Enclosures to pastures the preamble to the 4 Jacob. 11. incomparably sets
forth; and the 7 Jacob. c. 13. as to parks, Lipsius Poliorchet lib. 3. Dialog.
5. p. 166, 167.
makes penal; For as Walls and Fences Military are reckoned Inter sacra, and
they had their Fossae interiores and exteriores, within, and without to keep
the Enemy from assault, and when he had got the wall, to keep him, yet at
distance by the Inn-ditch, Vallo vel fossa circundare Gloss M. Paris. in verbo
Parca.
so did the wisdom of antiquity to keep Cattle safe from prey of beasts and
thieves, secure them by Enclosures fenced and ditched, which is the
signification of the word Park, from the French Parquer, to enclose.

Desuper arboribus plantatis quibus muniuntur a procellis, and aestu solis
eorum greges and armentae.

As mostly the hedges are of quick which keeps the fence thick, and the bank
strong, so in the quick are planted Trees of all sorts, but chiefly those that
bear a great leaf, and give a good shade, Timber Trees, Oak, Elm, Ash, and
though sometimes Apple, Arbor est generale nomen and appelationo ejus vites
quoque and hederas. etc. continetur Jurisconsulti.
Pare, Crabb, as in Hereford and Worcester shire and in Kent the Garden of
England (yea Sparsim every where) yet generally the other, because of the
lop-wood, whereof Stakes, Gates, and other things may be made, as well as the
Cattle defended by the shade of them. Planta de arboribus dicitur ea quae
transferendae gratia vel de arboribus rapta, vel ex seminibus est orta, Servius
in 2 Georg*
These Trees, they are not said nasci, but plantari; ( for thorns and briars
are the Earths aborigines) Trees are planted with the art of the hand and care
of the eye, yea, and to the comfort of the heart of the planter: Jerem. 2.21.

Psalm. 1.


Thus the good man is likened to a Tree planted by the rivers of waters, his
goodness is from his plantation* Isay. 5.
a noble vine he is because God made him a noble vine. Thus God is said to
plant his Church for a vineyard, wherein his Ordinances produce liquor of life
to penitent and prostrate sinners, and that upon this ground that he has
planted it to that end, Isay. 61.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7.
To bind up the broken heart, and to speak peace unto the Captives. Whereas
then our Text says, arboribus plantatis] it means Trees purposely set to
answer the owners end, in the Hedges ornament, the Cattels umbrage, and the
Lopps profit.

Quibus muniuntur a procellis and aestu solis eorum greges and armenta.
This shows the end for which Culturage had this care and defense raised about
it; as the Ships that carry rich Merchandise have Gunns aboard to defend their
lading; and Castles that have the Commands of Countries, have all military
habiliments to preserve and carry on their designs and interests; so the field
having its riches, Corn and Cattle, has not only Hedges and Ditches to prevent
Beasts forage and Swines rooting, but Trees shelter for the Cattle against
heat and cold.

Greges and armenta] These words comprehend small and great Cattle, the Gregary
Creatures are properly Sheep and Goats; these are the flocks to which our Lord
alludes in those words, Luk 12.32.
Fear not little flock, meaning these, who are commanded to be mild, passive,
and tender spirited: the Armenta are such as are called Majora animalia quae
arationi destinuntur, such as are Cowes, Oxen, Asses, Deer, and Swine, are said
also to be in Herds, Matthew. ^.
The evil Spirit went into the Herd of Swine: Now both these sorts, though they
have pelts well covered with wool and hair, yet are sensible of extremes either
of heat or cold; and because the oppression of nature by either hinders the
frolickness and vivacity of them, whence the thriving and fatning of them
comes, therefore experience prepares remedies for both those inconveniences,
which the Text calls Muniuntur,] a term applied to any defense: Instrumenta sua
Monachis nullatenus ostendere voluerunt, id est, ait Glossator, scripta sua
authentica chartae donationum, and evidentiae Munimonta vocantur. Gloss. in M.
Paris. in verbo Munim. and in Hist. p. 311.
in some Authors, Letters credential, or Certificates, whereby men unknown are
testified to be what they are, are called Munimenta; Sipontinus says, munire
is as much as fortificare, praeparare, it is to adorn and furnish them against
the time of need and trial, for as bare Walls make giddy Houswives, so open
fields without shelter makes but lean and thriftless Cattle, that look as a
man, In vita Agricolae. Praesidiis, custodiis, vigiliisque coloniam munire.
Cic. 1. In Catil. 3.
that would be resolute, does in Tacitus his words, contra pudorem se munire,
and as brave Commanders do secure their charges by Watches and Guards
obstructive to the treacherous enemy; and as innocence endeavors Muniri and
ornari bonorum omnium praesidio, as Pro Flacco. 80.
Tully's words are, and as bodies alive are De Senect. 47.
Munita contra avium morsum, whose Carcasses when they are dead they worry and
snap at, so are Cattle great and small, by shades from wind and heat
preserved, and this shelter is termed Munimentum.

Valla in Raudens.
A Procellis] This is vehementior venti impetus sed non durans, most an end in
the Sea rather then on Land, a cold blast we call it, because it carries all
down before it, and shatters all that is near it; a Tempest, which, because of
the terror and havoc it makes, Lib. 3.106.
is by Silius called immanis, by Seneca, insana, tristis, by Catullus, turbida,
whence not only the violation of peace by insurrection is termed Procellae, 3
Argonaut. Lib 8. Belli Punici.
but all things of terror expressed by it, Aequor procellosum in Valerius, and
Venti procellosi in Livy, yea Nati procellosi in Ovid, all to show the
unpleasing nature of cold and bleak Airs; A (...) notans levitatem. Scalig.
lib. 1. Poetic. c. 22. Procella vis ventorum cum pluvia ab ^o quod omnia
procellat. Servius.
which therefore are called Procellae, from Celes that nimble Courser, who flew
like the wind, and denotes such a sharp blast, as not only makes the Beasts
to quake, but wets them to the skin with the rain that accompanies it.

Et astu Solis] as Trees are defenses from cold winds, so from sultry heats
and accession of Vermin which vex and bite the Cattle, for as digestion is
fortified by an equal proportion of heat and moisture, so the temperament of
cold and heat in weather is contributive to the feeding of Cattle; and
therefore as in hot Countries men in the day keep their Houses and take their
Serenato's and refreshments by the umbrages they make to shelter them from the
fury of the heat, so do provident Husbands prepare for Cattels conveniences
to cool them, by interposing some natural or artificial defenses from the Sun,
for the heat of the Sun does not only partch the Hide and Skin, but exhales
the natural heat and disperits Cattle, which is the reason that our Text speaks
of Trees planted not only to defend Cattle from the cold storms, but also from
the Suns heat.

Ipsaeque Pasturae ut plurimum irrigatae sunt, quo infra earum claustra reclusa
animalia, custodia non egent per diem nec per noctem.

These are the feeding grounds, wherein the Milch Kine for Daries, and the Oxen
and Cattle that are for the Shambles, feed; and as they are called Pasturae a
pascendo, so in other books Librata terrae continet quatuor bovatas (id est,
Oxgangs) terra unaquaeque bovata tredecim acres continet; and librata continet
quinginti duo acres. Gloss. ad M. Taris. In verbo librata.
Oxgangs, these, as they are rich and from the spring of the ground, afford a
good gripe; so are they fitted with springs or standing ponds of water, which
are as necessary to make Cattle thrive as the grass they bite or the hard meat
they chew; for as meat goes down with men like chopped hay (as we say) when they
have not drink to it, so is it with cattle thriftless diet, where the throat of
them is not cooled, and the passage cleansed by water; this Element, of all, is
that which cattle rejoice in, and the residence of them is by the waters; God
when he planted Eden, made it Rivery, it had limpid streams issuing from it in
abundance; and the Patriarchs, when they seated themselves for Accommodation of
their cattle, respected waters as the great convenience of their employment; in
Genesis 26. we read of the waters of Gerer, and the Herdsmen contending with
Jacob's Herdsmen; Agri aquaerum irrigatione aut pluviae carentes, nullos
fructus cultoribus praestant. Lucas, De Penna. c. De fundis rei privatae, Tit.
11.
in Exodus 2.16, 17. of Iethro's Daughters, and the servants that watered their
Father's cattle, and wherever in Scripture pasture is mentioned, water is
spoken off, or at least presumed near: Ex agris irrigaetis bis in anno fructus
praecipiuntur. Papinianus apud Cassau. Catal. Gloss M. P. 589.
and the Text here calls this accommodation of water, Irrigatio, irrigatae sunt
Pasturae, where irregare is as much as adaequare, quasi aquas in agrum aut
hortum per rigationem deducere, thus Tully Cic. ^. De Not. Deorum. Plautus
Epid. 3.18.
uses the word waters in plenty, as Nilus overflows Egypt; Authors use this
word to signify number, thus Plautus says of one, he was homo irrigatus
plagis, and Lib. 2. c. 6.
Pliny expressing cruelty, sanguine irrigari, and Seneca, genae irrigantur
assiduo rore; and irrigua aquarum are those lanches by which waters are let
into Grounds to overflow and fertilize them, Iniqua aquarum, loca per quae aqua
rivos producit ad irrigandum. Plinius lib. 6. c. 26. and lib. 5. c. 4.
so that these being in grounds, answer the requiries of cattle, both to cool
them within, and make their food go down cleaverly with them, yet it saves them
the labor to be driven to water, Signum autem binignitatis pastoris est, quod
greges nori diffugerit, Fleta lib. 2. c. 79.
which wastes the body of cattle, and often chafes them; besides by reason of
this the charge of looking after them is lessened, for, they being able to
water themselves when they have a mind to it, a little looking to them once a
day is all they require; yea by reason of both the ditch, hedge, and water, they
need no watch, or at least less then without them they would.

Nam ibi non sunt Lupi] The Wolf is a terrible creature, heretofore frequent in
England, or rather in Wales, Vowell's Description of England, p. 225.
where Edgar, a Prince of happy power, is said to lay on the Welsh a charge of
300. Wolf-skins a year, in token of Tribute and Dependence; to the performance
of which, he gave liberty to the Welsh to chase them into any part of England.
They are a kind of wild dog, savage and crafty, enemies to sheep and all
creatures of mansuetude; in relation to which ferity of nature, they have the
Characters of acres, avidi, asperes, cruenti, and by reason of these, the
flocks of England and they, were never Cater-cofins, as we say: but the love of
the Nation to the sheep preponderating, the Wolf went to the pot, In l^queo
lupui. Adag.
which is the reason that Wolves are destroyed. The savageness therefore of
this creature, as it caused the eracing of them here, so did it make them
abhorred every where; the Adage insinuated enough of the fatality of the nature
of this beast where a Victor, (...). Chil. 3. Cent. 4. Ad. 94.
Before a Precipice, behind Wolves: and therefore, though our flocks in
England have not Shepherds so fierce as those of Agla, who will with their
Crook and Sling pursue a Lion and make him leave his prey, which gave rise to
the Adage, which is called a man of fear and faint-heartedness; Timidior
Leonae Aglae, Si le^ ovem vel agnum furantur apprehensi baculo vel lapide
fugientibus Leonibus timorem incutiat. Aldrovandus lib. 4. de quadrup. digit
Ovipar. p. 8.9.
yet our sheep are secure from this, that with us there are no Wolves; And he
that seeks Wolves here must Cent. 4. Chil. 1. Adag. 81.
(...), make account to seek what he shall never find: for so safe are our
flocks, that unless they straggle, or are for corporal food, or to make money
of, stolen, they will be forthcoming.

Vrsi nec leones.] As no Wolves, so no Bears nor Lions; those beasts are in
the extreme parts of the World: Bears in the Northern climates, Lions in Asia
and Africa; Non in Anglia quanquam in Europa in plaga septrionali Ulyss.
Aldrov. lib. ^. p. 122. Quadrup. Ovip.
some have said we have had, though no Lions, yet Bears breeding in England;
but Gesner denies it: though in the Northern parts of Europe he allow some to
have been, yet not in England. Linschotten descript. Indias, p. 76.
But we have had Wolves in Sheeps clothing, Bears and Lions in Men's shapes;
(...) In Persid.
we have had a Generation in it, who, like the Caffares of Mosambick, fyled
their teeth, as sharp as needles, to bite asunder the Gordian Knot of
Government, so that of late that of Aeschylus is true of England, Ha^ tantas
viri virtutes, ingentia vitia aequabant, inhumana crudelitas, perfidia
plusqua^^ punica, nihil very, nihil sancti, nullius dei metus, nullus
jusjurandum nulla religio, Livius lib. 1. de Hanaibale.
Here was a fountain of all evil opened: and though our flocks in the field
have been safe from wild beasts, yet not the Flocks in the Church from Scism
and Heresy; nor the Flocks of humble and innocent Subjects from violence,
oppression, and what not, that was clamourous to God for Vengeance, and to Men
for patience and prayers: No Age of England ever knew such truculent spirits in
manhood as there have been lately amongst us, whom God deliver all peaceable
subjects from: but I return to the Text.

Quare de nocte eves eorum incustoditae in campis recumbunt in caulis and
ovidibus.]
The Law watches the Sheep from the Stealer, whose act is Felony and Death; the
terror of which, if it keep the Thief off, the flock feeds quiet. For, though
the night be the season of prey, Surgent de nocte latron. Virgil.
because they that are wicked, are wicked in the night; yet the night is secure
even to the sheep in England: The sheep of all creatures is a harmeless
creature, that for a beast, which the Dove is for a bird; And it has no
forecast for it self, which Aristophanes notes, in that he calls the life of a
simple negligent person (...): yet the sheep is (...), In Pluto. Budaeus lib.
de Asse^, Et ejus partibus lib. 4. p. 175.
a Golden Fleece, a rich and profitable creature, his flesh good for diet, his
wool for clothing, his fat for tallow, his horns and hoofs for soil; and
this beast has this quality, that he will wander and straggle, if he be not
kept; and though he have (...) force to repel danger, yet has no foresight to
avoid it. Therefore the use is, to keep the sheep in the fields, In caulis and
ovilibus; That is, in such pens and prisons, that they shall not straggle in
the night, and be taken up as nigh-ramblers are.

Caulae.] Is a repository for sheep, where they were kept safe from injury, a
kind of denn, or underground lodge, wherein (before the finding out the use
of building above-ground) they lodged them. Servius terms them Munimenta and
septa ovium; and generally any refuge of security to sheep is called Caula. In
9 Aeneid.


Ovile.] Is the same under another name, properly this was a place in the
Campus Martius, figured like the penns of sheep, open lattesses, in which the
Romans stood, and thorough which gave their suffrages; Livius dec. 3. lib. 6.
Citatis Centuriae Senioribus datum secreto in ovili cum his colloquendi
tempus. Brechaus ad legem 198. de verb significatione.
It Was concerning choice of a Consul to make Head against Hanniball. Ordinarily
the Ovile is Stabulum ubi Oves stabulantur.

Quibus Impinguantur Terrae eorum.] The folds and pens are not only the
security of the sheep from stray, but the fertility of the ground, which their
dung adds to, and invigorates: For as the sheep-walks are most in those
Countries that are Champaign and arid, so are the grounds helped against their
natural sterility, by those foldings of sheep, the soil of which is not only
very succulent and productive of Corn and Grass, but avoids great charge, which
otherwise those remote grounds and barren would occasion. So good and wise is
God in the work of Nature and Providence, that he has appointed every thing its
station, and given a compensation to every defect, and an alloy to every
redundancy. Deep and fat soyls, that need no soyling from sheep, are not proper
for breed of them, though for raising the bodies of sheep they may be;
therefore the breed is in hungry and lean grounds, where the Cornfieldsd are
madefyed by their foldings.

Vnde homines Patriae illius vix operis sudore gravantur] This is only to be
understood heartily, that England is no iron flinty Soil, lying under the
perpendicular of the curse, Briars and Thorns only to bring forth; but it is a
full and free soil, on which the Tiller lives as easily, and from whence he has
as comfortable support for himself and his family, as any Nation in the world
yields its inhabitants; and because the feeding of cattle is more advanced by
prudence and care, then by toil and labor, our Text says, the Country man,
vix Iudore gravatur, that is, his flocks yield him profit when he stands still
and lies down by them as they feed: but this is not the condition only of
Countrymen, their lives are divided between the Plough and the Flock; some
there are that in some places wholly stock their grounds with flocks, but alas
this Land has not many parts of it so fitted to it, but that even there are
many Ploughs jogging also. It Is true indeed, I believe England is the richest
in flocks for number and goodness of any Island in the world, and men we have
had, whom reports have made incredibly rich in Sheep, as that Ancestor of the
Lord Spencer, whom same speaks (as is pretended, but with what truth I affirm
not) to be by Record in the Tower richer in cattle then Job; and that L.
Cheyncy owner of one of the Islands in Kent, either Sheppey or Thanet, who
being in France, and laying a wager with the then King of France of 100000. l.
and when the King asked whether he was able to pay it if he lost it, he
replied, That his Sheeps tayls in the Isle should pay for it, and reported they
are to have been of that value. I say, these and other instances may be
produced of men very rich in sheep, but that thence England should be made
only a sheep-walk, and the ground rendered such, as yields fruits and profits
without labor, is more a noble Character of the Chancellour's love to his
native Country, then that which can be made strictly good; that it is a brave
soil, and that sheep abound in it, is true, so is the assertion, that men are
as soon made rich by the standing of sheep, as by any thing, but that sheep are
gold to all, and that all parts of the Land are proper for sheep, is not
inferrable hence; though truly I think (but ever with submission to better
judgments) that breeding sheep, and tending flocks is not only a gainful,
(...), Philo in lib. De Josepho, p. 526.
but a very divine Patriarchal course of life, and those that follow it have in
a kind opportunity Spiritu vivere: for besides that the care of flocks is in
Philo's words The Tyrociny to State-Government, and that the mind is exercised
more in intellectual acts then corporal ones, gives the opportunity to meditate
and dwell more at home then other Callings permit: thus Jacob is said To go out
and meditate in the field, which probably was to read and contemplate while his
flocks fed, whereas in the occupation of the Plough, no longer is there thrift
then the Plough joggs; whereupon the Statute of 1 R. 3. c. 1. calls
Handicrafts, easy Occupations, and going to plough and cart, Budaeus lib. De
Asa, and ejus partibus, lib. 5. p. 261,
laborious Occupations; for though in such soyles as Babylon and the Sybarites
Country, there be 100, 200, 300 for one, as Pliny tells us; or truer 30, 60,
and some 100 fold, which our Lord alluded to in that 13 Matthew. 8. yet in most
Countries there being tougher soyles and less increases, the toils of
Husbandmen are great, and their ways and manner of life scant, narrow, and
full of hardship, which makes the poorer sort of people, born and bred to
misery, take to that, as the calling which is most suitable to their mean
birth, breeding, and spirits, for by hard labor, constant tugg, and incessant
vigilance, they do (...), rifle the monuments of natures riches, Chil. 1. Cent.
9. Adag. 12. (...), Eurypid. in Hecuba, Adag. 78. Chil. 1. Cent. 8.
for the gain that arises by the crop on her, which when they attain, they have
what they expect in compensation of their diligence and charge, when as in the
pastoral life there is not that pain and trouble required. Whereas then the
Fathers of old, and our forefathers are said by our Text, Spirita magis
vivere, and greges malle pascere quam animi quietem agriculturae solicitudine
turbare; our Chancellor is to be understood, that England was ever very rich
in sheep, by reason of which, our Clothing is the worthiest and richest
commodity of this Kingdom; 2 Instit. c. 25. ad finem.
And divide our Native Commodities exported into ten parts, and that (says Sir
Edward Cook) which comes from the sheeps back is nine parts, in value of the
ten, and sets great numbers of people on work; which considered, as Pests
and Rots of sheep are a great chastisement of God, Pastores autem expedit
habere discretos and vigiles and benignos ne oves per iras suas t^rqueantur.
Sed ut pacifice in laetitia suas depascant pasturas. Fleta lib. 2. c. 79.
so are all things that depreciate the wools and clothing of our Nation to be
cautioned against: by 11 E. 3.2. none were to wear any cloth but such as is
made in England: and c. 3. no Clothes made beyond the seas were to be brought
into the Kings dominions; but this being thought hard, was by 24 H. 8. c. 13.
in part repealed, and by 1 Jacob. 25. in general words; by the 31 E. 3. c. 8.
the weight, goodness, and sale-place of wools is appointed, confirmed by 13 R.
2. c. 9. 8 H. 6. c. 22. 3 E. 4. c. 1. 23 H. 8. c. 17. 13 Eliz. 25. yea, and
when the Florentines and other Natives came into England, and made clothes of
Ray, there was by the 2 E. 3. c. 14. the Measure and Assizes of them set down,
which was repealed by 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 6. but yet the more precise goodness of
later and more usual clothing specified; and by 4 E. 4. c. 1. the length and
breadth of cloths made to be sold, is limited; and no clothes wrought beyond
the sea are to be brought into this Land: And since Henry the eighths time,
when the new Drapery was brought in, more Acts have been made for wool and
clothing then ever before. From all which I collect the great concernment of
the sheep, and proceed of them to this Nation, which is the cause, that the
Chancellor supposes men that have so much leisure, as the sheep-Masters of
England have, whom their flocks make rich, without their constant corporal
labor, more probable to abound in exercises of their minds and
understandings, then other people, that are more harrassed, and so are less
masters of reason: thereupon he says, as it follows, Ex quibus homines
regionis illius magis redduntur dispositi ad discernendum in causis quae magni
sunt examinis, quam sunt viri qui telluris operibus inhabitants, ex ruris
familiaritate mentis contrahunt ruditatem.



This illation seems to have some weight in it, for though the temperature of
the air do contribute much to men's complexions and constitutions, and thence
to their virtues and vices; by reason of which the Greeks are termed light; the
Africans inconstant; the Germans strong and valiant; Cassan. Catal. Gl. Mundi,
p 473.
the Italians grave; the Spaniards proud; the French fiery, and so onward.
Though, I say, the mild climates producing, by moderate influences, temperate
and wise minds in men, may, in a good sense be accounted the external cause
of men's fitness here with us in this moderate Zone for Judicial affairs; yet
can it not be denied but that Education and ingenuity of calling, wherein men
have leisure, and helps to polish their minds, is a very notable furtherance
to intellectual plenitude: And hereupon this land having so much of advantage
reflecting on the Inhabitants of it, from its plenty, and the ease of many
gainful callings in it, Olympiod Excerpt. p. 854. Edit. Sylbur. gii.
may well be called (...), as Herodotus words are, a most blessed Island; the
men whereof, as of a Country blessed by God, Country from Contrada the Italian
word; so Emperor Frederick in his Epistle to our H. 3. M. Paris. p. 357.
Contrada tota descendit inde usque ad Joppen, id est Regio ait Gloss.
are not dull Greeks, rude Arabs, riotous Muscovites, fiery Goths, barbarous
Vandalls, gluttonous Danes, no nor light airy Braves, but sober, stanch,
resolute, apprehensive men; fit for the field, for the Court, in peace and war,
jest and earnest, ferious and trite things: and by reason of this advantage of
their Mother-aire, and the attendants on it, they are in our Chancellours sense
Native Statesmen and Justicers, Eam sententiam sic ad unguem servant hujus
temporis homine ut hominis vocabulo videatur indignus qui non qua ratione suis
consuler^ commodis noverit, Erasm. ad Adag. 21. Chil. 1. Cent. 6.
having a kind of constitutionall judiciousness in them, resulting from the
liberty of their Laws, and the enfranchisement and heroising of their spirits
thereby; And that not only in that single act of selfe-preservation (which men
of Anaexarchus his temper, who was Philosophorum omnium adulatorum
abjectissimus, thrive by, when such as Calisthenes, though they have ten
thousand times the merits of those flatterers, are ruined by plain-dealing) not
only, I say, are English men wise in that of promoting their own particular
interests, but in rebus magni exanimis; such as are trial of life and estate,
actions of promise and contract, projects of combination and forgery; the
cryptick and hellish secrecies of Treason, Rebellion, Murder: These, though
buried as it were under ground, does the sagacity of an English Jury follow,
and pursue to their subterraneous caves, and un-litter those kennells of
villainy and mines of poison and rancour that are brewing in them: and this they
do, by an ingenuity and natural endowment, which the Text terms in them,
magis apti and dispositi; which, though I do not believe, in the Astrologers
sense, is by pure influence of the Stars and energy of conception, yet I may
think arises from some benignity and largess of God, according to the
receptivity of the soul, and the concurrents of other appointments, which, I
think, is the sense of those that hold unam animam in naturalibus esse alia
excellentiorem and perfectio^em; though perhaps it do thwart the opinion of St.
Thomas Hales, and others, who determine animas esse aequales. For, since we see
there is in the souls of men degrees of ingeny, Cass. Catal Gl. Mundi. p. 475.
whence it should come but from a prelation of endowment, Anima secundum
ordinem naturae non perfertur alteri amina, S. Thom. Part. 1. qu. 64. art. 4.
I am not able to determine, nor do I determine any thing, but leave it sub
judice, only in that our Text says, Anima quanto nobilior est tanto plures
potentias operationis and organa habet, part. 1. qu. 30. art. 2.
Magis apti and dispositi, it asserts a priority in some to others, and this
consists much in a fitness of the body to the soul; For, as a Gun unevenly
boared, and not cleverly mounted, will shoot at random, though it have the best
powder and marks-man imaginable; prick out the rarest notes to a Songster, yet
if his voice be naught, the Music will not be delightful; lead men never so
puissantly, yet if the men lead do not follow on, no battle is well fought, or
day bravely got; so let the soul be never so divine and wise, Anima non
impeditur a suo corpore ut est perfectibile ab ea, sed ut habetis aliquid
repugnans animae, S. Thom. Part. 1. quest. 75. art. 3.
yet if the body mated to it be dull and stupid, the incorrespondency will
destroy all the precellency that is not answered by the other part of the
quire, which is the harmony of body and soul. So that by apti and dispositi the
Chancellor intends the fitness and towardliness of men to great employments,
Ex omnibus Latinis verbis hujus verbi vim vel maxim putavi. Cic. 2. de claris
Oratorib.
Aptus est qui convenienter alicui rei junctus est (says Tully) and Virgil,
Axem stellis ardentibus aptum: Critics account this verbal very large in its
signification, Qui aut tempus quid postulet non videt, aut plura loquitur aut
se ostentat, aut eorum quibus cum est vel dignitatis vel commodi rationem non
habet, aut denique in aliquo genere, aut inconcinnus, aut multus est, is
Ineptus dicitur, Advers. lib. 18. c. 9.
comprehendere vinculo they called apere; and Muret, in giving the description
of its contrary ineptus sets aptus amply forth; He that sees not what the
present time requires to be done, or he that is impertinent in saying or doing
what were better unspoken or undone, forfeiting his credit with those judicious
persons, who are witnesses of what he says and does, he is ineptus, a fond
man: Therefore in all good Authors the word aptus being the avoidance of the
prementioned extreme, is used to significantly express any thing; so Cic. in
Coelio, 1 Offic. de Opt. Genere Orato. 2 De Not. Deorum. Lib. 2. c. 12. Lib.
12. c. 7.
Tully applies it to Cat^, of whom he writes, Nulla aptior persona quae de illa
aetate loqueretur; that is, accommedatior and convenientior: None more proper
for that work then he that was so grave a man. So Apta compositio membrorum,
apta and cohaerentia, apta verba ad Latinorum consuetudinem, Aptae ad
stabilitatem commissurae and adactus finiendos accommodatae; so Aptus esse and
decere; so Celsus has Aptus curationi aeger; and Pliny, His aptus alicui rei;
and Quintilian, Animi apti; yea, all Authors equae aptae, color aptus, tempus
aptum, verba apta joco, umbra apta pastoribus, apta arma, and therefore it is
well here matched with dispositi:] As in other Authors, Aptum and ratione
dispositum; and dispositi in turmas; Cic. pro Roscio, lib. 18. lib. 35.
So Livy terms wise Counsel's Disposita in omnem fortunam consilia: and Pliny
calls Sabinus, liberalis vir, subtilis, dispositus, acer, disertus. By all
which the Chancellor applying apti to his Countrymen, makes them not men
whose heads are in their heels, (...). Adag. 18. Cent. 2. Chil. 2.
and when they are driven to straits, cry out bemoaningly, as he in
Aristophanes did, that his mind was shut up within his skin, and could not
appear to do him credit without the memento of a lash: no such dull figures of
manhood as deserve the taunt Plautus gives the servants of his time, Vivos
homines mortui incursant boves. Plautus de loris quibus caeduntur servi, qua
facti fuere e coriis bovalibus, Erasm. Adag. 18. Chil. 2. Cent. 2.
Dead beasts chastise living men; no such inelegantiores Lebethriis, as the
Adag. 48. Cent. 6. Chil. 1.
Adage has it, are the Freeholders of England; God be praised they do not
labor under that mentis ruditas which other common people (whose spirits are
suppressed, and their breedings mean, because of the tenuity of their
conditions) are unhappy in, and contemptible for; but as God has given us of
this Nation a pleasant Land, a free Law, and a plenary discovery of his Gospel,
so has he endowed the Nation with that tillage and culture of breeding, which
has polished all the rudeness of their minds into a smooth and amiable
oriency; so that if we do not sin against our light, and provoke God to
intenebrate us, there are mercies enough upon the Nation and the people, to
force from our Neighbors the confession, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 13.
That God has made us the head and not the tail, and that it is not only
better with us then we deserve, but then with any our Neighbors: And I never
fear any Reverter of us to this, Isa. 6.10. Isa. 6^.17.
that is here called, rudet as mentis, till we wilfully shut our eyes against
the light, and harden our hearts against God's fear, which if ever this Nation
should be guilty of, we may again, as the Angles, Picts, and British did before
Christianity, mentis ruditate gravari. It Is a dangerous thing to give way to
reigning sins, either in a Nation or person; in the History of France there is
a notable story of Fredegund the fair Wife of Chilperick, History of France. p.
30.
who suffering her self to be courted by Landri de la Tower, at last grew so
enamoured of him, that she was impatient to be without him; Chilperick riding
one day a hunting, went up, just as he was going, into his wives Chamber to
complement her, and finding her combing her head, being behind her, tapped her
most softly upon her head with his rod, she thinking Chilperick had been gone,
and it had been Landri, replied, A good Knight should always strike before and
not behind, the King understood the meaning and went sorrowful away; but she,
finding her self overshot in her tongue, plotted her Husbands death, which her
Paramour and she brought to pass, and a miserable Woman she became. But this
rudeness of mind not being the unhappiness here meant, but a Progression of
misery beyond it, I prosecute no further, but return to the Text.

Regio etiam illa it a respersa, refertaque est possessoribus terrarum and
agrorum, quod in ea, villula tam parva reperiri non poterit, in qua non est
Miles, Armiger, vel Pater famelias, qualis ibidem Franclaine vulgariter
nuncupant.

By this the Chancellor persists in the commendatory description of England,
as from the fertility of its soil, so from the plenty and splendor of its
inhabitants; for whereas amongst the Romans and Germans their Villa were only
Granges and Sheepcoats, Budaeus in Pandectus, p. 166. Edit. Vascos.
where their Drudges kept Cattle, tended Vines, and sowed Grain to furnish the
great men that dwelt in Cities of concourse, pleasure, and business; whereas
the Country seats were mopish and dull, rude and uncompt, and men used them
more for profit and necessity then pleasure and choice, in England every corner
is so thwackd with inhabitants, and so orderly disposed, that it is not only
possible to find men of office and honor in every Ville, but impossible
almost to find any Ville without them, there is such plenty of them as if the
Land were sown with them, so that one would think they could not live each by
other, and so are they verging each upon other, that Corn, thrust down in a
bushel, packs not closer to make the weight of the bushel more, then they do.
The Chancellor looks upon England as a Land of Tissue, Ager proscissus ad
serendas seg^tes arvum dicitur, plantatus autem and consitus arboribus, aut
vineis vinetum nominatur, adificatus vero villa est. Brechaeus ad leg. 27. lib.
De signific. verborum.
so embroidered with Nobility, Gentry, and Landowners, that the ground is by
them over-laid, and the luster of it occult; here metal upon metal argues the
richness of the bearing, for the mettle of the ground causing metal in the
purse of the Possessor, makes every Villula bear a Knight or Esquire, Lazius
lib 12 c. 6. p. 1073
or Master of some freehold.

In duodecem tabulis legum nostrarum nusquom nominetur villa. Plin. lib. 19. c.
4.
So that the name Villa being Roman (not so eminent as the Law of the twelve
Tables) the Roman sense of Villa is yet unforgotten, though somewhat advanced
by time and transplantation; amongst them their Villa was Lazius lib. 12. c. 6.
p. 1073.
domus extra urbem adificata cum omnibus aedificiis, quae non pecora solum
armentaque recipere possent, sed etiam omnis generis artifices and familiam, to
which Varro lib. 1. De re Rust. and Pliny accord. Villam tripartito distribuit
partem unam urbanum, rusticam alteram and terti am fructuariam Columella, lib.
1. c. 6.
Varro says it is so called Villa, Quod in ea convehantur fructus and
evehantur cum veneunt, and hence comes the word way quasi veha, the passage on
which Carts go too and fro: this was called Pagus also from (...) fons, because
it was usually in loco paludato, for that neither man nor beast thriving
without water, ancient Granges and Daries were commonly seated low, where the
defenses from storms are most, Budaeus in pandect, p. 166. Edit. Vascos.
and supplies of water and rich grounds best.

The Roman Authors make three properties of a Villa; 1. That it contain room
(...) for the Master and Lord, that is as our Mansion-houses, or Ha^^ ^nights,
as we call them, were or Berries, or Places. Praetoria, such were Cicero's
Tusculum and Ac^handus the son of CaFirmianum, from whence our term Farm
perhaps may come, or Budaeus ^^emies ( Ala in anum, on these the Romans
bestowed great costs, Ampla and operosa Praetoria gra^^ Band, Augustus; Villas
videlicet quasdam elegantius and sumptuosius extructas, says Suetonius* and of
Caligula, In (...) Spartianu^ Hadriano.
In extructionibus Praetoriorum atque Villaerum omni post habita ratione, nihil
tam efficere concupiscebat, quaem quod effici posse rogaretur; and of Hadrian
it is written, Tiburtinam villam mirifice ex aedificavit, ita ut in ea, and
Provinciarum and locorum celeberrima nomina inscriberet, Lycaeum, Academiam,
Prytanaeum, Canopum, Paecilem, Tempe vocaret, as desiring by sight of their
names, to be put in mind to contract the single rarities of them all into the
Ornament of his Country Seat, and as it were, Palace of pleasure.

2. The second Appendix to a Roman Villa was Humiliores ac potius casae quam
domus in quibus pecora erant, Alciat. in 211. leg. p. 459. De verb. signific.
Epist. lib. 12. ad Attic.
and familia servique habita, aut qui opera faciebant rustica, to which Cic.
alludes, when writing to his friend, he calls this, Villula sordida and valde
pusilla, of this Varro lib. 2. c. 9. De re Rust. so Horat. 2 Sermon. Si vacuum
tepido caepisset Villula tecto.
And from this part of the Villa arises the word Villains, who were Omnes
Villae adscripti and coloniari conditioni addicti, these were ever to be at
their charges and never to be off their labors, unless in their Lords service,
or to tend his cattle or commands.

3. The third part of their Village is pars fructuaria, their storehouses or
granaries, Alciat. ad leg. 198. lib. De verb. signif. Brechaeus ad leg. 198.
lib. De verb. signif. Fornerius ad leg. 198. lib. De verb. signif.

in which they repose and stow all their fruits that from the ground they
gathered, for the Husbandman or Swain was but to labor to sow, Lib 7. Rei
Rustic.
reap, and bring in or gather the fruits, when once that was done, the Lords
disposed of them, to which Columella referrs, Nec tamen instituendo villicam
domesticarum rerum villico remittimus curam, sed tantum modo laborem ejus,
adjutrice data levamus.

These were the three parts constituent of a Villa, and these every Villula,
Manzo sive Mansio, Italis est quantitas terra quae sufficit duobus bobus in
anno ad laborandum. Papias Glossator.
or Mansion House in England has; the Manor or Lords repose, the Farm-house or
Baylywick, where the Bailey and hindes are, and the cattle both oxen and horses
with the Dary is kept, and the Barns and Granaries where the fruits lie,
Vadianus Jurisconsultus in Origin. dicit esse villam cum pradio Ecclesiae
annexam and servitio seculari liberam, vid^ plura in Gloss. ad. M. Paris. in
verbo Mansus.
and out of which they are by the Bailiff delivered by tale, either to the
officers of the house for their respective expenses, or to Market for exchange
of money, wherewith to buy other necessaries for the Lord and his family, and
to defray the wages of his menial servants and day-labourers, together with his
sports, travels, and other pecuniary disburstments: yea, so has time bettered
these rude and thin-carcassed Cottages, from what they originally were, that
from being clamped with clay and headed with heath, neither capable to keep out
wind or rain, they are now generally well built and notably covered; yea,
often adorned luxuriantly, and that to encourage the Tenant to pray for his
Lord, and the servant to labor truly for his bountiful Master, under whom he
lives in comfort and plenty. So that our Chancellor in this clause highly
extolls the opulency and pregnancy of Englands Treasury, which is not only
many in Inhabitants, but mighty in wealth and abounding in conveniences, not
only of life, but for State, distinction and ornament, that, as England is the
Phoenix Nation, so every Villula and hemm-breadth of it is so digested, that it
seems to be a little Commonwealth, a Model of the National Government. For
whether the Romans here placing their Colonies in the British Towns, and having
their Villae in the Country, or whether from a Native British Origin I know
not; no Villa (I mean not in the large sense which equals it with Pagus,
vicus, arbs, but in a restrained sense, for a Neighborhood or small
conjuncture of houses) but has a system of politic Government in it, the Civil
Magistrate, the Lord of the Soil, who has from the Crown, or other great Lord
(who from the Crown holds it) Dominium Soli, all Regalities and Perquisites, or
such of them as the King excepts not to his own use; such are Jurisdiction and
profit of Courts for trials of offenses capital, criminal, or at least
Trespasses and Actions within the Manor, Escheats upon Felonies, or other
Accidents, Custody of Infants and Lunaticks, power of passing Estates and
admitting Tenants, Reliefs upon death, Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, and the like:
The Church-Magistrate, the Parson, Vicar, or Rector of the Church, who has, sub
Episcopo, curam animarum, and lives de proprio, the Church-Glebe, and the
Tithes and Church-book profits, for which he is by the Law to reside, and to
preach, instruct, reprove, and inspect the people, that They perish not for
want of knowledge and faith, which comes by hearing the word, which he is
constantly on Lords days, and other days if need be, to preach, and that
their knowledge may be sweetened to them in the blood of Christ, which he is to
offer to such of them as present themselves for knowing and worthy receivers at
the Lords Table, and he knows not notoriously ignorant and scandalous in their
lives.

The Officers both Civil and Ecclesiastical; Constables, and Headboroughs to
keep the peace, and to prevent frayes and unneighbourly fudes, and to secure
offenders to public justice, and to lead men, if need be, to defend themselves
against unlawful Assaulters, and predatorious insurrections against them; and
the Churchwardens and Sidemen to see the fabric of the Church kept decently,
and to receive and pay the incomes and expenses of it, and to answer for it in
all cases wherein it shall come in question, who, together with the Overseers
of the poor, take care for persons impotent, sick, poor, aged, Orphans, and
other objects of charity, that God be not provoked by neglect of them to deny
his blessings to the fruits of the ground, and revenues of the Parishoners, nor
the Religion and Polity, under which those poor souls are bred and live, be
evil spoken of, as inoperative, dead and lifeless as to works of charity to
men, as well as piety to God. Now because this resemblance of the National
Government in every Seigniory collated a dignity and ray of Grandeur to those
Lords and Gentlemen, whom the Kings of this Land (from whom all Lands and
Jurisdictions originally moved) dignified and privileged by Chartar, to reward
their service, or encourage their loyalty for the future; therefore the
Chancellor does not content himself to write, that many such Knights,
Esquires, and Freeholders there are, but terms England in all parts, and in
every Villa, respersa refertaque, words that signify plenty which way soever
we look.

Cic. 7. verr.
Respersa] Respergere is as much as circum circa spargere, thus Tully uses it,
Quum Praetoris nequissimi inertissimique oculos praedonum remi respergerent;
and Sanguine respergere dextram is in Catullus, Argon. 59.46. lib. 6. c. 2. Pro
Roscio Americ. Ad Qu. Fratrem. lib. 2.16.
and Mero respergere tergora is Columella's phrase, so Iuvenis respersus caede
fraterna in Catullus, and Manus respersae sanguine in Cicero; and Pliny notably
tells us, that the flighs of birds go in numbers, respersu pinnarum, or
pennarum hostem obcoecantes; and Referta] the other word, is a word of
accumulation, noting plenty, stuffed as full as full can be; so Cicero to his
brother owns the receipt of his Letters, 1 Academ. 5. Verr.
together with Caesar's also, refertis omni officio diligentia and suavitate,
and in other places he mates plenus and locuples with refertus, which sets
forth the Chancellours meaning, to show that England is a Land close-packed
with Inhabitants, so wedged together, that a man would wonder how they set
their horses together, especially when they are so potent and rich, not only
as they are Possessores terrarum, (for so in a large sense Occupiers or Farmers
of Land are, during the terms of which demised to them they are paying their
rents and performing the annexed Conditions possessers of the Lands so demised)
but as they are Possessores proprio jure, en son proper droit; as only those
are whom he expresses by those words, Miles, Armiger, Paterfamilias.

Miles] Of this I have written in the notes on the 22. Chapter. That which I
add here, is, that the Chancellor means not this in the large sense, as every
soldier is capable of the title, but as only Honorarily it is understood, as
they are Dignities, Electi Milites and Primicerii qui primi inceris
scribebantur, Duces Exercituum. Gloss. ad M. Paris. in verbo Primicerii.
bestowed by the Sovereign on men Dilecti and electi as they were, not only
the choice for vigor of body, being Florentioris aetatis, but as they were men
of fortune and interest, who were fit to be Senators for Counsel, Seminarium
Sena^orum equestrem esse lo^um. Noldenus De Statu Nobil. 60.62.
as well as Champions for conduct; and hence of old called Ritters, that is,
Servatores or Saviors, eo quod virtute and fortitudine servent patriam;
Besoldus De Nob. and Commit. Imperi^.
By reason of which, what donaries, largesses, and privileges these Equites or
Milites had, Lipsius, De Militia Romans p. 26.
the Roman stories every where tell us, especially learned Lipsius, who spares
no cost of time and judgment to illustrate their Militia, and all the parts and
premium's of it: These Knights, as we call them, were then very honorable, the
Carians called them Alabandi, from Alabandus the son of Careus, who obtained,
on horseback, a famous victory for them over their enemies ( Ala in their
Tongue signifying a Battle, and Banda Victory) whence probably our term Band,
for a company of warlike men; and the National standing Forces in M. Paris,
Civilium communiarum legiones, are called Trained Bands: and the Germans, in
part our Ancestors, Adag 99. Chil. 2. Cent. 2.
were wont to call Antiquae nobilitatis principem praepotentem Banderum, which
might be Seir (though with some alteration, as the badge of time) to the word
Bannerer, and Banneret, a degree of Knighthood more eminent then the Bachelour,
though that being done ictu gladii, seems the more natively military, and
catholickly honored: much here then might be said of Knights, as that they
ought to have those six qualifications which Casanaeus from Acursius mentions,
Catal. Gl. Mundi, p. 327. Digest. lib. 4. tit. 6. Miles periculi Com. p. 859.
that they are to be men of fortune; and that none but such ought to be in
their places to Parliament, 1 H. 5. c. 3. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 4. Patent
38. E. 3.
to serve Coroners, or on Assizes, as Proto-Jury-men. That none were
compellable to Knighthood when the Law was such, Multi de Militibus
universitatis regni qui s^ volunt. Bacchalaureos appellari sunt contriti M.
Paris de Justice apud Brackley, Temps H. 3. p. 768. Lege Gloss. in M. Paris in
verbo Baccalau^ei.
but those who were Claro loco nati, or Gentilhommes de estate, and had 20 l. a
year; nor to Just and perform Manly actions, but such as either were actually
such, or stood Candidates upon their Emeriting such to be: These who by
service, (a) 2 Instit. p. 595.
tenure, fortune, courage, were able and willing to serve their King and
Country: of these I could write much, but the incomparable M. Seldom has
prevented me herein, and so has Sir William Segar, and others, whom I refer the
Reader to, as also to the Statute of H. 1. c. 11. which Sir E^^ard Cook writes
of, on the Statute 1 E. 2. De Militibus; For, this honor, however in times of
Peace, it is given to reward riches honestly gotten, and learning industriously
acquired: yet, in the native rise of it is purely a brat of the field, and the
fruit and reward of hardship in, and victory after the encounter with an enemy.
And those chains and neck-jewels which Knights and their Ladies, as an honor,
defluent on them ( Vxor fulget radiis mariti) wear, as tokens of respect, were
at first remunerations of valor, and that as it were by direction of the light
of Nature; For even among the Caffares, Lindshotten Hist. East Indias.
or black People of Mosambick, nothing is accounted so honorable as to kill
enemies in battle, and every man they took and killed they dismembered of his
Virilia, and after they had dried them, to preserve them from putrefaction,
then they carry them to their King, and before him spit those out of their
mouths at his feet, who commands them to be gathered up, and given to them
again, and ever after they are accounted as Knights; and these privities they
string, and wear as Collars of SS. at public Feasts, Marriages, and Meetings:
yea their wives wear them as Carcanets of Jewels. The consideration of all
which amounts to the honor of our Chancellours reason, in alleging England
to be a rich Country, and the Freeholders of it fit for matters, Magni
examinis, because they are men of blood, wealth, and honor, and no Ville but
has such in it, the chief whereof are Milites.

Armiger.] This originally was a title of service, by standard-bearing to
Lords, and great Cheiftains, and thereupon in some Books Armigeri and
servientes are joined; so, when the French King understood that our Henry the
third would assault him in Poict^w, Erat numeras militum eleganter ad unguem
armatorum quatuor milia absque undique adventantibus, Armigerorum autem and
servientium ac Balistarum numerus ad viginti millia numerabantur, M Paris. p.
584*
he prepared a great Army of Knights, notably prepared, and of Esquires and
Attendants to the number of 20000. these were called also Scutiferi, and Idem.
p. 791.
signiferi (so Robert De Veer is termed Signifer Gulielmi Longaespathae) also
Primicerii and B. p. 69^. l. 22.
Balcaniferi; yea, men of this rank and title have not only been accounted
brothers in Arms to Princes, but taken to be husbands in Arms to Queens, 2
Instit. p. 50.
and yet not been disparaged; so was Owen aep Theodore to Katharine, once Queen
Dowager of England, and when she was so, maintained an action as Queen of
England: so our Law and National civility accounted ever highly of these,
because they were men of great valor and merit, My good friend M. Fabian
Philips, in his disc. of Capite Tenures. p. 23.
which was not only the reason that Lands held in Serjeantry have been to
find two Esquires to go in the Kings Vant-guard upon occasion of war with the
Welsh, as a grave Author informs me, but that men in times of trouble
purchased these, their friends and confederates as leaders, Rast. Stat Larg.
and daring to defend them by puissance and force, so I collect from Statute 1
R. 2. c. 7. which says, Because that diverse people of small garrison of Land,
Rent, or other possessions, do make great retinue of People, as well Esquires
as of others, in many parts of the Realm. So at this day no man is charged with
light horse (which is a Gentleman's service) but such as are in account
Esquires, and are fellows to those whom the Statutes of 1 H. 5. c. 1. 8 H. 6.
c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 4. 13 Eliz. c. 19. intends. And though before Henry the
fourths time men were not distinguishable but by their Forinsecum servitium;
yet the 1 H. 5. c. 5. appointing additions to ascertain men otherwise
doubtful, Sir Edward Cook 2 Iustit. On the Statute addition p. 665.
Titles came in use, and this of Esquire, before the time of our Chancellours
writing; concerning the degrees, privileges, and other curiosities of them,
the former authorities about Knighthood referred to, are proper to be in them
consulted, only these are the numerous part of the men of fortune, blood, and
breeding, in the Nation, and the second degree of the minor Nobility,
comprehending in it, under the notion of Gentlemen, Knights and Esquires.

Paterfamilias.] This word does not denote one, a servant or substitute,
Manerii Ballivus, domus dominica Custos, and Domesticus Famulus, as M. Paris
calls some; M. Paris. p. 855.
no, nor the Major Domus or Vice-Master; nor yet a Farmer (as Firma and
Firmarius used in our old Authors, Gloss ad M. Paris. in verbo vice dominus.
M. Paris. p. 56.258.
understand them: and as the Romans called their Coloni and Pagani, of which
Pro domo sua
Tully, Lib. 12. c. 6.
Lazius, and others write) but Paterfamilias imports one Brechaeus ad Leg. 46.
p. 130. de verb. signific. and in leg. 195.
Qui sui juris est, nullique addictus mancipio, called the Father of the
Family; Non quod familiam sed jus familiae habet, as the Lawyers say: This we
in England anciently called the Good Man; And the old Dames in my memory were
wont to call their husbands, my Good Man: later times more gentilized, discard
that name from all mouths, but those that are plebeian, and though it be
enunciative of Franklaynes; that is, free-liers, and owners of Land, in which
sense Swain^-Mete is the name of the Conventus libere tenentium, according to
the old Custom or Law, M. Paris. p. 206. Gloss ad M. Paris. in verbo Swain. Ex
quibus Robertus Knolls ex paupere mediocrique valerio mox factus ductor [Regii
exercitius] ad divitias usque regales excrevit ibidem. Walsingham in E. 3. p.
166.
Swaine-metum teneatur ter in anno; yet is it now not much set by, though from
this condition of them, there are many now grown into Families, now called
Franklin, who are men in the County of Middl. and other parts Magnis ditati
possessionibus, which the Text expresses to set out this Paterfamilias by, And
this is an argument of much wealth; For therefore he that is the Paterfamilias
here, is counted ditatus, because he has possessiones, not like those
Ascriptitii, which were a sort of Husbandmen, that bound themselves by
Indenture to till the ground, promising not to depart till their manumission,
nor as possessours of the one only Farm, or Mansion they live in, but many
farms and portions of lands they demise to others, and those not only in their
own County, wherein they live, and in which they are members, but in other
shires, and not only Copyhold, which is a badge of villenage, but free-holds:
Gloss in M. Paris Verb. Ascriptitii.
yea, and those not only Tenancies, but even capital Messages, and chief
Manors, by reason whereof they are drawn sometimes to bear Offices in
foreign Co^unties upon extraordinary occasion, Agri cultores and fossores
vinearum non de bent eligi in consules, ubi est copia aliorum sapientum, Jacob.
Rebuffus lib. 1. cap. de Agricolis.
and have opportunity to place their children apart, when their age and their
Parents pleasure is they should Marry, or be bestowed in a course of life, to
live upon what by their fatherly gift is become their own; And as many
possessions in number, so large in their extent, noble in their royalty, and
rich in their revenue: For of this race of men who were and are but plain Good
Man, and John, and Thomas, many in Kent, and Middlesex especially, besides
sparsim in every several County have been men of Knights estate, who could
dispend many hundreds a year, and yet put up to raise Daughters portions; yea,
so ambitious are many of them to be Gentlemen, that they by plentiful living
obtain the courtesy of being called Master, and written Gentleman; and their
posterities by being bred to Learning and Law, either in Universities, or Inns
of Chancery and Court, turn perfect sparks, and listed gallants, companions to
Knights and Esquires, and often adopted into those orders: And from this
sourse, which is no ignoble one, have risen many of the now flourishing Gentry;
For the gain of callings, whether Clerkly or Civicall, has preserved and
augmented estates, when the state and thristless laziness of the old English
Gentleman has sold them, and servants; by proving themselves laborious and
provident Bees; have entered by purchase upon their Masters hives and their
honey too. For besides the good pleasure of God who has decreed revolutions in
families as well as Governments, and variations in the parts as well as in the
whole of the world, there is a cancre even in time which eats out the luster
and puts out the light of the brightest family, whom few ages see obsolete and
vanished, and another in place of it; and there are periodique vices which
Varlets and Bigots in families have, by which Ancestors Graves, Corpse,
Monuments, Royalties, and Seats are transferred from them to others, whose
humors are more retentive, and veins less vain and riotous. And this is the
cause why God ought only to be eyed in the desired fortunation of families;
for no humane wit, providence, or adjunct whatsoever can preserve against this
moth; or promote against this depression, nor can the brightest star that
arises in the firmament of a family, shine to any durable illustricity, if it
be denied the rays of power and mercy to adjuvate and continue it; yea most an
end it is seen, that as blazing stars are portentuous presages of changes in
States, so are notable wits and polite persons (sparkling remarkably in
families) proems to the temporary if not total eclipse of them, for either they
suddenly dye re infecta (not reaping what they have sown, nor having past the
last round of the ladder of greatness) or else they neither leave no heirs of
their name, or such as are no honor to their names.

And therefore though the counsel of God be secret, and no man can presage
what, and when, Ab Aymaro de Valence-comite, Pembrochiae qui fuit unus de
assessoribus and judicibus super mortem, T. de Lancastria usque ad istum
Johannem de Hasting, nullus unquam comes Pembrochiae patrem suum vidit, sed nec
pater filii visione latatus est; Walsingham in R. 2. p. 376. Edit. Land.
and why, and by whom this family shall be made or marred, yet all wise men
know, that there have been, are, and ever will be floods and ebbs in families,
and men there will be in them who are made for the rise and fall of many in
them; some crown what others curse, some purchase, others profusely squander,
some are blessed with Marriages apparently rich, and succedaneously more rich,
and they live to have issue by them, and those Inheritors; others marry upon
hopes, and their abortion mutilates them even to a necessitous condition; some
cast away themselves, not caring whom they join to, and their desperate Voyage;
judged Shipwreck, proves a conquest of Peru; or springing of a Mine of gold
and treasure; the sum of all is to trust God, and design things with virtue
and moderate wisdom, not relying too much on the arm of flesh, and the event is
mostly better then when so much of man's policy and wisdom predominates, for
God's counsel will stand, and most an end he sets his wisdom to defeat ours
which is not also his: they seldom reckon of successes aright that reckon
without their Host (as with reverence) the Proverb is, they do, that take not
God into their thoughts, counsels, and actions; nay it is often the judgment
of men to be blinded by delusion, and deafned through pride and passion against
the counsel that propitiates and tenders (if followed) safety to them. In the
Irish Chronicle, in Sir John Perot's Deputy-ship; Vowel. p. 170.
there is a notable story, there was an engagement against the Obrins, who had
betaken themselves to a Wood, and there lay hid ready to entertain the English
valor which would come out there to assault them, Jacques Wingfield a brave
Commander, and experienced, had two Nephews, Sir Peter, and Captain George
Carew, who were hot upon the service, and by all means would enter the Wood
upon the Irish, Jacques would not let them, but Sir Peter would no nay but in he
must go, slighting his Uncles counsel, and Captain George would have gone in
also but that his Uncle forcibly hindered him, saying, I will not lose you both
at once, Sir Peter was presently taken and slain; but I recall my self to my
Text, which thus follows.

Nec non libere tenentes alii, and valecti plurimi suis Patrimoniis
sufficientes, ad faciendam juratam in forma pernotata.

This is added to show, that over and above Knights, Esquires, and reputed
Gentlemen, (whom the courtesy of the Nation favors with that appellation for
their wealths sake, they being Magnis ditati possessionibus;) there are others
of fortune and solid substance Socagers and Copyholders, who are fit to serve
on Juries, having Lands and Lands-worth to the value of the highest requiry;
and this shows the general wealth of England, that it is not cooped up in a few
great men's hands, who share out to themselves the delicate parts of the
National dainties, leaving bare bones to the meaner people, and rendering their
ingenuity fruitless to them, but spread abroad to all orders and degrees of
men, so as every one has his encouragement, and may perform his duty in turns;
and, by being capable hereof, endeavors by all good means to discipline,
train, and institute himself thereto. Now as before our Text explicated the
noble parts of this Nations anatomy, so now writes he his observations on the
other, though less eminent, yet as useful parts of the body politic; and
these he terms libere tenentes and valecti] the former freeholders without
doubt were opposed to Villains, Cook upon Littleton. lib. 1. p 43. B.
such as held their Lands in base Tenure, and base services; therefore being ad
natum domini, and subject to his passions, either of lust, rage, or reward, now
this not being the condition of all Country men, but some (either by hardiness
making conditions with Conquerours to enjoy their rights, or purchasing their
darling liberty out of the Tallons of victorious seisers of them; rested free
in their persons, relations, lands, and acquirements, paying only Quit-rents,
or other inconsiderable annual acknowledgments, as owning their Lords
Seigniory, The King, Lords, and great men did ever reserve the Sectas Curia,
though they made gift of Lands in Frankelmaigne; therefore the Bishops and
Clergy owned this, Item ratione hujusmodi possessionum, the King and other men
might compel Episcopos, Pralatos, Religiosus, and Rectores Ecclesiarum facere
sectas ad Curiam Laicalem. M. Paris in Additamentis, p. 202. Vbi secta est
servitius, quam tenentes debent Domino suo and Curia ejus. Gloss. in Textum
annexum.
and yet their own freedom, which if distrained from them, or they compelled to
any service or payment not due by the condition and compact of their Tenure,
nor customary in the Manor, then had they remedy against the Lord by Bill in
Chancery, as he had by seizure, in case they broke truce and were Trespassers
upon him) continuing free, their Tenure was called Land of Inheritance and
Free-socage, which yet owes some suites and service to the Lord it is held of,
and may pay also a Quit-rent, and as it may happen a Fine at every alienation
of 10. s. or some such small matter, yet that certain and not at the will of
the Lord; and these Tenants are called Barons, and from them the Court Baron is
denominated; yea, the Tenure of these is so estimable in Law (being of old date
and upon grand consideration) that they are a kind of Cheque-mates to the
Lord, because without them, in some cases, he cannot dispose of matters in his
Manor, not but that the Lords and Freeholders estates are for the most part
distinct and cognizable each from other, See Littleton. Sect. 187. and Sir Ed.
Cook on him, lib. 2.
but because the conjunction of both, in cases of enclosures of Commons, and
division of Wastes, and other such like things, as depends upon the Court Baron,
is necessary: and methinks this complication of things in a harmony commends
highly the prudence of Antiquity, in that it made such a dependence as
occasioned correspondence and communication between the head and foot, the hand
and heart, the better to keep the end of God in man's creation, inviolate, that
man should serve God, in serving these common ends that unite minds under his
supreme Government Dominion and Conduct, and the delegations of it to
Magistrates.

Et Valecti plurimi, etc.] These I suppose are men of less note, and not so
free, for though, when our Chancellor wrote, there was no Slavery or
Villeinage in England, for those were antiquated in R. 2. time; yet there were
seeming badges and prints of that deformity, which yet in H. 6. time, and to
this day some mistakingly judge to scar the face of freedom, and those they
take to be them which our Law calls Yeomen, see Stat. 16 R. 2. c. 4. and 20 R.
2. c. 2.

These are the next order to Gentlemen, termed Yeomen quasi young men, as some
think, or from Gemen or Yemen in the Saxon signifying a Commoner; so that of
old these were men of no rank above servants, though Valet in the French
imports quasi va lez son maistre, Burgasaticum] terras Colonerum, vel Burgorum,
and Ingenuoram, Heritages en roiture, Closs ad M. Paris. Garciones, id est,
Pedites, and sequentos Equos, quos vulgus expertum est pessimos esse ribaldos,
M. Paris, p. 698, 208, 522.355.
thence the word wallet [ pera viatoria] the bearers of this as some called
them Valets or Varlets, others called them Garcions, though of old it was a
title of better repute, for all young persons though Gentlemen, if not Knights,
and under eighteen years old, were called Valets in France, as we called them
Batchelours in England, hence Valet de Chamber, a Title of Honor to the King;
but Francis the First of France, perceiving those that attended him to be no
better then Roturiers (our Yeomen) introduced Gentlemen of the Chamber, though
yet in the King's Palace here the Officer Yeoman remains, Stat. 33. H. 8. c.
12. yet in subserviency to the Gentlemen-Officers; so are Grooms another Court
word, in French Valet, or Varlet; so that the Texts Valecti or Valetti are such
of the Commoners of Countries, who hold not their Land sub nomine Culvertagii
and perpetua Servitutis, M. Paris, p. 234.
but having been Servants or Tenants to great men, have either, pro bono
servitio impenso vel impendendo, had Land given them, or by industry and thrift
(blessed by God) been purchasors of Land in see to them and their heirs, and
that in such sort for the quality, and in such proportion for the value, that
the Law requires Jury men to be of, as before in the Chapter of Juries I have
showed; that they may be said to be Sufficientes ad faciendam juratam in forma
praenotata.

Sunt namque Valecti diversi in Regione illa, qui plusquam sexcenta scuta per
annum expendere possunt, quo juratae superius descriptae sepissime in Regione
illa fiunt.

This is added to show that Juries are peculiar to England, because Countrymen
of estate are only in England, in the several Hundreds of the Counties of it;
now though it be usual for men of the Plough to be and abide up and down in the
Country in Nations abroad, yet only with us are they men of estate, and
allowed, as such, to be judicial Members of Juries, and fit they should be
Judges of fact on other men's estates; because they have estates of their own,
and so knowing what an estate is, are presumed to be more intent upon, and
considerate about their Verdict in their Neighbors case. And this is the
reason that not only the Law requires they shall have solid and solvent
estates, but acordingly such in very deed they have, most of them to a very
convenient proportion, but some, and that not a few, qui plusquam sexcenta
Scuta expendere possent.

Scuta] are French Crowns, so called I think from the Shield of the Arms of
France, that they have on one side of them; there are three sorts of them,
Escusol, the best Crown now made having a star on one side; Escu coronne, the
next less by a sous then the former; and Escu veil the old Crown, worth 7. s.
2. d. Sterling; of the former Crowns I take our Chancellor to mean, and
according to that his computation of 600 yearly, valuing a Crown at 4. s. 6. d.
comes to about 130. l. English a year, which in our Chancellours time when
silver was at 20. d. an ounce, comes to almost 400. l. a year now, which though
it be a great Estate, is no more then many in every County of these true
Yeomen, gentilized only by the courtesy of the Nation, have with advantage,
and many to double the value; now these Churles (not hunger-starved like the
Peasants of France, nor cowed down like the Boores in Germany, but keeping free
houses, and being full of riches and plenty) are the persons whom the Text
mentions, not only as men of possessions, but as by them possessions fitted to
serve on Juries with Knights and Espuires.

Presertim in ingentibus causis, de Militibus, Armigeris, and aliis quorum
possessiones in universo excedunt duo millia Scutorum per annum.

This is subjoined to make good what before has been shown in the Chapter of
Juries, that Jury men were chosen of different worth, Lib. 2. c. 13.14. 15.
Duodecim Milites gladio cinctos electi in Assisa de consensu partium
litigantium, hanc Assisam solenniorem ob magnam and specialem aliquam causam
indictam. Gloss. apud M. Paris. in verb. Assissiam.
according to the different value and nature of the cause they were to serve
upon; in case of life and title of land, great Assizes, none but Knights were
summoned and served in Glanvil's time* and after, and in our Chancellours time,
though Esquires and great Yeomen under the name of alii did serve on them, yet
those had Possessiones, and those to the value of a Knights estate, toward
400, or 500 l. a year, as now things go; for I compute the Crown which we call
a French Crown, though the Translator reckons it much less in words, but not in
truth, for he renders 2000 Scuta by 500 Marks English in his time, which is
full as much and more then 600 pounds sterling now.

Quare cogitari nequit tales subornari posse, vel perjurari velle, nedum ob
timorem Dei, sed and ob honorem suum conservandum, and vituperium damnum quoque
inde consequutivum evitandum etiam ne eorum haeredes ipsorum laedantur infamia.

The Premises considered, and the Members of Juries being affluent men (above
the exigences and pressures of life, which follicite men often, and sometimes,
yea too too often prevail with them, to exchange a good conscience for a
transient accommod^tion) and being also such as disdain to stain their
honors, infamize their posterities, endanger their fortunes; and displease God
the righteous Judge, who delights in truth in the inward man; and being such as
those in whom the posse and velle of integrity is upon no ordinary terms
presumed to be: How, I say, these things well weighed, can by the wit of men
and Governments, any more probable way be excogitated to preserve Justice and
right Trial then England by Juries has, I cannot conceive? For, surely there
cannot be any thing cohibitive and repellent of temptation, if the fear of God
and shame amongst men be not prevalent to the formidation of, and the
abstinence from it.

First, Obtimorem dei.] For that being the beginning of wisdom, is that which
lays the groundwork for all the after-superstructure; Fear of God keeps the
soul stiff girt against all temptations, intent upon duty, vigilant over its
affections, exact in charitable distributions: Fear of God is a complex virtue,
that has omnis religionis and boni rationem in it; It Is that which adapts a man
to every command without dispute, to avoid every thing prohibited without
seeking evasions, and attempting dispensation for nonperformance, to observe
every voice of God, either in his Word, by his Spirit, or of his Rod, and to
follow the dictations of it: It Is that which searches the souls sesters,
quickens its dimm prospect, sharpens its devoute appetite, nimbles its
obsequious foot, elevates its active hands, invigorates the whole man, to be
what God will have him, and suffer what he has preappointed for him: And
therefore Solomen who was an incarnate Lucifer, and knew experimentally, and
thorough practice, what wisdom was, initiates it from the fear of the Lord,
because that directs a man to make God the aim, center, and achme of his
wisdom, and to be wise for his soul and eternity, both concerned and advanced
by Gods glory, which his fear propagates; and therefore though heathens
determine wisdom by knowledge of Men, Creatures, Books, Arts, and Politic
Practiques upon them, though they are excited to good, and deterred from evil,
by rewards and punishments, which bribe them to either one or other; yet the
best prescript is, to take and leave, as Gods fear principles and excites us;
Fear God and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12.13.
for this is the whole duty of man: Fear God, and that will make us keep his
Commandments, which are not grievous to his fearers, but paths of pleasure and
peace: And fear God, by keeping his Commandments, for that is the best
indication of our fear, and all his Commandments, for that testifies our
internal sincerity; yea, and Fear God and keep his Commandments, for it is
(...), the whole duty of man: Though not wholly the duty of man, for Angels
and Saints fear, yea Devils fear God, and it is their duty so to do, as well
as man's; But it is the whole duty of man: because, whatever God requires of
renovated man, whatever he accepts as the reparation of lapsed Nature, thorough
the Interposition of Christ, who fortifies the soul in his fear, and
out-brazens it against its Worldly confronts to a persistency, is couched in
this fear; This do O holy soul and live a Saint, and die and ever after live an
Angel.

So then, the fear of God being such a curb, as heretofore in this Book in the
notes on the fourth Chapter I have showed it is to all good men, in the
examples of Abraham, Moses, Joseph, Job, Jeremiah, David, Paul; the Primitive
Martyrs, and all the Seraphick comprehenders, and Militant Heroicks, who keep
themselves unspotted of the world, and meddle not with that abominable thing
that God hates, ea ratione, because he hates it, and because it makes them
unlike him; whom their piety endeavors to assimilate, it must needs work upon
precise pious souls proprie and quarto modo, and restrain others of moral and
civil principles, by way of proportion, and as resulting from that surviving
awe of God that is left upon their souls intemerate, and so it is amulettick.
For, if the fear of man, whose power is only temporary, and terrible to the
outward parts, the subject of its violence and dirily is such, that it forces
him to do or not do against the eddy and propension of his genius and
affection: How much more shall the fear of an immortal God (ruling in the
soul by a golden scepter of love, and impending over the soul, erring from him
by perfidie and elective degeneration, clouds of fire and brimstone; and those
eternally to be suffering in, without any possibility of reprieve, relaxation,
or discharge) preporiderate it to do what he commands, and decline what he
forbids, ob timorem dei.

Secondly, Honorem suum conservandum,] That Is another stimulation to integrity,
and a disanimation to perjury and prostitution of conscience; And this is so
suasive with mortals, that they will part with life rather then with that they
account honor: though some will do as the old doting and unfortunate Captain
did, who rendered a City of the King of Spain's to his enemy, Mariana in Hist
Hispan.
to save his head; but the King told him, Perdista mi villa y guardaste la
barba cana. Sir, You have rendered my Town to save your white beard, which you
shall be no gainer by: Thus sometimes it is, and usually ask Hectors what the
chief Article in the Creed of Gallantry is, and they will quote Honor and vita
aque passu ambularent; this is the Diana of this Worlds Ephesians, this the
Image that came down from their Jupiter; such gods in the likeness of men they
venerate: and what assaults this they execute, and are quickly in arms against;
and by this zeal to their imaginary eminence (which consists chiefly in
opinion and popular suffrage, and has it is systole's, and diastole's, as the
ages humor is, more or less, quicker, or less smart) they think themselves
safe in point of honor and reputation: Now the wit of man cannot contrive,
should it be intent on the exploration many ages a more durable and certain way
of stabilizing that, then Justice, the ready way to a good name, the great Idol
that men fall down before sinlesly: Tholoss. Syntag. Iuris universi, lib. 31.
c. 29. Sect. 4. Annotat. in Pandect, p. 199. Edit. Vascos. Luter. 1556 in Folio.
A good name, says Solomon, is as a precious ointment; This the learned render
by Existimatio, which is something extra aestimationem, without, beyond, and
above esteem; Dignitatis illaesae status legibus and moribus comprobatus, as
the Civilians call it: and Budaus, when he says, estimation is the
consideration and porpension of any thing, adds, Existimatio judicium and
arbitratus: therefore though some do calculate it to the proportion of (...),
Fama, yet he makes it more according to the computation of Lib. 11. c. 4.
A Gellius, whose words are Fama ex vulgi Iudicio nascitur sed existimatum
hominem esse qui in primis censetur; that is, Inter bonos and graves: For, both
esteem and reproach or infamy, follows the account of such, and such best rule
the exchange of both; And therefore when the Text writes of Ob honorem suum
conservandum added to the former, Tholoss. lib. 32. c. 11. Sect. 5. and lib.
38. c. 2. Sect. 3. Natura perennis fontis est gloria vena laudabilis nam sicut
ille sluendo non expenditur sic nec ista celebri sermon siccatur, Alathar.
apud Cassi^d. variar lib. 8. Ep. 21. Cypriano Patritio.
one would think our Master had produced arguments cogent enough, yet least the
fear of Religion, and of men's undervaluations should not take men off from
injurious courses, but they should persist to accumalate advantages to
themselves by the gain of unrighteousness, the Chancellor adds, Damnum quoque
consequunturum evitandum; which what that is, the Notes on the 26th Chapter
sets forth: yet as here the instance of it is introduced, it appears to be
that argument, which like the deep base drounds and prevails over all the
other Notes of arguments. For, many atheistick minds make nothing of God, (he
not being in all their thoughts, they put the evil day of his terror, and
visitation of them far off; drolling away the severe impressions and softnings
of conscience, with resolved wickedness, and Hectorean bravadoes) and the good
thoughts and reports of men they set light by, so they may add a cubit to their
fortunary stature: they can make takes to the Queen of heaven, and adore the
Planetary Deities, that have profitable and pleasant aspects on them: they care
not whose places they usurp, whose children they exheridate, whose reputation
they prostitute, whose estate they defraud, whose right they suppress, whose
bread they eat; To these that of Alatharick in Cassiodore is not applicable,
who, writing to Cyprian the Senator, says, Merito tibi prolixior aetas optatur
inqua fama semper robustior invenitur. Let men censure them as they will, they
will make much of one, and a fat sorrow (they cry) is better then a lean one,
rather would they be envied then pitied; Populus me sibilat, at domi ipse mihi
plaudo, cry they, for these against such like quezinesses prescribe, and
proclaim themselves ^^^noh, they care not for same, it is but air and prattle
of people, and that they value rot; but when the Laws of Government, fine and
imprison, when all they have must to pot for the offense against the King, in
wilful violation of his Laws, and that in the odious way of perjury, and that
in the case of a false Jury-man, Then, then men look about them, and are afraid
to be in deed what in affection they perhaps are, because they have wherewith,
and must loose that from themselves, and in a good part from their posterities;
This keeps them within compass, Ad evitandum secuturum damnum, they will keep
honest; 2 Samuel c. 23.
For, though they scruple not with David, the water of B^h^ehem; because it is
the price of blood, but have consciences so large, that thorough the wide arch,
and into the bottomless hell of them, vessels of never so great burden with
masts and sails; sins with colors flying, and Effronteries neighing, may pass
currantly and without boggle; yet ruin of estate their punishment, more
terrifies them then Gods curse and Heavens loss: And this the Law knowing,
urges them by it, not only sub timore and infamia curtelagii and perpetuae
servitatis, as Henry the third did summon his subjects against the French; but
as King John did his Nobles, M. Paris. p. 233.234.
as they would keep their estates, and prevent being nething, Rex milites
Anglos ut ad obsidionem veniant jubet nisi veline sub nomine nething quod
latin nequam sovat recinseri M. Paris. p. 15. Nething lucifica unde nigh nunc
Night. Gloss. ad M. Paris. in verbo.
next degree to nothing, by forfeit of their estates: All which considered, the
prudence of the Law in deterring men from these sinful engagements, to the
injury of man and displeasure of God, is very remarkable. And hereupon the
Chancellours inference is very good and material; Taliter (fili Regis)
disposita, inhabitataque non sunt aliqua alia mundi regna.] Which he adds, not
to depreciate other Countries which are also great instances of divine bounty
and power, but to raise his own Countries reputation, and his Country men's
gratitude: If God has made us like Capernaum, lifted up to heaven; If he has
given us the purity of Religion, the prerogative of being Governed by our own
Lords, our Kings, and their and our own Laws; the freedom of sitting under our
own Vines, and enjoying our good things in peace; If he have caused a
cessation of leading into Captivity, and complaining in our streets; Non
taliter disposita inhabitataque sunt alia mundi regna in this sense; but in
that we have Trials of life and fortune by Juries, good men of estate, and true
in disposition, standing stiff to the rule of Justice, and inclinable neither
to the fear of Power, love of gain, or by as of malice; but such, as if they
had a mind to be villainous, dare not for fear of shame and ruin to their
persons, fortunes, and posterities: This, Libera quia nihil iniquias venali
justitia plena quia justitia non debet claudirare celeris quia dilatio est
quedam negatio, Cooks 2 Instit. p. 56.
This, that there is in England, Justice free neither bought nor sold; full,
not curtayl'd or partial; speedy, not tedious and uncertain; occasions the Non
taliter disposita here, etc. For surely, as the Coin of England is, 2 Instit.
p. 741. 9 E. 3. c. 1. 2 R. 2.2. 2 H. 4.6. 19 H. 7.5. 5 H 4.9. 13 H. 4.6. 3 H.
5.1. 8 H. 5.2. 9 H. 5.11. 2 H. 6.6.9.12. 17 E. 41. 1 R. 3.9. 3 H. 7.8. 4 H.
7.2. 19 H. 7.5. 3 H. 2.1. 7 E 6.6. 18. Eliz. 1.
of any in the world, the most to the intrinsic value of what the Money goes
for (the Kings of England having passed many Laws, in all times, for the
custody of it from devirgination: and Howes Cronicle, p. 912.
King James of blessed memory, notwithstanding them, caused a search to be made
into the Coin, and a Jury to be summoned of brave men to try it, and came
himself in Person to see the Assay made of it) I say, as our Coin is the best,
so is our Justice the best, in that just Assay of it, which Juries of Knights,
Esquires, and other Freeholders of Englands several Counties make, in causes
upon which they are summoned to serve. And the reason why this is a peculiar
happiness to Englishmen, is, because England only has Persons of these ranks,
dispersed in every County; so it follows.

Nam licet in eis sunt viri magnae potentiae magnarum opum and possessionum,
non tamen little unus prope moratur ad alterum ut in Anglia commorantur viri,
nec tanta ut ibi haereditatorum est copia and possidentium terras.

No doubt but every Country has its blessing; some in Soil and Fruits, some in
Beasts and Birds, some in Mettalls and Ores, some in Men of all personal
Accomplishments, others Great in Power, Purse and Command; yet England, our
Chancellor thinks, has some advantadge above them all: because, as our
Hemisphere has no extremities of Weather; nor our Seas any Leviathans of Fish;
nor our Land Behemoths of Beasts; so our Land no men Giants of greatness, to
whom all their Neighbourhoods are but crumbs and morsells for their
ingurgitation: England being an Island, every thing in it is framed by the
mercy of God, and the wisdom of Government, to a general good; and to such a
method of improvement as is most dilate, and least oppressive: Abroad in the
Continent, Great men, as it were, live alone in the Earth; their vast
uninhabited Territories their Titles swell with, give them room to Lord it so
over their vassalls, that they shrivell their spirits into a non-ingenuity, and
leave thereby mighty Tracts of ground untilled; as thinking it toil enough to
get Meat and Drink, with a few ragged Clothes for their Lord, who takes them,
and all they have for his propriety, and rewards them with nothing but severe
Laws from him, and hard lives under him, such as these Viri magnae potentiae
magnarum opum and possessionum, Rolinus Cancellarius ducis Burgundiae, multas
domos ^excellentissimas construi secit, and suis posteris viginti quinque
villas, in quibus erant castra amplissima and superba cum viginti quinquae
millibus, lib. Turoneasum redditus annui reliquit, Cassan. Catal. Gl. Mundi, p.
585.
are there abroad in France, Germany, and all Countries; yea in England we have
had such great persons of power and estate, as did (in a sort) stand upon terms
with Princes, Lupus Earl of Chester, the Lords in King John's time mentioned by
Isti communes conjurati and confaederati Stephanum Cantuariensem Archiepiscop.
Capitalem consentaneum habuerunt. p. 254.
Paris, Hugh Bigot E. of Bungey, who in the time of H. 3. is said to utter that
Rhyme, If I were in my Castle at Bungey,
Upon the water of Waveny,
I would not set a button by the King of Cockney.
R. Bigot Earl of Norfolk, Vowell's Description of England, p. 195. Hypodeig.
Neustriae, p. 487. Mr. Nab. Philips of Capire Tenures p. 11, and 128.
Marshal of England; Bohun E. of Hereford and Essex, Constable of England; and
Gilbert de Clare E. of Chester, the Earls of Oxford, and Arundel, the Duke of
Norfolk, and others later have been men of great power and fortune; to this day
we have some such in England, but yet they are lessened by the Laws
encouragement to industry, and the blessing of God on frugality and gaining
courses of life, which steal upon the luxuriant idle lives of great men, and
undermines their fortunes by its thrift which often purchases them: and this
makes England (though not nutritive of Great men like the Asian Grandees, or
the German Dukes and Electoral Bishops, or the Italian Seigniors, Dukes, and
Princes, who all are Masters of Castles and Armies, and upon displeasure will
call their Leidges to their defense; Ligeancia obligatio Vasalli erga Dominum,
ut servitium debitum ei praestandum obedientia, and pro eo stet contra omnes
nunc soli Regi agnoscimus, M. Paris. p. 845. Temp. E. 1.
when in England all men, as well great as small, rich as poor, are bound to
the peace, and must not armedly dispute with their Prince, as Leoline Prince of
Wales traytorously did, and for it lost his life and Government, and as all
Traitors since have done to their deserved ruin) produce what is more
conspicuous in the Nation, An universal wealth and courage, diffused among the
people of all Counties; who, though they live near one another, yet do thrive,
entertain, negotiate, marry one with another, and mostly are not Malvicines
each to other, Gloss. M. Paris. ad verb. Malvicine.
or do act the part of Mangonells, slinging the stones of envy and destruction
each at other, but as fair guests about Prince Arthur's round Table sit merry
in their respective seats, bearing their proportions of service to their
Countries, Athenaeus in despnosophist. lib. 4. c. 13. p. 293.
according to their Sovereigns pleasure and the Laws requiry. The sum of all
is this, there may be some absoluter and more supreme great men in other
Countries, because they keep their Tenants slaves, when ours are free, and make
them drudges and beggars, when ours have easy lives and rich purses under
their Lords, who let them good penyworths and rejoice in their increase under
them: but the Chancellor says, there is not in any Country, though much
bigger then England, Tanta haereditatorum copia, such a harvest and plenty of
Socagers, Freeholders, and men of value, 1 Instit. ou Littleton. p. 6. In re
modica non est copia, Jul. Scalig. in Theophr. lib. De Plantis.
who have whereof to leave to their Heirs, and Executors after them (for Copia
come a con and open, plenty of any thing, copia quasi coopia, as medicum quasi
medium) so that in this copia haereditatorum, the Chancellor intends men of
value in Lands or Lands-worth (for the equivalence is as much within the intent
of the Text as the thing in kind) to be as it were thick-sowed up and down
England, and thick come up; which facilitates the Bailiffs labor in every
Hundred, to summon his Jury upon all occasions.

Vix enim in Villa una Regionum aliarum reperiri poterit vir unus, Patrimonio
sufficiens ut in Iuratis.

'Twas in the precedent clause the Chancellour's assertion of his Country
England, Haec tamen veluti in laudem patrii soli non [tantum] ex animi judicio,
sed amoris indulgentia prodidit, Ciuverius Antiq. lib. 1. p. 29. De Bodino
laudante Gallos.
that it was so packed and stuffed with lauded and estated men, that in it so
small a Ville or Thorp cannot be found, wherein dwells not a Knight, Esquire,
or some Freeholder of good Lands, or all of them, I may add, and that almost
every where; but here, when he parallels other Countries, he says, vix enim in
villa una, scarce can there in a Ville be found one of ability to be a
Jury-man, that is, worth 40. s. 5. l. or 20. l. a year, the reason not being
because the soil of other Countries is not so fertile, or the natural
ingenuity of other Country men less then ours, but only from the oppression of
the Great men that suck all the nutriment from them; and as Pikes in a river
prey upon the lesser fishes, Plebs pene Servorum habetur loco, qua per se nihil
audes, and nulli ad hibetur consilio. Caesar De Gallis, Com. lib. 6.
and by the continual drip of their amazing Greatness, upon which they dare not
cast one confident look, they become poor-spirited, lazy, and incogitative to
progg, and ingenuously improve their lives of labor; for let them advance what
they can, it is but to add heaps to their Lord, not a grain falls to their
grist, miserable they are and ever must be: This, This, is that which not only
arraigns their Lords of less generosity then the Lions of Africa have, De
Quadcuped. lib. 1. p. 11.
if Aldrovandus from Aelian do not mislead me (who when they in hard weather
come to the Cottages of the Moors in the Deserts, Dedecet is quadrupedum
animantium Regem ad tuguriolum meum alimenti causa accedere, tua interest per
montes proficisci ad capiendos cervos, and alia hujus generis animantia Leonino
victui competenies, quibus verbis Leo, quasi decantatus, oculis in ter^am
defixis. afflicto animo discedit, Aldrov. lib. 1. De Quadrup. p. 11.
and knock at the door, when the poor woman, keeping the door shut, answers
them in the Moors language which they understand, It Is your part, as King of
the beasts, to take your prey upon beasts which are proper for your food, and
not to come to seek relief at my poor Cottage, where I am so far from plenty,
whereof to relieve beasts, that I have not enough to feed me and my family;
these words do so charm the Lion; that he departs ashamed, as sensible he has
done an act disgraceful to him: This I say is reported to be the generosity of
that creature, who abhorrs to oppress poverty) when as the great men abroad do
nothing else but infelicitate the lives of their Peasants, Boores, and
Villains, by hard exactions from them, and strait allowances to them; and by
this keep them so narrow-spirited, Chil. 1. Cent. 6. Adag. 93.
that they know not what it is pennas nido majores extendere, and if any of
them act above the sphere of vulgarity, it is by the sufflation of a miracle, or
something which I can reckon no less then it; so was Chongius from a dull
Smith kindled into a bravery to become the place and power of Cham of Tartary,
and to behave himself in it bravely against the Turks; so did that young
Sicilian, who, when the Venetian General was in distress, offered to fire
Ottoman's Navy, which he did, and when he was taken, being asked by Ottoman
what moved him to do it, bravely replied, that He had done it to hinder the
common enemy of Christendom, Shute's History of Venice. p. 466.
and that this attempt would be much more glorious if he might as easily run
his sword through his body, as he had set fire on his Galleys; though these and
such like examples there may be of mean persons, low bred, and lowly living,
who having these Towers and altitudes in their minds, look upon the Valleys
below them as too mean for their delight, yet the major part being accustomed
to nothing but toil and poverty, Adag. 94. Cent. 6 Chil. 1.
do not in suum ipsorum sinum inspuere, but content themselves to know nothing
more then they ought, and desire nothing beyond what they have: this makes
those vast Countries, where men magna potentiae, and magnarum opum, and
possessionum are, to be barren of middle men, who amount to the value of
Jurymen, That one overgrown Giant starves all his Neighborhood, whom his
Magnitude suffers only to be Pigmies.

Nam raro ibidem, aliqui praeter nobiles reperiuntur possessores agrorum,
aliorumque immobilium, extra civitates and muratas villas.

It Is not nunquam but raro, not said by our Text that abroad there are none out
of Cities and Towns, men of estate and estates worth ( Possessores agrorum
aliorumque immobilium) but seldom or but few such: Such an one is Rara avis in
terris nigroque simillima cygno; One of a City and two of a Tribe, as the
Scripture phrase is to express paucity, the great Privileges and Possessions
are reserved for the Nobles, who being the braver Sparks, have the glitter of
estates to dazzle the eyes of their humble Valets by. This is purposely
subjoined to show the value foreign Laws put upon Nobility of race, and to
these only is indulged to be owners of Castles and Countries, and Offices of
honor and renown; Si Rustisus emat frudum nobile, non sit nobilis, Cass.
Catal. Gl. Mundi. p. 312.
for though in Cities and Corporations men of Trade and Arts have Estates in
Burgage, and are great Bankers, full of plenty and riches to live, and bestow
their Children by; yet the Lands that lie in the Country are Granges and
Husbandries, appertaining to Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who are called
Nobiles a la mode de France, and to whom the occupiers and dwellers in and upon
them are but servants: and therefore these that are so great Masters of all
that is conspicuous and desirable in life, ought to consider, that (as Philo
excellently, (...), etc.) Nobility is not only measured by blood and descent
from Ancestors of Prowess, Lib. De Nobilitate, p. 904.905.906, etc.
but by personal virtue and deeds of merit in him that claims it, which, if a
man want, though he have all the luster of successional glory, and be of a
family, Tater his fascibus praefuit sed and frater eadem resplenduit claritate;
Ipsa quodam modo dignitas in stemmatibus vestris larem posuit and domesticum
factum est publicum decus Alathar. Opil^oni apud Cassiod. variar lib. 6. Ep. 16.
whom honor it self has been entailed to, and concentred in, as in its
element; yet no true Nobi^ity is thence devolved on a degenerous successor:
King Alatharicus writing to Opilion, tells him, What a sparkling Ancestry he
broke out from, and how uniform the virtues of his brother were to those of his
father; that Nobility seemed to make his family her hive, and to hatch all her
noble brood in his Relations: Origo ipsa jam gloria est^lans nobilitati
connuscitur, idem vobis est dignitatis quod vita principium, Var. lib. 3. Ep. 6.
Yet, when all is thus by him expressed, he concludes; That though Honor and
life be contemporary to them, yet if virtue be not also concomitant, there is a
great abatement of the superexcellency of it. Though therefore Nobility be a
rare advantage to every ascent and conspicuity of life, Magna abundantia laudis
est in penurba Reipublica vel mediocria munera mer^^sse Alathar. S^natui Ep.
41. Var. lib. 5.
yet is it chiefly and only in the account of God and wise men so, when it
designs and acts service to God and men, in promoting his glory and their good:
For this to do, Hujus mali causa est nobilium institutum, qui res consentantas
and mutua open nixas, generis claritatem literarumque peritian collidi inter se
and di^^entire putant, quo errore factum est ut disciplina olim ingenua
appellatae ad plebem jamdiu transierint non tantum a nobilibus sed etiam O
mores perditos) a sacricolis repudiatae, ne non generosus esse and lantus,
antistitum ordo prasulumque putaretur, lib. 1. de Ass p. 24. Edit. Vascos.
is to excel, Nobiles esse quasi noscibiles, to carry the badge of their
honor on their actions; which is more Pompous and Magnificent then trains of
Lackeys, and vollies of Oaths, Then contempt of studies, and of lives of
employment and gainful subsistence, which are so abominated by the great and
gaious youth, that they deride those that are votaries to diligence in them, as
ignoble spirits, and by wholly waving them, leave them to such as will intend
them; which Budans sadly bemoans in France, and others may as sadly in England:
wherein truly nothing is thought noble but what comes too near idleness and
prodigality, In Pandect, p. 49. and 91.
contempt of Religion, and breach of promise, which God knows are so far from
being gentle and noble, that they are immoralities which vitiate the fair
portraytures of mercy in those advancements of men to greatness by God, whose
vassalls they are, and to whom they must be responsible: But the best remedy of
this is, to pray God to turn the hearts of men from libertinism to a severer
life, Note this well.
by which honor will have more prevalence then by any other engine: For, it is
not the coruscation of an Ancestour, or the vapor of a Title, or the plenty of
a Revenue that Nobilitates men, but the wisdom of the mind and action
seconding these, that makes a conspicuity and veneration by reason of them; And
this the Treaters on Honors and Nobility, put the stress of their arguments in
defense of it upon, since riches and force are nobilities, which beasts have in
common with men; but reason and sagacity is that which only is that endowment
which Men and Angels have: and that because they are made to be the daily
Attendants and Courtiers in ordinary before God. Though therefore I concur with
the excellent discourses of Bartholus, Cliothovius, Bonus de Curtili, Lucas de
Penna, Lundolphus, Pogins Florentinus, and others, who have acclamated Nobility
not more elegantly then so Prinecly a subject requires; Though I allow of that
heroic principle, N^bilitas est dignitas proveniens a coruscatione clari
sanguinis, a parentibus originem sumens and in liberos legitimos per carnem
continnata [Iurisconsulti.]
to stand upon the honor of our Ancestors and family, yet still I like the
association of virtue in a divine sense with it; which by making a man
acceptable to God (as Bartholus his words are, Apud deum iste nobilis est quem
deus sua gratia gratum sibi fecit) makes him also honorable amongst men, Nihil
in ea laudabo nisi quod propriam est, and eo nobilius quod ex opibus and
nobilitate, facta est. paupertate and humilitate nobilior Epist ad Principem
virginem.
which St. Ierom applying to Marcella, made her truly noble in his testimony
of her: other Nobility abstracted from this, is Nobility reversed, turned
topsie-turvy; like that the Father imputes to Helvidius the heretic, History
Venice. p. 105.
of whom he says, Nobilis factus es eo scelere, it is Nobility in the sense;
Lais the Curtezan is called Nobilis scortae, and the place where the Romans had
the overthrow said to be Nobilis ille clade Romana locus est: And the best
fruit it produces will be but like that mistaken bravery of mind, Vnde melius
nobilitati collegam quaerimus quam de vena nobilium, qui se promittat abhorrere
moribus, quam refugit sanguine vilitatem Nathar. Agapeto Ep. 41. Cassiod. var.
lib. 1.
which that vain Lombard expressed, whom the Venetian Senate decreeing
whatever he demanded, as a recompense for his art, in setting up the three
wonderful pillars in that City, he requested only the sanction, That it might
be lawful for all dice-players, and card-players, to play and cheat betwixt
those pillars, without any fear of punishment: This, I say, will be the sequel
of such gallantry, when as that Nobility that is mingled with piety and
prudence, refuses and abhors commerce with that vice, which alloyes the dignity
of descent by the ignobility of action: By all which it appears, that as
Nobility has preferreney to plebeity, so it is exalted in the positivity of
such degrees of heroicism as makes Nobles transcend Vulgars in virtues Divine,
Civil, and Politic; To be Noble for Wisdom, as was Solomon; for Meekness, as
was Moses; for Patience, as was Job: to dimm and eclipse ordinary
excellencies, as Alexander, Aristotle, Antoninus, Caesar, Scipio, Quid enim
gener^sius quam tot literarum proceres habuisse majores Al^th sonatui Var. lib.
6. Ep. 1. and lib. 2. Ep. 15.
Tully, Metellus did their contemporaries. Not only to be lineally descended
from Nobles, but to be noble in thought, word, and deed; such as these are the
true (...), whom Justinian calls his Nobles; not only from the sheilds in
which their Ancestors were effigiated, but from the notable conduct, and
un-tainted loyalty that their deportments in the trusts credited to them,
discover of them; and to such Nobiles as these too much cannot be attributed:
too great portions of Nations be given, because they are of men in Nations the
best, it is fit they should be best accommodated; virtue is a valuable
consideration for any purchase of favor and fortune, and by reason of the
impression of this on the first blazing stars in Families, did Nobility descend
to posterity, and with Nobility great patrimonies to support it in a decent and
becoming Equipage; for Honor without Estate is like a stomach without Meat, a
very great and unpleasing burden. Therefore wise Governments have ever exalted
those to Nobility, who either have had ample fortunes, or virtues attractive of
such, ingenuity and diligence being magnetic of them; which, though it be not
ever employed in gross and corporally laborious courses of life, yet if it be
in callings, that equally merit of Governments, ought to be suitably rewarded
by them: And hereupon, as Peace and War are the two poles on which the world
of Government turns, as the common sort of Arts-men and Laborers do follow
those professions of Peace; fo the Nobles and Gentry do engage in courses of
Chivalry, especially in France, where the Cavalry is made up of them, and that
is the strength and glory of that Kingdom: For the Infantry being so kept
under, by their indigent and suppressed lives, are not so considerable as ours
are, whose spirits being boayed up by the freedom of the Laws, Pedites ut
bellicosi and fortes evadant, opus est ut in condition aliqua non servili aut
inopi sed libera and copiosa degant, itaque si quod regnum and status in
nobiles generosos potissimum excrescat, Agricola antem and aratores loco tantum
and condition operariorum inserviunt, aut sort Tuguriastri meri existant, qui
pro mendicis tecto coapertis haberi possint, equitatu certe pollere possit, sed
peditaru mini^^, Dom Baconus Cancellar, in Hist. H. 7. p. 45. Edit. Lat.
vouchsafing them that plenty and accommodation that their labor and parsimony
acquires to them; they are bold and brave spirited in the field, and as ready
to encounter their King and Countries foes, as they were to bear the brunt of
heat and cold, early and late, wet and dry, in their Country employment. And
this is the reason that the Commoners of England being landed, are so
subsidiary to their Princes and Laws in all kinds of aid and duty, because
they have whereon to keep up their own spirits, and to breed their servants and
sons to manly and lusty exercises, from which as their train, they ascend to
ambitions of rivalry with men of generous birth, and often have more of prowess
in their minds then great born and bred men have, for though the Nobles and
Gentry with us have the great Royalties and Demesnes, the vast estates and
revenues, the lofty and towering Woods, the bottomless and rich Mines, yet the
Yeoman and his fellows have very much riches in money, land, yea and Royalties
too in every Shire. And therefore though it is the French Crown's interest to
keep the Commoner poor, and the Noblesse their Cavalry may eat him up, and he
not dare to begrudg their hard dealing, but crouch and cringe to their
Greatness, as thinking his answallowed down Carcass happiness and privilege
enough for him to have; yet the English Commoner is on better terms, live he in
what part of England he will, as remote from Neighbors as he can, yet the Law
is his Buckler, and the Nations justice so just a Guardian to him and his, that
he (following his honest vocation, and serving God, his Prince, and Country
according to the Laws) need fear no man further, then the fear of prudence and
civility obliges inferiors to be disposed to their superiors: for though the
Law and Custom of the Nation exclude High shoes from services of Honor and
Command, such as are Deputy Lievtenantships, Justiceships of the peace,
Memberships to Parliament, from being Captains of Trained Bands, personal
service to Princes at Coronation, (I mean near their body, according to the
nature of some Tenures, and sundry other things of the like nature;) yet do
they not stand outlawed and excommunicate from being rich in land and money,
free in housekeeping and clothing, but are what the Commoners of France are
not, Possessores agrerum aliorumque immobilium.

Nobiles quoque ibidem Pasturarum copiam non habent.] Ridley, view Laws
Ecclesiastical and Civil. p. 95, 96.
Though the Nobles, who are there all those that we call Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen (for as by the Civil Law there is no Title beneath Knights, the rest
going under the name of people, so in France there are only two degrees, the
Nobles and the Commons) though the Nobles, I say, have all the Country Seats
and Demesnes, yet are their Seats not furnished with pasture, grazing, and
Meadow-Demesnes, as ours here are; for Pasturarum copiam non habent] and the
reason is, not only because France is much a Hilly Country, but also because
its fields are champaign and vast, far from improvement by Enclosure, an enemy
to Horsemen, who love to find or lay all in Common, plain before them; besides
it being an Inland Country is not so irrigated by sweet and silver Rivers,
which overflowing the banks fertilize the conterminating Lands by their
Inundation, as other Countries which lie lower and being deep and flat, are
accommodated by: and therefore because the Nobles have not such Granges and
Farms whose Creslow grounds feed sturdy Oxen, succulent milch Cowes, deep
fleeced Sheep, and stall them also with their sweet-sented hay in Winter,
whereby their houses are provided for with all Substantials to Hospitality; and
of the Supernumeraries sold, buy other additions to that excellent and royal
Entertainments of Families, which is peculiarly the glory of England. The
French Nobles, while themselves and their retinues with their military
treatment, when their Army is in motion for the three or four hot Months of the
year, and the rest they live at home, plentifully for their own persons and
children, but all their retinue is at board-wages; for since they have not
pasture in plenty, nor must not husband things warily, as men do, that make the
most (as we say) of their own, pinch they must some way to bring their revenue
and expenses to be Cater-cousins, for that Principle of mistake runs through
the warp and wouf of Greatness. Those callings and courses of life that relate
to Learning, Corporations, or Agriculture, do not Statui nobili convenire, so
is the Text, Vineas colere aut aratro manus imponere statui non convenit:]
Which, though it were received here of old, when the Civil Wars of the Nation
made Soldiers the best Trumps, and ruffed off the board of honor all the
stakes of wealth and place, according to that clause in the Statute of Merton.
c. 7. which forbids that Wards should be married Villanis, seu Burgensibus, ne
disparagentur, yet now is altogether obsoleted; Peace the Mother of Arts and
Mistress of Riches bringing in those into the bed of honor, whose fortunes and
merits, dignifyed by the Sovereign's favor, vouchsafed admission to: so that
though in France a Noblemans estate, though small, may not be inched out by
setting his sons, or overlooking himself the occupation and improvement of it,
because it is below his Greatness so to do, yet with us nothing is more usual,
no, nor more commendable (due regard being had to moderation in the degree, and
consideration of the Farmer, whose calling this chiefly is) then so to do; for
though we do not Manus arratro apponere, and vine as colere, which are the
employments of perfect Colones, yet to inspect those that thus do, and to
order what, and see accordingly that they do, is the employment of many
Gentlemen, who yet keep Bailiffs, and notwithstanding find it necessary to
cast an eye into their offices; nor ought any man how great in birth, breeding,
and fortune soever, disdain the knowledge and care of the Plough, Aranti
Concinnato viator attulit dictaturam, Serranam invenere serentem oblati
honores, lege exempla apud Cass. Catal. Gloriae Mundi, p. 434. (...), Strabo
lib. 7. and lib. 4. Agriculturae non student majorque pars victus little lacte,
caseo, and carne consistit, Caesar de Antiq. Germanis, Com. lib. 4.
who considers his Progenitors in time and virtue taken from it to the highest
Atchievments; the Romans took many brave Citizens from the Plough to be their
Generals; and the Families of Lentulus and Cicero took their names from their
employments in the Country; and though the Germans our Ancestors did not much
dote on Tillage, but rather on Forage, which is the reason that Historians
note them to abhor it as unmanly, and to commit it to their women, or to those
poor spirits whom they call Burii, probably the Swains that drudged in the
Farm, Cluverius Antiq. lib. 1. p. 132
which we call yet in some places a Berry; yet is Tillage a very useful
employment and very creditable, (...), Strabo de Britannis, lib. 4. Nihil
agricultura melius, nihil uberius, nihil adulcius, nihil libero homine dignius,
lib. 1. Offic. and lib. 1. De Senect.
which besides the Authorities heretofore in this Chapter and on this argument
quoted, is confirmable from that of Tully, who, though an Orator by knowledge
and profession, so applauds it, that he gives it the utmost courtesy of his
eloquent munificence, Nihil agricultura melius, etc. Nothing is more profitable
and useful then Husbandry, nothing sweeter and more worthy a free-spirited man
then to employ his time and mind in and about it. And therefore for Nobles (as
France calls all that are not the common people) to think Tillage or
Vinedressing, I mean, In omni Gallia little hominum qui aliquo sunt numero atque
honor, duo sunt genera, nam plebs pene servorum habetur loco, qui per se nihil
audet, and nulli adhibetur consilio. Caesar. Comment. lib. 6.
overlooking the drudgers in them, not statui suo convenire, is more from a
huff of pride then the reason of prudence in them, for no man ought to count
that Calling slavery that brings in penny-savoury; and that it does when it
inches out the shortness of rent-fortunes to more capacious purposes. Nor are
Punctilio's nationally to be stood upon, where they are not credited and
supported by some fortunary Grandeurs: and therefore since necessity is the
Lord-Marshal that determines decency, and what is comportable with all men's
estates under it, it is prudence to submit to that which is most for
convenience, and has the directest tendency to preservation and increase;
which, Industry having the suffrage of Nations for, encourages Nations and
Princes to reward estates with Honors, and account those Honors best
supported that are well underlaid with Revenues. And thus as the Venetians,
Florentines, and we do account Merchandise not beneath a Gentleman, so did not
Lewis the Twelfth, that wise and worthy Prince, who privileged the Citizens of
certain great Cities to hold noble Tenures, which is contrary to the Law of
France, and gives the reason, Cass. Catal. Gl. Mundi, p. 314. Barthol. Caepolus
Tract. De Imperat milibus eligendis, In verbo Nobilitatis.
quia istae Civitatis habent jura Nobilitatis, for since those places do
benefit the Crown, good reason they should be benefited with honor from the
Crown; which yet the French do not generally receive for a rule, for Cassanaeus
one of that Country says, Apud nos Gallos, nobiles ut plurimum habitant in
rure, and ibi rejecta omni mercatura, cult^i agrorum (saltem non multum
opulenti) and rusticanae rei per familiam vacant, etc. which is not contrary to
what the Text says, for the Gallants do attend the Army of the King, and what
time they are at home they do not think any inspection over their Revenues,
which consists of Vineyards and Tillage, suitable to their state, because their
whole intentness is upon the Army, in which they are brave and live freely,
commanding whatever they please and come to, and when they are from that, on
hunting; and this humor was in a great measure here till the wars (between
the Houses of York and Lancaster determining in H. 7.) ceased; for then the
Gentry and Youth, not having whereon martially to busy their minds, fell to
such callings of industry, as throne by peace: thus came the younger sons of
noble and generous families to Corporations, as Apprentices to Trades, and to
Inns of Courts, and Chancery, and other callings of gain to their future decent
subsistence, and the Commonalty fell to tillage and manual labors, to busy
and support the multitudes of which, the great men of England, who had
depopulated Farms, which brought infrequentiam and diminutionem populi and per
consequentiam Oppidorum, Dom Baconus Cancellar. in ^ Hist. H. 7. p. 44. Lat.
Ecclesiarum, decimarum and similium, as the noble Historians words are, were
fain to be enjoined to restore Husbandry, hereupon by the Statute of 4 H. 7. c.
19. there was a penalty for decaying houses of Husbandry, or not laying
convenient Land for the maintenance of the same, which Statute though it were
repealed by the 39 Eliz. c. 1. yet by c. 2. arrable Land made Pasture, since 1
Eliz. was again to be converted to Tillage, and what is arrable was not to be
converted to pasture, which good provision for the Plough, the main engine of
all our chief support for life (bread) brought Husbandry in request, Magnam
partem fundi Regni Agricolis, and mediae sortis hominibus mancipabat, and
perpetuabat. Idem sodem.
and with it riches, plenty, and civility of manners. And hence by the blessing
of God comes it to pass that our Yeomen, who are the strength of the Nation
and the best foot-souldiers in the World, are so much encouraged and in so good
plight both in purse and courage; and hence comes Justice to flow so currantly
in Juries by the substantialness of these who are numerous in them; which I am
the longer upon, to show the vanity of disdaining honest and gaining callings,
and preferring an idleness of sin, shift, and want, before lives of business
and profit, as the reward and compensation of them. Let the Nobles of France
stand upon honor in this matter, the Gentry of England find too fatally the
unhappy fruit of idle children and relations, and knowing Industry in
Husbandry, Trades, Note this.
and Professions of Learning, blessed by God with heigths of Attainment, equal
to, and sometimes much transcending their families honor and estate, do now
freely, and further I hope will dispose their children to them: for as there is
no toil like to that of idleness, so no pleasure better returned with peace
and plenty then that of honest callings. To return then to our Chancellor;
this being premised to introduce the parallel of England (...) appeals to the
Lawyers on of Juries, his conclusion is, that because Juries, where (...) at
him, and exhibits multum remoti; nor to be had in Countries where men are poor,
(...) his words and lue required: It follows, that since alone England abounds
with (...) the conqualified men, and so near together as Jurymen ought to be,
who do (...) agnoscere ratione vicinitatis, Justice by their verdict, in
matters of fact, is only haved able in England; which I so far admire, that I
think if it be kept up in the honor of it, as I hope our Masters the Judges
will see it shall, we in England shall avoid that too true Character, that the
French Chancellor gives his Country, Haec Eunomia gallia non regitun, etc. By
this good law France is not governed. In which there is great indulgence to
vice, Vt modessissimo cuique and innocentia praedito jus suum obtinere
plerumque non liceat, aut certe in illis meandris forensibus harere, in
labyrinthosis dilationum similus consenescere, veteratorias pragmatiorum
imposturas plurima judicum fastidia fastusque quorundam perpeti, mill
iudignitates devorare necesse sit, Budaeus in Pandect. p. 45. Edit. Vascosam in
folio.
and rare rewards to virtue; where to blemish men of worth and wisdom is so
frequent; where recoveries of right by suite is so dubious, that modest and
good men were better loose their right, and be quiet, then seek the recovery of
it, with so much trouble, and so little certainty of obtaining it: Thus the
Chancellor, whose words I modestly translate, that I may not offend many of
our Gallants, who are so Frenchisied, that they despise every thing almost that
is English: Though therefore no man can deny to France that which God has made
it remarkable for, Terra est frumenti praecipue and pabali ferax and aemaena
lucis immanibus. Pompon. Maela lib. 3. de siiu orbis, p. 7. Edit. Steph.
that it has an excellent air, plenty of corn and food, furniture of men and
arts, quick and commodious, that it is the rising sun that looks to be adored;
yet do I not join with Blondus, Langolius, Bonandus, Textor, and Cassanaeus in
their Hyperbolicks, when they make that Prophecy of the 2 Daniel 44. where God
is said to set up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed; Nec potest sane
aliud esse praesiguratum praeter illud, Cassan. Catal. Gl. Mudi. p. 554. Textor
in Epithetis.
and the Kingdom shall not be left to other People, but it shall break to
pieces and consume all those Kingdoms: to be meant of France; which for
greatness of virtue, probity of manners, counsel, prudence, civility joined
with piety, and military skill is inferior to no Nation in the world. Though,
I say, I should grant to France much of this, yet there is yet an addition, to
be wished it, which a learned Frenchman made long ago, Budaeus Cancellar. lib.
4. de ass and ejus partibus. Catal. G. Mundi p. 578.
O beatam futuram Galliam si tam contigisset heroes habere frugi, quam bonos
habere solet; yea, and for all this, though it were granted to be so happy, Vt
hic Palladem cum Baccho certare videretur, as Cassanaeus his words are: yet in
the Justice of it is Trialls, 'twould (under favor of all the prealledged
Characters) come beneath England; For here the poorest subject cannot be
injured in his goods, or body, but he has remedy by a Jury of twelve men, and
the like for his life; for cast he must be by them, or die he cannot: when as
there is not a Marshall (if Marshall Biron be to be believed, and why he should
not I know not) can be free from being accounted, and condemned, as a Traitor,
by the single testimony of one, though a base person, as he alleged La Fin to
be, who had bewitched him by the potency of a charm, History France in H. 4. p.
1043, 1049.
and an image of wax, which deluded him into a belief he should be King of
France; but from such seductions, delusions, accusers, laws and ends, good Lord
deliver us: And so I end this Chapter.

CHAP. XXX.
Tunc Princeps. Comparationes odiosas esse licet dixerimus, etc.
THis whole Chapter is but introductionall, of the Prince replying to the
insinuations of the Chancellor, concerning the Justice of Juries, and the
possibility of having them in England above other Countries; To which, though
the Prince is produced, mildly answering, yet in that is there much strenuity
expressed, in refracting those hightnings that the Chancellours love to his
Common Laws Languaged it self by. Now, though the Prince waves comparisons,
as engines, rather to advance humor, provoke passion, and manifest pride, then
to dilucidate truth, and to lay open the candidates to a true judgment: yet,
in that he keeps to a modest assertion of the Civil Law, and states it is
Regency and Authority in the Continent, whereof France is a part; though he
allows the Common Law the same favor in this Island, he does but right without
inconvenience to either Laws, and the contenders for them, since all the zeal
and fervor that men passionately appear in to the averrment of their darlings,
is but that squib of wit, which, though it soars high, and blazes in the
firmament of popular admiration, evaporates and dissolves in a crack and issue
of nothing but smoke and stench; for God that made nothing in vain, but has
given every living thing not only breath but pabulary subsistence for its
continuation, and a providence of support to make that by his benediction
effectual to that end; that same great and good God, directing Neighbourhoods
to join into Cities, Counties, and Kingdoms, and to be governed by Rules and
Laws of prudence and order, has no doubt fitted every thing, not Laws
excepted, to every Country, and every Country to the Laws his wisdom in the
humane nature appointed for them; and the Laws of one Nation will universally
no more fit another, then all clothes will fit one body, or one bodies
proportion fit every bodies: In the common Principles, Laws in civilized
Nations all agree, though in the particulars they differ, as clothes made all
of one shape for men's bodies do in the more or less of them; and as that is
the best suit of clothes that best sets forth, and most accommodates the body
with warmth, agility, and defense against injury, so is that the best Law for
any Nation, that most promotes its peace, piety, and wealth, and impedes the
cankers and subversions of them; which since the Civil Law does abroad (and for
ought I know deserves in that regard that character which a learned Professor
of it gives, That if all the Rules, Maxims, Constitutions, and Laws of all
other people and Countries were put together, Dr. Ridley in his view of the
Civil and Canon Law. p. 3.
I except none (says he) save the Laws of the Hebrews which came immediately
from God, they are not comparable to the Law of the Romans, neither in wisdom
nor equity, neither in gravity nor in sufficiency, thus largely he;) yet
notwithstanding all this (which truly, being taken pro confesso, is very much
for the honor of those Laws) the Common Law of England has that specific
energy and adaption to the Land of England, as no Law in the world has or can
have: The Author's wish.
And I pray God I and mine, and all the true men of England, may live and dye
in the love and under the obedience of it, and of the Protectors of it, Kings;
and their Counselors, Parliaments. And so I end this Chapter.

CHAP. XXXI.
Sed licet non infime Cancellarie, nos delectet forma, qua Leges Angliae in
contentionibus revelant veritatem, etc.
IN this Chapter the Prince is personated as scrupling the goodness and
lawfulness of Juries, by reason of the seeming opposition the constitution of
them has to the Law of God; for the Prince, supposing that God in Deuteronomy. 17.6.
settled the decision of matters upon the mouth of two or three Witnesses, does
exclude all determinations of judicial causes from any interest in them, but
what is of the nature of that constitution, which the Prince says was a proof
according to the Law of nature and reason, and not a temporary Law in the
ceremoniality of it, determining with the Jewish Polity, which the Schools call
Vetus Lex figurae vel umbrae; and therefore our Lord, who was the dissolution
of whatever was not moral, but by his coming abrogated, confirms this to the
Pharisees in John 8.17. and Grotius says, that this was so generally received
that it became proverbial, Caterum Lex ista Mosis proprie ad facti
controversium pertinens, in Proverbium transiit, ita ut de rebus aliis
usurpatur, Grotius in Matthew. 18.16.
and so he takes the meaning of John 8.17. and 2 Cor. 13.1. yea, because the
weight of proofs shall not be scanted and want its full advantage, the Holy
Ghost adds two or three Witnesses, not thereby only to exclude one, Hoc dicit
ne pasiim sed cum discretione ad judicium mortis procedatur, in quo compescitur
malitia invidorum, Hugo Cardin. in Deuteronomy. 17.16.
but to take in a third for down weight if need be* and this is the reason
undoubtedly why the Laws of Nations, and our Law chiefly, though they allow
two Witnesses, good and stanch, proof enough, Sub testimonio trium peribit
omnis malus, and salvabitur omnis bonus; Patris scilicet Filsi and Sp. Sancti
sit peccatoris condemnatio erit sub testimonio cordis, oris, operis, Hugo Card.
in loc.
yet they look upon three as the fuller evidence; as in Company the more the
merryer, so in Evidences the more Witnesses, the more unquestionable the truth
of their evidence; and therefore our Lord does not plead Prerogative, As he was
the truth, and ought to be believed upon his own assertion, but he appeals to
the Lawyers themselves, who were his great opposites, and critically carped at
him, and exhibits himself forinsecally to them, as one that ought to be
credited, because his words and works had the testimony of God by miracle; and
of their consciences, by the conviction of them upon what he said and did: and
therefore he says, having approved himself according to the method of their
own Law, from the appointment of their own Lawgiver Moses, not to believe his
words thus attested, was not only to contemn Moses, but to proclaim their
enmity and malice against him, who, by testimony Juridick, was affirmed to be
the true God-man he asserted himself to be: This is the Princes objection, that
in as much as God had set down the way of condemnation to be by two or three
Witnesses; and Christ the new Lawgiver confirmed this, and subjected himself
to the manner of trial concerning the truth of his Doctrine and Divinity; Huit
legi contraire est legi divinae refragare: that is, to prescribe another method
then what God has set, is to wander from Gods appointment, and to contradict
the wisdom of God the Father in the positivity of his appointment, Matthew. 13.14.
and of the Judge of quick and dead, who approves it; yea, it is to set up
mortal weakness against immortal Power, Goodness, Wisdom, and Sovereignty,
which is Treason against the Sovereign of our souls: Nemo enim potest melius
aut aliud fundamentum ponere quam posuit dominus, says the Prince in our Text;
and upon this doubt, not narrowly or pusilly raised, but breaking forth from
reason and piety regnant in him, and evidencing it self in the proposal of its
arrest to his gravity, who is able, ready, and willing to enlarge it, by his
resolution of the difficulty does he apply to the Chancellor; this is the sum
of this one and thirtieth Chapter.

CHAP. XXXII.
Chancellarius, Non his quibus turbaris Princeps contrariantur leges Angliae
licet aliter quo dammodo in dubiis ipsae eliciunt veritatem.

HEre the Chancellor endeavors answer of the personated Prince his
expectation, and that in the solution of those doubts which he in the precedent
Chapter raised, to the discharge of which undertaking he applies himself not
with the levis armatura of words, light in their nature, and cheap to utter,
for then his reply had been like that (...), or Swallows nest, 2 Chil. 2 Cent.
Adag. 2, p. 437.
wherein the Poets tell us there is great noise, but no music no such
hail-shot does he from the birding-piece of a bombaste-Oratory discharge on the
Princes reason rampier'd up, and in a kind of civil hostility against him,
with no such mean and triffling lime twiggs does he hope to catch this bird of
Paradise with: but, knowing him to have a Kingly reason, and to answer in a
soulary plenitude his Majestic birth, and corporal sanctity, poures forth
upon him a volley of solid reason and judicious gravity; by the force of which
cannon-shot, so artlily levelled, he doubts not but to batter the breast-works
raised against him, and to gain those Towers of opposition, from whence these
artillery on him played; And the better to effect this, he yields to the Prince
in that which is the groundwork of this scruple, that what God has appointed
as a moral and fixed rule is irremoveable; and to wave it, or wander from it
is contraire divinae legi, Contraire vel contradicere, Glanvill lib. 10. c. 1^.
to rebel against the Divine Sovereignty, which is the highest sacrilege:
This he grants; yet does he hold his own, in denying the Princes inference:
For, though the Old Law does appoint, that in the month of two or three
Witnesses every word shall be established; Lex nova nihil determinat circa
catemonialia vel judicialia nes pracipit alia moralia quam lex vetus 1.2. St.
Thom. Quest. 308. at. 2.
yet does it not take away all prudent improvement of that prescription to the
end of it is institution, but under the latitude of that remedy admit whatever
after experience shall discover necessary, to obviate after villainy the defeat
of God's intention in that prescript, Lex vetus erat bona quia cons^nabat
rationi, reprimendo concapiscentius, sed erat im perfecta quia non poterat
sufficienter ad finem inducere. St. Thom. 1. Secanda Qu. 38. art. 1.
to which undoubtedly that Law of Moses was too short in the letter, as in
other things it is supposed to be; And therefore as the New Law being (as the
Schools term it) Lex veritatis; supplied that in the maine things that
concerned the grace of men and the glory of God, to which it is promulgation is
the rule and line, so does the Laws of National prudence conform to the
Mosaic Norm in the Moral and Natural rules of it, though they may alter and
vary in some explanatory methods, Lex vetus dissert a lege naturali non ut ab
ea penitus aliena sed ut aliquid ei superaddens, S. Thom. 1.2. q. 89. art. 2.
or additions of circumstance adapted to time and men; the liberty whereof may
be conceived indulged to Government, by the Magna Charta of Christian liberty,
to those notable and noble ends of carrying on order and Justice in the World:
And, of this nature is the addition of Juries in England unto the two or three
witnesses, which our Law does not do actu dominii, as if it arrogated a power
of antiquation in the point of witnesses (for the Law does every thing by
witnesses; where witnesses can be had that are fide digni, which the Laws of
God and all Nations enjoyne:) but it adds to witnesses, Juries; nutu prudentiae
and sub ratione majoris certitudinis, who upon their oaths and consciences are
to Judge whether they think the depositions are true, and the witnesses
creditable in that they have averred: For, as in bonds, the security men have
by sureties bound with the prime debtor, does not make the payment of the debt
less, but more sure: so in matters of witness, Juries empannelled to hear and
verdict a cause in Trial, does not depreciate and abate the justice of
decisions by witnesses, but enhanse the reputation, and imply the more credit
and conscience in them. And hence I humbly conceive the Law of England may, on
good grounds, be argued a very pious and just Law, in that it takes all
advantages to promote Justice, the great soder of civil societies; and that
not only by witnesses, Deuteronomy. 17.6. c. 19.15.
which God prescribes signally, but also from that honor he does witnesses, by
terming himself by that Name: Job. 16.16. Mal. 2.14. and by terming his holy
Spirit the witness; and his holy Apostles witnesses: all which proving his
approbation of witnesses, concludes the Laws wisdom and justifiableness in
allowing witnesses, and without them (where to be had) ordinarily doing
nothing. But yet, hence is there no ground to conclude that the addition of
Juries is supererogative; and not only more then needs must, but a sinful
supplement to that which is already perfect; which suspicion the Chancellor
takes off in those words, Non contrariantur licet aliter quodammodo ipsae in
dubiis eliciant veritatem:] which is as much as if in other words I humbly
conceive his sense had uttered; That, though there be a variation of the method
in some adjuncts to it, yet no aberration from the end, discovery of Justice:
For, as the intent of God was not the precise letter (sit hence then the
number, In ore duorum vel Trium] Bona fama, jus testimonii moribus Hebrais non
habent amentes, pueri ante annum tredecim, fures etiam post restitutionem qui
de alea victuant, publicani qui plus aquo exigunt, caprarii and si qui alii ea
factitant, qua verberibus digna sunt, Rejici etiam possint qui valde propinqui
au^ familiares aut inimici sunt partium alteri, Grot. in c. 17. Deuteronomy. 6.
two or three witnesses, how false or sordid soever, must have been his
appointment, without any limitation, which being the destruction of Justice,
cannot be the sanction of the great Justicer, who is Summum jus sine aliqua
injuriae macula; and being contrary to his will in other places of his Law;
would imply contradiction, which is odious to God) so, to keep to two or three
witnesses, where they presumed to be true may be otherwise, and not to admit
that which may discover them to be otherwise, as Juries (added to them) in the
trial of a cause and judgment on it may, is not against the Tenor of the
Enaction of God, in the maine intent and drift of it; for that being the
discovery of truth, and the delivery of Right from all Combination against it,
is pursued and attained in this way of Trial by witnesses and Juries.

Not that the Law wholly rests on Juries, and decides nothing by witnesses
without them; 18 H. 3. Coram rege inter Wakeling de Stoke and W. de la
Guildhal. St Francigena appellaverit Anglum de perjurio, furio, homicidio, aut
Rane, quod dicitur aperta rapina, quae negari non poteris Anglus se defendat
per quod melius voluerit aut judicio Ferri candentis vel duello. Leg. Guil. 1.
p. 177. Edit. Twisd. Brompton in W. 1. p. 982.
For, that in certain Cases it does, as hereafter in it is proper place shall be
showed; but because the Law introduced Juries, First, to clear truth more
against falsehood and conspiracy then otherwise it could be: For were witnesses
only taken, that might pass for current which is adulterate, as in that notable
record cited by Mr. Seldom on this Text, in the Bishop of Salisburies Court at
Sunning, whereof the Entry is Willielmus producit soctam suam and ipsi quos
producit per se discordantes sunt in multis and in tempore and in aliis
circumstantiis, etc. Wakelinus producit sectam qui concordati sunt in omnibus
and per omnia, and dicunt omnes quos ipse producit pro se, which shows the use
of Juries to judge whether of the parties witnesses are most creditable, and
accordingly to verdict the matter: another use of Juries also there is to
prevent the incertainty of judging integrity, and it is contrary by dubious
events, wherein God is not ever pleased to evidence his pleasure to the
determination of right, but leaves them to the empire of second causes, from
the conclusion of which there is nothing peremptorily collectable, such as were
trial by Ordeal of fire, which was in use tempore of the Conqueror, or by
Duel, Combat, and Battle, Glanvil lib. 14. c. 1.
of which Glanvil speaks in those words, Per Duellum potest placitum terminari,
which was antiquated in Henry the Seconds time, when Glanvil, treating of the
Great Assise brought in place of it, says, Ex aequitate maxim prodita est
legalis institutio. Idem lib. 2. c. 19.
Ius enim quod post multas and longas dilationes vix evincitur per duellum, per
beneficium istius constitutionis commodius and acceleratius expeditur, Spelman
in verb. Duelli, Oloss.
so that Juries coming in and antiquating these, there is patefaction by them
to more certain justice then otherwise was; all which well weighed amounts to
the Chancellours position, that Juries with Witnesses do not contradict the
divine constitution, licet aliter quodammodo in dubiis eliciunt veritatem.

Quid duorum hominum testimonio obest Lex illa generalis Concilii, qua cavetur,
etc.

This the Chancellor produces to prove that even the Canonists and Popes with
their Councils, that cry up the Civil and Canon Laws and the proceedings of
them by two or three Witnesses, and will not away with Juries, because they
pretend their institution is besides the rule and appointment of God in the
prealledged Scriptures, and the proceedings of Nations according to it; yet
even they are by our Chancellor instanced in, as proceeding by other Methods
then two or three Witnesses. And the particular case of their variation is in
that about testimony against Cardinals to make them criminous; for these
Cardinals created, whether by Pope Eugenius the Fourth, or Pontian, or
Sylvester, were held the Religionis duces and antistites, in the Roman Church
of great authority, Creaturae Papae, solo Papae minores, Cardines a quo motus
ostii firmatur in claudendo, Tholoss. Syntagm. Juris. lib. 15 c. 4. Binius ad
fin. Tom. ^. Concilior. p. 1027.

In Summis majoris Antonii, part. 3. lib 2. c. z. De Electione and Potestate
Cardinalium. Et Tit. 21. c. 1. De Statu Cardinalium and Legatorum. Cardinales
debent osse Dei amici singulares per vitae perfectionem, ut sicut praecellunt
alios dignitate, ita excellunt in sanctitate, ff. 1. quantum, etc.

Rubeus lib. 1. Rational. Divinor. Offic. c. 55. Impress. Venet.

Aurel. Arcad. Charis. lib. Singul. de Offic. Praf. Pratorio.


and aperiendo, etc. Cardinals from Cardo an Hinge, because as the hinge moves
the door to and fro, so do these the affairs of the Church, and as the heart
guides the man, so do these the Mystery of the Church and State of
Christendom; these then so magnificent Prelates were at first but few in
number, and of eminent parts and perfections, which made them worthily
venerable; after, when they being found useful to the interest of the Pope,
they grew more and mightier, and the Pope made what number and whom he would,
which made his Holiness so strong in the carriage of affairs, that he left
almost no room for temporal Princes, but all was swayed by him and his
Creatures; yet for all his power and pretenses, though the Cardinals were
incardinated and let into the Papacy so Lib. 1. Ceremon. Ecclesiastic. p. 44.
dexterously that there was no injuring them without injury to his Holiness,
Ritnum Eccles. lib. 1. sect. 8. sub Leone 10. Papa.

Baronius Tom. 5. p. 346.

Albergat. Discurs. Polit. p. 386, 388.

Cassander, p. 139. De Officio Missae.


in Pope Honorius's time they were all by the Emperor Isaacius banished, and
so abject, ut non fuisset qui resistere debuisset de clero; for though their
institution was good to carry on the amity of the Greek and Latin Church, and
to gratify the Greeks, the Tom. 8. Council. p. 1027. Chalcondylas, lib. 1. De
rebus Turc.
two first Cardinals Bessarion and Isidore of Sarmatia being Greeks, and so I
think were Tom. 8. p. 651.
all the Cardinals some time after; yet when the Popes made no bones (as we
say) of the Council Canons, Binius, To. 8. p. 66. Ius Pontificium. c. Prasulum.
2. q. 5.
but multiplied their number, debased their nature by choosing not for birth,
parts, and piety, but for vice, craft, and policy, contrary to the first
Ecumenical Council of Basil, then, with his Italians whom he mostly
Cardinalated, did he introduce that magnificent Grandeur, which as it arrogates
pre-eminence over Princes, so in time becomes a check to his Holiness. So that
now he that can accomplish the Cardinalitial favor, Cardinales, filii primi
gradus dicuntur, Tholoss. lib. 15. c. 4. sf. 2. Cum summi Pontificis seeds
vacat, in interregno sacro sanctum Cardinalium Collegium Rempublicam
christianam regit, rerumque difficaltati consulit, donec Pontifex creatus.
Tholoss. loco sodem, ff. 16.
and to be highest in the Suffrage of the Conclave, is not only likely but
sure to be Pope; and therefore as they can curb and (in a sort) awe the Pope,
so does he claw them to make them his Vassals. These, These, are the Purpurata
Mancipia, that as Legates a latere, and Conciliarii pro capite, do enrich his
Holiness, and for these scarlet Sons are the Canons of the Council, here in
the Text mentioned, made; though I confess I can find no Council (but perhaps
it is my ignorance, for which I crave pardon) where 12 only is admitted for
proof against a Cardinal: Binius Tom. 1., Council. p. 315. and 318.
for in the second Council of Rome, under Pope Sylvester the Second, it was
decreed (as much and more contrary to God's constitution of two or three
Witnesses then Juries are) that a Presbyter-Cardinal was not to be condemned of
crime under 44. Witnesses, a Deacon-Cardinal under 36. and summus Praesul, that
is, a Cardinal, not under 72. Witnesses, which Canon was undoubtedly overborne
by the Pope and his Cardinals, on purpose to make proof against and
condemnation of Cardinals, impossible, or not ordinarily feasible; for in what
deed of darkness and subtility (wherein their Eminencies are often parties)
will such Politico's as they, Spelman. Gloss. in verb. Cardinal.
be so public as to admit 72 Witnesses against them; and since without that
number they cannot be convict, they are as good as pardoned, that is, not fully
accused so as to be punished by degradation, be they never so enormous and
scandalous: thus Pope John the Ninth when a Cardinal, was Gallant, as we call
it now, in better English Stallion, to the famous Roman Courtezan, who ruling
Rome gratified her humble servant with first the Bishopric of Bononia, then
Ravenna, and at last the Popedom, which Aventine thinks gave rise to the story
of Pope Joan, this John being Papasyed by a woman, Aventinus lib. 4. Hist.
Boiorum.
and so called the Woman-Pope; thus the then Pope's Holiness in Anno 1364,
accused six Cardinals to have conspired his death, and went so far as to almost
degrade them for it, which if true, 'twas Murder before God, but alas by the
artifices of the Conclave and their adherents, the sentence was said not to be
passed legally and with good conscience and consideration of the Churches
honor, and therefore it was not prosecuted. By all which it appears, that the
Church, which the Prince acknowledged the Pope his Cardinals and Councils to
be, (appointing otherwise in this case then the word of God does in the
prealledged Authorities of Scripture set down) does as much seem to go above
and besides Scripture as the Law of England does in case of Juries; since they,
added to Witnesses two or three, do only corroborate truth and make it less
capable to be deluded and prevaricated with, then upon the single account of
Witnesses and their depositions, it might in probability be: and this I
conceive to be the intendment of our Text in alleging this Canon concerning
Cardinals, wherein the rule of God in Deuteronomy. 17. is in the Letter of it departed
from, and yet without the Prince's scruple, which the Chancellor insinuates to
dissolve this his scruple in the case of Juries upon no less if not a more
rational and equitable account. And therefore as this sanction of the Church
concerning Cardinals, which the Prince (according to the Religion of our
Chancellour's time) thought unerrable, was not by him concluded sinful,
because an addition of a greater number to that of two or three, and all to
promote right (as was pretended) to truth, relating to those Praesulary
Eminencies; so ought not the annexing of twelve Jurymen to the evidence, which
is to the same end of evincing right and subverting its contrary, Quanto magis
ponderat in Iudiciis plurium idoneorum testium fides, quam unius tantum, tanto
tutiore aquitate nititur ista constitutio, quam duellum. Cum enim ex unius
jurati testimonio procedit duellum, duodecim ad minus legalium hominum exigit
ista constitutio jur amenta, Clanvil. lib. 2. c. 7.
to be excepted against, but admitted as that which tends to the design of God
in that judicial Constitution: and hereupon our Texts inference is most
rational, if two or three worthy men confirming a testimony make it
irrefragable, and not to be ordinarily impeached, much more a greater number,
Quia plus semper continet in se quod est minus.

Supererogationis meritum promittebatur stabulario, si plusquam duos quos
recepit denarios ipse in vulnerati Curationem erogasset.

This is relative to the story of the merciful Samaritan, Luke 10. who did not
only come to the distressed and wounded man (when the Priests and Levites, who
saw his misery, turned the deaf ear to his moans, and the pittiless eye to his
sad misfortune (for the Text says, They passed by on the one side,) but bound
up his wounds, putting in oil and wine to purge and heal them, and set him on
his own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him; and to complete
his courtesy, on the Morrow when he departed, he took out two pence and gave
them to the Host, and said unto him, take care of him, and whatsoever thou
spendest more, when I come again I will repay thee, v. 35. This whatsoever thou
spendest more is termed Meritum supererogationis; for, because there might be a
necessity to carry on the kindness to the distressed person further then the
Samaritan could then see, or perhaps was then (being on his Journey and having
no more then would barely defray his own charge) convenient for him to moneyly
supply, he promises compensation for, when he comes again, that is, upon notice
of it; now this the Chancellor makes use of to clear the necessity, that
supplements be (by after prudence and experience made) to those things, which
at their first stabilition could not be conceived of, or provided for; and this
is the reason why more then two or three Witnesses are permitted by the Civil
and Canon Law in certain cases, Numerus supplet quod in fide deficit, Digest.
lib. 22. Tit. 5. ff. Numerus p. 3087. and lib. 22. Tit. 5. c. 21.

Lotinus Deuteronomy. 17.6.

Tatrinaceus de Testibus, did. 61. number. 42. and seq.

See Mr. Selden's Notes on c. 21. of our Text.


as well as Juries of twelve added to two or three by the Common Law, as in the
Notes of the 26. Chapter I have at large discovered. And therefore though the
Law of England join Juries to Witnesses in causes where Juries are to be had,
and is therefore justifiable, yet does it not suffer causes to fall by reason
of the invalidity of testimonies where Juries cannot be had, but proceeds in
those 9 Rep. Abbot of Strata Marcella's Case, p. 30.
cases secundum rationem, and jure Gentium, for so it follows.

Nisi quae supra altum mare, extra corpus cujuslibet comitatus Regni illius
fiant, quae postmodum in placito little Admiralto Angliae deducantur, per testes
illa juxta Legum Angliae sanctiones probari debent.

Here the Chancellor makes good his assertion in the 24. Chapter, Itu ut non
sit locus in Anglia, qui non sit infra corpus Comi^atus; for being to speak of
Maritime matters and cases that are in debate about Contracts beyond the Sea,
or Wrecks and Administrations of justice upon the Sea, he referrs them to a
particular Jurisdiction exempt from the ordinary Courts of Justice, to wit, the
Court of Admiralty, and gives the reason, because the original of the cause was
from the Sea, which is extra corpus cujuslibet Comitatus, and because every
cause regularly ought to be tried in the Country where began, unless by a
Certiorari it be removed to a higher Tribunal, he shows, how the fact being
upon the high Sea, and so our of any County, ought to have and so has a
particular Judge to determine it, which is the Lord Admiral: The Court of
which is not left to proceed how it pleases, but in the prosecution toward
sentence must pronounce secundum allegata and probata, for so his words are,
Quae postmodum in placito coram Admirallo Angliae deducantur, per Testes illa
juxta Legum Angliae sanctiones probari debent.

For the first, what Altum Mare in this case is, This, I humbly conceive, is
thus phrased, not to ^lead into the vast consideration of it, but to resolve
the Jurisdiction hereby intended; for Mure is called by the Learned altum, in
regard it is Hellno aquarum, and in common opinion, bottomless. The Learned
have been full of dispores about it, and they say, that the Sea is the moist
and liquid part of the Universe, which they therefore term (...), Lib. De Mundo
c. 3.
as the Philosophers words are. Seas, the Ancients called the circumvallation
of earth, or the girdle of its loins, which blessed it with moisture to help
on fructification, with passage to further Civility and Trade. The Ancients
speak variously of Seas, the great Secretary of Nature calls the Sea, (...),
which is what Moses calls the Sea in Gen 1.10. 2 Meterolog. c. 8.
(...) the gathering together of waters, and that not a bare gathering
together; for though the Hebrews have above twenty words to signify that, yet
they express this gathering not by the general word (...), which signifies all
kinds of gathering together, but by a special word importing a gathering
together by Statute and good warrant, by a Law of establishment, by a sanction
of power not to be controlled, and Decree not to be reversed; by which God is
said to set bounds to the Sea, beyond which its surly Waves shall not pass:
such a collection of waters as of Lines in the Circle, all which concenter in
the Sea and make a Mass of waters. And though all Seas are waters, yet all
waters are not Sea, for waters are particulars, Sea general, waters are in
propriety, Sea qua such is nullius in bonis, Mes appiert per l' opinion de
Bracton and Britton auxi, que flotsam jetsam and ^agan cy long come ils sont
in au sur le mere n' appent al Roy, mes occupanti conseduntur, Constable's
Case, 5 Rep. p. 108. Grotius de Iur. Belli and Pacis, lib. 2. p 134, 135.
but in occupancy; yea when the Roman Empire was expanded over almost the whole
world, 'twas said to them not unaptly, Mare liberum esse, non Romanorum, yet
there are Authorities of impropriating Seas; waters may rise and fall, as the
springs that feed them or the rains that fall into them; the Sea, properly so
called, is neither added to, nor subtracted from; for it is the Sphere of
liquidity, and is not in its true notion exhaustible, unless God miraculously
dry it up or add thereto by opening the fountains of the deep, as in the
Deluge. Indeed particular Arms and Toes of Sea by bordering on Land may through
the narrowness of passage swell and augment their depth, because the great
quantity of moisture in the Channel not being voidable, must needs, while it is
in passage raise its bulk, for all bodies must have place, but the Sea is vast
and so capacious that it ordinary is what it is, and though it gives yet
receives nothing from the Land but what the Land returns of its own: 2
Meteorologie. c. 1, and 2.
and therefore although some have ascribed Originals by way of Fountain or
Spring to the Sea, yet the Philosopher wholly refutes that, and concludes, that
Sea is the source of all waters, (...), and that all Rivers empty themselves
into the Sea, as into their great Resolution and Vessel of capacity.

Now the Sea being so vast a body of waters that the Earth seems to be but an
island in it, Genesis 1.2.
and being called by (...), an Abyss of waters, as God is an Abyss of mercy, as
I take the allusion to be, Abyssus ad Abyssum invocat, The Abyss of misery
calling to the Abyss of mercy, Psalm. 42. The Sea, I say, so vast, may well be
called Altum in this sense, though this be not altogether the sense of the
Chancellor; for he here makes altum Mare to be that which being extra regnum,
is exempt from the ordinary Jurisdiction of Law, which it would not be, were it
infra corpus Comitatus; for where altum Mare is, See our learned Mr. Seldom in
his Notes on this Chapter. 2 H. 3.9 H. 3 15 H. 3. Vide Rotul. 12 E. 3. ^Instit.
p. 144. 1 Instit. p. 260. B.
there is the power of the Common Law, as to trial of causes, determined: every
man that is upon the Sea of England is within the Allegiance of the King the
Sovereign, notwithstanding that Sea be altum Mare; but yet trial of all causes
that are super altum Mare shall be, by the particular Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty, determined, as appears by sundry Parliament Rolls; whereby the
Jurisdiction of that Court is very ancient, and as is plain by the Laws of
Oleron, which R. 1. made when he was there in France, returning from the Holy
Land, and is every where confirmed in Law Books. Altum Mare then is the proper
Region of the Admirals Jurisdiction, as appears not only from the common
consent of books, and the concurrent allowance of time, but also by diverse
Statutes declaring the power of the Admiral, as 13 R. 2. c. 5. 15 R. 2. c. 3. 2
H. 4.6.11. 5 Eliz. 5. all which do limit the Admiral to the high Sea, and
exclude his Jurisdiction over any cause that is infra corpus Comitatus; for in
that case the Law gives restitution, 4 Instit. 138, 139, and seq. 2 R. 2. fol.
12. Stamford. Pleas Crown, fol. 151. Dyer, p. 159.
as appears in sundry cases, Hibernici sunt sub Admirallo Angliae de re facta
super altum Mare; the Libel in the Admiralty Court makes the cause to commence,
Sur le haut mere, and infra Iurisdictionem del' Admiralty; and so the learned
Chief Justice Cook understands our Text here, for rehearsing the very passage
we are discoursing upon, he says, Which proves by express words that the
Jurisdiction of the Admiral is confined to the high Sea, 4 Instit. p. 141.
which is not within any County of the Realm.

Now then the question is, what is Altum Mare? for that must determine the
Corpus Comitatus; since whatever is not altum Mare is infra corpus Comitatus,
and subjest to the Common Law and Justice of the Nation. Now altum Mare is
thought to be where one can see no Land on the other side of that he stands; 2
E. 2. Tit. Coron. 399.
for in such case where a man may see from one Land to another, he is said to
be infra corpus Comitatus, and the Coroner shall exercise his office, and the
Country take knowledge of it, and the Trial shall be by a Jury of twelve men
and not by the Admiral, because the cause grows not super altum mare: and
generally where the water does flow and reflow it is within the body of the
County, as appears in the Abbot of 43 E. 3.
Ramsey's case, and 17 Eliz. Diggs his Case in Scaccario. Stamford p. 51. Pleas
Crown. Cook, 3. part. Instit. fol. 112. Chap. of Piracy.
Diggs his case; and if a man be slain upon any Arm of the Sea, where he may
see Land on both sides, the Coroner shall enquire of this Murder and not the
Admiral: and yet there is a good Authority for a divisum Imperium (as it were)
between the Common Law and the Admiralty; for though the low-water-mark be
infra corpus Comitatus at the reflow, 5. Report, p. 107. Sir Henry Constable's
Case.
and for causes thence arising determinable by the Common Law, yet when the Sea
is full, the Admiral has Jurisdiction super aquam, as long as the Sea flows.

The Power then of the Admiral is super altum mare only, unless by special
commission it be enlarged, as by 28 H. 8.6.15. it is; and the Jurisdiction very
ancient, not only since, but before the Conquest: for that the Monarchs of
Britain had command of their Seas, commonly called the Narrow Seas, is
confirmed by ancient Records, not only of King Edgar, who is said, Quatuour
Maria vindicare; and of Edward the third, who in Rotul. Scotiae of 10 Regni
sui, says thus, Nos advertentes quod progenitares nostri Reges Angliae Domini
Maris Anglicani circumquaque and etiam defensores; but also from sundry other
reasons and authorities, See in Sir Henry Constable's Case, 5 Rep. p. 108. it is
resolved by the Court, Que le Roy avera Flotsam jetsam and lagan comme est
avantdir per sen prerogative comment que ils sont in du sur le mere; and the
reason there is, Car le mere est del' ligeance del Roy and parcel de son corone
d' Angleterro.
cleared in the learned Seldens Mare Claus^m: And if they had such command of
the Seas, was it not fit they should depute Guardians of their Power, which
they called Admiralls, yea, and they did; and most an end more then one at a
time for the Nation: For (says Sir Edward Cook) the wisdom of those days
would not trust one man with so great a charge, Page 145. Part 4. This great
Officer of Admiral was in the Saxons time called Aen mere al, Tholoss Syntagm.
lib. 47. c. 26.9.
over all the Sea: Praefectus maris sive Architbalassus; and the Office called
Custodia Maritima Angliae; the Latin Admirallus most derive from (...), a
salsugine quod in salso Mari suum exercet imperium: but the best derivation of
the word seems to be that the learned Sir Henry Spelman mentions, Ex Anabi^i
and Graci connubio, ab Arabico amir, and Graco (...) quasi praefectus Marinus;
and the Knight likes this well, first, for that Homer calls Neptune (...), as
ruler of the Sea; and it was usual in aula orientalis imperii, to have words
bilinguis bujusce modi compositionis; and that the word Admirallus and Amireus
is used for one in great trust, appears from sundry authorities by him
laboriously quoted; so that both the Admiralty and the Admiral have been in
good esteem and of great jurisdiction, not only from Edward the third's time,
as some have thought, because then the Court of Admiralty had it is solemnity of
proceedings but from Richard the first's time, in which and for long since
there were Admiralls of the West, East, and Northern Coasts, and of the floates
in the Mouth of the Thames; but Admiralls of England there were none as I think
(but under correction ever) till the tenth of Richard the second; Spelmans
Gloss, p 16.17.
when Richard Fitz-Alan the younger Earl of Arundell and Surrey was created
Admirallus Angliae. The Admiralls Jurisdiction is then super altum mare, and
that because that cannot be intra corpus comitatus, Spelman in Gloss in voce
Admiral.
and so not triable by a Jury de vicinetto; now the high Sea is said to be
extra corpus comitatus, because the Counties are the Kings as part of his
Dominions, so are the narrow Seas, but this altum mare in the large notion is
said to be mare liberum, nullius in benis: but Gods Common, in which all
creatures claim share, and have the privilege and convenience, Gods blessing
and their own industry by help thereof occasion to them, this is the effect of
the record quoted in Non est aliquis qui inde privilegium habere possit, Rex
non magis quam privata persona, propter incertum rei eventum; to quod constare
non possit, ad quam regionem sunt applicanda. Sir Ed. Cooks 5. Rep.
Sir Henry Constable's Case; and hence it is, that because they are the
pretensions of all Nations that descend into them, they are to be accounted of
by the Laws of Nations, and the offenses done upon them, for ought I know,
punishable by those Laws, which the Admiral being Judge of, proceeds
accordingly by; And this represents the Admiral to be a very Commander and
Prince of Power, whose command is not only over the boldest and desperatest
mettled men in the Nation, but over those that often commit great outrages far
off, and yet are accountable for them when they come home; so great is the
Admiralls Power, that the whole Sea-Regiment, next under the King and his Laws,
Spelman in Gloss. loco pracitat. Seldens Mare Clausum. Vult me Pompeius esse,
quem tota hoec Maritima ora habent, (...) speculatorem and custodem. Sic Ep. ad
Attic. In majori dignitate constituti sunt Duces and Principes militum, apud
nos vulgo dicitur Conestabilis, Cassanaus. Catal. p 33. Admiralius Gallica
primum vox fuit, and dignitas latissime deinde a variis populis usurpata pro
ille illustri prafecto, cui maris imperium and littorum, a rege conereditum
est, qui classes and navalia.
is his; which is the reason that Antiquity delegated this power to Peers of
fidelity and prudence: Thus Tully in this place was called (...), Bishop of the
Seacoast; and Forcatulus tells us, France highly sets by this Officer, and
gives him a large proportion of power, and requires a suitable measure of care
in him, which justifies the Monarchs of England in committing this trust to
great Peers, and noble heroicks. And may the honor of it ever be blessed with
such a Guardian as it now (thanks be to God, and our most gracious Sovereign)
has, in the Noble and illustrious Prince James, Duke of York, the most August
Lord Admiral of England, whose Grace I beseech God long to preserve in health
and happiness.

Per testes illa juxta legum Angliae Sanctiones probari debent.]
I take this proof of facts Triable before the Admiral, to be in this place
intended according to the Civil Laws, which is, by witnesses, fide digui,
oculati testes; For such were, 3 Instit. p. 112.
I think, within the Sanctiones legum Angliae, when our Chancellor wrote; but
since many inconveniences happening (as I learn from the Preamble the Statutes
of the 27 H. 8. c. 4. and 28 c. 15.) Piracies and Outrages committed on the
Sea, See Resolut. of the Judges, Temp. Eliz. Regin. 3 Instit. p. 112. 4 Instit.
p. 147. Title Court of the Commission. c. 23.
are to be tried by witnesses with a Jury, and this by special Commission to
the Admiral from the King, wherein some of the Judges of the Realm are ever
Commissioners, and the Trial is to be according to the course of the Laws of
England, directed by the Statutes.

Consimiliter quoque soram Constabulario and Mariscallo Angliae fieri solitum
est de facto quod in Regno alio actum est.

As some men's affairs living in Counties, and others sailing on the Seas,
occasion their converse each with other, and so their Trespass one against the
other, and against the Law, Abbot Strata Marcella's Case 9 Rep. p. 30, 31.
which appoints decisions of these Controversies according to the respective
natures of them; so are their injuries done to men in foreign parts, which ought
to have, and accordingly have appointed Trials and Punishments for them: and
these are tryable before the Lord Constable and Marshall of England, which I
take (but if I err I humbly beg pardon) not to be only the Marshall mentioned
in some Statutes under the notion of Marshall of the King's house, 5 E. 3 c.
2.10 E. 3. c. 3. 28 E. 1. c. 3. 13 R. 2. c. 3. and in other Statutes.
because the Statute of 13 R. 2. c. 3. limits the bounds of that to twelve
Miles of the King's lodging: but the Constable and Marshall within the Text I
take to be a more splendid person, the latitude of whose power is rather to be
admired and dreaded then described; Spelman. in Gloss. in voc. Constabularii.
Hertog. and Hertug. Cluverius lib. 1. Antiq. German. c. 48. Erant and alia
Potistates and Dignitates per Provincias and Patrias universas, etc. Qua
Heteroches apud Anglos vorabantur, scilicet Barons nobiles, and insignes
Sapientes, and fideles, and animosi. Latin vero dicebantur Ductores Exercitus;
apud Gallos capitales Constabularil vel Mareschalli Exerci^us, Inter Leges Ed.
Confess. p. 147. Edit. Twisdensi.
for though at first it was according to the Etymology of the two Saxon words
Con and Stal, as much as Conservator Stabuli, or Comes Stabuli, (my Authority
is the Learned Knight;) yet after it became much more honorable, as being
applied to the Leaders of Armies, whom the Saxons styled Heterochii, who were
the chief men of the Precincts and Countries where they resided; And the Feron
au Catalogue des grands maistres de France, Tholoff. Syntagm. lib. 6. c. 8. ff.
6.
French so account of the Constable and Marshals of France, as of the great
Officers and Peers of France: with us the office of Constable-ship is very
ancient, as old as the Conqueror, who made, whether Walter Earl of Gloucester,
or William Son of Osborn Earl of Hereford, E. Constable is uncertain, but one
of them is agreed to be; in FitzEmpress Mawds time, Miles Son to the E. of
Hereford was Constable of England, Flor. Wigorn. in Anno 1138.
and so continued to King Stephens time; of this family of Bohuns were
successively numbered ten Constables of England, Spelm. Gloss. p. 184.
nine of which were Humphryes, who had the office by Tenure of Inheritance;
Seldom Notes on this Chap. p. 37.
from them it descended to the Lines of the Staffords and Dukes of Buckingham,
Dyer. p. 285.
as Heirs general to them, 'till by the opinion of all the Judges 11 Eliz. it
was lawfuly descended (as Sir Edward Cook instructs me) to that Edward Duke of
Buckingham, 4 Instit. p. 127.
who was attainted of Treason, 13 H. 8, and came to the Crown by forfeiture,
and since that time I think it has (in regard of the amplitude of the power)
not been granted in Fee to any Subject, but by Commission for a day or two upon
trial of a Peer, or such like extraordinary matter; and when it was resolved 25
of the Queen, that an appeal d^^lye in the case of Doughty, whose head Sir
Francis Drake struck off, and that it was cryable before the Oonstable, the
Queen would not make a Constable, 1 Instit. on Littleton. p. 74.
and ideo dormivit appellum. The consideration of this Officer in the magnitude
of his Authority, makes the Law very punctual to bound it, that it transgress
not to oppress Subjects under the color of Justice toward them; 28 E; 1. c.
3. Fleta lib. 2. c. 3. Le Case del Marshalsea, 10 Rep. 4 Instit. p. 123.
therefore, when as this, which anciently had moderate bounds, exceeded them,
the Statute of the 13 R. 2. c. 2, and 3. bounded it not only to limits of
place but of Jurisdiction, so says the 1 H. 4. c. 14. All the Appeals to be
made of things done within the Realm shall be tried and determined by the good
Laws of the Realm, and all the Appeals to be made of things done out of the
Realm shall be tried and determined before the Constable and Marshall of
England, Cook. 3. Instit. c. 7. p. 48. c. Pramunire p. 120. and seq.
they are the words of that Statute; from whence I collect, that the Common Law
had always a jealousy of all power that was not conservative of the Subjects
safety, but might bring him ad aliud examen then the known usual Common Laws.
And therefore our Sir Edward Cook, speaking of the Lord High Steward the
Marescallus here, Fleta lib. 2. c. 4. and 5. De Officio Mariscalli Forinseri,
de Officio Mariscalli tempore Pacis. 4 Instit. c. 71.
for though they are two names, and some will have them two Offices, the
Constable in War and the Marshall in peace; yet in as much as they are in the
Statutes put copulatively, I take them to be (as the L. Keeper's and L.
Chancellour's authority are declared to be one in 5 Eliz. c. 18.) but
Synonomous. See concerning these things Sir Edward Cook in his Notes on the
Court of Chivalry, where much notable learning in this matter is produced. The
judgment of Parliament in Good Thomas E. of Lancaster's Case put to death by
MartialLaw, 3 Instit. p. 52, 53. Note this Judgment.
39 E. 3. declared unlawful by the Parliament of 14 E 4 is notable, which Sir
Edward Cook recites in the Chapter of Murder, to show what Courts Martial are,
when Common Law Courts sit, Honor. Military and Civil, lib 3. c. 17. 4 Instit
p. 125. Spelman. Gloss. p. 119. Walsingham in R. 2. p. 245.
and Westminster Hall is open: see more of the Marshal and Constable in Sir
William Segar, and those other Authorities quoted in the Margent, which, if
there were need of it, I could extend to an infinity of similar Quotations.

Etiam and in Curiis quarundam libertatum in Anglia, ubi per Legem mercatoriam
proceditur, probant per restes contractus inter Mercatores extra Regnum factos.

As the former cases do show the Common Law in cases of necessity to admit
witnesses according to which they judge, which Mr. Solden has particularized in
his notes on the 21. See the Case of Abbot Strata Marcella, 9 Rep. p. 30, 31.
Cook 1 Instit. p. 11. B.
Chapter of our Author, and our Author himself has herein by the former
instances made good, so is this another case in which the same method to
Judgment is allowed; and this is called Lex mereatoria, and comprehended under
Lex terre: for this Land being opportune to the Sea, and of no great circuit
(though it be one of the noblest and capaciousest of Islands) is concerned to
promote Trade as that Bridge which makes a passage to it over the vast Seas to
the utmost Nations inhabiting their Coasts, and not only vents to them native
Commodities, but takes from them in exchange their growths, and by the proceed
of them not only acquires wealth, and increases the Navy, but accommodates
the Nation with all things necessary for the universal compleatness of natural
and politic life; which zeal of the Nation to Trade has notably appeared from
the Reigns of H. 3. to this day, in which descent there have been above 120
Acts of Parliament relating to Trade; Yea, all Acts, Note this.
that have been derogatory thereto, have been ever noted in this Nation to be
short lived. These Courts then here in our Text are, as the learned Seldom
instructs me, Seldom on the Text.
such as the Law of the Staple, called so, because they were places which held
and stayed Trade and Merchants, as a Staple does a Lock and thereby a door; for
though before the Conquest Merchants had liberty of egress and regress for
certain time, Mercatorum Navigia vel inimicorum quidem quacunque ex alto nulles
jactata tempestatibus in Portum aliquem invehemur, tranquilla pace fruuntor.
Inter Leg. Ethelst.
so not only the Laws of Ethelstan but Alfred, as the Mirror relates,
permitted 40 days and not above, which the 30. Chapter of Magna Charta
confirms; yet after Staples of Trade erected, limiting Trade to certain places
and times, Merchants grew discontented and Trade fell, 'till by the 2 E. 3. c.
9. all Staples were determined according to the great Charter, and Merchants
set at liberty to go and come with their Merchandises when they saw fit, until
they be forbidden: the Motives to the Constitutions of Staples are set down in
the Preamble to the Statute of 27 E. 3. c. 1. To prevent the damage which has
notoriously come as well to us (they are the King's in Statute-words) and to
the great men, Stat. 2. Anno 1353.
as to our people of our Realm of England, and of our Lands of Wales and
Ireland, etc. To the honor of God, and in relief of our Realm and Lands
aforesaid, etc. and cap. 2. As encouragement is given to Merchants to bring in
Commodities, so assurance of safety to them and theirs, with such festine
remedy, as the nature of their being strangers, and from home, requires;
according to the Law of the Staple and not the Common Law, which celerity of
Justice contributed much to Trade, so d^d also the laying open of all Ports to
land Merchandise at; for though native commodities are to be brought to certain
places and to none other, as all Tynn was to be shipped forth at the Port of
Dartmouth, till 15 R. 2. c. 8. which repealed that 14 of the same Reign c. 7.
so also that till the 21 Jacob, 28. which repealed the 15 R. 2. c. 8. that
limitation stood good; so all goods brought into the River of Tyne is to be
unladen at Newcastle, the 21 H. 8. c. 18. all Woolls, etc. to be brought to the
Staple, 27 E 3. c. 2.2 H. 5. c. 6.2 R. 2. c. 3.2 H. 6. c. 4. which though they
are row determined, yet were long in force, but yet the Staple-Law stands good;
and as the Statute of 3 H. 7. c. 7. gives liberty to land Merchandise at any
Port, entering them in the Kings Books, paying his Customs, and such
Merchandises not being prohibited; so does it allow safety and speedy Justice
to all Traders concerned in them, Item propter personas qui celerem babere
debent justitiam; sicut sint Mercatores quibus exhile^ur iustitia Pepoudrons,
lib. 5. de Brevi de recto, p. 334. and lib. 1. de exceptionibus, p. 444.
and that by the Law Merchant, which Bracton terms Celeris Iustitia, and which
is indulged them as they are common instruments of advantage, and in lieu of
the same kindeness Natives have in their Countries; as also for the reason of
Religion, which Bracton mentions, Propter privilegium and favorem Cruce
signatorum, quorum negotia maturitatem desiderant and instantiam: and as the
Law is in the Staple for Merchants Aliens, and is in all Nations of the World,
Cum commercia hominum maxima utilitatis sint and facilis esse expeditio deboat,
placuit negotiatoribus praeponi proprios judices, and fere apud omnes gentes,
cum and juris gentium commercia sunt. Tholossan. Syntagm. Iuris lib. 47. c. 37.
Sect. 1.
wherein in causes of Trade there are proper Judges; so is it on the Land for
Natives in Faires, wherein Courts of Pipouders are, which are established in
Faires and Markets by Common Law and ancient Charters, confirmed by the 2 E. 3.
c. 15. and 5 E. 3. c. 5. which under Faires couches this as the Justice in
them; but the 17 E. 4. c. 2. is punctual in the Court of Pipouders, the
Plantiff must swear that the contract was made in the time and jurisdiction of
the same Fair, 4 Instit. c. 60.
which done, there is justice to be had de hora in horam, as fast as the dust
can fall from the foot it adheres to, that is, smartly and speedily: From hence
the words he came with a powder, and i will pay you with a powder, Pipoudens, this
Court is a Court of Record confirmed by sundry Statutes, as in Cooks sixth
Report.
Gentleman's and Gregory's Cases is set forth, and the rules of it are such as
Bartholus mentions, Nota quod in curia mercatorum debet judicari de aquo and
bono omissis juris solennitatibus, hoc est, non inspectis apicabus. qui
veritatem negotii non tangunt. lib. 29. Sect. Tit. mandati vel contra.
to be equity and right, omitting the niceties and traverses of craft, which do
not concern the truth of the matter in question, but give releife to fraud,
according to which the Statute of 43 Eliz. c. 12. proceeds in the Trialls of
assurance by policy, which Law is thought very beneficial to avoid differences
and suits, which without it would be tedious, chargeable, and detrimentall to
Trade; For, surely the greatest controversies that arise, is by ignorance of
right reason, and resolution to oppose it, in favor to our selves, or
displeasure to others, the contrary to which Tully commends, as the glory of
Servius Sulpitius, above all the men he knew or ever read of; Neque enim ille
magis jurisconsultus quam justitta fuit; it aque quae proficiscebantur a
legibus and a jure cevils semper ad facilitatem aquitatemque referebat; neque
constituere litium actiones malebat quam controversias tollere. 9. Philip.
for he was not so much a critical lawyer, who applied himself to tie knots
and raise scruples, to intricate and clogg causes with dark and abstruse
disputes; but, as a man of conscience be accommodated all causes and cases to
equity and conscience, being willing to end more causes then continue them in
debate.

This regard to equity and speed of Justice, is the cause why our Text says,
the Law Merchant for contracts beyond the Seas is allowed; For the rule being
ordinarily that actions must be tried in the County where the cause of them
lay, and by freemen of that County, who are in Law accounted de vicineto, and
this not being possible in cases commencing extra regnum where no County or
Visne of English men is, yet necessary that some trial should be, the Law
admits what proof can be, and therefore witnesses, Probant per testes
contractus, etc. says our Text; and therefore as the Lex Rhodia which Vivian
comments upon, was most reasonable, To wit, that if a ship in a storm did
exonerate it self of some goods to save the rest and the lives of the men, Si
levanda navis gratia jactus mercium factus sit, omnium contributione sarciatur,
Quod pro omnibus datum est. Digest lib. 14. Tit. 2. de lege Rhodia.
that there should be an average, and all the goods should be contributive to
the loss of those goods cast overboard, because they were an expiation as it
were for the whole secured. So say I of this proceeding of the Common Law, it is
most just; for that it takes the best course that can be to decide differences,
and when it cannot do what it would, In necessitatibus nemo liberalis existit.
Reg. Jur. Bartolus apud digest. lib. 23. tit. 2. p. 2118.
yet is excused for just in doing the utmost it can to express Justice, for
that rule of Bartolus is most true, Necessity takes away freedom.

Similiter si charta in qua testes nominantur deducatur in curia regis,
processus tunc fiet erga testes illos, etc.

This is another case, in which evidence by witness sans Juries is allowed;
for, since the Norman Conquest, that scriptum obsignatum, which the Romans
called Symbolum, Tabula (whence Tablina in Pliny, Plin. lib. 35. Budaeus in
Pandect. Reliq. p. 243. Edit. Vascos.
for the place where Deeds and Records were kept, which we call (...), or
Archivum,) Epistola, Testamentum, Chirographum they forsooth must let in
Charta, in our English a Deed. This was ever subscribed with witnesses, not
such as we now use, any that first comes, but the best men of the County,
Chirographorum confectionem Anglicanam, qua antea usque ad Edwardi Regis
tempora fidelium praesentium subscriptionibus cum crucibus aureis absque sacris
signaculis firma fuerunt, Normanni condemnantes, Chirographas Chartas vocabant.
and chartarum firmitarem cum cerae impressione per uniassuinsque speciale
sigillum sub insullatione trium vel quatuor testium astantium conficere
constitnebant Ingulphus Abb. Crowl. in Histor. Edit. Savell.
and neighborhood; and that in perpetuam rei memoriam, to preserve the credit
of it alive, even when the witnesses are dead; men of quality being probably
known either by their hands or signets, which they affixed to their testimony.
Now these, if they came in question, if the parties were alive to prove them,
were by them proved; but, if they were of old date, and free from suspicion,
upon production of them they were allowed (every man being as it were a witness
for reverend and unspotted antiquity:) In these and such like cases the Law
allows, and accepts of proof by witnesses; but where the causes are referrable
to a proper County, and a Jury of the neighbor can be had, Per testes solum
lex ipsa nunquam litem dirimit, says the Chancellor, adding the reason,
because it is the most excellent form; Et remotior a corruptionis periculo, as
our Text is, concerning the excellency of the trial by Juries, which this
Chapter proceeds to treat of, see the Notes on the 25th and 26th Chapters,
wherein truly I have written my thoughts of Juries, not, I hope, passionately,
but with that gravity which becomes a sober Author, considering that legal
Juries are not made up of simple men, of which scarce four of the twelve
understand the Evidence; so that it may seem rather to be a matter of
superfluity then of good policy, to refer a matter to their verdict, when, as
they say, no other thing then as the judge taught them before; Stultum enim est
id facere per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, Doctor Ridley in his View
of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law. p. 184.
(as the words of a more learned then (in that) wise man's were) but Juries
are, and ought to be made of men of worth and prudence, and when such, they are
the readiest way to right judgment of fact of any in the world; and the mos
patriae and ancient trial of England being established by these, no wise and
worthy man's mouth is to be opened against them: the Rule of Law being, Reg. Iur.
as heretofore quoted, Neminem oportet esse legibus sapientiorem.

O quam horrendum and detestabile discrimen saepe accidit ex forma per
depositionem testium procedendi.

Concerning this see the Notes on the one and twentieth Chapter, whereby
appears what dangers may come, and yet justifies in those Lands, where this
is the way of trial, that to be not only tolerable but necessary; For God
having in all Nations stirred up brave spirits to affect Rule, and subjecting
to them the less generous ones, gives them so excited, prudence to compile
Laws suitable to reason and civil convenience, and to perfect such endeavors
as they discover in the use, the fitness or unfitness of them, It must be
thought and concluded that Laws being suited to People, and People to Laws,
the change of them with introduction of others, would be altogether as
inconvenient for, and nauseous to them, as high food is to a swayne, or course
diet to a Courtier; the consideration whereof prompts wise men to applaud the
carrying on of Government in all places by the Topique Laws, which ever are
the best for those places and persons they were fitted for, and have been
prosperously governed by.

Nonne si quis clandestinum contrahat Matrimonium, and postea coram testibus
mulierem aliam ipse affidaverit, cum tadem consummare Matrimonium arctabitur in
foro contentioso, and postea in poenitentiali foro judicabitur ipse concumbere
cum prima si debite requiratur, and poenitere debet qu^ties exactione propria
concubuerit cum secunda, licet in utroque foro judex fuerit homo unus and idem.

This the Chancellor brings afresh, as a Cannon, that by its shot of reason,
will (as he thinks) through and through the credit of deposition by witnesses,
and lay it low in the opinion of wise men; to wit, that Witnesses may make that
good in the Law which is not such in conscience; and want of Witnesses, that
void in Law which in conscience stands good before God, who judges righteous
judgment, and who considers things as they are, and not as they appear. And
this our Text referrs to the case of Marriage, the most excellent, Note this.
social, and free life imaginable (perfect Virginity and calm Chastity, much
professed but rarely attained, only excepted.) This Marriage is called
Matrimonium, because it of old was the Act of the will and affections, fixing
parties upon each other in a constant and faithful bond of love, cohabitation,
and communication of all things each to other. Ne quis in Matrimonis vinculo
indissolubili. fraud deciperetur, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. c. 19.
Alexander ab Alex. tell us that the Temple Virilis Fortunae was the place
whether all women repaired that would stand to be chosen, and there they stood
naked, that every one might see they had no imperfection, but were such indeed
as their choosers took them to be: but from the beginning it was not so; for
the purer ages, though they allowed candidation, yea, and as it were candida
vest, the fairest carrying usually the Market away: yet there was much
sobriety and modest kindness expressed each to other, and these parties were
called Pater and Materfamilias, as much as those that though they had not yet
coupled, yet did intend a Race of Natures improvement from them. For though
there have been some who debase Materfamilias to justa Pellex, yet Antiquity in
the stream of it did not; for Sulpitius, the Oracle of Lawyers, Sulpitius, Eam
qua in manum convenerat, in manu mancipeoque mariti esse dixit, idj est, justam
esse Matremfamilias; camque Concubinam, qua cum viro hujusmodi uxoris
consuevisses, justam pellicem esse. Budaeus in Pandect. prior. p. 27. B. Edit.
Vascos.

Idonei vacum antiquarum enarratores tradiderunt Matronam dictam esse proprie,
qua in Matrimonium cum viro convenisset, quod in Matrimonio maneret, etiamse
sibi liberi nondum nati forent, dictumque esse ita a matris nomine non adepto
jam, sed cum spe and omine mox adipiscendo. A. Gellius lib. 12. c. 6.


makes a vast difference, as much as between a lawful Wife and a Mistress of
pleasure: and therefore the more reserved Authors called these by the grave
and venerated name of Matrons; and thus Agellius affirms her to be accounted a
Matron, who was solemnly joined in Marriage with a man, in his hand as
publicly owning her, and one that with him continued, although yet there were
no issue between them, but they in hope and in persuance of it cohabited and
communicated each with other: and Budaus confirms it, as all I think must do,
that write truth. Hence is it that not only the Church has this definition of
Marriage in her forms of solemnization, and in her Canons concerning it: but
the Laws of Nations do affirm the nature of it to a Vnisoniety, as appears in
the Lib. 1. Regul. Digest. lib. 2. Tit. De ritu Nuptiar., p. 2106.
Digest; and as they had their Digest. lib. 23. Tit. 1. De Sponsalibus.
Sponsiones, (it being a custom of old to promise before Marriage, and to have
some interstitiary time from their consent to their Marriage, which we at this
day call, fairly promised or contracted:) so did they express every thing of
more then ordinary solemnity by something nuptial; the Heathens had their rit^s
Matrimoniales, which their Priests performed; Lege Zuingerum in Theatro. a p.
3317. ad p. ^3338.
they had their dies Nuptiales, (...), the Eve to, the day of, and the day
after the Marriage, and these they called Dies Nuptiarum legitimi; they had
their Locus sacer, and their Astantes Testes, their Ornatus Nuptialis, their
Invocationes and Hymnos Nuptiales, their Munera and Canae Nuptiales, all things
in the Paradoe of our times, only Christianity has sanctified them by this
transplantation of them into a more sacred Soil. This is the nature of the
thing spoken of in the Text, Marriage, of which enough; because I have written
of it in the Notes on the 21 Chapter: But the adjunct to it is that which makes
the stir here, Clandestinum Matrimonium,] such as we call, Stolen Marriages, De
die and in facie Ecclesiae celebrentur. Lindwood. lib. 4, De Sponsalibus p.
147. and p. 149.

Gratian. Decret. part. 2, cause. 30, qu. 5. per totum fol. 1573.

Tholoss. Syntag. Juris, lib. 9. c. 5. ss. 9.


when persons either non sui juris do marry, or when they that are sui juris do
not canonice nubere; this the Canonists say is sundry ways so made, 1. When it
is done without Witnesses. 2. When without all solemnity, hand over head, as we
say. 3. When no publication of the Banes has been, and when parents consents
has not been had. These, the practices of lucifugous persons, the Laws of all
Religion and Society decla^^ against, not as it is an Act of the will and
affection for ferruminating two hearts into one, and making up such a confort
as has all the Notes of delight and concent in it; for so no doubt it is
consentaneous to nature, and approved by the God of nature, by whose donation,
the powers of their compact express themselves: but as the Act has an
appearance of evil in it, and is abused by evil persons, who by it live in
scandal and are causal of breach of charity in them that censure them as
sinners in their association, Tholoss. Syntag. Juris universi. lib. 9. c. 5.
ss. 12.
which in it self may be, nay is, before God, lawful, consent only being in
soro Dei of the form of Marriage; these, together with the Marriages of
Priests, who mostly were guilty of this keeping their Marriages close to avoid
loss of preferment, knowing that, if their Marriages could be proved by
witnesses or instruments, their children would be legitimate, Ridley, View of
the Canon and Civil Law, p. 208. Lib. 7. Commen. Lib. De Senect.
caused the Canons of the Church to be most planted to the battery of this. And
in the time of Gregory the Ninth, Canons were made damnative of it; for so far
as any thing is clandestine, so far has it been thought suspicious and
uningenuous: so Caesar accounts Clandestina Concilia, and Tully, Clandestinum
Colloquium cum host, so Clandestinum foedus in Lib. 4.
Livy, and Motus clandestini in Lucretius. Yea our Law does not allow
clandestine Marriage, but disavows the posterity of it; for that Marriage that
the Law of England allows, 32 H. 8. c. 38.
is open and authoritative Marriage, In the face of the Church, Abbott Strat.
Marcell. Case 10. Rep. Ridley, View of the Laws p. 200. 201. Glanvil. lib. 7
c. 1. Reg. Juris.
by a lawful Minister, and according to the office and form for it appointed,
of which the Bishop can take notice, and certify whether loyal accouple or
not, and in which case only the issue, quoad Legem Terrae, will be lawful. To
this Marriage then, as Inheritance to the issue, so dower to the Wife is
allowed, and all other Matrimonial Privileges, which are denied in clandestine
Marriages, because the Church and Magistrate judges not de accultis sed
apertis; Glanvil. lib, 7 c. 1. Reg. Juris.
for non observata forma infertur adnullatio actus, as the rule (I have
heretofore quoted) is, which I the rather note, because stolen Matches and
libidinous Actings under the Palliadoe and Umbrage of clandestine Marriages,
has been charged on our Gentem Anglorum spretis legalibus connubiis adulterando
and luxuriando Sodomitici Gentis foedam duxisse vitam, Bonifacius Epise. Mentz
in Epist. apud Antoninum, Tit. 14. c. 2. ss.
Nation long ago, (but I hope better of us now.) For though it be too true
that Marriage was never under so little practical reverence as now it is (the
more is the pity and the shame,) it being fashionable to desert the company of
their own to attend (as Gallants and Mistrisses) on others Husbands and Wives:
yet, God be thanked, Marriage that is honorable amongst all men, is the
Sanctuary to which all modesty beneath perfect Virginity, betakes it self; and
though the sinful liberty of many Gallants may break in upon the severity of
his bond, yet on the gravest and greatest part of the Nation, that of St.
Jerome, charged on the Nitio uxores proprias non halet, lib. 1. Adv. Jovinianum.
Scots, is not chargeable. Every man may, and many men do drink of the water of
their own Spring, Omnium fere qui ad Septentrionem and ortum habitant, soli
umca uxore conte ti initio fuere, Sabellicus Ennead. 6. lib. 2.
so far is the Saxon humor yet undecocted in us, that we are for Wives, and
but for one at a time neither. For though the Jews, Chaldees, Greeks, Romans,
and other Nations had many, yea, Zuinger's Theatr. vit^. humanae, vol. 20. lib.
2. p. 3317, ad 3326.
though wise King Solomon was fascinated by this curiosity, which laid load on
his deathbed repentance; yet with us in England the Law has been to have only
one wife at one time, though the Statute of 1 Iac. c. 11. first made it felony
without Clergy. And this respect that the Law has ever had to Marriage, is the
reason that clandestine Marriage has been decryed, as that which evil persons
have pretended to credit leachery; and good persons, though they did it upon
weighty reasons as to the world, and warrantable as before God, yet did not
avoid that censure, which no humor or prudence, as they account this act of
theirs, could countervaile. Better a thousand times not marry at all then
privately, then to one that dares not, or will not be known of it. It Is a
slavery which no ingenious mind can content itself to be under, because it is
subject to be upbraided, and dares not justify its loyalty. Upon all which
considered, the Chancellour's mind is now to be learned, and that is, that
where the Law judges only by witnesses, that being proved which is less, as
promise of Marriage before witness, shall oblige; when the greater ( Marriage)
being clandestine and secret, though lawful and firm before God, may be
condemned, and one and the same man, by one and the same Judge, compelled to
performance with the one, and suffer penance for performance with the other,
Eorum appelat Quintilianus in quo judicia publica exercebantur.
though that in different Tribunals, called Fora because the Judges sat in the
Market places which were the most conspicuous and tenacious places, Budxus in
Pandect. in p, 35, 67, 269.
and because thither people applied, the seats of Justice are called Fora. For
as penance may be enjoined in Glanvil. lib. 10. c. 12. Quia Ecclesia non po^est
judicare de his qua latent, and ideo si de clam contractis nuptiis coram judice
Ecclesiastico agatur, came dubium illi sit non interveniente Ecclesiastica
solennitate an fuerat factum Matrimonium, non potest compellere servare illud.
Tholoss. Syntag. lib. 9. c. 5. De Personis and ritu Nuptia^um.
Curia Charitatis, which is the Forum poenitentiale he^e, for paying the wife
her due benevolence, according to the rule of the Apostle in 1 Corinthians. vii. 3.
(she that is clandestinely married, not being in the eye of the Church and Law
the wife but a woman that lives pleasurably, and so sinfully with him, because
not solemnly married to him) so may he that has promised be enjoined to make
good his promise in foro contentioso, that is, by action of the Case to the
person to whom he is affidated, notwithstanding he is married privately to the
first, because the second promised has a damage by the bruit of being
promised, and loses her opportunity with another, and the Man that couples
with the Woman he is clandestinely married to, shall be enjoined penance for
his effeminacy with her (who, though in truth his own wife) yet in repute is
but his woman.

Which considered, the Chancellor urges this effect of witnesses upon the
positivity of their Oaths (which cannot be softened by consideration of
circumstances which in case of a Jury would be probably in some sort allowed)
to be very hard, O quam horrendum and detestabile diserimen, as his words are,
which are an emphatick ejaculation, arguing admiration and vehemence, as if he
considered a man thus straightned, as not knowing what to do, which way to
take, but to be perplexed, as the Leviathan is described in Job, so it follows.

Nonne in hoc casu ut in Job perplexi sunt testiculi Leviathan; Prob pudor vere
perplexi sunt.

This passage out of Job. is in Chap. 40. v. 17. spoken of the Behemoth of the
Land, the Elephant, Behemoth Elephantem intelligunt omnes Hebraei. Grot. in
locum.
the words are, He moves his tail like a Cedar, the sin^wes of his stones are
wrapped together, which words, though there be some that apply to the
Leviathan, or Whale, yet the stream of learned men understand the Elephant,
(...), the Creature which cannot be chased without danger and hazard to his
hunters. Now this beast, though the largest and most robust of all Creatures,
and therefore Ad invincibile robur prastandum supra omnia animantia reliqua, in
Loc. Aldrovandas de Quadrup. a p. 440. ad p. 450.
Pelican says, the Ramification of his testicles is purposely expressed to
set forth his invincible strength above all creature's; Since the nerves so
plashed and entertwined each in other, do confirm and fix the strength of the
part in which they are thus complicated; this beast, Testes habet non foris
conspicuos sed intus circa renes conditos, Plinius de Elephanto.
I say, is said to be perplexed, the word (...) signi^ying a nerve, by R. David
on 48 Esaias 4^ is rendered by virga ferrea, because the nerves are in Cervice,
and makes the body like a pillar of iron or brass, solid and durable, (a)
(...). Verere, formidare.
especially when nerves are (...) Nervi testiculorum, the nerves of those parts
which are most guarded by us, because most to be feared in their hurt-taking;
Nervi intricati sunt, nam nervos intus absconditos habet, Grot in Loc. ex
Arist. lib. 12. de Genesis Animal. Aldrov. de Quadruped. p. 430.431.
and therefore (...) ramifioated, thickened and strengthened by their
reticulation: This then I conceive to be the sense of the words, though God had
made the Elephant of such strength even in his tenderest parts, yet such a
straight is he sometimes upon hunting, or other exigent brought to, that his
strength fails him, and he grows cold in the nest of his heat, and weak in
the element and sphere of his strength; which applied to the instance in the
Text, makes good the purpose of our Chancellor, that the various effects of
actions, as they are proved by witness or not, may distract men of great wit
and courage, so that they may not know which way to turn themselves; but as
people in fears and transports, are sorely angariated, Pro pudor vere
perplexi,] as the Texts words are: For, as between two stools, we say, a man
gets a fall, so between these two rivalls, for a man's company, the man loses
himself, in an uncouth despair and dissatisfaction, which of the ways to
take, and women to apply to. And this the Chancellor charges on the proceeding
by witness, as causall of the confusion and uncertainty, Ligula modus magicus
frequens apud Gallos, quo excellentia Matrimonia solvantur, and conjugale
vinculum a deo institutum labefactatur; and tamen hoc agere non tantum
perditorum hominum est, sed virorum bonorum and honestarum foeminarum, nec
putant hoc tam enormi facinore deum offendi, quod id impune patrant omnes and
doceant. Boissardus, lib. de divinat.
but whether so or not, I determine not, since arguments from accidents to
Subjects do not follow always, For though I know there be no such Magic
Girdle in our Law, as Boissardus says amongst the French is usual, and
approved to dissolve Marriages, by incapacitating the parties to act their
kindenesses each to other, which is a perplexity, which every unhappy sufferer
cries Prob pudor upon; yet, in as much as possible it is, that witnesses
credited overmuch by Juries, may drive a matter to this fatal issue, I will
not peremptorily say, that it is impossible, though I may safely say, it is
improbable any such thing should, and, I think, without president, that Tale
malum aut diserimen in casu aliquo evenire possit, etiamsi Leviathan ipse ca
generare nitatur, as the words of the Text are; And so with a recollection of
what has passed, and an application of the reason of them to the credit of the
Common Law in this method of Juries, he concludes the Chapter, gratulating the
Laws as victorious after all the eclipses and scrutinies, prejudice in some,
and disaffection in others put upon them, notwithstanding all which they do,
Tanto magis clarescere, quanto cisdem tu amplius reluctaris, as his conclusive
words are.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Princeps, Video, inquit, and cas inter totius orbis jura, in casu quo jam
sudasti praefulgere, considero in Legibus suis minime delectatos, etc.


THis Chapter is purely transitional, and framed, by the liberty of Dialogue,
to accommodate the continuity of the discourse; and to introduce the
Chancellor, not so much imperiously commanding (for that had not well become
him though the Nonages of Princes level them also to their Tutour's temporary
and disciplinary Sovereignty) as sweetly following the Prince with such tuition
as might occasion his Questions, and such solidity as by answer might resolve
them. Now, as in Comparisons there cannot be a total and complete
correspondence, but in some of the four feet they move upon, they are defective
and untunable; so in Discourses Dialogique, there is not a direct and strict
verity of History and Fact in every part of the questionary and to be resolved
part, because that (like Chancery-Bills) being formed to discover, is composed
of such generals, as in the answer to them, will comprehend the matter aimed
at to be resolved. For, as Rivers by circumambiency and circularity of current
and channel bring themselves to their Center, and the Rider on them to his
Port; so do Questions vagely, if with strength of art proposed, promise proper
resolution to what is most material and of consequence in them. And hereupon,
though I am apt to believe the Prince might answer in the love of his heart and
satisfaction of his judgment this personation here, in those words; Video, and
cas inter totius Orbis Iura in casu quo tu sudasti praefulgere;] yet do I,
under favor of our Text-Master, much doubt his privity to the next clause,
Considero tamen Progenitorum meorum, etc.] because (as I shall in the next
Chapter make appear) I know not whom of the Kings of England he could intend
here; for none of them do I ever remember, so little concerned in their own
stability as to part with the Municipe Common Law, the firmest Bond of
Sovereignty and Subjection next Religion, according to which it is framed, and
which, in all the severity of it, it affirms; nor is it (were there any truth
in the story of such mistake) usual for, or commendable in Princes, to mention
their Predecessors with dishonor, as truly this is, not to be delighted in
their own, but enamoured with foreign Laws. This, I say, being the Subject of
this Chapter, and so only the Prince's, as by it he is personated in the order
of the Dialogue, courts me to no long stay on the consideration of it, but
serves me for a Pass to the following Chapter, in the Notes on which the fuller
display of these matters will appear.

Satagentes proiude Leges Civiles ad Angliae Regimen inducere, and Patrias
Leges repudiare fuisse conatos.

Master Seldom on these words confesses, He understands not the Prince, and his
reason is, because the Chancellor here, speaking in the person of the Prince,
tells of some of his Progenitors, who, admiring the Civil Laws, endeavored
extrusion of the Laws of the Land, commonly used, and always approved best
for this Nation: and what Kings (says he) of England ever desired the Laws of
Rome? As intimating, that no president can be brought for this averment. But,
with leave of that learned Gentleman, I think, if due consideration be had to
the form of speech, 'twill not be strange, that he should put a question at
large to receive an answer in point: For the Chancellor, being desirous to
take occasion to speak of both Laws, and of the conveniences and
inconveniences of those to good Government and Order, and coveting a just
provocation to bring them in view with reproach, who endeavored to remove the
ancient bounds, and to take off the dishonor from Kings, the faults of whose
Ministers are accounted to them, most an end to their disadvantage, and
sometimes to the endangering of their Governments, brings the Prince in, laying
a heavy charge against those he complains of, that so, in the answer the truth
may be the more transparent. And therefore the words are not to be taken de
facto, as if any Kings had so done; but de more Prudentis, who, desiring to
make way for this design, does it by assertions, which are not only
postulative of, but important to be answered. For suggestions, that seem in
their first appearance wild and eccentrique, in their just examen cause
notable defenses and discoveries of matchless advantage, it being in
resolutions depending upon Question, as in things that men seek for and would
find, they must seek as well where they are not as where they are; so the
depth of wisdom is often arrived to, when questions are made not seemingly
conducing to it: and we often find what we most expect, from that design or
essay that we least confide in.

As for any that endeavored to undermine the good Laws of England by Foreign
and Imperial Laws, they were not of the Race of Kings; (for they are as much
honored, secured, and dignified by the Laws of England, as by any other Law:
and Government is as much carried on, in the point of Justice, under the
English Laws as any, insomuch that King James, who was born and bred under the
distribution of the Civil Law, and was of great years, experience, and learning
in the Laws of Nations, says, as heretofore I have quoted him, Speech at
Whitehall, Anno 1607. p. 512. Of his Works.
Notwithstanding that he thinks he is able to prove it, that the grounds of the
Common Law of England are the best of any Law in the World either Civil or
Municipal, and the fittest for this people, thus He; Kings and Princes of
wisdom and moderation, preferring old and approved Laws and Customs beyond new
conclusions and models.) But those that were for novity, and either appeared
vain or vile persons, such as had new projects to rule toward, or thought
Laws but like Rattles, of no solid import to the honor of a Nation, Non tam
comites Regni, quam hosts Publici, De Nugis Cur. l. 8. c. 21.
as Sarisburiensis terms some evil Counselors in his time; such were
Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere Deputy of Ireland, Michael de la
Pool Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian Chief Justice, who, in the Parliament 11
R. 2. were by the King and Lords in Parliament protested against, for
endeavoring such a subversion of the Laws as this the Chancellor treats of;
see the judgment thereon in Mr. Seldom on Fortescue, See Sir Ed. Cooks Preface
to the 8. Report. Lib. 8. c. 22. usque ad finem. Edi^. 1595. Lugdun. Batavorum.
c. 32. p. 41. There is an Account in Roger Bacon, that King Stephen made an
Edict against the Laws of Italy, which Sarisburiensis, a man of great place
and authority both with the King and the Pope, says, Was only to indict the
Canon Law; for he mentions it as an offense to the Church, his words are these,
Alios vidi qui libros Legis deputant igni, nec scindere verentur, si in manus
eorum Iura pervenirent aut Canones; and he goes on, Tempore Regis Stephani a
Regno jussae sunt Leges Romanae, quas in Britanniam domus venerabilis Patris
Theobaldi Britanniarum Primatis asciverat; ne quis etiam libros retineret
edicto Regio prohibitum est, and Vicario nostro indictum silentium, sed Deo
faciente eo magis virtus Legis invaluit, quo eam amplius nitebatur impietas
infirmare, so He.

In Cap. 33. p. 45.
Indeed, says the learned Seldom, in Archbishop Theobald's time both the Canons
and Civil Law began to be published; and its like enough, that going from Bec
in Normandy (where he was Abbot) to Rome for his Pall, he might bring those
Laws home with him; and it should seem the then Pope took this so heavily,
that he by a Legate severely increpated him, and told him, as I have it from
William Malmsbury, Non debere illum, qui se Christi fidei subjectum meminisset,
indignari, si a ministris Christi ad satisfactionem vocatus esset, tanti reatus
conscius, quantum nostra Saecula nunquam vidissent, In Novella lib. 2. p. 104.
Edit, London.
and he adds, that he seems in a kind ungrateful in thus doing, Ex debito
etiam oportere ut Ecclesiae faveret, cujus sinu exceptus non manu militum in
Regnum promotus fuisset. But Stephen, for all their bigg words, despised the
Canons, and commanded none of the Clergy to use them, or go to Rome to appeal,
Quia si quis contra voluntatem suam and Regni dignitatem ab Anglia quoquam
iret, difficilis ei fortasse reditus esset, they were the words of Alberic de
Ver. the Kings Lawyer or Justice, Page 104.
as I find them before quoted.

Horum revera consilium vehementer admiror.] And well he may, for the Laws of
England make England not a popular State, but an August Monarchy; not dependant
on Pope, or People, but on God: not elective, but successive, and by constant
recognition settled and declared it so; not subject to absorptions, as the
salique Law of France, which cuts off daughters and their issue, but as
rightfully successive in the line of descent, whether Male or Female, married
or single, of an other Nation or our own; right to the Crown takes away all
imperfections: no King is an alien, a minor, an idiot; he that is such is every
way accomplished, worthy our duty and prayers. That adage had significancy,
Quicquid coronatum videris, etiamsi bos sit, adorato; so that all things
considered, and the Common and Statute Law being so subsidiary to the Crown,
and subsisting it upon such a basis, as nothing but Treason, Treachery,
Perjury, and National defection can endanger or subvert, I clearly am of the
mind, that the Counsel, that shall disparage the Laws that yield such aid
to the being, subsistence and glory of Regality, should be attained; For it is
against reason that such a Zimri should have peace who thus endeavors to abuse
his Master, by dishonouring his Masters Mistress, the Law.

But in all times some sycophants have bepestred the ears of greatness, and
susurrated pernicious Principles into it, which has, by Gods just vengeance,
been the ruin of the givers of such ill advice; of this number were Empson and
Dudley, who, contrary to the ancient way of trying men per legem terrae, upon a
bare information, without Trial by twelve men, obtained an Act of Parliament
of 11 H. 7. c. 3. to be empowered to determine all offenses, against the
Statutes made, and not repealed: This unjust and injurious act (they are Sir
Edward Cooks words, not mine) by the forged, 2 Instit. p. 51.
feigned, and crafty informations of them, brought great damage and wrongful
vexation; and the ill success hereof, and the fearful ends of those two
oppressors should deterr others from committing the like, and should admonish
Parliaments, that in stead of this ordinary and precious trial Per legem
terrae, they bring not in absolute and partial trialls by discretion, so says
verbatim Sir Edward Cook. For it is fit that those that attempt to subvert and
enervate the Kings Laws, Cooks 2 Instit. p. 51. Regist. p. 64.
should, according to the old writ, Ad capiendum impugnatores Iuris Regis, be
carried ad Goalam de Newgate, which is lex terrae, by process of Law, in this
case, to take a man without answer or summons, and the reason is, Merito
beneficium legis amittit qui legem ipsam subvertere int^ndit; and I wish all
that will not take warning by their miscarriage may fare as they did: For, as
the Laws have hitherto seen their desire upon their enemies, and by their
judgment sent them to their Execution, Sir Ed. Cook 2 Instit. p. 53.
so, I hope, for hereafter they shall: and so the Prince ends this three and
thirtieth Chapter.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Cancellarius. Non admiraris Princeps si causam hujus conaminis mente solicita
pertractares, etc. Audisti namque superius, quomodo inter leges civiles
praecipuae sententia est maxima illa quae sic canit, quod principi placuit
legis habe^ vigorem, etc.


THis Chapter opens the cause why the Prince expected to be answered by him,
according to his scruple pre-recited; And for what concerns the rule of the
Civil Law, Quod Principi placuit, etc. I shall referr the Reader to the Notes
on the ninth Chapter, The Authors desire in this Book.
where, as in every other part of this Book I have endeavored (by Gods grace
conducting me) to demean my self as a sober Author, a sincere Subject, an
humble Christian, and an honest English Man ought to do, of that then I have
nothing to add, but to pray in David's words, Give thy Judgments, O Lord, unto
the King, and thy righteousness unto the Kings son: And then, when the King by
this Royal Donation is redeemed from error in judgment, there will be no
terror in the rule, Quod principi placiuit legis habet vigorem; For, then he
will not judge upon his own advice, but with advice of Counselors, and in the
capacity of a Regal Encathedration, attended with sage and prudent men of all
ranks and ages, which makes it Placitum non merae voluntatis and arbitrii, sed
rationis, consilii, justitiae, as all the Doctors agree this clause of their
Law to import; and thus sensing it, as it on the one hand waves the confusion
of popular suffrages, the candidates to which do cringe and crouch to their
voters; In usu fuit reipublicae officia consensu and suffragio populi
dispensare, and hoc elevatione manuum; unde a Graecis (...) vocantur qui in
rescriptis imperatoris Theodosii and Valentini Creatores appellantur cum vulgo
creditores, Cujacius apud Petreium in notis ad Philonis librum de officio
Iudicis.
and being their creatures are apt to tempt them to partiality, to gratify
their importunate cravings, which was the inconvenience in the popular
Government of Rome,) so does it also relate to the absolute and unlimited wills
of Princes, over whom, though Authoritatively and with Magistery none have
power within their Dominions, but only God, whose their Life, Breath, Thrones,
Power, and Souls are, and who with them can do what he please; yet in these
the voice of wisdom advocating, the love of benevolence conjuring, and the
reason of policy advising, all transactions by advice and serious consideration
(separate and abstract from passion, and the bewitching transports of it) do
but declare them great to good purposes, and not advantage Princes beyond
what is virtuous and safe for them to assume, and for their Subjects to submit
to. For so Leges namque Anglorum licet non scriptas leges appellari non videtur
absurdum, cum hoc ipsum lex sit quod principi placet and le gis habet vigorem,
eas scilicet quas super dubiis in consilio definiendis Procerum quidem
consilio, and principis accedente authoritate constat esse promulgatas.
Glanvil. in Prolog. ant. Tractat. de leg. and Consuetud. Angl.
Glanvill, who wrote in Henry the second's time, (a happy Reign under a most
pious Prince, under whom Justice so flourished, that no man durst be unjust, or
contumacious against the Laws;) I say, this King, who ruled so potently,
because he seconded his power with virtue, did so demean himself under the
liberty of this Maxim of grandeur, that ( a) Glanvill, one of his Judges,
allows this, Quod principi placuit, etc. not to be contrary to the Common Law
of England, when associated with the Council of his wise men, His Peers and
Commons in Parliament. For, as in the sense of the Kings giving life to the
preparations and advices of both the Houses, it is said, a Parliament can do
everything, it being the ultimum sapientiae, 4 Instit. c. 1. p. 3.
of which no dishonorable or defectuous thing ought to be imagined; so in the
sense of the two Houses counselling the King to pass a Law, and he accordingly
assenting, Quod Principi placuit may become an English Law, without any
entrenchment on lenity, or the Subjects liberty, both which are then only
endangered, when they are beleagured with Power and Passion, in the High-noon
of which, reason is as at Midnight dark and inorient. So long then as God
persuades the Prince to moderation, Qua quidem de causa Moses Roges istos ac
principes quasi corporales quosdam Deos su^ nomine constituit qui in Rep.
regenda and moderanda vicariam ei operam praestant. Hopperus, lib. de Instit.
Principum.

Verum ac proprium boni principis munus est dei imaginem and similitudinem ut
geren^, suorum commoderum oblitus, in unius Reipublicae verum ac solidum bonum
cedat. Hopper. loco eodem.


and keeps his eyes intent on his dependence on him, whose vicarage his mortal
divinity is, the greatness of his power will not provoke him to extend it
beyond the line of prudence and piety; but so to use the prerogative and
participation with supernity that he has, that it may appear he only
resolves it into the glory of his institutor, and end of his institution; which
is not only the voice of Scripture in the assertion of wisdom. By me Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Judgment: but also of those Heathen Oracles, Rex]
Deorum omnium commune elogium, sic Apollo a Theocrito. Noptunus ab Homero,
Priapus ab Orpheo, demum dii omnes ab omnibus Poetis. Cerda in lib. 10. Aeneid.
p. 493.
which by calling Apollo, Neptune, Priapus, Jupiter, Kings, taught King to act
according to the nature of God, Suaviter and fortiter; Paternly, with bowels
of good will to their Weal, and severely to the preservation of Authority in
all the just and useful appendencies to it. And since the power of legislation
is eminently in the Prince, Lib. 2. de Jur. Belli and pacis, p. ^31.
and every humane Law depends so upon the will of Man, that it not only is
there in origin, but in duratione, as Grotius his words are, there is good
reason to pray for Princes direction in well doing, that they may both further
it by their Laws and in their lives; which if they do desire to do, this Quod
Principi placuit legis habet vigorem will not be too great a prerogative for
them. For, though they will easily contemn such shadows of God, who reverence
not that supreme and adorable Majesty, in comparison of whom all the glory of
men and Angels is but obscurity: Yet has he giwen such characters of divine
Authority and sacred power upon Kings, as none may without sin seek to blot
them out; nor shall their black veiles be able to hide the shining of my face,
while God gives me a heart frequently and humbly to converse with him, from
whom alone are all the traditions of true Glory and Majesty; Eicon Basilic. c.
15.
so says that glorious Monarch, our Martyred King Charles.

Qualiter non sanciunt Leges Angliae, dum nedum regaliter, sed and politice Rex
ejusdem dominatur, and c.

Of this see the Comment on the ninth Chapter, where the Text being the same
with what it here is, the discourse thereon is proper to be recurr'd to; only
let me hint an instance of the moderation and bounty of one of our Kings, who
commanded very sovereignly, yet was himself commanded to part with his own
advantage for their good. It Is of Edward Grandchilde of Edgar, who remitted the
Danegeld to the people, which he looked upon as the Devils heap, being exacted
from the poor Subject by violence, Et de tam fera Exactione, ne Iota unum
voluit retinere, Ingulphus Edit. Savell. p. 510. Voluminis.
and therefore commanded the return of it to the owners, protesting, Not one
farthing of it so unjustly obtained should ever bide with him; which I
introduce, not as the only instance of such Monarchique bounty and benevolence
(for later examples there are as great as it, 12 Car. 2. Note this O England
and be thankful.
The Act of oblivion or free and general pardon, etc. not being a lesser but a
far greater indulgence, thanks be to God for giving his Majesty a heart to do
it, and thanks be to his Majesty for being so free too, and so constant in that
magnificent Action, which has, to use the Scripture phrase though in another
sense, Isa. 16.1.
prepared salvation for Walls and Bulwarks of safety in the loyalty of his
people) I say, I quote not that now, as the only instance of Regal Heroicism;
but to mind men, that are strait-laced, and think Monarchy not so free a
Government as the Republican way is, that Greatness of mind directs Princes to
bound themselves where no bound is besides that of their own fixation; and
that, be the Regal power what in the Ocean and Altitude of it, it can in a
mortal man and managery be, yet even this great power, when it is dispensed
with an eye to God the Judge, (to whom Princes as well as others are, and shall
be accountable, and in conscience to justice which Princes are to propagate and
carry on) cannot be but beneficial to pious and peaceable Subjects; and that
the freest Regiments men fancy to live under, will without this restraint
either find occasions by arrogations of advantage to it self, or take occasion
of derogation from others, to exercise its power vexatiously. Enough then of
this part of the Chapter, I proceed.

Quod Reges quidem Angliae aegre ferentes]
Who these were which the Chancellor predicates this of, I do not well know;
for though King John, Henry the Third, Edward the Second, Richard the Third,
and Henry the Fourth may be as probable to be intended as any, in regard that
the Chancellor might think, that the rigor of some of their proceedings,
transcending the moderate tenor of the Common Laws, tended unto somewhat
incongruous with politic Dominion, and came too near to that which he here
calls, Libere dominari in subditos, ut faciunt Reges regaliter tantum
principantes.] Yet that any of them did declare and produce so much displeasure
against the Native Laws, (because they were such a Sanctuary to liberty and
such a Mall to the contrary, as libere dominari in our Text's sense would be,
and showed so great desire of other Laws by which they might be the more
lawless) as might give rise to this assertion of our Text, is to me a Riddle.
^confesse the confession of my learned Antecessor on this service to Fortescue,
Mr. Seldom, Notes on Chap. 33. p. 41.
who says, here I understand him not, from him I learn that there was a
protestation against foreign Laws, and that the King in Parliament declared,
and that with a plenary concurrence, 11 R. 2.
That the Realm of England, unques ne serra rule ne govern par la Ley Civil,
which shows, that they ever accounted the patrial Laws most fit for England;
and satisfies me, that there was no signal endeavor in our Princes to alter
the frame of our Laws, but that this, which the Chancellor here insinuates,
has an eye more to some particular actions that signified, in the externity of
them, some such tendency, rather then any studied and designed scope to such an
impossible Atchievment. And therefore that H. 7. thought libere dominari (in
our Text's sense) an unprincely English Principle, Dom. Baconus Cancel. in H, 7.
is plain from this, that though he came in by battle, and recovered his Crown
by a hot Military dispute: yet, pro animi sui magnitudine aleam tim jecit, he
waved all Titles of Arms, and betook himself to his native right, and built up
his regality by those durable and firm foundations of Law and inheritance,
which he would so use, as a King by just claim and right of descent ought to
do. And though he discarded not other pretenses as second to this, E. Bacons
Hist. H. 7.
but kept them to obviate private enmity and public contradiction; yet his
great trust, next to God, was in the Law, which devolving the Crown on him,
with it brought all perquisites of it, and laid all the obligations ( I write
the word with reverence) on him, to rule More Majorum, that is, by the Patriall
Laws: and how the issuant successive Monarchs from him have strenuously
propagated this president all men know, that know any thing, and all men must
confess, that will own the truth. For though mistakes and prejudices have
given being to some seemingly-unpleasing actions, yet in truth there has been
as great alienation in the minds of our Monarchs, from introducing Persicam
servitutem, (as Tully calls that Government which is Non modo Romano homini sed
nec Persae cuiquam tolerabile, In notis ad lib. 2. Senec. de Beneficiis. p. 29.
as Lipsius quotes him) as the Parliaments and People of it has had opposition
and regret in their natures against it; and that not only because the Laws
Municipe are the secrecy of their own establishment as well as of their Peoples
freedom, but also because to maintain those Laws they were sworn at their
Coronation. Postremo cum juramento addidit, quod noluit sacramentum violare ad
quod astrictus fuerat in Coronatione sua, concedendo literas pacis, and
indulgentia tam notorie delinquentibus, in sus persona contemptum and totius
regni perturbationem and Majestatis Regiae lasi^nem. Walsingham in E. 2. p. 9^.
Which truth Edward the second made use of, in Answer to the Lords and others
in Arms against him, under pretext of their Liberty, assuring them, that he
would never neglect the Majesty and piety of a King, so far as to depart from
his Coronation Oath; and that since they had taken Arms in defiance of him and
the Laws, they should be tried by God and their Country, whom they had
disturbed thereby, and not be acquitted by his favor, to whom their hostility
was as much as in them lay a Dethronement, or at least without mercy the
prologue to it. And therefore as I in this, stick at the Quidam Regum,] etc.
not knowing who the Chancellor intends; so do I at the act here charged on
them, Moliti sunt ipsi progenitores tui hoc jugum politicum abjicere, ut
consimiliter and ipsi in subjectum populum regaliter tantum dominarint; sed
potius debacchari queant, etc.] This certainly is a very great charge, yet it is
euphemiz'd by the generality of the expression, and the namelessness of the
persons it refers to. Yet perhaps our Chancellor to the other before
mentioned, whom he conceived to rule besides the Laws, and were thereby
censurable, Moliri jugum politicum abjicere] he might mean Edward the third who
though (by the Stat. 14 Regni, Poulton, p. 140.
it was ordained, That the Realm of England and the People thereof, shall not
be subject to the King, or Kingdom of France; the reason of which Act was,
because the Kings of England then being Kings of France also, the subjects of
England might be subject to the King and Kingdom of France, and so grow into a
Government like that of France, which is in the Texts words, In subjectum
populum regaliter tantum dominari.] To prevent which, the Peers and Commons in
Parliament requested the King to declare, That the Kingdom of England never
was, nor ought to be in subjection, nor in the obeisance of the Kings of France
which for the time have been, nor of the Realm of France: and a little after,
Our said Realm of England, nor the people of the same, of what estate or
condition they be, shall not in any time to come be put in subjection nor
obeisance of us, nor of our Heirs nor Successors, as Kings of France, as before
is said; nor be subject nor obedient, but shall be free of all manner of
subjection and obeisance aforesaid, as they were wont to be in the time of our
Progenitors, Kings of England; so declares that Statute: notwithstanding which
Statute his fingers (are thought by some) to (...) after something in the
French Government here. ^ E. 3. c. 15.
For though in the six and thirtieth of his Reign he passed an Act at the
instance of his Parliament, that Pleas and Records of Law, which till that time
were in French, should henceforward be pleaded in the English tongue, Vt
singuli arts suas exercerent, and ut nulli pannis praetiosis aut pellura
uterentur, nisi qui possint expendere per annum centum libras; and ut plebei
operarii and agricultores non vescerentur cibis delicatis aut potibus sed haec
omnia nullum effectum capiebant. Walsingham in E. 3. p. 173. Edit. Land.
and enrolled in Latin; yet he did at that time, as Walsingham writes (though
I confess no such printed Act is in Anno 36.) endeavor reducement of the
Commons A la mode de France; No man was to wear rich clothing but he that could
spend 100. l. a year; and the husbandmen and day laborers should not eat nor
drink daintily: which though it was a fruitless constitution, it being free in
England for men to wear, eat, drink, and live in any reasonable proportion, to
Gods mercy, in the blessing of their industry, and the discretion men show in
the managing of it) yet it was suspected to be some little experiment toward a
more plain change: but whether this were any inducement to the Chancellor thus
to write or not, I cannot say, only somewhat historically true there was,
which occasioned this averment of the Chancellours, who by this Moliti sunt
Pr^genitores tui hoc jugum politicum abjicere, and ipsi in subjectum populum
regaliter tantum dominari, sed potius debacchari queant] did not intend to
blemish the Predecessors of his Prince, for that ought not to be suffered, as
King James of happy Memory, the once Learned deceased King of this Land,
counsels not to permit, Suffer not both your Princes (says he) and your
Parents to be dishonored by any, Basil con Doron lib. 2. p. 158, and 168,
Works in fol.
especially since the example also touches your self, in leaving thereby to
your Successors the measure of that which they shall meet out again to you in
your like behalf, thus that King. No such intent, I say, had our Text-Master,
but his aim being to press on the Prince the love of the Laws, he produces all
those instances of discouragement to the contrary, from consideration of the
naufrage Princes have been incommodated by, who have least adhered to the
National Laws, Nullius consilium, nullius consortium, nulliusve solatium curare
videbatur nisi Petri solius, qui pecuniam potius quam aequitatem plus respexit,
munera quam causarum qualitates, Walsingham p. 70. in Anno 1310.
and lain in their affections loosest from them, as did Edward the Second, whom
Peirs Gaveston so misled, that, though he loved gain better then Justice, and
his own profit beyond the common profit of the Realm; yet was so favored by
the King beyond measure, that he led him into very praeterlegal courses; so did
Edington, Treasurer to E. 3. who to advantage himself did not care to embase
the Coin, Hypodeigm. Neustriae, p. 122.
whereby every thing growing dear caused much murmr in the Nation; for that
it not only burdened the Subject, but dishonored the Crown, in that which is
one of the Glories of it, the Coin.

And therefore our Chancellor, Cent. 2. Chil. 2. Adag. 47.
writing thus to the Prince, does not (...), write beside his Text, as those
Musicians do err in their art that do rave extra Cantionem, but he keeps in
these notes of good counsel close to the duty of a grave Counselor and a
good subject, who, intent on his duty, proposes to his Prince such studies and
ways of politic Government, as may make his Government paternal in his
lenity, and loyal in his Subjects obedience; for well he knew, besides the
provocation of God and the hazard of the Prince's peace, the contrary thereto
does but betray seduction and transport, which is the greatest abatement to the
glory of a Monarch of any thing possible to diminish him: and when he has done
all he can to make good his first departure and eccentricity, his conclusion
toward serenity will be retractation, which had Edward the First foreseen, he
would not have broken the Act of 25 of his Reign, by laying unusual Taxes
without consent of Parliament on his Subjects, Confirmationes Chartarum. 8
Instit. p. 532.
which occasioned their murmr and disquiet, produced his passing the Act De
Tallagio non concedendo, Anno 34 Reg. which, though it were acceptable to the
Subject, yet did not advance him so high in their opinion, as forbearance to
burden them, of which they could be easied no other way then by such an Act,
would have procured him: (...), Ad. 7. Chil. 2. Cen. 2.
which the Chancellor, (no Aristodemus who had been seven years at Athens and
yet was altogether an infant in strength) no such fruitless Student or
Traveller but a man of great sageness and conscience, makes forth to the Prince
by the just measure of Government, according to the Law of nature and the
Comments of national practice and just constitution upon it, in a discourse
which he purposely penned and termed, which though I have never seen, nor could
I hear of any that ever saw it, yet was in being long after his time: and for
which, as this, and other his Works, The praise of Fortescue.

Townlaei Orat in memoriam Cambden. 1624. Imp. Oxoniae.

Cui laus hac tribuenda est quod primum in ista materia glaciem fregerit,
primusque docuerit multas esse exiguas vias in arteriarum extremitatibus, per
quas sanguis quem a cord accipiunt, in ramulos venarum ingreditur, Deschartes
in Method. Dissert. p. 43. D^ D. Harvaeo.


men do honor Fortescue in the words almost that the Oxford Orator did
learned Cambden, Velata lugent Iurium capita, ille velum detrahit, occulta
stupent naturae mysteria, ille aperit, dignus unice qui coelo a consiliis
adoptetur, and sacer fiet Iurisprudentia arbiter; yea, as the most ingenuous
Deschartes does our matchless Dr. Harvey, As (the first He that gave rise to
the circulation of politic blood in the body of the English Government; none
(I think without partiality) ever before him giving us so full and succinct an
Historical and rational account of the English Laws and Government, as he did,
who, as he was a great Statesman and Lawyer, whose many years, generous
education and experience, had instructed him in what was knowable to a
matchless accomplishment, so was he a very just and conscientious Christian and
English man, Interveniente enim populi voluntate and assensu crescit robur and
patentiae regum and major est ipsorum authoritas and faliciores progressus,
Cominaeus Com. lib. 55. de Gest. Ludov. 11. p. 179.
whose influence on his Prince spent it self in nothing more then in confirming
him in the reason and love of the Laws; For, as wisdom and experience enables
to give good counsel, which does not only make Monarchs prayed for, and praised
while they adhere to them, but conjure Subjects to obey, in and for the Lord,
their Governors so set over and so ruling amidst them, This is the effect of
that part of the Chapter which treats of those things, Politice regere and
Regaliter dominari, as they are pourtrayed out in the Governments of the Kings
of England and France: but because concerning this I have written in the Notes
upon the fourteenth Chapter, I conclude here, yet still following the
Chancellor, who to make the Government of England, under its gentle and
paternal Monarchy, appear glorious, compares it with the Government of France,
which he accounts more despotique, and so less indulgent, as in the following
Chapter is set forth.

CHAP. XXXV.
Reminiscere (Princeps divine) qualiter villas and oppida Regni Franciae frugum
opulentissima, dum ibidem peregrinaris, conspexisti.


THis Chapter treates of the condition of the French Subjects under the high
and mighty Government of the French King, who governing his people not
according to the ancient constitution of France, by a general Assembly of the
three Estates, the Clergy, Nobles, and People, by whose sanction every one was
bound, not the King excepted: (I say, after Albergatus no mean Author) this
way of Government being after a long continuance changed, Quicquid in eo
convent^ decernebatur legis habebat vigorem, neque modo populos obligabat sed
ipsum regem. Sed postquam regum virtus defecit, and cuique sua libido
imporavit, haec consuetudo congregandorum statuum abolitae est, ut paulatim hoc
jugum sum^^veretur. Tempore autem Ludovici undecimi perduellionis reus
habebatur, quisquis de eo consilio restituendo verbum fecisset; solebatque Rex
ille usurpare, se ex Ephebis jam excessisse, negue tutoris e^ere, Albergatus
discurs. Politic. p. 167.
in Lewis the eleventh's time it was made capital (not only to endeavor, but
even to word the restitution thereof.) France and the People thereof become
ruled by Armies and Counsels of power, in which only Royal will and pleasure
did preside; This being the condition of France in the infelicity of her
Subjects crushed and crumbled into nothing by the hard hand of power unallayed,
and unveluetly lined by the lenity of Politic Government mixed with Regal. The
Chancellor (who was ever bred up under our paternal and divine mixture, which
he treats of in many Chapters, as the Government which approximates that of
God, Cominaeus Com. lib. 10 de gestis Ludov. 11.
and of Paradise, if man had continued in innocence) minds the Prince of what
fruit he ought to collect from travel, and how great advantages to
intellectual accomplishment his pilgrimage in France gave him; since, while he
was at leisure to observe (being discharged from the encumbrances of business,
and pomp of life) he might, and ought to lay the foundation of after wisdom in
the observation of present occurrences, which, because those of the Government
and People of France (the place of his unpleasing present abode. (For, who can
leave England, the happiest of Islands and Nations if it had one public
spirited man in it, as the wise Abbot of Escalia adieuing it, said, without
grief or regret) were most contiguous to him? he humbly addresses to him the
recollection of himselfs concerning those discoveries of his Travel, which may
facilitate to him the truth and importance of his Chancellours arguments, in
behalf of Englands constitution and Laws, here in compare with them. Now,
though I well know comparisons in Governments as well as in persons, is no
further discreetly practicable, then is civil, seasonable, and necessary,
which restraints and modifications I am resolved shall bound me; Contzen
Politic. lib. 1. c. 21. p. 48.
yet must I crave leave to do right to mine own Native Country, and her most
admired Government, Laws and Monarchs, which according to all Authors and
Confessions is the most free and fatherly, and to disclaim all admiration, or
(as to my private affection and sphere) admission of any thing which is
enervative of it, or in any degree tends to the eclipse of the glorious
Monarchy herein by God fixed, which being Throned in righteousness, is, I hope,
established in the blessed posture it is in, for this World's Eternity, as I
may so say, or in plainer English, ever to last in the line of that Majestic
Family, that now (blessed be God) Rightfully and Royally enjoyes it, till
Shiloh comes the second and last time to Judgment. This then premised, as that
tender of affection which kindled in me from my Text-Masters spark and flame in
this Chapter, was not to be stifled but publicly owned as a signature of my
loyalty, I proceed to follow him in his method, taking the augmentation of
England's luster from that comparison of the State of France, which our
Chancellor here represents.

Regni Franciae frugum opulentissima] This is that part of Gaul which is
thought denominated from Francus, Cluverius Antiq. lib. 3. c. 20.
Son or Nephew to Hector, who, after the destruction of Troy, about the year
420. is storied to be Chieftain to the Franconians, a German-people, who, being
stirred up by the narrowness of their own border and the desire of a more
convenient abode, moved armedly into Gaul, and being prosperous, sat down in
that part which is between the River Scaeld and Seen, and thence was called
France or Gallia Comata, Gallia Comata quae nunc Francia dicitur, Budaeus in
Pandect. p. 86. Edit Vascos.
from (I suppose) its fertility and abundant succulency of soil. I or though I
know Pliny tells us all Gaul was called Comata Gallia, omnis Gallia uno nomine
appellata, lib. 4. c. 14.
Comata, yet this particular noble Island of it was specially so called,
because the Eden and Flower of all the Land: and this the Text complies with,
in that it terms it frugum opulentissima] Two words very comprehensive and
purposely phrasive of the latitude of abundance. Generale nomen est, non modo
ad frumentae, leguminaque; sed etiam ad omnes fructus terra quos in alimoniam
vertimus, Varro, lib. De Ling. Lat.
For Fruges] is a word that contains every esculent and pabulary thing; Varro
derives frumentu^ a fruendo, because by food men enjoy themselves in a
plenitude of health and strength, Festus, Servius, and Donatus.
others determine it, a frumine eminenti sub mento gutturis seu gurgulionis
part, qua cibus in alvum mittitur, a ferendo cibum appellari; whence soever,
sure I am it is used in Authors to denote plenty and abundance. 2 Epistol. 1. 2
Georg. 2 De Nature. Deorum.
Opulentissima here] so Locuples frugibus annus in Horace, Pareus frugum
tellus, gravidae, letae, maturae fruges in Virgil, Foeta frugibus terra,
Cererem fruges appellamus, unum autem Liberum in Tully; all which applied to
the Text's sense, sets forth France as a noble Country: and indeed, such it to
be, I my self have as well in a good part seen, as more fully from the best
Authors read. Pomponius Mela, though he makes it no India, that it produces
Pismires as bigg as little Dogs, Tam pinguis alicubi and tam ferasis soli, ut
in ea, mella frontibus desluant; lanas sylvae ferant, etc. lib. 3. De situ
Orbis. c. 7.
Honey running down in streams, Woods full of Wool, Reeds laden with Sugar, and
Vines with clusters of Grapes incredible; yet he terms it, Lib. 3. c. 2.
Terra frumenti praecipui and pabuli ferax: which is the reason that though
France be but a part of Gaul, Tota illa pars Europae praelustris ac omnium pene
nobilissima Gallia, in idem Franciae nomen transivit. Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 20.
yet Tota illa pars Europae, etc. That most noble part of Europe, heretofore
Gaul, is now called by the name of a little spot in it, France, so says
Cluverius. And therefore those commendations that the Natives give it, are not
besides the truth altogether. Bu^^^, a most grave and learned French man,
writes of it elegantly; and when he has asserted it of a clement Air,
productive of things good and plentiful in their kind, Lib. 4, De Ass p.
169. Edit. Vascos.

Vt ex filiis meis Primogenitus esse^ Deus post me, and natu secundus Gallias
imperaret. Lansius in Consult. Europae, p. 169. Geography p. 175. in fol.


concludes thus, In ea summum Liberi Patris cum Cerere certamen, ut vini
nobilitates non possis sine Nomenclatoris opera numerare. Which made Maximilian
the Emperor wickedly, and with profaneness too great for a Christian, say,
That if Nature could bring about his design to be a God, he would be that God;
and then by his Will, he would pass his Divinity to his eldest Son, and his
second Son he would make King of France, as supposing it the second preferment
to that of his fancyed Godhead. Add to this what our most accomplished
Historian, and late deceased Countryman, Dr. Heylin reports in these words,
The Soil is extraordinarily fruitful, and has three L^adstones to draw riches
out of other Countries, Corn, Wine, Salt; for which there is yearly brought
into France 2000000. l. Sterling, and the Country so full of pleasant Fruits
and Vines, Pymand. Mercurii, lib. 5. c. 11. Dialog. 5. p. 319.
that never eye beheld a fairer object, so He. I say, add this to all the rest,
and to that of Strabo which Rosellius quotes, and there was good reason to say,
France is a Country Frugum opulentissima.]

Regis terrae illius hominibus ad arma, and eorum equis it a onusta, ut vix in
eorum aliquibus quam-magnis Oppidis tu hospitari valebas.

This clause shows France had need to be such as it is described, because it
has such Armies in pay in, and moving through it; for as St. Clowis the chief
founder of that Government is storied by the Histories of France to atchieve
his Greatness, the pedestal to this, Grimston Hist. France, p. 20.
by such Artifices and practices of unchristian Policy, as I forbear to name;
so have many after Governors there carried on their Grandeurs by fierceness
and might of fury. So that not any lenitive dare be offered to soften the
pleasure of the French King, but his Will must be the Law, which Albergatus
confirms me in, who writes after the politic opinion, Relatione de Regno
Gallico, p. 165.
Ab ejus arbitrio solo omnis and belli and pasis deliberatio, etc. Tanquam
verus Monarcha solus omnium Dominus, etc. which uncontrouledness of power,
because he finds men at Arms properest to advance and establish, to these does
he give the civil spoil of the Land, that is, power to propagate his pleasure
be it what it will, and opportunity under the pretext of that to do what they
will with the poor Peasant, and drudging Countryman, who by these Homines ad
Arma are said to be burdened. Onusta] not somewhat charged, as by pilfering
and straggling numbers of loose people any place through which they pass, will
be; but Onusta] a word of number, weight, and measure, having all the
dimensions of grievance, as full of burden, not only as we proverbially say,
As an Egg is full of meat; but as a Ship is when stowed to its full lading, 3
Offic. 66.
so Onusta frumento Navis in Tully, when a Mariner knowing, Corn to bear a
great price at the Port he intends for, crowds as much as his Bulk will bear;
Livy 3. ab Vrbe.
Onustus praeda, when a Soldier has so much spoil that he even breaks his back
with the portage of it; Tacitus lib. 2.
Tergum vulneribus onistum, the description of a soldier whose breast was not
only pierced standing, but his back all wounds when flying; Onustus cib^ and
vin^, Cic. 1. Divinat.
when a man's stomach and head is so overcharged, that he is fit for nothing but
a basin and a bed: these are the Notions of the Onusta here, which points out
France so charged and surcharged with these Cavaliers, that there was no room
for any thing but these Homines ad Arma,] that is, Horsemen, for so our
Chancellor intends to express the King of France his strength by. For though
we read of Viri ad Arma nati in Lipsius and others; In Comment. ad. Taciti lib.
De Morib. German. p. 449.
yea, though Men at Arms in the Venetian History signified fusely All
Soldiers, Shute p. 14. Nic. Faber. in Notis ad lib. 2. Controv. Senec. 10. p.
111.
yet in our stories and laws, according to which, together with the common
Notion of them in France, our Chancellor went* Viri ad Arma are only
Horsemen, and so besides this in the Text, Walsingham in Hypodeigm. Neustriae.
p. 118, 119.
and equis ecrum,] other stories understand them; thus Thomas Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick is by Walsingham said to encounter Contra ducentos homines de Armis,
Cum multis Dominis and Baronibus and d^obus millibus fer^ hominum nominatorum
de Armis, de Communibus vero numerus ignoratur. Idem loco eodem.
and Homines Armorum a little after; so the same Author, writing How E. 3.
overthrew Philip of France, adds, With many Nobles and Barons, with two
thousand men called, Men at Arms. These, I say, being in so great measure did
not only terrify the people, but make the receipt of strangers in great Towns
as homely and scarce, as the safety of them on their travels questionable. Now
this the Chancellor remembers the Prince of, to raise in him a love to the
politic, and yet Imperial Government of England; which, though it be seconded
by force to suppress Rebellion and resist Invasion, yet is founded on general
Consent, and Parliamentary recognition. So that what Seneca writes of Augustus
is true of our Monarchs, That they well deserve the Name of Parents, who are so
tender and benign, Bonum Principem Augustum, and been illi convenisse Parentis
nomen fatemur, ob nullam aliam causam, hac gratum ac favorabilem reddidit, haec
h^dicque praestat illi fam^m qua vix vivis Principibus servit. Senec. lib. De
Clem.
that their Subjects good is more cared for by them then their own greatness;
so that if their power and their Subjects happiness (which is ever best in
their respective conjunction) could be separate, which is not possible, their
kindeness would carry them rather to wish their people happy then themselves
great: yea, so immortal a Garland is it to the Heads and Hearses of meritfull
Princes, that it will bud a fresh blossom of glory to their memories when dead
in person, though it deny any ornament or addition to living loveless ones.
Which instance, to wave foreign presidents, is evident in the Reigns of two of
our Monarchs, Edward the First, and Queen Elizabeth: the former, at the
Parliament of the seventeenth of his Reign, was besought by the Peers, Prelates
and Commons fully there in obedience to him convened, to renew the confirmation
of the great Charter and Charta de Foresta, according to what he had promised,
but he stood off a long time; at last, being pressed to perform his Regal
promise, he did it with a Salvo Iare Coronae nostrae, Quod cum audivissent
Comites, cum displicentia ad propria discesserunt Walsingham in E. 1. p. 44.
which the whole Parliament took so heavily, that they returned home
unsatisfied: And the latter, Q Elizabeth, so tempered her subjects, between awe
of, and love to her, and so dreaded any appearance of violence, other then that
of her Imperial, and necessary legal influence on her subjects, that she is
in no story charged with any Act, but what has a defense of Motherly
tenderness, as well as Majestic courage in it. Though then such like powers of
Homines ad arma be not used nor approved of in England (except upon
extraordinary occasions, when discontents and Parties, that will not be fairly
reasoned, and gravely Lawed down, must be pessundated by the terror of them;
Matthew. 17.21.
( this kind of Devil being not like the Gospel Devil, cast out by prayers
and tears, unless they are associated with force and punishment) yet in France
they are, and without them the Plebs would be but ruleless; and therefore
necessity, that has no law, calls for these homines ad arma there, and what
their being in abundance any where can occasion better then rudeness and
licentious outrage, let the Doctor Heylin, p. 180.
Author inform us, who says, the Neapolitans, Millanois and Sicilians, who
have had trial of both the Spaniards and French for their Masters, choose
rather to submit themselves to the proud and severe yoke of the Spaniard, then
to the lusts and insolence of the French, which if they were such as denied
even in Towns to Traveller, and that a Prince, Vix hospitari] that is, hardly
lodging; what churlishness, to say no worse, do they express to meaner persons,
and their own Countrymen, when they are more out of sight.

Vbi ab incolis didicisti, homines illos, licet in villa una per mensem aut
duos perhendinaverint, pro suis aut equorum suorum expensis soluisse aut
solvere velle.

This is a further instance, not of the miseries of a War; for, if an enemy
had done this, the People of France, sufferers under it, might have said in the
Psalmists words, Psalm 41 9*
If it had been an enemy that had done this we could have borne it, but it was
ye, our Countrymen, our friends and our acquaintance, and this is that which
renders it intolerably afflictive. For as much as the poor Peasant has nothing
to live upon but his labor, and a high Rent, and pays contribution to the
Kings Army, and that in so plentiful a measure, that the Revenues of the
Crown, to defray the charge of Government, is Quo anno haec prodidi, Princeps
noster tantam ferme pecuniam ex ditione Gallica percepit, Budaeus, lib. 3. de
Ass, p. 114. B.
counted as vast from that very Kingdom, Sic enim sunt Galli homines, ut prout
quidque Principi aut collibuit aut collibuisse dictitetur, id perinde jus
fasque esse credatur; omnium haeud dubie mortalium, qui quidem barbari non
sint, maxim ut Graece dicitur Pytharchiei id est principalibus edictis aequo
animo obsequentes. Idem. p. 115.
as the Romans before the Conquest of Mithrydates, and the third expedition of
Pompey had from all their Empire; yea, so absolute is the Sovereignty of their
King, and so content are they to be what he pleases, that he imposes nothing
but they submit to, and applaud the hand that puts so sore a burden on them;
which Budaeus notes as a virtue in them, so meritfull as nothing can be more:
so does Commentarius de rebus gestis Ludovic-11. lib. 10. p. 405. Paris. 1569.
Cominaeus, adding, That it is unjust and inhumane, that a Prince, having such
obsequious and open purst People should press them beyond their ability; it
being much more fair and generous to smooth them into a willingness by gentle
invitation and reason of love; quaem imperiosa agere pro sua libidine; that is,
then to screw and force by power and fear what they have, and he pleases to
command from them, thus be; which well considered, as it lays load of infamy
on those, that when there is but one Harvest and Crop in the year, from which
profit and subsistence is gained, exact unlawful and unreasonable
Contributions all the year long, and that without consideration of what the
Payers suffer, and the Receiver is by His Officers deceived of; Budaeus, lib.
3. de ass p. 119.
(of which Hybraeas the Orator told Antony; Asia has paid thee, Noble
Cheiftain, two hundred thousand talents, (...), etc. This, if thou have not
received, call thy Collectors to account, to whom we have paid it; and if thou
have had it answered thee, since tho^ can not give as two Crops, and two
returns, exact not two Tributes, each of which answers, or rather exceeds the
utmost we can render thee.) As, I say, it accuses the Imposers of much
mercilessness, so it renders the Imposed miserably poor and cowed; Hoc est enim
perendit quod Graeci (...) dicunt quasi post crastinum. Budaeus in Pandect, p.
32. Edit Vascos.
For our Text says, they do not only perhendinare, (a word Lawyers and
Historians use for stay, thence perhaps the word Enn or Inn, which is the stay
for Travelers for a night or two; so Walsingham uses perhendinare to denote a
stay, Magnates dutem apud Sanctum Albanum cum suis armatis exercitibus per
triduum perhendinantes --; In E. 2. p. 91.
so that perhendinare here is not only a chargeable, but a long stay, per
mensem aut duos menses; and a loosing one to put a further greivance, as the
Text says, they pay nothing at their departure, neither for man or horse,
which is not only the allegation of our Text, but the complaint of learned
Cominaeus a creditable Knight, Quae quidem cohortes obequitant liuc illuc
perpetuo, and non solum vivunt sumptu miserorum, sed etiam proterve and insolen
ter in eos multa faciunt; nec enim contenti sunt iis quae passim in agris
reperiunt, verum miseris etiam hominibus vim adferunt, eosque cogunt longius
abire, and aliunde adferre cibaeria delicatiora, mitto quod uxorum quoque and
filiarum pudicitiam tentant, Commentar. lib. 10 De Gestis. Ludov. 11. p. 400.
who says lamentingly, That the oppression on the poor Countryman is very
great, not only by the Taxes that is unreasonably leavyed upon them; but ab
Equestribus etiam cohortibus, etc. but from the charge the Cavalry, that lie on
them, occasion, whom they not only eat up, but abuse licenti^usly; nor are
they contented with what grows on the Farm and field, but compel them to
travel for delicater diet then at home they have: and when they are gone to get
them dainties, endeavor to abuse their wives and daughters to their lust, thus
Cominaeus; which is, what follows in our Text.

Sed quod pejus est, arctabunt incolas Villarum and Oppidorum in quae
descenderant, sibi de vinis, carnibus and aliis quibus indigebant, etiam
carioribus necessariis quam ibi reperiebantur, a circumvicinis Villatis, suis
propriis sumptibus providere.

This not to be contented with what is in house and at hand, is one of the
unwelcomest qualities in a Boarder, even though he pay well as to the value and
time; but when one comes on free quarter, and on charity, (as Government ought
to think they do that come upon another propriety, and yet are courteously
treated) then to capitulate and indent what they will and will not have, then
to take and leave what they lift, and to call for what is not to be had but
with trouble and charge, is not only uncivil but unreasonable. Yet this is the
condition of the French soldiery, who do not come, as our Country men have in
many places (even during this late unnatural Commotion) done, with Caps in
their hands, and carriages of humanity and gentleness; but with stern looks,
drawn swords, cocked pistols, Damn me, and all horrid oaths of Hell in their
mouths, and when they are quartered, so continue their imperiousness, that
it is hard to live in the house with them unstrapadoed, if not murdered. This
irregularity, which often frightens inhabitants from their houses, and ever
makes their houses terrors to them, is the effect of ill discipline and want
of pay: for had they whereon to live and pay currantly, Huic autem incommodo
facile possit occarri, si bimestri quovis dependerentur eis stipendia; sic enim
nullam essent haebituri causam qua se purgarent de injuriis illis quas
inforunt, necessitate quadam ut aiunt, eo quod ipsis non persolvitur. Idem lib.
10. p. 400.
they might be kept to the stricter conformity; but when live they must, and
money they have not, the Officer bears with them for his own peace, which to
prevent, as the Plague that infects Countries with ill will to soldiers, the
Dr. Ridley, View Laws Civil and Eccles. p. 88.
Romans took a course to provide diet in kind for their soldiers, Summer diet
from April. 1. to Septem. 1. and the Winter e converso, which diet was two
days Biscuit, the third day softer bread; one day wine, another day Vinegar;
one day Bacon, and two days Mutton, and by this kept they them lusty and
vigorous, yet temperate and civil. For though I know to keep up the spirit
there must be good diet, and enough of it, such as is flesh, wine, strong bear,
and other changeable food; yet that men should be their own Carvers at another
cost and table, and make the giver a Vallet to their curiosity and
intemperance, is that which France only its poor Subjects are abused by: we of
England, God be blessed, do not understand other then by hearsay and reading.
For though in Ireland from Edward the Second's time, when the Earl of Desmond
commanded in chief, the damnable custom of Coign and Livory was there set
a-foot, and continued to H. 4. his time, when, by the Statute of 12 H. 4. c. 6.
it was destroyed, Davis History of Ireland, p. 30.
for that by pretext of it the Commanders of the Army exacted from people
horse-meat, man's-meat, and money at pleasure, without ticket or satisfaction:
yet (times of flagrant war only excepted) were such rigorous courses never in
practice with us here; nor in times of war were they justified any other, then
by necessity and want of pay. So far is our licentiousness from the constant
temper of the French, that necessity only works that seldom and skulkingly
with us, which choice and no temptation, but that of ill humor and inclination
to vice and rudeness, evidenceth boldly in them. And since the Government of
France is supported by Armies and Garrisons, Heylin. Geogr. p. 238.
and those so numerous, that Charles the Ninth is reported to have 15000 horse
and 100000 foot of his own Nation, besides 50000 horse and foot of Swisses,
Germans, and other Nations; and Lewis the Thirteenth is storyed to have at once
five Royal Armies on foot, keeping 120000 men in pay many years, rigging 1000
('it is 10000 in Dr. Heylin, Geogr. p. 237.
but I ghuesse it the error of the Press) ships for sail and service: yea,
for as much as the Kings of France so depend on the fidelity of the soldiers,
there is no relief for the poor Peasant and Country-dweller hopeable, but they
must have what they will, though to procure it they do arctare,] put the purse
of the poor provider into little ease, and though he pawn (as it were) his own
skin, bone, body and soul almost to purchase it; for, They must needs go that
these Gallants of fury drive, whose violence has career enough to precipitate
even dullness itself, and to make it fly with the wings of fear to avoid the
Talons of their fury.

Et si qui sic facere renuebant, concito fustibus caesi, hoc agere
compellebantur.] This shows, that must is in France not only for the King, but
for every Horseman, who, if he be but mounted and become a man at Arms, thinks
himself absolute, holding his office by the Scepter of his Batton, which is so
nimble, that it is no sooner a word but a blow; and that upon his head who is de
jure head of him, while in his family and under his roof. Now these Fustes,
with which on unwilling, because (God knows) unable Hosts, they do execution, I
take to be no tesserae Hospitales; nor can the Ruffian, In Paenul. In Verr.
Act. ^. Budaeus in Pandect. p. 84, and in reliq. p. 253. B.
that thus vapors and fumes, say with him in Plantus, Deum hospitalem and
tesseram mecum fero: nor do these Hospitium renuntiare, ne hospitii jus
violarent, as Tully says the custom was; for this in them had been a grace of
ingratiation, which would rather have been thought a Prodigy then anything
ordinary, and fictive rather then real. I say, I take this Mall of their
uncivil execution to be no earnest for their welcome, but an intimation of that
Club-law that they hold their interest in their Quarters by, and therefore
while that is up, the Housekeeper is bound not only to the peace of good
words, but even of willing looks; for if he show any disgust of his guests
pleasures, strait to the lace he goes, which does so terrify them, Est quaedam
sane in nobis innata pravitas, adeo magna quidem ut nulla plane ratio nos ab
injuriis and violentia coerceat, Cominaeus Comment. lib. 19. De Gestis. Ludov.
p. 396.
that they are fain to take injuries contentedly, and to give thanks for being
eaten up, and out of house and home, as we say; for so are these Horsemen
flushed with their tyrannous absoluteness in their Quarters, that, to use
Cominaeus his words, No reason or humanity can restrain them from injury and
violence.

Ac deinde consumptis in Villa una victualibus, focalibus, and equorum
praebendis ad Villam aliam homines illi properabant.

This continues the misery, it is general, every part must bear its proportion;
these Curriers do circuit it to obtain the fattest prey and the plentifullest
provision; these Clyents to Venus and Bellona, the hot Goddesses, are all for
diet and drink, that in the vigor of them reach the utmost extents of their
flaming constitutions, which vice rather then nature has so accended, that
nothing but cold and hunger can reduce. Rather therefore then they will want
these cherishings of their pleasure, by which the Wolf of feebleness and
dispiriting is kept from the door of their moving Tabernacles, they will, as
bite close while anything is to be had, so change their pasture when it begins
to abate, Victuals of all sorts they will have; for though the Housekeeper,
Sea-mew like, must live upon the Spuma Marina, the Dew (as it were) or nothing:
yet these (...) must have first and second course, Adag. 33. Cont. 2. Chil. 2.
p. 465.
all sorts of things Victualia] quia vescuntur ab hominibus, they must have
speedily, as soon as they call, willingly without regret, plentifully without
scant, and seasonably, according as the nature of the year ushers in variety of
diet. Focus privata cujusque domus, quemadmodum Ara aliquando Templum
significat.
And as food, so fire must they have, Focalia] for this, as it is as
denominative of an house, as Ara is of a Temple, and as much to the completion
of entertainment as meat is, Vrbem, agrum, aras, focos, seque uti dederent,
Plautus Amphitr. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
(since without fire and candle, which are Focalia, what comfort have men in
entertainment.) I know Focalia has other senses in Authors, the Operimentum
colli and faucium is so called by Quintilian; Lib. 11. c. 3. Advers. lib. 7. c.
10.
but the Greeks applied the word pugillaribus and luctatoribus, which Turnebus
notes as well as others: yet our Chancellor by Focalia intends those things
that appertain to fire, which is best when it is in the Chimney; and thus it is
near of kin to the Ancient's Focaria, Sier to the word Fornicator, who was
Servant to the Baths and Fornaces, he that heated them, which because he ever
kept hot, he was termed Fornicator; thence an old Fornicator we call a man of
years, Turneb. advers. lib. 8. c 9.
that when he is past action of folly, yet is speculatively, and in word,
filthy and obscene.

Et Equorum praebendis] This is to express Horse-meat, not only pasture and
herbage, Tholoss. Syntag. Juris. lib. 15. c. 23. ss. ^.
but Provender, Hay, Straw, which are all Prabendae; because they do in
fructibus consistere: and such grass, hay, and grain being, they are termed
Equorum praebenda, though I know Praebenda in the Plural number in the Canon
Law has another sense, according to what the Ancients held the Residentiaries
in Religious Houses and Cathedral Churches, enjoyed to supply religious
Pilgrims and Strangers that came to them with testimonials, and Agellius
extends it to all necessaries for an Army, when he says, Lib. 15. c. 4.
Ventidius Bassus being straightened, Magistratibus qui sortiti Provincias
fuissent, praebenda public conduxisse, these, and other large Notions of the
word being not to the Chancellour's purpose, I keep myself to that sense of
praebendae which is obvious, and respects horses in Armies, whose Quarters
these Blades of Buff and Fury do change as they do their own when they impair,
according to the old Proverb, Love me and love my horse, which love to their
horses they best show by putting them into good pastures

Ad Villam aliam homines illi properabant, came consimiliter devastando.] These
flying Tormenters, like fleas, skip every where, biting close, soon in and out
of places, as they said of Charles the Eighth's expedition in and out of Italy,
Try they will before they buy; yet not so happy the poor Peasant, Heylin,
Geogr. p. 174.
to have things bought of and paid for to him. Eat and drink and wench and rave
they will, but a penny they will not part with in payment for what they take,
Ne denarium unum pro necessariis, says the Text. And this ubiquity of theirs,
though it terrifies all the Country, yet it ruins it less, and impoverisheth
it, as it were, more justly, every part alike. No Angle of the Country that is
good for any thing but is a Praebend for soldiers and their horses; yea, and
for somewhat more rapacious and bloody, their wenches, called usually Sucklers
and Laundresses, which the Text terms Concubinae, Morotrix dicitur, qua
indifferenter so exponit omnibus; Concubina vero, qua uni soli se exhibet. Est
autem Concubinatus foraicatio quaedans continuata rum soluta determinata, ita
ut sit velut cohabitatio quaedam ac si Matrimonia effet conjuncta, Sayerus in
Clave Regia Sacerd. lib. 8. c. 2. number. 9.
a word more press then Meretrices; for those are common to the seisers be they
what they will, first come first served, when these are a sort of loose
proprieties, pretendedly loyal to their own Mates, but extremely disorderly and
villainous. Yet these, though forbidden by the strict rules of War, are
suffered to attend Armies, and are so influential (being the Baggages that
attend the luggage, lumber, and heavy draught of the Army) that they are taken
care of by the Quarter Masters, and are as curious to be pleased as any: ^yea,
being vicious women and warped from modesty, are the most beastly and pestilent
enemies to the modesty of their own sex that can be imagined: yet even these,
so sordid, so nasty, so troublesome, do they constrain their Quarters to
receive in magna copia,] in great abundance; yea, for these as well as for
themselves do they compel the inhabitants of the Vill^ they come to and stay
in, to provide all necessaries, not only food and fire, but Socculariae] Genus
calciamenti a Sacco deductum, a Shoe like a slipper with an heel, which we
call a Sock, after the likeness whereof it was made: the Comedian tells us as
well of Risus Socci, as of Luctus Cothurni; In Vitellio. c. 2.
but socculus the Diminutive, Suetonius writes of.

Caligis] This is the Boot-hose, or leg, or short stocking which the Soldier
wears, Plin. lib. 9. c. 35. Venuleius lib. De Militibus.
hence called Caligati Milites; and though Caliga properly signify regumentum
Tibiarum militare, the cover of the military Pipe, suppose the Coronet or Fife;
Sueton in Calig. c. 9. Plin. lib. 7. c. 43.
yet it being of likeness to a Hose signifies that. This Caliga, or military
Calciament, gave the name to Cajus, Son to Germanicus the Emperor, who was
called Caligula, Quia Manipulario habitu inter Milites 'educebatur.

Vsque ad minimam carum Ligulam] Not only food and fire, washing and lodging,
shoes and hose, but Laces, and every Utensil about these Firebrarnds, must the
poor Peasant find; which makes me believe, that either France is all gold, or
the Peasant all dross; for, unless whatever he touches be Coin, he cannot but
be as bare as a louse, who has thus many Riflers of him successively each to
other: and therefore no wonder they are poor spirited that are thus harrassed
and outed of all ability to live handsomely or lay up any thing for their
Children. Alas, poor souls, all their thoughts are how to please and progg to
live, the gayety of life they neither know nor desire, all that they have to
call their own is an house of children, a wife horridly nasty, an house
slenderly furnished, a back barely covered, and an Army of Vermin every where
about them, and this is the condition of all those that dwell in open places,
without Garrisons and walled Towns; for of them there is not one expers de
calamitate ista] says our Text. For though Garrisons and walled Towns, Villa
and Oppida murata] be more chargeable, for that they maintain Garrisons to
defend them, and discipline in them is very strict, because it is in view of
all the Inhabitants, whose clamor would have audience if it were deserved; yet
is that charge ten thousand times recompensed in the security they have that
dwell in them, which is the reason that in all places, set England aside, no
security is almost out of Cities and Towns, fellows to them, there being not
only a force in Walls to deny access to Spoilers, but a kind of charm, which
languages the rude approachers to beware of Sacrilege in violating them: Si
quis violaverit Muros, capite punietur, Pompon. lib. 2. Digest. p. 119.

Advers. lib. 13. c. 12. lib. 6. c. 6. lib. 16. c. 11. lib. 30. c. 30.


In municipiis Muros esse sanctos, is Marcianus's his rule, lib. 4. Regularum;
concerning Muri and the Notions of them, consult Turnebus his excellent
learning, which I quote only to avoid prolixity, though the use of Walls is
from the very instance in consideration very important, since these Walls do
not only keep off the trouble, charge, and danger of Soldiers Quarterings,
but the often passes and repasses of them; for so the Text says, Quae non
semel aut bis in anno haec nephanda pressura gravatur, but very often is thus
vexed and impoverished; so that they are not plagues for a day and away, but at
all times, so often as they please: and this adds to the misery.

Praeterea non patitur Rex quenquam Regni sui salem emere, quem non emat ab
ipso Rege, pretio ejus solum arbitrio assesso.

This Royal Monopoly of Salt is that which is one of the Mines of the French
Crown's Revenue; and though our Text count it a part of the smart misery of the
there people to buy so necessary a thing as salt is, which they cannot be
without, any more almost then they can without water, fire, or air; yet truly
propriety being the measure of the value of things (provided the price
assessed, though it be proprio arbitrio, yet if it be in any degree moderate)
it is damnum sine injuria to the people, since the King may as well make the
most of his own as private men; though I think seldom Princes so do, though
their Farmers and those that officiate for them, grinding the people to enrich
themselves, draw much murmr of the oppressed people upon their Principals:
for so unhappy are Princes, that offend who will under pretext of their
authority, and by color of their service, the distaste and odium of them is
apportioned to Princes, which is a good caution to Princes not to crush their
shoulders and crimple the supports of their useful lives with such super
additions (to the unavoidable care of their proper offices) as arise from
mal-administration of men in place under them, Let every back bear its own
burden, which I purposely here insert, not only, as it is just, to vindicate
the right of Royal Commodities, as Salt in France is; but to remember the
fatality of this Artifice of popular tumult upon the pretext of oppression by
evil Counselors and Instruments, toward the best of men and Kings his
Contemporaries, St. Charles, who so heavily complains of them, that his words
are, If I had not mine own innocence and God's protection, Eicon Basilic. c.
15. Initia.
it were hard for me to stand out against those Stratagems and Conflicts of
malice, which by falsities seek to oppress the truth, and by jealousies to
supply the defect of real causes, which might seem to justify such unjust
engagements against me, so He. This premised, I proceed to discourse of this
the French King's restraint of Salt to any but such as buy it of him; and the
reason is, because it is the King's commodity. A veteribus Romany jamdudum
institutum fuit, in Leg. 17. ss. Salinarum. p. 51. De verb. signific.
Brechaeus, that learned Frenchman, tells us, that it has been the perquisite
of Regality, and that which Magistracy has taken as its Revenue in ancient
times, among the Romans always; and thence in those Countries which were
fractions of it, and took pattern according to the proportion of their parts to
its whole, to retain their necessary usages amongst them. This then of Salt,
one of the great necessaries to li^e, I shall not write of at large, but referr
the Reader to the Authors in the Margent; Coelius Rhodig. lect. Antiq. lib. 7.
cap. 2.

Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 32 a cap. 7. ad c. 10. Brechaeus loco praecitato.


only let me mind the Reader, that this Sal here, is not that Sal metallicum,
id est, fossitium, which Strabo lib. 5. calls (...), and Lib. 18. c. 11. lib.
31. c. 7.
Pliny, Lib. 5. c. 123.
Dioscorides, and Lib. 1. c. 7.
Varro mention, and of which I think I may with learned men conclude, that not
only Absolom's Pillar was made of, but also Let Us wives figure, Josephus lib.
1. Antiq.

Burchardus in descript. Terrae sancta. part. 1. c. 7.


as the solid body that in the perennity of its consistence would eternize the
memory of their sins and punishments. No such Salt is the King of France's
commodity here, but that Salt which the Wiseman says, Salt savoureth every
thing; that which not only our Lord hints of its conservating quality in that
allusion to discretion, the steerage of the conversation from danger and
disgrace, Have salt in your selves and be at peace one with another; Marc. 9.50.
but that Salt which is the relish of every Palate, and makes good every
crudity, which the Ancients apprehending under the name of Salt and Wood,
Parochi and Xenoparochi idem sunt. qui Peregrinis Salem and Ligna praebebant,
sub nomine autem harum specierum omnia hospitibus necessaria intelligimus,
Budaeus in Pandect, reliq. p. 262. Edit. Vascos
comprehended all necessaries to a charitable entertainment: so that though
many things to the celebrity of a Court-feast may be wanting, yet where bread,
beer, fire, and salt is, there is no lack of the integralls of Meals, and
those not any subsidiary to life, but wholesome to promote the comfort of it,
being in some measure there. And therefore the universal requiry of Salt
enhaunces the quantity that is vented and the price of it, especially where it
being in the sale no general commodity, by occasion of which, one underselling
another, the buyer has the more choice to deal with men, either as their good
humor and necessities do render them more tractable, or to forbear them when
the contrary; but in one hand, who either must be pleased in the price, or the
accommodation cannot be had. This being the state of Salt in France, the Text
complains of it as a sore curb to the Natives; for it is prized solo Regis
arbitrio, and at such Rates (though Merchants may choose to buy it to transport,
for buy it they will not but at such a rate as they can get by exporting it)
yet the eaters and users on the terra firma must; Advers lib. 14. c. 19. p. 510.
and by this he does so Orbem [Gallicum] Sale defricare, as the speech in
Turnebus is, That he by his Salt at his own price dreyns away the blood of
their purses, and so does in a kind, as of old was wont though in another
manner, consecrate by Tu^nebus advers. lib. 10. c. 22. p. 327.
the Salt his Table of Royal plenty and riches, Lege Budaeum lib. 4. De Ass.
p. 147. Edit. Vascos.
which he supports his Imperial Charges in a good part with. For though he has
other vast incomes, yet this of Salt is not the least; and therefore in that he
has it, and that for so mighty a people, and that in such a measure as he may
set his own rate, it is a very great Prerogative; which, since it must be in
one hand, is fittest to be in the best and most charitable one, who like
Meroveus, Grimston's Hist. France, p. 12.
the quondam Governor of France, ruled so, That in ten years be omitted not
one hour to do well; for Princes, as they have opportunities, so have spirits
suitable thereto, and though private men may be narrow and make the utmost they
can of what they have, yet they, out of their greatness of mind, love to be
bountiful, and in so doing deserve not the complaints that otherwise would
arise upon enhauncing. For as it would seem too hard a pressure on Subjects to
make them pay a rate for their breath, (...), Philo lib. De Septenario and
Festis, p. 1280.
light and water, so some make it hard to put such a gabell upon Salt; yet, as
I said before, it has been very anciently laid not only on the Roman and other
Government's Subjects, Tholoss. Syntag. Juris universs. lib. 3. c. 9. ss. 1.
and seq.
but even in France. And though this Salique Law has excluded the Subjects from
the Merchandise of Salt any otherwise but by buying it of the King, as well as
the other Salique Law has Females from that Crown; Albergatus Disc. Politic. p.
348.
yet there being a vast Revenue (reckoned at least to 700000 Crowns a year
coming to the Crown by it; ^eylin's Geog.
) and being a continuance of a long time in the Crown, the Nation finds no
burden of it, but grows rich notwithstanding it. For Princes do let and sell
good pennyworths, and if their Subjects are pinched, it is by their Ministers
avarices which cannot be avoided, not their desires to sell to the utmost
value; for some they must trust, and if they choose the wiselyest they can, yet
they may be deceived, Opportunity often making the thief, and then their being
deceived is more their misfortune, then their sin or mis-government. And
therefore the Subjects of France are no more displeased at this, then the
Egyptians were with Ioseph's store of Corn, which, though it bought out the
Land to King Pharaoh, yet rescued them that sold it from famine and perishing.
Petr. Martyr. in 1 Reg. c. 9.
For though this Salt raise a vast sum of money, yet it thereby defends the
people from rebellion and invasion; because it maintains an Army that
suppresses the one and advances boldly to refuse the other. (...), Chil. 2.
Cent. 2. Ad. 8. p. 459.
It Is true, I confess, there is no comfort in being hanged on a golden Tree, no
more then for a Virgin to be stuprated by a beauteous person. If ruined a
Subject must be, whether it be by Princes or others, men account it ruin and
welcome it not; but yet in things beneath ruin, in shortnings and
abbreviations of life, for particulars to suffer them to the accommodation of
the generalty, is very endurable; for time and use wears out those prints of
regret, that upon the first example and introduction of unwonted things, were
fixed in the minds of men against them. French History, p. 56.
The twelve Peers of France were wondered at, when first instituted by
Charlemaigne to make his voyage in the Wars with Spain more honorable in
show; yet ever since they continuing, are counted the Nobilities stabiliment
and the allowed height of their honor. This imposition on Salt grew up first
under the Wars between Philip of Valois King of France, Tholoss. Syntag. lib.
3. c. 9.
and our King Edward; the French King being in want of money made a Decree,
That no man, of what degree soever, should sell or buy Salt but from his
Granaries, which he set up (seizing all Salt in every Proprietors hand, and
giving them a reasonable price for it) which done, he set what price he thought
good upon it, and made every one at his stated price buy according to the
proportion of his family; and from that time ever downward. This then taken up
on that necessity, Lib. 4. c. 2. De Gest. Francor.
has been kept up, Ingeniosum profecto inventum (says Gaguin) quo nemo a
tributo liber esset, and unde ingens Regibus pecunia quotannis venit; yet time
has made this Gabell natural to the French Subjects, 3 H. 5. 2 Instit. c. 30.
M. Charta, p 61.
as Tunnage and Poundage is here. For though, says Sir E. Cock, that were
given to H. 5. but during his life in respect of his recovery of his right in
France, and there was a Proviso in the Act, that the King should not make a
Grant thereof to any person, nor that it should be any President for
hereafter: yet it continued all the Kings times after, and all of them enjoyed
it, which confirms, That time makes that pleasing which at first was not so.
And so, though for the French to purchase Salt at the King's rate were at the
first hard and disgustfull, yet use has made the Nation perfect in the custom
and way of so doing; that only which argues the rigor of it is, that the
Subjects must not only pay the King's rate for the Salt they buy, but must buy
such a proportion as the bodies of the persons in his family, are by the King's
Commissioners computed to spend, so says our Text.

Et si insulsum pauper quivis mavult edere, quam sal excessivo pretio
comparare, mox compellitur ille tantum de sale Regis ad ejus pretium emere,
quantum congruet tot personis, quot ipse in domo sua fovet.

Indeed this is hard, Miserrimum era^ spectaculum videre multitudinis and
populi arumnas, Cominaeus Com. lib, 10. De Gestis Ludov. p. 403.
that a poor soul, that must (through necessity) want much accommodation,
because money that fetches it, is short with him, that yet such a miserable
wretch (rich in nothing but children, wants, and vermin) should be compelled
to take Salt, which perhaps he would shift without, or to such a proportion
only as his money will reach to, (other things being considered also, which
are as much or more concerning to him) beyond his ability, is very irksome and
certainly offensive to God, because an oppression to the poor, whom God leaves
in the world as objects of charity and exercises of our gratitude to him,
between us and whom he only has made the difference. Yet is not this so strict
as true, that it is the condition of all parts of France, the pressure whereof
none feel but they that are least pityed by greatness, and least able to
relieve themselves against the burdens of it. But poor Wretch that the Peasant
is, he has no remedy, A good Principle.
but to commit his cause to God the only helpful Patron of distressed
Subjects, and unless he turn the heart of a Prince and make his bowels yern to
his poor Vassals, there is no remedy but patience; Better suffer any misery and
diminution then sin against the Law of Dominion and the fidelity of Subjection.
This is the safest way to a good life and death; though certainly they have
other Principles whose spirits rise up against Governors, whose accounts being
only makeable to God, are not to be questioned by men any further then the
Laws of Nations allow, The Author's prayer.
and the limitations of Religion expound those allowances; my Prayer being
ever, That God would season all good Subjects with that piety of resolution,
that they may make them love and obey, more then fear and be in awe of their
Prince; for love makes loyal, when hatred and dread is the preparation to
treachery and revolt. He said well that avowed his own experience of God's work
on his gracious soul, I had rather prevent my peoples ruin then rule over
them, Eicon. Basille. c. 15.
nor am I so ambitious of that dominion, which is but my right, as of their
happiness, if it could expiate or countenance such a way of obtaining it by the
highest injuries of Subjects committed against their Sovereign, thus the Oracle
of English Monarchs.

Insuper omnes Regni illius incolae, dant omni anno Regi suo quartam partem
omnium vinorum quae sibi accrescunt.

Chil. 1. Cent. 6. Adag. 37.
This is a further addition to the Revenue of that King, which though some may
censure for Mala vicinia to the precedent salsuginosa vicinia; yet truly I
know not how to think other, but that it is a reserve of the Crown on all the
Vineyards, which were originally derived from it: and then it is no more a levy
on his Subjects, then Rent is Tax on a Tenant, or Tithes on the Occupier of
ground. Yet in as much as our Text-Master, who lived long there, referrs it to
a badge of servitude and villenage according to the old rule, Quicquid
acquiritur servo, acquiritur domino ejusdem servi, seems to be more then
ordinarily worthy notice; for in our Chancellour's time this fourth part de
Claro, of the growth of Vines, was in effect, reckoning the charge of Tillage
and gathering, Vt fore in tota Francia ubi octava de umo venali fisco debetur,
Cassanaeus Catal. Gl. Mundi. p. 214.
the third: and Cassanaeus adding another imposition of the eighth part, de
vino venali, then the fourth part of the growth in kind, and the eighth part
of the value in price, brings the best part of the profit of Vineyards unto the
Crown: for as all persous are bound to yield it the fourth part of their growth
without diminution, so are they every where to give it without exception.

Et omnis Caupo, quartum denarium pretium vinorum quae ipse vendidit.

This Caupo the Translator terms a Vintner, because such are with us the great
sellers of wine; Caupona, ubi etiam advena and ad comedendum and ad cubandum,
non ad stabulandum recipiuntur; and differt a Taberna, qua est locus ubi
comestabilia venduntur, and comedentes recipiuntur, non ad cubandum vel ad
equ^s stabulandos, sed comedendum tantum, Digest. lib. 23. tit. 2. Marg. D.
Taberna, p. 2115.
and of these is there a wealthy Corporation in London. Yet Caupo in the Law
signifies so much as amounts to an Ordinary, where men eat, drink, and lodge,
but not their horses; which differs from a Tavern, in that therein men eat and
drink only and not lodge, it being a Tippling-house for a pass, and so the
lawful residence in it only for the day: though In Leg. 198. p. 429. De
verborum signific.
Brechaeus takes it otherwise, Caupo mercedem accipit, ut Viatores in Caupona
manner patiatur, stabularius ut permittat apud eum jumenta stabulari; yet our
Text restrains Caupo to an house of entertainment, an Hostlery as in France
they call them, which though the Statutes of 15 R. 2. c. 8. 4 H. 4. c. 25.21 H.
8. c. 21. so calling, understand Inns for beasts receipt as well as men's: yet
the Text primarily respects them as selling wine for men's drinking. But I take
Caupo to be more general, and to extend to any kind of negotiatour, as
cauponari to any kind of dealing; for it being Sier to Cupedia, which referrs
to lautiora esculenta venalia, takes in all kind of dealing for things, which
the Greeks render by (...): thus Ennius uses cauponari bellum, which he borrows
from Aeschilus, Lib. 1. De vita Apollonii c. 20. Lib. 4. c. 10.
(...); and Philostratus thus tells us Apollonius Tyanaeus wrote an Epistle
(...), to the Corn-Merchants; and in another place, when he writes of the toil
and moyl of callings, he says, There is no greater a slavery in the world,
then your Merchants by sea and land have, who do not only keep Faires in all
weathers, and notwithstanding all hazards; but (...), but keep so with comers
and goers in those public houses, Plato lib. De Legibus,

Tholoss. Syntag. Juris, lib, 39. c. 7.


that they are ever bibbing, and buying or selling in them, which he reckoned
desamatory. For the Ancients made Laws again Tavern-keepers, as persons
infamous and not admittable to Magistracy; yea, in as much as the keepers of
them were to receive all comers and minister to all their wants (which worthy
people would not conform to do.) Of old those that kept such houses were
counted E face plebis, no better, as we say, then they should be, Josh. 2.1.
under which reproach Rahab went, and was therefore called The Harlot; and our
Lord is thought to be disgracefully alluded to in that scandalous taunt of the
Pharisees, A Wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. This then is the
large notion of Caupo, which the Text Master restrains here, not to limit its
verbal latitude, but to reach the sense of his purpose in the Quotation; That
every public house and merryment in it, pays a duty to the public charge,
and that being the fourth part of the price, comes surely to a vast Revenue.

Et ultra haec, omnes Villae and Burgi solvunt' Regi annuatim ingentes summas
super eos assessas, pro stipendiis hominum ad arma.

Concerning Vills, see the Notes on the 29th. Chapter. That which their mention
here intends, is to notify, that as the open Country-dweller pays in his
spoil by the Army, so the immured ones answer in taxes; and these, as they are
annual, so are they not light and easy, but heavy and hard. Ingentes summas]
not only great but wondrous sums, such as exceed almost numeration; for
Ingens is a word of capacity, and has a kind of latitudinary vastness in it,
Ingens Moles, ingens Exercitus, ingentes Colossi, and Populi ingentes, are
frequent in Authors: yea every thing that is notorious and prodigiously
wonderful is termed by it. 2 Georg. Plin. Panegyr. 103.

Live. lib. 4. Lib. 10. Bel^^ Punici.

J. Sleidanus illustrium rerum and Galliae descript.


Virgil tells us of ingenti amore perculsus, and Pliny of ingens animus,
fortis, magnus and constans, and Livy of ^ura ingentes, ingentes gratias,
clamores, bellae, and ingentis nominis Rex; these things set forth the
concurrence of Authors with our Text to express extraordinary Taxes by
ingentes summas. And sure such they must needs be, for France is a Country that
has 23 vast Provinces, and every Vill and Town in them being yearly assessed,
the sum total of such Provents must be exarithmetique; yet so insatiable is
the mind of some Princes as well as meaner men, that they think they never
have enough, though they force men to digg upon the Rock, as he told
Pyfistratus the Athenian Tyrant, where nothing but toil and grief is to be
expected, and yet must it be done to pay his Masters imposition upon him,
although the end of such levyes be not prosecuted, but the Subject preyed upon
by the Army he pays, as if it were forces of Enemies: for the Text says, the
taxes are levied Pro stipendiis hominum aed Arma] but in truth they have least
of it, which causes the following words, that the Armata Regis, qua quam magna
semper est, etc.] That the Royal Army which is great is grievous also, making
little difference between taking all in an enemies Country, and leaving none in
their own Country: and this makes the condition of France sad, that men must
pay to support an Army, and yet, by that Army they contribute to, be eaten up
and totally ruined. Yet this is the misery of Armies, that they are not only
chargeable but insolent and cruel, and are armed such to be and not to be
refused, because they come into Countries all over prepared for commands and
terror. Armata dicebatur virgo sacristcans cui basinia tog^ erat in humerum
rejecta, Fest.
Armata] Cicero pro Cecin. 44.

Cic. pro domo sua lib. 1.38.


Tully points out to this sense of armata] Armatos si Latin loqui volumus,
quos appellare vere possumus, ^pinor cos qui scutis telisque parati ornatique
sunt, and in another place he speaks of one incredibili armatus audacia, and
Silius mentions, Armata dalis men's, and armatum fide pictus: so that the Army
of the King being potent and poor, and being not paid their wages, are forced
to either spoil or starve. And hunger breaking through stone Walls, and
necessity forcing to what (but for it, is execrable and not the choice of men)
the French Subject is hardly dealt with, who pays money for his security, yet
is quartered upon by the Soldiers; yea and that in Vills and Buroughs, such
an animosity is there in the Nobless against Corporations, and the Inhabitants
of them, that they can neither bear their thrift, nor forbear borrowing of them
when thrifty they are and can lend. Yea it sometimes happens that the huffs of
greatness better endure detriment to Nations, then take reparations by the help
of Citizens and Burgesses of Vills and Cities. There is a famous story
confirming this in Walsingham: In R 2. p. 213.
In the time of Richard the Second there was one Mexer a Scotch man infested
our, Coast so boldly, that no Ship could stir to and fro but it was snapped;
the Admiral of England that then was cared for none of these things, so true a
Gallio he was in neglect of his duty, that the Subjects were afraid to trade,
and merchandise grew scarce and dear: yea the Pirat braved so by his successes,
that he said, He would surprise England ere long. When no spirit in the Nation
rose to the suppression of this mischief, Sir John Philpot a Citizen of London,
and a man of great wit and wealth, pitying his native Country (so nosed by a
bold enemy, and neglected by heedless Ministers of State) resolved with himself
to clear the Seas of this Cormorant, Ducis Lancastriae and caeterorum Dominorum
defectum ne dicam falsitarem, qui Regnu^ defendere debuerant, attente
considerans Walsingham. p. 213. in R. 2.
and to secure his Countrymen and their Vessels from his rapacious clutches,
Thereupon de propria pecunia conduxit mill armatos, etc. he raised a thousand
men at his own charge, and with them set upon the Pirat, and not only took his
prizes, but him the ArchPirat also; which action, though it had the acclamation
of the Commons, yet brought him no favor with the great men: for Sir John
Philpot was summoned before the Lords, and told, he was too blame so to do, Ac
si non licuisset benefacere Regi and Regno sine consilio Comitum and Baronum,
Loco pracitato.
says the Historian. Patiently he bore the several censures of his Judges,
till overcharged with the tartness of the Lord Stafford, who rating him more
then he thought became him, was by Sir John stoutly replied upon to this
purpose, That he, not moved with pride or ambition, but with pity on their
sloth and his Nations dishonor, undertook the enterprise; and that what he had
at his own charge done, was so far from deserving displeasure, that he hoped
it was an acceptable work to God and his Countrymen: and that his Lordship
ought rather to commend his zeal to his Country, Vt Comos non habuit quod
responderet, Idem ^od. loc^.
then blazon it as a demerit of it, which reply did so daunt that Lord, that he
had not a word to say, thus the Story; which I note, because it often falls
out, that Great-men think nothing worthy or acceptable, that comes from a hand
they like not; (as seldom do the haughty of the Nobles and Gentry, Cities or
Citizens, though descended of Noble and Knightly Families;) who, though they
will seek Portions with Wives in Citizens Daughters (and were it not for
London, what Mine of that kind would they find in England, as meanly as they
think of it) yet are too often detracters from them, and utter phrases of
disparagement to it, like that Marginal Note which my Walsingham has on this
story in hand of Queen Elizabeth's time, A sawey Knave, Merchants answer to a
Nobleman. But enough of this, only it is pity Corporations, that are Staples of
Trade, should pay to avoid Quarterings on them, and yet be quartred upon: but
this being the posture of things in our Chancellour's time of stay in France,
occasions me to conclude, That all is fish that comes into the Soldiers Net.
Psalm, 124, 7. Isay. 1.26.
And since their Net, which heretofore caught the Nation, is broken and we are
escaped; and our Governors are as at the first, and our Judges as at the
beginning, as the forequoted Scripture expresses the happiness of a restored
people; God give us to think of this seasonably.
how much becomes it us all to sacrifice to God (in the advancement of his
glory and the gratitude of our reformed lives) the first and fatlings of our
serenity and order. For what Bocerus writes of Armies and Soldiers is most
true, Bona quae bellum aufert, sunt liber Religionis usus, Reipub.
tranquillitas, studia literarum, possessiones, agri, vineae, pradia, domus,
agricultura, mercatura, navigatio, etc. Milites enim castra sequuntur, sape non
ut bonam and justam causam defendant: sed ut spoliato and exuto omnibus
fortunis adversario, ditiores domum redeant, pileis inter se nummos
distribuant, holosericum non ulnis sed hastis metiantur, Lib. De Bello and
Duello, c. 29. p. 219.
All the good they do (necessity of Rebellion and Invasion excepted) is
toleration of all Religions to gratify the parties potent in them, disturbance
of settled order, decrease of good learning, dispossession of Subjects of their
houses, lands, vineyards, and accommodations, impedement of husbandry, trade,
navigation, destruction of buildings, murders of men, and waste of cattle and
wealth; for the soldier qua such does more intend his spoil and pay then
examine the cause; and caring not for any thing beyond returning home rich when
he shall be discharged, studies no civility to the Country he is a stranger to
and a temporary Conqueror of, thus Bocerus. From the danger of this then (God
be thanked) England being delivered, we have a mercy beyond the Subjects of
France; wherein, though there is no enemy, there is notwithstanding an Army,
which does quarter on the people shrewdly, so it follows.

Et ultra haec, quaelibet Villa semper sustinet duos sagittarios ad minus, and
aliqua pl^res, in omni apparatu.

Still more and more charge, belike France is all Gold and Gold's worth, not
only the fourth part of the Grapes, and a penny on the Quart for wine sold,
taxes raised yearly on Vills and Buroughs, free-quartring on the Peasants who
live in the open Country; but also besides all these, every Town and Ville is
bound to maintain at their own charge two Archers at least, and some more,
every way complete, in all manner and equipage of War: this will amount to a
mighty Army. Consider then if we do, Heylin, Geogr. p. 173.
France to be in length 660 Italian Miles, in breadth 570, in circumference
2040, its 23 great Provinces, that contain in Parish Priests of the Clergy, who
yet are but a small part of the men, yet are in number said to be 130000, other
Ministers 100000, Heylins Geogr.
3 Archbishops, 104 Bishops, 1450 Abbyes, 540 Arch-Priories, 12^20 Priories,
567 Nunneries, 700 Convents of Friars, 259 Commanderies of Malta, 27400 Parish
Churches, in which are computed 15 Millions of people. I say, Budaeus lib. De
Ass, p. 195. Edit. Basil. 1595. in fol.
France so vast in circuit and numerous in people, having perhaps as many Vills
and Buroughs as Egypt had Cities in Amasis his time, which Budaeus says, were
20000: if at 14 thousand of them 2 comes to 28000 Archers; and 6000 at 3 a
Ville is 18 thousand more. I say, these thus computed make a very vast Army of
Archers, and those are no mean Artillery but of great terror and execution.
Antiquity thought so of them, for besides that the Asiatique Nations and the
Indians to this day use them, Lib. 5. ad Attic. 108.

De Germanis, Quintill. lib. 3. c. 4.20.


the Romans and Germans had much esteem of them. Tully numbers Archers among
the Magna tormentorum copia, multis Sagittariis, multo labor, etc. and Tacitus
reports the Germans to Asperare sagittas ^ffibus, and Quintilian tells us of
Armatus sagittis and face; and Ovid, though he want only uses the phrase Nudis
sagittis uti ad bella, yet alludes to the customs of Wars, to have Arrows in a
readiness, when the wolf of an enemy was before them, this dog of Arrows was
behind hanging at their backs, Sagitta quod satis long agatur, vel a satis
and ictus, vel quod sagax sit ictus, Etymolog.
ready to fix them. For as Arrows are an Engine of War, doing execution
without noise and at distance, so are they very fatal in their galls to Horses,
and their injuries to foot-souldiers, which made Moses, who was mighty in word
and deed, compose his Army much of Archers and Darters, if Philo's Authority be
Canon in the case; Lib. De vita Mosis, p. 628. Plutar^h. in Apothegmar.
for he says, he had (...) and (...), which are often as potent to force an
enemy from his station, as that Persian money named Sagittarius, was, to force
Agesilaus out of Asia, when the King of Persia by Timocrates gave him thirty
thousand of them to have his Room rather then his Company. Nature. Hist. lib.
28. c. 8. p. 577and lib. 20. c. 20. p. 441. lib. 6. c. 29.
The Archers then of our Text are such as do, though they do not Venenatas
emittere sagittaes (as some barbarous Nations used, to cure the ill consequence
of which Pliny tells us, men studied Remedies) yet do Vulniferas emittere
sagittas, and such as brings men in potentia proxima, Stimulus amissae pecunia,
pestis corporalis miseriae, malleus infernalis memoria, Sanct. Bernard. in
Sententiis.
by mayhem to death. Thus Saint Bernard tells us allusively, that God has three
great sorts of Arrows to wound the hairy-scalp of wickedness, loss of fortunes,
Corporal disquiet, and Infernal torments, and that there are but three
defenses against them, Calm fear, Devout love, and Virtuous wisdom, by which
they will be frustrated. And certainly as heed to, and provision for the evil
day before it comes, is the way to conquer the terror and despoyl the triumph
of it when it comes; so to be unprepared for and negligent of it, is not only
to yield the breast of life and happiness to the fury of Arrows of enmity, and
to court a foe, in me convertite ferrum, but cloggs the disconsolacy and shame
of such advantage and insult, with reproach of asnery. And therefore our
Nation, who ever found great advantage by Archers and Arrows, Not only by many
notable acts and discomfitures of War against the Infidels Holingshed, p. 473.
Temp. R. 2.
and others, but subdued and reduced diverse and many Regions and Countries to
their due obey sance, to the great honor, fame, and surety of this Realm and
Subjects, and to the terrible dread and fear of all strange Nations, they are
the words of the Statute. 33 H. 8. c. 9. enjoynes Archery to be maintained; so
did, before 3 H. 8.3. 6 H. 8. c. 2. which, though they are repealed by the 33
forementioned, yet stand good as to the approbation of Archery therein
directed. And this the Text noting as a piece of the wisdom of the French (who
has often been defeated and galled by our Archers and their Vollies of Arrows,
Holingshed. p. 363, 373, 389, 397, 770, 771.
as at Hambout in Edward the Third's time under the Lord Mannyes conduct, after
at Abvile and Saint Requier, after at the battles of Poictiers, Aulroy,
Agincourt, in the expedition of the Lord D. Awbeny and Earl Morley against the
French in Henry the Sevenths time) finding the use and consequence of them,
array their Nation with them; though I read of no great execution that they
have done by them, but yet they do continue the exaction of Archers from every
Vill and Borough, which does find duos ad minus sagittarios, and aliqui
plures.

In omni apparatu and habilimentis sufficientibus ad serviendum Regi in guerris
suis.

This comes in to show, that not only the bare Archers are to be found, but
them set forth to, and furnished for performance in the war; For omnis
apparatus signifies a good clothing and arraying, as an Archer should be, with
Bows, Arrows of all sorts, Files, Whetstones, Gloves, Bracers, Bow-strings,
Sword, and all things else that to Archery appertains: Atque ad illam
causarum operam ad quam ego nunquam nisi apparatus and meditatus accedo.

1 De Legib. 17. 1 De Invent. 74. Valla lib. 5.


apparatus signifying not only the furnishing it self, but the preparation to
it, training up to the exercise, and this added to the former, makes complete
apparature: Thus Tully defines apparatus homo, and instructa and apparata domus
omnibus rebus, as much as ornata, so that every thing that is deficient of the
perfection of its kind, being said a magnificientia generis recedere. This
apparatus being the triumph over that mutilation, is that which is understood
the compleatness of it, which because in matters of war to have all
necessaries to carry on our undertaking to its full execution, do become a
Soldier. Habiliments of all sorts are necessary, and it is said, Cum
habilimentis sufficientibus, whereby is meant, according to the French
Habiliments notation, aptly, strongly, cunningly, and with good decorum; and
this to be enabled by good setting forth to do, is cum Habilimentis
sufficientibus, (as the Texts words are) worthy the Kings service in his wars.

Null terre sans guerr^, Prove. Gall. Translated, He that has Land, is seldom
out of Law. Hypodeigm. Neustriae, p. 176.
In Guerris suis.] A word made Latin from the French Guerre, which signifies
primarily intestine dissension and contest, a thing frequent in France, but is
used largely for any Military encounter; so Walsingham expresses it, and thence
the word War which is of the same latitude: For wars being the Kings to begin
and end, as to him in his Majestic consideration seems meet, those that are to
assist him by tenure and roll are so to do in France, when ever his Army is in
motion, and his Royal Orders to summon them to their Quarters; which Quoties
libet eos summonere] is a very vast power in that King, Hist. France. In his
life.
and those People willingest submit to, and with least regret bear, who live in
the times of such as Lewis the twelfth was, whom Histories publish to be good
to his subjects, A brave K. and a true public Father.
and always studied to ease them; for he raised many Armies of Horse and Foot
without the oppression of his People by new impositions, which made his
subjects often and freely grant him increase of Subsidies to supply his foreign
and domestic affairs, yet would he not allow of those impositions, desiring
rather to cut off the expenses of his own Person and Household to save his
People from oppression and spoil: Thus noble was King Lewis, who, though he
had all he pleased of his subjects in vassalage to him, and could mow the fair
Meadow of France by the sith of his Power as often as he pleased, and that to
such a proportion as should shave, rather then only sheare the fleece of his
subjects: yet amidst all these temptations, he employed not his Power to
burden and pinch them, Cent. 6. Chil. 1. Adag. 25.
but knowing God his Chief, knew (...), what was white or black, good or evil
in him, would accordingly reward or punish it. I say, under such a Prince no
latitude of power is too great, because God gives him power over his
temptation, and thereby secures them that otherwise he could annoy: but when
Princes of other temper, whose will is the Law, (when it wills nothing
consenting with the Law of God, Reges enim illi, solum dici merentur qui se and
alios virtutum plenitudine regunt, Cassan. Catal. Gl. M. p. 212. Gaguinus in
Chron. Franc. Cass. Catal. Gl. Mundi, p. 579. Hist. France in life of Lewis 11.
p. 415.
Nations, Reason and Religion) are in power, then full sad is the case of
Subjects, and full dismal the accounts those Princes have to make to God for
terrifying their quiet and patient people, and burthening their contented backs
beyond measure, and the proportion of necessity: which Lewis the eleventh King
of France in a high measure practicing, and rejoicing in nothing more then to
tyrannize, did feel repaid him in the dreadful terrors of his sick and death
bed; for when he began to decline, he was a terror to himself, hating and
mistrusting every one, (not his own son and son-in-law, his daughter, Nobles,
Courtiers, Commanders, excepted) but prosecuted them all with jealousies, only
James Cortiera, a Burgundian Physician, he trusts, and was so desirous to live,
that to draw forth Cottiera's utmost skill to save him, he gave him 10000
Crowns a Month, and what Lands and Offices for himself and his friends he would
demand, his Nephew he made Bishop of Amiens; In short, so he would but prolong
his life, he was contented he should command his Crown and Scepter: after this,
being fearful of death, he sends for Francis the pious Hermit of Calabria,
falls down upon his knees before him, Cass. Catal. Gl. Mund. p. 579.
desiring him to prolong his life: he causes the holy Relics to be brought
from Rheimes, Paris, and Rome, and by them standing by him, hoped to preserve
his life; and when all the Divines about him, told him he could not escape
death, but was to prepare for the entertainment of it, all he says is, I had
hope that God would help me, but God knew he little deserved it, for though he
took the politickest course he could to have his cruelty in Government
concealed, setting up his Statue in his life time, with his knees bended, and
his hands joined together and lifted up as a devotionary, and this he did to
prevent the effigiation of himself when dead, as the manner is, with both his
hands downwards, to signify those that did in utroque male administrare; yet
by this did he not avoid the severe Character of Historians: for miserable
Prince as he was, God was not near in the comforts of adversity, the prosperity
of whom was not only an estrangement from, but an enmity against God. Much good
may Honors do them that buy them so dear as some great men, whose will is the
Law, often do: so did the French Queen Katharine, who to establish her Regency
after Henry the Second, found no better means then to abolish the fundamental
Laws, the order of the Realm, the privilege of the Princes of the blood, the
authority of the general Estates, and the Prerogative of the Parliaments. O
surely it is a shrewd grief to undergo the cross purposes Princes affairs are
ruled by. Philip the Fair would needs raise impositions of ten Deniers on every
livre in Merchandises and Wares, Hist. France, p. 157.
the people in Picards, Normandy, Orleans, Lions, and other places flew into
such sedition that they made his life a trouble to him. And in Charles the
Sixth's time, by reason of high Government, it came to that pass, that his very
Servants banded against him, his Counsel plotted his ruin, and the chief
Controulers of his actions were the Princes of the blood. These, These, are the
miseries of Governments depending on will, which is such a wild thing, Toll
malam voluntatem, and toll^ ^ gehennam,
if not bounded by God who only can keep it from the hour of temptation and
miscarriage, that there is nothing more fatal (except Hell) then it is; nay,
it is that which makes the Hell of torment. This boundless Will in the
dangerous effects of it, is the cause of that His non ponderatis, which
produces Tallagia alia, etc. to the ruin and grief of subjects; for when
Greatness is set upon the carier, and will go on non obstante Religion and
Justice: O then it is nothing but God can remora it. Saint Clovis, the Founder
of the Gallique Greatness, is storyed to commence his Achievements after a
method very dreadful; He slew all his Kinsmen that their Principalities might
come to him and his Race, he spoiled men prodigeously of their goods, he seized
and slew Chararie and his son, condemning them (as they were polling) to be put
into a Monastery; the son seeing the father weep bitterly said, These green
branches will grow again, for the Stock is not dead, but God will suffer him to
perish that causes them to be cut off; which speech Clovis hearing of, said,
They complain for the loss of their hair, let their heads be cut off, and
slain they were. Add to this his Conspiracy with the servants of Raguachair,
and when they had brought Raguachair bound into his presence, he reviles him
for unworthy the blood of Merovee thus to suffer himself to be bound; and when
those that he hired to bind him came for their reward, he reproached them with
Avaunt Traitors, French Hist. p. 16, 17.
Is It not enough that I suffer you to live, I love the Treason but I hate the
Traitor: these and sundry the like which Gregory of Tours charges on him, make
him a most grievous sinner though a great King, and the more grievous because
so great a Personage. All these confirm, that Oppression proceeds from
unlimited Wills. When Princes give way to vage desire, they bound no where, but
think what they have too little, when what they would have, is far further too
much. Alas, What would the French Monarch have more then he has, who has all
his Subjects have? Enlarge his Revenues he would, but to what proportion he
knows not himself, nor do his Subjects: Lewis the Eleventh advanced the
Revenue of France one Million and half of Crowns; Francis the First doubled
that Advance; his Successor Henry the Second doubled the first double; Charles
the Ninth added to the six Millions a seventh; Henry the Third brought the
seven to ten Millions, and after to fifteen; in Henry the Fourths time the
Treasurer of the Duke of Mayenn said that his Master had more improved the
Revenues of the Crown of France then any King had done before him, Heylin's
Geogr. p. 238.
advancing it from two to five Millions Sterling, and yet not a tenth part come
clearly to the King's Revenue, the Crown having 30000 Officers to gather its
Revenue. These and the like unhappinesses of our natures in height of fortune,
argue Princes as men in danger, and Subjects under the ill Aspects of that
Greatness, not happy, but as the Text's words are, Lacessita Plebs
calamitatibus in miseria non minima vivere.

His and ae^ iis calamitatibus Plebs illae lacessita in miseria non minima
vivit.

These forementioned and others equivalent Oppressions, (...).
he calls Calamitates, to set forth the inevitable and fatal nature of them:
for Calamitas is properly the violent beating down of Corn or other vegetables
by Wind, Hail, Rain, or other Tempest. Theophrastus to show the demolishing
nature of it, renders it by (...), that which causes pain in the fracture of a
bone. From this Calamitas comes clades, which originally is Surculorum
contritio, and so Calamitas calamorum is taken for Strages stratarum arborum;
here it imports such affliction and sorrow of straight as men in love have, and
as those that we say are at their Wits end, that know not which way to bestirr
themselves. Lacessita Injuriis] Made mad by oppression, 4 Eccles. 7.7. Livius.
as the phrase is; thus Lacessere aliquem ad pugnam and bellum is To provoke to
battle, and Sermones lacessere To provoke talk; and when Silius says the Bull
does rupes lacessere, he relates to the Bulls madness, which will butt his rage
against the hard Rock; and Turnebus when he reproaches intemperate men, Mortem
lacesiit qui luxuriose intempevanterque vivendo valetudinem labefactar. Turneb.
advers. lib. 11. c. 19 ad finem.
says, they do Mortem lacessere; and I remember Donec privatus capit^, docuit
suo miserabili fine nobiles Milites non lacessendos, In Edw. 1. p. 66.
Walsingham writing of Pierce Gaveston says, he did Lacessere insolentiis
Regni Nobiles, etc. He provoked by his insolences the Nobles of England, till
they took his head off, and therein taught him m^re wit then to provoke honor
and valor. By then this clause, Rusticos pascua esse Militum, Milites pascua
esse Diabolorum, Dictum Ludovic. 12.
Lacessita plebs in miseria non minima vivit] the Chancellor does not only
mean they are kept short, as those pastures are that are overlaid, but so
afflicted as those are that have craving bellies, and no food or money to buy
it. This Cominaeus in other words sets out to the life, France he tells us was
before and in Charles the Sevenths time twenty years afflicted with grievous
exactions, which Lewis his son increased upon them (as if he had fullfilled
that commination that God threatened in that scourge of his, Deuteronomy. 28.^1.
That should eat the fruit of the cattle and the fruit of the land until the
people be destroyed, who also shall not leave Corn, Wine, or Oil, or the
increase of the Kine, or flocks of the Sheep, until they have destroyed them;)
for so immane was he, that my Cominaeus De Gestis Ludov. lib. 10. p. 403.

Note this.


Author says, It was amiserable thing to consider the extremities his cruelty
forced people to: which makes me often to mind my self and all my Countrymen
to be thankful to God for his mercy in our good Princes and good Laws, which
do not only give us freedom and security with full consent, but deny the
contrary upon pious and politic grounds. Cambden in his Remains.
For as England has ever had more Parkes and Chases in it then any part of the
world no larger then it, ever had or has; so has it had more in number and
virtue Pious and Merciful Princes then any Nation of the Christian World ever
has had; which is the reason the Laws and they, have so well agreed to bless
their people with riches, freedom, and cooperation in Government under them,
that I may (under favor of the great and noble State-Oracle, the now Lord
Chancellor of England) use his words very seasonably here, when speaking of
our most dear and beloved Sovereign he says, The Lord Chancellor's Speech at
the opening of the Parliament in May. 1661.
He has not yet given us, or have we felt any other instance of his Greatness
and Power and Superiority and Dominion over us, nisi aut levatione periculi aut
accessione dignitatis, by giving us peace, honor, and security, which we could
not have without him, by desiring nothing for himself but what is as good for
us as for himself, thus that Reverend and Honorable Sage; which makes me
reassume my former Magnification of the Government of England, in which there
is no slave, no Subject so vile and vulgar who can say he is lacessitus, or
does live in misery through the oppression of his Prince and the Laws; but
according to the thrift he expresses, and the blessing of God on it, lives in
the enjoyment of what they acquire to him. Which not being the happiness of the
people of France, they are said in our Text to live In non minima miseria;
Budaeus in Pandect. p. 193. Comment, lib. 6. de bello Gallico.
because, though they are in continual factions, according to that which
Caesar wrote long since of them, and Budaus does not deny, In Gallia, non solum
in omnibus Civitatibus, atque in omnibus pagis, partibusque; sed pene etiam in
singulis domibus factiones sunt, which is enough to; keep them miserable; yet
have enough whereon to support their lives and relations comfortably: yet is
that they have, so charged, that the exhaustion from it leaves nothing theirs,
but renders them so poor, That they do hardly keep life and soul together, for
the Text says Aquain quotidie bibit] As in the foregoing instances, the
fortunes and estates of the Peasants were charged, so as thence to render them
poor in estate; so here is a particularization of that which is in a sort
afflictive of their bodies, while, though they have wine and appetites to drink
it, their expenses be so enlarged by their taxes, that they are fain to spare
every luxuriancy to answer them* and for that cause, while they sell their wine
they drink water, and that not only sometimes for pleasure or medicine, but
quotidie, as often as they eat their bread, day by day. Now this water-drinking
the Text makes a part of their misery, not as water is the Mother of liquors,
(...), Dioscorides lib. 5. cap. 10. lib. 6. cap. 33.

Lege Commentar. in lib. 5. c. 10. p. 623.


and in some Countries, Seasons, and Cases excellently wholesome, being the
natural drink of man and beast, and so a blessing and no injury; but as it is
that, which in common account being cheap and chill, is improductive of such
generous Spirits as lustier liquors generate; and as it is that which has such
a mortifying operation upon nature, that it leaves the drinker dejected and
sad, and denies Nature all the merry notes of her Music and prankness. For
thus Water understood amongst all Nations passes for a drink of meanness and
want: hence that passage in the Prophet, wherein God alluding to the custom of
Power to afflict perverse and facinorous Delinquents with a dungeon, and only
bread and water therein, Isa 30.20.
says, Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and water of
affliction, yet it shall be well, intimating, that only bread and water are
the support of nature under adversity and affliction: so God's menacing
Ierusalem's reduction to short commons for abuse of her plenty, says, I will
break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, Ezech. 4.16.
and they shall eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drin^k water
by measure and with astonishment. So that to drink water daily, and that to
save charges, and to be able by such denial of themselves to gratify the great
levyes upon them, which they should be unable to disarrear if they did not so,
is that which confirms their misery according to the allegation of the Text,
Nec alium plebeii gustant liquorem nisi in solennibus festis] Though water be
most wholesome and the drink of epidemicalness, and though it does many good
offices to nature, feeding it to no excess, engaging the intrals to no
inflammation, though it impede corrosion and putrefaction, Ad tria sufficit
aqua, ad potandum, ad Lavandum, ad cibes coquendos; sic verbum Dei crudos
carnis cogitatus igne Spiritus sancti accedente coquit, and vertit in sensus
spirituales, and cibes mentis. Sanct. Bernard. Sermon. 22. in Cant. Caentic.
most of which injuries to nature are promoted by sophisticated wines, and
other ill-compounded liquors, as well as by salt, crude, and indigested diet;
yet when water is become (in this sense) of a servant a Master, when it, from
being serviceable to cleanlyness and to cookery of meat, advances to
concorporate with men, and that to be the only drink they must take down, then
it is hard. Water is thought cold comfort, welcome it is to Armies on their
march, and to Shepherds for their flocks, and to Travelers on their plod, and
to Garrisons in a siege, and to Prisoners in their Dungeons; but to men that
labor hard and have Wines growing, yet must sell their wines to pay
impositions and find Soldiers dainties, while they themselves are forced to
drink water, this is irksome. Yet the condition of France is such, that the
poor Peasant is kept so short, that eat and drink coursely he must; which
though some do in England, it is because of other accidents, not their
impositions. But in France the Plebs drink water except only Diebus Festis]
These Dies festi or Holy daeyes I have written of in the Notes on the 24
Chapter, that which I add here, is to notify the practice of Antiquity to
indulge to these great days, and the solemnities of them, extraordinaries of
all sorts, not only clothes and entertainments, Lib. (...), p. 1174. Non solum
autem vereres dicbus festis and laetis solebant templa ramis ornare and velare;
sed and in magna laetina familiaribusque sacris and nuptiis suos posts e^am
sertis umbrabant atque velabant and infulis decorabant ac insigmebant, addebant
and lucernas. Turnebus Advers. lib. 25. c. 4. p. 929. and lib. 27. c. 7. p.
1051.


but every other thing, the best whereof then appeared; so Philo tells us the
Jews did, and Turneb^s with Bud^ms out of the Roman Authors confirm. For
though I know they had their Budaeus in Pandect. p. 19. Edit. Vasco.
Dies Magui, besides these Festa; yet did they in these Festivals abound
argento, vest, omni apparatu, ornatuque, as In Pandect. reliq. p. 1^9. Imp.
Pasil. 1534.
Budaeus testifies: which entertainment of Festivals, as the Christian Church
has ever retained, as is evident in the Councils, and as Polydor Virgil has
made good: so also the custom of France is, that though the Plebs drink water
ordinarily, yet on Holy Days they feed and drink better; (c) Lib. 6. De
Invent, c. 8.
their compotations are then, as larger and freer, so more cheary and
spiritfull: then they tipple wine Cum Privilegio.

Froc^is sive Collobitis de canabo ad modum panni saccorum teguntur.

As their drink is water, so their garments mean, Frocks of Canvas made of
Hemp. This Frock anciently was the habiliment of Monk^; so Matthew Paris tells
us in the life of Wolnoth, and so Ingulphus; not that I would have it mistaken
as if these Frocks were that Vest we call the Candida Vestis or the Surplisse,
Formam Cuculli and Frocci quam colorem transmutavit Primitivum. In vita
Wolnothi. M Paris p. 38.
but that Monastique Garment, which of brown and course linen, or woollen hung
down from the neck to the knees, and which now Porters in London wear and
Horse-keepers: Indicit omni anno totum conventum cum secta sua de tunicis, omni
altero anno de Cucullis, and omni tertio anno de Eroccis, Ingulph. Hist. Croyl.
yea because they are worn also by Country Iobsons at this day, and denote
servility, we have a phrase when we would express our anger to one under our
power, I Will canvas his Iacket, or I Will canvas his Coat for him. This then of
Canvas hangs over their close garments, which is in color and nature much like
our Barge-cloaths, either brown or of an hair-colour, good for weather and
toil; and this I my self have seen the Peasants of France. in, God knows, with
wooden shoes and pitiful other accoutrements.

Ad modum panni sacculorum teguntur] Pannus is the general name for all that
which is (...), not only honey, oil, balsam, which keep the inward parts from
waste and injury; but that hemp, flax, and cotton, which rising from the
ground, cloth, In verbo 'P(...).
though course yet warm for outside covering, is made of. The Greeks call
Pannus by 'P(...), says Suidas. Indeed Pannus is taken for clothing of
meanness, and things of meanness; so Paracel^us calls a blemish born with one,
Lib. 15. c. 14. Advers. lib. 28. c. 13. p. 1080.
Pannus; Pliny styles the tumor or swelling in the groyne by Pannus, and
Turnebus tells us of pannaria mala; and Pannicularia in the In L Divus De bonis
damnator^m. Pannosus qut sordida vest, ^rassu panno vilique opertus est, nec
hoc nisi de panpere dicitur.
Digest signifies raiment and things of small value, not above five Crowns,
which a man carries with him into prison or the place of his death, so Vlpian
uses pannicularia; and he that is rude and beggarly in habit, a ragshame or
rakeshame is termed pannosus: so Justinus lib. 2.
Iustine tells us of a Military Feat that was done under disguise, Permutato
Regis habitu pannosus sarmenta collo gerens, castra^ hostium ingreditur; and
Saint Pannis involutus sacram in corpore suo dedicavit paupertatem, Sermon. 4. De
Nativ. Dom.
Bernard makes it A sanctification of poverty that our Lord humbled himself to
be Pannis involutus; thus for Panni. But the specification is Saccorum] Saccus
is one of the original words, that hold their own almost in all languages, in
the Heb. (...) or (...), whence the Greek (...), which is, to strain wine so
exactly as we would count it worthy our drinking, and keep it choicely as men
do Cordials; hence the best wine is called by Julius Pollux (...), Sacco Vinum
Veteres, Turneb. Advers. lib. 13. ^ c. 14.
and Theophrastus mentions (...), which wine, called Sack, holds its own (as we
say) for esteem even with us. From this custom of streining wine through these
Sacks or sacking, which were called Plin. lib. 24. c. 1. and 3.
Sacci Vinarii, we use to call every thing of linen or hair, that carries any
value in it A Sack, A Sack of Corn, A Sack of money (for money-baggs are little
Sacks.) Hence Religious men because their penitent souls are precious, and
their natural sins by their sorrow is dreined from them, were prescribed to put
on Sackcloath: from whence its grown the Livery of those Superstitionists, who,
under the pretext of Sackcloth, carry on subtle projects. So then when
Sackcloth is applied to the poor French, it is to show their poverty, which
cannot exceed the meanest clothing for their bravery.

Panno de lana praeterquam de vilissima, and hoc solum in tunicis subter
Fr^ccas illas non utuntur.]

Cloth of hair they wear, but cloth of wool they wear not, or if they do, but
that fort of it which is next door to hair, that is Dogs hair, as we
sarcastically call course cloth. For since the nature of the French is
confident and violent, necessity is on the King to humble them, if he will keep
his high Government; and if humble them he will, it must be in all things, as
well in clothes, as meat, drink, and money. And this the Text asserts he does
in that they are allowed no fine cloth to wear, for that is for fine fellows,
Masters of Peasants; the rough and course remains of refuse Wools are for their
Vests, and yet those not in view portending any value, nor in Garments of any
capacity; but in their short Coats like Cassocks, In Tunicis suis subter
Froccas.

Tunicae] most Authors agree to be the Cassock or Polonian Coats, Tunica
vestis estcui toga superinducitur, Budaeus in Tandect, p. 54. Edit. Vascos.
a Garment close and warm, which though the Greeks, and we after them (for
England was ever more like the grave then light Nations in habit and religion)
used long; yet the French Peasants cut off, wearing it in the place of a
doublet, it being loose and warm, plyant to the body in the labor and activity
of it. Some derive Tunica, a corpore induendo, others ab inducendo; because it
is a garment drawn over not only the body but also some other coverings of the
body. Critique Authors discourse much of this Garment: Advers. lib. 30. c. 30.
lib. 18. c. 19. lib. 11. c. 23. lib. 2. c. 4. lib. 18. c. 19. lib. 30. c. 21.
in Turnebus we read of Tunica Nilotis, Tunicae coloriae, Demissae tunicae,
Manuleatae tunicae, Tunicae Russae: and it should seem that the Laticlavian
Robe, which Senators had, Cui Laticlavii jus non erat, ita cingatur, ut tunica
prioribus oris infra genua paulum posterioribus ad medios poplit^^ usque
perveniant; nam infra mulicrum est. supra Centurionum, Budaeus in Pandect. p.
54. Edit. Vascos.
was a Tunica; which, though not so long as women's trains, yet longer then the
Military Coats, and was as the now Gowns Aldermen use, drawn over their other
clothes: so that Tunica understood for the exterior and visible Garment, was
applied to the externity of other things. The shell of a nut, Tunica nuclei;
Rosinus Antiq. Romans lib. 5. c. 35. p. 224.
the skin or coat that covers the eye, which Anatomists make Cornea, uvea,
vitrea, crystallina, this they called Oculorum tunica: that fatal Coat which
Malefactors had of Pitch about them, when they went to be burned, was called
Tunica molesta. In short, what the Text intends by Tunica is shortly uttered in
that which is the Country-mans garb with us, The short Coat; which, though our
Yeomen and Farmers wear, as Gentlemen do under a wide and longer vest: yet the
Peasants in France wear under their Frocks of Canvas or Sacking. And this is
their abatement and the badge of their servitude being the Vests of Porters.

Neque caligis nisi ad genna disco-operto residuo tibiarum.]
This further argues their suppression and vility, that they go barefoot,
having neither hose nor shoes, but those of wood, or old ones, the refuse of
our Nation transported thither. Now, as to be well shod as well as well clad
was among the Romans and is amongst all Nations a sign of freedom and
prosperity, Rosin. De Antiq. Romans lib. 5. c. 36. p. 225. Proprie as cruris
oppositum sura, Celsus lib. ^. c. 1.
so to be the contrary is a sign of extreme poverty. And therefore the French
Peasants are kept so poor that they cannot afford to buy hosen to shelter their
shin-bone (the Tibia here, which not only gives strength but beauty to that
flesh, which environing it, adorns and symmetrizeth the leg) but are fain to
go bare from the gartring, to which their breeches reach; and are so far from
great breeches (which are semi-pericoats, and the invents of effeminate
wantons, who by affectation of them proclaim their lubricity, and what it is
they are enamoured with) that they are glad they can purchase any thing that
will tolerably cover their body, and defend the knee, where the motive vigor
is, Arma quibus crura muniuntur Tibialia vocant. Hyeme quaternis cum pingui
toga tunicis, and subucula thorace laneo and femoralibus and tibialibus
muni^batur, In Aug. c. ^2.


from cold and injury; which breeches so girt under the knee, may well be
called Tibialia: as those other things were, which the Romans wore on that part
armed with it, of which Suetonius writes, and of which to write more would be
useless.

Mulieres etiam nudipedes sunt, exceptis diebus festis] This is a further
degree of the poor Peasants misery, that not only he himself must endure
hardship, but even his wife and Daughter; women in fex must do it also, and in
that, in this particular of going barefoot, the badge of very beggary. Now,
though true it be, that God made man, one nature, in two sexes; in which regard
Philo elegantly calls man, (...), Philo lib. De Cherubim. p. 115.
The male-woman, and woman, The female-man, puts them into conditions of
compassiency: (and the state of Marriage is under the indispensible condition
of For better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in health. And
usual it is, and otherwise it can not be, but that poor men's wives must be
miserable with their poor Husbands (I mean, in that scantness of outward
accommodation which men call a worldly misery:) yet, Muliards quast Molliores.
for women so to be objected to hardship is very irksome to any man to behold,
and unpleasing for me to write of. Tears here are the properest encounters of
these Narratives, and it is pity a pen should any further eternize such
Barbarism, then to be the remembrancer of that abhorrence, which men in all
successions ought to have of it, for women's sakes who suffer by it. But so it
is in France, the poor women are sain, to save hose and shoes, to go barefoot
and bare-legg'd, as beggars do, fulfilling that of Philo, though in another
sense then he meant it, (...), lib. De Temulentia, p. 247.
That they are subject to vulgar customs; only herein they exceed perfect
beggars, that they have hose and shoes for Holy Days, to Mass and to
Recreation, where they see and are seen, Cum autem esset dies sanctus
Pentecostes, supplicaverunt Cremonenses, ut propter diem sanctum differretur
Pugna usque in crastinum saltem. Rigordus De Mediolanensibus in Gestis Philipp.
Regis Franc. p. 212.
they will go trimm; otherwise, nasty and pitiful persons they about their
household affairs are. And this our Chancellor uses as an Argument of the
French Country-womens hard lives; though truly the Wives of their Nobless and
Villagers or Citizens, are plentifully accommodated with all necessaries; yea,
Fecit and in colle Quirinali Senaculum, id est, Mulierum Senatum, in quo ante
fuerat Conventus Matronalis solemnibus duntaxat diebus, facta and
Senatussonsulta ridicula de legibus Matronalibus, qua quo vestitu incederent,
quae cui cederet, qua ad cujus ofculum veniret, qua pilento, qua equo
saginario, quae asino veheretur, quae carpento mular^, qua boum, qua sella
veheretur, etc. Lampridius in Heliogab. p. 199. Tom. 2. Hist. August. Script.
Lat.
so glorious and gay are they, and so have they by their fashions newfangled
our Nation, that though I do not wish a revival of somewhat like that Senatus
Muliebris in Heliogabalus his time, which scoffing and deriding their vanities,
brought an Odium on, and diminution of women, the wearers of them. This, I say,
I wish not, least it too much lessen them (whom we men ought to have high value
of, and great loves for; because they are not only unspeakable blessings of
life, when they are worthy their names women, but also the means of the
continuance of the Race of mankind and so our temporal eternizers:) but that
which I do wish is without prejudice I am sure, Vopise. in Aurel.
and without all displeasure I hope to the truly worthy of that Sex; that as
In Pandect. p. 66. Edit. Vascos.
Budaus wished for Paris; so I, for London and the Suburbs, might see such a
constitution, Vt de nostratibus Matronis statueret, quae cuique cedere, quae
cuique Dux aut Comes esse deberet, quid gestare, quid indui, quid amieiri,
quidve cingi unamquamque deceret; but enough of this. Only, since the poor
men's wives of France are barefooted all days but Holy Days, and then put on
hose and shoes in reverence to those days, I cannot but wonder whence that
injunction of Simon Islip ArchBishop of Canterbury in Ed. 3. time should
proceed, Gulielm. de Nangis, De Gestis Ludovici Regis. p. 442. Script. Gall.
when Holidays being in the greatest esteem and credit, because Canonically
according to strictness observed, were to be days of recreation and devotion
(which is the reason that the Historian makes Saint Lewis the French King's
penance on Holy Days to be meritorious) and no Arts-man to work upon them;
Literis fuis patentibus sub poena excommunicationis praecipiens universis
Ecclesiarum Rectoribus and Vicariis sua Provinciae, and illorum subditis, ut de
catero non ab^^ineant in sestis quorundam Sanctorum; ab operibus manualibus and
servilibus, qua prius in talibus festis sieri non licebit. Walsingham p. 172.
yet then the Archbishop by his Letter Patents to all his Clergy, inhibited
upon pain of Excommunication, from abstaining on some Saints days from their
Callings of labor, and permitted them to work thereon as upon common days.
But I return to our Text.

Carnes non comedunt ibidem Mares and Foeminae, prater lardum Baconis, quo
impinguant pulmentariae sua in minima quantitate.

This Leut all the year with the poor Drudges of France, our Text produces as a
further argument of the tenuity of their condition, and their Taxes exhaustion
from them. For that they eat no flesh, is not (I conceive) from any religious
observation, or any State-injunction, but purely for cheapness sake; and by
their hard diet to enable them to keep somewhat about them to entertain their
Masters with, when they come abroad: and without which to treat and appease
them, they would be cruelly tyrannous. For flesh they breed up and have, and
stomachs they have to eat it, and a snap now and then they get of it; but they
diet on roots, grains, and fruits, which they make into pottages: this the Text
calls Pulmentaria] the same in effect with Pulmenta, that we call, Horat. 1.
Ep. 19. Ius porcorum, pullorum, piscium, and jus pulmentorum, Largissimas
epulas. Apuleius. Pulmentum pridem si eripait. Accius Plautus in Aulul. 9.37.
water-grewel, pulse, or thin pottage, the diet of poor people: to which Horace
alludes, Canes ut pariter pulmenta laboribus empta; and that which Apuleius,
Plautus, and others mention as thin diet: this the Text says they do make
hearty and strong with a small piece of lard of bacon, or, as I rather believe,
by the lard of bacon in the broth, they so quat their stomachs that they make
it go further by it; to this use of it Plautus alludes when he says, Ipse ego
pulmenta utor unctiusculo; and for this use lard of bacon is fitly called Lard
from arduo, quia ardor f^rmum and arduum facit; and thus bacon by being salted
and hung in the smoke, and over the fire, Succidia verbum Catonianum, quo
nostr^ lardum significant, ex quo in usum suum quotidie parts succidunt.
Agellius lib. 13. c. 23.
has much of the succulency, and moisture exhausted; which being the matter of
tenderness and putrefaction, renders it (in the absence of them) more compact,
firm, and durable. Now this Bacon or Lard, becoming a dish that will dure, is
ready ever upon the sudden, which is the reason that some of the * Ancients
have called it, Succidiam, because they do daily cut such portions off as they
use; and Tully says Cato was wont to call his garden hence Succidiam, quia
inde quotidie aliquod resecari possit. This then so cheap to the Peasants, who
bring up the swine of which it is made, and so ready at hand, and satiating the
gross labourer's stomach, is the flesh, that only those poor souls are able to
provide, which though they can do but in minima quantitate, yet better a little
then none at all.

Carnes assatas coctasve alias ipsi non gustant, praeterquam inter dum de
intestinis and capitibus animalium pro nobilibus and mercatoribus occisorum.

This shows, that the best of what they breed and kill, they sell to make Rent
and pay Taxes and Quartrings; and that which they keep is the course parts,
which are not moneys worth: and therefore they themselves sometimes feast with
it, but Carnes assatas coctasve, Roast and boiled meats, which are the Staples
of diet with us, they attain not to. Carnes assatas] This word assatas
Etymologists derive from ardeo; and in the best Roman Authors assare and assum
is as much as merum solum: Vbi aliquid aruit and rostum est, abit humidum,
solum id quod siccum and aridum superest Beeman. in verbo.
by way of Metaphor it signifies the effect of fire on any thing that extracts
by its heat the moisture of it, and thence obdurates it, leaving nothing almost
but siccity in it, or at least nothing so much as siccity; this our language
calls Through roasted. From this prevalency of fire, which by extraction of the
humid parts, leaves siccity to predominate in roasted flesh, Critiques term
every thing of solitary import by assare, and the words derivative from it, Vox
assa, A voice without Music, Tibiae assae, Music without voice; Assa, The
place in the baths where they do only sweat and not wash, we call it a Stove;
Assestrice^ vocabantur, quia assident f^ta. Etymolog.
Assae, Nurses that are so intent on the Babes they suckle, that they forget
themselves and their relations, to tend them: so Assam pro mero solo sine aqua
and humiditate. And when the Poets were said to devote a Poem to any particular
person, they were said assare; and their Poems were called Assamenta. This is
the Notion of the word, and the Ordeal by fire in which the flesh of beasts is
purged and made innocent to the stomach of man; as also it is by the Ordeal of
water ( Coctasve) which is the effect of fire working by water on flesh; not by
parching up, but by soaking out the moisture and humid parts of flesh, which it
allures to its self, and by which the liquour of its purgation is heigthned and
spirituated. This, though it has not the pre-eminence of the former, but
follows it in the account of cookery, we saying, roast and boiled, yet is very
wholesome diet; and for weak and declining bodies thought most nutritive. It is
with us here the diet mostly of the meaner sort, because it requires least
charge and attendance to its cooking; but in France they use it much, because
they delight in pottage, which is sier'd from it. Yet the Text says, the
Country people have neither one or other; all they of flesh attain to is the
offalls, the nobler parts are for the freemen, and those that are moneyed and
can fare and live high, which our Text says are the Nobiles and Mercatores.
The former for their blood and Commands sake, the greatness and dread of which
will fetch from the poor Commons whatever it desires: The later, the Merchant
or Citizen for his money sake, which does not only purchase him esteem in all
places, as Cassanaeus sets forth notably, Catalog. Gl. Mundi. p. 442.
but also procure him all conveniences to life and luster. Mercatores quia
pecuniam possident hisc^ temporibus, plurimum gratia valent; veru^ nulla
gaudent prarogativa; quta omnis lucri avidi professio Nobilitatem in Regno illo
maculat. Albergatus in Rel. Reg. Gallic. p. 115.
For though in France, Prerogatives and Seats of Honor and Military Tenure be
not purchaseable by Merchants and men of Trade; yet are such owned for very
rich in money and money's worth. And I think the Digest. lib. 23. tit. 2. art.
4^.
Julian Law, that prohibited a Senator's Son or Daughter to marry any one whose
Father or Mother did Artem ludicram exercere, will not in the exposition even
of France, which stands most upon Punctilio's, extend to men of Trade, Paulus
lib. 1. Ad Legem Juliam and Papiam. p. 2116.
the Mercatores here; seeing Trade of Merchandise, buying and selling staple
and useful commodities, is not Ars vilis but nobilis, (as noble as the
Advocate, who sells his breath to the Clyents fee, or the Soldier his life to
his Generals pay, or any other profession which men practice for reward) and so
the Holy Story accounts it, May. 23 8.
when it terms the Merchants of Tire, The honorable of the earth.

Sed Gentes ad Arma comedant alimenta sua, ita ut vix ova little ipsis
relinquantur pro summis vescenda deliciis.

Before it was Homines ad Arma, by which the Cavalry were understood; now it is
Gentes ad Arma, All the Soldiery. Provision the Peasants breed up, and perhaps
sometimes and in some measure sell to raise their Rents, and other charges, but
the most of what they get about them, by hard toil and parsimony, is but to
satiate the Soldier, not to recreate themselves: which makes me think these
poor wretches with others in the Asian Governments to be very miserable, and
those, that so belabour them with affliction and pressure, to justly fear the
return of that commination in Amos, Forasmuch therefore as your treading is
upon the poor, Amos. ^.11.
and ye take from him burdens of wheat, Zeph. 1.17. Verse. 21.
ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have
planted pleasant Vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them; for I know
your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins, etc. or that in Deuteronomy. ^8.36.
Deuteronomy. For truly if Poverty, which is God's affliction, be Great men's
marks to level their power at, and against it pitilessly to discharge it self;
if they that could eat flesh which they breed up, if they had it, are not
permitted an egg the slightest diet, Princes that have Subjects thus har^assed
and shortened, have great cause to have long ears and quick eyes; yea soft
hearts, to hear their Subjects groans, pity their griefs, and remove their
afflicters; and that not so much upon politic and plausible grounds, as upon
Principles of conscience to avoid the terrors of deathbeds, and the wrath of
their eternal and supereminent Sovereign, under whose power they themselves are
as well as the meanest of their people; so Jews the Pious told the world when
he was in affliction, Quod enim conservandis Regibus firmius praesidium, quam
pietas, quam mansuetudo, quam clementia and liberalitas esse potost. Gaguinus,
lib. 4. fol. 32. Edit. veter.
That nothing preserved Kings so safe as piety to God, clemency, meekness, and
justice to men. And Philip the Fair, when he was to dye, calling for his Son
Lewis that was to succeed him, said to him thus, Lewis, hitherto of my life I
have reigned as a Monarch, vexing my people with unreasonable, Ludovice,
inquit, Regnau^ ha^tenus, plur^^is vectigalibus and tributis meum populum
vexans, nec mihi satis cura fust, monetam cudere, qua legitimi ponderis esset;
came ob rem mu^torum odia in me concitavi: Ecce, post me regnaturus es, miserere
Patris animae,. and quae perperam a me gesta sunt. ipse emendes. Idem lib. 7.
p. 70. B.
and to them ruining taxes and tributes, debasing my coin, by making that go
for a value which indeed it was not worth, by this means I have raised the
hatred of my Subjects against me: O Lewis, behold thou art to reign after me,
have pity upon the soul of thy father, which is now departing, and see thou
amend what has been faulty in my Government, thus He. And thus have our pious
English Monarchs breathed out their Imperial souls in benedictions to the
people, and valedictions to the world, showing that they dyed in the love of
God as well as of men: Hear the Soul that was All, (as it were Heaven on Earth)
The true Glory of Princes consists in advancing God's Glory, Eicon Basil. c.
27. To the then Pr. of Wales, now our Gracious Lord and Sovereign.
in the maintenance of true Religion and the Churches good; also in the
dispensation of Civil Power with Justice, and Honor to the public peace: And
in another place, Since the public Interest consists in the mutual and common
Good both of Prince and People; nothing can be more happy for all, then in
safe, grave, and honorable ways to contribute their counsels, in common
enacting all things by public consent, without Tyranny or Tumults, etc. And
how well this counsel in the name of God and by Paternal Authority given, is
obedientially followed by our most excellent Lord and Master, Hear himself to
his Parliament expressing, A word in season is like Apples of gold in pictures
of silver.
In God's name provide full Remedies for any future mischiefs; Be as severe as
you will against new Offenders, especially if they be so upon old Principles,
and pull up those Principles by the roots: but I shall never think him a wise
man, who would endeavor to undermine or shake that The Happy Act of Indemnity
and Oblivion.

A divine sentence is in the lips of the K. his mouth transgresses not in
Judgment. Prove. 16.10.


Foundation of our public peace, by infringing that Act in the least degree;
or that he can be my friend, or wish me well, who would persuade me ever to
consent to the breach of a promise I so solemnly made when I was abroad, and
performed with that solemnity; because, In his speech at the opening of the
Parliament. 1661.
and after I promised it, I cannot expect any attempts of that kind, by any
men of merit and virtue: thus divinely, and like himself speaks our good King.

This disgression I have thought fit to make in relation to that sensibleness
which good Princes have of their poor Subjects conditions, which surely they
must needs relent at, who have Subjects dutiful to them, yet so miserable,
that though they breed up flesh and dainties, hardly can keep on egg, the most
trite thing about a Country, dwelling, for their own dainties, but are fain to
crouch to the Soldiers that quarter with them to their undoing, so says the
Text, the misery of the poor Peasant is, Vix ova eorum ipfis relinquuntur pro
summis vescenda deliciis, Et si quid in Opibus eis aliquando accreverit, quo
locuples eorum aliquis reputetur, concito ipse ad Regis subsidium plus Vicinis
suis caeteris oneretur; quo, ex tun^ convicinis cateris ipje equabitur
paupertate.



This is a further degree of misery, that a Governor's eye should be evil
because God's is good; or, that the thrift of a subject, not by vice or
villainy, but by labor and frugality, should be the occasion of his scrutiny in
order to his diminution. This, though it be here said to be the condition of
the Peasant, yet is not his affliction from his Prince or Parliament; Si vis
tribunus esse, immo si vis vivere, manus militum contiu^ Nemo pullum alienum
rapiat, ovem nemo contingat, uvam nullus auferat, segetem nemo deterat, oleum,
sal, lignum nemo exigat: annon sua contentus sit de praeda hostis, non de
lacrymis Provincialium habeat. Flavius vopisc. de Aureliano in Epistol.
Militari. p. 273.
but from those Soldiers in command near him, who can so pester him with
inroads, and charge him with levyes, that those lunches out of him shall leave
him as bare as his Neighbors: A cruelty that surely the Judge of quick and
dead will severely punish, and such as the Prince, whose Agents these are,
should endeavor to understand, and understanding to punish and redress; which
Forcatulus, that learned French Lawyer, Ego boni ducis functus sum officio, qui
debellare hosts didici, and socios honorifice tractare, corumque ulcisci
injurias; didicerat autem optime Militum licentiam coercere, inquiens,
Principem irritare Milites quos non castigat. Forcatulus De Gallor. Imp. and
Philosoph. lib. 5. p 330. B. Imp. Paris 157^.
says, was the excellency of Meroveus, the Founder and Amplier of the French
Government, Who thought it his duty to overcome his enemies by valor, and
oblige his party by kindeness, and not to permit his power to be abused to the
injury of any, not to suffer his Army to be licentious, but to restrain them
where such they were; accounting it an encouragement to violence, not to
prevent it by strict Mandates, and to punish it when, notwithstanding them,
perpetrated: by which means he appeared not to them a rigid Lord, Ideoque
omnibus populariter charus atque ita venerandus, ut ab ipso posteri Reges
Merovingi in Francia appellari caeperint, indicio manifesto rarae virtutis.
Idem eodem loco.
but a calm Father, and so inserted himself into the love of the people, that
to mind his Successors of what the people delighted, they should after his
example express toward them, they called them Meroveus's. And surely if this
example had been followed in France in our Chancellour's time, he would not
have had so just occasion to have bemoaned the miseries of the poor Peasants,
as in other, so in this respect. For as enjoyments of men's acquisitions is a
great encouragement to them to industriously endeavor, and ingenuously design
their plenty and locupletation: so to be deprived of those compensations, and
to become the spoil of others, who by their power worry their plenty and rape
it from them, is a disheartning of him to any thing above idleness; or at best
to make him but slow and improlifick in expression of himself. For since the
French Nation, Caesar lib. 6. De Bell. Gall.
according to their old Druid delirancy, derive their Origin from Dis the God
of riches, Cic. lib. 2. De Not Deorum.
that so many poor wretches should be in the Nation, who have not prodigally
wasted their patrimonies, if any they can be thought to have from that
Tradition, must proceed from the violence of some over others, and the success
they have had therein against them; Galli natura feri sunt atque superbi, and
in rebus tentandis animosi, in prosperis intolerandi, in suis commodis augendis
assidui, in alienis negligentes, and in re bellica saepe promissa fallentes.
Quandoquidem hac apud illos viguit opinio, ubi commodum adest, ibi quoque
adesse honestatem and Majestatem, soletque proverbio usurpari habeas Galliam
amicum, s^d vicinum nequaquam. Albergatus in Discursu Politic. p. 160.
which has made the Nobless absolutely great and rich, and the Peasants
absolutely poor and miserable: And for which no better Apology can be made,
then what I have heard, and is generally the character of the common French
people. Keep them poor and servile, and they will be gentle and loyal; but let
them prosper and be flush, and the waves of the Sea are not more insolent,
proud, and boisterous then they are.

Haec ni fallor forma est status gentis plebanae Regionis illius] This
concludes the narrative of the common man's condition in France; which, though
it be full of tristicity, and in the severalities of it very unwishable,
because beneath the delight or endurance of a free spirit; yet must be borne by
those whose subjections to their Prince calls them to this servitude: which
though the Chancellor has given me from this Text occasion to illustrate and
civilly to aggravate, with all those Historique circumstances, that carry it to
a plenarty of discovery, and thereby render it unamiable; yet as the
Chancellour's scope then; so mine now, is not to provoke those Subjects to
impatience, or to arraign the Polity of that great and Majestique Nation; but,
by the detection of that (so indulgent to Military men and their accommodation,
and so unbenign to men in courses of civil life, such as is Husbandry, Arts,
Merchandise,) to raise a just value and religious gratulation to God, and the
Kings and Parliaments of our own Nation, by whose favors and mediations there
is therein impartiality of freedom to all, Every man bear setting under his own
Vine and under his own Fig Tree; (and the Laws being equally the benefit and
terror of poor and rich, noble and common Subjects as they are good or bad.)
We, that are so privileged by and happy under this Paradis'd Government, ought
to express all loyalty and readiness to observe the Laws, and venerate the
Lawmakers, who certainly have been ever as true nursing fathers to this
Nation, as love, cohabiting with humane infirmity, would permit them: nor have
for the most part more concerned themselves to promote their own private
interest then consisted with the respective interest of their Subjects,
according to the measure of the known Laws; so declares good King Charles the
Blessed, I can be contented to recede much from mine own interests and personal
rights of which I conceive my self to be Master, Bicon Basil. cap. 6.
but in what concerns Truth, Justice, the Rights of the Church, and my Crown,
together with the general good of my Kingdoms (all which I am bound to preserve
as much as morally lies in me) here I am and ever shall be fixed and resolute,
so He. And so should every subject testify his loyalty to be fixed and
resolute for the King, his Laws, and his peoples rights, against all insolence
and innovation that rises up against them; for the Law being the surest
foundation, Note this.
all appearance according to it, and in opposition to whatever is frowardly
contradictory and adverse thereto, is very worthy good Subjects: And I pray God
give us all of this Nation the grace, To fear God and honor the King, and not
to hearken to them that are given to change. Thus much concerning the French
Plebs, and the restraint of them.

Nobiles tamen non sic exactionibus opprimuntur.] This shows the partiality
that is in France, in that the poor go to pot, while the rich go if not
scot-free, yet are not exacted upon; for France being a Military Government,
and the Nobless attending the King in his Wars and Armies, Non contribuunt ad
collectas Nobiles and ex constit. Carol. 6. cavetur no subsidia aliqua, talia,
focagia, impositiones, auxilia, a Nobilibus and little Successoribus solvantur
vel exigantur Tholoss. Syntag. Juris. lib. 3, c. ^. ss. 6.
excuse themselves and their estates from all forage and charge, putting the
whole burden on the poor Tradesmen, Vine-dressers and Husbandmen: and this the
Nobless do by a kind of Aboriginal right, as the instance of their freedom.
And not to suffer them to be thus privileged, were to enrage them to those
disorders that their quick spirits are naturally inclined to, Gallorum enim
Optimates recepto more, qui in Francos translatus est, cafuriem insignem and
copiesam lubenter ostentaverunt, ^^ fortasse libentius quod (ut jam dixi)
Franci quasi Liberi potissimum nominarentur. Forcatul. lib. 5. De Gall. Imp. Et
Philo p. 300. B. Edit. Paris. 1579,
and their enraged anger would make them persist in. Therefore as the great men
of France have ever gloryed in great heads of hair unpolled, as a token of
their being freemen; so have they preserved to themselves the liberty not to
be polled of their fortunes by exactions. For by this means the King does not
only keep up his Horsemen to keep under the rude common people, and repress
the insolences of their discontents; but prevents the dangerous effects of
displeased and unobliged Greatness: which has been such a pest to France, that
it has not only raised great Armies in it, but kept them so raised up to the
waste and spoil of men and treasure. For great spirits are impatient of
diminution, and when they are that way as they think undervalued, meditate
Returns, edged from the irritation of rage and grief, which ever make a
desperate medley, as in Contarino's assault of Forscari Duke of Venice
appeared; for that only proceeded from the opinion Contarino had that Forscari
was the obstacle to his Admiralship of the Adriatique Seas. Shute's Hist of
Venice.
And so in other cases abundantly might be instanced, the avoidance whereof is
that which dictates to a Non provocation of great persons and parties, which is
the reason the Text says, Nobiles non sic exactionibus opprimuntur.

Sed si illorum aliquis calumniatus fuerit de crimine, licet per inimicos suos,
non semper coram Iudice Ordinario ipse convocari solet; sed quam sape in Regis
Camera, and alibi in privato loco.

This Clause presents the Nobless not sometimes very happy: for since Greatness
is subject to temptation and Envy, both which are productive of Enemies, and
Enemies contrivers of Accusations, and Accusations too often believed, and
proceeded upon before the truth of things be thoroughly examined, greatness is
even in France a thing of danger: for, who can be secure there, where his enemy
may accuse, and he not be capable to defend himself juridickly; nay, how can
innocence stand in judgment, if it may not be tried per Pares, Persons of
Honor, as the Peers of a Nation cannot but be presumed to be. Yet the Text
says this is the condition of the Nobility in France, who, though they are
privileged, that in criminal Cases they usually may answer and defend by their
Proctor, Tholoss. Syntag. Juris universi. lib. 32. c. 24. ss. 20.
that they contribute not toward payments to the King, ( Talia namque munera
plebriis imponuntur pro modo suarum facultatum, as my Guido Pap. Decis. 384.
Authors words are;) though I say, Non sic exactionibus opprimuntur] yet their
persons are in danger and their fortunes too, by being accused and condemned
clandestinely as it were. Non semper coram Iudice Ordinario] in common
apprehension, is before the Judges that judge according to the Laws of
Nations, and the Customs of the Country, and are men of Law, and Graduates in
that faculty. But the Notion of Ordinarius Iudex in France, Ordinarii Judices
vocantur in Gallla qui judicant, cum ipsi non sunt periti, id est, non sunt
graduati in Iure; omnis enim graduatus prasumitur esse peritur. Et ideo his
Iudicibus appenduntur Assessores, qui homines sunt perite, and qui illos
judices informant in jure in omnibus Casibus. Catalog. Gloriae Mundi. p.
293.294.

Ordinaria and delegata potius copulantur p. 293.


as I have it from Cassanaeus a Frenchman born, and a Lawyer bred, is this,
When a man is to judge a cause who has no Law in him, but goes (as it were)
according to the private instructions he has from his Superior, or according
to the swing of his own will, having no rule to go by. Now, though true it be
that these Judges purposely delegated, and termed Ordinary, (because they have
but the learning of ordinary men in them, that is, they know no more of the Law
then is the Law of reason) ought to be ruled by the judgment of the Lawyer, or
Lawyer's assistant to, and associated with them in the Commission, and so
mostly are and proceed according to the course of the Laws in those Cases. Yet
so sad is the case of the Nobless there, that always they are not summoned to
a juridical answer; but sometimes, yea, quam saepe, that is, sapissime, are
summoned into the Camera Regis to hear their dooms according to their Princes
Royal wills and pleasures: now, this Camera Regis is not Paris the Royal City,
as London also here is, and thence in the Statute of 3 and 4 E. 6. c. 21. is
termed the King's Chamber, nor the Bedchamber or Chamber of Presence, which
the Greeks called (...), because it was arched on the top and had a unequal
figure, which they render by Fornex, the Archness of its figure being the same
in building that the Psalloides is in the body, argues state and united
strength. Hence Camera signifies any thing that has an Arch-figure, Rosinus
Antiq. Romans lib. 10. c. 20.
Camera Naves sunt archae and exiles, like close Liters, or Arks rather, which
(...). lib. De Nominum Mutatione p. 1050.

(...). lib. 3. Devit. Mos. p. 668.

Camera, id est, ex arca Domini. Tholoss, Syntag. Juri. lib. 6. c. 3. ss. ^.


Philo calls, The sacred repository of the Law, and the Vessel fitted for their
retention; it being the custom of Antiquity to make their Chests for any
sacred purpose Arch-figured, as we see at this day in many old Churches in the
Chancells of them: and these Chests were the Camerae of the Church-untensils,
Plate, Registers, Copes, Vestments, etc. wherein those times deemed the
external Majesty of Religion to consist. This is some notion of Camera, Camera]
vela ad excipiendum pulverem, ne super mensas spargeretur atgue dapes simul
conspurcaret Ab Horatio Aulaa vocatur, quem morem hodie Principes and Monarchas
servare compertum est. apud quos mensas sub quibusdam veluti Tentoriis sericess
parars sape videmus. Rosinus Antiq. Romans lib. 5. c. 27. p. 211.
which, as to the Text's sense, may (as I conceive) be the Chamber of the King,
where he lies down to rest, for in Military times Princes had their Pavilions
in the fields with their Armies, over which they had Arches not only to
prevent weather and wind, but dust and filths accession to them; and these
were called Aulaea, like the Canopyes of State, Monarchs to this day use to
dine and sleep under; some call them Tentoria sericea: to these in our settled
times, wherein Princes have fixed Courts, these Camerae do succeed; and the
officer of State, that has the charge of them, is called Camerarius Regis: Qui
praest cubiculo Camera Regi^ Cassan Catal. Gl. Mundi. p. 263.
in France, Le grand Chambellan. None of these Chambers does the Text chiefly
intend, but the sense of our Text-Master in alleging this, is to tell us, that
when Great men are in France under displeasure, they are summoned to the King's
Chamber (not his Chamber des Comptes, or Chamber du domaine, or Chamber du
Counsel, Serres Hist. of France, p. 559. London Impress. 1607.
or Chamber doree, but his Chamber Royal purposely erected as a Court of
censure and doom: for when any, that were of dangerous consequence, appeared,
they were called to the King's Chamber; so were the Lutherans in Henry the
Second's time, and others down all along since) to hear their doom. Et alibi in
privato loco, etc. Up he go, and his doom is privately adjudged him, without
judgment of his Peers, or defense of himself, Mox ut criminosum, eum Principis
conscientia relatu aliorum judicaverit; very hard to be condemned unheard, yet
it must be undergone, In Sacco positus absque figura Iudicii per propositi
Mariscallorum Ministros noctanter in flumin^ projectus submergitur] surely a
Judgment full of terrible cruelty, The Judgment on Parricide; Modestinus ad
L. Pompe^am de Paricidiis.
for of old, Parricides were scourged with bloody Rods, then put into a Sack
with a dog, a cock, a viper, and an ape, Schottus in Notis ad Contr. 17 Senec.
lib. ^. p. 142.
all alive sewed up with them, and they all cast with the Sack into the Sea.
And though I confess no Judgment can be too severe for such a Villainy as it is
to kill the Pater Patriae; Minime majores nostri lagendum putaverunt ^um, qui
ad Patriam delendam and Parents and Liberos interficiendos venerit. Pomponius
Digest. lib. 11.
yet this of giving an offender a cruel death, Absque forma Iudicii, is much
more rigid then (I doubt) to God can well be answered; for he being the father
of Mercies and the fountain of Justice, delights not to see Princes, Lib. De
Septenatio and Festis, p. 1^84.
in power under him, to be inclement and truculent, (...), as Philo's words
are, As not only the punishers of them offending in making their lives a
torture to them, but after depriving them of an easy dispach; for this he
accounts the error of his entrust, and too near a compartization with those
quadrupedial furies which he has inferiorated to man in reason, and thence
made the Subjects of his Empire: but that which he loves and commends in those
earthly Gods, whose lustres both of power and life are determinable, is, That
they should imitate him in beneficence, (...), Philo lib. de Judice, p. 721.

Philo in lib. Quod det potiori, p. 170.

(...). Idem lib. de Mundi Opific. p. 19.


in suffering the Sun of their favor and the Rain of their care to impend all
their Subjects; and though they correct their enormities, yet they then should
pity their infirmities, and bestow their Compassions on them as men in nature
with themselves; and if this they would do, considering themselves (...), etc.
The divine Artifice, whereby it has exemplified its transcendency to the
utmost capacity Mortality can attain to; their wills would be the Law by the
victory their goodness gets over the loves of men, rather then their persons
and power be terrible to them: then would not that complaint of our Text be so
true as it is, Qualiter and mori audivisti majorem multo numerum hominum quam
qui legitimo process^ Iuris extiterunt] For however some Princes in the (...)
and lustiness of their power may pish at calm and paternal exhibitions of
themselves to their politic Children; A good Monition to Greatness.
yet, when Experience the best Master has ingenerated the calmness of wisdom in
them, they will account it the only rise to continuation and serenity: nor can
any Prince be thought, as Lewis the Twelfth was, A Father to his people, but he
that by Justice governs, by Prowess defends, by Parsimony enriches, and by
clemency obliges his Subjects; for fury and severity unallayed by that Regal
Grandeur which uses them only as Physic, is not the endowment of Kings, but
the intemperance of sinful nature, which, though it torments others for a
while, yet ends in the reproach and dishonor of its Practicers. And therefore
let flattery prostitute truth never so much to the temporary satisfaction of
licencious Greatness, yet all things done beyond the rules of Religion, Magnum
sine mensura, dicitur enorme. Plin. Ep. 203.
Morality, and National Laws, are Enormia; for since these are the squares and
proportions according to which Imperial Architects should raise and carry on
their politic fabrique, Longitudines ad regulam and lineam, altitudines ad
perpendiculum, anguli ad normam respondentes exigantur. Vittuvius lib. 7. De
Opere Tectorio.
whatever in any dimension transgresses this, is enormous: and though men mince
it, and write not so openly and with vehemence as our Chancellor does of the
absoluteness that is taken from color of that Maxim of Law, Quod Principi
placuit, which means nothing less then is imposed upon it to be its sense; yet
do they in their hearts conclude, that such things are detestabiliter,
damnabiliterque perpetrata, that is, that they are sins committed by them
against the Laws of their Government, and therefore in their nature detestable,
and against the Laws of Religion and therefore damnable: which Doctrine
certainly, as true as truth it self, if it had been canonized at Rome, would
have undermined that horrid Artifice of secular policy which is conclav'd
there; and which wrought puissantly, Fuller's Hist. of the Worthies of England
in Lincolnshire. p. 155.
and to a notorious degree of wickedness in the case of Robert Somercot our
Countryman, whom I read storyed for one of the foremost of the three Elects
for the Popedom after the death of Pope Gregory: the Card^nals being set to
have an Italian and not an English man (and Celestine as after he was called
and not Somercot) made Somercot away by poison to prevent his obtainment of the
Chair, which they feared otherwise he would have had; but enough of this. For
as our Chancellor here took leave of the memory of these practicks to excuse
his Dialogue from any suller Register of them, Lege Cassanaeum part. 5. Catal.
Gl. Mundi. p. 198^. and seq.
and to prevent the exasperation of his pen, which might else be keener then
otherwise would be convenient; so shall I, after his judicious example, desist
the further Comment on this Chapter, the residuary parts whereof are only
enunciative of the design of this his exageration in what passages has
concerning the people of France occurred, and concerning the Subjects of
England are further to be produced. And as on the Text that concerned the
people of France I have discoursed with all the veracity and modesty I could,
acknowledging the French Nation very wise, warlike, and prosperous, and their
Government best fitted for their Clymate and People; so shall I, in what
follows concerning the just equity and excellency of the English Laws, and the
condition of England's men under England's Monarchs, write the truth and
nothing but the truth, according to the modesty and humble submissedness I have
herein endeavored to express, Acta exteriora indicant interiora secreta. Reg.
Juris Cook ^ Rep. 146.
and hope I shall be by my betters allowed to have accordingly acted, hoping,
that God will give us of this Nation grace, upon sight of the mercy we enjoy
beyond others, to value out Governors and Government above others, and to pray
for, and give obedience to the King, his Parliament, and his Laws, now happily
flourishing amongst us. For surely if there be any National Government that has
a symmetriousness to the Government of Heaven, The Author's hearty Advice to
his Countrymen.
it is this of our native Country; wherein, as our Sovereign resembles (with
reverence to God the incomparable King of Kings and Lord of Lords I write it)
the supreme Wisdom and Goodness, Rex hoc solum non potest facere quod non
potest injuste agere. Reg. Juris Cook. 11 Rep. p. 72, 74.
being by the Law said to be under no defect, and not possible (as King) to do
wrong; so his Peers and Commons in Parliament do (in their proportion)
assimilate Angels and Saints; Attribuat Rex Legi quod Lex attribuit et,
videlicet. Dominationem and Imperium Non est enim Rex ubs dominatur Voluntas
and non Lex. Bracton. lib. 4.
and his Laws, that divine charity which directs all the Subjects to fear and
love him, and to be at peace one with another. The consideration of which in
this blessed Ternary, might perhaps occasion that old saying, which thus is in
a good measure made plain by it, Regnum Angliae Regnum Dei, which though I know
to be commonly understood of God's particular Patronage of England; Ash. in
Fascicul. Florum Juris in Lit R.
yet may as well be intended of the form of our Government after the Model of
the Heavenly Empire: which premised, I humbly conclude this and enter on the
following Chapter.

CHAP. XXXVI.
In Regno Angliae nullus perhendinat in alterius domo, invito Domino.


AS in the foregoing Chapter he showed the misery of the open Country of
France, where the Soldier commands all, and makes the poor Husbandman afraid
to own himself Master of the house he lives in, and labors hard to pay his
Rent for; so in this he paralels the condition of the English-husbandman with
it: and he begins first with that which is the life of all security, the House,
which he says the Common Law does so preserve to the owners Propriety, that no
man can come upon his ground against his will but is a Trespasser; no man lodge
in his house without his consent and against his declared mind but is
punishable, and, as the case may be, a felon for so doing. Now this the
Chancellor does to show the just Imperiality of the Crown of England, 26 H. 8.
c. 1. 8 Eliz c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4. 2 Instit. p. 274.
which, as it depends on none but God, to whom only our Kings are (as to their
Superior) accountable, (the Popes of Rome being but 12 Eliz. c. 2. 25 H. 8. c.
12.
Usurpers in their claim, and God jealous of and displeased at their insolent
rivalry with him, causing a fire at Lions that burned the Pope's Wardrobe
there, in which was that detestable Charter which weak King John made to the
Pope to bring the Crown of England into servage to the Sea of Rome, evidenced
his displeasure that any testimony should be extant of this Nations slavery.) I
say, as the Chancellor by this instance of the Text clears the freedom of the
Kingdom of England, so does he avouch the exemption of every Subject in it from
Vassallage; for as he asserts that the will of the Housekeeper is warrant
enough for a man's abidance in it, though he be not ordinarily of the family; so
does he assure, that the will of the Master not had, Common right in 2 E. 3.
called common Law 14 E. 3. 2 Instit. p. 56.
no man can long, if at all, lawfully abide therein: the reason whereof is from
that common right which the Common Law does every rightful Claimant to it for
aid, Sub clypeo Legis nemo decipitur is the rule, and this the justice of
England does to withstand intrusion upon men by bold braving persons; who else
would take up their Quarters, presuming on the courtesy they never deserved
nor are ever resolved to require. For though the civility of the Nation gives
welcome, and did infinitely more in old times then now, See the Notes on the 35
Chap.
to any man of creditable appearance, that came for a day and away, to any
house of credit; yet perhendinare (which imports three days stay, (...), and
under color of that, differ in longum, de die in diem) it denies to any
without invitation, which Invitation has a^ more amicable sense then the Invito
Domino] here, for that is an act of the will, choice, and allowance, which the
Greeks render by (...), a calling of one to him by his word, letter, or
servant, acquainting him when and what he is then and there to do; but this
Invito Domino is as much as the Master unconsulted with, and in defiance of,
and so not only without his privity, but against his publication to the
contrary. When any man stays in an house when the Master bids him be gone,
F^gitivum esse in ait Caelius, qui ea mente discedit, ne ad dominum redeat,
tame^si mutato consilio ad cum re vertatur; nemo enim tali peccato, poenitentia
sua noc^ns esse desinit. Ulpian. apud Digest lib. 21. Tit. 1. p. 1965.
he is a trespasser, and may be a felon, because he does Perhendinare in
alterius domo invito domino] for the Law looks at the commencement of every
action, and judges the effect according to it. And therefore if a man come
forcibly into my house, and after he has so done I show not my distaste because
I fear; yet the Law I suppose will judge the force offered, and not qualify it
by my after-silence, Quia quod ab initio non valet, progressu temporis non
convalescit: nor will the Law believe any man has a good intention to be
harmlesly in the house when he enters into it uninvited, and stays in it
against the pleasure of the Master of it, whose the house is, and to whom the
Laws and charges of hospitality in it are accountable.

Si non in Hospitiis publicis] These are public houses called Inns, and being
purposely appointed for receipt of strangers, if they carry themselves civilly
and keep lawful hours, they may presume the Masters good will as long as they
stay and spend their money in it; though I make no question but if any man or
men come to an Inn, and stay there above three days and nights (not having
business, or being impeded travel by the act of God, or other unthought of
accident) he or they may be suspected and drawn to give account of their stay
even in these houses: for the Law raising them for strangers and travelers
accommodation, intends they shall in the use of them be Sanctuaries of resuge
against the incommodations of Journeyes, and nor Lodges of disorder and
harbors of vice. The word Hospes, whence hospitia comes, the Law defines to
import a foreign dweller which has an house, Hospitalia] locus erat ubi
recipiuntur homines causa misericordia vel auxilii. Digest. lib. 22. Tit. 1. p.
1966. S Asylum.
and because this house that is the receipt of those unknown persons that come
to it, does empty the purse of their guests by heigths of charges for
necessaries had in them, it makes the word (...) to be (...), the word used of
old for a stranger which we use for an enemy, which if an Host be, he is
unworthy his place, for that is to be friendly and true to strangers. And of
old before Inns and Hosts in them were in use, there were places of kindeness
set apart to receive strangers, Budaeus in Pandect. p. 84. B. Edit. Vascos.
which places were called Hospitalia or Pro^enia; hence Iuppiter Xenius was
called the Hospital God, and concerning affairs of these places they invocated
him: and as these were Residencies of amicableness, and the elder Ages used
them to maintain charity; so were these certain Emblems of kindeness
intercurrent, which being brought with the repairers to them, gave them the
assurance to receive welcome, as being not a cheat; but one really in amity
with them. These were, as heretofore I have mentioned, In Tandect. reliquas, p.
253.
which might be as our Tallyes clest in the middle, one part with the comer,
another residing with the Hospitallers, and without this brought and
corresponding with the other part, they that came with them were suspected and
not welcome; which probably gave rise to the Proverb with us, An unbid guest
must bring his stool along with him. At first the entertainment in these was
plain and homely, Judges v. 25.
probably they lay in straw; and had viands much like that in the Holy-Text,*
where it is said, Iael set butter and milk before Sisera in a Lordly dish; but
when the Greeks grew fortunate and effeminate, then their luxury spread its
self over all their civility; and by them was brought in great Entertainments,
not only lodging of them in gorgeous Chambers and rich Beds, but also the
first night entertaining them at a public supper, and next day sending them
pullen, eggs, apples, herbs, Note this.
and all other Country things: in reference to which perhaps the custom of our
Nation for the Sheriffs to entertain and present the Judges in their Circuits,
was a long time continued with us. To these Sanctuaries, for such they were
while the strangers in amity with them were entertained, (which was for three
days and yet is kept up in sundry places, where the Chartree Monks have
Convent) during which time they are sanctuarized, and have security from the
immunity of their residence, not to be injured, so faith Asylum] locus erat ubi
recipiebantur homines causa misericordia vel auxilii, puta Hospitalia and
consimilia, ab a quod est sine and sylvos quod est tractus, quia non
extrahebantur inde, qui eo confugerant.
Acursius; and Baldus; as he is quoted in the Margent of the Gloss. ad Digest.
lib. 21. Tit. 1. p. 1966. De AEdilicio Edicto F. Asylum.
Digest, adds, Nota argumentum ex hac Glossa quod Malefactor non possit extrahi
de Hospitali sicut nes de Ecclesia; concerning these Syntagm. Juris. lib. 15.
c. 28.
Tholossanus has fully written, that which I shall add, is, that Antiquity
giving so great honor and privilege to these, they in time became abused, not
only to harbor idleness and enormity, but to charge the Country in which they
were with burdens in provision for them; Observare aut^m Proconsulem oportet,
ne in Hospitiis prabendi^ oneres Provincias sicut Imperator nester cum patre
Ausidio Severiano rescripsit. Ulpian. lib. 1. De offic. Proconsulis.
to remedy which there were Laws made to ease and relieve the people against
the exactions of them. And though Sanctuaries (such kind of Hospitals) are
taken away with us by the Statute of 21 Jacob. c. 28. yet Inns and receipts for
travelers, Lib. 1. Digest. Tit. 15. p. 1^4.
the Hospitia publica in the Text, remain: and the Law takes great care that
such there should be in all convenient places, and those in them so honest and
so able to furnish them, that no necessary for horse and man shall be wanting,
nor any rates put upon them but such as are reasonable; by the 13. R. 2. c. 8.
the gains of Victuallers and Hostlers is ascertained, and what they shall take
for hay and oats over and above the Market; Sec 32 H. 8. c. 41. s. E. 6. c. 14.
and though the strictness of the later clause in that Statute be, by the Stat.
21. Iac. 11, and 28. repealed, yet the main scope of good using guests is
retained: Innkeepers must take reasonable prices, and make good horse-bread
and full weight under the penalty even of that Statute of 21 Jacob. 21. This
exaction of Inns is punishable by the Common Law in Leets, as being Contra
publicam pacem and fidem Regni, and an enormity which dishonors the
Government, and imposes upon strangers and men in need, who being unknown and
far from home are unable to right themselves against it. And hereupon as the
Text says the Law provides that Inns shall have present pay, and men not run
in arrears or take from them on Ticket, Vbi tunc pro omnibus qua ibidem
expendit, ipse plenarie solvet ante ejus abinde recessum;] so does it caution
that the prices so paid be no more then they have is worth, consideration being
had of the charges an Innkeeper is at to fit himself with all things necessary
to entertainment, for house-rent, servants, diet, wages, spoil of goods,
candle, and all other things of housekeeping considered, together with the
uncertainty of guests, and the casualty of fire considered, either they must
take great gains, or live they cannot without becoming beggars; which the Law
considering, allows them a convenient latitude, which, those that will
encourage guests to come to their houses as they travel by them, do not abuse.

Nec impune quisque bona alterius capit sine voluntate Proprietarii eorundem.]

This, though it be the Common Law, yet is confirmed to the Proprietor against
his disseisor by several Statutes; for, because Power would often make bold
with what was another, and Greatness sometimes thought it durst not be
refused, because it was under its opportunity to ruin what did not crouch to
it, Lords and Great men's servants seizing for their Masters uses what they
pleased without and against the owner's will, and under such a price as they
could not afford it, the Kings of Engl. consented to Laws of restriction, not
only to themselves, as in the Statutes of 28 E. 1. c. 2.36 E. 3. c. 6.23 H. 6.
c. 14. 7 R 2. c. 8. making it penalty felonious to take from any man what he is
lawfully possessed of without his consent, Droit ne poit pas morier, Reg.
Littletoni, See 1 Instit. p. 279.
although it be for the King's or Queen's own uses, so are the Statutes of 28
E. 1. c. 2. and 20 R. 2. c. 5. For though fit it be that the King, being the
Head of his Subjects, and the Noble He that impregnates this whole politic
Body with life and luster, should be supplied from this body with all things
necessary to his subsistence for so beneficent purposes: yet does the King
think fit, out of grace to his people, not to make his Prerogative their
punishment, but to live and let live, that is, to cherish their industry and
good will, by ease of, and justice to them, as in greater, so in lesser things.
And thus our sacred Kings have in all Ages done to prevent the insolence and
deceit of their Purveyors, who, to enrich themselves, have abused the King's
power to the peoples impoverishing, that as none can purvey but for the King or
Queen, or the Royal Issue; so none can for them, but by their special warrant
with the owners consent, at a reasonable value by the Constables of the Town
assessed, if the buyer and seller cannot agree to pay ready money or at a
certain prefixed day, so is the 21 Chapter of Magna Charta, Sir Ed. Cook. 1
Instit. p. 35.
3 E. 1. c. 31. 4. E. 3. c. 3.5 E. 3. c. 2. 10 E. 3. c. 1.14 E. 3. c. 19.25 E.
3. c. 1.1 R. 2. c. 3.2 H. 4. c. 14.1 H. 5. c. 10. 11 H. 6. c. 8.20 H. 6. c.
8.28 H. 6. c. 1.2 E. 6.^ c. 3. All which and sundry others since made, being in
affirmance of propriety, and that by the King himself and his Great-men, for
the common good declare their joint and several zeals for propriety; For the
Common Law (says Sir Ed. Cook) has so admeasured the Prerogative of the King,
2 Instit. p. 36.
as he cannot take nor prejudice the inheritance of any; I Will add, Nor can or
ought the Subject to entrench upon his Prerogative, but to hold himself bound
to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, for the Law also is so, and so
is and ought to be owned; De Possessione, id est, De Proprietate.

Digest lib. 5. Tit. 1. De Judiciis. K. Si de vi] p. 694. lib. 7. Tit. 6. p.
^44. Cook. Littleton p. 146. B. Note this well.


which I the rather note, because Protection and Propriety, that is,
Possession, is no further, or otherwise due to any Subject by the Law, then
according to his duty by the Law he gives subjection and aid to the King,
Defender of the Law; and if he justifies the possession of Subjects in their
propriety, there is reason his Subjects should justify him in the propriety
and possession of his power. Which since they mainly do by owning according to
the Law his just Prerogative, it becomes them to consider their duty in the
point of religious and legal obedience; for by the favor of King's have good
Laws been made, and these in particular which conserve Property according to
the Notion of our Text.

Neque in Regno illo praepeditur aliquis de Sale, aut quibusdam mercimoniis
aliis ad proprium arbitrium, and de quocunque venditore providere.

This shows the liberty of English ingenuity, that it may work upon any thing
it judges a profitable employment for it. For as the enhansing of any commodity
by one person or more, with exclusion of others, is accounted a Monopoly, and
so against the Common Law, and against the Statute of 21 Iac. c. 3. so, to deny
any Subject to deal in what he sees most convenient and gainful for him (the
Commodity not being forbidden, 'or dangerous to the Public, but such as
consists with honesty and usefulness) I humbly conceive to hinder him of this
(where no topique Privilege according to Law is cooperating with such
impedement) is to abridge him of his Right; for the Text says, Neque in illo
Regno praepeditur aliquis.]

All sort of victuals men may eat, and all sorts of ordinary clothes men, that
can pay for them, may wear and in any Merchandise men in open places by buying
and selling may trade, and with whom they will buy and sell or not they may
please; the Land is open for all industry, and trade both home and foreign not
embargued: for though the Corporations for Trade, such as are the
Merchants-Adventurers, and those that trade to Turkey, 12 H. 7. c. 6.
Muscovia, Eastland, the Corporation of the Merchants of Exceter, and the
East-India's, were first erected and since continued to regulate trade, and to
prevent, See the Preamble to the Statute of 4 Jac. c. 9.
by the prudence of their own experience the overclogging of Markets, which is
apt to be when every person that will, may trade, and for what proportion he
pleases, to the ruin of the commodity; while necessitous men, that must sell,
sell at the rates foreigners will buy, and so the purses of the Subjects of
England are emptyed to fill those foreiners, to whose Markets such Merchandises
are so unproportionably carried. I say, though on these and other grounds,
Corporations restrained such from trade to those places who were not Members
and submitted to the Government of them; yet in all other cases Trade was ever
free; not only to Aliens, who by the Stat. of 9 E. 3. c. 1.27 E. 3. c. 2. 11
R. 2. c. 7.1 H. 4. c. 17.14 H. 6. c. 6. and many others by which they were
permitted to sell the commodities they brought in gross, or in retail,
(notwithstanding any Charter to the contrary) but also to native Subjects, Who,
during the time of their Princes Wars, being charged, ought indifferently to
enjoy all the benefits of their most happy peace, so says the 3 Jacob. 6.
which therefore gives liberty, notwithstanding all former Charters to the
contrary, to all his Majesty's Subjects, from henceforth at all times to have
free liberty to trade into, and from the Dominions of Spain, Portugal, and
France, etc. so the King be paid his customs, and the freedoms of Corporations,
Cities, and Towns not infringed; so that the like restraint on Salt in France,
is here on no Merchandisable Commodity whatever, Cook. 4 Instit. Jurisdiction
of Courts. chap. 45.
other then such as is charged by Act of Parliament, or Royal Mines, which are
Mera Regalia, as the Tyn in Devonshire and Cornwall is, which being the King's
in the right of his Seigniory in the Duchy of Cornwall, is his commomodity,
and from his Farmers to be bought; but once of them bought is freely to be
traded in.

Rex tamen necessaria domus sua, etc.] Concerning this, see the foregoing Notes
on this Chapter, and the several Statutes therein quoted, which do confirm the
Text in the severalities of the Chancellour's assertion.

Neque Rex ipse per se aut Ministros suos Tallagia, Subsidia, aut quaevis alia
onera, etc.

Concerning this, see the Notes on the ninth Chapter, which do confirm what
here is in our Text. Ipse Patria munus afferre, and fascibus suis illam premera
potentia and dignitas est, humili se ac depresso loco stare putat, quisquis non
supra Rempublicam stetit, accepti ab illa Exercitus in ipsam convertuntur, and
Imperatoria concio est. Senoc lib. 5. De Benefic. p. 94.
Blessed be God and our Kings, the case of England is not like that of Rome,
Wherein, every man of power thought himself but pitifully accommodated, if he
did not set his foot upon the neck of the Common wealth, and trample down the
Majesty if that to set up his own Greatness: But such as makes the generality
of the Subjects rich and happy, and the Prince happy in governing such wealthy
and well-ordered people. And by reason of this freedom is it that the Text
says, that the poorest man in England uses fructus quos sibi parit terra sua]
that is, eats, drinks, sells, wears whatever he has growing; yea can dispose of
any emolument that he gets propria, vel aliena industria, that is, by his
labor or others kindeness to him, ad libitum arbitriumve] as he pleases,
without asking any leave to spend or give it; for though a man may not burn his
house; because that is destruction and may tend to the ruin of other men,
whose houses by contaction or Neighborhood may be burned also; yet any man may
fell his freehold or pull it down (no custom being in the Manor to the
contrary) and use his Land to what kind of purpose, not forbidden by Law; he
pleases: so much does the Law of England favor propriety, that it submits
every thing to it that may consist with the public and other private interests
intermixed with it.

Vnde inhabitants terram illam locupletes sunt, abundantes auro, and argento,
and cunctis necessariis vitae.

This Vnde relates as well to the freedom of Trade, as to the Subjects
exemption from unreasonable arbitrary and un-Parliamentary Taxes; for Trade
being the way to get estates and freedom from vast contribution to the public
(except in extraordinary occasions, when all lying at the stake, all is due to
the Commonwealths service and support) being the means to preserve an estate
so gotten; the locupletation and enriching of the Nation may be reasonably
ascribed to both, and they both be allowed the Vnde here. In that then the
Subjects of England are said to be Losupletes, Cum id tempora Reipubl.
postularent, aut a muneris pro familiari copia faciendi assiduitate. Budaeus in
Pandect. p. 13^. B. Edit. Vascos.
that is, Assidui, for so the Law of the twelve Tables defines it, ab assibus,
id est, Aere dando, when men are such as answers every thing that is required
of them, this is one sense of Locuples p^rro est qui satis and idonee habet pro
magnitudine rei quam creditor petit. Tholoss. Syntagm. lib. 24. c. 3. ss. 21.

Alciat. and Forner. in Leg. 134. ss. 1.


Locuples, though the genuine one be from the great possessions men have, for
which they are termed Locupletes: Locuples a lata hamo, hoc est locorum plenus,
qui pleraque loca, id est, qui multas possessiones habet, says Festus; and
with him accords Lib. 5. c. 10.39.
Quintilian: and Lib. De Senectut. 52.

Locupletem ait dictum qui pleraque loca hoc est possessiones ac pradia tenst.
Agellius lib. 10. c. 5.


Tully, when he writes Semper enim boni assiduique Domini, referta cella
vinaria, oleariae and penaria, villaque tota locuples est, abundat porco, hedo,
agno, gallina, lacte, caseo, melle, etc. intends a man rich in real estate,
Lands of great revenue, Rents of liberal income, such as our Law calls men of
great Demeasnes and Freeholds of Inheritance; for though in the largeness of
the word, and the acceptance of Authors, any person of note and thing of value
is termed Locuples, 5 Verr. 39. 1 Verr. 30. lib. 5. c. 14.
as Annus locuples frugibus by Horace; Locuples ac referta Provincia, Locuples
copiis civitas, Copiosa plane and locuples mulier by Tully; Locuples and
speciosa eloquentia by Quintilian; and Plato with Pythagoras are by the Orator
termed Locupletissimi Authors: 2 De Divinat. 179.
yet the more proper notion of Locuples is from fixed estates in Land. And thus
the Chancellor says the Subjects are Locupletes, some of them rich in real
estate, others in personal, Abundantes auro.

Abundantes auro and argento and cunctis necessariis vite] This is meant of
personal estate, which consists of Movables, Money, Plate, Leases,
Merchandises, Household Stuff, Corn, Cattle, and other things money-worth; which
are called necessaria vitae, because without them there is no living: for money
being the nerves of all commerce, and that which answers every thing in its
exchange for it. In the terms Auro and Argento] are the general notations of
riches and plenty; Genesis xiii. 2. Genesis xxiv. 35. Genesis xliv. 8.
so Abraham is said to be very rich in Cartel, in silver and in gold; so in
Ioseph's brethrens sacks, there was silver and gold; so Balaam joins silver and
gold together, Numb. xxii. 18. and xxiv. 13. and the Gods of the Nation are
said to be of silver and gold, Psalm. cxv. 4. Dan. v. 4. and so in sundry other
places: by which it appears, that our Chancellor speaks according to the
account of portable wealth, which is reckoned by money and plate, silver and
gold; and in this he says the Subjects of England do abound. For though
England has no Mines of gold or silver, Lib. 1. De Gallorum Imperio and
Philosophia, p. 48. B.
as Diodorus says France of old had, which Forcatulus, in love to his Country
perhaps, is ready to believe, and make public for Franc's glory; yet England
has such Staples of Cloth, Wool, Tyn, Lead, and other such like useful
trafficks, that will transmute themselves into gold and silver, and by turning
and winding the penny in trade will advance the Rent of Land, the Revenues of
Custom, the Hire of Workmen, and the plenty of living; which is equal to the
having gold and silver in kind, since it not only is equivalent to, but in
some degree better thus then it, especially when by this means there are
Caetera vita necessaria purchased, which is Household furniture of all sorts;
so that the Subject is not only rich, but accommodated neatly and
correspondently to his condition, having his house and its appurtenances
complete, as well as his purse full.

Aquam ipsi non bibunt, nisi quando ob devotionis and poenitentia zelum
aliquando ab aliis potibus se abstinent.

This is purposely inserted to show, that necessity and choice are two
different impulsions to the drinking of water. In France the Peasant drinks it
to save charges; here, when it is drunken, it is upon religious accounts, for
penance, and humbling of the flesh; which is well added by our Text to bring
the poor's draught into the possibility of a Prophet's reward, and of a
Prophet's practice, self-abasement, which is the sense of those three words,
Devotion, Penance, and Zeal, or rather the Zeal of devotion or penance, which
is that which alone is in them commendable; for there is no devout soul, that
is penitent for sin, and casts himself down before God in confession and
contrition for sin, but is willing to deny himself any thing that is fuel to
the fire of his carnal combustion: which because liquor of mettle is, he drinks
water: Now this the Chancellor says the English do thus drink but not for
poverty; for so the Peasant does not aquam bibere, but drinks beer and wine,
the former commonly, the other upon feast-occasions, when also They eat all
sorts of diet that the Season and Country yields, and their purses and stomachs
will reach too, whether fish or flesh.

Pannis de lanis bonis ipsi induuntur in omnibus operimentis suis] As all
Merchandises, furniture, meat, and drinks are free, so all Apparel. It Is true
indeed here have been sumptuary 37 E. 3. c. 8.3 E. 4. c. 5.22 E. 4. c. 1.1 H.
8. c. 14.6 H. 8. c. 1.7 H. 8. c. 7.1 Phil. and M. c. 2. Phavorinus part. 10. De
hominis Excellentia, c. 19. p. 63.
Laws to restrain such and such things to particular degrees; but those have
been but temporary and short-lived. For though Inordinate and excessive
Apparel, as the words of the Stat 3 E. 4. c. 5. are, is a great waster,
especially when it is such as Nero's was, who never wore a suit of clothes
twice, or Heliogabalus, who did not only make luxuriant garments for himself,
but Leonibus and Bestiis nobilissimas parabat vestes; and so Lollia Paulina,
whose garments were all trimmed with Pearl; or as Agrippina, Aurelian, and
others, who all were very extravagant in them, these indeed it is fit should be
restrained and denied, See his gracious Majesty's Speech at the Prorogation of
this Parl. 1662.
If men will not deny themselves the having them. But for any other clothes to
be denied, though it has been, yet at this day it is not; the Nation being so
full of Gentry in all places, that the younger brothers, no less Gentlemen then
their elder, think themselves, concerned to oppose it, being loath to see their
industry, secundated by God, to be eclipsed by Laws in disfavour of them.

Etiam abundant in lectisterniis and quolibet supellectili, cui lana congruit,
in omnibus domibus suis, nec non opulenti ipse sunt hustilimentis domus,
necessariis cultura, and omnibus quae ad faelicem vitam exigantur secundum
status suos.

This further sets forth the riches of the Housekeepers of England in the
furniture of their Chambers and Rooms for their Recreations and Callings, Quod
sacrorum gratia lecti in Tomplis sternebantur, ad discumbendum in apulo publico.
Abundant Lectisterniis says the Text] Alciat. in Leg. 45. p. 127. de verborum
signific.
These we call Bed-steeds at this day; but of old they were the Beds that they
eat upon in their Solemnities and Feasts devoted to their Gods. Hence properly
Lectisternium (from lectus and sterno) employed the Preparations in the Capitol
for Jupiter, Lib 5. ab Vrbe.

Valerius Maximus lib. 2. cap. 1. De Nuptiis.

Tu esto Lectisterniator. Tu argentum eluito. Plautus.


Juno, and Minerva; concerning these Livy and Valerius Maximus write: hence
Plautus terms him that does Lectum sternere, (as we say) cover the Bed or
Table, Lectisterniator. With us one of the chief furnitures of houses are these
Lectisternia, not only Couches but Beds well furnished with Curtains, Vallens,
Counterpanes, Hangings, Blankets, Pillows, Tables, etc. which the Text terms
Supellectilia] these the Supellex] domesticum instrumentum Patrisfamilias, quod
neque auro, argentoque facta, vel vesti adnumeratur, id est, res mobiles cujus
numero sunt mensa Trapezophori, Lecti inargentati, Sipontinus.
Civil Law accounts as aforesaid, and Lib. 5. c. 8.
Pliny too in these words, Totam supellectilem ligneam; every thing also that
was useful and graceful in any condition or course of life was hence called
Supellex, Lib. 8. c. 9. lib. 15. c. 4.
Turnebus uses Philosophiae supellex, and Servi supellecticarii for the
Wardroper, and Lib. 1. De Orat. 80. Lib. De Amicit. Lib. 2. Philip.
Tully has Oratorum supellex, and Vita supellex, and Cogitatio supellectilis ad
delicias, Lauta and magnifica supellex. So much is Supellex changed in its
sense from what it first imported, namely, the Tents or Receipts of
Ambassadors when they went their journeys, which being covered with Leather,
Supellectilis origo, immanavit, quod olim his qui legationem profsciscerentur,
locari solerent, qua sub pellibus usui forent. Fornerius in Leg. 183. p. 3^2.
De verb. signific.
as our Sumpter-horses lading, and our Portmanteaus at this day are, (which
carries the Journey-provision, and thence were called Supellectilia;) that now
every implement not only of the house is couched under Supellectile, but every
furniture of what nature soever. Here in our Text Supellectile cui lana
congruit] signifies the furniture of Beds, such as I pre-described; which,
though they are now made of silks in great abundance, yet in Henry the Sixth's
time were of homebred, and home-span making. De Lana] For our Ancestors in
the Golden Age of thrift, kept their families un-idle, and not only killed the
provisions they bred, but also made the linen and woollen they wore; which
profitable practice being brought to maturity in the house, The Woman's Kingdom,
our Law terms them Spinsters from that property of a virtuous woman, Prove. xxxi.
that so to do Solomon describes, who certainly wrote what in that case was The
conclusion of wisdom: for the house being the place of residence and security,
does then best please a noble Master and Mistress, when it is well arrayed and
furnished for all purposes of entertainment and convenience; which because the
Housekeepers of England have to a greater proportion then is usual any where
else, yea, to so complete a degree, as no addition is almost possible to be
made thereto, the Text says, they are Opulenti in omnibus necessariis ad
quietam and felicem vitam, secundum statum suum.

Nec in plasitum ipsi ducuntur nisi coram Iudicibus Ordinariis] See the Notes
on the 26. and 27. Chapters, wherein, what concerns the residue of our Text in
this Chapter, is written upon; which being well-weighed, and the differences of
Despotique and Paternal Governments considered by the good and evil effect of
them, his conclusion commended to the Prince, is, That the Laws of England are
the best rules of governing England by; (...). Plato lib. 1. De Republ. p. 576.
and that those Princes, ( Progenitores tui as his words are) who declined the
observance of them, were led therefrom by the Prepotency of passion and the
neglect of justice, which they, as Princes, should ever have prized above all,
(...). Plato in Minoe, p. 564. inducit Socratem sic loquentem.
which is modestly the substance of that which he expresses in those words, Et
nonne ambitio, luxus, and libido quos praedicti Progenitores tui Regni bono
praeferebant, eos ad hoc commercium concitabaet,] which he requests the Prince
to consider as the monition of his loyal Servant, for his Royal peace and fame,
which are best propagated and advanced thereby, And so he concludes this
Chapter.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Sanctus Thomas in libro quem Regi Cypri de regimine Principum scripsit, dicit,
Quod Rex datur propter Regnum, and non Regnum propter Regem.


THIS Chapter commences with a quotation from Saint Thomas, and from that
little Tract of his, Cogitanti mihi quid offerrem Regia celsitudini dignum
meaque professioni congruum and officio, id occurrit potissime ^fferendum at
Regi Regni de Regno conscrib^rem. In Proamio ad librum.
which in very great duty and devotion to the dignity and piety of Kings, he
wrote to the then King of Cyprus; it is in the order of his works placed in the
seventeenth Tome amongst his Opuscula: and though it be amongst his Breviaries,
yet it has many valuations with me from several adjuncts of conspicuity, Papa
potest canonizare aliquem approbando and manifestando alicujus hominis
sanctitatem and toti Ecclesiae proponere, and eorum venerationem mandare; nam
inter puros homines Papa est caput Ecclesia. Tria autem sunt de Canonizatione
alicujus Sancti, Sanctitatis, ejus approbatio. 2. Sanctitatis ejus adept^ a
popul^ veneratio. 3. Fidei totius Ecclesia benesicia illius Sancti posc^ntis
confirmatio. Baptista Rubaeus in Rationali Divinorum. Offic. lib. 1. c. 58. p
209. Impress. Venet.
which justly may be attributed to it. The first whereof is from the Author
Thomas Aquinas, whom the Text terms Sanctus Thomas, which title our Chancellor
not only gives him as he was sanctified by divine grace, and a Member of that
mystical body of Christ, but as also this holy man was canonized by Pope John
the 22. about the year 1323. and that not so much for the piety of his life, as
for that miracle which by invocation on him is pretended to be wrought on his
decayed Niece. Now though this Canonization (to write gently of his Holiness
and his Saintings) have some things in it, which in the design of them presume
those that by it are (as far as it can) honored; yet the many natural,
religious, learned accomplishments he above the rest of his Contemporaries had,
render him semi-divine with me, though he were abstracted from his Registry in
their Calendar; and these (amongst many others) are, First, His Origin was
noble, Aquine in Campany, and from Parents in it, as some write, descended from
the Earl of Apulia and the Kings of Sicily; or as others from the Lombard-Race,
and that Earl of Aquine who lived in Charles the Great's time about the year
800, which honor of his blood and birth no doubt kindled him to great
endeavors, Author vita Sancti Aquinatis.
and to such expressions of an holy Magnanimity, as seldom appears in the brats
of Plebeity. Secondly, The prediction of his after-proof by an holy man, who,
when his Mother was with child with him, told her, She was with child with
one that would be most famous, adding his name, profession, addiction, and
acceptance with God and the world, Nec res sanctissimi viri mentem fefellit,
says his Biographer. Thirdly, His early entry upon serious study; for coming
very young to Naples, he quickly mastered Logic and natural Philosophy,
disputing so notably in them, that every one that heard him admired, and
expected a suitable progress. Fourthly, His declension of applause and public
suffrage, cloistring up himself in a Convent, notwithstanding the many
temptations and civil violences he had expressed to further his conspicuity.
Fifthly, His obediential obstinacy in embracing this order of religion against
the commands of Theodora his Mother, and continuing in the love and labor of
it, maugre his Mothers Artifices to remove him, and his brothers vehemence in
rending, tearing, and abusing his Priestly habits. Sixthly, His famous Masters,
John St. Geminian and Albertus Magnus, who were so proud of him, that they
would not suffer him to lie hid, but so proclaimed him to the World, Vt ^a
lucerna non jam sub modio sed de sandelabro emicaret. Seventhly, His constancy
and abnegation of himself for Christ's sake, refusing a large Patrimony with
his brethren, and after, the Great Archbishopric of Naples, when Clement the
Fourth presented him to it. Eigthly, His capacious memory which held whatever
was reposed in it. Ninthly, His general admiration and acceptance with all
degrees, Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals who frequented his readings, and grew
famous by them. Tenthly, His choice friends Clement the Fourth, Urban the
Fourth, Gregory the Tenth, Lewis the Holy of France, Cardinal Bonaventure,
Ptelomaeus Luce^sis, and Reginaldus Privernas, Birds of a feather fly together;
I omit the miracles ascribed to him, as that of the Woman of St. Sabins
Monastery, Reynald, etc, because I think them questionable: but these
prementioned excellencies concentred in him, made him a Vessel of much grace,
fit to glorify God here on earth, and fitted for God's glory of him in Heaven.
This, This, is the Saint Thomas, the Author of the book quoted by our
Text-Master.

The Book this matchless Author wrote, was of the Government of Princes, a
very high subject worthy his incomparable Genius, which made its nest with the
stars, Libri qu^s de Regimine Principum ad Cypri regem conscripsit, ostendunt
quod illuc usque suarum virtutum fama, nominisque reverentia penetraverit, quid
autem libris illis huic Regi conscribendo occasionem prastiterit, nondum mihi
compertum est, nisi quod crediderim suarum virtutum samam, gratum ^um and
amicum tunc illi regi, tunc aliis multii ipsam reddidiss^ Aut^r vitae ejus.
and thought triter Texts were beneath the Majesty of its endowment; that it
was His, is praise enough to it, and that he wrote to a Prince of Princely
qualities and offices, commends his prudence in so proportionate a choice: for
surely he must have some rays of a Princely mind in himself, who has the
confidence to write to Princes of matters purely Princely, and to treat aptly
and with counsel of those secrets which are locked up in the Cabinets of
Grandeur, and to which none can unsacrilegiously approach, but those that are
pious, modest, loyal, and prudent; and such in every degree Saint Thomas
therein approving himself, directed his thoughts to the then King of Cyprus.
These things premised as emphatique in that our Chancellor here quotes out of
him, we will humbly and in God's fear consider the particulars as they are
pertinent to the order of our Commentary.

Rex datur propter Regnum and non Regnum propter Regem] This is a truth no wise
man can, and no just Prince will deny; for God instituting Government in
nature, which requires something regitive in every multitude, and having in
that institution a regard to the generality of his creatures and the
propagation of it, Oportet esse in omni multitudine aliquod regitivum. Lib. 1.
c. 1. De Regimine Principum.
though he place the power of order and jurisdiction in one or a few, yet does
he it in order to those many whose good he therein chiefly eyes. For in that
God gives one the Prerogative and Jurisdiction over multitudes of others, it is
not as that one is such numerally, but as that One in number, is Many and All
in dignity, as having a divine Vicarage in him, in the worth whereof he is worth
10000 of them, the Sun, Shield, Father, Oracle, the All of them. And hence,
though true it be that the Philanthropy of God displays it self in putting the
Many of his creatures under One for their good and profit, which is Rex datur
propter Regnum;] yet true also it is, that though multitudes are not made for
Holocausts to the rage of Princes, which is Non Regnum propter Reg^m] yet
comfort, observances, and supports of Princes they are appointed to be, and
Princes that love, govern, and discipline them deserve, ex opere operato, they
should be such to them; and therefore God has endowed Princes not only with
such qualities as are attractive of Subjects loves, and have cogency on the
wise and worthy of them, Justice and Generousness, (...). Plato lib. 1. De Rep.
p. 576.
whereby their hearts are pleasingly and to their profit stolen from themselves
and set on their Princes with resolutions of loyalty and reverence toward
them; but also with such adjuments of extern terror, as shall make the good
safe in their fidelity, and the refractory punished for their mutiny and
disorder. Now this Doctrine of the Text quoted out of Aquinas, all good Princes
have in the sense of St. Thomas, and all good Authors owned, especially our
own; so is the sense of the Preamble to the 1 E. 6. c. 12. showing, that
Princes as Fathers are to make Laws best suting to the tempers of their people
and to the time of their Reigns: so King James of blessed memory acknowledged
the duty of Kings in those words, K. James in his book of The true Law of Free
Monarchies. p. 195. of his Works in folio.
As a loving father and careful watchman, caring for them more then for
himself, knowing himself to be ordained for them, and they not for him; and
therefore countable to that great God who placed him as his Lieutenant over
them, upon the peril of his soul, to procure the weal of both souls and
bodies, as far as in him lies of all them that are committed to his charge,
etc. not to encourage their Subjects petulancy and peremptoriness, ( For though
Princes are so generous that their Subjects cannot ask more then they can give,
yet Princes may reserve to themselves the incommunicable Jewel of their
conscience, Eicon. Basilic p. 76. Edit Octav.
and not be forced to part with that whose loss nothing can repair or requite;)
but to mind themselves of their account to God, which as Fathers they are to
make, Gubernatoris est navem contra maris pericula servando illesum ad portum
salutis: bonum autem and salus consociata multitudinis est ut ejus unitas
conservetur, quae dicitur pax, qua remota, socialis vitae perit utilitas,
quinimo multitudo dissentiens sibi ipsi onerosa Lib. 1. De Reg. Principum. c.
2. p. 287.
and to their Subjects, as to their Children, to express; and by which they
infinitely deserve more love and support then ever they have from them, be they
never so dutiful and open-hearted to them. And therefore Kings being as Angels,
Dati a divina bonitate propter homines, non solum Christianos, sed and
Gentiles, and cujuscunque generis atque conditionis, as Lib. De Excellentia
hominis. part. 1. c. 53. p. 131.
Phavorinus says of them; whatever can be attributed to them without sin and
flattery is very highly due to them, See the Preamble to the Stat. 3 Jacob. c.
26.
and but the bare duty and not supererogation of Subjects to them. And
therefore this position is true in its just and prudent sense, in which only
our Text-Master quotes it, and I after him discourse on it; for in the
Anabaptistique and Iesuitique sense of judicial power in multitudes over their
supreme Magistrates, it is treasonous, execrable, irreligious, anti-scriptural;
it is all that is pestilent to Monarchies, dishonorable to Religion, and every
way unsafe for the sacred persons of Princes. Concerning these things then, I
having written in my Notes on the 13, 14, and 15. Chapters of this Book, I
shall pursue it here no further, only pray, That Princes and People may ever
keep close to the Laws of their Sovereignty and Subjection; for otherwise,
Nulla est securitas, Lib. 1. c 2. De Regim. Principum.
sed omnia sunt incerta cum a Iure disceditur, nec confirmari quicquam potest
quod positum est in alterius voluntate, ne dicam libidine, as Aquinas his words
are.

Quare Rex qui hec peragere nequit, impotens est necessario judicandus. Sed si
ipse passionibus propriis aut penuria it a oppressus est, quod manus suas
cohibere nequit a depilatione subditorum suorum, quo ipsemet eos depauperat,
nec vivere finit and sustentari propriis substantiis suis: quanto tunc
impotentior ille judicandus est, quam si eos defendere ipse non sufficeret erga
aliorum injurias?

Here the Chancellor shows, that as the Mastery men act over themselves, is
more noble then that they can over others; so the weakness men express in
being conquered by their lawless wills and reasonless passions, is more
notorious and defamatory then to be victor'd by an Adversary: and this he
applies in the reason of it to Princes in order to themselves and their
Subjects; for God having endowed them with divine souls, and with Authority
over their Subjects, men in common nature with them, and to whom they as
Fathers, Shepherds, and Guardians ought to evidence themselves; for such to
sauciate and exhaust them, and by a leontine voracity to consume them and
theirs, and all to bring their Wills to be the Law, and their pleasures the
Iron-Saw by which they hackle the persons, fortunes, and freedoms of their poor
Vassals, is an act of truculency, so altogether unmanly and irregal, that
Polybius says, (...). Po^yb. lib. 1. p 82.
Nothing is more ^^^crable then the injury and avarice of Governors; yea, so
to do is not only to be an enemy but worse then an enemy, a worrier of the
flock he by office is, and by affection pretends to love and keep. (...), quasi
dicas, Regnum omnibus numeris absolutum; ejusmodi erant Reges Principes Romani,
Ulpiani tempore, nihil jam priscae civilitatis retinentes, omnia arbitrio suo
staetuentes, ut and nunc Reges nostri sunt, qui omnia in potestate habent,
quique ut Homericus ille Jupiter, quoquo se verterint, omnia circumagunt, nutu
etiam solo omnia quatientes: denique Humani Joves, sed qui tamen hominum more
emoriantur. Budaeus de Reg. Galliae. Annot. in Pandect. p. 49. Edit. Valcos.

Illud naetura non patitur ut aliorum spoliis nostras facultates, copias, opes
augeamus, hoc enim expectant leges, hoc enim incolumem esse Civium
conjunctionem, quam qui dirimunt, eos morte, exilio, vinculis, damno coerc^nt.
Jacob. Tapia. lib. 2. De triplici bono and vera hominis Nobilitate. p. 245.

Turpem dicens ebrietatem in Rege quem oculi omnium auresque sequerentur.
Seneca lib. 3. De Ira.


Yet this is the unhapp^ness of absolute Greatness, that while it musters and
marshals forces to evict foreign assault and Subjects sedition, it self is found
guilty of violence and depredation upon the lives, estates, and serenities of
its Subjects, to whom because it does by a pravity of will and a vicious
affectation, which it may if it will resist, do that which is unjust, therefore
is Impotentior less virtuously just and abundant in true fortitude then that
Prince is, who, though he has force, yet dare not fight, because his number is
not such as he promises himself victory by; and so by fear suffers his Subjects
to be spoiled, whom, by a manly venture and a masculine performance, he might
have secured. Now this impuissance our Chancellor lays down as God's
punishment of vice, which so allayes the soul, that by uninnocencing it, leaves
only in it a pavidness and irresolution to any act of Heroickness, that look
as an unchaste wife cannot comfort herself against all the infirmities of life
and crosses of her Marriage state, That she has a good conscience to God and
her Husband, whom by disloyalty she has not abused; so a Prince that is never
pleased better then when he by negligence reduces himself to straits, and then
mercilesly relieves them upon his Subjects, Depilatione subditorum] frequently;
not once and away, but to such a proportion as it may be said, Depauperat
subditos:] and to suffer his Subjects so to be made miserable by it, as Nec
sinet vivere, and sustentari propriis substantiis.] Surely thus to put the Yoke
of servitude on Subjects, to gratify the licentious Insubjection of the
Prince's Soul to Reason and Religion, seems to bode ill to any Prince that is
guilty of it. And therefore Herodotus lib. 3. Hist.
Praxaspes, Cambyses his favorite did friendlyly by his Master, whom, when he
saw Persianly luxurious and rubified by an high and ranting compotation, he
with civil affection and majesty of prudence, admonished him from reiterating
such a Kingless jovialty, telling him, That Kings, who are the Chiefs of
Nations, on whom all their eyes are, and after whose examples they all do,
ought to be wary what they do, least by an ill President they undo thousands
of their Subjects; for one ill example shall more pervert then many good Laws
can rectify. And therefore one of the most Kingly qualities, that mortality is
capable of, is Self-Mastery, because where that is endeavored by us, and from
God consolidated to us, we are able to keep our prospect into things clear, and
not judge by the false Glasses of extremes, which magnify or diminish,
multiply or lessen, as our addictions to those vices are more or less
prevalent, or intense: for still judgment being obfuscated, our power is
transferred to that we are enjoyed by, Potens etiam non solum a possum verbo.
verum etiam a potior deducitur. Turneb. lib. 29. c. 24.
which is the victorlust. Therefore where ever wisdom resides in Princes, I
mean not only cathedrally but personally, there is in those Princes a constant
study to keep free from all Preoccupations; Non enim me cuiquam mancipavi,
nullius nomen fero, multorum magnorum virorum judicio credo, aliquid and meo
vindico. Senec. Ep. 45.
and so to ascribe to others, as not to exclude themselves the liberty to
consider and judge what they themselves are to do. And this truly I think we
of this Nation have very really and to a miracle of Regal Constancy, seen in
that once Father of us all, whom I take leave frequently to quote as my Oracle,
King Charles the First, Kingly Constancy.
whom no adversiry, no eclipse, not even that of death, could make recede from
his resolution of Patronage to the Church, the Law, the Crown, the Subject, to
all these he being firm, gave not way for fear or hope, but quitted himself as
a Christian, whose graces had mastered his infirmities. And the second to him
is his Son, our now Gracious Sovereign, who by that fixed immovableness that
he, notwithstanding all temptations to the contrary, retained, and in the Act
of Oblivion and Indemnity expressed, Speech at the opening of the Parliament.
1661.

L. Chancellours Speech then and thereunto annexed.

Lib. De studio literarum recte instituendo. p. 10. B. Edit. Vascos.


which He calls, The principal Cornerstone, which supports the excellent
building of this Government. Declared such a piece of fatherly tenderness and
^iety, as could proceed from no heart but such an one, in which God has
treasured up a stock of mercy, and justice, and wisdom to redeem a Nation, they
are the words of His Majesty's great Chancellor; and of them I may say in
Budaeus the Parisian Chancellour's words, Mercurialis hic sermo, mentium
sublimium interpres est, mirificorumque sensuum enarrator disertus and
copiosus. But I return to the occasion of our instance, which is, The necessity
of Power in Princes to refuse passions when they are not co-incident with
reason, which power unless they have, be they never so great, they are
Impotentiae nexubus vinculati,] and with King John will put their Crowns under
servage rather then not be revenged of their opposites: which ill habit and
distemper of soul is that remain of sin unmortified, which thief-like having
once crept into the house, opens the doors and lets all its Comarado's in to
him; and so this, Impotentia and Incontinentia conjung^ntur in bonis
authoribus. Turn. advers. lib. 20. c. 21.

Ne quis vestrum neve little aliquis, qui vobis paruerit, ^ffensionem aut
divinam aut nostra^ concitetis. Spelman in Concilus 396. ad An. Christi 928.


being the effect of incontinence, not keeping desires within their prison,
carries them to all the expressions of vageness and immorality, so that, no
bounds being observed, they lie open to all kinds and all degrees of
transport. 'Twas a rare charge Athelstane gave the Fathers and others in the
Council of Gratelean, I would have you, says he, do by me as our Lord Jesus
commanded we all should do; Do as we would be done by: Give me therefore
only what is my right as your King, and keep what is God's right to his use,
and what is yours to your selves, that none of you or your creatures may by
wrong-doing deserve and have the displeasure of God and of me, Thus this King,
whose potency over his will and passion rendered him more like God then his
throne did, without which he had been but Polyphemized, goodly statured, yet
defective in the main instance of and ingredient in his admirableness. By this
then it appears that our Law considering, and our Princes willing themselves to
be considered politic Monarchs, whose Soveraigntyes admit mixtures of
paternity to them, did only intend such practice of power over their subjects
as should render them able to support themselves by their subjects, and willing
(their subjects in such subjection to them) to preserve in the free use of what
God, Nature and Industry had made theirs. This is the sense of all that the
Chancellor does or can write on this argument, for the glory of a King is to
be Liber in his Prerogative, and Potens in his Subjects; so is the King by his,
How? His virtue-regal secures himself and his Subjects Erga propriam passionem
and rapinam, and so declares him and them Liberi.] And then that he is able to
defend them, Eorum quoque bona and facultates] and theirs from assaults of
enemies, thieves, robbers, and seditions by Sea and Land; this declares him
Potens by them, and they potent under him. For of all things in the world the
most sovereign expression of wisdom is, (...), etc. To keep close to the Laws
of our Country and the civil customs of our forefathers, Aristoteles 2. Lib.
2. Politic.
and to live by the Written Laws, and by them to judge of all men and things,
which happy compact accomplishes that felicity which (...). Polyb. lib. 6. p.
491.

Lib. 2. D^ Gestis Alphons.


Polybius says Licurgus brought to his Country, when, by the right settlement
of equality between men, He did so cement them, that they did join together
into one common Soul and City of civility and wisdom. For though wise Alphonsus
of Arragon, whom Panormitan styles Regum gloria and sapientiae exemplar,
thought it solaecismous Reges ab aliis regi, and Duces ab aliis duci, calling
those that would do nothing without their Councils concurrence, Consiliariorum
Mancipia; (...). Philo. lib. de virtutibus and vitiis. p. 295.
yet that Maxim of so doing will remain the eternal honor and security of
Kings: For, since the Laws of Nature and Nations prescribe it, to do otherwise
is to be injurious to their durable and wise enactions, which the pristine
Kings, Polybius gravely tells us, did so devoutly abhor, that as they were
chosen for their abilities of intellect and resolution; (...). Polyb. lib. 6.
p. 456.
so did they not so much as think of bringing, (...), etc. their Government
under the vassallage of their lawless and corrupt wills, (...), but invigilated
their charges and were not haughty and rigid but calm and familiar with them;
(...). Plato lib. 1. de Leg. p. 774.
and by this preference of justice, lenity, and temperance to fierceness,
wrath, and luxury, which Plato prescribes as the very necessary project of
Princes, and which renders them truly worthy; and therefore the delight and
blessing of their Subjects. This then to be able to do, notwithstanding the
temptations of self-accommodation to the contrary, is to be potentior,
liberiorve] then any King can be who can deny him nothing, will and power can
accumulate to him; for this which sufficit scipsum debellare, as the Text's
words are, is only the felicity of those moderate and virtuous Kings, who,
because they know they are delegated by God to rule according to his method,
exalt righteousness, and are themselves thereby exalted: Quod potest and semper
facit Rex politice regens popalum suum Quare experientiae effectu tibi constat
Princeps, Progenitores tuos qui sic politicum regimen abjicere satagerunt, etc.



This clause the Chancellor adds, to show the ill success Princes have in
England had, who have ruled praeter morem Majorum; for though we have here been
blessed (as I said before) with many most pious and just Princes, who have so
ruled, (...). Plato lib. 5. De Rep. p. 663.
as became England, wherein, to use Plato's words of Greece, Men ought to be
virtuous and free, and lovingly to live together, and are only to be kept such
by the Laws, their delight and buckler: Hoc enim vinculum est hujus dignitatis
qua fruimur in Republ. Hoc fundamentum libertatis, hic fons ^niquitatis. Cic.
Orat. pro Cluentio.
yet some we have had, who, though I say not they endeavored Politicum Regimen
abjicere] yet by governing otherwise then according to the strict Laws,
brought infelicity upon themselves and their people. For this Nation consists
of men born and bred up to freedom, and if they see their Prince as mild and
vigilant, so just and valiant, Polybius lib. 5. p 361.
they will admire, assist, and obey him, (...), etc. as convinced of his
kindeness and good offices to them; as they did in the general excellent temper
of the time of Queen Elizabeth, which is observed by the great Minister of our
State, L. Chancellour's Speech at the Prorogation of the Parl. May 19. 1662. p.
11.
To be full of blessed condescension and resignation of the people then to the
Crown, and the awful reverence then they had to the Government, and to the
Governors both in Church and State: so, if they perceive the contrary in the
effects of unwarranted actuations of power, they grow sour and displeased,
setting themselves to disappoint his deviation, and to own the law and customs
of ruling, in which are deposited the Subjects security and the Majesty of the
Prince, which amounts to that of the Text, Non solum in hoc non potuisse
nancisci potentiam quam optabant, videlicet, ampliorem, sed and sui binum,
similit^r and bonum regni sui, per hoc ipsi discrimini exposuissent and
periculo grandiori] For such Princes, (...), etc. Polyb. lib. 11. p. 624.
not considering what the adversity of popular troubles produces, and what
amidst them to do, being deceived by the meretricious suggestions of Parasites,
who bewitch them with their delusions, do draw on themselves and their
Confidents those difficulties that ever end in disquiet and sometimes in worse;
so befellit to Ed. 2. probably one of the Princes intended by our Text-Master,
for he being seduced by giddy Gaveston a foreiner, who labored to bring in
such absoluteness as the Laws of our Kings do not approve of; and that not for
the King's profit, but that this favorite and perverter, who ruled him, might
thereby rule all, so far inflamed the discontent and jealousies of the Peers
and Commons, that this Butterfly, that was so gay in the Summer of the King's
favor, must be accused and apprehended, to the performance of which they so
strenuously and with incessancy applied themselves, Tanquam legum subversor and
publicus Regni proditor, Walsingham in E. 2 p. 76. Quos odio inex^rabili
perstringebant, ca maxim quia regem ducebant pro sua voluntatis arbitrio, in
tantum quod nec comes, nec Baro. nec Episcopus quicquam valuit expedire in
Curia sine horum consilio and favore. Idem eodem loco.


that they put him to death, As a subverter of the Laws and a public Traitor
to the Kingdom, and when he was dispatched, not without the Kings great
affliction, the Despencers father and son succeeding to the King's favor, mis
steered him likewise, So that the King led wholly by them, and all things
following the counsel and appointment of those Gratioso's, neither Earl, Baron,
Bishop, or other could do any thing with the King but by their favor and
mediation, they became so execrable that they were forced to fly; and the King
himself that had lost his Subjects hearts for their unhappy sakes, becomes a
Prisoner at Kennelworth Castle, and was ever after unhappy: which I observe not
as a virtue, but the sin of the Nation (for bonum been) good Laws may be
evilly stood for; and evil men removed by evil means become the sin of a Land)
but to clear the truth of the Text, and to applaud the prudence as well as
piety of our well-advised Princes, who do nothing of importance without their
Councils advice, and declare no binding pleasure but either by matter of Record
( Lex praecipit and Rex praecipit being convertible) or by some Declaration in
affirmance of known and undoubted Laws, which considered, the Subjects of this
Land have ecchoed back the filial duty that this paternal obligation merits of
them, As knowing (to use the words of a most noble and eminently accomplished
Gentleman, Sir Ed. Turnor Speaker of the Commons House in Parliament, in his
Speech to his Majesty at the Prorogation of the Parliament in May 1662.
who now is deservedly honored publicly by this Nation) that the strongest
building must fall, if the coupling pinns be pulled out; and therefore our care
(says he) has been to prepare such constitutions, that the Prerogative of the
Crown and the Propriety of the People may, like squared stones in a well built
Arch, each support the other, and grow the closer and stronger for any weight
or force that shall be laid upon them.

Tamen haec quae jam de experientiae effectu practicata, potentiam Regis
regaliter tantum Praesidentis exprobrare videntur, non ex Legis sua defectu
processerunt, sed ex incuria, negligentiaque taliter principantis.

This is added to show that the absolute power of Kings, if just, is much more
tolerable and to be admired, then that, which under the pretext of it, is
practiced by some that rule by it; for if there were a consideration of
Subjects as the Mines and Quarries out of which the gold and silver of Princes
incomes must be fetched, and they were by Princes studied and secured, that so
they might the more safely bring their rich ladings to the Port of their
Princes Exchequer, and having paid their duty there, make the most (with their
Prince's blessing and good will) of what is theirs neat and clear, as by the
rules of Justice under the absolutest Monarch in the world they ought, then
would they have encouragement to bless God and their Prince for the mercy of a
Government, which did thus permit them to be happy under the Allegiance and
Justice of it. For it is not the strictness of Government associated with
Justice, that makes Subjects grieved and discontented, (no more then the
vigilant eye of a prudent husband over his beloved wife makes her discomposed,
for this being an argument of a wise mind to keep her to himself, and to
prevent all bold attempts upon her (in the negation of which chiefly lies that
sexes security) is the great argument of her virtuous gratitude and resolved
loyalty to him) but that which offends Subjects, and makes them entertainers of
fears and cross humors, is not ex Legis defectu] want of a right rule to walk
by, (for that the Law of Nature and Nations prescribes to every man, who more
or less has the Principles of it legible in his mind) but the grievance is,
Vbi jam sum ista regula, ubi quid sit justum ab injustis cogn^scitur; ubi
descripta sunt, nisi in libris illius lucis qua veritas dicitur, ubi lex omnis
ju^tae describitur, and in cor hominis qui operatur justitiam: non migrando sed
tanquam imprimendo transfertur, sicat imago annuli ex annul^. Sanctus Augustine.
lib. 14. De Civitate Dei. c. 15.
in the distorted will and the loose affections of the Governor, who,
regardless of the main ends of Government, Justice, and National Prosperity,
launches out into the Ocean of pleasure, and in the endearings of them (not
only drenched but drowned) looses all thoughts of that distributive Regality,
which from the intentness of a real greatness and virtuous care of and
conscience to Subjects, ought to be manifested; which Seneca found true in
Nero, and thence was bold to tell the World, That Tyrants and Kings differ not
so much in their outward appearance of State, Quid interest inter Tyrannum and
Regem; specie enim ipsa, fortuna, as licentia par est, nisi quod Tyranni
voluptate s^viunt, Reges non nisi ex causa and necesiitate, lib. 1. De
Clementia, p. ^24.
as in their direction of their Power to a proper end, Tyrants being truculent
as delighting such to be, but Kings as being forced to the severity they
practice by necessity, and as that remedy which they unpleasingly apply. For
since Kings are the Ministers of God, and have credited to them the
conservation of justice and virtue, Rosellius in Pymand. Trismig. lib. 1. c. 1.
quast. ^. p. 164. vol. 1. Orat. 1. contra Aristogiton. Digest. lib. 1. tit. ^.
p. 73.
which they are to propagate by rewards and punishments, and in the
distribution of them, not to err into any arbitrary by-path, but to follow the
Commune Praeceptum, which Demosthenes calls, (...), and on that ground, (...),
he says, It binds all men; to be remiss and cold in propagating that their
divine interest, and to permit sovereign balm and prudent medicinality to run
at waste, and to effect no purpose of its designment, but the contrary rather,
is surely that which provokes God to give people up to their own frowardnesses,
and to make them inundate the Mounds and Walls of Religion, Loyalty, and civil
love; and not to fear the power of him, whom they see weak by the absence of
self-denial, and by the facility of being victor'd by delightful folly, which
captivity being, very often (through the deceit of man's heart and the
temptations of Satan) the misfortune of mighty Potentates, who stand on tiptoe
of their unlimited Greatness, the Chancellor shows that by reason thereof the
condition of politic Princes is much more secure, and in the issue and last
result of it, not inferior to it in the point of absoluteness, Non
consolabimur tam triste ergastulum, non adhortabimus far imperia Carnificum,
ostendemus in omni servitute apertam libertati viam. Seneca lib. 3. De Ira. p.
592.
since by the bonds of love and the convictions of the paternal merit, it
challenges as of right, and receives with all readiness of good will, the firm
and flourishing fidelity and benevolence of Subjects, By which great seal and
affection which they bear to them, Preamble to the 8 Eliz. c. 19.
as the words of the Statute are, the Subjects do so meditate on and provide
for their Princes security, Preamble to the 13 Eliz. c. 1.
In whom consists all the happiness and comfort of the whole State and
Subjects of the Realm, that they are so far from disputing, that they freely
concur with them in all their just and regal postulations, and set themselves
with all careful study and zeal, to consider, foresee, and provide for them,
as professing, By the neglecting and passing over whereof with winking eyes,
there might happen to grow the subversion and ruin of the quiet and most happy
State and present Government of this Realm, Quia ad hoc ordinatur little
potetestas and ^ujuslibet domini, ut prosint gregi, alias non sunt legitimi
domini sed Tyranni. Aquinas lib. De Regimine Principum. c. 10.
which God defend, so are the words of the Statute aforesaid, which I thus
mention to fortify the Chancellour's position, that Politic Princes become
more absolute in conquering their people by kindeness, and convincing them of
the benefit their care and vigilance over them returns upon them, then any
severe and rigid administrations in the behalf of absolutely Regal Potentates
arrives at, which is the sum of what Saint Thomas in his book of the
Government of Princes wrote, and what our Text from it collects, and what in
the Notes on the 14 and 15. Chapters I have endeavored to illustrate, and
which here I have been no more copious in then I hope will be profitable to the
Reader, whom it may direct to praise God for the blessings we in this Nation
enjoy, Remember this.
while we are governed by Laws, just, holy, useful, and proper to us, and by
a Prince the Guardian of them, Perierant omnia ubi quantum suadet ira, fortuna
permittit, nec diu potest; quod multorum malo exercetur, potentia stare:
periclitantur enim, ubi eos, qui separatim gemunt, communis metus junxit.
Seneca lib. 3. De Ira. p. 5^3.
whose administration is not regulated by wrath, and written in the terror of
Subjects, but who admonishing his Subjects to beware the penalties and dangers
of his Laws, covets rather their amendment by gentle and merciful means, then
with severe execution of his Laws to be enriched by their evil deeds and
offenses, See the Preamble 10 the 7 Eliz. c. 14.
they are the words of the Preamble to the Statute, 8 Eliz. c. 19. The
consideration whereof should be Monitory to us to be dutiful, and to account
nothing so much our honor, as to value the mercy we above others are made
happy by, and to beleaguer God with earnest prayers, that he would ever
preserve amongst us, The unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, without
which neither Sovereign nor Subject can be solidly happy; concerning which Lib.
1. c. 9. D^ triplici bon^ and vera hominis nobilitate.
Iacobus Tapia has excellently discoursed, and in all reason and experience it
is so found to be true. And hereupon, as the Chancellor concludes this Chapter
with St. Thomas whom he began with, wishing that Omnia Regna politice
regerentur,] so shall I end my Comments on it, Eicon Basili^ p. 243. Edit larg.
Octav.
with the advice of an Oracle among Kings and men, our late Gracious King
Charles the Father, Nothing can be more happy for all (both King and People)
then in fair, Rare counsel worthy a good King.
grave, and honorable ways to contribute their counsels in common enacting
all things by public consent without Tyranny or Tumults, which is, Politice
regere and regi in St. Thomas his words, and to which as oracular, and that
which is the Prayer of every good Englishman, ought to be (in our Holy Mother
the Church of England's words) subjoyned, In the Letany of the Church of
England.
We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

CHAP. XXXVIII.Tunc Princeps. Parce obsecro Cancellarie, etc.
THis Chapter is as other formerly have been, but accommodative to the
personation of the Prince, and his proportionable demeanor in the dialogue.
All that the Chapter affords is but doctrinal to tender and infant-greatness to
be sequacious of grave and learned age, which this our Chancellor having in
that sense that age is truliest honorable in, attained to, and so abundantly
and with matchless sincerity evidencing to him as that flourishing branch,
which though rejected and forsaken of men, and thereby made a man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief; yet in the breathings and longings of his loyalty,
He, He (our Chancellor who loved much, and therefore ought to have much
forgiven him) hoped and expected (though God knows it was otherwise) would
come to pass. I say the Chancellor in all his pourtraying a most intense
loyalty to his Prince, whose Interest (as he conceived it) he was a sufferer
for, and after was with it civilly interred) I say this long robed Heroic thus
approving himself, is deservedly courted with a Parce obsecro Cancellarie] and
entreated to a further Information to his profit, which he professing the
particulars of it were, as in these words, mihi namque perutilia sunt] the
Chancellor is engaged to pursue his own promise in the method of the
personated Princes recital, primo ut aliquos alios casus, etc.] in producing
some such Cases as the two Laws do disagree in, that in consideration of them
he may the clearer judge which of the two he does most incline to study and
approve as best for the Government of the Kingdom and people of England: This
is the sum of this Chapter.

CHAP. XXXIX.Cancellarius. Quosdam casus alios in quibus dissentiunt leges
predictae, ut petis Princeps, detegere conabor.
HEre the Chancellor answers the personated Prince his expectation, which
being to be from him satisfied wherein the Laws agree and disagree, and the
reason of both will better clear up to his understanding the way of his choice.
This then being the scope of this Chapter, as it is appendicious to those other
foregoing instances In Chapters ^1, 22, 23, 34, 35, 36, 38.
of their dissonancy; though the Chancellor writes with much judgment, yet
presses he not his authority further then the reason of his arguments seizing
on his judgment, swayes his affection and practice; For so the modest words of
our Text are, Sed tamen quae legum earum praestantior sit in judiciis suis, non
meo, sed arbitratui tuo relinquam.] This for the Introduction.

The words of the Chapter most material follow. Prolem ante matrimonium natam,
ita ut post legitimam, lex civilis and succedere facit in haereditate parentum,
sed prole^ quam matrimonium non parit succedere non sinit lex Anglorum.]

Prolem.] This is a word of largeness, importing the issue of any creature or
thing used by Orators and Poets for that which the Greeks call (...), 1.
Fastorum.
thus Ovid mentions, volucrum proles, and Virgil, Olivae proles, faelix urbs
prole virum, proles ignara parentum, Tully has also Ferrea proles, Ferrea tam
vera proles exorta repent est. lib. 2. de Not. eorum.
and Pascit autem si est generosa proles frequenter duos, nonnunquam trigeminos
lib. 7. Tholoss. syntagm. Juris. lib. 9. c. 6. ff. 1.
Columella writing of the Goat, calls his young Generosa proles; in this
diminutive sense of proles, Budaeus uses proletarius sermo for plebeius, such
as is nulla animi dote; and the poor in Rome were from this called Proletarii,
whence perhaps our word to prole up and down, as much as to shark, the Act of
necessity. To those that are the refuse and ignoblest of Families, the Law
shows no countenance, in honor to marriage Gods Institution, and that which he
has in laid with honor amongst all Nations, so says St. Paul, and to confirm
this which is so clear, were to question the universal embracement of it; now
Matrimony being the chaste limitation of the loves of one man and one woman each
to other at one time, Uxorem duxi, natum sustuli, filium educavi. Quintil. lib.
4. c. 2.
the Chancellours phrase of proles, and not natus, nor filius quod omnium
constantissimus sit amor parentum in filios, says Sipontinus, Charitas quae
est inter natos and parents dirimi nisi detestabili scelere non potest. Cic.
lib. de Amicit.
nor Liberi which extended not only to the legitimate children of the body,
but to the nepotes and pronepotes, to which Lib. 7. c. 3. Tholoss. lib. 10. c.
3.
Glanvil assents, when he calls these Haeredes; I say the Text naming those he
writes of, not by these names of credit, but by that of Proles which is a
common title of the proceed of any creature, does thence insinuate that
illegitimate children are as no children, Consensus praeponderat concubitui.
Tholoss. lib. 9. c. 3. ss. 3. Consensus solus facit conjugium. Rogul. Juris.
being abscinded from the discents of the Families of those that got them, and
that because they are ante matrimonium natae.] For though in the Court of
Heaven they may be legitimate, their parents consenting conjugally each to
other before they coupled, and continuing loyal each to other after; Promis^to
de suturo Matrimonio, sequente copula, facit Matrimonium praesumptum, contra
quod non habet locum probatio. Regul. Juris apud Tholoss. lib. 10. c. 4. ss 3.

Discurs de Matrimonio. part. 2. c. 8. ss. 2. a p. 244. ad p. 248.

In Epist. ad Exoniens. Episcopum Council, Tom 7. part. 2. p. 739


yet in foro seculi the Proles ante Matrimonium natae, are Proles ignara
Parentum, incerta, and so have no right jure divino aut naturali, as
Covarruvias notably determines notwithstanding the Declaration of Pope
Alexander, which says, Tanta est enim vis Sacramenti, ut qui antea sunt geniti
post contractum Matrimonium-habeantur legitimi. Now Proles ante Matrimonium
natae they are, who are born before the Parents of them are lawfully married,
that is not married as the Pope by his Canons and Dispensations indulges, for
that sometimes has made that lawful which God's Law has made unlawful, and on
the contrary, as the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 38, declares; but according to the
appointment of the Law of England, 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 23. Glanvil. lib. 7. c. 12.
and 14.
Solemnized in the face of the Church, and by lawful Authority, the truth and
loyalty of which the Bishop only must certify, which these Natae ante
Matrimonium proles not being capable to be, they by our Law come to be
infamous, Selden's Notes on this 39 Chap.

Ubi non est copia aliorum, been assumuntur minus legitimi. Gratian. Decret.
part. 1. dest. 55 fol 66.


Ita ut post legitimaem Lex Civilis and succedere facit in haereditate
Parentum.] Mr. Seldom quotes Justinian for this, though the Canon rather then
the Civil Law makes them inheritable, if their Parents marry after, and there
be no other issue born after Marriage, This, Loco praecitato.

Lex enim h^sce justis filiis aequiparat, nihilque a legitimis legitimatos
differ jubes, no^ hi invicem dissimiles a legitimis and naturalibus
censentur. Alciat. lib. 3. de verb. signific. p. 366.

Tholoss. lib. 10. c. 4, 5, 6. and lib. 6. c. 11, 12, 13.


Covarruvias says, is Favor Iure Pontificio Matrimonio impensus. I confess the
Civil Law has, a way of legitimation of them, as our Law has by Act of
Parliament.

Sed Prolem, quam Matrimonium non parit, succedere non finit Lex Anglorum.
So great a reverence has the Common and Statute Law to Marriage, that though
natus intra Matrimonium shall be the child of the Marriage, Matrimonii
honestas naturalis est. Tholoss lib. 8. c. 1.15. De Privilegiis Matrimonii lege
Cassanaeum ad consuetudinem Burgundiae ad tit. des droit appartenans a gens
mariez.
the father by Marriage being presumed apt for generation, as natus ultra mare
within the 25 E. 3. and 42 E. 3. c. 10. shall be the Kings Subject though it be
born extra limits, if infra ligtantiam Regis Angliae, 2 Instit. p. 97. on c.
9. of the Stat. of Merton.
yet natus extra, that is, ante Matrimonium shall be a Bastard; for that the
Law repudiates all vage lust, the affront of Marriage, Non potest de facili
praeter consensum haredis sui filio suo post-nato de haereditate sua
quantamlibet partem donare. lib. 7. c. 1.
and dishonours the proceed of it. I know Pope Alex. 3. in 6 H. 2. made a
Decree to legitimate ante-nate Children upon subsequent Marriage between their
Parents; but this was never allowed here for Law, but the contrary asserted, so
Glanvil, who wrote in Henry the Second's time, says, Orta est quaestio, si
quis, antequam pater matrem suam desponsaverat, Glanvil. lib. 7. c. 15.
fuerit genitus vel natus, utrum filius talis sit legitimus haeres cum postea
matrem suam desponsaverit. Et quidem licet secundum Canones and Leges Romanas
talis filius sit legitimus haeres, Haeres autem legitimus nullus Bastardus, nec
aliquis qui ex legitimo Matrimonio non est, procreatas esse potest. lib. 2. c.
29. fol. 63. 20 H. 3. c. 9.
tamen secundum jus and consuetudinem Regni, nullo modo tanquam haeres in
haereditate sustinetur, vel haereditatem de jure Regni petere potest. So such,
Bracton also, who wrote in Henry the Third's time, says are not inheritable,
and that per consuetudinem Regni; for though he would write favorably of the
Ecclesiastical Constitution, which all the Bishops of England did in the
Parliament of 20 H 3. promote, yet all the Earls and Barons with one voice
answered, That they would not change the Laws of the Realm which hitherto have
been used and approved; which Bracton I say considering, though he says the
natural sons of men ad omnes actus legitimos idonei reputantur, Nec haeredes
judicabuntur quod Parentibus succedere possunt, propter consuetudinem regni qua
se habet in contrarium lib. 2. c. 29.
yet restrains it non nisi ad ea quae pertinent ad sacerdotium: for as to
secular things they are not lawful, which Sir Edward Cook takes notice of in
the 8 Report in Lechford's Case; and In Descript. Iuris Feudal. p 21.

Spurii autem non succedunt etiam in Gallia Patribus vel eorum agnatis, and ita
convenient omnes, quia non habent jura sanguinis. lib. 45. c. 6.


Doctor Zouch shows this to be the Custom of Normandy, and Tholossanus makes
the Law of all France, as others do generally of all the world; for even
amongst the Athenians if a man had a base son he had some portion allowed him,
but the inheritance went unto his lawful daughter, so says In verbo (...).
Suidas: and so strictly did our Law ever adhere to it, that in times of
Popery, when the Canons of the Pope were most adhered to, yet the Bishops in
case of general Bastardy, when the King wrote to them to certify who was
lawful Heir to any Lands or other Inheritance, 2 Instit. p. 97. on chapter 9.
Mert^n.
ought to certify according to the Law and Custom of England, and not
according to the Roman Canons and Constitutions, which were contrary to the Law
and Custom of England, and this was the reason they loving the Canons and
fearing the Pope who laded them with such chain-shot, desired in the Parliament
of 20 H. 3. to be relieved, but in vain alas; for the Nation would not stir
from adhering to Marriage, and the issue lawful of it; and that Bastardy is an
exception against inheriting, Lib. 6. c. 38. Capite de exceptionibus contra
personam quarentis, etc. Fitz. Herbert. Title Bastardy 21, 22, 25, 27, 28, 30,
33, 39. and the year books 1 H. 6. fol. 3. 11 H. 4. fol. 84. 39 E. 3. fol. 14.
44 E. 3. fol. 12
Fleta not only makes good, but all later Authorities. And to help this in a
particular case, which otherwise would have ended in disherison, was the
Statute of 9 H. 6. c. 11. made, For Bastards begotten and born out of lawful
Matrimony (an offense against God's and man's law) as the words of the 18 Eliz.
c. 3. are, has ever been not only disfavoured by the Laity in Parliaments, but
by our Clergy in their Deum ista conjugia semper prohibuisse and nunquam
placuisse, and pracipue temporibus Christianis Concubinas baber^ nunquam
licuit. nunquam licet, nunquam licebit excerptio Egbedi. Ad Ann. 750. Canon
125. Spelman in Council. p. 271. sic in Canonib. sub Edgaro. p. 462. sic inter
Leges Canuti; p. 558. 501. 516. 234. 787. 298.
Convocations; for although the Pope gave liberty, and some of the Clergy of
old took liberty to enjoy Concubines, yet the Church in her Councils decryed
and execrated it as abominable, and made the issue of it un-inheritable, Non
legitimam proclamans, says our Text.

Civilistae in casu boc Legem suam extollunt, qui incitamentum came esse dicunt,
quo Matrimonii Sacramento cesset peccatum.

Here the Text terms those learned Gentlemen of the Gown, which in other places
it names Iuristae, Advocati, Iurisperiti by Civilistae, A name of art and
dignity given to those that are Graduates in the profound study of the Laws,
the termination sta referring to the person, as i-us does to the office, thus
Sacrista, Exorcista, Lanista, Iurista, Canonista, all appropriated to men so
and so qualified; for these are not Orators or Historians words, so much as
terms of art and private invention. That which the Text says of these, is,
that they do extol their Law for this indulgence, that is, they being
Professors in both Laws, the Canon as well as Civil, do as much as in them
is, keep up the credit of their Laws, by evidencing the reason or equity of
them. And though this dispensative enaction be the Popes, and so directly their
Canon-Lawes rule, Tholoss. lib. 9. c. 21. sl. 2.
yet inasmuch as the rule is with them In Matrimoniis judicandis, and in his
qua aed ea pertinent, praeponimus Sanctiones Pontificias Civilibus, our
Chancellor says these Civilians, for that is the title of most eminency, do
Legem eorum extollere, that is, Lib. 5. Belli Africani. 530. Orat. pre Plancio
in Iugurth.
they judge it prudent and just, and such publicly and with confidence avow
it; thus Extollere armatum in sublime is by Hertius used, Extollere caput and
se erigere, and Ad coelum landibus aliquem extollere by Tully, Extollere verbis
pr^clara ingenia by Salust, Extollere indignationem by Pliny, Extollere in
majus by Livy: all which show, that our Text by these words Legem eorum
extollunt] intends a Magnification of their Laws, In Parad. 17.
which is what the Orator intends by Extollere se gloriando and praedicatione,
as Tully's words are. This I note, because it is not a vain jactancy that our
Text mentions these Civilians guilty of, for that had been not worthy them but
to be passed over by his ingenuity, no such extolling is this, but it is such an
extolling as is grounded upon reason and conscience, Quia incitamentum eam esse
dicunt, quo Matrimonii Sacramento cesset peccatum] That is, supposing the first
act be so strong a fetter to continued lubricity, Non enim coitus Matrimonium
sacit, sed maritalis affectio. Forner. ad Leg 13. ff. 1. p. 36. lib. de verb.
signific.
which is the sin of Incontinency, Marriage limiting and legitimating the
vageness and obliquity thereof, turns the sinful passion into a sinless
virtue, such fruitions in the latitude and effects of them becoming, by a not
to be blushed at transmutation, noble and creditable, which before such
Marriages were culpable and infamous; yea, notwithstanding all the precedent
irrectitude, charity may persuade to interpret a dispositive Marriage in their
minds, who (in their censured familiarity) were thus cordial each to other:
Qua ratione deprensi in concubitu and adulterii accusati se excusant, si
conjugium c^ntraxisse asseverent, corumque affirmatio verisimilis sit. Alciat.
ad Leg. 174. p. ^75. lib. de verb. signific.
yea and the Marriage in being, be but the design their loves tended to, though
the completion thereof had for some time and reasons interruption, so are the
words, Prasumendum quoque dicunt esse, tales fuisse contrahentium animos,
quales esse demonstrat subseq^ens Sacramentum.] And therefore the Church of
Rome counting Marriage a Field in his Appendix to the third book of the Church.
c. 15. Lege Cassandrum in Consultat. cap. De Romano Pontifice. p 31.
Holy thing (for that is as much as Sacramentum here will amount to) makes the
issue of it legitimate, which Act of legitimation is but yet the favor of a
particular Church, Tom. 1. Council. Tract de Primat. Romans Ecclesiae. p. 25. etc.
Dr. Field of the Church lib. 4. c. ^. etc. 31.
which though some Councils have declared to be Sacrosancta and Apostolica
Ecclesia quae non ab Apostolis sed ab ipso Servatore Dominoque nostro primatum
obtinuit, yet has only power over its Members and within its limits to
establish what it pleases in matters of ritual and circumstantial nature, but
in the Doctrinals and Mains of Religion, the Scripture not men ought to be
Judge: and therefore if the Church be taken here for the Roman Church, Pro
Prasidentibus Ecclesiae, pro Ecclesiasticis viris, Turrecremata Sum. lib. 2.
De Ecclesiae.
and pro auctoritate Papa virtualis Ecclesiae, as the Romanists generally hold;
Doctor Field's 4. Book c. 1. of the Church.
then that Church Non habens maculam neque rugas neque aliquid hujusmodi, as
Tom. 6. p 485. Nihil proinde aliud credendum, tenendum, aut docendum est, nisi
quod sanctae Romana tenet and docet Ecclesia, omnium consentientium Ecclesiarum
Matter and Magistra; cum vero qui a side Catholica and Romana Ecclesia recedit,
necesse est a veritate and capite deficere. Council. Trevirense ad Annum 1549.
Tom. 9. Council. p. 336.
Baronius his words are, will not establish any thing which is not according to
Scripture and Morality, and so is not the Ecclesia here, that does habere natos
ex subsequenti Matrimonio for legitimate. For then I suppose the Church, which
they say, as headed by the Pope, cannot err, must be granted to err; and that
in allowing that for ends of Policy and gain, which has an apparent turpitude
in it, and from which there is no absolution, but by God's mercy by an humble
penitence, which subsequent Marriage does not necessarily nor always imply; so
that the Ecclesia foetus hujusmodi habet pro legitimis] must only be meant of
a part of the Church-Catholick, that is, The Roman Church, which though
vitiated in many things, both practices and opinions, yet having the Integrals,
I dare not deny a Member of the Catholic Church: and I understand the
Chancellor only to intend the Roman Church here as it does foetus hujusmodi
habere pro legitimis; for the Catholic Church does not so judge, nor as I
think has ever so declared.

Ad quae sic respondent Legis Angliae periti. Primo dicunt, quod peccatum primi
concubitus in casu proposito, non purgatur per subsequens Matrimonium, licet
ejus merito delinquentium quodam modo minuatur poena.

This has several parts of its answer worthy consideration, First, that the
primus concubitus was a sin, because a violation of chastity and an act of lust
and irregular concupiscence; for it being not an observance of the institution
of God, nor to the end of prolification, (which though it happens
unexpectedly to be, yet was not the end of the coition, but merely the effect
of brutish sensuality, which titillated the concupiscence to acts of
inordinacy, and took the object it first lusted as the creature of its
pleasure, not the beloved and solitary object of its adhesion,) there being no
end of God in the institution of Marriage designedly promoted thereby, no
blessing of God on such conjunction can be expected therefrom, though the
patience of God forbear punishment of such a sin against his Law, the breach
whereof this act was, and does not in the very act destroy the sinner; yet is
the sin entered on record in heaven and without repentance is damnable: and
therefore the subsequens Matrimonium does not purge that, for then the remedy
must antidate it self and work before it had a being, then it must be either in
its own nature, or in God's acceptance of equivalence with guiltlesseness, for
else how can it purge from the guilt of sin committed, not that then can it do,
but all that it can do is to mitigate scandal and to give restitution in point
of fame, as thereby it imports to the world, that there was an inclination and
addiction of them to a Marriage completion, A contrahentibus publicata
Matrimonia olim valida. To. 9. Council. Genesis p 670. Luke xii. 46, 47.
and that they were soularily married, and so the subsequent Marriage may be
purgatio, that is, declaratio intentionis conjugalis, and this may purgare a
tanto though not a toto, or as the Text is, Poenam delicti minuere,] though not
tollere, which is all one with that of our Lord, Not beaten with many stripes
but with few stripes, by which appears that though the Church of God and the
Laws of men may allow the issue of reputed Marriage to be lawful, though
there were a pre-marriage, Bracton. lib. 2. De aequirendo rerum dominio, c. 29.
p. 61. Zouch in Descript. Iuris Feudal. p. 21. in Custom de Normandy 27.
provided that the party that was free when married, did not know of the former
Marriage, Quia crimen non contrahitur nisi volunt as nocendi intercedit, and
voluntas and propositum distinguunt maleficium, as the rule of Bracton. lib. 3.
c. 17. De Corona. p. 136.
Law is, and the children and one Parent ought not to suffer in this case for
the other Parents sin. Though I say there be favor showed the issues of these
Marriages, yet generally the Laws of God and men abhor them, and allow no
respect unto but thunder out Comminations against them, Concilior. Gene^al^
Tom. 7. c. 2. fol. 1151. Tom. 9. p. 411. Tom. 7. c. 2. p. 527. Proles tali nata
pollutione non solum Pareniem accipiat" N="sed etiam in servit-tem ejus
Ecclesiae de cujus Sacerdotis vel Ministri ignominia nati sunt" N="jure perenni
manelunt. A^t. 10. Council. Toletan. 9. Tom 4. Council. p. 781" N="782.
and when satisfactions are given for the very specific sin" N="yet the stain
of it remains" N="and the trouble of it in the conscience of the sinner while
he lives to remember it. And therefore though our Text saying" N=" Ecclesia
tales habet pro legitimis" N="seems to favor the Church of Rome's Primacy"
N="as if whatever she" N="for politic ends" N="publishes her pleasure in"
N="must be the doctrine and judgment of the Church; yet so long as the
Scriptures give no allowance thereto" N="nor the Catholic Church" N="
"Cassand. lib. De Officio pii viri. p. 786, 787. Vniversalia praecepta Iuris
naturalis sunt indispensabilia. Durand. lib. 1. distinct 48. Qu. 4. art. 10. p.
277. lib. 2. Did. 44. qu. 5. p. 467. Pralati Ecclesiae non sunt domini sed
ministri, nee fundatores sed executores. Idem lib. 4. did. 22. qu. 1. art 8 p.
299.
(of which the Roman is but a part, and God knows as now it is gallimaufry'd and
made a Cabinet of Civil Interest and State Policy as well as of Church-doctrine
and Church Discipline, but an infirm and vitiated part) the noise of the Church
makes no great Music in Catholic ears; for all the Dispensations and
Allowances that are given to immoralities and turpitudes do but prostitute the
credit of those that take money for them, and render them deservedly censured
for Pilati rather then Praelati, for Carnifices not Pontifices: God will never
approve in Heaven actions evilly done on earth, upon the suggestion of good
intents and great good aimed at. I like not the allowance of Stews to keep
chaste women from being tempted, nor of Concubines to help on the singleness of
Priests, nor of subsequent Marriage to legitimate issue, though the last be
most tolerable of the three.

Dicunt etiam quod peccati illius conscii, tanto minus inde poenitent, quo
Leges transgressoribus illis favere desiderant.

This is a sure consequence, as impenitency arises from obcaecation and sin not
discovered: so impudence and confirmation in sin, from sin by Law not censured
or disallowed; for the rule being, Quod non vetat Lex, id mandat, if there be
not a notorious manifest of the Laws displeasure, the corruption of mortal
nature will thence derive an encouragement to commit and justify it. And
therefore the Laws of our Nation having the Laws of God for their Original
and Exemplar, do according to it justify themselves to claim obedience from
men, because they enjoin those moral and just acts that the Law of God does,
which is, That every man shall enjoy his own wife and every woman her own
husband, 1 Cor. 7. Heb. 13.4.
because Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will judge; And that whatsoever is
beside or against the honor and loyalty of Marriage, is a breach of the Divine
Law, and a Trespass upon the Civil Magistrate the Keeper of both Tables, by
which these Laws retain their Majesty and worth, Cum Lex sit sanctio sancta,
jubeus honesta and prohibens contraria,] as the Text says: while they do by no
connivance at the sin make the sin either little or none at all, and so
tacitly invite to the Commission of it. And this our Chancellor gives as the
reason of the Law against Legitimation upon subsequent Marriage, Philo lib. de
Spe cialibus Legibus. p. 780.
because if this should be allowed, all vageness of fruition would be
practiced, and unless issue come which they neither expect nor welcome who are
lustfully acted, never subsequent Marriage would be. Therefore the Law to
honor and establish Marriage, necessitates persons to be in that state, if
they would have their issue descendable to estate or blood.

Nec vallari potest lex is it a per hoc, quod Ecclesia foetus hujus modi pro
legitimis habet. Pia namque matter illa, in quamplurimis dispensat, quae fieri
ipsa non concedit.

The sense of this clause is, that there is no argument from the dispensation
and permission of a thing to the legitimation of it, Dispensatio non potest
fieri contra pr^cepta Iuris naturalis communia, sed tantum contra ta qua sunt
quasi conclusiones little. prim secunda quaest. 97. art. 4. Mal. 2. 25.
because many things are suffered upon reason of state, etc. to gratify
emergent necessity which are not otherwise tolerable. Moses has gave the Jews
for the hardness of their hearts a bill of divorce, which from the beginning
was not so. Polygamy was not reproached in the Patriarchs, because the World
was to be peopled; yet God made One man for one woman, and why? Because he
sought a godly Seed. This therefore being our Chancellour's argument, he
excludes all subterfuge under the Churches introduction of allowance, Nee
Vallari potest Lex ista] As much as the Law has no trench or strength about it
to shelter the inference from the Church's permission to her justification,
(for so vallare is in Authors understood, Lib. 10. c. 33. 7. Atque haec omniae
quasi sepimento aliquo vallabit, disserendi ratione, very and falsi judicandi
scientiae. Cic. 1. de Legib. Cic. de Aruspice Res. 4.
so Pliny mentions Munire and vallare contra feras, and Vallare sepimento is in
Tully, Monitis vallare aliquem in Silius, and thereupon though he proceeds to
own a Power and Prerogative in Greatness to do (in things not mala per se) as
it shall see fit to the carrying on of order and the compliance with the
necessity of humane affairs, which otherwise it cannot accommodate, yet does he
deny that on this ground the conclusion of the Churches approbation of Children
ex Matrimonio subsequente follows.

Pia namque Mater] The Church he calls a Mother, because she bears Believers in
her womb, unto birth; and being born nourishes and suckles them to further
growth by the sincere milk of the word professed and teached in her, in which
relations though the Holy Text call only Jerusalem above (the Church
Triumphant) The Mother of us all; Gal. iv. 26.
yet it terms the Church on Earth The Body of Christ, 1 Coloss. xviii. 24.
Ecclesia est uxor Christi and pro amplitudine prolis sua matter sidelium.
Turtecremat lib. 1. de. Ecclesia. c. 40.
and The Spouse of Christ, and these import the office and affection of a
Mother to Believers and Professors the Sons and Children of Her, which she
does evidence to them more eminently then other Mothers can do; for though they
being seduced, do unnaturally leave their children to the wide World: yet the
Church like a ^ious Mother, as she keeps herself close to truth, so does she
keep her children close to her in the truth declared by her and defended from
her, for their support. And thus she shows her self a pious Mother, who more
regards the unity and edification of her children, then her own luster and
satisfaction, which is the cause that she as pious as she is, does that
sometimes ex plenitudine affectus, which she approves not in examine stricti
Iudicii. This the Text calls dispensare] a relaxation and exemption from the
ordinary rule, which though the Church of God in all times has in things
indifferent used, Non enim aliud est dispensatio quam juris communis quadam in
favorem particularem and relaxatio seu correctio, quae and privilegium dici
potest. Alciar. lib. 2. d^ signific. verborum. p. 554. Nunquam dispensandum est
in prajudicium boni communis. Sanctus Thom. prim. secund. quaest. 97. art. ^.
Oranis dispensatio a praelato debet fieri ad honorem Christi, and ad utilitatem
Ecclesiae. secund. secundae. qu. 88. art. 12. Pontificiam dispensationem quando
non adest justa causa dispensandi valere in Foro Fori, sed non in Foro Poli.
Bellamin. To. 7. Council. 6. p. 1987, 1988. Tom. 3. Council. part. 1. p ^25.
as St. Paul bore with those of the Circumcision. even while he preached and
pressed the Circumcision, not of the flesh and the letter, but of the Spirit,
and the Church has since done after the example of Christ, who though he were
the end of the Law, yet was present at and affirmed the Paedagogy of the Jews
while it was the way of the National worship: yet in things of an absolute evil
nature, the Church never arrogated a power of dispensation; for the Church
being but the body of Christ, cannot do any thing valid against her Head, as
the legitimation of what he has damned, must and will be. And of this nature I
apprehend dispensations in cases of legitimation of Children upon subsequent
Marriage must be; for if it were in its own nature a sin to couple with a
woman, which is not ours by Marriage, then to marry her cannot extinguish the
sin, Ex dispensatione Summi Pontificis nuptia contrahe possunt licite intra
gradus seu generationes prohibitas. Tholoss. Syntag. lib. 9. c. 11. ss. 23,
etc. Duarenus lib. 3. De Beneficiis. c. 6. p. 89. Bellarm. lib. 2. c. 11, De
authoritat. Conciliorum. Benzonius. in Psalm. 86. p. 246. Solus Deus potest
dispensare in praeceptis divinis, non autem Papa. 1. 2 da. qu. 94 art. 5. Reg.
Juris. Inter L. S. Edvardi si quis di usura convictus. Glanvil. lib. 5. c. 16.
nor admit into an unstained state the proceed of it, Quod enim ab initio
temporis non valet, progressu temporis non convaelescit; and hence supposing
the Church of Rome allowing the Pope dispensative power, not only in ordinary
things (his Prerogative herein not infringing the Prerogative of Christ, who
only can forgive sins) but in higher matters, such as are the licencing of
Marriage within prohibited degrees, taking and breaking Oaths, Pluralities of
Benefices, Incontinence of living, etc. In these cases, if the Pope shall
honest accipere quae inhoneste petuntur, give way to such things to advance
his peace, or enrich his Coffers, which he seems to make by arguments of
subtlety to be proprie and quarto modo (as I may so say) for the Church's
edification, because to maintain his splendor, in which he would make the
World believe all the Church's good and greatness consists. I say, if the Pope
shall do this as the viruall Church, yet it is more an argument of his pride to
usurp it and of his Church's cowardice to suffer it, then any argument that
they approve dogmatically of it, Quia quaedam tolerantur quae non approbantur,
of which infinite instances might be produced, so some things are permitted
which are not commanded in our own Laws. Usury the Stat. 37 H 8. c. 9 calls, A
thing unlawful, as it was by the Saxon Laws, Utterly prohibited by the word of
God as a vice most-odious and detestable, as the words of the 5 and 6 E 6. c.
20. are, though the 13 Eliz. 8. repeal the 5 and 6 E. 6. and reinvigorate the
37 H. 8. yet does it only allow Usury at 10. l. per Cent. as the 21 Jacob. c.
17. does at 8. l. per Cent. for a year to be unpenally taken; All Usury
forbidden by the word of God it expressly calls Sin and detestable, but the
Usury it permits and dispenses with ( not allowing the practice of Usury in the
point of Conscience and Religion, so are the words of the 21 Jacob. c. 17.
confirmed by 3 Car. 4.) is as to any advantage the Civil Magistrate should take
against the takers of it; these Statutes taking away the old Usury, Stat.
Merton. c. 5. 2 Instit. p. ^9.
which before the Statute of Merton was practiced here by the Jews, and after
till Henry the Seventh's time, when by the Statute of 3 c. 5. it was declared,
For as much as importable damages, loss, and impoverishing of this Realm is had
by damnable Bargains grounded in Usury, colored by the name of new Cheivance,
contrary to the Law of Natural Justice, to the common hurt of this Land, and to
the great displeasure of God. I say, the Law though (it taking away these) did
permit moderate interest to be taken; yet did but what the Text terms
dispensare with the taking it, as not looking on it as a matter of conscience,
but as a great expedient for trade and correspondence between man and man: and
thus Usury at this day standing, the Law may be said dispensare rather then
constituere Vsuram. And so in other cases instances might be given, which
confirms the Chancellour's position, that the Church in admitting the issue of
such after-Marriages for lawful, does not so much doctrinally conlude, as
piously dispense with what thus happens upon presumption of subsequent penance
in them, and future satisfaction to be made by them for former scandal, Per
Matrimonium subsequens docetur Ecclesia contrahentes poenitere de praeterito
and de futuro per Matrimonium se velle cohibere] And then as the Text says, if
Saint Paul did Fraena virginitatis laxare quod consulere noluit] If he that
preferred virginity above Marriage, yet did indulge Marriage to Christians in
persecution rather then burning, Absit ut matter tanta?] Our Chancellor puts a
God forbid upon the denial of the Church to show lenity to her Children, when
they, fallen into sin by aforesaid enjoyments, desire to return from their
wanderings by subsequent Marriage, and this is that which he produces in favor
of the Church, Quae foetus hujusmodi habet pro legitimis, that is, if the
woman, Mother of them, be before in concubinatu, in familia retenta, so that
there be an undoubted affection as in a wife, (says the learned Mr. Seldom on
this Chapter and words.
Bachelour, who makes many Doctors therein to agree with him) in this sense
the Church takes Prolem ante Matrimonium natam pro legitimis.

Sed long alium in hoc casu Lex Angliae effectum-operatur, dum ipsa non
concitat ad peccatum, neque peccantes fovet: sed terret eos, and ne peccent,
minatur poenas.

This he produces to purge the Law of England from cruelty and unmercifulness
in this exclusion; for Marriage being the institution of God, and Lust a (...),
not only a pugnation with God but with nature, which intentionally by it in
her noblest operation is defeated; the Law of England to prevent or correct
this sin committed, does incapacitate the issue of it inheriting, and puts a
deserved blemish upon them. And this it does to declare its abhorrence of vage
lust and inordinate copulation, the sin much of the Nation, and that which the
Law would be interpreted in not punishing to encourage, and in not abhorring to
cherish. Therefore is the Law constrained minare poenas, not castration and
exoculation, which are since Christianity antiquated, but illegitimation of the
issue, and a disherizing of them, as no Cyons's from the root and growth of the
family; and if children be gotten between two, an offense against God's Law and
man's Law, the words of the Statute of 18 Eliz. c. 3. They shall be provided
for by the reputed father and mother, Consules a consulendo, gladiis, id est,
Ringis, and Ringa cingunt Renes talium, ut custodiant se ab incestu luxaria;
quia luxuriosi and incestnosi Deo sunt abominabiles. Bracton. lib. 2. de
acquirend, rerum dominio. c. ^ fol. 5. B.
so is the Statutes direction confirmed by 3 Car. c. 4. yet if any
Bastard-childe so gotten and born shall be destroyed and made away, which some
l^wd women do to avoid their shame and escape punishment, the Statute of 21
Jacob. 27. makes it Murder without Clergy. This the Law does to show, as
Bracton says, That luxurious and incestuous persons are to God abominable; and
Philo gives it for a reason why Bastards are not to come into the Congregation
of God, (...), etc. Because these, Archers shooting at Rovers direct their
Arrows to no one only object, but being wild and of random fancies, imagine
not One, God the Creator and Preserver of all things, but many causes and
principles of things and creatures, and thence are execrable to God, because
Authors of all monstrous and prodigious tenants and actions, Lib. de
confusione inguarum. p. 341.
the effects of their vast wits and limitless passions, thus Philo.

And therefore since Carnis illecebrae fomento non egent;] and that be the
Laws never so strict there will daily dishonor accrue to God by the infirmity
of our nature, and the advantages Satan takes by our discovery of our selves to
tempt us, as the irritamenta lasciva, be importunate and incessant, (never
expiring menace of us while we are in the body) so are our vigilancies and
remedies to be suited thereto, and all little enough to keep under the body,
which naturally tends to expend it self in generation rather then on any other
way; for every creature naturally desiring being and perpetuation in its kind,
embraces that which thereto tends, which because to generate it is like is the
only means to effect his desire, Necessarium fuitad quietam and pacificam
hominum vitam aliquas ab hominibus Leges imponi, quibus homines improbi metu
p^na a vitiis co^iberentur and virtutem assequi possint. S. Thom. prim. secund.
qu. 95 art. 1. Conclus.
his actuation will thereto drive: and so man having the common notion of
desire with the creature, intensly designs the conducement thereto, and is kept
from it by no restraint but that (...), Virtue divinely restraining, or fear of
punishment servilely deterring him, which the wisdom of God well-knowing,
rivetted in humane nature such prudence and conservative Principles, as do
answer every requiry of Nature's infirmity, and adjuvate every branch of the
interest of God in the circumduction of things to the full point and
consistence of his glory, for which he made the World and all creatures in it.

Et homo quum individuo perpetuari nequit, perpetuari naturaliter appetit in
specie sua; quta omne quod vivit, assimilari cupit causae primae, quae perpetua
est and aeterna.

This is here introduced to show the reason of man's dotage on
generation-enjoyments, it is because the good of being ever he cannot obtain,
(his body being elementary, mixed, and so dissolvable) his great drift is to
contribute to the being of his kind, though by it he pay the death and
determination of his person; for though the life of man be dear to him, Job.
2.4.
skin for skin, that is, one part of his substance after another 'till all be
exhaust, will a man give for his life: yet to be a benefactour to succession in
prolification is that which preponderates life, and more natural and noble is
it for man to carry on the succession of man by generation, then to enjoy
individual life if it were possible to a perpetuation, because the one is but a
solitary good, the other a diffusive and general one; which Abraham no mean
Artist in nature as well as in piety apprehending, Genesis 15.2.
complaints to God, that all he had, did him no good since he went childeless,
as conceiving, he lived not at all to the purpose of nature who had not
generative energy, or having it, expressed it not; nor did he seem to himself
favored by the God of nature, whose natural endowment orderly expended brought
no harvest to succession. Now though I am apt to think there was some sensual
instinct that impresses this desire and urges on this impetuosity of man; yet
do I not believe but that some ambition of a temporal eternity as pledge of
assimilation to the first cause (in a degree and apprehension of perpetuity,
and as it were indeterminateness of being) acts man to this: and God having
furnished him with soulary powers to it, proportionates corporal Organs to
those offices of life and activity, Vnde fit quod plus delectatur homo in sensu
tactus, quo servatur species ejus, quam in sensu gustus.] The Senses of man are
the deficient participations of Intellect, Sensus est quadam deficiens
participatio Intellectus. Sanct. Thom. part. 1. qu. 77. art. 7.
say the Schools, because they distinguish of objects and things by some
directive and discriminative property, which is like though not very
intellectuality; Sensus gustus quadam species tactus quae est in lingua tantum,
non autem distinguitur a tactu in genere, sed a tactu tantum ad illas species
quae per totum corpus diffienduntur. Sanct. Thom. qu. 78. art. 3. ad quartum
dicend.
those senses that are here mentioned are the two keenest and most consequent
of all, Taste and Touch, which though they he but one in the true nature of
them (Touch comprehending Taste as it is the sense of all the parts, whereas
Taste is but the touch of the tongue) yet are distinguished in the order of
Senses; and as no man can live without food and taste, Quod cum absque aliis
sensibus vivere po^tumus, absque aspectu scilicet, odoratu, a^ditu, atque
complexu, absque gustu and cibis impossible est humanum sustinere corpus.
Sanct. Hieron. tract. 2. c. 8.
so no man can generate this kind without touch. Therefore the Hist. Animal.
lib. 4. c. 8.
Philosopher makes this inseparable to generation, (...), etc. Men and all
Creatures that do generate have touch. And man, though he be answered nay
exceeded in other senses by the creatures, who have them in transcendency above
him; (...) lib. 1. c. 15.
yet in touch and taste he is Lord of them all; none have them in any degree
comparable to him. This is his peculiarity and donative of Prerogative, wherein
he is more excellent then all the works of God's hand; for this is that without
which no other sense were acceptable to, or illustrious in him: for in these
his soul eminently appearing, does accommodate them with all the energies and
subsidies of it, Plin. lib. 10. Hist. Animal. c. 69 p. 210. Lib. 2. De anima.
Text. 94. Capit^ do Odore.
which is the sense of the Philosopher, lib. 2. De Anima. c. 3. and therefore
in the third Book and twelfth Chapter, he calls the touches of the tongue and
of all the body, (...), The necessary senses of living creatures; which touch
of man being so excellent, (and as it is more quick in some men then others, so
argues more excellent souls and prudent minds) is the reason why above the
ordinary proportion of men, wise and brave men are most addicted to Venery; not
only upon the account that men generally are, Lib. 11. c. 63. De gener. Animal.
which the Philosopher mentions when he says, There is no time exclusive of
their courtesy as there is in other creatures: but as they are apt to intend
an object summarily and to an ecstasy of degree, Note this. Lib. 3. De anima.
Fracastorius lib. De Sympath. and Antipath. c. 14. Phavorinus part. 1. c. 29.
Plin. lib. 7. Animal.
and on that object so enamouring them and enamoured by them to expend
themselves to a prodigious, luxuriant and boundless proportion, which in some
has been not only to the heights of constitution and civility, but even to an
insaniency, or what is further, exanimation; thus dyed Cornelius Gallus and
Quintus Haterius, two Roman Knights, and Pontanus reports one Beltr and
Ferrerias of Barcellona so to have dyed, and multitudes of others. But enough
of this, that only which I drive at is to commend the reason of the Text, that
as the sense of Taste keeps man by the help of meat and drink to live this
bodily life, which is vivere in individuo,] so the sense of Touch enables him
to immortalize his frail body, by generating his like, which is vivere in
specie: and by the improvement of this, Plus delectatur homo in sensu tactus,
quo servatur species ejus, quam in sensu gustus, quo conservatur individuum.

Quare Noe ulciscens in ^elium qui ejus pudenda revelavit, nepoti suo, filio
delinquentis maledixit, ut inde plus cruciaretur reus quam proprio possit
incommodo.

This Quotation is out of Genesis ix. 25. where Cham the second son of Noah is
cursed for his unnaturalness, in that, when his father was denuded, he did not
modestly cover him as his brothers did, (...) etc. Philo lib. de his verbis,
resipuit Noe. p. 278.

Non tantum servilis erit conditio sed vulgari servitute deterior. Vatablus in
Loc.


but rudely beheld him with a bold and braving glory over his infirmity, which
therefore God curses him for, and to show his abhorrence of such a childeless
unnaturalness curses his posterity; for Canaan his son for this fact is
condemned to be a Servant of servants, that is, the meanest of servants, not
only of a servile condition, but more base then servility to men can be
thought to be, (...), Servus perpetuus qui nunquam manumittitur ab co cui
servit, as Drusius renders it: though therefore Cham was the immediate sinner,
yet God to show his Judgment on his sin, No (...), etc. Philo lib. praecit. p.
280
punished his son Canaan, inasmuch as Canaan signifying Commotion, was stirred
up by Cham, which imports Heat; for though the sin were in Cham's heart
lurking, yet so long as it appeared not in villainy of action God declared not
the curse against it, but when it did, punished it in his posterity who are to
this day, A Seed of Evildoers.

Quare Lex quae vindicat in progeniem delinquentis, penalius prohibet peccatum,
quam quae solum delinquentem flagellat.

This is a good consectary, and justifies the Law of England in that it follows
the Method of God in punishing Children for Parents transgressions; for though
the punishment of Hellfire be annexed to the person that sins, according to
that, The Soul that sins it shall dye, Ezech. 1^.
And the father shall not bear the iniquity of the son nor the son of the
father, but every one shall answer to God for their own deeds and not for
another; yet in external punishment, as the good of Parents often reaches evil
children their posterity, so the evil deeds of Parents often reaches good
children their offspring, (and that for the greater solemnity and notoriety of
God's Sovereignty both in rewards and punishments:) Answerable to which, As God
is known by the Judgments he executes when the wicked are taken in their own
snare; Psalm. 9.16.
so is the power of God in the distribution of earthly Magistrates to be
proportioned as may most encourage to good and deterr from evil. Which because
those Laws do most effectually, that reward the child for the father's
virtue, and punish the child for the father's sin, as in the case of Bastardy
the Law of England does. The Chancellour's position that the Law of England is
Lex casta,] and that quia facit castos by its admonition and discovery of the
excellencies of continency; or if it works not that effect, yet it does
fortius, firmius que repellere peccatum, by declaring the issue of incontinence
Illegitimates, then do those Laws that do, ex Matrimonio subsequente, allow
them. This being the Chancellou'rs conclusion, He therewith ends and so do I
the Notes on this Chapter.

CHAP. XL.
Praeterea Leges Civiles dicunt filium naturalem tuum, esse filium populi, de
quo Metricus quidam sic ait. Cui pater est populus, pater est sibi nullus and
omnis.


TO the honor of the Civil Laws be it written, that they do all imaginable
Honor to Marriage and all dishonor to the contrary; the rule therefore of the
Law is, That the Marriage proves the Son, and that the son that will have a
father and inherit from him, Nuptia probant filium, Gloss. ad Nolit filium]
Digest lib. 1. tit. 6. de his qui sui vel alieni juris sun^. p. 98.

Cum legitima nuptiae facta sunt^, patrem liberi sequuntur, vulgo quaesitus
Matrem sequitur, lib 29. Digestorum.

Lex naturae haec est, etc. Ulpian. lib. 17. ad Sabinum.

Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. p. 93.

Syntag. Juris. lib. 42. c. 2^. ss. 23. and lib 45. c. 6. ss. 1, and 2. and
lib. 44. c. 2. ss. 18.


must be the son, of his Marriage, thus Celsus peremptorily concludes, and
Vlpian says it is the Law of nature, That he that is born out of lawfu^^
Marriage, unless there be a particular Law to the contrary, has no relation to
his father that begot him, but must rely on his Mother that bore him: to this
agrees Tholossanus, who calls these natural sons, Spurii, his words are, Cum
naturales tantum procul a patris successione arceantur omni illicito coitu
reprobato jure divino, and naturales etiam ideo a feudo rejiciuntur paterno,
etiam si fuerint legitimati rescripto Principis, and In Leg. 191. ss. 1.
Foeminarum. p. 435.
Alciat allows only legitimate sons to be of their father's family; yea, so
does the Civil Law suppress these as to any thing of splendor, that though
they come from the body of a man, yet his Nephews and remoter kindred shall
inherit and not they; for they being (...) are therefore left at large, and by
the Law unprovided for as strangers are: answerable hereunto is Littleton's
rule, Cook ^n Littleto^. p. 3. 123. Dyer. p. 313. 345.
A Bastard is quasi nullius filius, and therefore can lay claim to no blood or
fortune by descent, but if any he has it must be by deed or will, by which
they often (and God forbid it should be otherwise) have estates given them: for
if any man knows a person to be his child, though sinfully begotten, (the more
is his shame and ought to be his sorrow) not for him to give it his estate, if
no lawful children he have, or something of it if such lawful children he
have, is a very great unnaturalness, and that which discovers an horrible
ingratitude to nature, and a sensuality in himself which he ought to recompense
to the child which was passive in the act of his generation, and yet is
thereby rendered infamous; which One, as I have heard of note, in the Reign of
King James the Wise, considering, and having a great affection to his natural
son, settled his estate upon him, his Kindred endeavoring to make it void by a
Bill of Equity, had as much right done to them therein as the eloquence of Sir
Francis Bacon then a Pleader could afford them; upon the close of Sir Francis
his elaborate impeachment of the settlement, which he said was done to make and
favor a spurious brood, the then Judge of the Court of Equity leaning upon his
staff, and well attending the strength of his arguments and the vehemence of
his expression, notwithstanding them, decreed for the settlement, saying,
Terram dedit filiis hominum, wherein he did well (if the case was only thus as
I have heard it reported.) For reasonable it is, that he that has the power of
an estate should settle it as he pleases, and to those he best judges to
deserve, which certainly those must by any reasonable man be judged to be who
are his children, though not legitimate, he having none such, yet natural, and
such he having. Which I write not in the least degree to apologize for
looseness which I hate, or to dishonor Marriage by the benefit of which (I
bless God) I have been happy in a serene life and an hopeful issue; but to
dissallow that execrable oblivion and sordid folly, which too much swayes with
wanton and wild persons, who first sin against God in begetting children in
vage lust, and then sin against their own bodies, in disowning such support of
the fruit of them, as they are able in point of estate to allow. But of this
enough.

Cui pater est populus, pater est sibi nullus and omnis.
Cui pater est populus, non habet ipse patrem.
Sect. 1^8. of Villenage p. 123.
This is mentioned as the saying of a certain Metrician, but whom I know not,
nor does Sir Edward Cook, who yet recites it in his Commentary on Littleton,
mention the Author of it, possibly it is some obscure Monkish Distich, whose
Authority being of urgent weight, the authors name may remain a secret without
loss to any Reader; the sense of it is but the same with what in other words is
forecited, and therefore I shall mention it only as a pass to that absurdity
which the Chancellor says will follow upon legitimation of issue upon
subsequent Marriage, to wit, That when as a natural child he had no father at
his birth, thereby he after gets a father and so becomes a lawful child;
which in reason no children being possible to get without aid of that Gloss, In
Margin. Gloss. lib. digest. 23. ti^. 2. de ritu Nuptiarum p. 21 12. Ulpianus
lib. 6. loco pracit.
which is diametrally contrary to our Common Law rule, Quod ab initio non
valet, ex post facto convalescit, which though it be a good Gloss to that of
Vlpian's in the case of a Senator, Ad Legem Iuliam and Papiam there treated
on, and a Libertine may by the Prince's indulgence become just a ^xor; yet in
case of issue, ex post facto legitimated, is very hard to yield: nay certainly
since the Text says, non novit natura, how a man can be father after birth
that was not father at the birth of a child. It may be added, nec admittere
debet Iustitia, how from a corrupted fountain of lewd fruition the pure streams
of legitimate children should flow.

Maxim infra regnum Angliae, ubi filius senior solus succedit in hereditate
paterna.

As marriage is defined by Philoxenus to be (...), the cohabitation of man and
woman in all conjugal duties, so the fruits of it are by the Law of conjugation
to inherit the possessions of the so married couples: And that in England, not
as they are equally allied to, and descended from their genitors by equal
proportions, but as all the glory and sovereignty of descent is fixed on the
eldest son of the Family, who is the chief in blood, and also in inheritance
above his brethren. This the Ius commune of England allows, and though
particular customs in Manors rule descents otherwise, as in Gavel-kind and
Burrough-english Tenures, yet the Lex terrae is so, that solus senior succedit
haereditate paterna.] And this seems to come up to the appointment of God and
the dictate of Nature, Eo quod pater in illo primum masculam suam virtutem
exserit, and declarat se virum esse. Fagius and Munsterus in 49. Genes. Drusius
in Genes. 99.
whereby the eldest being the head of the Family, as every sheaf did homage to
his sheaf, so did there such a Majesty reside in him, that he being (...) did
overtop others and took them under his umbrage to defend them from all
inconvenience, and to be a kind of divine Oracle to them all. Thus Reuben is
said by Jacob to be his first born, my might and the beginning of my strength,
the excellency of dignity and the excellency of power. Now this the Hebrews
write to consist in that the government and authority over his brethren should
be his as their common father, and that they should stand before him and give
reverence to him as to their father; and Drusius adds that by virtue of
primogeniture he should have two portions of all his fathers estate to any of
the rest: Thus Primogeniture was accommodated amongst the Jews; with us in
England it is so ordered that wherein the elder brothers reverence is
diminished, his estate is advantaged, the younger brothers are not bound to be
so submiss to their elder, nor are they often so; but the elder brother has the
inheritance, Lib. 8 disput. digest. lib. 15. tit. 1. de peculio. 57. Stuprum in
virginem viduamve committitur quod Graci (...) appellant Budaeus in Pand.
Reliq. p. 223. Fleta lib. 1. c. 14.
and this ties the younger brothers to their respect for fear, if not for love.
All the while spurious issues are (as to descents) out of doors. For as the
partus ausillarum and foetus pecudum, are by Tryphonius coupled together as
equally disregarded by the Law, so in our Law, filius ex stupro cannot
participare cum filio ex legitimo thoro] that is, the child of adultery or
unlawfully coition (for the Julian Law uses them both promiscuously) cannot
partake the inheritance with the child of lawful marriage, because the Law
looks on issue only lawfully begotten, which none being but those born in
wedlock the descent of estates is only upon them by the Law of England.

Nam Sanctus Augustinus sic scribit, Abraham omnem censum suum dedit Isaac
silio suo, Lib. 16. De Civitate Dei. c. 25.
filiis autem concubinarum dedit dationes, ex quo videtur innui quod spuriis
non debetur haereditas, sed villus necessitas.

Here is an instance in confirmation of what the Law of England does in the
case of lawful issue, and what the men of England ought to do in the
settlement of their estates amongst their children; Concubina sum faminae
cohabitantes cum hominibus absque scripto and subarratione and legitimis
Ceremoniis.
and this is out of Genesis 25.6. where Abraham a most holy man is storyed to have
by the permission of his wife (a beautyfull but as yet a barren woman) a
Concubine named Hagar, by whom he had a son, begot and brought up in the house,
and to whom he gave love and portions as a father to his children, but not the
Inheritance; for when Sarah's Isaac was born, then the Concubine and her brat
was to be gone, Genesis 21.11.
Cast out this Bondwoman and her son (said she) for the son of the Bondwoman
shall not inherit with my son, even with Isaac, which words of vehemence Sarah
spoke as the challenge of that right which was due to Marriage, and the son of
the wife by the Laws of nature; (...), etc. Demost. Orat. contra Neaetam.
for so the Greek Orator sets out the right of Wives above Concubines or vage
women of pleasure, which men use as, and when they will; and their lust
satisfied, throw them off as debauched Vermint: but Wives men have lawful and
inheriting children by and make them Ladies of their lives and families. And
Musonius, after he had made a very eloquent and just Encomium of Marriage as no
impediment to Philosophy, showing that Pythagoras, Crates, and others were
furthered in their studies thereby, Musonius in lib. An Philosophiam impediant
nuptiae. Stobaeus Sermon. 186. Hierocles. lib. De Nuptiis.
concludes, (...), etc. That Marriage must be the most excellent and worthy
state of life, because the Gods are particular tutelars and fautors of it, and
do special honor and respect to it. Yea Hierocles, when he has written notably
of Marriage, concludes thus, (...), etc. Neither can Cities be without
families, nor families without Marriage, for that is no perfect family but
maimed which is not such by Marriage. And hereupon Concubines and use of women
besides wives, though it has been of old tolerated to some persons and in
certain cases, yet it was non ad explendam libidinem, sed ad generandam prolem;
and it did not make a man exsultans sed obediens conjugi, as the father
observes of Abraham, whom though it very sorely grieved to have Ismael thrust
forth and disowned, yet it irritated not to brow-beat Sarah, or reason down her
eagerness, which made the father cry out of him, O virum viriliter utentem
soeminis, Lib. 16. De Civit. Dei. c. 25. Spurius] a (...) seminare, quia nihil
habet a patre nisi semen. Etymologistae.
conjuge temperanter, ancilla obtemperanter, unlla intemperanter, but to yield
to her; and when his wife that first betrayed him to her Maid, recalled her
indulgence and removed the rival of her jealousy, Hagar goes from Abraham and
Ismael with her, and though it grieved him to turn them out of doors as rents
from him and no parts of him, yet away they went packing with some small
pittances, Cap. 25.6.
such as aftertimes termed, Ad nothos pertinentia bona, which the Athenians
called that part of a man's estate that he might give to his By-blows to the
value of 1000 Drachmes, (...). Aristophan.
with these he packed them away, the inheritance was Isaac's the son of
Marriage begotten on the wife; Habent ergo nonnulis^ munera silii Concubinarum
in plaga Ortentis, sed non perveniunt ad Regnum promissum. Sanctus Augustine.
lib. 16. De Civit. Dei. c. 34. Hebrat sentiunt altercationem inter Ismaelem and
Isaacum subnatum fuisse de hareditate, quisnam ipsorum potior haeres Abraham
suturus esset, ibique Ismaelem consisum praerogativa primogenitura pra se
Isaacum contempsisse. Fagius in Genesis 21.11.
and because Ismael's insolence was such, that being he was before Isaac in
time, therefore he strove with him for the inheritance, and was impatient that
Isaac should have it, contemning him as the younger, therefore the Hebrews
think Sarah was so earnest to remove Ismael, and Abraham, who knew in Isaac's
seed the blessing was to reside, consented to and forwarded it, giving them
Censum ejus, that is, not Lands and Houses, for those fixed things he thought
better became his heir, but his portable fortune, Cattle, money, goods, and
such like, these being of value are called Budaeus in Pandect. priores p. 54.
55. Edit. Vascos.
Census; for since Abraham being a Prophet, and knowing the mind of God,
understood, that one so born as Ismael was, ought not to come into the Economy
of God, as Cresolius Mystagog. lib. 2. cap. 4. p. 220.
Cresolius had at large discoursed, he thought it best for his son Isaac's
peace to banish Ismael his house, and to leave Isaac sole Master therein. Ex
quo videtur innui quod spuriis non debetur haereditas, sed victus necessitas,
as the Text is.

Sub nomine vero Spurii denotat Augustinus omnem foetum illegitimum, qualiter
and saepius facit sacra Scriptura quae neminem vocat Bastardum.

That these base children are no heirs, nor can have the rights of their
Parents descend to them, (...) etc. Eustathius p. 1455. l. 40. Edit. Romae.

(...). Suid. in verbo (...).

Tholoss. Syntag. Juris lib. 42. c. 27. ff. 6.


is plain from all authority; for though they that are thus born may have many
brave qualities, according to that the learned Seldom on the Text quotes of
Peleus out of Euripides, (...), and Agamemnon in In Androm. act. 3. v. 90.
(...) Schol. in Homer. in ^. Ilyad.

Plutarch in Artaxerxe.

In Comment. Grac. Lingu. p. 442. a Platone.

(...)] Qui non est ex propria and legitima uxore, sed ex alia natus muliere,
extraneus de his dicitur, qui est ex urbibus vicinis Jerusalem, humilis and
contemptibilis. Pagninus in verbo.


Homer declares Teutrus to be: yea, though in some parts of the world at this
day, these natural sons have gentilitial Privileges, though no where they
succeed to the inheritante, yet in all Ages and times (...) was a word of
diminution, and an alloy to any thing it was affixed to; thus (...) is opposed
to (...), so any feigned foreign and not proper atticism the Greeks termed
(...), as proper and regular elegancies they called (...); so (...) Budaeus
renders by spuria cogitatio, and Suidas explicates (...) by (...) beggarly,
trite, mean, next door to stranger that no body knows or owns. Hence the
Tumebus Advers. lib. 17. c. 15. p. 567. lib. 29. c. 13. lib. 30. c. 31. p. 1190.

In Summis Tit. Matrimonii, p. 589.


Latins use virginalia and spuria, id est, procliscoena part; so Apuleius
calls the parts of our bodies which are covered spuria and fascina. Though
therefore the Holy Ghost in Scripture use not the word Bastard, because it is of
a later edition and language, yet He uses that which sets it forth, and by
spuriousness intends all dishonor to lust, as the contempt of that ordinance
of God which he accepts the issue born from, and which all mankind after his
example admits to inherit, as Crespetius has to my hand made good, and Tholoss.
lib. 45. c. 11. ss. 13.
Tholossanus agrees to; and hence our Chancellor in the Text inferrs, Ecce
differentiam non minimam,] etc. Which is purposely subjoined to cast contempt
on incontinence, as it is in contradiction and upbraid of Marriage, that though
the children of them that be such may be valiant, witty, learned, etc. yet
there is somewhat in their very constitution that will corrode the vitals of
their consistence and duration. This the Chancellor makes good from the fourth
Chapter of Wisdom, where the words are, Emittere ex se profundas radices ut
faciunt arbores bonae, hoc est, sobolem virtuesam seu vitam laudabilem.
Carthus. in loc.
But the multiplying brood of the ungodly shall not thrive, nor take
deep-rooting from Bastard-slips, nor lay any fast foundation, that is, as
Carthusian's exposition is, They shall not shoot out their roots, as thriving
and pregnant trees expansively do, their children shall not be virtuous and
notable for holiness of life. Non dabunt radices altas, says a Gloss, though
they flourish in the upper boughs of their temporary prosperity, yet they are
intenaces soli, their root withers, and so non collocabunt stabile fundamentum;
and all because they are not built upon the rock of God's institution and
benediction, Marriage, Cassan. Catal. Glor. Mundi. p. 416.417.
but upon the sands and fallacious levity of wantonness, which is the reason
that the Doctors say they are Inhabiles ad ea quae in decoro consistunt, ut ad
dignitates, that is, Quia tale statutum contra jus divinum, ut in Burgundia
dicitur. Idem eodem loco.
They (says Cassanaeus) can be no Counselors of Princes, no Witnesses, no
Doctors of Law, not bear Arms or Ensigns Gentilitial, not claim right in their
fathers Wills, not be successible to Inheritances either by Custom or Statute,
as the Law of Burgundy is.

Reprehendit and Ecclesia quae eos a sacris repellit Ordinibus] Such has ever
been the account of Holy Orders, that not only the Church has kept from them
persons that were impares oneri, Baron. Tom. 9. ad Annum 723. p. 33. Concilium
Pictaviense sub Paschali secundo. Binius 7. Tom. Council. p 530, 531.

Cressol Mystag, lib. 2. p. 156, 231, 262.

(...), lib. 7. Politic.


as mained and illiterate, but also sordid and mean born ones, the reason being
good, Rerum divinarum tractatio maxim ad ingenuous pertineat; therefore the
Philosopher in his Politiques prohibits Husbandmen or men of sordid life to be
priested, and if so, then much more reason has the Church to prohibit spurious
Children to be in In decretalibus statutum est quod nullus Episcopus spurios
aut servos, donec a dominis sunt manumissis, ad sacros Ordines promovere
praesumat. Glanvil. lib. 5. c. 5.
Orders, because the disparagement of their birth transcends all other
incapacities; for their birth being against the Laws of God, (fornication and
adultery being sins against his purity and institution) the issue of it cannot
but be odious to him, and so unfit to serve before him; and therefore the
Church has ever abhorred men of stained Origins to be in Orders, as well as of
polluted lives, Epist. 3. Innocentii. Part. 1. Tom. 1. Conciliorum. p. 755.
Tom. 9. p. 555.
such as are Keepers of Cap. 24 Can. Apost. Tom. 1. Concilior. p. 8. and Can.
60. p. 14. Tom. 7. p. 674.
Concubines and loose Immoralists, whom it has not only excluded before they
took Orders, but deprived of them after they in them have lived unworthy of and
unsuitable to them; for God having appointed those that serve at his Altar,
Ridere ea Rideri secularibus derelinque; gravitas tuam personam decet. St.
Hieron. Epist. 7. Ad Laetam.
and live on his Altar, to live and be holy as the God of their Altar is. A
profane and lewd, nay a light and jovial Priest, whose crankness at tipple and
entertainments of riot and dissolute mirth is a blasphemy to his serious and
sacred Calling, ought to be accounted of the number of those, Quos reprehendit
Ecclesia; for I dare say, Note this.
(who, as a Gentleman, know the Modes of converse, and the Intrigo's of these
fashionable civilities and correspondencies) That Priests, who feed high, study
and pray little, Vestis aspera, zona pellicea, cibus locustae, milque
sylvestre, omnia virtuti and continentiae praparata. Sanct. Hieron. Ep. a. ad
Rustic. Monachum de Joh. Baptist.
frequent women's companies, neglect their watch of the flock of God, over which
they are set, give way to passion, affect excessive Pomp, and are drowned in
the cares and lures of the World, never do, or shall bless the Church of God,
nor will Religion according to Godlyness prosper in their days; for these will
by their ill lives and putid examples, subvert more then they will by their
doctrine convert: and therefore the Church does justly reprehend these, because
they are Beams in the eye of her brightness, Scarrs in the face of her beauty,
Spots in her feasts of love, who make the Sacrifice of the Lord to be abhorred,
and the way of truth to be evil spoken of. This I the rather note because men
are apt to huddle upon Orders without any consideration what the work of
Holiness and Mortification is upon their hearts; alas, it is not learning alone
that qualifies a man to be a good and gracious Minister of Christ, for many of
them shall have cause, notwithstanding abundance of this, to cry out, Scientia
mea me damnat, as Saint Augustine once did; and at the last day 'twill not be,
Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, have we not in thy name prophesied, and in thy name done wonders, that
will procure Christ's owning: for notwithstanding all these fruits of great
parts he shall say, I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Not
then these extern Prerogatives will be the refrigeraries in that Solstice of
his indignation, Plus debet Christi discipulus prastare quam mundi Philosophus,
gloria animal and popularis aura atque nummorum venale mancipium; tibi non
sufficit opes contemnere nisi Christum sequaris. Sanct. Hieron. Epist. 26. ad
Pammachium.
but the grace of his likeness in the heart and life, the humility, sincerity,
and preciseness of the life to the rule of his word; This, This, well
understood and well practiced is the best learning in the holy Ecclesiastique,
and without this, great parts will but make men mad on the World, and venture
their eternities rather then not carry the day in it; Lib. 6. de Consideratione.
which has caused the pious and tender-spirited men in all times of the Church
to debacchate against secular snares and avocations, so did St. Bernard to
Eugenius, so did Ex Epistol. ad Maketum de Egressu ex Babylone.
Clemangis, so did Luther, Aliquid permittigratia virtutis, quod alias non
permittitur. Gloss. in Pandect. lib. 3. tit. 1. p. 331. O virtuti
so have, so will all zealous men do to the end of the World; for while
passions, which are the tinder for Satan's spark to kindle upon, be keen and
quick in men, they will do any thing to undo themselves and others souls and
securities, rather then not prevail in their design. Caesar Borgia was known to
be the unholy son of that unholy, Note this.
Holy Pope Alexander the Sixth, when his father would Cardinalate him, which he
could not, (he being, as spurious, incapable by Canon) He the Pope found this
Villainy to evade the obstruction, He suborned certain Knights of the Post, (as
we say they are, who will swear and forswear any thing) who came into Court and
deposed, that Caesar Borgia was the lawful son of another man; and so his
incapacity was delete, and he admitted: which contrivement between a sensual
father, and a most like son, favored of so high a falsehood and deep-tinctured
hypocrisy as suited with no Varlets better then Herod and Judas, whose interest
was only to rage and get gain, though they prostituted their souls and bodies
to the greatest servitude. And therefore no wonder the Church does not only
Tales reprehendere, but also Indignos judicare sacro Ordine, and repellere ab
omnia praelatia, as the words of the Text are.

Gideon autem virorum fortissimus, septuaginta filios in Matrimonio legitimo
procreasse, and non nisi unum solum habuisse ex Concubina; filius tamen ipse
Concubinae, omnes filios illos legitimos nequiter peremit, excepto uno solo.

This story is out of Judges viii. 30. where Gideon is said to have many Wives,
Saltem per consuetudinem, non per legem. Drusius in loc.
Mothers to those seventy sons, which Poligamy was in some degrees successive,
and in other degrees contemporary; for though he had not all his wives at a
time, Concesta fuerunt viris uno tempore plures uxores in spem ulterioris
sobolis. Grot. in loc.
yet at all times he had more then one, it being then no scandal to have many
Wives, but rather an honor as thereby there was the greater occasion to people
the world, (...) Libanius Declam. 33. p. 748. Edit. Moreilii, Anno 1606.
then but thin of Inhabitants. Now the children of these Wives were all
Coparceners in the inheritance, the eldest only having the double part, and
they entercommoned in affection each to other, and were together in the house
of their father, loving and tendering each other; but the base son who was
filius meretricis or concubina, (not that she did make mercimony of her body by
taking reward for the hire and pleasure of it as Harlots did, Mulieres fuisse
artis Cauponaria, quarum mariti tum forte abierant negotiationis ergo. Vatablus
in 1 Reg. ^.16.
who were wont, when their Husbands were abroad at Sea or otherwise, to expose
themselves to the lust of any Chapman, and if they proved with child by it,
which was rare and against their wills, to kill their child;) for no such
person was this Gideon's Concubine, but one that probably kept to him only,
and gave him no just jealousy that any one came near her carnally but himself:
but that which is the disparagement to her and her child is, Cum Lex hoc
nomine vetat connubia diversarum tribuum, ne permistio fiat pradierum. Drusius,
Munsterus, Clarius in loc.
that she was uno viro addicta citra vinculum Matrimonii, that she was of
another Tribe then Gilead, and therefore must with her son be a stranger to
inheritance. This is that which brands her and disables her son to inherit,
which so boyles in the stomach of this blazing star of lust, that he meditates
the ruin of all his fathers lawful sons.

In which story there are sundry things observable. First, There is the
Bastards craft, he enters not on the act alone without a strong party, nor
craves aid of any that would come in to him, but solicits the Sichemites, whom
he calls his Kindred, Bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh.

Secondly, The Bastard's confidence to attack the Sichemites and to solicit
them to such a design, and so to engage them by his plausible insinuations, as
not only they should connive at and underhand approve his project, but give
him money to entertain men to effect it, Chap. ix. 4.

Thirdly, The Bastard's cruelty to slay so near relations, Brethren, so many of
them, sixty nine; in that place, their father's house; at one time, upon one
stone, in sight of one another, upon no provocation, but because they were
legitimate and must inherit, not he. v. 4. compared with v 2. and 6.

Fourthly, Here is the Bastard's subtlety, rage, and cruelty, partly frustrated
by God, and his fancyed Sovereignty disturbed by the reservation of Iotham one
of Gideon's sons unslain, whom God preserved to revenge the blood of the sixty
nine slain, upon the Bastard and his Sichemites, from the 7. to the 24. verse.

Fifthly, The effectualness of small means cunningly carried and subtlely
employed to bring portentuous things to pass, seen not only in Abimelech his
sin in soliciting the Sichemites, and murdering the sixty nine sons of his
father, but in Iotham's Parable, who set all Israel a-gog to revenge the
fratricide purely by the cogency of a Parable and the intention of it, which
explicates the falseness and ingratitude of the Sichemites to Gideon their
Deliverer, v. 8. and prophecies God's vengeance on them for it, v. 19, 20. and
God's means to unravell the rope of sand that they twined together to hold
their wickedness fast, by sending an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men
of Sichem, v. 23.

Lastly, The commensuration of the punishment to the sin, rule he would who was
born to serve, ruin his brethren he would who ought to have reverenced them as
his betters, Partisans he would have in the fact, that having begun he may go
through with it; but God turned his Confederates into conspirators against him,
that the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Ierubaal might come,
and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother which slew them, and upon
the men of Sichem which aided him in the killing of his brethren, so is it v.
24. Thus may we see how just God is to make the sin men design for their
greatness, their shame and diminution; which not only happened to this Bastard
and his misguized Partisans here, but to sundry others to this day; For though
it be not an infallible rule that Gods vengeance always meets with sinners in
this world, in the punishments that are declarative of their sin, Surius
Commentar. ad Annum 1541.
yet often it is so. That Queen of Hungary found it so, who being unjustly
possessed of Hungary against Ferdinand the King of the Romans, and after
Emperor, and not able to defend it against Ferdinand, craved aid of Solomon,
who came into Hungary, and deprived her and her son of the Kingdom; and Henry
the third of France when he designed the murder of the Duke and Cardinal of
Guise, used Saint Clement for the watchword to the Assassines, and after the
same Prince was himself murdered by one Clement in the midst of his Army. D.
Avila. p. 316.


Quo in no tho uno plus maliciae fuisse deprehenditur, quam in filiis
legitimis. 69.

This is subjoyned to set the disgrace of adultery and fornication home in the
abhorrence of all good men, who cannot but hate it, not only because it tends
to the utter destruction of souls, but is a provocation of the terrible wrath
of God, upon the places where such abominations were used and suffered, they
are the words of the Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 38. but also because the sin and
obliquity of it, is so thorough vitiative of the production of it, (...) lib.
1. Gener. Animal. c. 18. p. 1061.
that it according to our Chancellours sense makes them out of measure sinful,
as full of mischief as a toad is of poison; which though it be too often true
(as it also is in the children of lawful marriage, then which mankind never
saw greater villains then some of them are:) so is it not ever true of base
children as we call natural sons, for some of them have been in all times men
of Courage, Seldom in c. 40. of Fortescue Tiraq. de Nobilitate c. 15. Pontus
Hutterus de veteri Belgio ad finem.
Learning, Piety, Prudence, every way accomplished. Hence is it that not only
our Text tells us of a bonus Bastardus, but Mr. Seldom out of Tiraquella and
Hutterus concludes, That most of the brave spirits, and able, of the former
times are in the Catalogue of famous Bastards, (...) Plutarchus in Alcibiad. ad
Initium p. 192. edit. Paris.
some of whom have had dubious Mothers: So Nicias, Demosthenes, Lamachus,
Phormio, Thrasybulus, Theramines, famous Athenians and brave men, and others;
if they had any Fathers known, yet those known to be theirs by surreptitious
and unchaste raptures and effusions. To omit what Lib. 1. Tom. 2. Haeres. 55.
Epiphanius writes the Jews held, Melchesedec ideoque nec nomen patris vel
matris in sacris literis expressum, says he, I say to omit this, there are
presidents of multitudes of the greatest Heroicks of this Tribe, Scotius,
Farthenius, Theseus, Romulus, Abimelech, Ieptha, Jupiter, Neptune, Venus,
Apollo, Aeneas, Homer, the Partheniae amongst the Lacedaemonians, Demaratas,
Themistocles, Demades, Timotheus, Aristonicus, Perseus, Hircanus, Remus,
Brutus, Iugurtha, Alexander, Claudius, Constantius, Theodoris, Carolus, Martel,
Carlomannus of Bavania, Manfred, Hencius, Pope John the eleventh and twelfth,
Adelstan, Amundus King of Suevia, Pomponius L^tus the great Geographer, Gratian
the great Decretalist, Andrea, Ferdinand King of Naples, and Alfonsus King of
Arragon, Comestor, these and thousand others, have come of that illegitimate
race, and yet been renowned in their times, which shows that God has a secret
and predominant power over natures not only act but sin, that he can suspend
the vigor and vehemence of that Pheontick gallop that makes the genitors of
these meet together like torrents, that coupling make a mixture to swallow up
all calmness of temper and mediocrity, that this I say is so sweetened, Sperma
omnibus rebus nascentibus attribuitur pro Principio, Scaliger in Com. ad lib.
1. Animal. Aristotel. fo. 33.
is a mighty mercy to mankind: for else should these, who are best card as
Kilian Etymologizes Bastard, id est optimae indolis sive naturae, and have
cheerful and high spirits, Illegitime enim and furtive concubitu procreati,
animo plerumque sunt alacri and elate, ingenio sagasi, and judicio exacto;
Sumnerus in Gloss. ad scriptores, Antiq. Angl. Impress. Land. 1652.
sage wits, and mature crafty natures, not be restrained: what prodigies of men
would they be? Yea, what terrors would not their vast and various endowments
surprised by Satan, occasion to the world, but this that is their sin by
Nature, God corrects by special favor; not as they are issues from libidinous
stocks, but as they are passive under that regency of nature, which in the
natural generative expression of her, is his own Implantation, and in which
nature vitiated by sin is isntrumental to the multiplication of mankind, and
this is the reason why any of this race are so restrayn'd, (...) Arist. de
Part. Animal. lib. 1. c. 1. p. 970.
and so excellent, as to favor any thing calm and sober; for in nature there
is nothing in them but the heighths of all passion and excess in which sense
the Text makes them to be more fierce and hot by nature then legitimate
children are, which is the reason that they have been ever the Attempters of
desperate actions which no spirits but theirs durst cope with. A lively
instance whereof is in Frisco the Bastard of Azzom of Este, mentioned in the
Venetian story, which duly weighed, the saying mentioned si bonus est bastardus
hoc ei fuerit a casu videlicet gratia speciali, si autem malus ipse fuerit hoc
sibi accidit a natura] is not only true as Grace gives the advantage against
the corruption of nature in all both good and bad, but also as it does more
then ordinarily overcome the evil of nature in these that have their pravity
wodded and double dyed by the lewdness of their parents, and the lawlesness and
monstrosity of the motives to, and kindlings in their coitions, Shute p. 167.
which the Text not only expatiates upon, calling it libido parentum
culpabilis, peccatum fornicantium, and that which in legitimis castisque
amplexibus conjugatorum non solet debacchari; For thus our Text in sundry parts
of the Chapter phrases it, that it concludes them to deserve rather the title
of filios peccati then peccatorum] which brings to my mind that Tradition of
the Jews that the cursing Tribes on Mount Ebal were the sons of the Handmaids,
Mentioned by the Phoenix Prelate Bishop Brownrig. 1 Sermon. Inauguration p. 19.
and the Tribes of Gerazim were the sons of the Free-women, and they were
Tribes of blessing to show no doubt that children born against the Law of
marriage are worse then those according to it; for children begotten of
unlawful beds are witnesses of wickedness against their Parents in their
Trial, so says the Author of the Book of Wisdom c. 4. v. 6. which warrants
the Chancellours Eulogy of lawful progeny in those words, O quam pulcra est
casta generatio cum claritate; for if all the examples of villainy in a profuse
and debauched rage and wander of choyceless looseness were perished, Dion
Cassius. lib. 38.
but only that of Messalina to Mnestor the base and sordid Pantomime, whom she
dishonored her self with; That, that, were enough to set forth the horrid and
detestable nature of that impetus, which as it is kindled by Hell in the
members, does tend to Hell in the complement and reward of it.

Creditur idcirco, caecum illum natum de quo Pharisaei. Joh. 9. Dixerunt, tu in
peccatis natus es totus, fuisse bastardum, qui nascitur totaliter ex peccato.

That this blindman was of old held a Bastard, was not only the opinion of the
Ancients who wrote before our Text, and the belief of many Christians according
to it; but also the consent of Grotius, Pererius and others, and that because
he is said to be totut natus in peccato, a Toting sinner, as we say, a
monstrous great sinner, such an one as has not only the blemish of his genitors
natural sin, in which all the sons of Adam are conceived and born, but an over
and above-sin upon him, not only of the nature, but also of the state which his
Parents who begat him were dishonourably in, Incomparably Learned Doctor
Hammond in his Annotations on this Text 9. John.
to wit, not the state of marriage which has the presence and allowance of God
with it, and thereupon being a kind of sinless and Innocent state is honorable
among all men, but a state of contempt and sculkingness, a lucifugous state,
which is that of the night, a state of prey and violence, that derives on the
proceed of it, the reproach and scorn of a thorough and total turpitude. Cic.
4. de Finib. 2. Tuscul. Q. Totum and parts. Cic. 1. Academ. Totus ego. Totus
gaudeo, Plautus.
Totus natus in peccato] so Tully ranks totum and universum, toto corpore atque
omnibus angulis, as if the vitiation of the prostituted parents incubated all
the Mass, and dislustred it in every limb, article and action of it, totus
natus in peccato; For though there is in all as I wrote before a defilement of
every faculty of the soul of man, and a deformity in the abuse of every member
of man's body; yet in one born thus, there seems by this to be a
super-superlative impression of sin, which disposes the sinner (subject of it)
to be violent, eager, cruel, crafty, and what not which is opposite to learning
and judgment of temper, the endowment of chaste and lawful love. Hence the
Pharisees a sect of knowing and smart men, who had notable insights into arts
and men, reply so vehemently upon him, tu doces nos, as if they intended to
tell him he was out of the road of spurious born men to affect to be learned,
that they wholly begotten in the sulphur of lust, are more disposed to actions
of mettle and violence then to arts, books, and things of coolness and
composure. This the Chancellor understanding the sense of them in that place,
writes, Bastardum non ut legitimum in naturalibus esse dispositum ad scientiam
and doctrinam. The sum then of this Chapter being to advocate for the Law of
England in its exclusion of the issue upon subsequent Marriage from
inheritance, having done it, as he conceives, in the former part of the
Chapter, he proceeds to such an Epilogue as resolves all the prealledged
particulars into one Mass of assertion, that therefore the Law of England does
not Parificare Bastardos and Legitimos in haereditate paterna, quia illos
dispares judicat Ecclesia in haereditate Dei; and therefore determines for the
English Law, because it doing honor to Marriage and punishing its reproach,
deserves to have all honor and suffrage from those that are children born in
Marriage. And so he concludes this Chapter.

CHAP. XLI.
Princeps. Revera came quae fortius a Regno peccatum eliminat and firmius in eo
virtutem conservat.


IN this Chapter the Prince is introduced complying with the Chancellour's
judgment in the Preference of the Laws of England, as the rule of Government
here, to any exotique Laws; which though for other Countries they may be
convenient, yet to this, other then as assistant Laws, are altogether
inidoneous. And that the Chancellours praise of the Laws may not appear more
the effect of custom and use (the Tyranny whereof prevails often beyond the
influence of reason and judgment) then of experience the best Oracle next to
that of justice in Government, there is such a Preface precurring it, as will
not be denied welcome with all men of science and conscience. For as sin is
that which promerits a divine curse and impends it over Kingdoms sure to sink
under the weight and terror of it; so Laws in Kingdoms which do cast forth
the abominable thing that God hates, and preserve the integrity of soul which
God accepts and will reward, are certainly the most to be approved and chosen.
And this the Law of England doing in the Method that in the foregoing Chapter
is described, the Chancellor presents the Prince, though in the main
satisfied, with some further instances of the variety of the Laws in their
Prescripts and Sentences, which is the Sum of this one and fortyeth Chapter.

CHAP. XLII.
Leges. Civiles sanciunt, quod Partus semper sequitur ventrem.

THIS is agreed by all the Doctors, In liberali causa matris non patris
inspicienda est conditio. Tit. de lib. causa L. 28. and L. 40.

Tholoss. Syntagm. lib. 20. c. 7. ff. 2.

Lib. 7. c 2. ff. 10.

Ulpian. lib. 27. ad Sabinum.

Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. p. 93. De statu hominum.

Fornerius ad Leg. 17. p. 76. de verb. signific.

Tit. De his qui in potestate sunt.

Alciat. ad Leg. 196. p. 425. de verb. signific.

Legitime natus quoad conditionem and originem patrem sequitur, matrem vero
sequitur non legitime natus. Bartol. Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. p. 92.

Celsus lib. 29. Digest.

Digest. loco pracitat.


Partus naturae ratione matrem sequitur, and the reason is because in the Law
the partus is pars visceris matris; the reason of this Law Notes ad cap. 40.
Fortescue.
Mr. Seldom shows to be, That where Marriage or Jura Connubii could not be,
there always Partus sequebatur ventrem; to this Vlpian assents, Lex naturae
est ut qui nascitur sine legitimo Matrimonio matrem sequatur, on which the
Gloss, Quoad libertatem and servitutem quod and verum, etc. That the Partus,
(which is the child out of Marriage, Partus aucillarum and foetus pecudum,
Paulus joining together) is here meant, appears not only from that of Vlpian,
Connubio interveniente liberi semper patrem sequuntur, non interveniente
Matrimonio matris conditioni accedunt, but also by Celsus, Bartolus, Paulus,
and all the Doctors: to these agree the Gratianus Decret. part. 2. cause. 15.
qu. 8. fol. 246.
Canonists, and that from the reason which causes the semper in our Text; for
that is jure naturae and gentium so to have it; for though the father that
begets may be uncertain, yet the mother that produces must be certain, and
whose child soever it is not, here it is, In vita Themistocl.
Plutarch writing of Hercules says (...), that he was the Son of a lewd woman,
and because Iephtha was the son of an Harlot, Matter quae legi se subjecerat,
non maculabat natales, neque ad haereditatem capescendam obstabat. Grotius in
Iud. xi. 2.
id est, extraneae says Grotius, They thrust him out of his father's house, as
being no chip from his block, but his mother's son, and as such disparaged;
according to this Advers. lib. 29. c. 13 p. 1112.
Turnebus writing of the Spurii uses these words, Horum natales non habent
obscuram matrem sed patrem appellare non possunt. 1 Kings xiv. 21. c. xv. 2. c.
xxii. 42. 2 Kings viii. 26.
This the Holy Text regarding is sure to remember the Mothers name as the glory
or blemish of her son, for though the father be the motive and active
Phavorinus lib. de excellent. hominis. part. 1. c. 16. p. 56.
cause of generation, yet the matter of the child is more from the mother,
(...) Arist. Hist. Animal. lib. 1. c. 3.
(the f^tus being formed by the vis plastica which consists of the nature of
the womb as well as of the seed of the father) and by conjunction of them both
(as say Anatomists) forms all the parts of the body as to their spermatical and
solid substance, which compagination being resident in the belly of the mother,
gives the child a stronger tincture of the mother then father, from whom it
passes only in a whirlewinde; nay besides this the mother by a constant act of
sovency does in se ipsa generare, as she (does by the umbilique veins unto the
arterias illiacas, and all the rest of the parts of the body by which air is
given to the child) convey nutriment from her self to it; which is the reason
that children do most favor the mother, not only in visage but in humor, and
why wise men do choose brave women to breed upon; for as a course cloth proves
an ill ground for a noble design and draught in picture, and as a tough and
misshapen logg will deform the art of the noblest Statuary, so will an
ill-chosen wife vitiate and alloy the brood of any family: Non-observation of
this cause of much mischief.
which is the reason why choices by prudence (as they fashionably call their
Marriage Iockkying, wherein persons bartar away their comforts and
conspicuities in a brave and procerous issue, for accommodations of pelf and
coin) are so often repented and digressed from with abhorrence, because there
being no true splendor, the disseminations whereof will bud and blossom in
posterity, the portions the father acquired with the mother is doubly and
trebly expended with the daughters and sons, whose blemishes thereby are fain
to be compensated for with great and wasting portions: the like mischief is
where brave women marry with absurd men, the incomplacency whereof they often,
if not always repent.

Vt si mulier servilis conditionis nubat viro conditionis liberae. Proles eorum
servus erit, and e converso, servus maritatus liberae, non nisi liberos gignit.

Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. ss. 5. p. 83.

Florentin lib. 9.

Instit.

Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. de statu hominum. p. 87.


This is the instance wherein the Partus does sequs ventrem. A Lord has a woman
that is his vassal, she marryes one that is free, as the child is ingenuns qui
ex matre natus est libera, so is the child of a bondwoman a slave or servile
in his condition; now though servitude be against the Law of nature, and this
constitutio Iuris gentium 5. and this constitutio Iuris gentium being
introduced by saving persons victor'd from death, who having the right of their
persons so under their power and kept alive till their manu-mission, they
marrying, though to a free man, do not produce a free child but a bond one,
because the Partus does sequi ventrem, Notes on the Text. p. 49.50.
and the mother being in that condition, the proles or partus of her must so
be; Mr. Seldom not without warrant thinks this thus to be, Upon presumption
that the Marriages with bond-persons were always accounted but Contubernia and
not Connubia, In Legem 184. p. 398. lib. de verb. signific. Hercle quid istuc
est? Serviles nuptia? Servine uxorem ducent? Plautus Prol. Casiu.
and they were called Contubernales non Conjuges, which I find allowed by
For^erius, Nam quod inter liberos and cives Romanos Matrimonium, id in servorum
conjunctione and copula Contubernium Veteres appellarunt, which Justinian calls
servile consortium; and Contubernales Vlpian expounds by Conjuges servi and
ancillae, when as Connubium Tholoss. Synt. lib. 9. c. 1. ss. ^. 1 Instit. on
Littleton, p. 123.
He terms ducendae uxoris jure facultas, nullum cum servis: so that when the
Mother does convey her condition to the child and not the father, as in this
case it should seem to be understood, such are children Contubernii non
Connubii; yet this I find current, that the child is wrapped up in the
mothers condition, and whatever the father be, yet in reputation of the Civil
Laws is as his mother is bond or free.

Sed Lex Angliae nunquam Matris, sed semper Patris conditionem imitari partum
judicat.

This is confirmed by all our Books, Sect. 187. Cook on him. p. 123. Liber Rub.
c. 77. Bracton. lib. 4. fol. 271. Si mulier serva copulata sit libero, partus
habebit haereditatem. lib. 4. fol. 298. Partus monstrosi, id est, contra
naturam seu formam hominum, non dicuntur esse legitimi. Bartol. Digest. lib. 1.
tit. 5. p. 30.
Si vne villein prent frank feme a feme, and ad issue enter eux, l' issues
serront villeins; mes si neife prent frank home a sabaron, lour issues serra
frank, says Littleton, according to all the Books, Quia semper a patre non a
matre generationis ordo texitur. And though I know Bracton tells us in the
County of Cornwall there was a custom in some Mannours, That if a bondwoman
marry to a freeman, and she, by him admitted to his free house and bed, have
two children, one to a freeman, and she, by him admitted to his free house and
bed, have two children, one shallbe free as her husband, the other bond as she;
yet the same Author says in another place the general Law was, If a
bondwoman marry to a freeman, the child of them shall inherit, which must be
understood of being free as his father, for else he could not inherit, the rule
being, Quicquid acquiritur servo, acquiritur domino il lius servi, supposing
them the Partus not to be Monstross, (for then they are non Legitimi by both
Laws, such as are mentioned by Historia naturae, p. 134. Ammian, Marcellin.
lib. 19.
Neirembergius and Ammianus Marcellinus, Aliquid habens duo capita, as the
Gloss on Paulus explains Prodigiosum.) If the partus be secundum membrorum
humanorum officia a child, it shall be reputed and as such, follow the
condition of the Father, and be his child whose the marriage is according to
the rule of both Laws, Pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant.

Quae putas Legum harum melior est in sententiis suis? Crudelis est Lex quae
liberi prolem sint culpa subdit servituti, Nec minus crudelis censetur, quae
liberae sobolem sine merito redigit in servitutem.

Because our Text-Master here is both the Scrupler and the Resolver, and seems
to determine hardly against the Civil Law, which in this case he calls Lex
crudelis, by the same reason the Civilians may call the Common Law so, ob
exclusos nothos ex subsequente Matrimonio, treated on in the foregoing Chapter.
Because (I say) there ought to be a very calm soul and a wary pen in writing
any thing to the prejudice of the accord of both Laws, Ratio non potest reddi
in his quae sunt de justitia positiva, nisi quod sic visum fuit Legislatori.
Digest. lib. 3. tit. 1. D^ postulando.
my humble offer shall be in excuse of the Civil Law for the Continent, thus
prescribing, That it is Ratio quia Ius, and in Laws of positive Justice, there
can no other reason be given, but the pleasure of the Lawmakers; which as they
allow us for our Law, we must allow them for theirs: For since the Amassers of
the Civil Laws are deservedly to be owned and honored as men as learned and
wise as any either the Greek or our Lawmakers have been, that which they, in
this case, have constituted, to be the Law of the Empire, is to be thought as
fit for that vast body, as our Laws appointment fit for us to observe. For as
he ought to be counted a madman, that because there was one Messalina, whose
wantonness, if it could be coped with an hundred times a day, Quae etsi centies
in die viro commiscuerat, potius delassatam quam satiatam sepradicabat.
would rather be wearied then satisfied, cries out against all women as
insatiable; so are they to be esteemed little other then mad, who, because
there are differences in the manner of exhibiting Justice according to the
Common and Civil Laws, exclaim against the Civil Laws for this, when as it
concerns them rather to applaud the wisdom of Law makers in framing their Laws
thus variously to answer the varieties of men and manners, which arise from
constitutions and accidents attending them. For there is no diversity in either
of the Laws but has Topique arguments very rational allegable for them, and
upon scrutiny will appear to be so strenuous, that all circumstance of time,
The Author desires ever to be modest in all his expressions of the Laws.
place, and persons considered, they will not easily be overthrown; which gives
me the constant monition to be very circumspect in averring any thing on the
side of one Law, which may have any unbeseeming reflection on the other Law. All
that I have written, or shall write in the case of both Laws, shall I am
resolved savor of no unhumble affectation. I honor both Laws in their
respective Spears, though ever, as to the Government of England, I must, and
shall ever say and protest to all men, That the Common and Statute-Laws are in
my mean opinion the only way of wise, mild, and effectual rule of it, that the
wit of man can prescribe, or the experience of man discover, always premising
the association of the Civil Law in those cases wherein that Law is adopted,
and made by use and custom part of the Lex Terrae. And therefore though the
Chancellor here does marshall the arguments on both sides, that out of them
well considered and discussed, the reason and judgment of the Prince whether
to adhere to may be cleared; yet shall I, in the illustration of it, only
modestly point at those things that are material in both their arguments as
here they are alleged, and so proceed.

Legistae vero dicunt, Quod non potest arbor mala fructus bonos facere, neque
arbor bona fructus malos facere. Ac omnis Legis sententia est, quod plantatio
qualibet cedit solo quo inseritur.

This Sir Ed. Cook mentions on Sect. 187. Littleton. p. 123. Digest. lib. 7.
tit. 4. p. 938. Gloss. O. and p. 977. lib. 2. Tit. 1. de servitu tibus and
Digest. p. 1433. Solum vertere, id est, terram. Budaeus in Pond. Relig. p. 116.
Caesar Cons.
This is the defense the Civilians make for their making the Partus matris sequi
ventrem, because every plant partakes of the nature of the soil in which it is
set and grows; for the root fixed in the ground and drawing nourishment from
the solum or terra (for it is all one) the Plant is said cedere solo, because
the soil or mould wherein it grows, victors and conquers it from its own
original nature to somewhat analogous to the nature of the soil, which is
cedere solo, as we say, a resignation to become one in nature with the soil; so
Cedere loco, urbe, patria, domo, is in Authors to leave ones Country and
residence, and Cedere bonis and possessione is in this sense used by
Quintilian, and Amori turpi cedere by Valerius, Cedere testibus by Vlpian, and
Vives when he expresses the desire of one to his wife to give up her interest
in her son-in-law to him, writes, Exorata uxore ut sibi genero cederet, and
some where I have read of Cedere foro for Bankers, who defraud men of their
moneys by nonappearance, which is giving themselves up to obscurity, playing
least in sight; all which answer the purpose of our Text-Master, rightly
phrasing his intention, Gassendus de Plantis. Tom. 2. Physic. lib. 4. c. 5. p.
179. Theophr. Hist. Plant. lib. 1. c. 7.
that Position has a great influence on action, and nourishment on nature.
Hence argue the Civilians, if a Plant by mere being in the earth, partake of
the earth, and is good or bad as the soil, is in which it is; then the child
being pars viscerum matris, and lying long in her and having ablactation and
fovency from her, must needs be according to the ordinary dispensation of
nature as the mother is: and therefore if the mother be good or bad, the child
is presumed such as she is to be, since according to nature, A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit. Therefore, say they, just
it is that the partus which lodges in the belly of the mother and partakes so
much of her as to be predominantly in nature hers, should be denominated from
the mother and be reputed bond or free, good or evil as she is; which argument
of theirs carries much of reason with it, for it is built upon undeniable
Premises, Such as the tree is, such is the fruit, our Savior's argument, Matthew
vii. 18. according to which all mankind conclude, Menander has the same,
(...), Grotius makes this the principle of nature which all men concur in;
Grot. in Matthew. vii. 18. Arist. 2. Topic. c. 9. Lib. 1. Hist. Animal. c. 2. 2
Not. Auscult Tract. 3. c. 3. Gassend. Physic. sect. 1. lib. 4. c. 8.
so that supposing God the supreme cause interpose not, nor he by his influence
divert not the ordinary course of nature in causes and effects, it stands for a
general rule not to be denied, that a good tree, so long as it is good, Clarius
in Matthew vii. 18.
brings forth good fruit, and an evil tree while it is evil, brings forth bad
fruit, Quamdiu quisque malus est, non potest facere bonos fructus; sicut enim
potest fieri ut quod fuit, nix non sit, non autem ut nix sit calida: sic autem
potest fieri, ut qui malus sit, non fit malus, non tamen potest fieri ut malus
benefaciat, quia etsi aliquando utilis est, non hoc ipse facit sed fit de illo,
divina providentia procurante. Aquinas in locum.
A bonis bona proficiscuntur necesse est, a malis contra, says Clarius, which
I suppose he borrowed from Saint Augustine, as did also Aquinas, who to this
purpose quotes him; for a surer rule cannot be given, then to judge according
to causes of effects: so that the mother being the nourisher of the child,
which she supplies with sustentation from every part of her body according to
the capacity of the child, which without it would never thrive nor make to
birth, (since neither the mouth, nor the liver, nor the heart, say the
Physicians, do prepare nourishment for the child, but the mother from her
store and treasury of succulency sustains it,) there seems very high reason
that the mother predominating in the nature of the child, Lex natura est hac,
ut qui nascitur sine legitimo Matrimonio matrem sequatur. Ulpian. lib. 17. ad
Sabinum. Digest. p. 93. pracitat.
should, where not the Mother in Marriage, denominate the child, and its
external condition follow the nature of the belly of the mother wherein it was
so long steeped, and from whence so carefully produced; and this the Law-Civil
so orders, because the mother is more limited and bound to abide with the
child then the father, for which cause it is proverbially said, It Is a wise
child that knows his own father, for the mother every one must know that
either sees her delivered, or hears it from those that saw her, and thence
transmit it to others and so it becomes notorious, Qui est in utero pro nato
habetur quoad sui commodum. Reg. Iuris apud Gajum. lib. 1. Instit. Digest. lib.
1. tit. 5. p. ^^.
but the father of the child, there is only the mothers word for, which
though it be of great credit, being (in a cause of vehement suspicion) assured
in the pains of that condition, yet is not so demonstrably true as the
certainty of the mother, from whose belly the child is taken; which being the
reason of the Civil Laws position, Partus semper sequitur ventrem, seems to me
not to be without much of reason in the observation of it.

Ad haec legis Angliae consulti dicunt: quod partus ex legitimo thoro non
certius noscit matrem, quam genitorem suum. Nam ambae leges quae jam
contendunt, uniform iter dicunt: quod ipse est pater, quem nuptiae demonstrant.

The Law of England looking upon the child as the partus legitimi thori,
concludes the child as well capable to know his father as his mother; for the
knowledge here being that of polity and civil enaction, follows the prescript
of the Law which appoints and orders it, which is that lawful procreation be
within marriage, so that if a child born in marriage may know his mother who
is the wise of the father, the same child may by the same rule of marriage
know his father, that being concluded on by all hands, Pater est quem nuptia
demonstrant. Paulus lib. 4. ad edictum. Digest. lib. 2. tit. 4. De in jus
vocando. p. 186.
He is the father who is the husband of the mother in marriage; for as the
parturition of the child by the mother declares who is the mother of the
child, so the marriage of the mother with the father attributes the
father-hood of the child so begotten and born in marriage to the husband in
that marriage, and his in reputation of Law it shall be, if no impossibility in
him to beget it be maintainable; and as wedlock declares the mother as to
honor, so does it the father as to legitimation and inheritance; and the man
being the head of the wife, 1. Instit. on Littleton. p. 123.
and the wife and he but one person in the Law, the Law of England holding up
the honor of marriage, and vilifying whatever is honestative thereto, judges
it more convenient ut conditio filii ad patris potius quam ad matris
conditionem referatur] as the Texts words are, and being with us there is a
rule which none must depart from, That no man ought to think himself wiser then
the Law, all argument against this constitution and practice is sacrilegious;
for though here be under marriage a discrimination of sex, yet is there an
unity of nature and indiscriminate parentage, so is the Text.

Cum de conjugatis dixerat Adam, erunt ipsi duo in carne una, quod dominus
exponens in Evangelio ait, Iam non sunt duo, sed una caro.

This is produced to show both the antiquity, honor and innocence of marriage
(instituted in Paradise, and hence by God sanctified to the ends of his
institution) and the intimacy of marriage, which purports a dearness of
invisceration beyond that of adhesion, for it is not said they shall only leave
father and mother and cleave to one another, but it is said that those acts of
leaving dear relations, and cleaving to the solitary choice marriage makes,
shall be that, whereby they may be one, which aphorism uttered by Adam in Genesis
2.24. was (I am apt to think) when he was extatique or seraphique above what he
as a mere man was for it is prophetique and prefigurative of what should be the
conviction and duty of man and woman in marriage to the end of the world. Lib.
de recta nominum ratione. Eam naturam quae rebus nomina imposuerit celsiorem
esse hac humana. Clarius in Loc.

Deus per hominem dixit quod homa prophetando praedixit. Sanctus August. lib.
2. de Nuptiis c. 4. Vatablus in Matthew. 19. v. 5.


I take my notion from Saint Augustine and Clarius) I say when Adam was thus
abstracted from humane feculencies, and carried above the perch and flight of
the narrow and dwarfie prospect of mortality; Then, then, was it that he said
of man and woman in marriage, erunt caro una] that is, says Vatablus, unus
homo, for that ipsi duo in carne una, is our Lords addition in Matthew. 19. v. 5.
where the word (...) seems to me to be somewhat less then that (...) Mark.
10.7. For when a thing is joined to another, as Fletchers do in pieceing of
arrows, or Masons in cementing of stones, or Builders in joining frames,
though there be a support and assistance each of other, yet there are flawes
and joints which wind and weather may pierce and make chinques and chops in,
but when a bone forced aside, is set in its proper place, and a Cyons inserted
the stock, and let into a convitality with it, then it grows to be one
invisible punct of kindness and conjunction, then is that done which this (...)
seems to me to intend. Thus our Lord says, Adams erunt una caro is made good
in the double (...) which refers to the union of body and mind, by which e
duobus fiet unus, ^rasm. in Loc.
not as if the Holy Ghost pointed, says Erasmus to the carnal contents of
marriage, which the Greeks termed (...), or that he commended this Idem Adag
Cent. 9. Chil. ^. Adag. 23.
union as it was (...) wherein wives had delights of husbands as husbands had
of wives (though this is the effect of marriage) but our Lord drives it thus
home to represent the dearness of that tie in the virtuous amicitiality of it,
Grot. in c. 19. Genesis v. 5. Nostris ex ossibus alter. 4. Aeneid. (...). 2.
Politic. 4. Plutarch. in sympos. (...).
if it were abstracted from all possibility of sensual fruitions, and the
oblectaments of carnality; and so St. Paul in Ephesians. 5.30. applies it to Christ
and the Church, which dignification of marriage Grotius thinks to be that which
declares marriage to be rem vere sacram, non humanitus sed divinitus repertam,
for it is God that can make two in an house to be of one heart, and one mind,
that is, to be two in one, which the Heathens made the top of Concord and
kindness. Now this the Chancellor applies to the case in point, if, cum
masculinum concipiat faemininum, ad masculinum quod dignius est referri debet
tota caro sic facta una] as much as if he had said Adam (the first man and
husband) under the polysexuall word, Man, couches Woman part of him, and
imports the nobility of humane nature to reside in the man as being the first
tempore and dignitate, which I write not to advance the huffs and prides of men
over their companions, who are bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh,
the best, only, excellent, and rational comforts of life, but to assert the
rights of manhood, and to excite men to live and love, worthy the majesty and
merit of their divine Endowment; for in that man is called creaturarum
pretiosissima and dignissima, Digest. lib. 21. tit. 1. p. 1997, 1998. de
edilicio edicto.

Theophilus Antecess. Instit. lib. 3. tit. 3. de senatus consult.

Tertul. p. 4^2.


and is preferred above the woman, as Theophilus Antecessor makes good, and
Fabrottus observes on him to be according to the Laws of nature, and to what
God declares Genesis 3.16. where he says to the woman Thy desire shall be to thy
husband, Semper seniorem juniori and amplioris honoris inferiori, and marem
famina and ingenuum libertino praeferemus Ulpian. lib. 54. adedict. Digest.
lib. 22. tit 4. p. 20^4.

Digest. lib. 1. tit. 9. p. 119.

Aelian. hist. animal. lib. 9 c. 5.


which Aben- Ezra reads by obedientia tua erit viro, it is to be understood,
not as if the dominion of man were a tyrannous and violent one, but to show
there is a certain natural and affectionate virtue implanted by God in the
woman, disposing her with complacential delight to submit to her husbands mild
and civilly-obliging Government, Observe this.

Non semper cum mulieribus mariti agunt amice and (...). Grotius in 1 Timothy c.
2.11.


as that which she is made free by, and rests happy in. Now though Grotius
according to the ballast of his Incomparable judgment makes the subjection
mentioned in 1 Timothy c. 2. v. 11. to be a branch of servitude penal on the woman
being deceived, and so first in the transgression; yet surely it is that whc by
the Institution of God is very comely in them to submit to, and very
contributive to the order and propagation of mankind, and therefore the glory
of modest and virtuous women to own in all the latitude of a marriage loyalty
and sweetness; for no wife recalcitrates the government of her husband whom she
is presumed to have chosen and voluntarily to have pledged her faith to and
reverence of; Tholoss. l. 11. c. 4.

Prius diligendam esse uxorem quam ducendam, cognoscendam quam amandam; and
sapius maelitia and contemptus uxoris causam, esse stultitiam and fatuitatem
maritorum qui non noverint cum uxoria opera authoritatem viri retinere.
Tholoss. lib. 9. c. 6. ss. 17.


but she that is fickle in order to dishonor, and weary in preparation to a
desire of change: for man being in his nature so excellent that he has the
perfection of all creatures in him, the luster of Jewels, the flourish and
increase of Plants, the activity of Animals, the intellect of Angels which made
him be accounted by the Ancients quoddam omne, Phavorinus lib. 17. and 18. de
Excellentia hominis. p. 134.

Principium jure tribuitur homini, c^jus causa videntur cuncta alia genuisse
natura.

Plin. in Pro^mio ante lib. 2. Hist. Nature.

Tholoss. lib. 9. c. 4. ss. 10.11. Vxores coruscant radiis maritorum and eorum
dignitate and privilegiis gauden^. Lib. 6 Fidei Commiss. Digest. lib. 1. tit.
9. p. 122.


mortalis Deus, Eccel^ior coelo, profundior inferno, longior terra, latior
mari, as Phavorinus his words are, (for which cause the Ancients have
attributed so much to him that they have made all things nothing in compare
with him) I say, as woman is blessed rather then burdened with his
superiority, so are their children begotten by him, dignified by bearing his
name, and becoming him in the continuity of a succession, which is the reason
that our Common Law considering that the greater is more worthy then the less
(because it implies the less in it, and has prelation from the super-addition
it has) appoints the child to follow the condition of the father and not of
the mother.

Ipse quoque civiles leges dicunt, quod mulieres semper coruscant radiis
maritorum suorum.

This Tholossanus confirms from Justinian and the Authentic; and Vlpian
concludes, Femina nuptae clarissimis personis, clarissimarum personarum
appellatione continentur; and Acursius gives this in our Text for the reason,
Quia uxor fulget radiis maritorum. Hence is it that the Tholoss. lib. 18. c.
13. ss. 25.
Laws say, Vxores domicilium and forum maritorum sequuntur, for since they are
one flesh with their husbands, good reason is there they should have the same
respect their husbands had while they continue their husbands relicts, or marry
in his degree; for though if they marry above, they mend their luster as their
Marriage is more illustrious, or equally, they are no losers, but still do
coruscare radiis mariti; yet if they take husbands beneath it, the courtesy of
England is, they retain their best title, and this women have to preserve their
Matronage, or if not that, to compensate the subjection they are under; not
that which of old was executed in case of disloyalty, Apud veteres Romanos
nulla fuit Lex. neque institutum divortii faciendi, and licebat maritis axores
adulteras occidere, aut vinum si bibissent. Brochaeus ad Legem 191. p. 411.
lib. De significatione verborum.
but that affectation of show and pomp which is naturally in them, and which if
they are abated in or deprived of, they grow discontented and unpleasant. For
though the Laws of Nations do abhor a (...), and he deservedly be
reproachable, That being enthroned by God does consent to his abas^ment and
vility, Pudendo eorum more qui usque adeo uxoris sunt, ne dicam ignavi, ut domi
sua privati sint and uxoria potestati pareant, cum foris Magistratus gerant,
and viris imperare se dignos esse censeant. Budaeus in Pandect. p. 16. Edition.
Vascos.
as that unworthy husband deserves to be accounted to do, who is shrivelled up
to nothing by the parch and sharpness of his Sultanish wife, as Budaeus
complains many henn-peck'd men are deservedly accounted; yet does civility,
religion, and good breeding commend to, and command from men love, respect,
yea, high kindeness and courtship of endearment to the wife, as the flower and
fineness of all domestic contents. And since the wife has no greater, nor at
all any nobler portion of the felicities of life then what she has devolved
from and imparted to her by her husband, worthy and wise wives, or those that
such women would be accounted, Note this well.
should be very exact and choice in the fixation of their Marriage-loves, for
surely the aberrations and straggles from pudicity, and the intoxicating
Labyrinths of stolen and defaming pleasures, commence from the violencies that
either parental commands, or ambition, or covetousness gratified, surprise
women of rare parts and persons by to unequal matches, from the husbands of
which these wives having no coruscation, but rather a total Eclipse through the
fogg and dead night of their dismal and inorient appearances, these Sparks,
enraged by the loss and diminution of their names and reputations, turn
Apostates to their plighted troth, and seek abroad what they have not at home;
to prevent which, as the great botch and plague sore of womanhood, and that
which is the dead fly in the precious ointment of their reputation, it were to
he wished they would resolve on such husbands as have cornscancy, and those
had, and that had from them, be satisfied with them. For surely, next the grace
of God, nothing is so certain and effectual a muniment of feminine modesty as a
complete and suitable husband, which does not only make all eggs of attempts on
her, addle, but gives her a serenato in her mind, and disposes her to the most
noble and notable endeavors and performances of her Sex, which Livia the
Empress, wife to Augustus, so made true, that she, from the example and
ambition of congruity to her husband, grew the mirror of mortals, (...), etc.
Dion. p. 600. ad finem vitae Augusti.
not only loving and observing him while alive, but rewarding even the news of
his being in heaven brought her by Numerius, who not only said, but swore he
saw his soul fly into heaven; which felicity of his she no doubt would have
thought her self little concerned to reward, had she not had a vigorous
affection from him, as the He, from whom she had the Cataracts and full streams
of glory descending on her. For women's passions are the signs of the Heaven,
and points of the Compass they steer by; and therefore to keep those influences
of theirs within Compass, Holingshed. p. 562, 626, 627, 659.
that they portentuously inundate none of the fair grounds of Religion, which
they are the greatest Pretenders of Neighborhood to, Policy and Laws of
Nations have allowed them many reserves to blunt and break the ferocity of such
passions in them, Selden's Titles Honor p. 879. 6 Rep. p. 53.
which to men are denied, Mulieres honor Maritorum erigimus, and genere
nobilitamus] says our Text. For though that be a true rule, Ceo que est gain
per Marriage poet auxi estre perde per Marriage; yet if a Queen-Dowager marry
any of the Nobility, or under that degree, she loses not her dignity. Katharine
Dowager married to Owen ap Theodore Esquire, and maintained her action as Queen
of England, Rot. Pari. 26. E. 1. Rot. 1.
and the Queen of Navarr marrying with the Brother of Edward the First, sued
for her Dower by the name of Queen of. Navarr and recovered it. But si minoris
ordinis virum postea s^rtitae, etc.] If she marry in the same order with the
first husband, she goes as the rate of the second husband is, so is the rule in
Acton's Case, unless the dignity be such by her birth, then it is inseparable;
but if not, Quando mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis. ^
Rep. p. 18.
then if upon her second Marriage she marry in the same degree below her
Husband, she loses, so is the judgment of the Judges in Acton's Case before
cited, Mes si feme s^it noble, etc. per descent comment que el marry ou un
desonch le degree de Nobility uncore son birthright re maine, car ceo est
annexe a son sank and est caracter indelebilis. 4 Rep. p. 118.

Countess Rutl. Case. 6 Rep.


and in the Countess of Rutlands Case, and so our Text is to be understood; yet
if she marry not in her first husbands degree but beneath him, as being a noble
woman to a Knight, or being a Lady to a Gentleman, she by the courtesy of
England holds her own degree of first or former Marriage, as we see in every
days experience made good; See Selden's Titles Honor. p. 879.
and this the Law of England allowing in courtesy to women, Nuptae prius
consulari viro, impetrare solent a Principe quamvis perraro, ut nupia iterum
minoris dignitatis viro* nihilominus in consulari maneat dignitate. Ulpian.
lib. 2. De Censibus 12. p. 124.
does honorably by them, considering they are the Mothers to those Children
which succeed to their fathers, and whose Husbands are presumed to will their
Honors to those their Wives on whom they beget their Children, as to such
Children begotten of them, upon which ground the Chancellor concludes, Digest.
lib. 1. tit. 10.
that since the Mother (retaining the honor of the Husbands condition who is
Father to the Son of Marriage) is said honor and condition resplendere] the
Son who is born to the Father will by the same consequence be resplendent by
his Father's state to which he succeeds; for the Father being the predominant
in Marriage, Which is the Common Law of England says Sir Edw. Cook 1 Instit.
on Littleton. p. 123.
the denomination of the child as to freedom or bondage is by our Law to
follow him, Si neife prent frank home, lour issues serra frank, is Littleton's
rule.

Crudelis etiam necessario judicabitur Lex, quae servitutem augmentat, and
minuit libertatem. Nam pro ea natura semper implorat humana. Quia ab homine and
pro vitio introducta est servitus.

This our Chancellor writes to disable Principles of absolute Government
introductory of will for Law, and of slavery instead of liberty, from
prevalence with the Prince, whom he endeavors in this discourse to make a
Mirror of goodness and Regal temper; and the better to press on the prevalence
of his loyal project, to all the precedent insinuations in behalf of Laws, as
the rule of manners in men, and administrations in Princes, he adds this of
inveighing against cruel legality, which the Scripture calls, Setting up
mischief by a Law, as well knowing that nothing is more common with Politicians
then sub gravitatis purpura nepotari, to pretend Law and Justice for Will and
oppression; which abuse of God's trust, and men's confidences evidencing it self
in the fruits of hard conditions on willing and ready obedience, he terms a
cruelty because an approbation of that which is the abridgement of natural
freedom, and a stabilition of that in the room of it, which is unpleasing to
and regretted by the humane nature; for though servitude was brought in upon
necessity, Tholossan. Syntag. Juris lib. 1. c. 1.

Iure Gentium introducta fuit servitus. Tholossan. ^yntagm. Juris lib. 11. c. 1.


and reason it is that those that reserve them whom they could slay, should
after saving of them have their service: yet is it not to be promoted to such
high degrees of diminution of man's natural freedom, Servitus est constitutio
Iuris Gentium qua quis dominio alieno contra naturam subjicitur. Florentinus.
as shall extirpate all remains and footsteps of the primaeve sanction, which,
as the Law of nature, is immutable. For servitude is the result of that
defection from God and nature's innocence, which lust and corruption
occasioned; Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. fol. 88. De Statu hominum.
and as the longer it wanders, from its first station, the more contumacious it
is against the rule of its censure and restraint: so the more adverse to a
return of regulation it is, (...). Arist. Politic. lib. 6. c. 2.
the more pugnant with that justice and lenity that should associate power and
magnanimity. And therefore since liberty is the instinct of all creatures,
Bestia quas delectationis causa concludimus, cum copiosius aluntur quam si
essent libera, non facile tamen patiuntur se contineri. Cic. 5. De Finibus.
who are not brought into the power of man but against their wills, and who no
longer rest under it then that power has a menace and dread in it; which
liberty in men is that jewel and darling that they will venture life and soul
to preserve it from losing, Cic. 10. Philipp. 1 Offic.
or else recover it when lost, as we see in the combustions of all the World,
Tholoss. Syntagm. lib. 11. c. 12, 13 14, etc.
which chiefly are to contend for it. I say, this natural liberty overpowered
and become servitude is so much the abomination and distaste of humane nature,
that the Chancellor says, It is a cruel Law that exacts against the Law of
Nature and the God of it, Qua sit libertas quaris? nulli rei servire, nulli
necessitati, nullis casibus, fortunam in aquum deducere. Senec. Epist. 75. and
76.

Hanc quam dico societatem conjunctionis humanae munifice and aque tuens.
justitia dicitur, cui sunt adjunctae pietas, bonitas, liberalitas, benignitas,
comitas, quaeque sunt generis ejusdem, atque haec itae justitia propria sunt,
ut sint virtutum reliquarum communia; nam cum sic hominis natura generata sit,
ut habeat quiddam innatum quasi civil atque populare, quidquid aget quaeque
virtus, id a communitate, and ea qua exposui charitate atque societate humana
non abhorrebit. Budaeus in Pandect. p. 13. Edit. Vascos.


who being himself a free Agent, created his creature to a freedom. Now though
the Laws of men have profitably introduced restraints of freedom in the
sinful excesses of it, and reduced the power of multitudes into few, and the
Dictates of licentious will to the Empire of religious Justice and moral order;
yet is this no violence or rape upon the natural freedom in the main design of
its position and donation, but a preservation and improvement thereof to those
principal ends, that the mercy and wisdom of the endower thereof indulged it
for, which, if not ^tinted in the excursions of it, (as sin by defacing the
soul has sensualized it) would be a more intolerable evil in men then in
beasts. And therefore Laws and Lawmakers are Patrons to common preservations,
and to be honored as Secundi Dii, who do favere libertati where they may do it
salvo ordine and regiminis pace, and yet propitiates it no otherwise then it is
favorable to its self in a regularity of action and a virtuosity of order,
which so far is accommodated to multitudes, as they, by the prevalence of
virtue conquered to the will and Empire of prudence, are fitted for the
entertainment of it: which because the people of England are in the Mass of
them more civilized then most Nations are, the Laws of England are said by our
Text, In omni casu libertati dare favorem.

Haec considerantia Iura Angliae, in omni casu libertati dant favorem.

That is in omni casu legali dant libertati legalem favorem; for the
Chancellour's drift is not to assert an incircumscription of favor in the Law
to licentious and ill-constituted liberty, (for then he had made the Laws of
England Patrocinies to every extravagance; nor would any virtue or order be
promoted here, did the Law in the latitude of this notion favor liberty.) But
this In omni casu libertati dant favorem, is so to be understood of the Law, as
it makes good the definition of ars aequi and boni, which a Law ought to be,
and then the sense will be, That the Laws of England in all cases wherein
freedom consists with virtue and peace, favors the freedom of Lord and Vassal,
that the rights of both may be properly conveyed to them; and hence the learned
know that the Laws of England are called Libertates Angliae, 2 Instit. p. 3.
quia liberos homines faciunt: and therefore the first Chapter of Magna Charta
is Concessimus etiam and dedimus omnibus liberis hominibus Regni nostri, Page 4.
which words Sir Ed. Cook says extend, To all Persons Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, yea to Villains, for they are accounted freemen saving against their
Lords, yea against their Lords when they unlordlyly abuse their Villains; for
though Villainage did draw service, and the Lord might command his Villain or
Neif to any service that was painful if honest; yet to that which had
turpitude in it, or was above the nature and ability of man to do, and was
only fit for a beast, the Lord jure dominii could never force the Villain to
perform; for as the rule is Lex non cogit ad turpia, so is it also Lex non
cogit ad impossibilia. And the Law of England being grounded upon the Law of
God and upon Reason and Religion, defends the Villain from the unlawful
tyranny though not the just service of his Lord; for though a Villain shall not
have an appeal of Robbery against his Lord, for that the Lord may lawfully take
the goods of his Villain as his own, Sect. 189, 190, 191. Cook on it p. 123. B.
1 Instit. Fleta lib. 1. ^. 5.
yet in an appeal of Murder, Poet aver envers son Seignior vne action d' appeal
de mort son pere ou d' auters de les Ancesters que heir il est, says
Littleton; for the Law, says Fleta, does not as of old reach ad vitam and
mortem, sed hodie coarctata hujusmodi potestas, qui enim servum suum occiderit,
non minus puniri jubetur quam si alienum interfecerit; and to this Littleton
gives many instances of the Lord's accountableness if he do exceed, Sect. 189.
ad 194. Libertas Legibus and Magistratibus suis constat and Imperii certa
forma. Lipsius in lib. 2. Taciti p. 43.
as appears in him in the title of Villainage, which declares the Law of
England, dare libertati favorem. For the Law was not made to shelter oppression
and injury, but to succor innocence and passivity against it; and if the Lord
upon presumption that his Neif is his, shall ravish her, notwithstanding his
propriety in her as to his honest service, yet his injury to her chastity,
which is her jewel, by the Laws of God and men, shall bring on him loss of his
eyes, propter aspectum decoris quibus virginem concupivit, and loss of his
testicles whereby he was excited ad calorem stupni; and if this will not secure
the unvitiated chastity of a woman, but her Lord will riot on her, as was the
sin of some in Edward the First's time to do, then by the Statute Westmin. 1.
c. 13. 34 E. 1. it is declared Felony, which the Leet being in the L. Manor,
Cook on 1 Westminster. c 13. p. 1^1. 2 Instit.
cannot (says Sir Edward Cook) enquire of but the Courts of Law, because it is
a felony by Statute not by Common Law. Yet here is to be remembered, that
though Marriage with a freeman enfranchised a Neif, yet even then, though the
Lord could not recover his Neif from the freeman that had enfranchised her
during coverture; Fleta lib. 2. c. 54. 1 Instit. p. 136. Nullam vilem personam
natione spuriam vel servilis conditionis ad militia strenuitatis ordinem
promovere licebit. Fleta loco pracitato.
yet the Lord for this should have recovered a reasonable recompense for the
service of his Neif: and so if a Villain be made Knight, though there be no
reduction of him to his service, yet there is a rationabilis valor to be
recovered, for the Law though it cannot recall what is once done and cannot be
undone, yet does it preserve as well to the Lord his liberty as to the Villain
or Neif their freedom, and so the Laws of England are justly said libertati
dare favorem.

Et licet jura illa judicent eum servum, quem servus in conjugio ex libera
procreavit, non per hoc jura illa rigida, crudeliave sentiri poterant.

The Laws of England adjudge the child to that state which the father is in,
for the Mother does nihil confer to the child but only nourishment and
production, Cook 1 Instit. sect. 187. p 123. Britton. fol 78. B. Bracton. lib.
4. fol. 29^.
Such as the father is, such is the child, so says Littleton and Sir Edward
Cook on him, and that because the husband and wife being one person in Law, the
condition of the man shall determine the condition of the child begotten on
his wife; for as a Neif marrying a freeman during coverture is enfranchised, so
a freewoman that marryes a bondsman is during her coverture a bondwoman, and
cannot redire in pristinum statum till she be released from the coverture,
since such as the husband is, must by the Law the wife be. For though in case
of Crowns husbands may be Subjects where wives are Sovereigns, as King Philip
was to Queen Mary, Stat. 1 Mar. c. 2.
yet between Subjects the Laws of Matrimony are such as devolve the
Prerogative on the husband, and subjects the wife to his condition, Fuller in
Westmorl. p. 136. In lib. 3. Annalium. p. 514.515.
which the Queen of France sister to Henry the Eight made good to Charles
Brandon, and Queen Katharine Parr, who after the death of Hen. 8. married the
Lord Seymour, and was a very respectfull wife to him; and Lipsius on Tacitus
shows this to be the nature of Marriage in all times and amongst all people,
and so is not a violence or fraud by which women are either forced to and
beguiled into a degradation, (...). Plotinus Ennead. 6. lib. 8. p. 740.
but an act of will and choice, proprio arbitrio se fecit ancillam] that is,
not only to do that which the Digest. lib. 7. tit. 8. de usu and habitatione.
p. 954.
Ancilla usuaria did, if her husbands fortune will not support her without it,
but also that which the Ancilla usuaria was not bound virtute ancillatus to do,
that is, to bear children, which though the bondwoman might not be Ancillae non
emantur ut pariant. Gloss. T. venit, Digest. lib. 19. tit. 1.
bought to that end, yet the wife is married so to do; and when she knows this
is the Law of her Marriage, and is carried by that motion of nature which is
rational to put her self into the conjugal Chariot, and to be hurryed up and
down with the vicissitudes of it, Lib. 5. tit. 3. ex Ulp. lib. 15. ad edict.
ss. 27.
and to submit to the conduct of her husband, the guider of it; when, I say,
this is soberly and with consideration entered into and accepted, (...), etc.
Plotin. Ennead. 2. lib. 3. p. 144.
the woman is bound so long as her husband lives to be conformable to him, and
the proceed of their ventures must be in condition as He that is of them the
father: which no doubt the Heroique Constantia the Relict of Raymond Prince of
Antioch was contented with, Fuller's Holy War. c. 32. p. 85.
who after she had lived a good while a widow, refusing the affections which
many Princely Suitors proffered unto her, yet at last descending beneath her
self married a plain man Reynold of Castile, (...). Plotin. Ennead. 6. lib. 8.
p. 736.
yet was contented with the choice she had made, and the reason was because
there was a free choice of her own, which to repent of would argue her light,
and continue on her an impossibility to be remedyed, which contradicted the
merit of generous patience and contented freedness. For though God has left to
man the Vice-Regency of all creatures under him, and as the great Major ratio
in hominibus quam in Angelis. Rosselius in Trismegist. vol. 1. lib. 6. com. 8.
c. 2. p. 284. and vol. 2. lib. 4. c. 16. p. 444.
Master of reason, has subjected the woman to him, and endowed her only with
such proportions of courage and art, as may make her know good and evil, Nisi
te Marcia scirem tam long ab infirmitate muliebris animi, quam a caeteris
vitiis recessisse, and mores tuos velut antiquum aliquod exemplum aspici.
Senec. lib. de consol. ad Marciam.
and submit to her husband as her head, and have desire to him as to her
boundary, which when she does and shows her self to do, she does her duty; for
the wife is sub potestate viri, and ipse dominabitur tibi] says the Scripture,
which being the Magna Charta of man's superiority, the woman is hence bound to
her good behavior, which many of that noble sex delight with so great
readiness to own, that they sometimes steal the hearts of men from them, and
with it their Empire, which while they abuse not they deserve to keep, and have
sooner from wise men then fools. By all which it appears that Marriage is
favored, and the children of it succeed to the state of their father either
bond or free; and that the wife (if she be not Sovereign) is under the Common
Law of Marriage in all the precise determinations of it, and that the wife so
being, can expect no better a reputation then reflects on her from her husband,
whom though she is free to choose before she marry, Vxor nomen est dignitatis,
non voluptatis. Digest. lib. 24. tit. 1. p. 2203.
yet she is bound to cohabit with and submit to when married: for a wife being
A name of honor and not pleasure, as the husband that duly considers the
friendship and beauty of his Conjunct ought, so will he kindly and with
tenderness and respect apply himself to her, and so work upon her love that she
shall think her yoke easy and her burden light, while she is with fidelity
and courtesy thus victored. This is the Summa and forma Legis Angliae in this
case, which gives some inlet to the judgment of both Laws, in the wise
constitutions of them for the respective places of their Regency; my conclusion
being in this case as in the former, For England the Law of England is the
best, Pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant, and nunquam matris sed semper patris
conditionem imitari partum judicat.]

CHAP. XLIII.
Princeps. Anglorum Legi in hoc casu^, etc.

THIS whole Chapter, as the 41. is only serviceable to the compleatness of the
Dialogue, and to the vehiculation of the Chancellour's design to that
perfection, which his aim (through the mediation of providential advantages
well observed and improved) promised him to arrive at; for though many men and
things properly fitted and industriously followed do not attain what, in the
enterprises of their actours minds, In corpus humanum pars divini spiritus
mersa. Senec. Ep. 66. arbitria bonorum and malorum Ep. 7^. Ep. 92. lib. 2. De
Benefic. c. 8. and 4. De Ben. c. 10.
they are studious to dispose themselves and their endeavors toward: yet so
long as reason, which Seneca calls, A portion of divinity, sunk and lodged in
us, and that which leads the creatures and follows the Gods in the wisdom and
conduct of it, so long, I say, as reason swayes men, they are well guided, and
probable to arrive at the lawful issue they expect. This being the
Chancellour's argument in the personated Prince, that he makes it omnis honesti
comes, and thence concludes on the Law of Englands side, is but what he has
throughout this Treatise done, and which he thinks the Laws of England
deserve: and that because they do not only show themselves just to give to
every one their due, that will sue to them for right, but establish right to
innocent and impotent babes that are not able to help themselves. And hereupon
the rule of reason and Law is, as here quoted, Odia perstringi and favores
convenit ampli^ri] which is the rule of the Civilians, Digest. lib. 4. tit. 4.
Gloss. p. 534. de minoribus 25 annis.

Lib. 14. tit. 6. de Senatus consult. Macedoniano. p. 1502.

Nullum bonum putamus esse quod ex distantibus constat, Senec. Ep 103.

Tria ex praceptione veteri prastanda sunt ut vitentur Odium, Invidia,
Contemptus; quumodo hoc fiat, sapientia sola monstrabit. Epist. 14.


and Accursius applauds it, so also does our Laws; for where any case is
equilibrious and is capable of two senses, the best and most beneficial one is
put upon it, and it made to intend what is most in favor of justice and mercy,
and in prevention of discontent and hatred. Seneca tells us that the old rule
of wisdom was to avoid three evils, Hatred, Envy, Contempt, the way to do
which, wisdom only can discover; and that being in the Law which is sapientia
temporis, it in all cases preferrs justice and mercy before oppression and
violence: and this not only in exposition of Regal Grants, and in cases that
concern the estates and liberties of men, but their lives also, and most
chiefly, Pleas Crown. p. 133.
witness that of Mr. Stamford, where it is said, that though by the strict rule
of the Common Law, he is not to have benefit of the Clergy who cannot read any
where in the book offered to him; yet in judgment of Law, and for favor of
life, he that can read but a word or two, or spell letters, and after put them
together, shall be allowed clerice legere; so whereas a Prisoner in Felony was
in a bad case, 2 Instit. p. 164.
because he lost his challenges to the Inquest that found him guilty, and yet
upon the Inquest of office formerly used, ut sciatur qualis ordinatio liberari
debet, he forfeited all his goods and chattles and the profits of his Land,
Mercy the true property of a Judge.
until he had made his purgation; The thrice Reverend and Learned Sage Sir John
Prisot studying how to relieve the poor prisoners that were destitute of
counsel, with the advice of the rest of the Judges in Hen. 6. (our
Chancellour's) time, for the safety of the innocent, would not allow the
prisoner the benefit of Clergy before he had pleaded to the felony, and having
had the benefit of his challenges and other advantages had been convicted
thereof, which just and charitable course has been generally observed ever
since, which is an argument of the favores c^nvenit ampliari in the Text; See
Statute of 3 Ed. 1. c. 32, 33.
and that it may carry on the Majesty of Government in a due circulation of
Inferiority and Superiority. Odia perstringi is also the care of our Law, for
all feuds and animosities it discountenances, and as they appear punishes as
breaches of the peace, or by actions of recovery against the damage of them if
just cause be; for our Law being Lex pacis and concordiae, promotes every
adjument to quiet, Note this.
and prosecutes every remora thereunto, and therefore declares, That it
conceives jealousies and distances in names and ways of contradiction each to
other, to be a not only fever but plague sore to a Nation; to cure which
there is a rare Prescript by one of the best State-Physicians (if the frenzy
of the Nation would have hearkened to him) that ever this or any other Nation
had, given in these words, Beware of exasperating any faction by the crossness
and asperity of some men's passions, Eicon Basil. c. 27. To the then Pr. of
Wales now our most gracious Sovereign.
humors, or private opinions, employed by you, grounded only upon the
differences in lesser matters, which are but the skirts and suburbs of
Religion, wherein a charitable connivance and Christian toleration often
dissipates their strength, whom rougher opposition fortifies, and puts the
despised and oppressed party into such combinations as may most enable them to
get a full revenge on those they count their Persecutours, who are commonly
assisted by the vulgar commiseration, which attends all that are said to suffer
under the notion of Religion, thus that wise King; and to this purpose speaks a
Right Noble and well-advised Sage and Grandee after him, who minding the wisdom
of the Nation, what, as wise Physicians, they are to do, divinely counsels
them, Be not (says he) too severe and rough toward your Patients in
prescribing remedies, The Lord Chancellor in his Speech. May ^. 1661.
how well compounded soever, too nauseous and offensive to their stomachs and
appetite, or to their very fancy, allay and correct those humors which corrupt
their stomachs and their appetites. If the good old known tried Laws be for
the present too heavy for their necks, which have been so many years without
any yoke at all, make a temporary provision of an easier and a lighter yoke,
till by living in a wholesome air, by the benefit of a soberer conversation, by
keeping a better diet, by the experience of a good and just Government, they
recover strength enough to bear, and discretion enough to discern the benefit
and the ease of those Laws they disliked, thus the Grave Chancellor and
Counselor of England, whose divine and ponderous counsel in these words,
confirm the wisdom of the Law alleged in our Text, Odia restringendo and
favores ampliando.] For surely if any thing carry a Law with credit to its
noblest end, The glory of God in the orderly Government of men according to the
rules of justice and the dictates of kindeness, it must be that participation
which that Law, in the soul and design of it, aptly expressed in
administration, has of that divine wisdom and goodness by which the world and
all in it is governed by God, Whose ways are all mercy and truth as well as
judgment and power. And these being the scope and practice of both Laws in
their respective Spears to promote, though there be a variation in the method,
yet the union in the end makes them happy conducements to multitudes
felicities; which considered, the Chancellor is to be understood not to
allege his arguments for the Common Law out of design to reproach any other
Law, but only to winn the Prince to a love of the English Laws, upon
consideration that of all others they are the most suitable to the nature of
England and Englishmen. And so he proceeds to the fourth case wherein the Laws
vary, contained in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XLIV.
Leges Civiles impuberum tutelas proximis de eorum sanguine committunt.

THIS is the fourth Case wherein the two Laws do vary in their Judgments, to
wit, The tuition of Orphans; for though the Laws agree to supply the impotency
of them by substitution of some persons meet to rule and order them and theirs
in that necessary trust, yet the Common Law and the Civil Laws do place their
confidence of the due execution of this honest and parental charity diversely.
The Civil Law does commit Impuberum tutelas to the next of their whole blood,
says the Text. This act of the Law is according to the law of nature, and the
provident wisdom of Nations; for impuberty being the novicism of manhood, and
that vacation wherein the first dawnings of virility are not, Pubes] lanugo qua
maribus decimo quarto, feminis duodecimo anno circa pudenda oriri incipit, quod
quia maturitatis est signum, factum est ut mas pubes sive puber vocatur,
quamprimum ad generandum aptus est, and femina ad concipiendum. Theophil.
Antecessor. lib. 2. Institut. Tit. 116. p. 344. De Pupillari Substitutione.
Edit. Fabrotti.
but persons (Males under 14. and females under 12.) have no sign of the spring
of perfection and adultness in them, the in-ability of the child thus infirmed
was ever in all times and Nations made good by the addition of some person of
years, integrity, and worth; who during the child's incapacity to order himself
and his affairs, should dispose them to his advantage for him. This is evident
not only in the times of the Jews, but also of the Heathens; for Laertius
tells us Aristotle appointed by his Will Antipater Guardian of his son Nicanor
and of all he had, till Nicanor should come of age to take care of himself.
From this common observation of Nations Saint Paul mentions this Law in Gal.
iv. 1. where he tells us, The Son is under Tutours and Governors until the
time appointed of the father; for as the Master or Lord had the power of the
Servant or Villain jure Gentium, Pueris pupillis dubantur Tutores, furiosis and
adolescentibus Curatores qui res suas administrabant. Erasm. in loc.
and could manumit him when he pleased: so had the father Iure Civili, power of
the child to dispose his estate to him when he pleased, Theophilus Antecessor.
lib. 1 Instit. tit. 10. p. 67. De patria potestate.
which is the reason why it is said, Till the time appointed of the father. For
these Impuberes were ever alieni non sui juris, and till they were seventeen
years of age or eighteen, Impubes constitutus in patris potestate, citari non
potest verbaliter nec etiam realiter, id est, capiendo personam. Bartolus
Digest. lib. 2. tit. 4. p. 193.
as some say, they were by the Athenians not admitted, (...), etc. Laertius in
vita Aristot. p. 116. Edit. Romae.
(...), as Hypocration testifies, but were under tutours who answered for them
upon all occasions; Gajus lib. 1. ad L. 11. Tabul. Digest. lib. 2. tit. 4. p.
193.
so that according to this account, Impuberty, which the Greeks called (...),
and which we account the whole time of childhood to 14 years of age in males
and 12 in females, Theophilus Antecessor. Instit. lib. 1. tit. 21. p. 138. De
Authoritate Tutorum.
is therefore under tuterage, because till then there is not probable
discretion to guide themselves in any commendable convenient measure, Brechaeus
ad legem 204. lib. De verb. signific. p. 447.
but apt they are to be deceived and abused through the levity of their nature,
and their unexperience in the quality and temper of good and evil. And though
in some children there may be monstrous pregnancy not only of wit but also of
body before this age, as was in that Boy which Sanctus Hieronym. Ep. ad Vitalem
Presbyterum.
St. Jerome mentions, and in those that Brechaeus in Leg. 204. loco pracitato.
Brechaeus out of Hostiensis reports of; yet for the most part, and not without
somewhat wonderful, Fornerius loc. pracit. p. 448.
it is otherwise: for Seneca tells us, ante pubertatem non testantur, and the
Laws think adultery incredible ante decimum quartum annum. Pubescentes herbae
non mihi videntur adulta, sed lanosae, lanuginosa; nam in veneficio quo viri
qui pu^ent and barbati sunt* petuntur and incantantur, majorem vim habere,
plusque pollere quam leves and impuberes censebantur. Turneb. Advers. lib. 26.
c. 26. p. 952.
And though Puberty being the inclination to the vigorous time of life, and
that in which every thing flourished and appeared gay, was accounted lovely and
acceptable; in allusion whereto pubes and pubescere and pubentia are ascribed
to all things of appearing perfection, as pubescentes herbae, and Genae
pubentes we read of in Virgil, and Rosae pubentes in Statius, Ora pubentia and
virgulta pubentia foetu in Claudian; Advers. lib. 5. c. 3. p. 141. lib. 26. c.
26. p. 952. lib. 23. c. 7. lib. 30. c. 9. p. 1160.
and in Turnebus nothing is more frequent then to have pubes and pubertas
expressed in this sense, as mpubes and mpubertas is in the contrary. All which
I instance to illustrate the wisdom of Nations, who did hold the infancies of
men and women, excused from all care of and prudence in business; yea almost
from all punishments except in notable wickednesses, (...), etc. Basilic. lib.
60. tit. 51. c. 44. Quod illum ubi adolevisset multo fore crudeliorem
existimarent, ubi men's adhuc tenera malis cupiditatum imbuta venenis, sese jam
prodit, supplente aetatem malicia. Fornerius ad Legem 204. p. 449. de verb.
signific.

(...). Aristippus apud Laertium lib. 2. p. 52. Edit. Romae.


as in that case wherein the Areopagi censured the Lad who picked out the eyes
of a young Crow, which those Judges thought to be so ominous of a future
wickedness in him, that, They punished him severely for it, to nipp the fruit
of his growing folly in the bud of its first appearance; which well ruminated,
directs to pitch well in the assignment of children to Trustees or Tutours. For
as good or bad Masters ordinarily make good or bad men, institution being a
second nature, and rendering youth such as they probably become men; (which was
the reason that Socrates made grave men, when Dionysius made light ones:) so
good or bad Tutours and Guardians produce Pupills or Orphans rich or poor, well
or ill-bred, according as they do carefully improve or carelessly neglect the
trust reposed in them: which trust that they should be engaged to mind more
from the stimulation that nearness of blood presuming dearness of affection
proclives to, the Text says the Impuberum Tutelas is committed, as follows.

Proximis de eorum sanguine.] The Grammarians deriving proximus from prope make
this person here mentioned to have the priority, to be of the nearest of the
whole blood of the Pupil, Alciat. ad Leg. 157. p. 344. de verb. signific.
for though Proximus be a general word, (in which sense it is no more then
Vicinus and Amicus, there being a Neighborhood and cognation of manhood,
habitation, profession, friendship, in all which proximity is allowed, yea
brotherhood.) Yet in the Lawyer's sense, cum transfertur ad sanguinis jura,
then the Proximi are such as not only do positivi vim habere, Lib. 1.
Elegant. c. 17. Biochaeus ad Laegem 157. loco praecitate, Proximus est quem
nemo antecedit, ut supremus quem nemo soquetur. Fornerius in Legem candem.


and are primi, proximi, and intimi, as Valla writes, but also such as are soli
in relatione, that is, supremi, such as have no fellows to them in nearness of
blood and perpendicularity of descent, these the Law terms Agnati seu Cognati]
which terms are Gentilis vero and agnationem and cognationem complectitur.
Paulus de Grad. and Affinit. lib. 38.
Gentilitatis nomina, and are not to be understood in Pliny's sense, who makes
agnatus to amount to abundans; so he calls the supernumerary Members of man's
body, which are useless and monstrous, Lib. 11. c. 52.
Membra animalibus agnata, and Lib. 11. c. 39.
Pili agnati for abundant hairyness: but by Agnati the Laws intend those that
are of the Male-bloud from the line of the father, Tholoss. lib. 11. c. 9. ss.
6. lib. 42. c. 12. ff. 1. lib. 45. c. 13. ss. 6. Seldom on this Chap. p. 50.

Tholossan. Syntagm. Juris. lib. 9. c. 9. ss. 12.

Alciat. lib. 2. de verborum significat. p. 559.

Agnati sunt codem sanguine procreati, sed proximiores. Forner. ad legem 53.
lib. de verb. signific. p. 142.


as Cognati are of the Female; and these Agnati are the first in preference,
for the Cognati are comprehended in the Agnati, but not the Agnati in the
Cognati, since they are further off and are not inheritable, nor can have the
custody of them while the Agnati are in being, for Agnatio does in the Law
comprehend all right of alliance: and therefore in all disabilities, whether of
nonage or lack of reason by madness, the custody of the impotent Kinsman was to
be in the Agnatus the next of his fathers blood; Si furiosus est, agnatorum
gentiumque in eo pecuniaeque ejus potestas esto. Cic. 1. De Invent. 132. Varro
lib. 1. de Re Rustic. c. 2.


so Tully and Varro mention the Law, and Budaeus in Pandect. p. 90.
Budaeus tells us the Proverb hence grew, Carry madmen to their Kindred, not
that they are sure ever to be most taken care for, and most made of by them,
but because the Laws of Nations in preferring them, follow the rule of nature,
which is, that we love our own; which Saint Paul had regard to when he says,
Ephesians. 5.29.
Never man hated his own flesh but nourished and cherished it: and that Cousins
of the whole blood are one flesh and so ought to be as to the title of love and
dearness cannot but be granted, Iura generis non possunt dirimi. Bartolus
Digest. lib. 2. tit. 14. de pactis p. 294. D.
which is the reason that this commitment of either children or madmen to the
nearest of their blood, Ius agnationis non posse pacto repudiari non magis quam
quis dicat nolle suum esse. Modestinus lib. 5. Regularum.
is by the Lawyers said to be a Law that cannot be receded from, a nearness
that all the water in the Sea will not wash off, as we proverbially speak; and
Vivian after he has glossed upon the Texts of the Doctors, who all agree the
latitude and fixation of the right of Agnation, concludes, Id est jus quod
habet quis, ideo quod est agnatus ut in hareditatibus and tutelis; whereas then
the Chancellor says aguati fuerint seu cognati, Idem dico si est cognatus.
Vivianus in Gloss. P. Ius digest. lib. 2. tit. 14. p. 294. Cognati omnes
dicuntur aequalis juris.

Syntag. juris lib. 6 c. 13. ss. 12.

Consanguinei una massa, quilibet autem eorum residuum dicta massae Grorius in
locum. Lorinus in locum Digest. lib. 3. tit. 5 p. ^64. Gl. c.


he thus joins them, because the same privilege in this case is to the
cognates as to the agnates, though the preference be to the agnates if such
there be; For what Budaeus says of gentilitas and agnati that the ancients
always joined these words together, is true of the cognati and agnati, they
differ little or nothing but in priority, where they are competitours. For so
great is the indulgence of the Law to the agnati, that in some cases they are
exempted from what the Son as heir was bound to, as Tholossanus who is my
Authority for it, makes good, and therefore as God appointed in the 27 of
Numbers and the 11 verse, that the Father having no brethren, the inheritance
was to be to the inheritance that was next to him of his family, who was
counted residuum, a part, and the remaining part of himself, so the Civil Laws
do in case of infancy or incomposure of mind appoint the care of the disabled
person to his next kinsman, who is, as it were, sui residuum; and this being
ordo juris, ought to be accounted antiqua solennitas. Et ratio hujus legis est,
quia nullus tenerius, favorabiliusve alere infantem sataget, quam proximus de
sanguine ejus.

This is the reason of the Law in custody of persons, Ad proximiores primum
defertur tutela a lege, quod bona tutius administrari nec melius conservari
posse lex crediderit, qua^ ab eo qui, eadem ad se, suosque perventura aliquando
speret. Tholoss. syntag. Iuris lib. 12. cap. 6. ss. 9. Genesis 13.8.
as well as in conservation of goods. For as to goods preservation the Laws
Civil commits the care and power to the next of kinn, because 'twill be thought
they will best look to them that they be not wasted whose they are to be, in
case of death or misfortune; so the person none are presumed more faithfully to
love and keep then those that are of their blood and alliance, this surely is a
rational conclusion, which from the beginning was as true as true could be; for
in the simpler and less subdolous ages, as there were no vices so frequent and
prodigious as now there are; so were there no deceits of trusts occasioned by
them as now there are, such being culpae vitia, non naturae, This is made good
from that speech of Abraham to Lot, Let there be no difference between me and
thee, and between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen, for we are brethren. Abraham as
I believe referring to the Law of Nature, which for bad depredation on friends
and neighbors, much more on brethren, who are one in blood and solicitous
fidelity each to other; Yea, I am apt to think, that Cain making that reply to
God, Genesis 4.9.
Am I my brothers keeper? had some self-accusation that overtook him and
impeached him to his Conscience of sinning against that Law of love to and of a
brother, which the strict ligament of that relation implies. And certainly
those passages in Saint Paul, Romans 14. 1 John c. 2, 3, and 4.
Love the brotherhood, offend not thy brother for whom Christ died, cause not
the weak brother to stumble, and those of Saint John wherein he lays the law
of love to the brother, do all lay load on this his obligation of tenderness to
relations in the preservation of them and theirs from injury, Tamen long
aliter de impuberum custodia statuunt leges Angliae. Nam ibidem, si haereditas
quae tenetur in socagio, descendat impuberi ab aliquo agnatorum suorum, non
erit impubes ille sub custodia alic^jus agnatorum ejus, sed per ipsius
cognatos, videlicet consanguineos ex part matris, ipse regetur.



Because there was not as I conceive, when our Chancellor wrote, any
villainage in England, nor any estates held in base tenure, except copyholds of
inheritance be accounted such but much of the mean states in socage, that is,
the service of the plough, therefore our Chancellor begins to show how the
Children of such being infants or otherwise incapable to order themselves and
their estates, Cook 1. Instit. p. 86. Bracton lib. 2. c. 77.

Glanvil lib. 7. c. 9 and 11, lib. 9. c. 4

Fleta lib. 1. c. 8. lib. 3. c. 14, 16.


are by the Law cared for, to wit, the Lord of whom they hold such their
estates, does grant over the custody of the body of the heir of the deceased
socager, to his next of kinn that cannot inherit. For all lands being derived
from the Crown, as the great Tenures called Tainlands, were in the hands of the
Nobles and Gentry, who held them in escuage or other military tenures, and
attended the Kings in their Wars; so the lesser ones named Reevelands were
held in socage; And the heirs of them when impuberes, 4. and 5. Phil. and Mary
c. 8. Preamble.
that is, within fourteen years if male, or twelve if female, if they be not
given by will of their father, or delivered by him in his life time to any
particular person son whom the Father selects to that trust, shall be in the
custody of the prechcin ^my a que le heretage ne poet descendre says
Littleton. 1.1 istit. on Littlet on. p. 16.
For the Law intending the preservation and good nurtriture of the Child,
commits it to them that have great interest of love, though none of estate, in
case of the failer of the Child, well knowing, that occasion often makes the
thief, and that many an one had not been so bad as he was, had he not been
trusted farther then he ought. P. 88. Nanquam remanebit aliquis in custodia
alicujus de que haberi posits suspicio, quod velit jus clamare in ipsa
hareditate Bracton lib. 2. p. 87. Flera lib. 1. c. 9. Clanvil. lib. 7. c. 11.
To prevent which danger of treachery for advantage, the Law concludes, That no
heir shall remain in the custody of him, that there is any suspicion of his
claim to the heirs estate, which they of the Mothers side not being, the
commitment shall be to the next of kinn on the Mothers side, to whom the
inheritance cannot descend. And our text adds the reason, which is the reason
of all ancient books; To commit the custody of a Child to him that is next to
succeed to the inheritance after him, is to commit the sheep to the Wolf who
is readier to worry then cherish it, and who secures no further then he may
preserve it; from others to make it become a prey for himself. Now the law in
this is not more jealous then wise, nor more vigilant then rational; for there
no greater villainies have been acted in the world then those who from hopes to
gain by their success have been encouraged to act them, This is the heir lets
kill him that the inheritance may be ours, was the cursed combination of the
evil terre-tenants in the Gospel parable, A friend that is near, is better then
a brother that is far off
nor are any acts of truculency more transcendently horrible then those that
have been acted by, or connived at by relations of blood and kindred; Were not
Cain and Abel brothers, yet Cain who should have been his brothers keeper was
his butcher? So Esau and Jacob were uterine brothers, yet none more malicious
against plain and downright Jacob then his furly brother Esau, The brethren of
Joseph were Joseph's sellers to strange Merchants, which was intentional murder
in them; because they would have Joseph out of the way, who was more beloved of
their common father then they were. And who considers that not only falsehoods
in friendships but even in brother-hoods are frequent, and that it was Reuben
who vitiated his Fathers Concubines, and Absalom that intruded his Fathers
Throne, and Amnon that stuprated his own Sister, and Zimri that slew his
Master, will conclude, that men's enemies are often those of their own house;
Theatr. vita humans p. 1646.
nor shall men readilyer find greater fallacies, and more real ruins from any
then from false Brothers, and perfidious Uncles, the confirmation of which
Zuinger has collected in the instances of Danaus to his brother Egiptus, Xerxes
to Masistes, Horatius Romanus to Curiatius, Atila to Buda, Vitiosa to Theofred,
Gondebald to Childeric, Perinus Fregrose to his brother Nicholas with many
others, but above all, the enmity of Zaringensis Prince of Carinthia to his
kindred, is notable, which he dying expressed by willing that all his plate,
jewels, and utensels of worth might be gathered together to provoke his Kindred
to fight, and stay one another about the obtaining of it, Idom p. 2174. 2375.
3406. Josephus Antiq. lib. 15. c. 15.
to which Josephus adds the story of Ptolomy Governor of Jericho, who that he
might reign, slew his brother-in-law with his two sons; I could instance in
many more, but none of them are more pregnant to confirm the rational and
prudent severity of our Law in committing the custody of heirs to those that
after them cannot inherit, then the examples of persidie, that first occasioned
the Law so to be; for undoubtedly there were presidents of this mischief before
this remedy of it was found out and prescribed, since ex malis moribus bona
leges nascuntur, and the Law willing to provide safety for those that cannot
provide for themselves, nor ought to be sacrifices to their keepers voracity,
established this prudent reserve, to prevent that effect of ambition and
covetousness which ends in murder of innocence and intrusion into their
rights, witness that bloody Richard the third, whom, Sir Thomas Moor anatomizes
to be versepellis, In Hist. R. 3. Impress. Lovanii.
iracundus, invidus, semperque etiam ante partum pravus, This Uncle, who could
be light and grave, pensive and pleasant, rageful and mild, religious and
profane, as he saw his projects were best accomodated by his ambidextrallity,
This monster of Guardians, whose very exsecation from his Mothers belly
portended that somewhat he would prodigiously act in his life. This, This
crafty and bloody Uncle cogs his two Nephews into his custody, Sive id inscitia
factum seve fato, agnus certe consulto in lupi sidem creditus est. Idem p. 408.
as one that had a parents love for them, when God knows he all the while
intended their murder and his own enthronization, which, though the mother of
those royal babes foresaw, and did as much as a prudent foresight, and a
motherly affection could do to prevent, yet was not prevalent to effect it; but
the Protector (for so the Uncle was) first got possession of them, then slayes
them, then secures all their loyal friends, from whom he dreaded trouble, and
at last ascends the Throne; Which nefarious fact ratifies the reason of the
Law, to commit the heir to none that by the miscariage of it can possibly
inherit, but to the next kindred of the contrary side, who may be presumed to
have affection enough to perform a trust, and not any temptation from advantage
arising to him to forfeit and betray it.

Sed si hereditas illa non in socagio, sed teneatur per servitium militare,
tunc per leges terra illius, infans ipse and baereditas ejus, non per agnatos
neque per cognatos, sed per dominum feodi illius custodientur, quousque ipse
fuerit aetatis viginti and unius annorum.

This is added to show, that as there are men of arts and arms in every Nation,
so there are tenures and services by which these men hold lands in order to
peace and war, arts and arms; having therefore in the former clause declared,
how the infants of socagers, which are men of the plough and plain, are secured
during their minority, he proceeds to evidence, how the infants of the more
noble Tenurers, who hold by military service are provided for, and those he
says are to be kept by the Lords of the fees, of whom they hold their estates,
and to whose persons they in war, when able, are to do service.

Per servitium militare] Here the Chancellor passes over lands held by Homage
Ancestrel, because, though the custody is the same with those in Escuage and
Serjeantry, which are the military services here, yet perhaps there was at the
time of our Chancellours writing little land held by Homage Ancestrel, both
Lords and Tenants altering and changing, and the land nor continuing in the
blood of Lords and Tenants as by the precise nature and rule of that tenure
ought. Escuagia a scuto quo militare dicuntur, Bracton lib. 2. c. 36. scutagiam
dicitur quod talis prastatio pertinet ad scutum quod aessumitus, and servitium
militare dicitur. lib. 1. c. 14. Littleton sect. 153. Cook l. 2. c. 8. p. 68,
69. Entitled the statute of Wards and reliefs.
And thereupon the Chancellor takes notice only of such tenures as were in
being, concerning the custody of the infants of which, is most pertinent to his
purpose, and those are Escuage and Grandserjeantry, or Knight service, this
Littleton defines thus. Tenure per grand serjeantie est lou an home tient ses
terres on tenements de nostre Seigniour le Roy, etc. On this, Sir Edward Cook
has largely written, and made good in himself, what in another place he writ of
Sir William Herle, Chief Justice to E. 3. the words are, This our student shall
observe that the knowledge of the Law is like a deep well, out of which every
man draws according to the strength of his understanding, He that reaches
deepest, he sees the amiable and admirable secrets of the Law, Thus he, which
truly I think he himself made good in his Commentary on the 95 sect. of
Littleton, therefore to him I shall referr the Reader, and to the Stat. of 9 H.
3. c. 27.28. E. 1.17. E. 2. c. 2. 2 Instit. p. 44. To these militaria servitia
then as attendancies on the King in his wars, the Text says, the heir of the
tenants shall be committed domino feodi] till he be 21 years old, which is the
age of livery and manhood, or full age, so 9. H. 3. c. 4. 52. H. 3. c. 6. 3. E.
1. c. 21, 22, 47. 13. E. 1. c. 7. 14. E. 3. c. 13. direct, and so has been the
Law I think till of late the Court of Wards, and all the privileges and
effects of it was by our now gacious Sovereign taken Statute of 12. Car. 2. c.
24.
away, so that now all the military tenures as to marriage and relief are void;
and the custody now I suppose is to follow the course of socage tenures
proximis de ecrum sanguine] unless the ancestour shall otherwise will or
deliver in his life time his heir to any person he has a great trust in; for
then I think, the Lord of the fee upon petition is to grant it to that person,
none being more prudent, in the presumption of reason, to judge of the fitness
of a Guardian for a child, then the father of the child. And thus wardships,
which Mr. S^lden says, were before the Conquest, or at least contemporary with
it, as appears by the authority he quotes against Higdens supposed contrary
assertion, Notes on c. 44. p. 51. Titles honor p. 692. 693.
determine, notwithstanding they were instituted at clientes perpetua
patronorum profectione defenderentur, ac vicissim cos omni obsequio colerent,
as Oldendorpius, Craig, Cujacius, and all the feudists agree, and hereupon
though I might take occasion to pass over this Chapter, because the Law and
usage in it is by the late Act of Parliament in a great measure, if not wholly
obseleted, yet I shall shortly descant on it, because somewhat not unworthy the
Readers entertainment may perhaps be culled from it.

Tholoss. Syntag. Juri. lib. 15. c. 28. ss 5. Brechrus and Fornet. ad Leg 217.
p 472 de verb. sig. Cic. 1. De Invent. 5. Ipsum Scipionem accepimus non
infantem fuisse. Cic. de clarit. Orat. 33. Ennead 1. lib. 6. p. 52.
Quis put as Infantem talem.] Therefore the Law committed the Heir to custody,
because he was Infans, a state of helplessness, ab In,(...), and sando, one
unable to tell its own wants, or judge what is good for its self. This is not
only tempus cum fari possit, which is about the seventh year, but also by our
Laws to a greater proportion, and that not in inheritances only, but in other
cases; therefore infantes and Insipientes are ranked together and opposed
magnis and disertis viris, and Infans in the Orator is taken pro non facundo,
Orationis facultate destituto: consideration then being had to Infancy as
(...), etc. A kind of inform thing capable to take whatever art and use
impresses on it and fits it to, as Plotinus his words are, there was good
reason that infans talis, who was ratione tenurae to do military service,
should be educated in actibus bellicis] Indeed naturally in masculine children
there is an inclination to manly things, which is the reason that whereas
females delight in babyes, Neminem excelsi ingenii virum sordida dolectant and
humilia, magnarum rerum species ad se vocat and extolliet, noster animus in
motu ect, eo mobilior and actuosiar, quo vehementior fuorit. Senec. Ep. 39.
clouts, and such like toys, boys are pleased with Drumms and Daggers, Swords
and Pikes, with Tops and Balls, with running and swimming, all manly exercises,
yea and the horse youths mightyly delight in; now if this proclivity be
furthered by custom and education, Despexit illum, quod non bellicosus vir,
and pugnis affuctus; nam cernebat illum juvenem rubicundum and pulchro aspectu,
quales martiales homines esse non solent, ques radii solares and assidua
desatigatio deformes reddunt. Clatius in 1 Samuel 17. v. 33.

Romana Militia mos fuit puberes primo exerceri armis, nam decimo sixto anno
militabant, quo etiana solo sub custodibut agebant. Servius in 5 Aentid.

Turncbus A'dvers. lib. 26. cap. 22. p. 9^4.


it by the assuescency to, causes a delight in and an attainment of the skill
of it to perfection. For Soldiers are not expected to be neat and
clear-skin'd, but robust and hardy, such as are harrassed and adusted by
continual hardships; which David not being, but seeming to Goliath to be a youth
tenderly and delicately to be brought up, was contemned by him: to prevent
which the Romans took a care to educate their Puberes martially, and to place
them under Tutours to be disciplined accordingly, which Servius and Turnebus
specially remember us of, so did the Germans, and so did we ever; which because
the Gentry were best able to instruct men in, as being men not only gladio
cincti, but gladio dediti, therefore had they the education of their young
Tenants, as those that could and would melius instrucre cos] because as they
were hardy, valiant, and loyal, so were their Lords whom they attended in war
better defended, and brought off with honor and safety. Which brings to my
memory that story of the Lord Audley's four Esquires, who attending their Lord
in the black Prince his Wars in France, were rewarded with the 400. Mark a
year, which the Black Prince rewarded the Lord Audley with, and that with this
further testimony from him, That they having right-valiantly defended him,
deserved, what he had presented him, to have given them.

Et qui majoris potentiae and honoris astimatur.] This is written to show that
the Law judged the Lord meetest to have the custody and education of his
servants, who must when he is able personally attend him, because his Lord best
knows how to breed him, and is probable least to injure him; for his Lord
having a great estate has not the temptation thereto, as in a minuter fortune
is more urgent: yet this rule is not so general but there are many flawes to be
found in it, and so notorious have the abuses of Wardships and Marriages been,
that our Gracious King, as I said before, has quitted them by an Act of 12. c.
24.

Et quid utilius est infanti, qui vitam and omnia sua periculis bellicis
exponet, quam in militia, arcubusque bellicis imbui.

It Is true there is nothing more profitable and efficacious, for so the learned
explain and join them, Digest. lib. 13. tit. 4 p. 1383. and lib. 8. in. 6. p.
1030.
then for any child to be trained up in his youth to that which in manhood he
must practice; for that being facile and habitual to him, Lib. 20. tit. 1. p.
1908.
causes with his delight, an acquirement of excellency in it. Egregium virtutis
apud vos efficium est, voluptates pragustare. lib. De beata vita.
Hence proceeds that which Seneca says of the Epiraeans, Whose discipline made
them virtuous by a pregastation and fore-contemplation of the pleasure of it;
Tubebat cos qui audicbant pictano in Tabula voluptatem pulclierrimo vestiia and
ornatu regali in solio sedenzem, etc. Cic. 2. De Finibus. De Cleanthe.
for when they intend their minds on War, They do, as Cleanthes says, fam^y
victory in all the angustness of it coming toward them, and discard fear, as
beneath the aspiration of their courage and constancy, and sedate and
exterminate those pests of youth ((...), etc.) vice, unsetledness, wildeness,
which are in the Ethic. c. 1.
Philosophers opinion, the marrs and cancres of all their hoped for
improvement; for, since youth is the time of desire, 'Oi (...), lib. 2.
Rhetoric. c. 12.
and is spent most an end in travel and observation, what is then treasured up,
grows dear and natural to men; for the Philosopher observes well, that
Experience makes wisdom, which youth wanting (for (...), as his words are) use
teaching perfection, 6 Ethic. c. 10. (...), lib. 2. Rhetor. c. 12.
and use being learned by time to accustom a child to manly things, is the
only way to make him manly when a man. And this, had it been more the method
of those to whom Wards were granted, that they had done as they ought, Alcaeus
and Philiscus Pseudo-Epicuraei Roma pulsi, quod essent turpium voluptatum
adolescentibus Autores. Aelian. lib. 9. c. 21.
(brought up young Wards to Heroique and Brave Sports, and Feats of Arms, by
which their minds employed, would have been more fixed on manly things, and
more averse to vice and effeminacies, Gassendus lib. 3. c. 4. De vita and
maribus Epicuri. Tom. 5. Oper.
which are the Hell of youth, and disarray them of all hopes of future
perfection) there would never have been such a Party in the Nation, Invenis
genere nobilis, manu fortis, sensu celer, ultra Barbarum promptus ingenio.
Paterculus Hist. lib. 2. p. 72. Edit. Lipsii.
and those of the Gentry, against Wardships, but still they might have
continued; but when favorites covered them, not to breed them up bravely and
martially, and to make them as Arminius in Paterculus, Noble in mind, valiant
in person, quick in action, prompt in design, but to get their estates, and
marry their persons to their disparagement, or at least contrary to their
fancies and delights, what could be more the abuse of a brave institution then
this was? For though I know there is nothing but is abusable, and if abuses in
things should always occasion the amotion of them, Tom. 5. Oper. lib. 8, c. 5.
De vita Epicuri.
nothing, though never so good, would continue, as Gassendus has learnedly
observed in the life of Epicurus: yet I cannot but confess, abuse in this,
which so often ruined noble youth both fortunarily and personally, is upon
occasion just enough punished by determination.

Et revera non minime erit Regno accommodum, ut incolae cjus fi^t in armis
experti.

This is not to be denied, the Common Laws enjoin this: for in the Confessor's
Laws it is thus said, Debent enim universi liberi homines, etc. secundum feudum
suum and secundum tenementa sua arma habert, and illa semper prompta
conservaere ad tuitionem Regni and servitium Dominorum suorum juxta praceptum
Domini Regis explendum and peragendum. Lambard. p. 135. E Saxoni.

Statuimus and firmiter praecipimus, ut omnes Comites and Barons and Milites
and Servientes and universi liberi homines totius Regni nostri praedicti,
habeaent and teneant se semper in armis and in equis, ut decet and oportet, etc
Inter Leges Will. 1. Edit. Twisd.


All free men ought to have Arms according to their condition and tenure, and
to keep them always in Kelter and ready to defend their King and his Kingdom
at the service of the Lords, to whom they are to attend in the Wars, when the
King shall summon them. and so in the Laws of the Conqueror it is said, We
enact and establish, That every Earl, Baron, Knight, Esquire, and all other
Freemen of our Kingdom, have and keep in readyness their Horses and Arms, as
becomes their quality and degree; and that they be always ready to serve us
whenever our necessities shall put us upon commanding their assistance and
service: so have later Statutes declared and enjoined, viz. 7 E. 1. 13. E. 1.
c. 6. 1 E. 3. c. 6. And the custom of the Nation to train the freeholders and
them to discipline, declares it, that it has ever been held accommodum Regno,
that the Incolae Regni should be in Armis experti] And thus they ever have
been, and ever I hope will be to defend their King and his Laws, Gassend. Tom.
3. lib. 1. Exercis. Paradoxorum.
which they will boldlyest and best do, when they do not fight at random and
in confusion, but according to method; for that is true Philosophy which our
Text here quotes, Quilibet facit andacter, quod se scire ipse non diffidit,
which though some practices confure, yet the rule in the main abides, and so
the Chancellor concludes this Chapter.

CHAP. XLV.
Princeps] Immo Cancellarie Legem banc, etc.

HEre the Chancellor obtains from the personated Prince, a concession in
behalf of the Laws of England, that they do wisely provide for the care and
custody of Orphans and their fortunes, Lege Theodorerum in Orationibus de
Provident. Tom. 4. Operum
and especially of that nobilium progenies whom he terms so provided for, that
de facili degenerari non potest. Now though the prime and efficacious
prevention of degeneration, is the merciful act of omnipotence, which only can
put bounds to natures insolence, and which alone can shore up its declension from
its central rectitude yet wise and wary laws are great helps and advantages
thereto, not only as they discover the turpitudes of straying from the good
old way, but as they punish such strayings with disfavour and terror.
Therefore the law and custom of England, looks upon the nobiliam progenies, as
the young nobility, not only in the sense Seneca writes of, Bona men's omnibus
palet, omnes ad hoc sumus nobiles, animus facit nobilem, cui ox quacunque
condition supra fortunam licet surgere. Seneca Ep. 44.
A brave mind becomes every one, and by this we are all noble, the mind makes
the Nobleman, by which a virtuous soul will be great in meanness, and free in
restraint and bondage; but as they are successors of the Peerage of England,
and so presumed to be ad virturem been a natura compositi. Neminem despexeris,
etiamsi circa illum obsoleta sunt nomina, and parum indulgente ad juti fortuna,
sive libertini apud vos habentur sive servi sive caterarum gentium homines.
Erigile audacter animos, and quicquid in medio sordidi jacet, transilite:
exspectat vos in summa magna nobilitas. Lib. 3. de benefic.
These that have from the examples of their ancestors, and the rewards
thereof, such excitations, cannot but be roused up to great actions, at least,
non facile degeneraripossunt; for degeneration is a genere decedere, to become
mungrel and rascal; and as there is no value to be made of excrements and
deformity, according to that rule of Gajus, Cicatricum aut deformitatis nulla
fit astimatio lib, 6. ad Edict. Prouinc. c. 7.
so is there no honor due upon any account to degeneration qua such, and
therefore, as the Countryman is said to degenerate, who does deponere rastra
ut sequetur castra, Digest. lib. 9. tit. 3 de noxalibus actionibus p. 1098.
and the child to degenerate, when according to Servius Degener est qui patris
vel majorum suorum moribus non respondit, in 2 Aeneid. iIuvenis patriisnon
degener^oris Ovid. 3. de Ponto.
he does not appear like to, and worthy of his parents so is the Nobleman said
to degenerate, when he does not take in noble principles, and evidence them in
noble practices. Hence is it that all defects from notable originals proposed,
after which generous copies should be taken, Cic. lib. de Provid.
are termed degenerations. Statins tells us of degener alta virtutis patrum,
Pro Flacco. Cic. 1 Divinat.
and Tacitus of insidiae degeneres, and Pliny of degener humani ritus, and
degenerare in feritatem, and Tully of degenerare a gravitate paterna, Plin.
lib. 5. c. ^. Proles non degener Senec. Ag^mem. 5, 15
a perenni constitutaque virtute morum, a secta vel Doctore aliquo degenerare.
All which confirm, that where so notable helps to virtue are, to accept and
improve them is non facile degenerari potest nobilium progenies.]

Sed probitate potius, strenuitate, and morum honestate antecessores suos ipsa
transcendet,

Of Probity, see the notes on the two and twentieth Chapter, to which I add
Illum esse praecipue probum in quo vires imaginationis rationisque prorsus
intellectis formata sunt, adeo ut tota vita secundum intelligentiam peragatur,
ubi non vitae praeest Demon aliquis, sed ipse Deus, and scilic et divinus
intellectus, tum intellectualis unitas qua est intelligentia quasi auriga caput
etc. In 3 Ern^ad. Plot. lib. 4. c. 5. p. 282.
Ficinus his note, That Probity consists in likeness to God the only rule of
excellency, and in conforming the life to that intellect that he has endowed
man with, as the conduct of him in all his worthy and wise actions, which God
only will reward and accept; for this, He, that is, one simple being, looks
upon, as a sincere act of the intellect, leading to a plain and uncompounded
action of virtue and integrity, which being delightful to God, to whose pure
nature it is a present, he rewards with approbation and credit with men, in
regard of which it is termed probity] which is such a tincture of the whole man
with goodness, that it will stirt a man up to do, as Probus is reported to
do, excellent things with pleasure and delight, (...). Juliani Aug. Caesaris
in Probo. Edit. Cantoclari Tom. 3. Romans Aug. script. Graec. minorum p. 837.
as he is said to build 70 Cities and dispose of the Empire wisely, that little
time be reigned, which was but 7 years, and therefore to be favored of the
Gods, whom though they suffered to be afflicted, yet they so far succored that
they made all his Traitors miserable. So that this Probity, is that ballast and
temper of the mind, which keeps a man from evil, by a propitiousness of
mediocrity, which it insinuates, and thereby guards from all engagement in, or
pursuit of unreasonable and licentious things, which Seneca calls a sempiternal
bappiness, Semper esse felicem, and sine morsu animi velle transire vitam,
ignorare est rerum naturae alteram partem. 4. de Providentia.
and a transition of life without any snarle or discomposure, so that a man
knows not what the black and passionate misery of nature and life means. O it is
a rare attainment to be thus adorned, the merchandise of this virtue is better
then the merchandise of gold; for it makes us active non malitiae, sed virtutis
impulsu and imperio, and swayes us to follow what is good purely for that goods
sake which is an ample Theater to it self, Honestum propter nullam aliam.
causam quam propter usum sequimur. Seneca 4 Benefic. c. 9.
and a sufficient reward to its practicer. Which, though debauched minds, as
Messalina's was, think folly and madness of pusillity of spirit; yet will be
honorably monumental to its patrons and clients, when their turpitude will
render them infamous. Therefore Numerianus though but a scholemaster by
profession, (...). Dion Cass. lib. 60. p. 686.
yet sent by Severus, General into France, deserved, and obtained great honor
from Severus; for he did not only (...), sending the Emperor great sums of
money, but also did like a just and a worthy servant, impart honest and prudent
counsel to him, and when his Master would have given him ample honors, (...),
Idem in Severo p. 851.
he refused them, and betook himself to a mean country domicil, and small
pittance, which Severus day by day allowed him. Here Is probity tuitive of
innocence, which will make a man not only not covet great things for himself with
the injury of others, but perform all his actions in aspero and probo as I may
so say, that is, spotlesly and without blemish, pay the age and time a man
lives in, (...), idem quod (...) Lipsius in 19. Epist. Sever.
the debt of his parts and talents which God has lent him to serve his glory
and their good with, (...), in aspers, not in reviles, but in current and
beauteous coin, not only in that which is intrinsiquely valuable, In Pandect.
reliq. p. 234. Edit. Vascos.
but that also which is outwardly grateful, probato opere and approbato, that
is, recte and probe consummatum se praebere, Est enim approbare, efficere at
probum, rectumque judicetur, id quod quis facit vel dicit. Cic. in Verrem.
as Budaeus appositely out of Tully. So that by probitate, Our Text means, a
rectitude of inclination, disposing a man to do every thing squarely and
aboveboard as if all the eyes of Men and Angels were upon him.

Strenuitate] This points out to that specifique endowment which God gives
virtue, Boldness and undauntedness in pursuit of that which is good, and this
seems to be the native honor of every thing that is English, that it is not
discouraged by repulses, but persues its end, aut vincere aut mori. For, as our
horses will not faint at a tug, but draw many and many repeated pulls at a
living tree, which they cannot stir, and loose their eyes rather then discover
cool mettle; and our dogs are so bold and braving, that they will fasten upon
a Lion once and again, and never be drawn of but by violence, Vowels descript.
of England. p. 231 Adag. Chil 2. Cent - 7. p. 635. Lib. 10. c. 5. Lib. 4.
Thucyddes. Idem lib. 2. (...), protatto at acciperentur vel accuserentur.
Turneb. advers. lib. 16. c. 12^ p. 533.


nor yet easily by that, but will come on a fresh, as often as they are let
loose, witness that dog of the Lord Buckhursts, who, before the French King in
one day, alone, without any help, first pulled down a huge Bear, then a Pard,
and last of all a Lion: so our soldiers are no viri cervini, but strenuous and
daring beyond any others. Fortissims viri and milites strenuissimi as Plinies
words are, not only strenuous, as strenuus is accompanied with acer and dirus,
but as it is explayned by cita and celeris, as they are resolved, and dispute
not of the danger, but conclude the action, be the hazard what it will, (...).
Prompt to all performancies, as the Historian says of some, when he opposes
(...), to (...), vigorous activeness, to supine lazyness. This strenuity then
is the proof of soldiers, and as the Laws Civil gives to fruitful matrons
more privileges, both alive and dead, then they did to barren ones ( cujus
honoratis ossa venuntur Equis) so did they attribute more to strenuous
soldiers then to spiritless ones; for though I know strenuity as an influence
of the stars, which are boasted by Astrologers to convey to men fortitude of
mind and Herculcan efficacy, be but fabulous and nugatory, In Astrol. lib. 4.
c. 9. p. 364. and lib. 3. c. 13.
I mean, as to the necessary influence of them, which Picus Mirandula makes
good against them: yet do I confess, that strenuity (arising from a natural
vigor, alloyed and debased by no guilt or vice) is a very great virtue in a
Soldier. And this our Text says the breeding of young Heirs under their
Lords, the Nobles, did arrive them at. (...). Plato in Protagor. p. 240. (...).
Idem. 1 Rhetoric. c. 9. 1 Moral. c. 19. Non quicquid mortale est, bonos mores
facit. Senec. Ep. 122. Ad Attic. lib. 7. 1 Offis. Pro Muraena.


Honestate morum] By this I think the Chancellor intends Fair condition and
civil deportment, that kindeness and truth of conversation which excludes all
elation and falsehood, and abhorrs mixtures of fraud and levity with that which
seems amiable and worthy in men. This Plato is so precise in, That though he
expects not men should be irreprebensible, yet he would have them that would be
accounted honest to do no evil premediately, and for the once as we say. This
Honesty the Philosopher calls, (...), the good of justice, (...), the victory
and honor of all good men and good things, (...), the utmost procedure of
virtue, beyond which nothing by man can be acted here on earth. This Pleonasm
to the honor of Honesty, the Moralist gives the reason of, It Is no mortal
Principle that moves to Honesty of manners, but a consideration of God above,
and conscience within and men without, all Supervisors or Judges of our
Behaviors. Upon this ground the Ancients mate the most noble virtues and
rewards with Honest as, Tully joins Dignitas with Honestas, and writes of
Honestatem and decus conservare, and Honestatibus partis and omni dignitate
privare; thus Honest a dicta, nonestus dies, nonesta virgo, nonesta forma,
nenesto loco natus, nonesta arma, nonesti exitus, nomen nonestum, mors nonesta,
are so frequent to express the best of excellencies by, that there is no doubt
but our Chancellor by morum nonestate] means the best and most unspotted
accomplishments of generousness, blamelessness of life, 1 Offic. c. 8. Lib. 3.
c. 4.19. (...), etc. Enchyrid. lib. 4. c. 2. p. 380.
and exemplarity of conversation, Honest as turpitudini vitae contraria, as
Tully and Quintilian often mention them. This Saint Paul calls walking
circumspectly and inoffensively, and Epictetus, A freedom and friendship with
God, which (says he) God expects I should walk worthy of; for he has not given
me in charge adorning my body, or getting a great estate, or an honorable
fame, but he has commanded me upon the penalty of his disfavour and his
abhorrence and rejection of me, to be sober and solid, to live orderly and
conform to the moral Dictates of reason, avoiding all turpitude as the
disluster of his image in me. Indeed, next to that we Christians call Grace,
this Honesty of manners is to be valued and endeavored; for it not only keeps
from every extreme, but carries on and continues in such a direct line of
mediocrity, as is glorious to behold and imitate: and therefore is so much the
more to be pressed on great men, because they are so apt to love and practice
licentiousness, and are by it so influential to mislead the meaner sort, that
without it prevail over them, all good Virtue and Order is like to be discarded
the World. For my part, I think sobriety and civility of Manners and Garb the
great Ornament of Nobility and Gentry, and conclude, Philostratus in vita
Apollonii. lib. 4. c. 10. p. 190.
as Apollonius Tyanaeus did of Sparta, They do, (...), etc. extend their glory
to the Heavens by it, and in the failer of it, Eclipse and drowned them, (...),
not only in the Sea but on the Land. The consideration of which made Pliny,
that grave Author, brand the Aedility of Marcus Scaurus, with mischief to the
Commonwealth, because it introduced new toys into it, to the dishonor and
abolition of the old fashions and manners. This evil to avoid, Probity,
Strenuity, and Honesty of Manners will instruct, while it preferrs to men of
blood and honor selfdenyal of vicious appetites, courage in virtuous
undertakings, and exactness and veracity in demeanours and dealings. This is to
become A man without welt or guard, the same he seems to be, and this is the
noblest end of generous education. And this our Chancellor says young Lords
and Gentlemen are probabler to have abroad then at home, and in the Lord's
Houses rather then in their father's house, because it is Altior nobiliorque
Curia, etc.

Antecessores suos ipsa transcendet, dum in altiori, nobiliorique Curia quam in
domo parentum illa sit imbuta, etc.

The sense of these words is, That as every youth is presumed to excel as his
opportunities to excellency are more and meeter to that end, so every age and
succession of education gives being to somewhat of additional accomplishment
which precedent times and breedings did not; for as the World grows older in
time, so the men of it grow quicker in invention and more dextrous in action,
and thence facilitate more and more that, Actiones nostra, nec parvae sint nec
audases nec improbae, lib. 3. de Ira. Hinc Lipsius, Nec viles minutas. que esse
actiones nostras vult, incultas nimis, and audaces, media sequamur. In Comment.
64. sect. c. 7. p. 602. Note this. Sequuntur a conversantibus mores and ut
quadam in contactus corporis vitia transiliunt, ita animus mala sua proximis
tradit. Senec. lib. 3. de Ira. p. 590.
which but for their discoveries, would be difficult and immethodique. This is
the sense, as I conceive, of this clause, upon the groundwork of which the
Chancellor raises a lofty rooff of prospect upon the houses of Noblemen in his
time, which as they were Curiae for the multitudes of frequenters to them, so
were Nobiles altioresque by the great entertainments both for activity,
fashion, and feasting in them beyond what was in the houses of the Gentry; for
of old, before and in Hen. 6. time, the state of the Baronage was great, and
They were attended not with few but many, not airy and pigmy, but sad and
proper servants, well-clad, well-manur'd, well-fortun'd, well-treated. The
Majesty of England was seen in every appearance of Nobility, in the Garb, in
the Train, in the Table, in the Solemnities, in the Officers, in the
Recreations of their Houses, all Arts, Arms, Exercises, Pleasures being there
so ordered, that the young fry of both Sexes, thither sent and there accepted
to be bred, came away madePersons as to all their after-lustre, and owed all
the after-eminency of their lives to the acquirements of those Houses, which
the Text calls, Nobiliores altioresque Curiae then their fathers houses were.
But the times being altered and the Methods of Houses transformed, the Gentry's
children now find their fathers houses their best and safest residence, and
from it obtain the best and only preferment.

Principes quoque Regni sub hac Lege regulati, similiter and Domini alii a Rege
immediate tenentes, non possunt de levi in ruditatem lasciviamque labi.

As the mean Lords hold of the Chief Lord, so the Chief of their Chief the
King; Ego autem ( inquit Cicero) Nobilium vita victuque mutato mores mutari
civitatum puto, quo perniciosius de Republicae merentur vitiosi summi in
Civitatibus viri, quod non solum vitia concipiunt sed cainfundunt in Civitatem;
neque solum obsunt, quod ipsi corrumpuntur, sed etiam quod corrumpunt, plasque
exemplo quam peccato nocent. Cic. lib. 3. de Legilus. Budaeus in Tandect. p.
97. B. Edit. Vascos.

Sarisburiensis de Nugis Curialium. lib. 4. c. 4, 5, 9, 7, etc.


and as the heirs of these were during their impuberty, educated in the houses
of their Lords, and thereby taught to love and serve them according to the
condition of their Tenures and their native degree: so the Noble youth,
Principes Regni, the young Lords and Barons, during their Minority, were
trained up in the King's Court, as the properest Schole of Virtue, Prowess, and
Heroique demeanor; for as soft raiment is for Princes Courts, so are all noble
qualities best becoming it, and best learned from the virtue and variety of the
displayes of them in it. For suppose a Court (such as The Solomon of Kings, the
First of his Name over England, Basilie. Doron. 1 Book p. 148. of his works in
fol.
sets it forth) lustrous in a Prince and Chief, who does, as he advises,
Remember, that as in dignity he has erected you above others, so ought ye in
thankfulness toward him go as far beyond all others. A moate in another tie
is a beam into yours, a blemish in another is a leprous bile into you, and a
venial sin ( as the Papists call it) in another is a great crime into you, 2
Book. p. 166. 167.
Suppose a Prince such therein as to use his words, Let your own life be a
Lawbook and a Mirror to your people, that there in they may read the practice
of their own Laws, and therein they may see by your Image what life they may
lead, in the Government of your Court and Followers in all Godlyness and
Virtue, in having your own mind decked so with all virtuous qualities, that
therewith you may worthily rule your People. And a little after, As to the
Government of your Court and Followers, King David sets down the best Precepts
that any wise and Christian King can practice in that point; for as ye ought to
have a great care for the ruling well of all your Subjects, so ought you to
have a double care for the ruling well of your own Servants: Choose (for your
service) those within age that are come of a good and virtuous Kinn, such as
are come of a true and honest Race, and have not had the house, whereof they
are descended, infected with falsehood and treason. Delight to be served with
men of the noblest blood that may be had; for besides that their service shall
breed you great good will and least envy, contrary to that of Start-ups, 2 Book
p. 169.
ye shall often find virtue follow noble Races. And again, Make your Court and
Company to be a pattern of Godlyness and all honest virtues to all the rest of
the people, Be a daily Watchman over your Servants that they obey your Laws
precisely; for how can your Laws be kept in the Country, if they be broken at
your car, punishing the breach thereof in a Courtier more severely thin in the
person of any other of your Subjects, and above all, suffer none of them (by
abusing their credit with you) to oppress or wrong any of your Subjects, etc.
And shortly, maintain peace in your Court, banish envy, cherish modesty, banish
debauched insolence, foster humility and repress pride; setting down such a
comely and honorable Order in all points of your service, Page 170.
that when Strangers shall visit your Court, they may, with the Queen of Sheba,
admire your wisdom in the glory of your House and comely order amongst your
Servants. I say, imagine a Prince's Court, not like that Cornelius Agrippa
mentions to his friend in those sarcastique and profane words, an non in
Inferno es, amice, qui es in Aula ubi Daemonum habitatio, nor like that Tom.
12. Bibliothecae Magnae part. 2. p. 712. Epist. 14.
Petrus Blesensis writes of; but thus exemplary, thus refert with rare persons
and religious practices, as this King proposed his Sons Court to be when he
should come to it; Conclude this not an Vtopia, or a display of Kingly wit and
politic sagacity, but what really and truly his wisdom found out to be the
Interest of Kings to make, and the Religion of Kings to keep their Courts such.
What (when a Court is such and so ordered) can be a readier and more notable
means to ingenerate and preserve virtue in youth then Education there, where
they shall not take in good and grave Principles as they do, who do
Vappambibere e lagenis, Chil. 4. Cent. 5. p. 1090.
but ingurgitate them freely as they do, who do E dolio haurire, who are (as we
say) at the Wellhead, (...), encircled with every thing that is magnificent. I
say, in a Court that is thus raryfied and sublimated, (that by the Elixar of
Imperial Prudence is turned from tinn and course metal into pure gold, as
Frederic the Third, King of Denmark, is reported to have made his Court) no
miscarriage almost because no degeneration can be in lasciviam ruditatemve de
levi] For the sobriety of such a Court keeps youth from luxury, (...).
Aristophan. in Pluto. Dion. Hist. lib. 48. p. 382, 507, 556. Chil. 2. Cent. 6.
p. 610. Dion, lib. 48. p. 382. 13 Rich. 2. c. 3. Stamford's Pleas Crown. p. 38.
and the state and fashion of it from rudeness. For though Athens were a place
wherein there was so many Artists, that no one Artist was valued, which made
him in the Tragedy cry out, That there was no Reward is her, nor any Art
flourished there: Yet this Domus Regia] in the Text, called in other names,
(...) and (...), has Rewards and Encouragements for every conspicuity in its
Courtiers, and they that compare any places to them, where nobly (and as of
old) they were composed, does Rosam cum anemona confer. For as Princes have
no fellows in their Dominions, so have their Courts no fellows in the
Privilege and Magnificence of them; for besides that (...) that is given them
abroad, our Laws make them exempt from ordinary Jurisdiction, and offenses
done in them contrary to the sacredness of them highly punishable. If a man
fight in the King's Court, the King being then and there present, he shall lose
his right hand, and be for ever, during his life, imprisoned, and pay fine and
ransom at the King's pleasure, which was like to have been the doom of Sir
Edmund Knevet in Anno 1541, but that the King remitted it upon his humble
submission and entreaty; for these Residencies of the King are accounted
Honors by the Statute of 37 H. 8. c. 18. and it being against the Honor of
the Sovereign of the Law to have his Laws violated in his presence, the
penalty of such Insolence is very severe: and those that make bold to brave and
dishonor the order and sacredness of them, are wellcomed with a punishment
remarkable. Fulbertus reads those words of Psalm. xxviii. Magna Bibliotheca
Patrum. Tom. 11. p. 101.
Adorate Dominum in atrio sancto, by Colite cum in conscientia vestra
mundissima, and he gives the reason, ipsa est enim Aula Regalis and habitatio
Spiritus sancti. And therefore all persons that approach the King's Court, as
they are to be trimly habited, and to the elegantest proportion of their
degree; so ought they there to demean themselves soberly and with civility,
since Princes Courts are Paradises of pleasure and state, Alex. ab Alexan. lib.
2. c. 6. Zuinget Theatr. vit. hum. p. 1319. Luitprand Ticinensis lib. 6. c. 2.
as might at large (if need were) be made good out of great and grave Authors:
which is the reason the Chancellor here in the Text says, Opulentiam,
magnitudinemque illus collandare.

Dum in ea Gymnasium supremum sit nobilitatis] The Court of the King according
to our Text, is not only the sphere of riches and luster, but the Academy of
activity and manliness Gymnasium nobilitatis, A nudis dicta Gymnasia Scalig.
lib. 1. Poetic c. 22.
says our Master. Now Gymnasium was the place where the Actors of old, Budaeus
in Pandect. p. 95. Edit. Vascos.
stripped themselves naked, that they might show themselves active, without
hinderance. Lib. 2. de Ira. Nutritus in palatio contubernalis and condisispulus
Augustorum, non est inflatus superbia, nec alteros homines adduct a front
contempsit. sed cunctis amabalis ipsos principes amabat ut ^tratres,
venerabatur ut dominos; ministros autem little and universum ordinem palatii,
sic sibi charitate sociaral, ut qui merit, inferiores erant officiis, se pares
arbitrarentur. Sanctus Hieronymusde Nebridio ^p, ad Salvinam viduam ejus.


Seneca terms Pyrrhus (the institutour of these) maximum praeceptorem
certaminis Gymnici, and the caution he chiefly gave his youngsters was, that
they should not be passionate and choleric but do as wise Courtiers ought,
accipere injurias and refer gratias. Lipsius his Commentator tells us not
what Pyrrhus this was, but Pyrrhus probably it was the Epyraean King that
brought in dancing, called afterward Pyrrhica saltatio. These corporal
exercises of running, vaulting, justing, wrestling, tilting, and torneaments,
though under other names, together with the liberal learned sciences, were
always judged so proper for Courts, that nothing was judged more peculiar to
them then they; because they took youth off from effeminacy, and intended them
on exp^essions of manliness. Budaeus asserts Lycaon the Arcadian, to have
delivered them to the Greeks, P. 95. B. in Pandect. Edit. Vascos.
who had their Lycaeum, Academia, ^ynosarges, to further the education of
youth, and in all these, erudited them according to (...), or laws of
instituting youth by their (...), who were purposely designed to attend them.
And how diligent the young fry there were, that they might be notable
gamesters, and renowned for their victories. Plautus minds us in those words,
Ante solemn exorientem, Racchol. Act. 3. Scen. 3.
etc. nisi in Palaestram v^neras, If one came not into the pit before Sunrise,
he was sorely punished: There by running, striving, activity of spear, quaiting
or throwing up in the air, fighting at Cuffs, playing at ball, dancing, they
exercised themselves rather then with Whoring and Kissing, thus he. And surely
had not the wisdom of humane nature found it necessary to divert youth from
sinful pleasures which engage the mind, they would never have done such honor
to these corporal exercises, and the excellers in them as they have done; nor
would Historians have taken the pains to write of their ancients Athletae, and
Palaestritae, their cursores in stadio, their saltati^nes and pugilum
certamina, Zuinger in Theatro p. 2519.
their Hyplomachi gladiatores, their equestres concursus and pugnae, as Caelins
Rhodiginus, Plato, Sabellicus, Athenaeus, Pausanias, Alexander ab Alexandro,
Plutarch, Scaliger, Diodorus Siculus, Faber, have done; and therefore I
conclude that they are necessary and advantageous to draw out and keep up the
manhood of the mind, Saltationem armatam Curetes docuere, Pyrrichen, Pyrrhus,
Sueton. in Ver. c. 12.
and to enable men to serve their Countries, with their bodies against their
enemies, and justify the Courts of Princes to have exercises of activity. Not
only the Pyrrhica saltatio, which, though on foot was somewhat like Tilting,
wherein the engagers were armed Cap-a-pee, and the Sicinnis, which was
satyrick, wherein the dancers clad as satyrs, by the variety and agility of
their motions, did provoke by the rareness of their singing, delight: but also
that (...), or civil exercise of dancing, (...), etc Lib. sept. de legibus.
which Plaeto calls very honest and harmeless dancing, And we may call French
and Country dancing, or dancing in Masks, which truly is in its self I
suppose so harmeless a repast, as nothing can be more harmeless, ( evil be to
them that evil think the jollity no doubt is lawful, if it be used lawfully)
And much (in things not mala per se) is allowable to the Courts of Princes,
which is not fit to be practiced elsewhere, which if some would rightly consider,
they would not be so imprudently rigid in their censures, as they, more to
their own disgrace then to others disadvantage, impudently are.

As then to the suprema Gymnasia of our Text, and the schola quoque
strenuitatis, probitatis and moram] which the Kings Court is called, I can
write nothing punctually as concerning the teaching of Martial seats and
activities therein; but near and in the verge of the Kings Court, all these
exercises have been and yet are taught, though now the young Lords more
addicted to travail then heretofore, learn them abroad, whether they go very
young, and so these places and masters are not so much taken notice of as then
they were. Holingshed p. 366. P. 474. P. 646. 774. P. 807. P. 815. P. 873. P.
805, 806, 896
But that practices of activity have been ever here performed, is plain in our
stories, in 18. and 19. E. 3. these were performed at Windsor, in 14. and 15.
R. 2. the King kept his Court at the Bishop of London's house in London, and
there were justs in Smithfield, and after, dancing and revelling after the
Court manner in Henry the 6. time at the Tower, and at Greenwich, so in Henry
the 7. time, at Sheen for a month together, within and without the Kings
Palace: so at Westminster 1. H. 8, 4. H. 8. at Greenwich, and 14. of the same
King, there before Charles the fifth, and ever since almost, though of late
years Tilting has been disused, yet still other exercises are continued;

So that when our Text says, it is schola strenuitatis, probitatis and morum,
it intends such a collection of men of arts and arms, Adag. Chil. 4. Cent. 10.
p. 1193. Chil. 4. Cent. 8. p. 1151. True Nobility, whence.
of valor and courtyery in it, that every young nobleman that thereunto comes,
may (if he have ambition to appear, (...) (...), a prognate of Jupiter's, be
excellently adorned with all complements of honor) and not be (...), not one
that has no evidence of his nobility, but his bare descent; for, as it is not
bulk that declares the man, but spirit and valor, so is it not name and
equipage that publishes a nobleman, but a brave mind and a brave courage, See
Sir Edward Waterhouse, my Uncle's Epistle to the Earl of Essex, in Holingshed.
p. 1266.
a stanch virtue, and a not to be impeached fidelity: these are verae
nobilitatis insignia, and therefore are by our Chancellor annumerated as those
things which do honor and illustrate a Kingdom.

Quibus honoratur regnum and floret] This is a great truth which all experience
subscribes to, that strenuity of action, probity in mind, and honesty of
manners is the chief glory of any Kingdom. This I think, Moses according to our
Texts sense intimated that 4 Deuteronomy. 6. where he charges Israel to keep all his
enactions, which God, who had so highly deserved of them, had enjoined them
observance of; For this says he, is your wisdom and your understanding in the
sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, surely this
great nation is a wise and understanding people. For virtue being the corner
stone of Governments, and the firmament of its luster, no honor is to be had
or kept without her, nor is the truly any where, but where she shows her self
in the fruits of courage, abstinence from turpitude, and zeal for propagation
or order, which three are the leures of greatness to any people; for valor
gains ground, and makes the purchase, and prudence orders acquisitions by
equity of administration, whereby it cements minds so together, that they as
one man join in propagation of common interest, raising by the art of loyalty,
such a rampire and defense about them, as no art or assault of their enemies
shall subvert, and darts such rays of conviction on beholders, that they
cannot but admire and desire to be under the rooffe of such politic
artificers, as build both stately and securely, yea, and makes the way open for
merit to be rewarded, when servility and abjectness of condition makes
unchearful subjects, and such as, though they are bound (...), With golden
fetters; yet would think themselves more happy to be free: not as to dependence
on and loyalty to their Prince (for that is the best Charter and evidence for
orderly political freedom) but as to that Vassalage which is the effect of
absolute and unlimited will, Sarisburiensis lib. 4. de nugis curialium c. 1, 2,
3, 4. Quanto quisquo promptior obsequio, tanto citius honoribus and opibus
extollitur. Tacirus. Florere authoritate and gloriae. Cic. Ep. ad Nigidium.
Florere exis^imatione Cic. pro Fronteio. (...) (...). dictum Peryandri Eras.
Adag. Chil. 2. Cent. 2. p. 473.
which being no method of our Princes to their subjects, produces in the
subjects, thus paternally treated, Strenuity, Probity and honesty of manners,
to such a degree as makes the Kingdom in which they are, honorari and florere,
flourish in its self, and be honored abroad by others; for there is nothing
acquires such benediction of God, on men studious to thrive by just and good
endeavors, as justice, honesty, and persistence in their well and judiciously
chosen way, which as they are first commended to the affections and made
connatural by good breeding and right principling in youth, so are often
visible in those enlargements, which manhood in the ripe and prudent experience
of it, occasions men to evidence, and by it to be renowned. For since wisdom
makes a man's face to shine, and education is the stirrup to help up into that
faddle, where, well feated, we sit notwithstanding all the menaces of dismount,
that the various and cross accidents of life suggest to us, it is the readiest
course to attain that, by such company and conversation, as are greatest
masters of it; and this being to be observed in the houses of Lords for young
gentlemen, and the Court of the King for young Lords, as therein to breed them
was the custom in our Chancellours time, the Conclusion of our Text is as in
all other Chapters, that this method of England in this as in other parts of
it, was best for England, while it was the use so to do. And what the difuse
or other appointment of their custody and education will better to after ages
produce, then that did to our times let after ages tell when they know, We
that know but in part, can but prophecy in part. To God to whom the event of
all things is known, and by whom overruled I refer it, and so I conclude this
Chapter.

CHAP. XLVI.
Tunc Cancellarius. Sunt and alii casus nonnulli in quibus differunt Leges
audictae, etc.


TO the prementioned cases, wher^in the two Laws in the manner of their
administration differ, our Chancellor subjoyns that of manifest Theft and of
ungrateful Libertines; in both which Cases the Civil and Common Laws give
different judgments.

Leges Civiles judicant Furtum manifestum per redditionem quadrupli.

Furtum] the Lawyers derive from (...), id est, auferendo contrectandoque;
Alciat. ad Legem 183. p. 392. de verb. signifi^. Paulus Iurisconsult.

Alciat. Disput. lib. 1. c. 10.

Tholoss. Syntagm. lib. 37. c. 1.

Digest. lib. 17. tit. 1.


hence they define it, Contrectatio rei alienae mobilis and corporalis,
frandulenta, invito Domino, gratia lucrandi rem ipsam vel usum ejus vel
possessionem. It must be Contrectatio, for the animus intercipiendi is nothing
as to men, if contrectatio be not; so is the Gloss, sine contrectatione furtum
fieri non potest, And rei alienae; for in propria non committitur furtum.
Mandati vel contra Gloss. non r^ddidis. p. 1674.
Therefore the matter of the Theft must be the right of another, and mobilis
and corporalis it must be, Tholoss. lib. 37. c. 1. and 6. and 12 lib. 11. c 28.
Digest, lib. 17. tit. 1. Mandati p. 1674.

Digest. lib. 18. tit. 1. H. Dubitatio in Gloss.

Tholoss. lib. 37. c. 6. and 12. and lib. 11. c. 28.

Qui, ultra modum, tempus vel locum a Domino constitutum utitur, furtum faci^
quia invito Domino facit. Tholoss. lib. praenotat.


quia hae, capi, ferri and moveri possent; for although Aulus Gellius tells us
Sabinus delivered it, Non hominum tantum, neque rerum moventium quae
auferriocculte and surripi possunt, sed fundi quoque and edium fieri furtum:
yet the more current judgment is, that Thefts must be de re mobili and
corporali, and then it must be fraudulenta, for animus fraudendi maxim
inspicitur, and non sit furtum sine affectu furandi, as also it must be invito
Domino, not only when first taken, but when it is kept longer then his time
prefixed; so also if it be taken or kept with his privity and consent, it is
not theft, but a theft it is if otherwise, Furtivum non est quod sciente Domino
inclusum est. Paulus lib. 3. ad Neratium. Digest. lib. 24. tit. 1.63. p. 2217.


because it is done animo lucrandi rem ipsam, vel usum ejus, vel possessionem,
Furtum facit, scienter accipiens indebitum; and no man that takes what is not
his own, but knows it to be another, and takes and keeps it to the injury of
the right owner, Digest. lib. 4. tit. 9.
but is a thief, and this makes the Theft: for Theft is not computed inter
casus fortuitos, Baldus Digest. lib. 9. tit. 3. ad Legem Aquiliam.
but it supposes a premeditation and an ill mind to the owner of it, which
they call not only damnum cum corruptione rei, Manifestas fur est, qui in
faciendo deprehensus est, and juxta terminos ejus loci unde furatus est,
comprehensus est. vel antequam ad cum locum quo destinarat porvenire. Paulus
lib. Sentent. De Furibus.
but furtum cum amotione rei.

Now these Furta were either Manifesta, such as are in the very fact, in which
the thief is termed (...), hoc est, (...), with the thing stolen about him, or
he that is apprehended within the bounds of the place whence it was stolen; or
else not manifest ones, Q^asi ad manus s^ris sta^s. Cic. pr^ Ro^cio.
that is, such as though they are proved, yet they came cleaverly off, and went
smoothly away with, as we use to say: thus Tully expresses manifestum furtum by
clarum and apertum, Pro^ Cluentio.
and he calls it, Manifesto comprehensum and deprehensum facinus. Hence because
Manifestation is the act of light, Authors express every thing of palpability
and obviousness by Manifestum; Manifestus Amator, libido manifesta, pietas
manifesta, signa manifesta, Budaeus in Pand. Reliq. p. 210.
manifesta caedes, etc. These Thefts were (says our Text) differently
punished, in old time, amongst the Nations, I suppose with death in the party
stealing, and with the bondage of his Companions, Genesis 44.9.
to which the brethren of Joseph had probably an eye when they willingly
proposed to the Lord of Egypt, that With whomsoever of them the money for the
Corn be found, both let him dye, and we also will be my Lords bondmen. I know
there are learned men that make this only a bold offer of innocence, which
knowing it self free, condescends to the hardest terms to vindicate it self;
and hereupon they rank it amongst the follies and vapors of these sons of
Jacob, who, as Israelites, would seem to be more abstemious, and not so
temptable as other men, but saving their greater judgments I humbly conceive
it to have respect to the Custom of the Nations, Si liber furti coarguatur,
servire cogitur. Lex Lyciorum apud Nicolaum. lib. de Moribus G^ntium.
perhaps Egypt, thus to punish theft, which punishment, though they were
strangers they willingly condescend to, nor was it strange they should, Alciat.
in Legem 42. p. 121.
who knew theft was a notable sin against the Moral Law, and that justice which
God has implanted in every man, Plato lib. 9. de Legibus lib. 936.
and when it was so manifest as their's was, could not but expect the
punishment of manifest theft, Gajus lib. 7. ad Edit. Provin.
which was death, especially, if in the night the thief were taken in the
house; Digest. lib. 9. tit. 2. p. 1056.
so Plato appointed, and the Law of the twelve tables, and so the theft per
lancem and licium, Lance and dicebatur apud antiquos, quia qui furtum ibat
quaerere, in domum alienam licio cinctus intrabat, lancemque ante oculos
tenebat, propter matrem familia aut virginum praesentiam. Turneb. advers. lib.
30. c. 23.
(like our night-robbers, who come in Vizards and with cords to bind men,
while they ransack the house,) was punished as manifest theft; now, because
theft is often in small things, in which, Acursius thinks, it ought to be
prosequuted, modice puniendo, and not capitaliter; therefore the Law Tholoss.
Syntag. Juris lib. 37. c. 1. ss. 23.
appoints this fourfold restitution of the thing stolen. Indeed God himself
appointed restitution in case of theft, so in the 22 of Exodus and the first
verse, Five oxen are to be restored for one Ox stolen, and four sheep for a
sheep; Alciat in L^gem 9. De verbor. signifi. p. 27.
and the principal with a fifth part of the value in a trespass, Levit. 5.26.
etc. 6. v. 5. Numb. 5 7, but in cases of small things stolen, manifest theft
was to have a fourfold restitution, so King David determined against himself,
that Vriah's lamb taken from him by violence, should be restored fourfold, 2 Samuel 12.6, which was according to the Law in Exodus; answerable to this was
Zacheus his protestation, Luke 19.8. Joseph. lib. 16 Antiq. Judaicarum. c. 1.
If I have taken from any man by forged Cavillation, I restore him fourfold.
This Law continued amongst the Jews till Herod's time, when Josephus tells us,
he altered it, and appointed the thief absolutely to be sold. Grotius says,
from this Law of Exodus, c. 22 the Greek and Roman Law took their prescripts;
Grotius in Luca 19.8
and; that if a thief before he had made away the Matter of his theft did
before arraignment repent of it, Manifestum furtum, quod nulla alia probatione
indiget. Tholoss. loc^ pracitato, ss. 13.
and restore it entire, and a fifth part more with it, he was absolved
according to the text of Numb. 57. but if the thing stolen were alienated, then
he was to restore fourfold, Verbum reddendi, pr^ dare. Digest. lib. 3. tit. 1.
p. 707
that is, to give him four times more satisfaction then the injury done him
comes to. To this quadruple, I think our Lord alludes in the Luke 6 38. Good
measure shall men return into your bosom, Mensura justa, coacta, succussata,
superfluens. Grot. in locum.
pressed down, shaken together, and running over; four degrees of measure
alluding to the fourfold restitution that the directed manifest theft was to
have.

Et furtum non manifestum per dupli compensationem expiari]

Gajus lib. 1. ad edictum AEdilium Curulium c. 45.
Non manifestum est quod manifestum non est, say the Lawyers, that is where the
thing does not prove it self, but needs some other proofs; Digest. lib. 21.
tit. 1.
for this being capable of evasion and excuse or something in mitigation, In
duplum condemnatur. Spelman Council p. 358. 367, 372
is allowed but a twofold compensation. Thus I find it among the Laws of
King Alfred, and so it was ever among the Ancients, Arist. Problem. sect. 30.
c. 14
Aristotle gives the Law (...), etc. If any one stole out of the baths or
theater, or the Forum, he was to be put to death, Plato lib. 9. De Legibus.
but if from a private house, he was to restore only twice the value, A
Gellius lib. 11. c. 18.
so also Plato, and Agellius confirm the law to be.

Sed Leges Angliae, neutrum facinorum illorum mitius quam committentis morte
puniri permittunt, dummodo ablati valor duodecim denariorum valorem excedat.

This I suppose was the law before the Conquest, that Felonies exceeding the
value of 12. pence should be punished with death, Cestassavoir que null ad
judgment de la mort, si non larceny, etc. ^e ne passont 12 deniers de sterling.
Mirr. Justic. c. 4. ss. Fleta lib. 1. c. 38 De Far^o
for this is grand larceny oustre le value de 12 pence, says the 3. E. 1. c.
15. Answerable hereto is Fleta, who adds, that pro modicis delictis petty
felonies, pissories, loss of the ears, and brandings with a red hot Iron were
invente^; Ex pluralitate tamen, and cumule modicorum delictorum poterit
capitalis scutentia generdri. Idem lib. pr^^ot.
for though every little may make a mickle, or in Fleta's words, many small
larcenyes may make a great and capital one: yet for one single theft if not
exceeding the value of 12. pence no death of man can be. Sir Edward Cook gives
us much learning concerning this, 2 Instit. p. 190 Exposit. of c. 15. of the 1
West. and 3 Institut. pleas of the Crown c. 47
so does Master Stamford, which I have enlarged upon in the notes on the twenty
seventh Chapter; for since the Law of England, is a Law of justice, and justice
requires defense of property and order, See the Statut. 23. H. 8. c. 1. 32 H 8.
c. 3. 1 E. 6. c. 12.
which theft violating, and thieves growing so loose, that they make a mock of
sin, and delight themselves tabulis lusoriis, De Tabula Lusoria, and lusu
latronum leg^ Turnebum advers. lib. 27. c. 3. p. 1007.
with which they trifle out the day till the night come, wherein they act their
villainy, and Bulas like, are so Proteus'd, that they by their deluding
ingenuity, go invisibly, and care not what mischief they engage in, (...)
Dion. lib. 76. p. 865.
I say, this, so pestiferous to the property and possession of rightful owners,
the law is most severe against, whether it be manifest theft, that is, the
thief taken in the fact, or not manifest, that is, proved by witnesses against
the accused person, if it do exceed 12 pence it is death. For though many
offenses are clergyable, Stamford. lib. 2. c. 42
yet not felonies of theft; For where people are warlike in nature, and given
to theft, not to punish it capitally, Civ^s furibus non parcunt; qui surti
fuerit accusatus, vel levem suspicionem habuerit, inauditus suspenditur, ^ec
purgandi sui tenepus datur, etc. Ro^ellius in Pymand. De Oppidis, Castris, and
Villis, Austriae, lib. 5. com. 11. dial. 5. p. 330
is to favor it more then in relation to order ought, which the Saxons our
Ancestors considering, were so rigid against theft, that to be even accused of
it was decreed capital, and that by hanging the thief, which Fartis suspendium
addidit, qud poena nunc per Europam utimur. Lud. Vives lib. 7. De causis
corruptarum artium.
Vives says, the Emperor Frederick the third first exampled Christendom to.
Nor is the Law of England to be accounted cruel herein, for that it does but
what the wisdom of Legislation suggests necessary to obviate national
impieties, and to secure the order of national justice, which, other Nations as
well as ours, have in the very case of theft, so also doomed. Quicquid antiqui
operis ex are and murmore suit, quicquid oculos potuit delectare, sublatum aut
vi revulsum ad naves deferri jussit, ut plus ornamentorum unus septem dierum
spacio urbi detraxerit quam ^arbari 258. annorum spacio. Sabellicus lib. 4.
Ennead. 8.
For though great and victorious thieves, that with the Emperor Constantine
the third, ransack Rome of all its bravery more in seven days, then the
barbarous nations had, or could do in 258 years, go off with the preyes of
stately Capitols, renowned Arsenals, well arrayed Warderobes, vast Treasuries,
and are flattered, when so they do, by the Oratorious Panegyricks of adulating
admirers; yet, the thieves that are masterable by justice, are fatally
accounted with: Lib. 6. c. 10. E^ lib. 3. c. 5. Nicolaus de moribus Gentium
apud Stobaeum sermon. 42. Bonfiaius
so among the Indians, Phrygians, Scythians, so A. Gellius lib. 11. c. 18
Draco punished theft, and for it Alex ab Alexand. lib. 3. c. 18
Fabius adjudged his Son to die, so did Sertorius put to the sword a whole
plundering Cohort, and Sabellic. lib. 8. Ennead. 6
Mark Antony put to death the thief that stripped Brutus his body, and
Pescentius Niger, a soldier but for taking away a henn from a woman, and gave
her ten henns for it. Fulgosus lib. 2. Capite de re militari
Sundry other examples of severe inflictions on theft, Johannes Magnus,
Ludovicus Vives, Iovius, Fulgosus, and others, furnish us with, Is latrociniis
infamis esse, Strabo lib. 1. Latrocinari and rapto vivere solitos, sed and
fortassis gentis vitium hoc fuit. Alciat. disput. lib. 3. c. 20. p. 189.
all which show, that theft is an odious sin, and the Law of England in
punishing it with death, does but what other wise lawmakers have in the like
kind done. For since perhaps, our Nation has ever been addicted to theft, and
as amongst the Isauriaus, so with us, Laws against theft, as the reigning sin
ought to be tart and fatal, the Laws so made and executed, are worthily
magnifyed; for as much as theft does not only rob the living, but even the
dead, Si quis to^^at de Chrysippi libris quae aliena sunt, vacua illa charta
relinquetur. Zuingeri Theatr. vitae human. vol. 16. lib. 2. p. 2389.
not of their sheets of worth and wit, in which, if their mortal lives had
their due, they would be in a sort immortalized (as Thestorides did Homer's
verses, whilst he bribed Homer to be silent in his arrogation of them to be
his; and Chrysippus, when from Eurypides he stole those notions that
Apollodorus says he got his name by; and Menander, whom Eusebius and
Porphyrius charge to be the thief of the ancient Poets; and Flavius the
Libertine of Appius Claudius, by purloining his Masters Works, insinuated into
the people so far by it, that they made him an Aedile and Tribune.) I say,
these and others by theft do not only rob the dead of their sheets of
learning, but even of their winding-sheets, as that miscreant Cook Pleas Crown.
3 Instit. p. 110. Bree^wood. lib de N^mmis Iudaeorum c 1. (...). Waserus lib 2.
de Nummis He braorum c. 16.
Haynes did ( furto inaudito) in the 10 of King James: good reason is there
that such Villainy should doom to death the Actors of it, Dummodo ablati valor
duodecim denariorum valorem excedat.

Item Libertinum ingratum Leges Civiles in pristinam redigunt servitutem; sed
Leges Angliae semel manumissum, semper liberum judicant, gratum vel ingratum.

Libertini sunt qui ex justa servitute manumissi sunt. Gajus lib. 1. Instit.
Marcianus lib. 1. Instit. Digest. lib. 1. tit. 5. p. 88. Tholoss. Syntag. lib.
14. c. 7. ss. s.
This is the last instance wherein the Laws do vary in their sentence, that of
an ingrate Libertine. Now a Libertine was such an one as after just service was
manumitted, so Gajus defines him: Marcianus makes Libertines to be one of the
degrees of freemen, as Ingenuous men are the other. Three sorts of Libertines
the Laws of old mention, as there were three degrees of Liberty or
Manumission: 1. The Plena Libertas, which was in their being enfranchised
Citizens of Rome. 2. Latin Libertines, ex Lege Iunia Norbana, which after was
taken away. 3. The Dedititia Libertas, which was ex Lege Aelia Sentia, which
also was taken away: which way soever then they became Libertines, the Law
looked upon ingratitude in them as monstrous and pernicious. This should seem
to be one of the Laws of the twelve Tables, for Schottus writing on that Law,
In Notis ad lib. 6. Controv. Senecz, p. 253.
That every man might dispose of his own, mentions this exception, nisi sit
nequam and prodigus, and decoctor h^res est futurus, aut parentibus non
obediens, aut denique ingratus; cum and servus manumissus ob ingrati crimen in
servitutem retrahatur, so He. Suitable to this are all the Instances of
punishment on Ingratitude; Tholoss. lib. 6. c. 119. p. 21. De rebus and feudis.
and lib. 12. c. 6. ss. 5. lib. 28. c. 15. ss. 7. lib. 34. c. 3. ss. 4, 5. lib.
32. c. 16. ss. 5. lib. 11. c. 6. ss. 2.
for Ingratitude being not only a Rebellion, and so as the sin of Witchcraft,
but also an abuse of love and freedom, is therefore so vehemently persecuted,
because it is an unnaturality inconsistent with reason and moral justice, which
caused the Athenians to enact that memorable Law, Supersedeo, inquit, te habero
Civem tanti muneris impium astimatorem, nec adduci possem ut credam urbi utilem
quem domi scclestum cerno. Abi igitur and esto servus, quoniam liber esse
nescis. Valor. Max lib. 2. c. 1.
wherein the party, who did enfranchise any one who was unworthy that favor,
did supersede his enlargement, and call him to his bondage as the punishment of
abused goodness. For of all the vices none more unpardonable then ingratitude,
since it is the womb of all enormity, God himself is offended with it, and
therefore reproaches Isreal's immemory of his mercies, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 18. Ier. ii.
32. Ier. xxiii. 27. Hosea. iv. 6. and his peoples wantonness in the high-noon
of them, (...). Sanct. Chrysostom. apud Stobaeum Sermon. 59. p. 230,
and threatens to bring their old miseries upon them, Ier. xvii. 4. So amongst
men ingratitude is reckoned as the greatest provocation, because it takes
occasion to return good with evil; hence becomes it a deformity not in all
persons only, Ipsa Respubl. quam ingrata in optimos, and devotissimos sibi
fuerit; Camillum in exilium misit, Scipionem dimisit, exulavit post Catilinam
Cicero, diruti ejus penates, bona direpta, factum quicquid victor Catilina
fecisset. Senec. lib. 5. De Benefic. p. 95.
but also in whole Nations guilty of it. The Jews God sent his Son to, and that
unspeakable mercy they contemned, and cried down the holy one and the just,
desiring a Murderer, and God cursed them with blindeness more then Cimmerian.
Hereupon, because Ingratitude is so execrable, Seneca indicts Rome of it, as a
spot and blemish she could not easily wipe off, which considered, the Persians
a wise Nation punished no offense more grievously then this, (...). Xenophon.
lib. 1. de Instit. Cyri, p. 4. and 5.
which they thought was an unnaturalness to God, the Country, our Parents, our
friends and our selves; and therefore abominable to all these: which makes me
to conclude, That reduction of Libertines to servitude, because they are
ungrateful, is a most just and necessary Law for those places and persons over
whom it is particularly received to predominate.

Yet the Law of England is otherwise, for though it hate Ingratitude, ranking
it amongst those sins which are in the very forlorn and main Battalia of Hell;
yet when servitude was in being with us, it punished it not with reduction to
servitude, because that is an undoing what the Law has done, and a playing fast
and loose with the states and conditions of men, which are bond while
manumission, and after that continue free. And perhaps our Law is so consistent
in this, from the apprehension it has of God's abhorrence of the Jews cruelty
and hypocrisy in Ieremiah's time; for God having commanded them that every man
should let his manservant, Ier. 34.10.
and every man his maid servant go free, that none should serve themselves of
them any more, which they obeyed, and let them go: But afterward (says the
Text) they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let
go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for
handmaids; which act of recess from their lenity and justice to their
servants, God took so ill, that he for it, Proclaimed Liberty for them, to the
Sword, to the Pestilence, and to the Famine, and I will make you to be removed
into all the Kingdoms of the earth, verse. 17. By which sad return of their
cruelty and unmercyfulness, we are told that God loves no double dealing, but
delights in righteousness persisted in, and mercy thoroughly extended. And this
I suppose may be some ground of the reason of the Law, which manumits once for
all; for if the Lord does enfranchise his Villain, he must be free, revillain'd
he cannot be, Because the Lord's act shall be construed most forcibly against
himself: and no new Villainage can be made, Sect. 172. c. 11.
licet gratus vel ingratus sit Libertinus, says our Text. For as when
Villainage was in England, Villains could not out their Lords of their rights
in them by a Writ of Libertas probanda, but that their Lords, notwithstanding
such Writs, might seize the bodies of such Villains, Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 18. and
obtain their servage, 1 R. 2. c. 6. c R. 2.2. so when Villains are libertin'd
to reduce them by a retrospection to their Vassalage, was (I suppose) utterly
against the Law, which accounts once well done ever done, and forfeits freedom
upon no account but disloyalty.

Alii quoque sunt hujusmodi casus, etc.] These and sundry other cases there are
wherein the variation of the Laws do evidence themselves; but the Quotation of
these, as the Chancellor, so his humble Commentator enlarges not upon, because
they are not of very great moment, nor require any elaboration in the treaty of
them, but only serve to the compleatness of the Dialogue, in which the Prince
is introduced by our Text- Master in the following words.

CHAP. XLVII.
Princeps. Nec expedit, Cancellarie, in his multum sudare, etc.

THIS Chapter is but as some others before, transitional to what is subsequent;
for the Chancellor having in the 46. Chapter showed the discrepancy of the
Civil and Common Laws in determination of Theft and Enfranchisement, in which
he conceives the Common Laws to be more terrible to Theft and more indulgent
to freedom then the Civil Laws are. The personated Prince, satisfied with the
main of his assertion, requests his preterition of what might further be
alleged in this case; and to proceed to satisfy him why the Laws of England,
tam bonae, because so just, tam frugi, because so temperate and suitable, tam
optabiles, because so tuitive of freedom, which every man naturally loves, 21
H. 8. c. 13.
are not taught in Universities as Civil and Canon Law is. This is the sum of
this Chapter.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Cancellarius. In Vniversitatibus Anglia non docentur Scientiae, nisi in Lingua
Latina.


AS Mechaniques and Societies of trading-men had among the Greeks and Romans
their Corpora, Corpora omnium constituit Vniariorur^, Lupinariorum,
Caligariorum, etc. omnino omnium artium, hisque ex sese Defensores dedit.
Aelius Lamprid. in Severo, p. 215.
or Guilds, or Halls, whereto they resorted, and in which they met for
consultation about their Art; so have the Liberal Sciences had their places of
Convention, called by some Academies, by others Schools, and here Universities;
so Stat. 3. H. 8 c. 11.14, 15 H. 8 c. 5. 13 Eliz c. 12. 18 Eliz. c. 6. 2 and 3.
Phil. and Mary c, Tandem in hoc convenerunt communiter, ut Regi nunciaretur ex
part Vniversitatis quod negotium dilationem caperet. M. Paris in H. 3 p. 905.
15. 13 Eliz. c. 20. in which mention is made of Universities, as a name not
only of number and multitude, but of that which is unum totum; so Matthew
Paris mentions Vniversitas, Tholoss. lib. 35. c. 1. ss. 18. lib. 1. c. 13. ss.
8. lib. 3. c. 1. ss. 2. lib. 23. c. 16. ss. 7. lib. 17. c. 6. ss. 48.
and so the Civilians take it sensu complexo and capaci, for Tholossanus his
words are, Vniversitatis dicis ca tantum quae Communia sunt municipibus ejus
loci, vel Civitatis, ut Stadia, Theatra, Digest. lib. 3. tit. 4. ss. 7. p. 409.
lib. 1. tit. 21. p. 55. Bartholus Digest. lib 4. tit. 3. p. 517.

Digest. lib. 3 tit. 4. p. 405.

Lib. 6. tit. 1. p. 823. and lib. 18. tit. 1. p. 1732 in Marg.

Forner. in Legem 15. p. 45. and in Legem 145. p 332.


Pascua, Nemora, and id genus similia: so that Universities, in our Texts
sense, are places set apart and privileged for learning and learned men, there
to reside and study for the service of the Nation in Church and State. And as
Universities in general are designed for this use by the bounty of Kings and
sovereign Princes ( vere carum Parents and conditores, says Choppinus lib. ^.
De D^manio Francia, p. 586.
Choppinus) so have the Vniversitates Angliae been, and accordingly have proved
Feraces Ingeniorum and Artium, not only to a proportion with, but to degrees
beyond any other Universities (I think) in any Nation of the World. In these,
says our Text, Docentur Scienti^ Liberales] These Liberal Sciences the
Ancients had a great value of: Meritoria Artificia sunt ha^tenus utilia, si
praparant ingenium, non detinent. Ep. 88.
Seneca calls them Meritorious Artifices, very profitable if they serve for
preparation to greater things, and do not entangle and detain the mind in them,
An tu quicquam in istis credis boni, quorum Professores turpissimos omnes ac
fla9^tiosissimos cernis. Idem codem loco.
prejudicating it against all other necessary acquirements; for though he were
a very great Admirer of and proficient in these Liberal Sciences, yet he
forbears not to avocate men from doting on them further then is convenient,
(...), lib. 6. de Moribus c. 3. (...). Lib. 2. cap. 5.

'H (...), lib. 1. Metaph. c. 1.

Tamdiu enim istis immorandum est, quamdiu nihil animus agere majus potest.
Rudimenta sunt nostra non Opera. Quare Liberalia Studia dicta sunt vides, quia
homino libero digna sunt; Caterum unum Studium vere Liberale est quod liberum
facit, hoc sapientia; sublim^, forte, magnanimum; catera pasilla and puerelia
sunt. Senec. Ep. 88.


Because they are subject to abuse, and are often inoperative in their greatest
Masters as to those ends of virtue which they were primarily intended to
promote. For since the Philosopher calls them, Habits and means to demonstrate
things, and says, The chief end and noblest perfection of them, consists in
their conduct of men to a wisdom of mediocrity in all their actions, they are
to be cherished as the fruits of practical experience, by which a right
judgment is made of things, and a right method prosecuted to the obtaining of
what is excellent in them, or what excellence may be wrought in us by them: for
this is the reason why the Arts professed in them are called Liberal Sciences,
because they rightly understood and improved, deliver the mind from the
bondage of ignorance and the villainage of passion and error, and make it
wise, sublime, courageous, generous, and what not, which is excellent and
unvulgar.

Concerning the number of these, some variation there is between the calculate
of Antiquity and later times; nay even in the later computation, In Muscei
usis, p. 401.
Claudius Clemens reckons among the Liberal Arts and Sciences Architect,
Hunting, Hawking, Printing, Graving, Painting, etc. which I think are not
admitted but under other heads by most of the Learned besides himself. The
Ancients by the Liberal Arts understood Gymnastica, corporal exercises
preparatory to soulary ones; Lege Muretum in Ep. 88. Senec. p. 390. Edit. Mag.
Rhetorique, which made men express their minds aptly; Poetry, which excited
and magnified the fancy to all height of conception and variety of fancy;
Arithmetique, which taught the use of Numbers; Geometry, which treated of the
position and circumference of the Earth; I. Sarisburiensis lib. 1. c. 6. de
nugis Curialium, and lib. 2. c. 18.
Music, which taught the use of Notes and Sound; Philosophy, which treated of
the whole latitude of Nature, Morality, Ethiques, Politiques, Oeconomiques;
these were the liberal Sciences which in them we read of. But these I think,
though in effect what our Text says, Docentur in Vniversitatibus] are yet not
set down in the very method they are mentioned, there professed; for the
Liberal Sciences therein are, Divinity, Physic, the Civil and Canon Law,
Philosophy, History, the Mathematiques, Music, which, together with all the
Appendixes to them, are professed there and taught therein.

Nonnisi Lingua Latina] That is, The Latin Tongue is the most general language
in which their Lectures and Authors are read and written; for though Hebrew
was the language in which all the Arcana of wisdom was written, as after the
Greek tongue, when its Empire flourished, was the most admired: yet in the
Triumph of the Latin Empire, and its prevalence over Nations, all applications
were in the Victors language, and all the Sacrifices of Servility to the Idol
of Success, though it were really short of that which gave way to it. Seneca
seems to avouch this, who, though a pure Latinist, and one whom partiality
would have inclined, if ingenuity were consistent therewith, to admire the
Latin tongue, which was in a sort his Mother Tongue; Quanta verborum nobis
paupertas, immo egestas, nunquam magis quam hodierno die intellexi. Ep. 58.
Cassanaeus Catal. Gl. Mundi, p. 508.
yet heroiquely professes, That it was but narrow and short, not capacious
enough to admit the expression of his mind in. But alas the Latin tongue is
since advanced, for to that prisca and condita Latina which the Aborigines and
eldest Latins under Juno and Saturn used, and that which the Italians used
from Latinus and the other Tuscan Kings, in which Latin the Law of the twelve
Tables was wrote, and the Roman Latin, which after the determination of their
Kings, they used under their Aristocracy, to all these, mixed Latins (which
came in, when the Empire had many Nations admitted into it, who brought their
Idioms into use with them) made addition by which though the language may be
decocted and somewhat abated in the strenuity and elegancy of it, yet is it
more capacious and large as those additions have been contributions to it: and
though the generalness of speech be not so elegant, yet the Latin of learned
men's writing and speaking is yet polite and truly Roman. Itasentio and saepo
disserui Latinam linguam non mod^ non inopem ut vulgo putarent, sed
locupletiorem etiam esse quam Graecam. 1 de Fiv. 15.
I know Tully, that Eloquentiae humanae flumen, is no friend to the opinion
that the Greek tongue is more copious then the Latin, but calls it a vulgar
opinion, asserting the Latin more copious, which whether it be or no I leave
to the learned to judge, concluding it in our Chancellour's sense, excellent as
it is in the general the learned University-language, In quibus docentur
Scientiae.

Et Leges Terrae illius in triplici lingua addiscuntur, viz. Anglica, Gallica,
and Latina.

These Leges Terrae what they are, I have showed in the Notes on the ninth
Chapter. In that they are said to be taught and learned in three Tongues, it
shows the mutations States are subject to, and the different Methods they take
in different times; for the old Saxon Laws were written in the Saxon tongue,
and probably the Customs of England, called our Common Laws, being
contemporary therewith were recorded in Saxon: but when the Conqueror came and
prevailed, then in came the French, with a powder as we say, and every thing
was done and said a la mode de France, Non permiserunt ipsi eorum Advocatos
placitare causas suas, nisi in lingua quam ipsi noverunt] that is, in French;
and this he did to declare his Conquest, since change of Laws and Language are
tokens of plenary Conquest^ For though I know the Conqueror retained and
confirmed the major part (...) Common Laws, Sir Ed. Cook Preface to the 3 Re^
waving those parts of them only wherein they put any th^^g of his
absoluteness in danger; yet in as much as he had them all under his power and
they were new christened and had a French name given, whereas they were written
in Greek, Saxon, or Latin before, they may well be said to be in this sense
changed as to the declaring him a Prevailer over the Nation, and as to the
introduction of the French Idiom put upon the Laws, not only in the books,
but from the mouths of the Advocates pleading: so that France being brought
into England, and the customs of Normandy, which were said to be originally but
transcripts from our old Greek, British, Latin, and Saxon Entryes, become
current here, and pleaded as in France in the French tongue, there was a great
progress made to the funeral of the English language.

^iliter Gallici post eorum adventum in Angliam, ratiocinia de little
Proventibus non receperunt, nisi in proprio Idiomate.

As the Pleas in Courts, so the accounts of their Lands and Offices they would
not take or admit but in French; not that they understood not English, for it is
probable in a short time they did that: but because they would retain the
memory of their title to England, and by the old language discarded and a new
one introduced, tell the Natives they were Tenants at will, and would reduce
their proud stomach to the plyableness of the French Peasant. For though
probably they had English Drudg-Bayliffs who did gather in from the several
Farmers their rents and incomes, Ipsum etiam idioma Normanni tantum
abhorrebant, quod leges terrae, statutaque Anglicorum Regum lingua Gallica
tractarentur: and pueris etiam in scholis principia literarum grammatica
Gallice, ac non Anglice traderentur, modus etiam scribendi Anglicus omitteretur
etc. Ingulphus apud Seldenum in c. 48.
and who conversed with the renters of them in the English tongue; yet before
the FrenchMonsieur, who was all agog on his native speech, the accounts must be
in French terms and in a French method, which had it been because the French
understood not whether they had right done them or not, would have been
excusable, but when it was purely out of design to dishonor our nation and
language would never have been borne but that necessity had no Law. For men
being born, must be kept, and living under the regency of providence which
circumacts Governments and things as most discovers the absoluteness of God,
(who permits their variation as far as he pleases and when he will restraines
them,) havin a strong and not to be denied invitation thereto, not to do it
were to undo themselves, and to disserve as much as lies in them the future
revolutions of good that God had decreed, emergent in their proper season,
which considered, the French Masters not willing to receive their rentals but
in French terms, their then English Vassals did well to observe them, and
thereby to make a virtue of necessity. Venari etiam and jocos alios exercere ut
talorum and pilarum ludos non nisi in propria lingua delectabantur

As military action in time of War, so hunting in peace is a generous
exercise, if it be used generously; for though the venatio oppressiva hominum,
which Nimrod used, be tyrannous and execrable, and Maximinus that exercised
whole legions in it, that thereby they might be most accurate executioners of
torments on his subjects, Solis venationibus Legiones frequenter exercebat.
Senatus eum tantum timait, ut vota in Templis public, privatimque, mulieres
etiam cum suis liberis facerent, ne ille unquam urbem Romanam videret; erat
enim ei persuasum, nisi crudelitate imperium non teneri. Julius Capitolinus in
vita Maximini p. 226

Vnde mos tractus sit, ut proficiscentes ad bellum Imperatores, munus
gladiatorium and venatus darent. Idem in Maximo and Balbino p. 242


who by them did so terrific the people, that they prayed he might never return
safe to Rome, who thought the Empire could not be held but by cruelty. To use
hunting as a hardening of the heart, and an induction to act mercilesness on men
by the assuescency of it to the actors of it on beasts, as Capitolinus reports
the custom to be, before chieftaines went to the wars is justly to be
condemned. I say though this kind of cruel and vild hunting has many pretenses
of plausible advantage in it, which Sarisburiensis Lib. 1, c. 4. De nugis Curial.
mentions, and though men of good consciences cannot use or delight in it; yet,
that hunting which is saltuosa, either of beasts of prey, or birds of wing,
sive fiat propter necessit atem indigentiae, as a way of livelihood, sive
propter necessitatem violentiae, - or to destroy those that would destroy
cattle and fruits, Quomodo ergo dignus est vita, qui nihil aliud novit in vita,
nisi vanit atis studio saevire in bestias. Sarisbur. lib. 1. c. 4. De nugis
Curialium.
or propter utilitatem for food to eat, as in those Countries where no
butcheries are, but every man kills for his own use, they are all lawful unless
immoderately used, Nec canes nec aves ad venandum (...) habere agricolae, ne ab
agricultura (...) tur aut divertantur. Joh. de Platea in I domin. cap. de
agricolis lib. 11,
and unless municipally prohibited, as in France they wholly are to the
peasant, who dare not keep a Gray-hound, or mungrel, but must manicle and
mutilate them, as in the verge of the forest has here often been. Cass.
Catalog. Gl. M. p. 446.

Lege constitutiones Canuti Regis De Fores^a.

23. Eliz. c. 10


Though therefore the husband man is, as before I have showed, kept short, yet
the noblesse is left free, venari he may, where and when he will, so he observe
bounds, and do no wilful trespass; for as no man of what degree soever, may
hunt, when the corn is upon the ground, and the feilds closed up, unless in his
own ground, or in Chases and Parks by leave of the owner of them: so no man can
be (as I conceive) denied to hunt (except within the verge of the Kings house,
and in destruction of his game, who is the high Lord of the Nation) unless he
be of base condition, and not able to live in the state of a worshipful man,
for whom only this recreation of hunting is proper, so is as I humbly conceive
the intent of the statute of 13. R. 2. c. 13.3. E. 6. c: 17.1. H. 7. c. 7.19.
H. 7. c. 11.31. H. 8. c. 12.32. H. 8 c. 11. when ever then Lords and Gentlemen
hunted, either with kennel hounds, Fox dogs, or coursing hounds, whether buck
or hare (For wild beasts we never had in England, at least not in our
Chancellours time, our Text tells us, they did (before E. the third's time at
least) use all venatory phrases in French, and this they did to bring their
exercises into a French method, and I wish, that now-a-dayes, though the French
terms be obsoleted, yet foreign humors did not too much possess many of our
young Gentlemen, who think, nothing so generous a quality in them, as to be
fierce and indefatigable in the chase of beasts, Vtinam audiretur a nostris, ut
saltemin provectio^ aetate nugis suis reipub. scria anteponerent. lib. 1. cap.
4. ad finem.
and I would to God they would consider, that as they are by their sublimity of
blood and plentiful fortunes, advanced above others, so in Sarisburiensis his
words, They would prefer the solid good of the public, before their
pleasurable toys; and lay aside follies, to promote the great consequences of
peace and war.

Et jocos alios exercere] As their bodily exercise was Frenchly, Ioca and seria
contraria. Cic. 2. D^ Finibus. In Praf. lib. 2, in Eutrop. 2 Trist. 113, 89
so their wits activity was also; for they used to be pleasant and facetious in
French. Iocus] is by Tully opposed to serium, and therefore all nugatory
behavior, expressed in words, is expressed by illiberalis jocus; hence insanus
jocus in Claudian, lassivus jocus, saevus jocus in Horace, Iocus venenatus and
turpis in Ovid, yea the holy text seems to brand this sinful airyness, as
arguing some effrontery and settling upon the lees of sin, Prove. 14. v. 6.
with delight and contentment. Fo^les says the Wiseman, make a mock of sin.
Yea, I am apt to think, that because Jerusalem did not put on mourning
thoughts, and had not an humbled sense of Gods visitation, but in the day of
her affliction and of her misery remembered all her pleasant things that she had
in the days of old; Lam. 1 v. 7
therefore God not only obdurated her enemies hearts against her, but suffered
them to mock at her Sabbaoths. Though therefore there be much folly in this
mirth; yet is it that pleasantness of humor which many delight in, and for
their excellency in smart and facetious speeches are highly valued: This also
the text says was uttered in French, that both earnest and jest might be in
that language. Et Talorum and Pilarum ludos non nisi in propria lingua
delectabantur]

The mind of man being restless, and chosing rather employment, then musing,
antiquity invented the disports of Dice and Ball. These dice are by the Latins
termed Tali, from Talus the anckle bone of the foot, or the postern bone of a
beast, of which, they were wont to make these Dice; whence our Proverb, when
one will act cruelty on a man, they are said, to make Dice of his bones: this
is near of kin, in the nature of the word to that game of Cock-all, which boys
use amongst us, which Cock-all, is as much as win and take all, Proprie ludus
in facto, ut jocus in verbis non seriis. L^ur. Valla lib. 4 Eleg. c. 16

L^do and j^co uti quidem licet ut somno and cateris quietibus. Ita si gravibus
caterisque rebus satisfecorimus. lib. 1. Offic. Pessimum est genus homicideis,
sibi manus injicere* quod is facere videtur qui existimat perpetuo animi and
corporis motu afftigere debere. Tholoss. syntag. Juris lib. 39. c. 2. ss. 4


as a Cock does who victorying, has not only the praise of all, but wins all
that's laid on the match by the Abettors against him. This is Cock-all; hence
Talorum ludi, is that cast of the dice that carries the game and wager. Now
these Talorum ludi are things of factive, as the other were of verbal
recreation, and Tully commends them, when moderately and without injury to
grave things; and surely though it is good to keep the mind always well
employed, and the less levities do avocate men from serious thoughts the
better is the heart made: yet harmeless and decent recreations, whereby release
is given to those austerites, is very necessary and lawful, and not to do it,
is a kind of homicide and self-felony. For as God in point of duty commands us
no more, then we (if we will put our selves out to the utmost) are enabled to
do, nor in point of suffering, lays no more upon us then we are able to
bear; so men ought not to be more vexatious to themselves, and put greater
burdens and harder laws of restraint on themselves, then may consist with the
hilarity, as well as sincerity of piety. And therefore, though I am no
delighter in these lusory recreations, but notwithstanding my general and long
converse with men of all Ages, fashions, addictions, sciences, am yet
designedly and in prosequution of a long determined resolution, a novice in,
and stranger to all play, being wholly ignorant of the terms, method and
delight of it, and i hope as happy in, and as contented with the ignorance and
unsurprisedness of it as any Infant is, or as the most captivated lover of it
is with the witchery of it; yet do I not disapprove the recreation that
persons of worth and wisdom take in it, but rather believe it as wisely and
worthily by them used, to be harmeless and practicable. Whereas then the laws
do forbid play that depends on chance, Si Iocus est ludus honestus a rebus
series, quae animum intendunt, requies est, and velut inducia, a quibus nunquam
graves and cordati viri loco and tempore commodo abhorruerunt. Tholoss. Syntag.
Juris loco pracitato.
such as are Dice, Tables, Cards, which are all ceux d' hazard; yet do they
so do, upon the account of the abuse of them, and the dreadful events that
they have had such as are vain expense of time, and prodigality of fortune,
Oaths and blaspheming of God, passions and quarrels amongst men, prostitution
of the pudicity of Ladies, who, by too much familiarity contracted thereby,
Idem. lib. ^9. c. 3. De Alca lusu vetito.
give occasion to their affections and persons surprisal, and voluptuous
engagement, which, I the rather note, because I have known much inconvenience
really issuing ing from hence, which, those that have by occasion thereof
suffered, have never had the happiness to be compensated by, Nonne satis
improbata ost cuju^que aris exercitatio, qua quantum quisque doictor, tanto
nequior aleator quidem omni^ hic est. M^ndaciorum siquidom and perjuriorum
matter est alea, and aliena concupiscentia sua prodigit and nullam habens
patrimonii reverentiam; cum illud effude^i^, sensim in furta dilabitur and
rapinas. 1. Sarisburiensis lib. 1. c. 5

Inter Seria sobrii Germani aleam exercent tanta lucrandi perdendique
temeritate, ut cum o^nia defecerunt, extremo ac novissimo jactu, de liberate
ac de corpore contendant. De Moribus Germanorum.


with any thing of honorable balance to it, but have been for the ever of
their lives injured thereby, so true is that of some in our days which Tacitus
reports of the Germans, that they loved play so intently, and were so besotted
to it, that they would not only loose all their money at it, but lay even
their clothes and bodies at stake, rather then be disgamestred. I am therefore
in earnest against, not the use but the abuse of play, though I think the less
any one plays, the less they are in danger to be in love with it, and to be
withdrawn from seriouser things by it; yet I dare, and do say, very wise and
good persons of both sexes use it, and that with greater grace and honor to
it, Quoniam usu compertum est, ut alea ludo, saepe surta, raepina^, frauds,
blasphemias, aliaque id generi^ flagiti^ proficisci perhibeant taxillis aut
alea ludi. Tom. 9. in Mediolan. Concilio primo. p. 481.

Sarisburieus. De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. c. 4, and 5.


then I wish did thereby accrue to the encouragement of others, who, under
pretext of their using it, do themselves abuse it, but enough of that, only
let the Laws of Nations be ever understood to abhor and decry Dice and Cards,
or other Gameing. Themistocles made a Law, that Magistrates should not game, ne
respublica ludere videretur, defectum sui relicta gravitate pronunciet; so
amongst the Canons of the Apostles, c. 41. Vol. 1 Council. Gener.
(...); etc. Tholoss. lib. 39. c. ^ Tom. 5. Council. p. 337 50. Canon 6. Synod.
Tom. 9. Council. Mediolan^nse 1. p, 481. Concll, Aquileiens. 1. Tom. 9. p 706
A Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon, that is intent on drunkenness, or gaming,
either let him lay aside his Coat, or be degraded; so 6 Synod Constantinople,
(...), etc. No man whether lay or Clergy, must from henceforth (scandalously)
play at Cards, if he do, being a Clergyman, let him be deposed; and a lay man
excommunicated: and the Synod of Augusta thought constant Gamesters so profane,
that they decreed them denial of the Sacrament Tom. 9. p. 270.
by which exactness, the Church did not so much declare them unlawful because
sinful, as intend the avoydance of scandal, and confirming of those in it, that
from the example of divine men using it, would be prone undivinely to abuse it.
And by the stat. 33. H. 8. c. 9. Order is taken for unlawful games, such as
there are named Dice, Cards, etc. out of Christmas, which the Law does not to
deprive men of fashion of their recreations, for that is saved by the Satute;
but to disharbour the lodges of these Gamesters in houses of expense and riot,
in which, estate, time, reputation, is besotted to, and wasted by these sports;
which therefore the Statute calls unlawful, because they are unlawfully used:
and by them so abused, the Magistrate becomes blemished through the insolence
of them, whereupon they are declared unlawful and penal, Turnebus Advers. lib.
5. c. 6. and lib. 9. c. 7. etc. 23, lib. 18. c. 12. 1. Pollux lib. 9. c. 7.
Sarisburiens. Polycratic. lib. ^. c. 4. and 5.
and all licenses to keep houses of Game made void by Stat. 2. and 3. P. and M.
c. 9. Concerning these Tali read Turnebus, Julius Pollux, Johannes
Sarisburiensis, Master Gataker, and sundry others.

Pilarum ludis] This was one of the repasts, which, within or without doors,
Ad pilam se, aut ad tal^s, aut ad testeras se conferens, homines labor assid^^
and quotidiano assueti cum tempestatis causa oper^ prohibentur. Lib. 3. De
Oratore
the Ancients used their youth to; though it be ranked by Tully with Dice and
Tables, yet is thought of a more allowed nature then they, and is one of those
quinque games that Justinian allows, and which at this day we use, whether
Football or Handball, called Stool-ball. Four sorts of these the Doctors
mention, Paganicam, Lib. 3. Paedagog c. 10.
Arctam, Trigonalem, Follem, Clemens Alexandrinus, Sipontious and Tholoss. Lib.
39. c. 4.
tells us, the gamesters at it did play stripped, and with all earnestness
retorted the ball they received either by hand or foot, Pilae proprietas est
cum aqualitat^, aequalitatem hanc accipe quam vides in lusoria pila. Senec.
Not. Quaest. lib. ^. p. 889.
and were accounted good or bad gamesters as they did it nimbly and
effectually, which Seneca De Benefic. c. ^2. Turneb. advers. lib. 7. c. 12.
phrases pilam site and diligenter aeccipere, adding, sed non dicitur bonus
lusor nisi qui apt and expedite remisit quam acceperat; the Greeks called this
Ball (...), from its sphearical figure, The term Hurly-Burly, whence probably
originated.
as the Latins pila from (...) aequo, because its on all sides alike. Methinks
this sport is kept up liveliest in Cornwall, in their hurlings, which is by a
round ball plated with silver, and is thrown up for those that bring it away
from the many contenders, to keep as their own, and to present to whom they
please. One of them I have my self had at my being in that Country, presented
to me, accompanied with a mighty concourse of young persons, whose congress may
well be called a Hurly Burly.

These and other sports managed in some method and with some words, our
Chancellor says, were passed in the French tongue, in which the French
(flushed with their victory and heightened by the favor of greatness (for our
Chancellor has respect to the times in and near the Conquest) gloryed to
propagate their Nations honor, and to enervate and worm out all memory of the
English language and manners.

Quo and Anglici exfrequenti eorum in talibus comitiva, habitum talem
contraxerunt, quod hucusque ipsi in ludis hujusmodi and compotis linguam
loquuntur Gallicanam.

This is added to show the force and influence of use and habituation, in that
it works another nature in men, which is the reason wise Lawgivers have
cautioned against ill customs and habits, as the great Apollyons of grave and
good manners. For the nature of man being prone to evil, and endeared to the
object of its familiar intuition and converse, does not only at first civilly
bear, and friendlyly affect what it so familiarly meets with, but at last
passionately dotes on even to a delight of surprise by that it so is acquainted
with and accustomed to. Which God, who knew the heart of Israel better then
they did their own, foreseeing to be the sin of them under their captivity to
the Nations, Lev. 18.30.
to whom their sins were penally to bring them, forewarns them not to follow
the Statutes of abomination which were set before them: God has told them, that
because of the evil customs and practices of the Nations, he had made their
Land spew them out, verse. 26, 27. and because Israel that came into their Land,
and with whom some of the Inhabitants would be left, whom they mingling and
treating with, might be entangled in the love of their Idolatry and Immorality;
therefore does he forewarn them to keep close to their directory, his Law, and
not to observe the Statutes of Abominations, that is, such customs as by
continuance has obtained the reputation and authority of a Law, and therefore
were (...), Abominations to God, because practices against his Law and the
Prescripts of nature, which he calls vain, Jer. 10.3. because they entertain
men in their appearance without any real satisfaction of or reward to them for
their confidence. (...). Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 18. Dion. lib. 36. p. 18, and
19.
This then, as odious to God and deceptive to men, the Lord cautions Israel
against, Deuteronomy. 18.9, 12. and that because they have a nature of insinuation
into man, and thereupon drew God's abomination of man. Of this sort besides
many others were those customs of Rome to sanctuary Thieves and promulgate
lewdness, which Socrates says were used many hundred years till Theodosius
exploded them. Hereupon as all Lawgivers have enjoined severity of manners, so
have they looked upon avoidance of converse with and neighborhood to evil, as
the best means to preservation of good manners; for vices come into credit by
use, and fashions into request by example and practice: so did the Ambitus for
Magistracy among the Romans, for though begging of Votes made servile
Magistrates, who did sordid and wicked things, yet when the Lex Ambitus came to
reform this ill use; it found notable opposition and was decryed, many Factions
appearing for it because it had long been in use. So is it in the most enormous
things Stories acquaint us with, and therefore more probable it is in things of
indifferent nature, as playing for recreation is; yet by them says the Text is
the French terms of play and account kept to our Chancellours, and to this day.

Et placitare in eadem lingua soliti fuerunt quousque mos ille vigore cujusdem
statuti quamplurimum restrictus est.

Though Play was not fit or worthy for the States notice or regulation, I mean,
as to the terms and method of it, it being reducible to those things that are
rather tolerated then commanded; See the Preamble to the Stat. 36 E. 3. e. 15.
yet Pleas in public Courts are, because they concern multitudes of people,
and are the defenses of learned Advocates in Law-cases, which because the
people concerned in them should understand, which they could not when pleaded
in Fren^h, the Statute of 36 E. 3. c. 15. appointed that all Pleas which be to
be pleaded in any of his Courts before any of his Justices or before any of his
other Ministers, or in the Courts and places of any other borders within this
Realm, shall be pleaded, showed, defended, answered, debated, and judged in the
English tongue, and that they be entered and enrolled in Latin, so that
Statute; by which the judgment of the Nation appeared against admitting foreign
language into common use, to the dishonor and eclipse of the national one:
Ordine placitandi servato servatur jus. Cook on Littleton, p. 303. sect. 534.
Little.
for it having ever a great respect to pleadings, (which are chief parts of our
Law-art, and wherein the Lawyer as much evidences his skill as in any or all
other parts of his profession, and since to the obtainment of right placitare
was necessary, because else the cause could never be tried) the wisdom of the
King and Parliament ordered Pleadings should no longer be in the French but
English language. Concerning Pleadings and Pleas read the Authorities cited in
2 Instit. p. 22. Cook on ^. 11. Magna Charta.
and my Notes on the six and twentieth Chapter,

Tamen in toto huc usque aboleri non potuit] Though the Statute took effect as
to the language of pleadings, yet not as to all terms of Art; for they having
been purposely formed to accommodate the Science of the Law, the abolition of
that would occasion a new invention besides that of time and use, and make some
rudeness and defect in speech, which men of art delight not to be encumbered
with. Therefore, since long custom had rivetted French terms and forms into
use in forming of Writs and Entryes of books concerning them, the Statute not
directing its inhibition to work on those, men and time conspired to continue
them as to this day they are, and that I think to keep the Law more secret from
the insolence and arrogance of the illiterate and vulgar, who, did they
understand these terms of art, or were they so explicated to them as use and
business renders them to the learned, they would take upon them to value the
Law less, or to understand more then they do, or then consists with their
subjection to it, or their charity with their Neighbors; which I think is the
reason why that Declaration of November 1650. That all Report-books of the
Resolution of Judges, and other books of the Law of England shall be translated
into the English tongue; Scobells Collections, p. 148, 149.
and that all Writs, Processes, Returns, etc. shall be in the English tongue,
and not in the Latin or French, being not more Majorum, is obsoleted by the
introduction of the old Method, of which our Text says, Plus proprie
placitantur in Gallico quam in Anglico; and the Declarations upon Original
Writs, tam connenienter ad naturam illorum pronunciare nequeunt.]

Reportantur etiam ea quae in Curiis Regis plaeitantur, disputantur, and
judicantur, ac in libros ad futurorum eruditionem rediguntur, in sermon semper
Gallico.

This relates to the Year-books called the Old Reports, which contain the
collection of four or more learned men, who (particularly chosen to, and (as I
suppose) feeed for their attendance on the Kings Courts, in which they had a
particular station, and therein abode all the sitting of the Courts) did
observe and take notes of all the Pleas, Arguments, and Judgments that in them
occurred, which notes they at the least at the end of every Term did
communicate with the Judges about, and rectified them by the Judges advices,
and compared them with the Entryes of the Courts, by which they being confirmed
were booked; and of these Entryes are the old Reports of the Judgments in the
Reigns of E. 3. H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. E. 4. R. 3. H. 7. Sir Ed. Cook Preface to the
^ Report. Hollingshed p. 8.
made up and written sermon semper Gallico, that is, not in quaint French, nor
in the French that is vulgarly spoken in France, but in good old Norman French,
this is Littleton's French, and the French of the old Year-books; and this we
read the Conqueror wrote the Laws in. The intent of which laudible design was
to transferr the notion of wisdom to afterages, and to perennate to after-ages,
the memory of venerable Sages, famous for knowledge and justice in their
Generation, and to them to bequeath the fair Legacy of honor and uprightness,
according to the national Laws, to all that should succeed them in place, and
thereby have the opportunity (if they walk worthy of the mercy God vouchsafes
them) to exceed them in profound judgment and dexterity of determination;
which happy end truly I think succession has been blessed with arrival at, in
the matchless continuation of our Reverend and Learned Masters the Judges in
all the Ages since: and may they ever continue so to be, that the Law may
flourish, and the Subjects be secure and happy by the protection and favor of
it. For though it lisps out French, and some Acts of Parliament are recorded in
French, as 1 Westminst. 3 E. 1. Stat. Gloucester. Stat. De Iudaismo. 18. E. 1. and
Stat. Mod. levendi fines of the same year, Confirmat. Chartarum 20 E. 1.
Articuli super Chartas 28 E. 1. and many others, as a Remembrance of what
occasioned its survey and mutilation by the Conqueror, whose English Issue
soon restored it to its ancient Demesnes, as I may so say; yet its full notes
are to purposes of English freedom, and in abhorrence of symbolization with
ought that is French, and not naturalized by act of Parliament. And therefore
though our new Reports, Dyer, Plowden, Cook, Crook, Moor, and others be in
French, as fit they should be, as well as the Authors of any other Art in
their learned language are; yet the Acts of our Parliament are published in
English, that all may know that every thing that is purely English is the love
and study of the English Nation, Sir Henry Hobars and his Companions 13 Iac. in
Banco Regis. See Preface to 1 In. stit. on Littleton.
and of the wisdom, strength, and majesty of it: which surely I am so far in
love with, and so professedly a votary to, that should I be in place, when the
English language should be disparaged in compare with the French, I should take
the confidence to do as those learned Judges did when a Cafe of Littleton's,
Whether a release to one trespasser should be available to his
fellow-trespassers, came before them, who gave judgment according to
Littleton, Note this well.
saying, That they owed so great reverence to him, that they would not have his
Case be disputed or questioned; after whom I should be very positive not to
have any thing that is English subjected to the French, Concorde^ sermo tuus
cum vita, ille promissum suam implevit, qui and cum videas illum and cum
audias, idem est; non delectent verba nostra sed prosunt. Sen. lib. 1. de I^a.
whose ingenuity and valor, whose language and laws I honor in all things,
but wherein they are Competitors with and derogatory from the splendor of
these Excellencies of my native Country, Whose prosperity God continue, whose
Religion God propagate, whose Sovereign God preserve, God grace, and God
glorify, whose Laws God maintain, whose Rights God defend, the wealth of
whose Subjects God increase, and the looseness of whose manners God reform, but
I proceed to the Text.

Sub tertia verolinguarum praedictarum, videlicet, sub Latina, omnia Brevia,
Originalia, and Iudicialia, similiter and omnia Recorda Placitorum in Curiis
Regis, etiam and quaedam Statuta scribuntur.

The use of Latin was probably introducted by the Clergy, when sundry of the
Bishops and others of the Spiritualty were Judges and chief Officers in the
Kings Courts of Law, Instit. p. 304.
as from after the Conquest to the middle of Edw. 3. time they in a good
measure were. And they knowing that whatever the alteration of national
languages were, and however the Entryes of judicial matters in them differed
according to the language in or out of use, as befell the British, Saxon,
Danish, Norman Tongues, Latin would rest current and be universally
understood, caused Entryes of the Courts of Law, and the Instruments to bring
causes and persons to appear and stand Judgment to be in Latin. Now those
things that the Text here referrs to, are Original and Judicial Writs;
concerning Writs see my Notes on the 25. Chapter. By Originalia I am apt to
think our Text means Writs to call men to answer for violation of some Original
Law, whence because they are Formata ad similitudinem Regulae Iuris, they may
be called original Writs, Bracton. lib. 3. fol. 413.
because they do (as I conceive, yet ever with submission to the Learned)
Originem dare Secta, Fleta lib. 2. c. 13.
as the original Law violated does Originem dare Brevi; for the rule in Fleta
is, Qua consilio totius Regni sunt approbata, ea quidem mutari non poterint
abseque eorundem coutraria voluntate. Fleta lib. 2.^. 13.
Tont erunt formula Brevium quot sunt genera actionum, quia non potest quis
sine Brevi agere. These original Writs being grounded upon original Laws, that
is, either the Common Law or some Statute, cannot be altered or digressed from,
but when the Laws themselves can be altered, that is, by Parliament, the
common Consent of the Nation, so says Fleta, and Sir Ed. Cook after him.

Iudicialia] So called because they are to bring the party that offends to
judgment of Law. Cook on Littleton. sect. 101. p. 73. B. lib. 2. c. 3, Of
Escuage. Preface to the 3 Report.
These are, if I mistake not, varied according to several occasions being
framed by the Cursitors who are the Masters of the Office whence they issue,
and thereupon called Magistralia. Both these are by our Text said to be Lingua
Latina: so are the Records or Rolls of the Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer, and the several Appendixes of them are all in Latin.

Etiam and quaedam Statuta] To wit, Magna Charta, Stat. Marlbridg, the Statute
de Bigamis, See them in the 2 Instit.
We siminst. 2. the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, the Stat. 3 Westmin. 18 E.
1. De Tallagio non concedeudo, 34 E. 1. De Asportatis Religios. 35 E. 1. De
Frangentibus Prisonam, 1 E. 2, De Militibus, Articuli Cleri 9 E. 2. and the
rest.

Quare dum Leges Angliae in his tribus addiscuntur linguis, ipse in
Vniversitatibus, ubi solum exercetur lingua Latina, conveniexter erudiri non
poterunt aut studeri.

This clause recollects the force of all the Premises, and answers the Quaere,
Why the Laws of England were not taught in the Universities of England as well
as the Laws Civil are, to wit, because the Civil Laws are originally writ in
the learned Languages, which are common to all Schools and Scholars, and
without which the Arts cannot be attained; and the Latin tongue being there
publicly spoken, (for the solum referrs to the place not to the tongue, as if
only Latin were there spoken and exercised and no other learned language, for
Greek, Hebrew, and other languages are, in the same sense the Latin is,
exercised therein:) but therefore it is said solum lingua Latina, because the
Latin tongue is therein more used in discourse and exercise then any other
tongue there, or in any other place of the Nation is, Exercises in Latin being
as it were entailed to the Schools, and fixed to the Freehold of the
Universities, for thither all persons of learning repairing, and there staying
to study, thereby merit their degrees. And as all wits and perfections of
promptness are there presumed to be; so all Exercises, Authors, and Dexterities
in Art are also, which is the reason that the Universities have the only
opportunities to institute youth in matters of speculation into Arts and
Languages. And therefore the Laws of Nations, The Civil Law, being in the
Latin tongue, and being the Law of the Continent, which a Professor of it may
practice and own in any part of the Christian and civilized World, (when as the
Common Law is but a Topique Law, and serves only for a municipe purpose, being
thereupon writ in a municipe language) is proper to be taught in the
Universities, and has degrees and honors therein, when our Common and
Statute-Lawes have none there.

Leges tamen illa, in quodam studio publico, proillarum apprehensione omni
Vniversitate convenientiore and proniore docentur and addiscuntur.

This Clause introduces the discourse of the famous Societies of the Law,
called The Inns of Court. Of which to write to the proportion of their
Augustness is altogether impossible for any man, who has so little help to
their illustration, as (for ought I see) the learned and generous Professors of
them are enabled to communicate to him that has a desire to blazon the Beauty,
Antiquity, and Accommodation of them. I confess my hopes and expectations were
to have found much assistance herein from my friends of the Long-Robe; but
truly, save that the learned and most civil Gentleman Sir Thomas Witherington,
Sergeant at Law imparted a discourse which in the conclusion of this Chapter I
mean to print verbatim, nothing has been communicated from any of them to me.
It is probable at first men that studied the Common Laws dwelt and lodged in
diffusion, where being far from the Courts of Westminster, and uncertain to be
found by those that desired their skill and advice, How probably the Inns of
Court first began.
they to avoid that trouble to themselves and their Clyents, did associate and
join their studies and lodgings each to other, which in time came to be
accounted Studium publicum; all of the Profession resorting to the common
residence, and so making one public presence of Law and Lawyers. After as they
increased, men of name withdrawing themselves for convenience of more room and
better air, as their Clyents followed them, so also young Students, admirers of
them, joined themselves to them; till at last by time and agreement they grew
into some proportion of a body, which had so much of Head and Members, Laws
and Servants, as are necessary to a subsistence of Honor, and a perpetuation
of Being: Study being best carried on in a place of repose, and by numbers that
are ambitious to search that they may know, to know that they may profess, to
profess that they may gain, to gain that they may enrich their Heirs and
Families, and by these riches acquired by the Law, encourage a Continuation of
Students in the Law. Thus as I conceive, Qameunque paertem rerum divinarum,
humanarumque comprehenderis, in ingenti copia gerendorum, discendorumque
fatigaberis. Haec tam multa, tam magna ut habere possint, liberum hospitium.
non dabit se in haes augustias virtus, laxum spacium res magna desiderat.
Epist. 88. p. 187.
rose the Inns of Courts about Edward the thirds time; for before that though
the Law of England was ever in high honor, yet was it less celebrious in its
public professors and profession then after it became. For when by the
influence of the renowned Judges Vere, Glanvil, Lucy, and others, Gentlemen of
great families and interest in the Nation, the schools of Canon and Civil
before and in that time publicly kept in London and elsewhere, were put down
as about the year 1234. 19. H. 3. Ad Fletam dissertatio. c. 8. p. 525.
they according to Master Seldom were, then I conceive these publica studia of
the Law took root, and sprouted out more in a few years then before they had
done; And these publica studia, as to the rudimenting and practice of the Law,
are (says the Text) Omni universitate convenientiora and proniora.

Studium namque illud situm est prope Curiam Regis, ubi leges illae
placitantur, disputantur and judicantur.

Though time has enlarged the one only society of Law, which our Text calls
studium illud into many, yet those many are by our Text called but one study;
because though they are lodges of several students, yet tend to one end, the
propagation of National Justice according to National Law: which because it is
determined in the Kings Court (not that of his personal but politic
residence, therefore Inns of Court seated so near Westminster, where the Courts
of Law are, are said to be prope Curiam Regis. For as in the sense of the Text,
all the Inns of Court make but one public study, so all the Courts of
Westminster Hall make but one Curiam Regis, it being the same Great KING whose
Laws are administered in every bench of his Court to one and the same purpose
of order and justice; to do which (so symmetrious to the administration of God
himself, who is the Archetype Justicer) our Chancellor says, the Laws that
all persons must submit to and be adjudged by, are opened, debateed and judged
there, and there only ubi leges illae placitantur, disputantur and judicantur,
says the Text; Placitantur by the parties, disputantur by the advocates,
judicantur by the Judges; Placitantur, that they may come to trial,
disputantur, that they may appear what they truly are in trial, judicantur,
that they may be sentenced as they appear to be upon and after trial;
Placitantur, that every grief may have a remedy, disputantur, that the remedies
may be rational and according to legal justice and Circumstances of fact,
judicantur, that the determination of learning and justice may be subsequent to
the matter, Inter se, ita miscendae sunt, and quiescenti agendum and agenti
quiescendum est; cum rerum natura delibera, illa dicet tibi se and diem secisse
and noctem. Seneca Ep. 3.
pro and con; this gradation shows the Law not to proceed furiously, nor to
delay slothfully: but to hear, consider, and determine, as the weight of the
matter in controversy requires, and that judgment to deliver from, and enroll
in, the Kings Court, according to Justice and good Conscience.

Per Iudices, viros graves, Senes, in legibus illis peritos and graduatos
As the pleading, opening, and arguing of Cases belong to the Students of the
Law, who being Barristers or Sergeants, are incipient and perfect graduates in
the Law: so the decisive act of the Law, is from the venerable and prudent
mouths of the Judges, whom the Text, to the Honor of the Kings and Laws of
England, terming Viros graves, who, though men by nature, and graduates by
their proficiency in the knowledge and apprehension of the Law in all the
attainable latitude of its profession, it raises to all veneration as Heroiques
and Divine Sages, from the consideration that they are Graves mente, Nunquam
hanc auditorum partem videbis, cui Philosophi schola diverseri^m otti est.
Senec. Ep. 108. Ego quidem priora illa ago ac tracto quibus paratur animus, and
me prius scrutor, deinde hunc mundum. E^ pist. 65.
Senes corpore, Fathers of experience, whose youths abused not the Inns of
Court by making them otii diversoria, and by trifling out their time in them,
but were taken up with incessant studies, profitable conferences, diligent
exercises in the houses, constant attendances on the Courts, laborious
transcribing of Reports, yea and who when they were called to the Bar, (which
they never or rarely importuned) did forbear practice, till they had ruminated
well, what the duty of, the requisites to, and abilities for it, were; These
Oracles thus ascended to, and the virtue in them thus graduated, have by the
wisdom of the Kings of England in their respective reigns been advanced, and by
the people of England been accepted, as the ordinary living and speaking Law,
that is, Those learned, pious, and impartial dispensers of Justice in all
causes, and to all persons, Who are able men, fearing God, loving truth and
hating covetousness. But of these, because I have written in the notes on the
24. and 25. Chapters, and shall further, on the 51. Chapter, when I come to it,
I forbear to write more; only let me ever remember the Nation of that due
gratitude they are to perform to God and the King, for the mercy and favor of
furnishing the Courts of equity and Law, with such learned men, and sincere
Judges as now sit in them, of whom I must ever profess my thoughts, That I
believe they are in all respects of learning and integrity, inferior to no age
of their predecessors; nor were the people of England ever better satisfied
with the Judges of their times, Sola sublimis and excelsa virtus est nec
quicquam magnum est, nisi quod simul and placidum. Seneca lib. 1. De Ira.
then now the people are with the present Judges, who are (for I am above
flattery, and despise to prostitute my name and pen by any ungentleman-like
meanness) as the Text (written by one of them in every regard) describes them
to be Viri Graves, Senes, in legibus illis periti, and graduati,] And as Sir
Edward Cook says, Littleton had great furtherance in composing his work, in
that he flourished in the times of many famous and expert Sages of the Law; and
He himself accounts it of all earthly blessings not the least, that in the
beginning of his study of the Laws of this Realm, the Courts of Justice, both
of Equity and of Law, were furnished with men of excellent judgments, gravity,
and wisdom, from whom he confesses to have learned many things which he
published in his Institutes, So may the hereafter-writers as well as the
present ones attribute much of their happiness and encouragement to the great
parts and virtues of these excellent Sages, Note this.
who yet (blessed be God) live the life of nature, and ever will live that
better and more desirable life of fame: For when the name of the wicked shall
rot, the upright shall be had in everlasting remembrance, but I proceed.

Quo in curiis illis ad quas omni die placitabili consluunt students in
legibus illis, quasi in scholis publicis leges illae leguntur and docentur.

In euriis illis] That Is in Westminster Hall for there the Courts are fixed
when as before they followed the Kings Court, II. Chap. Mag. Charta. p. 21.
Institutes 2. part.
and were removable at the Kings will, the returns being ubicunque fuerimus;
therefore the Courts wherein law is debated, considered, and adjudged, being at
Westminster, the public lodges of the students so near it, advantage the
students to repair more readily to them: and that they that intend to be
Lawyers, and make a progression of their study, do, omni die placitabili] that
is, every Hall-day in the Term; for they I conceive are only dies
placitabiles, when the Courts sit wherein Causes are pleaded. Actor vel reus in
judicio contentioso, non admittuntur, ut si feria sacrae and solennes sint,
quibus jura edixerunt silere lites. Tholoss. syntag. lib. 49. c. 2. ff. 10 1
Instit. on Littleton. Lib. 7. Belli Gallici 177. 2. Tuscul. 9. 2. De Legibus
11. Cic. pro Plancio 68. Cic. 1. De Inventione. Cic. in Salust. 10
For though in Term times some Holidays are dies non placitabiles, and non
juridici, as the common lawyers call them, of which sort in every Term, there
are some to be named besides sunday in every week, which is dies non juridicus;
yet every ordinary day in Term is reputed dies placitabilis or juridicus] And
thereupon pleas are held in the Courts, and thither upon such days the Clerks
and the Atturnyes of the Courts, together with the Pleaders and Students do
confluere] that is, not barely repair to, but meet and conjoyn in, as many
waters do refund themselves into one common Panch. Thus Caesar says,
consluebat ad eum magnus numerus; and Tully has confluere ad aliqua studia, In
unum locum confluere, Ad nos pleraeque causae confluunt; and when he is
Seraphique in the praise of one, he says, Laus, Honor, Dignitas, ad aliquem
confluit, and Sentina Reipubl. confluit aliquo. And this the Students do, that
they may from the arguments of the Advocates, and the dictinctions and
declarations of the Judges, hear and understand what the Law is, and by this
are the students as much instructed as they are, in scholis publicis leges
illae leguntur and docentur.

Situatur antem studium illud inter locum Curiarum illarum and civitatem
London, quae de omnibus necessariis opulentissima est omnium Civitatum and
Oppidorum regni illius.

This studium here intended, is (as I said before) not referrable to one Inns
of Court, but to all thoses severalties of that one study, all which he calls
the Inns of Law. For though I know Master Stow tells us, that the Temples were
granted to be houses of Law in the time of Edward the third, when probably
other Inns of Court were not so destinated; yet that our Text means these,
excluding the other, is not likely. For our Chancellor was a Member of
Lincoln's Inn, which house of his study and breeding; he cannot be thought to
leave out of his Studium in the Text; Stow's Survey, p. 448.
for though before H. 8. time (when Sir Tho. Lovel is said to be a great
Benefactor to and enlarger of it) it was not an Inn of that magnitude it now
is: yet a most ancient house has it been of the Earls of Lincoln, one of which
dyed there Anno 1310. But rather that he looking on them all as in the Suburbs
of London and Confines of Westminster, makes them lie pat for receiving Clyents
from the City the seat of Trade, applying themselves to Westminster where the
Courts the Sphere of Justices are; where all controversies depending on
Contract (which brings more sacks to the Lawyers Mill then any thing else,
because it is the general commodity of the Nation) are to be determined. Now
this opportuneness to London as it is the Mother-City of England, Opulentissima
omnium Civitatum and Oppidorum Regni illius, declares the wisdom of the men in
seating themselves so near the greatest, richest, and most populous City of
England; concerning which I have, as in duty and gratitude I am bound as it is
the place of my birth, written somewhat testimonial of it in the Notes on the
24. Chapter and In my Defense of Arms and Armony, printed 1660.
elsewhere: so should I add somewhat here in admiration of her, but that the
Text prevents me when it terms her De omnibus necessariis opulentissima omnium
Civitatum and Oppidorum Regni.] Notwithstanding which, many reproaches and
detractions daily pass from the mouths of envious and ingrate men against her,
The Authors zeal for London.
which are so far from effecting any real evil to her, that they do but intend
the industry of her Citizens the more to trust to God and their diligence, and
by the blessings of them to make themselves and their families happy, which
they would soon do to the disappointment of their reproachers, would they match
within themselves, and give in Trade not so large credit; for so long as God
sets not his face against London, and the River of Thames flows up to London,
London will be London when all its contemners are in dust, and will be
honorably remembered when they and their names shall be forgotten. For its
immortal Genius has so much of an indefinite felicity in it, that as it has
hitherto in all Ages been the glory of this Empire, Consol. ad Helviam. Lipsius
in Notis ad Consol. Helviae. p. 816. in Folio.
so will it for the future I trust continue to be; for it is Urbs per euncta
Maria Genitrix, as Seneca wrote of Miletum; it is Civit as Literarum, as
Cassiodore termed Rome; it is Domicilium Legum and Gymnasium Literarum, and in
Lipsius his words Opto sic esse and manner: and therefore the Text does not
Hyperboliquely call it Opulentissima, but with relation to the plenty of men,
diversities of Callings, abundance of Merchandise, and vastness of wealth,
which above and beyond any City in England it has. Civitas non potes^ stare
sine Iurisperito, cum Leges tendunt ad conservandam Rempub. Civitatis and
hominum congregationem. Baldus apud Cassanaeum Catal. Gl. Mundi p. 365.
Furthermore our Text says, the Inns of Court placed in the Suburbs, Scorsum
parumper, ubi confluentium turba quietem perturbare non possit,] were fitly
seated; for had they been in the streets of trade, there had been no
convenience for study which is advantaged by silence; and had they been in the
Country, there had been no opportunity to the King's Courts but with much toil
and inconvenience, which this situation so accommodated both to the City, the
Magazine of money, food, books, men of all sorts and conditions, and to the
Courts of Westminster whereunto all men are for Justice to apply themselves,
has prevented. These things, I say, wellweighed, there appears in the
situation of them, where they are, much of prudence and convenience. And so I
end this 48. Chapter.

CHAP. XLIX.
Sed ut tibi constet, Princeps, hujus studii forma and imago, illam ut valeo
jam describam, etc.


THIS Chapter is purposely designed to treat of the Inns of Court, and of all
those circumstances in and about them; which the Chancellor, whose delight and
stay was much in them, endeavors to impart to the honor and advantage of
them. For since our Chancellor was no heady and desultory Writer, (who passes
over the solid parts, and treats only of the trifles of his undertaking) but a
grave and learned Author, which gives every limb and part its due Emphasis,
proportion, and ingrediency, whereby he makes the whole symmetrious. As he had
before in the eight Chapter discoursed of the Forma Iuris, which every good
Student should embrace and prosecute; so here he does discourse of the Forma
and Imago Studii, of the nature and order of the Inns of Court, wherein the
Law, which is so useful to Order and Religion, is studied. Concerning these I
must profess my unhappiness not to be able to write as I would, and they
deserve; (for that they being no Corporations, but Convents of men who have no
sanction from the Prince to incorporate them, but are what they are by mutual
Consent and an Order of common understanding, which passes between the gravity
and youth of them, who are for the most part so considerate each of other, that
what the Bench and Parliaments in them conclude upon, the rest observe; or
otherwise must expect not only the scandal of being rebellious, but the
disfavour of the Judges who will not hear any Korah's that are disorderly to
the Ancients rules: which loss of their practice and reputation makes some as
pliable to the Benchers orders, as the Benchers are obsequious to reason and
justice in the dispensation of them to the Youngsters.) I say, concerning these
I would more elaborately discourse, but that I yet neither find, nor have
communicated to me any thing but what is too narrow to complete such an
undertaking. Wherein therefore I am defective herein (as I am in many other
parts of this endeavor) as I humbly crave the Learneds pardon for it, so I
promise an hereafter-supply if God shall bring this Commentary to a second
Edition, and betwixt this and then I shall endeavor such Collections as may
most contribute thereto; in the mean time I am to consider these Houses or
Lodges of Law as our Text calls them Hospitia. Concerning Hospitia I have
written in the Notes on cap. 36. that which I shall add here, is, that the
Lodges and places of receipt to Soldiers in their advance to or retreat from
the Wars, were of old so called. For though the Soldiers had among the Romans
their Hospitia Campestria, Hospitiorum nomine Domini tenentur praebere
Hospitibus, qua habitationis causa tantum necessaria sunt. Tholossan. lib. 7.
8, 9.
which were their Tents in the Field; yet their Hospitia Militaria were fixed
to some settled place or other, from which they departed not, but to which
resolutely adhered. These were called Inns for their receipt and charitable
accommodation, because what receipt they gave was free and in an orderly and
suitable manner to such expectations as strangers could hope to receive upon
travel. Hence comes it to pass, that because Hospitia Militaria are properly
intended to receive Military men; the Inns of these Military men termed
Templars, residing in the Temple, London, gave name to the most ancient and
eminent of the Inns of Court, The Temples, which became Inns of Law, as
heretofore I have showed.

These Hospitia] our Chancellor says, are either Minora, preparatory Lodges
of Freshmen; Order of Lincolns 4 and 5 P and M. An. 1557. lib. 4. p. 317.
for none were to be admitted of an Inns of Court, but such as first have been
in an Inns of Chancery; and such as probably were forced by exigency of fortune
to live near: or Majora, such as received not the Gudgeons and Smelts, but the
Polypus's and Leviathans, the Behemoths and the Giants of the Law. Of the first
sort called the Inns of Chancery, so called possibly because they contained
such Clerks as did chiefly study the formation of Writs, which regularly
appertain to the Officers of the Chancery (to wit, the Cursitors,) there were
by the Text ten: these were as the ten Tribes, that revolting from ignorance to
Clerkship, became men of prudence, diligence, and fortune. Those that of them
yet remain are Thavy's Inn, reputed the ancientest Inn of Chancery, Lib. 8.
Lincolns Inn. fol. 64, 87, 97, 99.
so named from one Thavy a Citizen of London that therein Temps E. 3. lived;
but Temps H. 7. it is said to be purchased by Lincolns Inn. Bernards Inn, in
the occupation of one Bernard, who Temps. H. 6. dwelt in it, and ever since it
has been called so. Furnival's Inn, so called from Sir William Furnival, Temps
E. 2. Idem eodem lib. p. 48, 49, 142, 227. and lib. 4. p. 200.
in H. 6. time it belonged to the Earls of Shrewsbury, after purchased Temps Q.
Eliz. by the Society of Lincolns Inn. New-Inns, erected to be an Hostle for
Students Temps H. 7. since purchased by the Society aforesaid. Clement's Inn,
so called because it pertained to the Parish of St. Clements Danes. Clyfford's
Inn, the house of the Lord Clyfford. Staple-Inn, belonging to the Merchants of
the Staple. Lions-Inn, Carter Analys. of Heraldry.
before H. 7. time it was the sign of the Black-Lion, whence called LionsInn to
this day. These eight are all now in being. There was a ninth, Chester's Inn,
which stood on or near the place where Somerset House stood, but it was pulled
down Temps E. 6. The tenth Inn of Chancery, which was standing in our
Chancellour's time, Stow's Survey. p. 66.
is wholly lost in the memorial of it; unless St. George's Inn over against St.
Sepulchers Church, which is thought to be the ancientest Inn of Chancery, be
it: for Scroop's Inn is not to be accounted one, since it has been reputed to
be an house of Sergeants. See Orders for Inns of Chancery in lib. 8. Lincolns
Inn, p. 60, 61, 186, 187, 281, etc.
But these eight yet in being are still inhabited by young Atturneys, and
Students after the manner of the Inns of Court, and are accordingly governed
and ordered; for they do all of them appertain to some or other of the Inns of
Court, and have Readers every year sent from them, who do therein read Law to
the young Students after the likeness of the Inns of Court: and every one of
them, says our Text, contained Centum Students ad minus] Who though they
resided not therein always, nor had Commons in them but in Term-time, when the
Atturneys and others Members of them came up to the Term to follow their
Clyents businesses; yet were they contributary to the charge, and submissive to
the Government of them, and there had their Chambers and were in judgment of
Law abiding. And many of them that were young and intended study of the Law, in
order to transplantation to the Inns of Court, learned here the knowledge of
original and judicial Writs, and read the Elements of the Law, to fit them for
remove into the greater and more creditable Spears of Law, Hospitia Curiae] so
called because they are Receipts of the Children of Nobles and Gentlemen, who
only of old were admittable into them. These our Text reckons as at this day
four, The two Temples, the House of the Templars, wherein they lived in great
plenty above an hundred years; Lincolns Inn, the House of Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, Lib. 7. Lincolns Inn. fol. 317.
afterward it was the Bishop of Chichester's till Henry the Eight's time, when
the interest thereof coming to Justice Sullyard, Sir Edward Sullyard in 22
Eliz. sold it to the Benchers and Society of Students therein. Though the
Temples have ever been famous for good Pleaders, yet this Inn grew up chiefly
in Henry the Sixth's time, when one of the greatest Gloryes of it was our
Reverend Chancellor; Gray's Inn, seated within the Manor of Poorpool, as I
conjecture, the Corpse of some Prebendary in Saint Paul's Church; called Gray's
Inn from the noble family of the Grayes inhabiting it in Edward the Third's
time, near about which it began, inhabited by the Students of the Law, who had
it granted to them. All which are Societies of the Cream of the Gallantry of
England, each of which in our Chancellour's time contained near 200 Students,
which is a vast augmentation since Henry the Fifth's time, of which Mr. Fern
says he has seen an Alphabet of the Names and Arms of all those that were
Members of an Inns of Court, Glory, Generosity. p. 24.
exceeding not above the number of sixty: so great an improvement does a few
years produce, that in the very next Reign those Inns had near or full out 200.
Benchers, Barristers, and single Students, since all these are contained under
the Text's Students, for they do studere optimis disciplinis and artibus, Cic.
1. verr. 4 De Finib. 1 De Finib.
as the Orator says; and thereby they do landi and dignitati studere: yea,
they do pesuniis, Imperiis, gloriae studere, and in so doing, arrive at that
Greatness no Profession, besides theirs, brings the Proficients in them unto.

In his enim majoribus Hospitiis, nequaquam potest studens aliquis sustentari
minoribus expensis in anno, quam octoginta Scutorum.

By this it appears the Honor of being an Inns of Court man was great in our
Chancellour's time, because none were admitted of them but men as of blood so
of fortune; since to live and study there was so chargeable that a thrifty
liver there could not come off for less then 80 Escues, which I take not to be as
Mr. Mulcaster makes it to amount to twenty Marks, but casting the Escues into
those that are Escue vicil, worth 7 s. 6 d. Sterling a piece, Si vis vacare
animo, aut pauper esse aportet, aut pauperi similis; non potest Studium esse
salutare sine frugalitatis cura. Frugalitas autem paupertas voluntaria est.
Senec. Ep. 17.
comes to near 30 l. a year, which in that time was a good allowance, and this
the Chancellor knew to be very competent for a Student that lived in no
luxurious pomp, but intended his minds accomplishment in order to his future
profession of the Law. For although most men now repair thither for fashion,
and to spend money; yet of old they thither went and there resided to acquire
parts of virtue and action, and to complete themselves as good Christians and
stout Gentlemen; and this to do, nothing contributes more, next God's
blessing, then frugality of living and keeping close to study: for large
fortunes and allowances make youth preys to vice and baits to seduction. For
when in elder Ages there was more severity conveyed to youth by education and
frugality of nurture, then were effeminacies anticipated, and luxury was wholly
borne down by the prevalence of resolved virtue; the moderation of which as it
directed the affections and desires to God and goodness, so did it take away
the necessity of a great fortune, which in this deviation from it, is
indispensably to concur with the charge and state of immoderate and high
living, which is the reason of the change of times in portions and expenses;
for whereas the portion of H. the third, Son to the Conqueror, when he was a
younger brother, was but bare 5000 pounds, and that was then thought a good
estate, now such a portion is thought but small for an Aldermans Son; In his
Character of some Kings of England. p. 150
So much, says Sir Henry Wotton, is either wealth increased, or moderation
decreased.

Et si servientem sibi ipse ibidem habuerit, ut eorum habet pluralitas, tanto
tuno majores ipse sustinebit expensas.

In our Chancellours time, men of honor and worship, sent no children to these
Inns of Court, but such as they could honorably and plentifully treat there,
which they not opinionating to be done, other then by adding to their
convenient Chamber, decent furniture, rich apparel, different Masters for every
science, and a full purse for every pastime, a well apparated servant to attend
them, enhaunsed the expense of their stay there, which they very willingly
allowed to train their Sons up to generous purposes of recreation and
profession, since, as they were the best of the Nation that so placed them, so
they having sufficient estates to defray the charge of their conspicuity,
expended it on them in their persons and equipage. For as then none but men of
estate entered themselves in the Inns of Court; so being there entered, none
almost lived but with a servant to attend him when an under-bar student, which
was very comely and useful, if the servant were well chosen, and proved well.
For though a mean and trifling servant, Servus, perpetuus mercenarius est. Lib.
3. Senec. De Benefic. p. 47.
be but a harpy, and serves only to promote a debauched Masters vanity, by the
instrumentality to which he takes confidence to become a Quartermaster with
his Master, as knowing he must not displease him, least the secrets entrusted
with him take air by his discovery; the convenience of which servant to carry
on his secret as it first assisted the Master in his clancular designs of vice,
so the awe of his detection upon discontent, makes him so mean a vassal to his
servant, as nothing meaner can be. For nothing is more insolent then a
necessary servant, which the Earl of Essex found true in Sir Anthony Bacon,
whom he made use of in all his secrecies in the difference he had with Cecil,
and thereby did so inflame Bacons mercenary soul, that he covetous to dreyn the
Earl of some notable reward, gave out that he could mend his fortune under the
Cecilians, which the Earl of Northampton hearing, friendlily discovered to the
Earl of Essex with this concurring advice, Sir. Henry Wotton. p. 14, 15.
to keep Bacon his confident, whatever he gave him, least his discoveries
should ruin the Earl in his fortune and honor. The Earl of Essex followed the
counsel, and gave him Essex house, which he was fain after to redeem with 2500
pounds in money, and 1500 pounds he before had upon a like trick, which shows
that servants if not well chosen, and warily trusted, are dangerous attendants.
That then which the servant is an advantage in, is when he is sober and
sincere, when he understands his duty, and makes conscience to perform it, and
both will and can serve his Master to honest and worthy purposes, to excite him
to worthy actions, to advise him humbly in doubts, this is a servant that
deserves to have patrimonium libertini as well as he has ingenium libertini,
Senec. Ep. 27.
as Seneca says, not as Lipsius interprets ingenium libertini, humile, terreum
and quod saperet stirpem, but in that he has a free and virtuous soul, deserves
to be sutably rewarded for his service. Occasion vero sumptuum hujusmodi cum
ipsi nobilium filii tantum in hospitiis illis leges addiscunt.

It should seem by this clause, that none but Gentlemen of the best quality
sent their Sons hither; and by Command of King James, none was to be admitted
to the Inns of Court, but a Gentleman by descent, Primo Jacobi, Lincolns Inn
Atb. 6. p. 210.
and that not only because they had keenest stimulations to liberal studies,
wherein being Masters they might best serve the noble ends of justice and
order: but also for that the expenses of their education to the Law being so
chargeable, is best borne by them that have plentiful incomes to defray them
by: And these by the text are said to be nobiles, and their Sons sent thither
nobilium filii] which is to be understood not of the high Nobility, Lib. 7.
LincolnsInn p. 110.
the Peerage (though often their Sons were thither sent, and there have
professed the Laws, and been advanced in fortune by them) but the Sons of the
lower Nobility, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen's Sons, who are chiefly the
nobiles here; (...). Plato lib. 5. De Repub. Euphrades Philosophus apud
Cressolium Mystag. lib. 2. c. 4.
for these, as their Fathers have great estates, and generous blood in them, so
do beget and nourish in their children that bravery which may excite them to
and confirm them in virtuous emulations, and rouse up their spirits to
excellent performances. And this the ancients thought so peculiar to noble
birth, that they decryed all mean born persons from public trusts and honors,
and that, for that (...), For the very servility and meanness of spirit which
is impressed on them by their genitor; and also, that (...), that illiberal
education that they take by reason of it. I know this is no general rule exempt
from all exception, for there is every days experience of Gentlemen born, that
are sordid and mean in nature, and of Plebeians by birth that are Genteel'd in
disposition; but for the most part, and according to the general dispensation
of nature it being so, the learned in all times have judged those fittest for
great trusts and honors, who are not (...) (as Mercury in Lucian cries out of
extemporary Philosophers, who base in birth, Lucianus in Bis accusatus.
and breeding, covet to do high things but fail in them.) but (...), as
Socrates his words are, Well born, and well employed and improved by virtuous
education, who thereby will be able and willing to expedite Justice, and to
prevent oppression and violence, which as ill Advocates do promote, so good
ones do prevent. This is the reason D'argentre in his account of Britany
says, that by the Laws of Britanny, and according to the old constitution of
that Duchy, no man could be an Advocate or pleader of Causes, but he that was
of a noble Ancestry of Gentry; because mean spirits do embase the honor of
the Laws by serving the ignoble ends of those, who being great would be cruel
and disorderly against the counsel and enaction of the Laws: which because men
of good families may be presumed not to connive at or approve, but to oppose
and reject, therefore they have been ever judged meetest to be bred to the
knowledge of Laws that they might be employed in those trusts. Generosi animi
and magnifici est, juvare and prodesse; qui dat beneficiae, Deos imitatatur;
qui repetit, foeneratores. Lib. 3. De Benef. p. 47.
And therefore though some despise blood and parentage (and in some it deserves
no less, because their lives and minds are so unlike it in any expression
worthy it) yet wisdom thinks (...), Philo Judaeus. Lib. De Nobilitate. p. 903.
the most glorious Temple of the mind only fit to contain it, and that only
nobility to be, as Philo's words are, the greatest good and causal of the
greatest good, (...). Idem lib. praecitat. ad Initium.
which is solely bent upon and conjured to advance goodness and virtue; which
ambition, when the mind of man has, he in whom that mind is, deserves the
utmost secular honor. Let these be Kings, says Seneca, though their
Ancestors were none; Sint hi Reges, quia majores eorum non fuerunt, quia pro
summo Imperio habuerunt justitiam, abstinentiam, quia non Rempublicam sibi, sed
se Reipubl. dicaverunt; Regnent, quia vir bonus proavus eorum fuit, qui animum
supra fortunam gessit. Senec. lib. 4. De Benefic. p. 72.
for in that they preferred Justice before their emolument, and when others
tore and rent the Commonwealth with factions, these lay still and encouraged
no commotion, nor irritated any party. Let these rule, who could so well
overrule their own passions; and so benefit mankind by good precepts and
principles. This is true nobility, not tincture of blood, and grandeur of
fortune, or honor from Princes, but that honor that appears (...), Philo.
Lib. De Nobilitate. p. 304.
etc. in active virtue, when high spirits, put men upon high designs of virtue
in deed and truth, and not in word and vapor; For without these, Gentility and
Nobility signify just nothing, Is hercle posteritatem deserit, qui antiquitati
addictus nihil suae atati concedit. Petrus Crinitus c. 1. De Honesta disciplina.
nor is it any addition to our student to be nobilis ortu, if such he be not
dotibus and studiis. Whereas then it is said in our Text, ipsi nobilium filii
tantum in hospitiis illis leges addiscunt, it is to be understood that as they
are most proper to learn and practice the Law, so for the most part they, and
they only do; For tantum is not here exclusive, but accumulative, not an only
of impropriation, as if none but such did or might: Non est Philosophia
populare artificium, nec ostentationi paratuni, non in verbis sed in rebus est.
Senec. Epist. 16.
but an only of annumeration, as I may so say, more of them then of any other
do, nay the greatest part of those that do in hospitiis illis leges
addiscere, are of those ucbilium filii. For this Philosophy is no populare
artificium, but those are to study and attain it, who are industrious and not
faint hearted, whom no labor and toil of brain will discourage, no
voluminousness of Authors will affrighten. Cujus (Hospitii Juris) cum
vestibulum salutassem, reperissemque linguam peregri nam, dialectum barbaram,
methodum inconcinnam, molem non ingentem solum, sed perpetuis humeris
sustinendam, excidit mihi fateor animus. Spelman in Pr^oemio ad Gloss.

Non est quod admireris animum meum, adhuc de alien^ liberalis sum. Senec. Ep.
16.

Qua, sive contineas nihil. tacitam conscientiam juvant, sive proferas non
doctior videb^ris sed molestior. Lib. 1. De Brevit. vita. p. 734.


For though ingenuity and mother-wit may do much, and may make a great bustle
with it; yet books thoroughly read and understood are the great helps to skill
and art: and he that intends them well shall addiscere, as our Chancellour's
word is, that is, not operose nihil agere, and in literarum inutilium Studiis
detineri, which the Moralist accuses the Greeks to have corrupted the Romans
with the love of; but to learn by study what may add to their own ingenuity,
addiscere quasi addere ad qua didicerunt, to make an improvement by learning to
what God has given them in nature.

Cum Panperes and vulgares pro filiorum suorum exhibitione tantos sumptus
nequtant sufferre, and Mercatores raro cupiunt tantis oneribus annuis attennare
Merchandisas suas.

Here the Chancellor shows how it comes to pass that the Gentry only do send,
and can maintain their sons at the study of the Law which is so chargeable. For
there being amonst men poor and vulgar persons who cannot, Pauperes a parvo
lare.
and men of Trade who will not be at the charge, those that do and will must
be of the Gentry, who are neither of both ranks but a degree above them: and
thence are the Nobilium filii sent to these Hospitia as the soli that can and
will bear the charge of the breeding to profess the Law. No Attorney to be
admitted into any Houses of Law. Order of Lincolns Inn. 15^7, lib. 4. fol. 317.
4 P. and Mar.
Alas, in our Chancellour's time the Yeomen and Country-Farmers were kept low
and needy, the Citizens not so full and landed as since Queen Elizabeth's time
they have grown; and therefore our Chancellor had good reason to write as he
did, that the Nobilium filii only did, because the Pauperes and Vulgares could
not, and Burgers the Mercatores here, would not be at that charge, by breaking
their stocks and disbursing such sums of money, as in this way of breeding was
to be expended. But alas since that time all things are become new: the Peasant
grown rich makes his son par cum Thaino dignitate, Tu si filios sustuleris,
poteris habere formosos, poteris and deformes; and si fortasse tibi multi
nascentur, esse ex illis aliquis tam servator patria quam proditor poterit.
Senec. Consol. ad Marciam. p. 175.
and the Citizen descended out of the best families of Gentry in England,
having an Elder-brothers fortune for his son, breeds him as high as may be, and
yet does not Merchandisas attenuare. For he looking upon men's sons that have
risen to be great Counselors to Princes upon the account of good parts well
directed and fortunated, hopes by brave education, to see him prove one of
them, and thereupon cares not what he spends upon him, so he be sober and
diligent: but rather the breeding of a son to this course makes the father more
diligent and concerned to get, that he may leave an estate fit for such his
sons generous education. So that now not blood is the only good ingredient to
an Inns of Court man, but fortune, and Gentlemen in reputation men are
according to the latitude or narrowness of their fortune; Haec sanctitate moru^
effecit ut puer admodum dignus Sacerdotio videretur. Senec. Consol. ad Marciam.
c. 24. p. 779. Lipsius in Senec. Consol. ad Marciam. p. 191. Nobiles
adolescentulos avitis ac paternis Sacerdotiis recoluit. Tacitus.
though truly good breeding and brave qualities with little fortune often
works greater wonders by its endeavor to obtain conspicuities of life, then
the greatest blood or fortune without them has obtained, witness not only
Martia's son, whom Seneca terms so rare a lad, that the wisdom and majesty of
his demeanor brought him into the Sacerdotal Grandeur, when but a child, and
Fabius Maximus, Cnejus Domitius, Sempronius Gracchus, all which when but very
young were highly for their wisdom dignified, and Tacitus says, deservedly;
but also in that never to be forgotten but ever to be honored Sir Henry
Sidney, a Gentleman, who though he had many Peers to him in fortune, yet had
none in his time of almost equal virtue, nor any that I remember of like
reputation as he was; for though Queen Elizabeth's time, which was so choice in
Ministers of State and public employment, nourished many incomparable Statists
and Courtiers, yet did few if any of them overtop Sir Henry Sidney, but that he
was accounted the glory of them all: being therefore not full one and tweny
years of age, he was sent Ambassador to H. ^. of France, and that not upon
Complement, but matter of great Concernment; which he transacted with so great
judgment, that every year after he was on some Embassye or other: and at last
was four times Lord-Justice of Ireland, three times Deputy of Ireland by
special Commission, Holingshed. p. 1548.
and dyed Knight of the Garter, leaving his son most like him in all renowned
qualities, and therefore admired by all the World, learned, eloquent, valiant
and courtly Sir Philip Sidney, who yet remains in memory the Darling of the
Muses, and the eternal grace of all good Letters: but I proceed.

Quo fit, ut vix doctus in Legibus illis reperiatur in Regno, qui non sit
Nobilis, and de Nobilium genere egressus.

This unavoidably follows upon the Premises truth: If none can be learned in
the Laws but those that study it, and none can to a latitude of learning study
it but they that do it in proprio Studio, that is, take the water at the
springs head, and attend the Courts in their debates and resolutions; and those
that study it must be able and willing to undergo the charge, which few in
Henry the Sixth's time were but the Nobiles, that is, the Gentry, who had fair
Lands and Offices, by the income whereof they plentifully supported themselves,
if by all these Gradations there is ascent to learning in the Law, then the
learning that is attained to, must be by the Nobles, that is, the Gentry, who
are so docti in Legibus,] that they are Sacrarum opinionum Conditores, as after
they have been double Readers or Sergeants they are accounted. I grant there
might be some then, as now there are many more who are learned; yet not of the
Nobilium genere, which is the reason of the vix to qualify the peremptoriness
of the position: but to one that was, twenty were not of any race below that of
Gentry by the Father, which is the right line, and so are Nobiles within the
Text; or by the Mother, who being de genere Nobilium, her son may by our
Chancellor be said to be de Nobilium genere egressus.

Vnde magis aliis consimilis status hominibus, ipsi Nobilitatem curant and
conservationem honoris and famae suae.

This is added to show the trust that the Nation puts in men of the Law, and
the confidence they have in them from the consideration that they have honors
and fortunes to aw them from all fordid and trucking practices. For though
every man is, as an honest man, bound to keep himself just and upright, because
of God his Judge, and Conscience his accuser or excuser; yet are some seemingly
more obliged hereto then others, because they have superadded restraints and
favors to those common ones, which the humane nature promiscuously has, and
by which it is circumscribed and confined: and this the Text makes to be Riches
and Blood, the two Darlings of all Polities, and those pair of Favorites that
accommodate Peace and War. Now though no man can endow himself with either of
these further then God gives him opportunity thereto, and gives him wisdom to
discern and cooperate with his opportunities; yet every man that has the use
of reason and the fervor of Justice in him, can choose whether he will be
fordid or not, and can (if he will) resolve to keep himself from a just
arraignment of dishonesty and injustice. And therefore men, next to the fear of
God, should propound to themselves great examples and great exceedings of any
thing in their family before them, as that which might both keep them in aw of
lessening their family by doing any thing minute, and put them forth to do
somewhat beyond what is almost effectable: my reason is, because where there is
not something of merit and unvulgar floridness appearing in men, the
disappointments of life will so lessen and abate them, that they shall have
nothing able to cope with or prevail against them, but must take down their
top-sayls and strike Mast, leaving all that is dear to them to the mercy of
those cruel vicissitudes, Sic ^v^nit mihi, quod plerisqu^ non suo vitio ad
inopiam reda^tis; Omnes agnoscunt, nemo succurrit. Sen. Ep. 1. Non suo vitio]
sed temporum fortuna judicat callide in aula sibi tempus perire. Lipsius in
Not. ad Ep. 1. p. 157. In his life, p. 53.56.
which often swallow down with more then beastial ferity the most lovely fruits
of life, great Parts and great Diligence. That passage of Seneca is enough to
bid men beware dependence on mortal levity or popular fame, So it happens to me
as to many (says he) who are not by vice, but by a secret providence brought
to poverty; All pity, but none relieve: Lipsius has a note on those words,
which referrs his grief to the Court of Nero, which he having spent much time
in, bemoans himself for the loss of it, all his attendance there neither
bettering the minds of those he conversed with, nor advancing his fortunes as
any compensation to his service. A misery that facetious and generous spirits
are so often flattered into and deluded by, that they bemoan themselves too
late to be accounted either wise or recompensed. That ingenuous Sir Henry
Wotton is one of the livelyest instances of this, for that great soul of his
which thought the Emperor's jewel given him, but a narrow present for the
Countess of Sabrinah's short treatment of him, was so eclipsed by the disfavour
of greatness, that it was forced to publish inability to defray the charge of
every day that came upon him; In his letter to the Duke of Buckingham, p. 483.
and to bemoan his former greatness, the abridgement of which, caused his face
to be wrinkled with care, and on another occasion, to complain that after a 17.
years public employment) he is left destitute of all possibility to subsist
at home, being much like Those scale-fishes, which over-sleeping themselves in
an ebbing water feel nothing about them but a dry shore when they awake, which
comparison says he, I am fain to seek amongst those creatures, not knowing
among men that have so long served so gracious a master, any one to whom I may
resemble my unfortunate bareness. I forbear the sad eclipse of the most
ingenious Chancellor Bacon. These things I instance in, to show the
instigation men have from noble births to endeavor their conspicuities, and to
bemoan the defeats of them, which the students of noble families are best
thought to endeavor, who seek nothing more in their profession, then to be
able to deserve many and good Clyents, and to be great gainers by them, and so
becoming honestly and fairly rich, Rhenanus in Notis ad Senec. Ludum. p. 949.
and not showing themselves like the Causidici in Claudius his time, Venale
genus hominum; but keeping close to the Law, and being faithful to their
clyents, may be said Magis aliis consimilis status hominibus nobilitatem
curare, etc.

In his revera hospitiis majoribus etiam and minoribus, ultra studium legum,
est quasi Gymnasium omnium morum.

This the Chancellor writes to show the generous accomplishment of a noble
Student, whom, though he knows sent to the Inns of Court to be a professed
Lawyer; yet he presents here as apt, by the quaintness of his general breeding
to comply with all conditions of life, to which God, his genious and his
opportunities shall most incline him to. Now though here I have a fair occasion
to humbly suggest my apprehensions of excellent perquisites to the study of the
Law, as to live soberly and retired, to study moderately and with method, to
keep company sparingly and with choice, to frequent exercises both public and
private, to An old order in LincolnsInn, none to come to the bar under 10.
years standing. lib. 4, Temps E. 6. p. 345.
practice leasurably and not too soon after his call to the Bar, to be not
greedy of fees till they be deserved, to counsel in Causes just and lawful, and
to discourage prosequution of the contrary, to keep his Chamber, Study, and
Courts constantly, to treat his Clyents affably, and to hear them calmely, to
stick to their interest if just, resolutely, and to settle himself to the
consistence in these by a fit and convenient marriage. Though I say I might
enlarge on all these, which do account highly to the studium Legum, Plin. lib.
10. c. 29.4. Iuris praecepta sunt tria, honest vivere, alterum non ladere, jus
suum unicuique tribuere. Bracton lib. 1. c. 4.
and are in effect but those three precepts of the Law that Bracton mentions;
yet I pass them over to avoid tediousness, desiring the Student to remember
that all these without Gods blesssing on, his diligence cannot secundate it:
For he that endeavors any thing without God, Habes sharissime qua possunt
tranquillitatem tueri qua restituere, qua subrepentibus vitiis resistant. Illud
tamen scito, nihil horum satis esse validum, rem imbecillam servantibus, nisi
intenta and assidua cura oircumeat animum labentem.] Senec. Lib. De Tranquil,
ad stuem.
does but reti ventos venari. That then which I pass to, is that which besides
the study of the Law is learned in the Inns of Court, to wit, Exercises of
manhood, of ornament, and delicacy, of Learning and activity. Of the first sort
are singing and playing n instruments very great additions to a Gentleman; for
though Music seem to be but of an aerie and volatile nature, yet in the
consequence of it it proves to be a very notable furtherer of the minds
delight, order, and composure, which is the reason that the ancients prescribed
Music not only in Civil, but sacred rites: and that not to make those
mysteries light and jovial, but to draw up the heart and soul by every occasion
of joy, and expressive agility to actuate it self upon that divine Opificer,
whence these powers and art to improve them come, Cantus est modulatio, se^
fluxus and transitus vocis a gravi in acutum, and vice versa, per intervalla
concinna, qui aptus est ad animi latitiam, dolorem, aut alium effectu^
exprimendum vel commovendum. Mersenius Harmonicorum lib, 7 p. 113. In Tabul,
proposit.
and by whom they are ingenerated in us. This Music the Text respects both as
it is vocal and instrumental, Cantare ipsi addiscunt] says the Text. Now
Cantare, is not bare modulation, or transition of the voice from grave to acute
notes, and so backward, joining thereto apt intervals and cadencies; Nor is it
only as Canere grandia ^late, jucunda dulciter, and moderata leniter. Quintil.
lib. 1. c. 10.20.
Quintilian says, a noting of great things loftily, pleasant things sweetly,
and moderate things softly, but it is a singing of celebration, and a mirth of
grandeur and composedness; Cantare, quasi incantare and fascinare, to do that
by the voice which Orators do by words, surprise and captivate hearers, yea
work conquests over their own minds and passionss. This dulcimer of the voice,
whether it be sacred or civil, is very effectual to excite the mind to all
facetious pleasure, and to recruite it of those spirits which are exhaust by
intentness and labor; therefore the Holy Ghost by Moses excites the people to
praise God by singing Exodus 15.21. And in all the book of God, nothing is set
forth as a devouter part of worship then vocal Music, Sing unto the Lord is
the exhortation of every Psalm; yea in the primitive times singing of Holy
Anthems and Psalms, was the peculiar character of Christians, the Heathens
from this practice of the Jews uttered most of the praises of their Gods and
their Hero's by singing, which is so harmeless and tunable a token of foulary
joy, that nothing can better testify internal contentation and rapture then
singing.

Whereas then it is said, Cantare ipsi addiscunt] it means not rude and artless
singing, for that is natural, (being the expression of the air or breath from
the lung, which invigorates and sonifies it) but that which they learn is
artly, singing by book and rule according to the Gammuth, and the true position
and order of sounds, to give every note its height and depth, and time its
length and breadth: Omnis Cantus certis pthongis, intervallis and temporibus
constat. Mersenius lib, 8, Harmonicorum p. 161.
thus to sing, is to divide time into proper portions, and to observe order in
the transports of our joys, and this Maphius Vegius thinks so necessary to
good institution, that nothing can be more graceful, Musica ad degendum recte
in otio vitam, moderandosque animorum motus, leniendasque perturbationes
ediscitur, qualis est maxim qua fortium virorum gesta, divinaque lands
decantantur; nihil certe cognitione ejus utilius, nihil homini libero
convenientius. Lib. 3. De Educatione liberorum. c. 3. Tom. 15. Biblioth. magnae
Patrum. p. 863.
nothing more worthy a freeman. For that Suetonius in Nerone c. 20, etc 21.
Nero delighted in singing and jovialty was not his reproach, but in that he
expressed it by such lewd and vain singings, as savoured of obscenity and
immoral lubricity, that was his abuse of singing. And therefore artly singing,
as it is a very wholesome thing to keep the breath sweet, and has a taking
acceptance with the ear and heart of all auditors; so has it a very useful
influence on the content of all actions. For as we are to eat, sleep, recreate,
study in proportion; so we are to be merry in due and convenient manner.
Nothing more rocks asleep and reposes, Forte inter epulas Aulicis (uti mos est)
canentibus. Aurel, Victor c. 5. De Caesaribus p. 512*
nothing more renders entertainments acceptable then singing, which is the
reason that all treatments at meals, all festivals of joy are associated with
singing, the pleasure of which does not only in a sort digest the meat, but
affablize the nature of the communicants each to other, especially when hereto
instrumental Music is added, which the Text calls genus harmoniae.

In omni genere harmoniae] This is not so much wind and pipe, as touch and
stringmusique; not the Music that is loud, Stentorian, and clamarous, as that
which is sweet, silent and undisturbing: Music which goes so soft that it may
sweetly note it in a Ladies Chamber, as the Proverb is. This music of the
Lute-Viol, and the like, is that which becomes an Inns of Court, and an Inns of
Court-man; nor is there any thing in the World more disposes men to sweet and
social temper; None hate Music, but rude minds.
then Music and Voices, these by a pleasing and harmonious witchery,
harmelesly sedate and surprise minds to a delightful comportment with all
humors, accidents, companies. Nor are any men more acceptable companions then
men of Musical addiction; For if Orpheus as the Poets feign, surprised trees,
and Arion fishes by their Harpes; If instruments well tuned, lay evil spirits
in Saul's; and pacify the distempers of brainless furies; if this be the effect
of Harmony, to incline the eye to kindness, the hand and foot to agility, the
ear to attention, the whole man to grace of behavior, Our Inns of Court-man is
to be accomplished therewith, and not to stay there, or come away thence
without it.

Ibi etiam tripudiare ac jocos singulos nobilibus convenientes qualiter in domo
Regia exerceri solent, enutriti.

As serious things become the manhood of Nobles, so lighter and more active,
their youth; for as the year has her season of fruits and weathers, and the sea
of ebbs and flows, and the Air of winds and rains: so the Ages of men have
their peculiar virtues and vices, and accordingly evidence the fruits of them.
Therefore as sedere, silere, studere, are the companions of age; so are active
recreations the treatments of youth. Cicero 2 de Divinat. 110.

Cato c. 186.

Columella lib. 1. c. 6.14.

Quia cum pascuntur, necesse est aliquid ex ore cadere and terram pavire.
Becman in verbo.


This the Text alludes to in the word Tripudiare] that is, dancing or vaulting.
Tripudium, of old Terripavium, after, Terripudium, then Tripudium derived from
Pavio, which is applied to birds who are light creatures, and who hop up and
down when they are lighted the wing, to pick up viands: hence dancing, which is
a quick motion of the body here and there, is called Tripudium; so Ac per urbem
ire canentes carmina tripudiis solennique saltatu jussit. Lib. 1. ab urbe 83.
Livy and Sed illum tot jam in funeribus Reipublica exuliantem and tripudiantem
Legum si possit laqueis constringeret. Pro Sestio 77.
Tully both render it by saltare. Which dancing perhaps was not as with us, by
congees, paces, chases, boundings, vaultings, turnings, and other such
graceful demeanours as obsequious to the Music, make the merryment orderly;
but such a dancing as does ter pede in saltando terram ferire, as Lib. 25. c.
29.

Turneb. Advers. lib. 14. c. 12. and lib. 27. c. 17.


Turnebus well observes. Of these Tripudia there were sundry sorts, Tripudia
solestina and Tripudia sonivia. With us we have only French dancing and
Country dancing used by the best rank of people. Morris-dancing is an exercise
that the loose and vile sort only use, and that only in faires and meetings
of lewdness: but the tripudare in our Text is that decent, harmless, and
graceful carriage of the body in all the motions of it, which answers the
exactness of perfect Majesty of gate and grace of comportment, for which men
are said to be well-bred and well-fashioned, or of good behavior, de bonne
mean. This in these places is expressed in part by Revellings.

Ac Iocos singulos Nobilibus convenientes] Iocus is properly verbal mirth,
telling of Romantique Stories, and proposing Riddles, exercising Questions and
Commands, acting passions of love, which therefore is called Courtship. These
are Ioci as to the notation of the word, though when the later clause is made
to expound it such as does Nobilibus convenire, and as in dome Regia exerceri
solent,] then it should be something more manly and dispositive to Arms and
Activities, as fencing, leaping, vaulting, riding the great horse, running,
these seem to me together with cards, bowls, tennis, and the like, which are
exercitial of the mind and body, to be Ioci within the Text; for these are
much the repasts of Nobles, and men that but for them know not how to spend
their time, and that not unbeseemingly. For as Solomon allows a time for all
things, so have wisemen in all Ages mixed with serious, jocose things, as
conceiving an amability in the moderate medley of them. Socrates the gravest of
Mortals, Socrates cum pueris ludere non ^ruboscit. Senec. de Tranquil.
thus condescended to humor youth, Not blushing to bear his part with boys in
their boys play, which was such as was that sport, in arnudine equitando, Lib.
8. c. 8. Ad numeros Satyri movere Bathylli, Persius.

Et Scipio triumphale illud and militare corpus movit ad numeros, non milliter
seiufringens ut nunc mos e^ etiam incessu ipso ultra mulierum mollitiem
fluentilus, sed ut illi antiqus viri solebant, inter lusum and festa tempora
virilem in modum tripudiare, non facturi detrimentum etiamsi ab hostibus suis
spectarentur. Senec. lib. de Tranq.


Valerius Maximus writes of; and Scipio is reported to please himself in acting
his military and manly body according to the direction of the then Music,
keeping time in his motions, Not as effeminate persons use, says Seneca, to
do, but as of old Athletique and Pugillary men did, that is, on Festivals and
great appointments of Recreation, they so manly vaulted, leaped, jumped and
danced, that they would have been magnified therefore, had their Enemies been
Spectatours and Judges.

In ferialibus diebus eorum pars major legalis disciplinae studio, and in
festivalibus sacrae Scripturae, and Cronicorum lectioni, post divina obsequia
se confert.

This clause remembers the virtuous and thrifty division of time, which the Law
of the Inns of Court in our Chancellour's time directed, to wit, that the study
of the Law should not eat out God's portion of time, nor the reading and
meditation of Scripture, or converse with History, but that though the most
time were allowed the Law, yet those other necessary accomplishments were to be
duly and in their proper time also intended.

In ferialibus diebus] That is, on common days, the six days of the week,
Feria dicuntur dies quibus cessatur ab opere aliquo, sed per extensionem
dicuntur feria sex dies post Dominicam, quos nomine Planetarum and Idolorum
dicebant Ethnici, Lunae, Martis, etc. Tholoss. lib. 2. c. 15. De Feriis
Festisque.

Feria dicta sunt dies in quibus ab aliquo opere vacui, dabunt hominos, vel
dar^ poterunt operam aliis negotiis quales sunt feriae nundinarum, etc. Bruno
lib. 6. de Ceremon. c. 6.

Lil. Gyrald. lib. De Ann. and Mensibus, p. 593.

Apud Stobaeum Sermon de Avaritia.

Lib. 2. Syntagm. Juris. c. 15. lib. 48. c. 8. ss. 13. lib. 49. c. 2. ss. 10.


none of them being Holy days, which if they were, so many only as were not,
ought to be employed in the study of the Law. To write of these Feriae at large
were to perplex this Commentary; and to little profit the Reader. That only
that is necessary to insert, is, That in Antiquity Feriae were such days as
were vacations from all ordinary labor, and had extraordinary indulgence
allowed them, it being a chief Prerogative of them to be free and brisk in all
disports and recreations that are not absolutely flagitious, the wisdom of
Legislators appointing them to be the releases of servants and men of toil from
the sowerer practices of life, as the encouragement of them to return to their
Drudgery more contentedly: which gave occasion to that saying of Democritus,
(...), etc. A life without Holy days was a long way without an Inn. Of these
Feriae there were diverse sorts, stativae, imperativae, conceptivae, nundinae;
of which Tholossanus writes at large: so also mention is made of them in the
Lib. 2. tit. 12. De feriis and dilationibus and diversis temporibus.
Digest, and in In Pandect. prior. p. 43.
Budaeus, and Sigonius in Fast. and triumph. Romanor. p. 68.114.
, Suetonius in Claudio. c. 22.

Plutarchus in Moralib. per totum opus.


others. That which the Text is applyable to, is the designation of these Feria
to reading of the Law: that is, as I humbly conceive, when the Student has laid
a good foundation the first three years, and labored hard at the little Books
together with the Register, which I take to be the best pointer out of original
Laws, Writs being the remedies of their violation, and thence importing
original Laws violated, I say, (with submission ever to the learned) when the
understanding is accustomed to the Law, and there is in the Student an
habituation to the Law; then to repair on Court-dayes to the Courts, and there
to take notes and observe the arguments and carriages of persons and causes
therein, is very advantageous to the profit of the Student, who there may learn
much, and from thence bring it written down to his after-improvement. For to
our Student these Feriae are no r^leif from study, Legum conditores festos
instituerunt dies ut ad hilaritatem homines public cogerentur, tanquam
necessarium laboribus interponentes temperamentum. Senec. lib. De Tranquil. p.
487.
as to other men they are from corporal labor: but they are diversions of the
labor from the Students body in repairing to the Courts and intending the
causes pleading in them, to his mind intent on his books in his study. For the
Text says not, he should by jollity and good fellowship refresh himself, as
Seneca says Cato did, Cato vino laxabat animum publicis curis fatigatum. Eodem
loco.
and therefore by Memmins was railed at for intemperance; but the Text says
that the greater part of the Students do on Common and Court-daye devote
themselves to the study of the Law, Lipsius in Notis ad lib. De Tranquillit.
that is, if they cannot hear Law at Westminster Hall, Feriarum festorumque
dierum ratio in liberis requietem habet litium and jurgiorum, in servis operum
and laborum. Cic. 2. De Legibus 47.
they will read it in their own Chambers; for Law they will have that come and
intend to be Lawyers, whatever diligence they express and whatever pleasure
they deny: for the very days of other men's pleasure is to them a time of great
pains and expression of diligence.

Et in Festivalibus] Of these I have written in the Notes on the 35. Chapter.
These Festivals were the sacred Portions of time in which The honor of the
Gods, as the Heathens phrase was, took up all the thoughts and actions of men;
and wherein they not only sacrificed in token of Religion, Festi dies erant in
quibus vel sacrificia Diis offerebantur, vel dies diurnis epulationibus
celebrabantur, vel ludi in bonorem dierum fietant, vel feriae observabantur.
Nonius in verbo.

2 De Oratore. 153.

Terence Adel. 2, 3, 8.

Psiud. 22.7.

Casina 17.2.


but also feasted and jollited in relation to the sweenting of life, which
thence did receive much pleasing entertainment. Hence every thing of delight
and plenty they termed Festivum and Festivitas; so Tully calls a man of a
pleasant and gay genius and humor, Homo festivus, and Terence says he has
Festivum caput; and loci festivi and festivi ludi are frequent in Plautus: when
then in the De Claris Orator, 91.

Cic. 1. De Invent.

1 De Orator. 12.6.


Orator we read of Festivitate igitur and facetiis, Festivitas, Splendour,
Concinnitudo in Oratore, festivitate and venustate conjuncta vis dicendi, it is
to remember us that the joy of Festivals is no new thing; but that which
prudence in all Ages has ordered to associate the plenty of it. And therefore
Christianity has allayed the mirth of excess with duties of Devotion in both
parts of the day at Prayer hours; and the Student of the Law, though he may
keep his Chamber post divina obsequia, yet after he has been at the public
prayers (wherein his devotion dictates the most humble and un-pharisaical
posture to him) yet even his retirement and holy day recreation must be reading
of Scripture and of History, that thereby he may know how as a Christian and a
good man, to demean himself. For the word of God being notified to man, as the
declared will of his maker, and the Law of his eternal soul, as by reading,
understanding, and practicing of it, it is able to make him wise unto
Salvation; so by reading the Records of past ages, he satisfies himself in the
virtues, vices, humors, laws and reasons of the transactions of them, and is
thereby enabled to discourse of, and judge concerning the nature and impulses
of the same. For as in order to the grace that leads to, and the glory that is
in the triumphant world, the Sacred Scriptures are the surest Oracle, and he
that trusts to them shall never be ashamed or deceived, because they are not
only the power of God to salvation, but the light that shines in the darkness
of error and infidelity; and discovers those things, that eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor hat entered into the heart of man to conceive or think of,
which is the reason Our Lord charges his Disciples to search the Scripture,
assuring them that therein they have eternal life, and they are they that
testify of him; So in relation to this world so full of sin sorrow and
dissatisfaction, Nihil earum rerum scire, quae antequam nasceris factae sunt.
hoc est, semper esse pueru^, cognoscere vero res gestas antiquitali,
exemplorumque memorabilium habere notitiam utile decorum. laudabileque ac prope
divinum est. Cic.
the study of Chronicles, in which ages long since past, are presented men as
in then being, is the second best expense of time wisdom can possibly
prescribe, since conversation with wise men's books and actions are no less
instructive in wisdom then personal converse with them: which because men who
are not contemporary with, or near livers to, or timelily acquainted with them,
cannot have, History and Record of them is only able to become supplement to
those great defeats, which sin on man's, and judgment on Gods part, has
incommodated mortality with, and against which there is no compensation but
that of continuation, by which the excellent and immortal penns of heroique
men, do by Histories in a sort eternize men and ages. Which is the reason our
Text makes holy days spent in reading Scripture before prayers in the morning,
and History after prayers in the afternoon (for so I understand divina
obsequia as referring to the Inns of Court devotion-orders) to be a most
notable account of time, and the probablest engine to adorn a Students life
with piety and knowledge.

Ibi quippe disciplina virtutum est, and vitiorum omnium exilium] This is a
notable Character of them, that the Inns of Courts are what luxurious Athens
was not, Matres virtutum, novercae vitiorum; for none coming thither but with a
resolution to submit to the government of them, the government actuated by
learned and prudent Gravities, termed Masters of the Bench, is such as is
modelled and conform to virtue, and diametrally opposite to vice: hence is it
that as the students were kept close to Chapel; Commons, Exercises, studies,
so did they at their leisure, and at their recreation acquire such Genteel
qualities, as made their nature manly, their behavior graceful, their language
and writing courtly, and their conversation praiseworthy. To further them in
which, by amotion of whatever might add fuel to the fire of vanity in youth,
See 5. Book Lincoln's Inn. p. 415.
Orders have from time to time been against long hair, hats, greatruffs and
excesses of apparel, against riot in meat or drink, quarelling or fighting in
the societies, and against all intemperance, by reason of which these studies
of the Law may well be written of, as here they are, Ibi disciplina virtutum
and vitiorum omnium exilium.

Ita ut propter virtutis acquisitionem, vitii etiam fugam, Milites, Barons,
alii quoque magnates and nobiles regni, in hospitiis illis ponunt filios suos.

It should seem by this, that the Inns of Court were in high esteem in H. the
6. time; for they were then the trains of the flower of our youth, who are
termed nobilium filii, hence the Statute that mentions, Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, says also, and other Nobles and great men of the Realm. 2. R.
2. c. 5. which Nobles by 22. E. 4. c. 6. are named Lords, Knights, Esquires,
and other noblemen of this noble Realm of England, honorable and noble
persons, so 1. Mar. c. 1. For when travel was not so frequent as now it is,
our gentry and nobility that then were bred at home in these Inns, were as
towardly to all purposes of war and peace, counsel and conduct, as now travel
makes them; nay undoubtedly though some are much accomplished by it, yet many
more are so tainted, by the liberty they have in it taken, that they never
return to a sobriety of principle and practice, but are confirmed in a lawless
latitude of doing and speaking their pleasures, to the Confront of all moral
and religious restrictions: hence come the frequent debaucheries and
incontinencies of life, the vain disguises and transports of fashion, the
prodigal expenses and haughtiness of living, the ruining looseness of
recreations and gaming, the manless disuse of activities and Tilting, the great
decays of Hospitality and house-keepings, these and other such like mischiefs
ensue upon the frequent travels of our great men, who learn that liberty abroad
that they never after refrain at home. Indeed travel when men are of years,
have conduct, and design it an accomplishment to their understanding, and
accordingly employ it, is very sovereign to excellent ends; but as it is
afforded youth, and they by it are seduced from that gravity and sobriety, that
more restrained breeding would acquaint them with, so it is dangerously
enervative of all future stayedness, which our Ancestors well understanding,
chose rather to put their Sons, how well born, honored and fortuned soever, to
these Inns of Court there to learn the mode of living, sutably to their
quality, rather then to send them abroad, fearing nothing more, then the
infection of foreign toies and the tinctures of foreign vices. Nihil enim moribus
hujus atatis publicum, praeter aerem and pluviam censetur. Budaeus lib. 4. De
Ass, p. 171. edit. Vascos.
But now the times are such, that the Inns of Courts are thought mean lodges
for Nobility and the eldest Sons of Gentry, who all go abroad to travel,
leaving the younger brothers or Gentlemen's sons of smaller fortune to inhabit
them: so that the young Inns of Court-men of our age, are such as mostly study
to profess the Law, and by it become great and rich, which they well deserve to
be who prefer a learned diligence and industry in a profession, before a vain
sinful and needy idleness and latitude of life, which is so great a burden to
a noble and actively virtuous humor, as nothing can be more, since that only
answers the end of Gods mercy to our beings, births, and lives, which enables
us to glorify him, benefit men, and serve our own fames, in the opinion of
those that either knew us alive, or read us dead, which they will hardly] with
pleasure delight to do those who studied themselves only as all persons of
vice and vanity do.

Ibi vix unquam seditio, jurgium, aut murmur resonat.] These Inns of Court
consisting of so many Gentlemen of different tempers, may reasonably be
expected to be variously acted, as the severalties of them in their
predominancy, do incline, but that the ingenuity and gentle submission of them
to the government of their society, steers them to a more comely submission and
conformity, vix unquam] says our Text, not nunquam; for that has many times
been. The youth have been (as we may say) in rebellion against the ancients,
and the bar against the bench, but this is but seldom, and not durable, it is
nubecula cito transitura, soon up soon down; though it be a sede itio, a show
of sedition, and seemingly a departure from the rule of subjection, yet when
ever it happens it is seditio levitatis non pravitatis, Tacit. lib. 20. Hercul.
Fur. 3.3. Propertius lib. 4, Eleg. 4.

Lucret. lib. 1.114 Cavendum vero ne etiam in graves inimicitias convertant se
amicitiae, ^ quibus jurgia, maledicta, contumelia gignuntur.

Cic. De Amicitia 67.

1 Jacob. c. 8.


adolescentiae non malitiae it is not seditio malevolentiae sed incogitantiae,
not such an one, as being complicated with Tacitus his acria jurgia, and
Seneca's rabiosa jurgia, with alta and fera murmura in Propertius, minitantia
murmura in Lucretius, these formidable disobediences tending to violence and
dissociation, are not the unhappinesses of the Inns of Court; for our
Chancellours words are, vix seditio, jurgium aut murmur resonat] that is, there
is hardly any whispering or echo of discontent, not so much as that noise of
it, that the musical waters have in their gliding, vix resonat] that is, contra
sonantem imperium vix sonat seditio etc. As much as if the Text had said, there
is not so much hidden displeasure, as amounts to a mouth open against the
orders of the Parliaments and Benchers of the houses, but all obedience is
given them; for that the Governors are thought to be wise, and worthy, and to
do nothing but pro bono societatis, and the governed are orderly and
submissive in demonstration of good examples, and civil breeding, which directs
them to observe their temporary Governors while they are under Government, as
they themselves when Governors would be observed by puisnes, under government.

Delinquentes non alia poena, quam solum a communione societatis suae amotione
plectuntur.

This is introduced to show that these societies are no Corporations, or have
any judicial power over their Members, but only administer prudential cures to
emergent grievances, which being submitted to by the society, have (by consent)
the honor and effect of Laws, and work only upon the contumacious, by way of
either discommoning them for light offenses, or expelling them for greater,
which way of reproaching and discountenancing irregularity was very primitive
in the cohabitations of Christians, in relation to religious and civil life;
for as they under persequution were inclined by grace to be of one heart and
mind, Seld. lib. D^ Syu^driis Judzorum. Lib. primus minor Hosp. Lincolns. Inn.
p. 148. Lib. eodem loca pracitat^. Lib. 6. p. 309. 1 Cor. 5. v. 11.
the better to propagate their profession, and to adorn it with a suitable and
peaceful conversation: so did they in prudence wholly agree the punishment of
enormity within themselves, the Civil Magistrate neither protecting nor
affecting them. From this dreadful punishment of excommunication practiced
amongst the Jews, and from them in use amongst Christians, have the societies
of the Law and Colleges in Universities, the course to put out of Commons,
which the Apostle remembers in those words, If any man that is called a brother
be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such a none no not to eat. And this putting out of Commons,
or removing from the table, in the Inns of Court is often the punishment of
unseasonable playing at Cards and Dice, making disturbances, disrespect to the
Seniors, etc. Expulsion is for greater offenses, such as are, breach of the
peace, and violent assault of members of the society, or for refusal of
conformity in payment of Commons, or obedience to orders; This so disgraceful
to a Gentleman, to be unworthy worthy company, is so great an awe, that
nothing, (no not the fear of death) can be a greater awe almost to those
generous spirits, then expulsion is, they well remembering that rule of honor,
Honor and vita aequo passu ambularent, since to be cut of from a society of men
of worship, is to be infamous, and that remedilesly; for so great a harmony is
there between the societies of Law, that a Member expelled any one society can
have no admission in any other, since the act of one house is (in these Cases)
in construction of the rest, their own act, as far as their cooperation in the
allowance of the punishment makes them ratificators of it; so is the Text,
semel ab una societatum illarum expalsus, nunquam ab aliqua caeterarum
societatum illarum recipitur in socium.

Formam vero qua leges il^ae in his discuntur Hospitiis, hic exprimere non
expedit.

Concerning the forma juris and studii, I have wrote something iu the notes on
the eight Chapter, though as the Chancellor who knew undoubtedly much of it,
discovers it but minutely: so I, (who God knows) know very little in comparison
to his great proficiency, dare only offer at it, as I hope I have here done
very modestly. That which in this Chapter I shall add, is only to recollect the
Chancellours sense therein, to wit, that the way of study in the Inns of Court,
is very ingenious, and profitable to generous accomplishment, and that the
Laws studied in the famous Universities of France, Anjon, Cane, and others (
Paris only excepted) are not entered into, and carried on by such well grown
and manly Gentlemen, as the Laws in the Academies of the Inns of Court are,
which that they may further appear to be the noble Nurferies of Probity,
Strenuity, Honesty of manners, and Law-learning, this following discourse,
which I before thankfully owned to the kindness of Sir Thomas Witherington's
impartment to me, will more evince, which verbatim follows.

To the most High and Puissant Prince and our most dread Sovereign Lord and
King Henry the Eight by the grace of God, King of England and of France,
Defender of the faith, Lord of Ireland, and on Earth the supreme Head under God
of the Church of England, Tho. Denton, Nic. Bacon, and Robert Carry, His
Highness most humble and faithful Servants, wish continuance of health,
increase of his most prosperous felicity, and right fortunate success of his
Graces most godly Enterprises and Purposes.
WHERE AS, Most dread Sovereign Lord, after that we had, according to Your
Graces Commandment, delivered unto your Highness a book of Articles, containing
the chief est exercises of Learning, and Orders now used in the Houses of Court
amongst the Students of your Graces Laws, Your Royal Majesty of a most
Princely purpose and Godly zeal minding to erect an House of Students, wherein
the knowledge as well of the pure French and Latin tongues, as of Your Graces
Laws of this Your Realm should be attained, whereby Your Grace hereafter might
be the better served of Your Graces own Students of the Law as well in foreign
Countries as within this Your Graces Realm: Your Highness therefore gave us
further in Commandment, that we with our most diligent endeavors should set
forth, and describe unto Your Highness in writing certain other Rules and
Exercises whereby Your said Students might, besides the knowledge of the Laws,
be also expert and learned in the knowledge of the said Tongues. We therefore,
according to our most bonnden duties, for the satisfying of your Graces
expectation in this behalf, have in Articles set forth herein such Orders and
Rules both concerning the Corporation of the same Houses, and also the
Exercises as we think convenient to be put in ure and practice by Your Graces
Students. And this our rude and simple Device we herewith offer unto Your
Graces hands, most humbly beseeching Your Highness to accept the same in good
part. And we further again most humbly beseech Your Majesty not to take it any
wise as the doings of them that will presume or attempt to prescribe or appoint
unto Your Graces incomparable wisdom and judgment, any Rules or Orders in this
Your Graces most Godly purpose: But we most humbly beseech Your Majesty to take
it only as a Testimony or witness of our readiness and promptitude, according
to our most bounden duties, in the diligent accomplishment of such things as
Your Royal Majesty shall will us to attempt or take in hand, submitting the
correction and alteration thereof to the censure and most expert judgment of
Your Graces most Royal Majesty.

Hereafter follows in Articles the manner of the Corporation and Elections,
and of Exercises of Learning, together with certain Rules to be observed in the
King's Graces House.
FIRST, The manner of Corporation.
The certain number of such as shall be the King's Students, and of his Graces
exhibition to be limited by his Highness.

Secondly, One ancient, grave, and learned man, and of no small Authority,
which either has the knowledge, or at the least is a Factor and Furtherer of
all such knowledges as are studied and professed there, to be named of the
King's Grace to be Chief and Head-Governor over them; and his name of
Corporation to be appointed by his Highness.

Item, One in his absence to be a Vice-Governour, who also would be one as
should procure the furtherance of all the studies indifferently, and be bounden
perpetually to be resident, saving every year to have liberty of absence two
Months, but never passing three weeks together; and that but at certain times
when the least exercise of learning is in the House, except the Governor be
there.

Item, That the Vice-Governour in the time of his absence shall always appoint
one of the Company to supply his Room.

Item, That of these three, that is to say, the Governor, Vice governor and
Students, or by such other names as shall please the King's Grace, a
Corporation to be made by the King's Letters Patents; and for a further and
perpetual establishment thereof, that it be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

The Elections and other Ordinances concerning the same.
The Election and Nomination of the Governor, Vice-governour, and Students, to
belong to the King's Grace.

Item, His Grace shall elect P. or as many as his Grace shall think meet, of
the most sage, discreet, and learned of all the Students, to whom with the
Governor and Vice-governour, the ordering and execution of all the Rules and
Ordinances shall pertain, which shall be called the Company, or such like name.

Item, That all Ordinances hereafter to be made concerning this House by them,
and signed by the King's Grace, shall be as good and effectual as if it had
been made upon the foundation and past by Act of Parliament.

Item, That all the King's Students be sworn to observe the Rules and Orders of
the House.

Item, that it shall be lawful for them or any two of them to admit to study,
besides the number of the King's Students, as many other young men which shall
not have the King's stipend, as to them shall seem meet, undertaking to the
Governor or Vice-governour for their good behavior, so that they may be
twenty years of age.

Item, That such shall be at a Table and Commons by themselves, and shall be
bound to observe all the Rules and Learnings in the House; and also be sworn at
their admittance thereunto.

Item, That none be admitted the King's Students under the age of two and
twenty years.

Item, that whenever the Vice-governour chance to dye or be otherwise
removed, the Governor and Company shall choose and appoint three out of the
same House, or the other Houses of Court, as men most toward; and the King's
Grace of the three to appoint one to be his Student.

Item, That all Elections and Ordinances to be made as aforesaid concerning
this House, there be present the Governor or Vice-governour, and six of the
Company at the least.

Item, If any of the ten, which is before called the Company, chance to dye or
otherwise to be removed, the Governor and Company to elect another of the
King's Students into his room; and he to be ready the next Vacation after his
Election, if he be elected one Quarter of a year before the Vacation, or else
the next Vacation after.

Item, That in all Elections and Ordinances hereafter to be made, the consent
of the greater number to bind, and if they be equal, then that part that the
Governor takes, or in his absence the Vice-governour.

Item, That it shall be lawful to the Governor and Vice-governour and five of
the Company at the least, to admit any young man of the age of eighteen years
and under twenty to be a Student, they being thereunto moved by some singular
quality or excellency of knowledge that appears in him.

Item, That the King's Grace shall appoint every of his Students his Ancienty,
and after his Ancienty to go by continuance.

The Exercise for the learning of the Law, and first of Moting.
First, That every week three times, that is to say, on Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday, except Festival days and their Vigils, a Mote be had in the House.

Item, That the inner Barristers shall plead in Latin, and the other
Barristers reason in French; and that either of them shall do what they can to
banish the corruption of both tongues.

Item, That three by the course of the Company which shall be the most ancient,
shall sit at the Motes as Benchers and argue unto them.

Item, That every man in Commons shall keep his course in Mote, as well as the
King's Students; and this course once appointed by the Governor to continue
for ever.

Item, That none of the ten, called the Company, shall be bound to mote, but as
Benchers to argue in them.

Item, That the Mote be always after Supper, as is used in Court.

Item, That after dinner every three, as they sit, to have a Case propounded
and argued unto, before they rise.

Item, That after Supper, if there be no Motes, three Cases shall be propounded
to the Company by the other Learners, and the puisne shall choose which of the
three Cases he will, and argue thereunto, and after him three at the least of
the Company.

The first reading Vacation the Vice-governour shall read, Reading of the Law.
and after him every of the rest in his Ancienty.

Item, That none be called to be a Reader, but only the King's Students.

Item, That after the ten have read, one after another, then he that read first
to read in the Lent-Vacation; and so every Lent, one to read that has read
before: and every Summer-Vacation one that never read.

Item, That any Reader during his Vacation shall deliver to them whose course
is to mote, such Cases as shall be moted, new questions or old at his pleasure.

Item, If any the King's Students refuse to read being thereunto called, except
he have such reasonable excuse as the Governor and Company shall accept, to
lose the King's exhibitions.

The Exercises are to be observed in manner and form as they here appear by the
space of two years, and after in somethings to be altered in manner as
hereafter shall be declared.

In the Term-time and Vacations, Exercises for the Latin and French tongue.
every Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, (Festival days only excepted) one of
the excellent knowledge in the Latin and Greek tongue to read some Orator or
book of Rhetoric, or else some other Author which treats of the Government
of a Commonwealth, openly to all the Company, and to all other that will come
for the knowledge of both the said Languages; and therefore it seems
convenient that there be two of these.

Item, That this Lecture be in the Afternoon between three and four of the
clock.

Item, That every Friday and Saturday in the Term, and Vacation at the same
hour, one learned in the French, read some introduction, to teach the true
pronunciation of the French tongue.

Item, That the first two years past, every Mote that shall be brought in,
shall in order go after this sort, that is to say, the first in good Latin,
and the utter Barristers to argue in good Latin so much as they can, and the
second in good French; and this to continue alternatim: and the Benchers to
argue in like manner after three years past.

Item, That the mean Vacations after two years past, instead of Motes, to have
daily Declamations at the same hour in Latin; Proviso, that none of the
Company shall be bound to be at this.

Item, We think it very convenient that they should have some House not far
from the City, where they might lie together and continue their study at such
time as the infectiou of the Pestilence or other contagious sickness shall
chance amongst them or nigh their House.

Item, That during the Lent-season the Latin Lecture to cease, and instead
thereof from Thursday after Shrove-Sunday till Palm Sunday, even the same man
to read an open Lecture of Scripture.

First, Rules and Orders to be kept in the Mouse.
Keeping of Concubines in the House to be the loss of his stipend: fighting in
the House, expulsion of his part begins the Quarrel, and finable for the
other.

If any be known for a notorious whore-hunter or common Quarreller to be
expulsed: playing at Dice or Cards in the House out of the twelve days in
Christmas to be expulsion.

Absence of any one, one week, at times appointed to be 'resident, without
special License to be expulsion, except he have a cause thought and judged
reasonable by the Governor, Vice-governour and Company.

Item, If any the King's Students convey or steal any books out of the Library,
or be privy or consenting thereunto, that he shall be expulsed and lose the
King's exhibition.

Item, if any other of the House consent or be privy to any such act, to be
expulsed and committed to the Fleet, there to remain without bayl or mainprize
as long as it shall please the Governor and Company.

Item, All other offenses to be punished by the discretion of the Governor or
Vice-governour and Company; and that they shall have power to commit any of the
House to the Fleet, there to remain during their pleasure.

Item, That one of the Butlers every Saturday make clean the Library, and clasp
the books, and lay them in their places.

Item, That the Governor, or Vice-governour and Company, shall have power to
call counsel in the House as often as they shall think fit for the preferment of
good order, and reformation of Offenses.

Item, Forasmuch as we think it meet, that such as should be the King's
Students should be seen expert in all civil things that are requisite to be
known to do good and faithful service to the King's Highness in the affairs of
his Graces Realms and Dominions; we most humbly desire that it would please the
King's Majesty, that when his Grace does send any Ambassadors into any foreign
Realm, that his Grace would associate or send to wait upon the same Ambassador
one or two of his Graces said Students to be assigned by his Highness, to the
intent that thereby they may be more expert and meet to serve the King's
Majesty in such affairs, when occasion shall serve.

Item, Forasmuch as it seems no wise convenient, that neither the politic
Government of this Imperial Realm, and the noble Acts of the Governors of the
same, which undoubtedly are worthy of eternal memory and fame; neither on the
other side the detestable and divelish Acts attempted against the Commonwealth
contrary to the express Laws of God and nature, and the due and just
punishment for the same sustained, should in any wise other by negligence or
lack of knowledge be drowned in forgetfulness or buried in ignorance, but that
they should be rather chronicled and remain in Histories for ever, whereby our
posterity seeing (as it were before their eyes) the goodly access of so noble a
Government, should better provide for the security of this Realm, We therefore
most humbly desire, that it would please the King's most excellent Majesty to
appoint two of his greatest Students to put forth in writing the History and
Chronicle of this Realm; and they that shall be so appointed, to take an Oath
before the Chancellor of England and the King's most honorable Council truly
and indifferently to do the same without respect of any person, or any other
corrupt affection: and also that those two or one of them when any notable
arraignment or high Treason shall be, to give openly evidence for the King's
Highness by the Councils appointment, whereby they being so made privy to the
matter, may the more truly and lively in their Chronicles set forth the same.

And whereas we think it very expedient, that such men should also besides
their studies aforesaid, have some knowledge and practice in martial Feats,
whereby they may be able to do the King's Grace and the Realm service both in
time of peace and war also. First therefore, That it shall be lawful for every
the King's Students to occupy and exercise at his pleasure shooting in a
Cross-bow and Long-bow without License and Placard; so that it be not
prejudicial to the King's Highness games.

Item, That whatsoever War shall hereafter chance between any foreign Prince,
that a certain number of the activest young men, and of no small discretion and
soberness, to be appointed by the King's Majesty, which shall amongst others
repair into those parts not only to view themselves the order and fashion of
their Camps, and assaulting and defending, but also to set forth in writing all
the whole order of the Battle, and this to be registered in their House and to
remain there for ever.

To the most High and most Excellent Prince our most Gracious and most
Redoubted Sovereign Lord and King Henry the Eight, by the grace of God, King of
England and of France, Defender of the faith, Lord of Ireland, and supreme Head
on Earth immediately under Christ of the Church of England, Tho. Denton, Nic.
Bacon, and Robert Carry, His Graces most humble and faithful Servants, wish
prosperous health and continuance of felicity.
Pleases it Your most Royal Majesty to understand, that whereas Your most
godly disposition and tender zeal impressed in Your most noble heart, both
toward the advancement of the Commonwealth of this our Realm, and also
toward the furtherance and maintenance of good Learning, and the study thereof
hereafter to be used in the same, Your Highness now of late commanded us, to
our inestimable comfort and consolaetion, to assemble our selves together, and
upon the diligent search and perusing of all the Orders of the Houses of Court,
compendiously to set forth unto Your Grace the best form and order of Study
practiced therein, and all their Orders and Rules meet to be used and observed
amongst them that profess study and learning: We immediately considering the
godly effect and intent of this Your meaning, tending only to the right
institution and education of Your Subjects of this Your gracious Realm, whereby
they shall be undoubtedly as much unto Your Grace as to these natural Parents,
did not only render hearty thanks to Almighty God the only Author of this
Your Princely purpose, in that it has pleased him to send us such a King and
Head to reign over us, that is not only endued and adorned himself with all
kinds and sorts of good learning as well divine as profane, and exact
judgment in the same, but also to send us one that most endeavors and
purposes to set forward, and as it were to Revive I suppose it ought to be,
but it is ruin in the Copy.
ruin the study and perfect knowledge thereof of long time detested and almost
trodden under foot; that this His Realm in short time shall not be equal with
other but far excel them, whereby not only we that are in this present Age,
but the whole Realm for ever, and all our Posterities shall be most bound to
him therefore. For in times past, yea in our days (alas for pity) how many
good and gentle wits within this Your Graces Realm have perished, partly for
that in their youth (the chief time to plant or graft good learning in) they
have not been conversant nor trained in the study thereof; but chiefly for that
the most of them in their tender years, indifferent to receive both good and
bad, were so rooted and seasoned as it were in barbarous Authors very Enemies
to good learning, that hard it was, yea almost impossible to reduce them to
goodness, but even like a fertile ground overgrown with thorns and briars
produced no good fruit at all. The Redress therefore undoubtedly, most Gracious
Sovereign Lord, shall be the noblest and Princelyest Act that ever was
enterprised or attempted in this Realm. We therefore according to our most
bounden duties have endeavored our selves with all our wits and power to
satisfy Your Highness said desired purpose and expectation. And now having
concluded Your Graces Commandment in all things as nigh as we can, we do offer
the same here unto Your most Excellent Majesty, most humbly beseeching the same
to accept in good part this rude thing, submitting it to the most excellent
wisdom of your Majesty, whereunto we do and shall conform our selves, as to our
most bounden duty appertains.

The manner of the Fellowship and their ordinary Charges, besides their Commons.
FIrst it is to be considered, that none of the four houses of Courts have any
Corporation, whereby they are enabled to purchase, receive, or take lands or
Tenements or any other revenue, nor have any thing toward the maintenance of
the house, saving that every one that is admitted fellow, after that he is
called to the Masters Commons, pays yearly 3. shillings 4. pence, which they
call the pension money, and in some houses, every man for his admittance, pays
20. pence, and also besides that yearly for his Chamber 3. shillings 4. all
which money is the only thing they have toward the reparations and rent of
their house, and the wages of their Officers.

That what sorts and degrees the whole Fellowship and Company of Students of
the Law is amongst them divided. Benchers.
The whole company and fellowship of Learners, is divided and sorted into three
parts and degrees; that is to say, into Benchers, or as they call them in some
of the houses, Readers, Utter-Barresters, and Inner-Barresters.

Benchers, or Readers, are called such as before-time have openly read, which
form, and kind of reading shall hereafter be declared, and to them is chiefly
committed the government and ordering of the house, as to men meetest, both for
their age, discretion, and wisdoms, and of these is one yearly chosen, which
is called the Treasurer, or in some house Pensioner, who receives yearly the
said pension money, and therewith discharges such charges as above written;
and of the receipt and payment of the same is yearly accountable.

V^ter-Barresters,
Utter-Barresters are such, that for their learning and continuance, are called
by the said Readers to plead and argue in the said house, doubtful Cases and
Questions, which amongst them are called Motes, at certain times propounded,
and brought in before the said Benchers, as Readers, and are called
Utter-Barresters, for that they, when they argue the said Motes, they sit
uttermost on the forms, which they call the Bar, and this degree is the
chiefest degree for learners in the house next the Benchers; for of these be
chosen and made the Readers of all the Inns of Chancery, and also of the most
ancient of these is one elected yearly to read amongst them, who after his
reading, is called a Bencher, or Reader.

All the residue of learners are called Inner-Barresters, which are the
youngest men, that for lack of learning, Inner-Barresters.
and continuance, are not able to argue and reason in these Motes, nevertheless
whenever any of the said Motes be brought in before any of the said Benchers,
then two of the said Inner-Barresters sitting on the said form with the
Utter-Barresters, do for their exercises recite by heart the pleading of the
same Mote-Case, in Law- French, which pleading is the declaration at large of
the said Mote-Case, the one of them taking the part of the Plaintiff, and the
other the part of the Defendant.

The Order and Exercises of learning.
The whole year amongst them is divided into three parts; that is to say the
learning-Vacation, the Terme-times and the mean and dead Vacation.

They have yearly two learning-Vacations, that is to say, Lent-Vacation, which
beginns the first Monday in Lent, and continues three weeks, and three days,
the other Vacation is called Summer-Vacation, which begins the Monday after
Lammas-day, and continues as the other, in these Vacations are the greatest
conferences, and exercises of study that they have in all the year; for in them
these are the Orders.

The Exercises of Learning in the Vacation. The manner of Reading in the Inns
of Court.
First, The Reader and Ancients appoint the eldest Utter-Barrester in
continuance, as one that they think most able for that Room, to read amongst
them openly in the house, during the Summer-Vacation, and of this appointment
he has always knowledge about half a year before he shall read, that in the
mean time he may provide therefore, and then the first day after Vacation,
about 8. of the Clock, he that is so chosen to read openly in the Hall before
all the Company, shall read some one such Act, or Statute as shall please him
to ground his whole reading on for all that Vacation, and that done, does
declare such inconveniences and mischiefs as were unprovided for, and now by
the same Statute be and then recites certain doubts, and questions which he
has devised, that may grow upon the said Statute, and declares his judgment
therein, that done, one of the younger Utter-Barresters rehearses one question
propounded by the Reader, and does by way of argument labor to prove the
Readers opinion to be against the Law, and after him the rest of the
Utter-Barresters and Readers one after another in their ancienties, do declare
their opinions and judgments in the same, and then the Reader who did put the
Case, indeavoureth himself to confute Objections laid against him, and to
confirm his own opinion, after whom, the Judges and Sergeants, if any be
present, declare their opinions, and after they have done, the youngest
Utter-Barrester again rehearses another Case, which is ordered as the other
was; thus the reading ends for that day: and this manner of reading and
disputations continue daily two hours, or thereabout.

And besides this, daily in some houses after dinner, one at the Readers board,
before they rise, propounds another of his Cases to him, put the same day at
his reading, which Case, is debated by them all in like form, as the Cases are
used to be argued at his reading, and like order is observed at every mess, at
the other Tables, and the same manner always observed at supper, when they
have no Motes.

Of those that have read once in the Summer-Vacation, Lent-Vacation.
and be Benchers, is chosen always one to read in Lent, who observes the
like form of reading, as is before expressed in the Summer-Vacation; and of
these Readers in these Vacations, for the most part are appointed those that
shall be Sergeants.

In these Vacations every night after supper, The ordering and fashion of
Motying.
and every Fasting-day immediately after six of the Clock, boyer ended
(Festival-dayes and their evens only excepted) the Reader, with two Benchers,
or one at the least, comes into the Hall to the Cuboard, and there most
commonly one of the Utter-Barresters propounds unto them some doubtful Case,
the which every of the Benchers in their ancienties argue, and last of all he
that moved; this done, the Readers and Benchers sit down on the bench in the
end of the Hall, whereof they take their name, and on a form toward the midst
of the Hall sits down two Inner-Barresters, and of the other side of them on
the same form, two Utter-Barresters, and the Inner-Barresters do in French
openly declare unto the Benchers, (even as the Sergeants do at the bar in the
King's Courts, to the Judges) some kind of Action, the one being as it were
retained with the Plaintiff in the Action, and the other with the Defendant,
after which things done, the Utter-Barresters argue such questions as be
disputable within the Case (as there must be always one at the least) and this
ended, the Benchers do likewise declare their opinions, how they think the Law
to be in the same questions, and this manner of exercise of Moting, is daily
used, during the said Vacations.

This is always observed amongst them, that in all their open disputations,
the youngest of continuance argues first; whether he be Inner-Barrester, or
Utter-Barrester, or Bencher, according to the form used amongst the Judges and
Sergeants.

And also that at their Motes, the Inner-Barresters and Utter-Barresters do
plead and reason in French, and the Benchers in English, and at their reading,
the Readers Cases are put in English, and so argued unto.

Also in the learning-Vacations, Exercises of motes in the Inns of Chancery,
during the Vacation.
the Utter-Barresters which are Readers in the Inns of Chancery, go to the
house whereunto they read, Either of the said Readers taking with them two
learners of the house they are of, and there meet them for the most part two of
every house of Court, who sitting as Benchers (do in Court at their Motes)
hear and argue such Motes as are brought in, and pleaded by the Gentlemen of
the same houses of Chancery, which be nine in number, four being in Holborn,
which be read of, Grayes-Inn, and Lincoln's Inn, And Lincoln's Inn have Motes
daily, for the most part before noon, which begin at nine of the Clock, and
continue until twelve, or thereabouts, and the other five which are within
Temple Bar, which are of the two Temples, have their Motes at three of the
Clock in the afternoon.

The only exercises of Learning in the Terme-time, The 'exercises of Learning
in the Term time.
is arguing and debating of Cases after dinnet, and the Moting after supper,
used and kept in like form, as is heretofore prescribed in the Vacation-time,
and the Reader of the Inns of Chancery to read three times a week, to keep
Motes, during all the Term, to which Motes, none of the other houses of Court
come, as they do in the learning-Vacations, but only to come with the Reader
of the same house.

The whole time out of the Learning-Vacation and Term, The Exercises of
Learning in the Mean-Vacation.
is called the Mean-Vacation, during which time, every day after dinner, Cases
are argued, in like manner as they be in other times, and after supper Motes
are brought in and pleaded by the Inner-Barresters, before the
Utter-Barresters, which sit there, and occupy the room of Benchers, and argued
by them in like form as the Benchers do in the Terme-time, or
Learning-Vacation

The Readers and Benchers at a Parliament or Pension held before Christmas, if
it seem unto them that there be no dangerous time of sickness, The manner of
Christmas, used amongst them.
neither dearth of victuals, and that they are furnished of such a Company, as
both for their number and appertains are meet to keep a solemn Christmas, then
do they appoint and chose certain of the house to be Officers, and bear
certain rules in the house during the said time, which Officers for the most
part are such, as are exercised in the King's Highness house, and other Noble
men, and this is done only to the intent, that they should in time to come
know how to use themselves. In this Christmas time, they have all manner of
pastimes, as singing and dancing; and in some of the houses ordinarily they
have some interlude or Tragedy played by the Gentlemen of the same house, the
ground, and matter whereof, is devised by some of the Gentlemen of the house.

The manner of their Parliament, or Pension.
Every quarter, once or more if need shall require, the Readers and Benchers
cause one of the Officers to summon the whole Company openly in the Hall at
dinner, that such a night the Pension, or as some houses call it the
Parliament, shall be holden, which Pension, or Parliament in some houses, is
nothing else but a conference and Assembly of their Benchers and
Utter-Barresters only, and in some other of the houses, it is an Assembly of
Benchers, and such of the Utter-Barresters and other ancient and wise men of
the house, as the Benchers have elected to them before time, and these together
are named the Sage Company, and meet in a place therefore appointed, and there
treat of such matters as shall seem expedient for the good ordering of the
house, and the reformation of such things as seem meet to be reformed. In
these are the Readers both for the Lent and the Summer-Vacation chosen; and
also if the Treasurer of the house leave off his Office, in this is a new
chosen. And always at the Parliament holden after Michaelmas, two Auditors
appointed there, to hear, and take the Accounts for the year, of the Treasurer,
and in some house, he accounts before the whole Company at the Pension, and out
of these Pensions all misdemeanors and offenses done by any Fellow of the
house, are reformed and ordered according to the discretion of certain of the
most ancient of the house, which are in Commons at the time of the offense done.

First they have one called the Steward, whose office is to provide the victual
of the house, The Officers, and their wages.
and has for his wages five mark.

They have three Butlers, whereof the chief Butler has 40. shillings, every of
the other has for their wages 20 shillings.

They have three Cooks, of which, the chief Cook has yearly 10 pounds.

The Manciple, or Stewards servant, whose office is to convey the provision of
the house home from the market, and has yearly 26 shillings 8 pence.

The under-Cook has yearly for his wages 20 shillings.

The Laundres of the Clothes for the Buttery, has by the year 6 shillings 8
pence.

And besides this wages, the three Buttlers have in reward at Christmas of
every Gentleman of the house 12 pence, and some more.

And at Easter, the Cooks and Manciple have in reward, of every Gentleman 12
pence, or more amongst them.

The Diet of the House.
The whole Fellowship is divided into two several Commons, the one is called the
Masters Commons, and there is the Clerks Commons.

The Masters Commons amounts yearly to 20 nobles, or thereabouts, which is
after the rate of 2 shillings 8 pence the week.

The Clerks Commons amounts by the year to five pounds six shillings eight
pence, which is after the rate of 2 shillings 2 pence a week.

These, most redoubted Sovereign Lord, are the most universal and general
things concerning the Orders and Exercises of learning in the houses of Court,
which we thought meet to describe, and to present into your Grace's hands; and
having regard to other particular or private things, we thought it not
convenient to trouble Your Highness with them, partly, because of the multitude
of them, and partly, because they are things of no great importance, or weight.

CHAP. L.
Sedeum tu, Princeps, seire desideres, cur in Legibus Angliae non dantur
Doctoratus and Baccalaureatus gradus, sicut in utroque jure in Vniversitatibus
est dare consuetum, scire te volo quod licet gradus bujusmodi in Legibus
Angliae minime conferuntur, and c.


THIS Chapter begins with a reference to the conclusion of the 47. Chapter,
where according to the order of the Dialogue, the Prince is introduced
querying, Why the Laws of England are not taught in Universities, and why
Degrees inchoate and consummate are not conferred in them. Now the Chancellor
being willing to let no Query of the Prince pass unresolved, after he has
written of the Academies of the Law, (^Inns of Court and Chancery) which are
the subjects of the 49. Chapter, proceeds in this, to a replication in
satisfaction to him; that though the Laws of England do differ from the Civil
Laws in the names and kinds of their Degrees: yet in the import and
signification of them, they are suitable in every notation of desert and
dignity, Licet gradus hujusmodi, etc. says our Chancellor.

Datum tamen in illis, nedum gradus, sed and status quidam gradu Doctoratus non
minus celebris aut solennis, qui gradus servientis ad Legem appellatur.

Nedum status sed and gradus] Concerning this honorable Degree, see my Notes
on the 8. Chapter. Fol. 138, 139, 140. Lord Coventry's Speech Creation of
Sergeants 12 Carol. 1. Anno 1636.
The Honor of Serjeancy, as it is a state and degree in the Law conferred by
the King's Writ or Patent, is not only (says the late learned and honorable
Chancellor the Lord Coventry) A very ancient state and degree, so ancient that
Books are as silent in it as in the Commencement of the Common Law; but also a
very honorable one, the high reward of profound Learning, spotless integrity,
and notable fortune, and whatever tends to a Jurists accomplishment. For
besides that it is coupled in the Stat. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. c. 8. with the great
men of England, and has place next to Knights; Sir Edw. Cook 2 Instit. on Stat.
de Milit. p. 595.
the clause of Status and Gradus in the Writ amounts to some honor like that
of Knighthood, and conveys an Addition of Gentility importing Name and Blood:
and this makes it non minus celebris aut solennis then the Doctorship of the
Law is. For though it has not been said that this Degree has 130 grand
privileges attending it as Ludovicus Bologninus has computed those of a Doctor
of the Law, (thanks be to him, who being himself a Doctor has generously
amassed and propalated the dignity of his degree.) Which none of the learned
Sergeants has ever, that I know, done to the luster of their Dignity (being
more intent on gain by it, then glory from it, which truly I beg their favor
to say, is none of their greatest praise and emeritingest commendation,) yet is
there much undoubtedly to be said and written in exemplification of the renown
and worship that is due to this state and dignity of the learned Long-Robe. Now
though I cannot serve them here in to the proportion I would, because to write
of it strenuously and to the non ultra of the nature of it, would become a
distinct work of some largeness, and a noble Compiler of some more then
ordinary industry and exactness, learnedly and with judgment to do it; though
I say I cannot undertake to write to the amplitude it calls for, yet so far as
my tenuity can contribute thereto I readily shall, being a servant to all and a
particular friend to some of them that are dignified with this state and
degree: in testimony whereof, I shall crave leave according to the method of my
Comment, to write what I find suitable to the matter of our Chancellour's Text,
and apposite to be insisted on in the illustration of his language and meaning.
The form of which solemnity of Creation he thus describes.

Capitalis Iustitiarius de Communi Banco, de Consilio and Assensu omnium
Iusticiariorum, eligere solet, quoties sibi videtur opportunum, and c

This Clause shortly abridges the ancient (and yet in the main practiced) form
of calling Sergeants, from their travel and retirement in study to their reward
and conspicuity; which excellent men in our Chancellours, as in all good times
arrived at, not by any means less ingenious and worthy, then by the merit and
reputation of excellent parts, constant diligence, stanch integrity, approved
fidelity, which, because they best appeared to the Judges, who best know and
judge of them, therefore is the nomination, approbation, and presentation of
such fit persons referred to them (that is) to the Chief Justice of the Common
pleas. For that is the peculiar constellation of Sergeants, and therefore the
presentation, etc. is by the Chief Justice of that Bench, with the advice and
consent of all the Justices, these all so concurring, do eligere] That is, the
Chief Justice of that Bench in the name of all his company, does nominate and
present such as he accounts meet to be Sergeants; For eligere here has not a
notification of fixed designation, but of discreet presentation, upon which,
though acceptance be usual, The Author not ashamed to acknowledge his defects.
1 Verr. 24.
yet I take it as in the Case of the Speaker of the house of Commons, to be
gratiae not debiti, ordinis, non juris; for the eligere solet here] seems to
me (but I ever beg pardon for, and shall recall, when I know my mistakes, which
without Gods mercy and men's pardon, will be many and injurious to me) to be
rather Optionem alicui facere, at eligat utrum velit, as Tully's words are,
then any necessary cause of call thereunto, since I think persons so presented
may be refused to be called, which they could not be, were the eligere soles
unavoidably to be answered with acceptance. This then eligere solet (as in the
Text referred to the Chief Justice) is to be qualified with a quantum in se,
juxta posse officii, and salvis praerogativis Regii beneplaciti, and argues
rather a favor, that accepts for orders sake the persons presented, then right
and necessity of Law and usage so to do.

Quoties sibi videtur opportunum] This is to be understood when the degree of
Sergeants grows thinn by death, or other disablement, when there are not
enough to serve the King and his people in the great affairs of Law; For
Sergeants of old (says the Lord Chancellor Coventry) were men of Learning and
great cunning, who did love the Law for the Law's sake, and intended their
Clyents Cases for God, and a good Conscience sake, in order to which heretofore
Counts and Pleadings were received at the Bar, and every little doubt was
prepared and cleared by a debate there openly before either Demurrer or Issue
were joined, such was the care of the Sergeants not to disadvantage their
clyents cause, Lord Coventry's Speech in Chancery. 12. Car. 1. Anno 1636. at
the creation of Sergeants.
by any sudden or indigested conceptions, or by omissions or neglect, and then
the Prothonotary entre^it on record, thus that Sage. Whence I conclude that
Sergeants being so judicious and careful of men's Causes, no Causes were well
handled without them; and so there was a necessity of them in their number
suitable to their consequence, to be continued: and therefore quoties sibi
videtur opportunam referrs to the discretion of the Court where they plead, to
certify the decay, and present a supplement of it, which succession (though it
may be in the numerical persons declined) yet in the intent of it, to furnish
the Courts with able practicers, and the people with learned Advocates is never
departed from, but for the most part those very men called by writ, who are
presented by the Court, as fit for that state and degree.

Holingshed p. 667 1. Stow p. 716.
Septem vel octo de maturioribus personis] Here I conceive is a definite number
put for an indefinite, 7. or 8. for so many as shall be wanting, and shall be
necessary to be supplied, to the furnishing of the Bar with Sergeants; for in
the call of 4. E. 4. there were but eight, In Anno Idem p. 779.
1494. Temps 10, 11. H. 7.9. In Anno Holingshed. p. 791.
1503 20. H. 7.10. In the Stowes Survey p. 426.
23. H. 8. Eleaven, in the 1. E. 6. six. Holingshed. p. 1210.
In the 9. Eliz. only 7, Idem p. 1314
In the 23. Eliz. eight, so all King James, and King Charles the first's time,
and so in the late call, All which shows, that the number of them was not
only 7. or 8. but as many more or less, as the King pleased; for there being
calls of grace as well as of necessity, Lib. 4. Hospitii Lincolus Inn. p. 178,
179, 180.
the number purely at the pleasure of the King, for He it is that is the
fountain of this, as of all other honor, and by His writ only it is that the
Sergeants are called ad statum and gradum.

De Maturioribus] As the duty of Sergeants is, to counsel the King and people
aright, as heretofore I have shown; so are their abilities to be suitable to
this great trust and confidence the King and his^people have in them; which
that they may well discharge, the Text says, the persons presented to be
called, are de Maturioribus,] that is, those that by being docti and periti, as
other where he calls them, are able and willing to counsel according to Law and
good Conscience; for though Maturus in Authors sometimes signifies festinus
and repentinus, Mature, cito and ante tempus, says Donatus, Soon ripe (as we
say) and soon rotten: yet here de Maturioribus] denotes that settlement of
judgment and ballast of solidity that poyses a man against every extreme, Cic.
7. Verr. Celsus lib. 5. c. 25. Agellius lib. 3. c. 7. Ut enim insirmitas est
puerorum, and ferocitas juvenum, and gravitas jam constantis atatis, sic
senectutis maturitas natural quiddam habet quod suo tempore percipi debeat.
Cic. de Senect. 30.
that which full ripeness and taking in time is in fruit; thus Maturitas
Senectutis as Tully calls it, which is as much of perfection as nature can bear
or arrive at: which is so much the glory of every thing in the apprehension of
wisdom, that whatever is omnibus numeris absoluta is phrased by Maturitas, thus
Cic. Sulpitio. lib. 4.4.14.
Maturitas aetatis, De clar. Oratorib. 4.
Orationis, Pro Caelio, 60.
Virtutis, C.I. in Catil. 22.
Sceleris, is used by Tully. This Maturity applied to time is called a proper
season, or a fit time; and it is that virtue in men by which they do every
action in weight and measure, Maturare, accelerare, ita ut adhibeatur
industriae celeritas and diligentiae tarditas ex quibus duobus contrariis sit
maturitas, ut neque aliquid citius, neque serius fiat.
so as neither too much haste, nor too great sloth dulls the visage and flats
the edge of its design and success; but that it is carried on in an orderly and
advisive way, and has all the advantages that art, nature, and experience can
contribute to its production. This is the sense of de Maturioribus] when as a
man's ascent to honor is expressed by mature extollere aliquem ad summum
Imperium per omnes honorum gradus, Cic. 1. in Catil. 20.
so this learning of Intellect in the Law is the result of many years study and
practice, whereby the student is perfected to become a judicious and
well-advised Advocate in all points of Law-learning and right Judicature,
Speech at the Call. 12. Car. 1. Anno 1636.
which the Lord Chancellor Coventry terms The approved and best-worthy in
every Inn of Court; and our Chancellor by Qui in praedicto generali studio
majus in Legibus profecerunt.

Et qui eisdem Iustitiariis optimae dispositionis esse videtur] This eisdem
Iustitiariis explains the former clause, Capitalis Iustitiarius de consilio and
assensu omnium Iustitiariorum] For because the Chief Justice is the first and
most eminent Justice, therefore his act, when he delivers what he does with
their consent and privity, is the act of them all; which the Law and Custom of
England purposely does to avoid error and iniquity in Judgment, and to
transact judicial things with all their appurtenances by consent and
concurrence of all those that are concerned in and entrusted with it. For since
a Sergeant is a person public, Cook 2 Instit. p. 422. Upon the Stat. 2 West.
c. 30.
and his qualifications, if such as they ought, are extensive in the good or
evil of them, good reason many wise and worthy men should consider and report
his fitness that is to that state and degree to be promoted, and that fitness
in his government over his passions and his severeness of virtue and sobriety
of life, which is optimae dispositionis videri within the Text, and to be most
worthy in the Stat. 42. E. 3. c. 4. see my Notes further on this in the 24.
Chapter.

Et Nomina little ille deliberare solet Cancellario Angliae in scriptis, qui
illico maxdabit per Brevia Regis cuilibet Electorum illorum, quod sit coram
Rege ad diem per ipsum assignatum ad suscipiendum statum and gradum servientis
ad Legem, etc.

A convenient number of grave and learned Apprentices or their Fellows chosen
by the Justices out of the Inns of Court, the Studium Iuris,] the names of them
are to be presented to the Chancellor; who being the Primum Mobile of a
Subject, is the sine qua non to all good warrant and dispatch. Ossirium
Cancellarii est sigillum Regis custodire simul cum controrotulis suis de
praficuo Regni. Flera lib. 2. c. 29.
Therefore since all things that pass by the Great-seal, are passed by this
High Officer of Estate, all Acts of Parliament mention him the first in
Commissions; and when any thing is to pass by the Broad-seal, application is to
him, who, under the King, has the power and custody of it; and as the He, that
according to his great and grave judgment, can either pass or stop it, as it
seems good or evil to him: See Sir. Ed. Cook 4 Instit. c. 8. O^ the Court of
Chancery.
which considered, the usage upon Creation of Sergeants, to present the Lord
Chancellor with the names of such in all or most of the Inns of Court as are
de Maturioribus, and can best perform the office of counselling the King and
his people in gravioribus Legis, is well declared by our Text to be Cancellario
Angliae; for as he only can, so he readily will (no cause of the contrary
appearing to him more then discovered it self to the Judges that present them)
send forth Writs to summon them to appear at a certain day, to take the State
and Degree of a Sergeant at Law.

Mandavit per Brevia] This shows how the persons presented as fit for
Sergeants, are summoned to appear to take their State and Degree, to wit, by
Writ: not by paper-order, or word of mouth, or Message; but Mandato Brevis,
that by a legal Command, see the Notes on the 36, and 37. Chapters. Which
summons is not general to them all, as in case of witnesses many are put into a
Writ; but for the greater publication of the King's regard to them, as to men
of value and learning, a Writ is sent cuilibet Electorum: concerning this also
see the Notes on the 8. Chapter. That which I add thereto is, that so public
does the Law and usage of England account the honor of Serjeanting, that the
duty and solemnity of it is in no sort to be clancular and in hugger mugger,
but openly at the Court, and that in the due Solemnities; which when the
Sergeants of 3 Caroli did not observe, Termin. Pascha in Com. Banco Crook 3
part. Reports p. 67, 85.
but whereas they ought to have presented themselves to the Justices in Robes
of Brown-blew, al. Black-coloured, they came in their party-colored Robes, for
which cause they were sent back again; also they came into the Hall, each of
them having his Servant bearing his Scarlet Hood, his Coyff and Cap before him:
but that also being against course, (for every Servant ought immediately to
follow and not precede his Sergeant) they were directed to go back again and
return in their Gowns of Brown-blew, Part 3. Crook's Reports p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and then they recited their Count, and had their Writs read in Term-time, by
solemn procession of the Inns of Court with them: so I read the resolution of
all the Judges was I Caroli. For as they are to take Oath publicly, and Count,
and have their Robes and Coyff publicly put on; so are they to keep their
Feast publicly, that all men may be witnesses of the King's grace to them, and
their fitness for and resolution to discharge their place, Remembering the
modesty, Lord Coventry's Speech Creation Sergeants. 12 Car. 1636.
fear, care, and conscience of those excellent men that were their
Predecessors, and endeavoring if possible to succeed them.

Et quod ipse in die illo dabit aurum secundum consuctudinem Regui.

As Kings at their Coronations give Medals in token of their Entrance on their
Government, and in memory of the luster of their triumphs; so have they
indulged men of worth in favor with them to symbolize with them in such
partial imitations of greatnnss, as are competible with their being Subjects.
Thus did Viris claris permisit ut eodem cultu, quo and ipse, vel ministeriis
similibus convivia exhiberent. Julius Capitol. 145, 146. Edit Sylb.
Antoninus Philosophus out of his great respect to learned and brave men; so
probably did Alexander, who loving Ulpian and other learned men at his meals,
and being pleased with the Music of their wisdom and science, Cum inter suos
convivaretur, aut Ulpianum, aut doctos homines adhibebat, ut haberet fabulas
literatas, quibus se recreari dicebat and pasci. Aelius Lamprid in Severo p.
215. Edit. Sylb.
thought no donary too magnificent for them. From this use of good Kings and
Cheifs so to do, probably grew the example of our Ancestors, and the use to
our Chancellour's time (as I think) for Sergeants upon Creation-dayes, to
bestow pieces of gold, artlyly formed and inscribed, in token of their
admission to honor by the King s favor, which I ground upon the former
insinuations, and that which is additional to it in the Text; for
notwithstanding there is mention of Rings after in this Chapter, yet here it is
said, Dabit aurum secundum consuetudinem. But of this, as of all other the
Solemnities of Sergeants, because our Chancellor who was long an Ancient of
Lincolns Inn, under the name of Fortescue senior, and I take to be serjeanted
about the 12. of H. 6. thinks it too tedious to discourse, Cum Scripturam
majorem illa exigant, as his words are; I thereupon restrain my pen the labor
to enlarge, referring the plenary satisfaction in it to such discourses as are
purposely intended for illustration of it. One of the most punctual accounts
whereof, that I have seen, Lib. 4. Hospitii Lincolns Inn p. 178, 179, 180, and
seq.
is that of the manner of proclaiming Edward the Sixth, and making Judges and
Sergeants, with the proceeding of the Sergeants Feast kept in Lincolns Inn Hall
1 E. 6.

Scire tamen te cupio, quod adveniente die sic statuto electi illi inter alias
solennitates festum celebrant and convivium, ad instar Coronationis Regis.

Though our Chancelour waves the less material Solemnities, yet the main and
most conspicuous he here describes, as first, the punctuality of the day of
their appearance being the return of the Writ, Die quidem Dominico mercata
celebrari, populique conventus agi, nisi flagitante necessitate, planissima
vetamus; ipso praterea die Sacrosancto a venatione and opere terreno prorsus
omni quisque abstinete. Inter leges Eccles. Canuri c. 22. Spelm. Council. p.
546. See the Statute 3. Car. c. 1.
which is called dies statutus; for as God did set apart Diem statutum, his
Holy day, as that sacred time of his especial Worship, which was in the end and
mystery of it moral, and after by positive Laws directed other times for other
services, yea as Solomon from the light of nature tells us, there is a time
appointed for all things under the Sun: so all Lawgivers in all ages, have
consecrated set times to particular occasions, and from them not receded but
upon grounds equivalent to the reason of their first appointment. In order to
which our Laws have Set days for Set purposes: Days of Lent, rather Leanth,
when men ought to intend devotion, and other works of Charity, for remedy of
their souls, as the words of the statute 31. E. 3. c. 15. And the keeping
whereof is rather in ceasing from sin, and abstaining from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul; then in bate abstinence from flesh, and so is expounded
in the statute of 2. and 3, E. 6. c. 19. Holy days, for calling men off
corporal labor, and recreating them by the service of God, and pleasure of
recreation 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 3. Set days for Rent those mentioned 32. H. 8.
c. 48. For keeping Courts 9, H. 3. c. 35.31. E. 3. c. 15.2. E. 6. c. 25. For
the Assizes of novel disseisin, Mortdauncester and Darrein presentment 3. E. 1.
c. 48. These together with days limited for payment of bonds, election of
Officers, determination of nonage, as the Law precisely looks upon the
observation of: so also of appearances to answer suites, give evidence, and
accept dignity, which day statuted by the return of the Writ, the summoned do
observe and appear at, and then and there after Oath taken, Robes and Coyf put
on, and Count rehearsed more consult and solenni, they return to some place of
receipt and convenience, Festum celebrant and Convivium] That is, as we say,
they make Holy day, and give up their study in sacrifice to the disports and
entertainments of their friends; they feast, and that convivando, as a
testimony of their friendly amity, respects, and civility each to other, as
common slips from one and the same stock, the Humane nature. For though
Convivium, in the latitude of it be any familiar meeting, Deipnos. lib. 5. p.
192. 5. In Verr. Lilius Gyraldus lib. De Annis and Mensibus p. 601. Festum
quiequid latum and feriatum. Nonius. Lavamur and tondemur and convivimus ex
consuetudine. Quintil. lib. 1. c. 12.
suppose for service of the Gods, (in which sense Atheneus tells us, (...),
etc. Every Convivation was of old in honor to the Gods, and was celebrated
with Songs and Hymns, sacred to them: and Tully tells us of Gladiatorum
Convivia, which Lollius was placed in.) Though I say, Convivia signify this at
large; yet here in the Text it imports meeting only for eating, drinking, and
friendly delight each of other, and thus it is applied to the Sergeants Feast.
Which Hospitable reception of the Sergeants friends, and the great states of
the Nation called Serjeants-Feast, is a solemnity answerable to antiquity in
all Nations upon great occasions, whether particular or public. Thus we read
of Genesis 19.3.
Lot's feasting the Angels, and Genesis 21.8. c. 29. v. 22.
Abraham's feasting at Isaac's weaning, Of Labaus at his Daughters Marriage,
and 40. v. 20.
Pharaoh's on his birth day, of Iud. 14.10. 1 Kings 12.32. 1 King. 8.65.
Hestar. 1.3.
Sampson, when he went to his wife, and Ieroboam's feast, of Solomon's Feast at
the Dedication, and of Ahasuerus his feast, of these feasts the Holy story
tells us. Profane Authors also tell us of Feasts, (...) is mentioned in Homer,
which Turuebus comments upon, Credo quod feriis hominum conventus celebris
epulantium latitia coire soleat. Advers. lib. 27. c. 7.
Grave and Great Plutarch confirms this, (...), etc. Feasts are the communions
of serious and merry words and actions, and therefore not all are admitted
thereunto, but only friends, who pleasingly and pleasantly eat, drink, and
talk over their good Viands. The same Author recites to us Feasts that they
had upon all great occasions, Moral. p. 748. 527. 715. 717. 293. 362. 276. 671.
310. 280. 446. 355. 655. 334. 715. 293. 280. 715. 275.
as their Agrionia and Amatoria festa, their Bacchanalia, Carina, Carila,
Charmosyna, Consalia, and almost twenty others of like nature; and he brings in
one rarely marshalling Feasts, (...). Symposiacon lib. 1. p. 618. Edit. Paris.

Convivia agitant and ampla and assidad, it a fere patentissimis locis ut
sexcenteni simut discumberent. Id Claudio c. 32.


that is, not placing young and old, rich and poor by themelves, but so placing
them, that those that abound may give to those that want, and they that want
may be filled with the plenty of those that have more then they know well how
to want or how to have. The Latins also had their Convivia upon great
occasions, and those opiparous, and extravagant; thus Suetonius mentions
Claudius his Feasts, not only copious to the capacity of 600 guests at a time,
but very often and very publicly, So Sueton in Augusto c. 1.
Augustus, Lamprid. p. 203. Edit.
Heliogabalus, Vopiscus p. 303. Sylburg.
Carinus, Jul. Capitol. 145. c. 65.
Pertinax, Lamprid. In Severo. p. 215.
Severus J. Capitol. p. 151.
Marcus, and the rest, abounded in feasting, yea that famous or infamous feast
in Vitellius his time, in which there was (as Genial. Di^rum. lib. 5. c. 21. p.
763.
Alex. ab Alex. tells us) 2000 dishes of choice fishes, and 7000 of ^owle.

From these, Feasting came in use among the Germans and Us, who celebrated all
Solemnities with feasting, yea not only the Coronations of Princes,
Installations of St. George's Knights Deliverances from evils, and victories
over them, Commemorations of Magistrates anniversaries, Consecrations of
Bishops, Calls of Sergeants, and such like Great things are celebrated with
feasting; but even Marriages of Children, choice of Officers in Corporations,
and every thing that is of a more then ordinary nature, is accompanied with
feasting: And that not without much advantage to love, and riches moving to and
fro in the Nation by reason of it. Amongst these notable feasts our stories
remember us of that of H. 3. Anno 1236. kept in Westminster Hall, for
entertainment of the Emperors Ambassador, who came for Isabel the Kings
Sister, and at Christmas the same year, Hollingshed p. 219.
the Treasurer Havershill, by Command of the King, caused on the Circumcision
day 6000 poor people to be fed at the same place But above all feasts, Stow's
Survey p. 520. E. Rotul. Turris London. Loco codem. M. Paris. p. 606. Stow's
Survey, p. 521. Holingshed p. 579. Stow's Survey p. 426. 427.
famous is that Marriage Feast of Richard Earl of Cornwall, King H. 3. brother,
with the Countess of Provence her daughter, where there were told (says Stow)
thirty thousand dishes of meat. Add to these the feast of Pentecost held by E.
2. Anno 1326. and that notable Christmas one Temps R. 2. at which there was
spent 26. or 27. oxen, 300. sheep every day, besides Foul and other provision
without number. So at the Coronation of the Lady Katharine, Temps H. 5. These
and the like of later times have been great Feasts. Also of Lord Majors Feasts,
not only the yearly ones, of his as it were Coronation, but that famous one of
Sir Henry Piccard, in Anno 1363. is honorably remembered. So are the Sergeants
feasts (the discourse of which occasions the mention of all the rest) those of
4, E. 4.10, and 11, and 20 H. 7.23. H. 8.1 E. 6.9 Eliz. 23 Eliz. and these
latter in King James and King Charles, the blessed Father, and King Charles our
now beloved Sovereign's reign, are not beneath any of the former, being full of
the Noblest persons of the Nation, furnished with the best cheer, graced with
the best order that wit, Legum conditores festos instituerunt dies ut ad
hilarihomines invitarent Varius nobis sermo fuit, ut in convivio nullam rem
usque ad exitum adducens, sed alii aliunde transiliens. Ep 64.
art, and cost could set them out by. For as on feast-dayes, men have ever been
cheery, recreative, and gay, wholly giving up themselves to pleasure and
pastime; so at Meals of these days they have had all recreation imaginable,
not only that Rodomontado prittle prattle (as I may call that chat which comes
to nothing) making only noise, which Seneca describes, but also sundry other,
more pleasing and jovial freedoms, They eat freely, being entertained by those
that did Tibullus lib. 1. Eleg 9. Propertius Epigram. 44. Lib. 1. c. 7.
facere lauta convivia, yea and those plena mensa, They drank freely, taking it
for granted that it was a rite due to feasts Hilerare convivia Baccho, they had
Singing and Music in their feasts. And though gravity ever discountenanced
obscene Cantings, and such loose sport as did obscenitate convivium obstrepere,
as Quintilian's phrase is; yet joviality and mirth that was not purely vicious,
all ages allowed, as that which repetita convivii laetitia does ornare and
apparare convivium, Lib. 13. Cic. 6. Verr. 39. Lib. 5. c. 21.
as Tacitus expresses it. I know the Gymnosophists declined this, for they, as
Alexander ab Alexandro tells us, appointed at feasts, that every one should
make forth some action of theirs, advantageous to mankind; and he that could
not, went away unfeasted, and the Persians before meals did discourse of
modesty, the Graecians proposed riddles, and he that best unfoulded them had
the reward, the Spartans sang and played on the Harp the praises of brave and
dispraises of base men, the Sybarites brought in horses so musically trained,
that they would keep time with the instrument, and the Indians and Samnites
were wont to fence and try skill and valor at sharps, Yet the Romans bringing
in Jesters and Actors of mirth and abuse, probably occasioned our custom of
having Music, Singing, Justing, Tilting, Interludes and Mis-rule at and after
feasts. Thus publicly as during their eating our great feasts have ever
Music and Singing; Holingshed p, 392. 646. 219.
so after, Dancing and Exercises. So our Stories tell us 34 E. 3. the Mayor and
Aldermen of London, Justed against all comers in Rogation-week, so 36 H. 6. in
Whitsunday week, at the Tower, so 12 H. 3. at the Marriage of Q. Eleanor, so at
Richmond, 7 774.
H. 7. the like, 8 p. 818. 873. 892.
14, 18 H. 8. and P. 1316. 1317. 1318.
23 Elizabeth, to welcome the French Lords, Tilting and other exercises were;
and to this day upon grand days, Music, Masks, and Comedies are: and all
this to express the fullness of the joy and the liberality of the welcome, which
is further advanced by what follows.

Quod and continuabitur per dies septem] This shows that Sergeants Feasts are
not Misers ones, one meal and have done; but as noble in their nature and
plenty, so in their repetition and continuation, for a whole week, per dies
septem] Concerning the sacredness of numbers I have discoursed in the Notes on
the 25, and 26. Chapters. The number 7 of all other is most sacred, not only
(as before I have showed) from God's sanctification of the seventh portion of
time to himself, Fulgentius lib. 3. Mythologia. Turneb. Advers. lib. 19. c. 31.
which occasioned the Jews to put a great value on the seventh Month and
seventh year; but also for that this number was in their opinion a most
complete number, having a double three ( and tria sunt omnia) and one over and
above in it, and so seeming to be the peculiar number of excellency and weight,
a number of capacity and emphasis. Thus in solemn Oaths they obliged each other
by 7. so Abraham said to Abimelech, These seven Ewe-lambs shall thou take at my
hand, Genesis 21.2^.
that they may be a witness unto me that I dug the Well, wherefore he called
that place Beersheba, because there they swear both of them: thus in
reverences, Genesis 33.3. Genesis 50.10. Exodus 13.6. Exodus 29.30. Lev. 8.11. c. 12.2.
c. c. 13.5. c. 23.39. c. 25.8. c. 26.28. Numb. 8.2. c. 28.11. c. 31.19. Deuteronomy.
16.3. etc.
Seven times Jacob bowed to Esau: thus in Mourning. So Joseph made a mourning
for his father seven days: thus in eating of unleavened bread seven days, the
last of which shall be a feast to the Lord: so in sundry other things which are
quoted in the Margent. From this opinion of the number 7, the Jews kept their
great Feasts for 7 days; so did Solomon the Feast of Dedication mentioned 1
King. 8.65. which it is said he kept 7 days and 7 days, that is but 7 days in
time, though 14 in the Solemnity, because as much bounty and great
entertainment was shown in that short time, as would have taken up twice the
time had it not been extraordinarily improved; this I collect from v. 66. where
it is said, The eighth day he sent the people away: which he could not have done
had he kept the feast longer then seven days. Heptas, coleber apud Persas
numerus. Grot. in loc. Drusius in cap. 2. v. 12. Ezr. 7.14.
And the Nations hence observed 7 days to betoken the Grandeur of Feasts; so
Ahashuerosh his Feast was for 7 days, Esther and the Eunuchs that stood before
him being (...), as Josephus phrases them, were in number seven, with whose
counsel the King feasted himself: which with other such things considered, the
Sergeants feast continuing for a week, which is 7 days, is in the nature of it
very sumptuous and costly. So it follows.

Nec quilibet Electorum illorum sumptus sibi contingentes circa Solennitatem
Creationis sua, minoribus expensis perficiet, quam mill and sexcentorum
Scutorum, quo expensae quas octo sic electi tunc refundent, excedent summam
duodecim millium and octingentorum Scutcrum.

Herein the account of the whole, and every particular's expense at his call to
be Sergeant, is set down, 1600 Scuta, which here if he means half-rose Nobles
at 3. s. 4. d. a piece, comes to 266. l. 13. s. 4. d. to each of them, which
being multiplied by 8. the number in the Text mentioned to be called, it makes
up the 3200. Marks here in the Text; which sum being in pounds 2133. 6.8. at
20 s. to the pound, makes a great sum of money, especially in our
Chancellour's time, when though things were risen higher then in H. 2. time
they were, (when a Measure of wheat for bread for 100 men was by the King's
Officers valued but at one shilling, Spelman in Gloss. ad vocam Firma.
the carcass of a fat Ox, 1. s. of a Sheep, 4. d. and for Provender for 20
horses but 4. d) I say, though in H. 6. time things were raised above this
proportion; yet were things then so cheap that this sum amounts to near as
much as 7000. l. now, and declares the state and degree neither cheaply come
by, nor cheaply to be maintained, and therefore to become only those who have
Law in abundance to answer the learning and duty, and estate enough to support
the dignity and equipage of it. And therefore if it so happened that some were
returned to be Mature men, Cook on Stat. de Militibus. 2 Instit. p. 597.
fit for their skill and integrity to be Serjeanted, if fortune they had not,
they could upon refusal but be fined, and that but once, which they were better
to submit to, then take a degree to impoverish their family. For as Honor is a
beauty when it has fortune suitable thereunto; so in the absence of it, is it a
great burden, which did men well consider, they would not when they have
Honor, squander away their Estates the support of it: or when they have it
not, desire Honors to dishonor those Honors and themselves by want of
perquisites thereto.

Expense then they must be at, and a great one too, rather more then
now-a-dayes; for then Sergeants (as all other Honors) were fewer then now, and
those only had calls to them who were men of great estates, able to live like
themselves in all points of greatness suitable to their Degree, which was
expensive not only as to the quantity predescribed, (which I take to be the
charge of their Robes, Attendants, Diet, and Equipage:) but also further in
Donaries of Rings which they are to give: so the Text proceeds.

Quilibet little dabit Annulos de aur^ ad valentiam in teto quadraginta librarum
ad minus monetae Anglicanae.

This (as I said before) is to show that public inaugurations into Honor, as
it is accompanied with feasting friends; so those feastings are attended with
Donaries, probably pieces of gold to some, and certainly Rings to others. For
as Sovereign Princes gave gifts at their Coronations, Esther 2.18.
as it is said of Ahasuerus, That at his Feast he gave gifts according to the
State of a King; so he gave to his Queen (...), a City Regis Persarum uxoribus
in Calceamentum data, Grot. in loc. ex Herod. lib. 2.
as Grotius notes, that is, to buy her shoes and shoe-strings, like our saying,
To buy pinns with. And as Princes to this day do give Medals and other money,
and equivalent rewards at their Coronations; so do they indulge Subjects
honored by them to bestow some such rays of bounty as testify their
admission into Greatness, and their minds prepared for and fitted to it. These
gifts our Text names proper for the Sergeants feast to be Rings. Plutarchus in
Questionibus Romany, p. 269.

Eutrop. lib. 1. Breviarii. p. 559. ad Initium.

Messala Corvinus, lib. de Augusti Progerie p. 337.


Annulus from Annus the computation of time consisting anciently of ten
Months, whereof March was the first; whence perhaps it follows that the Reigns
of Princes, whose Governments depend much on Martialness, are computed from
March the Month of Mars: or twelve Months, as after the Romans concluded it,
making January the entrance into them. Dedit Annulum in signum potestatis quam
ci faciabat, cujas moris exemplum habes. Genesis 41, 42.

Grot. in loc. Esther. 3.10.


I say this Annulus the diminutive of Annus being round as time in its motion
is, is the Emblem of amity, acceptance and honor. In this sense the giving of
Rings is not, but it is understood as a remembrance and token of friendship and
love, Sueton in J. Caesare. p. 7.
Iure Annulorum, a letting them into relation, Budaeus in Pandect. p. 52, 53,
54. Edit. Vascos.
and into a kind of participation of honor with them. In Authors I read of
many Rings, the Fl. Vopis^. in Aurelian. ad sinem vita.
Annulus sigillaricius which Aurelian made for himself and his daughter; the
Annulus fatidicus and the Annulus pensilis fatidicus in Lib. 29. in Valentin.
p. 481.
Marcellinus; their Turneb. Advers. lib. 20. c. 2. p 678.
Annuli aestivi and hyberni, which were heavier or lighter as the season of the
year was hot or cold; Lib. 33. c. 1. and lib. 20. c. 2.
and their Annuli Samothracii, which were of Iron inlayed or welted with gold;
the Annulus signatorius, which Sit Annulus tuus signatorius non ut vas aliquod,
sed tanquam ipse tu. Cic. In quae verba Turnebus. Ne passim sinat Annulum suum
signatorium a quovis, ut domestica vasa tractari, sed eo solus utatur. Advers.
lib. 27. c. 1. p. 1005.

Alciat ad Legem 74. p. 180.

Brechaeus loco codem.

Turneb, Advers. lib. 6. c. 22.

Majores nostri Imperatores superatis hostibus, optime Republ. gesta, scribas
suos Annulis aureis in Concione donarunt. Cic. 5. verr.


Tully relates to when he gives the charge it should not be made common, but be
trusted in no hands but either our own or those we know to be faithful, and as
such, love them as our selves. These were of old engraven with the device of
figures in appropriation to families, like Arms at this day; and they were of
Iron to Servants, of Silver to Libertines, and of Gold to Freemen Hence was it
that the chief Servants of Conquerours had from them gifts of golden Rings; and
Ambassadors from the Romans, though they wore Iron-Rings; at home, yet abroad
wore Gold-ones. By which appears, that as Rings were tokens of Relation, and
Rings of Gold of Nobilitation; so these Rings of Sergeants import love, bounty,
and freedom to all those they are sent to: nay, they imply an expectation from
them to witness his Marriage to the Law, and his disposal of Rings as his
wedding-favour. For as women are wedded to their Husbands by Rings, and Doctors
to their Profession by Rings; so is the Sergeant evidenced to be wedded to the
Law by his donation of Rings, as the Ensign of his Creation in the state and
dignity of a Sergeant. And these our Text says cost the Sergeant at least
forty pounds sterling, which is as much as near 200. pounds now, And no less
do I think the Sergeants at this day do spend annulis aureis, in their
old-fashioned joint rings.

Et been recolit Cancellarius ipse, quod dum ille statum and gradum hujusmodi
receperat, ipse solvit pro annulis quos tunc distribuit quinquaginta libras,
quae sunt trecenta scuta.

This the Chancellor introduces to show that as he was not made a Judge
without the feast and charge of giving Rings, when he was made a Sergeant; so
he did not sparingly, but to the full proportion of his degree bestow those his
Sergeants Rings: For though, when he was Serjeanted, I yet cannot find, yet I
guess it about the 12 H. 6. which was 8. years before the 20 year of that
King, when I find him by Writ of the five and twentieth of January, Pat. 20.
H, 6. part prima memb. 10. in Turri. 25. Land. part. 1. M. 12. 32. M. 9.
Claus, 2^ M. 21. 25 M. 24. 27 M. 24. 28 M. 26. 29 M, 31. 31 M. 31. 33. M. 31.
38 M. 30. 31 M. 29.
constituted Chief Justice, and so summoned 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 38
years of that King, yet that he was Serjeanted is plain from this been recolit
Cancellarius ipse, and from this charge he was at in it, which though it were
great, coin not being above 1/3 value of that now it is, yet may easily arise
to the mentioned sum, when presentment of rings are as follows.

Solet namque unusquisque servientium hujusmodi tempore Creationis suae, dare
cuilibet Principi, Duci, and Archiepiscopo in solennitate illa praesenti, ac
Cancellario and Thesaurario Angliae, annulum ad valorem octo sontorum.

This Clause shows the orderly distribution of the rings, made by the
Sergeants, according to the nature and quality of the personages they have to
invite, and entertain. For the ancients, and we when we do wisely and well
after them, do not account our entertainment good, unless it be every way
complete, tempestivum convivium; and Varro as Lib. 13. c. 11, 1. Si belli
homunculi collecti. 2. Si lectus locus 3. Si tempus lectum. 4. apparatus non
neglectus. Turneb. Advers. lib. 6. c. 16. 24. H. 8. c. 13 31. H. 8. c. 10
A. Gellius quotes him, makes four things to go to the perfection of a right
entertainment, good company, a fit place, a fit time, and order and plenty of
every thing, all these are notably met at our Sergeants Feast; for here are
lecti homines, non homunculi, but hominum magnates, primaria capita, Cuilibet
Principi says the Text.] That Is of the Kings family, either Sons in descent or
Cosens, and of the Blood Royal, who are all in the Text intended; For Principes
intends somewhat more then Duces, or Archiepiscopi, which none are in England,
but those of the Blood, unless we'll understand Dux and Archiepiscopus to be
the species of Princeship in our Chancellours sense, which may and may not be;
yet I confess the Arch Bishop of Canterbury his Grace, as he has the title and
place of a Prince, so, as first after the King's Children and his Vicegerent
has the Chief place, and so in the Statute 21. H. 8. c. 13. It Is every
Archbishop and Duke, which precedence the Religion of the Nation has ever
given, in ordine ad sacra. To mind them no doubt that as the Nation honors
them for God's sake, so they should love, watch over, and instruct the Nation
by holy life and sound doctrine for God's sake and the peoples salvation; which
while they do, they will be worthy double honor for their Callings sake.

Cancellario and Thesaurario Angliae] These are the high Officers of England,
those that have custody of the seal by which Charters, Patents, and Offices
pass, and of the rents, incomes and profits of the Crown, by which the expenses
of the Kingly office is defrayed, These the Statute of 31. H. ^8. c. 10. says,
being of the degree of Barons, shall sit and be placed on the hither part of
the form on the same side, above all Dukes, except only such as shall happen
to be the Kings Son, the Kings Brother, the Kings Uncle, the Kings Nephew, or
the Kings Brothers or Sisters Sons. As they are of the great Officers of
England, and have pre-eminence and place accordingly, so are by our Text, if at
the feast they be present, but if not it is sent them, (and happy the Sergeant
whom they are pleased to accept it from) a Ring of 26. shillings 8. pence
according to the value of our Chancellour's age.

Et cuilibet Comiti and Episcopo] Earls, Barons and Bishops are ranked here
together, and their Rings are according to the abatement of their degree, a
noble abated in their value, which is done for orders sake, that the Presents
may suit with the persons, and to reduce the charge into reasonable bounds; for
of the former rank there are but few in number, possibly ten may be the most in
any time, not so many in most reigns, but of Earls, Bishops and Barons many
are, and therefore those present, or whom of them the Sergeants please, have
their Rings sent them, to the value of twenty shillings.

Custodi privati Sigilli, Capitalibus Iustitiariis, Baroni de scaccario, ad
valorem sex scutorum.

These, though no Barons, yet are of Chief note and high honor in the nation,
and brought in under equality of Present with the former, and that for the
height of the honor and trust they have in the transaction of judicial things.
Hence the prementioned Statute 31 H. 8. c. 10, ranks the Lord Privy Seal (whom
I take to be the Custos privati Sigilli here, amongst the great Officers next
after the high Chancellor, and high Treasurour; 25 H. 8. c. 16.
And the Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, being the Proto-Iudges of the High
Courts at Westminster, deserve accounts with the best of subjects, no Barons,
and so are in all public Instruments of state declared; and therefore when as
in the Statute of the 21 H. 8. c. 13. omission was made of some of them, as to
a Chaplin, supplement was made by the 25. c. 16. and they allowed a Chaplin to
attend them in their house.

Omni Domino Baroni Parliamenti, and omni Abbati and notabili Praelato ac magno
Militi tunc praesenti, custodi etiam Rotulorum Cancellariae Regis and cuilibet
Iustitiario, annulum ad valentiam unius marcae.

Because differences there must be in Rings, as there are in the quality of the
persons to whom they are presented, and that Rings of that breadth as Sergeants
Rings are, cannot be in weight less then a mark; therefore are all these
particular persons here nominated, Omni Domino Baroni Parliamenti] that is, to
every Member of the Upper-House, under the degree of an Earl, and that sits
there en son proper droit, and is thither summoned, there to sit as one of the
Peerage, Omni Abbati] which intends not only Abbots Sovereigns, 16 R. 2. c. 6.
(as they were called who were subject to no Bishops but were within their
Monastery absolute, and were Lords of Parliament, and thither came as Bishops
did and do) Of this rank in the Parliament 49 H. 3. there were 102. in E. 2.
time only 56. in E. 3. time, Spelm. Gloss. p. 4.
decrescente Cleri potentia and aestimatione, only 33. so they continued under
40 from E. 3. time to the dissolution of Monasteries; For though there were in
6 E. 3.23 more then the old 33. yet the Roll of 23. says, Istis Abbatibus and
prioribus subscriptis non solebat scribi in aliis Parliamentis.

13 E. 1. c. 41.
Et notabili Praelato] This term might take in some remarkable person that is
comprehendable under none of the former notions, other Prelates stat. 14 R. 2.
c. 4. perhaps some Deanes that had government, such as were those five, called
by Writ to Parliament in 49 H. 3. These or such like Governors of some Royal
Hospitals, being in a remote sense Praelati notabiles, may be within the intent
of our Chancellor, as magno Militi] may be either a Knight of great office in
Court, such as the honorable offices of the Court were fitted with temps H. 6.
(For then Lords and Knights were rare and and unordinary) or else such as were
magni opibus and proficuis, men of great fortunes, families, and revenues;
Custodi etiam Rotulorum Cancellariae Regis] See the notes on c. 24. fol. 331.
whereby it appears how great an Officer this is, when as in the absence of the
Lord High Chancellor, he is the first President (as I may so say) in the high
Court of Chancery, and in the Rolls in afternoons, orders causes that in Court
are not dispatched by reason of multitude of businesses, and interposition of
circumstances of delay.

Similiter and omni Baroni de seaccario] These are the Kings Justices or
Judges, though otherwise named then those of either Bench are; for that the
Normans, who introduced that Court into England, do call their Judges and
Magistrates, Solum Iudices Scaccarii vocamus Barons ex prisco Gallorum usu,
qui Iudices and Magistratus quoslibet Barons appellabants and hoc quidem in
causa est, quod cateri apud nos Iudices non sunt dicti Barons quia sola hac
Curia e Gallia scilicet Normannia suum ad nostra duxit specimen. Spelman.
Gloss. p. 85.
Barons, as we in England called them Judges and Justices; which Sir Henry
Spelman instructs me in, not without great probability of truth: for the word
Baron signifies freedom and power to judge and determine matters within
themselves, as it is understood in the Title of Court-Barons, Barons of London
and the Cinque Ports. 3 Instit. p. 147.
These Barons then of the Exchequer are the same in power and honor with other
Iustitiarios suos in Scaccario. Fleta lib. 2. c. 25. Crook 3 part. Report. 6
Carol. Term. Mich. p. 203.
Judges, and hold their places quamdiu se been gesseri^t, which Chief-Baron
Walter, that prudent and learned Judge held his place by to his death, though
he were under displeasure, which if he had been patented durante been placit^,
he could not have done. Barones] eo quod suis locis Barons sedere solebant.
Fleta lib. 2. c. 26.

Capitalis Baro Scaccarii locum illic obtinet Capitalis Iustitiarii Angliae,
cujus ^lim in hac Curia seeds erat Primaria, maximus hic utique Baro, and ex
potentioribus Regni magnatibas. Spelman in Gloss. ad vocem Bar^.


The Chief-Baron of this Court was in Edward the Third's time a great Peer,
which is the reason that by the 14 E. 3. c. 7. he is named next after the
Chancellor and Treasurer, before the Cheif-Justices of either Bench: but when
he became a Lawyer, as in our Chancellour's time he was, then he comes, as in
the Statute of 33 H. 6. c. 1, next after the Cheif-Justices of either Bench.

Regis Camerariis] This I take not to be so much the Great Officers of the
King's Household, 2 Instit. p. 332. 1 Instit. sect. 153. 2 Instit. p. 380. Lib.
2. ^. 70. Edit. Seld. Officium Camerariorum in recepta consistit in tribus,
clav^s arcanum bajulant, pecuniam numeratam ponderant, and per centenas libras
in sorulas mittunt. Ockam cap. quid, sit Scaccarium.
the High-Chamberlain or Vice-Chamberlain mentioned in the Statute 13 E. 1. c.
41.16 R. 2. c. 6. as the Chamberlains of the Exchequer mentioned in the Statute
7 E. 6. c. 1.51 H. 3. called now Receivers, anciently Chamberlains; Fleta
intends these in those words, Habetis per hoc Statutum de servientibus Ballivis
Camerariis, and aliis quibuscunque Receptoribus; these giving daily attendance
on the King's Revenue-affairs, are taken notice of by the Sergeants, and
presented Rings to, as all other notable Officers and men are in the King's
Courts, as Registers, Clerks of the Crown, Protonotaryes, Philizers, and
eminent Atturneys, who if they do not all come under the notion of Officiarii
in Curiis Regis ministrant, yet are introduced under those words Notabiles
viri, and have Rings according to their quality presented them.

Et ultra hos ipsi dant Annulos aliis amicis suis] Still this augments the
charge, for because the Sergeant cannot invite all to their Feast, and there
present them with Rings, therefore he supplies the omission of one part of his
friendlyness by addition of the other part, presentation of Rings, which they
make to those of their acquaintance, Clyents and others as they call and treat
as friends; these, if any, are the true meriters of Rings and hearts too, if
truly friends they be. Which our Text intends not of that severe and solid
friendship, which the Moralist calls A most matchless good which works prepared
hearts in each other to gratify with all their might and main those they love,
Nihil tamen aeque oblectaverit animum quam amicitia fidelis and dulcis; quantum
bonum est, ubi sunt praeparata pectora in qua tuto secretum omne descendat,
quorum conscientiam minus quam tuam timeas, quorum sermo solicitudinem leuiat,
sententia c^nsilium expediat, hilaritas tristitiam dissipet, conspectus ipse
delectet. Lib. de Tranquil. p. 681.
and to be wanting in no kindeness and representation their power reaches to,
whose truth is so intense and conscience so upright, that a friend has cause to
mistrust himself rather then them, I say, our Text by Amicis does not intend
these, for these are none Such'ss; should Rings be restrained to these, our
Sergeants would present but few: for I presume they, as other men, Amicos
primos habaerunt and secundos nunquam veros. Lib. 6. De Benesic. p. 116.
may say over Seneca's words of Gracchus and Livius Drusius, They have many
great and rich friends but few true ones: But Amicis suis] imports acquaintance
by ordinary civility and treatment of courtesy, friends of breeding and study
with them, of kindeness and respect toward them. These friends (as common
notions of friendship pass and are understood) are they for whom, besides what
is ex debito as it were, (as to the prementioned are to be given) supernumerary
Rings are provided, and that according to their dignity and degree. Which
brings to my mind the Analogy of the use in London, where the Liveries of the
Societies feasted by the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs (whom they present more
Civitatis with gold, some more, some less, but the least to the proportion of
two pieces a Head) have in the end of their year returned them a Donary of a
gilt spoon, either an ordinary one or a 3. l. one, or more, according to the
magnitude of the present in return turn whereof it is. From whence, as well as
from the Sergeants Feasts and Presents, I collect, that feasts were anciently
accompanied with gifts, and those gifts of gold or gilt, as most pure, rich,
and orient, betokening the wealth, integrity, and good will of the Presenter.
And in the Serjeant's case surely the Ring bestowed by him on his friends being
of gold for the matter, and of orbicular form, which is the figure of
perfection, imports constancy and uninterruptedness in the study of the Law; to
enable themselves whereunto, Lord Coventry's Speech at Creation of Sergeants 12
Car. 1. Anno 1636.
They should not only content themselves to have read the Yearbooks, but to
read them again, that they may learn them better: and as they attend the Kings
Courts for their practice, so to attend them for their learning, remembering
still that the degree they have is the highest in their Profession, and their
learning ought to be suitable and proportionable to their Degree, which is
superlative. They are the words of a Dictator in their study and learning,
whose advice is apposite and serious.

Similiter and liberatam magnam panni unins secta, quam ipsi tunc distribuent
in magna abundantia, nedum familiaribus suis, sed and amicis aliis and notis,
qui eis attendent and ministrabunt tempore solennitatis praedicta, etc.

As they please the eyes of some with the show of their proceeding, and the
ears of others with the gravity and learning of their Counts and Speeches, the
Fingers of some with Rings, and the bellyes of others with good cheer; so do
they cloth the backs of sundry with good and grave Liveries. Which Liberatae,
though they are not displayes of Enfranchisement and Independance, as 5 R. 2.
c. 15.21 R. 2. c. 5.27 H. 8. c. 10.32 H. 8. c. 1.
Livery is, which is frequent in the Law; yet are badges of such graceful
service, as men of great and good rank that are Masters of themselves and of
others too, notwithstanding submit to. And therefore though in the Statutes 1
R. 2. c. 7. 16 R. 2. c. 4. 20 R. 2. c. 1. 1 H. 4. c. 7. 8 H. 6. c. 4. 8 E. 4.
c. 3. 11. H. 7 c. 3. 19 H. 7. c. 14. 2 E. 6. c. 2. Liveries are Badges of
service, when we call a servant's coat his Livery. Yet in regard that in the
Statute of 2 H. 4. c. 21. mention is made of the King's honorable Livery to
the Lords Temporal, and to Knights and Esquires, and in the 13 of the same
King, c. 1. mention is made of Liveryes to men of Law. And in as much as at St.
Georg's Feast, the Lord Mayor's Show, and Sheriffs appearances at Assizes to
attend the King's Judges and deliver the Goal, men of very good quality do put
themselves for the Honor of the persons they pretend to, in their Liveries;
yea even Princes themselves when at Marriages and in Camps they wear the
Bridegrooms favors or Generals colors, are in a sort in their Livery, as part
of their train. And as it is part of the honor of the created Sergeants, so no
dishonor to their Attendants, to attend them at this Solemnity; which is so
much the more lustrous and complete, (...) Athenaeus lib. 5. Deipnos. p. 192.
The grace of Feasts.
by how much the more numerous and well-instructed the Attendants be* because
accordingly is the show and glittering of the pomp; for according to the old
English Calculate, nothing became a great Entertainment better then capacity of
Room, choice of Guests, plenty and good Cookery of Diet, neatness of Linen,
grace and agility of Attendants, orderly service of Tables, mirth and repast at
them, kindeness and sobriety after them, and a free and open welcome from the
Master of the Feast. These are the gradations of pleasing Feasts, to which if a
great train of Attendants upon motion of the Master be added, All Is Noble.

As then it is Liberata and unius sectae, that is, as it is a Livery of one
color and kind, to show the state and degree of the Master of them that wear
it; so it is Panni, to signify not only that wisdom favors and promotes
native Commodities, as woollen cloth is: but Panni, to continue the memory of
it for some time, and for some benefit to the wearer. For the Sergeant looks
not only to his seven days wonder, and that done, cares not how few and small
Penny-worths the wearer has afterward out of it; but desires it may reside
with and rest by him, as a monument of his Creation. Therefore it has been
known that Liveryes given upon this occasion have stayed by the meaner sort of
men many years, though the better, after the Solemnity, give them away; for
when their service (by the expiration of the Solemnity) determines, then also
their Liveryes grow with them out of season.

Quare licet in Universitatibus, etc.] This is written to show the Charge,
Worship, and Solemnity of a Sergeant, which though it be answered by the
solemnities of a Doctor of the Laws, who has a Creation as the Sergeant has,
Birretum quasi bis rectum, quia his rectum decet esse Philosophum and Doctorem,
scilicet, in docendo and operando. Luc. De Penna Murileg. lib. 12.
and who makes a Feast, and of old might give bonnets [ birreta] round like his
own, in token of sanctity and truth, as those virtues he is by his degree
remembered of and required to express, and wears scarlet, Cassanaeus Catal. Gl.
Mundi. p. 38-388. 389.
etc. yet our Chancellor says, He does not give gold and other presents as
Sergeants give. Which though it be most true, and declares a greater and more
popular splendour in his Creation, Salmasius in notis ad Tertull. Lib. De
Pallio. p. 22, 23.
then that of a Doctor has; yet is the Doctors Creation to his degree very
significant and solemn in every Circumstance of it, as First, In signum
carentia sordium, quia ubi angulus est, ibi sordes esse dicuntur. Cass. Catal.
Gl. Mundi. p 388. 389.
He is as it were crowned, with a round Cap in signum sanctitatis and
veritatis, by the figure of which he is taught to be sincere and unsordid,
generous and scientifique; Then he has the books of the Law delivered him, that
he should remember to read, observe, and practice according to the Wisdom and
Justice of it: and this the Doctors generally agree so necessary after the
example of Scripture 2 Chro. c. 23.11, where it is said, They brought out the
King's Son, and put upon him the Crown, and gave him the Testimony, which
referrs as by the marginal note appears to Deuteronomy. 17.18. where it is said, when
he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of
the Law in a Book or out of that which is before the Priests, etc. I say, the
Doctors agree this so consequential, that without the delivery of a book of the
Laws to him, he can be no Doctor, quia in librorum lectione consist it
Doctoratus; Then he has a ring put on his finger, Luc. De Penna lib. 12. cap.
De Professoribus. Cass. l^co prae^itato.
implying that by his degree he is sponsus factus verae Philosophi^e and
scientiae quam profitetur. For as by a Ring given and taken, betokening faith
and troth plighted each to other, Marriage is solemnized between man and wife;
so by a Ring at Creation, the Marriage of a Doctor to his art is intimated:
only there is a difference of fingers between these two wearings of their
Marriage Rings, the woman wears her Ring on the fourth finger of the left
hand, in which there is quaedam vena sanguinis, quae ad cor hominis usque
pervenit, but the Doctor wears it on the thumb, ut facilius testificari
possunt sub suo s^gillo, Then the Doctor is set in a chair, and has his duty
represented to him in Pathetique words, Proceed and go out worthy and virtuous
men, sit ye in the seat of virtue and science, not of vice and pestilence, And
the chair he is created in has many notable depictions in it, all significant,
In the inward part of it two young men, Cass. lo^^ pracitat^, p. 288.
referring to Love and Labor, In the latter part of it, two Virgins
representing Care and Watching, In one of the sides thereof a young man girded
about the loins, carrying little ordinary things, intimating poverty or
contentation with a little, as if humility were the only way to seek and find
wisdom of science, In the other side is the portraicture of a man presenting a
figure that flies away, noting, that life is short, and art long, and that if
we would attain learning, we must banish all diversion and pursue it eagerly,
then there is presented him a girdle of gold, and he is bid to gird his loins
with the girdle of faith, that is, to be faithful to the Laws, and to his
Clyent, and not to betray his trust, no more then a soldier should solvere
militi^ cingulum, which he cannot honorably do Quia indecens omnino probatur,
prius solvere militiae cingul^m quam cedat victori adver sitas praeliorum, Then
he is kissed on the cheek with a kiss of Love, to mind him foedus pacis in
facultatibus Iurium servare perpetuum, These and such like rites and attendants
there are to the investiture of a Doctor of the Laws, which show him in his
degree not to be inconspicuous, but the contrary in all the degrees of
Scholastique luster; for of this rank and breeding of men, are the great
Counselors, Ambassadors, and Ministers of state, almost of the World, and to
these do the names of Grotius, Budaeus, Tholossanus, and others, famous for
all good learning contribute honor, the Doctors of the Civil and Canon Law,
being as great masters of learning, as any or all other besides them have been,
or are, which I menti^on as heretofore I have, not to claw them (For that is
odious to me, who proposing to write the words of truth and soberness, Note
this well.
need not fear the brow, or, by any soft and adulating precarinesses, beg the
smile of any men) but to clear to the World, that I prosequute nothing but
integrity to all men, and all things of worth, and to own my Collections in
this and other my studies, from many Authors, Civil-Lawyers; By reason whereof
I cannot but averr the Doctors of the Laws, most eminent Graduates and great
Masters, although that of the Text here cannot be denied.

Nec est Advocatus in universo mundo qui ratione Officii sui tantum l^cratur ut
serviens hujusmodi.

Though Servicus ad Legem be a term of State and Degree, yet Advocatus is of
office and employment, Digest. lib. 3. tit. 1. gl. B. contradicere p. 329. lib.
12. c. 8. lib. 4. tit. 6. ex quibus causis lib. 10. tit. 6
concerning this see the Notes on the eighth Chapter, wherein the nature and
honor of advocation is set forth. Whereas then the Chancellor here magnifies
the Sergeant at Law, he is to be understood not to do it in relation to
himself, (He being one of that degree, and a very learned one, I believe, as
ever was before or since him,) nor as vituperating and lessening the degrees of
Doctors, in which there are and ever have been as renowned Wits, as serious
Judgments, as Heroique minded men, as in any profession in the World; no such
pedanteriness is our Great and Grave Chaucellour herein guilty of: but he setts
out the oriency of the dignity, thus to advance the reputation of the Law and
the Love of the Nation to it, evidenced in that it has instituted, continued,
and augmented, such an honor for men of great worth in the National and
Country Laws as is no where in the World, neque in reguo aliquo orbis terrarum
datur gradus specialis in legibus regni illius praeterquam solum in regno
Angliae] As if he had said, as England is by it self in its National Law, which
is favorable to freedom, tuitive of Government, promotive of ingenuity, more
then other Laws are; so has it a peculiar honor for those that excel in the
knowledge of it, above other Nations, and suitable to the honor, indulges it a
support, paramount, to that of any Advocate in the World below. For though the
Advocate with the Father, Our Glorious Lord JESUS, Remember this O My Soul, and
be thankeful.
(whom all the Angels of God worship and to whom my Heart in all humility
asoribeth all the Grace and Glory it has or hopes for) has this Name above
every Name, his Advocation transcending all Advocations, though He is ascended
above the Principalities and Powers of Mortal Merit, and Mortal Glory, and has
gained by his Advocation, all Power both in Heaven and Earth, all Praise from
Men and Angels, Though He, that Only Precious and Prevailing Advocate, Who is
at the right hand of God, comes within the tantum lucratur, which no eye can
see, no tongue language, no pen discourse, no thought conceive, Though He be in
nature, perfection and exaltation, as far above all the gainers in the World,
as Heaven is beyond Earth, and no Mortal is to be mentioned in compare with
him, the Immortal, Invisible and Only Wise Advocate; yet in all other
respects, wherein Mortal Advocates have the greatest encouragements, this
Sergeant at Law is not matchable, Advocati salarium deb^t dari pro facundia
ejus and fori consuetudine. Digest. lib. 3. tit. 1. De Postulando A. 330. and
lib. 2. tit. 14. De Pactis, p. 307.
nec est Advocatus in universo mundo, qui ratione Officii sui tantum lucratur]
For as He is the only pleader at the Common Bench, and the only requested one
in great pleadings elsewhere, in Chamber-Counsels, and Circuits, which makes
his cunning as a fountain ever full of the water of Life, Silver and Gold fees,
so that the Circuits of some one of them have been more profitably valuable,
then the practice of a great Civilian all the year long, so have they by
custom of the Nation great fees, that their proficiency in learning and
procedure in integrity may be encouraged; and the best love they can express to
their present renown and future peace, is to be earnest in prayer to God not to
permit, and steadfast in resolution, not to take any temptation to the contrary,
Nunquam tuta est liumana fragilitas; and quando virtutibus crescimus, tanto
magis time* re debemus ne de sua limite corrua* mus. Sanctus Hieron. in c. 2.
Joelis.
but to fear the blind of a gift, and the terror of a frown, as that which
God hates, and men execrate, and always to remember the tragical ends, and
amazing deathbeds of covetous Caytiffs, who having not the fear of God,
boggled at no villainy that was gainful. While Achan's wedge, and Balaam's
reward, Haman's honor, and Absolon's rule, Judas his treachery, and Simon
Magus his prophanness are upon record, there will never want monitors to great
gainers to be wary. That only is sweet and found gain that is Godly gain, and
has the promise of a Gods blessing in a life of repute, and a death of hope.
And to that end, the Sergeant best endeavors that most follows the wise
counsel of a Chancellor, Lord Coventry's Speech Creation Sergeants. 12 Car. 1.
Anno 1636.
who to the Sergeants gave this in charge; Strive and study to be more and more
learned unto your degree, your Advocateship is inseparably united, and that for
whom and for whose use? but for all the King's people, many millions of men:
and for what? For all their inheritances, their properties and their interests:
and then what exactness and multiplicity of learning ought to be for the
conscionable discharge of so great a duty? Thus that wise Sage, which well
observed by the Sergeants, is the best way to preserve them well worthy of the
great gains their care, skill, and fidelity accumulate to them above any other
Advocates in the World.

Nullus etiam, nisi in Legibus Regni illius scientissimus fuerit, assumitur ad
Officium and Dignitatem Iustitiarii in Curiis Placitorum coram ipso Rege and
Communi Banco, quae sunt supremae Curiae ejusdem Regni Ordinariae, nisi ipse
Primitus statu and gradu Servientis ad Legem fuerit insignitus.

As no man ordinarily is Serjeanted till he be de Maturioribus, 4 Instit. c. 7.
of the King's Bench. p. 75.
that is, above sixteen years standing, or rather has read, (I write according
to the wonted course and the usual rate of men, allowing Proviso's for
extraordinary praecocious wits, or men of great birth, fortune and favor;) so
no man, though he be de Maturioribus, can be a Justice in the King's Courts
till he be Serjeanted: for Serjeancy is the sine qua non to Justiceship, upon
the presumption that that degree obtained, learning, gravity, and integrity is
sans dispute. This the Kings of England have pleased to method themselves in,
In Prooemio Digest. p. 50.
as the only probable means to produce Justices, Iustitioe Satellites, and
Iudiciorum optimi tam Athletae quam Gubernatores, that is says the Gloss,
Athletae in advocando, Gubernatores in judicando, that is, every way complete,
both to a solid conception, a ready delivery and a sincere Judgment. Concerning
Justices I have written in the Notes on the 25 Chapter, and in fol. 523. also
of their Courts which are called here by our Text Supremae Curiae Ordinariae,
as they are by the Act of 25 H. 8. c. 16. I have discoursed in the same
Chapter. That which the Text gives occasion to add is from the word Insignitus,
which being a clarissimation or an illustriorating of him that has soulary
virtue and professional merit, renders the Sergeant, as step to a Justicer, a
most eminent person, especially when consideration is had that he and none but
he, is admitted to practice and plead in that Court, 2 Instit. p. 22, 2^.
which one calls the Lock and Key of the Common Law, Ubi omnia realia placita
placitantur, says our Text, when all Pleas therein flow from those nigri,
purpurati, and coccinei Seniores, who are no Puisnes, but have exceeded two
Apprenticeships at the Law, sexdecim annos ad minus complevit.] Not but that
great learning may bring a man to the Degree before that standing (as it did
Scaliger in not much above ten years after his entrance at Leyden to be a
Professor;) but nullus huc usque to our Chancellor's time has bin called, but
he that has intended so long the general study of the Law: and that because as
the duty requires learning, so the Degree and State gravity and poyse, which is
seldom in youth how towardly soever. For surely if any one deserved to be
Serjeanted before this standing, Preface to the 1 Instit,
'twas famous Littleton; yet he was not called before he had read, but some
time after, and so was no President for being Serjeanted before sixteen years
standing in study: though he was a man of ancient blood, great fortune, noble
parts, and general approbation, and therefore in 15 E. 4. with the Prince and
other Nobles he was made Knight of the Bath; yet notwithstanding all these
excellencies, he was not called to be Sergeant till he had fulfilled and passed
his sixteen years.

Et in signum quod omnes Iustitiarii illi taliter extant graduati, quilibet
eorum semper utitur, dum in Curia Regis sedet, Birreto albo de serico quod
primum and praecipuum est de insignibus habitus quo servientes ad Legem in
eorum^reatione decorantur.

Herein the Sergeants degree is to the office of a Justice necessarily
precursive above that of a Doctor to a Bishop; for he that is a Graduate in the
Universities may be a Bishop, though a Doctor he be not: but no man how learned
soever he be can be a Justice, but he that is already a Sergeant; nor can he
sit in the King's Courts but with that particular habiliment of a Sergeant,
which (with reverence to that noble Dignity) is in a kind nailed to his head,
I mean so fixed that thence it is not to be removed, no not (I beg the boldness
to say) in the King's presence, this is the Caul on his head called the Coyff.
The Chancellor words it by Birretum, others by Birrus or Birreta, tegmen
capitis, De liabitu quo ^^ oportet extra ^r^om.
Pileus says the Codex Theodos. It was permitted servants of old as a token
their servility was On its last legs, as we proverbially call service that is
determining, aftertimes adopting the use of these Night-caps or women's gear,
as we may call them, into credit. These Coyffs or Caps became Emblems of
Mastership, to which Clemangis alludes in these words, Epist. 74.
Non Cappa ut in Proverbio Monachum efficit, nec Cappae etiam aut Cathedra
birretive impositi^, Magisterium. In aftertimes they grew vary-coloured,
Spelm. Gloss in vocem Birretum.
Cardinals had Birreta coccinea, scarlet or purple Bonnets or Caps, Bishops
black, but Sergeants at Law these white ones: which though they now have
impropriated to them, as one of the Insignia of their Degree, was of old purely
Sacerdotal: Varro pedigrees it from the Women-Priests, who amongst the Romans
used it to cover their heads in Sacrifice, Capital quod Sacerdotula nunc in
capit^ solent baber^. Varro lib. de Lingua Latina.
so Pompeius; and Turnebus makes it to be that Coyff or Caul that women do to
this day tie up their hair in, their night-linnen called a Coyff. Advers. lib.
22. c. 30.
The Priests taken with these, used at nights to lie in them, or on travel to
cover their rasure, Vt rasuras sive coronas capitum bujusmodi Cappis
defenderent.
and protect their heads from cold; other then in these cases, by the
Constitution of Othobo^, our Priests might not wear them: but that they did
wear them, and that to cover their rasure was plain from that which M. Paris
writes of W. de Bussey, Cl^rici nonnis^ in itinere constituti unquam aut in
Ecclesiis, aut ^oram Praelatis suis, aut in conspectu communi hominum public
infulas suas, vulgo Coyffos vocant, portare aliquatenus andeant vel prasumant.
Lindwood. p. 68. B. 11.
the evil Counselor of W. de Valence, who when he was apprehended, and
brought to make answer to the accusations against him, when his guilt made him
answerless, and his impieties were not to be defended, Voluit ligamenta sue
Coyffae solvere (says Paris) ut palam monstraret tonsuram se habere
Clericalem. Matthew. Paris. p. 985. in H. 3.
From Priestly men Judges in Courts of Law about Edward the Third's time this
Coyff descended with Justiceship to Laymen, and from being made of open
Cancell-work, Cut-work, Pagnin. in verb^ p. 2828.
(such as in my memory women wore Coyffs of, which in regard of the bars and
network of them, were what the Hebrews call by (...)) it was made of silk
Birreto albo de serico in our Chancellour's time; but after, it became to be of
Cambrick the next to it in transparency, and thus to this day it continues.
From which covering, white in color, and pervious in the nature of it, we may
conjecture the scope of it to signify protection of the head to purposes of
sanctity and sincerity, mindeing the Sergeant to not only fill his head with
learning, but employ that learning to the establishment of Justice, and the
support of Innocence against powerful oppression and fraudulent subversion;
and it calls them to own themselves Freemen from the frowns of Judges, Primum
(...) quod ante se aliud habere non potest. Reg. Juris Civil, Digest. p. 46.
who sometimes brow-beat Puisnes, and gives them liberty, as Brothers of the
Long-robe, to speak boldly because weightily in a good matter. And this is the
reason why the Coyff being such an instance of sacredness and authority is
called by our Text, Primum and praecipuum, de insignibus habitus.

Nec Birretum istud Iustitiarius sicut nec serviens ad Ligem, unquam deponet,
quo caput suum in toto discooperi^t, etiam in praesentia Regis, licet cum
Celfitudine sua ipse loquatur.

This is subjoined as a notable instance of this Sergeants dignity, to wit,
that whereas of old no man might come capp'd into Princes or Great men's
presences, without a particular grant so to do, which I collect from the use
till Henry the Eighth's time, when I read one Mr. Brown had Letters Patents,
Fuller Church History. part. 2. p. 167.
confirmed by Act of Parliament, to enable him to put on his Cap in the
presence of the King or his Heirs, or any Lord Spiritual or Temporal in the
Land, Whereas I say no man might come capp'd into the King's presence without
special leave, the Sergeant Privilegio status and gradus might; and the reason
perhaps might be, for that the head of a Sergeant, so full of law and learning
useful to the King and his people, should suffer no injury by cold, nor appear
no not with the defects of old age, or other accident, which might injure or
diminish his reputation: but that he may retain that reverence that becomes so
venerable a Profession as the Law is, and so grave a Sage as He the Sergeant is
presumed to be. This may be one reason why Princes permits these worthy Persons
to wear that in their presence to which they thereby command reverence from
others, who are much ruled by the practice of their betters, especially of
their Prince, who not only suffers these to appear before him Coyff'd, but
often speaks with them and is counseled by them in matters that concern his
Crown and Dignity; and even then when they are nearest him, Licet cum
Celfitudi^e sua ipse loquatur] they do stand capp'd and coyff'd

Which Considered, and the Laws of England (so conform to the Law of God, the
Law of nature, and the condition of England and the nature of the people of it,
so prosperous in the peace, plenty, honor, riches, and universal advantage
that it has in all ages produced) while it is studied by brave men of parts and
parentage, pleaded and distributed by learned and aged Sages, and judicially
declared by the upright and well advised Masters of it, the Reverend Justices
of the King's Courts. All this I say premised, the Chancellor humbly not only
conjures the Prince non hae ^itare which of the Laws to love and choose, but
from the result of what the premises discoursed upon produce, to conclude, That
for the Piety of them they are pretiosae, being as the Queen's daughter, all
glorious within; and for the reason, judgment and gravity of them Nobiles,
sublimes ac magnae praestantiae, and in the effect of them to the Glory of God,
Honor of the King, and comfort of the people. Maximaeque scientiae and
virtutis, So He; and I after him humbly conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. LI. Sed ut Iustitiariorum sicut and servientium ad legem status tibi
innotescat, eorum formam officiumque ut potero jam describam.
HAving shortly described the material parts of the manner of Creating
Sergeants, He proceeds from the Step to the Throne, the Investiture of
Justiceship, which though it be no State and Degree, Iustitiarii r^gis jurati,
sunt omni exceptio^e majores. Leg^ Cook 2. Instit. p. 422. 449. Fleta lib. 2.
c. 34
but an express of State and Degree in an office judicial; yet is so far an
advance of dignity, as in worship and honor is not in the Law to be exceeded:
and therefore to what of it I have under favor of my Lords the Justices
written of their dignity in the five and twentieth Chapter, and in fol. 523 I
shall add only that which the Chancellor here gives me the invitation in the
Comment on him to do, reserving the more plenary treating of them to some
discourse purposely on that subject. In the mean time I follow my Text.

Solent namque in Communi Banco] Here the Chancellor begins by a modest
condescension with the Court of Common Pleas, so called because of the
Common Pleas there holden; Now though this Court he presided not in, (being
Chief Justice of, and so placed in, the King's Bench, which according to the
learning of time and usage has the priority) yet to evidence how little his
merit stands upon punctilio's, and how trite he accounts rivalty between those
pair of Sisters that are to serve the King and his people in decisions of Law
and Justice (I would to God the same were the ingenuity of the members of both
Universities, and then they would honor not derogate from one another) He
writes first of the Common-Bench, which undoubtedly is not only a most ancient
Court, not only before Henry the third's time, but before R. the first, or
even the Conquerour's time. 4 Instit^ c. 7. of the Kings bench p. 72. 73.
And as in the King's Bench, pleas of the Crown, and things concerning the King
and Subjects were and are tried; so in the Common-Bench real actions by
original Writs, are to be determined, and also Common Pleas mixed and personal:
And therefore as there being the high matters of Law judged in it, so are the
pleadings to be performed only by Sergeants. There is usually in this Court,
for the greater weight and more substantial carrying on of right judgment,
Quinque Iustitiarii vel sex ad majus says the Text] Ma^y, for in the multitude
of Counselors there is safety, and five an uneven number, that the balance
may be preponderated by the odd voice, and so decision of the Courts judgment
be. Of old it should seem by our Text there may have been six, which Master
Cambden does not deny in those words, 4. Instit. Jurisdict. of Courts. c. 10.
p. 99.

Britania p. 178, of the Courts of England.

1 and 4 Carol. 5. Iustitiarii 3. Rep. Cook temps Car. 1.


The Judges there, are the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, with four
Justices assistants or more, as the King shall think good; but that there have
been in late reigns any more then five with the Chief Justice, I cannot find,
but sometimes there have been fewer.

Et in Banco regis quatuor vel quinque] This Court is the first of the high
Courts Ordinary of Law, called the King's Bench, because the Kings of England
have there sat as Presidents in proper Person, Cambden's Britania of the Courts
of England. p. 178. P. 177.
which is the reason the returns in it are coram meipso, and because also it
peculiarly holds pleas of the Crown and such other Matters which pertain to
the King and the Weal-publique, and withal (says Master Cambden) it sifteth
and examineth the Errors of the Common Pleas. Anciently this Court followed the
King's Court, for it was kept-in Aula regia, whence the prementioned Cambden
tells us, they were called Lawyers of the Palace, and Justices of the Court,
and Justices assigns de nous suer. Cook 4 Instit. p. 71. P. 73. 9 Rep. p. 118.
119.. Pat. 20 H. 6. part prima M. 10 25 H. 6. part prima M. 12.32 H. 6. M. 9.
Spelm. Gloss. in verbo Iustitiarii. Cook 4 Instit. p. 74, P. 75. 5 E. 4. fol.
137. Of the Court of King's Bench.
The Justices of this Court Sir Edward Cook calls the Sovereign Justices of the
Oyer, and Terminer, Goale-delivery and conservation of the peace in the Realm,
so was the resolution of the Judges in the Lord Sanchars Case, and the Chief
Justice of it called by the Patents of Kings Capitalis Iustitiarius Regis, and
Capitalis Iustitiarius ad placit. coram Rege tenend. the King's Chief Ju^^ice
of England; so in the Statute of 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 26. 37 H. 8. c. 12. But the
style and authority which this high Officer, called Iustitia Angliae in H. the
third's time had, was altered temps E. 1. not only in the power, but in the
name and ground of his power from Iustitiae Angliae, to Capital. Iustit. Regis,
and from Patent to Writ; so that though the rest of the Judges of the King's
Bench have their offices by Patent, the Chief Justice is constituted by Writ,
and therefore when in 5 E. 4. it is said, that a man cannot be Justice by Writ,
but by Patent and Commission, it is to be understood of all the Judges, saving
the Chief Justice of this Court, see more of this in the 4 Instit. c. 7. Now in
this Court there has been, says our Text, Justices quatuor vel quinque] So has
the number mostly been 3 besides the Chief Justice, both in the Reigns of King
James, the last King, and such the number now is; Which Justices of the King
are of so great sway with the Nation, that they not only settle all suits and
causes in their Benches and Circuits, but their resolutions are of high
authority, 2 Instit. p. 267. Resolut. Judges 3 Jacob. upon the Stat. Articuli
Cleri. 2 Instit. p. 601.
not only Inducements to Parliamentary declarations, as in the Stat. De
Bigamiis 4 E. 1. but also in arduous scruples upon Laws, and the
interpretations of them, which appears in the quotations of them every day as
Law, and in the allowances of our Kings in all times, that their resolutions
are Law. Which lessons all men to honor the Judges, and all Pleaders before
them to demean themselves with judgment, sobriety, and Law-learning; For as
much as they are the Ordinary Lex loquens, and next to the Books, according to
which they ( having the morning light, which is the defecate light of
knowledge) do speak, and therefore are to be diligently heard, and reverendly
observed.

Ac quoties eorum aliquis per mortem vel aliter cessaverit, Rex de avisamento
concilii sui eligere solet unum de servientibus ad Legem, and cum per literas
suas Patentes constituere, Iustitiarium in loco Iudicis sic cessantis.

2 Instit. p. 447. 4 Instit. c. 7. of the Kings bench fol. 75.
As life, merit and choice makes a Justice; so death, demerit and disfavour
discharges him. When therefore any of the King's Justices do die by age or
sickness, being perpetuo languidi, or otherwise are superseded, as by Writ
under the great Seal, I suppose they may, though made Justices, they are Lib.
5. E. 4. fol. 157.

Preface to his 3. part. Rep. temps Car. 1. p. 52. 375


said not to be by Writ, but by Patent or Commission; and as that learned and
upright Judge, Sir George Crook upon his humble Petition, by reason of his very
great age honorably was, and as Sir Randal Crew 2 Car. 1. Sir Robert Heath,
and Sir Edward Cook 10 Car. and others have upon sundry reasons been, which is
per mortem vel aliter cessare] Then the King, whose the Justices places are,
and in whose place, and by whose power they administer Justice to his people
does elect new ones cum avisamento concilii] For the King having diverse
Councils his Commune Concilium, Cook on Littleton sect. 164. p. 110.
his Magnum Concilium, his Privatum Concilium, his Iudiciale Concilium, is said
to do what ever he does ex avisamento Concilii, that is, by advice of his
Council, secundum subjectam materiam, as in state matters out of Parliament of
his Privy Council so in Law-matters by counsel of his Judges. Now this
avisamentum concilii sui being referrable to the choice of a Judge, who is a
person of Law, and proper to be scanned by men of Law, though the Councils of
the King in the former notions are not excluded; yet avisamentum concilii seems
to me chiefly to respect the Judges, from whom the King understands the fitness
of persons in that office to serve him, so as he be (and other then such, 4
Instit. c. 10. p. 10^.
they will not nominate) unus de Servientibus ad Legem. For though I know the
Patent or Writ to make them, does not term them Sergeants that are so, Or make
them Sergeants if they be not such; 4 Instit. p. 75. c. 7. Of the King's Bench.

7 Car. Sir R. H. Serjeanted October. 24. and October. 25. advanced. Crook 3 Rep.

So Idem p. 65. Idem. p. 215, 403.


yet no man can be a Judge unless he be a Sergeant of the degree of the Coyff,
Vnum e Servientibus] if not a Sergeant long before, as of old the
Senior-Serjeants in regard of their great experience were (I presume) advanced;
yet a Sergeant when advanced, though but so created the day before advancement.
Et cum per Liter as, Patentes constituere] These Letters Patents are Writs
under the Greatseal; directed to him or commanding him to attend the office of
Chief Justice, or Justice; and they are called Letters Patents, because the
King's pleasure and judicial Command and Power is patefyed in them: and they
issue forth from the Chancellor who is termed Secundus a Rege in Regno, and
according to Fitz-Stephen, is enabled, Vt altera part Sigilli Regis, 4 Instit.
c. 8. Court of Chancery.
quod and ad ejus pertinet custodiam propria signet Mandata, they are the words
quoted by Sir Edward Cook. And this being done More Solenni, and to preserve
the King's Power in a due exercise of it toward his people, is a very
provident Supplement to Death, Decay, or Discharge.

Et tu^s Cancellarius Angliae adibit Curiam] What the Chancellor has sealed
privately he owns publicly. And that the Justice to be made may more seriously
consider the King's Grace, and the people more respectfully reverence the
King's Justice, the Great Chancellor, Cambden. Brit. p. 181. What the
Chancellor is.
who is Keeper of his Seals (for in H. 6. time there were three Seals in the
custody of the Chancellor who is) The Signer of his Grants, the Presenter to
his Promotions, the Judge of his Equity, the general Oracle to all Orders of
men condescends to come from his High Court the Chancery, which is always open
when other Courts are shut, out of Term, to the Court where the Justice is to
be placed, 4 Instit. c. 8. Of the Court of Chancery. p. 81. Ad gubernacula
Reipub. sedere. Cic. pro Roscio. Persarum Satrapae pro dignitate cujusque seeds
habebant apud Regem, idque ex Cyri instituto. Drusius in c. 1. Esther. Ier.
22.4, 30.
adibit Curiam ubi Iustitiarius sic deest.] Et sedens in medio Iustitiariorum]
It Is not stans for that is a posture of ministration and request, but sedens;
for as that is the station of Pleaders, so this of Judges: Advocates stand at
the bar to plead, but Judges set on the Bench to judge, Sedere, quasi seorsum
erecte caeteris seperari, so Tully uses the phrase. Sitting is a posture of
consideration and intentness, hence Servius renders that of Celsa sedet Eolus
arce by id est curat; and Plautus when he brings in the servant saying to his
Master, Sine ut juxta Aram sedeam, and meliora consilia dabo, hints to us, that
sitting is a posture of solidity and judgment, post designatas Coeli parts a
sedentibus captantur auguria. Hence is it that in Scripture God is phrased to
set upon his Throne, Is. 6.29. Ier. 17, 25, etc. and Christ Jesus is said To
sit at the right hand of God, and his Apostles and Martyrs are promised To set
upon Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Ille ergo possidet qui
sedere, id est, sedem ponere potis est a sessitando. Alciat. ad Legem 203. p.
441. De verb. signific. 1 De Orat. 7. Cic. 1 De not. Deorum. Plutarchus lib. 1.
Sympos. p. 617. Edit. Paris. (...). Idem p. 616. Joel 2.27. Zeph. 3.5.
So that the Texts Sedens] imports possession by a kind of temporary right: as
the King's high Delegate He Sitts, to betoken judicial Prerogative; and in
medio Iustitiariorum because of official excellence. For as if there be but
two, the right hand is the place; so when there are three or more, the middle
or center is the place of dignity: because it is that whence, as from the
center, the lines of circumvallation move, and wherein they are united.
Therefore the Latins oppose in medio esse to obscurum; so Tully, dicendi omnis
ratio in medio posita, and Ponam in medio sententiam Philosophorum. And surely
when the Moralist has written much of placing at meetings, and determines the
propriety of Primacy, (...), To virtue and dignity; yet in that he brings in
Democritus choosing the middle place, he intends the notification, that the
middle being his choice was by him accounted the best, quia virtus in medio.
From the consideration of this dignity of the Middle, as the most conspicuous,
we read that God is often in Scripture expressed to appear in the amidst, so
Out of the Bulb, Exodus 3.4, 20. and c. 24.16. so In the midst of the Camp,
Numb. 5.3. Out of the midst of the fire, Deuteronomy, 4.12, Out of the midst of the
darkness, Deuteronomy. 5.22. God is in the midst of her, Psalm. 46.5. Thou O Lord art
in the midst of us, Jer. 14.9. The Holy one in the midst of thee, Hosea 11.9.
When our Lord Jesus, the Judge of quick and dead, is said to be In the midst of
them that are gathered together in his name, Matthew. 18.20. and In the midst of
the two Thieves on the Cross, John. 19.18. and when he appeared to his
Disciples after his resurrection, He stood in the midst of them, John. 20.19.
when he is said to stand, Rev. 1.13. c. 2.3. c. 4.2, and 3.
and walk, and set his Throne in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks:
sure all these signify not only special and eminent presence, but also
Authority, Majesty and every thing that is transcendent. And therefore sedens
in medio Iustitiariorum] here, is enunciative of the Chancellour's dignity, in
that he sets in the Courts of Law not as a stranger, who by the courtesy of
the Court has the best Seat; or as Parning Chancellor to E. 3. did, 4 Instit.
c. 10. p. 99.
to debate matters of Law: but as the King's chief Minister of State to
dispense the King's Grace in a graceful and majestique manner; that from the
Solemnity people see in the constitution of a Judge, they may learn to
reverence him: and the Students of the Law may be excited to diligence and
virtue, that they may be in due time honored with the Bench, as well as fitted
for it by the Bar. But it follows.

Introduci facit Servientem sic electum, cui in plena Curia ipse notificabit
voluntatem Regis de officio Iudiciario sic vacant.

Till the Chancellor be sat in the Court, the Sergeant appears not; for the
intent of the Solemnity being to magnify the grace of the King and the office
of the Judge, the best means thereto is to do it plena Curia, when there is the
greatest appearance both of Judges, Officers, and Auditors, which then being,
when the Chancellor is fat, the to be promoted Sergeant appears, and then the
Chancellor, who is always a man of learning and oratory, declares the King's
favor to his people in supplying them with Seats of Judgment, and with
judicious and just Sitters on them: and that in such a number as suits best
with the expedition of justice, and the prevention of delay, error, or
iniquity; yea, who continually provides against the supersedals of death,
impotency or demerit, by additional Justices to complete the necessary and
usual number. And this as an act not more of policy then good will, for it is
Voluntas Regis that determines the office and alters the persons officiating as
Judges in the Courts; Voluntas Regis per Iustitiarios suos and Legem suam. 2 R.
3. fol. 11. 3 Instit. p. 146.
and that because the Courts are Curiae Regis, and the Laws are Leges Regis,
and the Justices being Iustitiarii Regis nothing is more reasonable and just,
then that the King should do, as to this, what he will with his own, that is,
what he Kinglyly and legally by matter of Record (his legal will) pleases to do
with his own. Which though it be in this case contrary to the Tenants of
disorderly times and tempers, such as were those Temps H. 3. where the Provisio
Magnatum says contrary to this Text, ravelling out the good pleasure of the
King into the pleasure of the Subjects; M. Paris p. 641. 744.
yet the very Author that relates this, adds a notable censure of it, as
usurpation upon and injury to his Sovereign Grandeur and Propriety, Tot enim in
Anglia Reguli, ut videantur in Anglia antiqua tempora renovari: Page 904.
but enough of this. The language of the Text is more Law and reason when it
tells us, the Chancellor does Notificare voluntatem Regis de officio
Iudiciario sic vacant.

Et legi faciet in publico Liter as praedictas] This is done to show the reason
of his coming to the Court, and the warrant for this his performance in the
Court; for as the King calls a man of worth to a public charge; so he
signifies this pleasure of his by a public Instrument, publicly read, that
all may witness the lawfulness of his Title, that being sworn and placed, Sitts
and Judges. For as the Patent read declares what the King's will is; so the
Oath read and administered which is that of 18 E. 3. shows him what he is to
perform in duty to the King and his people, To the King he takes the Oath of
Allegiance kneeling, Crook 3 Rep. Regni Carol. 1. p. 403.
according to the Stat. 3 Iac. To the King he takes the Oath of Justice
standing: which done, Cancellarius sibi tradet Literas Patentes] Before he be
qualified by taking the Oaths previous to his trust, he has not his Patent
delivered, and so no admission to his judicial office. For though the sealing
of the Patent seems to give him jus ad rem, that is, an inchoate right as it is
explanatory of the King's favor, and an allowance of his conceived fitness;
yet till he have testified his subjection to the King and the Law, and bound
himself by the Oath of God to be true to his trust in all the particulars of
it, the jus in re commences not, for that is perfected by the delivery of the
Patent to him: but when he has to his submission to the terms of his acceptance
and duty, satisfied the Chancellor and the Court, that he is the man he is
taken for, then his Title is delivered him, and he enters on his Charge.

Et Capitalis Iustitiarius Curiae assignabit sibi locum in eadem, ubi deinceps
ipse sedebit.

When the King's Chancellor has performed what for the King's Honor and his
peoples good is, to be as far as prudence and piety can secure and render them
in their honest performance undoubted, then he recedes leaving the formalities
that are purely local to the order of the Court; the Chief Justice, who is the
chief actor in the Court, then places the new Judge (but here is nothing
preposterous, but every Iota appointed in the solemnities) in the place where
he must sit, which being according to the seniority, for I take it, the vacancy
ordinarily advances the next to it, the Judge is to sit there till he have room
made higher for him, by which, emulation is prevented, and love between the
Justices of the Court preserved.

Sciendum tibi est, Princeps, quod Iustitiarius ifte inter caetera tunc
jurabit, etc.

This is a summary of the juramentum Iustitiariorum 18 E. 3. and it consists of
those heads, which comprehend the pious and plenary dispatch of Justice, freely
without sale, fully without denial, speedily without delay, which though it
were declared in those words, Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus aut differemus
Iustitiam vel rectum; yet is more fully here charged on the Judges, who as the
King's distributers of it to the people, Vet. Magna Charta. 29. Chap. M. Charta.
by the force of their Oath are to do as follows Well and lawfully to serve
the King and his people in the office of Justice, to warn the King of any
damage, to do equal Law to all his Subjects, to take no reward of gold,
silver, or any other profitable thing, (meat and drink only excepted) To give
no counsel where the King is party, to suppress breakers of the peace and
contemners of the Law, to maintain no suite or quarrel, to hearken to no
letters or commands to delay or deny Justice, to procure the profit of the King
and his Crown, with all things where they may reasonably do the same. This is
the sum of the Oath which our Text insists on, as that which must not only be
the bridle of restraint to Judges; but the confidence of the people, that they
shall live under a Law so dispensed in all Godliness and Honesty. For therefore
is the subject of England rich, free, secure, and what not that is emulable;
because his Prince pleases to rule by the Laws, which Laws are distributed by
such Justices as fear God, 3 Instit. c. 6^. p. 146, 147.
and reverence man no further then they reverence God in Heaven, and the Law on
Earth, which is the true and during support of Sovereignty and subjection.

Sciendum etiam tibi est, quod Iustitiarius sic creatus, Convivium
solennitatemve aut sumptus aliquos non faciet tempore susceptionis officii and
dignitatis sua, cum non sint illa gradus aliqui in facultate Legis, sed
offi^ium tantum illa si^t and Magistratus ad Regis nutum duratura.

Here the Text tells us, that there is no cost of Presents, entertainment or
equipage at this advancement of a Sergeant to a Justiceship; and the reason why
none there is, to wit, that the cost of solemnities attends Degrees, Dignity
and State of Honor conferred on a person, Hac est voluntas Regis per
Iustitiarios suos, and per legem suam, and non per Dominum Regem in Camera sua
vel aliter. 2 R. 3. fol. 12. 3 Instit. p. 146.
from the result whereof others, attendants, relations and friends are seen in
service and gratified for it: but Justiceship being only delegation to an
office executable by and determinable at the pleasure of the King, there is no
Degree proceeded in beyond that of Sergeant, but an additional faculty to
express Magistratiquely and with judicial authority, the learning of Law, that
in the Sergeant was seen in pleading, and now may further appear in judging. It
is true, in the Case of Bishops it is otherwise, for though when they were
Doctorated they kept Feast; yet shall that not excuse them, but at their
Consecration, they so shall do also, because they are admitted into a
superiority of order, Episcopatus est Sacerdotium completum and perfectum,
inferiores ordines sunt antececedentia ad Sacerdotium ex congruitate, sed non
ex necessitate. Durandus lib. 4. did. 24. Q. 1. art. 8. p. 809.
and have a dignity of temporary Baronage, though not personal, yet in the
rights of their Sees, and are therefore to gratulate the King's favor and
their friends kindness in attending the Ceremonies of their Consecration with
preparation for, and entertainment of them with gloves, and good cheer, and
with sober, hearty and generous welcome, the cream, marrow and Music of all
entertainments: but in this of a Justice, the official Improvement of a
Sergeant, there is no cause of further joy and triumph, then as it is an
opportunity to glorify God, serve the King, and his people, honor the Law,
his study and profession, nor is the reward of it more, if so much, as by a
good round practice is gained; And therefore when it comes to a Sergeant of
years that has plied hard at the oar when young, and has feathered his nest
well, it comes very seasonable to alleviate his toil and to be a port to his
old age and a help to his retirement. These are the motives to good and grave
men's inclinations to observe the King's pleasure, and to serve him as Justices.
Pride, popularity, covetousness, idleness, are no jewels or ornaments in a
Judge, but rather the treacherous Syren-notes that make the Achilles of
Learning, piety and truth in them self-felons, 30 E. 3.4. Instit. Chap. 8 p.
79.3 Instit. c. 68. of Bribery p. 147.
accessaries to their ruin and defamation which had Thorp considered he would
not have so dishonored the Law, and his singular judgment therein by bribery,
nor Tho. De Wryland Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, for an accessory in
Murder, or Stratton Chief Baron, For Felony; and all the Justices in E. 1.
time (except Mettingham and Beckingham) have deserved for their bribery and
corruption to be removed, M. Paris p. 904.
fined, and imprisoned: Qui non amoverentur nisi clarescentibus culpis, as
Matthew Paris his words (of some such delinquents) are.

Habitum tamen indumenti sui in quibusdam ipse extunc mutabit sed non in
omnibus insigniis ejus.

The Coyff called the Pileum in the Roman Stories, being a Priestly habit, and
so by Saint Ierom owned under the name of Pileolum, as the fourth kind of
Sacerdotal habiliment, Romani Saturnalibus Pileum gerebant, aliis diebus nudo
capite erant. Turneb. Advers. lib. 8. c. 4. Sanctus Hieronymus ad Fabiolam.
lib. de Vest Sacerdotali.
the Judge continues; so does he his long Robe and Cap, only habitum in
quibusdam mutabit. Now a habit we know is a token of Regency in Universities,
It Is to accompany the Hood, when Masters of Arts go to Congregations, It is an
old Philosophers short cloak, of which I have written in the notes on the
precedent Chapter; that which is to be added is, that as men of honor in the
Heroique ages, either covered not their heads at all, (Which is the reason why
Homer makes no mention of Pileus, nor any of the ancient Statues are seen other
then bare headed; or if they did cover them, yet only but when need was, and
that with some lap of their garment) so did they not then wear covering for
shoulders longer then necessary, Lege Salmasium in Tertul. lib. De Corona
Militis. Turneb. loco praecitato.
nor them longer then either cold or rain required it: which though we (now
accustomed to more delicacy and trimness) have altered, yet so much of the
antique vest as intimates gravity and learning is retained, and this our Text
makes to reside in the habit of a Sergeant in Common with a Judge, who wear
long Robes Priestlike, for so the long Robe is reckoned 39. Exodus 22.

Cum Capitio penulato circa humeros ejus and desuper collobio] with a furred
cape about his shoulders; so is the Translators reading; Robes were the best of
garments, and those that signified excellency and State. And therefore as they
were long from the collar to the foot, to import the extent of dignity over the
whole person of the wearer, according to that pattern which I believe the
Christian Church took for her long robe, from that Text, Rev. 1.13.
wherein we read in the midst of the seven Candlesticks, one like the Son of
man, clothed with a garment down to the foot; So was there a shorter robe,
which the Priests wore from the pattern of old, pallium superhumerale (...)
Exodus 28.4.21. verses, which Pallium or short cloak signified a vest, panno out
pelle suffulta, whence the lining of the Judges robes with silk in summer,
Cunxus lib. 2. c. 2 De Republ. Hebraeorum in Tom. 8. Critic. Bibl. p. 854.
Spelm. in Gloss. p. 138. Capapro scrinio ad conservandas reliquias. Idem codem
loco.
and furr in winter, hence the furred Cape, Capitium] anciently mamillare
foeminarum, a stomacher, or rather a short cloak, like those women heretofore
wore, when they rode, or were ill, and yet do wear in Childbirth, which is
now worn only by Country old women, and Country Midwives, which Capitium,
because it was a guard to the breast and shoulders, which cabinetted and
secured the entrals of life and tenderness, things of security from weather
were called Capes, thus the Seamen call a port where they touch for relief, and
put in for safety a Cape. Our Chancellor then by Capitium penulatum] means
not that tegmen Capitis which Varro mentions, but that penulatum Capitium,
Tunicas neque capitia neque strophias neque zonas, etc. lib. 4. De vita. Pop.
Romani.
that vest or loose garment which is worn in rain and storms over the close
garment, which Vlpian reckons amongst the garments that are in common between
men and women, and are used indifferently by them, Penulata vestis quae
nebuloso and pluvioso tempore supra tunicam assumitur loco pallii ad arcendas a
corpore pluvias.

Alexandrum constituisse ut senes penulis intra urbem frigoris causa uterentur,
quum id vestimentum itinerarium aut pluvia fuisset. Lampridius in Severo.


both call penulas, or as we call them Caped rockets or short Cloaks not much
longer if so long as the middle; Severus is accounted the first that allowed
this garment, yet only to old men, and that on their journeys, and in cold and
wet weather; Cic. ad Attic. lib. 10. Ep. 138. Lib. 6. c. 3.
Tully terms it penula viateria; Galba made so much of this garment that
Quintilian tells us, when one of his favorites asked him to bestow his penula
upon him, he refused to do it, saying, Si non pluit non est tibi opus, si pluit
ipse utar. Paysius tells us of many Penula's, Quantum humilitatis putamus
cloquentiae attulesse penulas istas, quibus astricti, and velut inclusi cum
judicibus fabulamur. In Dialog. Orator.
the Penula scortea which the Pegasarii Cursores used, the Penula Gausapina
which we call the Gossips Mantle, the Penula Oratoria which Tacitus alludes to,
all which were several habits for several persons on several occasions, such as
the Capitia Penulata for the Sergeants, who being men of years, weakness, and
dignity, do as well for security as state, wear these short Cloaks furred in
the Cape. From these furred Capes on their Capitia Penulatia came probably Semi
copes and Copes used in Cathedrals and Churches under the name of Capae
Canonicae and Capa Chorales; and from this the term of Festa in Cappis, Matt.
Paris in vitis. p. 123, 127.

Observandum est interim has cappas Chorales olim pellibus ^ariis fuisse
furratas, suffultas, and duplicatas, ut dicimus nunc, lineatas. Gloss ad Matthew.
Paris in voce Cappa.

Milites Cappati Cappis Regiis, nihil praeter Camisiam de Sacco, Calceos de
Bove, and Capam de Cilicio secum gerant. M. Paris. p. 610.

Cod. Theodos. lib. 4. tit. 10.


which because they were lined with furr or silk on the inside according to the
season of the year, the Sergeants, that in their Robes are Sacerdotal, continue
to wear Robes lined according to the seasons,

Et desuper Collobio cum duobus Labellis.] This Collobium does not here
signify a short Coat or a Tabard, like that we call Soldiers Mandils, or
Mantles of the fashion of Coat-Armours, such as our Heralds Coats are; for that
the Codex Theodos. forbad Senators and men of worship to wear: but it imports
that Cowl that was proper to Monks, Hermits, Soldiers, and Countrymen, who
because they were encounterers with hardships, had these Superhumeralia to
defend them. Thus the learned Knight understands these very words of our
Chancellor; Spelm. Gloss. in Collobio.
and thus we all know, that though the Hood or Cowl be worn about the
shoulders, it is the proper tegument of the head and neck. And therefore Julius
Firmicus reckoning those that are defective and impaired in health, Morientur
autem aut Spatici, aut Apoplectici, aut Collobiet. Lib. 3. c. 14.
and thereupon dye, mentions among others Collobici, that is, such as by reason
of infirmity are fain to keep their heads in cases, and bide them in a hole as
it were, least the wind blow upon them. Collobium then was as a hood for
warmth, so cum duobus Labellis, which Lips, longer then ordinary, might be
convenient to close up that room in which their trinkets were carried, Perae
Oratoriae, that in which Advocates carried their Papers; Ovid 1. Amor. Eleg. 8.
Salust. 1. Catil.
for as Priests and Priestly men did by severe penance and study portare rugas
in vertice frontis, and auxilium portare Clientibus, so did they portare
fasciculum librorum sub ala: and so our Advocates ordinary do, save only
Sergeants and the great (within Bar) Counsel; for these have their Baggs
carried by their Clerks, but of old 'twas otherwise. For as the Collobium was
used for the Headcase, so the duo Labelli joined to it might render it capable
to be useful for stoadges. And thus in the habit and some other solemnities the
Sergeant and the Doctor of the Laws agree, and little or no dissimilitude is
between them; for though the Sergeant has in England more Honor then the
Doctor of the Laws: yet the Doctor of the Laws is more generally honored and
owned in the World, because he is a Professor of the Laws of the Continent,
when the Sergeant is only of the municipe local Laws.

Sed Iustitiarius factus Chlamyde inducetur firmata super humerum ejus dextrum,
caeteris Ornamentis Servientis adhuc permanentibus.

As the office of a Justice is an advance to the State and Degree of a Sergeant
in the person of the Officer; so is there an advance in the Nobility of that
Vest, which in a Justice is superadded to that of a Sergeant. The Long-robe and
Cap, the Hood and Coyff are the same, and the colors of black, purple, and
scarlet, for the respective days are the same; but the Chlamys which the
Justice has, makes the difference. Now this Chlamys, Suidas in verbo.
Suidas calls '(...), a Military Garment, and he says Numa was the founder of
it, who learned it from the Albanians, whom he being Victor of, Lib. 6. De
Lingua Latina.

Quaeramus quid optime factum, non quid usitatisimum. and quid nos in
possessione felicitatis aterna constituat, non quid vulgo. veritatis pessimo
interpreti, probatum sit. Vulgum autem tam Chlamydatos quam Coronam voco; non
enim colorem vestium quibus pratexia corpora sunt aspicio, oculis de homine non
credo, habeo certius meliusque lumen, quo a falsis vera dijudicom. Senec. de
vita beata. c. 2.


and liking their Vest, from them used it. It was called by the Romans,
Paludamentum; and Varro says it had its name, quod qui ea habent,
conspiciuntur ac fiunt palam: to this Seneca alluded when he says He does not
loek upon men for their gay Garments and rich Apparel; but accounts of them as
he believes their minds are crowned with virtue and tissued with generosity,
and the noble and virtuous pride of well-doing. This Chlamys Imperatoria was
that which the Fornerius ad Legem 100. p. 236.
Roman Chieftains put on when they led forth their Armies, as the Toga was
their garment in peace, when they stayed in the City. Virgil describes Pallas
by this; Aeneid. 8.115.
-- Ipso agmine Pallas
In medio Chlamyde pictis conspectus in armis.
This Garment after grew so requested that every Nation had of them, Valor.
lib. 1. de Crasso.
and those of diverse sorts: hence is it that we read of Chlamys aurata,
crocea, purpurata, intexta variis coloribus; also of the Chlamys Phrygia,
Sidonia, Spartana, Tyria: Cum ad bellum exit Imperator ac Lictores mutaverunt
vestem and siqua incinnusrunt, dicitur proficisci paludatus. Varro lib. 6. De
Lingu. Latina.

Breviarli lib. 9. p. 127. Edit. Sylburg.

Xiphil. Epitom. Dionis in Caro Caligula. p. 249.

E(...). In Vitellio. p. 311.

In Severo. p. 408.

In Caracalla. p. 429.

Herodianus in Severo. p. 524.

Idem in Caracalla. p. 546.


yea, all the Roman Emperors and Military Magistrates gloryed in it, as in
that which was the very (...) and specification of absoluteness and Majesty, so
Eutropius says, (...), etc. That the chief token of Maximinian' s absoluteness
was his rich Cassock, or rather Robe; so of Caligula it is said, He put on,
(...), a silken purple Robe studded with precious stones; so the same Author
tells us of Vitellius, That he was on a Kingly well-mounted Horse, adorned with
a rich purple Chlamys; so Severus, Antoninus, Caracalla, Herodian, lib. 7. in
Maxim. p. 595.
Maximinus, Zosimus lib. 5. p. 809.
Honorius, and Theodosius, are storyed to wear this, which originally
(according to (...), In Commodo p. 382.
Xiphilinus) was a Greek Vest: but Cassiodore says, by Dioclesian it was first
introduced in the Embroyderies of gold and precious stones, and the reason that
he would have such a glorious Vest was, because he would be accounted a God,
and as such adored, Cum ante eum omnes Imperatores, etc. When before him all
the Emperors we looked upon and saluted as Judges, and had nothing to
distinguish them from the habit of Citizens but their purple Robe. Cassiodor.
in Chronicis. p. 628. Edit. Sylburg.

Jornandes lib. 1. De Regnor. and Tempor. Success. p. 651.

Xiphilinus in Epist. Dionis, p. 428.


From these and the like instances and received customs have the use of the
Chlamys, which was first Military, then Imperial, and thence Judicial and
Magistratique (in not only primary but subaltern and derivative Magistracy, as
is that of the Justices here in the Text) been derived to us; and not only
been the distinction of them when living and sitting on their Benches, Statua
Scipionis cum Chlaveyde Cic. pro Rabirio Postbumo 6.
but also their Ornaments and honorable Remembrances when in their graves:
witness the Sculptures of the Roman Statues Chlamydated, and of our Knights and
Judges in their Pictures and Monuments. Now this Chlamys is in our Text said to
be firmata super humerum ejus dextrum, ^ to tell us, that Judgeship is a thing
of burden to an honest man, Humeris Rempub. sustinere. Orat. pro Flacco 72. Vt
Comitia suis, ut dictitabat, humeris sustineret. Cic. pro Milone.
and one that makes conscience to know and perform his duty; and that he that
buckles to it had need to lay his right shoulder, his best abilities of mind
and body to discharge it wisely and fully. Hence it is that Sipontinus derives
humerus from Humus, because as the ground complains of no burden that is laid
upon it, but supports it because it self is of solid substance; so a good
publick-spirited Heroique, whom God has endowed with parts and piety, goes
thorough stitch, as we say, with his duty, and having put his shoulders to the
yoke, flinches not, but is firmatus super humerum dextrum, that is, goes on in
his work indesatigably, as if he were (...), as our Lord Jesus is said to be so
adapted to it, Isaiah 9.6. c. 22.22.
That the Government which was laid upon his shoulders, Quamuis puer sit habet
humeros aptet and Imperium sustinendum. Forner. in Is. 9.6. Grotius in Ezech.
28.13.
he bore up valiantly and victoriously. As our Judge must pray and endeavor,
he (according to his opportion and ability) may, that the Magistracy he has
virtute Chlamydis data and impositae, he may peragere digne and debite without
any gap, chop, or breach in justice; for therefore is this Chlamys closed on
his right shoulder, that he may learn to be always uninterruptedly courageous
for, and in the truth: and that the firmness of his faith in God and to the
King, may appear in his service of them both, and their people for their sakes,
with might and main.

Excepto quod stragulata vest aut coloris bipartiti, ut potest Serviens
Iustitiarius, non utetur, etc.

Sergeants always, till within this late time of distraction, I think wore
their partycoloured Robes, and their Attendants party-Liveries, for the first
year after they were Serjeanted; and that not as a token of diminution, but of
their tenderness and new entrance on their State and Degree. Genes. xxxvii. 3.
it is said, Jacob loved Joseph more then all his Children, Tunicam polymitam ex
variis liciis confectam, tunicam figuratam, and pictam. Fagius in loc. Omne
ovum volucrum bicolor, lib. 10. Not. Hist. c. 52. Judges 5.30. 2 Samuel 13.19.20
Ezekiel. 16.10.13. c. 27.24. Psalm, 45.15.
and he made him a coat of many colors. And this was done not only to comply
with the nature and humor of youth, which delights in variety and novity, in
which regard that allusion of Pliny's may not be impertinent, That every egg of
birds is party-colored, which signifies youth to be an unsettled thing, this
and that, and neither yet either, etc. but also to instruct us, that
party-colour in garments signifies honor and victory, so, To Sicera a prey of
diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors, of diverse colors of needle work, on
both sides meet for the necks of them that take the spoil. In which words
there is not only (...) vestis Phrygionica, that embroydery in many colors
set out to the life, which makes the garment glorious, gaudy, and delightful,
of which the Prophet Ezekiel and other Scriptures speak; but that party
colouredness that is by tincture or dye, as the Rabbis expound this place by
vestes factae diversis speciebus colorum, so (...) signifies: For though the
Plural. (...) signifies what has as many kinds of colors as there are days in
the year, yet in the Singular it signifies only vary colors.

Stragulata vest is coloris bipartiti] Though our Sergeants color is black and
purple, party per pale; Quod in Festis ante altar sternunt in pavimento
stragulum rite vocabimus.
yet stragulata vestis, is in Authors any thing that is rich and delightful;
Stragula] Valla lib. 6. c. 46. Dico te maximum pondus auri and argenti, eboris,
purpurae, plurimam vestem Melitensem, plurimam stragulam, etc. Cic. 4. Vetr.
127. and 33.
genus vestis, sive quicquid vel insternitur lecto, vel equo, vel alii rei; so
Tully also computes stragulatas vestes amongst the greatest jewels, and Live. 4.
Belli Maced. 34.
Livy; so Budaeus tells us, that tapetes and tapetia, tapistry as we call that
part of rich furniture, was brought by the Army out of Asia to Rome, and
accounted an advance to the luxury of Rome. Whereas then our Text uses
stragulata vestis, for bipertiti coloris vestis, it is not to signify as if
Sergeants vests were like Heralds-Coates, embroydered with silk and gold, but
were only of two different colors of cloth, to signify his initiation by
gravity and learning into grandeur and luster: and thus sable and purpure make
a fair display of a Sergeants qualifications suitable to his trust, Learning and
Generosity; by the one to know what justice and honesty is; and by the other to
be enabled with courage and resolution to serve and propagate them.

This then being a Companion and Emblem of incipiency and mere entrance and
Freshmanship, as I may so say, in the State and Degree of Serjeancy, the
Justice is not to be alloyed by, and therefore the ensign of it not to wear,
Iustitiarius non utetur] says the Text.

Capitium ejus non alio quam Menevero penulatur] This is another difference; as
the Sergeants Cape is lined with Lambskin, which is in token of tenderness: so
the Justices is with Menever, that is, as I take it either the skin of a little
beast bred in Germany, or of a Russia squirrel, but it is that which is spent
in lining hoods and garments of graduates in arts, as black and yellow furrs
are for the linings of Liveries of Men of Societies and Mysteries. With this
Menever, as the Caps of Judges and men of honor were lined, so the attires of
Ladies and persons of quality, as somewhere I have seen in an ancient Picture.

Qualem habitum te plus ornare optarem cum potestas tibi fuerit ad decorem
status, Legis, and honorem regni tui.

This clause is insinuative to the Prince why, and upon what reason Formalities
were established, and civil Ceremonies first nourished, to wit, in order to the
great and more consequent ends of stability and government. For as hedges of
thorn and briars preserve fields of Corn and Grain, and locks of Iron on door
of wood defend Carkanets of jewels, and Treasuries of gold, as Soldiers that
have hardly a tatter (as we say) at their breeches, protect rights that have
Kingdoms depending on them, and farthing Candles help men to find a gemm that
is invaluable, and without them would be lost; so the little things (as they
are thought) of forms and methods, habits and proceedings, do so conduce to
the greater and nobler parts and portions of administrative prudence and
virtue, that without them and their punctilio's in every thing duly observed,
Errors and Inconveniences will ensue. This is the reason our Chancellor
minds the Prince, when God shall do well with him, to do well by the Law,
not only in the greater and more considerable matters of securing it from all
encroachment upon it, but also in the very circumstantial and ritual
appendances to it, qualem habitum te plus ornare optarem] and that not so much
for love to me, your Chancellor who have followed your misfortunes and
disasters, and resolve to live and die your Votary, who though now a Banished
Person from the Bench, and from the Country I love because I was born in it;
yet cannot but wish well to the Law my study, Cic. pro lege Manilia.

Cic. 2. De Finibus.

Flos Italiae, firmamentum populi Romani. ornamentum dignitatis.

Cic. ^. De Finibus.

Our Chancellor is worthy of admiration, even for this, which is a public
spiritedness well becoming a Gentleman.


to the Professors of it my Companions, whom I would beseech you to favor
highly, and in all things to promote, defendere, amplisicare and ornare, as
Cicero's words are, magnificentius augere and ornare as the same Author. I say
Our Chancellor does not here barely desire their esteem, but somewhat more
decretis ornare, to declare favors to them by Law, Aedificare and ornare
classes, to enlarge the borders and boundaries of houses of Law, and to make
the habits of Lawyers, vestitum pulcherrimum, and ornatum Regalem, to account
the professors of the Law as the Orator did Eloquent men of his time, The
Flower of the Nation, the Firmament of the Roman splendour, the Ornament of the
Cities Dignity; This is the generous temper, and supereffluent cataract of his
love to his profession and study beyond any private and narrow emolument of his
own. For He presents not to the Prince his Fidelities and Sufferings, his
Eclipses and hazzards, his Relations and Country, whom for his Sovereigns
sake, he has quitted and is dubious ever to see, He beseeches him not to
remember his Family when He comes into his Kingdom, and to set one Son of his
at his right hand, and another at his left in the glory of his restitution, no
such mercenary sallies of a mean soul does he in these words discover; but all
that He remembers him of as a grave Counselor and Father to his youth, so
winnowed and chaffed to and fro by the Euroclydon of a distracted Nation, Orat.
pro Milone
a potent Antagonist in a possessed Throne, and his doubtful victory over his
present dislustre, Orat. 3. in Catilin.
All that I say he craves of Him, is that he would make the Law which he
counted lumen and ornamentum Reipublicae, as Tully styled Hortensius, in all
the Ceremonies of it honorable, and the habit of it Honoris ornamenta,
monumenta gloriae and landis insignia, Orat. pro Domo sua.
as the Orator said against Catilin. And this he does, not from a spirit of
opposition or in remora to the conspicuities of other artists; but as a brave
and true spirited Englishman pro bono publico, this (says he) will make men
esteem well of the Law, and the professors of it, and ornatissimam de illis
sententiam dicere, as the Orator's words are, and this comes to our Texts ad
decorem status Legis, that men by the honors and riches they attain to by
study of the Law, may be invited to apply themselves to it, and acquire
excellent knowledge in it, and in the Conclusion fill the Nation with learning
and skill, which accomplishes that which the Chancellor here presses, honorem
regni. Thus the Chancellor evidences in his advice to the Prince, his love to
the Law, which yet as a wise man he desires not exhibition of, till a fit
season to show it self in, is effectually administered. He, Good man, is not
all agog, for he has learned patience and submission by the things he has
suffered; but resolves by a holy and humble obsequiousness to serve Providence,
and submit to the Regency of it. Therefore while he shows his Love in this
Advocation for the Law, he also manifests his submission to God for the time
when his pleasure shall most advantage it self in the discovery of it, so it
follows.

Cum potestas tibi fuerit] Those are his modest limits. Princes as well as
Subjects are in and under the power of God, and he will have his will on them
as well as on meaner men; for they are all but clay in the hand of the Potter,
and the vessel he makes to honor is but still a vessel, the work of his hand.
It Is not for us worms, who crawl on a soil of dust, and are busied in a World
full of shadows and snares, to stand upon terms, and be dictatorianly
haughty. God that is above us can worry our folly, A good Monition
and launch our Tympany; yea and with the humorous matter, let out also the
life-bloud of our beings, and then what are we? O what a madness is it to fret
and fume, to sacrilegiously resolve not to wait upon the Lord any longer. Such
arrogant Nebuchadnezzars, who raunt and rave in their Sultanish bravado's, and
consult not with God, build on tottering foundations that shatter down in a
moment, and the place of them is no more known. Better and firmer is that
foundation which is laid on faith in God, and obedience to God which resolves to
wait till God return and have mercy; and when that season of his is come, then
welcomes and walks worthy of it. This is the scope of our Chancellours cum
potestas tibi fuerit] For his purpose being to press upon the Prince courageous
Prudence and generous Patience under his present condition, when he presents
the Law and its artists as meet objects of his favor and kindness, and wishing
his benefaction to them, as meet to promote the main design of Government,
Peace, and Order, Religion and Learning, Industry and Riches, he so intends his
advice to take place, as God's providence in the favor of a worthy issue to
his adventures shall permit; for till God's (...) is come, all is but talk and
bustle, vanity and vapor that is put on by the spurr of the keenest mettle,
and laid a-soak in the ripeningst prudence and the most effectual conduct. Men
may pray and project, form and sight, but can never overcome their fears and
obtain their wishes, Petrus Crinitus lib. 5. c. 3. De bonesta disciplina.
'till God's counsel be answered in every punct of it: and then his figure has
all the perfection that weight and measure can accomplish it by. For as in the
computation of life there are four Aera's, the Spring of Childhood, the High
summer of Youth, the Autumn of Manhood, the Winter of Old age, and each of
these have their proportions of the sum of life, dividing the eighty years of
man into four twentyes, Not sumus apud quos usque udeo nihil ante mortem
etiosum est, ut si res patitur non sit ipsamors otiosa. Seneo. de otio
sapientis. p. 962.
and allowing to each pass a twenty years, before the absolving of which no
ordinary avenue is possible to the privilege and benefit of the gradation that
is before it; so in the series of God's operation, which is infallible, there
is such an exact harmony and Sorites of concurrences, which are not to be
abated or promoted beyond the proportion of God's endowment and situation of
them, that there is nothing more to be done in the entertainments of God's
pleasure in productions, then to be subact in our minds to God, and to be
thankful that he gives time as the season, and men as the instruments to their
production.

Scire te etiam cupio quod Iustitiarii Angliae, etc.

Here in the promiscuity of Titles ( Iustitiarii Angliae here, as well as
Iustitiarii Regis in the former Chapter) our Text-Master shows the unity and
inseperableness of King and Kingdom, Non potest aliquis judicare in
temporalibus, nisi solus Rex vel Subdelegatus. Fleta lib. 1. c. 17. Sine
Warranto [Regis] jurisdictionem non habent neque correctionem. Lib. 2. c. 34.
De Iustitiariis de Banco.
both which make up but one and the same great Good, which compleats the Head
and Members of Government and Order. And therefore as respectu fontalitatis the
Justices are the King's, for he only does, as he only can commissionate them
to judge the people, whose the people, they be to judge, are; and that by the
Law, whose the Law they are to judge the people by, is: so respectu utilitatis
and finis the Justices are the peoples, that is, distribute justice in the
place of the King for the peace of the people, which circumaction of
appropriation in this reciprocal line of endearment, ties that Gordian knot
that nothing but necessity unavoidably can loosen or dissolve.

Non sedent in Curiis.] That the Justices sit argues their authority, that they
sit in the King's Courts displayes and declares the publickness of it; but that
they sit not above three hours, and that in the first and clear part of the
day, when there is time to prepare for the Court before it sets, and to
dispatch the subsequent business in the Afternoon when the Court sits not, is
contrived with great prudence. For Lawing is not the Totum Regni, but the
Plough and the Ax, the Shop and the Barn, the Field and the Market is to be
tended as well as the Study and the Bar. Therefore as there are but certain
times which are called Terms, wherein the Courts of the King sit, and by them
causes in dispute can be determined: so are there in those Terms certain hours
in the day, in which only those Courts sit to hear causes, which hours are the
hours that are neither so early that weak and sickly persons cannot rise at
them, nor men, when they rise be without sleep, and drowsiness not shaken off
them, fit presently to come to the Court: but they are the three middle hours
in the fore-noon, which in the time precurring them, gave way to devotion, and
preparation for the Court by consultation with Counsel before the Court sits,
and takes the wits of both Clyents and witnesses in their coolness and keenness
before they be laden and surcharged with visceration, which the antecession of
meat burdens the After-noons hours with. I say, the order of the King's
Justices sitting those hours, from eight to eleven, that is, from that time
more or less as emergencies require, (for strict minutes, no nor hours in this
case are precisely stood upon, that Maxim of the Law being true here, Apices
Iuris non sunt Iura,) argues a prudent appointment of experience to avoid the
temerity and drowsiness, the indisposition and unfitness, that After-noons
clogg dispatches with. For though as to Formalities and Entryes, as to matter
preparatory to Trials and Courts of Law, the fallows of Afternoons do well; yet
as to the judicial and wise determination of affairs of life, reputation, and
estate, the Morning judgment is most subtle, sincere, and undisturbed: which
is I believe the reason that the chief service and devotion of the Church was
ever accounted her Morning Exercise. And surely if the Morning had not been as
Musis amica so Devotioni, David would never have attributed so much to the
Morning as he does, Psalm. 130.6. Psalm. 92.2. Psalm. 143.8. Psalm. 5.3. Cum
indulget judex indigno, nonne ad prolapsionis contagium provocat universos?
Fleta lib. 1. c. 17.
Thou shall hear me in the Morning, In the Morning will I direct my prayer unto
thee, nor would he speak so much of God's loving kindeness in the Morning, if
he did not attribute much of furtherance to sanctity and seriousness to the
Morning. Now the Morning being, in a large sense, any time before noon, and
arguing sobriety and freedom from repletion and luxury, which declines prudence
of forecast and deliberation, the hours here limited though but 3 in number,
yet being in the best and clearest time of the day, are enough to dispatch much
business in; especially considering the Judges are aged, whose infirmity as it
often disables them in their decay of strength and tenacity to sit long: so
after meals do the same infirmities engage them to repose, Fleta lib. 2. c. 35.
De diebus constitutis in Banco.
and therefore says our Text, Curiae post meridiem non tenentur.] For as there
are Dies non Iuridici (as before I said) not only every Lords day, but some
days in every term; so are there Horae Iuridicae and non Iuridicae, which our
Text warrants: whose Authority the great 2 Instit. on c. 51. of Stat. 1 Wesim.
p. 265.
Chief Justice quotes in the very words of our Text.

Sed Placitantes tunc se divertunt ad pervisum and alibi, consulentes cum
Servientibus ad Legem and aliis Consiliariis suis.

This referrs (not to the Pleaders repairing to the Pervise-Exercises of
Academique Origin, Seldom notes on this 51 Chapt.
the same in Law that those Exercises in Oxford are, called Pervisiae, or
sittings general in the Schools in the Afternoon (which Mr. Seldom says he
understood first out of Mr. Wake's Musae regnantes) and to which not only
young Lawyers repaired to learn, Pro ipsa subsiantiola cogebatur ille
panperculus multis diebus Scholas exercens, venditis in pervisio libellis,
vitam famelicam and Codrinam protelare. M. Paris p. 798.
but old Sergeants to teach and show their cunning,) I say, this clause turns
us not to that Pervise, from whence the little place (whereof teaching of
Schole was) in the lower part of the Church, was called Pervisium; but this
referrs to the consultation that Clyents use to have with their Counselors
and Sergeants about their Pleadings, Bills, Demurrers, Rejoynders, special
Verdicts, Orders, the reading over of which judiciously and with intentness is
called Pervisum, or as we say, perusal of them, that is, considering the
legality of them, comparing them with Originals, making Briefs out of them,
marshalling the evidence and preparing for trial in Court.

Quare Iustitiarii postquam se refecerint totum dici residuum pertranseunt
studendo in Legibus, sacram legendo Scripturam, and aliter adcorum libitum
contemplando, ut vita ipsorum plus videatur contemplativa quam activa.

This clause, from so true and knowing an Oracle as our Chancellor was,
informs us of the piety and wisdom of the Law, that therefore calls the learned
age of Lawyers off practice to Iusticing, Et caveat sibi [Rex] ne in sede
judicandi, qua est quasi Thronus Dei, quenquam loco suo substituat insipientem
and indoctum, corruptibilem vel severum, ne pro luce ponat tenebras, and manu
indocta modo furioso gladio feriat innocents, culpabilesque prece vel precio
utetur illegitime reddere quietos, ne per malitiam, vel ejusdem substituti
imperitiam, simul cum ipso aterno luctus maesiitiam sibi comparet. Fleta lib.
1. c. 17.
that they may the better do justice to the people when they are taken off from
all action of diversion, and wholly set apart to read over their books again,
which they had in a good measure forgot; for practice though it adds to the
stock of coin, yet it abates the stock of reading; therefore the Judge being
taken from pleading, is wholly to betake himself to read over his Law Books, to
peruse Scripture-directions, and to contemplate moral prudence. This if the
Judges had in that latitude that our Text speaks of, they had not that trouble
with multitude of persons repairing to them, that now they have: for then the
tricks and sharks of men were fewer then now they have found out, which
multiplies the trouble and diversion of the Justices; though that time they
have free from business contributive to the expedition of the Court, and from
visits and conferences with friends, together with the affairs of their
families and fortunes, they spend in meditating upon the Law, and on the word
of God, and in such methods of wisdom as becomes their years, dignity, and
learning to evidence themselves versed in. For a good Judge that does employ
his Vacation as our Text describes, Lib. 1. Sermon. Domini in Monte.
does not as Acindinus in St. Augustine, abuse power to oppress his underlings
till they have quitted their right and sacrificed it to his lawless and sinful
pleasure; Lib. De Vera Religione c. 31.
but so demeans himself in the use of humane laws, ut secundum aeternae legis
immutabiles regulas, quid sit, quo tempore jubendum vetandumque discernat, Non
eadem often sententia tribunalis ejus and anguli susurronum, multae hominibus
viae videntur justa quae postea reperientur p^va, Sanctus Hieron. in Epist. ad
Virgins Hermonenses.
considering that of Saint Ierom, That the judgment of God and Man is not
alike, nor is the same plea available in the assise before the Judge of quick
and dead, assessed with by Saints and Angels, that will be acceptable here
before us men, with whom many things pass for virtuous, which there will be
rejectedas vild; Studium est animi asiidua and vehemens ad aliquam rem
applicata magna cum voluptate occaepatio. Cic. 1. De Inventione.
And this our Text sets forth not so much as matter of recreation and pleasure
as pain and study of the mind studium, est dedita opera voluntatis hominis
attentior atque impensior says Donatus. Hence is it that men of study do
wholly retire themselves from avocation, Quid tam populare quam otium, quodita
jucundum est, ut and vos and Majores vestri and fortisimus quisque vir, maximos
labores suscipiendos putet, ut aliquando in atio posiit, esse, praesertim in
imperio and dignitate. Idem codem loco.
and intend their thoughts and speculations ultimis viribus, giving no sleep to
their eyes, nor slumber to their eyelids; but rising with the light, and
sitting on the Eggs of their conception constantly, till they have hatched
their designs. This David calls in his holy soul Meditation in Gods Law day and
night, celebrare per otia recta studia as the Orators words are. And this
study, the occupation of the mind in Contemplation and Invention, being
properly the work of age, when the mind wearied with the seeming gaudery and
real nothing of objects pleasing to light and credulous youth, retires it self
in penance to time misspent in fruitless action and sinful delight, returns to
consistency, and to preparation for higher fruitions, and more real and solid
contentments. I say when the mind of man in the age and serious temper of it,
dwells at home, and is abstracted from the objects of its vageness and
insolidity. Then, Then, is it best at leisure and most pleased with the repose
of study and the delights of contemplation. For as in youth the glory of it is
action, so of age the honor thereof is contemplation. A good employment of old
age.
Then they do quietam vitam agere ab omni solicitudine ac mundi turbinibus
semotam their passions are ebbed low, and their curiosities satiated, with
desire defeated, and expectation glutted, turns them upon more real objects of
captivation, the contempt of the World, the preparation for death, the
appropriation of the joys and comforts of the Almighty, the Communion with God
and Christ, by the assistance of the Holy Spirit. These, These alts and elahs
of Holy Music, Militum Christi perfectio est exuta^ mentem habere a eunetis
terrenis negotiis and tumultu seculi. Sanctus Hieron. Com. in c. 3. Lamentat.
Tom. 5. Oper.
which attol the soul above wonted endearments, and heretofore surprising
Iuventutis lupanaria, are the only blessings of age, and the noblest
compensations of life's infirmity. When men can defy the sinful fear of men, as
Gascoigne did, and dare own truth in the day of hazard for it, then they do
as those that are remoti a mundi turbinibus, then they do quietam vitam agere,
which Hankford Chief Justice to Anno 1470. 10 E. 4. Holingshed p. 677.
E. 4. (though he was a most learned man in the Laws, had never a Son, and had
a great estate) yet never attained to. For had he not feared difficult times
and the issue of them more then he ought, he had not been his own Murderer as
he was, nor had Sir James Hales that honest Judge, who stood alone in the
Integrity of a lawful judgment in the Case of the Crown Temps E. 6. and who
therefore highly deserved of Queen Mary whose Champion for her right in
succession to the Crown he was (though She requited him ill, in suffering him
to be imprisoned for his Religion, which owned so constantly her Supremacy and
Sovereignty) I say had that good Judge feared less the terrors of men he had
not made himself away to avoid them as he did. P. 1091.
I say had these, though other wise worthy men, been a turbinibus mundi remoti,
had they the quietae vitae actio, which as good Judges and grave Sages they are
described in the Text to have, they would have kept themselves from this great
Offense.

Nec unquam compertum est little aliquem, donis aut muneribus suisse corruptum.

This is not in the strictness of the letter to be understood. For our
Chancellor right well knew, that Sir William Thorp Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench 24 E. 3. cepit munera contra juramentum suum, 5 Instit. p. 145, 146 and
Chapt. 68.
and 20 E. 1, all the Justices except two, 27 E. 3. Justices Itinerant took
bribes of Berners, and were fined for every pound a thousand marks, and so
others, which Sir Edward Cook nominates, I say our Chancellor knowing these
errors and misdemeanors in Judges, could not be thought to write thus
confidently in a matter of apparent questionableness; but whereas he says nec
unquam compertum est, he is to be understood, non frequenter; Raro unquam, as
Quintilian expresses it. Lib. 5. c. 7.
For though there have been such persons and presidents of misdemeaning
Justices, who have been donis and muneribus corrupti; yet not often, as seldom
as next door to never, Good Justice administreed in England.
have such been, The Justices of England being for the most part the most
approved and impartial Judges of any in the World, nor is there any place under
the Cope of Heaven, where I think so little iniquity in judgment judicially
is, as in England.

Unde and hoc genus gratiae vidimus subsecutum; quod vix little aliquis sine
exitu decedat, quod justis magnae and quasi appropriatae benedictionis Dei est.

This inference is to have a modification to reduce it to rectitude in the
Court of experience and truth. For because in outward things, the Wise man's
caution is safe, not to conclude good or evil, Eccles. 9.2.
love or hatred by them, for as much as they have unequal events and various
catastrophes; therefore is the hoc genus gratiae, and vix eorum aliquis to be
gently pressed as an argument of benediction on men in their way and prosession
as rewarded by them for it. For though true it is, that Children are the gift
of God, and that posterity to preserve a name, is much the delight of men and
the mercy of God to many, that are in their families eternized by it, as has
been our Royal-Family, in which, Speech White Hall. 1607. p. 520 of his works.
in which, King James said he was in descent to the Kingdom of Scotland 300
years before Christ, and may it so continue in them I beseech God, and so is
the suffrage of all true Englishmen, till Shiloh come, that is, for this Worlds
ever. And as many others of ancient extract have by it been long in Nations and
in honors, yet falls it so out often, Nominem Dioclesiane Auguste prope
magnorum virorum optimum and utilem filium reliquiste satii claret, denique aut
sine liberis viri interierunt, aut tales habuerunt, ut melius fuerit de re bus
humanis sine posteritate decede^^. Lege plura apud Aetium Sparrianum in Severo.
p. 176. Edit. Sylburgii.
that brave men either have no issue at all, or those not Monumental to them,
unless it be for wickedness and dissimilitude of manners to their Genitors,
which Aemilius Spartianus makes good in Romulus, Numa, Camillus, Scipio, both
the Cato's, Homer, Demosthenes, Crispus, Terence, Plautus, Caesar, Tully,
Trojan, Antoninus Pius, Severus, and may be instanced further in thousands of
others; and therefore this is no infallible instance of Gods favor, no more
then other things are, which are commonly distributed, of which the Father
says dantur bonis, ne videantur esse sum mala, dantur malis ne videantur
esse sum bona, but that which I would have our Chancellours sense herein is,
that God has so approved the integrity of the Judges in England, and so
rewarded it with living Memory, that very seldom they being Men of good
Families, Breedings, Fortunes, and courages, do deny themselves the content of
Marriage (as Justices did when Priests and under vows, as till E. 3. time,
they often were) but in their lusty and liberal youth, bestowed themselves to
women of quality, and thereby gained additions of fortune and relations, and as
a consequent of their natural vigor, and conjugal content, prolificated. For
though I know all the vigor and kindness nature has in her Repertory, and the
most endeared expression of it parties can testify each to other, availes
nothing to increase without Gods fiat, and his benedictive Amen; yet where
those are, and are properly expressed, issue may come as the work of nature, as
well as from a more hallowed cause, which our Chancellor calls here Gods
grace, magna and appropriata benedictio Dei. And therefore, though I concur
with Sir Edward Cook, Preface to Littleton.
who to this of our Chancellor adds another Crown to Judges, That they die not
will-less; yet do I think both these if they be peculiar blessings, yet are
only so to Judges as to other wisemen, who walk humbly before God, are
diligent in their callings and advice, and act for the peace and plenty of
their families living and dying. For though I know to be Childless is a curse
as in the case of Coniah, and to have no Male Children is a death to a family,
daughters with their persons carrying all they are and have into their Husband
families; yet is it better to have no Sons then lewd and for did ones. For as a
wise Son makes a glad father Prove. 10.1, for such an one gathers in summer,
verse the fifth, such an one hears his Fathers Instruction c. 13. v. 1. so a
foolish Son is a Son that causes shame c. 10. v. 5. c. 17. v. 2. is a grief
and calamity. And if wise Sons the Justices of England have eminently had, as
truly I think, they more conspicuously then any profession of men have had,
because they have given them better breedings then others have done, it is much
toward that our Chancellor intends in that clause, quasi appropriate
benedictions Dei est.

Quod ex Iudicum sobole plures de Proceribus and Magnatibus Regni huc usque
prodierunt, quam de aliquo alio statu hominum Regni, qui se prudentia and
industria propriaopulentos, inclytos, nobilissimosque fecerunt.

This clause gives much confirmation to the precedent assertion, that the
Judges of England have the rewards of justice in Gods benediction on them
consisting in the increase and continuation of their issue; which is so great a
felicity that Job accounts it amongst the rewards of God's beloved ones, whom
he corrects to their emendation, and thereby dignifies by this special
testimony of his love, Job. 5.25. Ier. 22. ult. and 28. Ier. 36.31.
That their seed shall be great, and their offspring as the grass of the earth.
For if it be a judgment to dye issueless, as in the case of Coniah, and to
have ones seed cast out, as in the case of Iehoiakim and his seed whom God
threatens; Prove. 20.7. Ps. 85, 1^. Prove. 11 210
if God threatens to pour out his wrath upon the children of wicked men, then
surely to have children, and to have those children blessed after them, to have
them inherit the earth, to have them delivered in the evil day, is the peculiar
honor of God to the piety and justice of Ancestry: which the Chancellor here
takes notice of to fix on the Princes mind a love of the Law, which has been
the raiser of so many excellent Siers, whom God has made the extern instruments
and the natural causes of so fertile a Peerage and Nobility, as from them
Lawyers by Profession and Judges by office have arisen. For though true it were
that when the Justices were Clergymen, Rot. Parl. 45 E. 3. Rot. 22. M. 15. 4
Instit. c. 8. of Chancery. p. 79.
there were no Magnates or Proceres that came from them as their lawful
Soboles; yet when Laymen came to be Justices, and they married and had issue,
the issue of them inheriting such fortunes as they left them honestly gained
and thriftyly improved, made them sit and worthy of the King's Honor, Barons
dixerunt posteri quos antiqui Heroes and Proceres. Spelm. in voce Baro. Page
968, 970, 971, 974, 979, 982, 990, 991, 993, 999, 1000, 1003, 1004, etc.
whereby they were not only made men of Honor, but Proceres and Magnates
Regni,] that is, Barons, and of the high Nobility of England; so Proceres and
Magnates are frequent to express Earls and Lords by, c. 38. Magna Charta, Stat.
Merton, W. 1. Gloucester West. 2. Quo Warranto, West. 3. and so in M. Paris, and
so in all Acts of Parliament, when the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are named,
those the Text calls Proceres and Magnates, are intended. And that these have
in a great measure (many of the Ancient Baronies of England being extinct and
determined) been the supplements and rise of the growing Nobility, no man can
deny that has any skill in Antiquity, though because to avoid inconvenience I
forbear to instance in particulars; Leaf next after the Epistle to the 2 Report.
yet a truth it is from our Chancellor, seconded by Sir Edward Cook, who has
numbered near 200 great families risen from Lawyers, The Professors of which Law
by the blessing of God, has obtained a greater blessing and ornament to their
family and posterity then any other Profession; Ps. 92.13.
for it is an undoubted truth, That the just shall flourish as the Palm Tree,
and spread abroad as the Cedars of Libanus, thus Sir Edward Cook. Not that our
Text-Master attributes all ascents to honor by Riches, and Virtue, to the Law
in the science and practice of it; for there are many courses of life and ways
of profession, wherein diligence, crowned with success, makes rich, and riches
had, procure Titles and Dignities, such as are Offices, Physic, Trades,
Husbandry, Plantation, Buying and Selling of Land, all which have raised great
estates and made families rich and honorable by them, especially the City,
which how much soever it is vilified is no infrequent or unfruitful womb of
Honor, Though I say the Chancellor allows these to have their respective
shares in the pleasing returns of Conspicuity on their issues; yet the persons
that have risen to be Opulentos (that is, divitiarum pleni, 2. Offic. Senec. in
Herc. Furent. 3.
as Tully renders it, Pecunia opulenti, rich as they are who do componere opes
nullo sine, and who get what they have Ex sanguine and miseriis Civium, as
Salust accused some; like that Clericus Militaris whom Lichfield's Chronicle
mentions in a short time to have grown from the inheritance of an Acre to an
Earldom, and Mansell that greedy unconscionable Clerk, that had fifty
Promotions at a time, being able in H. 3. his time to spend 4000 Marks a year.
These are, as the Text says, Opulentos, inclytos] that is, Inclyta justitia
religicque ea temipestate Numa Pompilii crat. Lib. 1. ab Urbt.
eminent fulgore fame conspicui, preferred above the vulgar, non tantum titulo
sed merito, not for their fortune having genus inclytum magnis titulis, but
virtue, as Livy stories Numa, whom he terms inclyta justitia: Nobilesque] that
is, having fortune to support, and virtue to become Honor and Peerage, are
preferred to, and blessed in it above others,) he accounts the issue of the
Justices.

Quanquam Mercatorum status, quorum aliqui sunt, qui omnibus Iustitiariis Regni
praestant divitiis, numerum in millibus hominum excedat.

This our Chancellor grants, that by how much the greater improbability of it
is, the greater may appear the blessing of it, to improve it to so unlikely an
end. For though I think it well-becomes the Chancellor to advance his purpose
by all the plausible arguments, that art with truth can form to so noble a
tendency; yet that thus he magnifies the estate of Merchants beyond that of
Judges, and yet concludes the Judges children to be more durably fortunate and
worthily honored then the sons of Merchants are, seems to me high-wracked,
perhaps beyond the proportion that can be made out in confirmation of it. For
though I believe in H 6. time the Justices were not so great gainers as since
they have been, by reason whereof they might be so much excelled by Merchants
as now they are not; yet, that either they then should be so mean in estate,
that one Merchant should in wealth exceed them all, or that any Merchant should
be so great, as that he should so vastly exceed ordinary calculates, seems to
me strange I confess Trade is a thing of gain if well followed, and timelyly
left; (for there are Apoplexies in Trade, and men sometimes had they known well
when to have given over, had dyed great in estate, who persisting in it have
dyed beggars:) but that it operates such Mountains and Mines of wealth, as one
man of the number may thereby get twelve men's estates, and those Justices, who
are for the most part men of great years and great fortunes, is to me strange,
and as in the Text, Hyperbolique. Yet in that our Chancellor says what
historially I will believe rather then dispute, unless I could think his age
produced what Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the rise of riches and trade, did, a race
of Sir John Spencers, Sir William Cravens, Sir Thomas Greshams, to which may be
added Sir Baptist Hicks, Sir William Cockain, Sir Thomas Middleton, and Sir
Stephen Soams, unless I say these were matched by men in our Chancellour's
time, I see no reason he should so advance the gains of trade above that of the
Law, when as there are instances of late as well as former Judges, Judge Gaudy,
Mounson, Cook, Popham, and the Chancellor Coventry and others equal to them.
So that in what Profession soever, if God move the heart to ingenuity and
diligence, and fortunate them to a prosperous event, there may be great
increase as well as in the Profession of the Law; for it is God alone that
makes men by his blessing rich, and adds no sorrow to the riches he blesses
men to get, Prove. 10.22. Prove. 11.25.
For the liberal soul shall be made rich, and he that waters shall be watered
also himself.

Dilige ergo Iustitiam, Fili Regis, quae sic ditat, colit, and perpetuat foetus
colentium eam, and Zelator esto Legis quae Iustitiam parit, ut a te dicatur
quod a justis scribitur, Et semen eorum in aeternum manebit.

Having in the prementioned passages shown the worth and eminency of the Law,
and commended it in the fruits of God's blessing on the labor and posterities
of the chief Lawyers the Justices, whom he acknowledges to be the great
meriters of respect, and the great stakes in the hedge of Government, who as
they have Primorum Ordinum Sacerdotia, id est, Doctrinae, virtutisque praemia,
as B^daeus his words are, so are every way accomplished to it: and therefore
are by the Chancellor, as Promoters of Justice, to be beloved. For in as much
as the Law is the rule of English Justice, and the Justices, 4 Instit. c. 7.
King's Bench. p. 73.
the ordinary speaking rule of the Law, do answer all motions in the Courts,
even in the presence of the King, by reason that the King's Judicature is
committed to them by the King, according to the Law; and that Answers and
Declarations of theirs from the Courts are the Law and Justice of the Nation,
by which the Order, Wealth, and Peace of the Nation is preserved, Our
Chancellor, (...) Acts. 21.20. Zelari significat amulari, cupide aliquid
imitari, vehementer amare, adeo ut nullam amoris in partem admitti patimur.
I say, upon these persuasions that the Law is so beneficial to not only the
Professors of it, but to their Posterities, whom the blessing of God gives and
preserves estates and honor to, for that is the sense of ditat, colit, and
perpetuat foetus colentium eum,] counselling him well to not only love the
Law, but Esto Zelator Legis] to be a passionate doter on the Law, as a Suitor
is on his Mistress, whom he desires to keep from all lovers but himself, and
that for that one and only reason, that it does ducere ad virtutis viam and
praemium, that the promise may be fulfilled in you, Their seed shall remain for
ever. And so he ends this one and fiftieth Chapter.

CHAP. LII.
Princeps. Vnum jam solum superest.


HERE the Prince is personated as formerly convinced of the wisdom and fitness
of the Law of England for England, and of the unreasonableness of all Arguments
produced against the prevalence, honor, and continuation of it; yet that he
may be fortified to repel all Applications of diversion, he further craves the
Chancellour's solution of that which chiefly sticks with him, and somewhat
demurrs his plenary consent and resolution. Vnum superest solum] That Is but a
little punct but of huge import, like the One thing our Lord says is
necessary, Mary's choice, the better part, and the One thing David desired of
the Lord, and the One thing that is first to be sought, the endeavor after
which has promise of all things to be added. One thing says the Prince, one
numero, but all pondere, for it unresolved, does fluctuare mentem and
inquietare, that is, fluctuando inquietare; for as Seas are disturbed by the
agitation of waters from the wind, Lib. 8. Aeneid. Lib. 4. 217. v. Fluctuari
animo Rex putabatur, and modo suum modo Parmenionis consilium expendere.
Curtius. Quod sine nervis and articulis huc and illuc se habet. Author ad
Herennium lib. 4.147.
so is the mind of man hurryed this and that way when it is unquiet, this
Virgil terms magno curarum fluctuat aestu, and Lucretius, Fluctuat incertis
erroribus ardor amantum; yea Curtius setting out Alexander's distraction, not
knowing what way to go, or whose counsel to follow, expresses it by this, That
the King was at a stunn which advice to follow, whether his own or Parmenio' s:
and as a man severed from all consistence and with the wind hither and thither
acted, as it alters its blasts, so the Princes owns himself to be discomposed;
and therefore as he prays relief from his wisdom, so promises he not to raise
more scruples, non amplius te quaestionibus fatigabo] says he. This premised
he produces his debate.

Dilationes ingentes, ut asseritur, patiuntur Leges Angliae in processibus suis
plusquam Leges aliarum Nationum, quod petentibus, nedum juris sui prolatio est,
sed and sumptuum quamdoquidem importabile onus. etc.

Because Delay of Justice is one of the great errors of men in power, as being
a kind of Denial of Justice; therefore the Laws are said pati not infer
Dilationes. Patiuntur Leges] says our Text, thereby intimating that Laws do
permit rather then approve of Delays, and account them rather necessary evils
then desirable goods. This Dilatio Authors interpret by Prorogatio, Lib. 18.
c. 2.10. Phil. 3.12. In Art 35. de Senibus. Maximum remedium irae dilatio est.
Lib. 3. de Ira. p. 591. Seneca lib. 1. de Ira. p. 546. Commentar in loc. p. 554.
so Pliny in those words, Nec ulla segetum minus dilationem paetitur; so Livy,
Per Dilationes bellum gerere, that is prorogare bellum, Pedetentim and per
Intervalla bellare; thus Cicero uses Temporis dilatio, and Horace, Dilator, spe
longus, iners, avidusque futuri: thus the Moralist tells us that Delay is the
best remedy of wrath, and as it impedes precipitations and advantages, truth
and justice in the ripening of discoveries; so the Laws of Nations and the
wisdom of Lawmakers did encourage petere advocationes, which Lipsius on that
phrase in Seneca writes, Significare moram and tempus deliberandi, which is
suitable to Seneca's expression lib. 2. where his words are, Lib. 2. de Ira. p.
569. Alciat. in leg. 99. Fornerius in Leg. eandem. p. 232.233.
Utrique parti dares advocationem, dares tempus, nec semel audires; magis enim
veritas elucet, quo saepius ad manum venit. Thus for the good of men in the
clearing of justice in all the lineaments of her beauty and truth, the Civil
Laws allow Delay, and hard it would otherwise be, nay impossible it would in
some cases be to make out truth where the act of God or other occurrence
inevitably intercepted, if time should not be indulged men either to use that
help whence the hinderance should be removed, or to think of some other way
equivalent to that which by reason of those demurrs, is not obtainable. For the
Law being Ars aequi and boni, and intending nothing but justice, as it allows
Delays for such a time as the Judge, who is presumed just and wise, shall
allow, ubi spatia non cadunt in certam regulam, for then there is no waving the
prefixed time of the Law; Fornerius loco pracit.
so does it abhor that those well-intended conveniences and prudent remedies
should be misapplyed, to softer injury and delay of shift and dishonesty; for
they account such execrable, crebrae dilationes quibus res in longius tempus
extrahuntur frustrationis and calumniae suspicione laborant, Fornerius. Loco
praecitato.
say the Doctors; and therefore though the Law allow time or prorogation upon
petition, yet does it do that purely upon the pre-asserted grounds, and if
second days of delay be desired, In pecuniariis causis omnis dilatio singulis
causis plus semel tribui non potest, in Capitalibus autem reo tres dilationes,
accusatori dua dari possant, sed utrinque causa cognita. Paulus Lib. 5. sent.
it judges of the justness of them, and grants and denies as it sees fit, so
are the authorities which confirm the rule of Bartolus, Ex causa potest Iudex
dilationes prorogare, yea and minuere too, as he in wisdom and justice finds
the reason so to do, Digest. lib. 2. tit. 12. p. 239.
which considered since this which our Text calls dilatio, is the constitutio
vel extensio spacii temporis ad aliquid agendum vel dicendum per consensum
quorum interest, Digest. lib. 2. tit. 12. p. 238. in margin.
vel per legem vel judicem facta, and that ordinary and extraordinary ones,
Digest. lib. 5. tit. 1. p. 694. De judiciis. and p. 709.
are in their kinds allowed necessary and convenient for the accomplishment of
the ends of justice, Syntagm. Iuris lib. 48. c. 8. De actionibus and
dilationibus. 14 E. 3. c. 5.
as Tholossanus cleares out of the Civil Laws. The Laws of England which
allows Essoine-dayes, does not exceed the proportion of other Laws, nor
herein gratifies the gain of Officers, who by these delays, multiply to
themselves fees, which the Prince here calls by importabile onus, but does in
whatever the Law is slow and the proceeding favorable to any excuse that may
plausibly and with color of reason be granted in prosequution of a gentle and
religious tenderness that it has to all men's conditions, and with an eye to
that general rule of doing to others what we would have others do to us, and
because no man ought to go beyond, 2 Thessalonians. 4.6.
and defraud his brother, since the Lord is the avenger of all such: these
things being by the Prince well ruminated, the Laws of England are by him
charged (through misinformation) with that which they are not guilty of. For
notwithstanding that in all Governments and Laws, some inconveniences will
fall out, and some persons be aggrieved, by reason that delays are occasioned
by difficulty, diverse opinions of the Judges, and sometimes for some other
cause, as the words of 14 E. 3. c. 5. are; yet is there as little fault to be
found with the Law of England for this, as with any Law in the world. For
though the Law of England does think it unreasonable to condemn a person
unheard, especially where he is not able to appear, the act of God, or other
impossibility of appearing, intervening and crossing him; yet does the Law, as
delay savours of fraud, oppression, of ill will and perverse humor, utterly
decry and disapprove it: witness the Statutes of 14 E. 3. c. 5. etc. 14. 20 E.
3. c. 2. 27 E. 3. c. 1. 27 Eliz. 5.8. Eliz. c. 2. which together with sundry
others have in all times been enacted against it And thereupon, though there
may and are several excuses on good and reasonable grounds allowed; yet is not
the Law light or therein Favorable to unnecessary delay and prorogation of
spite: but purely inclined so such lenity and latitude upon the prementioned
reasons, which protects both Laws and men from sin and guilt for legally
practicing it, according to that rule of Bartolus, Digest. lib. 2. tit. 14. De
Pactis. p. 307.
non est in mora qui potest exceptione legitima se taeri. And so he ends this
Chapter.

CHAP. LIII.
Cancellarius. In actionibus personalibus extra Vrbes and Villas Mercatorias,
etc.


IN Actionibus Personalibus] Of these I have discoursed in the Notes on the 25.
and 26 Chapters. Extra Vrbes and Villas mercatorias] That is, without
Corporations, which are Counties and Staples of trade within themselves. (For
Corporations being the most secure residencies of men of art and mystery, have
private local Laws reserved and indulged to them, which are distinct from the
general Laws of open places,) which is the reason the Text says extra Vrbes
and Villas mercatorias, the processus sunt ordinarii] That is, all matters of
Justice, whether in actions between man and man, or in matter that concern the
peace, are tried in the Hundred, County Court Leet or Assizes, 2 Instir. p. 73.
c. 35. Magna Charta.

Rot. Par. 1. H. 4. Memb. 2. number. 1. 2 Instit. p. 51.


according to the Custom of them respectively, and that as part of the Lex
terrae, which though it cannot avoid some delay; yet so long as it is in any
degree moderate, is very tolerable and useful. So was the judgment of
Parliament in Justice Richel's Case, wherein it was determined that a
reasonable time may be taken to deliberate upon answer to interrogatories: but
when they are excessivae, such as are unsuitable to Justice either in men to
desire, or in the Law to grant, when they are merae subtilitatis and ingeniosi
doli molimina, and tends to the mortifying of a cause, (for so excessus, whence
excessivus, is by Lib. 1. De Legibus.
Tully rendered) then the Laws of England never have, Certe non long a tuis
adibus inambulans post excessum suum Romulus, Julio Proculo dixit se Deum esse.
never can, never I hope will endure them, but have discovered them; hence
allowed they by the Statute 13 E. 1, c. 12. no Essoine in appeal of the death
of a man, no Essoine De malo lecti, where the Tenant is not sick and
produceable to appear before the Justices, Legitime summonitus f^ non venerit
ad diem litis, secundum quod fuerit summonitu^, puniendus erit, nisi
excusationes habeat legitimas per quas sua absentia merito debeat excusari.
Fleta lib. 6. c. 7.
13 E. 1. c. 17. no Essoine after a day given prece partium; yea in that the
Statute of Essoines does allow Challenges of Essoines in certain Cases, it
clearly appears that Essoines as delays in obstruction of Justice the Law
allows not. For the Law of England being a Law of virtue, loves nothing that
is, excessive, which virtue is not; for in medio consist it virtus.

In Vrbibus vero and Villis illis potissimum cum urgens causa deposcit, celeris
ut in aliis mundi partibus fit processus.

Because men of trade as well Strangers as others, are the inhabiters of Towns
and Cities of trade, and their affairs will not permit them long stay;
therefore the Law of England has allowed them a speedy course for the
obtainment of right against detainers of it from them, so Stat. Acton Burnel 13
E. 1. 9 E. 3. c. 1, and other Statutes, the execution of which being in
Corporations (where of course by the local custom and Law there are weekly
Courts, in three or less of which judgment may be obtained) Delays are in a
great measure out of doors. 3 H. 6. cap. 1.
For those Chapiters and Assemblies of men having much of contract and contest,
and of Buying and Selling for great sums upon barely the Royalty of the faith
of traders, without Bond, Bill, or Witness, if it should not be speedily and
without delay be made good by the Law of the place, so great inconveniences
would follow, as the Law thinks not fit to permit, but to prevent the fatality
of them, has by act of Parliament ever saved the rights of them, and that for
the better carrying on of Justice, Honesty and Civil living within them; yet is
not the haeste (as we say) a cause of waste, for though the trials are speedy,
yet not quicker then is convenient, both for the Plaintiff to prove his charge,
and the Defendant to provide himself of defense; for if there were nimia
praecipitatio it might cause Quaerentis partis laesionem, as well as in the
nimia cunctatio there would be. That then which is by our Text aimed at is to
present the Justice of England, in the legal Administration of it, admirable
both as to the allowance of delay as a moderate and proper assistant to
ripeness, and the disallowance of it as a dissipation of those ill humors
speedy trial would draw to an head and expel.

Rursus in Realibus actionibus in omnibus fere mundi partibus morosi sunt
processus, sed in Anglia quodammodo celeriores.

This is added to show that the greater and more valuable the nature of the
thing is that the Law is to determine, the more time does the Law allow to the
trial and decision of it. Real Actions what they are I have touched in the
Notes on the 25 and 26. Chapters, yet as to the mention of them here, this is
to be added, that the Laws of all Nations esteem them the greatest and most
valuable of things Civil, not in the sense that the actiones extraordinariae in
the Civil Law are, which do wholly depend on the Judges pleasure, Et hae
extraordinaria action imploratar officium judicis nobile, quia in ejus
arbitrio situm est ad agendum admittere vel non, cum Magistratus sit custos
bons and aqui. Tholoss. Syntag. Iuris lib. 21. c. 8 ss. 10.
who can make them what they will. No such notion of real actions are we to
have; for in that they are extraordinary actions, and cause more delay then
other less consequent ones do, arises from the value, intricacy, and
difficulty of them, since title of Land and the fee's of Estate are much more
weighty in their nature and value qua such, then Debts, Damages, and the like.
This is the reason why in all Actions that are to try and determine solid parts
of Estates, Lands, Vsque eo difficiles ac morosi sumus ut nobis non satisfaciat
ipse Demosthenes. Cic. in in Oratore 56.
Offices, etc. every where in the World, Morosi sunt processus, says our Text,
that is, not only tedious and crabbed, but difficult and hard to bring about;
Difficiles ac morosi Tully couples, to show, that all things that are of
Concern are leisurably to be transacted, and capable by many pauses and sluggs
on them to be retarded: Sed in Anglia sunt celeriores,] For that the Law, as
has been heretofore made good, hates delay as it is opposite to justice, which
ought to be free, full, and speedy as far as may stand with reason and
convenience. For though Essoines upon solid reasons are allowed, and
Protections in case of service to the King and Kingdom against the enemies of
it been given some time, but ever by allowance of Law: yet did Queen Elizabeth,
who maintained many Wars, grant few or no Protections, and her reason was,
Note this well.
That he was no fit Subject to be employed in her Service that was subject to
other men's actions, Cook on Littleton. p. 131. B.
least she should be thought to delay justice. Which added to the former
instances, accommodates the Chancellour's purpose with Confirmation, That
speedy execution of justice is the glory of England; and that no delay can be
in trials if there be not neglect in prosecution, or combination in Adversaries
to spin out suits in infinitum: Contemptor propriae vitae, Magister tuae.
and then, as in all cases so in this, he that values not but contemns his own
quiet, may disturb another man's. For though no Law can well hinder
turbulentness, which is a sufficient vexation to its self; yet the Laws of
England do as much to discourage and punish it as may be, 3. Instit. p. 143. c.
66. Of Conspiracy. etc. 74. Of Perjury. p 163 c. 75. p. 169. c. 77. and 78. p.
175.
and that by punishment of Conspiracy and Perjury, Forging of Deeds Champerty,
Barretry: and this to prevent Delay of justice, and to promote the fruits and
felicities of love and charity. Which the Law doing to outlaw those liars in
wait, whose only work and wages it is to do mischief, does contribute much to
the expedition of justice and to the absorption of unnecessary delays, which
are faults and errors of men, not of the Law, for that decrees righteous
things, and proceeds according to evidence, allowing no delay but what is
contributive to discovery and determination of right; if the indulgence of the
Law to these purposes be abused by one parties industry, and not opposed by
suitable vigilance in the other party, the Law is not to be blamed, but the
party whose the remissness is: for the Law gratifies always the diligent
Prosecuters, presuming those have ever good desires to come to issue, who
prosecute the means thereunto most vigorously. Now that it may appear that the
Chancellour's averrment, that proceedings legal in England are more speedy then
in other parts they are, he quotes his own experience while he lived in France.

Sunt in Regno Franciae, in Curia ibidem suprema, quae Curia Parliamenti
vecitatur, processus quidam, qui in eis plusquam triginta annis pependerunt.
etc.

This instance acquaints us with the misery of seeking justice where justice is
hard to be found; Cum Parisiam venisset Ludovicus conventu generali habito,
Rempubl. reformavit, statutis optimis Legibus de jure a judicibus dicendo, and
de officiis non emendis. Gaguini Hist. in Ludovico Divo. lib. 7.
for though true it be, there were of old good Laws and brave Parliaments in
the constitution of France: yet, since Absoluteness has been affected, and
Armies necessary to support it, since these must live upon the spoils and
sharks from the poor Peasant, and all Offices must to sale to raise Revenues
and to maintain the equipage of Favorites, Causes that come into Advocates
hands must be so lengthened out, that not years of Apprenticeship but even of
life must be the measure of them. This the Chancellor makes out in instances
of great oppression and excessive delay; which though it may perhaps in some
few cases be paralleled, some Lawsuits being hereditary and continuous: yet is
that not because judgment of Law has not been effectually given in them, but
for that the parties have resolved an incessancy of suit, and bequeathed the
Christianless legacy of persistance to their Children and Successors, whereby
they have immortalized the suits and differences in their families, to the
ruin and disquiet of one or both parties of them. This indeed has sometimes
fallen out in England, but that has been in case of Honor and Arms bearing; as
in that matchless memorable Contest between Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthen and
Sir Edward Hastings, which lasted undetermined from R. 2. Bissaeus in Notis ad
Spelmanni Aspilog. p. 95.
time to 11 H. 4. when judgment I think was given in it, from which there was
Appeal to the King, by reason of which it rested litigious till Henry the
Sixth's time: but this being but in a case of Arms, reaches not the instance of
our Text, which charges France in the High Court of Parliament (which ought to
be the readiest and more effectual Court of dispatch) to be in so great a
degree dilatory, that Plaintiffs had better lose their cause then sue for it,
and Defendants answer the Demands of it then defend it in that Court, where not
only there are detentions of suit without Judgment thirty years in some cases
and ten in other, but those chargeable evils brought upon Subjects, for seeking
remedies of small evils, the remedies whereof have been worse then the
diseases, witness the allegation of the Chancellor, who in the Text recites a
case of one in Paris, who for a right of eight pence English in Rent, eight
years in the Parliament of Paris prosecuted the detainer of it, and all in
vain, for as the words are, Nec speravit se in octo aliis annis se judicium
obtenturum. Many other such cases of ruining Delay I have my self been
acquainted with from those, whom I could name if it were convenient, who have
been undone or at least unrepairably maimed by Suits in the Parliament of
Paris: so that true our Chancellor conceives it to be Angliae Leges non tant
as ut mihi visum est dilationes sortiuntur ut faciunt Leges Regionis illius]
which is confirmed by the prementioned Statutes made against Delay, 4 Instit.
p. 67. c. 6.
and particularly by the 14 E. 3. c. 5. Which Statute though it erected a Court
for redress of Dela^^ of Judgments in the King's great Courts; yet was the
inhibition and punishment (...) ^nnecessary and unjust Delay before that
Statute at the the Common Law, which required, that plena and celeris justitia
fiat omnibus; so in the Writs of Praecipe quod reddat, are quod just and sine
dilatione reddat: and so in the Writ de executione judicii, and the rest: all
which, pleno ore, do confirm, That the Laws do abhor delay as it is an
obstruction to justice.

Sed revera pernecessarium est, dilationes fieri in Processibus Actionum
omnium, dummodo ipsae non fuerint excessivae.

This the Chancellor asserts not to gratify delays of Subtilty, but delays
of Security and Discovery; for many things are either composed or conquered by
time, which in Post-hastes are lost and infeasible: which is the reason that
there are such steps and gradations to judgment, that when ever it is gained
it may appear to be after Consideratum est per Curiam, and after all, that
diligence on both sides could inform the Court by, has been used. As therefore
the Law does grant Essoines in certain cases, as hereafter shall be specified;
yet those because they are in view of Law Delays (though not evil-intended
ones) shall be restrained as much as possible. Item, It is accorded and
established, that it shall not be commanded by the Great-seal nor the
Littleseal to disturb or delay common Right, so says the Statute, 2 E. 3. c.
8. By the 6 E. 1. c. 8. If the Defendant Essoine himself of the King's service,
and does not bring his Warrant at the day given him by the Essoine, he shall
recompense the party's damage for his journey, and shall be grievously amerced
unto the King. For the Law, as I said before, though it tolerates necessary and
reasonable Delay, which does not endanger the freehold, and very life and soul
of a cause; yet it abhorrs needless and vicious Delay, which the Text styles
excessive.

Nam sub illis, parts and maxim pars rea, quam saepe sibi provident de
defensionibus utilibus, similiter and consiliis, quibus alias ipsi carerent.

Though the Law provides not for the guilty person, as he is an offender
against the Law, to answer which the Plaintiff compells him; and therefore
ought and is rather favored in trials then the Defendant: yet that the equity
and impartiality of the Justice of the Law may appear, the Text says, that
Delays are useful and good as they steed all parties, even the guilty side
with discoveries and improvement of men and things to its vindication and
defense. For as it is the noblest victory that is obtained in a field foughten,
and against an enemy disputing terms ultimis viribus; so is that the most
creditable decision and judgment on causes and persons, which is after the
causes and persons have not been surprised, and had all convenient latitude to
free and evince their sentence and condemnation: Then then the sentence of the
Law is most clear and justified. And hence come the unavoidable Delays of the
Law, Delays do I term them, rather deliberations of the Law. (For delay being
a word taken in the worst sense, is not properly attributable to the Law, which
is ars aequi and boni) but when the Law seems to be guilty of it, it is to be
charged on Men the Lawyers, not on their Mistress the Law, for the Law is
precisely against delay, wherein then it does not speed processes, as eager
persons desire, proceeds from the wisdom resident in it, which dictates to do
all things by deliberation, to a just and not to be repented of conclusion. And
Magistrates who are in love with Justice, as that (...), which becomes the
wearing of reigning Darius's. (I allude to the Story in Strabo, which tells us,
that because Syloson having a garment that Darius when a private man loved,
Lib. 14. Geograph. Vnius vestis munus tam opulento vegno compensans. Valor.
Max. lib. De Mirabilibus.
gave it him freely, in recompense thereof Darius when Emperor gave Syloson
the whole Island and City of the Samnians) when I say Magistrates are
virtuously entangled with the love of justice, and put on righteousness as a
Garment, justice not only helps them to, but continues them in, and graces
them by her largesses. This is the Chancellours sense, that the Law of England,
and the Judges in it, are therefore so blessed by God in the accommodation of
their integrities, with Monuments of temporal eternity, their posterities in
Name, Fortune, and Honor, because they do not, either precipitate or retard
justice, but so proceed upon Trial to Sentence, that during the pendence of the
cause, there is time given recte consulere, perite defendere, utiliter
consummare, what is pertinent, if not to their total vindication, yet at least
to their mitigation in point of judgment.

Nec unquaem in judiciis tantum imminet periculum quantum parit
processu^festinatus.

This is in other words, To err on the right side, rather by being something
too slow, then in any degree by being too quick; and that because we men dwell
in a valley whence we can take but a short prospect of things, and being
fallible by reason of our imperfect judgment, Mult^s fortuna liberat paena,
metu neminem, quia infixe nobis est ejus rei aversati^ qua^ natura damnavit;
ideo nunquam latendi fides fit etia^ latentibus, quia coarguit illos
conscienti^. Sen. Epist. 57. Erasm. Adag. p. 401.
are so apt to err and mistake, because poysed and gravelled with so many
partialities and frauds; what we want in perspicacity and certainty of
judgment, we are to supply by integrity of watch and diligence of search and
enquiry, to which since nothing more contributes then time and experience,
therefore too much haste making waste, is to be in all reason declined. For
thereby conscience is not galled nor innocence injured, or if it be, yet in a
less degree, and with a better excuse and defense. For however the passions of
men may ruffle them into vehemencies, and no pace in judgment pleases them,
but the Carrere, and full swoop, to ride as desperately upon their opposites
ruin, as rage and cruelty can prick them on to; yet a wise and worthy Genius,
such as that in Justice is, likes not those Manilia Imperia, those hot headed
and fierce spirited proceedings, Magnanimi motum tardum docet Philosophus,
voce^ gravem, locutienem tardam stabilemve. Lorinus in Eccles. 5.2. Eccles.
5.2. c. 7. v. 9. Prove. 14.17. Festinare praecipitanter and came subit^ quodam
pav^^e and solicitudine. Lorinus in Eccles. 5.2. Dan. 2.15.
but follows the method of God, who waits that he may be Gracious, and the
exhortation of the Apostle, to be slow to wrath, and to judge nothing before
the time: yet this not so much out of timorousness, irresolution, or
disaffection to justice, as in care and providence to conduct her into her
proper channel, and to preserve her pure to the purpose of her institution. For
because nothing is so perilous in judgment as hastyness, the Wise man's
Counsel is, not to be rash in our words, nor to let our heart be hasty, and in
another place, G^e not forth hastily to strive least thou know not what to do
in the end thereof. Since as in private actions nothing is more injurious to
men's fortunes and fames, then sudden and rash evidences of themselves, so is
it in public sanctions and judgments of Law, which Daniel intimated in that
Stigma he gave the unjust and sanguine decree of Nebuchadnezzar, which he call
a hasty decree, why says he to Arioch the King's Captain, is the decree so
hasty? The word in the original is not (...) hasting righteousness Isaiah 15.5.
nor (...) Psalm. 55.8. where David speaks of a prudent and warrantable haste,
Vid^tur his verbis Daniel oblique perstringere Regis iracundiam and simul
ingratitudi nem, quod non sa it is diligenter ingussi^rit, antequam prosiliret ad
crude l^ illud supplicium, Calvin, in lecum.
I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest, nor (...) in Prove.
29.20. See thou a man that is hasty in his words, there is more hope of a
fool then of him, it is none of these words, but it is (...) a Chaldee word
signifying crudelis, festina, id est, crudelis faith Grotius and Lorinus, yea
Calvin says that Daniel does in them perstringe the King for not deliberating
on the tart nature of his decree, but passing that so lightly which concerned
the lives of innocent persons. This mischief in judgment our Text tells us the
Law avoides by halting in processes. Nec unquam in judiciis tantum imminet
periculum quantum parit processus festinatus.

Vidi nempe quonda^ apud Civitatem Sarum coram Iudice quodam ad Goalam ibidem
deliberandum cum Clericosmo Assignato, etc.

Here the Chancellor produces an instance of injury though not murder
committed by a Justice his quickness, in showing the extremity of his power;
and it is an instance not by report or hearsay, but whereof the Chancellor was
himself an ocular witness. Vidi says he] that is, vidi personam and andivi
sententiam, for he being a practiser of the Law in his youth quondam] and
riding the Western Circuit, did then at Salisbury, where the Assizes for the
County of Wilts was holden, see one tried before a Judge and condemned to be
executed by burning, and the Clerk of Assizes in Commission with him. 4 Instit.
c. 30.31 2 Instit. on c. 30. Westminster. p. 422.
Ad deliberandum Goalam] as there are Justices of Assise, Oyer and Terminer,
and nisi prius, according to the Stat. West. 2 c. 30. so are there of
Goale-delivery, and that to expedite justice, and deliver persons by execution
or discharge of them from unreasonable burdens, which delivering of the Goal
concerning the life and Members of man ought to be performed with great
caution, and from a judicious Bench, 4 Instit. c. 27. p. 160.
which Sir Edward Cook well remembers me of in those words, By the original
institution of Justices of Assizes and of nisi prius, the trial should be
before two at the least, and it were much for the advancement of Justice and
right, to have the Law put in execution, for plus vident oculi quam oculus, and
especially in Pleas of the Crown concerning the life of man so that grave
Judge; which tells us, that the Law does not only take care that there should
be plena and celeris justitia; (and therefore commissions, Goal deliveryes, ne
homines diu detincantur in prisona) but also that they should be before Judges,
Few but effectual words says Sir Edward Cook 4 Instit. p. 68 4 Instit. c. 28.
p. 167.
bone gents and Sages autersque des places: and that because the Law would
have. Justice and Mercy fairly mixed and marshalled together, that there may
not be more haste then good speed, which that Judge of whom our Text speaks
should have better considered then he did, and then he had avoided the terror
he fell into. For though true it be that Justices of Oyer and Terminer may upon
indictment found, proceed the same day against the party indicted, as appears
in 2 H. 4. in the Case of Marks, the resolute Bishop of Carlisle, of Empson the
turbulent executor of the penal Statutes 1 H. 8. of Bell 3 E. 6. of Bonham, 10
Elizabeth, and Felton in our Memory, and yet not be festinatum judicium, but as
the enormities and proofs may be, prove though so speedily executed, most
serious and good justice. Yet in a dubious Cause, and in that which concerns
the life of one unnatural to their relations, where neither confession nor
direct proof is, there upon presumptions, though never so vehement, or positive
oath of suspected credit, as to the credit and veracity of the Affirmer, to
adjudge and warrant execution is very hard, because the Judge is discernere per
Legem quid sit justum, and the Law having entrusted him with a power of
reprive, to the next Session, that then better proof may come if any be, or
favor be showed them, if the proof be not found enough to take away the life.
This I say a Judge being enabled to do and not according to his enablement
doing is much to be blamed. And this our Text instances in, to mind how
dangerous suddenness is. For here was a woman accused and condemned for murder
of her husband, and burned therefore, who was clear of it, and that by the
confesson of a servant that did it, and owned afterward the fact, who besides
that he charged himself only with it, and was deservedly executed for it, did
purge the woman executed from all hand in and all knowledge of it; Magistram
suam uxorem ejus tunc combustam innocentem omnino fuisse de morte ejus] So are
the words of the Text which show not only a plenary purgation of her, that was
so speedily concluded the Murderer; but also a sad sentence on himself for
suffering an Innocent person to be condemned for his offense, which was
accompanied also with such a terror to the Judge, that he never clawed it off
(as we use to say) but had the memory of it before his eyes, as his daily
terror and amazement. The consideration of which should make all men study
temper and restraint of violence, and not indulge anger and fierceness of mind
and action; for that our Lord reproves it in the Disciples that would have
called for fire from Heaven, in those words, Luke 9.54.
Ye knew not of what spirit ye are, and instructs his to be slow to judge, and
to bear with offenses, as far as wisely and safely we may rather then revenge
them; which Augustus considering as great a piece of wisdom practiced it
toward Timagenes, whom though he knew to be an intemperate and rude reviler of
him, yet he permitted to be in Pollio's house; and though he charges Pollio
(...), Pollio thou nourishest a wild Tigre or Savage to me: yet he seises not
on the miscreant, Seneca lib. 3. de Ira. c. 25.
nor disfavours not Pollio, but says Fruere mi Pollio, fruere, by which
condescension he avoided all severity against him, Securitatis magna porti^ est
nibil inique facere, confusam vitam and perturbatam impotentes agunt, tantum
metnunt quantum nocent, nocens habuit aliquando latendi fortunam, nunquam
fiduciam. Ep. 105.
and did not burden himself with the blood of a Subject. Nor shall any man
have cause to repent of his lenity in a dubious cause, because it proceeds from
goodness and likeness to God, and has his approbation of, and benediction on
it, which the contrary has not; for rash and sudden severities are the bratts
of rage, which are repented of too late, if ever: witness the hard sentence on
the good Earl of Lancaster, which cost the House of Valence E. of Pembrok, Hic
consentiamus mala facinora conscientia flagellari and plurimum illi tormentum
esse co quod porpetuo illam solicitudo urget atque verberat. Senec. Ep. 97.
that had so deep a hand in it, Extirpation; and Holingshed. p. 1100.
Judge Morgan who ran mad, and cried continually to have the Lady Jane taken
away from him. O, it is good to be slow in doubtful things, and not to suffer
passion to precipitate; for though it be suitable to Iezabels rage and Ahab's
covetousness, to Cain's envy and David's lust, to the Jews malice and Judas his
treachery: yet it is agreeable with no virtue in man, no love of or likeness to
God, Genes. 18.21.
For his Judgments are always just; and in that he is said To go down and see
whether the men of Sodom and Gomorrha have done altogether according to the cry
of it which is come unto me, and if not I will know, so is the Text, God as the
Chief Justice of the world teaches Judges to consider their Judgments before
they deliver them: for (...), that temperament that is equally averse to
rashness or sloth, is the best humor of a Justicer, without which no learning
or fidelity in a Justicer can be meritful or valuable, Nihil minus in duce
perfecto quam festinationem temeritatemque convenire arbitrabatur. Sueton, in
Octavio.
The experience of which is the reason of that position and rule of the Law
which Sir Edw. Cook quotes from this Chapter, and the Editor of Forteseue sets
out in another Letter, Epistle to the 8 Report.
to show, not that it is a transplant (as I conceive) from some Author
unnamed, but that it is a golden sentence of his own, Crebro in
deliberationibus Iudicia maturescunt, sed in accelerato processu nunquam, which
is as much as if he had wrote, That moderate and prudent respite may dilucidate
and clear up the way to a just determination, which in a speedy and heady
course proves abortion of all profitable discovery. Hence is it that our Law
being a Law of Justice and Judgment, allows Essoines as approaches thereto, so
the Chancellor says in the next words.

Quare Leges Angliae Essonium admittunt, qualia non faciunt Leges aliae mundi
universae.

As the Laws of England are for freedom Laws by themselves, as we call those
things that have no fellows; so are the Laws of England particular and
singular in this point of Essoining: for though other Laws, as heretofore I
have showed, have what is in proportion (as it were) the same to these
Essoines, yet Essoines in the nature and diversity of them they have not. The
word Essoin is purely French, signifying want of ability in Soldiers to hold
or take a place; thence Essoiner, to excuse or discharge an absent or impotent
person. In the Assizes of Clarendon Temps H. 2. Essoniare is a word made Latin
by our Historians, and used at large for any excuse; Nulli liceat hospitari
extr^neum aliquem ultra unam noctem in domo sua nisi Hospitatus ille Essonium
rationabile habuerit. Hoveden in Annal. p. 449. in H. 2.
so Hoveden, No man was to lodge any stranger above one night in his house,
unless he that is so entertained have a reasonable Essoin and Excuse: but the
Lawyers restrain it to such excuses as in real Actions guilty persons make in
the King's Courts, Hengham Parva c. 2. p. 85. Edition. Seldeni.
or in the Courts of their Lords. These Essoines at the Common Law are reported
to be five, 1. De ultra Mare. 2. De Terra sancta. 3. De Malo veniendi. Fleta
lib. 6. c. 7.8.9, etc. Glanvil. lib. 1. c. 12.19. Spelman. Gloss. p. 241.
Probabit quodlibet Essonium jure jurando propria and unica manu, etc. Glanvil.
lib. 1. c. 12.
4. De Malo lecti. 5. De Servitio Domini Regis. Of Essoines the Stat. of
Marlbridge c. 19. writes, and Cook 2 Instit. on c. 19. Stat. Marlbridg. p. 137.
Sir Edw. Cook tells us on it, That they were instituted upon just and
necessary causes; and because they should not be used in feigned causes of
delay, he that casts the Essoin ought to be sworn that the cause thereof was
just and true. It should seem at the Common Law Oaths were not of old required,
but men growing bold to misapply the just remedy of the Law unjustly, the
Statute restrained Oaths to extraordinary not ordinary Essoines, that the
reason of the excuse was necessary not dilatory, I mean, in Essoines of great
delay, such as were those of the service of the King, etc. which had great
delay; and therefore he that alleged that, was to swear, though in common
Essoines, which were but for a small term, no Oath was required by the Statute:
for the end of these being the promotion of Justice, Fines dilationum sine
dubio multi sune and aperts, ut deliberatio, probatto, exhibitio, instructio,
auditio, productio, conclusio and similia, Tholoss. Syntag. Juris lib. 48. c.
8. ss. 20. de Dilattonibus.
if it appeared the party obtaining it otherwise designed it, 'twould benefit
him little, and injure the party as little; for the Judges, who hate delay,
will admit excuses in no case without Oath, but in in common Essoines. Besides
these Essoines there are other stops to Proceedings at Law, and those
profitable ones, the Text styles them Vtiles vocationes ad Warrantiam] Of these
Lib. 3. c. 1.2.3.
Glanvil writes, and Cap 13. Sect. 697.
Littleton; and the reason of the Law is, that if I be bound to defend the
title of another, as the Tenant is to defend the title, then he that has the
reversion, fee, or term, must not only furnish him with Deeds, if any he has,
but with such a proportion of money as is reasonable to that end; Cook on
Littleton. c. 13. sect. 733. p. 383. Lib. 3. Instit. c. 1. p. 174. Fleta lib.
6. c. 4.
and that because if my term which precedes his futurity fail, his expectance
also fails: and he warrants to me, and warranty draws supply and recompense for
all damages. The like is the reason of Coparceners, Quireddent pro rata, si
tenementum comparticipi allottatum evincatur] says our Text. This is I suppose
the sense of learned Littleton, Sect. 203. upon this reason, that where all
have a joint title, the eviction of part shall have contribution from the rest
after an equal rate and proportion, because they all are of equal title and
ought to be equal in profit and loss, according to that rule, Cujus est lucrum
ejus debet esse damnum, and e converso: and where many are concerned, their
profit and loss shall be proportioned and allotted to them indifferently. And
these are therefore called by our Text Res utiles, because they do not only
engage parties to join in defense, that estates be not recovered from the
Possessors of them; but after recovery oblige to recompense the damage that
contrary to the nature of their estate they sustain: and this being but
rational and just, is therefore profitable to be effected. All these the Laws
of England admitting, do not further thereby delay of pretense, Vt ille qui cum
130. dierum essen^ cum host pacta induci^ noctu populabatur agros quod dierum
essens pactae non noctium induciae. Live. 4. ab urbe 127. In amore hac omnia
insunt vitiae, injuriae, suspiciones, inimicitiae, inducia. Terenco in Eunuch.
1.
which we call spinning out of time, which the Text terms Frivolae and
infructuosae induciae] like the Parlyes of crafty Soldiers with those that
besiege them, whom they pretend discourse with in order to rendition, when it is
but to cease hostility till they be relieved, or have otherwise diversion: or
like crafty and selfended Creditors, who pretend offers of composition with
their Debtors, whom by the hopes of it they keep from prosecutions of
extremity, when as all the while they are designing escape and withdrawing
themselves from them: or like cunning Mistrisses, who pretend correspondencies
with men whom they have designs upon, and them served, slight and desert them.
The futility and fraudulent rottenness and inanity of which, operating nothing
but frustration and circumvention, is the reason why frivolae and infructuosae
are joined with these Induciae, and why the Text explodes them allowance in the
Law: which further then they are ampliative of the truth, and not unreasonably
prejudicial to the adverse party, the Law allows not. And if time and vice of
man shall usher in any subdolous error, by which the good intent of the Law
becomes void, then the Law has a remedy ready for it, In omni Parliamento
amputari ipsae possunt.] For that is the felicity of England, that Parliaments
are frequent, and the King in Parliament by that serious and effectual power
that resides in Parliament, can either sweeten or reform the incovenience; or
if those seem not good to his Sovereign and Parliamentary Judgment, amputari
possunt, that is, they may be damned by a Law, and cut from that root of
inconvenience they to that time sprung from: so Festus uses Amputare for
resecare vel abscindere ramos Arborum, and Tully Amputare ramos miseriarum; 3
Tuscul. 21.
so Amputata 1 De Finib. 70. 8 Philipp. 244.
circumcisaque inanitas pro sublata: and the reason is, because amputation is
the remedy of pestilency, mortification, and gangrening, hence in Tully,
Amputare quicquid and pestiferum. So that when our Text tells us of reasonable
Delays, it intends such as not fraud but favor, not craft but justice has
introduced and continued; but when of such as are Minus accommodae] that is,
which are occasions of injury to particulars, and of loss to the whole which is
composed of particulars, as the former it concludes proper to be continued, so
these latter it judges necessary to be discharged, by that Grand Maul and
Battery of Injustice and oppression, Parliaments; wherein not only new risen
and emergent evils are to be remedied prece subditorum, and consilio Membrorum:
but also any Laws in being, when they do claudicare, that is, when by reason
of age they grow dull and dispirited, as to the activity of their first
Creation. When they have either Corns on their toes that make them tread
gingerly and tenderly, or Gouts and Palsies that render them wholly unable to
follow offenders smartly and quickly, when they do claudicare] that is, do as
Plantus his Tailor does, Quasi clasidus Suitor domi sedet totos dies. Plautus
Aul. 4.34. lib. 2. De Oratore. De Claris Orator. 120.
sit cross legged, still as a stone all day, when they are Badger-footed and
wont endure trial but fall short of the end, ex vulnere accepto claudicare as
Tully's words are, when Laws do not tenorem servare aequabilem, as Budaeus
translates Tully's actio claudicat, then are those Laws fit for Parliaments,
(and blessed be God) these Physicians are of value to such valuable purposes.
For from Kings, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with Commons in Parliament, have
the good additional Laws of England been made, I mean those wholesome
Statutes, which either restrained, explained, or added to the Common-Lawes, and
which thereby have been, are, and I hope ever will be the daily cure of growing
inconveniences, which minds me daily to pray, in the words of the Psalmist
though in a variation of sense. Give thy judgments, O Lord unto the KING, and
thy righteousness to these the King's Sons and Subjects, See the Prayer for the
High-Court of Parliament.
that as the KING delights to be a fountain of Mercy and Justice; so his
Subjects as Politic Sons may be dutiful and aidant to him therein, that the
Nation may evermore bless and pray to God for This High Court of Parliament,
under Our Gracious and Religious King assembled, and enjoy good and beneficial
Laws by their in strumentality. For by the means of Parliament is it that
England ever has, and ever will be happy; since by them, the best Laws of the
world have been either actually made, or possible so to be made, when they
shall see cause of addition to or explication of the Laws made, which is that
which our Text intends by optimae in actu vel potentia. For as he can want
nothing that either has actually every thing, or has that in his power which will
procure every thing when his will pleases to apply his power thereunto; so can
that estate be defective in no point of good Laws, which either has good Laws
in actu exercito, or has power to make the acts that are not, such as it would
have them, since frustra est potentia quae non reducitur ad actum. And
therefore the Law being, that Parliaments are frequently to be held, and those
enabled to make Laws of all sorts, recte concludi potest says our Text, that
if good Laws there be not to answer all emergences, men are to blame, not the
Government; for in that there is that sacredness which conveys optimacy to
Laws, if not in actu, yet in potentia, if they be not already the best, they
may be bested further, per potentiam reductam in actum. For the Kings of
England have been ever so Gracious Lords, that they have yielded to all good
and just Laws that their Subjects in Parliament have humbly presented them;
Regum proprium est facere judicium and justisiam, and liberare de monu
calumniatorum vi oppressos, and peregrino, pupilloque and vidua qui facilius
opprimuntur a potentioribus prabere auxilium. Sanctus Hieronymus in c. 22.
Jeremiae.
yea and the Subjects of England have ever (when themselves, and not seduced)
been so dutiful Leiges, that they have desired nothing that their Princes have
had just cause to except against, but have so been principled with Religion and
Order, (...). Aristot. Politic. lib. 3. c. 6.
that the Law has been acknowledged by King and Subject the just Arbiter: and
that conducted both King and people to happy improvements of good and durable
advantages in prosequution of the Oath of God, both on Sovereign and Subjects.
So ends the 53 Chapter.

CHAP. LIVE.
Princeps. Leges illas nedum bonas, sed and optimas esse, etc.


THIS Conclusive Chapter is designed by the Chancellor in the Person of the
Prince, as the recollection of all that has been written concerning the Laws
in the former Chapters of the Dialogue, wherein the intent of the Chancellor
being, to present the Laws of England to his love and judgment, as not only
Good but best for England, and that in whatever kind time or men necessarily
call for either Change or Explication; what, in those Cases, is fit to be done,
may be wisely and seasonably done by Parliament, which considered, the Prince
is brought in acknowledging what heretofore the Chancellor had written in the
15 Chapter in those words, Legem illam bonam esse and efficacem adregni illius
regimen] which was in replication to his doubt Chapter the fourteenth; and
which he seconds Chap. 28.30.33.45.47. Adding, that the Kingdom of England
being governed praestantissimis Legibus] His discourse of so superexcellent
Laws cannot but be acceptable to the Kings of England in all times; and that
because, as the knowledge of them is non inutilis doctrina] so the exercise of
such knowledge is the Grace and Peace of Princes, who do delectare regere
legibus praestantissimis] and who have then their regal care in a good degree
lessenned, when they are instructed by equal Laws, and by them indifferently
administered, and thereby thrive in the blessing of God, and the love and
acclamation of their Subjects. For as no end is attained without proper means
conducing thereunto, Via inepta, incommoda, dissicilis. Cit. ad Attic. lib.
16.337.
which is apparent in Mechaniques, wherein a good figure is not formed without
good tools, but be the designer the skillfull est man in the World; yet
ineptio instrumenti] that is, the incongruity and unhandiness of the tool
indisposes to a complete artifice. (For ineptio and ineptus signifies every
thing of defect and imparity; Thus Terent. And. 15.22.
Causa inepta in Terence, 2 Epist. 11.54
Chartae ineptae in Horace, Plin. Ep. 9.
Labor ineptus in Pliny, Ovid. 2. Tristib. 45. Lib. 4. Belli Macedon 26.
Lusus inepti in Ovid, and thus ineptire pro facere aut dicere, quod neque
loco, neque tempori, neque rebus, neque personis conveniat, are to be
understood.) I say our Text mentioning ineptio instrumenti, as that which does
fastidire, not only not make work pleasing to the Workman, but tedious, for so
fastidire aliquem signifies, hence fastidire preces in Livy, and Aestus
fastidit amictum in Epithal. 46.
Claudian, implies that fitness to every purpose makes men excellent and
acceptable in it.

Et militem ignavum reddit debilitas Lanciae and mucronis] That is when a man
dare not trust on the strength and toughness of his weapon, and the truth of
its edge, that it will do execution and keep off an enemy, though he press
hard on him. For Lances, the weapons of H. 6 time, Bonum integritas corporis,
misera debilitas. Cic. 5. De Finibus 145.
if they were not of well grown, well seasoned, and stiff materials, if they
would bend this and that way with the body of him whom it touched, yet
dismounted not or took off from further trial of honor; or if the point of it
would not pierce the clothes and light defenses of Antagonists, but when they
come to close fight, their edgeless arms, drew no blood, did no execution,
such disanimations eclipse men of valor, and make them disappear on action: so
do Laws that are unfit and not congruous to people, toil out a Magistrate,
and make him live and govern displeasingly, because the engines whereby he
should do, move not agilely, nor evenly, but have unequal pulses, being either
too short or too long, too severe or too lax, too merciful or too just. Which
since the Laws of England are not but every way fitted to the Government of
England, so that in the safety and preservation of them, all honest men do
think the welfare of their Country does consist, so said Eicon Basil. p. 176.
the best and knowing'st Immortal Mortal of his time. The Monarchs of England
have ever had great encouragement as to rule by the Laws, so to know the Laws
they are to rule by. For as that of Vegetius quoted by Saint Thomas, Lib. 3. De
Regimine Principum: cap. 21. p. 322.
or Aegidius Romanus is true, that a Soldier is heartned on to battle when he
has fit arms, and competent knowledge to use them, when he knows what he
enterprises and delights in it, as it is the object of his intellect and by
reason thereof is not strange to him, quia nemo facere metuit quod se been
didicisse confidit as the Text's words are] So is it in Government. No
Magnetique is more potent, no inducement more cogent, then Laws of reverence
to Princes and punishments of the contrary, then power to defend, protect,
order, reward, punish, all which being due to Princes by the Law of England,
they have great encouragement to adorn their Province, to go on courageously,
and to proceed to know more and more of the Law, which is thus a buckler to
them, and a beautifyer of them. For though as I wrote before in the Notes on
the eighth Chapter, a Prince is not to be expected so furnished with discreta
determinataque peritia and scientia] as a Justice has need to be; yet in the
nature and form, in the general and inchoate knowledge of it, he must have
insight. For as those passages of Fathers and Scriptures which require in a
Prince Scripturarum Divinarum peritiam] and ascribe to a Prince infallible
knowledge, Prove. 16.12.
according to that of the Wiseman A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King,
therefore he shall not err in judgment; yet are to be understood not of
profound and indeterminate knowledge of Scripture, but only of such
proportions as are convenient for direction and judgment in conducts and
administrations of piety to God and men, Hoc igitur officium Rex se suscepisse
cognoscat. ut sit in regno sicut in corpore anima, and sicut Deus in mundo; qua
si diligenter recogtet, ex altero justitia in eo zelus accenditur, dum
considerat ad hoc se positum ut loco Dei judicium regno exerceat, ex altero
vero mansuetudenis and clementiae lenitatem acquirit, dum reputat singulos qui
suo subsunt regimini sicut propria membra. Sanctus Thomas lib. De Regimine
Princip. c. 12.
I say; as these are then answered according to Scripture-requiries, when there
is the Day-starr from on high visiting Princes in holy and serious resolutions
of walking humbly before God, and prudently in the sight of men; then a Prince
that does it may well be said to know the Scriptures like a good Christian,
though not like a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, that is, to the
proportion of a thorough-read Divine. For though it tends much to Princes
luster and admiration, that they, as Christians, know much of the depths of
holy Learning, Vt decet sacra Theologiae Professorem] as our Text's words are,
Learned Princes in matters of Reformed Religion.
and as King James and King Charles the First, Princes of eternal memory, to
the admiration of all men are acknowledged to excel in, and it to evidence in
their writings, which are memorable and matchless remains of their regal
judgment and piety in the knowledge of the mysteries of our Holy Religion, and
of the Law of God the rule of it. I say, though to be scientifique to this
proportion be the glory of them; yet, Earum in confuso degustare sententias]
less proportions in our Chancellour's sense would have creditably adorned them,
because they have Councils in Sacris, whose place it is to know the more
cryptique parts of Scripture knowledge: Ci^. ad Attic. lib. 1.13. 1 Offic. 118.
so that Princes need not Vitam profundere, omnes nervos intendere, and omnem
ingenii vim applicare, as Tully phrases it; not are Princes to be put upon such
exactnesses as reside in those who endeavor to do by sacred science, as he in
Plautus is brought in, saying, Ejus nunc Regiones, Panul. 2.

Theologia ut nomen pra se fert est scientia de Deo, hujus autem scientia
perfecta traditio and earum rerum qua Deo per se competunt, and illarum quae
eidem ex eo quod mundi opifex and finis est, convenient, exacta notitia
continetur. Arragonius in Prafatione ad 2. secundae Sanct. Thomae despe, fide
and charitate.


limits, confinia determinabo, and rei finitor factus sum ego. Thus Spiritu
and art determinare, which Pliny makes the Meta ultima of Criticalness, is
that which the Text presses not to; for it mentions only In confuso sententias
degustare, which is leviter and intranscursu attingere, as Lib. 4. c. 1.10.
Quintilian's note is on those words, Degustanda tamen haec prooemio non
consummanda; and as Tacitus lib. 5.
Tacitus translates it in that speech to Galba, Imperium, and tu Galba,
quandoque degustabis, and Cic. pro Cluentio. 56.
Tully in that passage, Aliquid speculae ex sermon alicujus degustare, id est,
aliquantum spei concipere. As thus then the Prince, as a Christian, being
versed in Scripturelearning, may be well accounted in De Morali Institutione
Principum. lib. 15.
Belvasensis his words quoted in our Text, Scripturarum divinarum habere
peritiam:] so by understanding the Law in the sense we have in all humility
(and under pardon of our betters) prediscoursed of, (respect being had in the
plenaryness of knowledge and learning thereof to the Reverend Judges, the Great
Masters of that Science, who are the Prince's Counsel, and by whom he
distributes his justice to his people) the Prince may be said to understand the
Law, his interest, and preservation, and accordingly to be encouraged to
undergo the great and Godlike charge of Government cheerfully; for that the
Text's rule is, Nemo facere metuit qui se been didicisse confidit. For since
ignorance causes fear, and knowledge confidence, the Chancellor presses the
Prince to know the Law, that he may trust in it, as that which best warrants
Government, and most enables him to a courageous managery of it, Observe this.
which That holy Miracle of Devotion and Magnanimity, whom all Generations for
it shall call Blessed, our late blessed Sovereign King Charles, had so much the
conviction of, that he applies to his Great Son, our now Gracious Trajan, this
counsel, Rather to be Charles le Bon then le Grand, Good then Great; for the
true glory of Princes consists in advancing God's glory, Cap. 27. To the Prince
of Wales.
in the maintenance of true Religion and the Churches good, also in the
dispensation of civil power, with justice and honor to the public peace.
Piety will make you prosperous, at least it will keep you from being miserable;
nor is he much a Loser that loses all, yet saves his own Soul at last.

Sic and fecerunt Carolus Magnus, Ludovicus filius ejus, Robertus quondam Rex
Franciae, qui hanc scripsit sequentiam, Veni Spiritus, adsit nobis gratia.

Here the Text presidents the Prince by the great examples of France, which he
is so much taken with, Cujus exempluns imitati omnes sere qui secuti sunt
Francorum Reges, magnis atque excellentissimis factis cum Religione and fidei
Christiana dignitatem conservarent atque ampliarent. Lege Gaguini Hist. in
Carolo Magno. Grimston. Hist. France. p. 50.
to be excellently accomplished both in the knowledge of God and the Law of his
Government; and that upon the account, that Princes great in reputation and
glory, have thereby attained those eminencies, by name Charles the Great,
Charlemaine as the French Historians call him, who, as he was the founder of
the French Empire, so did excel in all those gifts and graces of mind which
were requisite to make a Charle-maine: For he was carefully instructed in
Religion, which he honored and loved with reverence all his life time, and
likewise the Churches Pastors, charity, temperance, equity, care of justice,
relief of the poor, to keep his faith both to friend and foe, to use victory
modestly, were the notable effects of his excellent knowledge; he by nature
loved learning and learned men, be called humane Sciences his Pastimes, he
built the Universities of Paris and Pisa, he honored the Laws of the Land,
nothing would he do without advice of the three Estates, He took not the
Empire but with consent of the Romans who elected him, Page 52. P. 61. P. 63.
the good old Laws of the Empire he confirmed, and excellent new ones he
added, Church Affairs much disordered he settled by five Councils, Mentz,
Tours, Challons, Rheimes, Arles, all congregated to settle and reform it,
Imitator erat in hac Caroli Magni Imperatoris and filii ejus Ludovici
Imperatoris qui per semetipsos lectionibus pasiebantur. In Fragmento Historia
Aquitanicae, p. 81. p. 64.
which settlement he caused to be published in a Book called Capitula Caroli
Magni, when he was 68 years old, and had ended the Wars, he spent three whole
years in his study, reading the Bible and Saint Augustine: thus says the story
of Charles the Great. Good things also record they of Lewis his son, named in
our Text, who was called Ludovicus Pius, not in Grimston. p. 64.
reproach to his Kingless sloth, for which, losing all his Dominions, he was
styled Lewis the Gentle; Ob morum mansuetudinem Pii nomen est consequutus.
Gaguini Hist. in vica ejus.
but for that he was of most excellent temper, and did patrizate though not in
fortunateness, yet in intentness on meditation of Scripture and good books: as
long after did Lewis the Ninth, whom Historians call the Saint, History of
France. p. 130.
Leading a life worthy a King, loving and honoring Religion with much zeal and
respect, taking delight in reading the Holy Scriptures, Bonis moribus
spectatissimus Rex nec minus optimis Disciplinis eruditus. Gaguinus lib. 5.
fol. 42. B.
the which he caused to be translated into the French tongue, He had a good,
just, and sober soul, etc. Et Robertus quondam Rex Franciae] This Robert was
the 37 King of France, Son of Hugh Capet, and was so noted for piety, that he
is called Robertus Pius. Erat in eo jugis and frequens ad Deum oration, genuam
flexio innumerabilis ad humana conversationis exemplum, per laboris genera
universa, vir provectus ad summa, sist^nt in consistorio clientem se esse
libentissime fatebatur, nunquam injuria accepta ad ulciscandum ductus, etc.
Helgaldus in Epitem. vita ejus inter Historias Francorum ab Anno Christi 900.
ad Annum 1285. p. 63.
Helgaldus in his life says so much of him, as more of admiration and
super-superlative character cannot be written, That he was the Standard-example
of civil life, the patient embracer of all the casualties of mortality, devout
to God, making the Church his content, and the humility of a sinner in it his
daily delight, simplicity of soul he loved, contemned and pardoned injuries,
avoided excess both in dress and diet, was a man of notable eloquence, taken up
wholly in reading and meditating David's Psalter, a great Benefactor to the
Church, having a Priestly mind in a King's Estate and Person; which so
contributed to his acceptance in what ever he said or did, that the responsals,
which our Text calls the sequence, Grimston Hist. France. p. 96.
Spiritus sanctus adsit nobis gratia, etc.] are said to be his this and much
more is he famed for in Chronicle. These, together with other Princes of France
famous for piety, Philip, Lewis the Seventh, and Lewis the Ninth, who reigned
all long and desiredly, Isagoge Moral, Philosophia.
are by our Chancellor from Belvacensis presented to the Prince, as the
notable examples of piety and probity, which are the chiefest ornaments of
Princes, and which being efficacious and in very truth in them, disposes them
to the right use of power; which is not more to consider themselves placed by
God and the Laws in an uncontrollable height, (which no Subjects must or
ought, to dare to set themselves to insolently confront or abate, the rule
being in the Doctors, Imperator gerit omnia Iura in scrinio pectoris, (by which
they are made sole Lords of Laws) whereby to incline them to do what they in
the latitude of such power may, as men of might in the full swoop and swinge of
their absolute power do) then to solicit and remember them, that though they
are accountable to no man or Tribunal here, yet to God and the Majesty and
Jurisdiction of his Divine Absoluteness, whose Vassals the mighty Monarchs of
the World are, they are responsible. And therefore as the Chancellor began,
and has hitherto prosequuted this Discourse of the commendation of the Laws of
England, to beget in the Prince a desire to know what is just and unjust by the
Law, and that Law the Law of England, and the measure of that Justice by the
Law, has acquainted him with, and earnestly invited him to make the object of
his love and choice; so does he here in this conclusion inculcate the sense of
these prementioned designs of his love, evidenced in those familiar, friendly,
and loyal applications to him, which the Prince in the Dialogue is brought in
so to resent, that he not only yields to the Chancellour's swasion, as appears
in those words, Quia, Cancellarie, ad Legum Angliae disciplinatum mihi jam
conspicio sufficienter esse suasum, etc. but subjoyns a relaxation to the
gravity and goodness of his love and learning therein from any further travel
or argument in satisfaction to his youth, Non te amplius hujus praetextu
solicitare conabor] says he: and as a towardly and grateful Prince, who well
understood the profit and benefit of his Discipline, entreats him to a further
procedure in methodizing the Law, and in regulating his studies therein, that
so he may attain to the knowledge of the English Law, which is the glory for
English Princes to know that they may love, and love that they may conform
their public administrations thereunto. This is that which the personated
Prince is here mentioned obnixe deposcere, Quem ego credo manibus pedibusque
obnixe omnia facturum. Teteut. And. 1.1.134.

Caesar Comment. lib. 7. Belli Gallici. 5.

Cic. 3. Philipp. 147.

Vt illa flamma divinitus extitisse videatur, non quae deleret Jovis Optimi
Maximi Templum, sed quae praeolarius magnificientius que deposceret. Cic. 6.
Verr. 61.


that is, not faintly and formally, but cum conatu, instanter, totis viribus,
to desire and long after; (for deposcere is a verb of vehemence, so Caesar uses
Deposcere omnibus pollicitationibus ac praemiis for earnest and not to be
denied attacking, leaving no stone untryed and unremoved: Non modo non recusem,
sed appetam atque etiam deposcam is Tully's.) And that upon resolution of
conviction, that as the Chancellor was no Chil. 1. Cent. 8. p. 277, 278.
(...), no Gracchus, making a great noise to no purpose, or in our Proverb's
language, A great cry and a little wool; nor did he in his discourse and the
arguments of it, Apologum Alcinoi introducere, as they do ingratefully enough
to wise men, who frame arguments from impertinent fabulosities, no such trite,
nugatory, Theatrique trifler was our Text-Master: but as one that had himself
imbibed the Law, and by the practical science of it had connaturalated the
reason of it to his mind, which was fully possessed of it, and was able to
possess others with the love and understanding of it, he draws off the Prince
from his prepossessions, and makes him a Convert of that courage that he bids
defiance to all other Laws in competition with it; for his approbation of its
fitness to the temper and people of England, the incomparison between which and
it he makes as wide and impossible to be rationally reconciled, as to compare
the (...), which precedes the Sun and has the pre-eminence of all stars in the
influence of the World, De Privilegiis Luciferi. Lege Ro^sellium in Piman.
Mercurii. Tom. 1. lib. 2. Com. 9. c. 4.
Lucifer] to the other stars, which are as far beneath it as Heaven and
Earth, or the utmost opposites in nature are remote from each other. Not but
that the Prince approves other Laws as highly for other Countries, as the
Common and Statute-Lawes for this; but that he would conclude as he began,
being still the same he was in the fixedness of a well-ballasted judgment, he
supersedes his further address to him and progress in this Dialogue, giving
humble and hearty thanks to God who is Alpha and Omega, qui ea incipit,
prosecutus est, and finivit, as his words are.] For God alone it is that
excites us to, encourages us in, preserves us for, and crowns us with ability
to serve his glory in all honest and worthy undertakings: and to him, As the
only giver of every good and perfect gift, does my prostrate and grateful soul
ascribe the only praise and power of this my weak enablement to finish this
undertaking. For notwithstanding those flattering Hyperbole's which vain men
are apt to excurr in, Commandinus in Epistola Dedicatoria Cardinal. Farnesio
ante opera aliqua Archimedis. Impres. Venetiis Anno 1558.
as he vapouringly did who encomiated Archimedes in those words, Quod ad
Geometriam attinet Deum aliquem in ea fuisse Archimedem, There is too too just
cause for all men to debase themselves before God, and to acknowledge all that
they know is but ignorance to the light of his Omniscience: and that whatever
is theirs in the clarity of speculation, is but mutuated from that primaeve and
Architectonique light, which enlighteneth all that come to, and live in, the
World. This, This, being the Mercy sprung from on high visiting me in the
darkness, error, and ignorance of my sinful mind, and raising me up from the
grave into which I was almost By reason of a great sickness.

Vbi dum operi suo invigilat operi suo intermoritur. Ribadeneira Catal.
Societatis Jesus. p. 134.


gone while this was composing, and from which this goodness and favor of God
(which I beg may be ever legible in my heart and life) raising me when others
have miscarryed, as did Father Pradus in his Comment on Ezechiel, Continuis
tandem la^oribus fractus and magni operis mole veluti oppressus, pestilenti
morbo Romae succumbit. Idem p. 1^4.

Quem tametsi scio imperfectum esse, semper en^m accessio fleri poterit, utilem
tamen sore existimo magnoque aliis incitamento, ut dugeant inchoata, liment
rudia, impolita perpoliant, and novis accessionibus suppleant quae a me
praetermissa, vel ninots comparta sunt. Ribad. idem loco praecit. p. 226.


and Villalpandus, who perfecting Pradus his unaccomplished endeavor, dyed
also at Rome, what remains, but that as God has given me a new life to perfect
(though in a weak and worthless measure) this endeavor; so I hope he will give
me a will to improve every advantage his providence ministers to me to his
glory, and the good of the men with whom, and Age in which, I live.

The Author's Conclusion.
I Shall conclude all with the Epilogue of the grave and learned Littleton, Que
ieo voil que tu croies, etc. I would not have thee (READER) believe, that all
which I have said in these [Commentaries] is Law, or apprehended by me void of
mistake,] for I will not presume to take this upon me, but of those things that
are not Law, enquire. And albeit certain things which are moved and specified
in these Commentaryes be not altogether Law, nor in every particular such as
men of deeper judgment would produce: yet what is in all love and humility
offered Thee may make Thee in some measure more apt to understand and apprehend
the reason and arguments of our Text-Master, drawn from, and quoted for, the
honor and establishment of the Laws. For my intention is not to blazon an
ambition to seem to know much, or by a Dictatorian confidence to impose upon
Thee any thing against thy reason and better skill, but to continue some
memorial of what the learning of former men and times has instructed me in to
the benefit of those that shall live after me. And I pray God I may attain to
that high and only to be emulated degree of learning, to know how to be truly
humble and generously modest, 4 Jacob. Ad calcem Iustitutionem in Littletonum.
considering that of the Apostle, God resists the proud but he gives grace
to the humble, which Sir Edward Cook comments well upon in that Aphorism, which
on Littleton's Epilogue he recites, Nulla virtus, nulla scientia, locum suum
and dignitatem conservare potest sine modestia.

Scripsi (...)
(...). Operam da ut vivus laudabilis, mortuus autem beatus judiceris.
Antagenes apud Stobaeum, Sermon 69. Literarum scientiam justam, juveni morum
temperantiam, seni solatia vitae afferre, in rebus secundis ornamentum, in
adversis subsidium esse. Budaeus in lib. De studio Literarum recte instituendo.
A TABLE of the principal Heads and material things contained in These
COMMENTARYES.
A
ALlegiance due to the King's Person. Page 15 By the Law of nature. ibid. Due
to Kings qua-such, and not only when good, but when evil also. ibid. Danger of
limiting allegiance to one capacity of the King, excluding the other p. 16
Affliction good for men. p. 74 Acclamations of people to good Princes. p. 81,
82 Aristotle the Philosopher worthily so called. p. 85 The subject of envy at
home. p. 86 Ill used now dead. ibid. Arts derided by Ignorance. p. 88 None can
rightly value Arts but Artists. p. 89 Every Artist loves his own art best. p.
90, 91 Absit] What it imports. p. 97 Adjuration, what it imports. p. 99
Apocryphal Books not divine. p. 109 Apprentices at Law. p. 138, 547, and seq.
Absolute power has no limitation. p. 159, 160, 161, etc. Absolute Government
instituted first as a punishment. p. 175, 176 The Original of Absolute
Monarchy. p. 179, 180 Of it. p. 214 Angels have more power then men, in what
sense. p. 220, 221 Attaint of Iuries for Perjury, the great punishment of it.
p. 346 ad 352 Altum Mare, What the Admirals power on it is. p. 408, 409
B
BIshops, Governors of the Church, ought to know more then other men. p. 127,
128 Kingdoms, Bodyes-politique are compared to Bodyes-natural, the King the
Head, the Law the Heart, etc. p. 197, 198, 199 Brute the first Monarch
probably. p. 201 Bayliwicks what. p. 323, 324 Bastardy. p. 466 ad 475
C
Catholic and Catholici. p. 31, 32 Roman Church no more Catholic then any
other Church. p. 32 The Countenance is the glass of the soul. p. 42 Good
Counsel welcome to good men. p. 76 Custom to do acts of virtue will make virtue
delightful to us. p 103 Good Counsel despised, dangerous. p. 114 Children to be
educated according to their Genius. p. 113, 114 On their breeding depends
ordinarily their proof. p. 114, 115 Customs what they are and import. p. 119,
120 Causes, Elements, and Principles, What. p. 125 Charity. p 126 Corporations,
how first, very ancient. p. 208, 209, 210 Civil Law highly respected as in
right it ought. p. 213, 214, 224, 228, 236 Conquests of us by Romans, Saxons,
Danes, and Normans. p. 231, 282, etc. Conquests change Laws and Language. p.
233, 234, 235, etc. Common Law and Civil Law not to be hostilely compared. p.
236 Chastity a Fresident of it. p. 271, 272, 273, 274 Contracts what. 320, 321
Countyes what. 231, 322, 323 Criminal Causes how the Law of England proceeds
in. p. 359, and seq. Cardinals, when created, what they are, and how difficult
it is to accuse them though never so facinorous. p. 405, 406 Corpus Comitatus
what, and how Altum Mare is Extra Corpus Comitatus. p. 409 Clandestine Marriage
forbidden. a p. 412 ad 417 Commons of France miserably poor. p. 440 ad 448
Children bond or free as their Mothers are by the Civil Law. p. 485 Courts of
Princes, when good Nurseryes of Youth-Nobility. p. 506, 507, etc. Cards and
Dice how to be used, and how not. p. 518, 519, 520
D
PRinces as well as others have their Delights. p 9 Deuteronomy why prescribed
to be read by the Prince. p. 34 Doctus, what sense it has. p. 95. Depilatio,
what it signifies. p. 168. Demons, what. p. 314 Dispensations when lawful in
matters that relate to Conscience. p. 4^1 Many things dispensed with, that are
n^^ legitimated. p. 471 Delays hated by the Law. p. 585 ad 590
E
THe Eye the chief Organ in man. p. 41 Escheats, what in our and the Civil Law.
p 96. Elements, what they are in the Law as well as other Arts. p. 118, 125
Elders evil. p. 271, 272, 273 England, the commendation of it. p. 367 ad 390
England a free Government compared with that of France. p 421 ad 440. and 451
ad 456 Essoines allowed by Law, how and why. p. 584 ad 590
F
FOrtune does not ever favor worth. p. 10 Fear of God what, and the different
natures of fear with the effects of it. p. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, and seq.
Felicity, wherein it consists. p 58 Felicity, wherein it consists. p 58
Felicity and Beatitude all one. ibid. It consists in virtue. p. 59, 60 Faith,
Hope, Charity. p. 126 French Government tends to misery of Subjects. p. 419,
420 ad 450 Father of the child he is whose the Marriage is, and whom such to
be, that declares. p, 483 and seq. The denomination of the child as to bondage
and freedom, follows the father. p. 487, etc. French tongue much prevailed till
the 36 E. 3. See the mischief. p. 515, 516, 517
G
GReat men ought to have great minds p. 10 Gratitude is quick and sure in
repaying kindnesses. p. 41, 42 Grace of God must make the Law effectual to
teach Justice. p. 65 Grace of God what and how called. p. 69 It must conduct us
to and concur with us in all good. p. 70, 71, 72, 73 Greatness had need of
grace 77, 78 Grammar, the parts of it, and what they import. p. 131, 132
Gentlemen, famous by virtue p. 397 Intemperate and deceitful Gaming forbidden.
p. 518, 519, 520
H
HOpe. p. 126 Humane Laws, either the Law of Nature, Customs, or Statutes. p.
224 ad 227 Heritage and Heirs. p. 322, 323 Husband and Wife, one flesh, how. p.
488
I
IGnorance of the Law, a fault in the Prince. p. 27 Justice defined by the Law
of every Government. ibid. Judges, their Charge and Honor. p. 53 Justice, what
it is, and how excellent. p. 63 64 Justice of the Law makes the Law amiable. p.
67, 68 Justice of the Areopagites. p. 68 Justice is the soul and life of all
beauty in things and men. p. 65, 66 Instruction given Princes by God. p. 75,
76, 77 Vicious minds hate Instruction. p. 76 Instructions and Counsel in
Scripture for all occasions. p. 79, 80 Judges Judgments, in a sense, the
King's Judgments; in what sense better by Judges then by Kings in Person. p.
133, 134, 135 Industry what. p. 144, 145 Judges, what manner of men they are to
be. 134, 135, 136, 137 And what degrees of learning to have above Princes. p.
148, 149 Justices of the King's Courts their habits, appointment to their
Office, and placing by the Lord Chancellor. p. 560 ad 580 Impositions not to
be laid but by Authority of Parliament. p. 165, 166, 167, 168 Judges are not to
see Offenders tortured p. 310, 311, ^ seq. Injuries. p. 321, 322 Iuryes. p. 335
ad 346 and 356 Iuryes how kept in integrity. p. 392, 393 Impositions upon every
thing in France. p. 429 ad 440 Illegitimate children who. p. 467. and seq. Inns
of Court what, and how ruled and ordered. p. 526, 527. and seq. None but
Nobiles were to be of them, that is, Gentlemen of blood. p. 528, 529 All
Gentile qualities learned in them. p. 534, 535, 537 The Order and Government of
them. p. 536 ad 546
K
KIngs ex Officio manage their people in War by conduct and courage, in Peace
by right-judging them. p. 11 Kings have great Prerogatives. p. 14 Kings make
the Law their wills. p. 14, 15 Kings and Tyrants differ. ibid. Kings should
divide their times between Arts and Arms. p. 19, 20, 21 Kings subject to God,
though to none but God. ibid. and p. 76 Kings in what sense Absolute. p. 20
Kings ought not to be ignorant of the Law. p. 27 and 95 Kings have great cares
with their Crown. p. 64 Knowledge of the measure of our love to the Law. p.
82, 83, 84, 89, 90, 107, 108 Wisemen love no Kickshawes in words. p. 115
Knowledge of faith, hope, and charity, the knowledge of the whole Law of God.
p. 125, 126 What Knowledge of the Laws is necessary for a Prince. p. 133, 141,
142, 143, and seq. Kings cannot do what by their Laws they cannot do. p.
152, 154, 155, and seq. Kingly Government an happyness. p. 168, 169, where the
rule is not by the will but by the Law. p. 170, 171 Kings how useful and
sovereign they are to their people as Heads of them. p. 191, 192, 193, 194, 195
Kingdoms compared to natural bodies. p. 197, etc.
L
LAW the King's will in what sense. p. 15 The King's will the Law, how and how
not. ibid. The Law of God is to be written by the King out of the Copy with the
Priests, Why? p. 26 The Law ought to be known by the King. p. 27 Laws, Civil,
of Nature, Nations, Common Laws. p. 28, 29, 30 Civil Laws where, and in what
Authors contained p. 29 Laws of England whence originated. p. 30 Martial
affairs ought not to steal away the Princes love from the Law of his Country
and Government. p. 30, 31 Levitical Priesthood what, and how different from the
Evangelique one. p. 31, 32 Literati qui. p. 31 Humane Laws where just, have
God their Author. p. 43, 44, 45, 46, 62 Lawgivers venerable. p. 37 Laws,
what the Ancients styled them, and the reverence they gave to them. p. 45, 46
Laws ought to be just, and holy, and good; and those that are not, lose the
desert of being sacred Laws. p. 46, 47, 62 Laws are to be accommodated to men
and things. p. 46, 47 Laws of men when just, are in a sense the Laws of God.
p. 53, 54 Laws are to be taught the People from God's Law p. 56 Lawyers in
what sense called Sacerdotes. p. 49, 50 Some Laws of men are unjust. p. 61, 62
Laws are rules durable, immovable. p. 63 Law makes men in a civil sense
happy. p. 67, 68 Not to know the Law, is in a Prince a kind of enmity to it.
p. 97 Knowledge of the Law prevents inconveniences. p. 100 Knowledge got by
time and industry. p. 143 Laws of England how, and how not, to be altered. p.
153, 154, and seq. 164, 165 Laws of England the best for England, as the Civil
Laws are the best for the Empire. p. 222 etc. Laws of England have nothing
cruel in them. p. 365 Laws of England not contrary to the Law of God in the
case of Iuryes. p. 403 Laws of England favor liberty. p. 491 Law, though it
grants Essoines, yet hates Delay unnecessary and injurious. p. 580. etc.
M
MOses a famous Law giver and Captain. p. 21 His Excellencies above those of
the Caesar's. p. 22 God's endowments extraordinary of him, suitable to his
employments extraordinary. p. 23, 24 Ministers are to be, where they may be,
Episcopally ordained. p. 33 Man being in the Image of God, ought to affect
learning and knowledge. p. 96.97 Maxims, what they are. p. 121, 122 Mysteries
of Religion. p. 127 Mixed Government, Regal with Politic, God's Government
and Moses his Government. p. 172, 173, 174 Absolute Monarchy when, and in whom
began, together with the fierceness of it. p. 179, 180, 181, 182 Marriage of
Ministers lawful and convenient, where, and where not. p. 279, 280 Marriage
Clandestine unlawful when it is such, and why forbidden. p. 413, 414 Marriage
subsequent legitimates not Antenate children. p. 469, and seq. Mothers by the
Civil Law being bond or free, make the child so. p 485 Music, learned by
Inns of Court men, how excellent in them. The praise of Music. p 533, 534
N
THE Nobles in France trample upon the Peasantry. p. 448, etc. Natural Sons
who, and what. p. 475 Nobles, how best bred. p. 502 ad 510 Number of Judges in
the King's Courts. p. 563
O
ORators make good Prefaces. p. 1 Ordination according to the reception of the
Catholic Church, necessary to a Minister. p. 33 Obedience due to the Higher
Powers by the Law of God. p. 52 Orphans to whom by both Laws committed. p.
495, 496, etc.
P
A Princely virtue, Serenity. p. 5 Warlike Exercises the delights of Princes.
p. 6 The Ancients thought no virtue so proper to Princes as Chivalry. p. 7 What
Exercises of Manhood are Princely. ibid. Powers are to be obeyed for God. p. 52
Philosophers who and what they were. p. 57 Philosophers, though they differ in
the names of things, yet agree in the main. p. 59 Princes great Authors of
good to people. p. 81, 82 Peritus, what signification it has. p 95 Principles,
what they are. p 117, 121, 122, 125 Parables why and what. p. 128, 129, 130
Princes may attain Law-learning in a short time, if they please to intend it.
p. 148, 149 Politic Government mixed with Regal, what, and how Excellent. p.
157 Power absolute may do any thing. p. 160, etc. In what sense Quod Principi
placuit legis habet vigorem, is true. p. 162, 163 Polling and Peeling of
Subjects, what. p. 167 Parliaments only lay legal charges on the people. p.
166, 167, 168 Politic Government with Regal, the Government that would have
been in innocence if man had stood, and that which was the Government of Moses
and the Judges. p. 173, 174 How Politic Governments began. p 190, and seq. ad
200, and ad 207 Princely Spirits act Greatness in Exigencies. p. 210 Power is
then only Power, when it acts virtously. p 213, 214, etc. Parliaments, their
number and nature. p. 239 Acts of Parliament, when durable and when not. p.
241, 242 Parliaments are Senates of wisdom. p. 244 Priests, where misguided,
apt to do evil. p. 278, 279, 280 Purgatory, an Invention. p. 313, 314, 315
Public spiritedness, as well as Learning, the virtue of Fortescue. p. 572,
etc.
R
RIghteousness, the darling of Christ, eminent in him, and rewarded by God. p.
105, 106 Rules and Maxims, what they are. p. 121, 122 Restitution of the King,
Lords, and secluded Members, a Mercy. p. 277, 278 Racks usual in France, not
here. p. 288, etc. Revelling or Dancing used in Inns of Court. p. 534 Robes
what, where read of long Robes. p. 569 Respite of Appearance called Essoines,
allowed. p. 580, etc.
S
SErenissimus, the Title of Sovereign Princes. p. 1 Serenity, what it is. p. 2,
3 Solomon a wise King, and a President to Kings. p. 16, 17, 18 Subjects free,
how and how not. p. 21 Servants ought to know, that they may do their Master's
will. p. 36, 37 Sacerdotes, who. p. 49, 50 Sciences have a connection and
dependence each with other. p 93 Wisemen vilify Science in no man. p. 94
Sacraments of Christ, which. p. 126 Sergeants at Law. p. 137, 138, and 547
Sergeants at Law their Ceremony, Habits, etc. p 547 ad 562 Study in the Laws
well methoded for the time of it. p. 150, 151, 152 Scotland, an homage Kingdom
to us. p. 204 Security of Subjects a great end of Government. p, 211, 212 How
Subjects are well pleased. p. 213 Statutes how passed in Parliament. p. 237,
238, 239 Not to be revoked by the same Authority that established them. p. 245,
246 Spirits of men in great actions excited by God. p. 275, 276 Schools. p. 312
Satan how s^ffered to torment good and evil men. p. 316 Sheriffs what, and how
chosen. p. 325, etc. Sheep abundant in England, the profit of them. p. 377, and
seq. Good Rules for a Student of the Law. p. 532 Singing what, and to what end
taught in the Inns of Court. p. 532, 533 Sudies of Law or Inns of Court, the
nature and manner of them in a Discourse purposely about them. p. 539 ad 546
Sitting, a posture of Authority, therefore the Justices do sit on the Bench.
p. 565 Solemnity of placing a Justice in the King's Courts. p. 566, 567 Set
times for sitting in the Courts. p. 573 Slowness sometimes an help to Justice.
p. 580, etc. Sanguinary severity odious in a Judge. p 586
T
TIme, what it is. p. 144, 145 Tallages not to be imposed but by consent of
Parliament, and what Tallages are. p. 161, 162, 166, 167, 168 Trials by
witnesses, by Civil Law: Trials by Iuryes and witnesses per Legem Communem. p.
247, etc. Trials by the Civil Law. p 249, 250, 251 Treason, what. p. 283, 284,
285 Torments usual in France, not here, punishments by Canon Law. p. 290, 291,
292 Torments allowed by the Civil Law in criminal Cases where witnesses are
wanting. p. 296, 297 Truth is not always discovered by them. p. 297, 298, and
seq. Torments are Hellish furies. See the effects of them. p. 300 ad 310
Terrors of God in the soul. p. 316, etc. Theft manifest and not manifest. p.
510, etc. Time well spent in the Inns of Court, Hallda^es in the Morning at the
Courts, in After-noons at the Sudy, on Festival days in reading of Scripture
and the Chonicles. p 535, 536, 537, and 575 Travel when dangerous for youth,
and oftener occasion of ruin then advantage. p. 537
V
VIrtue the way to felicity and beatitude. p. 60 Virtue much the effect of
Custom. p. 103 Universities, the places wherein Sciences are taught. p 512,
etc.
W
REadyness of wit will do much to get art. p. 146, etc. Witnesses how in danger
to be corrupted, see examples of two Witnesses suborned in several Cases. p.
255, etc. Wisdom of the children of this World, and of the Children of light.
p. 262, and seq. Women good and bad. p. 268, 269 What Witnesses the Law allows
not. p. 357 Women are in account of Law as their Husbands are, except in
certain cases. p. 485 ad 488 Wives are only conspicuous as their Husbands
illustrate them. p. 489, 490, etc. Women should have a care to marry brave men
that may honor them. ibid. Writs Original and Judicial. p. 522, 523
FINIS.
The Author's request to the Reader.
THough I have endeavored by an unusual inspection, to avoid all mistakes in
the Press; yet some have unhappily intruded themselves, which if thy ingenuity
incline thee to pardon and correct, thou shall highly oblige me, who, what ever
this may prove, intend well in it to thy benefit: Be pleased therefore to
rectify the Errata's as follows. Page 8. lin. 56 read it. p. 10. l. 42. r.
also. p. 28. l. 33. r. had. l. 41. r. vivendi. p. 29. l. 4. r. detrahimus. l.
8. r. for we. l. 30. r. Sempronius. l. 53. r. England, p. 32. l. 1. r. Christ.
p. 33. l. 16. r. doctrinaeque. p. 34. l. 23. r. apposite. p. 35. l. 8. r.
(...). l. 9. r. this. l. 13. r. Lordly. ibid. r. with which. p. 39. l. 22 r.
servilizes. p. 40. l. 56. r. considerable. p. 43. l 4. r. insuperability. p.
46. l. 11. r. need. p. 48. l. 54. r. Preservation. p. 52. l. 24. r. have. p.
53. l. 16. r. that. l. 38. r. For p. 54. l. 46. r. as. p. 56. l. 31. r. hic. p.
60. l. 9. r. addictions. p. 65. l. 30. r. care. p. 72. l. 27. r. of p. 68. l.
18. r. just. l. 26. r. time to come after us. p. 74. l. 35. r. was. p. 80. l.
47. r. his. p. 85. l. 10. r. George the Artist. p. 89. l. 54. r. mettle. p. 98.
l. 23. r. his. p. 112. l. 35. r. a for and. l. 55. r. but. p. 114. l. 13. r.
had. p. 126. l. 35. r. ingenious. p. 138. l. ult. r. King. p. 139. l. 10. r. to
the Law. p. 136. l. 8. r. whom. p. 140. l. 17. r. E. 3. p. 159. l. 47. r. could
not do. p. 164. l. 34. r. thing. p. 168. l. 41. r. to them. p. 170. l. 27. r.
Laws. p. 172. l. 5. r. Profession. p. 174. l. 33. r. by. p. 179. l. 36. r. a.
p. 182. l. ult. r. dissolute. p. 198. l. 38. r. is. p 228. l. 26. r.
repressing. p. 245. l. 14. r. not. p. 288. l. 34. r. other. p. 291. l. 33. r.
temerity. p. 292. l. 10. r. obstinate. p. 306. l. 30. r. timid. p. 326. l. 34.
r. Ministerial, but. p. 334. l. 19. d. not only. p. 342. l. 23. r. 6.5. 8. d.
l. 26. 3.5.4. d. p. 434. l. 1. d. they. p. 435. l. 50. r. Mercer. p. 436. l.
23. r. a. p. 470. l. 52. d. has. p. 487. l. 55. r. indivisible. p. 548. l. 49.
r. many more. p. 544. l. 27. r. exceed. p. 537. l. 27. d. to. r. in. l. 51. r.
sonantes.. ip. 565. l. 19. r. Chancellor. d.) p. 565. l. 26. r. erectus a. p.
567. r. For. p. 583. l. ult. r. But. p. 591. d. Isagoge Moral. Philosoph. in
marg. In the Introduction p. 1. l 18. d in. p. 3. l. 12. r. Gentile. p. 4. l.
14. r. Isabel.


