A Necessary FAMILY-BOOK, Both for the CITY and COUNTRY, In Two Parts.

CONTAINING Exact, Plain and Short Rules and Directions, for Taking and Killing
all manner of VERMIN on Land and in Water: As,

PART I. BY LAND. The Fox, Polcat, Buzzard, Kite, Weasle, Adder, Snake,
Caterpiller, Frog, Mole, Pismire, Fly, Bug, Rats and Mice, Fleas and Lice. PART
II. BY WATER. The Hern, Dob-Chick, Coot, or More-hen, Cormorant, Sea-Pie,
Kings-fisher, Otter, Water-Rat, and Ospray, all great destroyers of Fish.


To which are added, Many Natural and Artificial Conclusions, both Pleasant and
Profitable.

The whole Illustrated with many proper Figures.

BY R. W. Gent.

London: Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultry. 1688.

Price 6 d.

A Necessary FAMILY-BOOK Both for the City and Country.
INTRODUCTION.
SInce the generality of Mankind is wonderfully disturbed by these small and
inconsiderable Insects and Vermin, I have here Exposed (for general good) many
Excellent and Infallible Receipts for the taking and destroying of them, partly
Collected from Learned and Judicious Authors, who have been proud of searching
into the Nature of these small things, and partly from my own Observation and
successful Practice, to the great Advantage of many others as well as my self.
So, not doubting but that they will prove advantageous to such as shall put
them in practice, I shall orderly proceed.

CHAP. I. Of the FOX.
1. The Drag-Hook to take the Fox.
depiction of trap

THIS Engine is called a Drag-Hook; it is made of Iron or great Wire, and turns
on the Weavel like a Greyhounds Collar. The Husbandmen in France hang them on
branches of diverse Trees, about their Grounds, to take the Fox, Woolf, or Dog,
but chiefly for the Fox: they hang them so high from the ground, that a Fox
must leap at it, before he can catch it; which Hooks are baited and covered
with Livers of Beasts, or other Flesh. When he catches the Hook in his mouth,
he cannot deliver himself from it, but hangs and turns about with the Hook in
his mouth. And hereunto they make trains with some Garbage against night. By
this Engine they destroy many of their Foxes, which otherwise would devour many
of their Lambs and Poultry.

For men that dwell nigh the Seaside, where there are no Trees, there 'twill
be convenient to set up Gibbets and hang your Drags thereon, and so you may
destroy your Foxes in a short time.

2. A Whip or Spring-Trap for the Fox.
depiction of trap

This Trap is called the Whip or Spring. It is set thus: There is a String tied
unto the end of some Pole set fast in the ground; unto the said String is made
fast a small short Stick with a nick in the lower end thereof, made thin on the
upper-side, there the Pole is bound down with it unto another Stick set fast in
the ground, with a nick also under; then join both the nicks together (as you
may see by the Figure) as slightly as you can, then open the end of your
String: set it in some Muck, or where you think good. When any Fox or other
thing do pluck the said upper-string aside, then the nick slips by, and the
Pole starts, and so holds him up. There is yearly killed by Foxes in this
Kingdom, as many do judge, 1000 Lambs, 2000 Poultry, 4000 couple of Rabbets,
besides young Fawns in many Parks and Forests.

CHAP. II. Of the POLCAT.
The Dead-fall for Polcats.
depiction of trap

THis Dead-fall is made with a square piece of Timber, or suchlike, weighing
about fifty pounds or more, with a hole bored in the midst of the upper-side,
and therein a hooked Crook set fast. There is also four forked Stakes which
must be set fast in the ground: then lay thereon two Sticks across, on which
Sticks you must lay a long Staff to hold up the Dead-fall by the Crook; under
which Crook you must put a short Stick with a Line made fast thereunto, which
Line reaches down to the Bridge below, which Bridge you must make five or six
inches broad.

Also on both sides of this Fall you must set Boards or Pails, or you may hedge
it with close Rods, and make it ten inches high or more. The four spreading
corners are made to show the low Hedges, that no Vermin shall pass so easily
by, but come through the Fall. The Passage must be no wider than the Fall is
broad.

CHAP. III. Of the BVZZARD and KITE.
1. A Trap for Buzzards and Kites.
depiction of trap

THis Trap is made after this manner: You must set a Hurdle on the ground where
you think good, which Hurdle must be held up before with a crooked Stick, and
that Stick is held up with a forked Stick put under it, which forked Stick must
stand loose on the ground, without the lower Bridge or forked Stick: Also in
setting up the lower end of the crooked Stick, that holds up the Hurdle, you
must observe that it be small, and slightly put into the forked Stick and
Bridge; which forked Stick is made fast and tied with two threads to the
ground, under the back of the Hurdle: And when you set it up, it shall be good,
with the crooked Stick's end, to let the Bridge stand a handful high from the
ground, and put therein the end of your crooked Stick as slight as you can,
that when any thing comes to take the Bait and treads it down the Hurdle falls
suddenly on them.

2. To take the Buzzard with three Lime-Twigs.
depiction of trap

These Lime-Twigs are to take the Buzzard in the Spring of the Year, as in
March and April, and are thus made: Take three small Rods growing on the end of
some Bough, or three small Twigs set on the end of a pretty big Stick. You must
so place them, that two Twigs must lie on the ground, and the other lying over,
the Stick must have a hole bored in the end, and a Mouse-tail, or a Thread with
a live Mouse, must be tied unto it. Also the Twigs must be finely laid with
Lime, and in a morning laid on the ground, where you do see any Buzzards near,
and as soon as you are gone, if she spy the Mouse, you shall see her soon
taken. This is a very good way to take them in the Spring, but at other times
not so good.

3. A Trap to take Birds, to be set up in Cornfieldsd, or Orchards.
depiction of trap

This Trap is made with a Pole of seven or eight inches about, and seven or
eight foot long, set fast in the ground. Make in the said Pole two holes, one
below, and the other above; in the lowermost hole fix a Spring-wand, and bow it
unto the hole above; through which hole you must put a String tied fast to the
end of the Wand, which has a knot to keep it from slipping off: on the
fore-side of the hole you must put a blunt piece of Wood seven or eight inches
long, set loosly in by the knot to stay the String, which Pin must be cleft in
the middle, and in the cleft you must put a Cherry or Ear of Wheat for a Bait;
then spread the String on the aforesaid Pin, as you may see by the Figure. The
top of your Stick must be made sharp, that no Fowl may light thereon, and when
any lights on the Pin it drops out, and the String takes them by the legs. You
may set many such about your Grounds, or you may make them on the boughs of
your Trees.

CHAP. IV. Of WEASELS.
1. To gather Weasels together.
TAke the Gut of a Lizard and beat it with Springwater, and pour it on the
ground in such places where the Weasels usually come, and they will in an
instant gather together to that place.

2. How to kill Weasles.
Take Sal-armoniack and Wheatflour, mix it into a Paste with Honey, and throw
it in such places where the Weasles usually come; they will greedily eat it,
and it quickly kills them.

3. To prevent Weasles from sucking of Eggs.
Take Rue and lay it about tho places where the Hens lay, and the Weasles will
not come near them.

4. To drive Weasles away.
You must catch a Hedg-Weasle alive, and cut out his Stones, and cut his Tail
short, so let him run, and all the other, be they never so many, will run away
to other places.

CHAP. V. Of ADDERS and SNAKES.
1. How to gather Snakes and Adders to one place.
TAke one handful of Onion, and ten River Crab-fish, pound them together, and
lay it in the places where the Snakes and Adders are, and they will all gather
together.

2. To kill Snakes and Adders.
Take a large Rhadish, and strike the Adder and Snake with it, and one blow
will kill them.

3. To drive Adders and Snakes out of Gardens.
Plant in several places of the Garden Wormwood, and they will not frequent the
Garden.

4. Another.
Take Dears Suit and strew it up and down where they usually come, and they
will depart from the place.

5. Another.
Take the Roots of Centaury, and lay it in the place where they come, and they
will depart.

6. How to touch and handle Snakes and Adders without harm.
Wash your hands with the Juice of Rhadishes, and you may freely touch them
without danger; or take in your hand the Herb Sidretum, and the Snake or Adder
will not hurt you.

CHAP. VI. Of the CATERPILLER.
1. How to kill Caterpillars.
TAke Ox-Piss and Lees of Oil and boil them together; it kills the Caterpiller
infallibly, if you cast it upon the Trees or Bushes where they are.

2. Another.
Take Sheeps Dung, and a small quantity of Tar, mix it with Chamber-lye, and
apply it Morning and Evening to the Root, Stalk, or Branch, infected with
Caterpillars, and in a very short time it will kill them.

3. Another.
Take Fig-leaf Ashes, and cast it on the Root, and it destroys the
Caterpillars; Or take a Gallon of Crabs, and steep them ten days in Water, and
sprinkle the Trees with the Water, and it kills the Caterpiller.

CHAP. VII. Of FROGS.
To gather together and kill Frogs.
TAke Ox, Sheep, or Goats Gaul, and bruise it by the Waterside, and the Frogs
will gather to it, and so will quickly die.

CHAP. VIII. Of the MOLE.
1. How to gather Moles together to one place.
TAke a living Mole, and put her in an Earthen Pot, stop it close, and make a
Fire in the place where you would gather the Moles together, and set the Pot on
the Fire, and immediately all the Moles will gather to the Pot, hearing the
Mole in the Pot cry.

2. How to kill Moles.
Take an Earthen Jug, or Pot, that has a full Body, and narrow Neck, and put
Brimstone, Cedar-wood, Beeswax, and Rosin cut into small pieces, mix them
together, then stop the Mole-holes that are near with the Earth, that the Moles
have cast out, all but one, and into the hole that is open put the Neck of the
Earthen Pot, after the combustible matter is set on fire, so that the smoke of
the Pot may enter into the Earth where the Moles passes, and they will
immediately be choked.

3. Another.
Take white Hellibore bruised very small, mix with it Wheatflour, the Whites of
Eggs, Milk and Wine, and lay little Cakes of it in the mouth of the holes, and
the Moles will greedily eat of it, and it certainly kills them, or take the
Juice of wild Cucumber, and pour it into their holes, and it kills them.

CHAP. IX. Of the PISMIRE.
1. How to drive away Pismires.
TAke half a Pound of Brimstone, melt it in an Earthen Pot, on a slow fire, mix
with it the Salt of Wine, Stone three or four Ounces, mix it so long till it
become red, then take it from the fire, and beat it on a Board with fair Water,
and it will cool immediately, then let it dry, and beat it to powder in a
Mortar; then put it into a Glass of Water, and let it stand till it has
colored the Water, sprinkle the Water on the Pismires Banks, and it kills them.

2. To kill Pismires.
Take the Roots of wild Cucumbers, and set them on fire where the Pismires are,
and the smoke will kill them; Or take Cirenicum and melt it in Oil, and pour it
on the Pismire-banks, and it will kill them.

3. Another.
Take Musk-shells, burn them with Storax, and beat them to a small Powder, and
strew the Powder where the Pismires usually are, and in the great Banks, and it
will kill them.

CHAP. X. Of FLIES.
1. To gather Flies together.
TAke a deep Earthen Pot, and lay in it beaten. Coriander, and all the Flies in
the House shall be gathered together.

2. To kill Flies.
Take Alum and Origanum, beat them, and mix them with sweet Milk, and sprinkle
the Room and places where the Flies come, and they will all die.

3. To keep Cattle from Injuries by Flies.
Anoint the Beast with Oil wherein Bakeler has been boiled, and the Flies
shall not come near him; or anoint the Horse, Ox, or Cow with the Juice of
Carwoerden-leaves in the beginning of Spring, and the Flies will not come at
them any more that Year.

CHAP. XI. Of BVGGS.
1. To kill Buggs.
TAke the Gall of an Ox, and mix it with Vinegar, and rub the Cracks and Joints
of the Bedstead with it, and all the Buggs will suddenly die; Or take a
quantity of Brimstone, beat it to Powder, then mix the Powder with old Oil, and
use it as before.

2. Another.
Take a convenient quantity of fresh Tar, mix it with the Juice of wild
Cucumbers, let it stand a day or two, stirring it four or five times a day,
then anoint the Bedsteads with it, and all the Buggs will die; Or take strong
Glue, and boil it with Vinegar, and rub the Bedsteads with it, and the Buggs
will certainly die.

3. Another.
Take Wormwood and Rue of each a good handful, and mix them with common Oil,
and put to them as much Water as Oil, that the Oil and Water may cover the
Wormwood and Rue; then boil it till all the Water is boiled away, then strain
the Oil out from the Herbs, and mix it with Sheeps Suet, as much as the Oil,
anoint the Bedsteads with it; it is an infallible Remedy.

4. Another.
Take Brimstone and Wax, and burn them under the Joints of the Bedsteads and
Creases, where the Buggs are, and they will immediately come out of their
holes, and you may kill them; Or take Quicksilver and mix it with Hoggs-grease,
of each a like quantity, and anoint the Bedsteads with it.

CHAP. XII. Of FLEAS.
1. How to kill Fleas.
TAke Sope-Lees, and boil two or three Onions in it, let it cool, then sprinkle
the Room with it, and it kills the Fleas. Or this, Take Mustard Seed, and boil
it with the Herb Daphines in Water, and sprinkle the Room with it.

2. Another.
Take Wormwood, Lavender, and Nut-leaves, and boil them in Vinegar a good
while, then sprinkle the Blanket with it; it certainly kills the Fleas.

3. Another.
Take an Earthen Platter, that is broad and shallow, fill it half full with
Goats Blood, and set the Platter under the Bed, and all the Fleas will come
into it like a swarm of Bees. Or take the Blood of a Bear or Badger, and put it
under the Bed, as before, and it gathers the Fleas to it, and they die
immediately.

CHAP. XIII. Of LICE.
1. How to kill Lice.
TAke Hogs-Lard, Quicksilver and Sage, as much of each as is needful, and mix
them together to a Salve, and anoint the afflicted place.

2. How to kill Nits and Lice in the Head.
Take three Ounces of Oil of Olives, one Ounce of Wax, three Drams of
Stavosaee, and as much Quicksilver, of these make a Salve, and anoint the Head
all over, it certainly kills the Nits and Lice.

3. Another.
Take red Orpiment and Saltpeter, of each a Dram, and Lice-Herb two Drams, mix
these together with Oil and Vinegar, and anoint the Head with it, and it kills
them.

4. How to kill Crab-Lice.
Take a roasted Apple, and take the Skin and Core from it, and beat it in a
Mortar with as much Quicksilver as will make it into an Ointment, and therewith
dress the afflicted place.

CHAP. XIV. Of RATS and MICE.
1. How to gather together all the Rats and Mice into one place in a House or
Barn, and to kill them.
TAke a Brass or Copper Pot as big as you can get, and fill it half full of the
Dregs of Oil, and then set it in the most convenient place in the House, about
the middle, and all the Rats and Mice will make their appearance, as if it were
an Assembly of an Army of Rats and Mice, and you may then strew about the place
Potashes, and it kills them all.

2. Another.
Take two or three living Rats or Mice, and put them into an Earthen Pot, then
stop the Pot close, that the Rats or Mice may not come forth, then make a fire
of Ashen-tree-wood, and place the Pot on the fire, and when it burns
moderately, all the Rats and Mice in the House, hearing the cry of those in the
Pot, will run immediately to the place where the Pot stands on the fire, as
if they did intend by force to deliver the Rats and Mice in the Pot.

3. Another.
Take Hemlock-seed and cast it into the Holes where they usually come, and they
will eat it greedily, and it certainly kills them.

4. Another.
Take very small Filings of Iron or Steel, which you may have at any Smiths,
that works with small Files, mix the File-dust with Wheat-dow, and when you
lay it into the holes the Mice will greedily eat of it, and it is present death
to them.

5. How to make Rats and Mice blind.
Take Tithimalum beaten to Powder, sift it through a fine Sieve, then mix it
with a like quantity of Wheat-flour, then put to it a sufficient quantity of
Metheglin, to make it into a stiff Paste, and lay it in the usual places where
the Mice and Rats come, and in a short time after they have eat it you will see
the effects, for they will become Beetleblind.

And thus much I think may be sufficient for these Vermin, Insects and
Raveners, that infest the House, Field, Park, and Warren, from which I shall
proceed to give you Directions how to Take and Destroy such as haunt Fish Ponds
and Rivers, devouring an infinite number of Fish, etc.

PART II. By WATER.
Directions how to take and kill the Hern, Dob-Chick, Coot, Cormorant, Sea-Pie,
Kings-fisher, Otter, Water-Rat, and Ospray, etc. all great destroyers of Fish.

1. How to take the Herne.
THE Herne destroys much young Fish, and others if they come nigh the shallow
Places or Banks, she is fearful, and difficult to take, therefore some do bait
a Hook with a Minow or other small Fish, or with a piece of an Eel; then make
your Line green, or like the Water where she haunts in a shallow place, there
put your Pin in the Earth of the shallow Water, and lay your Bait so that she
may wade half a foot deep unto it, for else the Kite or Crow will soon have it;
she will soon swallow it, and so be taken.

2. How to take the Dob-Chick.
depiction of trap

The Dob-Chick is a Waterfowl, they are commonly on Rivers and Pools, they are
near as large as a Theal, and are black; they will commonly dive under water to
take young Fish. To take them, the Fishermen do lay on the Water long Lines of
small Thread, knit full of little Corks, a handful asunder on the Line, and cut
apiece, like big Dice, (as you may see by the foregoing Picture) and
where they see them haunt they will spread the said Line before them on the
water, then with their Boots on, drive them to the said Line; and by this means
many are taken.

3. How to take or kill the Coot or More-hen.
The Coot or More-hen lives likewise on Waters, and also are great destroyers
of Fish. To kill or take these, the only way is with Lime or Gun.

4. How to destroy the Cormorant.
The Cormorant is a great destroyer of Fish also, he uses the fresh Waters,
and will dive under the water and take Fish of three or four Years growth. The
only way to destroy them is by destroying their Nests in breeding-time; they
breed in Islands and Rocks by the Sea. Some may be destroyed in Rivers and
Pools with a Cross-bow or Handgun.

5. How to take Sea-Pies.
depiction of trap

The Sea-Pie is a Fowl that uses the Seas, and breeds in Islands in the Sea,
and lives most by Fish. Where they use in fresh Rivers, they destroy much young
Fry, and such as swim near the top of the water. One way to take them is, by
liming two small Oziars, and bind the ends that are next the Bait almost
crosswise, then take another short stick and bind the one end unto your ends of
cross Twigs, (as you may see by the Figure) and put that short stick through
the Fish or Bait, then lay it on some Water-leaf, Rushes, or such like, in the
midst of the River, and, as soon as they see it, they will take and fly away
with it in their Bills, but are immediately lim'd and taken.

Another way of laying these Lime-twigs is, You must put a small short Stick in
the Bait, (as you may see by the Figure) and at the lower-end tie a Thread an
Inch long, and to that Thread tie your limed Twigs, and when she takes and
flies away with it, she cannot fly far but she will be limed, for the Twigs
will turn and touch her Wings, and then she will fall.

Thus you may take many Sea-Pies both in Summer and Winter, and the same way
you may take both Crows and other Birds.

6. How to take the Bird called the Kings-fisher.
This Bird is likewise a great destroyer of young Fry and small Fish; he is
about the bigness of a Lark, and does commonly breed in Banks of Rivers and
Brooks; his Feathers are green and Blew; he always haunts about the sides of
Rivers and Brooks, where small Fish are, and as soon as he has caught a Fish
he will fly to the next Bough, and there sit on a Twig and eat the Fish. To
take this Bird, you must mark where his haunt is, and there set down a Bush or
Branch, and put a Lime-twig under the said Bush, for so soon as he has taken a
Fish he will fly thither and light on that under Twig lim'd, and so you take
him.

This Bird, being dead, if you hang him up by the Bill with a Thread in your
House, where no Wind blows, his Breast will always hand against the Wind,
whereby you may know perfectly in what Quarter the Wind is at all times, both
Night and Day.

7. How to take the Otter.
To take the Otter or Water-Woolf in a Weel made for that purpose, is as
follows: This Weel is not made in all points like unto other Weels, where he
eats the Fish and comes forth again safe, but is made with a double Teme or
Tonuel, and against the utmost Teme within is set an Iron, like a Grid-iron,
with four holes, staying and sliding upon two round Sticks, which must be set
upright in the Weel before the Teme, to hold up the Iron, which two Sticks must
be fast bound to the Weel, both above and beneath; then must you have a good
stiff Rod, the one end must be set over the Weel, to hold up the Grid-iron or
Grate, and the other end of the Rod must reach over the inner Teme, and a small
Ozier tied at that end of the Rod, which small Ozier must be made with a round
knot, and so put down upon the end of the lowermost Ozier, in the middle of the
inner Teme, but a very little way put on, that when the Otter is within the
first Teme, he comes to the second, where the Fish is, and there he puts off
the Ozier, and the Rod flirts up, and the Gridiron falls and stops the outmost
Teme, where he came in; as soon as he hears it fall, he will turn back, without
touching any Fish, gnawing the Grid-iron, and so is drowned.

This Description shows the setting of the Grid-iron before the Teme of the
Weel, and when he falls, to rest on two stiff Oziers, as you may see above; but
when you shall Set or Tile the said Grid-iron, it must be plucked up above the
mouth of the Teme; all the Oziers must be cut even by the wreath, except those
two that must hold up the Grid-iron beneath; which Mouth of the Teme must be
betwixt six and seven Inches deep, so that a pretty big Dog may creep therein;
for if it be too little, the Otter will gnaw the Weel; also the Gridiron must
fall easily on the two sticks that stay it, and must be broader than the mouth
of the Teme, and put in when the Weel is a making. The Grid-iron is made with
five flat Bars, weighing about two Pound weight, because it may fall the sooner.

8. How to take the Water-Rat.
The Water-Rat is a hurtful Vermin, that kills Fish, especially Crevis, Loches,
Culles, and Trouts, lying in holes of Banks. They do destroy much other Fish
and Spawn in shallow Rivers and Brooks. It is hard to kill them; but where you
see their Paths on Bank-sides, there set a Dead-fall, for they range abroad at
Nights, like other Rats, and will frequent Corn-mills and Fulling-mills, to eat
Corn and gnaw Clothes. The only way to take them is, to pin square Boards
against the holes where they haunt, which Boards must have a great hole in the
midst, and set just against their coming in or out, fastened to the Banks; then
make a Latch, and set it on the outside of the Board, tiled as you tile the
Fox-Latch, (as you have seen before in its proper place) on the lower part of
the hole before mentioned; you must put three or four Pricks of Wire, to hold
any thing that comes out or in. This Experiment is easily tried.

9. How to kill the Ospray.
The Ospray is a Bird like a Hawk, near as big as the Tarcel of a Goshawk; he
is a great destroyer of Fish; he will take Fish in the midst of a great Pond;
he has one Foot like a Duck, and the other like a Hawk; as he flies over the
water the Fish will come up unto him. The best way to kill him is to watch
where he eats his Fish, (for he will eat it on some Tree near the place where
he takes it) and there kill him with a Gun.

10. How to make Lime.
Take the Berries of Misletoe gathered in Autumn, in the full of the Moon, (for
then they are in most force) and bruise them, letting them lie for a space to
rot, then wash them in running Water, till they be clean, like other Lime; and
therewith you may take Birds, as with other Birdlime made of the Bark of Holly.

11. To make Bird-lime that will serve in Water.
Take a Pound of Bird-lime, cleanse and wash it in running Water very well,
that no Knots be left therein, then beat out the Water, and dry it again; then
put thereto two Spoonfuls of sharp Vinegar and as much Goose-grease as will
make it run; add thereto half a Spoonful of Lamp-Oyl, and a little Venice
Turpentine; then boil all these together in an Earthen Pan, and stir it well:
so take it off the Fire, and reserve it, and warm it when you use it.

And thus much for the Taking and Killing of those ravenous Destroyers of Fish.
From which I shall proceed (for the Reader's divertion) to Natural and
Artificial Conclusions, etc. both pleasant and profitable.

Natural and Artificial CONCLUSIONS, Both Pleasant and Profitable.
1. How to Take Kites, Ravens, Crows, or the like, alive.
BUY at the Apothecaries two Pennyworth of Nux Vomica, beat it to powder, or
slice it as you do Ginger, then take raw Flesh, or Liver, and cut it into
little pieces, that they may swallow them whole, then cut holes in the same,
and put your Powder or Slices therein, then lay the pieces where they haunt; as
soon as they have swallowed down the same, they will fly to the next high Tree
they come at; this presently makes them so drunk, that they will fall down from
the top of the Tree to the Ground, where you may take them up alive. You must
be sure to watch them, for they will soon recover, and fly away.

2. To make a Cat Piss out a Fire.
A merry Fellow coming into an Alehouse in cold weather, and finding a sorry
Fire, said he would make the Cat Piss it out; and, watching his opportunity, he
gets his Hostesses Cat, putting her Head betwixt his Thighs, and holding her
four Feet fast in one Hand, with the other held up Tail near the Fire, and she
did piss such abundance, that she quite quenched the same.

3. How to Write a Letter secretly from one Friend to another, that it cannot
be discovered.
Write your Letter on one side with common Ink, then turn your Paper, and write
on the other side with Milk, (that which you would have secret) and let it dry;
(but observe your Pen be clean) when you would read it, hold that side which is
written with Ink to the Fire, and the Milkey Letters will then show bluish on
the other side, which may be easily discerned.

4. To make pleasant Sport with Ducks and Poultrey.
Take a Yard of strong Thread and a little red Rag, tie it to one end of the
Thread, at the other end fasten a bit of Cheese, somewhat less than a Bean,
which you may throw amongst a company of Ducks, when immediately one of them
will greedily swallow it down, the rest of the Thread and Rag dragging after
her, which when she perceives, she will be so affrighted, that running from
place to place, and finding it still follows her, will take wing, and fly into
some Pond or Water, there perceiving the Rag to swim after her, will dive into
the water, and up again, for many times together, and at last, being still
affrighted, will fly out of the water, and run up and down, until the String
catches hold of something, that either breaks it, or pulls the Cheese out of
her Belly, and then she will be at quiet.

5. How to break a Staff upon two Glasses of Water.
Place the Glasses, being full of Water, upon two Joyntstools, an equal
distance from the ground, and distant one from the other the length of the
Staff, then place the ends of the Staff upon the edges of the two Glasses, so
that they be sharp; this done, with all the force you can, with another Staff,
strike the Staff that lies on the Glasses, in the midst, and it will break,
without breaking the Glasses, or spilling the Water.

6. How to make a Glass of Water seem to Boil.
Take a Glass near full of Water, and setting one hand upon the Foot of it,
hold it fast, turn slightly one of your fingers of your other hand upon the
edge of the Glass, having before privately wet your finger, and so passing
softly on with your finger, in pressing a little, the Water will seem to boil,
and leap over the Glass by drops.

7. How to make two Images, one of which shall light a Candle, and the other
blow it out.
Upon the side of a Wall make the Figure of two Images; in the Mouth of each
put a Pipe or Quill so artificially, that it be not perceived; in one of which
place put Saltpeter, very fine and dry and pulverized, and at the end set a
little Match of Paper: in the other Paper put Sulphur, beaten small; then,
holding a lighted Candle in your hand, say to one of those Images, by way of
command, Blow out the Candle: then lighting the Paper with the Candle, the
Saltpeter will blow out the Candle immediately: then go to the other Image,
(before the Snuff of the Candle be out) touch the Sulphur with it, and say,
Light the Candle; and it will immediately be lighted.

8. How to make a Sixpence seem to fall through a Table.
You must have an Handkerchief about you, having a Counter neatly sewed in one
of the corners of it: take it out of your Pocket, and desire somebody to lend
you a Tester, and seem to wrap it up in the midst of the Handkerchief, but
retain it in your hand; and instead of so doing, wrap the corner in the midst,
that has the Counter sewed in it; and then bid them feel if it be not there,
which they will imagine to be no other than the Tester, that they lent you:
then bid them lay it under a Hat upon the Table, and call for a Basin of Water,
hold it under the Table, and knock, saying, Vade, Come, quick; and then let the
Sixpence fall out of your hand into the Water; then take up the Hat, and take
the Handkerchief, and shake it; saying, It is gone; then show them the Money in
the Basin of Water.

9. How to seem to blow a Sixpence out of another Man's hand.
Take a Sixpence, blow on it, and clap it presently into one of your
spectators hands, bidding him to hold it fast; then ask of him, if he be sure
to have it, then, to be certain, he will open his hand, and look; then say to
him, Nay, but if you let my Breath go off, I cannot do it; then take it out of
his hand again, and blow on it, and staring him in the face, clap a piece of
Horn in his hand, and retain the Sixpence, shutting his hand your self: bid
him hold his hand down, and slip the Tester between one of his Cuffs, then take
the Stone that you show feats with, and hold it unto his hand, saying, By
Virtue hereof, I will and command the Money to vanish, that you hold in your
hand; Vade. Now see, when they have looked, then they will think it is changed
by virtue of your Stone; then take the Horn again, and seem to cast it from
you, retaining it, and say, Vade; and anon say, You have your Money again: he
then will begin to marvail, and say, I have not; say then to him, You have; and
I am sure you have it; Is It not in your hand? if it be not there, turn down one
of your Sleeves, for it is in one I am sure; where he finds it, and will not
a little wonder.

10. How to convey Money out of one of your hands into the other.
First you must hold open your right hand, and lay therein a Tester, or some
big piece of Money, then lay thereupon the top of your long left finger, and
use some words of Art, and upon a sudden slip your right hand from your finger
wherewith you held down the Tester, and bending your hand very little, you
shall retain the Tester therein, and suddenly drawing your right hand through
your left, you shall seem to have left the Tester there, especially when you
shut in due time your left hand, which, that it may more plainly appear to be
truly done, you may take a Knife, and seem to knock against it, so as it shall
make a great sound; but instead of knocking the piece in the left hand, (where
none is) you shall hold the point of the Knife fast with the left hand, and
knock against the Tester held in the other hand, and it will be thought to hit
against the Money in your left hand, then after some words of Art pronounced
upon your hand, and when nothing is seen, it will be wondered at, how the Tester
came removed.

11. How to keep Cherries, Pears, Nuts, or other Fruit, a whole Year, as fresh
as they came from the Tree.
When they are pretty ripe, cut off the Stalks, and put them into an Earthen
Pot well leaded, and then cover them with Honey; then stop the Pot with Pitch,
or Wax, that no Air may come in; and then set the Pot in some Cellar or cool
place, burying it well in Sand, and so let it remain until you use it.

12. How to make it Freeze by the Fireside.
This Feat cannot be done but in Winter, and when Snow is to be had. He that
will perform it, must have a handful of Salt in readiness; then let him call
for a Joynt-stool, a Quart-pot, and a handful of Snow, a little Water, and a
short Stick or Staff; First let him pour a little Water upon the Stool, and
upon it let him set the Quart-pot, and put the Snow into the Pot, and likewise
the Salt, but privately; then let him hold the Pot fast with his left hand, and
take the short Stick in his right, and therewith churn the Snow and Salt in the
Pot, as if one should churn for Butter, and in half a quarter of an Hour, the
Pot will freeze so hard to the Stool, that you can hardly pull it off with both
your hands.

13. How to tell the Number that another Man shall think, be it never so great.
Let the Person that thinks, double the Number which he thought; which being
done, bid him multiply the Sum of them both by 5, and give you the Product,
(which he will never refuse to do, it being so far above the Number thought)
from the which, if you cut off or take away the last Figure of the Product,
(which will always be a Cipher or 5) the Number thought will remain.

As for Example.
Let the Number thought be 23, which doubled, makes 46, and multiplied by 5,
makes 230; then if you take away the Cipher, which is in the last place, there
will remain 23, which is the Number thought.

14. How to know the Hour of the Day by the Hand and Fingers.
Take a Straw, or the like, of the length of the Index, or the second Finger,
hold this Straw very right between the Thumb and the right Finger, then stretch
forth your Hand, and turn your Back and the Palm of your Hand toward the Sun,
so that the shadow of the Muscle, which is under the Thumb, touch the Line of
Life, which is between the middle of the two other great Lines, which is seen
in the Palm of the Hand; this done, the end of the shadow will show what of the
Clock it is, for at the end of the great Finger, it is 7 in the Morning, or 5
in the Evening; at the end of the Ring-Finger, it is 8 in the Morning, or 4 in
the Afternoon; at the end of the little Finger, or first Joint, it is 9 in the
Morning, or 3 in the Afternoon; 10 and 2, at the second Joint, 11 and 1, at the
third Joint, and midday in the Line following, which comes from the end of the
Index. Note, that this Experiment must be performed by the left Hand.

15. How one may find out what is hidden in two hands.
Suppose that a Person holds diverse things in his Hands, as Silver and Brass,
and in one Hand he holds the Silver, and in the other the Brass; Now to know
which Hand the Silver is in, and which the Brass, appoint for the Silver 4
Shillings, and for the Brass 3 Shillings, or any other Pieces, so one be odd,
and the other even, then bid him treble that which is in the right Hand, and
double that which is in the left; then bid him add these two Products together,
and ask him if it be even or odd; if it be even, then the Silver is in the
right Hand; if odd, the Silver is in the left Hand.

16. To cause Water (contrary to its nature) to ascend.
Take a Basin with a Pint of Water in it, or thereabouts, then take an Earthen
Pot or Jugg, with a round Belly, (fittest for this purpose) and light a piece
of Paper) cast it into the Jugg flaming, then turn quickly the Mouth of the
Jugg downward, and set it on the midst of the Basin of Water; it will suck up
all the Water, if it be no more then it can receive and contain in the Belly of
it.

17. How to know whether there be any Water in Wine or not.
Take raw Pears, pare them and make them clean, and cut them in the middle, or
else take Mulberries, and cast them into the Wine, and if they swim upon the
Wine, it is pure and clean without Water, but if they sink to the bottom, then
there is Water mixed with the Wine.

18. To make old Writing look fair.
Take Galls and boil them in Wine, and wash the Writing therewith.

19. To prevent Fleas from infesting Dogs.
Take the green outward Shell of Walnuts, and stamp them, and anoint the Dogs
with it where the Fleas vex them, and especially in the Ears, and the Fleas
will not touch them.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE Of Fourteen Useful BOOKS, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow,
against the Church in the Poultrey.
1. INstructions for Children: Or, The Child's and Youth's Delight, teaching an
easy Way to Spell and Read true English. Containing the Father's Godly Advice;
Directing Parents in a Right and Spiritual Manner to Educate their Children.
With a Christian Catechism, wherein all the chief Principles of true
Christianity are clearly opened. Together with many other things both Pleasant
and Useful for the Education of Children. Written by B. Keach, Author of War
with the Devil. Recommended to the Use of all Parents and Schoolmasters, by H.
Knollis. Price Bound 8 d.

2. The Balm of the Covenant applied to the Bleeding Wounds of Afflicted
Saints. First Composed for the Relief of a Pious and Worthy Family, mourning
over the Deaths of their hopeful Children; and now made Public for the Support
of all Christians, sorrowing on the same or any other Account. To which is
added, A Sermon, Preached for the Funeral of that Excellent and Religious
Gentleman, John Upton of Lupton, Esquire By John Flavell, Preacher of the Gospel at
Dartmouth in Devon. Price 1. s.

3. A Discourse of Divine Providence. 1. In General: That there is a Providence
excercised by God in the World. 2. In Particular: How all God's Providence in
the World, are in order to the good of his People. By the late learned Divine,
Stephen Charnock, B. D. sometime Fellow of New College in Oxon. Price Bound 3
s.

4. The Conviction of Worldly Vanity: Or, The Wandering Prodigal, and his
Return: In Two Parts. Part I. Containing his Debate with himself about his
setting forward in search of the Palace of Worldly Felicity; His harkning to
the Advice of Folly, and submitting himself to her Conduct; the manner of her
furnishing him out; of the Progress he made, and the various Adventures he met
with by the way: As also the Entertainment he found at his Arrival, and his
Riotous Living there; With his Description of the Vices Reigning therein. Part
II. Giving a full Account of his Miraculous Escape from the Palace of Worldly
Felicity: Of the glorious Prospect he had of the Celestial City; And of the
Progress he made toward it, under the Conduct of Divine Grace: With the manner
of his Proceeding, and the several Occurrences he met with by the way: His
Arrival at the Palace of Virtue and True Felicity, and his Joyful Reception
there: His Excellent Description thereof, and of the Divine and Moral Virtues
which he found therein. Both pleasant and profitable. Delivered under the
similitude of A Wandering Youth. Illustrated with proper Cuts. Price Bound 1 s.

5. Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ: Or, A plain and profitable Discourse on
John 6. Verse 37. Showing the Cause, Truth and Manner of the Coming of a Sinner
to Jesus Christ; with his Happy Reception, and Blessed Entertainment. The Third
Addition, with Additions. By John Bunyon, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.
Price Bound 1 s.

6. A Discourse upon the Pharisee and the Publican. Wherein several weighty
things are handled: As the Nature of Prayer, and of Obedience to the Law; with
how far it obliges Christians, and wherein it consists: Wherein is also showed
the equally deplorable condition of the Pharisee, or Hypocrital and
Self-righteous Man, and of the Publican or Sinner. Together, with the Way and
Method of God's Free Grace in pardoning penitent Sinners. Price Bound 1 s.

7. The Saints Comfort, in all, but more especially in Evil Times. Drawn from
Twelve several Texts of Scripture; which are briefly explained in this small
Piece. By T. G. Minister of the Gospel. Price 1 s.

8. A Directory for Midwives: Or, A Guide for Women in their Conception,
Bearing, and Suckling their Children. The first part contains, 1. The Anatomy
of the Vessels of Generation. 2. The Formation of the Child in the Womb. 3.
What hinders Conception, and its Remedies. 4. What furthers Conception. 5. A
Guide for Women in Conception. 6. Of Miscarriage in Women. 7. A Guide for Women
in their Labor. 8. A Guide for Women in their Lying-Inn. 9. Of Nursing
Children. By Nicholas Culpepper. Price Bound 3 s.

9. A pleasant and compendious History, of the first Inventers and Instituters
of the most Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole
World. Together, with many other Rarities and Remarkable things, rarely known,
and never before made public. To which are added, several curious Inventions,
peculiarly attributed to England and Englishmen. The whole Work alphabetically
digested, and very helpful to the Readers of History. Price Bound 1 s.

10. England's Jests Refined and Improved; Being a choice Collection of the
merriest Jests, smartest Repartee's, wittiest Sayings, and most notable Bulls,
dispersed through the several Tracts on those Subjects; with many new Ones,
never before printed. To which are added, Fourteen Ingenious Characters, drawn
to the Life. The whole Work compiled with great care and exactness: And may
serve as the witty Man's Companion, the busy Man's Diversion, and the
melancholy Man's Physic and Recreation. The Second Edition, with Additions of
several Jests, witty Sayings, Bulls, and Two new Characters. Calculated for the
Innocent spending of the Winter Evenings. By H. C. Price Bound 1 s.

11. A Present for Ladies. The Nimphs of Diana: Or, The Excellencies of
Women-kind, described as well in their External Beauty, as Internal Virtue;
being an Advocate for the Fair Sex; comprised in an Illustrious History of it,
represented not only in lively and pathetical Discourses, grounded upon Reason,
but in sundry rare Examples of Virtuous Love, Piety, Prudence, Modesty,
Chastity, Patience, Humility, Temperance, Conduct, Constancy, and Firmness of
Mind, with what else in the like nature, is necessary to the Accomplishment of
the most celebrated Beauties; with other Examples of Women, skilled in the most
curious Arts and Sciences. To which are added, The Examples of warlike Women,
their noble Exploits and Victories: With the Prophecies and Predictions of the
Sybils, in relation to our Savior Christ, etc. And as an Appendix, the
Character of a Virtuous Woman in all her Capacities, viz. Of a Virgin, of a
Wife, and of a Widow; wherein is showed, the happiness that accrues to Man, in
the possession of so great a Blessing as a virtuous Woman; with ^^e Reasons,
why Man's happiness is not complete on Earth, without the charming creature
Woman. The whole Work enriched and intermixed with curious Poetry, and delicate
Fancy, suitable to so charming a Subject. Price Bound 1 s.

12. The True Fortune Tellers: Or, Guide to Knowledge. Discovering the whole Art
of Chyromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy, and Astrology. Containing, 1. A
Description of the Planets, their power and influence over the Bodies of Men,
Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angles, and sacred
Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and Planets they are governed as to good or
bad Fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows, Nose,
Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard, and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the signification of the
Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles, and their significations. 7. Of Dreams, and
their Interpretations. 8. Of Nativities, and their Calculation. 9. Of the Rod,
by which hidden Treasure is found. 10. Of Marriage, and at what time any Person
shall be married. 11. Rules to know the danger of Death. 12. Of good and bad
Days. 13. The manner of resolving doubtful Questions, as to Friends, Marriages,
places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love, or Business. 14. Of
Pythagoras his Wheel of Fortune. 15. Of the good and bad days in each Month
relating to Health. To which are added, Aristotle's Observations on the Heavens,
their Motion. Of Fiery Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, Eclipses, Comets,
Earthquakes and Whirl-winds. Illustrated with several proper Figures. The
second Edition. Price Bound 1 s.

13. A short and plain Account of the late-found Balsamic Wells at Hoxdon. And
of their excellent Virtues above other Mineral Waters; which makes 'em
effectually Cure most Diseases both inward and outward: with Directions how to
use 'em. By T. Byfield, M. D. Price stitched 6 d.

14. Twelve Ingenious Characters: Or, Pleasant Discriptions of the Properties
of sundry Persons and Things, viz. An Importunate Dun, a Sergeant or Bailiff, a
Pawn-Broker, a Prison, a Tavern, a Scold, a Bad Husband, a Town-Fop, a Bawd, a
fair and happy Milk-Maid, the Quacks Directory, a Young Enamorist. Price
stitched 3 d.


