Methodi Practicae Specimen. AN ESSAY OF A PRACTICAL GRAMMAR; OR An Enquiry
after a more easy and certain help to the Construing and Pearcing of AUTHORS;
and to the Making and Speaking of Latin.

Containing a Set of Latins answerable to the most Fundamental Rules of
Grammar, and delivered in an easy Method for the first Beginners to make
Latin, at their entrance on the Rules of Construction.

By Christopher Wase, M. A. Teacher of the Free School at Tunbridge in Kent.

The Fifth Edition Corrected and Amended.

-- Quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, tantum radice in Tartara tendit.
London, Printed by A. Maxwell, and are to be Sold By Samuel Gellibrand,
February 11. 1667.

TO THE READER.
IT must not be denied, That the present Age has brought to light great helps
to the Instruction of Youth in the Latin tongue: For those who in foreign parts
have invented means for the expediting of this, it may suffice to instance in
that great Regulator of School-Policy, who has much matured the Learning of
Tongues, the Reverend and Singularly Ingenious Comenius. At home, diverse happy
pieces have been published; with all which, it might further conduce to the
facilitating that employment, if the work of making Latin were put into an
orderly and artificial course, which seems to have been left too much at large,
not with us only, but in other parts, as far as I can understand. I hope it
will be approved to the Judicious Reader, that this labor is not unnecessary,
if he shall with me reflect,

1. That there are wholly wanting assistances of Technical Books, which might
draw on Children to the exercise of the several or most principal operations of
Grammar in train, for translating out of the Vulgar into Latin. It would turn
to better account, if as the Children are entrusted with any stock, they were
required to trade with it, and were directed orderly to refund it in practice.

II. That it is more difficult to learn the Reason of the Latin Tongue by
pearcing of Authors, than by making Latins; the investigation of the Theme from
the Obliques, being far more various than the descending from the Theme to the
Obliques, by certain and uniform Characteristicks.

III. That it is evident by an Induction of the several Arts, amidst which we
converse, That as without the direction of a Master, it is difficult by bare
practice to arrive to the perfection or truth of an Art: So that neither is it
much riddance, if a Master should couch in writing the several operations of
his whole Art, and exact of his Novice to commit it all to memory, and end
before he fall to practice any particulars of it, and thereby to understand
them: But the most easy, speedy, and familiar way is, after very short,
general Instructions, concerning the terms of that Art premised, if the Learner
put his hand to the work, that particular Problems be laid down in a clear
direction; this followed with manifold working, that reviewed and polished with
continual correction. Thus the understanding will run parallel with the memory;
for we then only know a rule of working, when we can do the work.

IV. To distribute Grammar into Problems, makes it more comprehensible to a
narrowsighted understanding, and more portable for the weak memory of a Child;
that strength may in a convenient time remove a Sack of Corn into a
Storehouse, if it be parcelled into proportionable burdens; which can in no
time carry it away, by heaving to lift at once, that which is a burden
over-proportioned to it.

V. This may be some defense for the seeming compass that this method carries
the Learner about; for the attainment of Arts and Sciences, is well compared to
the climbing a steep Hill. Our fancy may contrive to spring up perpendicularly,
but it will be found the most feisible and easy way to gain the top by a
spiral ascent.

VI. Hereby different Capacities are comprehended, quicker Apprehensions will
be informed and confirmed, and brought to a habit of ready working, while the
slower are not discouraged, nor wholly left behind: Some wits are of a more
yielding, others of a more sturdy nature. Now each single instance propounded
to be wrought, is as a knock of a Hammer to rivet into the understanding and
memory, that rule upon which it depends in the working, and the several heads
of sense serve the more to clench it down.

VII. Nor is it any real compass that this method takes more than others, if we
consider the perpetual parts and repetitions used in learning the Grammar; for
to work by the same rule in forty examples, is less tedious both to Master and
Scholar, and makes more to the understanding that rule, and is not longer than
to repeat and hear the rule forty times over.

VIII. Yet because wits are not of equal acuteness, and some do more readily
apprehend the propounded rule than others can; If a single Pupil be instructed,
when he sufficiently perceives the operation, and the particular Cases of it
are salved, it matters not, that he be detained to pass through all those
proofs that are here offered (which yet would be not without profit to him) but
he may speed on to the following Fundamental Canons, and there will be no
abruptness in such proceeding, only if the rule be carried before in the
understanding; the best expedition for Forms, is, That upon discovery of
differing parts, they be not unequally matched: So that the prudence of the
Master may make it neither too long for the more quick, nor too short for the
more slow. And as the received method is a means to discover the inequality of
memories, so this will be helpful to try the quickness of apprehensions.

IX. That the examples are not very coherent, not classical, but plain; and the
way has somewhat of new in it; these several Objections admit a distinct
solution, not very difficult to be found out; the first only must be excused,
the latter three defended and owned. Indeed it were to be approved, that
besides the truth of Rule, a constant harmony of Sense might run through the
whole body of examples in the Art: For then the mind would be less distracted,
and dwell more willingly upon its work and the intention of the instances be
more evident. If it be narrowly looked into, this has been attempted in the
present Scheme (however the difficulty of the matter, with the inability of the
Author, may have occasioned a coming short of what may be in this point
imagined and desired) so that a dis-joyned Conformity, and grateful Variety,
have been aimed at in the whole; the Heads of Sense being drawn from the World,
Natural, Artificial or Moral; Neither are they yet more unsuitable to one
another, than the Examples throughout the received Grammar. Now that this might
be effected, it was secondly proper to cast a Set of Sentences, rather than to
no advantage, ambitiously to collect them from the Authors of Latin. Why must
it be stood upon to attest the constant and ordinary expressions of the Tongue
from the pure Writers? or what are Tully, Seneca, Terence, Virgill, Ovid, to
him that enters on his Accidents? Is not the Master's authority to him more
known and more important? Aristotle says rightly, The Learner must believe, I
have herein asserted that freedom to Grammar, which Writers of other Arts take
to themselves, and Comenius the great advancer of Didacticks does ordinarily
challenge. These were thirdly, calculated for the weakest capacities of raw and
tender beginners, to be familiar in Sense and Analogious (ordinarily) in
construction, and laid even one by another in an orderly contexture, wherein
nothing sublime or profound, nothing anomalous, nothing preposterous, might
trouble the young Learner; and if this be blamed, with as just reason may a
Nurse or Mother be blamed who should remove out of the way whatever might be
occasion of stumbling to her Child that is upon practicing to go alone. No
ground is plain enough to preserve Children from knocks at that time; nor can
any method be so clear, but Novices will at first be apt to mistake till they
be set upright; the charge must here lie rather after an information, whether
it be plain enough. Fourthly, If upon an inquiry it appear to design somewhat
unattempted hitherto by the several Compilers of Grammar, whether at home or
abroad, this will vindicate the Author from the imputation of a Plagiary.
Indeed here is offered at an artificial System of Vulgars (as some term them)
or (exercises of Translation from the Mother Tongue into Latin; therefore by
others from the opposite term called) Latins (as what they are to be made.)
The whole care of this has hitherto been left to the leisure of Masters, who
are either put to the trouble of perpetual dictating Latins proper to the
proficiency of those Forms which they instruct, or else to put them to some
English Author, and exact of them to translate tasks out of it; which is at
once to lay the whole weight of the Latin Grammar upon a Beginners shoulders:
We bring them to pearse Latin, by leading them through Sententiae Pueriles, and
Pueriles Confabulatiunculae, and Corderius Colloquies, and so to Aesop's
Fables, Cato's Distichs, Terence, and the easier pieces of Ovid and Tully.
Ought not the same condescension to be used in requiring the Work from them?
should they be at once, at the very first engaged upon the whole work of
Grammar promiscuously? Allowing, that they have the whole body of Grammar in
their memories; yet if they have it not in their understandings, it is but like
Cash committed to their keeping locked up; they should be accountable only for
so much as is entrusted to them under their own Key. Now a single example does
very difficultly open to so young Beginners a general rule; but manifold
practice sliding from the Vulgar to the Latin Tongue, is a more certain and
ready Key. And besides this difficulty to the Learner, promiscuous Latins are
an insufficient proof of Grammar skill; they are unequitable to the young
Student, and inadaequate to the work, Contingent practice cannot without a
great tract of time, let one into a full knowledge of any Art, nor does it then
certainly. These two Reasons may serve to maintain the Introduction of the
Latin Praxis to be proved by the Rule, concurrently with the English: By which
Analysis and Genesis of Latin, it may become familiar to them to ascend from
the Obliques to the Theme, and to descend from the Theme to the Obliques, as a
Seaman attains by custom to run up and down the Ladder of a Mast, which would
be difficult to one not practiced to it: Nor is this method considerably
differing from the received way in Schools, but only a superinducing of a
further help, which may appear to have been wanting in carrying them on in the
received Authors.

X. What I apprehend a more material Objection, is; That though my liberty in
conceiving Examples be allowed, though the way be granted pleasant, because
more coherent then ordinary, easy, and so far new, as is not abhorrent from,
but subservient unto the received order of Teaching: Yet these proceedings
while they indulge the ease of the Learner, lead him by fallible way marks;
when he lances into an Author, he shall not find those measured uniform clauses
those entire sentences, those analogous parts; another face of Oration will
present it self. He must engage with language in a style different from the
Engl. composition: which way will our young Practitioner in Latin, now turn
himself? If the artificial and umbratile method fail in encounters with natural
language, it delights fairly; but inconveniences foreseen are in a fair way to
be prevented. The way marks of the Latin language, are the Terminations of
Nouns and Verbs principally, with other accidents of the Tongue, which are more
evidently propounded, and rendered more familiar by use in this method. The
easiness which arises from suiting the clauses under their Rule, from giving
entire sentences, from picking cut regular parts of the sentence, from putting
a composition commensurate to the known order of our Native Tongue, only
prepare the Learner to be acquainted with, and prompt in the Declensions and
Conjugations, by passing on without rubs. It hinders not, that a child may grow
up to travel in rugged ways, who has learned to set his steps upon the
smoothest pavement, and from before whom, at first, all causes of stumbling
have been studiously removed; yet even this formality is endeavored to be
taken off, by throwing several sentences under their proper Rule, into an
arbitrary order in Verses, by subjoining Observations concerning the peculiar
composition of the Latin Tongue, by drawing up the Anomalies into a Synoptical
Table, by advising the Learner of the usual abr^dgment of sentences (especially
when he is carried on to look into the construction of Zeugmatical Periods) by
summing up diverse Rules into one Recapitulatory Practice (whereby those
contrived equalities fall off, and only the Rule sticks by.)

XI. Now, though it be admitted, that this course is profitable to the Learner
of Latin, it will not therefore follow, that a like innovation would be as
useful in learning the Greek, because there is a disparity of Reason. This is
taken up by Children, and those wholly unacquainted with the Art of Grammar;
that is superadded to them grown more adult, and well versed in the Latin
Grammar, especially when the Accidents of the Latin are far more incommensurate
to the English, than those of Greek are to Latin.

XII. The only Postulate of this Method, is, That the Scholar be able to write,
who shall do well to have a Dictionary of his own; and is further desired to
get a Paper-Book, wherein to enter his Latins fair after correction, that so he
may have by him a Sententiae Pueriles, which he may frequently read with
understanding and delight, as being of his own making.

XIII. The desired benefit of it is, that the industrious Student may
understand Grammar, and with ease pass on unto, and with speed and profit pass
through the received Authors.

XIV. I find by a Book newly published and come to my hand, that a like design
has been contrived and successfully practiced by Mr. Charles Hool. I have
reason to be much confirmed by the testimony of so worthy an Author, whom,
though by face unknown, yet from his Translations seen by me, and the Preface
to Cato's Distichs I have honored not only as candid and industrious, but
acutely judicious in Didacticks: Not that I should pass by his being
experienced in teaching, who was (as I collect from his New Discovery of the
old Art of teaching School) a Schoolmaster, before I was a Schoolboy. In the
last mentioned Book, page 57, 58. also 118, 119, 120. his notion concerning
such like Scheme, and his progress and practice in it, are expressed. I promise
my self when I shall attain to see his pieces of this nature published, that
the defects in this Essay may be much redressed: And this my attempt may
confer, if nothing of light or strength to the work, yet the weight of a
witness to the way.

XV. I can safely from Experience testify, concerning the one part of this
Work, that is, the Train of Englishes to be done into Latin, that hereby
without much tediousness, either of Scholar or Teacher, the attentive Learner
has with speed and ease been let in to a steady skill of making Latin, and to
perceive with evidence, the contexture of the Latin style. What is further
contributed hereto by the other Additionals, the Work not being published
through want of Copies, I could not make trial; the Reasons of adding them,
have been above mentioned.

Advertisement to the READER.
BEing required to render an account of the Etymological part of this Grammar
contained in the two first Leaves, as to the Order, Sufficiency, and use of it,
I do thus endeavor to perform it briefly.

The Verb I consider according to the Character of the Infinitive, given as
short (answering the Barytone of the Greek) or long (in an equal number of
Conjugations, with their Circumflex or contract Verbs): The first is the most
Simple and Standard of the rest, especially in the Tenses deducible from the
second Theme, therefore here premitted; and these Tenses in the long Verbs not
repeated.

In Conjugating, the Lad is required to give the first Theme, then the
Infinitive, which characterizes it Long or Short; To which, in course, may be
subjoyned the two Participles that descend from it, as Tego, tegere; tegens,
tegendus: Afterward the second Theme with its Infinitive, concluding the two
Participles descending from it, Texi, texisse; tectus, tecturus. In tegendus
the three Gerunds are included, as, i, um, o, in oculus; in tectus the two
Supines like the Accusative and Ablative of vultus, um, u, for they are argued
(if not universally agreed) to be but Verbal Nouns.

A sixth Tense is transferred from the Subjunctive into the Indicative, because
that Tense is observed sometimes to signify not Conjunctively. The Subjunctive
Terminations are separated from the Imperative. This for the Verb.

In the Noun, the first and second Declensions are shifted according to the
true and natural order of the Hebrew Gramamrians; and the course of derivation:
for Asper is before Aspera, not the contrary. The Terminations also of the
Obliques are set down nakedly as they are to be wrought. I only add this, that
this premised part being other where learned, (as out of the Grammar of Lilly)
yet the Practical part, which is the body of the Book, will make the whole work
of the Scholar more plainly and easily parcelled out unto him.

Tego tegere Texi texisse. To Cover. Sum esse Fui fu^sse. To be. Possum posse
Potui potuisse. To be able. Volo velle Volui voluisse. To will. Nolo nolle
Nolui noluisse. To be unwilling. Malo malle Malui maluisse. To be more willing:
Fero far Tuli tulisse. To bear.
The Present tense.
TEgo Tegimus Tegis Tegitis tegit tegunt Imperfect.
Tegebam Tegebamus Tegebas Tegebatis tegebat tegebant Future.
Tegam Tegemus Teges Tegetis teget tegent Perfect.
Texi Teximus Texisti Texistis texit texerunt Pluperfect.
Texeram Texeramus Texeras Texeratis texerat texerant Near-Future.
Texero Texerimus Texerit Texeritis texerit texerint Sum Sumus Es Estis est
sunt

Eram like Texeram

Ero Erimus Eris Eritis erit erunt Possum Possumus potes potestis potest
possunt

Poteram like Eram

Potero Ero Volo Volumus Vis Vultis vult volunt Nolo Nolumus Nonvis Nonvultis
nonvult nolunt Malo Malumus Mavis Mavultis mavult malunt Fero Ferimus Fers
Fertis fert ferunt

The Subjunctive Mood is formed from the Conjugated Verb by this Rule:

Turn o into am; add m.

Turn i into erim: add m: as from

Tego Tegam s. t. mus. it is. nt. But

Tegere, Tegerem Sum, Possum, Volo, Nolo, Malo, make Sim, Possim, Velim, Nolim,
Malim. Texi Texerim Texisse Texissem

The Subjunctive Mood is used with Particles which conjoyn Sentences, as ut,
uti, utinam; ni, si, nisi; quod, cum, The Present also forbids with ne, and
bids being set by it self.

The Imperative Mood is formed from the Present redoubled, by casting away re,
or the last syllable; as,

Tegere, Tege.

Tege Tegite Dicere, Ducere Facere, cast dway the short e also; and from Nolle
comes

Tegito Tegitote tegito tegunto.

Noli Nolite Nolito Nolitote

The Participles, Tegens covering, Tegendus to be covered, Tectus covered,
Tecturus about to cover. The three last of which, are commonly joined with sum.

The Passive Voice: Togor, tegi.

Tegor Tegimur Tegeris Tegimini tegitur teguntur Tegar ris, tur: mur, mini,
ntur. Tegerer Tegebar Tegebamur Tegebaris Tegebamini tegebatur tegebantur
Tegere Tegimini Tegitor Tegiminor tegitor teguntor. Tegar Tegemur Tegeris
Tegemini tegetur tegentur.

The long verb has three Conjugations.

1. are. 2. ere from eo; 3. ire.

^do laudare Laudavi laudavisse, To praise. ^eo monere Monui monuisse, To
advise. ^io punire Punivi punivisse, To punish.

^do laudamus Moneo monemus Punio: imus ^das laudatis Mones monetis Punis: itis
^dat laudant monet monent punit: Eo and Queo make eune and queunt. Ibam Quibam.
Ibe Quibo.
iunt

^audabam, Monebam, Puniebam, like Tegebam. ^dabo Laudabimus Monebo Monebimus
Punia: iemus ^dabis Laudabitis Monebis Monebitis Punies: ietis ^dabit laudabunt
Monebit Monebunt Puniet: ient ^dor Laudamur Moneor Monemur Punior: imur ^daris
Laudamini Moneris Monemini Puniris: imini ^datur laudantur monetur monentur
punitur: iuntur Laudabar, Monebar, Puniebar, like Tegebar. ^dabor Laudabimur
Monebor Monebimur Puniar: iemur ^daberis Laudabimini Moneberis Monebimini
punieris: iemini ^dabitur laudabuntur monebitur monebuntur punietur: ientur
The Subjunctive Mood of the first of the long, turns o ^ em.

The Imperative Mood of the long-Verbs keeps their Vowel.

^uda Laudate Moan Monete Puni Punite ^dato Laudatote Moneto Monetote Punito
Punitote ^dato laudanto moneto monento punito Eunto and Queunto
puniunto ^udare Laudamini Monere Monemini Punire Punimini. ^udator Laudaminor
Monetor Moneminor Punitor Puniminor. ^dator laudantor monetor monentor punitor
puniuntor.
A Noun is expressed as a Verb, with Number, Singular and Plural.

An Eye, Eyes, Oculus, Oculi. A Cheek, Cheeks, Gena, Genae.

An Ear, Ears, Auris, Aures. A Lip, Lips, Labrum, Labra.

From three Plurals, ending in i, ae, s, arise three Declensions.

In each Declension we consider three places of the Noun in its Sentence: The
After noun of, the After verb, the After-sentence to, with.

i ae s Oculi Oculorum Genae Genarum Auris Aurium Oculum Oculos Genam Genas
Aurem Aures Oculo Oculis Genae a, Genis Aurie, Auribus.

There are also Plurals ending in a, which want the second Case. A from um it
of the first Declension: A not from um is of the third; as Labrum, Labra, thus;
but Caput, Capita, otherwise.

um a Labri Labrorum Capitis Capitum. xx xx xx xx Labro Labris Capiti, e
Capitibus.

There are also of the third in s, Nouns contracted in us, as Vultus, Vultus;
and in es, as Facies, Facies.

Vultus. Vultuum Faciei. Facierum. Vultum. Vultus. Faciem. Facies. Vultui, u.
Vultibus. Faciei, e. Faciebus.

PRAXIS I. Nominative and Verb agree in Number.
AMnis fluit. The Rose withers. Torrens ruit. The Blossom blasteth. Imber
cadit. The Flower fades. Flumen vadit. The Morning hastes. Nix solvitur. The
Sun sets. Ether volvitur. The shadow flies. Ros arescit. The Candle wastes.
Vita vanescit. Man dies.

The Moon waxes. Luna decrescit. The Water flows. Aqua refluit. The Grass
springs. Herba mar^ascit. The Wind blows. Ventus reflat.

Rota Versat.

Res fluit; ardet amor. Res defluit; alget amicus,

Sol micat, umbra patet. Sol cadit, umbra later.

Culter secat. A Spade digs. Gladius necat. Rake gathers. Cuneus find it. Prong
pitches. Securis scindit. Sickle reaps. Virga caedit. Saw cuts. Fustis laedit
Whet stone whets.

Corrigiae st^ingunt, tenet uncus, fibula nectit.

Fila suunt, figit subula, pungit acus.

Ager aratur. Wool is spun. Gleba dimovetur. Yarn is weaved. A^vum sepitur.
Cloth is dyed. Fossa soditur. A Garden is sowed.

Discitur ars, aedes fabricantur, quaeritur esca;

Explorantur ag^i, sollicitantur aquae.

Irretitur avis, terretur cerva, feritur

Piscis, plantatur terra, rigatur olus.

Agnus nutritur, mulgetur vacca, putatur

Vitis, caeduntur ligna, domantur equi.

Carpuntur flores, resecantur prata, premuntur

Cerae, conduntur mella, cremantur apes.

Tondentur lanae, velluntur lina, leguntur

Poma, seges metitur, contumulatur homo.

A Burler twitches. A Cloth-worker furbishes. Knots are twitched. Garments are
furbished. A Sheer-man Sheers. A Dyer dies. Flocks are sheered. Clothes are
dyed.

Net netrix, Textor contexit, Mango resarcit.

Fullo lavat, Vendit venditor, Emptor emit.

Tornio tornat. Sartor sarcit. Mensa tornatur. Vestes sarciuntur. Vietor viet.
Suitor suit. Dolia vientur. Calcei suuntur.

Artifex operatur.

Cerdo suit, Faber aedisicat, Crustarius albat.

Vectat nauta, Fodit fossor, Arator arat.

The Heart thinks. Digitus indicat. Task is thought, Scriptum indicatur. Eye
sees. Unguis scabit. Book is seen. Caput scabitur. Ear hear. Manus tractat.
Master is heard. Pagina tractatur. Tongue whispers. Pes ambulat. Lesson is
whispered. Terra ambulatur.

Infans vagit, Homo loquitur, Vulpecula gannif.

Hinnit equus, mugit bucula, balat ovis.

PRAXIS. II.
THe Substantive-Verbs, Sum, Fio, and Passives Dicor

Appellor, etc. draw a Nominative after them.

Suber est arbor. The Rose is a Flower. Spongia est alga. The Whale is a Fish.
Canna est arundo. The Lion is a Beast. Ebur est dens. The Eagle is a Bird.
Membrana est pellis. Wine is a Juice. Achates est lapis. A Date is a Fruit.

Lilia sunt flores, baccae dicuntur clivae,

Bellua balaena est, Vipera bestiola est.

A Trade is an Estate. Scholaris est apicula. Labor is a Treasure. Libri sunt
flores. Meat is a Refreshment. Schola est alveare. Play is a Recreation.
Sapientia est mel. Sleep is Rest. Cessator est fucus.

Ars est palma, Schola est ludus, Sunt arma libelli:

Praeceptor dux est, Militia est studium.

Observe. I. That the Latins delight to pack the Verb last, if the closure of
Vowel and Consonant in the beginning and end of words, or of both less harsh
Consonants permit, as Suber arbor est: Achates lapis est. So that if the Verb
couple different numbers, as Olera sunt cibus, Boletus est deliciae: The Verb
put last, complies with the Nominative next before it, as Olera cibus est.
Boletus deliciae sunt, Florum colores horti decus est.

II. That the Latins use frequently to leave out the Substantive-Verb,
especially in Similitudes, as Avis, navis; pectus, prora; venture, carina; alae,
remi; cauda, gubernaculum. So Homo, bulla; vita, spithama.

Covetousness is a Vice. Avaritia appellatur frugalitas. Liberality is a
Virtue. Liberalitas dicitur profu^io. Wealth is a help. Temperantia vocatur
austeritas Poverty is an hindrance. Ebrietas habetur hilaritas. Laziness is a
sleep. Clementia putatur senitas. Praise is a spur. Disciplina nominatur
asperitas.

Copia fit morbus, Paupertas est medicina.

Paupertas dolor est, fit medicina labor.

Infans fit Puer. Puer Adolescens. Adoiescens Vir. Vir Senex. Puella Anus. Tyro
Veteranus.

Vitulus fit Bos. Haedus Caper. Agnus Ovis. Catulus Canis. Verres Aper. Ovum
Pullus.

Fructus fit Arbor. Malum Malus. Pyrum Pyrus. Prunum Prunus. Cerasum Cerasus.
Glans Quercus.

PRAXIS III. OF (after a Noun) is a token of the Genitive Case
Juba est honor Equi. Crista Galli. Cauda Pavonis. Apex Upupae.

Clusters are the ornament of the Vine. Flowers Garden. Oaks Wood. Ships River.

Est Rosa laus florum, Balaena est terror aquarum:

Est I co rex pecudum; Rexavium est aquila.

Fax noctis Luna est; Titan est flamma Diei;

Est homo Rex mundi; Rex hominum Deus est.

Peace is the Mother of Plenty. Plenty Pride. Pride Discord. Discord War. War
Poverty. Poverty Humility Humility Peace.

Abundantia est filia Artis. Saturitas Abundantiae. Pigritia Saturitatis.
Egestas Pigritiae. Fames Fgestatis. Industria Famis. Ars Industriae.

Est ce^ sus nutrix, hominum concordia; Fabri

In rumenta juvant; Militis arma no^ent.

Acontempt of Error is the fruit of Prudence. Money Justice. Dangers Fortitude.
leasures Temperance.

Amor Iusus est la^es ^ueritiae. Voluptatis Adolescentiae. Lucri Senectutis.
Otii Vitae.

Flos perit aetatis, virtutis gemma perennat.

Gemmae durat honos; gloria floris abit.

Observe. The Genitive is usually put first in order, so in Terrae motus, Aquae
ductus.

PRAXIS IV. A Noun following a Verb, is of the Accusative Case.
Amor acuit Amorem. Benevolentia Benevolentiam. Beneficentia ^eneficentiam. Ira
Iram. Lis Litem. Vindicta Vindictam.

Virtue exceeds Virtue. Reward Reward. Fault Fault. Punishment Punishment
Learning Learning. Form Form.

Labor precedes Rest. Work Reward. Seed-time the Harvest. Warfare Pay. The Race
the Prize. Life Death.

Quies excipit Laborem. Merces Opus. Messis Sementem. Stipendium Militiam.
Palma Cursum Mors Vitam.

Peace breeds Plenty. Plenty Pride. Pride Discord. Discord War. War Poverty.
Poverty Humility. Humility Peace.

Abundantia comitatur Artem. Saturitas Abundantiam. Pigritia Saturitatem.
Egestas Pigritiam. Fames Egestatem. Industria Famem. Ars Industriam.

Lis odium generat; Corcordia nutrit amorem.

Ira pa^it litem: Jurgia solvitamor.

A Bank bounds a River. Aves faciunt nidos. The shore breaks the Sea. Apes
struunt favos. The brink contains a Well. Araneae texunt telas. An Hedge
incloses a Field. Sciurus frangit nuces. A Bulwark defends an Army. Sus vorat
glandes. A Wall surrounds a City. Talpae fodiunt cubilia.

Vallat spina rosas, praetentant hordea spicas.

Ostrea testa tegit, cornua taurus habet.

A Soldier buys a Sword. Reaper a Sickle. Ditcher a Spade. Tailor a Needle.
Cobbler an Awl. Barber a Razor. Weaver a Shuttle. Dyer a Copper. Clothier Wool.
Scholar Books.

Pileo vendit Pileos. Suitor Calceos. Bibliopola Libros. Chirothecarius
Chirothecas. Candelarius Candelas. Suitor Ocreas. Pistor Panes. Lanius Carnes.
Pectinarius Pectines. Pellio Pelles.

Nauta regit navem, currus auriga gubernat,

Verrit arator humum, Plaustra bubulcus agit.

Scruta polit polio, Condensat pileo lanas,

Ligna faber fabricat, Tornio tornat ebur.

Tornio tornat mensas A Burler twitches knots. Vietor viet dolia. Shearman
shears flocks. Sartor sarcit vestes. Clothworker furbishes garments. Suitor suit
calceos. Dyer dies Clothes.

Pensa trahit netrix. Orditur stamina textor.

Fullo lavat pannos. Mango resarcit opus.

Observe. 1. These are called Verbs Active or Transitive.

2. The emphatical parts of a sentence, are the front and reer-Hither the Verb
is often transposed. Vendit pileos pileo, Calceos suitor vendit.

Nutrit nil ignis, Tellus animalia pascit,

Scindit avis nubes, Flumina piscis amat.

The Gun breaks. The Gun breaks a Gate.

A Candle burns. A Candle burns a Thread.

The Ale cools. The Window cools the Ale.

The Father of a Fool grieves. A Fool grieves the Father.

The Thief hangs. The hangman hangs a Thief.

The Ale heats. The Fire heats the Ale.

The Wax melts. The Fire melts the Wax.

The Heart rejoices. Success rejoices the Heart.

Timber rots. Water rots Timber.

A King rules. A King rules the People.

The Ship sinks. The Gun sinks the Ship.

The Housekeeper wakes. ^he Cock wakes the Housekeeper.

Remember some Verbs draw after them a Peculiar Case.

Genitive.
Memini. Reminiscor. Recordor. Obliviscor. reum criminis.
Moneo Accuso Arguo Convinco Damno Absolvo
Misereor. Miseresco. Satago.
Double Accusative.
Doceo. Rogo. Posco. Celo. Passives with an Accusative.
Induor Moneor Doceor Rogo Poscor

Dative
Adulor. Blandior. Cedo. Do. Edico. Faveo. Gratulor. Haereo. Indulgeo.
Lenocinor Moderor. Muto. Opitulor. Parco. Queror. Respondeo. Suadeo. Tempero.
Valedico. Commodo, Incommodo Prosum, Obsum Placeo, Noceo, Irascor, Minor.
Impero, Pareo. Dominor, Servio. Credo, Promitto. Confido, Reddo. Polliceor,
Solvo. Medeor, Nubo.
Ablative.
Vescor, vivo, creor, nascor satus, editus, ortus, Victito, sto, consto, nitor
fungor, fruor, utor.
Careo. Egeo. Indigeo. Opus est. Vinco. Abundo. Affluo. Impleo. Onero. Levo.
mercem pretio.
Aestimo Emo Licitor Vendo Potior

PRAXIS V. TO and For (the use of another) are tokens of the Dative Case.
Ager profert. Herbam ovibus. Semina avibus. Flores apibus. Fruges hominibus.

The fire boils Meat for the Cook. Beer for the Drawer. Clothes for the Dyer.
Medicines for the Apothecaries.

Sylva nuces praebet pueris; Hastilia praebet

Sylva viris; Praebet sylva seni baculum.

A Bow case i^ fitted to a Bow. Quiver Arrows. Scabbard a Sword. Sheath. a
Knife.

Calcei accommodantur ^edibus. O^reae ^ibiis. Chirochecae m^nibus. Femoralia
femorib.

Piscibus exsultant pinnae; rota curribus ardet;

Navi vela tument; ala movetur avi.

Corn grows for the Husbandman.

Punishment is prepared for the Malefactor.

A Garland is plaited for the Conqueror.

Bands are bought for the Prisoner.

Conduntur populis leges, arx conditur urbi,

Lora crepant canibus, froena parantur equis.

Observe after sum a double Dative.

Plumae sunt integumento avibus Squamae piscibus Villi canibus Vellera ovibus
Setae suibus Capilli capris

Prickles are a safe guard to Roses Barbs Barley Shells Oysters Horns Bulls
Nails Cats Weapons Men

Oves sunt decori Pastori Equi Equiso(...) Plantae Hortul(...) Milites Duci.
(...) Cives Regi. Discipuli Doctori(...)

PRAXIS VI. WIth or By (an Instrument) is a token of the Ablative Case.
A Barber shaves with a Razor. Fossor fodit ligone. Tailor sows with a Needle.
Faber dolat a scia. Sawyer cuts with a Saw. Frondator lignatur securi. Reaper
reaps with a Sickle. Suitor suit subula.

Remo cymba movetur, aguntur lintea vento;

Bos agitur stimulo, cogitur agna pedo.

Clauditur arca sera, signatur epistola cera;

Flamma alitur stipula; flamma domatur aqua.

Falce seges metitur, sulcatur vomere tellus;

Cote chalybs teritur, fallitur art labor.

Error is overcome with Prudence. Dorsum premitur onere. Money Justice. pectus
premitur curis. Danger Fortitude. Corpus pascitur pane. Pleasure Temperance Cor
pascitur doctrina.

Fertur onus dorso, tolerantur pectore curae.

Auribus ars bibitur, manditur ore cibus.

A Horse is curbed with a Bridle. Pugna committitur jaculis. A Ship is steered
with an Helm. Praelium cernitur gladio. A Bull is tamed with a Yoke.
Sagittarius ferit sagitta. A Dog is tied with a Chain. Spicularius minatur
spiculo. A Lion is restrained with Grates. Hastatus trajicit hasta. The Mind is
ruled with Laws. Tormentarius transverberat globulo.

Militat ungue leo, calamis transverberat hystrix.

Calce ferocit equus, dente minatur aper.

Observe. Time is put in the Ablative case.

Vere rosae florent, fruges aestate leguntur:

Astra die latitant, sidera nocte micant.

PRAXIS. VII. THe latter of two Verbs is of the Infinitive Mood.
Piscis docet pisciculos natare Avis aviculas volare. Vermis vermiculos repere.
Rana ranunculos saltare.

Mothers teach Children to speak. Masters Scholars to read. Scholars
School-fellows to study. Truants School-fellows to truant.

Nare petunt pisces, gaudent volitare volucres.

Currere gestit equus, repere vermis aver.

A Soldier knows to manage a Sword. Clerk handle a Pen. Printer Print Books.
Gardener Plant Trees. Lav^ Plead Causes. (...) Prescribes Medicines.

Nauta nescit ^^emere stivam. Arator gubernare clavum. Hortulanus instruere
aciem. Imperator agere causas. Pileo suere calceos. Suitor cogere lanas.

Texere scit textor. Tinctor scit tingere. Netrix

Nere scit. Agricolae rura domare sciunt.

Texere vult textor. Tinctor vult tingere. Netrix

Vult nere. Agricolae rura domare volunt.

Opportunitas debet arripi. The Sun may be overcast: Hora carpi. Virtue may be
darkened. Infamia vitari. Life may be extinguished. Existimatio retineri. Fame
may be stained.

Damna queunt redimi, cernuntur tecta rena^c^.

Jacturam lucis Luna replere parat.

Crescer^ barba solet, revirescere cernitur arbor.

Hora redire nequit, fama redire nequit.

Aquilae docent pullos involare serpents. Feles catulos insectari mures.
Anates naticulas deglutire ranas. Vulpes vulpeculas praedari anseres.

The Ploughman teaches an Ox to bear the Yoke. Horse-rider an Horse to bite
the Bridle. Miller an Ass to turn the Mill. Cook a Puppy to turn the Spit.

Pugnarum gaudet memorare pericula miles;

Nauta procellarum damna refer solet.

Observe. That the Infinitive of the Substantive-Verbs draw that case after it,
which went before it.

Magi dicuntur fieri lupi

Sagae dicuntur fieri feles

Vulgus credit magos fieri lupos.

Vulgus credit sagas fieri feles.

PRAXIS VIII. THe Preposition requires a Noun in the due Case.
These Particles require a Noun in the Accusative Case.

Infra, supra, ultra, citra, circa, juxta,

Erga, contra, extra, inter and intra.

Per, praeter, propter, post, prope, pone, penes,

Ob, trans, apud, ante, secundum, ad, versus, adversus.

Frons porrigitur infra capillos. Nasus extat frontem. Os a peritur nasum.
Mentum prominet os.

The Water flows beneath the Earth. Earth is stretched Clouds. Clouds fleet
Moon. Moon is rolled Sun.

Caput nutat supra collum. Collum vertitur thoracem. Thorax patet ventrem.
Venture prominet pedes.

The Firmament is spread above the Clouds. Clouds flit Tree. Trees grow Earth.
Earth sits Waters.

Supra tellurem Solis clementia sulget;

In^ra tell urem ^una gubernat equos.

The Shore rises beyond the Sea. Thee Bank rises River. A H^dg is planted
Ditch. A Valley sinks Hill.

Sagitta volat ultra Metam. Equus nititur Calcem. Discipulus excurrit Lectione^
Fama durat Vitam.

The Shore rises behither the Sea. The Bank rises River. A Ditch is dug Hedge. A
Valley sinks Hill.

Sagitta cadit citra Metam. Equus deficit Calcem. Cessator languet Pensum.
Pigritia fugit Victoriam.

Subsistit pondus citra mare corporis; ultra

Oceani fines pectoris ala volat.

A Wall is built about a City. A Bulwark is raised An Army. Hurdles are placed
a Sheepfold. The Guard goes the King.

Milites excubant circa Praetorium. Vallum ducitur Milites. Fossa secatur
Vallum. Equitatus excubat Fossam.

The Sheep grazes nigb the Bank. Shepherd sits Sheep. Dog couches Shepherd.
Staff lies Dog.

Scholaris stat juxta Abacum. Charta explicatur Scholarem. Cornugraphium
ponitur Chartam. Regula jacet Cornugraphium.

Oceanus circa tellurem porrigit undas;

Oceani juxta littus arena jacet.

Observance is required toward a Master. Mildness Servant. Severity Truant.
Kindness Schoolfellow

Timor exercetur erga Deum. Charitas Homines. Dilectio Fratres. Pietas
Parents.

A Captain fights against A Captain. A Soldier A Soldier. A General A General
An Army An Army.

Eques ruit cotra Equitem. Pedes Peditem. Nauta Nautam. Navis Navem.

Erga tutorem pupillus honor probatur,

Erga pupillum tutor amore placet.

Contra pisciculos rostrum larus exserit: Ungue

Contra perdicem dirigit accipiter.

Adversus cervos catulorum militat agmen:

Adversus lepores vertragus arma gerit.

A Bird without the Cage, slies. Scholar School, skips. Sheep Fold, strays.
Fish Water, dies.

Gladius extra Vaginam terret. Pecunia Crumenam sollicitat. Nucleus Putamen
pascit. Medulla Os nutrit.

The Brain quivers within the Scull. Heart pants Breast. Blood flows Veins.
Marrow swells Bones.

Urina continetur intra Vesicam. Stercus comprimitur Viscera. Saliva spumat
Fauces. Lac surgit Mammas.

Rugitus intra clathrorum septa leones

Dant: Intra caveae texta queruntur aves.

Extra clathrorum praedantur septa leones:

Coelum, extra caveae vimina, scindit avis.

The Rose is Queen am^^g Flowers. Oak Trees. Whale Fishes. Eagle Birds.

Sol est Rex inter Stellas. Aurum Metalla. Leo Feras. Adamas Ge^mas.

Inter aquas Balaena petit Regina vocari;

Inter aves Aquilae regna tenere petunt.

The Enemy marches through Fire. Water. Swords: The Soldiers pursue Pikes.
Cities. Fields.

Lepus fugit per Montes. Valles. Sylvas. Catuli sequuntur Amnes. Sepem. Fossam.

Per sola mors homines stern it: Mors per mare Pisces

Solvit: Per coelum mors populatur aves.

Repere vermis avet per humum: Volitare per auras

Gaudet avis: Piscis per mare nare petit.

A Scholar buys Paper besides Books. Pens Paper. Ink Pens. a Ruler ink a
Plumbet a Ruler.

Pater-samilias praebet Vestitum praeter Victum. Tectum ^^^^tum. Operam Tectum.
Praemia Operam. Poenas Praemia.

Praeter balaenam Delphin grassatur in undis;

Praeter vulturium milvius urget aves.

Absynthium hauritur propter Lumbricos. Glycyrrhiza manducatur Tussim. Carduus
bibitur Febrem. Sulphur inungitur Scabiem.

Laus impertitur ob Diligentiam. Pudor incutitur Negligentiam. Praemium
assignatur Modestiam. Supplicium infertur Petulantiam.

Because of

The Trumpets sounds before the Judge. Bell rings Assembly. Allarum is heard
Battle. Token is given Race.

Lucifer micat ante Diem. Hesperus oritur Noctem. Turdi discedunt Ver.
Hirundines adveniunt Aestatem.

Rest is obtained after Labor. A Reward Work. Harvest Seed-time. Pay Warfare.
The Prize The Race.

Pueritia sequitur post Infantiam. Adolescentia Pueritiam. Juventus
Adolescentiam. Senectus Juventutem. Mors Senectutem.

Post cursum Solis, venit Hesperus ante tenebras;

Post tenebras, oritur Lucifer ante Diem.

The Soldiers go behind the Captain. Children Father. Servants Master. Maids
Mistress.

Princeps inceditpone Regem. Judex Principem Eques Judicem. Plebs Equitem.

Panis habetur penes Pistorem. Caro Lanium. Vinum Cauponem. Frumentum
Agricolam.

Linum habetur penes Linteonem. Lana Pistorem. Corn^ ^utorem. Mater^ ^abrum.

Pons duci^ur trans ^oss^m. Portitor vehit trans amnem.

(...) (...) versus Patronum. (...) (...) Iudicem. (...) Aegrum. (...) (...)
apud Veterinarium.

Mariner^ (...) ^owards the Ship. Soldiers come to Army. Pleaders Town house.
Scholars a^ide at School.

Note, That Versus is put after its Accusative, as Clientes tendunt patronum
versus.

Proceres incedunt secundum Dignitatem. Discipuli sedent Doctrinam. Milites
laudantur Virtutem. Mercatores aestimantur Divitias.

Death is expected according to Nature. Crimes are punished Law. Wealth is
fined Custom. Mercy is exercised Will.

These Particles require a Noun in the Ablative Case,

Abs, ex, cum, coram, prae, pro, sine, de, tenus, absque.

Helluo discurrit a taberna ad tabernam. caupona cauponam. popina popinam.
lupanari lupanar

The Beggar wanders from Place to Place. Chimney Chimney. Door Door. Street
Street.

A ponto veniunt amnes;

Lux a nocte subit;

Ros stillat ab auris.

Grana ruunt ad humum.

Ad pontum remeant amnes;

Nox redit ad lucem;

Vapor halat ad auras.

Grana ruunt ad humum.

Flores colliguntur ex Hortis. Nuces Sylvis Pisces Amnibus. Grana Agris.

Wine is squeezed out of Grapes. Oil Olives. Milk Dugs. Honey Honeycomb

Agnus eripitur ex ore lupi.

Columba evolat e rostro accipitris.

Lepus effugit e rictu canis.

Anguisla elabitur e manu piscatoris.

Ex Zephyro tepor aspirat, Delabitur humor

Ex Austro, Densani ex Aquilone nives.

Puer fit ex Infant Adolescens Puero Vir Adolescente Senex Viro Anus ^uella
Veteranus ^irone

Cervus fit ex Hinnulo. Caper Haedo. Ovis Agno. Pullus Ovo. Canis. Catulo.
Aper. Verre.

Arbor fit ex Fruct^. Malus Malo. Pyrus Pyro. Prunus Pruno. Cerasus Ceraso.
Vitis Uva.

Ex ovo fit avis, Quercus ex glande seruntur.

Ex vitulo fit bos, Ex catulo Leo fit.

Labor concatenatur cum Quiet. Opus Mercede. Militia ^tipendio. Dolor Gandio.
Cura Honor. Mors Vita.

The Rose is found with Prickles. The Violet Nettles. Honey Wax. Wheat Chaff.
Meal Bran. The Bean Husks.

Musta fluunt cum saece. Trapetis manat olivum

Cum fracibus. Ponti cum sale spumat aqua,

Cum maculis Sol conspicitur. Cum sordibus aurum

Nascitur. Est naevo cum probitate locus.

Salinum sine Sale destituit usum. Candelabrum Candela Poculum Potu Putamen
Nucleo

A Well without Water fails Hope. Purse Money Bowl Wine Doctor Learning

Men's sine doctrina, mundus sine sole videtur;

Absque jugo canis est, absque pudore puer.

Proceres apparent coram rege, Reus sistitur coram judice.

Ae^prae ferro eligitur. Oculi ardent prae Ira. Argentu^ prae aere Genae rubent
Pudore. Auru^ prae arge^to Cor salit Gaudio. Victus prae auro Manus tremunt
Timore.

Brother pleads for Brother. Sister Sister. Friend Friend. Neighbor Neighbor.
Pastor Pastor. People People.

Pater agit pro Filio. Matter Filia. Filius Patre. Filia Matre. Maritus Uxore.
Uxor Marito.

Pro grege pervigilat pastor. Pro milite curas

Dux patitur. Miles pro duce bella gerit.

The Physician discourses concerning Diseases. Soldier Battles. Lawyer Laws.
Merchant Ships.

Arator. disserit de tauris. Pastor. ovibus. Venator. canibus. Discipulus.
libris.

Chirothecae explicantur cubito tenus. Ocreae pube Fossor madesit genuum tenus.
Piscator aurium

Observe tenus is put after the case, and is joined to the Genitive of Plurals
in the third Declension.

These serve to the Accusative and Ablative, sub, subter, super, in, clam.

In and sub after Verbs af Motion, require an Accusative Case, otherwise an
Ablative.

Pecus abditur sub umbras. Canis mensam Felis lectum. Vermis terram.

A Ship flies under a Harbor. Hare Heath. Stag Thicket. Soldier Castle.

Navis latet sub portu. Lepus ericeto. Cervus fruticeto. Miles turri.

Fruits lie under Trees. Acorus an Oak. Nuts an Hazel. Dates a Palm.

The People assembles into the Church. the Townhouse. the Court. sits in a
Ship.

Discipuli convenient in Auditorium. Scholam. Aulam. Cubiculum. manent in
Auditorio. Schola. Aula. Cubiculo.

A Sub terram repunt vermes, sub flumina Pisces

Merguntur, stagni sub vada rana salit.

Sunt sub aquis ranae, sunt sub torrente Lapilli;

Sub terra rostro talpa cubile fodit.

In mare flumen abit, flammae nituntur in auras;

Ros cadit in terras, tendit in astra vapor.

In sylvis fera regnat, aves spatiantur in auris;

Piscis in undarum gurgite radit iter.

Super (upon) with either Accusative or Ablative, (about) with an Ablative.

Vacca cubat super frondibus. Equus stramine. Nauta tabulis. Miles gramine.

Glacies geminatur super glaciem. Nix nivem. Pluvia pluviam. Aerumna aerumnam.

Pater rogat super filio. Filius rogat super patre.

Discipulus lusitat clam magistro. Reus fugit clam custode.

More anciently it was joined to an Accusative, as also clan culum.

The use of the Latin does often put the Praeposition to the Verb, which is
compounded with it.

Rota circumvertitur axem. Amnis praeterfluit urbem. Mare circumlabitur orbem.
Navis praetervehit arcem. Littus circumsedet aequor. Volucris praetervolat
agros Sol circumvolvitur annum Piscis praeternatat algas.

Puer perlegit lectionem. Puer relegit lectionem. Puer perscribit dictamen.
Puer rescribit dictamen: Author peragit opus. Tinctor recoquit pannum Discipulus
percurrit pensu^. Textor retexit telam.

Ambit lympha solum; Tellus amplectitur undam.

Verbs compounded with ab, ex, de, pro; govern ordinarily an Ablative Case.

Usually a Dative Case follows Verbs compounded with sub, super, ad, (cum) con,
prae, post, ob, in, inter, and ante.

Rex super ponit coronam capiti.

Victor supponit caput coronae.

Hospes apponit cibum hospiti.

Dapifer imponit cibum mensae.

Discipulus interponit lusum studiis.

Athleta opponit artem viribus.

Philosophus componit aurum virtutibus. anteponit virtutes auro. praeponit
postponit aurum virtutibus.

Observe in Composition, how the end of the Praeposition compounding, or the
first Vowel of the Verb compounded, changes.

Ad Sub Ob Accumbo. Succumbo. Occumbo. Affundo. Suffundo. Offundo. Aggero.
Suggero. Oggero. Appono. Suppono. Oppono.

In before b, p, and m, is im; before r and l takes the same letter. Con before
Vowels, and h leaves out n; before ^, p, and m is com; before r and l takes the
same letter. Ex is e before b, d, g, l, m, n, j, and v, and epoto only.
Although in Ancient and in Country words, it abides before those letters.

So for Verbs, some turn the first a into e, others turn the first a, ae, or e
into i; three unto u: Calco, Salto, Quatio; three omit a, Causo, Claudo, Lavo.

Emptor transit ab Officina ad Officinam. Urbe Urbem. Emporio Emporium. Regione
Regionem.

Textor sedet ad Jugum. Tornio Tornum. Nauclerus Clavum. Venditor Tabernam.

Pannificus tendit Netorem adversus. Lanius Pastorem Pistor Molitorem
Bibliopola Typographum

Merces debetur ob Opus. Naulum Vecturam. Minerval Institutionem. Sostrum
Medelam.

Hospes est apud Hospitem Vector Navem. Con^^^^ Mensam. Amicus Amicum.

Servus est penes Dominum. Pupillus Tutorem. Filius Patrem. Merx Mercatorem.

Instrumentum est propter Opificem. Falx Messorem. Tribula Tritorem. Ca^^rum
Pistorem.

Radius transit per Telam. Subula Corium. Acus Pannum. Serra Lignum.

Artifex certat adversus Artificem. Tibicen Tibicinem. Poeta Poetam. Orator
Oratorem.

Sartor poscit Filum praeter Acum. Scriba Atramentu^ Pennam. Pharmacopola
Mortarium Pistillum. Fissor Cuneum Malleum.

Olitor oblectatur inter Olera. Vinitor Uvas. Mellarius Alvearia. Discipulus
Libros.

Molendinum ponitur juxta Fluvium. Salinae fodiuntur Mare. Diversorium patet
Viam. Torcular struitur Vineam.

Gladius nitet extra Vaginam. Culter Thecam. Arcus Corytum. Sagitta cohibetur
intra Pha^

Opus fit ab opifice. Opus sit (...) Mensa tornatur a tornione. Men's(...)
Dolium vietur a vietore. (...)arina. Vestis sarcitur a sartore. Pannus texitur
ex lana. Calceus suitur a sutore. Calceus suitur ex corio.

Opifex certat cum Opifice. Faber Fabro. Sartor Sartore. Suitor Sutore. Textor
Textore

Artifex lauda (...) Opifice. Coquus ^ixa. Sartor. Veterame^tario. Suitor.
Cerdone Nauclerus. R^^ige.

Opifex cessat sine Instrumento. Faber Regula. Sartor Acu. Suitor Subula. Textor
Radio.

Opifex ^o (...) de Opere. Arator Bobus. Venator Canibus. Miles Praeliis.
Discipulus Libris.

Miles pugnat coram Duce. Remex nititur Hortatore. Discipulus studet Magistro.
Servus laborat Domino. Ancilla laborat Domina.

Stipendium solvitur pro Militia. Naulum Vectura. Sostrum Medela. Comistrum
Bajulatione. Merces Opere.

Mercator quaerit subsidia contra solicitudines.

Mercator quaerit subsidia contra paupertatem.

Mercator relinquit uxorem cis fluvios citra labores.

Mercator relinquit uxorem cis maria citra pericula.

Mercator proficiscitur a patria exponitur sub dium.

Mercator solvit a portu exponitur sub aqua.

Mercator sequitur pone praetorem cubat sub di o super paleam cum nautis absque
stragulis.

Mercator sequitur pone praesidium cubat sub aquis super pellibus cum
mercatoribus absque culcitra.

Mercator fertur adversus socios.

Mercator fertur adversus hosts.

Mercator vehitur per fluvios praeter syrtes inter praedones prope naufragium
circum montes ultra terras Barbaros versus.

Mercator vehitur per maria praeter scopulos inter procellas prope captivitatem
circum valles ultra stellas Hospites versus.

Mercator currit trans fluvios jactatur e terra in navem.

Mercator currit trans maria jactatur e nave in terram.

Mercator patitur frigora ante hyemem aspergitur genuum tenus.

Mercator patitur calores ante aestatem aspergitur mento tenus.

Mercator moratur extra domum intra navem apud Barbaros procul uxore.

Mercator moratur extra patriam intra hospitium apud Hospites procul liberis.

Mercator aestimat merces secundum molem.

Mercator aestimat merces secundum puritatem.

Mercator levat merces erga venditore^ coram venditore clam emptore.

Mercator gravat merces erga emptorem coram emptore clam venditore

Mercator licitatur infra valorem.

Mercator indicat supra valorem.

Mercator eligit aurum prae argento.

Mercator eligit gemmas prae auro.

Mercator equitat juxta veredarios.

Mercator navigat juxta nautas.

Mercator revertitur post menses sine jactura.

Mercator revertitur post annos sine morbo.

Mercator subit pericula propter quaestum reportat quaestum ob pericula.

Mercator subit labores propter otium reportat otium ob labores.

Mercator appellit ad portum refert merces Pro pecunia. narrat de laboribus.

Mercator appellit ad patriam refert pecuniam Pro mercibus. narrat de periculis.

Mercator relinquit divitias penes uxorem.

Mercator relinquit honores penes liberos.

PRAXIS. IX. SUbstantive and Adjective agree in Gender, Case, and Number
Nouns receive Gender first from their signification of Male or Female

as Equus, Lupus, Sponsus, Dominus Masculine a and Agnus, Cervus, Filius,
Servus Feminine.

or neither of the two; as Saxum, Metallum, Lignum, Mare.

Patri filius haeret. Adhaeret filia matri.

Servus herum sequitur. Serva ministrat herae.

Some being common in signification, are of both Genders.

Augur, Vates, Dux, Hostis, Antistes, Civis, Comes, Judex, Sacerdos, Municeps,
Miles, Vindex, Author, Parens, Conjux, Sus, Custos, Patruelis, Infans, Bos,
Conviva, Affinis, Haeres, Canis.

Or secondly, They receive Gender from their declension (considering the
termination) by these Nine Rules.

a Plural is Neuter, Caput ita. Labrum ra.

i Masculine Oculus i Alvus, vannus, humus, domus, are Feminino. Names of Trees
fagus, ulmus, ae Feminine Gena ae Some Greek words, as Papyrus, etc.

es not increasing is Feminine Auris e^a.

from one Syllable is Feminine Voxces b.

es increasing long is Feminine Cervixices c.

short is Masculine Vertex ices d.

us Masculine Vultus us; but Manus, Acus, Tribus, Porticus, Domus; and Trees,
as Quercus, Pinus, are Feminine.

es Feminine Facies es, Meridies, is Singular and Masculine. Dies Singular is
doubtful, Plural Masculine.

a Erceu venture, is orbis, fascis, Piscis, and unguis,

Callis, caulis, follis, collis, mensis, and ensis,

Vermis, funis, panis, penis, crinis, and ignis,

Torris, vectis, sentis, postis, fustis, and axis.

One. Syllables are Feminiue, except

b Sal, Sol, mos, flos, ros, ren, splen, dens pes, simul as, bes,

Seps, grips, mons, pons, fons, grex, glis, simul exiguus mus,

c En lichen, o Sermo, in io verbalia toll.

Mascula in er, or and os, craterque, laborque, labosque.

d Danto genus muliebre superbissyllaba do, go;

Grando, teges, seges, arbor, hyems, compes pecudesque.

Is chlamys, is pyxis, nec non as Graecula lampas,

Cassis, item cuspis, carex, forsexque, filixque.

Appendix, and coxendix, and lauta supellex.

The Doubtful abound in Gender. The Epicoene are deficient

Adjectives are of the first and second Declension in us and r, with three
terminations, Verus, a um, Asper a um. The Masculine and Neuter are of the
first the Feminine is of the second Declension; or of the third Declension in
is, with two Terminations, as Gravis e; others in the Nominative singular, are
but of one Termination in x, velox, us, vetus, rs, solers, ns sapiens, es
dives, ar par. Some in er pauper, others in er have three Terminations celer is
e.

Singulariter Singulariter N. Verus a, um. G. Very, ae. Acc. Verum am. D. Vero
ae. Abl. Vero a. N. Gravis e G. Gravis. Acc. Gravem D. Gravi. Abl.

Pluraliter Pluraliter N. Very ae, a. G. Verorum arum. Acc. Veros as. D. Veris.
Abl. N. Graves ia. G. Gravium. Acc. Graves D. Gravibus. Abl.

a Duo, ae, o. so D. and Abl. obus, abus; ambo, likewise.

b Adjectives of one termination make their D sing. in i. Abl. in e.

The practice of the Gender may be by prefixing, Hic, Haec, Hoc.
Hic liber est novus. This Hearth is cold. Haec charta est bibula. This School
is empty. Hoc dictamen est mendosum. This Bench is naked. Haec vestis est
pulverulenta. This Form is idle. Haec lex est rigida. This Beam is strong. Haec
lectio est longa. This Weather is hot. Hic canon est rectus. This Wall is
sullied. Hic gradus est alrus. This Play is unseason the. Haec acies est
obtusa. This Face is foul.

Sometimes the Verb Substantive is omitted as Ars longa Vita brevis. Magister
m^tis, Puer sedulus, C^ndisc^pul humani, Methodus facilis, Tempus charum, Nihil
adversum, Nemo invidus.

Vinum est calidum. Aqua srigida. Crocus puniceus. Lac candidum.

Honey is sweet. Wormwood bitter. The Rose tender. The horn rough.

Vinum generosum inebriat. Sweet Honey gluts. Aqua tenuis retr^gerat. Bitter
Wormwood cures. Lilium pulchrum delectat. The tender Rose pricks. Pomum mite
pascit. The rough Thorn senses.

Gravitas sentinae soetidae offendit. Facies carceris tenebrosi Stridor serrae
asperae Sapor absynthi^ amari

The Sent of a sweet Perfume delights. Sight of a sair ^icture Melody of a
tunable Lute Taste of gene^^^^ W^ne

Equiso cupit (...) nitidum. Pastor oves pingues. Vinitor vineam (...).
Hortulan^ hortum ^rriguum.

The Horse loves rank Pa^tures. Sheep the tender Herb. Vineyard warm Hills.
Garden fresh Moisture.

Seges luxuriat agricolae impigro.

Carmina fluunt poetae ingenioso.

Oration torret oratori diserto.

Doctrina procedit discipulo studioso.

Clients swarm to a skilful Lawyer.

The Threshold is worn to a faithful Physician.

Glory lasts to an incorrupt Judge.

Work abounds to an accurate Artist.

Animus Inflatur honoribus immodicis. Distrahitur opibus nimiis. Gravatur
doloribus ingentibus. Erigitur alloquiis mitibus. Alitur consiliis salubribus.

The stomach is pampered with delicate Junckets. fed with solid Meats. relieved
with bitter Potions. oppressed with various Dishes. cheared with hot liquors.

The soft Brain quivers within the hard Scull. quick Heart pants within the
broad Breast. red Blood flows within the blew Vein^* moist Marrow swells within
the hollow Bones.

Margaritae candidae latent intra mare profundum.

Venae metalliferae serpunt intra terram opacam.

Ferae pervigiles sedent intra sylvas densas.

Ranae importunae coaxant intra paludes limosas.

Firmamentum stellatum. explicatur extra Regionem aeream Regio aerea Globum
terrestre^ Equitatus levis propugnac ulu^ firm Propugnaculum firmum Peditatum
tutum.

A deep Cellar lies beneath a spacious Hall. spacious Hall. handsome Chamber.
handsome Chamber high Garret. high Garret firm Roof.

Nasus sagax est insra Frontem patentem. Os Vocale Nasum sagacem. Mentum
pendulum Os Vocale. Collum teres Mentum pendulum.

A Merchant sails through vast Seas. Soldier charges sharp Swords. Huntsman
rushes thick Woods. Scholar passes many Difficulties.

A Truant blames a difficult English, besides a long Lesson. a naughty Pen, a
difficult English. clotty Ink, a naughty Pen. sinking Paper, clotty Ink.

Labor durus absolvitur ante quietem mollem. Opus difficile mercedem justam.
Militia aspera stipendium charum. Praelium acre victoriam dulcem. Cursus
impiger palmam illustrem.

Joyful peace follows after sad War. Clear light the dark Night. The welcome
Harvest the wet Seed-time. Heavy disgrace filthy Pleasure. Bitter weeping sweet
Laughter.

The starry Arches are raised above the fleeting Clouds. fleeting Clouds
mountainy Woods. mountainy Woods wide Plains. wide Plains deep Waters.

Garments are provided against quivering cold. Meats biting hunger. Houses
vehement storms. Medicines various Diseases.

The Barley grows with sharp Barbs. Wheat the light Chaff. Peach soft Down.
Rose rough Prickles.

A Ship reels without a just Ballast. A Horse flings a stiff snufftle. The
Thoughts wander honest employment. The Mind swells the Divine Law.

Spices are brought from hot Climes: Furrs cold

Sands are scattered in dry places.

Herbs are generated in wet ^en.

AeTas est fagitiva, dies alat a reeedit;

Firma juventa perit, tarda senecta subit.

Aurea Sol rutilae permittit fraena diei,

Obscurae noctis Luna flagellat equos.

Crastina lux noctem pellit, N^x altera lucem

Trudit, iners tempus mobilis h^ra rapit.

Luna vetus renovare parat dispendia lucis;

Plena novam lucem perdere Luna parat.

Post hyemem gelidam tepidum ver incipit Almum

Post ver aestivo terra vapore calet.

Sub tutas umbras pecus omne recumbit, ab umbris

Amnes ad tristes cogitur omne pecus.

Autumnus calidam post m^ssem poma ministrat,

Post madidum autumnum bruma recurrit iners.

Villicus hyberni contra vim frigoris acrem

Arida sublimi de strue ligna trahit.

Ingens ventosis excitur follibus ignis.

Tota domus clarum desidet ante focum:

Ad praesepe boves foeno jejunia solvunt,

Aspergit durum cana pruina solum.

Subducit naves siccas in littora tuta

Nauta piger: Tumidi tollitur ira freti.

Orb brevi pronum Sol praeceps conficit annum;

Sol redit: Orb pari proximus annus abit.

Infanti tenero veniunt discrimina multa,

Incauto juveni crimina multa placent.

Multa viro firmo curarum copia surgit:

Invalido morbi dant mala multa seni.

Sola manet virtus: Victus sublimior astris,

Altior e terris regna superna petit.

TUtrices prohibent immitia frigora vestes,

Vela ver^cundus quaerit honesta pudor.

Pilea lata premunt umbroso margin frontem,

Nudus conspicui ce^^ it ^r or^s h^nos.

Lactea colla decent collaria pura, Lac^rtis

Dant niv^is ma^icae vincula pura pares.

Virginibus teneris d^cus est armilia, Tyranais

Gemmatum circum colla monile sedet.

Compar multif^r^m thorac^m fibula n^ctit;

Hamatas caligas excipit ansa tenax.

Incurvus patulis immit titur uncus ocellis,

Ferratas squamas aura subire nequit.

Cingula dividuas renuunt committere braccas,

Z^^arum cinctus integra vestis amat.

Discrimen f^m^rum gemiaum femor alia produnt,

Tibia de proprio nomine tegmen habet.

Calceus aptatur pedibus de pelle bovina.

Vaginam ma^^bus pellis ovina parat.

Remember some Adjectives draw after them a Case,
Of being joined Genitive. Measure of quantity in English set first Accusative.
unum pedem. Memor. Longus Immemor. Latus Reus. Insous. Crassus Peritus. Rudis.
Altus Cupidus. Timidus. Prosundus

Verbals in -- ax.

To being joined Dative. Of follows these, and a Genitive Ablative. Utilis.
Plenus. Noxius. Vac^^^. Charus. may Dignus. Gravis. Indignus. Fretus. Fidelis.
Contentus, Infidelis. Praeditus. Supplex. Adversa^^us. Verbals in -- bill^. To
is ^^ith these sometime spared Similis. Dissimilis. Par. Impar. Or with a
Genitive.

The whole subscribed by its part, with the property, puts it in the Ablative.

Pavo est ales gemmata cauda.

Palumbes est avis annulato collo.

Vespertilio est animal membranaceis alis.

Papilio est infectum picto corpore.

Talpa est bestiola crassis oculis.

Camelus est jumentum gibboso dorso.

PRAXIS. X. THan after a Comparative, is a token of the Ablative Case. The
Adjective in the Positive degree, is given with Number.
The Comparative turns the Plural i, es into ior. Superlative issimus. lis in
three. er Positive errimus. Facilis Ilimus. Humilis Similis

Bonus, Melior, Optimus. Magnus, Major, Maximus.

Malus, Pejor, Pessimus. Parvus, Minor, Minimus.

Multus, a, um. plus. Plurimus.

Wisdom is pretionser than a Jewel. Luxury crueller War. Disgrace greivouser
Poverty. Industry richer Sloth.

Gemma est Vilior Sapientia. Bellum Mitius Luxuria. Paupertas Levior Infamia.
Pigritia Pauperior Industria.

Luna est obscurior sole. Amnis angustior mari. Frutex humilior arbore. Nox
tristior die.

The Sun is brighter than the Moon. The Sea wider a ^iver. A Tree higher a
Shrub. The Day pleasanter the Night.

Operarius est illiberalior opisice. Fossor hortulano. Corbulo caementario.
Bajulus errario. B^b^lcu agricola. Remex nauclero.

An Artist is worthier than a Labourer. A Gardener a Ditcher. A Bricklayer an
Hodman. A ^mith a Porter. A Husbandman a Carter. A Pilot. a Rower.

Than notes the measure. term.

Quanto operarius est illiberalior opifice,

Tanto corbulo est indignior coementario

By ow much an Artist is more creditable than a Labourer.

By so much a Bricklayer is werthier than a Hodman.

Rex appellatur serenissimus. Princeps celsissimus. Dux excellentissimus. Comes
honoratissimus. Senator sapientissimus. Aeques illustrissimus.

An Orator is styled most eloquent. A Poet ingenious. A Lawyer practiced. A
Physician faithful. A Master vigilant. A Scholar studious.

Vinum generosissimum acescit. The sweetest Honey gluts. Pomum mi^issimum
putrescit. The bitterest Wormwood cures. Rosa suavissima marcescit. The sourest
Pear mellows. Gena pulcherrima senescit. The hardest disposition relents. Coma
nigerrima canescit. The tenderest Rose Pricks. Lacertus validissimus rigescit.
The roughest Thorn fences.

Frutices sugiunt vehementissimos ventos. Specus latent rapidissimas procellas.
Infantes nesciunt mord acissimas curas. Casae spernunt minacissimos timores.
Innocentia refellit atrocissima pericula. Virtus repellit rabiosissimam
invidiam.
The Winds toss the hugest Ships. Tempests tumble the highest owers. Cares vex
the loftiest Lords. Fears disquiet the richest Palaces: Dangers surround the
strongest Forts. Envy assaults the most illustrious Virtue.
Sunt violae suaves; Pietas suavissima res est: Suavibus est violis suavior
alma fides. Sunt gemmae pulchrae: Probitas pulcherrima res est Est pulchris
gemmis pulchrior alma fides.
Observe. Adjectives if put alone, understand

in the Masculine, Man. Feminine, Woman. Neuter, Thing.

Sapiens quaerit scientiam. Omnes appetunt bonum: Justus despicit quaestum.
Plerique quaerunt utile. Fortis adit pericula. Multi sequuntur jucundum.
Temperatus fraenat cupiditates. Pauci colunt honestum.

Lenia jejunus poseit. Satur acria quaerit. Aeger amara bibit. Dulcia sanus
edit. Laetos laeta juvant. Delectant tristia tristes. Saeva probant saevi.
Mitia mitis amat. Jucundum est sperare. Utile est legere. Jucundius est potiri.
Utilius est scribere. Jucundissimum est frui. Utilissimum est scire. Honestum
est flectere equum. Aequum est monere pravos. Decorum est tendere arcum. Justum
est coercere superbos. Turpe est ignorare literas. Humanum est efferre funus.
Belluinum est damnare arts. Pium est nudos vestire.

Observe. 2. Adjectives in the Genitive understand Officium.

Sapientis est quaerere scientiam.

Fortis est adire pericula.

Justi est despicere avaritiam.

Temperati est fraenare cupiditates.

Observe. 3. The Superlative puts the general Nonn in the Genitive.

Sol est Fulgidissimus syderum. Aurum Pretiosissimum metallorum. Leo
Generosissima ferarum. Adamas Firmissima gemmarum.

The Rose is the sweetest of Flowers. Oak solidest rees. Whale hugest Fishes.
Eagle swiftest Birds.

Praxis I. NOminative and Verb agree in Number.

II. The Substantive-Verbs Sum, Fio; and Passives Dicor Appellor, draw a
Nominative after them.

III. Of after a Noun is a token of the Genitive Case.

IV. A Noun following a Verb, is of the Accusative Case.

V. To and For (the use of another), are tokens of the Dative Case

VI. With or By an Instrument, is a token of the Ablative Case.

VII. The latter of two Verbs, is of the Infinitive Mood.

VIII. The Praeposition requires a Noun in the due Case.

IX. Substantive and Adjective agree in Gender, Case, and Number.

X. Than, after a Comparative, is a token of the Ablative Case.

The Recapitulatory Exercise.
I. LAbors end, Moneys abide.

II. Money is a Safeguard, Money is called a Queen.

III. Money is a help of Virtue.

IV. Money gains Friends.

V. Liberality scatters Money to the Poor.

VI. Providence gathers Money for Children.

VII. Money is purchased by Labor.

VIII. Money is wont to overcome strength.

IX. Contentedness seeks Money greediness. keeps without carefulness.

X Money is a strong safeguard

XI A penny in the Purse, is surer than a Friend in the Court.

I. MOneys run, Art sticks.

II. Art is an Estate.

III. Poverty is the Nurse of Arts.

IV. Art finishes Nature.

V. Fathers provide Arts for Children.

VI. Art is finished by Practice.

VII. A Thief can rob Moneys.

VIII. Art abides among Thieves, in banishment, after losses.

IX. Art is a safe Estate.

X. Art is an Estate, safer than Moneys.

ADverbs of quantity and quality have the same degrees of comparison as their
Adjectives.

Puer bonis moribus Studet diligenter. Ludet moderate Legit clare, distinct.
prompte. Loquitur opportune, modeste, apposite. Juvat condiscipulum libenter.
Salutat hospitem humaniter.

The Comparative is formed by turning e into ius. Superlative issime.

re from the Adjective in er, errime.

Been, melius, optime. Valde, magis, maxim.

Male, pejus, pessi me. Parum, minus, minime.

Multum, plus plurimum.

Cessator Valde cupit luctari. Magis saltare. Maxim jactare pilam. Been
luctatur. Melius saltat. Optime jactat pilam. Parum curat legere. Minus
scribere. Minime componere dictamen. Male legit. Pejus scribit. Pessime
componit dictamen.

There are other. Adverbs which are not compared.
Non ver perpetuum est: Non est syncera voluptas.

Nulli non inter gaudia cura venit.

Haud sine sent rosa est. Nux haud sine cortice crescit,

Aestivi soles haud sine nube micant.

Non est semper hyems: Non vexant usque procellae

Nautas; aeterna non nive canet humus.

Haud been mortales inflantur tempore laeto;

Rebus in adversis haud male sperat homo.

Undique circumstant humanam incommoda vitam:

Saepe fames cruciat: Copia saepe necat.

Immodicos sequitur plerumque superbia census,

Parvula vix recipit grandia vela ratis.

Paene per aeratas turres excurrit egestas,

Raro timet leges imperiosa fames.

Frangit membra labor. Corrumpunt otia mentem;

Fallax insidias hostis utrinque locat.

Vir vigil in fortem clypeum praetentat utramque

Prudenter, Dextre vir vigil arma movet.

The Formation of the Preter tense
These double the head repeating a by e. Do, Sto, Mordeo, Spondeo, Pendeo,
Tondeo, Pango. Tango, Caedo, Cado, Parco, Pario, Cano, Fallo, Cello, Pello,
Tendo, Pendo, Pedo pepedi. Disco, Posco, Tundo, Pungo, Curro cucurri. are, avi,
but Lavo Juvo vi. Sono, Tono, Domo, Mico, Plico, Frico Seco, Neco, Veto, Crepo,
Nexo, Cubo ui.
ere, ui, but Neo, Fleo, Vieo, -- pleo, -- leo, evi, -- veo, vi, Maneo mansi,
Jubeo jussi. L and r before geo, and I before ceo, make it si. Ardeo, Rideo,
Suadeo, Haereo, Torqueo, si. Angeo, Erigeo, Luceo, Lugeo, xi. Sedeo, Prandeo,
Strideo, Video, di.
ire, ivi, but Venio veni, Sancio, Vincio xi. Iaurio, Sentio, Sarcio, Farcio,
Fulcio, Sepio, si. Amicio -- cui -- vi. Salio -- ui -- ivi.
ere, thus Vinco, Linquo, Scindo, Findo, Fundo, Rumpo lose m, n, Ago, Facio,
Jacio, Capio make e^, Frango, Tango lose n too. Lego, Edo, Emo, Fodio, Fugio,
lengthen their Vowel. c q g h ct make xi. two from ct, insert u also. Necto xi
xui. Pecto xi xui.

Lambo, Bibo, Scabo by, Strepo pui, ^edo, Praemo, Uro, Gero, Quatio ssi. d
Claudo, Plaudo, Rado, Vado, Laedo, Ludo, Rodo, Trudo, Divido si. Cado, Rudo,
Sido, Strido and di.
l m n r s t x, in these insert u, Colo, Molo, Volo, Alo. Consulo, Occulo,
Fremo, Gemo, Tremo, Vomo, Gigno, genui. Pono posui. Sero, Pinso, Sterto, Meto
messui, Texo texui: else Sallo, Psallo ti. Vello, velli, and vulsi. Como,
Promo, Sumo, demo psi. Sino sivi, Lino levi, Cerno crevi, Sperno sprevi, Sterno
stravi. Sero sevi, Quaero quaesivi, Tero trivi. Verro verri. Arcesso, Lacesso,
ivi. Facesso, Capesso ivi and i. Incesso, Viso i. Verto i. Peto ivi, Mitto
misi, Sisto stiti. -- vo vi, Lacio lexi, Specio xi, Rapio ui, Sapio ui and ivi,
Cupio ivi. -- uo ui. Pluo pluvi.

The Compound-Preters do not double the head, except Disco, Po^co, Do. These
put in u. Antecello, Praecello, Excello, Compesco, Dispesco, Occino, Succino,
Elicio: But -- cumbo, etc. omit m, also Aperio, Operio ui. Intelligo, Diligo,
Negligo exi.

The Preter Participle does not double the head nor change a into e. does lose
n further from Strinxi ui from uo make utus. Pinxi Finxi Minxi Pinsui Rinxi vi
vo

d four, sidi, fodi, scidi, sedi ssus, but dedi datus. Pandi pansus and ssus.

l make sus. But tuli latus. r peperi partus.

s but torsi, hausi, fulsi, farsi, farsi, indulsi, ussi, gessi, tus, misi ssus.
(psi makes ptus.

Nexi, Pexi, Flexi, Plexi, Fixi, Fluxi xus.

The Preter Participle Compound.
Jactus, factus, captus, raptus, fartus, partus, sparsus, cantus, carptus, turn
a into e. Status, satus into i. So cognitus, agnitus.

The Preter tense of Deponents.
Adipisc or adeptus. Amplector amplexus. Comminiscor commentus Complector
complexus. Expergiscor experrectus. Fruor fruitus. Fungor functus sum. Gradior
gressus. Irascor Iratus. Labor lapsus. Loquor loquutus. Morior mortuus.
Nanciscor nactus. Nascor natus. Nitor nisus and xus. Obliviscor oblitus. Orior
ortus. Paciscor pactus. Patior passus. Proficiscor profectus. Queror questus.
Sequor sequutus. Ulciscor ultus. Utor usus.
Divertor, Praevertor, Revertor, borrow the Preter tense Active.

In the second long, Fateor fassus, Confiteor confessus, Misereor misertus,
Reor ratus, Tueor tuitus.

In the third long, Assentior assensus, Metior mensus, Experior, Opperior,
Comperior -- pertus. Ordior to weave orditus, to begin orsus with the compounds.

The Preter Tense of Neuter-Passives.
Audeo ausus, Gaudeo gavisus, Fido fisus, Fio factus, Moereo moestus, Soleo
solitus.

These want the first theme; Coepi, Odi, Memini.

These want the second theme; Polleo, Renideo, Glisco;

Fatisco, Vergo, Ambigo; and Denominatives, Inceptives as Puerasco.

These want the Preter-Participle. Lambo, Scabo; Mico, Parco, Dispesco,
Compesco, Posco, Disco, Strido, Rudo, Aveo, Paveo, Flaveo, Liveo, Conniveo
Ferveo, Satago, Dego, Ango, Lingo, Ningo, Sugo, Psallo, Volo, Nolo, Malo,
Tremo. Compounds of Nuo, and Compounds of Cado, besides Occido and Recido.
Timeo, Metuo, Respuo, Linquo, Luo, luo, Sterto, Ingruo, Congruo, and Neuters in
eo, ui, except Oleo, Doleo, Placeo, Taceo, Jaceo, Noceo, Pareo, Careo, Pateo,
Lateo, Valeo, Caleo.

There are accounted eighteen Pronouns.
Ego, Tu, Sui, Meus, Tuus, Noster, Vester, Suus. Quis? qui, Is, Iste. Ille,
H^c, Ipse, Cujus? Nostras, Vestras,

Singulariter N. Ego. G. Mei. Acc. Me. D. Mihi. Abl. Me. Pluraliter N. Nos. G.
Nostrum. i. Acc. Nos. D. Nobis. Abl. Singulariter N. Tu. G. Tui. Acc. Te. D.
Tibi. Abl. Te. Pluraliter N. Vos. G. Vestrum i. Acc. Vos. D. Vobis. Abl.
Singulariter and Pluraliter N. G. Sui. Acc. Se. D. Sibi. Abl. Se.

Sui and suus are interpreted by the forenamed subject.

Pater solatur se suis liberis. Matter Parents solantur Urbs solatur se suis
civibus:

These six make their Neuter in d. Quis, Quae, Quid, (but Qui, Quae, Quod) Is,
Ea, Id; Iste, Ista, Istud; Ille, Illa, Illud. And Alius, a, ud.

Singulariter N. Quis, quae, quid. G. Cujus. Acc. Quem, quam. D. Cui. Abl. Quo
i, qua. Pluraliter N. Qui, quae, quae. G. Quorum, quarum. Acc Quos, quas. D.
Quibus or Queis. Abl. Singulariter N. Hic, haec, hoc. G. Hujus. Acc. Hunc,
hanc. D. Huic. Abl. Hoc, hac. Pluraliter N. Hi, hae, haec. G. Horum, harum.
Acc. Hos, has. D. His. Abl. Singulariter N. Is. ea, id. G. Ejus. Acc. Eum, eam.
D. Ei. Abl. Eo, ea. Pluraliter N. Ii, eae, ea, G. Eorum, earum. Acc. Eos, eas.
D. iis. Abl.

Singulariter N. Iste, ista, istud. N. Isti, istae, ista, G. Istius. G.
Istorum, istarum. Acc. Istum, istam. Acc. Istos, istas. D. Isti. D. Istis. Abl.
Isto a. Abl.

So Ille. Alius makes in the G. Sing. Aliius, D. Alii. B^ Ipse, a, um.

and Unus, ullus, nullus, solus, totus, make the G. Sin^ ius, D. i. Uter,
Uterque, neuter, alteruter,

Alter makes the Genesis Sing. Alterius.

The Person speaking and spoken to, have their form.
Observo, Innuo, Irascor, Vociferor.

Cur ludis? Cur cessas? Cur torpes?

Cur nugaris?

The Pronoun is added for distinction, or eminence, and si^gularity.

Ego Lego. Tu Ludis. Rogo. Cessas. Meditor. Nugaris. Studeo. Rides. Laudor.
Objurgaris. Promoveor. Teneris. Donor. Castigaris.

Nouus in us have a Vocative termination in e, except D^us. Meus makes mi,
Filius fili. And all proper names in i^ makes i, as Georgius Georgi.

Of what number the Vocative is, the Imperative is of t^ same.
Puer Sede in loco tuo. Lege librum tuum. Examina lectionem tuam. Audi
condiscipulum tuum.

Pueri Parate chartam vestram. Adhibete elementa vestra. Expedite dictionarium
vestrum. Conjungite voces singulas.

The Vocative is set distinct in the Sentence.
A. Quem librum legis, mi puer? B Sententias Pueriles, domine. A. Quota in
class seeds? B. In secunda, A. Ni^l^ne Colloquiorum, suavissime, didicit
classis vestra? B. Jam nunc, domine, tendimus ad Confabulatiunculas, ^^
Corderii Colloquia. Hactenus haeremus in Rudimentis. A. Feliciter; vale,
blandum caput. B. Valebis tu quoque, ^^^ sum.

The Interregative and Responsive are made by the same Case.
Q. Quid est illud in sinu tuo, mi puer? B. Liber, Domine. A. Cujus est iste
liber? B. Condiscipuli mei. A. Quem condiscipulum vis? B. Ducem Scholae
nostrae. A. Cui studio te addicis? B. Grammaticae. A. Quota in class ^edes? B.
Secunda. A. Libet ulterius percontari. Quarum rerum omnes mortales meminisse
oportet? B. Mortis, ^udicii. coeli, inferni. A. Quarum rerum eosdem oblivisci
^^eet? B. Injuriarum. convitiorum, offensarum. A. Quas ^pes maximas opinari
possumus? B. Contentum suis rebus ^nimum. A. Quem thesaurum pauperes
fortiuntur? B. La^orem. A. Cui rei debemus imprimis parcere? B. Tempori. A.
Quibus cum hominibus versari licet? B. Cum omnibus. A. Qualibus amicis uti
convenit? B. Probis. A. Quanti as est existimationem hominum de nobis bonam
facere? B. Permagni. A. Quanti pecuniam aestimare nefas est? B. Pluris. A.
Quotus quisque sic animatue est? B. Vi^ ^^ecimus quisque. A. Quaenam est radix
malorum omniu^? B. Avaritia. A. Cui aetati vitium hoc potissimum insidiari
^mdiu observatum est? B. Senectuti. A. Qua labe ma^ulatur adolescentia? B. A
more voluptatum. A. Ecquod ^enenum est pueritiae dulce? B. Otium. A. Quot annos
^a tus es? B. Octo. A. Quotum aetatis annum agis? B. ^onum. A. Apt
respondiffi, puer ingenue: abi, vir es.

I. Pronouns are signs for things otherwise named.

II. The person speaking and spoken to, have their form.

III. Of what number the Vocative is, the Imperative is of the same.

IV. The Vocative is set distinct in the Sentence.

V. The Interrogative and Responsive are made by the same Case.

I. Mors conjungitur cum ipsa vita: Haec praecedit illam Illa sequitur hanc.

II. Novi natalem, Nescio diem mortis.

III. Suspicite mortem, juvenes: Aspicite candem, senes

IV. Mors vos, juvenes, rapit; Eadem vos, Senes, colligit.

V. A. Quorum mors est acerba? B. Juvenum. A. Quorum mors est matura? B. Senum.

Naenia. I. Opus est faciendum, quis faciet? II. Qu^faciet? III. Opus est
factum, quis fecit? II. Lapis jactus jecit? Vitrum fractum, fregit? Opus actum,
egit? IV. A. Quota est hora? B. Instat prima, secunda. C. Son^tertia, quarta.
D. Audita est quinta, sexta. E. Praeterii^ cum quadrante septima, octava. Est
sesqui-nona, decima. G. Praeteriit cum dodrante, undecima, duodecim^ V. Quid
ubi sit? VI. Quando? VII. Quamdiu?

PRAXIS. I. SUbstantives are joined in the same Case: as, Surname names of
Dignity, Age, Trade, Relation; Descriptions plain or in likeness only, and
definitions.
Marcus, Tullius, Cicero, est author de Officiis. Publius, Ovidius, Naso, libri
Tristium.

Cicero Consul Romanus appellatur filius fullonis. Vir egregius. Orator
disertissimus Oratorum facile princeps Flumen eloquentiae

Rosa, laus florum cito arescit.

Leo, terror nemorum tandem moritur.

Boletus, deliciae mensarum crescunt in campis.

Urtica, labes hortorum diligenter evellitur.

PRAXIS. II.
THe Relative receives Gender and Number from The Verb following immediately
the Nominative.

The Verb following with a Nominative after the Verb.


Case

Noun foregoing.

Monetarius cudit pecuniam quae pascit avaritiam.

Monetarius cudit pecuniam quam avaritia devorat.

Fusor fundit typos qui instruunt typographum.

Fusor fundit typos quos typographus emit.

Muri cingunt urbem quae continet opifices.

Muri cingunt urbem quam opifices incolunt.

Sepes tuetur agrum qui fert fruges.

Sepes tuetur agrum quem fruges operiunt.

Onus gravat humeros qui subeunt sarcinam.

Onus gravat humeros quos sarcina premit.

Doctrina levat animum quem praecepta imbuunt.

Doctrina levat animum qui recipit praecepta.

The Dier dies the Purple which adorns the Magistrate.

The Dier dies the Purple which the Magistrate wears.

The Printer Prints the Books which delights the Scholar.

The Printer Prints the Books which the Scholar reads.

Rivers water the Ground which ondure heats.

Rivers water the Ground which the heats chap.

Props sustain the Vine which produces Clisters.

Props sustain the Vine which the Clusters load.

Comfort raises the Mind which discovers Cares.

Comfort raises the Mind which Cares disquiet.

Honor clothes the Breast which desires Learning.

Honor clothes the Breast which Learning possesses.

A Dyer buys a Copper, which the Erazier sells. The clothier buys the Wool,
which the Shepherd sells. The Merchant buys the Clothes, which the Clothier
sells. A Scholar buys the Books, which the Bookseller sells. A Barbar buys a
Razor, which shaves a Beard. A Mower buys a Sithe, which cuts the Meadows. The
Carpenter buys a Hatchet, which hews Timber. The Traveller buys a Sword, which
defends Life.
Avari defodiunt aurum, quod fossor effodit. Sartor discindit pannum, quem
textor contexit. Tinctor inficit vestem, quam fullo lavat. Molitor comminuit
triticum, quod tritor excutit. Scintilla creat flammam, quae mergir navem. Rima
admittit aquam, quae mergit navem. Rima emittit potum, qui lavat pavimentum.
Porrigo diffundit venenum, quod pervadit gregem.
Hunger cures the Niceness, which Fullness breeds. Discipline removes the
Contempt which Familiarity draws. Disuse loses the Art, which use gains.
Idleness consumes the wealth, which Labor gets. The File polisheth the Iron,
which the rust frets.
Clementia frangit animos, quos asperitas irritat. Submissio pacat iram, quam
contumacia provocat. Verecundia ornat puerum, quem improbitas dehonestat.
Somuus reparat vires, quas labor exhausit. Pa^ recl^dit portas, quas bellum
claudit.
The Furmer tills the Fields, which feeds the Farmer. The Shepherd feeds the
Flock, which feeds the Shepherd. A man keeps a Horse, which keeps a Man. The
old Man bears up the Staff, which bears up the old Man. The Thief robs the
Judge, which condemns the Thief.
Glacies parit aquam, quae parit glaciem. ^emen emittit arborem, quae emittit
semen. Nox praecedit lucem, quae praecedit noctem. Sitis intendit hydropem, qui
intendit sitim. Maeror inducit solitudinem, quae inducit moerorem.
Observe, For the Latin Composition, oftentimes the Antecedent being pitched
down, the rest of the Principal Sentence is thrown behind the Relative
Sentence; as,

Pecuniam quae pascit avaritiam, monetarius cudit. quam avaritia devorat,
Zebethum, quod aspergit aulicos, selis excernit. aulici olent, Succinum, quod
delectat sumptuosos, mare evomit. sumptuosi hauriunt,

Or the Autecedent is blended with the Relative-Sentance, as,

Quas eques induit ocreas, Suitor ungit.

Quos Rex gestat calceos, Suitor conficit.

Quibur Scholaris utitur libris, Bibliopola vendit.

The Relative Sentence is alike depending on the Nominative of the Principal.

Somnus, quem divites ambiunt, ambit pauperes.

Laus, quam gloriofi affectant, affectat modestos.

Praemium, quod pigri petunt, petit impigros.

Dignitas, quam ambitiosi sequuntur, sequitur probos.

Observe, Whose, whereof, whereto, wherewith, whereby, wherein, are
Relative-Obliques of both Numbers.

PRAXIS III. PArticiples govern the Case of their Verb.
Arator premens stivam quaeritat victum. Nauta gubernans clavum Pileo cogens
lanas Suitor suens calceos Faber dolans trabem Sector secans tabulas.

A Soldier managing a Sword, obtains praise. Clerk handling a Pen, Printer
Printing Books, Gardener Planting Trees, Lawyer Pleading Causes, Physician
prescribing Medicines.

Puer Verberans turbinem flagello ludit. Percutiens pilam reticulo Projiciens
lapidem funda Contorquens glandem balista A Clerk Cutting a Pen with a Pen
knife: sits. Ruling Paper with a Ruler Writing Letters with Ink Drying the Copy
with Sand

Light discovering the World, covers the Sun.

The Sun softning Wax, hardens Clay.

Nox arcens homines, evocat seras.

Dies evocans homines, arcet seras.

Miles aditurus aciem emit gladium. Messor resecturus segetem falcem. Fossor
ducturus fossam ligonem. Sartor sarturus vestes acum. Suitor suturus calceos
subulam.

A Barber about to shave Beards buys a Razor. Carpenter about to square Timber
an Ax. Sawyer about to saw Boards a Saw. Cloathier about to make Clothes
Wool. Scholar about to get Wisdom Books.

Turbo verberandus flagello sumitur a puero. Pila percutienda reticulo Lapis
projicienda funda Glans contorquenda balista

A Pen knife to be whetted with a Hoan, is taken by a Clerk. A Pen cut with a
Penknife, Paper ruled with a Ruler, A Copy dried with Sand.

Pratum flumine rigandum, in valle subsidit.

Vinea sole fovenda, in collibus haeret.

Corpus fractum diurnis laboribus, reficitur nocturna quiet.

Pectus hebetatum immodicis studiis, recreatur tempestivo otio.

Appetitus dejectus suavibus cibis, renovatur acri aceto.

Animus inflatus perpetuis successibus, reprimitur diversa sort.

The Earth chap'd with Summer heat, is moistened with Autumnal showers.

The Rivers bound with Winter Frosts, are thawed with Spring-gales.

A Ship tossed with vehement storms, is recovered with a gentle wind.

A Country afflicted with long War, is restored with sweet Peace.

-- ing with the mark of a Case, is a Gerund from -- dus.

Cupiditas edendi augetur edendo. bibendi bibendo. dormiendi dormiendo. ludendi
ludendo. The Skill of Swiming is got by Swiming. Riding Riding. Running Running.
Leaping Leaping. Usus Legendi reddit promptos ad Legendum. Scribendi
Scribendum. Canendi Canendum. Numerandi Numerandu^

The practice of Spinning makes active at Spinning. Weaving Weaving. Burling
Burling. Shearing Shearing.

The Noun put after the Gerund, may also, and is more usually joined in Concord
with it; and it is then called a Gerundive-Adjective.

Magister hortatur puerum ad Legendam lectionem. Scribendum dictamen. prohibit
a Lacerando libro. Scindendis vestibus.

Scientia gubernandi populi continetur Moderandis perturbationibus. Vincendis
cupiditatibus. The skill of exercising valor, is tried by bearing Afflictions.
despising Pleasures.

Wisdom exhorts men to flee Vice. desire Virtue. deserting Justice. dehorts
from commiting Injury.

Serta relaturus, certamina dura lacessit,

Displicit e facili palma petita jugo.

Dulcia privatae fugiens so latia vitae,

Arctius acclivi tramite scandit iter.

Art levi navem tranquilla per aequora vectam.

Dirigit in tumidis nauta peritus aquis.

Pellentem morbos, non mollis vestis and aurum

Arguit, at medicum pestis and aura gravis.

A Verbal of the Participle of the Preter tense, is used in the Accusative and
Ablative; called the former and latter Supine.

The latter of two Verbs, if the former be a Verb of Motion, is put in the
first Supine.

Puerit oratum, lotum manus and os. jentatum, petitum aliquid. repetitum
lectionem, pransum. scriptum, lusum, coenatum. mictum, secessum, eubitum,
dormitum.

The Infinitive Passive, after Adjectives, may be expressed by the latter Supine.

Hoc est Honestum Visu. Auditu. Dictu. Turpe Factu.

PRAXIS. IV. ABsolute Sentences are put in the Ablative Case:
Tinnunculo plangente, succumbunt alaudae. Catulis latrantibus, cervi fugiunt.
Leone rugiente, ferae expavescunt. Gallo canente, diluculum appropinquat.
The Trumpet sounding, the Horse neighs. The Whale swimming, the Sea boils. The
Swallows coming, the Summer approaches. The Flies departing, Cold hastens.
Suave rosae redolent, Zephyro spirante, per hortum: Lilia formosum, sole
micante, nitent. Vere tepente, jacit blandas Philomela querelas; Concretae,
Borea flante, gelantur aquae. Singula diversis tribuuntur tempora formis,
Alternas certa lege regente vices.
Being put absolutely, is of the Preter-tense Passive.

Work being finished, Rest is welcome:

Cares being scattered, the Mind is quiet.

laving with a Transitive Verb, put it in the Participle of ^he Praeter-tense
Absolute.

The Husbandman having unyoked the Oxen, returns to the Village.

The Schoolmaster having dismissed the Scholars, walks into the Field.

Aves, relicto nido, quaerunt escam.

Mercator, exacta peregrinatione, reportat opes.

If that Transitive be rendered by a Deponent, it is fashioned by the Rule of
Participial Sentences.

Verus amicus opitulatus misero, gratulatur felici.

Amicus infidus adulatus diviti, deserit pauperem.

Discipulus ludit, clausis in scrinia libris;

Sepositis armis, otia miles agit.

Nautae, subductis in littora tuta carinis,

Hiberni vitant murmura ranca freti.

Observe. Thus also Absolute Sentences are pricked into the Principalone, as,
Pueri, Magistro Scholam ingresso, sedent taciti.

Tenebrae, sole orto, diffugiunt.

PRAXIS V. Conjunctions Copulative, join like Signs (where different are not
expressed.)
Of Number (in Verbs.) The Husbandman Sows or Reaps. Tense. will Sow or Reap.
Mood. prepares to Sow or Reap. Case. Inns a Crop of Wheat or Barley. Gender.
Plough; dry or Moorish Earth. likes the more light and Comparison. most black
Mold. is to be loved and encouraged. Participle. about to Sow or Reap.

Two Singulars conjoined, govern a Plural.

Dolor and voluptas alternantur.

Observe. In more terms than two heaped together, the former are put unconjoyned
with a pause between, only the Conjunction is expressed to the two last.
Pistores, Lanii, Cetarii, and Popinones esculen ta vendunt. Tinctores,
Carminatores, Netores, Textores, Fullones, Defloccatores, and Pannitonsores
pannum praeparant. In Rhetorical style of Prose or Verse, sometimes all are
conjoined to cause deliberation, and to magnify: In constantes homines and
sperant, and timent, and optant, and fugiunt (called Polysyndeton.) Other times
all are left loose to signify expedition: Inconstantes sperant timent, optant,
fugiunt, (called Asyndeton.)

Note secondly, Conjunctions couple like Cases.
Hora abit inter Speculum and Pectinem. Aetas defluit Ludum Somnum. Vita pendet
Spem Metum.

Praepone animam, scilicet gemmam.

Postpone corpus, videlicet cistam.

Excole meliorem partem, h. e. mentem.

Gemma est Vilior quam sapientia. Bellum Mitius quam luxuria. Nemo Beatus nisi
sapiens.

Parce tempori perinde ac thesauro: Excute maerorem tanquam tineam animi. Fuge
desidiam velut lupum.
Omnia possunt eripi praeterquam dotes animi. Homo pro factis reportat
laetitiam vel moerorem. Cessator consequitur nec honorem nec opes. Pauper
consultat, malit ne laborem an egestatem.
Some Conjunctions require a Subjunctive Mood, as Ut, uti, (that); Utinam, ne,
quin; others ordinarily admit a Subjunctive, ni, si, nisi, quo, cum.

Jubeo ut, uti facias officium.

Utinam legas! perlegas! discas! ediscas! sedeas in loco tuo! loquaris,
eloquaris! exponas, examines, repetas lectionem tuam! juves condiscipulos tuos!
facias officium, puer!

Si facias haec omnia, been est; sin ludas, cesses, rideac gar^ias, grave
imminet periculum.

Moneo ne ludas, cesses, exclames, lucteris, nugeris.

Non potes quin aliud agas?

Nisi facias officium, vapulabis.

Quod, Because.

The Father rejoices because the Son loves Virtue. Master grieves Scholar
affects Idleness. Physician mourns Patient despises Direction

Cum tinnunculus plangat, alaudae succumbunt. catuli latrent, cervi fugiunt.
leo rugiat, ferae expavescunt. gallus canat diluculum appropinquat. When the
Trumpet sounds, the Horse neighs. Whale swims, the Sea boyls. Swallows come,
Summer approaches: Flies depart, Cold hastens.

Observe. Conjunctive Sentences are also pricked in between the parts of the
Principal Sentence.

Colligere solet medicus, dum ver praebet, rosas: Quas, ubi sol torruerit
agros, frustra requirit aeger.

Quaerere debet puer, dum anni sinunt, literas: Quas, ubi curae domesticae
circumsteterint, vir incassum defiderabit.

Omnia lege rotant, si coeli sydera spectes;

Seu terram spectes, omnia lege vigent.

Sive maris liquidos pinnato cum grege campo^

Perspicias, certa nil nisi lege fluit.

Cum Sol abscedat, nudatur frondibus arbors

Cum Sol accedat, gramine terra viret.

Lux parit alma diem, ne tempora pigra quiescant:

Neve cadant vires, nox tegit atra polum.

Ordine cuncta geruntur, and ordine cuncta reguntur,

Omnia lege fluunt: Nil sine lege ruit.

PRAXIS VI. THe Present and Preter of the Subjunctive without a Conjunction is
to be rendered Imperatively, for the most part; the other Tenses potentially.
Quid cupit laudem, studeat, discat, legate, scribat.

Let the Grasshoppers sing, the Ant will labor. Drones loyter, Bees will work.
Worms crawl, Eagles will fly. Hares fear, Lions will fight.

Cessator studeret, si posset facere citra laborem.

Studuerit, didicerit, legerit cessator, doctrina sequeretur.

Occasio adfuisset, nisi men's defuisset.

A Boy would Play, if he durst. would Write, if he could. should Repeat, if the
form stood out. could Answer, if he were asked.

Contexture of Sentences.
1. Several Sentences on the same subject, take it common.
Before the Verb.
Rosa jam rubet, mox marcescit. Vitrum, dum splendet, frangitur, Bulla nunc
lucet, nunc disparet. Scintilla modo micat, modo perit. Amnis mane fluit,
vespere refluit. Ventus hodie flat, cras reflat. Luna 14 diebus crescit,
totidem diebus decrescit. Frondes vere germinant, autumno decidunt.
Which common subject may be added to the last sentence.

Praecipitat linguam; Pugnas committit: Amicos

Dissolvit: Mentes obruit ebrietas.

The after-Verb.
Segetem terra parit, imber auget. Triticum tritor excutit, molitor comminuit.
Lanam tondet pastor, emit pannifex. Pannos texit textor, tingit tinctor. Libros
imprimit typographus, vendit Bibliopola. Pharmaca praescribit medicus, miscet
pharmacopola. Navem texit naupegus, agit nauclerus. Currum pangit carpentarius,
agit auriga. Ingenium natura facit: Corroborat usus: Excolit ars: Nutrit
gloria: Cura polit.
2. Several Sentences on the same Verb, take it common.
Solvit salem aqua, ceram ignis.

Jungit tabulas gluten, lateres coementum.

Consolidat metalla ferrumen, vulnera unguentum.

Secat vitrum smiris, lignum securis.

Tegunt pedes calcei, manus chirothecae.

Ornat collum torquis, brachium armilla.

Pascit bovem faenum, suem colluvies.

Secat hominem medicus, equum veterinarius.

Which common Verb may be added to the last Sentence.

Squamas, piscis: avis, plumas; barbam atque capillos, Hoedus; aper, setas;
vellera gestat ovis.

Ver tepidum, sertis: Maturis frugibus, aestas: Autumnus pomis: Igne juvatur
hyems.

3. Several Adjectives on the same Substantive take it Common, before or after
the Verb.
Puer ignavus cessat, studiosus elaborat.

Miles fortis pugnat, piger fugit.

Nauta veteranus audet, novitius pallet.

Equus generosus currit, degener deficit.

Odor teter offendit, suavis delectat.

Vinum modicum levat, nimium obruit.

Lignum aridum slagrat, viride fumat.

Vestis munda decet, immunda dedecet.

Which Common Substantive, may be added to the last Sentence.

Tabescit vitiis suprema, laboribus ima;

Quae vitae ratio est inter utrumque placet.

Vasa aurea fundit aurifaber; fictilia fingit figulus.

Vestem laneam vendit pannifex, lineam texit linteo.

Calceos veteres resarcit cerdo; novos conficit suitor.

Pensum breve discipulus flagitat; justum praeceptor exigit.

Aetatem teneram nugae abstrahunt; Maturam curae impediunt.

Censum exiguum inopia premit; ingentem pericula circumstant.

Conditionem humilem obscuritas sepelit, excelsam invidia petit.

Vitam rusticam labores frangunt, urbanam vitia corrumpunt.

Cur, cum'longa dies urbes, cum marmora solvat,

Incautos homines tarda senecta premat?

Tempore, quod segetes, quod poma, quod excoquit uvas Cuaa suas vires ponit,
and ira suas.

The Interjections are Notes of Passion.
O calling, Heus and ohe, with a Vocative.

O exclaming, with Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative.

Proh, Ah, and ^ah, with Accusative and Vocative.

Heu, with an Accusative.

Hei mihi. Vae tibi.

Hem manum.

Apage pigritiam.

The Doctrine of Profodia may be well referred to ars Poetica. Which with the
Substance of Smetius, is briefly and judiciously couched in order by Mr. Adam
Littleton.

Thus far I have undertaken either to digest or illustrate the first Rudiments
of the Latin Tongue, which may in a short time be comprehended by one of an
ordinary capacity and industry. Which Observations I adventure to public View
for my own use, and the eas^ of those who shall approve to instruct their young
Scholars to the Practice of Latin.

FINIS.
A
TO abide, Maneo ere. To abound, Abundo are, ^^urate, Accuratus i. ^ Acorn,
Glans des. ^ive Promptus i. ^adorn, Orno are. affect, Affecto are. afflict,
Affligo ere. Affliction, Aerumna ae. ^, Cervisia ae. Ant, Formica ae.
^pothecary, Pharmacopola ae. ^pproach, Appropinquo are. ^uch, Fornix uces.
Army, Exercitus us. Arrow, Sagitta ae. Ars, tes. ^rtist, Artifex ces, ^ssault,
Impugno are. ^ss, Asinus i. ^ssemble, Convenio ire. ^ssembly, Concio nes.
^mnal, Autumnalis es. ^wl, Subula ae. ^x, Ascia ae.
B
Balance, Libramen ina. A Band, Vinculum a. ^^hment, Exilium a. ^^nk, Ripa ae.
^^b, Spica ae. ^ber, ^onsor es. ^^y, Hordeum a. A Battle, Proelium a. A Beam,
Trabs es. A Bean, Faba ae. To bear, Fero re. To bear up, Sustineo ere. A Beard,
Barba ae. A Beast, Fera ae. A Be, Apis es. Beer, Potus us. A Beggar, Mendicus
i. A Bell, Campana ae. A Bench, Subsellium a. To bend, Tendo ere. To bind, Ligo
are. A Bird, Avis es. To bite, Mordeo ere. Biting, Mordax ces. Bitter, Amarus
i. Black, Niger gri. To blame, Culpo are. To blast, Defloresco ere. Blew,
Coeruleus i. Blood, Sanguis nes. A Blossom, Floseulus i. To blow, Flo are. A
Board, Tabula ae. To boil (Act.) Coquo ere. (Neut.) Bullio ire. A Bone, Os sa.
A Book, Liber bri. A Bookseller, Bibliopola ae. To bound, Coerceo ere. A Bow,
Arcus us. A Bow case, Corytus i. A Bowl, Calix ces. A Boy, Pu^r i. The Brain,
Cerebrum a. Bran, Furfur ures. A Brazier, Aerarius i. To break (Act.) Frango
ere. (Neut) Crepo are. A Breast, Pectus ora. To breed, Pario ere. A Bricklayer,
Coementarius i. A Bridle, Fraenum (i and) a, Bright, Clarus i. To bring, Affero
re. A Brink, Margo ines. Broad, Latus i. A Brother, Frater tres. To build,
Aedifico are. A Bull, Taurus i. A Bulwark, Agger es. To burl, Enodo are. A
Burler, Enodator es. To burn (Act.) Uro ere. (Neut.) Ardeo ere. To buy, Emo
ere.
C
A Cage, Cavea ae. To call, Voco are. A Candle, Candela ae. A Captain, Dux ces.
A Care, Cura ae. Carefulness, Sollicitudo ines. A Carpenter, Faber bri. To
carry, Veho ere. A Carter, Bubulcus i. A Castle, Castellum a. A Cat, Felis es.
A Cause, Causa ae. A Cellar, Cella ae. Chaff, Palea ae. To chap, Findo ere. A
Chain, Catena ae. A Chamber, Cubiculum a. To charge, Grassor ari. To cheer,
Conforto are. A Child, Puer i. A Chimney, Focus i. A Church, Templum a. A City,
Urbs es. Clay, Lutum a. Clear, Clarus i. A Clerk, Scriba ae. A Client, Clines
tes. A Clime, Plaga ae. Cloth, Pannus i. To cloth, Vestio ire. a Clothier,
Pannificus i. a Cloth-worker, Interpolator ^ Clotty, Spissus i. a Cloud, Nubes
es. a Cluster, Racemus i. a Cobbler, Cerdo nes. a Cock, Gallus i. Cold (Subst.)
Frigus ora. (Adj.) Frigidus i. To come, Venio ire. Comfort, Consolatio nes. To
commit, Inf^ro re. To condemn, Condemno are. a Conqueror, Victor es. To
consume, Consumo ere. To contain, Contineo ere. a Contempt, contemptus us.
Contentedness, Aequanimitas ^ a Cook, Popino nes. To cool, (Act.) Frigefacio
ere. (Neut.) Frigesco ere. a Copper, Ahenum a. a Copy, Exemplum a. Corn,
Frumentum a. To cover, Tego ere. Covetousness, Avaritia ae. a Country, Regio
nes. a Court, Aula ae. To crawl, Repto are Crime, Crimen ina. Crop, Messis es.
^o crouch, Cuho are. ^ruel, Crudelis es. ^o curb, Cohibeo ere. ^o cure, Sano
are. Custom, Consuetudo nes. ^o cut, Seco are.
D
DAnger, Periculum a. To dare, Audeo ere. ^ark, Tenebrosus i. ^o darken,
Obscuro are. A date, Dactylus i. A day, dies es. Death, Mors tes. Deep,
Profundus i. ^o defend. Tueor eri. ^o de hort, Dehortor ari. Delicate, Lautus
i. ^o delight, Delecto are. ^o depart, Discedo ere. ^o desert, Desero ere. ^o
desire, Cupio ere. ^o despise, Sperno ere. Difficult, Difficilis es.
Difficulty, Difficultas tes. ^o dig, Fodio ere. Direction, Praescriptum a.
Discipline, Disciplina ae. Discord, Discordia ae. ^o discover, Prodo ere. ^o
discourse, Dissero ere. ^ disease, Morbus i. Disgrace, Dedec^^ ora. ^ Dish,
Ferculum a. ^o dismiss, Dimitto ere. Disposition, Ingenium a. To disquiet,
Inquieto are. Disuse, Desuetudo nes. A Ditch, Fossa ae. A Ditcher, Fossor es.
Divine, Divinus i. A Doctor, Doctor es. A Dog, Canis es. A Door, Ostium a.
Down, Lanugo ines. To draw, Traho ere. A Drawer, caupo nes. A Drone, Fucus i.
Dry, Aridus i. To dry, Sicco are. To die (by death) Morior i. To dye (cloth),
Tingo ere. A Dier, Tinctor es.
E
AN Eagle, Aquila ae. A Ear, Auris es. The Earth, Terra ae. Eloquent, Disertus
i. An Employment, Occupatio nes. Empty, Vacuus i. To encourage, Foveo ere. To
end, Desino ere. To endure, Patior i. An Enemy, Hostis es. An English, Dictamen
ina. Envy, Invidia ae. Error, Error es. An Estate, Census us. To exceed,
Supero are. To exercise, Exerceo ere. To exhort, Hortor ari. To expect, Expecto
are. To extinguish, Extinguo ere. An Eye, Oculus i.
F
A Face, Facies es. To fade, Declino are. To fail, Frustror ari. Fair, Pulcher^
i. Faithful, Fidelis es. Fame, Fama ae. Familiarity; Familiaritas tes. A
Farmer, Colonus i. A Father, Pater tres. A Fault, Culpa ae. A fear, Timor es.
To seed, Pasco ere. To fence, Vallo are. A Fen, Palus udes. A Field, Ager agri.
To Fight, Pugno are. A File, Lima ae. Filthy, Turpis es. To find, Reperio ire.
To fine, Multo are. To finish, Absolvo ere. A Fire, ignis es. The Firmament,
Firmamentum a Firm, Firmus i. A Fish, Piscis es. To fit, Apto are. To flee,
Fugio ere. To fleet, Volito are. Fleeting, Volucri es. To fl^^ (hasten a way,
or avoid) Pug^o ere; (of a Bird) Volo a^e. T^ fir^, Calcitro are. A flock (of
Cattle) Grexges, (of ^oth) Floccus i. To f^ow, Fluo ere. A flower, Flos res. A
Fly, Musca ae. A Fold, Ovile ia. To follow, Sequor i. A Fool, Stultus i. A
Form, Classis es. A Fort, Propugnaculum a. Fortitude, Fortitudo ines. Foul,
Immundus i. To furbish, Expolio ire. Fresh, Frigidus i. To fret, Corrodo ere. A
Friend, Amicus i. A Frost, Frigus ora. A Fruit, Fructus us. Fullness, Saturitas
tes. A Furr, Pellis es.
G
TO gain, Acquiro ere. A Gale, Aura ae. A Garden, Hortus i. A Gardener,
Hortulanus i. A Garland, Corolla ae. A Garment, Vestis es. A Garret, Coenuculum
a. A Gate, Porta ae. To gather, Colligo ere. A General, Imperator es. To
generate, Gigno ere. Generous, Generosus i. Gentle, Lenis es To get, Quaero
ere. To give, Do are. Glory, Gloria ae. To glut, Satio are. To go, Incedo ere.
A Grasshopper, Cicada ae. Grass, Herba ae. A Grate, Clathrus i. To Graze, Pascor
i. Greediness, Aviditas tes. To grieve (Act.) Contristo are, (Neut.) Tristor
ari, Grievous, Gravis es. The ground, Tellus ures. To grow, Cresco ere. A
guard, Satellitium a. A Gun, Tormentum a.
H
A Hall, Aula ae. To handle, Tracto are. Handsome, Speciosus i. To hang (Act.)
Suspendo ere, (Neut.) Pendeo ere. A Harbor, Portus us. Hard, Durus i. To
harden, Induro are. A Hare, Lepus ores. A Harvest, Messis es. To haste or
hasten, Festino are. A Hatchet, Securis es. A Hasel, Corylus i. To Hear, Audio
ire. The Heart, Cor da. A Hearth, Focus i. To hear (Act.) Calfacio ere. (Neut.)
Calesco ere. Heat, Calor es. A Heath, Ericetum a. Heavy, Gravis es. A Hedge,
Sepis es. A Helm, Clavus i. A help, Subsidium a. An Herb, Herba ae. To hew,
Caedo ere. High, Altus i. A Hill, Collis es. A hindrance, Impedimentum a. A
Hoan, Coticula ae. A Hodman, Corbulo nes. Hollow, Cavus i. Honest, Probus i.
Honey, Mel la. Honor, Honor es. Hope, Spes es. A Horn, Cornu a. A Horse, Equus
i. a Horse-rider, Eques tes: Hot, Calidus i. a house, Domus us. a House keeper,
Dominus i. Huge, Immanis es. Humility, Submissio nes. Hunger, Fames es. a
Huntsman, Venator es. a Hurdle, Cratis es. a Husbandman, Agricola ae. a Husk,
Siliqua ae.
I
IDle, Ignavus i. Idleness, Ignavia ae. Illustrious, Illustris es. To enclose,
Circundo are. Industry, Industria ae Ingenious, Ingeniosus i. an injury,
Injuria ae. Ink, Atramentum a. To Inn, Recondo ere. Joyful, Laetus i. Iron,
Ferrum a. a Judge, Judex ices. a Juice, succus i. a Juncket, Daps es. Just,
Justus i. Justice, Justitia ae.
K
(...) ^^^stodio ire. Kindne^^, ^^^nitas tes. A King, Rex ges. A Knife, Culter
tri. A Knot, Nodus i. To know, Scio ire.
L
Labor, Labor es. To labor, Laboro are. A Labourer, Operarius i. To last,
Duro are. Laughter, Risus us. A Law, Lex ges. A Lawyer, Causidicus i. Laziness,
Pigritia ae. To leap, Salio are. Learning, Doctrina ae. A Lesson, Lectio nes. A
Letter, Litera ae. Liberality, Liberalitas tes. Life. Vita ae. Light (Subst.)
Lux ces: (Adject.) Levis es. To like, Probo are. A Lion, Leo nes. A Liquor,
Liquor es. To load, Onero are. Lofty, Celsus i. Long, Longus i. To lose, Perdo
ere. A Lord, Dominus i. Loss, Damnum ^. To love, Amo are. To loyter, Cesso are.
A Lute, Cithara ae. Luxury, Luxuria ae. To lie, Jaceo ere.
M
THe Magistrate, Magistratus us. A Maid, Ancilla ae. To make, Facio ere. A
Malefactor, Reus i. Man, Homo nes. To manage, Rego ere. Many, Multus i. To
march, Gradior i. A Mariner, Nauta ae. Marrow, Medulla ae. A Master (of
Scholars) Praeceptor es, (of Servants) Herus i. A Meadow Pratum a. Meal, Farina
ae. Meat, Cibus i. A Medicine, Pharmacum a. To mellow, M^tesco ere. Melody,
Modulatio nes. To melt (Act.) Liquefacio ere, (Neut.) Liquesco ere. A Merchant,
Mercator es. Mercy, Misericordia ae. Mildness, Clementia ae. A Mill, Molendinum
a. A Miller, Molitor es. A mind, Men's tes. A Mistress, Hera ae. Moist, Humidus
i. To moisten, Humecto are. Moisture, Humor es. Mold, Gleba ae. Money, Pecunia
ae. The Moon, Luna ae. Moorish, Uliginosus i. The Morning, Aurora ae. A Mother,
Matter tres. Mountainy, Montanus i. To mourn, Maereo ere. A Mower, Messor es.
N
A Nail, Unguis es. Naked, Nudus i. Nature, Natura ae. Naughty, Vitiosus i. A
Needle, Acus us. To neigh, Hinnio ire. A Neighbor, Vicinus i. A Nettle, Urtica
ae. Niceness, Fastidium a. Night, Nox ctes. A Nurse, Nutrix ces. A Nut, Nux
ces,
O
AN Oak, Quercus us. Observance, Observantia ae. To obtain, Obtineo ere. An old
Man, Senex es. To oppress, Opprimo ere. An Orator, Orator es. An Ornament,
Ornamentum. To over-cast, Obduco ere. To overcome, Vinco ere. An Ox, Bos ves.
An Oyster, Ostreum a.
P
A Palace, Palatium a. A Palm, Palma ae. To pamper, Sagino are. To pant,
Palpito are. Paper, Charta ae. To pass, Evado ere. A Pastor, P^slor es. A
Pasture, Pascuum a. A Patient, Aeger gri. Pay, Stipendium a. Peace, Pax ces. A
Peach, Persicum a. A Pear, Pyrum a. A Pen, Penna ae. A Penknife, Scalpellum a.
A Penny, As ses. A People, Populus i. Perfume, Suffimentum a. A Physician,
Medicus i. A Picture, Pictura ae. A Pike, Pilum a. A Pilot, Nauclerus i. To
pitch, Furcillo are. A place, Locus i (and a.) To place, Loco are. A Plain,
Campus i. To plait, Necto ere. To plant, Planto are. To play, Ludo ere. Play,
Lusus us. To plead, Ago ere. A Pleader, Actor es. Pleasant, Jucundus i.
Pleasure, Voluptas tes. Plenty, Copia ae. A Plombet, Plumbeus i. To Plough, Aro
are. A Ploughman, Arator es. A Poet, Poeta ae. To polish, Polio ire. Poor,
Pauper es. A Porter, Bajulus i. To possess, Possideo ere. A Potion, Potio nes.
Poverty, Paupertas tes. Practice, Exercitatio nes. Practiced, Exercitatus i.
Praise, Laus des. To precede, Praecedo ere. To prepare, Paro are. To prescribe,
Praescribo ere. Precious, Preciosus i. To prick, Pungo ere. A Prickle, Sentis
es. Pride, Superbia ae. To Print, Imprimo ere. a Printer, Typographus i. a
Prisoner, Captivus i. a Prize, Palma ae. To produce, Proferorre. a Prong,
Bidens tes. a Prop, Adminiculum a. To provide, Paro are. Providence, Frugalitas
tes. Prudence, Prudentia ae. To Punish, Punio ire. Punishment, Poena ae. a
Puppy, Catulus i. To purchase, Acquiro ere. Purple, Purpura ae. a Purse,
Crumena ae. To pursue. Persequor i.
Q.
A Queen, Regina ae. Quick, Agilis es. Quiet, Tranquillus i. A Quiver, Pharetra
ae. To quiver, Tremo ere. Quivering, Horridus i.
R
A Race, Cursus us. To raise, Erigo ere. A Rake, Rastrum (i and) a. Rank,
Laetus i. A Razor, Novacula ae. To read, Lego ere. To reap. Meto ere. A Reaper,
Messor es: To recover, Reduco ere. A Recreation, Recreatio ne^* Red, Ruber bri.
To reel, Labo are. A refreshment, Refectio nes. To rejoice, (Act) Laetifico
are. (Neut.) Laetor ari. To relent, Mollesco ere. To relieve, Levo are. To
remove, Tollo ere. To repeat, Repeto ere. To require, Posco ere. Re^, Quies
etes. To restore, Restituo ere. To restrain, Arceo ere. To return, Redeo ire. A
reward, Merces e^des. Rich, Opulentus i. To ride, Equito are. To ring, Tinnio
ire. To rise, Exto are. a River, Amnis, es. To rob (money) Eripio ere, (a
person) spolio are. To roll, Volvo ere. a Roof, Tectum a. a Rose, Rosa ae. To
rot (Act.) Putrefacio ere. (Neut.) Putresco ere. Rough, Asper i. a Rower, Remex
iges. To Rule (Act.) Rego ere (Pass.) Regno are, (with a Ruler) Metor ari. a
Ruler, Canon ones. To run, Curro ere. To rush, Ruo ere. Rust, Rubigo ines.
S
SAd, Tristis es. Safe, Tutus i. A Safeguard, Praesidium a. To sail, Navigo
are. A Sand, Arena ae. A Saw, Serra ae. A Sawyer, Sector es. A Scabbard, Vagina
ae. To scatter, Spargo ere. A Scholar, Scholaris es. A School, Schola ae. A
School-fellow, Condiscipulus i A School master, Ludimagister i. A Scull, Testa
ae. A Sea, Mare ia. To see, Video ere. Seed-time, Sementis es. To seek, Quaero
ere. To sell, Vendo ere. A Sent, Odor es. A Servant, Servus i. To set, Occido
ere. Severity, Severitas tes. A shadow, Umbra ae. Sharp, Acutus i. To shave,
Rado ere. A Sheath, Theca ae. A Sheep, Ovis es. A Sheepfold, Ovile ia. To
sheer, Tondeo ere. A Shell, Test a ae. A Shepherd, Pastor es, A Shearman,
Pannitonsor es. A Ship, Navis es. A shore, Littus ora. A shower, Imber bres. A
shrub, Frutex ices. A shuttle, Radius i. A Sickle, Falx ces. A sight,
Spectaculum a. To sing, Cano ere. To sink (Act.) Demergo ere. (Neut.) Subsido
ere. Sinking, Bibulus i. A Sister, Soror es. A Sithe, Falx ces. To sit, Sedeo
ere. Skill, Peritia ae. Skilful, Peritus i. To skip, Salto are. Sleep, Somnus
i. Sloth, ^igritia ae. A Smith, Ferrarius i. A Snaffle, Camus i. Soft, Mollis
es. To soften, Mollio ire. Solid, Solidus i. A Soldier, Miles tes: To sound,
Sono are. Sour, Acerbus i. To sow (with Thread) Suo ere. (Seed) Sero ere. A
Spade, Ligo nes. Spacious, Spatiosus i. To speak, Loquor i. A Spice, Aroma ta.
To Spin, Neo ere. A Spit, Veru a. To spread, Expando ere. Spring (Adj.) Vernus
i. To spring, Viresco ere. A Spur, Calcar ia. To square, Quadro are. A Staff,
Baculus i. A Stag, Cervus i. To stain, Maculo are. To stand out, Exto are.
Starry, Stellatus i. To steer, Guberno are. To stick, Haereo ere. ^tiff,
Rigidus i. To style, Appello are. The stomach, Appetitus us. A Storm, Procella
ae. To stray, Erro are. A Street, Compitum a. Strength, Robur ora. To stretch,
Porrigo ere. Strong, Validus i. Studious, Studiosus i. To Study, Studeo ere.
Success, Successus us. Sullied, Obsoletus i. Summer (Subst.) Aestas ates.
(Adject.) Aestivus i. The Sun, Sol es. Sure, Certus i. To surround, Ambio ire.
To sustain, Sustineo ere. A Swallow, Hirundo ines. To swarm, Ferveo ere. Sweet
in taste) Dulcis es, (in sent) Suavis es. To swell, Turgeo ere. Swift, Pernix
ices. To swim, Nato are. A Sword, Gladius i.
T
TO take, Sumo ere. To tame, Domo are. A task, Pensum a. A taste, Sapor es. A
Tailor, Sartor es. To teach, Doceo ere. Temperance, Temperantia ae. A tempest,
Tempestas ates. Tender, Tener i. To thaw, Solvo ere. Thick, Densus i. A
Thicket, Fruticetum a. A Thief, Fur es. To think, Cogito are. A Thorn, Rubus i.
A Thought, Cogitatio nes. A Thread, Filum (i and) a. A Threshold, Limen ina. To
till, Colo ere. Timber, Materia ae. A Token, Signum a. A Tongue, Lingua ae. To
toss, Jacto are. A Tower, Turris es. A Townhouse, Forum a. A Trade, Ars tes. A
Traveller, Viator es. A Treasure, Thesaurus i. A Tree, Arbor es. A Truant,
Cessator es. To truant, Cesso are. A Trumpet, Tuba ae. To try, Probo are. To
tumble, Ruo ere. Tunable, Canorus i. To turn, Verso are. To twitch, Vellico
are. To tie, Vincio ire.
V
A Valley, Vallis es. Valor, Virtus tes. Various, Varius i. Vast, Vastus i.
Vehement, Vehemens tes. A Vein, Vena ae. Virtue, Virtus utes. To vex, Vexo are.
Vice, Vitium a. Vigilant, Vigilans tes. a Village, Villa ae. a Vine, Vitis es.
a Vineyard, Vinea ae. a Violet, Viola ae. Incorrupt, Incorruptus i.
Unseasonable, Intempestivus i. To unyoke, Abjugo are. Use, Consuetudo ines.
W
TO wake (Act.) Expergefacio ere, (Neut.) Vigilo are. To walk, Ambulo are. a
Wall (of a City) Murus.) of a House) Paries etes. To wander, Vagor ari. Warm,
Apricus i. War, Bellum a. Warfare, Militia ae. To waste, Consumor i. Water,
Aqua ae. To water, Rigo are. Wax, Cera ae. To wax, Cresco ere. Wealth,
Opulentia ae. a Weapon, Telum a. To wear, Tero ere. Weather, Tempestas tes. To
weave, Texo ere. a Weaver, Textor es. Weeping, Fletus us. a Well, Puteus i.
Welcome, Gratus i. Wet, Udus i. a Whale, Balaena ae. Wheat, Triticum. To whet,
Acuo ere. a Whet-stone, Cos tes. To whisper, Susurro are. Wide, Latus i. a
Will, Arbitrium a. The Wind, Ventus i. a Window, Fenestra ae. Wine, Vinum a.
Winter, (Adj) Hiber^us i. Wisdom, Sapientia ae. To wither, Marcesco ere. To be
wont, Soleo ere. a Wood, Sylva ae. Wool, Lana ae. Work, Opus era* To work (as
Bees, Mellist^o are. The World, Orbis es. a Worm, Vermis es. Wormwood,
Absynthium a. Worthy, Liberalis es. To write, Scribo ere.
Y
YArn, Stamen ina. A Yoke, Jugum a.
FINIS.

