A SERMON Touching SCHISM, Lately Preached at St. Mary's in CAMBRIDGE, By RI.
WATSON Fellow of GONVILE and CAjUS College.

ROMANS 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause
divisions, and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them. For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
people. Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1642.
And are to be sold by William Graves, Bookseller in the Regent-walk.

To the Worll. my very worthy friend, and much honored Patron, Mr. RICHARD
CAMDEN.
Sir,
SAint Augustine and diverse reverend Fathers of the Primitive Church, because
there were many heretics in their time, writ themselves and advised others of
competent ability to write against Heresy. We have alike reason in these our
days, and, if the mouths of our grave Ecclesiastical Worthies could breath
through the iniquity of the times, might from them too assuredly have alike
encouragement to preach against Schism. My apprehension hereof first incited
me to a rational discussion, which at length concluded in this resolution,
That my silence (how inconsiderable soever) should not entitle me to the least
interest in betraying the Church to either of her two homebred prevalent
enemies, Blind Ignorance or Obstinate Malice. The success which my endeavors
herein found by this Academicall performance (if my friends tongues translated
aright the language of their hearts) being as beyond its desert, so, I truly
and ingenuously confess, beyond likewise either my expectation or hope, could
be but a mean, if any incentive to this my farther publication of it; whereby
it may meet with a different character from that which their charitable
impression at first afforded it. For I Will not go about so to captivate the
judgments of my candid auditors, as to chain them to their first conceived
opinion. I know the eye is a lamp which often lights the understanding to the
discovery of some errors formerly lost in the labyrinth of the ear. Things
approved when heard may undergo a contrary most just, because more deliberate,
censure in the reading. What motives soever I had (such, it may be, as imposed
rather a kind of necessity then gave me satisfaction) I desire to conceal. The
reason of my dedication to your self (my many and great Collegiate obligations
engaging the choycest of my future endeavors in a higher discharge) needs
run no hazard of your various conjecture, being my desire to employ it as a
thankful acknowledgement of your first Christian grace vouchsafed me at the
Font, seconded by your pious most careful performance of that charge the
Church there gave you of my nonage, and still continued by your most frequent
ample accumulation of favors, which shall hereafter upon the emergence of any
farther occasion be most duly commemorated by

Your ever-obliged servant and dutiful Godsonne, RI. WATSON.

Ephesians. chap. 4. verse. 2, and 3. With all humbleness of mind, and meekness,
with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love: Endeavoring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
PYthagoras, that old Samian Philosopher, who (as Justine Martyr records) was
wont to veil and disguise his opinions under dark speeches and mystical
symbols, having made Unity the original of all things, and the cause of all
good that is in the world; the Father takes not his words for his meaning, but
under the allegorical veil of that Unity discovers an undivided Deity:
(...), says he in his Cohortation to the Grecians. As if that and God were so
inseparably linked together, that the thought of man, although suggested but by
the dictate of nature, could not possibly part them asunder. In like manner, S.
Paul in this chapter exhorting the Ephesians to the endeavor of keeping the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, after he has told them, There is
but one body, meaning of a Catholic Church howsoever dispersed over the whole
earth; But one Spirit, of a God informing and giving life to every member
thereof; But one hope of their Christian calling (as if all this Unity were
but to usher in a single Deity) he concludes all with an (...), There is one
God, verse. 6. Yet before he gets up to this, he binds the Ephesians in a bond
of union with that triple cord, wherein their whole Christianity was twisted,
which could admit of no separation at all, unless they would seem to dissolve
their profession: There is one Lord, whom Christians obey, and therefore no
distraction by service, There is one faith, whereby they believe, and therefore
no division by Creeds; There is one baptism, whereby they get entrance into
the Church, and therefore no distinction by initiative grace. And these three
are more peculiarly (...), that Trinity of Unities, wherein God, by the
ministry of S. Paul, appears to his Church, as it were in the shape of three
Angels, as once he did to Abraham and Sarah, to put her in mind of that
conjugale foedus, that league of love between her and her husband, whereby she
may fructify and bring forth an Isaac, a child of joy, peace, unity, and
concord, wherein may all the earth be blessed. Or, to speak plainly, They are a
triple motive to that Christian duty enjoined in my text, a serious endeavor
of preventing Schism, of preserving Peace and Unity in the Church.

There is a two fold firmament, says a reverend and learned Prelate of our
own, (...) ad O^ig. Eccl 6.
Firmamentum Coeli, and firmamentum Ecclesiae; one of heaven, and another of
the Church here upon earth. Now as we read in the history of the Creation of
two great Luminaries ordained by God for the ornament and benefit of that, so
says he, is the like number appointed for the convenience of this: Sol and
Luna, Regnum and Sacerdotium; There the Sun and the Moon, here the Kingdom
and the Priesthood. And as for preserving the entire luster of the Moon is
required a continual influence of light from the Sun; so likewise to
maintain the Sacerdotall Dignity, a perpetual emanation from the Regal
Authority: Nam ubi semel tollebatur sceptrum Iudae, profanabatur and Levi
sacerdotium, When once Juda's scepter's departed, Levi's Priesthood's presently
profaned. And thus far the parallel holds very well. In one thing it
fails, or rather exceeds, That whereas the Moon repayeth no tribute, nor
(for ought we know) conferreth any thing to the ornament or benefit of the
Sun; here it is otherwise, where the Regal rays transmitted to the
Priesthood reflect on themselves, and (beside that in the end they double the
luster of that glorious body from whence they proceeded) contract such an
influence in the reflection, as conduces much (if not to the being precisely
taken, at least) to the happy and well being of the same. Wherefore these two,
like Eros and Anteros in the Fables of the Poets, are sick or well both at a
time. There is a double cause of their distemper; Rebellion in the one, and
Schism in the other: which two too often engender, and endeavor to beget some
strange monster, the seed of which must needs be the subversion of Monarchical
government in the State, Episcopal in the Church. The later of the two, which
is Schism in the Church, is chiefly aimed at in this place by S. Paul: the
prevention of that, the duty in the text, Endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

There shall be some resemblance between my manner of handling these words, and
the thing it self implied in the same. And therefore of them I will make no
ominous division, which intend a happy and successful union. Nor will I deal
much with them by themselves, but wind them into my discourse on the former in
the second verse. Wherein I shall follow Aquinas his method, who, out of the
connection they have both together, has well observed four vices which
concur to the production of Schism, and four opposite virtues, whereby it
is easily crushed in the womb, and becomes abortive. The first is Pride, and
to that is opposed Humility, (...), with all humbleness of mind. The second
Anger, and to that is opposed Meekness, (...), with meekness. The third,
Impatience, to that Patience, (...), with long-suffering. The fourth and last
is Inordinate zeal, the opposite virtue to which is not expressed, but implied,
as he thinks, in the subsequent words, (...), supporting one another through
love. Of all these in their order.

First of Pride.

What S. Hierome said of Heretics, ^om in Ho^ ^. 5
is very true of Schismatics, Matrem habent iniquitatis suae superbiam, dum
semper altiorase scire jactitant and in Ecclesiae contumeliam debacchantur,
They have Pride the mother of their iniquity, while they always boast of their
transcendent knowledge, and rage to the contumely and reproach of the Church.
Which made Irenaeus join them together, Scindentes, and clatos, and sibi
placentes, Advers. haer. lib. 4. c. 43.
Schismatics, proud, and self-pleasing men. These are they, whose private
opinions must stand in equipage with the determinations of General Councels,
the unanimous consent of Primitive Traditions; nay, the Scripture it self must
strike sail to their judgments, and admit of none but their vain glosses, and
absurd interpretations. This for the Doctrine. As for Discipline, since they
cannot by their double diligence find our Mother the Church so strait laced, as
to be restrained to either precept or president (I mean not in her Episcopal
Government, which being established, as we suppose, by Divine right, the whole
Army of their Presbyteriall arguments will scarce be ever able to move, much
less to evert; but) in prescribing ceremonies, things indifferent in
themselves, and wholly left to her pious judgment in a legal Synod to alter,
increase, or diminish, according as the different circumstances, incident to
her state and condition, may dictate convenient; they feign to themselves a
peculiar familiarity with God, as Numa did with his goddess Egeria, and think
the Church is bound to believe them, and, out of a reverend esteem thereof,
confine her practice to their prescriptions; not one of which but they all
hug as close as ere Ixion did his Juno in the Fable, being none of the true
Juno indeed, no goddess descended from heaven, but a mere cloud of their
depraved fancy and proud conceit.

I have read of Socrates, That when the Oracle of Apollo had pronounced him the
wisest of men, though his reverence was such to his god, that he would not
plainly give him the lie, yet was his modesty likewise such, and mean conceit
of his own worth, that he would not take it in terminis to himself: and
therefore indifferently to preserve both, he gave this reason of Apollo's
Oracle, Quod hoc esset una omnis sapientia, non arbitrari se scire quod
nesciat, Because this was the only wisdom (and to this he could lay a most
just claim) not to suppose he knew that, whereof he was ignorant. I wish these
men were of Socrates his mind; or if not of his, because an Heathen, of devout
Anselm's, Lib. D^ Simil^. c. 98.
whose speech it was, Quanto amplius quis superbia involvitur, tanto lucem
veritatis minus intuetur, The more a man is involved in pride and self-conceit,
the less he beholds the light of truth: Or if not of his, because a Bishop,
at least of our blessed Apostle S. Paul's, 1. Cor. 8. If any man think that he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. Surely then they
would humble themselves and become obedient, Con^^it. Monastic^. 19.
laying the same ground to theirs as S. Basil did to the obedience of his
cloister man, A persuasion of a possibility to learn from their Superior,
(...), the knowledge of piety and sanctity, (...). (...), not asking the
reason, but performing the duty of the command. For, as Origin says of the
Ecclesiastical observations of his time, In Numer. c. 4 Hom. 5.
Some such there are as must necessarily be practiced by all, though the reason
of their injunction be not clear to all. He instanceth in two: Kneeling and
turning to the East in prayer: Nam quod genua flectimus orantes, etc. For why
we bend our knees in prayer, and turn from all corners of heaven to the East,
non facile cuiquam puto ratione compertum, I think not any one can easily
render a reason: De Spir. S. c. 27. (...), etc.
(though for the later S. Basil was of another mind, taking one out of
Scripture, which records that Paradise was planted in the East, and that we
by that posture signify we have respect to return to our old country:) Yet if
they cannot be so satisfied, but a reason they must have, they should require
it (...), that is, decently and with due reverence, I make no question but they
would have their answer. But if they will take no rational answer, the Church
is then enforced to put them as hard a scruple in their own practice, and may
justly silence them in our Saviors words to the too too inquisitive Scribes
and Elders, Mark 11. (...), I tell you not by what authority I do these things.
Lastly therefore (to conclude with the Father) they should not only (...), be
asking the question, and hearing what may be answered to the same; but (...)
too, be instructed thereby, and for the future satisfied. Which rule if it were
duly practiced by all our homebred schismatical Sectaries, I make no question
but their irrational prejudice against the present Discipline would soon be
removed, the desired union of the Church restored, and many seditious practices
in the State happily prevented. Modest and reasonable Examination, etc. chap. 5
For as Doctor Covell, who had to deal with these men, writes very well, That
which in different opinions makes contentions to cease, is when men are
persuaded of their betters that they are not easily deceived, and of themselves
that they may and do easily err. And thus much concerning Pride, the leading
vice in the production of Schism, and Humility, the virtue opposed by S. Paul,
(...), with all humbleness of mind.

The second is Anger, to which Meekness is opposed by the Apostle, (...), with
meekness.

Lactantius says, Anger is one of the three Furies which the Poets feigned. De
Ver. Cult. c. 19. De Regno and Reg. In^t^^. l. 4. tu. 10.
Patricius tells us that Discord which attends it is Alecto by name, and gives
us the moral of it: Haec est discrepantia ac contentio illa, etc. This is that
discord and contention, by which the Ancient Poets thought all things in the
world to be dissolved and destroyed. It is such a Fury as frights a man out of
himself, and takes violent possession of the soul, putting all the faculties
upon hot service: the understanding upon a misguided apprehension of every word
and action, how general soever, as maliciously intended to injure his
particular person, or cross his opinion: the will upon a tyrannical
resolution of revenge, to be terminated, if possible, no otherwhere then in the
conceived Authors destruction. And this, for the most part, the tongue must be
the Herald to proclaim, his own hands sometimes the instruments to execute. If
that cannot be, then, as Saint Chrysostom says, (...).
(...), There Is most deadly feud, and war without end.

Now what a convenient subject for Schism is this? What bond of peace is like
to hold him and the Church together? the Unity whereof, Aquinas tells us, 22. q
39. a. ^. c.
consists in the connection or communication of the members one with another
(and this Gordian knot his fury will not afford him the patience at leisure to
untie; but the least thwarting word that proceeds out of another man's mouth
puts a sword in his hand to cut it in pieces) or in the order of all the
members to one head, which if it dispose not of all according to his ambitious
desires, we know then what noxious fumes the heat of his passion presently
sends up to disturb the several operations thereof, what solicitations
presently ensue tending to a perfidious revolt, which discovers it self either
in seditious tumults, and seditious fames (which two differ no more then as
brother and sister, masculine and feminine, whereas if they once become
incestuous and engender together, prodigious is their offspring, which can be
christened with no better name then downright rebellion) or else in the
inconsiderate denial of due and necessary nourishment to that chief part, the
starving of which must needs be accompanied with the final dissolution of all.
For, alas, arms and legs will have much ado to persuade the soul to confine her
self to their corrupt and rotten habitations, when once they have forced her
out of her marble tower the head. She has a better mind to be mounting
upwards, to seek there (...), an habitation not made with hands, nay and (...)
too, an habitation never yet, not ever like to be, pulled down and ruined by
any such Schismatic rebellious hands, (...), eternal in the heavens.

Now let a man consider with himself, when he is thus transported with passion,
when his reason has taken her flight, what a competent judge he is of any
enormity committed by the Church, which might move him to forsake the communion
of it. Offic. l. 1. c. 21.
Mala lex peccati indignatio est, says Saint Ambrose. Indignation or wrath is
but a bad law to reform sin by. Perturbat animum, it raises a cloud of dust
in the mind, which may sooner put out then clear the eyesight. Me thinks a man
in this case is as it were turned inside outward, so that whatsoever malice and
rancour lies at the heart, whatsoever prejudice possesses the brain, what
ignorance soever might occasion both, is now exposed to the view of the world;
but in the mean time his eagle eyes, wherewith he should spy what is done
abroad, are clothed in mists, involved in darkness. Which darkness may be
best dispelled by a beam of that Sun which S. Paul, the good Intelligence,
(...)*
moves to him, or him to that, (...), with meekness. (...), it is S.
Chrysostomes similitude; As a beam of the Sun appearing soon chaseth
darkness, so a good and meek man soon turns trouble and contention into
peace and quietness. (...), he makes music of them; so that then, if ever,
Empedocles his opinion may pass for current, The soul's an harmony. Si
commotionis hujus, quae ira dicitur, impetus retundatur, omnes hominum
contentiones malae sopientur, says Lactantius. Lib. De Ver. Cult. c. 5.


And so I pass to the third productive of Schism, Impatience, which has its
opposite virtue set down by S. Paul, (...), with longsuffering.

And this is a vice of an ancient house, being that whereby the father of evil
came to have his first claim to the kingdom of darkness. Insomuch as
Tertullian disdaineth, Lib. De Patient.
he tells us, to propound this Quaere, Whether the Angel of perdition were
first possessed of Sin or Impatience? or whether he hatched them not both of
an egg, and cherished them in his bosom. Palam cum sit impatientiam cum
malitia, aut malitiam ab impatientia esse auspicatam. To be sure he has
brought it up to his hand ever since, and employed it as his chief and choicest
instrument to disturb the peace and quiet of the Church. Whereby, as by anger,
he first puts us out of possession of our souls (for Patience is our tenure,
says he that gave them us. In your patience possess ye your souls, Luke 21.)
and then out of possession of the Church too, which is easily done; that being
no other then a spiritual building made up of our souls cemented with love,
(...): so Saint Chrysostom.

Now that which makes men become so impatient is their tender conscience (as
they call it) which cannot brook the least touch of Authority commanding that,
which, in their opinion, inclines any way to innovation in the Church. I said,
In their opinion; for well it were if they made not that the mistress of their
judgments, if they confined not themselves to that as the touchstone whereby
to try the Antiquity of all the Church-Constitutions. They may find a far
better, if they please, in S. Austines 119th. Epistle to Januarius, where he
says, Omnia talia, quae neque sanctarum Scripturarum autoritatibus
continentur, etc. All such things as are not contained in the authority of
sacred Scriptures, nor found decreed in the Councels of Bishops, nor confirmed
by the practice of the Catholic Church, ubi facultas tribuitur, sine ulla
dubitatione resecanda existimo, When power should be given, he thought all
without doubt to be cut off and rejected. For the first of these, they like it
very well, if themselves may be the only interpreters. And herein their error
is the same with that which the Father otherwhere discovered among some of his
time. l^b. De F^d. and Op^^.
Errant homines non servantes modum; and cum in unam partem procliviter ire
coeperint, non recipient Divinae autoritatis alia testimonia, quibus possint
ab illa intention revocari, and in ea quae ex utrisque temperata est veritate
ac moderatione consistere: Men, says he, err, keeping no mean, and when they
begin to be propense toward one part never regard other testimonies of Divine
authority, whereby they may be recalled from that inclination, and fix
themselves in that truth and moderation which is made up by the due temperature
of both. When they come to the second, they are so far from admitting their
Canons, as instead of that they cry down their functions, scoff at their
titles, accounting them Ecclesiastical solecismes, Ep. Dedic. Jacob. 6. Reg.
Scot. ante Dial. De Iure Regni apud Sco^o^s.
as Buchanan their forefather did those honorable phrases of Majesty,
Highness, and Lordship, soloecism^s and barbarismos aulicos, mere solecismes
and barbarismes of the Court. Tell them of the third, which was the practice of
the Catholic Church, then all their Theological knowledge is nothing but
Platonicall remembrance, extending no farther then their own memory, or the
monuments of some few Reformed Divines, such, it may be, as were rather
Deformers, Authors of Schism, and renouncers of our Ecclesiastical
Discipline in the first Reformation.

And this their impatience, when it has made a Panicall flesh-quake at their
hearts, breaks out at their mouths, like a storm which scatters the true
Church of Christ, that chaff as they call it, so that it had better endured the
fire. For I think I may use the words of S. Austine against the letters of
Petilian the Donatist, changing Evangelium into Ecclesia. Quae mitius pertulit
saevientium Regum flammas, quam vestras patitur linguas: The Church better
endured the flames of Tyrants, then the tongues of Schismatics. Nam illis
incendentibus unitas mansit; vobis loquentibus manner non potuit, For while
they burned, unity remained; but while these rail, the Church must needs be
divided.

Now let them make use of S. Paul's remedy, walking worthy of their Christian
vocation, (...), with long-suffering, or patience. (...), says Antiochus one
of the lesser Fathers, Hom. 110.
In longsuffering the Lord does inhabit, but the devil in impatience. He
therefore that would have the Spirit of God dwell within him, must himself keep
the unity of that Spirit, and continue with patience within the pale of the
Church. (...), Ep ad Poly^^p. Episc. S^^in.
says Blessed Ignatius; Lest any of you be found a desertour or runaway from
the Church. Let Baptism be your armor, Faith your helmet, Love your spear;
but (...), Patience capape, your whole armor of defense. He must not separate
himself with Korah, and tell Moses and Aaron they take too much upon them, or
make themselves Princes over the people. He must not murmr at Moses his stay
in the Mount, and in the mean time cast in his eare-ring to the making up of a
calf; that is, He must not envy the leaders of the Church their free access to
Kings and Princes, those gods upon earth, Dixi enim, Dii estis, and that in
their mounts, their erected Thrones and stately Palaces, and in the mean time
contribute any trifling principle (which it may be some Presbyteriall Divine
hung at his ear at the last Exercise) toward the making up of a new imaginary
Discipline in the Church. Nay, I Will go farther with him: If the Church should
set up a calf of her own (as God forbid) that is, be so far corrupted, as to
command the practice of idolatrous worship, that is not sufficient to justify
Schism, or make good his desertion. Here Is room still to make use of his
passive obedience, though I advise not his active. He may, he must here suffer
the punishment, whatsoever it is, to be inflicted for the omission, and be
guilty of no commission at all. (Not that I would hereby stop the mouth of any
reverend Prelate, Priest, or Deacon, entrusted by God with the souls of the
people, whose then unseasonable exemplary silence may be interpreted by the
ignorant at least connivence, if not encouragement to communicate in the sin.
I think him bound to rebuke the same by what authority soever countenanced.)
But if his conscience yet be so far mistaken, as to persuade him, That his
not renouncing of an external communion in things either indifferent or
commendable, implies a guilt of positive communion in those corruptions which
are absolutely sinful, I pity his case, he is like a serpent between the
shadow of the ash and the fire: but let me tell him, It is cooler being in one
then the other, and therefore he must be a little more subtle then with her to
skip into the heat of contention, the fire of Schism. Veneric Vercellens. ut
putatur lib. De Unit. Eccles. conserv. p. ^.
Flagitium Schismatis constat gravius esse quam scelus idololatriae; It is
manifest that the haynousnesse of Schism is far greater then the wickedness
of idolatry, says an ancient Author in his Tractate concerning the Unity of
the Church; and he draws his reason from the difference of punishments allotted
in Scripture, to Idolatry the sword; to Schism, the strange opening of the
earth and swallowing up Korah with his contentious company. And thus much
likewise concerning the third productive of Schism, together with its contrary
virtue set down by S. Paul, (...), with long-suffering.

The fourth and last is Inordinate zeal, the opposite virtue to which is not
named, but implied in these words, (...), supporting one another through love.

And now we are got under the torrid zone of unruly passion, and illimited
ambition: among such a nation, as he that walks righteously and speaks
uprightly must be a cohabitant with devouring fire and dwell with everlasting
burnings, contrary to that the Prophet Esaias promises, Esaias 33. (...), says S.
Paul in his fourth Chapter to the Galatians. It is a good thing indeed to be
zealously affected, but it must be (...), in a good matter. And not only so,
for the same Apostle bears record of some who had the best of zeals, Zelum Dei,
the zeal of God, and yet in them too there was somewhat wanting; they had it,
Romans 10. 2.
not secundum scientiam, not according to knowledge. I will take a step into S.
Austines path, and add a third possible defect, and that is in the
qualification or condition of the persons, according to which he observes zeal
to admit of a directly opposite specification in bonitate and malitia: and
therefore he commends it as good in David the King, Lib. 20. De Civ. Dei* 12.
who says of himself, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up; but on the other
side condemns it as bad and misbeseeming the Commons, an ignorant multitude
(the arm of whose discretion and judgment was not able to wield a weapon of
that size) when it is said of them, Zelus occupavit plebem ineruditam, Zeal
has possessed an unlearned people.

But to take it a while in its pure naturals, without those several
circumstances and different limitations, I read it defined as abstracted in it
self, Desideriu^ vehemens, quo quis incitatur ea tollere, Gerson, part. 3. De
Consol. Theolog. l. 3.
quae rei sibi dilectae videntur adversa, An earnest desire to take away such
things as seem opposite to that which he loves. Now as there is nothing which
should so swell up our souls with joy and delight, nor lodge in any corner of
our hearts, as the love of God; so can our zeal be employed about nothing so
well as the utter abolishing of that which either gives him a direct affront,
and that is Idolatry; or stops the free current of our service and due devotion,
by intermixing the muddy inventions of weak brains, and vain curiosities, and
that is Superstition.

But this zeal, as good as it is, must be attended by three handmaids, to bear
up his train, which according to Gerson are Benevolentia, Discretio, and
Constantia; else, says he, it is like a two-edged sword in the hand of a
madman, aut fulmini sine obice pervaganti, or like that kind of lightning,
which makes way through all, and will admit of no opposition. Upon the first of
the three our Apostle seems chiefly to reflect, the absence thereof being
that which chiefly causes the breach of union, the disturbance of the peace
and quiet of the Church.

I should begin with this, but I must first give you a brief character of such
persons as are fittest to be employed in this business. S. Austine grants
them, Expos. in Evang. Joan. Tractat. 10.
whosoever they are, a large commission, Fac quicquid potes, Do what thou
can. But what? presently set fire on the Church? No. Frigidum fundit, he
casts cold water to allay this heat. Do it, but still pro persona, quam portas,
only according to that person which thou bear. No mechanic put his profane
hand to the pulling down of that most sacred and ever venerable Episcopal
function. Tractet fabrilia. No women vent their impiety and ignorance in
slandering it as an Antichristian Prelacie. Let them be silent as in, so of, or
concerning the Church too. It was S. Paul's advice, Discant in silentio, not
that they should teach but learn in silence. Nay, non patiar, says he; I
suffer not a woman to teach, 1. Tim. 2. 12. And this argues the irrational
licentious practice of our times, wherein either sex and any profession crowds
in a finger to the moulding of the designed Reformation; and this, if not with
public toleration, if not without some contradiction, I am sure not with a due
peremptory penal prohibition. Nay, they must be Leaders in the case, and teach
the very Captains themselves of the Church militant their several postures,
prescribe them a form to muster their men. I have read of the Ambassadors of
the Sarmatae, That attending Valentinian the Emperor of the West, and telling
him, being basely clad, that they were prime men of that nation, he fell into
such a passion for warring with so base a people, that he dyed suddenly. In
like manner, I think, if Religion in these days did but view the Grandees of
Schism in their mechanic habits, and seriously consider with what a ragged
Regiment of ignorance and impudence she has had so long a continued encounter;
she would out of indignation desert us, and leave her golden crown to be at all
adventure usurped either by insolent profaneness, or blind Atheism. But to
leave these Bedlams at length to be well lashed by their own too impetuous
spirits, and to be as good as my word, I think we are bound by the doctrine of
our Church to surrender the first place of composing differences, and zealous
reforming what abuses soever are crept into it, to him whom we acknowledge her
head, and that is the King. And good reason too: For that is true as well in
Church as State, which Salust in Tacitus suggested to Livia, Annil. lib. 1.
Eam conditionem esse imperandi, ut non aliter ratio constet, quam si uni
reddatur. Or more properly that which follows soon after, Non aliud
discordantis patri^e, (We'll make it Ecclesiae) remedium esse, quam ut ab uno
regeretur. Whom, as the Anointed of the Lord, howsoever we acknowledge to have
a more then ordinary influence and special assistance of the Spirit of God;
yet being not bound (so far as we know) to take away infallibility from the
Chair, and chain it to the Throne, nor to give it a Crown instead of a Mitre;
we find it most consonant to reason, and correspondent to the perpetual
practice of the Primitive times, as also to that of all such Christian
Churches, as still retein the true ancient doctrine and discipline, that he
assume to him the counsel of his Bishops and Clergy, who, if so qualified as
their places require, may be presumed the fittest men to moderate zeal, to
compose all different opinions, and to pick truth out of partiality. Not to
trouble you with various quotations out of several Fathers, I will only fetch
you one from the head, and that is Blessed Ignatius, who speaks to our purpose,
in asserting, Ep. 2. Ad Trallian.
That whosoever does any thing without the Bishop and his Presbytery, (...),
such an one has his conscience defiled, and is worse then an infidel. But lest
you should think the Prince in this case a priviledg'd person, he otherwhere
inverts our order, and has his (...), Fp. 6. Ad Philadelph.
Let Caesar himself be ruled by the persuasion of his Bishop. Now the former of
these seems to be grounded upon S. Paul's rule, who would have zeal to be
regulated according to knowledge. For, to speak the truth, if the Clergy be
once excluded this business, and Laymen (who by reason of their several
avocations are for the most part forced to take up their Theological
principles I wish I could say but at the second or third hand) must have the
perpetual patent of this concurrent judicial employment; if ignorance chance
to incorporate with authority, and both grow up strong and stout in time, it
may well be feared in the future age Divinity must be fetched within the sphere
of their apprehensions, conjured within the circle of some politic law, and
the maintainers of what truth soever (if either mistaken by them, or not taken
at all, as being too profound and out of their reach) may chance to be dashed
out of all their preferment by the seeming force of some old decrepit statute,
if not blown away by the violent breath of some zealous Patriot, and Lay
ill-affected Arbiter.

And thus much shall serve to have been spoken of the persons, whom I conceive
the fittest to handle zeal, and to reform any exorbitancie of the Church.

As touching the three attendants thereof, which I had out of Gerson; the first
of them was Benevolentia, which I Will interpret good will or Christian charity
toward our brethren. And this should be showed either in preserving their
credits, or bearing with their perverse manners, Supportantes invicem,
supporting one another, ut alter alterius mores fer at licet rusticos, licet
asperos, licet petulantes, etc. Corn. a Lapid. Chilling^.
says one on the place. Or lastly in admitting a charitable judgment of their
errors, though untrue, as much more pleasing to Almighty God then a true
judgment, if it be uncharitable. Whereof how far short come the writing and
preaching zelots of these our days? whom I have often observed (as in their
pamphlets, so likewise in their pulpit invectives) to gain ground on popular
minds, and to give a little life to those deformed pictures they make of such
men as to whose doctrines they will not conform themselves, that they obliquely
draw a dark shadow of their impure conversations; and no diversity of opinion
but must be attended by some notable irregularity in manners. I confess those
men upon whom this is justly charged (if any such there are) as they cannot
expect to be any where excused, so much less to have an advocate in this
sacred place. But I pray God themselves be blameless that blame others. Indeed
those men at whom they glance, have not got the trick to do it in the dark, but
too ingenuously think the world will be as charitably affected to them, as they
are to the world. This I Will say, which I confidently presume, That were they
not so bated and worried for their opinions, which they think in their
conscience they may well justify, and thereby driven as to a desperate neglect
of their studies, so likewise to a less strict guard of their lives, they
would be somewhat more regular in their actions, which upon serious
recollection and pious meditation it is likely in their reasons they condemn
and vilify.

Nor does this their uncharitable zeal extend it self only to some few
particular persons, but encircleth no less then the whole Church, themselves
exempted: upon which, instead of praising God for the first happy conversion of
this nation to Christian Religion; for that, wherein they think themselves have
the only interest, an after-Reformation from blind superstition; they daily
cast the foul-mouthed calumny and undeserved aspersion of Pelagianisme, and
whatsoever other wretched heresy they find condemned by the Catholic Church
in her sacred Records, and venerable Antiquity, which they neither search nor
care for but when it may furnish them with a few bare names, such as they may
cast like dirt in the face of those worthy men, who drop better Divinity in
their daily discourse with every crumb that falls from their tables, then these
men do in their large distributions of the bread of the Word, as they too often
emphatically causlesly term it. So that what Palemon proudly professed of
learning, they arrogantly conceit of Religion. Qui secum natas, secumque
interituras affirmare audebat literas: They think it all shipped in one
bottom, and that is the rotten one of their own framing. The ground of which is
a strange assurance they challenge to themselves of a more then ordinary
peculiar assistance of the Spirit, outstripping S. Paul (though an Apostle, and
none of the meanest neither) who went no farther then his Puto autem, I think
also I have the Spirit of God. 1. Cor. 7. 40.
For howsoever A Lapide out of S. Austines 37. Tractate upon S. John, will have
this (...) non dubitantis esse, sed asseverantis and increPantis: I rather
think (under correction) it argues S. Paul's modesty, who would not
Magisterially profess it, and ring nothing but reprobation in the ears of them
that would not readily acknowledge it. I judge none, yet I suspect some instead
of having that Holy Spirit, (...), that leading and true Spirit, ^^. 6. A^
Philadelph.
have (...), a deceitful spirit, seducing the people, as S. Ignatlus said of
the false prophets and Apostles of old. But whatsoever spirit they have, this
their confidence inflames their zeal, and puts them upon those violent (but
most impotent) expressions of Let us Preach down, Pray down, nay sometimes
they will venture at Dispute down too whatsoever is got above their
intellectuals, when indeed they do nothing but talk down all: when alas they
are not so forward in the two former, but they are twice as backward in the
last; in all having a self-denial, as they call it, that is indeed a denial
of all what themselves should be, I mean discursive and rational as men,
learned as scholars, and (which is worth all) truly devout as Christians.
Whereas in their prayers they have oftentimes most uncharible, if not
schismatic Devotion, bold ignorance in their Sermons, and, instead of solid
reasons, a few new-invented canting distinctions in all their disputations,
calculated for the climate of their exotike Divinity, and endeavored to be
obtruded upon our Church in the place of better, such as might safely be
selected out of the School, or de medio montium, as Peter Lombard speaks,
S^nt. l. 2. (...) 16.
meaning the ancient Fathers and reverend Antiquity. So that what Alexander
Borgia was wont to say of the expedition of the French into Naples, That they
came with chaulk in their hands to mark out their lodgings, and not with
weapons to fight for them, may be said of these men in their great undertaking
and zealous promoting a new reformation. They mark out their conclusions
whereon they may rest, without producing any rational premises which may force
an assent.

If I have digressed a little too far from my text, I may the rather presume
of a pardon, having been in the pursuit of such men as usually run a great
deal farther from theirs, and of whom, for all my have, I have much ado to get
perfect sight. I was moved thereto by the equity of the cause, heretofore (as I
thought) injured by the silence of some worthy men, whose eminent abilities
might have better encouraged them to have been as well speaking abettours of
truth, as their abundant charity made them silent affectours of unseasonable
peace.

I pass now to the second attendant of zeal, and that is Discretion. Which, if
we look at the propriety of the word, according to those different
significations that it frequently admits of, implies a distinct separation of
one thing from another, an exact view and judgment of the same. For cernimus
animo, videmus natura, aspicimus ex improviso, said Fronto, who pretended to be
an indifferent arbiter and equal dispencer of dues to words. And Quotcunque
Senatus creverit for judicaverit, De (...).
it is thought the Roman Orator said, that perpetual Dictatour of the Latin
tongue. And indeed whether cerno be not (...) a little metamorphiz'd, discerno
(...) I desire the Critics at their leisure to inform us. No Discretion thus
taken disables those person or dealing with zeal, whose weak capacities are
overcast with such a cloud of ignorance as intercepteth their view, and
blunteth the point of the brightest ray their understanding sends forth to
discover any error of the Church. As also those whose judgments, howsoever
mounted higher, and raised above this misty region, are seated upon such a
dangerous precipice, that their first conception, their first apprehension,
fixes not there, but rowls down to their mouths, and breaks forth in a
clamourous storm of passion, if it fall not lower to their arms and hands, and
vent it self thence in a bloody tyrannical persecution. For the first of which
there is none of us all but may find a shelter, Tulingua, ego aurium sum
Dominus. But if it once come to the second, as if they were following the sent
of a fresh victory, Nec temperari facile nec reprimi potest stricti ensis ira,
the last step of their power is the first of their mercy. S. Austine sets them
a better rule, proposes himself as a better president, Faciat certe quod me
non fecisse succensuit, Epist. 111.
said he of a Bishop, to whom he had written an harsh epistle, but received an
answer in more bitter language. So these men, who when time serves can
sufficiently complain of hard usage, and brand the due Ecclesiastical Censure
of obstinate Schism (I may say Heresy) with that scandalous undeserved name
Persecution, should do well to mete out their own words with the measure of
indifference, and when themselves come to be actours, putting judgment or
discretion in one s^ale, and power in the other, make even weight without a
grain of affection depressing either. Divide, and impera, you know who said it,
and we have too many that follow that counsel in the worst sense, who might, if
they pleased, make use of it in a better. Let them use this (...), this
moderate discretion, this judicious division; ita dividant, and tum imperent:
Let them thus divide, and then let them talk of taking the dominion and command
of the Church. But if they will rashly huddle up all together, and not
admitting the least check of a sedate judgment, publish only the impetuous
dictates of their indiscreet and too precipitant fancy, either yielding
nothing, or suffering a licentious practice of all things; we must put them in
mind of that State Maxim, which is too often made good by the ruin of a
Church, Corn. Tacit. A^nal. l. 1.
Periculosa severitas, flagitiosa largitio, seu nihil militi, seu omnia
concederentur in ancipiti republica; I will english it thus, Dangerous is that
severity, impious that bounty, where to a Christian militant either all things
are granted, or nothing permitted in the doubtful and distracted condition of
a Church.

And thus much of Discretion, zeals second handmaid.

The third is Constancy. And of this but a word.

And some may think a word superfluous too, considering the firm immovable
resolution of our obstinate zelots, who will part with all, their obedience to
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrate, their charity due to their Christian
brethren, rather then one whit of their fancy and fond opinion. Therein
following too near at the heels their valiant Captain Reformer Knox, who
resolutely, but rebelliously, writ to the Queen Regent of Scots in the behalf
of himself and the Holy Brethren, That without the Reformation which they
desired, they would never be subject to any mortal man. And Martin Luther, how
eminent soever, I. Armin. Declar. Sent. ad D. D. Ordin. Holland. and (...).
was in this case a little too obstinate, when being upon his deathbed
requested by Philip Melanchthon to draw near a concord as touching the
difference about the Eucharist, utterly refused it, idque hanc ob causam,
sicuti illum dixisse aiunt, ne ex eo tota doctrina in dubium vocaretur; and
that for this cause, lest his whole doctrine should be brought into question.
These zelots, as if they were the oracles of the world, or at least in some
special manner inspired (as indeed they p^etend) do in effect thrust the Pope
out of his Magisteriall Chair of Infallibility, to the end that they may sit in
it themselves. But alas this pertinacious adherence to ungrounded principles is
but the feigned model of constancy, the foundation whereof must be right
reason, no fond opinion, quae non aliud quam rationis vana imago and umbra,
Lips. De Constant. li. 1. c. 5.
says one; the groundwork humility, the main pillar impartial integrity, and
the whole prospect toward the even plains and champian of truth, without the
least loop-hole to any by-respect or sinister intention.

Now as obstinacy is to be declined on one hand, so must likewise levity on the
other. Wherein howsoever they conceit themselves to have but little if any
interest at all, yet if we pull off that false vizard wherein their zeal too
often personates, (I mean their pretense of Scriptures authority for all their
new started Divinity) we shall find it otherwise, and that they at their
pleasure can fix on the same an unparalled non-presidentiall interpretation
to usher in any new devised opinion. Nor is this caution only personal, but
best befits such synods or convents as assume to themselves a power of
Religion, of drawing up a form of any Ecclesiastical Reformation. For (not to
flatter our selves nor them) if they sometimes will be enacting or articling,
at others, without due consideration, repealing and nullifying, every man
cannot make a weathercock of his conscience, to be blown about through all the
rumbes of Religions card by the confused violent blasts of such successive
dissonant assemblies.

And thus at length have I done with that last productive of Schism,
Inordinate zeal, the opposite virtue to which is not named, but implied in
these words, (...), supporting one another through love.

If I should now enter on the duty by it self, and draw it off from the lees of
my former discourse, I might find matter sufficient to double the time allotted
for this business. I will give you only a touch of the chief observables, and
so conclude.

The first shall be from the first word thereof, (...), endeavoring. Which
shows how one unity is prerequired to the inducement or conservation of the
other. First a conjunction of every man's powers and faculties in himself,
composing one individual inclination; and then a concurring with others to a
general union of wills and affection. (For Pax hoc in loco est voluntatum
unio, says Catharinus on the place.) And therefore S. Cyprian renders it well,
satis agentes, as if it would sufficiently busy, and take up no less then the
whole man to do it to the purpose.

Secondly, (...), Endeavoring to keep. For it is not sufficient to search it
out with some pains when we are at a loss for it, but we must keep it with the
like when once we have found it. Nec sufficit eam quaerere, Ad Res^^. M^nach.
says S. Hierome, nisi inventam fugientemque omni studio persequamur. It is
with this great part of the kingdom of grace, as our most reverend and pious
Prelate worthily terms this Unity of the Spirit, as it is with civil states and
dominions, Iisdem artibus, quibus parta sunt, facile retinentur. Labor in
getting, and no less labor and endeavor in keeping.

Thirdly, (...), the unity of the Spirit. Nor is it every spirit that will
serve the turn: for there are many that keep the unity of a spirit to a
contrary purpose. Such were those Prophets whom Ezekiel speaks of, Ezekiel. 13. 3.
foolish prophets, against whom he denounces a woe. Vae prophetis qui ambulant
post spiritum suum, Woe to those prophets who walk after a spirit of their own.
And they keep it in the bond of peace too. For as Plato said of injustice, That
without justice it could not stand; the like say I of Schism and Division, It
is impossible for it to subsist without union. S. Hilarie thought that term too
good for it, Enar. in ps. 140.
and called it by a worse name, Combination, because that unity is in faith and
subjection, but Combination is consortiu^ factionis, consenting in faction. It
must therefore be no unity of any such spirit, but (...), with an emphasis on
the article, of that Spirit indeed. The fruit whereof is love, joy, peace,
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, a goodly
train of Christian virtues, Gal. 5. 22. That Spirit which before it came down
to the Church upon earth had concurred to the like good mysterious work above
in heaven, making an exact Unity of the blessed Trinity. For as S. Austine
says, De Verb. Dom in Evang. Matt. Sermon. 11.
Societas est quodammodo Patris and Filii ipse Spiritus Sanctus. We have two
other presidents for this godly union from the two other persons of the Blessed
Trinity. From God the Father first in man's creation, who made him one, to the
intent that we all knowing we came from one, should love as one. Vt dum
cognoscerent se ab uno esse omnes se quasi unum amarent, says the Master of
the Sentences. From God the Son next in man's redemption, com. in E^ech.
who (as S. Hierome observes) would not suffer when the Priesthood was entirely
in one, but under two, Annas and Caiaphas, Vt religionis little scissum
monstraret errorem, That he might show their error of Schism in Religion.

Fourthly, (...), in the bond of peace. First in peace. Men are commonly very
observant and careful of preserving the least relic left them by a deceased
beloved friend, especially if he bestowed it on them with his own hand about
the time of his departure. Our Savior our Christ deserves surely as much at
our hands as to have his peace carefully kept by all such as pretend the
preserving any the least memorial of him, it being the last legacy he left to
his Church; (...), Apparat. 2.
B. Mountague tells us S. Basil calls it, his farewell gift; I Am sure he calls
it (...), a largess dropped from a higher world, worth the keeping. Peace I
leave with you, my peace I give unto you, John 14. 27. He gave them peace,
promised them knowledge, but that was to be sent after his ascension. The Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, shall teach you all things. As if
peace and love were to have the precedence, the first place in the heart of
man. The only order observed in heaven, where the first place or degree is
given to the Angels of love, which are termed Seraphin; the next to the Angels
of light, which are termed Cherubin. First love, and then illumination. But our
Enthusiasts invert the order. They will have first light, and that of
revelation; then love, and that but to such as will come off to their own
faction.

Secondly, In loc.
In the bond of peace. S. Anselme says, This bond of peace is an external
profession of peace and concord, which is quasi vinculum and nexus interioris
unitatis Spiritus. I like it well if he means a united conformity and
conjunction in the outward service of God. You know when we go about to bind up
things close together, we usually lay them in the same posture, not some
doubled, others at length, but all having a due correspondence one to another.
And thus it is in Ecclesia fasciculo. If in our outward religious performance
and worship of God, some be kneeling, others standing, a third sort, in a worse
posture by far, uncivilly sitting; it will be a hard matter to bind them so
close together, but some will drop out of the bundle of the Church. I will use
another familiar similitude with your leave: When we bind up a bundle, we lay
not the parcels at any great distance, but as close and near one another as may
be. And therefore if we be at a distance one from another, come not to serve
our God together, but while there is a Congregation in the Church, there is a
Conventicle in a chamber, a Meeting in a barn, and a Ring too it may be in the
fields or woods; it is a hard matter to bind al these together, the bond I fear
will be somewhat too short, and we had need have a little to spare to make a
knot that it may be the surer. Prolog. ad Tract. 1. De Doctr. Chi^st.
For Charitas nodo Vnitatis astringit, says S. Austine, It is the knot that
does it: If Unity have no knot it is easily dissolved. Therefore the Ancient
English (who were better united as in their affections, Camden Re^^
so likewise in their devout Congregations) called this holy service of God
most significantly Eanfastnes, as being the only fast binder of the members of
the Church, Religiosae vinculum pacis, the only bond of a Religious peace.

S. Chrysostom observes three things that unty this knot, (...)
unbind this bond of Unity in the Church. (...), The love of riches. The love
of rule and sup^riority. The love of glory, that is popularity. I need not show
you how all these have conspired together to unty out knot of Christian
charity, produced an unhappy Schism in the Church. The case is clear. What
else mean those whispers of some grand plotting, and a strange mysterious
working to commit sacrilege, to rob the Church of her poor patrimony, if not
that which God himself has given her, at least that wherein many ages since
his Saints and Servants out of their ture working piety have enstated her? What
else those loud aspiring cries of Down with Episcopacy? Up with a Presbyteriall
Superintendency? What lastly means that truly mounting-Lecture-Language, and
most irreligious Pulpit imposture, whereby too many, when they have once drawn
the yielding hearts of weak people into those open and unfenced fortresses of
their ears, there chain them to their own motions. Thus leading captive to
their own vainglorious (though but low-descended) spirits not only silly
women, but men too laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts?

It is time for me now to have done with my text, and ease you of your trouble.
I will only out of charity add a triple rule for those either malicious or
mistaken souls, against whom my whole discourse has been intended, whereby
they may be happily reduced, and with them the Unity of the Spirit restored.
And that is, in brief, first by Reason rightly weighed; Secondly, by Scripture
rightly interpreted; Thirdly, by the Constitutions and Canons of the Church to
that purpose rightly assembled. To which three if they deny to submit, much
good do them with S. Austines character, in whose opinion they are no other
then madmen, infidels and Schismatics. For says he,

Contra rationem nemo sobrius, ^ib. 4. De Tr^n. ^. 6.
contra Scripturas nemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacisicus senserit.
(...).

